Negotiations Over T i m e in a Multi-Agent Environment 
Preliminary Report 
Sarit Kraus* 
Graduate School for Library Studies and 
Dept. of Computer Science 
Hebrew University, Jerusalem 91904 Israel 
sarit@cs.huji.ac.il 
Jonathan W i l k e n f e l d 
Dept. of Government and Politics 
University of Maryland 
College Park, MD 20742 
wilkenfeld@umd2.umd.edu 
A b s t r a c t 
One of the major foci of research in distributed 
artificial intelligence (DAI) is the design of au-
tomated agents which can interact effectively 
in order to cooperate in problem-solving. Ne-
gotiation is recognized as an important means 
by which inter-agent cooperation is achieved. 
In this paper we suggest a strategic model of 
negotiation for N agents (N > 3), that takes 
the passage of time during the negotiation pro-
cess itself into consideration. 
Changes in the 
agent's preferences over time will change their 
strategies in the negotiation and, as a result, 
the agreements they are willing to reach. 
We 
will show that in this model the delay in reach-
ing such agreements can be shortened and in 
some cases avoided altogether. 
1 
I n t r o d u c t i o n 
One of the major foci of research in distributed artifi-
cial intelligence (DAI) is the design of automated agents 
which can interact effectively in order to cooperate in 
problem-solving. Negotiation is recognized as an impor-
tant means by which inter-agent cooperation is achieved. 
That is, D A I is concerned with the design of agents which 
are able to communicate in such a way as to enhance the 
possibility of reaching mutually beneficial agreements 
concerning problems such as a division of labor or re-
sources among the agents. 
Negotiation has always been a central theme in D A I 
research [Davis and Smith, 1983; Georgeff, 1983; Mal-
one et al., 1988; Durfee, 1988; Durfee and Lesser, 1989; 
Rosenschein and Genesereth, 1985; Sathi and Fox, 1989; 
Conry et a/., 1988; Zlotkin and Rosenschein, 1990]. 
This research has focused on strategies for designing 
agents capable of reaching mutually beneficial agree-
ments. 
Sycara ([Sycara, 1987]), using case-based rea-
soning, and Kraus et al. ([Kraus et al., 1991J) modeled 
negotiations from a cognitive standpoint. 
*This work was partially completed while the first au-
thor was at the Institute for Advanced Computer Studies and 
Dept. of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College 
Park. 
Yet it is also recognized that although negotiations are 
necessary for reaching such agreements, the negotiation 
process is both costly and time-consuming, and thus may 
increase the overhead of the operation in question (see 
[Bond and Gasser, 1988]). In negotiations on such issues 
as job-sharing or resource allocation, it is important to 
minimize the amount of time spent on negotiating mu-
tually beneficial agreements so as not to detract from 
time spent on the task itself. Thus, in the presence of 
time constraints, negotiation time should be taken into 
consideration. 
In [Kraus and Wilkenfeld, 1991a] we propose a strate-
gic model of negotiation that takes the passage of time 
during the negotiation process itself into consideration. 
That study focused exclusively on a two-agent model. 
The present study generalizes this process by consider-
ing the N-agent environment. 
Following [Rosenschein and Genesereth, 1985; Zlotkin 
and Rosenschein, 1990; Kraus and Wilkenfeld, 1990; 
Kraus and Wilkenfeld, 1991a] we examine negotiation 
using game theory techniques with appropriate modifica-
tions to fit artificial intelligence situations. We will focus 
primarily on works in game theory and economics that 
have studied the effect of time preferences on the negoti-
ation process, following the classic paper by Rubinstein 
([Rubinstein, 1982]). 
Unlike the work of Zlotkin and 
Rosenchein, [Zlotkin and Rosenschein, 1990] we investi-
gate multi-agent environments (more than two agents) 
and our approach makes no assumptions about the pro-
tocol for negotiations. 
Also, our model takes the pas-
sage of time during the negotiation process itself into 
consideration. 
Furthermore, by taking the passage of 
time during the negotiation process into consideration, 
our approach is able to influence the outcome of the ne-
gotiation so as to avoid delays in reaching agreements. 
2 
I n i t i a l Setting 
N autonomous agents A\, 
A2,...,As 
have a common goal 
they want to satisfy as soon as possible. In order to sat-
isfy a goal, costly actions must be taken and an agent 
cannot satisfy the goal without reaching an agreement 
with one of the other agents. Each of the agents wants 
to minimize its costs, i.e., prefers to do as little as possi-
ble, if it can assume that the goal will be fulfilled prop-
erly without additional effort on its part. We note that 
56 
Architectures and Languages 

even though the agents have the same goal (under our 
simplified assumptions), there is actually a conflict of in-
terests. The agents have different preferences concerning 
goal satisfaction and for the different possible agreements 
which can be reached. 
We make the following assumptions: 
1. Full information - each agent knows all relevant 
information including the other agents' preferences for 
the different outcomes over time. 
2. The agents are rational - they will behave according 
to their preferences. 
3. 
Commitments are enforced - if an agreement is 
reached both sides are forced to follow it. 
4. Assumptions (l)-(3) are common knowledge. 
We demonstrate the cases we are interested in with 
the following example. 
E x a m p l e 2.1 
Three robots, A, B and C, stationed on 
a satellite, are instructed to move an expensive telescope 
from one location to another as soon as possible. 
Delay 
in moving the telescope will reduce the number of pictures 
sent back to scientists on earth. 
Any two of the robots 
can move the telescope, but the tools essential to perform 
the task are distributed among the three agents. 
Any of 
the agents can opt out of the negotiation, choosing not to 
satisfy the goal. 
If that occurs, the remaining two cannot 
achieve the goal (since critical tools will be missing). 
3 
The Structure of Negotiations 
Our strategic model of negotiations is a model of Alter-
native Offers.1 
For reasons of simplification and clarity, we will con-
centrate on the case of three agents, but our results can 
be easily extended to N agents where an agent can sat-
isfy a goal by reaching an agreement with another agent2. 
So, in our case, three agents, A, B and C have a com-
mon goal they want to satisfy as soon as possible. Each 
of them has a set of capabilities, 
PA,PB and Pc and 
a set of tools TA , TB and Tc respectively. The agents' 
capabilities influence their ability and their ways of satis-
fying the goal, and all the tools are needed to satisfy the 
goal. We now present formal definitions of agreements 
and strategies. 
3.1 
A g r e e m e n t s a n d Strategies 
We first define the set of possible agreements. We assume 
that there exists a set of possible agreements between 
any two agents. We denote by A the set of agents. 
1See [Osborne and Rubinstein, 1990] for a detailed review 
of the bargaining game of Alternating Offers. 
2In the case in which the agents may divide the labor be-
tween all of them, i.e., agreement may be reached only among 
all the agents, the model of Alternative Offers is usually dis-
appointing (see [Osborne and Rubinstein, 1990]). It is still 
useful when the agents have specific types of utility functions 
(see [Stahl, 1977]). 
3 A similar definition can be given concerning a division of 
resources. 
Kraus and Wilkenfeld 
57 

58 
Architectures and Languages 

Kraus and Wilkenfeld 
59 

60 
Architectures and Languages 
6 
The Application of the Theory in 
Building Autonomous Agents 
One of the main questions is how one can use the above 
theoretical results in building agents capable of acting 
and negotiating under time constraints. 
We note that in each of the cases we have investigated, 
either in this paper or in [Kraus and Wilkenfeld, 1991a], 
where we presented a strategic model of negotiations for 
only two agents, the perfect-equilibrium strategies are 
determined by parameters of the situation. 
So, one can supply agents with the appropriate strate-
gies for each of the cases we have dealt with. When an 
agent participates in one of those situations, it will need 
to recognize which type of situation it is in. 
Assum-
ing the agent is given the appropriate arguments about 
the situation it is involved in it can construct the exact 
strategy for its specific case and use it in the negotia-
tions. Since we provide the agents with unique perfect 
equilibrium strategies, if we announce it to the other 
agents in the environment, the other agents can not do 
better than to use their similar strategies. 
7 
Conclusion and Future W o r k 
In this paper we demonstrate how the incorporation 
of time into the negotiation procedure contributes to a 
more efficient negotiation process where there are at least 
three agents in the environment. We show that in differ-
ent cases this model, together with the assumption that 
the agents' strategies induce an equilibrium in any stage 
of the negotiation, may result in the agent being able to 
use negotiation strategies that will end the negotiation 
with only a small delay. We suggest that these results are 
useful in particular in situations with time constraints. 
We are in the process of using this model in develop-
ing agents that will participate in crisis situations where 
time is an important issue. 
The most obvious outstanding question concerns the 
relaxation of the assumption of complete information. 

In many situations the agents do not have full infor-
mation concerning the other agents. 
Several works in 
game theory and economics have considered different 
versions of the model of Alternative Offers with incom-
plete information (see for example, [Rubinstein, 1985; 
Osborne and Rubinstein, 1990; Chatterjee and Samuel-
son, 1987]). 
We are in the process of modifying those 
results for use in D A I environments. 
8 
Acknowledgement 
We 
would 
like to 
thank 
K. 
Arrow, 
R. 
Aumann, 
B. Bueno de Mesquita, J. Oppenheimer, A. Rubinstein 
and P. Young for helpful suggestions about game theory 
and negotiation. We would also like to thank J. Hendler 
and D. Perlis for helpful discussions. 
References 
[Bond and Gasser, 1988] A. H. Bond and L. Gasser. An 
analysis of problems and research in D A L In A. H. 
Bend and L. Gasser, editors, Readings in Distributed 
Artificial Intelligence, pages 3-35. Morgan Kaufmann 
Publishers, Inc., San Mateo, California, 1988. 
[Chatterjee and Samuelson, 1987] K. 
Chatterjee 
and 
L. Samuelson. Bargaining with two-sided incomplete 
information: An infinite horizon model with alternat-
ing offers. 
Review of Economic Studies, 54:175-192, 
1987. 
[Conry et al, 1988] S. E. Conry, R. A. Meyer, and V. R. 
Lesser. 
Multistage negotiation in distributed plan-
ning. In A. H. Bond and L. Gasser, editors, Readings 
in 
Distributed 
Artificial 
Intelligence, 
pages 
367-384. 
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Inc., San Mateo, Cali-
fornia, 1988. 
[Davis and Smith, 1983] R. Davis and R.G. Smith. Ne-
gotiation as a metaphor for distributed problem solv-
ing. 
Artificial Intelligence, 20:63-109, 1983. 
[Durfee and Lesser, 1989] E. H. Durfee and Victor R. 
Lesser. 
Negotiating Task Decomposition and Allo-
cation Using Partial Global Planning. In L. Gasser 
and M . N . Huhns, editors, 
Distributed Artificial Intel-
ligence, 
Volume II, pages 229-244. Pitman/Morgan 
Kaufmann, London, 1989. 
[Durfee, 1988] E. 
H. 
Durfee. 
Coordination 
of Dis-
tributed Problem Solvers. 
Kluwer Academic Publish-
ers, Boston, 1988. 
[Georgeff, 1983] M. Georgeff. 
Communication and in-
teraction in multi-agent planning. 
In Proc. of the 
National 
Conference 
on 
Artificial 
Intelligence, 
pages 
125-129, Washington, D.C., 1983. 
[Kraus and Wilkenfeld, 1990] S. Kraus and J. Wilken-
feld. 
An automated strategic model of negotiation. 
In 
AAAI-90 
Workshop 
on 
Reasoning 
in 
Adversarial 
Domains, Boston, 1990. 
[Kraus and Wilkenfeld, 1991a] S. Kraus and J. Wilken-
feld. The function of time in cooperative negotiations. 
In Proc. of AAAI-91, California, 1991. To appear. 
[Kraus and Wilkenfeld, 1991b] S. Kraus and J. Wilken-
feld. Negotiations over time in a multi agent environ-
ment. Technical Report UMIACS TR 91-51 CS TR 
2649, Institute for Advanced Computer Studies, Uni-
versity of Maryland, 1991. 
[Kraus et al., 1991] S. 
Kraus, 
E. 
Ephrati, 
and 
D. Lehrnann. 
Negotiation in a non-cooperative en-
vironment. 
Journal of Experimental and 
Theoretical 
Artificial Intelligence, 1991. Accepted for publication. 
[Luce and RaifTa, 1957] R. 
D. 
Luce 
and 
H. 
Raiffa. 
Games and Decisions. John Wiley and Sons, 1957. 
[Malone et ai, 1988] T. W. Malone, R. E. Fikes, and 
M. T. Howard. Enterprise: A marketlike task schedule 
for distributed computing environments. In B. A. Hu-
berman, editor, 
The Ecology of Computation. North 
Holland, 1988. 
[Nash, 1950] J. F. Nash. 
The bargaining problem. 
Econometrica, 18:155-162, 1950. 
[Osborne and Rubinstein, 1990] M. 
J. 
Osborne 
and 
A. Rubinstein. 
Bargaining and Markets. 
Academic 
Press Inc., San Diego, California, 1990. 
[Raiffa, 1982] H. RaifTa. 
The Art and Science of Nego-
tiation. Harvard University Press, 1982. 
[Rosenschein and Genesereth, 1985] J. Rosenschein and 
M.R. Genesereth. 
Deals among rational agents. 
In 
Proc. 
of the 
Ninth International Joint 
Conference on 
Artificial Intelligence, pages 91-99, Los Angeles, Cal-
ifornia, 1985. 
[Rubinstein, 1982] A. Rubinstein. 
Perfect equilibrium 
in a bargaining model. 
Econometrica, 50(1):97-109, 
1982. 
[Rubinstein, 1985] A. Rubinstein. A bargaining model 
with 
incomplete 
information 
about 
preferences. 
Econometrica, 53(5):1151-1172, 1985. 
[Sathi and Fox, 1989] A. 
Sathi 
and M.S. Fox. Constraint-directed negotiation of re-
source reallocations. In L. Gasser and M. N. Huhns, 
editors, 
Distributed 
Artificial Intelligence, 
Volume 
II, 
pages 163-194. Pitman/Morgan Kaufmann, London, 
1989. 
[Selten, 1975] R. Selten. Re-examination of the perfect-
ness concept for equilibrium points in extensive games. 
International Journal of Game 
Theory, 4:25-55, 1975. 
[Staid, 1977] I. Stahl. An n-person bargaining game in 
an extensive form. In R. Henn and 0. Moeschlin, edi-
tors, Mathematical Economics and Game Theory, Lec-
ture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems 
No. 141. Berlin:Springer-Verlag, 1977. 
[Sycara, 1987] 
K.P. Sycara. Resolving Adversarial Con-
flicts: 
An 
Approach 
to 
Integrating 
Case-Based 
and 
Analytic Methods. 
PhD thesis, School of Information 
and Computer Science, Georgia Institute of Technol-
ogy, 1987. 
[Zlotkin and Rosenschein, 1990] G. 
Zlotkin 
and 
J. Rosenschein. Negotiation and conflict resolution in 
non-cooperative domains. In Proceedings of AAAI-90, 
pages 100-105, Boston,MA, 1990. 
Kraus and Wilkenfeld 
61 

