Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
Does the visual system exploit projective geometry to help solve
the motion correspondence problem?
Richard A. Eagle a,*, Maarten A. Hogervorst a, Andrew Blake b
a Department of Experimental Psychology, Uni6ersity of Oxford, South Parks Rd, Oxford OX1 3UD, UK
b Department of Engineering Science, Uni6ersity of Oxford, Parks Rd, Oxford OX1 3PJ, UK
Received 25 February 1997; received in revised form 9 February 1998
Abstract
Projective geometry determines how the retinal image of an object deforms as it moves through three-dimensional space. Does
the visual system use constraints derived from this information, such as rigidity, to aid the tracking of moving objects? A novel
psychophysical technique is introduced for assessing which of two competing motion transformations is ‘preferred’ by the visual
system, in a two-frame sequence. In the ﬁrst experiment, relative preference strengths for translations parallel and perpendicular
to the major axis of a wire-frame object were measured by pitting the two against each other. It was found that parallel
translations were preferred to perpendicular ones. On the basis of these data a proximity measure for normalising different
transformations, independent of any effects of ﬁgural similarity, was developed. In the second experiment, two wire-frame planar
structures were used to pit one of ﬁve transformations (rotation, expansion, vertical expansion, shear and random jitter) against
a translation. Preference strength was measured as the translation distance at which the transformation and the translation were
perceived with equal frequency. The PSEs were found to collapse on to a single line when plotted against the proximity
magnitude, with the exception of a residual preference for pure translation over all other transformations. In general, these results
suggest that preference strength for moving wire-frame ﬁgures is determined primarily by the proximity of local features on the
displacing contour, with little regard for the projective shape transformation. © 1998 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Motion; Correspondence problem; Shape; Proximity; Projective geometry
1. Introduction
1.1. Projecti6e geometry
It is well known that the pattern of retinal motion
produced by a moving object or observer is sufﬁcient to
elicit a striking percept of the underlying 3-D scene (e.g.
Wallach & O’Connell, 1953). As early as 1950, Gibson,
stressed the need to understand the nature of the three-
dimensional visual environment before the nature of
these visual processes could be understood (Gibson,
1950). More recently, in computational vision, Marr
(1982) has championed this approach. Objects in the
world tend to have surfaces that vary smoothly in depth
and remain rigid, at least locally, in space and time.
Moreover, the trajectories that objects and observers
follow through the three-dimensional world often have
long-term correlations. Projective geometry describes
the relationship between a particular 3-D structure
moving through the world and its projected image
motion (e.g. Zisserman, 1992). The lawfulness of this
mapping along with the statistical regularity of the
world means that the patterns of retinal image motion,
or ﬂow, tend to be highly structured. In turn, this
allows for the possibility that the visual system exploits
these physical constraints so that it is tuned to patterns
of ﬂow that are common or biologically signiﬁcant.
Koenderink & van Doorn (1975) pointed out that the
motion of a surface patch can be broken down, locally,
in the neighbourhood of a point, into four ‘differential
invariants’ (divergence, curl and two components of
deformation). The term invariance refers to image
properties, such as parallelism of lines, or ratios of
lengths, that do not change when the viewpoint is
moved (see Fig. 1). In general, Koenderink’s differential
* Corresponding author. Tel.: +44 01865 271380; fax: +44 01685
310444; email: richard@psy.ox.ac.uk.
0042-6989/98/$ - see front matter © 1998 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
PII: S0042-6989(98)00149-7

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
374
invariants account, not merely locally but globally, for
the motion of rigid, planar structures whenever perspec-
tive effects are negligible. In this case, these invariants
may be of great signiﬁcance because they allow the
visual system a way of tracking moving structures over
time by considering only the afﬁnely-deforming image
(instead of having to generate a 3-D object-based repre-
sentation). In particular, if the visual system allowed
only correspondences between afﬁne-equivalent ﬁgures,
then the correspondence problem would be much re-
duced. In computer vision, a recent tracking algorithm
that has incorporated such a 2-D afﬁne ‘template’ for
bounded contours was found to signiﬁcantly decrease
the likelihood of false object-matches (Blake, Curwen &
Zisserman, 1993)
1.2. Psychophysics
The question of which aspects of a stimulus the
visual system uses in the motion correspondence pro-
cess has a long history in psychophysical research.
Early work produced equivocal results. For instance,
Orlansky (1940) found evidence of form affecting per-
ceived motion, but Kolers & Pomerantz (1971) and
Navon (1976) both argued from their own data that
form was of little importance to motion detection. A
difﬁculty with several of these early studies was the
nature of the subject’s task. Often subjects were asked
to rate how ‘good’ or ‘smooth’ the motion was, and it
is not clear how to relate such judgements to the
operation of particular mechanisms for solving the
correspondence problem.
A further problem with these early experiments was
that there was little theoretical analysis of the types of
transformations being studied. Warren (1977) made a
signiﬁcant input to this issue by considering the corre-
spondence problem within the framework of Gibson’s
ecological optics (Gibson, 1966). His suggestion was
that the visual system might prefer shape changes that
are consistent with ecologically-valid transformations.
He found that subjects tended to perceive projective
transformations as a single object in motion. In con-
trast, when the transformation was topological or
afﬁne, subjects tended to report a percept of two ob-
jects. Furthermore, he showed that the effect of feature
similarity (same number of sides and corners) had no
effect on this judgement.
It is worth considering Warren’s assertion that afﬁne
transformations are non-ecological (Warren, 1977).
Strictly speaking, Warren is correct as afﬁne transfor-
mations model planar motions without taking into
account the effects of perspective viewing (they assume
‘weak-perspective’ projection where a single depth is
assigned for the entire object). However, as pointed out
by Ullman (1977), the effects of perspective projection
on the transformations used by Warren would have
been so negligible as to have been undetectable by the
visual system. In fact, this ﬁnding belies another
difﬁculty in the interpretation of most existing studies
of this issue, which is that the magnitude of the trans-
formation has rarely been considered. By magnitude we
mean some measure of the amount of image distortion
caused by the transformation, and details of particular
measures of the distortion are considered later. It is
extremely unlikely that the visual system will interpret
every projective transformation as a rigid body in mo-
tion, and reject a motion percept for every afﬁne or
topological transformation, without regard to the mag-
nitude of the transform. Even if the visual system were
indeed exploiting constraints imposed by projective ge-
ometry, small non-rigid motions may be more common
or likely than extremely large rigid motions. A casual
look at the transformations Warren (1977) used (his
Fig. 1) shows that his afﬁne transforms resulted in
much larger image distortions than did his projective
transforms. Thus, it may be that the visual system will
interpret both afﬁne and projective transforms as struc-
tures undergoing motion in 3-D space, as long as the
image distortion is not too great. A similar difﬁculty
arises in interpreting the results of Chen (1985) who
claimed that topological properties such as connectiv-
ity, closure and holes are important invariants in bio-
logical
vision.
Because
there
was
no
quantitative
analysis of the different stimuli used in his experiments,
Fig. 1. A hierarchy of geometrical transformations. Euclidean trans-
formations, which model image-plane translations and rotations,
preserve both lengths and angles. Similarity transformations, which
also allow for translations along the line of sight, preserve angles and
ratios of lengths. Afﬁne transformations allow for general 3-D mo-
tions, where the change in depth is small relative to the viewing
distance. Angles and lengths are not preserved under an afﬁne
transformation, but properties such as parallelism, ratios of lengths of
parallel segments and ratios of areas are. Topological transformations
can be used to model elastic non-rigid motions. Afﬁne invariants are
not preserved, but properties such as connectivity and closure are.

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
375
it may be that the data reﬂect differences in the stimuli
other than the type of transformation.
To support a more quantitative investigation into
whether ﬁgural similarity inﬂuences correspondence
strength, a more sensitive, and less subjective, psycho-
physical technique is required. A promising approach
can be found in the ‘competition paradigm’ (e.g. Kol-
ers, 1972; Navon, 1976; Ullman, 1979). The simplest
case consists of a two-frame apparent motion display in
which a central element in frame one is replaced in
frame two by two spatially-ﬂanking elements. The
name of the paradigm, derives from the fact that these
two frame-two elements are competing, perceptually,
for correspondence with the frame-one element. The
task of the observer is to indicate whether the perceived
motion was to the left or to the right. If the frame-two
elements are equidistant from the frame-one elements
and are identical in form, subjects typically perceive the
motion as ‘splitting’ with the frame-one element ap-
pearing to move, with equal strength, to the right and
left. However, if either of the frame-two elements is
moved further away from the frame-one element, then
the perceived motion tends to be to the closer element.
Thus, it seems that proximity is a cue used by the visual
system to resolve ambiguous motions. Most results
using this paradigm appear to show that global form
similarity plays little, if any, role in determining corre-
spondence (e.g. Navon, 1976; Burt & Sperling, 1981;
Shechter, Hochstein & Hillman, 1988). One notable
exception to this ﬁnding is the study of Ullman (1980).
His stimuli consisted of a repetitive pattern of alternat-
ing vertical and near-vertical lines that, when displaced,
could either be seen to move to the right, with each line
changing its orientation, or to the left, with each line
retaining the same orientation. Ullman found that
when the two possible motions were matched physically
for proximity, the visual system preferred the match
that preserved orientation. In a similar set-up, he found
that the visual system preferred length-preserving mo-
tions too.
However, there are important caveats that need to be
considered when interpreting the results of these studies
too.
In
the
Navon
(1976),
Burt
&
Sperling
(1981)andShechter, Hochstein & Hillman (1988) stud-
ies, the elements in the displays were very small (all
under 0.5° in the longest dimension). This means that a
coarse-scale mechanism may not have been sensitive to
the
ﬁgural
changes
(Ramachandran,
Ginsberg
&
Anstis, 1983). Compounding this, the ﬁgural transfor-
mations were normally accompanied by a translation.
Given that coarse-scale motion detectors are generally
thought to operate at longer displacements, it is possi-
ble that these procedural details masked the activity of
motion mechanisms sensitive to form change. Finally,
as before, these studies did not make any quantitative
analysis of the magnitude of the transformation, and
have not looked systematically at different types of
transformations. In these three studies, for instance,
most of the transformations considered were topologi-
cal or lower. None modelled any transformation that
could occur when a rigid body moved through 3-D
space.
Given these concerns, and the results of Ullman
(1980), the possibility remains that using a more sensi-
tive technique the visual system may still be shown to
favour certain transformations over others in a compet-
ing
apparent
motion
sequence.
Our
experimental
methodology was designed to overcome the aforemen-
tioned difﬁculties. Our speciﬁc goal was to investigate
whether the visual system utilises the constraints on
image deformation imposed when planar objects move
through the 3-D world to help solve the correspondence
problem. The ﬁrst part of the paper outlines a novel
competition paradigm designed to enable sensitive mea-
surement of preferences for any magnitude of an arbi-
trary transformation. In the experimental sections,
psychophysical data on actual correspondence strengths
are presented for a range of transformations of particu-
lar ecological signiﬁcance. In the modelling sections,
measures
of
proximity
for
comparing
preference
strengths
across
different
transformations
are
developed.
2. Experiment 1
In order to compare preference strengths across dif-
ferent transformations it is ﬁrst necessary to develop a
metric against which PSEs for the different transforma-
tions can be compared. Otherwise it is impossible to
interpret ﬁndings such as that PSEs for a rotation of
25° and an expansion of 1.15 are equal, in terms of the
translation magnitude. This metric needs to deﬁne a
measure solely of the magnitude of the transformation,
and not of the type of transformation. That is, the
metric must reﬂect the magnitude of displaced features
on the transformed object but be blind to the type of
global transformation (e.g. expansion or rotation). The
metric can then be used to produce a measure of
proximity for each transformation and translation.
From this, a null hypothesis can be produced stating
that when two motions pitted against one another are
matched in terms of proximity, they will be perceived
with equal likelihood. In contrast, if there is an effect of
the type of transformation, over and above that of
proximity, then the results will show a preference for
one of the transformations at the point of matched
proximity.
In order to investigate the nature of this metric, what
is required is a set of stimuli that all undergo the same
transformation, to preclude effects due to differential
preferences for transformation type. There are two

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
376
particular advantages in using a pure translation as the
common transformation. First, a translation has the
effect of displacing the ﬁgures away from each other, so
preventing
a
spatial
overlap
which
might
present
difﬁculties for segmenting the two motions. The fact
that the translations can be along different axes further
alleviates this potential problem. Second, as the transla-
tion leaves the ﬁgures undistorted, we can be sure that
the pattern of results will not be affected by processes
concerned with shape changes.
2.1. Apparatus and stimuli
All stimuli were generated on a Silicon Graphics
Crimson/VGX workstation. They were presented on a
19 in Silicon Graphics monitor whose screen resolution
was
1280×1024
pixels.
The
stimuli
were
viewed
monocularly with subjects’ dominant eye in a dimly lit
room with their head supported by a chin-rest. Subjects
maintained ﬁxation on a central red spot during each
trial. Subjects saw just one sequence of these two
frames (rather than a continual oscillation), and then
pushed one of two mouse keys to indicate their re-
sponse, regarding which of two motions was perceived.
Viewing distance was 86 cm such that one pixel
spanned one arc min. The exposure duration of each
frame was 100 ms, with no ISI. The experimental
ﬁgures were all planar, wire-frame structures. These
were polygons with six vertices (as depicted in Fig. 1).
The ﬁgures were generated, in their initial form, by the
algorithm described below.
1. Space the control points around a rectangle of sides
120 arc min, each separated from one another by
between 10 and 30 arc min, randomly drawn from a
rectangular distribution.
2. Deform the square by stretching one side by 
2
and the other by 1/
2, preserving the area but
producing a rectangle with an aspect ratio of two.
3. Jitter the positions of each point off the perimeter in
a direction perpendicular to the contour on which
each one lies by up to920 arc min, drawn ran-
domly from a rectangular distribution.
4. Join
up
the
control
points
through
linear
interpolation.
The experimental method was two pit two transla-
tions, in orthogonal directions, against one other (see
Fig. 2a). The whole stimulus was presented symmetri-
cally around the ﬁxation cross. A similar conﬁguration,
though with isolated dot stimuli, has been used previ-
ously by Ramachandran & Anstis (1983). The two
possible percepts for these stimuli are (i) opposite trans-
lations parallel to the ﬁgures major axes; or (ii) oppo-
site translations perpendicular to the ﬁgures major axes
(see Fig. 2b).
Fig. 2. (a) Example of a stimulus used in experiment 1. A pair of
identical ﬁgures are presented in frame one, separated both horizon-
tally and vertically about a ﬁxation spot. In frame two, the ﬁgures
have been translated. (b) There are two possible percepts here:
opposite translations parallel to the ﬁgures’ major axes or opposite
translations perpendicular to the ﬁgures’ major axes.
2.2. Procedure
Three subjects, the ﬁrst two authors and one naive
observer, participated in this experiment. Each subject
sat through three blocks of 50 trials, 10 each at ﬁve
different spatial offsets (translation magnitudes) for
each experimental condition, randomly ordered in a
Method of Constant Stimuli design. The contoured
ﬁgures could be stretched either along the horizontal,
vertical, +45 or −45° axes. The point of subjective
equality (PSE) was determined by ﬁxing the translation
magnitude in the direction perpendicular to the ﬁgures
major axis (termed here reference translation) and vary-
ing the magnitude of the translation parallel to the
ﬁgures major axis (termed here test translation). Ex-
ploiting the fact that the visual system has a preference
for small translations, high PSE values can be taken to
represent low preference strengths for the particular
motion being tested. PSEs were determined for each
ﬁgure orientation by performing ten trials each at seven
levels of test translation. As previous researchers have
pointed out (Mack, Klein, Hill & Palumbo, 1989;
Pantle, Pinkus & Strout, 1992) the perceived direction

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
377
of motion on a given trial can be affected by the
direction on the previous trial. By measuring PSEs
simultaneously for conditions in which the ﬁgures’ elon-
gation was 90° different, effects in the data due to this
hysteresis were minimised. We sought to minimise the
effects by running different conditions within the same
block of trials. Thus, conditions in which the ﬁgures
were elongated either horizontally or vertically were run
together and the task of the subject was to indicate
whether the objects were perceived as moving along a
vertical or horizontal axis. Also, conditions in which
the major axis of the ﬁgures was either +45 or −45°
were also run together, and here the task of the subject
was to indicate whether the objects were perceived to
move along the +45 or the −45° diagonal.
Four magnitudes of reference translation were used:
18, 35, 71 and 141 arc min. Cumulative Gaussians were
found to account for the psychometric functions well,
and were ﬁtted individually to the data from each
condition by probit analysis (Finney, 1971). No system-
atic differences were found between the ﬁts for the data
from the different translation-direction conditions and
so the results were pooled. The data in Fig. 3 show the
mean PSEs across the four orientations at each refer-
ence translation magnitude. Error bars show the stan-
dard error of the mean for the four individual probit
ﬁts. As expected, these data reveal a monotonic in-
crease in the PSE as the magnitude of the reference
translation is increased, showing that the visual system
prefers small motions to large ones. Also on the graph
are plotted the null-hypothesis predictions derived from
several measures of proximity, the details of which are
given below.
3. Metric for normalising transformation magnitude
3.1. Proximity with the correct-match constraint
One obvious metric for deriving transformation mag-
nitude is related to the magnitude of the distance
between corresponding image features undergoing the
transformation. A simple physical description of the
transformation magnitude that can be made common
for any arbitrary transformation is to measure the
average image displacement (direction disregarded) of
points along the ﬁgures contours. If 2-D proximity of
correctly-matched image features is the sole criterion
for the visual system’s tuning to different transforma-
tions then the PSE should be reached when the average
displacement of points undergoing the transformation
equals the magnitude of the pure translation.
To implement this measure, average displacements of
100 corresponding pairs of points evenly spaced along
the ﬁgures contours in the two frames were calculated
for the same stimuli used in experiment one. The thick,
diagonal line also plotted in Fig. 3 is the prediction
from this measure. That the data fall above this pre-
dicted line shows that there is a preference for transla-
tions parallel to the objects major axis over translations
parallel to objects minor axis. This suggests that the
visual system is not using a measure of proximity based
on the veridical matching of features on the displacing
objects, even though subjects perceive these matches.
3.2. Proximity without the correct-match constraint
In experiment 1, the anisotropy is more pronounced
when the reference translation is small: the PSEs ap-
proach the predictions of the correct-match proximity
measure at larger displacements. An important differ-
ence at small displacements between the cases where the
translation is parallel or perpendicular to the major axis
of the ﬁgure is as follows. When the displacement is
parallel,
nearest
neighbour
matches
for
individual
points along the contours will tend to be smaller than
when the displacement is perpendicular. This is a direct
consequence of the fact that the orientation distribution
of the ﬁgures’ contours is biased to the major axis of
the ﬁgure. It is important to note that, in general, these
nearest-neighbour matches will not be the correct
matches for the parallel displacement: the magnitudes
of the correct matches will always correspond to the
translation magnitude, regardless of the direction of the
Fig. 3. Data from experiment 1 for three subjects. The PSEs (transla-
tion parallel to the long axis of the object) are shown as a function of
the reference translation (translation orthogonal to the long axis of
the object) along with predictions from several proximity models. The
straight line corresponds prediction from the proximity model based
on the correct-match constraint, while the dotted lines corresponds to
versions of the proximity model that does not imposes this constraint,
with different values of the parameter a, with a=1.0 in bold.

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
378
translation. As the displacement becomes larger, rela-
tive to the size of the object, this inequality in the
magnitude of the nearest neighbour matches for the
two cases will diminish.
Perhaps then, the visual systems preference strength
for a translation is related to a measure of proximity
without the imposition of a correct-match constraint.
So, instead of taking the average distance between
correct matches it might be better to take the average
distance between closest points along the ﬁrst- and
second-frame contours. To generalise this idea we
deﬁne a distance measure from a point on the contour
in the ﬁrst frame to the whole contour perimeter in the
second frame which is a weighted sum over the dis-
tances to every point on the contour in the second
frame.
More precisely: we pick the same, large number of
points (n) equally spaced along each ﬁgure’s con-
tour1, using the same stimuli as in the experiment. The
points on the contour in the ﬁrst frame are labelled by
index i=1..N, the points on the contour in the second
frame are labelled by index j=1..N. As a measure of
distance D we take2:
D= 1
N %
N
i=1
Di,
in which
Di=
%
N
j=1
rij
−a·rij
%
N
j=1
rij
−a
,
with rij the distance between point i on the contour in
the ﬁrst frame and point j on the contour in the second
frame. In words, each point along the ﬁrst-frame con-
tour is initially paired with each point along the second-
frame contour. The contribution of each pairing to the
overall proximity measure declines with increasing dis-
tance between the two points. The contribution, or
weight, falls off with the distance to the power -a. In a
competing situation, the transformed ﬁgure with the
smaller D value will be preferred over the one with the
larger value. To gain an intuitive understanding of the
behaviour of this proximity model, it is noteworthy that
for a=0 all points have the same weight; whereas for
increasing a, the weight of closer points increases and
the model approaches a local, nearest neighbour solu-
tion. For a\0, the contribution to the distance D from
a particular point, i, is due largely to pairings with
points on the second-frame contour lying within a
region centred at the minimum distance from i to the
second-frame contour and with size proportional to this
distance. For small translations of the ﬁgure between
the two frames, this means that ﬁne-scale matching of
points will determine D, whereas for large translations,
coarse-scale matching will become increasingly impor-
tant. This behaviour is compatible with the psycho-
physical ﬁndings that the upper displacement limit for
direction discrimination is proportional to the spatial
scale of the stimulus (e.g. Bischof & Di Lollo, 1990)
and that for large displacements, only coarse spatial
structure inﬂuences preference strength (Ramachan-
dran, Ginsberg & Anstis, 1983).
Fig. 3 also shows the predictions from this metric
with values of a=0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 and  and n=100.
None of the measures predicts the data within their
uncertainty (the deviations are larger than a few stan-
dard deviations). Still, the average deviations from the
best ﬁt are only about 10%. Also, the general trend is
well captured by the model, showing a greater tendency
towards the original, correct-match metric at larger
reference translations. In sum, this algorithm, parame-
terised by a=1.0, can be taken as a plausible metric for
proximity that can now be used to produce a null-hy-
pothesis for preference strengths when arbitrary trans-
formations are pitted against one another.
4. Experiment 2
The aim of this experiment was to compare prefer-
ences for a range of projective transformations. The
image transformations studied here were as follows:
rotation; expansion; vertical expansion; shear; and ran-
dom jitter (see Fig. 4). In geometric terms, the ﬁrst four
of these transformations are 2-D afﬁne or less general,
and thus each model rigid planar motions in the world
(when perspective effects are negligible). Rotation, a
Euclidean transformation, preserving both lengths and
angles, models a rotation of the object about the line of
sight. Expansion, a similarity transformation, preserv-
ing angles and ratios of lengths, models a translation of
the object along the line of sight. Vertical expansion, an
afﬁne transformation preserving parallelism and ratios
of areas but neither angles nor ratios of lengths, models
a rotation of the object about the horizontal axis. Shear
(horizontal stretch, vertical compression), also an afﬁne
transformation, models a rotation about the horizontal
in combination with a translation along the line of
sight. Random-jitter (generated by adding random, in-
dependent motion to the wire-frame control points) is
1 This approaches an integral over the curves parameterised by the
distance along the curve. Note that in principle it is more reasonable
to take a uniform density of control points in the 2-D image as
opposed to taking them uniformly spaced along the contour: in
fractal structures the distance along the contour can be extremely
large when measured at a small scale. However, in our particular case
these subtleties can be neglected.
2 In practice we ﬁrst determine the closest distance and use this to
determine the relati6e weights of the other point. This prevents
numerical errors or dividing by zero.

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
379
Fig. 4. Examples of the ﬁve transformations investigated. (a) Rota-
tion. (b) Expansion. (c) Vertical stretch. (d) Shear. (e) Random jitter.
See text for further details.
tuning to different motions to be established. As in
experiment 1, establishing the translation magnitude at
which the PSE is reached gives a measure of the
preference strength for that transformation (the smaller
the value, the higher the preference strength).
4.2. Procedure
Three subjects, the ﬁrst author and two naive observ-
ers, participated in this experiment. Each subject sat
through three blocks of 50 trials, 10 each at ﬁve differ-
ent spatial offsets (translation magnitudes) for each
experimental condition (combination of transformation
Fig. 5. (a) An example stimulus from experiment 2. Frame one
consists of two wire-frame structures, the larger one being simply an
expanded and displaced version of the smaller one. Frame two
consists of the same two structure although now their positions have
been swapped over (translated through each other). (b) Illustration of
the two possible percepts arising from the stimulus shown in Fig. 1.
The stimulus conﬁguration in Fig. 1 is abstracted here to isolate the
two wire-frame structures with thin lines depicting the position of the
structures in the ﬁrst frame and bold lines depicting the position of
the structures in the second frame. Note that the large and small
structures are shown separately purely for the sake of clarity. The top
row depicts the possibility that the two structures are seen translating
through each other by equal magnitudes. This magnitude is deﬁned
by the spatial separation of the structures in frame one. The bottom
row depicts the possibility that the small structure is seen expanding
to the large structure, while the larger structure is seen contracting to
the smaller structure.
topological and simulates a non-rigid transformation of
the ﬁgure’s structure.
4.1. Experimental technique
Oyama (1972) developed an two-frame apparent mo-
tion technique using a pair of ﬁgures related by the
particular transformation, such as a size change (see
also Watson, 1986). In frame one, the two ﬁgures are
spatially offset by some distance and in frame two, the
locations of the two ﬁgures are simply reversed. As
Oyama, Naito & Naito (1994) noted, there are at least
two possible percepts in this case. First, the structures
can be seen to either deform (e.g. expand and contract)
or second, they can be seen to translate through each
other, with no change in shape (see Fig. 5).
There are four notable beneﬁts of this particular
technique. First, all elements are completely matched
up, regardless of which motion is perceived. Second, the
technique can be used to pit a pure translation against
a pure deformation (i.e. with no translatory compo-
nent). A third advantage of this technique, unexplored
by Oyama, is that the magnitudes of the translation and
the transformation can both be independently manipu-
lated (see Fig. 6). Fourth, any transformation can be
pitted against the translation, so allowing the relative

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
380
Fig. 6. Illustration of how the magnitudes of the translation and transformation can be independently manipulated. Comparing (b) to (a) shows
how the translation can be increased, whereas comparing of (c) to (a) shows how the transformation (here expansion) can be increased.
and speciﬁc magnitude), randomly ordered in a Method
of Constant Stimuli design. The subject’s task was to
respond whether, on a given trial, a percept of a
translation or a transformation dominated. On any one
run, only a single transformation set at a single magni-
tude was used. Subjects were shown clear examples
prior to the run of the particular condition to illustrate
the appearance of the two possible motions paths.
The parameters used to generate the wire-frame con-
tours were as described in experiment one with the
following exceptions. First, step two was left out so that
the shapes were based on a square rather than a
rectangle. Second, a new step was added at the end as
following.(4) Randomly select an angle from between 0
and 360° and then rotate the ﬁgure around its centre in
the image plane by this amount.
Finally, an additional step was taken in order to
ensure that the horizontal extent of each pair of struc-
tures was equal for different magnitudes of expansion.
The sides of the original square were set to 240/(x+1)
arc min, where x=expansion rate in one dimension,
and the magnitude of jitter added was proportional to
the ﬁgure size. The second ﬁgure in the displays was
deﬁned simply by transforming the original structure in
a manner according to the particular experimental
condition.
Preference strengths were measured for ﬁve transfor-
mations each at a range of ﬁve magnitudes. For the
rotations, magnitudes of 10, 15, 20, 25 and 30° were
used. For the expansions, magniﬁcation factors of 1.15,
1.3, 1.45, 1.6 and 1.75 were used. For the vertical
expansions, magniﬁcation factors of 1.25, 1.4, 1.55, 1.7
and 1.85 were used. For the shear stimuli, the horizon-
tal dimensions were expanded while the vertical dimen-
sion was compressed by a similar factor. The scale
factors were 1.2, 1.35, 1.5, 1.65 and 1.8. For the ran-
dom jittering, the vertices or control points of the
ﬁgures were individually jittered away from the under-
lying square in the manner described in Step (3) in
experiment one. The magnitudes of these displacements
were 99, 16, 23, 30 and 36 arc min. All other stimulus,
procedural and statistical details were as for experiment
one.
Fig. 7 plots the mean PSEs for three subjects across
the ﬁve transformations at each magnitude. As ex-
pected, these data reveal a monotonic increase in the
PSE as the magnitude of each transformation is
increased.
Fig. 7. PSEs for three subjects for the different transformations. Note
the individual co-ordinates for each transformation. Increasing the
magnitude of the transformation leads to an increase in the PSE for
each transformation. This means that preference strength is inversely
proportional to the transformation magnitude.

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
381
Fig. 8. Data from Fig. 7 replotted as a function of the PSE predicted
by the proximity model with no correct-match constraint. The value
of the exponent a=1.0. Three graphs show results for individual
subjects, while the lower right graph shows the results averaged over
subjects. The error bar on each plot represents the mean SEM over
each condition either across trials for the individual subject, or across
subjects.
simple metric provides a good account of the variations
in the PSEs of the ﬁve transformations. Furthermore,
the error in the ﬁt of the a=1.0 and 2.0 versions is
14%, which is no more than the variability between
subjects’ settings, averaged across all transformations
(15%). Also shown for comparison is the goodness of ﬁt
for the measure of proximity based on the distances of
corresponding points on the moving contour. The ﬁt
here is much poorer.
In sum then, these data show that while the visual
system does have a preference for image translations,
there is no evidence for differential preferences between
several Euclidean, afﬁne and topological transforma-
tions.
5. Experiment 3
In this experiment, we focused on two factors that
may have inﬂuenced the data in experiment two: the
temporal aspects of the stimuli and the random varia-
tions in the ﬁgures shapes. Previous investigators have
postulated a duality of motion processes, with a short-
range process operating at short spatio-temporal dis-
placements and assumed to be stimulated by real,
continuous movement, and a long-range process, oper-
ating at longer spatio-temporal displacements (e.g.
Braddick, 1980; Anstis, 1980; Petersik, 1989). Further-
more, proponents of this dichotomy have sometimes
argued that form may play a more important role
under conditions that favour the long-range process. A
potential criticism of our work then is that by working
with relatively small spatio-temporal displacements, we
have restricted ourselves to a domain where the active
visual motion detectors are inherently local and thus
precluded the possibility of global form playing a role
in our results.
In order to gain an insight into differential prefer-
ences for these ﬁve transformations plus translation,
these data are replotted in Fig. 8 against the proximity
measure developed above. To obtain this plot, the
proximity measure was applied to each stimulus used in
the experiment, and PSEs was produced by ﬁtting
cumulative Gaussians to the model data. The data
obtained with different transformations all lie along
lines of slope 1.0. Furthermore, there are no systematic
differences in the height of the lines, as can be seen in
the graph showing the PSEs averaged across subject.
The average PSEs are 55, 10 and 32% higher than y=x
for subjects RAE, RAS and MFB respectively, and
37% higher averaged across all subjects (SEM=15%).
This indicates that there is a preference for translation
over other types of transformations. However, the fact
that the data cluster together around a single line
suggests that there are no systematic differences in
preference strength for the other transformations.
Fig. 9 shows how well the PSEs, averaged over
subjects, are ﬁtted to a straight line with slope 1.0. The
ordinate plots the standard deviation of the distribution
of human PSE values divided by model PSE values.
Goodness of ﬁt is about the same for a=1.0 and 2.0
and only slightly higher for a= Recall that the case
of a= is that of nearest neighbour matching, with
no correct-match constraint. This result shows that this
Fig. 9. Percentage deviations of the PSE values plotted in Fig. 9 from
a single line of slope +1.0, measured for a range of proximity
measures.

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
382
On the other hand, acceptance of the two-process
distinction is far from universal, and recent data ques-
tion some of the primary evidence on which it was
based, including both the spatial limits (Eagle &
Rogers, 1996) and temporal limits (Stout, Pantle &
Mills, 1994). Furthermore, in the current work we have
sought to determine whether form plays a role in
determining correspondences under natural viewing
conditions, where small spatiotemporal displacements
are the norm. However, whether the role of form
changes under different stimulus conditions clearly mer-
its investigation, as the results may have signiﬁcance for
current theories of motion perception. To investigate
this issue, we have measured preference strengths for
different transformations under both short and long ISI
conditions.
A further concern regarding the preceding experi-
ments is that the data were obtained by averaging over
a large number of very differently shaped objects. The
possibility exists that on the average there is no prefer-
ence for a particular transformation, but that prefer-
ences do exist when individual objects are examined. To
investigate this, regular shapes were used here as the
untransformed experimental ﬁgures; speciﬁcally, circles
with a radius of 71 arc min. These circles were then
transformed into a curve whose radius R is a function
of the angle f in the following way:
R(f)=1.2*R0*{1+0.1* cos [f/l+p]*2r}
where R0 the radius of the untransformed circle, l the
period and, f the relative phase (randomly 0.0–1.0) of
the original circle.
Four conditions were run in which the period l=p/
4, p/2, 2p/3 or p rad. A further condition was added in
which the circle was uniformly expanded by a factor of
1.2. Two conditions were run, with different levels of
ISI (blank frame with luminance matched to the stimu-
lus background): 13 and 145 ms. It has been argued
that beyond around 100 ms, the short-range process is
inactive while the long-range process remains active
(e.g. Braddick & Adlard, 1978). Other aspects of the
stimuli were as in experiment 1.
Fig. 10 shows the PSEs obtained in the ﬁve condi-
tions for two subjects (the ﬁrst two authors). The
transformed ﬁgures are shown at the top of the ﬁgure,
along with the original circle. While the transforma-
tions induced by the expansion and the condition in
which l=p rad model rigid 3-D motions (translation
along the line of sight, and translation along the line of
sight coupled with rotation about an image plane axis,
respectively), the other transformations model non-rigid
motions. As such, a scheme in which differential prefer-
ence strengths exist for rigid and non-rigid motions
would predict PSEs that differ. Also displayed are the
predictions from the various measures for proximity
presented earlier. As all of these models are form-blind,
Fig. 10. PSEs obtained in the ﬁve conditions at two levels of ISI
along with predictions from several proximity models. At the top of
the ﬁgure for each condition the transformed ﬁgures are shown, along
with the original circle (the untransformed object).
there are no differential preferences for any of the
transformations.
In line with these predictions, it is clear that there are
no overall differences in the psychophysically-deter-
mined PSEs for the rigid and non-rigid transforma-
tions, for either ISI. Since this result agrees with
predictions from a range of proximity measures, it can
be taken as strong evidence that the visual system does
not use similarity for matching objects. For both sub-
jects, the PSEs are, on average, 85% higher than the
prediction for a=1.0. This reinforces the earlier ﬁnding
that there is a preference for translation over other
transformations. The effect averaged across subjects
appears to be larger here than in experiment two,
though the one subject who performed both experi-
ments, RAE, also had a relatively large preference
(55%) for translation in experiment two.
The only systematic trend in the data for the two ISI
levels is that the PSEs are all raised somewhat relative
to the short ISI condition. This implies that preference
for pure translation did increase. This suggests that if
there are two motion systems, and the ISI setting
determines which is dominant then both behave quite
similarly for these stimuli. Both show a preference for
pure translations over other transformations, but no
differential preferences regarding other transforma-
tions.
6. General discussion
We have developed a novel, sensitive technique for
quantifying preference strengths for different shape

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
383
transformations in a competing apparent motion se-
quence. We have found that the visual system has a
preference for image translations over other global
transformations. However, no evidence for differential
preferences for other transformations, including Eu-
clidean (rotation), similarity (expansion), afﬁne (vertical
expansion and shear) and topological (random jitter)
ones were found. These ﬁndings show that the visual
system does not make sophisticated use of physical
constraints, such as rigidity, to help solve the corre-
spondence problem. Rather, a simple algorithm in
which proximity of local features is the primary deter-
minant of correspondence can account for the majority
of the data.
These results extend earlier ﬁndings in the literature
suggesting that form plays little role in determining
motion correspondences (e.g. Navon, 1976; Burt &
Sperling, 1981; Shechter, Hochstein & Hillman, 1988)
even with relatively large shapes, small displacements
and ecologically-valid transformations. Furthermore,
the ﬁnding that translations are preferred to other
transformations is consistent with the data of Ullman
(1980) who observed that matches preserving line
length and orientation were preferred to ones that did
not. In our experiment two, translational motion was
the only condition that preserved both line length and
orientation.
A number of models is available that try to solve the
correspondence problem for point to point matches
(e.g. Ullman, 1979; Dawson, 1991). In certain aspects
these models are related to the proximity measure
developed here. In both Ullman’s and Dawson’s models
the connection strength between points falls off rapidly
with the distance, similarly to the distance dependence
used in our measure. Also, in the neural network
implementation used by Dawson (1991) all points inter-
act with each other, as in our model. However, these
other models tend to use additional constraints, such as
uniqueness and relative velocity. These constraints are
appropriate in these models, as their success is judged
by whether their outputs match the percepts of human
observers. In contrast, we have developed a metric that
seeks to capture the essential factors determining the
proximity between two contours, independent of which
global transformation is perceived. This metric can be
used to predict which contour moves to which, in a
competing apparent motion sequence, but does not
predict what the appearance of the motion will be.
Consider for instance a circle with a spike on it. When
this contour is rotated, it is perceived as such, so that
the distances between corresponding points increase
with increasing rotation angle. However, our model
predicts that the preference strength for matching the
overall contour will be largely unaffected by the rota-
tion angle. Our proposal of a proximity measure should
not be seen as being in competition with models that
compute the appearance of a motion transformation
(e.g. Hildreth, 1984; Ullman, 1979; Dawson, 1991).
Instead, we argue that computations that act at an
earlier stage of motion processing, prior to the full
solution of the motion correspondence problem, can
have a surprisingly important effect on which of two
competing motions are perceived.
Movshon, Adelson, Gizzi & Newsome (1985) have
described the measurement of motion as a two-stage
process: the ﬁrst stage involving measurement of the
components of motion in the direction perpendicular to
local features; the second combining these components
of motion to compute the full 2-D velocity ﬁeld. The
processing required to implement our proximity mea-
sure are plausibly located within the ﬁrst stage of this
scheme. Certainly, for small motions the nearest neigh-
bour matches that approximate the model’s behaviour
will coincide with the normal ﬂow estimated by local
motion detectors. The matches involved in determining
the proximity measure might then reﬂect the activation
of local motion detectors covering the visual ﬁeld and
acting, initially at least, independently of one another.
As such, it is appropriate that constraints such as
uniqueness and relative velocity are not imposed. Thus,
unlike models that attempt to capture the percept of a
motion
transformation,
properties
such
as
motion
smoothness (Hildreth, 1984) or relative velocity (Daw-
son, 1991) form no part of our measure of proximity.
There is evidence indicating that there is no percep-
tual access to the outputs of the ﬁrst-stage motion
mechanisms (Welch, 1989). This is consistent with the
fact that subjects perceived the global transformations
applied to the ﬁgures, rather than the local matches
that the proximity measure is based on. Interestingly
then, it seems as if mechanisms at this ﬁrst, perceptu-
ally-inaccessible stage determine which of two compet-
ing global matches is preferred. The second stage
mechanisms then ignore the alternative global match,
and compute the perceived global motion or the pre-
ferred match. This means that the system may prefer
one transformation over another even though the mean
distance of correctly-matched features is larger, as long
as the mean distance of closest matches is smaller.
These speculations are also consistent with the experi-
mental results of Dawson (1989) showing that global
spatial relations (e.g. topological structure) affect the
quality or visibility of apparent motion (assumed here
to be a second-stage operation) but do not inﬂuence
motion correspondence per se (a ﬁrst-stage operation).
The particular proximity measure we have used must
be incomplete as a biologically plausible model, as it
does not include tuning for parameters such as spatial
frequency, orientation and temporal offset, known to
exist at the ﬁrst stages of primate motion detection (see
Snowden (1994) for a review). More plausible models
incorporating such features have already been proposed

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
384
(e.g. Grossberg & Rudd, 1992). However, the success of
the current model testiﬁes to the fact that the key aspect
of any viable model hoping to account for preferences
in an ambiguous apparent motion sequence is proxim-
ity of local features. It may be that incorporating other
characteristics, such as orientation tuning, will help to
account for the residual preference for translations over
other transformations, although this remains to be
tested.
One weakness with the current model is that it
assumes that the segmentation problem—knowing that
there are two separate ﬁgures to begin with—is solved
at a very early stage, as the model implicitly makes use
of this fact. In principle, however, this problem is not
insurmountable as segmentation of the ﬁgures used in
these experiments is clearly solved under static presen-
tation, and so could be made to feed into the initial
motion computations, rather than be derived from
them. Indeed, when we looked at stimuli in which the
contours were replaced with multiple dots, any coherent
sense of motion broke down suggesting that the object
segmentation is a necessary prerequisite for the global
ﬁgure motion to be perceived. Subsequent work will be
needed to test these notions of the proposed model’s
implementation. Either way, what seems clear is that
the visual system makes primary use of the proximity of
local matches to determine motion correspondences,
with scant regard for the global shape transformation.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a BBSRC project grant
No. 43/SO 5036 awarded to AB and RAE. Parts of this
work were presented at the ARVO annual conferences
held in Ft. Lauderdale, Fl. in May 1995 and May 1997.
References
Anstis, S. M. (1980). The perception of apparent movement. Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London, series B,
290, 153–168.
Blake, A., Curwen, R., & Zisserman, A. (1993). A framework for
spatio-temporal control in the tracking of visual contours. Inter-
national Journal of Computer Vision, 11, 127–145.
Bischof, W. F., & Di Lollo, V. (1990). Perception of directional
sampled motion in relation to displacement and spatial frequency:
Evidence for a unitary motion system. Vision Research, 30, 1341–
1362.
Braddick, O. J., & Adlard, A. J. (1978). Apparent motion and the
motion detector. In J. Armington, J. Krauskopf, & B. R. Wooten,
In Visual psychophysics and physiology. New York: Academic
Press.
Braddick, O. J. (1980). Low-level and high-level processes in apparent
motion. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of Lon-
don, series B, 290, 137–151.
Burt, P., & Sperling, G. (1981). Time, distance, and feature trade-offs
in visual apparent motion. Psychological Re6iew, 88, 171–195.
Chen, L. (1985). Topological structure in the perception of apparent
motion. Perception, 14, 197–208.
Dawson, M. R. W. (1989). Apparent motion and element connected-
ness. Spatial Vision, 4, 241–251.
Dawson, M. R. W. (1991). The how and why of what went where in
apparent motion: modeling solutions to the motion correspon-
dence problem. Psychological Re6iew, 98, 569–603.
Eagle, R. A., & Rogers, B. J. (1996). Motion detection is limited by
element density not spatial frequency. Vision Research, 36, 545–
558.
Finney, D. J. (1971). Probit Analysis, 3rd. Cambridge: University
Press.
Gibson, J. J. (1950). The Perception of the 6isual world. Boston:
Houghton Mifﬂin.
Gibson, J. J. (1966). The senses considered as perceptual systems.
Boston: Houghton Mifﬂin.
Grossberg, S., & Rudd, M. E. (1992). Cortical dynamics of visual
motion perception: short-range and long-range apparent motion.
Psychological Re6iew, 99, 78–121.
Hildreth, E. C. (1984). The Measurement of Visual Motion. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Koenderink, J. J., & van Doorn, A. J. (1975). Invariant properties of
the motion parallax ﬁeld due to the movement of rigid bodies
relative to the observer. Optica Acta, 22, 773–791.
Kolers, P. A. (1972). Aspects of Motion Perception. Oxford: Perga-
mon Press.
Kolers, P. A., & Pomerantz, J. R. (1971). Figural change in apparent
motion. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 87, 99–108.
Mack, A., Klein, L., Hill, J., & Palumbo, D. (1989). Apparent
motion: Evidence of the inﬂuence of shape, and size on the
correspondence process. Perception & Psychophysics, 46, 201–206.
Marr, D. (1982). Vision. New York: W.H. Freeman.
Movshon, J. A., Adelson, E. H., Gizzi, M. S., & Newsome, W. T.
(1985). The analysis of moving visual patterns. In C. Chagas, R.
Gattas, & C. G. Gross, Pattern recognition mechanisms. Berlin:
Springer.
Navon, D. (1976). Irrelevance of ﬁgural identity for resolving ambi-
guities in apparent motion. Journal of Experimental Psychology:
Human Perception & Performance, 2, 130–138.
Orlansky, J. (1940). The effect of similarity and difference in form on
apparent visual movement. Archi6es of Psychology, 246, 85.
Oyama, T. (1972). Comments as a discussant at Symposium ‘Percep-
tion of Space and Motion’ at 20th International Congress of
Psychology, Tokyo.
Oyama, T., Naito, K., & Naito, N. (1994). Long-range apparent
motion as a result of perceptual organisation. Perception, 23,
269–286.
Pantle, A., Pinkus, A., & Strout, J. (1992). Motion signal interactions
[Abstract]. In6estigati6e Ophthalmology & Visual Science, 33, 973.
Petersik, J. T. (1989). The two-process distinction in apparent mo-
tion. Psychological Bulletin, 106, 107–127.
Ramachandran, V. S., & Anstis, S. M. (1983). Extrapolation of
motion path in human visual perception. Vision Research, 23,
83–85.
Ramachandran, V. S., Ginsberg, A., & Anstis, S. M. (1983). Low
spatial frequencies dominate apparent motion. Perception, 12,
457–461.
Snowden, R. J. (1994). Motion processing in the primate cerebral
cortex. In A. T. Smith, & R. J. Snowden, Visual detection of
motion. London: Academic Press.
Shechter, S., Hochstein, S., & Hillman, P. (1988). Shape similarity
and distance disparity as apparent motion correspondence cues.
Vision Research, 9, 1013–1021.
Stout, J., Pantle, A., & Mills, S. L. (1994). An energy model of
interframe interval effects in single-step apparent motion’. Vision
Research, 34, 3223–3240.

R.A. Eagle et al. / Vision Research 39 (1999) 373–385
385
Ullman, S. (1977). Transformability and object identity. Perception &
Psychophysics, 22, 414–415.
Ullman, S. (1979). The 6isual interpretation of motion. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.
Ullman, S. (1980). The effect of similarity between line segments on
the correspondence strength in apparent motion. Perception, 9,
617–626.
Wallach, H., & O’Connell, D. N. (1953). The kinetic depth effect.
Journal of Experimental Psychology, 45, 205–217.
Warren, H. W. (1977). Visual information for object identity in
apparent movement. Perception & Psychophysics, 21, 264–268.
Watson, A. B. (1986). Apparent motion occurs only between similar
spatial frequencies. Vision Research, 26, 1727–1730.
Welch, L. (1989). The perception of moving plaids reveals two
motion-processing stages. Nature, 337, 734–736.
Zisserman, A. (1992). BMVC92 Tutorial: Notes on Geometric Invari-
ance in Vision. British Machine Vision Association for Pattern
Recognition.
.

