Ancient Indo-European Languages between Linguistics and Philology
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

Brill’s Studies in Historical
Linguistics
Series Editor
Jóhanna Barðdal
(Ghent University)
Consulting Editor
Spike Gildea
(University of Oregon)
Editorial Board
Joan Bybee (University of New Mexico) – Lyle Campbell (University of Hawai’i
Mānoa) – Nicholas Evans (The Australian National University)
Bjarke Frellesvig (University of Oxford) – Mirjam Fried (Czech Academy of
Sciences) – Russel Gray (University of Auckland) – Tom Güldemann
(Humboldt-Universität zu Berlin) – Alice Harris (University of Massachusetts)
Brian D. Joseph (The Ohio State University) – Ritsuko Kikusawa (National
Museum of Ethnology) – Silvia Luraghi (Università di Pavia)
Joseph Salmons (University of Wisconsin) – Søren Wichmann (mpi/eva)
volume 18
The titles published in this series are listed at brill.com/bshl
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

Ancient Indo-European
Languages between Linguistics
and Philology
Contact, Variation, and Reconstruction
Edited by
Michele Bianconi
Marta Capano
Domenica Romagno
Francesco Rovai
leiden | boston
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Names: Bianconi, Michele, 1991- editor.
Title: Ancient Indo-European languages between linguistics and philology :
contact, variation, and reconstruction / edited by Michele Bianconi [and 3
others].
Description: Leiden ; Boston : Brill, [2022] | Series: Brill's studies in historical
linguistics, 2211-4904 ; volume 18 | Includes bibliographical references and
index.
Identifiers: lccn 2022006178 (print) | lccn 2022006179 (ebook) |
isbn 9789004508811 (hardback ; acid-free paper) | isbn 9789004508828
(ebook)
Subjects: lcsh: Indo-European languages. | Languages in contact. | Language
variation. | Reconstruction (Linguistics) | Extinct languages. | LCGFT: Essays.
Classification: lcc p901 .a48 2022 (print) | lcc p901 (ebook) |
ddc 417/.7–dc23/eng/20220210
lc record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022006178
lc ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2022006179
Typeface for the Latin, Greek, and Cyrillic scripts: “Brill”. See and download: brill.com/brill‑typeface.
issn 2211-4904
isbn 978-90-04-50881-1 (hardback)
isbn 978-90-04-50882-8 (e-book)
Copyright 2022 by Michele Bianconi and Marta Capano. Published by Koninklijke Brill nv, Leiden,
The Netherlands.
Koninklijke Brill nv incorporates the imprints Brill, Brill Nijhoff, Brill Hotei, Brill Schöningh, Brill Fink,
Brill mentis, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Böhlau and V&R unipress.
Koninklijke Brill nv reserves the right to protect this publication against unauthorized use. Requests for
re-use and/or translations must be addressed to Koninklijke Brill nv via brill.com or copyright.com.
This book is printed on acid-free paper and produced in a sustainable manner.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

Al nostro Maestro Romano Lazzeroni
(1930–2020)
∵
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

ἡἀλήθεια ἐλευθερώσει ὑμᾶς
John, 8:32
∵
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

Contents
Foreword
ix
Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald
Acknowledgements
xii
List of Figures and Tables
xiii
Notes on Contributors
xv
Introduction
1
Michele Bianconi and Marta Capano
1
Divine Witnesses in Greece and Anatolia: Iliad 3.276–280 between
Contact, Variation, and Reconstruction
11
Michele Bianconi
2
Achaemenid Elamite and Old Persian Indefinites: A Comparative
View
48
Juan E. Briceño Villalobos
3
Phenomena of Spirantization and Language Contact in Greek Sicilian
Inscriptions. The case of τριαιντα
88
Marta Capano
4
Egyptian Greek: A Contact Variety
115
Sonja Dahlgren
5
Substrate Matters
153
Franco Fanciullo
6
Natural Language Use and Bilingual Interference: Verbal
Complementation Patterns in Post-Classical Greek
166
Victoria Fendel
7
Where Does Dionysus Ὕης Come From?
196
Laura Massetti
8
Alignment Change and Changing Alignments: Armenian Syntax and the
First ‘Death’ of Parthian
211
Robin Meyer
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

viii
contents
9
Rewriting the Law: Diachronic Variation and Register in Greek and
Hittite Legal Language
234
Katharine Shields
10
Lexical Variation in Young Avestan: The Problem of the ‘Ahuric’ and
‘Daevic’ Vocabularies Revisited
254
Elizabeth Tucker
11
Greek ἄγυρις ‘Gathering’ between Dialectology and Indo-European
Reconstruction
276
Roberto Batisti
12
Here’s to a Long Life! Albanian Reflections of Proto-Indo-European
Semantics
301
Brian D. Joseph
Index
313
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

Foreword
Alexandra Y. Aikhenvald
Throughout centuries of linguistic research, the Indo-European language fam-
ily has been the paragon for historical and comparative linguistics. Indo-
European linguistics has set the golden standard for the field—from the fam-
ily tree model to the strict division between synchrony and diachrony. Any
educated student of historical linguistics will be trained on the laws of Indo-
European (explicitly summarised by N.E. Collinge in his 1985 compendium).
Similar developments will then be discovered in the comparative studies for
many other families, reaching into the previously undescribed languages of
South America, Australia, and New Guinea, and giving them an extra glow
of respectability. Studies of Indo-European languages have, in many senses,
been laying down the law of the land for historical linguistics, hand-in-hand
with painstaking philological studies of older sources of languages whose doc-
umentation goes back thousands of years—Hittite, Luvian, Ancient Greek, to
name a few. New models of historical expansion and reconstruction of origins
and ancestral homelands use the Indo-European family as a testing ground (for
better or for worse, and oftentimes with dubious results). As the discipline of
linguistics evolves and expands over time, so do studies of Indo-European lan-
guages.
CalvertWatkins,aclassic of thefield, remarkedin2001: ‘farless familiar than
thevalueof Indo-Europeanforthetraditionalcomparativemethodisthevalue
of Indo-European as a laboratory for language contact and areal studies’. Now,
more than twenty years on, this is no longer so. Indo-European linguistics—
and more precisely, the study of Ancient Indo-European languages which have
survivedonlyinwrittensources—hasprogressedtoembracelanguagecontact,
areal diffusion, and sociolinguistic variation. This volume is a testimony to this
true progress in linguistics.
Back in the old days, language contact studies may have been considered
a hand-maid of historical reconstruction. Chapters in this volume show, inter
alia, how painstaking investigations of contact-induced change and the smat-
terings of sociolinguistic variation—gleaned from the ancient tablets and
lore—can help improve and refine our reconstruction and fine-tune our know-
ledge of the proto-language. Using the metaphor by Brian Joseph (in this
volume), the echoes of Indo-European heritage reverberate across semantic
patternsinthedaughterlanguagesandthosewhichcomeincontactwiththem.
The Proto-Indo-European concept of ‘long life’ is a case in point.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

x
aikhenvald
As the discipline of linguistics evolves and we learn more and more about
how languages work and what to look for, new phenomena come to light. We
now know that many Ancient Indo-European languages, Hittite among them,
had serial verbs, a phenomenon first identified for West African languages
back in the later nineteenth century. A careful reconstruction of sociolinguistic
situations—gleanedfromtheattesteddocuments—shedsnewlightonthedif-
fusion of grammatical categories and the emergence of typologically uncom-
mon patterns. The periphrastic perfect in Classical Armenian was developed
under the influence of Parthian, an Iranian language (in Meyer’s chapter in
this volume). The uncommon feature of this newly developed perfect was, for
a period of time, ‘tripartite marking’—with A (transitive subject), O (trans-
itive object), and S (intransitive subject), each expressed in a distinct way—
comes from the reanalysis of the Parthian ergative structure. The Old Persian
indefinite pronouns bear an indelible impact of the contemporary Elamite,
a neighbouring isolate (Briceño-Villalobos, this volume). Elamite must have
beenlearntasasecondlanguageof administrationbyIranian-speakingscribes.
The development of indefinite meanings in interrogative pronouns is hardly
unusual. It is the context of this contact-induced change in the ancient world
that makes it curious.
Newwaysof lookingatancientlanguages—incomparisonwithmodernlan-
guage situations—yield new results. We now know that Greek spoken from
1st century ce onward in Egypt bears a strong impact of Coptic, and appears
to have all the trimmings of a contact language, not dissimilar to Finland
Swedish, or Indian English (as shown in Dahlgren’s chapter). And what was
taken for granted no longer has to be. A passage of the Iliad that had been
unquestionably taken to be of Near-Eastern origin, can in fact be traced back to
Indo-European patterns of Anatolia (as shown by Bianconi). Different registers
of a language—or, as Shields puts it, each ‘situationally-defined variety’—
wouldhavetheirspecial,linguisticfeatures.Differencesinsyntactictechniques
employed in Ancient Greek legal inscriptions and in the Hittite Laws (many of
which bear a strong impact of contemporary Akkadian laws) highlight their
different functions in the two societies, and the differences in language mater-
ial at hand, evolved over centuries. Many conclusions are tentative, and so they
have to be: acknowledging the limits of what one knows is a mark of true schol-
arship.
For centuries, studies of Indo-European languages have led the way, in lin-
guistics and philology. To be an Indo-Europeanist, one needs to be a polymath:
the knowledge of languages, sources, history, often epigraphy, and many other
associated disciplines are de rigueur. No place for short-lived rules and formal
theories—noneof whichwilleveroutlivethelanguagestheypurportedlyapply
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

foreword
xi
to. This volume is a compendium of polymaths, with each chapter a gem, and
an impressive repository of knowledge and analytic depth. Studies like this
one will lead the way to further glory for Indo-European scholarship. Here is
to its long life—in the words of the title of Brian Joseph’s chapter! Or—using
an Albanian expression with a long Proto-Indo-European pedigree—për (në)
jetë të jetëve ‘for eternity’, literally, ‘for (a) lifetime of lifetimes’!
References
Collinge, Neville E. 1985, The laws of Indo-European, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Watkins, Calvert 2001, An Indo-European linguistic area and its characteristics:
Ancient Anatolia. Areal diffusion as a challenge to the comparative method?, in
A.Y. Aikhenvald—R.M.W. Dixon (eds.), Arealdiffusionand geneticinheritance.Prob-
lems in comparative linguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 44–63.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

Acknowledgements
This volume contains a selection of papers presented at a two-leg confer-
ence which took place in Pisa (April 2018) and Oxford (May 2018). We would
like to thank the institutions that supported our project (the Ertegun Schol-
arship Programme in the Humanities, St Hilda’s College, and the Faculty of
Linguistics, Philology and Phonetics at the University of Oxford; the Diparti-
mento di Filologia, Letteratura e Linguistica at the University of Pisa) and the
people who made it possible. Two independent volumes arose from this con-
ference. In the making of this book, the only one we are uniquely responsible
for, we have tried to give an inclusive and faithful representation of current
researchers and research directions. We greatly profited from discussion with
and help from both colleagues our age and more experienced scholars. Their
advice has profoundly and positively impacted our work, although—as per the
usual disclaimer—any infelicities are solely our responsibility. Most import-
antly, each article underwent a very rigorous peer-review process, which is the
backbone of good academic practice. We would like to take this chance to
thank our reviewers, whose work we deeply appreciated and respected, and
Brill, which facilitated the entire process. Finally, we would like to thank our
Authors, who entrusted us with their work, and followed us through the pro-
ject with patience and generosity. We hope to have offered their contributions
the volume that they deserve. This book is part of the prin project “Ancient
languages and writing systems in contact: a touchstone for language change”,
funded by the Italian Ministry of education, University, and Research. During
thelongandoftentryingyearsof thisproject,wefoundsupportandinspiration
from one another and from many friends, family members, both in and out of
academia, and our respective life partners. They followed our work with love,
encouragement and understanding, and to them we would like to express our
deepest gratitude.
Michele Bianconi & Marta Capano
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

Figures and Tables
Figures
2.1
Old Persian, Middle Persian, and Achaemenid Elamite indefinites and their
functions
79
3.1
The inscription of Antoninos
106
4.1
Map of Egypt
120
4.2
ogn i: 72, The Cairo Egyptian Museum
129
8.1
Incidence and trend of perfects with copula in fifth-century texts
222
8.2
Incidence of non-standard alignment patterns in fifth-century texts
223
Tables
1.1
Synoptic table of deities in Hittite treaties
36
2.1
The typology of indefinite pronouns
51
2.2
Words and phrases of (5) and (6) arranged according to their equivalent in each
language
60
2.3
op kašci and ae akkar
61
2.4
op cišci and ae aški
63
2.5
The formula “whoever you are” in db
69
2.6
op kā haya and ae akka(ya)
71
2.7
op taya and ae appa “whatever”
73
2.8
op ai̯va and ae kir
76
2.9
ae kaš
78
4.1
The inflection of Egyptian names in Greek
127
4.2
Nouns ending in -is
132
4.3
Inflectional endings for Greek nouns ending in -is as perceived by a L2
learner
133
4.4
Comparing ‘alternative’ kharis to the inflection of Egyptian names ending in a
vowel
134
4.5
Comparing alternative polis to the inflection of Egyptian names ending in a
consonant
134
4.6
Comparing the inflection of Egyptian names ending in -ês to the inflection of
Periklês
135
4.7
Comparing the inflectional endings of Egyptian names to the third declension
nouns
136
4.8
Coptic integration of the Greek loanverb
144
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

xiv
figures and tables
6.1
Table head
175
6.2
Xenophon, historiography, 5th / 4th centuries bc, tlg, lemma γράφω (searches:
June 2020)—98 passages in total
178
6.3
Plutarch, historiography, 1st / 2nd centuries ad, tlg, lemma γράφω (searches:
June 2020)—36 passages in total
178
6.4
DDbDP, s.v. lex γράφω, language: Ancient Greek, provenance: known,
ad250–700 (searches: June 2020)—256 passages in total
179
6.5
Private letters belonging to bilingual papyrus archives, 4th to mid-7th centuries
ad, language: Ancient Greek (searches: June 2020)—61 passages in total
179
8.1
Summary of the Classical Armenian alignment pattern
216
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

Notes on Contributors
Roberto Batisti
isTeaching Assistant and collaborator of the Department of Classical Philology
and Italian Studies at the Alma Mater Studiorum—Università di Bologna.
Michele Bianconi
is Diebold Researcher in Comparative Philology at the University of Oxford,
Lecturer in Classics at St Hilda’s College, and Fellow of the Harvard Center for
Hellenic Studies.
Juan Briceño-Villalobos
isPostdoctoralResearchScholaratthePontificiaUniversidadCatólicadeChile.
Fondecyt de Postdoctorado 2021 (anid), Proyecto N° 3210689.
Marta Capano
is Post-Doctoral researcher at the Universiteit Gent and will be a Fellow of the
Harvard Center for Hellenic Studies for the 2022–2023 academic year.
Sonja Dahlgren
is Post-Doctoral researcher at the University of Helsinki.
Franco Fanciullo
now retired, was formerly Professor of Historical Linguistics and Dialectology
at the Università di Pisa.
Victoria Fendel
is Leverhulme Early Career Fellow at the University of Oxford.
Brian D. Joseph
is Distinguished University Professor of Linguistics and Kenneth E. Naylor Pro-
fessor of South Slavic Linguistics at the Ohio State University.
Laura Massetti
is Carlsberg Foundation Visiting Fellow at the University of Oxford and Fellow
of the Harvard Center for Hellenic Studies.
Robin Meyer
is Assistant Professor of Historical Linguistics at the Université de Lausanne.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

xvi
notes on contributors
Katharine Shields
is completing her PhD at University College London.
Elizabeth Tucker
is Emerita Jill Hart Research Fellow in Indo-Iranian Philology in the Faculty of
Oriental Studies and the Faculty of Linguistics, Philology and Phonetics, Uni-
versity of Oxford.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Michele Bianconi and Marta Capano, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_002
Introduction
Michele Bianconi and Marta Capano
This book sets out to offer new insights on language contact, variation, and
reconstruction, with a focus on the ancient languages belonging to the Indo-
European family and with a method that straddles the divide between two
disciplines which are nowadays very broad: Linguistics and Philology.
It is well known that studying the Indo-European (ie) languages means hav-
ing a privileged viewpoint on diachronic language change. Because of the rel-
ative wealth of documentation of these languages, which spans over more than
3 millennia with almost no interruption, and because of the cultural position
that they have enjoyed in human history,1 the ie family has been the prime
object of study of most branches of modern linguistic science. Whan it comes
to the ancient ie languages, the scholarly focus has traditionally been on lan-
guages such as Greek, Latin, and Sanskrit, whose large corpora provide solid
grounds for comparison. Languages which are more fragmentarily attested
have consequanetly had a lesser inpact on the study of language change and
reconstruction.Recentyearshaveseenashift,inthatwenowhaveanimproved
understanding of many of these Trümmersprachen, thanks to new discover-
ies and to a growing number of theoretical reflections on contact and vari-
ation in the ancient world. This has led to renewed attempts at integrating
them in the reconstruction of Proto-Indo-European. Furthermore, over the
past thirty years, scholars have brought new attention to previously under-
studied branches like Albanian (see Joseph’s contribution in this volume) and
Tocharian, which, in addition to the already lively interest in the Anatolian
languages, have finally allowed a more balanced reconstruction of the pro-
tolanguage, which was predominantly reconstructed on the basis of Greek and
Sanskrit until the half of the last century.2
Contact, variation and reconstruction have been thoroughly studied in the
linguistic literature, but a volume which includes several under-studied Indo-
European branches and takes into account the most recent findings in both
linguistic theory and the philologies of the individual languages is still a desid-
eratum.Here,weendeavourtoofferanewandup-todateselectionof casestud-
ies, most of which are looked at through inter-disciplinary and intra-disciplin-
1 One could just think of the importance of Latin in Medieval Europe or of Classical Sanskrit
in Pre-Modern India.
2 E.g. Melchert forthc.; Kümmel 2007; Jasanoff 2017.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

2
bianconi and capano
ary lenses.These contributions reveal at the same time the multiplicity and the
unity of our discipline(s), both by showing what kind of results the adoption of
modern theories on “old” material can yield, and by underlining the centrality
and complexity of the text in any research related to ancient languages.
Two of the poles around which the current volume revolves can allow schol-
ars to gain new insights on the third pole. Traditionally, in the history of Indo-
European linguistics variation and contact have been used as tools for a better
understanding of reconstruction; today we know that reconstruction itself—
especially when carried out through a rigorous handling of the data—has the
potential to shed light on previously-undetected phenomena of contact and
variation. Several contributions in this volume will touch upon these issues in
different ways. The study of living languages (to give a notorious example: the
Romance dialects) shows that a monolithic view of spoken languages is a pure
abstraction which is far from historical reality, as languages display sociolin-
guistic and geographicvariationandinterferencewithneighbouringlanguages
at most (if not all) levels. The adoption of these two parameters in the study of
corpus languages has the potential (mutatis mutandis) to influence the recon-
struction methods and practices when it comes to proto-languages. An exem-
plary case of this type of research is Franco Fanciullo’s work in this volume,
where a variationistic approach is applied to the evaluation of the substrate of
pre-Roman languages to Romance varieties.
As pointed out by several scholars, and as our late teacher Romano Lazze-
roni used to say, language change happens on a three-dimensional level, which
encompasses space, time, and society. The first parameter is superficially
understood by any speaker, who might experience that their language varies in
pronunciationandsometimeslexiconjustinamatterof kilometres;thesecond
one has been traditionally driving all studies of historical linguistics; the third
parameter, however, has been overlooked in the studies of historical linguistics
at least until the second half of the 19th century.3 Of course, philologists and
classicists from the past century, whose work focussed on literary texts with
a strong diastratic component (such as, for instance, Campanile 1957 on Pet-
ronius,orVineis1974onthelanguageof theLatinBible),noticedandanalysed
those texts on what we would now call a sociolinguistic level—but it was not
until much later that a comprehensive theoretical model was available.
One of the most impressive changes in recent theoretical paradigms in his-
torical linguistics is an improved understanding of language contact, which is
3 As is well known, a theoretical framework that fully addresses the social component of vari-
ationandchangehasbeenbroughttotheforeinhistoricallinguisticsbyscholarswhoworked
on modern languages, such as Labov (see e.g. Labov 1972).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

introduction
3
possible the first of the three directories of this volume. Language contact stud-
ies have recently entered a ‘golden era’: the publication in the past two decades
of several handbooks and companions on language contact and related top-
ics4 is only one of many hints thereof. Nonetheless, comparatively few works
focus specifically on contact and variation in the ancient ie languages, and
none—to our knowledge—does so on such a scale. For instance, recent books
on language contact in the ancient world focus either on one or two individual
languages,5 or provide case studies whose fil rouge may be difficult to detect.6
This book will have some predecessors, which however were published at a
time in which some significant advances in our disciplines had not yet been
made,7 or mainly focussed on a specific area or on a specific part of language.8
The recent progress in language contact studies and historical sociolinguist-
ics,9 along with an ever-increasing capacity of handling sparsely—and often
scarcely—attested data (cf. e.g. Jenset—McGillivray 2017) and the applic-
ation of new theoretical paradigms on diachronic data,10 allows us to provide a
fresh look on more- and less-studied topics. This volume combines the pres-
ence of the parameters of contact, variation, and reconstruction with their
application to a wide range of ancient Indo-European languages in light of
recent theoretical developments. However, dealing with ancient languages,
especially those fragmentarily attested, poses some additional challenges in
the interpretation of the material. All the contributions in this volume show
how a thorough consideration of the philological (and sometimes even mater-
ial) aspects of a texts can help untangle phenomena of contact and variation in
closed-corpus languages, and effectively reconstruct both synchronic and dia-
chronic aspects of such languages.
As one can infer from its prominent position within the title, the stand of
this volume “between Linguistics and Philology” reflects an indissoluble bond
which risks to be threatened by rather recent divisions between disciplines
4
Thomason 2001, Myers-Scotton 2002 and 2006, Winford 2003, Heine—Kuteva
2005, Matras 2020, Haspelmath—Tadmor 2009, Hickey 2010, 2017, and Bakker—
Matras 2013 just to cite a few.
5
These often happened to be Greek and Latin (e.g. Adams—Janse—Swain 2002; Adams
2003); but recently also on Oscan and Greek: McDonald 2015; Luwian and Hittite: Ya-
kubovich 2010.
6
A recent example is Meiser—Hackstein 2005.
7
E.g. Campanile—Cardona—Lazzeroni 1988.
8
E.g. Briquel-Chatonnet 1996 on the Ancient Near-East; Blanc—Christol 1999 and
Garnier 2020 on lexical material.
9
Cf. Romaine 1982, Labov 1994, Conde Silvestre 2007, Hernández Campoy—
Conde Silvestre 2012, Marotta—Rovai 2015, Molinelli—Putzu 2015.
10
On the case of diachronic Construction Grammar, cf. recently Barðdal 2015.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

4
bianconi and capano
(and departments). Philology and linguistics should in fact be treated as two
sides of the same coin, especially if one is working with ancient languages only
attested in a small corpus. Not only is the knowledge of linguistic phenom-
ena fundamental to understand (and eventually emend) a text, and is a sound
knowledge of the text (and all ancillary disciplines) fundamental in order to
have reliable data on which to base linguistic analyses—but the two discip-
lines are tied as an even more fundamental level. A brief detour in the history
of the discipline will exemplify it.
The first systematic attempt at drawing the relationships between the lan-
guages of the (then) newly discovered Indo-European family comes from
August Schleicher (1821–1868), who was influenced by Hegel and by the con-
temporary models of the natural sciences. Schleicher conceived each language
as an organism undergoing a life cycle, and proposed a genealogical model for
the representation of languages and their relationships: the Stammbaum, or
family tree. The theoretical premises behind the family-tree model are remark-
ably similar to those of the stemmatic method adopted in textual criticism,
which was also developed in the 19th century and owed much to evolutionary
theory. Manuscripts of a given text are evaluated according to their transcrip-
tion errors (= innovations), which can be ‘conjunctive’ when they tell us that
two or more manuscripts must come from a common source, or ‘separative’
when they indicate that a given manuscript (or group thereof) must be sep-
arated from another manuscript (or group thereof). The task of the editor is
to find significant conjunctive errors, and therefore exclude all those trivial (=
typologically common) innovations which may have occurred by chance. All
manuscripts are then grouped in a family tree (stemma codicum) and collated
(= compared) in order to reconstruct the original text or, more realistically the
so-called archetype, the text originating the textual tradition. As is well known,
thefirstandforemostreactiontotheStammbaummodelwastheso-calledWel-
lentheorie(‘wavemodel’),developedbyJohannesSchmidt(1843–1901).Inaway,
the Wellentheorie could find a parallel in the very common situation of ‘hori-
zontal contamination’ that one finds in those manuscripts which do not have
a single source.
It is perhaps worth noting that both methods developed in a period in which
sciences of nature and sciences of culture were more in contact than they are
today. It is generally thought that Darwin and Schleicher did not read each
other’s works, but the fact that phylogenetic models were developed at the
same time in different disciplines leads to the intrinsically a posteriori consid-
eration that “the time was ripe” for such an advance in scientific methodology.
The basic difference between the two fields does not lie in the method, but in
the shape of the object of enquiry: texts can be definitely fixed, natural lan-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

introduction
5
guages cannot. In order to reconstruct the relationship between languages, or
manuscripts,oneneedstolookateventualinnovationsof oneormoreof them.
Now, whereas in textual criticism these innovations often take the shape of
errors (including lacunae, contaminations, etc.), in languages there is no such
thing as an “error”, and actual contact is intrinsically more pervasive.11 This of
course does not impinge on the validity of the method; it only shows some of
its heuristic limits.12
Therefore, one can only admire the words of Giorgio Pasquali, who fam-
ously wrote that “the historical linguist—like the classical philologist—does
not know disciplines; (s)he knows problems, and tackles them from all sides
with every possible means”. This volume sets out to represent this very ap-
proach, investigating language phenomena under the lens of the philologist
and the linguist at the same time, in the conviction than any means should be
utilised if they can ensure a better understanding to ancient languages.
This volume features contributions dealing with several branches of the
Indo-European family (Anatolian, Indo-Iranian, Greek, Armenian, Italic,
Albanian), as well as non-Indo-European languages (such as Elamite and Egyp-
tian),andexploresmechanismsof languagechangefrommultipleperspectives
and through different heuristic paradigms. It also gives importance to some
of the traditionally less studied areas, such as Albanian, Luwian, post-classical
Greek, and the Middle-Iranian languages. In what follows, we offer a synthetic
overview of the book chapters.
In his contribution, Michele Bianconi studies a much-debated passage from
the third book of the Iliad through the lenses of contact, variation, and recon-
struction. After a focus on the theme of lists of divine witnesses in oaths
in various Near-Eastern languages (Hittite, Akkadian, Aramaic), he looks at
the variation of such a theme in the Hittite material, and evaluates what
can and cannot be reconstructed at an Indo-European level. He then adds
11
Contact is also more likely between two lects than it is in the transmission of written texts,
or between—say—two specific manuscripts. Therefore, one needs to look at innovations
lato sensu, and this is not always simple, because an innovation is such in opposition to
an archaism, and linguistic archaisms are not as easy to detect as the original lectiones of
a text.
12
One case in point. In languages, inheritance and contact do not necessarily exclude each
other, as one may envisage preservation because of contact. This is a relatively under-
studied part in language phylogenetics and contact studies, because—as we saw above—
it is innovations that establish relationships. However difficult to detect it might be, con-
tact may help preserve archaisms, but this is often not directly inferable from the evid-
ence.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

6
bianconi and capano
a new piece to the puzzle, arguing that a newly-deciphered Luwian inscrip-
tion shows a parallel with the aforementioned Iliadic passage, and seems to
suggest a possible transmission route of the theme of divine witnesses in oath-
swearing.
Juan Briceño-Villalobos compares Old Persian and Elamite indefinites in the
Achaemenid Royal Inscriptions, the pre-Achaemenid Elamite Royal Inscrip-
tions, and the Persepolis administrative tablets. Through an analysis of those
elements whose syntactic distribution and semantic context may help us
understand the expression of indefiniteness, he argues that the Elamite indef-
initeformsmightexplainthesyntacticdistributionof indefinitesinlaterstages
of the Persian language, and at the same time that the promotion of certain
Elamite morphological elements was due to contact with Old Persian.
In her chapter, Marta Capano looks the issue of spirantisation of stops in
Sicilian Greek through the lens of contact with Latin, of the comparative ana-
lysis of other areas of the Greek-speaking world, and of typological evidence.
She then focusses on a specific case from a Sicilian inscription, arguing that a
form, which was hitherto regarded as the result of an error of the engraver, is
in fact an authentic product of the spoken language. The chapter offers a new
piece of evidence for a case of language contact between Greek and Latin in
the Roman period and outlines a periodisation of spirantisation of voiced velar
stops in Sicilian Greek.
Sonja Dahlgren studies phenomena of language contact in the Narmouthis
Greek ostraka, in which the many phonetic-based spellings show interference
between Greek and Egyptian at the phonological level, both in segmental and
suprasegmental features.Byshowingthat transferfromL1mostly takesplaceat
the phonological level, Dahlgren argues that in the case of Egyptian Greek one
can envisage a contact situation in which speakers of a prestige language who
are still strongly attached to the original culture interact with speakers shifting
from their original language to a L2.
Franco Fanciullo offers new methodological insights on the debate over
the influence of pre-Latin substrate languages on regional Latin. After review-
ing Ascoli’s “proofs” for substrate and distinguishing between “substrate” as a
specific subfield of contact linguistics and “substrate” as a specific theory of
language change developed in the second half of the 19th century and popu-
lar until at least the first half of the 20th century, he argues that the debate
between “substrate-maniac” and “substrate-phobic” scholars could have been
less hot if one had considered the modern interaction between Italian dialects
and Standard Italian. On these grounds, Fanciullo reconsiders a well-known
case study (the assimilation of -nd- > nn and -mb- > -mm-), and puts it under a
new light.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

introduction
7
Victoria Fendel endeavours to explain the form-function pairing in two
instances of the verb γράφω ὅτι + deontic verb in an early 4th-centuryce letter
from the Oasis Magna in Egypt. Through a study of the verb profile of γράφω
in classical and post-classical literary and documentary Greek sources, she sug-
geststhatthisconstructionisaresultof acombinationof bilingualinterference
(with an L1 model), chunking of frequently recurring pieces of language, and
the availability of insubordination in Greek.
Laura Massetti’s paper endeavours to explain the origin of the Greek myth of
Dionysus Hyes, ‘Dionysus of the rain’ through the establishment a new Anato-
lian parallel within the context of Greek-Anatolian religious contact.The figure
of Dionysus Hyes is portrayed in different versions in the Greek sources, but
the common point is that the god manages to escape persecution from an
enemy (Lycurgus or Perseus) plunging into the see and receiving help from a
femaledeity.MassettiinvestigatesDionysus Hyesbothfromamythologicaland
ritual perspective, with the reference to the Agrionia festivals, often connected
with stories about Dionysus’s persecution. This chapter shows how the narrat-
ive concerning young Dionysus has an Anatolian parallel, both on a ritual and
mythological ground, in the “Sacrifice and Prayer to the Storm-god of Nerik”
(cth 671), a New Hittite text. Massetti argues that the similarities between
the two myths are not of Indo-European origin, but rather a case of myth-
ological/ritual borrowing from the Ancient Near East to Greece through the
mediation of Hittite.
Robin Meyer argues in his paper that the construction of the Classical
Armenian perfect, which consists of a participle in -eal (< pie *-lo-) and an
(optional) form of the copula, is most accurately described as tripartite
morphosyntactic alignment in which intransitive and transitive passive verbs
construe with a nominative subject and subject agreement of the copula, and
transitive active verbs take genitive agents, accusative objects, and the copula
is a petrified third person singular. This alignment pattern can be explained as
a case of pattern replication and pivot matching of a Middle Iranian, specific-
ally Parthian, ergative-absolutive model in pre-literary times and subsequent
adaptation to Armenian requirements. More generally, the existence of Iranian
syntactic patterns in Armenian is due not only to language contact, but indeed
to language shift of the Parthian ruling class to Armenian.
The chapter by Katherine Shields deals with two features associated with
the revision and replication of Greek and Hittite legal texts: constituent order
inconditionalclausescontainingtheconjunctionstakkuandmānintheHittite
laws, and asyndeton in Greek legal inscriptions dating before 400bce. She
aims to examine the diachronic development of the register of ‘legal language’:
using a methodology informed by both sociolinguistic studies of register and
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

8
bianconi and capano
construction grammar-based approaches, she considers what evidence these
texts, which were frequently modified and rewritten, can provide for register
development in a type of language often considered hyper-conservative and
lacking in variation.
ElizabethTuckerprovidesnewinsightsonlexicalvariationinYoungAvestan
by studying the distribution of ‘ahuric’ and ‘daēvic’ vocabulary, i.e. those sets
of lexical terms that apply to good versus evil animate beings. Her contribu-
tion focuses on how different Younger Avestan texts employ ahuric and daēvic
vocabulary,andthevariationsthatcanbeobservedfromtexttotext.Sheargues
that that a philological analysis of the Avestantextspoints toa developingliter-
ary convention which resulted in different composers selecting in various ways
from the synonyms in their language to highlight the contrast between good
and evil.
Throughastudyof thelexicalfamilyof ἄγυρις‘gathering’,‘assembly’,Roberto
Batisti discusses one of the most problematic exceptions to the regular Greek
sound change */o/ > /u/ in some specific (labial or palatal) environments—
generally known as “Cowgill’s Law”. Against previous explanations according to
which these irregularities are due to unconstrained variation or to improvable
contact between different dialects, Batisti assumes that forms such as ἄγυρις
are phonetically regular, and argues for a morphological explanation by way of
a different derivational history involving an old u-stem.
Brian Joseph’s conclusive chapter focusses on reconstruction by looking
at diachronic lexical semantics, which has long been one of the less system-
atic enterprises in historical linguistics. He draws the attention to the cultural
and pragmatic milieu, which can also reveal instances of semantic persist-
ence, sometimes over long stretches of time. As an example such persistence,
he discusses an example from Albanian, whereby details of usage for various
present-day Albanian words and phrases reveal aspects of what can plausibly
be reconstructed as Proto-Indo-European cultural semantics having to do with
an interest in longevity. These echoes reflect a linguistic continuity lasting for
more than six millennia.
References
Adams, James N. 2003, Bilingualism and the Latin Language, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Adams, James N.—Janse, Mark—Swain, Simon (eds.) 2002, Bilingualism in
Ancient Society: Language Contact and the Written Text, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

introduction
9
Bakker, Peter—Matras, Yaron 2013, Contact Languages. A Comprehensive Guide,
Boston/Berlin: de Gruyter.
Barðdal, Jóhanna—Smirnova, Elena—Sommerer, Lotte—Gildea, Spike
(eds.) 2015, Diachronic Construction Grammar, Constructional Approaches to Lan-
guage, vol. 18, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Blanc, Alain—Christol, Alain (eds.) 1999, Langues en contact dans l’antiquité.
Aspects lexicaux, Nancy: A.D.R.A.
Briquel-Chatonnet, Françoise (ed.) 1996, Mosaïque de langues, mosaïque cul-
turelle: Le Bilinguisme dans le Proche-Orient ancien, Paris: Jean Maisonneuve.
Campanile, E. 1957, Osservazioni sulla lingua di Petronio, “asnsp” Serie ii 26: 54–69.
Campanile, Enrico—Cardona, Giorgio R.—Lazzeroni, Romano (edd.) 1988,
Bilinguismo e biculturalismo nel mondo antico: atti del colloquio interdisciplinare te-
nuto a Pisa il 28 e 29 settembre 1987, Pisa: Giardini.
Conde Silvestre, Juan Camilo 2007, Sociolingüística histórica, Madrid: Gredos.
Haspelmath, Martin—Tadmor, Uri 2009, Loanwords InTheWorld’s Languages: A
Comparative Handbook, Berlin: de Gruyter Mouton.
Heine, Berndt—Kuteva, Tania 2005, Language Contact and Grammatical Change,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hernández Campoy, Juan Manuel—Conde Silvestre, Juan Camilo 2012,
(edd.), The Handbook of Historical Sociolinguistics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hickey, Raymond 2010, The Handbook of Language Contact, Chichester/Malden
(MA): Wiley-Blackwell.
Hickey, Raymond 2017, The Cambridge Handbook of Areal Linguistics, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Jasanoff, Jay 2017, The impact of Hittite and Tocharian: Rethinking Indo-European in
the 20th century and beyond, in J. Klein—B. Joseph—M. Fritz (edd.), Handbook of
Comparative and Historical Indo-European Linguistics, Volume 1, Berlin, Boston: De
Gruyter Mouton: 220–238.
Jenset, Gard B.—McGillivray, Barbara 2017, Quantitative Historical Linguistics:
A Corpus Framework, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kümmel, Martin J. 2007, Konsonantenwandel. Bausteine zu einer Typologie des Laut-
wandels und ihre Konsequenzen für die vergleichende Rekonstruktion, Wiesbaden:
Reichert.
Labov,William 1972, SociolinguisticsPatterns, Philadelphia: University of Pennsylva-
nia Press.
Labov, William 1994, Principles of Linguistic Change. Vol. 1: Internal Factors, Cam-
bridge (MA)/Oxford: Blackwell.
Marotta, Giovanna—Rovai, Francesco (eds.) 2015, Ancient Languages between
Variation and Norm, “Studi e Saggi Linguistici” 53/2.
Matras, Yaron 20202, Language Contact, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

10
bianconi and capano
McDonald, Katherine 2015, Oscan in Southern Italy and Sicily, Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Melchert, H. Craig (forthc.), The Position of Anatolian, in A. Garrett—M. Weiss
(edd.), Handbook of Indo-European Studies, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Meiser, Gerhard—Hackstein, Olav (eds.) 2005, Sprachkontakt und Sprachwan-
del. Akten der xi. Fachtagung der Indogermanischen Gesellschaft, 17.–23. September
2000, Halle an der Saale, Wiesbaden: Reichert.
Molinelli,Piera—Putzu,Ignazio(eds.)2015, Modelliepistemologici,metodologie
della ricerca e qualità del dato. Dalla linguistica storica alla sociolinguistica storica,
Milano: Franco Angeli.
Myers-Scotton, Carol 2002, Contact Linguistics. Bilingual Encounters and Gram-
matical Outcomes, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Myers-Scotton, Carol 2006, Multiple Voices. An Introduction to Bilingualism,
Malden (MA): Blackwell Publishing.
Radulescu, Mircea-Mihai 1994, The Indo-European Position of Messapic, “Journal
of Indo-European Studies” 22: 329–344.
Romaine, Suzanne 1982, Socio-Historical Linguistics. Its Status and Methodology,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thomason, Sarah G. 2001, Language Contact. An Introduction, Edinburgh/Washing-
ton DC: Edinburgh University Press/Georgetown University Press.
Vineis, Edoardo 1974, Studi sulla lingua dell’Itala, Pisa: Pacini.
Weiss, Michael 2009, Outline of the Historical and Comparative Grammar of Latin,
Ann Arbor: Beech Stave.
Winford, Donald 2003, AnIntroductiontoContactLinguistics, Malden, MA/Oxford:
Blackwell Publishing.
Yakubovich, Ilya 2010, Sociolinguistics of the Luvian Language, Leiden/Boston: Brill.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Michele Bianconi, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_003
chapter 1
Divine Witnesses in Greece and Anatolia: Iliad
3.276–280 between Contact, Variation, and
Reconstruction
Michele Bianconi
1
Introduction: Graeco-Anatolian Studies between Philology and
Linguistics*
The renewed popularity of Graeco-Anatolian studies is affirmed by a relevant
numberof recentcontributions,1inwhichscholarshavelookedatpossiblecon-
tact phenomena both at the linguistic and at the cultural level. This is a field
that makes the intersection between linguistics and philology its raison d’être,
and despite the absence of a comprehensive synthesis, it provides a generous
arrayof casestudiesthatmaybelookedatfromdifferentangles.Thegoalof this
paper is to show how profitable it can be to look at specific case studies through
the lenses of contact, variation and (Indo-European) reconstruction. This is a
well-trodden path in traditional historical linguistics, but here I argue that such
a method can also be of great help when it comes to cultural reconstruction. By
looking at possible foreign models for a passage in the third book of the Iliad, I
endeavourtodemonstratethatthefieldof Graeco-Anatolianstudiesbothlends
itself to more fine-grained analyses on the basis of known material, and—
thanks to the dramatic advances in Anatolian philology—provides “new wine
for old bottles”, allowing us to add fresh new data to ongoing discussions. Spe-
cifically, I am going to add a new piece of evidence, a Luwian inscription from
Tell Ahmar (ca. 900bce), which shows a non-trivial parallel with the Homeric
text: our Iliadic passage lists heavenly gods, rivers, earth, and underworld gods,
and the Tell Ahmar text contains a set of specific gods (some of which also
*
I wish to express my gratitude to José Luis García Ramón, Craig Melchert, Emily Kearns,
Philomen Probert, and two anonymous reviewers for useful feedback on this paper; heart-
felt thanks go to Emily Reith for improving its style. The usual disclaimer applies.
1 See e.g. Bachvarova 2016, Bianconi 2015, 2020; Cotticelli-Kurras—Giusfredi 2018;
Dardano 2013; García Ramón 2011, 2012; Gasbarra—Pozza 2012, 2019; Hajnal 2014,
2018, Hawkins 2010, Melchert 2014a, 2014b; Metcalf 2015; Rutherford 2020. A more
complete list, together with a history of the studies in the field, may be found in Bianconi
2021.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

12
bianconi
appearin Il.3.276–280),whichincludesheavenandearth,mountainsandriver-
lands. We shall evaluate this parallel taking into account the evidence from
other (ie and non-ie) traditions and look at the issue from the three points
of views that characterise this volume: contact, variation, and reconstruction.
It is widely known that similarities in language may occur because of inher-
itance from a common ancestor, contact, or chance (the latter may include
typological frequency). A very similar approach is adopted in the study of tex-
tual transmission, where the study of similarities in errors allows the scholar
to establish the relationships between manuscripts.2 In principle, the Compar-
ative Method can be used with profit not only when looking at phonology and
morphology, but also in when it comes to formulae, phraseology, and possibly
evenliterarytopoi—butonedoesneedanevengreaterdegreeof careeachtime
that cultural reconstruction is the goal (cf. some methodological remarks in
Lazzeroni 1987, 1998 and Campanile 1979). In order to successfully recon-
struct (parts of) an unattested language, we usually look for systematic corres-
pondences at the formal level, and try to establish which attested forms are
archaisms and which are innovations. However, when there is no direct corres-
pondencebetweenformandfunction—e.g.wheneveroneaimsatreconstruct-
ing a system of values, not an individual lexeme3—it might be more difficult to
establish what is an innovation (in particular a non-trivial one) and to exclude
parallel independent developments, which would prominently bring the ele-
ment of ‘chance’ to the fore.
Contact complicates the picture even more. When a case of contact is hypo-
thesised at the lexical level, one may look at the phonetics, at the morphology,
or at the semantics.4 However, when contact is combined with reconstruction,
as in the case that we are about to analyse, an extremely careful approach and
2 A very similar approach is adopted in the study of textual transmission, where the study of
similarities in errors allows the scholar to establish the relationships between manuscripts.
Cf. the remarks in the Introduction to this volume.
3 “Cognate formulas, like cognate cultural institutions, may but need not be accompanied by
cognate linguistic expressions. Lexical substitution and cultural change in the course of mil-
lennia may leave only the semantic features of the original expression present. But this must
not mask the fundamental fact of the preservation of an inherited unitary formulaic and
thematic “deep structure”” (Watkins 1995: 49). Cf. also Campanile 1979: 237.
4 For instance, while a lexeme inherited by two languages should show the respective regular
sound changes, loanwords generally show some sound changes of the source language, and
eventually some later sound changes of the target language, and should be integrated in a
compatible morphological class (e.g. Latin second-declension nouns are generally adapted
in Greek as o-stems). Or, when the meaning of a lexeme attested at a later stage of a given
language resembles that of a similar lexeme in another language with which it came into
contact, then it is possible to postulate that contact was responsible for the shift. These two
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
13
a solid methodology are essential to obtain a picture as clear as possible of the
relationships between the given comparata. One must indeed keep in mind
that cultural contact and language contact may overlap, but are not mutually
interdependent.Inotherwords,languagecontactmaybeaconsequenceof cul-
tural contact, but cultural contact is not a necessary and sufficient condition
for language contact to take place. Finally, typology plays a crucial role in this
type of analysis, in that it helps us to weigh the different possibilities for the
direction of language change. It is not always possible to prove something in
the strictest sense when it comes to cultural reconstruction (not least because
of the scarcity of the material and the gaps in our knowledge), but all of the
above may allow us to make some informed guesses on what might be more
probable.
Some historical areas and periods, such as the Aegean and the Near-Eastern
world between the Late Bronze Age and the Early Iron Age, represent an excel-
lent field to put these methodologies to the test. Not only do we observe a wide
range of instances of cultural and linguistic contact throughout regions and
centuries, but we are also progressively able to use an ever-increasing treasure
trove of primary sources that allow us to identify varied and diverse examples
of linguistic and cultural reconstruction. This is why, I argue, only a method
that takes onto account both philology and linguistics, i.e. both the nature and
context of our evidence and the mechanisms of language change, can produce
real progress in this field.
In the specific case of contacts between Greek and the cultures of the
Ancient Near East, opinions differ,5 but—by and large—there are two schools
of thought amongst those who do believe that a certain amount of contact
has taken place. Some have argued for direct transfer of motifs directly from
Mesopotamia and the Levant into Early Greek culture, while others believe
that Anatolia was an important route of transmission for Near Eastern motifs
to Greek epic literature.6 In what follows, we shall take an opposite eastward
route, and look at our case-study starting from the Greek text and moving to its
examples do not exhaust the typology of language contact at the lexical level; for an up-to-
date bibliography on language contact studies, cf. the Introduction to this volume.
5 Cf. Bianconi 2021 for an overview of previous studies and further references.
6 The first is represented by the studies of Walter Burkert (1991, 1992, 2004, 2005) and Martin
West (1997). Burkert in particular envisaged a transmission from the East to theWest through
either wandering poets, or bilingual scribes who introduced Akkadian models into early
Greek literature (cf. also Bryce 1999, who hypothesised the presence of Anatolian scribes
in Mycenaean Greece). More recently, Mary Bachvarova challenged these ideas by stressing
the importance of long-distance élite interactions, and of a deep interconnection between
Greek and Anatolian courts in the Late Bronze Age (Bachvarova 2016).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

14
bianconi
possible Near-Eastern sources. We will then focus on the variation of this motif
in Anatolian sources and on the reconstruction of a possible Indo-European
motif, and finally consider a recently deciphered Luwian passage that will shed
some further light on the issue.
2
A Famed Iliadic Passage
The third book of the Iliad famously features the duel between Menelaus and
Paris, which was supposed to resolve the war in favour of one of the oppos-
ing sides. At the very core of the book,7 right before the duel, a ritual that
accompanies the oath-swearing is performed. First, wine and water are mixed
in a crater (ll. 269–270), the commanders’ hands are washed (l. 270), and
hair is cut from the heads of the sacrificial lambs and distributed to the Tro-
jan and Achaean leaders (ll. 271–274). Then, Agamemnon invokes a series of
divine figures (Zeus, Helios, the Sun-God, the rivers, the earth, and the two
gods of the Underworld, Hades and Persephone), openly calling them μάρτυ-
ρες ‘witnesses’ and asking them to protect the ὅρκια πιστά, the ‘trustworthy
oaths’:
(1)
Γ 276–280
Ζεῦπάτερ Ἴδηθεν μεδέων κύδιστε μέγιστε,
Ἠέλιός θ’, ὃς πάντ’ ἐφορᾷς καὶπάντ’ ἐπακούεις,
καὶποταμοὶκαὶγαῖα, καὶοἳὑπένερθε καμόντας
ἀνθρώπους τίνυσθον ὅτις κ’ ἐπίορκον ὀμόσσῃ,
ὑμεῖς μάρτυροι ἔστε, φυλάσσετε δ’ ὅρκια πιστά
Father Zeus, ruling from Ida, most lordly, greatest,
and Helios, you who look upon everything, who listen to everything,
and rivers, and earth, and you (two) who under the earth
punish suffering men, whoever has sworn false oaths,
you (pl.), be witnesses! (and) protect the trustworthy oaths
The ritual continues with Agamemnon spelling out of the conditions of the
oath (ll. 281–291).Then the lambs are killed (ll. 292–294) and the wine is poured
7 Cf. Bowie 2019: 1–4 for a subdivision of the book into thematic sections. It appears that the
remaining episodes are built around the oath-swearing, which takes 69 lines in the central
part of Book 3.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
15
(ll. 295–296), before another prayer is said by some among the Acheans and the
Trojans (296–301).The scene ends with Priam withdrawing from the battlefield
and bringing the dead lambs with him (ll. 303–313).
Several scholars have pointed out the dependence of this Iliadic passage
from Near-Eastern models, especially in the framework of shared ritual culture
(one may find the latest and most comprehensive analysis in Dardano 2021).8
Here we shall focus on the list of divine figures invoked, which has received
comparatively less attention in the existing literature.
The latest commentary on Book 3 of the Iliad reads as follows: “Zeus the
highest god and Helios who sees and hears everything, the rivers and the Earth,
and the gods of the underworld are all invoked as representatives of all parts
of the universe: the division of the universe into three parts is a common fea-
ture of Greek and Near-Eastern cosmologies. This relatively short list of deities
corresponds to the sometimes extremely lengthy ones in near-eastern oaths”
(Bowie 2019: 37–38).
This is certainly true,9 but I contend that a more fine-grained analysis is pos-
sible. What is the specific model of the Greek passage? Where and when could
the transmission have happened? In order to try and answer these questions,
we shall first look at similar formulae in some Near-Eastern cultures, before
moving to a closer scrutiny of variation in such formulae in the Anatolian con-
text and of possible parallels in other Indo-European traditions.
3
Contact: Near-Eastern Parallels of an Invocation
That this ritual, which includes the invocation to the deities in Iliad 3.276–
280, reflects Near-Eastern practices has become a mainstream idea in Homeric
studies.10 This is probably due to the influence of such a work as The East Face
of Helicon (West 1997) on studies on early Greek literature. But the first (and
8
Here, the practices of sacrifices and ὅρκια πιστάare exhaustively and extensively treated,
and the readermayfindfurtherreferences.See,among others,also the ‘classic’West 1997:
20–23 with further references.
9
Though, for the threefold division of the universe as a pie concept, cf. 4. infra.
10
Justtogivethemostrecentexample,AngusBowieopenstheprefacetohiscommentaryto
Iliad3bysayingthat“asignificanttrendincurrentstudiesof AncientGreekliteratureisan
interest in the relationships between Greek culture and the cultures of the Ancient Near
East” (Bowie 2019: ix). He then introduces the section we are interested in (p. 37) stating
that “in the oath-swearing […] we can see something of the influence that Anatolian cul-
ture had on Greek customs”. Cf. also Rollinger 2004a: 383–416 and 2004b, Puhvel 1991:
9 and Faraone 1993: 72–76.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

16
bianconi
often forgotten) scholar who noticed that there were Near-Eastern parallels to
this Homeric passage was Giovanni Nenci: in a very short article published in
1961, he compared the structure of divine witness lists in Hittite texts and in
the Homeric epics, by mentioning the treaties between Šuppiluliuma and Mat-
tiwaza (sic!) of Mitanni, Šuppiluliuma and Tette, and Muršili and Talmi-Šarma
(Nenci 1961: 381 fn. 3). Martin West (1997: 20–22) lists not only the aforemen-
tionedHittitetreaties,butalsosomelaterSemiticandGreekparallels(cf.infra).
One may find some further parallels in more recent literature (e.g. the treaty
between Šuppiluliuma I and the king of Hayasa cited by Bowie 2019: 38), but
a comprehensive survey is still unavailable. The present section and the next
one endeavour to start to fill this gap by giving a representative collection of
examples (both in the original languages and in translation).
One of the most extensive examples of the Hittite typology, for which there
is abundant evidence,11 is the treaty between the Hittite king Muwattalli ii and
Alakšandu of Wiluša:
(2)
kub 21.1 rev. iv 1–30 (cth 76)12
1
[dutu (ša-me-e lugal kur.kurmeš lúsip)]a udu ša dumu.lú.u19.lu
dutu uruA-ri-in-na
[munus.lugal ku(r.kurmeš d10 pí-ḫa-aš-)]ša-aš-ši-iš ša ⸢sag⸣.du
dutu-ši d10 nir.gál
[…d10 uruḪa-a]t-ti lugal kur.kurmeš d10 ḫi.ḫi d10 uruZi-⸢ip⸣-pa-la-a[n-
da]
[…]⸢d⸣10 karaš d10 uruḪa-la-ap d10 ki.lam
5
[(d) … -t]i? ù uruA-ri-in-na d10 uruḪe-eš-ša-aš-ḫa-⸢pa⸣
[(d10 uruKu)m-ma-an-ni] d10 uruŠa-mu-u-ḫa d10 uruḪur-ma d10 uruŠa-re-
e[š-(ša)]
[…d10 uruL]i-i[ḫ-z]i-na d10 uruU-da d10 uruŠaḫ-pí-na d10 uruá.taḫ
11
For a more thorough analysis, cf. the next section. On the Hittite pantheon, cf. also
Yoshida 1996, Singer 1994, and Schwemer 2006.
12
The reference edition is still Friedrich 1930: 42–102, but in recent years new transla-
tions have been published (Beckman 1999: 87–93, Starke apud Latacz 2004: 105–110,
Devecchi 2015: 151–159, Del Monte 2003: 65–67) which include some of the new frag-
ments that have emerged (see Devecchi 2015: 152 for an overview). However, despite
Kitchen—Lawrence 2012, Del Monte 2003 and Christiansen 2012 (they either
offer an edition and translation based on Friedrich’s manuscripts, or re-edit only parts
of the text), a new complete edition with translation and commentary would perhaps be
desirable. Here I am following, with minor changes, the edition of the passage given by
Birgit Christiansen (Christiansen 2012: 255–256).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
17
[(gú4Še)]-⸢er⸣-ri-iš gú4Ḫu-u-ur-ru-iš dNanx-ni dḪa-az-zi
⸢d⸣Ḫé-pát munus.lugal ša-me-e
10
dlamma dlamma uruḪa-at-ti dKar-zi-iš dḪa-pa-an-⸢ta⸣-li-⸢ya⸣-aš
dlamma uruGa-ra-aḫ-na dlamma kuškur-ša-aš dal-⸢la⸣-tu4 da.a-aš dTe-
li[(-p)í-nu-uš]
d30! en né-eš dingir-lim dištar dištar líl dištar uruNe-nu-wa (ras.)
⸢dištar⸣uruḪa-at-ta-ri-na dNi-na-at-ta-aš dKu-li-it-ta-aš
dIš-ḫa-ra munus.lugal né-eš dingir-lim dza-ba4-ba4 dza-ba4-ba4
uruḪa-at-ti
15
dza-ba4-ba4 uru!Il!-la-ya dza-ba4-ba4 uruAr-zi-ya
dYa-ri-iš dZa-ap-na-aš
uruŠa-mu-ḫa-aš dA-ba-ra-aš uruḪur-ma-aš d!Ḫa-an-ti-da-aš-šu-uš
uruA-an-ku-wa-aš d!Ka-taḫ-ḫa-aš uruGa-a-ta-pa-a-aš munus.lugal-aš
uruTa-ḫur-pa-aš dMa-am-ma-aš uruDu-un-na-aš <d>Ḫal-la-ra-aš
20
uruḪu-u-pé-eš-na-aš dgaz.ba.a.a dingirmeš lu-la-ḫi dingir!meš ḫa-
⟨bi-⟩ri-ya-[aš]
dingirmeš lúmeš dingirmeš munusmeš ḫu-u-ma-an-te-eš17 dNa-a-ra-aš
dNa-a[p-ša-ra-aš]
dAm-mu-un-ki-iš dTu-⸢ḫu-ši-iš⸣⸢d⸣A-mi-iz-za-du-uš
dKu-mar-bi-iš «d» den.líl-aš ⸢dnin.líl⸣
ḫur.sagḪu-u-ul-la-aš ḫur.sagZa-al-li-ya-[nu-uš …]
25
ḫur.sagḫi.a i7ḫi.a pú!meš ša kur uruḪa-a[t-ti …] x
ne-⸢pí-iš⸣te-kán-na immeš-uš al-[pu-uš … ḫu-u-m]a-an-te-e[š17]
ša kur uruÚ-lu-ša d10 ⸢karaš⸣d[…]x(-)ap-pa-li-u-na-aš
dingirmeš lúmeš dingirmeš munusmeš [x x x] x x [x x x]x dkaskal.kur
ša kur uruÚ-i-[lu-ša … n]a-ra-am d10
30
uruPí-ḫa-aš-ša-aš-š[i … -a]n-ni ḫal-zi-iḫ-ḫu-un
[The Sun-god] of Heaven, King of the Lands, Shepherd of Humankind,
the Sun-goddessof Arinna, [Queen] of the Lands, the personal Storm-god
of Lightning of My Majesty, the Powerful Storm God, [King of the Lands,
the Storm-god of Hatti],King of the Land, the Storm-godof Lightning, the
Storm-god of Zippalanda, [Storm-god of Nerik], the Storm-god of Aleppo,
the Storm-god of the Market (?), the [Storm-god of …], the Storm-god
of Arinna, the Storm-god of Hisashapa, the Storm-god of [Sapinuwa],
the Storm-god of Samuha, the Storm-god of Hurma, the Storm-god of
Sarissa, the Storm-god of Lihzina, the Storm-god of Uda, the Storm-god
of Sahpina, the Storm-god of Help, Sheri, Hurri, Mount Nanni, Mount
Hazzi, Hebat, Queen of Heaven, the Tutelary Deity, the Tutelary Deity
of Hatti, Karzi, Hapantaliya, the Tutelary Deity of Karahna, the Tutelary
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

18
bianconi
Deity of the Hunting Bag, Allatu, the Moon-god, Lord of the Oath, Ishtar,
Ishtar of the Countryside, Ishtar of Nineveh, Ishtar of Hattarina, Ninatta,
Kulitta, Ishhara, Queen of the Oath, the War-God, the War-God of Hatti,
the War-god of Illaya, the War-god of Arziya, Yarri, Zappana, Abara of
Samuha, Hantitassu of Hurma, Katahhaof Ankuwa,theQueen of Katapa,
Ammamma of Tahurpa, Hallara of Dunna, Huwassanna of Hupisna, the
mountain-dweller gods, the mercenary gods, all the male and female deit-
ies, ⟨all the primeval deities⟩—Nara, Namsara, Ammunki,Tuhusi, Minki,
Ammizzaddu, Alalu, Kumarbi, Enlil, Ninlil—Mount Hulla, Mount Zaliy-
anu, Mount Taha, the mountains, the rivers, and the springs of Hatti, the
great Sea, heaven and earth, the winds, the clouds, all [the deities] of the
land of Wilusa: the Storm-god of the Army, […]appaliuna, the male deit-
ies, the female deities, the mountains, [the rivers, the springs], and the
underground watercourse (?) of the land of Wilusa. I, My Majesty, [Great]
King, Beloved of the Storm-god of Lightning, have summoned them to
assembly in witness.
transl. Beckman
This passage is interesting for a number of reasons,13 and it is worth noting that
this is as close as one can get to the setting of the Iliad, even if just in merely
geographical terms. In this text, various sun-gods and sky-gods join heaven,
earth, and other natural elements in being called upon to witness the oath
betweentheWilusan(=Trojan)Alakšandu(generallyinterpretedastheAnato-
lian adaptation of Gk. Ἀλέξανδρος)14 and the Hittite king.
One may find gods witnessing (and consequently protecting) treaties in sev-
eral first-millennium texts from Semitic cultures. See, for instance, the follow-
ing Neo-Assyrian treaty, dated 754bce:
13
For instance, the presence of the epithet lúsip dumu.lú.u19.lu ‘shepherd of Humankind’,
which is reminiscent of the Greek ποιμένα λαῶν (said of Agamemnon in the Iliad); the
mention of Mount Hazzi (cf. Mt. Kasios, connected with the eponymous cult of Zeus in
later times); the mention of Appaliuna (cf. Watkins 1986); the possible mention of an
underground watercourse, which was identified by Korfmann in the Trojan archaeolo-
gical site. Each one of these topics would require an individual discussion, but this goes
beyond the aims and limits of this article.
14
Kretschmer 1924 is generally credited with the identification of this personal name,
but it is worth noting that the discovery pre-dated the decipherment of Hittite. The first
contribution in which we find the connection was Luckenbill 1911.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
19
(3)
Ashur-nērārīV’sTreatywiththeArameankingMati’-iluof Arpad(saa2.2:
vi 6–26)
daš-šur man an ki tum3-ma-tu2-nu
da-nu-um an-tu4 ki.min dbad dnin.lil2 ki.min
ddiš ddam-ki-na ki.min d30 dnin.gal ki.min
dutu da-a ki.min diškur dša-la ki.min
10
damar.utu dzar-pa-ni-tu4 ki.min dag dlal2 ki.min
dmaš dme ki.min duraš dnin.e2.gal ki.min
dza-ba4-ba4 dba.u2 ki.min du.gur dla-aṣki.min
ddi.kud dnin.gir2.su ki.min
dḫum-ḫum-mu di-šum ki.min
15
dgiš.bar dpa.tug2 ki.min d15 nin uruni-na-a ki.min
dinnin nin uruarba-il3 ki.min
diškur ša2 urukur-ba-il3 ki.min
diškur ša2 uruḫal-la-ba ki.min
digi.du a-lik maḫ-ri ki.min
20
d7.bi qar-du-ti ki.min
d[d]a-⸢gan⸣d[m]u?-ṣur-u-na ki.min
d[mi-il-qar-tu dia-s]u!-mu-na ki.min
d⸢ku2⸣!-b[a-ba dkar]-ḫu-ḫa ki.min
diškur d[x] ⸢x d!ra!-ma!-nu!⸣
25
ša ur[u di-maš-qa ki.min]
dza-[x x x x x x x x]
By Assur, king of heaven and Earth, you have sworn; by Anu and Antu,
ditto;15 by Enlil and Mullissu, ditto; by Ea and Damkina, ditto; by Sîn and
Ningal, ditto; by Šamaš and Aya, ditto; by Adad and Šala, ditto; by Mar-
duk and Zarpānītu, ditto; by Nabû and Tašmētu, ditto; by Ninurta and
Gula, ditto; by Uraš and Bēlet-ekalli, ditto; by Zababa and Bau, ditto; by
Nergal and Laṣ, ditto; by Madānu and Ningirsu, ditto; by Ḫumḫummu
and Išum, ditto; by Erra and Nusku, ditto; by Ištar Lady-of-Nineveh, ditto;
by Ištar Lady-of-Arbela, ditto; by Adad-of-Kurbail, ditto; by Hadad-of-
Aleppo, ditto; by Palil, who marches in front, ditto; by the heroic Sebittu,
ditto; by Dagan [and M]uṣuruna, ditto; by M[elqart and Eš]mun, ditto; by
Kub[aba and Kar]ḫuḫa, ditto; by Hadad, […], and Ramman-of-[Damas-
cus, ditto;] by Za…
15
“The scribe’s use of ki.min indicates how the scribe thought the gods were to be paired.
Rather than appearing at the end of each line following a collection of divine names,
ki.min typically appears after each pair of deities, who are often a divine couple” (Allen
2015: 119).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

20
bianconi
In first-millennium Mesopotamian treaties, gods are generally paired, and
lists are divided into three parts (Barré 1983: 22): first, one finds the supreme
god of the pantheon, Marduk in Babylon and Assur in Assyria; then comes a
list of high gods that usually has the Sebetti as its last member; finally, foreign
gods are mentioned, and a summary phrase (“all the gods of the land X and all
the gods of the land Y”) usually concludes the whole list.
In an 8th-century treaty from Sefire (near Aleppo, in Syria), this time in
Aramaic, a list of gods is followed by natural powers, and once more they are
grouped in pairs:
(4)
Treaty between Barga’yah of ktk and Mati’-ilu of Arpad (kai 222: A 7–13)
[qdm ’sr]
wmlš wqdm mrdk wzrpnt wqdm nb’ wt[šmt wqdm ’r wnš]
k wqdm nrgl wlṣwqdm šmš wnr wqdm s[n wnkl wq]
(10)
dm nkr wkd’h wqdm kl ’lhy rḥbh w’dm[h wqdm hdd zy ḥ]
lb wqdm sbt wqdm ’l w‘lyn wqdm šmy[m w’rq wqdm mṣ]
lh wm‘ynn wqdm ywm wlylh šhdn kl ’[lhy ktk w’lhy ’r]
pd(?)]
“[before Assur]
and Mullissu and before Marduk and Zarpānītu and before Nabû and
Ta[šmētu and before Erra and Nus]-
ku and before Nergal and Laṣand before Šamaš and Nur and before Sîn
[and Ningal] and [be]-
fore nkr and kd’h and before the Gods of the open country and of the
[cultivated] ground and [before Hadad, that of A]-
leppo and before the Sebittu and before El and Elyon and before
Heav[en and Earth and before Ab]-
yss] and Springs and before Day and Night. Witnesses (be) all (you)
g[ods of ktk and gods of Ar-
pad?]”
Divine lists are by no means confined to treaties. An incantation plaque from
ArslanTash in Upper Syria (7th c. bce; cf.West 1997: 21) reads “Aššur has made
an eternal pact with us […] and all the sons of gods and the numerous gener-
ation of all the Holy Ones, with oaths by the Heavens and Earth, the eternal
witnesses”.
If later texts are valid proxies for earlier customs, one may draw two further
parallels. One is generally thought to be the Greek translation of a Punic treaty,
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
21
and features Hannibal swearing an oath and invoking a list of gods and of cos-
mic powers. Here is the entire passage, as reported by Polybius:
(5)
Pol. Hist. vii, 9, 1–2:
ὅρκος, ὃν ἔθετο Ἀννίβας ὁστρατηγός, Μάγωνος, Μύρκανος, Βαρμόκαρος, καὶ
πάντες γερουσιασταὶΚαρχηδονίων οἱμετ’ αὐτοῦκαὶπάντες Καρχηδόνιοι στρα-
τευόμενοιμετ’αὐτοῦπρὸςΞενοφάνηΚλεομάχουἈθηναῖονπρεσβευτήν,ὃνἀπέ-
στειλε πρὸς ἡμᾶς Φίλιππος ὁβασιλεὺς Δημητρίου ὑπὲρ αὑτοῦκαὶΜακεδόνων
καὶτῶν συμμάχων, ἐναντίον Διὸς καὶἭρας καὶἈπόλλωνος, ἐναντίον δαίμονος
Καρχηδονίων καὶἩρακλέους καὶἸολάου, ἐναντίον Ἄρεως, Τρίτωνος, Ποσει-
δῶνος, ἐναντίον θεῶν τῶν συστρατευομένων καὶἩλίου καὶΣελήνης καὶΓῆς,
ἐναντίονποταμῶνκαὶλιμνῶνκαὶὑδάτων,ἐναντίονπάντωνθεῶνὅσοικατέχουσι
Καρχηδόνα, ἐναντίον θεῶν πάντων ὅσοι Μακεδονίαν καὶτὴν ἄλλην Ἑλλάδα
κατέχουσιν, ἐναντίον θεῶν πάντων τῶν κατὰστρατείαν, ὅσοι τινὲς ἐφεστήκα-
σιν ἐπὶτοῦδε τοῦὅρκου.
(This is) the oath that the general Hannibal, Mago, Myrcan, Barmocar,
and all Carthaginian senators present with him, and all Carthaginians
serving under him, swore in front of the Athenian Xenophanes son of
Cleomachus, the envoy whom King Philip, son of Demetrius, sent to us
on behalf of himself, of the Macedonians and of the allies. In the pres-
ence of Zeus, Hera, and Apollo, in the presence of the deity of Carthage,
of Heracles, and Iolaus; in the presence of Ares, Triton, (and) Poseidon;
in the presence of the gods who battle with us and of the Sun, Moon, and
Earth; in the presence of Rivers, Lakes, and Waters; in the presence of all
the gods who possess Carthage; in the presence of all the gods who pos-
sess Macedonia and the rest of Greece: in the presence of all the gods of
the army who preside over this oath
West just points out that Hannibal and his army “swore by a list that included
Sun, Moon and Earth, Rivers, Lakes (?), and waters” (West 1997: 21), but one
can go even further: the mention of the tutelary deities of both parts (ἐναντίον
πάντων θεῶν ὅσοι κατέχουσι Καρχηδόνα, ἐναντίον θεῶν πάντων ὅσοι Μακεδονίαν καὶ
τὴν ἄλλην Ἑλλάδα κατέχουσιν) is an even less trivial parallel with the Hittite texts
under examination (for further examples, cf. 3. infra).16
16
Barré 1983 offers a thorough analysis of this text, with special reference to Near-Eastern
material. Interestingly enough, he does not seem to mention the Homeric passage we are
interested in.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

22
bianconi
An even later possible parallel may be found in a passage from the Gospel of
Matthew (5:34–35): in this part of the so-called “Sermon on the Mount”, Jesus
talksaboutoaths,andtellshisfollowers:ἐγὼδὲλέγωὑμῖνμὴὀμόσαιὅλως•μήτεἐν
τῷοὐρανῷ, ὅτι θρόνος ἐστὶν τοῦΘεοῦ, μήτε ἐν τῇγῇ, ὅτι ὑποπόδιόν ἐστιν τῶν ποδῶν
αὐτοῦ“but I tell you, don’t swear at all: neither by heaven, for it is the throne
of God; nor by the earth, for it is the footstool of his feet”. This is echoed by
James 5:12: Πρὸπάντων δέ, ἀδελφοίμου, μὴὀμνύετε, μήτε τὸν οὐρανὸν μήτε τὴν γῆν
μήτε ἄλλον τινὰὅρκον “But above all things, my brethren, swear not, neither by
heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any other oath”. Both passages indir-
ectly point to a custom that was present in Roman Palestine, and that might
well date back a few centuries.
One may go on with the examples, but it should already be quite clear that
listing divine figures in treaties was a prominent element of Near-Eastern cul-
tures, and therefore the possibility of Γ 276–280 reflecting “foreign” practices is
real. Given the diversity of the available evidence, establishing the specific rela-
tionships between each instance and pinpointing on a map the diffusion paths
of such a phenomenon might prove a difficult task, one that would require an
amount of space and knowledge that goes beyond the limits of this paper and
of its author. However, it is in my view possible to argue, on the basis of the
diachronic and diatopic extension, the variation, and the sheer amount of the
Hittite material, that Anatolia represented a vector, if not even a model, for the
diffusion of divine lists, both towards the East and towards the West.
In the next section we will take a closer look at instances of god lists in our
Hittite corpus, with particular reference to their presence in the oath section
of diplomatic texts.
4
Variation: Divine Witness Lists in Anatolia
The increased availability of Hittite texts allows us to take a fresh look at the
theme of divine witnesses, and to focus on variation in our texts. Here we
shall consider a specific genre, that of treaties between the Hittite king and
the leader (or leaders) of a separate political entity. This sort of text has a fairly
regular structure: most treaties feature a preamble, a historical introduction, a
section with provisions, followed by a statement about the deposition of the
tablet, and an oath featuring a list of divine figures and a series of curses and
blessings.17 In this type of documents, gods are explicitly called to witness and
be protectors of the treaty.
17
For further details, see Devecchi 2015: 31–52 and Beckman 1999: 2–3 with references.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
23
As we have mentioned above, divine lists (either partial or complete) are a
standard feature of Hittite treaties. I counted 24 occurrences in our extant cor-
pus(see Appendix).18Theselistscanbefairlylengthy(cf.(1.)supra),butdespite
the fact that the precise sequence of deities is not the same throughout, we
notice several structural similarities, as certain members of the lists occur in
a fixed order.19 The Sun-god of Heaven and the Sun-goddess of Arinna tend
to open the list, and they are immediately followed by a list of Storm-gods
(d10) of different places (Hatti and Arinna are recurrent ones) and tutelary
deities (denoted by the sumerogram dlamma). Then generally come a group
of Babylonian deities (Allatu, queen of the Underworld, Ea, the god of water,
knowledge and creation),20 either preceded or followed by Hebat or Telip-
inu (respectively the mother goddess of the Hurrians and the Hattic god of
fertility). Both may be mentioned multiple times, in association with their
cult places. Next is the goddess of love Ištar, often mentioned together with
her attendants Ninatta and Kulitta. She either precedes or follows the Moon
God and the goddess Išḫara, both qualified as protectors of the oath (en
né-eš and munus.lugal né-eš), and the War-gods (again, from different
places), which often come with Yarri, Zappana, and Hasammili.21 Nikkal, the
Ugaritic/Canaanean goddess of orchards, sometimes appears in this section.
There follows a group of local deities: amongst them, one may find Hantitassu
of Hurma, Abara of Šamuha, Katahha of Ankuwa, Ammamma of Tahurpa,
Huwassanna of Hupišna, Hallara of Dunna, the Lady of Landa (possibly the
Hurrian Allani), Kuniyawanni of Landa, and Nin-šenšen of Kinza. The lulaḫḫi
and ḫapiru gods, protectors of foreign mercenaries (according to Gurney 1977:
5 and Liverani 1967), come right after, but they are sometimes preceded by
Mount Lebanon, Mount Šariyana or Šariššiya, and Mount Pišaiša. The list goes
on with the deities of the Underworld,22 starting (and sometimes ending) with
18
Kestemont 1976 has a useful collection of data, but a fresh new assessment proved to be
necessary, as new data are now available, and Kestemont’s subdivision is rather idiosyn-
cratic and unsatisfactory in many respects (see criticism in Barré 1983: 30–31).
19
The present account is based on an autonomous examination of the texts; the reader may
find a similar (though not identical) analysis in Gurney 1977: 4–6; cf. also Barré 1983:
30–37 and Kestemont 1976.
20
Marduk, the patron deity of Babylon, is only mentioned in cth 42 (KBo 5.3 i 53).
21
Hasammili is only mentioned in cth 51 (KBo 1.1 rev. 48) and perhaps in cth 52.1 (KBo 1.3
rev. 3), though the reading here is very uncertain.
22
In two cases, (cth 106.a.i and cth 106.b.ii) Lelwani, a Hattian goddess of the Underworld,
is mentioned at this point; in cth 51 and 52, she is named right before Ea, while in cth
138.1 one may find her before Ištar.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

24
bianconi
the Sumerian Ereshkigal, sometimes called “Sun-goddess of the Earth”,23 and
usually continuing with the so-called ‘primeval deities’, which are sometimes
named: Nara, Namšara, Minki, Tuhuši, Ammunki, Ammizzadu, Alalu, Antu,
Anu, Apantu, Enlil, Ninlil, and Bēlet-ekalli.24 The list is generally closed by the
mountain-dweller gods, the mercenary gods, the male deities, and the female
deities, followed by mountains, rivers, springs, the Euphrates (only in cth 51),
the (great) sea, heaven and earth, the winds, and the clouds.
Despite close similarities and a fixed structure, we have no example of two
identical lists: not only are local and supra-regional deities mentioned in some
treaties and omitted in others, but also the natural elements that close the
list are not always the same. An instructive comparison in this respect is that
between cth 106.b.ii (treaty between Hattusili iii and Ulmi-Tessub of Tarhun-
tašša) and cth 106.a.i (treaty between Tudhaliya iv of Hatti and Kuruntya of
Tarhuntašša).25 The precise relationship between the two documents is still
debated, as is the identity of the king of Tarhuntašša,26 but here we are inter-
ested in the fact that these two treaties come from the same milieu, and they
are therefore expected to show minimal variation. The two lists are however
not identical, as the later document contains a few more deities:27
(6)
Treaty between Hattusili iii of Hatti and Ulmi-Teššub of Tarhuntašša
(cth 106.b.ii)
In this matter the Storm-god of Lightning, the Sun-goddess of Arinna, the
Storm god of Hatti, the Storm-god of Nerik, Ishtar of Samuha, Ishtar of
Lawazantiya, and the Thousand Gods of Hatti shall be witnesses. And in
regard to the fact that I have made this treaty tablet for you, the Thou-
sand Gods are now summoned to assembly. They shall observe and listen
and be witnesses:The Sun-god of Heaven, the Sun-goddess of Arinna, the
23
In cth 53, 66 and 69 she coexists with Allatu, mentioned a few lines before. It does not
seem to matter that they are essentially the same goddess.
24
Bēlet-ekalli is Ninurta’s wife, and became assimilated into the Hurrian pantheon as
Pentikalli (Gurney 1977: 5). Her name only occurs in cth 51 (KBo 1.1 rev. 53).
25
A comparison between the two treaties with Ugarit (cth 46 and 66) would be as use-
ful, but unfortunately the divine list in the treaty between Šuppiluliuma i of Hatti and
Niqmaddu ii of Ugarit is badly damaged, and one can only read a few divine names.
26
Cf. Devecchi 2015: 160–161 and Beckman 1999: 102–103 for discussion and further refer-
ences. The two treaties are similar also because they both feature human witnesses.
27
In the following translations, taken from Beckman 1999, I have used boldface for those
deities which are not present in the other text and italicised those deities which appear
in a different position.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
25
Storm-god of Heaven, the Storm-god of Hatti, the Storm-god of the Army,
the Storm-god of Hisashapa, the Storm-god of Zippalanda, the Storm-god
of Nerik, the Storm-god of Aleppo, the Storm-god of Uda, the Storm-
god of Sapinuwa, the Powerful Storm-god, the pihaimmi Storm-god, the
Storm-god of Lightning, Lulutassi, the Tutelary Deity, the Tutelary Deity
of Hatti, Ayala, Karzi, Hapantaliya, Sharrumma, Zithariya, Hebat, Queen
of Heaven, Ishtar, Ishtar of Nineveh, Ishtar of Hattarina, Ninatta, Kulitta,
Nikkal, [Ishhara], the Moon-god, Lord of the Oaths, the Deity of Arusna,
the War-god, the War-god of Hatti, the War-god of Illaya, the War-god of
Arziya, Yarri, Zappana, Abara of Samuha, Hantitassu of Hurma, Katahha
of Ankuwa, the Queen of Katapa, Ammamma of Tahurpa, Hallara of
Dunna, Huwassannaof Hupisna, Lelwani, the mountain-dweller gods, the
mercenary gods, the male deities, the female deities, the great sea, the
mountains, rivers, and springs of Hatti and of the land of Tarhuntassa
transl. Beckman
(7)
Treaty between Tudhaliya iv of Hatti and Kuruntya of Tarhuntašša (cth
106.a.i)
And in regard to the fact that I have made this treaty for you, the Thou-
sand Gods are now summoned to assembly in this matter. They shall
observe and listen and be witnesses; The Sun-god of Heaven, the Sun-
goddess of Arinna, the Storm-god of Heaven, the Storm-god of Hatti, the
Storm-god of the Army, the Storm-god of Hisashapa, the Storm-god of
Zippalanda, the Storm-god of Nerik, the Storm-god of Aleppo, the Storm-
god of Uda, the Storm-god of Kizzuwatna, the Storm-god of Samuha,
the Storm-god of Sapinuwa, the Powerful Storm-god, the Storm-god of
Lightning, Lulutassi, the Tutelary Deity, the Tutelary Deity of Hatti, Ayala,
Karzi, Hapantaliya, the Tutelary Deity of the Countryside, the Tutelary
Deity of the Hunting Bag, Zithariya, Sharrumma, Hebat of Uda, Hebat
of Kizzuwatna, Ishtar of Samuha, Ishtar of the Countryside, Ishtar of
Lawazan- tiya, Ishtar of Nineveh, Ishtar of Hattarina, Ninatta, Kulitta,
the Moon-god, King of the Oaths, Nikkal, Queen of the Oaths, Ishhara,
the Deity of Arusna, the War-god, the War-god of Hatti, the War-god of
Illaya, the War-god of Arziya, Yarri, Zappana, Hantitassu of Hurma, Abara
of Samuha, Katahha of Ankuwa, Ammamma of Tahurpa, Huwassanna of
Hupisna,Hallaraof Dunna, Lelwani, the mountain-dweller gods, the mer-
cenary gods, the male deities, the female deities, heaven, earth, the great
sea, the mountains, rivers, and springs of Hatti and of the land of Tarhun-
tassa
transl. Beckman
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

26
bianconi
Most additions have to do with Storm-gods, Tutelary deities, Hebats and
Ištars, i.e. deities that are identified with multiple cult centres, but it is inter-
esting to note that cth 106.b.ii lacks heaven and earth, which are otherwise
almost always present.
Even though the greatest majority of treaties contain similar lists to the ones
seen in (2.) (6.) and (7.) above, we are able to isolate a second type, whose best-
preserved example is the treaty between a Hittite king (possibly Arnuwanda i)
and the Kaška people:
(8)
KBo 8.35, ii 8–13 (cth 139.1; ed. Gerçek 2012: 235)
nu ka-a-ša li-in-ga-i[n] ⸢i⸣-ya-u-en nu dingir.meš-mu-uš ḫu-u-ma-an-
du-uš
tu-li-ya da-i-⸢ú⸣-en dutu-un dim-an dza.ba4.ba4 dlamma-aš de[n.zu]
10
dištar-in dIš-ḫa-ra-aš li-in-ki-aš iš-ḫa-a-aš ne-e-pí-i-ša-aš dingir.meš-
e[š]
ták-na-a-aš dingir.meš ka-ru-ú-i-[l]i-aš dingir.meš ša kur uruḪa-at-
ti dingir.meš-eš
ša kur uruKa-aš-ka dingir.meš ne-e-pí-is te-e-kán ḫur.sag-eš íd.ḫi.a-
eš
na-at ki-e-da-ni li-in-ki-ya ku-ut-ru-ú-e-ni-iš a-sa-an-du
We hereby made an oath. We placed all the gods in assembly: the Sun-
God,theStorm-God,theWar-god,theTutelaryDeity,theMoonGod,Ištar,
Išḫara, the Lady of the Oath, the deities of the heaven(s), the deities of the
earth, the primeval deities, the deities of the Land of Ḫatti, the deities of
the Land of Kaška, the sky, the earth, the mountains, the rivers. Let them
be witnesses to this oath!
This text belongs to a type which is peculiar under many respects (cf. Gerçek
2012: 115–118): zababa, the War god, appears at the beginning of the list, along
with the chief deities, the Sun God, the Storm God, and the Tutelary Deity, and
therefore has an otherwise unattested prominent position. The list is placed
towards the middle of the text, and it coincides with the end of a section of
the agreement. In cth 138.1.a and cth 139 (Middle Hittite), divine witness lists
appear near the beginning. Another peculiarity is that in the former Hittite and
Kaška gods are invoked and listed separately, though this also happens in the
treaties between Šuppiluliuma i and Šattiwaza of Mitanni (cth 51 and 52).This
shorter typology of lists is common to a handful of texts connected with the
Kaška people (cth 138.1.a, cth 138.1.b, cth 139.1.a, and cth 139.1.b), and schol-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
27
arship is divided as to whether this is an abridged version of the longer type
or whether it is its forerunner.28 In either case, it is notable that heavenly and
chthonic gods are mentioned along with cosmic powers, which are never omit-
ted.
The treaty betweenTudhaliya i of Hatti with Šunaššura of Kizzuwatna, most
of which has come to us in an Akkadian version, also contains a shorter list, but
this is in a slightly different format, as the mention of the godsforms an integral
part of the curse:
(9)
KBo 28.110, 80–84 (cth 41.i.1; Akkadian; ed. Wilhelm 2011)
[– – – – a]-wa-at tup-pí an-ni-im e-et-ti-iq
[dutu uruA-ri-i]n-na diškur uruḪa-at-ti ⸢dlamma⸣uruḪa-at-ti
[diškur uruḪa-la]-ab dḪé-bat denxzu d⸢ištar⸣dza-ba4-ba4
[– – – ]x dingirmeš ša kur uruḪa-at-ti ù dingirmeš
[ša kur uruK]i-iz-zu-wa-at-ni ša-mu-ú er-ṣe-tu[m]
[…]x ḫur.sagdidli.ḫi.a ù ídḫi.a numun-šu šum-šu li-ḫal-li-qú
[Whoever] transgresses the words of this tablet, [the sun goddess of
Ari]nna, the weather god of Ḫatti, the tutelary deity of Ḫatti, [the Storm-
god of Ḫal]ab, Ḫebat, the moon god, Ištar, the God of war, […] the gods of
Ḫatti and the gods of Kizzuwatna, heaven and earth, […], the mountains
and rivers will destroy his seed and his name.
It should be noted that in Hittite texts divine lists are not confined to oaths, but
are also found in annals and prayers: famous examples are the gods ‘running
before’ (= helping) Muršili ii in battle (cth 61) and the invocation which makes
up most of Muwattalli’s prayer (cth 381). In the former, the list is much shorter
(it only features the Sun-Goddess of Arinna, the Storm-god, Mezzulla—who
incidentally never appears in treaties—and all the gods); the latter, instead,
seemstoreflecttheshorterversionof listsintreaties,andfeatures,amongother
deities, mountains and rivers.
These texts reveal that the practice of listing divine witnesses was most dif-
fused among the Hittites. The differences between lists are very likely due to
regional variation and local deities, but the structure of divine lists is fixed
at least from the times of Šuppiluliuma i. At a later stage, the pantheon was
28
Cf. Laroche 1974 and Gurney 1977: 7 fn. 1 respectively. The latter is followed by Barré
1983: 34ff.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

28
bianconi
morearticulatedasnewdeitieswereincluded:thisisthoughttohavehappened
not through assimilation (as is generally the case in ancient civilisations), but
through a process of “agglutination” (as defined by Beckman),29 which is very
peculiar to the Hittites. The intense diplomatic activity of the Hittites, together
with their military endeavours, might have helped the diffusion of such a cul-
turaltraitintheNear-East,andtheimpactof treaty-makingmighthavedeterm-
ined its eventual survival in first-millennium languages, both related and unre-
lated (cf. 1 supra and 4 infra respectively).
Through a wide range of comparisons, we have seen that our Iliadic passage
has a few traits in common with near-Eastern divine lists. At least three com-
mon features are present: 1) the Sun is represented as all-seeing; 2) Heaven and
Earth are present, and sometimes even coupled; 3) celestial and underworld
gods are invoked, along with natural elements, to be witnesses of human oaths.
We have also seen that, despite some regional variation, Hittite deity lists in
treaties remain rather similar over the centuries, and that they are expanded
through an agglutination of new deities instead of being modified by substi-
tution; we might be able to isolate two typologies of lists, a longer one and a
shorter one, and the deities that are common to both are interestingly very sim-
ilar to those mentioned in Γ 276–280.
All of this being said, we also know that similarity does not per se point to
contact; it will now be a question of establishing whether or not we are able
to postulate a common ancestor for these themes. In other words, a search in
other Indo-European branches will allow us to determine to what extent this
trait might have been inherited from pie.
5
Reconstruction: A Possible Indo-European Motif?
Thefactthatskydeities,inparticulartheSun,areall-seeingisawell-knownpie
motif.30 In the R̥gVeda, the Sun (which is represented as both Surya and Savitr̥)
is said to gaze on the entire world, and is defined as the eye of celestial deities
(such as Mitra andVaruṇa).31 It is defined as viśvácakṣas- ‘all-gazing’ (rv i, 50, 2;
29
Beckman 2002–2005: 308; cf. also Singer 1994: 86–87, Hundley 2014: 180, and Allen
2015: 72.
30
Cf. West 2007 (with references) and Durante 1976: 92.
31
rv i, 164, 44c víśvam éko abhí caṣṭe śácībhir “gazes upon everything with his powers”; viii,
25,16abayámékaitthā́purū́rúcaṣṭevíviśpátiḥ“This(Sun)here,asclanlord,gazeswidely—
the one (gazing) over the many”; vii, 63, 1ac údveti subhágo viśvácakṣāḥsā́dhāraṇaḥsū́ryo
mā́nuṣāṇāmcákṣurmitrásyaváruṇasyadeváś“Upwardherises,bringinggoodfortuneand
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
29
vii, 63, 1), vicakṣaṇá- ‘wide-gazing’ (rv i, 50, 8) and urucákṣas- ‘having a broad
gaze’ (rv vii, 35, 8; vii, 63, 4)The Indo-European association of the sun with an
eye is not only evident from theVedic evidence (cf. the famous myth of Puruṣa,
rv X, 90, 13: “From his eye the sun was born”), but also from the etymology of
Old Irish súil- ‘eye’, which is generally thought to go back to the ‘sun’-word.
The idea of the Sun as the all-seeing god protector of oaths is certainly not
residual in Greek culture: in the Hymn to Demeter, the eponym goddess goes to
Helios (called θεῶν σκοπὸν ἠδὲκαὶἀνδρῶν) in order to find out the whereabouts
of her daughter Persephone (hd 62ff.); in a later oath in the Iliad, Agamem-
non swears by Zeus, the Earth, Helios, and the Erinyes (T 258–259); the episode
of the cattle of the sun32 in the Odyssey (μ 260ff.) is an excellent mythical
paradeigma to show what happens to the transgressors of oaths.
This idea is also found in the non-ie Ancient Near-Eastern world. One
example should suffice. In the Sumerian myth of Etana (attested in three dif-
ferent versions—Old Babylonian, Middle Assyrian and “Standard”, cf. Dal-
ley 2008: 189), the eagle and the serpent swear an oath of friendship, calling
Shamash, the sun god, as their witness:33
(10) Myth of Etana (transl. Dalley 2008: 191–192)
(But) come, let us stand up and [make a pledge (?)]
Let us swear an oath on [the net of Shamash (?)]
In the presence of Shamash the warrior they swore an oath,
Whoever oversteps the limit set by Shamash,
Shamash shall deliver into the hands of the Smiter for harm
Whoever oversteps the limit set by Shamash,
May the mountain keep its pass far away from him,
with his gaze on everything, the common support of the sons of Manu—the Sun, the eye
of Mitra andVaruṇa”; vi, 51, 1 údu tyáccakṣurmáhi mitráyorā́ṁéti priyáṃváruṇayorádabd-
ham “Up goes this great eye of Mitra and of Varuṇa—dear and undeceivable”. On the role
of Mitra as god of treaties or agreements, cf. Anthony 2007, with references.
32
This is a motif shared with Hittite, cf. the explicit mention of the Sun-god’s sheep in the
Telipinu Myth (cth 324, in particular kub 17.10, iii 3–4); this passage has been given vari-
ous interpretations (see Archi 1993 with reff.), but the presence of the Sun-god’s sheep
is certain. Parallels of this myth from other cultures are given in Page 1972: 82–83 who
however does not mention Hittite.
33
In a recent contribution, Hartmut Scharfe argues that the motif of the sun as an overseer
comes into Indo-Iranian culture from Mesopotamia (Scharfe 2016; I wish to thank an
anonymous reviewer for pointing this out to me). This hypothesis is certainly fascinating,
but it should be weighed against the typological evidence that we are going to see in what
follows.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

30
bianconi
May the prowling weapon make straight for him,
May the snares (on which) the oath to Shamash (is sworn) overturn him
and ensnare him!
When they had sworn the oath on [the net of Shamash (?)]
They stood up (?) and went up the mountain.
One may even go one step further: some of the aforementioned motifs are
found in cultures that are unlikely to have derived them from Indo-European
models. For instance, as Raffaele Pettazzoni showed, omniscience is an attrib-
ute of a wide range of deities across different cultures. In the ancient world,
beyond the aforementioned Indo-European and Semitic cultures, one should
mention the figure of Ra in Egypt. There are several native American cultures
in which the sun is an all-seeing deity: the Pomo people in Northern Cali-
fornia, the Meskwaki in the region of the great lakes, the Siksikaitsitapi and
Arapaho people, the Lenape people, and the Dakota people (here, the Sun
both saw and heard everything). Again, the sun is the eye of Ra for the Egyp-
tians, of the sky-god Ngai for the Masai in Kenya, and of Waqa, whom the
Cushitic peoples revere as their supreme god, who also oversees oaths. The
Sun is conceived as an eye by the Nuxalk people from British Columbia and by
the Matsés (or Mayoruna) people between Peru and Brasil (Pettazzoni 1955
passim). One could go on and find further parallels for other celestial deities
who are conceived as omniscient; however, this should be enough to show that
the omniscience of the Sun is such a common trait that its presence in two
different cultures does not per se point to inheritance or contact. Obviously,
the co-occurrence of other non-trivial particulars (such as the association with
another deity or the presence in a certain context) suggests that the reason for
the similarity must be sought in something different from chance.
As for heaven and earth, they are reconstructed for pie,34 but at the same
time they are a natural couple in many cultures. Vedic provides a parallel to
our Greek and Anatolian passages, in that the R̥gVeda features them acting as
witnesses: (rv X, 12, 1ab) dyā́vā ha kṣā́mā prathamé r̥téna / abhiśrāvé bhavataḥ
satyavā́cā “Heaven and Earth, who speak what is real, become the first to hear
34
For instance, in the RgVeda, there are six hymns dedicated to dyā́vapr̥thivī́.They are some-
timesreferredtoastheprimordialcouple:(rv i,164,33ab)dyaúrmepitā́ janitā́ nā́bhirátra
bándhurmemātā́ pr̥thivī́mahī́yam “Dyaus, my father, my parent, here (is) the relation; this
great earth, my mother (is) the relation”; cf. also vii, 53, 2 and X, 65, 8. On Sky, Earth, and
related matters see the synthesis (with further literature) of West 2007: 166–193; cf. also,
most recently, Ginevra 2019.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
31
in accordance with truth”; (rv i, 105, 4e) vittám me asyá rodasī “Take heed of
this (speech) of mine, you two world-halves”.
The call of celestial and underworld deities together with natural elements
to be witnesses of human oaths, on the other hand, does not seem to be a
universal,orsomethingthatcanbereconstructedfortheproto-cultureof Indo-
European peoples. Oaths sworn by the sun and other natural elements were
certainly not restricted to Greece and Anatolia, but we find no unambiguous
correspondencesinotherbranches.OnemayperhapsciteanoverlookedCeltic
parallel: we do not know much about oaths in medieval Ireland besides the
famous formula tongu do día toinges mo thúath “I swear by the gods my people
swear by”, but it is thought that the pagan inhabitants of Ireland “swore on sol-
emn occasions by the sun, moon, wind, and other elements, the dew, the crops,
and the countenances of men” (Ginnell 1917: 129). This may point to a prim-
itive concept that was preserved in different branches, but a vague reference to
natural elements in oaths is by no way comparable to the highly standardised
structures presented above.
Up to this point, we have seen the extent to which our understanding may
profit from a more fine-grained analysis of the evidence, even though much of
it was already known to scholars interested in the field. It is now time to look
at an entirely new piece of evidence, which to my knowledge has never been
used in this context. We have said above that the fast-paced progress in Anato-
lian philology allows us to gain further insights into old issues: this is, in my
opinion, a striking example thereof.
6
A Luwian Contribution
A Hieroglyphic Luwian inscription fromTell Ahmar contains a divine list of the
type we are used to by now. However, this was not fully understood until very
recently because of the unknown phonetic reading of two signs,
(*128) and
(*30):
(11) tell ahmar 6 §2 (late 10th–early 9th c. bce; ed. Hawkins 2006: 12ff.)
caelum (deus)tonitrus-sa (deus)ia-[…] (deus)bonus (deus)luna
-sa |á-ta-na |(pes2)tara/i-za-mi-i-sa (deus)sol-sa (deus)cervus-sa ||
(deus)kar-hu-ha-sa (deus)ku+avis (deus)hi-pu-da-sa |exercitus-la/
i/u-na- si-ha (deus)sà-us-ka-sa [(deus)]fortis-sa (deus)sarma-sa |
“caelum”-ti-sa|“terra”-rel+ra/i-ti-sa-ha(deus)avis-ti-zi (deus)*30-
da-ti-zi a-tá |ta-sa?-mi-zi deus-ní-zi |(lituus)á-za-ta
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

32
bianconi
… Celestial Tarhunt, […], the Moongod, the benevolently inclined Sun-
God, Runtiya, Karhuha, Kubaba, Hipuda (= Hebat) and Šauska of the
Army,Teššub,Šarruma,HeavenandEarth,thedivineavis-ti-zi,thedivine
*30-da-ti-zi, the … gods loved (me, the first-born child)
In a recent article, Petra Goedegebuure convincingly argued that the two signs
should be phonetically read as follows:
(*128 = avis) = /wa/ and
(*30)
= /hapa/ (Goedegebuure 2019). Not only do the new readings of these signs
addtwodivinenamestothelist,thatis(deus)avis-ti-zi=(deus)wax-ti-zi/wat-
tinzi/ ‘mountains’ and *30-da-ti-zi = /hapadantinzi/ “riverlands”,35 but they also
provide another strikingly similar parallel with the Hittite and Greek passages
analysed above (“[…] Heaven and Earth, the divine mountains, the divine river-
lands”).
It must be admitted that this is not an oath, but a celebratory text. However,
the similarity with the Hittite materials we have seen does not require much
comment, as we have noted how, in Anatolia, divine lists are not exclusively
confined to treaties. So, this further parallel corroborates the hypothesis of a
culturalmotif sharedonbothsidesof theAegean.Butthereismore:theimplic-
ations of this document are important for our understanding of the possible
models of our Homeric passage, for both chronological and geographical reas-
ons. Not only did Luwic-speaking populations very likely share this motif in
certain types of texts (and this is significant, given the fact that Luwic popula-
tions might have been in proximity with the Greeks since the second millen-
nium),36 but this piece of evidence also gives us the first example of a divine
list in a first-millennium Anatolian language. If such a motif survived in Luwic-
speaking areas in the first millennium, the possibilities of Greek acquiring this
trait are not confined to contact with second-millennium Hittites. It is true that
Luwian very probably derived this feature from Hittite culture, though a con-
temporary influence by West-Semitic languages cannot be discarded a priori.
One can go one step further, as there is an additional piece of evidence
that, in my opinion, links our Homeric passage to a Luwian milieu. As Gior-
gieri (2001: 441) suggested, that of slaughtering an animal in connection to an
oath-swearing is a specifically Luwian practice:37 this seems to be confirmed by
35
According to Goedegebuure, this form is a personifying -ant- derivation of (flumen.
regio)hapada/i- (c.) ‘riverland’, ‘valley’.
36
This is the communis opinio, but cf. Yakubovich 2010 and 2013 for a different analysis
of the linguistic landscape of Western Anatolia; on the possibility of a Greek presence in
Cilicia in the Early Iron Age, cf. Yakubovich 2015.
37
An anonymous reviewer reminds me that the practice of sacrificing animals in oath cere-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
33
the Treaty between Arnuwanda i of Hatti and Huhazalma of Arzawa (cth 28;
cf. Devecchi 2015), which is the only Hittite treaty that attests to the throat-
cutting of a sacrificial sheep,38 and by the Zarpiya ritual (cth 757), where an
oath is again associated to animal sacrifice. The explicit mention of a sacrifi-
cial victim makes these examples well comparable to Agamemnon’s oath, and
this further parallel may help us establish more precise co-ordinates for where
contactbetweentheseculturescouldhavetakenplace,especiallyinlightof the
western location of Arzawa.The possibility that a Near-eastern trait, which was
particularly prominent by the Hittites, reached Greece also thanks to Luwian
mediation, becomes more than an idle thought.
7
Conclusions
In this paper, I endeavoured to demonstrate that a well-known passage of the
Iliad (Γ 276–280) whose Near-Eastern ascendancy is generally agreed upon, is
to be specifically traced back to an Indo-European Anatolian milieu. This was
argued with the support of internal and comparative evidence, and by using
a methodology that took into account both the potential of typology, and the
limits of cultural reconstruction.
The wealth of near-Eastern parallels to our Homeric passage shows how dif-
fused the motif of divine lists was, but at the same time makes it difficult to
pinpoint its diffusion path. A more fine-grained analysis of the Hittite mater-
ial, however, allowed us to isolate some specific parallels that are not easily
attributable to chance. Also, a look at other branches of Indo-European (in
particular, the Indo-Iranian one) suggested that some concepts were possibly
inherited. For instance, we have seen that celestial deities (the Sun, the Sky, the
Earth) acting as witnesses of oaths is both an ie and an ane motif. However,
their co-occurrence in non-trivial contexts in Greek and Anatolian seems to be
best attributable to contact. In the Greek passage we have not only a juxtapos-
ition of concepts which seems to be either Indo-European (heaven and earth)
or Near-Eastern (celestial and chthonic deities), but we also notice precise cor-
respondences(celestial,underworlddeities,andnaturalelements)withHittite
treaties,andnowalsowithaLuwiangodlist.Notonlydoesthispointtothefact
that the ὅρκια πιστάin Γ 276–280 have a specifically Anatolian origin (cf. also
monies is obviously not confined to Luwian culture, but is also found in other Levantine
and Mesopotamian cultures (cf. Faraone 1993). On this, cf. also Dardano 2021.
38
There are no divine lists, but this could well be due to the very fragmentary nature of our
only manuscript (KBo 16.47).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

34
bianconi
Dardano 2021), but—if we add some further cultural data, such as the prac-
tice of cutting the throat of a sacrificial victim—it could also help us narrow
the focus. This opens up the possibility of a Luwian mediation, i.e. of an actual
transmission from (or through) Anatolia in the Early Iron Age, which would
in turn remove the obstacle of imagining an extremely old tradition surviving
the Late Bronze Age collapse in Greece. In this case, it is possible to suggest
thattheGreekcustomdescribedinthe IliadoriginatesfromNear-Easternmod-
els through the mediation of Anatolian cultures, where “Anatolian” is of course
meant in a linguistic sense. In order to determine the context in which this
transmission might have happened, one would need to bring in further evid-
ence, possibly from other disciplines (such as archaeology); but at this stage it
seems reasonable to assume that the ceremonies in which treaties were rati-
fied might have played an important role.39 Further studies have the potential
to support this view.
The wider implication of applying such a method of analysis is that only a
case-by-case analysis of this sort will allow us to establish a taxonomy for the
phraseology that Greek shares with the Indo-European languages of ancient
Anatolia. Such taxonomy must make appropriate distinctions between cases
of inheritance, of contact, and of independent developments, and can only be
based on studies at the interface between linguistics and philology.
Appendix: Synoptic Table of Deities in Hittite Treaties
1.
Treaty between Šuppiluliuma i of Hatti and Huqqana of Hayaša (cth 42)
2.
Treaty between Šuppiluliuma i of Hatti and Niqmaddu ii of Ugarit (cth 46)
3.
Treaty between Šuppiluliuma i of Hatti and Aziru of Amurru (cth 49)
39
On the transmission of cultural motifs through ceremonies, cf. Burkert (1992: 68),
Karavites—Wren (1992) and Weinfeld (1973; 1990). In more recent times, d’Alfonso (2006:
325–329) suggested that the Hittite-style treaty conventions could have spread to north
Syria via treaty-making ceremonies (and vice-versa); cf. also Goedegebuure (2012: 415) on
possible Assyrian influence on Hieroglyphic Luwian inscriptions, Quick (2017) on Ara-
maic and Biblical conditional curses attached to treaties, and Levinson—Stackert
2012 and Steymans 2013 (with references) on the possibility of Neo-Assyrian influence in
biblicalpassagessuchas Deuteronomy28.OneshouldalsonotethatIronAgeHieroglyphic
Luwian inscriptions (such as topada, the re-interpreted kizildağ 4, and the newly-
published türkmen-karahöyük 1; cf. Goedegebuure et al. 2020) provide indirect
evidence for vassal treaties made between a Luwian-speaking ruler and Phrygian pop-
ulations (cf. d’Alfonso 2019) and I wish to thank an anonymous reviewer for pointing
out this further bibliography to me.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
35
4.
TreatybetweenŠuppiluliumaiof HattiandŠattiwazaof Mitanni(cth 51)[divine
witnesses of Mitanni are not considered here]
5.
Oath of Šattiwaza of Mitanni (cth 52)40
6.
Treaty between Šuppiluliuma i of Hatti and Tette of Nuhashshi (cth 53)
7.
Treaty between Muršili ii of Hatti and Tuppi-Teššub of Amurru (cth 62)
8.
Treaty between Muršili ii of Hatti and Niqmepa of Ugarit (cth 66)
9.
Treaty between Muršili ii of Hatti and Targašnalli of Hapalla (cth 67)
10.
Treaty between Muršili ii of Hatti and Kupanta-Kuruntya of Mira-Kuwaliya (cth
68)
11.
Treaty between Muršili ii of Hatti and Manapa-Tarhunta of the Šeha River Land
(cth 69)
12.
Treaty between Muwattalli ii of Hatti and Alakšandu of Wilusa (cth 76)
13.
Treaty between Hattušili iii of Hatti and Ulmi-Teššub of Tarhuntašša (cth
106.b.II)
14.
Treaty between Tudhaliya iv of Hatti and Kuruntya of Tarhuntašša (cth 106.a.1)
15.
Treaty between Tudhaliya iv of Hatti and Šaušgamuwa of Amurru (cth 105)
16.
Treaty between Arnuwanda i of Hatti (?) and the Kaška people (cth 138.1)
17.
Treaty between Arnuwanda i of Hatti (?) and the Kaška people (cth 139)
18.
Fragment of a treaty between Šuppiluliuma i of Hatti (?) and a king of Mukši
(cth 136)
19.
Fragment of a treaty between Šuppiluliuma i of Hatti and Šarri-Kušuh of
Karkemiš (cth 50)
20.
Fragment of a treaty between Talmi-Teššub of Karkemiš and Šuppiluliuma ii of
Hatti (cth 122.1)
21.
Fragment of a treaty with Kizzuwatna (cth 132)
22.
Fragment of a treaty between Hatti and Hayaša (cth 39)
23.
Fragment of a treaty between Hatti and Alašiya (cth 141)
24.
Treaty between Tudhaliya i of Hatti with Šunaššura of Kizzuwatna
40
This text is generally grouped together with treaties, but it shows rather peculiar features:
not only is it presented as an edict by Šattiwaza, but also it omits the provision section
almost completely. One may find two divine lists, accompanying the blessings and curses
sections, which are laid out in two separate sections.The presence of Mitra,Varuna, Indra,
and the Nasatyas in the list of deities of Mitanni may be of particular interest to the Indo-
Europeanist.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

36
bianconi
table 1.1
Synoptic table of deities in Hittite treaties
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14 15
16 17 18 19
20
21
22
23 24
Sun-god of Heaven
✓
✓
✓
[✓] [✓] [✓] ✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
Sun-goddess of
Arinna
✓
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
[✓] [✓] ✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
Storm-god of Heaven
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
Storm-god of Hatti
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
Šeri
[✓]
✓
✓
Hurri
[✓]
✓
✓
Mount Nanni
[✓]
✓
✓
Mount Hazzi
✓
✓
✓
Other Storm-gods
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Lulutašši
✓
✓
Tutelary deities
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Zithariya
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
Karzi
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
[✓]
Hapantaliya
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
Babylonian
deities
Allatu
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Ea
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
37
table 1.1
Synoptic table of deities in Hittite treaties (cont.)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14 15
16 17 18 19
20
21
22
23 24
Babylonian
deities (cont.)
Damkina
✓
[✓]
Marduk
✓
Hebat(s)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓] [✓]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Enki
✓
Telipinu(s)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
Pirwa
[✓]
✓
✓
Bunene
✓
[✓]
[✓]
Aškašepa
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Grain-deity
✓
[✓]
Ištar and her
attendants
Ištar(s)
✓
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Ninatta and Kulitta
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
Protectors
of Oaths
Moon God
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Iššara/Išhara
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
Nikkal/Ningal
✓
✓
✓
✓
Deity of Arusna
✓
War-gods
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Yarri
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

38
bianconi
table 1.1
Synoptic table of deities in Hittite treaties (cont.)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14 15
16 17 18 19
20
21
22
23 24
Zappana
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
Hasam(m)ili
✓
[✓]
Deities of the army
✓
Local deities
Hantitaššu of Hurma
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
Abara/Ayabara of
Šamuha
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
[✓]
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
Katahha of Ankuwa
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓a
✓
✓
The Queen of Katapa
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Ammamma of
Tahurpa
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Huwaššanna of
Hupišna
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓b
✓
✓
Tapišuwa of
Ishupitta
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
[✓]
Hallara of Dunna
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
the Lady of Landa
[✓] ✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
a
Here spelled ⟨Hatagga⟩.
b Here I have followed Singer 2001: 638–640, but I wonder if, on the basis of cth 122.1 (also with Karkamiš),
one should reconstruct “The Tutelary deity of Huwaššanna” instead of “Huwaššanna of Hupišna”.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
39
table 1.1
Synoptic table of deities in Hittite treaties (cont.)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14 15
16 17 18 19
20
21
22
23 24
Local deities
(cont.)
Kuniyawanni of
Landa
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Nin-šenšen of Kinza
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
lulaḫḫi and ḫapiru
gods
✓
✓
✓
✓
Mountains
Mount Lebanon
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
Mount Šariyana /
Šariššiya
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
Mount Pišaiša
[✓]
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
Deities of the
Underworld
Ereshkigal / Sun-
goddess of the Earth
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
✓
Lelwani
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
✓
Primeval
deities
Nara
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
Namšara
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
Minki/Munki
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
Tuhuši
[✓] ✓
[✓] ✓
✓
[✓]
[✓] [✓] ✓
[✓]
✓
✓
Ammunki
[✓] ✓
[✓] ✓
✓
[✓]
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
Ammizzadu
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
[✓] ✓
✓
[✓]
✓
Alalu
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

40
bianconi
table 1.1
Synoptic table of deities in Hittite treaties (cont.)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14 15
16 17 18 19
20
21
22
23 24
Primeval
deities (cont.)
Anu
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
[✓]
Antu
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
[✓]
✓
[✓]
Apantu
[✓]
✓
✓
[✓]
[✓]
[✓]
✓
✓
Enlil
[✓] ✓
[✓] ✓
✓
[✓]
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
Ninlil
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Bēlet-ekalli
✓
✓
Kumarbi
✓
✓
✓
mountain-dweller
gods
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
mercenary gods
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
all deities of Hatti
✓
✓
deities of heaven
✓
✓
✓
deities of the earth
✓
✓
Natural
elements
male deities
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
female deities
[✓] ✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
mountains
✓
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
rivers
[✓]
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
springs
[✓]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
41
table 1.1
Synoptic table of deities in Hittite treaties (cont.)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14 15
16 17 18 19
20
21
22
23 24
Natural
elements
(cont.)
the Tigris
[✓]
the Euphrates
✓
[✓]
the (great) sea
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
heaven and earth
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
winds
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
[✓]
[✓] ✓
✓
clouds
✓
[✓] ✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

42
bianconi
The following deities do not appear in the table:
In cth 76
Mount Hulla, Mount Zaliyanu, Mount Taha, all [the deities] of the land
of Wiluša, and ]appaliuna, the underground watercourse (?) of the land
of Wiluša
In cth 138.1
Huwattašši (Kaskean deity)
In cth 139.1
the primeval deities (just cited as a cover term)
In cth 50
the gods of Karkamiš, Kubaba, Karkuhiš … Taruppašani.
In cth 122.1
Ku[baba, K]arḫuḫi
In cth 39
… Š]amniwa; ⸢Nergal⸣of Hayaša, Ištar of Patteu[…]annu of Lahirhila,
Zagg[a …]arniya, Tarumu of Kam? [… the Storm-god?] of Pahhuteya.
Terittuni of the plain? of Arhita, Baltaik of Tukamana, Unagašta of Par-
ray[a], […]huhu of Gašmiyaha, Šil[…]
In cth 41.i.1
the gods of the Land of Kizzuwatna
References
Allen, Spencer L. 2015,TheSplinteredDivineAStudyof Ištar,Baal,andYahwehDivine
Names and Divine Multiplicity in the Ancient Near East, Boston/Berlin/Munich: de
Gruyter.
Anthony,DavidW.2007,TheHorse,theWheel,andLanguage:HowBronze-AgeRiders
fromtheEurasianSteppesShapedtheModernWorld,Princeton:PrincetonUniversity
Press.
Archi, Alfonso 1993, Kamrušepa and the Sheep of the Sun-God, “Orientalia” 62/4:
404–409.
Bachvarova, Mary R. 2016, From Hittite to Homer. The Anatolian Background of
Ancient Greek Epic, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barré, Michael L. 1983, The God-List in the Treaty between Hannibal and Philip v of
Macedonia: a study in Light of the Ancient Near Eastern Treaty Tradition, Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
Beckman, Gary M. 1999, Hittite Diplomatic Texts, Atlanta: Scholars Press.
Beckman, Gary M. 2002–2005, Pantheon. A. ii. Bei den Hethitern, “RlA” 10/3–4: 308–
316.
Bianconi, Michele 2015, Contatti greco-anatolici e Sprachbund egeo-micrasiatico.
Statodellaricercaenuoveprospettive, “Archivio Glottologico Italiano” 100/2: 129–178.
Bianconi, Michele 2020, Some thoughts on Anatolian Lexicon in Mycenaean Greek,
in R. Garnier (ed.), Loanwords and Substrata, Innsbruck: Institut für Vergleichende
Sprachwissenschaft der Universität Innsbruck: 63–88.
Bianconi, Michele 2021,ThereandBackAgain:aHundredYearsof Graeco-Anatolian
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
43
Comparative Linguistics, in M. Bianconi (ed.), Linguistic and Cultural Interactions
between Greece and Anatolia: in Search of the Golden Fleece, Leiden: Brill: 8–39.
Bowie, Angus M. 2019, Iliad. Book iii, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bryce,Trevor R. 1999, Anatolian Scribes in Mycenaean Greece, “Historia” 48: 257–264.
Burkert,Walter 1991, Homerstudien und Orient, in J. Latacz (ed.), Zweihundert Jahre
Homer-Forschung. Rückblick und Ausblick, Stuttgart/Leipzig: de Gruyter: 155–181.
Burkert, Walter 1992, The Orientalizing Revolution: Near Eastern Influence on Greek
Culture in the Early Archaic Age, trans. by M.E. Pinder and W. Burkert, Cambridge
(Mass.)/London: Harvard University Press.
Burkert, Walter 20042, Die Griechen und der Orient. Von Homer bis zu den Magiern,
München: C.H. Beck Verlag.
Burkert,Walter 2005, Near Eastern connections, in J.M. Foley (ed.), A Companion to
Ancient Epic, Oxford: Blackwell: 291–301.
Campanile,Enrico1979, Meaningandprehistoryof OldIrishcúglas,“Journalof Indo-
European Studies” 7/3–4: 237–247.
Christiansen, Birgit 2012, Schicksalsbestimmende Kommunikation. Sprachliche,
gesellschaftliche und religiöse Aspekte hethitischer Fluch-, Segens- und Eidesformeln,
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Cotticelli-Kurras, Paola—Giusfredi, Federico 2018, Ancient Anatolian lan-
guages and cultures in contact: some methodological observations, “jlr” 16/3–4: 172–
193.
d’Alfonso, Lorenzo 2006, Die hethitische Vertragstradition in Syrien (14.–12. Jh. v.
Chr.), in M. Witte—K. Schmid—D. Prechel—J.C. Gertz (eds.), Die deuteronom-
istischen Geschichtswerke: Redaktions- und religionsgeschichtliche Perspektiven zur
„Deuteronomismus“-Diskussion inTora undVorderen Propheten, Berlin/New York: de
Gruyter: 303–329.
d’Alfonso, Lorenzo 2019, War in Anatolia in the post-Hittite period: The Anatolian
Hieroglyphic inscription of Topada revised, “Journal of Cuneiform Studies” 71: 133–
152.
Dalley, Stephanie 2008, Myths from Mesopotamia. Creation, the flood, Gilgamesh,
and others, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Dardano,Paola2013, Linguaomericaefraseologiaanatolica:vecchiequestionienuove
prospettive, in M. Mancini—L. Lorenzetti (eds.), Le lingue del Mediterraneo antico.
Culture, mutamenti, contatti, Roma: Carocci: 125–150.
Dardano, Paola 2021, Homeric covenantal terminology and its Near Eastern forerun-
ners, in M. Bianconi (ed.), Linguistic and Cultural Interactions between Greece and
the Ancient Near East: in Search of the Golden Fleece, Leiden: Brill: 40–79.
Del Monte, Giuseppe 2003, Antologiadellaletteraturaittita, Pisa: Servizio Editoriale
Universitario di Pisa.
Devecchi, Elena 2015, Trattati internazionali ittiti, Brescia: Paideia Editrice.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

44
bianconi
Durante, Marcello 1976, Sulla preistoria della tradizione poetica greca. Parte
seconda: risultanze della comparazione indoeuropea, Roma: Edizioni dell’Ateneo.
Faraone, Christopher 1993, Moltenwax,spiltwineandmutilatedanimals:sympath-
etic magic in Near Eastern and Early Greek oath ceremonies, “jhs” 113: 60–80.
Friedrich, J. 1930, Staatsverträge des Hatti-Reiches in hethitischer Sprache, Leipzig:
J.C. Hinrichs’sche.
García Ramón, José Luis 2011, Sprachen in Kontakt in Griechenland und Kleinasien
im 2. Jahrtausend v. Chr., “zsm-Studien” 4: 23–45.
García Ramón, José Luis 2012, Eredità, prestiti, mutamenti comuni nel lessico e nella
morfosintassi delle lingue indoeuropee: il caso di anatolico e greco, “silta” 41/3: 425–
439.
Gasbarra, Valentina—Pozza, Marianna 2012, Fenomeni di interferenza greco-
anatolicaneliimillennioa.c.:l’ittitocomemediatoretramondoindoeuropeoemondo
non indoeuropeo, “aion” 1 (n.s.): 165–214.
Gasbarra, Valentina—Pozza, Marianna 2019, Percorsi lessicali nel Mediterraneo
orientale antico, Alessandria: Edizioni dell’Orso.
Gerçek, Nebahat İ. 2012, The Kaška and the Northern Frontier of Ḫatti, Doctoral
Thesis, University of Michigan.
Ginevra, Riccardo 2019, Indo-european Cosmology and Poetics: Cosmic Merisms in
Comparative and Cognitive Perspective, “Archivio Glottologico Italiano” 104/1: 5–17.
Ginnell, Laurence 19173, The Brehon laws: a legal handbook, Glasgow: P.J.
O’Callaghan.
Giorgieri, Mauro 2001, Aspetti magico-religiosi del giuramento presso gli Ittiti e i
Greci, in S. Ribichini—M. Rocchi—P. Xella (eds.), La questione delle influenze vicino-
orientali sulla religione greca. Stato degli studi e prospettiva della ricerca. Atti del col-
loquio internazionale—Roma, 22–24 maggio 1999, Roma: Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche: 421–440.
Goedegebuure, Petra—van den Hout, Theo P.J.—Osborne, James F.—
Massa, Michele—Bachhuber Cristoph—Şahin, Fatma 2020, türkmen-
karahöyük 1: A new Hieroglyphic Luwian inscription from Great King Hartapu, son
of Mursili, conqueror of Phrygia, “Anatolian Studies” 70: 29–43.
Goedegebuure, Petra 2012, Hittite iconoclasm: Disconnecting the icon, disempower-
ing the referent, in N. May (ed.), Iconoclasm and Text Destruction in the Ancient
Near East and Beyond, Chicago, Illinois: The Oriental Institute of the University of
Chicago: 407–452.
Goedegebuure, Petra 2019, The Hieroglyphic Luwian signs *128 (avis ‘bird’) = wax
and *30 = hapa, in A. Süel (ed.) Acts of the ixth International Congress of Hittitology,
Çorum 08–14 September 2014, Ankara: T.C. Çorum Valiliğ: 295–316.
Gurney, Oliver 1977, Someaspectsof Hittitereligion, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hajnal, Ivo 2014, Diegriechisch-anatolischenSprachkontaktezurBronzezeit—Sprach-
bund oder loser Sprachkontakt?, “Linguarum Varietas” 3: 105–116.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
45
Hajnal, Ivo 2018, Graeco-Anatolian Contacts in the Mycenaean Period, in M.A. Fritz—
J. Klein et al. (eds.), Comparative Indo-European Linguistics. An International Hand-
book of Language Comparison and the Reconstruction of Indo-European, Berlin: de
Gruyter: 2036–2055.
Hawkins, J. David 2006, The Inscription, in G. Bunnens—J.D. Hawkins—I. Leirens
(eds.), Tell Ahmar ii. A New Luwian Stele and the Cult of the Storm-God at Til Barsib-
Masuwari, Louvain/Paris/Dudley: Peeters: 11–31.
Hawkins, Shane 2010, Greek and the Languages of Asia Minor, in E.J. Bakker (ed.), A
Companion to the Ancient Greek Language, Chichester/Malden (MA): Wiley-Black-
well: 213–227.
Högemann, Peter 2003, Das ionische Griechentum und seine altanatolische Umwelt
imSpiegelHomers,inM.Witte—S.Alkier(eds.), DieGriechenundderVordereOrient:
Beiträge zum Kultur- und Relgionskontakt zwischen Griechenland und dem Vorderen
Orient im 1. Jahrtausend v. Chr., Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht: 1–24.
Hundley,MichaelB.2014,TheGodCollectors:HittiteConceptionsof theDivine,“AoF”
41/2: 176–200.
Karavites, Peter—Wren, Thomas E. 1992, Promise-Giving and Treaty-Making:
Homer and the Near East, Leiden/New York/Cologne: Brill.
Kestemont,Guy1976, Lepanthéondesinstrumentshittitesdedroitpublic,“Orientalia”
45: 147–177.
Kitchen, Kenneth A.—Lawrence, Paul J.N. 2012, Treaty, Law and Covenant in the
Ancient Near East, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Kretschmer, Paul 1924, Alakšanduš könig von Viluša, “Glotta” 13: 205–213.
Laroche, Emmanuel 1974, Les dénominations des dieux ‘antiques’ dans le textes
hittites, in K. Bittel et al. (eds), Anatolian Studies Presented to Hans Gustav Güterbock
on the occasion of his 65th birthday, Istanbul: Nederlands Historisch-Archaeologisch
Instituut in het Nabije Oosten: 175–185.
Latacz, Joachim 2004, Troy and Homer. Towards a solution of an old mystery, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Lazzeroni, Romano 1987, L’organizzazione del lessico indeuropeo: etimologia e ideo-
logia, “asgm” 28: 1–13.
Lazzeroni, Romano 1989, Per l’etimologia di ὅρκος: una testimonianza ittita, “ssl” 29:
87–94.
Lazzeroni, Romano 1998, La cultura indoeuropea, Roma: Laterza.
Levinson, Bernard M.—Stackert, Jeffrey 2012, Between the Covenant Code and
Esarhaddon’s succesion treaty: Deuteronomy 13 and the composition of Deuteronomy,
“Journal of Ancient Judaism” 3: 123–140.
Liverani, Mario 1967, La preistoria dell’epiteto ‘Yahweh ṣĕbā’ōt’, “aion” 17: 331–334.
Luckenbill, Daniel D. 1911, A Possible Occurrence of the Name Alexander in the
Boghaz-Keuei Tablets, “cp” 6: 85–86.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

46
bianconi
Melchert, H. Craig 2014a, Greek and Lycian, in G. Giannakis (ed.), Encyclopedia of
Ancient Greek Language and Linguistics, vol. ii, Leiden/Boston: Brill: 67–70.
Melchert, H. Craig 2014b, Greek and Lydian, in G. Giannakis (ed.), Encyclopedia of
Ancient Greek Language and Linguistics, vol. ii, Leiden/Boston: Brill: 70–71.
Metcalf,Christopher2015,TheGodsRichinPraise.EarlyGreekandMesopotamian
Religious Poetry, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nenci, Giuseppe 1961, Gli dei testimoni nei trattati ittiti e in Γ 280, “pp” 16: 381–382.
Page, Denys 1972, Folktales in Homer’s Odyssey.The Carl Newell Jackson Lectures, Cam-
bridge (MA): Harvard University Press.
Pettazzoni, Raffaele 1955, L’onniscienza di Dio, Torino: Einaudi.
Puhvel, Jaan 1991, Homer and Hittite, Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenschaft der
Universität Innsbruck.
Quick, Laura 2017, Deuteronomy 28 and the Aramaic Curse Tradition, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Rollinger, Robert 2004a, Die Verschriftlichung von Normen: Einflüsse und Elemente
orientalischer Kulturtechnik in den homerischen Epen, dargestellt am Beispiel desVer-
tragswesens, in R. Rollinger—C. Ulf (edd.), Griechische Archaik: interne Entwicklun-
gen, externe Impulse, Berlin: Akademie Verlag: 369–425.
Rollinger, Robert 2004b, Hethiter, Homer und Anatolien. Erwägungen zu Il. 3, 300f.
und kub xiii Nr. 3, iii 1f., “Historia” 53/1: 1–21.
Rutherford, Ian 2020, Hittite Texts and Greek Religion. Contact, Interaction, and
Comparison, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Scharfe, Hartmut 2016, Ṛgveda, Avesta, and beyond—ex occidente lux?, “Journal of
the American Oriental Society” 136: 47–67.
Schwemer, Daniel 2006, Das hethitische Reichspantheon. Überlegungen zu Struk-
tur und Genese, in R.G. Kratz—H. Spieckmann (eds.), Götterbilder, Gottesbilder,
Weltbilder. Polytheismus und Monotheismus in der Welt der Antike, Tübingen: Mohr
Siebeck: 241–265.
Singer, Itamar 1994, ‘The Thousand Gods of Hatti’: The Limits of an Expanding Pan-
theon, in I. Alon—I. Gruenwald—I. Singer (eds.), Concepts of the Other in Near East-
ern Religions, Leiden: Brill: 81–102.
Steymans, Hans U. 2013, Deuteronomy 28 and Tell Tayinat, “Verbum et Ecclesia” 34/2:
1–13.
Watkins, Calvert 1986, The Language of the Trojans, in M.J. Mellink (ed.), Troy and
the Trojan War. A Symposium Held at Bryn Mawr College October 1984, Bryn Mawr:
Bryn Mawr College: 45–62.
Watkins, Calvert 1995, How to Kill a Dragon. Aspects of Indo-European Poetry,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Weinfeld, Moshe 1973, Covenant terminology in the ancient Near East and its influ-
ence on the West, “Journal of the American Oriental Society” 93: 190–199.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

divine witnesses in greece and anatolia
47
Weinfeld,Moshe1990,TheCommonHeritageof CovenantalTraditionsintheAncient
World, in L. Canfora—M. Liverani—C. Zaccagnini (eds.), I trattati nel mondo antico:
forma ideologia funzione, Roma: L’Erma di Bretschneider: 175–191.
West, Martin L. 1997, The East Face of Helicon: West Asiatic Elements in Greek Poetry
and Myth, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
West, Martin L. 2007, Indo-European Poetry and Myth, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Wilhelm, Gernot 2011, hethiter.net/: cth 41.i.1.
Yakubovich, Ilya 2010, Sociolinguistics of the Luvian Language, Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Yakubovich, Ilya 2013, Anatolian Names in -wiya and the Structure of Empire Luwian
Onomastics, in A. Mouton—I. Rutherford—I. Yakubovich (eds.), Luwian Identities.
Culture, Language and Religion Between Anatolia and the Aegean, Leiden/Boston:
Brill: 87–123.
Yakubovich, Ilya 2015, Phoenician and Luwian in Early Iron Age Cilicia, “Anatolian
Studies” 65: 35–53.
Yoshida, Daisuke 1996, Untersuchungen zu den Sonnengottheiten bei den Hethitern,
Heidelberg: Winter.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Juan E. Briceño Villalobos, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_004
chapter 2
Achaemenid Elamite and Old Persian Indefinites: A
Comparative View
Juan E. Briceño Villalobos
Para J.A. y E.
∵
1
Elamite and Semitic Languages*
Elamite is an isolate, non-Indo-European language that was spoken in south-
western Iran at least between the 23rd and the 4th century bce. It is an agglu-
tinative language with a cuneiform script that represents an adaptation of the
Sumero-Akkadian script.1 Its first textual evidence is the Treaty of Narām-Sîn
(eki 2) dated around 2260–2223bce2 and more texts of inscriptional nature
continue to be present in southern Iran off and on until the beginning of
the Achaemenid period. Old Elamite (ca. 2600–1500bce) and Neo-Elamite
(ca. 1000–540bce) texts are badly documented. On the contrary, Middle Ela-
mite (ca. 1500–1000bce) and Achaemenid Elamite (ca. 550–330 bce) are bet-
ter attested. While the former is usually taken as the classical period of the
language, the latter—mainly found in two distinct registers: Royal Inscrip-
tionsandadministrativearchive—representsapartiallyrestructuredvarietyof
MiddleandNeo-ElamitecarriedoutbyIranianscribes,ascanbeobservedinits
*
This research has been funded by the Agencia Nacional de Investigación y Desarrollo (anid),
Chile, Fondecyt de Postdoctorado 2021, Proyecto N° 3210689.
1 This must have been developed already by the middle of the 3rd millennium bce.
2 Narām-Sîn was an Akkadian king, grandson of king Sargon of Akkad. Scholars have proposed
that the actual Elamite king behind this treaty is king Helu or king Hita of the Awan dynasty.
Moreover, most recently, it has been announced that Linear Elamite has been deciphered by
François Desset along with four collaborators, Kambiz Tabibzadeh, Mathieu Kervran, Gian
PietroBasello,andGianniMarchesi.Thisfirstphoneticscriptwouldhavebeen devisedbythe
22nd century bce—by the time of Puzur-Inšušinak, the last king of the Awan dynasty—and
it would have run parallel to the cuneiform script borrowed from Mesopotamia. It has been
suggested that this script might be a continuation of the still undeciphered Proto-Elamite
script created by the end of the 4th millennium bce.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
49
grammatical peculiarities in comparison to previous stages of the language. It
must be taken into account that Achaemenid Elamite was not the sole admin-
istrative language of the Achaemenids: above all stands Imperial Aramaic, the
most important administrative language of the empire, and, to a lesser extent,
Achaemenid Babylonian (Late Akkadian), both being of the Semitic linguistic
family.
It must also be kept in mind that the Achaemenid Royal Inscriptions are
trilingual: Achaemenid Elamite (ae), Old Persian (op), and Achaemenid Baby-
lonian(ab).Inthecaseof theBīsotūnInscription(db),themostimportantand
longest of all Achaemenid Royal Inscriptions, also includes an Aramaic version
found in Elephantine, Egypt.Throughout this paper, I will make constant refer-
ence to the Semitic data gathered from the Royal Inscriptions, concretely from
Achaemenid Babylonian (ca. 600bce–100ce) and Imperial Aramaic (ca. 700–
200bce), as long as this material provides valuable information regarding the
morphology employed in the ae and op versions.
Finally, I must point out that it has been admittedly established that the
order of redaction of the three versions found in the Royal Inscriptions is as
follows: Old Persian > Achaemenid Elamite > Achaemenid Babylonian. This
is particularly clear in the case of the ae text, since it follows the op syntax,
with a lot of loans and calques. As opposed to the rest of the Royal Inscrip-
tions, however, db is a particular case, since the first version to be carved into
the rock was the ae text. Hence, the op version should have followed the ae
version, although recent studies suggest that the ae version in db would have
been after an uninscribed op version that has not come to us.
2
The Typology of Indefinites
Before embarking upon the analysis of op and ae indefinites, I will briefly
explain the linguistic typology behind my survey in the following sections. As
we know, negative polarity items (Haspelmath 1997: 33ff.) and free-choice
items (Giannakidou 2001) are two types of indefinite pronouns widely at-
tested in the world languages.3 On the one hand, npis are only licensed by
non-veridical semantic operators such as negation, conditionals, interrogat-
ives, and standard of comparison, whereas fcis are polarity items that, being
3 Giannakidou (1998: 17) defines polarity as an item α that is an expression whose distribu-
tion is limited to sensitivity to some semantic property β of a context c of appearance. Most
scholars nowadays take polarity as a type of semantic deficit or semantic dependency. Cf.
Giannakidou—Zeijlstra 2017.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

50
briceño villalobos
of a non-episodic nature, are only grammatical in contexts providing multiple
alternatives, worlds, or situations. In this regard, fcis represent the highest
levels of indefiniteness. The most typical environments that can trigger their
presence are sentences that express possibility or permission (imperatives),
sentences that can be interpreted generically, hypothetical and counterfactual
sentences, or sentences expressing sufficient conditions, habituals, future sen-
tences, modals verbs, etc. (Haspelmath 1997: 48). See Table 2.1 for examples.
There are mainly two types of fc indefinites: nominal and relative,4 cf. Horn
2000: 71–107. The latter type is overly marked by domain-widening particles,
suchasEnglish-ever,whichareinchargeof enhancingtheexpressionof awide
range of possibilities, closely resembling the x alternatives displayed by nom-
inal fc semantics. One of the most important features of fc indefinites is that
they tend to avoid negative and interrogative contexts (unless non-episodic).
As concerns irrealis indefinites, these are also non-specific as npis and fci and
they are, normally licensed by the future sentences, non-indicative modality,
‘want’ contexts habitual events, imperatives, etc. (Haspelmath 1997: 40ff.).
In English, this type of indefinite is also rendered by the ‘some’-series. Finally,
existential quantifiers, which represent the lowest levels of indefiniteness, are
indefinites only licensed by veridical/specific semantic contexts that refer to a
speaker who presupposes the existence and unique identifiability of its refer-
ent (Haspelmath 1997: 37ff.). In relation with the knowledge of the speaker
conveyed by these indefinites, he may (known) or may not (unknown) be able
to identify the referent of the indefinite pronoun (Haspelmath 1997: 45ff.).
In the following sections, I will examine to what extent Old Persian relies
on these types of indefinites, which follow distinct diachronic developments
into Middle Persian, and how Achaemenid Elamite mirrors, in many ways, Old
Iranian morphology.
4 In this paper, relative fc formations entail both non-specific free-relative clauses (I will give
you whatever you want), which fill a functional slot within the main clause, and concessive
conditionals(Whateveritis,Iwillgo).Withinthelattertype,relative-correlativeconstructions
“whoever ….he/that/this” would be included. As far as early ie languages are concerned, both
types of fc indefinite relative clauses share the same morphology. For their morphological as
well as semantic affinities, cf. Haspelmath 1997: 135–136, Haspelmath—König 1998: 557,
606–608. In turn, in their assessment of wh-ever fcis, Cheng—Giannakidou (2006: 155–156)
conclude that fc relative clauses are actually definite by nature and that they lack polarity
sensitivity due to the fact that they are licensed in episodic contexts, unlike nominal fcis.
Despite the validity of this assertion, I will not take into account in this paper this difference
between nominal and relative fc indefinites.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
51
table 2.1
The typology of indefinite pronouns
Negative polar-
ity items
(npis)
neg
I don’t see anything on that room.
cond
If anyone sees that, let me know.
interr
Have you seen anything lately?
comp
He is faster than anyone else in this trial.
Free-choice
items
(fcis)
nominal
Pick up any card you want.
Anyone can do that with the right motivation.
relative
You can hire whichever person you see fit.
Whoever pushes the bottom, he must do it now.
Whatever happens, just go!
Irrealis
(irr)
Someone will come to the party.
He wants to encounter someone with the right attitude.
Find me something that I can actually wear.
Existential
quantifiers
(eq)
unknown
Yesterday, I think I saw someone of your friends,
but I could not see who he was exactly.
known
I have bought something I know you are going
to like.
3
op kašci npi/fc: mp kas-iz npi and me akkar npi: ae akkar npi “anyone”5
In principle, op kašci is an animate npi indefinite mainly attested under the
scope of negation. In origin, op kašci, similarly to its Indo-Iranian cognates,
5 I will leave for another occasion the discussion of some other attested op and ae
interrogative-indefinite formations, universal quantifiers, and polarity items such as op ciyā-
karam “what kind, how many” (ae appa hamak), op ada-kai̭“then, at that time” (ae hamer),
op citā “so long”, ae marrita “all, entire”, ae appan “ever, someday” (ew: 72, Tavernier
2018: 432), ae unra “each” (Grillot-Susini 2008: 56), and ae lurika “each” (Stolper 2004:
77).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

52
briceño villalobos
OAv/YAv.kascit̰fc/uniandVed.káścid fc,musthavebeenanominalfcindefinite
“any”, a compound of the interrogative-indefinite stem IIr. *ká- plus the scalar
focus particle IIr. *čid.6 It is cross-linguistically common to encounter such
scalar/additive focus particles (e.g. “also, and, even”) functioning as domain-
widening particles along with the interrogative-indefinite stem: as shown by
König (1991: 64–66) and Haspelmath (1997: 157–164), this is a very prolific
strategy among the world languages for the creation of fc indefinites.7 As we
know, among early ie languages, pie *-kwe also operates as a domain-widening
particle together with the interrogative-indefinite stem: e.g. Lat. quisque and
Goth. ƕazuh.8 In this manner, both pie *-kwid and *-kwe overtly mark the scalar
endpoint of ie interrogatives, transforming the latter into fc indefinites.9
However,Indo-Iranianhasmodifiedthesemanticsof thisinheritedfcindef-
inite: it has turned it either into a distributive/universal pronoun “each, every-
one” (Old/Young Avestan and Old Persian) or into an npi indefinite “any” (Old
Persian and Classical Sanskrit).10 The former development is said to consist in
the semantic change from a fc indefinite into a distributive/universal quan-
tifier. Cf. Haspelmath (1997: 154–156). I take this distributive/universal reading
to be derived from the fc semantics assumed by the interrogative stem along
6
Lubotsky—de Vaan (2011: 201) translate op kašci and op cišci as fc indefinites “whoever”
and “whatever” respectively. In this section and in the next, I will show that there is a
more fine-grained distinction at play within the indefinite frame, concretely between fc
and npi uses of these indefinites.
7
In Sabellian -pid (Osc. pispid), we find another instance of pie *-kwid operating as a
domain-widening particle in the formation of fc indefinites. Cf. Machajdíková—
Martzloff 2016: 96ff.
8
It is plausible that the indefinite Hitt. kuiški also represents the union between the inter-
rogative stem and the particle *-kwe (> Hitt. -kku “and, also; if” > -ki). It is with this in mind
that Sideltsev—Yakubovich (2016) propose that Hitt. kuiški was originally a fc indefinite.
The use of this particle along with non-specific relatives as well as with conditional mark-
ers has parallels in other early ie languages: HGr. ὅς κε “whoever” /εἴκε “if”, and IIr. *yá-
ci/ka-ca “whoever”/ Ved. ced (< *ca-íd) /-ca, OAv. -ca “if” (Briceño-Villalobos 2019:
184–186). In turn, it is safe to say that particles *-kwid and *-kwe are not the only particles
employed in the creation of fc indefinites among early ie languages. Notice, for instance,
the focus particle Hitt. imma “even” (kuiš imma “whoever, any”) (cf. Sideltsev 2018), the
additive particle tb -ra “also, like” (ketra “whoever(’s), whomever”, ket-rāññe “belonging
to whomever”) (cf. Pinault 2010: 288ff.; Adams 2013: 569), or the irrealis-modal particle
Gr. ἄν (ὅς ἄν “whoever”): all of them are employed as domain-widening particles in the
formation of fc indefinites.
9
Scalarity is a key feature shared by both fcis and npis (Haspelmath 1997: 164).
10
In the Rigveda, we already find instances of káś cid functioning as npi, although the fc
functionismostlyattestedforthisindefinite.Additionally,weseeinClassicalSanskritthat
this indefinite—already covering the functions of free choice and negative polarity—has
evolved into an eq “some”.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
53
with scalar focus particles after a multiple-alternative reading, which is a key
trait of fc indefinites. This development is also observed in Lat. quisque uni/fc
“everyone, anyone” (< *kwis-kwe fc “anyone”) or Go. ƕazuh (< *kwis-u-kwe fc “any-
one”). On the other hand, the semantic development from fci into an npi
is called ‘semantic weakening’ or ‘extension from free-choice’ and, according
to Haspelmath (1997: 149–150), it consists in the loss of scalarity and of non-
specificity. This semantic change might also be observed in Hitt. kuiški npi/exi
“anyone, someone”, Skrt. káś cid npi/exi “anyone, someone”, and Arm. ok‘ npi “any-
one”.11
In this way, Old Persian displays the two possible developments: on the one
hand, op *kašci fc “anyone” turns into op kašci uni “everyone, each one”,12 as
in (1a), and, on the other, op *kašci fc “anyone” turns into op kašci npi “any-
one”, as in (1b). Notice that in the latter example negation is preverbal and after
the indefinite, just like ae akkar npi (inni) and mp kas-iz npi (nē).13 Cf. mp kas
eq-unknown“someone”andmpānkas eq-known“thatperson,someone”.14Although
11
Cf. Klein (1997), De Lamberterie (2013: 43).
12
For the universal / distributive indefinite, Middle Persian employs mp harw “every, each,
all” (< op haruva “all”, cf. Ved. sárva “whole”): harw kas uni “everyone” (> np har kas fc/uni
“anyone, everyone”) or mp harw tis “everything”. Observe that, in the same way as Middle
Persian employs mp harw for creating non-specific fc indefinite relatives (e.g. harw kē fc
“whoever”/ mp harw če fc “whatever”), the rest of Middle Iranian languages also make use
of OIr.*harwaasadomain-wideningparticlebeforeoraftertheinterrogative-relativepro-
noun: Khot. halci, Oss. alči (< OIr. *harwa-čid), Khot. hanu (< OIr. *harnu), Bactr. υαρσο (<
OIr. *harwa + ισο), and Bactr. φαρσο (<OIr. *fra-harwa + ισο??). Additionally, notice that
New Persian displays a rather odd semantic change: from universal “every” into fc “any”
(Haspelmath1997:156).Similarly,Turkishhasaherhangi-series,whichisacompoundof
her, borrowed from Persian har “every” and the interrogative determiner hangi “which?”.
13
In Middle Persian, the negative polarity function can also be performed by other indef-
inite formations: the bare indefinite mp kas can function as a npi within non-veridical
semantic contexts such as negation (Brunner 1977: 91) or conditionals (mp kas npi…nē
“not anyone”, mp ka kas npi “if anyone …”), and mp ēč kas npi “anyone” (> np hič kas(-i)
npi “anyone”). The first element of this compound, mp ēč npi “any” (< OIr. *ai̯u̯a-čid), is an
indefinite that is almost completely restricted to negative functions (similarly, np hič npi
“any”). Nevertheless, mp ēč also contributes to the formation of fc indefinites such as ēč
kē fc “whoever” (cf. or rel ok‘npi “whoever”) and ēč-ēw fc “anyone”. How a npi element can
aid in the expression of fc semantics must be left for future typological research. It seems,
though, that the scalarity feature embedded in npis must play a role of some sort.
14
Also, cf. mp kas-ēw irr/cond “someone” and np (yek) kas-i eq/irr/npi. In combination with the
relative np ki, it forms non-specific indefinite relative clauses: np kas-i ki “whoever”, as in
mp kas kē “whoever”. With np har, it forms a uni/fc pronoun np har kas(-i) “everyone,
anyone”. According to our data, mp -ēw (> np -e) is certainly employed along with nomin-
als as an indefinite article with a eq (specific-known) function “a certain, some”. However,
in conjunction with other indefinites (e.g. mp kas, tis, ēč, ēk, etc.), mp -ēw marks irrealis as
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

54
briceño villalobos
not attested in Old Iranian, Old Indic has the indefinite Ved. káś caná npi “(not)
anyone” for the npi function, the interrogative-indefinite stem plus the de-
instrumentalscalarfocusparticleIIr.*čana.15Fortheuseof OIr.*činaalongside
of the numeral ‘one’ with a npi function, see section 4.
(1)16 a. DSep §5, 37
gāϑavā
in place
kašci
each one
astiy
be-3sg
dātam.
put
‘Each one is put in his place’.
b. dbp 1, §13, 53–54
kašci
anyone
nai̯
neg
adar̥šnauš
dare-3sg
cišci
anything
ϑastanai̯
to say
‘Not anyone dared say anything.’
c. dbe 12 (ex 13), 40–41
ak
and
makkar
anyone
aški
anything
mGammata
Gaumata
mmaguš
magician
tupaka
regarding
inni
neg
lilma.k
testify-3sg
‘And not anyone said anything about Gaumata the magician’.
In turn, Achaemenid Elamite attests the animate indefinite akkar [ak-ka4-ri]
“anyone”, which is a compound made of the animate relative-interrogative pro-
noun akka “who? who”17 and the delocutive animate 3rd sg. classifier -r (Ta-
vernier 2018: 427). As it is the case for the inanimate relative-interrogative
pronoun appa “which, what?”, akka is indeclinable. ae akkar operates as a
‘strong’ npi indefinite, given that all its attestations are under the direct scope
of negation that is placed in a fixed preverbal position: akkar + neg +V. See (1c)
and (2) for examples.
well as fc functions, leaving aside negative polarity uses. Notice that the indefinite marker
mp -ēw becomes essential in the formation of the New Persian i-series that would even-
tually be employed in all functions, including the negative polarity functions, except for
the comparative and fc functions, for which New Persian employs har “every” + indef. Cf.
Haspelmath (1997: 282–284).
15
For the etymology of this focus particle and a detailed assessment of its occurrences in
early Indo-Iranian, see Briceño-Villalobos (2019: 145–149).
16
For this passage, the ae and ab parallel texts are badly preserved.
17
Cf. Reiner (1969: 86); Khačikjan (1998: 27–28), Grillot-Susini (2008: 54–55), Bavant (2014:
272–274), and Tavernier (2018: 431–432).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
55
(2)
dbe 51 (ex 63), 82
appan
ever
lakkimme18
harm
akkar
anyone
uggi
above
inni
neg
hutta
do-1sg
“‘ never did harm upon anybody’
This fact is corroborated by the me material, where the indefinite akkar [ak-
ka4-ra]19 (Cf. eki 183) is attested up to five times and follows the same syntactic
distribution as ae akkar. See (3).
(3)
eki 28A, §5, 820
sunkip
king=pl
urpubba
former=pl
akkar …
anyone
inri
neg.3sg (anim.)
dur[naš].
know-3sg
‘(of) the former kings, no one knew’.
However, in the Persepolis administrative tablets, akkar is attested expressing
an eq “some”, as in (4), similar in function to the numeral ‘one’ in both ae kir
andopai̯va,probablyduetoOldPersianinfluenceandnotbecauseof semantic
change as seen above.21 This use is also parallel to mp kas eq “some” that also
functions as an existential quantifier without mp -iz.22
(4)
pf-nn 2506
Masa
Masa
akkar
some
‘a certain Masa’
Now, if we turn to dbp 1, §13, 49, we observe op nai̯… kašci haya “not … anyone
who” (see 5a). According to Skjærvø (2009: 159), this passage represents a case
of a conditional relative clause (3rd sg. perf. optative). I believe this consid-
18
For this passage, Aliyari Babolghani (2015) and Bae (2001)’s reading [ap-pan la-ik-ki-um-
me] differ fromVallat (1977) and Grillot-Susini et al. (1993)’s [ap-pan-la-ik-ki-um-me]. The
former reading is also supported by ew (73) and Tavernier (2018: 432).
19
eki 28a -Šutruk-Nahhunte i (ca. 1190–1155bce): (×3) akkar…imme /inri, eki 17, irs 54-
Šutruk-Nahhunte ii (ca. 717–699bce): akkar…inri, and eki 79-Tepti-Huban-Inšušnak:
(ca. 550–530bce) akkar…imme.
20
Also, eki 28A, §11, 17.
21
See section 6.
22
However, as has been kindly pointed out by an anonymous reviewer, this discussion relies
on a single occurrence in an unclear context, since -akka in akka-ri might be part of a
personal name [Ma-a-sa-ak-ka4]. Therefore, we should take due caution regarding the
accountability of this form.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

56
briceño villalobos
eration is in connection with the semantics shared by both conditionals and
non-specific fc indefinite relative clauses (Briceño-Villalobos 2019: 181–
188).23
(5)
a. dbp 1, §13, 48–50
nai̯
neg
āha
be-3sg
martiya
man
[nai̯
neg
Pārsa
Persian
nai̯
neg
Māda
Median
nai̯
neg
amāxam
our
taumāyā]
family
kašci
anyone
haya
who
avam
this
Gaumātam
Gaumata
tayam
the
magum
magician
xšaçam
kingship
dītam
deprived of
caxriyā
make-3sg
‘There was no man, [neither Persian nor Median nor of my family],
anyonewhocouldhavedespoiledthatGaumatathemagusof theking-
ship’.
b. dbe 12 (ex 13): 37–38
mruhmeš-ra
man
inna
neg
šari
be-3sg
inni
neg
uttara
doer
inni
neg
mParsira
Persian
inni
neg
mMada
Median
ak inni
and not
mnumunmeš
family
mnuka.mi
ours
// akka
who
mKammada
Gaumata
mmakuš
magician
msunki-me
reign=from
e.mi
of him
[duš-ti].
get-3sg
‘King Darius says: there was neither men nor anyone, [neither Persian
nor Median nor of our race], who(ever) could get the reign from Gau-
mata the magician’
Notably, the ae parallel text in (5b) does not show the expected npi indefinite,
since the negative marker inni is placed before the pronominal form as part of
the negative coordinator ae ak inni “and not, nor” (see Briceño-Villalobos
2020).24 This is why we find the relative akka instead of the npi akkar, which
must always be placed before the negative marker in preverbal position: akkar
+ inni + V.
23
The semantic affinity between fc relatives “whoever might have …” and conditional
clauses “if anyone might have …” is further supported by the employment of the perfect
optative in the case of Old Persian. Similarly, in Middle Persian it is observed that the rel-
ative kē “who, whoever” and the conditional conjunction ka “if” are often confused due
to the similarity of their semantics and morphology. Cf. also Khot. kā cu “if anyone, who-
ever”. There is also a marked morphological relationship between indefinite relatives and
concessive (conditional) markers. See below.
24
Avestan has similar negative coordination constructions: OAv. nōit̰…naēdā, υαv. nōit̰…
naēδa “neither nor”, YAv. naēδa “and not, nor”.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
57
I admit that by simply acknowledging the npi status of op kašci acting as the
antecedent of the following relative clause would be a much simpler solution
to the syntax of this phrase: “not … anyone who …”. Nevertheless, there are a
few arguments in favor of considering kašci haya a fc indefinite relative “who-
ever” and I believe that this is what Horn (1904: 241) implies in his annotations
to db.25
Firstly, it seems that the genitive amāxam taumāyā “of our family” works as
another descriptive adjective in the same way as the nominatives Pārsa and
Māda, both modifying the nominative martiya, the three terms being coordin-
ated by the asyndetic repetition of the negative markers (op nai̯…nai̯…nai̯).
Notice that in the ae version the negative coordinator ak inni “and not, nor” is
aligned with the two previous negative markers (inni…inni…ak inni). This sug-
gests that in the Old Persian version Pārsa, Māda, and amāxam taumāyā also
function as a block, all of them modifying martiya and being coordinated by
three negative markers. Thus, the indefinite relative op kašci haya must refer
back to op martiya.
Secondly, from a typological perspective, we notice that the indefinite op
kašci happens to be present within an episodic negative context op nai̯ āha
“there was no …”. Although the latter is an environment that fcis admittedly
try to avoid, it must be taken into account that wh-ever relatives differ from
nominal fc any in that they can appear in episodic environments when sub-
triggered by a relative clause that allows them to perform grammatically with
its fc nuance “anyone fc who” (Giannakidiou 2001: 52–54).26 Therefore, in
this case, kašci is a fci subtriggered by the relative op haya.
A third argument in support of the fc reading of op kašci haya is based on
its morphology: the union between the fc indefinite—that can also operate as
a npi—and the relative pronoun closely resembles what we see in the Middle
Persianfcindefiniterelativempēčkē“whoever”,madeupbympēč “any,atall”,a
npi indefinite almost always found in negative contexts, and the interrogative-
relative pronoun mp kē “who? who”. Additionally, Middle Persian attests mp kas
kē fc “anyone who” that may point as well to a similar ‘indefinite plus relative’
combination.
Finally, a fourth argument comes from the ab version. At the end of the
clause,wefindulamēlu(lú)…ša“noraman…who”,that,inprinciple,wouldgo
parallel to op nai̯…kašci haya and ae ak inni…akka. However, ab amēlu (= Akk.
25
Horn (1904: 241 fn. 5) translates op kašci “every, any”, op kašci haya “anyone who”, and
tuvam kā haya “thou who”.
26
Cf. English, That night John talked to any fc woman who came up to him (Giannakidou
2001: 53).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

58
briceño villalobos
awīlum, amīlum, etc.) “man, human being” is equivalent to op martiya and ae
mruhmeš, which are placed at the beginning of each version.27 In (6), I provide
the Achaemenid Babylonian text parallel to the op (5a) and ae (5b) versions.
(6)
dbb §12: 19b–24a
mamma
anyone
yānu
neg be
ul
neg
Parsāya
Persian
ul
neg
Madaya […]
Median
ul
neg
amēlu
man
ša
of
zerini
lineage
ša…
who
‘There was not anyone, a man, neither Persian nor Median nor of my fam-
ily, who …’
If wetakealookattherestof aeamēlu(lú)28occurrencesinthedb,itiswithin
the scope of negation only in two occasions: one with the prohibitive negative
marker lā and the other (this example!) with the standard negative marker ul.
Its other occurrences are in the nominal phrase išten amēlu “a certain man” (cf.
op ai̯va martiya, ae ruh kir) and next to the relative pronoun ab amēlu ša “(a)
man who” (cf. op martiya haya, ae ruh akka).29 If we check its uses in Akka-
dian outside db, we witness its employment within conditional clauses almost
as if it were an indefinite pronoun: šumma amīlum “If a man [anyone] …”.30
Indeed, cad (Mi: 53) reports that one of amīlum’s meanings is that of an indef-
inite pronoun “someone, anyone”.31 Akk. amīlum can function as an indefinite
pronoun, especially in multiple-alternative non-episodic contexts that enable
27
It must be stressed that the four versions of db are not a 100% identical. They display sev-
eral disparities in word order and the dislocation of mostly similar morphological forms.
28
It should not be confused with the determinative lú before gentilics and words denoting
occupations.
29
In some world languages such as Cheke Helo (Austronesian), the existential indefinite is
formed after the generic noun and the relative pronoun: mae ihei “man who > someone”.
Cf. Boswell (2018: 101–102).
30
See Cohen (2012) for a complete discussion of conditional structures in Old Akkadian.
31
It is cross-linguistically common to find indefinites pronouns based on generic nouns. In
this regard, Sumerian is particularly interesting given that it consistently employs gen-
eric nouns for the expression of indefinites: lú “man, someone”, lú na-me “anyone”, níg̃
“thing, something”, níg̃ na-me “anything”, etc. (Jagersma 2010: 231–232). Other examples
of generic-noun based indefinites are Hebrew ’iš “man, anyone”, Bactr. ανδαρισο “anyone
whoever” (< ανδαρο “man” + υαρσο “every”), or Bactr. τανο κισο “anyone” (< τανο “body” +
κισο “any”), Lepcha (Sino-Tibetan) maró “man, someone”, Pichi (ie creole) sɔn pɔsin “some
man = someone”, etc. Cf. Haspelmath (1997: 28). Contrary to general tendency displayed
by generic-noun based indefinites to be restricted to negative polarity or negative func-
tions (such as Fr. personne),Akk. amīlum tendstobe restricted to fc functions, avoiding as
much as possible negative (polarity) enviroments. All this may raise the question whether
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
59
fc indefinites to appear: modals, imperatives, conditionals, generics, etc.32 So,
there seems to be a tendency for amīlum to appear in non-negative contexts
when acting as an indefinite pronoun. Although amīlum has other attested
indefinite uses, Achaemenid Babylonian displays a very clear distribution: the
indefinite ab mamma is always with negation, while ab amēlu avoids negative
contexts. Moreover, as pointed out by Malbran-Labat (1994: 46), the ab version
has two types of indefinite pronouns: mamma npi and mannu fc. In section 4,
I will show that only the latter, which is actually an interrogative pronoun, is
invested in the expression of fc indefinite relatives along with the relative ša,
whereasthenpimammaisalwaysunderthescopeof negation.33Therefore,ab
amēlu goes parallel to op martiya and ae ruh, despite the fact that these two
nominals are found at the beginning of their corresponding sentences. So, ab
amēlu is modified by Parsaya, Madaya and the genitival construction ša zerini,
much like op martiya is modified by op Parsā, Madā, and amāxam taumāyā.34
In turn, in the same line, a few words before, we see ul mamma “not anyone”35
and mamma yānu “there is not any …”,36 the latter being the actual parallel to
op kašci npi. Thus, I believe that this analysis corresponds with my idea that
negative coordination is connecting three modifiers around the word for ‘man’
and that op kašci haya provides appositive information regarding op martiya.
Hallock (1969: 771) and Bae (2001: 352) suggest that the form ae uttara in
(5b) should be translated as “anyone”. Although its meaning might be closer to
“perpetrator, doer” (cf. ew: 1253), its correlation with op kašci and ab mamma
might make this meaning very likely, especially given that the relative ae akka
is a genuine Akkadian strategy to employ generic nouns as indefinite pronouns or is it a
non-inherent strategy borrowed from Sumerian due to language contact.
32
Although we also find šumma mamma “If anyone …”, the indefinite Akk. mamma and
its variants tend to appear within the scope of negation and, to a lesser degree, they can
also function as an eq “some”. Cf. also Akk. amīlūtu (awīlūtum) “mankind, human being,
somebody, anybody”, which similarly tends to appear in contexts that display multiple
alternatives.
33
Thus, in Achaemenid Babylonian, mamma is a ‘strong’ npi. In the same line, we evid-
ence in earlier stages of Akkadian that Akk. mamman tends to avoid other non-veridical
semantic contexts such as conditionals.
34
Notice that amēlu…ša patterns with other identical attestations in db of this generic noun
alongside the relative particle.
35
In (6), I have not included the phrase ul Bābilāya ul mamma ina mātāti “nor Babylonian
nor anyone in the lands” since it is an ab addition not found in the other versions. See
Malbran-Labat (1994) or Bae (2001).
36
Indeed, we find in Ugaritic (and other Semitic languages) existential particles along with
indefinite pronouns: ’inmm /’ēnu-mimma/ “there was not anything …” (Hunt 2007: 59).
Note that, in Akkadian, indefinites tend to stand as close as possible to the beginning of
the sentence.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

60
briceño villalobos
table 2.2
Words and phrases of (5) and (6) arranged according to their equivalent in each
language
Meaning
ae
op
ab
“man”
mruhmeš.ra
martiya
amēlu
“anyone”
(inni) uttara
kašci
mamma
“who”
akka
haya
ša
“there was not …”
inni šari
nai̯āha
yānu
“neither Persian,
nor Median nor of
my family”
inni Parsira
inni Mada
ak inni mnumenmeš
mnukami
nai̯Parsa
nai̯Mada
nai̯amaxa taumaya
ul Parsāya
ul Madaya
ul…ša zerini
istheonlyavailablepronominalformafteranegativecoordinatorakinni.Since
*ak inni [akkar akka…duš.ti] with a pre-indefinite negative marker would not
have been possible, the ae version resorts to the distortion of the phrase word
order and turns to uttara to operate as an npi indefinite. For the sake of clar-
ity, I provide in Table 2.2 all words under discussion in this section organized
according to their equivalent in each language.
Then, in the case of ae and ab versions, it seems clear that both ae uttara
and ab mamma function as npis: as I already pointed out, ae uttara is under
the direct scope of an extra negative marker (inni) and ab mamma is always
present in negative contexts (yānu). However, there is enough evidence to sug-
gest that op kašci haya should be considered a fc indefinite relative. If we turn
to its other attestations, we see in (1b) that negation is in preverbal position
kašci npi nai̯V, much like mp kas(-iz) nē V and ae akkar inni V, and, in (1a), we
haveopkašciwithauniversal/distributivemeaning,justasAv.kascit̰uni.There-
fore, provided the fragmentary state of the language, it is safe to say that Old
Persian data does not yield a unique account for this indefinite.
In Table 2.3, I provide all occurrences of the nominal animate indefinite in
Achaemenid Elamite and Old Persian and their Middle Iranian counterparts.
4
op cišci npi : mp tis-iz npi and me azkit npi : ae aški npi “anything”
Attested once, op cišci has traditionally been taken to reflect a reduplicated
inanimate indefinite pronoun acting as an npi indefinite (WaK: 158; Kent 1953:
184). See (1b) for anexample.Reduplicationcan bedefined as the prefixationor
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
61
table 2.3
op kašci and ae akkar
Achaemenid Elamite
Old Indo-Iranian
Middle Iranian
dbe 12, ex 13, 40
akkar (inni) npi
“anyone”
Cf. me. akkar npi
dbp 1, §13, 53
op kašci (nai̯) npi
“anyone”
Cf. Ved. (ná) káś caná npi
Cf. Skrt. (ná) káś cid npi
> mp kas (-iz) npi (nē)
“anyone”
dbe 51, ex 63, 82
akkar (inni) npi
dbp 1,§ 14, 67 ✗
dbe ex 13, 37–38
ak inni… akka rel
dbp 1, §13, 49
op nai̯…] kašci haya fc
mp kas/ēč kē fc
“anyone who, whoever”
DSee 37 ✗
Cf. ae unra uni/distr
“everyone, each one”
DSep §5, 37
op kašci uni/distr
“everyone, each one”
Cf. OAv/YAv. kascit̰ fc/uni
Cf. Ved. káś cid fc
mp harw kas uni/fc
“everyone, anyone”
pf-nn 2506, pf 1846, 101
ae akkar eq (= kir)
“some”
mp kas eq
“some”
suffixation of ‘a complete or partial copy of the base’ (Booij 2005: 35) of a word
for lexical or grammatical purposes. Cross-linguistically, the use of reduplica-
tion to produce fc indefinite pronouns is fairly common (Haspelmath 1997:
23–24; 179–182). Hence, op cišci, allegedly a fc indefinite,37 would have evolved
into an npi indefinite undertaking ‘semantic weakening’, as discussed in sec-
tion 2 for the animate indefinite. However, its Middle Iranian counterpart, mp
tis-iz npi “anything”, suggests that op cišci is actually the nominative-accusative
neuter singular of the interrogative stem—saved for inanimate entities—plus
the scalar focus particle OIr. *čid.38 In addition, typologically speaking, it is
37
The inherited fc value is attested in its Anatolian (Hitt. kuiš kuiš fc, HLuw. kwis kwis fc) as
well as in its Italic cognates (Lat. quis quis fc, Osc. pis pis fc).
38
Herzfeld (1938: 355), Kent (1953: 184), and WaK (158) all consider that this inanimate
indefinite is the result of reduplication, OIr. *čid-čid. Similar complications to distinguish
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

62
briceño villalobos
strange indeed to find reduplicated indefinites functioning as npis, given that
they either remain fcis or evolve into universal/distributive indefinites.39
As regards Elamite, ae aški [áš-ki] is an inanimate indefinite, a compound
formed by the nominal aš “part” and the numeral ‘one’ ki-: lit. “one part”
(Khačikjan 1998: 29). See (1c) and (7).
(7)
dbe 12 (ex 13), 40–41
meni
then
mtaššup
troops=pl
appa
which/that
munina
mine-1sg.(anim.)
aški
anything
inni
neg
huttaš
make-3pl
‘Then, my troops did nothing’
There are no examples of this inanimate indefinite outside the Royal Inscrip-
tions. Hallock (1969: 670) suggests that -ki is a calque of op -ci (< OIr. -čid). One
argument against this assumption is the fact that the generalizing particle ae
-da is the actual equivalent of op -ci, as can be seen in ae daeki-da: op aniya-
ci “another”. Furthermore, it is very likely that its connection with me azkit npi
“anything” should dismiss this line of thinking, especially given that, although
with a different spelling, me azkit might be a similar compound (Grillot-
Susini 2008: 57): as/az-ki-t: “part” + “one” + inanimate marker -t.40 See (8) for
an example.
(8)
eki 11Aa / mdai xli 36
azkit
anything
hušutta
vengeful=inanim.
ingi
neg-1sg
hinga.
obtain-1sg
‘I might get no punishment?’
Both me azkit and ae aški are ‘strong’ npi indefinites since their appearance
in a given sentence can only be licensed by negation.41 The same applies to
between a reduplicated form and an inanimate neuter indefinite plus a domain-widening
particle are observed in Oscan pidpid. Cf. Machajdíková—Martzloff 2016.
39
Actually, Old Persian attests a reduplicated adverbial relative of the *(H)i̯o- stem: op yadā
yadā“wherever”.Thisform,attestedinXPhp39throughemendation(Schmitt2014:288),
hasniceparallelsof relativereduplicationinClassicalSanskrit yaya,andOldPhrygian yos
yos. Vedic also attest adverbial relative reduplication: Ved. yatra yatra “wherever”, yáthā
yáthā “in whichever way” (Briceño-Villalobos 2019: 163).
40
Cf.Tavernier (2018: 427) for the inanimate nominal suffix -t. Cf. ew (1987: 103) for a general
view of azkit.
41
The ab version does not present parallel inanimate indefinites in these passages, although
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
63
table 2.4
op cišci and ae aški
Achaemenid Elamite
Old Persian
Middle Iranian
dbe ex 12, 40–41
ae aški (inni) npi
“anything”
Cf. me azkit npi
dbp 1, §13, 53
op (nai̯) cišci npi
“anything”
mp tis-iz (nē) npi
“anything”
Cf. mp ēč tis npi
dbe ex 25, 20
aški (inni) npi
dbp 2, §25, 27–28 ✗
dbe ex 28, 36
aški (inni) npi
dbp 2, §28, 48 ✗
op ciš-ci and mp tis-iz42 that operate as npi items. In Table 2.4, I provide all
Achaemenid Elamite and Old Persian inanimate indefinite occurrences as well
as Middle Iranian forms.
5
op kā haya: ae akka(-ya)
op kā is found six times in the Old Persian corpus, most attestations being in
the db and one in the Daiva Inscription (XPh).
it attests the inanimate indefinite mimma “anything” along the relative mala “as much as”,
so as to form an inanimate fc indefinite relative, ab mimma mala “whatever”. See sec-
tion 5. In turn, in the Aramaic version, there is no parallel inanimate indefinite pronoun
either. However, in other passages of db, the Aramaic text presents the inanimate mnd‘m
npi /madda‘m/ (Syriac /meddem/) “anything” (X3). Cf. Syriac kell-meddem “everything” (<
earlier Aramaic kl /kull/ “every”). For more information about this inanimate indefinite
and its etymology, see Muraoka—Porter (1998: 172) and Gzella (2015: 26–27, 116, fn. 338).
Earlier Aramaic has no common indefinite pronoun, but it employs interrogatives as head
of non-specific indefinite relative clauses, similarly to Akkadian.
42
mp tis has similar functions as the animate indefinite mp kas: tis eq-unknown “thing,
something”, ān tis eq-known “that (some)thing”, tis-iz npi “anything”, ēč tis npi “anything”,
tis-ēw irr/cond/comp “something, anything”, harwtis(-ēw) uni/fc “everything, anything”, and tis
čē fc “anything that, whatever”. Notably, in Turfan Middle Persian, mpt tis-iz fc “whatever”
has a fc function (Durkin-Meisterernst 2012: 216). Thus, mpt -iz and Parth. -ž (<
OIr. *-čid) preserve their original function as domain-widening particles employed in the
formation of fc indefinites.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

64
briceño villalobos
Although most scholars43 agree that op kā is a reflex of pie *kwo-H1, I argue
in this section that this assumption is typologically unsustainable and that, as
has already been suggested by Kern (1891:47) and Horn (1898–1901: 121), op kā
formsafcindefiniterelativepronounalongwiththerelativepronounophaya.
Therefore, kā would be in this case the nominative singular of the interrogative
stem.
With Schmitt (2014: 198) and contra Hinz (1973: 25) and Back (1992: 266
fn.18),Ibelievethatopkācannotbeconsideredafocusparticlethatperformsa
domain-widening function alongside tuvam “you”. As far as early Indo-Iranian
materialshows,IIr.*čidandIIr.*čāaretheonlydomain-wideningparticlescon-
sistently employed in the formation of fci indefinites: the former is involved in
the creation of nominal fc indefinites (op kašci, Av. kascit̰) and the latter in the
creation of fc indefinite relatives (cf. Av. yō-cisca).44 We also should disregard
Gray (1902: 60),45 Bartholomae (1904: 422), Kent (1950: 178), Schmitt (1991: 67
fn. 37; 2014: 198), and, most recently, Brust (2018: 154)’s assertion that op kā is a
generalizing/reinforcingparticle.Atthesametime,IdonotagreewithSchmitt
(2009, 2014: 198, 2016: 27–28) who provides “wherever (Germ. wo immer)” as
one possible translation, considering op kā (< pie *kwo-H1) an instrumental
form that is able to express locative semantics.46 We should dismiss this line
of thinking provided that, cross-linguistically, instrumental suffixes in early ie
languages activate indefinite adverbs as npis, and not as fcis.47
In order to explain the phonetics behind the long vowel in op kā, we must
take into account that long final vowels should not be interpreted as inherited,
but rather as an Old Persian self-developed feature (Hinz 1973: 25). Interest-
ingly, Rawlinson (1848: 245–246) suggests that the visarga in the interrogative
form OIr. *káḥ(< IIr. *kás) might have been elided undertaking compensatory
lengthening: *káḥ> > op kā. Similarly, Gershevitch (1988: 77) proposes that op
[ka-a] should be read as op ka /kæ/. Be as it may, both scenarios fit with the
preservation of the nominative case ending along with the enclitic -čid in Old
Iraniansandhiforms:opkaš-ci:opkā,andAv.kas-cit̰:OAv.kə̄,YAv.kō.Asregards
the transcription and the transliteration of this form, op kā is attested as [ka-
a] in dbp, transliterated as /kā or kă/, and as XPhp [ka-ă], transliterated as /kă/.
43
Chantraine (1968: 921), Frisk (1960: 632), Beekes (2010: 1264), lipp (464), WaK (198), etc.
44
In turn, IIr. *čana overtly marks indefinites and the numeral ‘one’ as npis.
45
Gray connects op kā with theWest Greek modal particle κα /kā/ with a ‘generalizing’ force
and asserts that it is somehow related to early Greek modal particle κε with a similar func-
tion: ὅς κε “whoever”.
46
Similarly, HGr. πῃnpi “anywhere” (< pie *kwe-h1).
47
Cf. Briceño-Villalobos (2019: 111–114; 145–152, 154–155) for instrumental case indefinites in
Homeric Greek and early Indo-Iranian.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
65
In the latter form, a different cuneiform sign is employed for /a/. Skjærvø (1999:
161) is the first one to propose that we are dealing with an actual etymological
nominativeformonaccountof thenewsignă(onlyemployedinXPh).Schmitt
(2009: 168 A46f), however, rejects this assumption.
Thus,afirstargumentagainstconsideringopkātobeaninstrumentalindef-
inite form is the fact that it has no connection whatsoever with negation or
any other non-veridical semantic context, whereas its so-called cognates, such
as Gr. πω “yet, at all” or Lat. quō “to where, to anywhere”,48 operate as npis
(Briceño-Villalobos 2019: 114; 188–189). Moreover, there is no evidence
among early ie languages that sustain the assumption that the instrumental
case plays any role within the expression of fc. To the contrary, there is plenty
of evidence that indicates that the instrumental case is intimately related to
the reinforcement of negation and, more importantly, to negative polarity con-
texts.49
Although Schmitt (1991: 69 fn. 37) realizes that the nominative xšāyaθiya
“king”shouldbeincludedwithintherelativeclauseheadedbytherelativehaya
“who”—probably due to its disposition already as an ezāfe-like particle,50 I take
kā haya plus the subjunctive mood to embody an indefinite relative pronoun
“whoever”. See (9a–b) for examples.51
(9)
a. dbp 4, §55, 37
ϑātiy
say-3sg
Dārayavauš
Darius
xšāyaϑiya
king
tuvam
you
kā
who
xšāyaϑiya
king
haya
-ever
aparam
hereafter
āhi.
be-2sg
‘Proclaims Darius, the king: you, whichever king you are hereafter’
b. dbp 4, §56, 41
tuvam
you
kā haya
whoever
aparam
hereafter
imām
this
dipim
inscription
patipr̥sāhi.
read-2sg
‘You, whoever reads this inscription hereafter’
48
Lat. quō represents a cross-over between instrumental and directive formations. See
Dunkel (1997: 74), García Ramón (1997: 138), and lipp (438, 465). Also the interrogative
Goth. ƕe “how?” is a cognate of these de-instrumental forms.
49
Cf. Briceño-Villalobos 2019.
50
Cf. also mp -i/-ig < OIr. *hai̯a-ka (see Durkin-Meisterernst 2012: 268 fn. 17). For a Per-
sian Elamite-induced ezāfe, cf. Yakubovich (2020: 97–101). Nonetheless, I believe that the
Aramaic disposition of the relative particle zy /dy/ as a linker between two elements—
genitive constructions, also seen in Akkadian with the relative particle ša—is the real
origin of Persian ezāfe. Cf. DNWSIa: 312–313.
51
Cf. Schmitt (2016: 27–29) for the figure of speech of apostrophe in these passages.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

66
briceño villalobos
One further piece of evidence in support of the reality of this fc indefinite
relative comes from Achaemenid Elamite.The Daiva Inscriptions (XPhe 38–39)
attestsarelativeformaeakkaya,insteadof thestandardrelativeaeakka“who”,
the latter being, according to Bae (2001: 265), the equivalent of op kā, Aram. mn
/man/ “who?, whoever”, and ab mannu “who?, whoever”. Notably, Paper (1955:
98 fn. 21) suggests that -ya in ae akkaya may reflect the relative OIr. *i̯a found
in the compound relative pronoun op haya (< OIr. *sa-i̯a).52 In the Fortifica-
tion Tablets, we find other reflexes of the Old Iranian relative: ae ia-na-a (also
ia-né and i-ia-né), a calque of the adverbial relative op yanai “where, whereon”
(Tavernier2007:36).Thus,accordingtomyview,aeakka-yasignalsthemiss-
ing connection between the op interrogative-indefinite stem and the relative
pronoun taken as one morphological entity in the Elamite text. Therefore, I
conclude that ae akka is not simply heading a standard relative clause, but a
non-specific indefinite relative construction.53
Notably, early Akkadian (Old Babylonian and Old Assyrian) shows similar
indefinite relative constructions composed by the indefinite pronoun mam-
52
In early Elamite, there is a suffix -ya attested in the formation of inanimate adjectives.
According to Quintana (2013: 36 fn. 17), this suffix may be formed by the relative particle
-a, which along with nominals ending in vowel would create a diphthong /-ia/, writ-
ten -ya. The same author, however, asserts that in Achaemenid Elamite -ya also appears
within animate adjectives such as hakkamannušiya “Achaemenid”, bapiliya “Babylonian”,
etc. I believe that this suffix is a morphological calque from op -iya- employed for the
stem derivation of adjectives or nouns: e.g. op haxāmanišiya “Achaemenid”, op aθuriya-
“Assyrian”, op xšāyaθiya “king”, etc. In turn, some scholars have proposed a connection of
this word with ae akka(ya) “companion” (cf. Hallock 1969: 665), mainly found in the
Fortification Tablets and admittedly borrowed from op *haxā (cf. YAv. haxi “companion,
friend”). Cf. Tavernier (2007: 199–201; 425–426). In this case, I think that the -ya extension
found along akkaya “companion” is the very same suffix -ya employed in the creation of
adjectives. Either way, I believe that this nominal has nothing to do with the akkaya we
encounter in dbe here.
53
Since the Neo-Elamite period, there seems to be a tendency in Elamite of marking non-
specific relative clauses through verbal reduplication, which has been traditionally
explained as some sort of expression of plurality. Notably, in the Elamite version of this
phrase,wefindthereduplicationof theverbbera“toread”:dbe45,67:nuakkameššintuppi
hibebra-n-t “you,whoeverinthefuturereadsthisinscription”.Atfirstglance, thereduplic-
ated verb bebra may not imply any additional semantics, but, if we take a look at dbe 47
(ex58),weobservethesimpleform(bera)beingusedwithinarelativeclauseagain,akka…
bera-n-r-a[bera-conj.iii-3rdsg.-relativeparticle],but,inthiscase,withoutconveyingnon-
specific values. On the contrary, bebra-n-t [bebra-conj. iii-2nd sg.] does display a multiple
alternative reading along the lines of op tuvam kā haya + patipr̥sāhi whose subjunctive
mood find an equivalent in the Elamite conjugation iii that can express imperfective
action in the present/future time. Furthermore, the other occurrence of this reduplicated
bebra has iterative semantics: dbe 55 (ex 70): bebra-k [bebra-conj.ii] “(was) written again”.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
67
man and the determinative-relative particle ša, Akk. mamman ša “whoever”
(Huehnergard 1997: 123–124, Kouwenberg 2017: 348). However, as poin-
ted out earlier, Achaemenid Babylonian attests the indefinite relative mannu
ša “whoever”, i.e. the interrogativeplusthe determinative-relative(cf. Ungnad
1992: 38). The same compound is also found in Imperial Aramaic mn zy /man
dy/ “whoever”54 (Muraoka—Porten 1998: 172) as well as in Biblical Hebrew
mî še “whoever”55 (Joüon—Muraoka ii 1991: 536–537). In consequence, the
use of the interrogative ab mannu “who?” (Akk. mannum) contrasts with that
of the indefinite ab mamma,56 which is exclusively attested as a npi indefin-
ite. Cf. Malbran-Labat (1994: 46–47). Indeed, the interrogative mannu, besides
its function as an animate interrogative pronoun, has indefinite functions,
especially when employed in indefinite relative clauses with or without the
determinative-relative particle ša.57 According to Waltisberg (2011: 311), head-
less relative clauses are either introduced by the relative particle (Akk. ša), or
by the interrogative (Akk. mannum), or by the indefinite (Akk. mamman), the
latter two strategies with or without the aid of the relative ša. But while ab
mamma does not attest fc values, which seems to be the case in Old Akka-
dian mamman (ša) “whoever” (Huehnergard 1997: 188, Kouwenberg 2017:
787–788), the interrogative ab mannu, always accompanied by ab ša, is able to
Notice that, typologically speaking, verbal reduplication is usually identifiable with re-
peated, habitual, or ongoing action. Therefore, I am under the impression that Elamite
marks the fc nature of the relative clause by means of verbal reduplication.
54
Cf. also Sam’al Aramaic mz “whatever” (< interr. mh /mā/ “what?” + rel. zy /dy/ “who,
which”) and Phoenician m ’š “whatever” (interr. mh “what?” + rel. ’š “who, which”). Cf.
Tropper (1993: 193).
55
Cf. Ugaritic my “who?” (Cf. Sivan 2001: 58ff.) and Phoenician my “who?” (Krahmalkov
2001: 108ff.).We also find Hebr. kol mî še “whoever”. kol (< Proto-Semitic *kull, cf. Akk. kalû
“all, everything”) is a universal quantifier “everyone, all” that also participates in the form-
ation of headless indefinite relative clauses in other Semitic languages such as Mandaic
kol man “whoever”. Notice that, as in the case of mp harw, which can also form headless
indefinite relative clauses as in mp harw kē/čē “whoever/whatever” (> np and Bal. har ki
“whoever”), Semitic kol violates the typological generalization that universal quantifiers
cannot become fcis (Haspelmath 1997: 156 fn. 13).
56
ab mamma is a compound made up of the Semitic interrogative base *man and the focus
particle -ma. It should not be confused with Akk. mamman, which is formed by reduplica-
tion (< *man + man). See Delitzsch (1889: 142–144) and Faber (1988: 221–238) for an overall
view of early Semiticstrategiesforthe creationof indefinite pronounsafter the interrogat-
ive stem. Overall, Akkadian indefinites are based on the interrogative stem plus the focus
particle -ma: mamma (< *man “who?” + ma) “anyone, someone”, mimma (< *min “what?”
+ ma) “anything, something”, and ayyumma (< *ayyum “which?” + ma) “whichever”.
57
In Neo-Babylonian, mannu can sustain a distributive value “each”, which meaning seems
to be derived from its fc values embedded in its non-specific indefinite relative function.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

68
briceño villalobos
introduce fc indefinite relative.58 Therefore, it is safe to say that Achaemenid
Babylonian overtly marks the difference between fc “whoever” (ab mannu
ša) and npi “anyone” (ab mamma) indefinites. Interestingly, we find the same
distribution of indefinites in the Nabonidus Inscriptions (c. 556–539bce):59
mannu ša fc “whoever” and mamma/mimma npi “anyone, anything” (see Gad
1958). Consequently, the ab employment of the interrogative mannu in the
formation of indefinite relatives instead of the indefinite mamma should be
taken as another argument of op kā haya being an indefinite relative pronoun
and of the fact that op kā is a (nominative) interrogative pronoun, followed by
a relative, rather than an (instrumental) indefinite pronoun.60
Finally,letuslookattheformulaicbeginningof thefourversionsinTable2.5.
Although earlier Akkadian attests a grammaticalized form attamasc./attifem-
mannu (you + interr.) “whoever you (are)”,61 which is usually attested in Meso-
potamian ritual conjurations, Achaemenid Babylonian, along with other
Semitic languages such as Old Aramaic and Achaemenid Phoenician, attests
the opposite order of elements (interr. + you).We can see this in the Nabonidus
Inscriptions (c. 556–539bce) Akk. mannu atta,62 in the Nerab Inscriptions
(c. 700–600bce) Aram. mn ’t /man ’attā/,63 and in the Tabnit Inscriptions
(c. 490bce) Phoen. my ‘t.64 This last array of elements certainly appears to
be the one present in both Achaemenid Babylonian and Imperial Aramaic:
mannu atta65 and mn ’nt /man ’attā/.66 To the contrary, Old Persian seems to
follow the configuration displayed by earlier Akkadian: Akk. atta-mannu (“you”
58
The interrogative Akk. mannu can also express a indefinite relative without the help of
the relative ša. Notice that in Sumerian an interrogative pronoun can also be used in the
same way: a-na “what?, whatever”, a-ba “who?, whoever” (Jagersma 2010: 230).
59
Cf. Gad (1958: 35–92) and Moran (1959: 130–140).
60
Since ae akka is an interrogative-relative pronoun, it is irrelevant here whether it is the
interrogative or the indefinite relative that is operating when ae akka heads free-relative
clauses acting as fc indefinite relative “whoever”, in the same way as ab mannu.
61
Cf. Haul (2009: 128 fn. 86). This formula appears attested since Middle Babylonian texts.
See cad (Aii 509).
62
In Neo-Babylonian (c. 1000–600bce), we already find mannu atta: abl 1250 r 7, mannu
atta lú.a.ba ša tassasûni “whoever you are, scribe, who read (this)”.
63
Cf. Yun 2006: 19–43.
64
Cf. Kramalkov 2001: 109.
65
However, there are two passages where we observe ab atta ša, instead of ab mannu atta
ša.
66
As pointed out by Gzella (2015: 143–144), ’nt instead of Old Aramaic ’t is a feature of Achae-
menid Official Aramaic, which, in contrast to other dialectal varieties of Aramaic, does
present ‘degeminating’ spellings of long consonants: /*anta/ (cf. Arabic ’anta) > ’t /’attā/
(Old Aramaic) > ’nt /’antā/ (Achaemenid Aramaic). This degemination also occurs in the
feminine form: ’ty /’atti/ > /’att/ > /’at/ vs. ’nty /’anti/.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
69
table 2.5
The formula “whoever you are” in db
Old Persian
Achaemenid
Elamite
Achaemenid
Babylonian
Imperial
Aramaic
you + interr. + rel. tuvam kā…haya
you-who?-who
nu akka
you-who?/who
interr. + you + rel.
mannu atta…ša
who?-you-who
mn ’nt…zy
who?-you-who
+ “who?”). Although is not certain that op tuvam kā reflects the Akkadian idio-
matic nominal phrase, it looks appealing that the Mesopotamian formulaic
tradition might have caught up with dbp, especially given the long literary,
written tradition of Akkadian. Be as it may, the different combinations among
pronounsinthefourversionspointagaintotheinterrogativeandnottheindef-
inite nature of op kā.67
But there is one last piece of evidence that may further support our line
of thought: that Old Persian follows the early Akkadian formula. Notably, the
ab version of XPh (line 38) attests atta-mannu ša “whoever you are who …”.68
Then,XPhbattamannucontrastsdbbmannuattaandisamatchwiththeearlier
Akkadian grammaticalized idiomatic phrase (attested since Middle Babylo-
nian) and with the Old Persian word order. Therefore, I deem that op tuvam
kā patterns the Akkadian formula atta-mannu “whoever you (are)”.
Thus, I believe that the structure found in Old Persian, which does not agree
with the word pattern shown by Indo-Iranian indefinite relatives (rel. + indef.):
IIr.*ya-kas/kim-ča/čid > Av. yō-cisca, yō-kacit̰, Ved. yá-káśca, yá-kimca “who-
ever,whatever”(AIGc:570–572),mighthavebeeninducedbySemiticinfluence,
especially Achaemenid Babylonian or Imperial Aramaic (c. 600–200bce), the
latterbeingthe mostimportantandwidespreadadministrativelanguageinthe
Achaemenid Empire.
67
op kā would not be the only interrogative attested in Old Persian. We also have op ciyā-
karam “how, of what sort; how many” (ae appahamak) formed by the inanimate interrog-
ative ciyā- and -karam. The latter element would be formally related to the verb op kar-
“to do” that can be better explained as part of a phraseological sentence, literally meaning
“what (is) done”. Hackstein (2004: 172–173) shows some parallels in ta kuyal formed after
the interrogative pronoun ku- “what” plus the verbal adjective yal “to be done”. This form
would have evolved into a conjunction with causal meaning “why > because”. In Ternate
Malay, we find a similar grammaticalization process for this phraseological array: binking
apa [make what] > biki apa/kiapa “why” (Litamahuputty 2012:185).
68
See Herzfeld 1938.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

70
briceño villalobos
Nevertheless, although Semitic contact might have played a role in the form-
ation of the attested indefinite relative pattern op kā haya “whoever” (interr.
+ rel.), I would like to suggest that there is something else behind ae akkaya.
I believe that this form points to an inherited ie morphological form, one of
whose reflexes is mp kē “who? interr, who rel”. Interestingly, the Rigveda attests
the indefinite Ved. káya-cid (×3)69 “every, any”, the interrogative Ved. ká- plus
-ya (AIGc: 563, EWAia 307; Gotō 2013: 74).70 Remarkably, this Vedic indefin-
ite pronoun also has a distributive/universal (“every”) as well as a nominal fc
(“any”) values.
As we know, OIr. *ká- only performs interrogative (O/YAv. kə̄ /kō “who?”) as
well as indefinite (O/YAv. kascit̰, op kašci “anyone”) functions, while OIr. *(sa)i̯a
> Av. yō and op haya carries out the relative function. It has been traditionally
assumedthatmpkē derivesfromafossilizedgenitiveof theinterrogative/indef-
inite stem *kahya.71 Contrary to this view and after Horn (1893: 196) and Hüb-
schmann (1895: 142), I consider mp kē to be derived from the indefinite relative
OIr. *kai̯a > op *kaya “whoever”, cognate of Ved. káya, which must have oper-
ated as an interrogative-relative pronoun in non-specific free-relative clauses
and which, by the early Middle Persian period, would have already entailed
both interrogative as well as relative functions, the latter adopted from the pro-
nominalbaseOIr.*ká-.Notably,Ved.káyacid fc“anyone,everyone”hasaperfect
match in in mp kē-iz “whoever” as well as Parth. kēž npi/fc “anyone, whoever” (cf.
Tedesco 1945: 128–129),72 provided that all these forms are derived from IIr.
*kai̯a-čid.
69
See rv 1, 129, 5; 1, 27, 8; and 8, 25, 15. This form, only attested in the genitive: Ved. kasya,
should not be confused with the interrogative Ved. kayā, intr.sg. fem. “in which manner?”.
70
I will not discuss in this paper whether this -ya actually is a reflex of the Indo-Iranian rel-
ative pronoun IIr. ya- or not. Suffice it to say here that the ie reflexes of *kwo-(H)i̯o- might
point to the merger between the interrogative-indefinite stem and the anaphoric *h1i-.
The creation of new pronominals after the union of interrogatives and demonstratives is
typologically common. Some other possible cognates of *kwó-(H)i̯-o-s may be Gr. ποῖος,
Arm. o(v), Lat. cuius, ta ke (and tb ket-ra), etc.
71
Cf. Salemann (1895–1901: 292), Reichelt (1903: 574); Nyberg (1974: 54); Durkin-Meisterernst
(2012:214), Baghbidi(2017:34).Similarly,Aram.dy rel“who,which”seemstobea fossilized
genitive form (Gzella 2011: 577).
72
While Parth. kēž, alongside of negation, has an npi function “any”, it can also express
fc values heading non-specific indefinite relative clauses “whoever” (Brunner 1977: 42,
dmmpp: 219, Durkin-Meisterernst 2012: 215.) Cf. also Parth. kadāž “never (with neg.),
whenever”, similarly to mp hagriz “never (with neg.), whenever” (< op hakaram-ci). Notice
thatParth.kēžistheequivalentof mpkas:kēžkēž distr“each,everyone”,harwkēž uni“every-
one”, etc. Parthian also attests the interrogative-relative pronoun Parth. kē interr/rel “who?
who”.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
71
table 2.6
op kā haya and ae akka(ya)
Achaemenid Elamite
Early Indo-Iranian
Middle Iranian
ae akkaya fc =
ae akka fc “whoever”
dbe §44 (ex55) 63–64,
dbe §45 (ex 56), 66
dbe §52 (ex 64), 83,
dbe §53 (ex 65), 84
dbe §54 (ex 69), 94b
ae akkaya fc “whoever”
XPhe 38–39
op *kaya fc (< pie *kwo-(H)i̯o-)
“whoever”
Cf. Ved. káya cid fc/uni
“anyone, everyone”
op kā haya fc “whoever”
Cf. op kašci haya fc
dbp 4, §55, 37
dbp 4, §65, 70
dbp 4, §56, 41
dbp 4, §64, 67
dbp 4, §69, 87
op kā haya fc “whoever”
XPhp §6, 46
> mp kē interr /rel /fc
“who?; who, whoever”
Cf. Parth. kē-ž npi/ fc “any-
one, whoever”
mp kē-iz “whoever”
Cf. mp harw kē fc “whoever”
Cf. mp ēč kē fc “whoever”
Thus, the interrogative-into-relative shift assumed for OIr. *ká-, through a
fossilized genitive, might be better explained as the complete absorption of the
relative function by OIr. *kai̯a, after relative pronoun op haya (> mp -ī) had put
aside its relative function in favor of ezāfe-like constructions already attested
in Old Persian.73 In the same vein, mp kē often appears heading non-specific
relative clauses expressing a fc value. If my interpretation is sound, the former
interrogative-indefinite stem OIr. *ká- (< pie *kwó-) would have only kept its
indefinite function: the bare stem mp kas eq/npi “someone, anyone” and mp kas-
iz npi “anyone”.74 In Table 2.6, I summarize the contents of this section.
73
Phonetically, according to Sunderman (1989: 109–110), haya-ka- (< OIr. *sa-i̯a-ka, cf. Ved.
yaka-) developed into mp īg and haya would have developed into ē. Therefore, it is still
possible to derive mp kē from *kahaya, although I believe that this is less likely. Cf. On the
etymological and phonetic reading of op relatives, cf. Tavernier (1999).
74
Nonetheless, professor Agnes Korn (p.c.) has pointed out to me that genitive forms as ety-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

72
briceño villalobos
6
op taya fc : ae appa fc “whatever”75
Old Persian as well as Middle Persian place the relative pronoun in clause-
initial position for expressing fc values along subjunctive verbal forms, some-
times within relative-correlative structures: op taya, mp čē…subj.76 See (10a–b)
for an example.
(10) a. dbp 4, §66, 75–76
utā
and
taya
which
kunavāhi,
do-2sg
avatai̯
that
A.uramzdā
Ahuramazda
ucāram
successful
kunau̯tu.
do-3sg (imp)
b. dbe (ex 66), 87
ak kutta
and
appa
which
huttanti,
do-2sg
huhpe
that
dUramazda
Ahuramazda
hazzaš.ni.
to make great-2sg.opt. part.
‘And whatever you shall do, may Ahuramazdā make that successful.’
If we turn to the ab version, we find the compound form ab mimma mala
“whatever”, the indefinite pronoun plus the quantitative pronoun mala “as
mological origin of Middle Persian pronominals is not at all rare: e.g. mp man “I” (< op
manā),mptō“you”(<op*tawa),mpamāh“we”(<opamāxam).Thesamecanbeobserved
in some mp demonstratives: e.g. mp ōy “this” (< op au̯ahya). Cf. Durkin-Meisterernst (2012:
207, 213–214). As regards ie parallels, professor Ronald Kim (p.c.) has indicated to me that
West Slavic displays a similar phenomenon: the shift from Proto-Slavic gen. *česo, *čiso to
nom./acc. Cf. Meillet 1924: 386–387.
75
In this section, I will restrict myself to ae appa as a fc indefinite relative “whatever” and,
therefore, I will not discuss op aniya…aniya (dbp 1, §18, 86–87) / ae appa-pa…appa-pa
(dbe 17 (ex 18), 68–69) “some … other”, which functions as a multiple partitive construc-
tion. For its typology, see Haspelmath (1997: 177). Here, ae appa-pa could consist in the
relative ae appa plus the plural animate nominal class marker, as in ae akka-p, or in a
formation modeled after me akka-r. See ew: 73 and Filippone (2016: 35–36) for a detailed
discussion of these forms. Notice that we also find similar multiple partitive constructions
in Middle Iranian: mp kē…kē and Khot. kye…kye “some … other”. I will not discuss either
the non-specific relative op yaci (DNbp §3, 13) “whatever” nor the interative op yaci…yaci
(DNbp §8, 35–36) /ae anka…anka (DNbe §8, 24–25): “whether … or”, which entails an
alternative concessive conditional. See Coenen (to appear). I will leave for future research
the relationship between ae appa anka [what if] “whenever; whatever” (cf. np agar-cē
[if what] “although, even if”), a possible concessive conditional from (sap) appa anka “if,
when, as, because”, and op yadi “if” and op yaθā “as, when, because, etc.”.
76
Cf. Reichelt (1903: 574–575); Brunner (1977: 85), Skjærvø (2009: 256), and Durkin-Meister-
ernst (2012: 215).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
73
table 2.7
op taya and ae appa “whatever”
Achaemenid Elamite
Old Iranian
Middle Iranian
ae appa interr/rel/fc
“what?, which, whatever”
dbe (ex 66), 87
dbe (ex 67), 89
op taya rel/ fc
“which, whatever”
dbp 4, §66, 75–76
dbp 4, §67, 79–80
mp čē interr/rel/fc
“what?, which, whatever”
Cf. mp harw čē fc
much as”.77This may be surprising as we might have expected to find either the
inanimate interrogative Akk. minû(m) “what?”, heading a non-specific relative
clause together with the relative particle (interr. + rel.)—in the same way as
the animate interrogative Akk. mannu “who?”—or an indefinite relative Akk.
mimma (ša)78 (indef. + rel.). Hence, this ab form sustains our assessment of
taking op taya and ae appa79 as inanimate fc indefinite relative pronouns
“whatever”.80 In turn, the inanimate interrogative-relative mp če “what?, which,
whichever” shows similar formations, although sometimes it employs the uni-
versal quantifier mp harw “every” for marking the indefinite relative function.
In Table 2.7, I summarize this section.
7
op ai̯va and ae ki—“one, some, certain”
A marked trait of early Indo-Iranian is the almost complete absence of a spe-
cific indefinite (eq “some”). In its place, the numeral ‘one’ op ai̯va (< *(H)oi̯-
u̯o-. cf. Ved. ékas < *(H)oi̯-ko-) is employed to fulfill this function. See (11) for
an example. Even though Schmitt (1991: 51 fn. 36) is against considering the
numeral ‘one’ a real indefinite determiner, I take op ai̯va as a proper indef-
inite pronoun already by the Old Iranian period (cf. WaK: 128). This view is
confirmed by the Middle Persian and Parthian data, although, in the latter, the
employment of the numeral ‘one’ as an indefinite marker is much less common
(Brunner 1977: 43–45).
77
Akk. mala (ša) alone can also express similar values “whoever, whatever, everyone who,
etc.” See Huehnergard (1997: 188). Cf. Aram. kmst dy “as many as”.
78
Cf. The idiomatic nominal phrase Akk. mimma šumšu, literally “whatever the name” >
“everything”.
79
Nevertheless, it is observed that appa can also have an animate reference.
80
There is no parallel passage in the Aramaic version.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

74
briceño villalobos
(11) dbp 1, §11, 36
pasāva
afterwards
ai̯va
one/a
martiya
man
maguš
magician
āha
be-3sg
Gaumāta
Gaumata
nāma.
name
‘Afterwards there was a/some man, a magus, Gaumāta by name.’
In Old and Middle Iranian, the numeral ‘one’ is deeply connected with the
expression of indefiniteness. op ai̯va and its derivative, the enclitic suffix mp
-ēw,81 can function as indefinite articles “a, a certain”, much like a specific indef-
inite pronoun “some”. mp -ēw is also involved in the formation of other types
of mp indefinite formations: the indefinite mp ēč npi “any”82 and fc indefin-
ites after interrogative pronouns such as mp kadām-ē(w)fc “whoever”,83 mp
kadār-iz-ē(w)fc “whatever”,84 and mp čēgam-iz-e(w)fc “whichever”.85 I already
mentioned that mp -ēw also marks irrealis as well as fc functions along with
indefinite and numeral forms (kas, tis, ēk and ēč), leaving aside negative polar-
ity functions. The fact that mp -iz exclusively marks negative polarity functions
strongly suggests the status of -ēw as a non-negative polarity marker. There-
fore, whereas mp -ēw86 are in charge of overtly marking fc indefinites, mp -iz is
abundantly employed as a npi marker.87
81
Skjærvø 2009: 205.
82
AccordingtoKlingenschmitt(2000:212),itisderivedfromOIr *ai̯u̯a-čid.Nevertheless,the
fact that op -ci yields mp -z should cast some doubts on this etymology. Cf. Baghbidi (2017:
50) and Bernard (2019: 43 fn. 11).
83
Cf. Ved. katamá-interr “who or which of many”, Skrt. katama caná npi “(not) anyone”.
84
Cf. O/YAv. katāra interr “who?”, YAv. katarascit̰ distr “each of the two”, Ved. katará- “who,
which of the two?”, Skrt. katara caná npi “(not) anyone (of the two)”.
85
Notably, mp čē-kām-iz [cy-k’m-c] is formed by the inanimate relative-interrogative čē and
the verb kām- “to wish, to desire” along the particle -iz. Cf. Similar fc indefinites Lat.
quī-uīs fc “anyone”, Span. cualquier fc. In Middle Persian, the verb kām- can also func-
tion as auxiliary verb along with infinitives describing future actions. In Khwarezmian,
we observe nice parallels of both phenomena: Khwar. kām appears as a grammatialized
future particle, much like English will, and as an enclitic particle along interrogative stems
adding an indefinite nuance, e.g. Khwar. kd’m-k’m “whatever” (< OIr. *katāma-kāma).
86
Nevertheless, as mentioned before, we find MPt -iz (as in MPt tis-iz fc “anything,
whatever”), mp -iz (as in mp kē-iz fc “whoever”), and Parth. -ž (as in kež fc “whoever” and
kadāž fc “whenever”) acting as domain-widening particles. Notably, in Middle Persian we
find an adverbial concessive conditional sharing the same morphological element i.e. OIr.
-čid: mp ka-iz “whenever” (mp ka “when, if”). Similar constructions can be seen in early
Indo-Iranian op yaci “whatever” (universal concessive conditional) and op yaci…yaci
“whether … or” (alternative concessive conditional), and Ved. yad cid “even if; whatever”
(scalar and universal concessive conditional respectively). For a detailed analysis of these
forms, cf. Coenen (2021: 121–166, to appear). Furthermore, notice that np har cand ke and
Bal. har či employ the element har, also found in the formation of fc indefinites since
Middle Persian onwards.
87
As in mp hagriz “ever” (< op *hakaram-ci).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
75
While early Indo-Iranian displays the combination between the numeral
‘one’ and the de-instrumental particle IIr. *čana: YAv. (nōit) aēuuō-cina npi and
Ved. (ná) ékaś caná npi,88 Middle Persian shows the numeral ‘one’ along with
the particle OIr. *-čid, as in mp ēč npi (< OIr *ai̯u̯a-čid) “any (at all)” and also
in mp ēk-iz “(not) even one, anyone”,89 the latter form with negation usually
found before the numeral. Nyberg (1974: 69) mentions the form mp ē-cin (ēzin),
seemingly derived from OIr. *ai̯u̯a čina and he regards it as equivalent of YAv.
aēuuō-cina. Nevertheless, as shown above, its mp equivalent of the numeral is
not mp -ēw, but mp ēk.
For its part, the Elamite numeral ‘one’ is ki and is mainly found along the
delocutive 3rd sg. suffix -r: ae kir (Cf. Paper 1955: 124–125; Tavernier 2018:
433).90 It works as an indefinite determiner, similarly to op ai̯va (Reiner 1960:
225; Reiner 1969: 86; Quintana 2013: 56), and as a member of compounds
such ae da(e)ki- “another” and the aforementioned indefinite forms ae aški
“anything”, and me azkit “anything”. ae ki also functions along with inanimate
suffixes in formations such as pel kima “within one year” or sut-kime sat-kime
“each night and each day”,91 where the numeral is always in second position.
Finally, in the Persepolis tablets, the numeral ‘one’ is found in fractions such
as X ir-ma ki “X parts in 1” or X kur-ma ki “X parts in 1 handled” (Grillot-
Susini 2008: 30, Quintana 2013: 100 fn. 57).92 In addition, in the adminis-
trative tablets too, we find ae kir (cf. pf-nn 1431) employed as a numeral and as
an indefinite determiner. Furthermore, in db, although the collocation ae ruh
88
Notice that Old Avestan (Y29,6) attests nōit̰ aēuuā “not one”, negation plus the numeral
‘one’ in the instrumental case. Here, OAv. aēuuā functions as an npi, although, in this
case, without the aid of a de-instrumental, scalar focus particle OIr. *čina. See Briceño-
Villalobos (2019) for the relationship between instrumental suffixes, pie *-h1 and pie
*-kwene, and negative polarity contexts.
89
Bernard (2019) proposes that OIr. *ai̯u̯a-i̯a-ka is the actual ancestor of mp/np yak “one”.
He also deems doubtful the form mp ēk, which is traditionally taken as the correct tran-
scription of mp ⟨’ywkˈ⟩and derived from OIr. *ai̯u̯a-ka. As regards its uses, mp ēk displays
functionsthatgoparalleltothoseshownbythempindefiniteskasandtis:ēk eq“one,some”,
ēk-iz npi “not one, anyone”, ēk npi “anyone” (with conditionals), ēk-ēw irr/fc “some, any”, harw
ēk-(ēw) “everyone”, and ēk ēk distr “one by one, each”.
90
As pointed out by Quintana (2013: 28 fn. 13), Achaemenid Elamite also generalizes the
employment of -ra [-r (nominal class marker) + a (relative particle) as some sort of indef-
inite marker meaning “a, one”.
91
Cf. mp kas kas, Parth. kēž kēž “each one”.
92
Notice that the second position of the numeral after nominals closely resembles the one
observed in mp -ē(w) “one, some”. The similarity is particularly striking when we con-
sider that mp fractions are expressed by means of mp -ēk-ēw as in mp sē-ēk-ēw “one third”
(Durkin-Meisterernst 2012: 220).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

76
briceño villalobos
table 2.8
op ai̯va and ae kir
Achaemenid
Elamite
Old Iranian
Middle Iranian
kir num/eq “one, some”
pf 1859, 16
inri kir npi (= akkar)
“anyone”
op ai̯va num/eq “one, some, a
certain”
OIr. *ai̯u̯a-ka
OIr. *(nai̯) ai̯u̯a-ka-čid npi
OIr. *ai̯u̯a-čid npi
Cf. YAv. (nōit) aēuuō-cina npi
Cf. Ved. (ná) ékaś caná npi
> mp -ēw num/eq/irr “one, some”
Cf. mp kadām-ē(w) fc “whoever”
mp kadār-iz-ē(w) fc “whatever”
mp čēgam-iz-ē(w)fc “whichever”
> mp ēk “one”
> mp (nē) ēk-iz npi “(not) even
one, any”
> mp ēč (nē) npi “any (at all)”
Cf. Parth. ēwiž (nē) npi “any”
kir “some/a certain man” closely follows op ai̯va martiya,93 there are instances
where the numeral kir does not have a parallel in the op text (e.g. dbe 44, (ex
29), 38: barsir kir vs. dbp 2, 29: Pārsa “(a certain/some) Persian”). This implies
that somehow the use of the numeral ‘one’ as a specific indefinite is more con-
sistentlyemployedinaeversionthanintheopversionitself.Itshouldbenoted
thatthis use of thenumeralasanindefiniteisnotattestedpriortoAchaemenid
Elamite times.
Finally, the numeral ‘one’ is also found along with negation, as in (12). In
this case, it does not follow the Elamite word order for npi indefinites (indef.
+ neg), but the Old and Middle Iranian one as observed in negative indef-
inites, O/YAv. naēcis ni “no one”, and npis based on the numeral ‘one’, OAv.
nōit aēuuā npi, YAv. nōit aēuua-cina npi “not (even) one”, mp nē ēk-iz “not any-
one”, Parth. nē ēwiž npi “not (a single) one”.94
93
Bae (2001: 243) remarks that there is no word divider between the numeral ‘one’ and mar-
tiya in the op version.This may imply that the indefinite nuance conveyed by the numeral
‘one’ is further supported by the nominal martiya “a man” > “someone”. Also cf. ab išten
amēlu “one man”. As mentioned, Akk. amīlu is often employed as an indefinite.
94
The position of the negative marker with the latter two can vary, since it can also appear
after the numeral in preverbal position.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
77
(12) pf 1859, 16
lipar
servant
inri
neg-3sg
kir.
one-3sg
‘There is no servant.’
In Table 2.8, I summarize the uses of the numeral ‘one’ in both Achaemenid
Elamite and Old/Middle Iranian.
8
ae kaš kaš
Henkelman (2008: 446, fn. 1035) has suggested that the form kaš, attested in
some Neo-Elamite texts (eki 85 6, 7, 8, 10:95 kaš kaš) as well as in the Achae-
menidadministrativetablets(pf269:8,pf755,4),mayrepresentaloanfromop
kašci.96 This form refers back to animate and, rarely, to inanimate objects as a
resumptive pronoun. Hallock (1969: 9, 711) asserts that ae kaš [bi] is in substitu-
tion of the 3rd sg. dat. resumptive pronoun hi “to him”.97 Cf. also Stolper (2004:
77).98 Thus, although it seems an admittedly rare formation, in some cases
along with the original resumptive hi, ae kaš99 must be taken as a resumptive
pronoun of its own accord rather than an indefinite pronoun and definitely not
as a substitute of hi. Therefore, ae kaš could be reckoned as another instance
of the op influence over Elamite.100 Elamite would have acquired kaš from op
inventory and, after stripping this morphological loan of its original value, it
would have redeployed it back into the pronominal system transformed into
a resumptive pronoun.101 In Table 2.9, I provide a summary of the contents of
this last section.102
95
From the period of king Tepti-Huban-Insušnak (ca. 550–30bce).
96
In Achaemenid Elamite, the addition of a final -š is a general phenomenon observed in
Old Persian loans (Henkelman 2008: 446 fn. 1035).
97
Tobefair,hicanworkasademonstrative,anaphoric(orresumptive),orpersonalpronoun
(3rd sg.). Cf. Quintana 2013: 40ff.
98
However, Vallat (1987) considers kaš an archaic formation of the sign hi, which, therefore,
should be read hi. Thus, in his view, kaš should be taken as a ghost word.
99
With reduplication in eki 85, 6,7, 9, 10, similarly to Avestan and Old Persian reduplicated
indefinites.
100
Especially if we consider the late date of the Neo-Elamite inscription where this form is
attested and its presence in the Achaemenid administrative archives.
101
Cf. Tavernier (2018: 429–430).
102
Notice that mp kas eq “some” can also mean “person”, which meaning seems closer to that
of a resumptive pronoun “him, her, it”.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

78
briceño villalobos
table 2.9
ae kaš
Achaemenid Elamite
Old Iranian
Middle Iranian
pf 269:8, pf 755, 4 kaš resupt
eki 85 ne kaš kaš resupt
“him, that one”
Cf. Av. kaŋ́he kaŋ́he fc
“each and every”
Cf. mp kas eq “some”
Cf. mp kas kas distr,
Parth. kēz kēz distr
“each one, everyone”
9
Conclusions
The objective of this paper was to highlight the diachronic developments of
Persian indefinites in order to track down their diverse semantic functions
on each stage of the language (Old and Middle Iranian) as well as to assess
how Achaemenid Elamite, in several cases, serves as a reflection of Old Iranian
indefinite morphology. At the same time, we have seen that Semitic morpho-
logical data has aided us in our better understanding of ae and op indefinite
formations, especially in cases where Babylonian or Aramaic may have played
a role in the creation of slightly odd phraseological patterns. In Figure 2.1, I
provide a complete list of op indefinites, their mp developments (>), their mp
equivalents (=), and their ae counterparts (bold letters).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
79
op kašci npi “anyone” > mp kas-iz npi “anyone”. ae /me akkar npi “anyone”
op kašci uni “each, everyone” = mp harw kas uni/distr “each one, everyone”.
ae unra distr/uni “each, every”
op cišci npi “anything” > mp tis-iz npi “anything”. ae aški/ me azkit npi “any-
thing”
op kā haya fc “whoever”. ae akka(ya) fc “whoever”
op *kai̯a interr/fc “who?, whoever” > mp kē interr/rel/fc “who? who, who-
ever”. ae akkaya fc “whoever”
op taya fc “whatever” = mp čē interr/rel/fc “what?, which, whatever”.
ae appa interr/rel/ fc “what?. which, whatever”
op ai̯va num/ eq “one, some” > mp -ē(w) num/eq/irr/fc “one, some, any”.
ae kir num/ eq “one, some”/ akkar eq (= mp kas eq) “some”
op *ai̯u̯a-ka num “one” > mp ēk num/ “one, some”
op *[nai̯] ai̯u̯a-ka npi “not even one” > mp [nē] ēk-iz npi “not (even) one”.
ae [inri] kir npi “not (any)one”
op *ai̯u̯a-ci npi “any” > mp ēč npi “any”
op kā- interr “who?” > mp kas eq “someone”. ae kaš / me kaš kaš resump
“him, that one”
figure 2.1 Old Persian, Middle Persian, and Achaemenid Elamite indefinites and their func-
tions
Abbreviations
Languages
ab
Achaemenid Babylonian
ae
Achaemenid Elamite
Akk.
earlier Akkadian
Aram.
Imperial Aramaic
Arm.
Armenian
Bactr.
Bactrian
Bal.
Balochi
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

80
briceño villalobos
Skrt.
Classical Sanskrit
Gr.
Classical Greek
HGr.
Homeric Greek
HLuw.
Hieroglyphic Luwian
Hitt.
Hittite
IIr.
Indo-Iranian
Khot.
Khotanese
Khwar.
Khwarezmian
Lat.
Latin
me
Middle Elamite
mp
Manichean Middle Persian
mpt
Turfan Middle Persian
ne
Neo-Elamite
np
New Persian
OAv.
Old Avestan
OIr.
Old Iranian
Osc.
Oscan
Oss.
Ossetic
Parth.
Parthian
Sogd.
Sogdian
Turk.
Turkish
Ved.
Rigvedic Vedic
YAv.
Young Avestan.
Typology/Morphology
cond
Conditional
comp
Comparative
distr
Distributive
eq
Existential Quantifier
fc
Free-Choice
fci(s)
Free-Choice Item(s)
ind/indef.
Indefinite
interr/interr.
Interrogative
irr
Irrealis
neg
Negation
ni
Negative Indefinite
npi(s)
Negative Polarity Item(s)
num
Numeral
opt.
Optative
part.
Particle
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
81
rel/rel.
Relative
resumpt
Resumptive
uni
Universal Quantifier
V
Verb
✗
no correspondence
For db, I have followed the Achaemenid Elamite and Imperial Aramaic texts in
Bae (2001) and the op text in Schmitt (2009). For the rest of the Achaemenid
Royal Inscriptions, I have followed Vallat (1977). For the administrative tablets,
I have made use of ochre: Online Cultural and Historical Research Environ-
ment. Thanks are due to prof. Stolper, as director of Persepolis Fortification
Archive (pfa) Project, for letting me quote Fort. Texts. For the Middle Elamite
texts, I have used König (1965). Finally, for the Achaemenid Babylonian texts, I
have made use of Bae (2001), which, in turn, is an updated version of Malbran-
Labat (1994).
References
Adams, Douglas Q. 2013, A dictionary of Tocharian B, Amsterdam/Atlanta: Rodopi
B.V. Editions.
AIGc =Wackernagel, Jakob 1896–1930, Altindische Grammatik.Bd.iii,Nominalflex-
ion, Zahlwort, Pronomen, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Aliyari Babolghani, Salman 2015,TheElamiteVersionof DariustheGreat’sInscrip-
tion at Bisotun (in Persian), Tehran: Nashr-e Markaz.
Back, Michael 1992, Topikalisierungen in Alpersischen, in B. Brogyanyi (ed.), Prehis-
tory, History, and Historiography of Language, Speech, and Linguistics Theory, Ams-
terdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company: 241–268.
Bae, Chul-Hyun 2001, Comparative studies on king Darius’s Bisitun inscription, PhD
dissertation, Harvard University.
Baghbidi Hassan R. 2017, Middle Persian Historical Phonology, Osaka: Osaka Uni-
versity Graduate School of Language and Culture.
Bavant, Marc 2014, Résultatif, diathèse et possession en basque, vieux perse et élamite,
PhD dissertation, Utrecht University.
Bartholomae, Christian 1904, Altiranisches Wörterbuch, Strassburg: Verlag von
Karl Trübner.
Beekes, Robert S.P. 2010, Etymological dictionary of Greek, vol. 1–2, Boston/Leiden:
Brill.
Bernard, Chams 2019, On the etymology of Persian yak ‘one’, “Wékwos” 4: 37–51.
Booij, Geert 2005, The grammar of words: An introduction to linguistic morphology,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

82
briceño villalobos
Boswell, Frederick A. 2021, A Grammar of Cheke Holo, PhD dissertation, Leiden
University.
Briceño Villalobos, Juan E. 2019, Negation, indefinites, and polarity in early Greek
and Indo-Iranian: a typological and comparative approach, PhD dissertation, Com-
plutense University of Madrid.
Briceño Villalobos, Juan E. 2020, Correlative negation in Old Persian, “Poznan
Studies on Contemporary Linguistics” 56/3: 451–475.
Brunner,ChristopherJ.1977, ASyntaxof WesternMiddleIranian,Delmar,ny:Cara-
van Books.
Brust, Manfred 2018, HistorischeLaut-undFormenlehredesAltpersischen.Miteinem
etymologischen Glossar, Innsbruck: Innsbrucker Beiträge zur Sprachwissenschaft.
cad =TheAssyrianDictionaryof theOrientalInstituteof theUniversityof Chicago, 1968–
2010.
Chantraine, Pierre 1968, Dictionnaire étymologique de la langue grecque: histoire
des mots, Paris: Klincksieck.
Coenen, Pascal 2021, The Functions of Vedic cid, íd, īm, ī and sīm, PhD Dissertation,
Universitiy of Köln.
Coenen, Pascal (to appear), The Functions of the Old Persian Particle =ci.
Delitzcsh, Friedrich 1889, Assyrian Grammar (transl. By R.S. Kennedy), Berlin:
H. Reuther’s Verlagsbuchhandlung.
dmmpp = Durkin-Meisterernst, Desmond 2004, Dictionary of Manichean Middle
Persian and Parthian, Turnhout: Brepols.
DNWSIa = Hoftijzer, Jaboc—Jongeling, Karel 1995, Dictionary of North-West
Semitic Inscrptions, Part 1 (’- L) with appendices by R.C. Steiner, A. Mosak Moshavi
and B. Porten, Leiden /New York/Köln: E.J. Brill.
Dunkel, G.E. 1997, B. Delbrück and the Instrumental-Ablative in *-m, in E. Crespo—
J.L. García Ramón (eds.), Berthold Debrück y la sintaxis indoeuropea hoy: Actas del
Coloquio de la Indogermanische Gesellschaft, Madrid, 21–24 de septiembre de 1994,
Madrid/Wiesbaden: Ediciones de la uam/Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag: 63–83.
Durkin-Meisterernst, Desmond 2012, Grammatik des Westmitteliranischen (Par-
thisch und Mittelpersisch), Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wis-
senschaften.
eki = König, Friedrich W. 1965, Die elamischen Königinschriften, Archiv für Orient-
forschung, Beihefte 16, Graz: E. Weidner.
ew = Hinz, Walter—Koch, Heidemarie 1987, Elamisches Wörterbuch, Band i–ii,
Berlin: Verlag von Dietrich Reimer in Berlin.
EWAia = Mayrhofer, Manfred 1992, Etymologisches Wörterbuch des Altindo-
arischen, Band i. Heidelberg: Carl Winter Universitätsverlag.
Faber, Alice 1988, Indefinite pronouns in Early Semitic, in Y.L. Arbeitman (ed.), Fucus,
A Semitic/Afrasian Gathering in Remembrance of Albert Ehrman, Amsterdam/Phil-
adelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company: 221–238.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
83
Filippone, Ela 2016, Goat-skins, Horses and Camels: How did Darius’ Army Cross the
Tigris?, in C. Redard (ed.), Des contrées avestiques à Mahabad, via Bisotun. Etudes
offertes en hommage à Pierre Lecoq, Paris: Recherches et Publications: 25–60.
Frisk, Hjalmar 1969, Griechisches Etymologisches Wörterbuch, Heidelberg: Carl
Winter Universitätsverlag.
Gad, Cyril J. 1958, The Harran Inscriptions of Nabonidus, “Anatolian Studies” 8: 35–92.
García Ramón, José Luis 1997, Adverbiosdedireccióneinstrumentalindoeuropeo”, in
E. Crespo—J.L. García J.L. Ramón (eds.), Berthold Debrück y la sintaxis indoeuropea
hoy: Actas del Coloquio de la Indogermanische Gesellschaft, Madrid, 21–24 de sep-
tiembre de 1994, Madrid/Wiesbaden: Ediciones de la uam/Dr. Ludwig Reichert Ver-
lag: 113–141.
Gershevitch, Ilya 1988, Word-Final ‘a’-Vowels in Old Persian, “East and West” 38 /1/4:
65–80.
Giannakidou, Anastasia 1998, Polarity Sensitivity as (Non)Veridical Dependency,
Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company.
Giannakidou, Anastasia 2001, The meaning of free-choice, “Linguistics and Philo-
sophy” 24: 659–735.
Giannakidou, Anastasia—Cheng, Lisa L. 2006, (In)Definiteness, Polarity, and the
Role of wh-morphology in Free Choice, “Journal of Semantics” 23: 135–183.
Giannakidou, Anastasia—Zeijlstra, Hedde 2017, The Landscape of Negative
Dependencies:NegativeConcord, N-Words,SplitScope,inM.Everaert—H.vanRiems-
dijk(eds.),TheBlackwellCompaniontoSyntax,2ndEdition,London:Blackwell:1–38.
Gotō, Toshifumi 2013, Old-Indo-Aryan morphology and its Indo-Iranian background,
Vienna: Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Gray, Louis H. 1902, Notes on the Old Persian Inscriptions of Behistun, “Journal of the
American Oriental Society” 23: 56–64.
Grillot-Susini, Françoise 2008, L’Élamite. Éléments de grammaire, Paris: Geuth-
ner Manuels.
Grillot-Susini, Françoise—Herrenschmidt, Clarisse—Malbran-Labat,
Florence 1993, La version élamite de la trilingue de Behistun: une nouvelle lecture,
“Journal Asiatique” 281/ 1–2: 19–59.
Gzella, Holger 2011, Imperial Aramaic, in S. Weninger (ed.), The Semitic languages.
An international handbook, Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter Mouton: 574–586.
Gzella, Holger 2015, A Cultural History of Aramaic, From the Beginnings to the
Advent of Islam, Boston/Leiden: Brill.
Hackstein, Olav 2004, Rhetorical Questions and the Grammaticalization of Interrog-
ativePronounsasConjunctionsinIndo-European, in A. Hyllested—A.R. Jørgensen—
J.H. Larsson—T. Olander (eds.), Per Aspera Ad Asteriscos, Studia Indogermanica in
honorem Jens Elmergård Rasmussen sexagenari Idibus Martiis anno mmiv, Inns-
bruck: Innsbrucker Beiträge zur Sprachwissenschaft: 167–186.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

84
briceño villalobos
Hallock, Richard T. 1969, Persepolis Fortification Tablets, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Haspelmath, Martin 1997, Indefinite pronouns, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Haul, Michael 2009, Stele und Legende, Untersuchungen zu den keilschriftlichen
Erzählwerken über die Könige von Akkade, Göttingen: Universitätsverlag Göttingen.
Henkelman, Wouter. F.M. 2008, The other gods who are. Studies in Elamite-Iranian
AcculturationbasedonthePersepolisFortificationtexts,Leiden: NederlandsInstituut
voor het Nabije Oosten.
Herzfeld, Ernest 1938, Altpersische Inschriften, Berlin: Verlag von Dietrich Reimer.
Hinz, Walter 1973, Neue Wege im Altpersischen, Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz.
Horn,LaurenceR.2000, Anyand(-)ever:Free-choiceandfree-relatives,inA.Z.Wyner
(ed.),TheProceedingsof theFifteenthAnnualConference,TheUniversityof Haifa1999,
The Israel Association for Theoretical Linguistics.
Horn,Paul1893,GrundrissderNeupersischenEtyomologie,Strassburg:VerlagvonKarl
J. Trübner.
Horn, Paul 1898–1901, Neupersische Schriftsprache, in W. Geiger—E. Kuhn (eds.),
Grundriss der Iranischen Philologie, Strassburg: Verlag von Karl J. Trübner: 1–200.
Horn, Paul 1904, The Old Persian Inscription at Behistan, transliterated with philolo-
gical annotations, in E.W. West (ed.), Avesta, Pahlavi and Ancient Persian Studies,
in honour of the late Shams-Ul-Ulama Dastur Peshotanji Behramji Sanjana ma, PhD,
Strassburg/Leipzig: Karl J. Trübner/Otto Harrassowitz: 231–262.
Huehnergard, John 1997, A Grammar of Akkadian, Atlanta, (GA): Scholars Press.
Hunt, Joel H.—Schniedewind, William M. 2007, A primer on Ugaritic. Lan-
guage, Culture, and Literature, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hübschmann, Heinrich 1895, Persische Studien, Strassburg: Verlag von Karl J. Trüb-
ner.
Jagersma, Abraham. H. 2010, A descriptive grammar of Sumerian, PhD dissertation,
Leiden University.
Joüon, Paul—Muraoka,Takamitsu 1991, A grammar of Biblical Hebrew,Volume 2,
Part 3: Syntax, Roma: Editrice Pontificio Instituto Biblico.
Kent, Ronald G. 1953, Old Persian, New Haven, CT: American Oriental Series.
Khačikjan, Margaret 1998,TheElamiteLanguage, Roma: Consiglio Nazionale delle
Ricerche.
Klein, Jared 1997, Indefinite Pronouns, Polarity, and Related Phenomena in Classical
Armenian. A Study Based on the Old Armenian Gospels, “Transactions of the Philolo-
gical Society” 95: 189−245.
Klingenschmitt, Gert 2000, Mittelpersisch, in B. Forssman—R. Plath (eds.), Indo-
arisch, Iranisch und die Indogermanistik, Arbeitstagung der Indogermanischen
Gesellschaft vom 2. bis 5. Oktober 1997 in Erlangen, Wiesbaden: Dr. Ludwig Reichert
Verlag: 191–229.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
85
Kouwenberg, N.J.C. (Bert) 2017, A Grammar of Old Assyrian, Boston/Leiden: Brill.
König, Ekkehard 1991,TheMeaningof FocusParticles, London/NewYork: Routledge.
Krahmalkov, Charles R. 2001, A Phoenician-Punic Grammar, Boston/Leiden: Brill.
DeLamberterie,Charles2013,Grec,phrygien,arménien,desanciensauxmodernes,
“Journal des Savants” 1: 3–69.
Litamahuputty, Bathseba H.J. 2012, Ternate Malay: Grammar and Texts, PhD dis-
sertation, Leiden University.
lipp = Dunkel, George 2014, Lexicon der indogermanischen Partikeln und Pronomin-
alstämme, Band ii, Heidelberg: Universitätsverlag Winter.
Lubotsky, Alexander M.—de Vaan, Michiel A.C. 2011, Old Persian, in H. Gzella
(ed.), Languages from the World of the Bible, Boston/Berlin: Walter de Gruyter: 194–
208.
Macdonell, Arthur A. 1910, Vedic Grammar, Strassburg: Karl J. Trübner.
Machajdíková, Barbora—Martzloff, Vincent 2016, Le pronom indéfini osque
pitpit “quicquid” de Paul Diacre à Jacob Balde: morphosyntaxe comparée des
paradigmes *kwi- kwi- du latin et du sabellique, “Graeco-Latina Brunensia” 21/1: 73–
118.
Malbran-Labat, Florence 1994, La version Akkadienne de l’inscription trilingue de
Darius à Behistun, Roma: Gruppo Editoriale Internazionale.
Meillet, Antoine 1924, Le Slave Commun, Paris: Librairie Anciene Honoré Cham-
pion.
Moran, William L. 1959, Notes on the New Nabonidus Inscriptions, “Orientalia (Nova
Series)” 28/2: 130–140.
Muraoka, Takamitsu—Porten, Bezalel 1998, A grammar of Egyptian Aramaic,
Leiden/New York/Köln: Brill.
Nyberg, Henrik S. 1974, A Manual of Pahlavi, Volume 2, Wiesbaden: Otto Harrasso-
witz.
Paper, Herbert H. 1955,Thephonologyandmorphologyof RoyalAchaemenidElamite,
Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.
Pinault, Georges-Jean 2010, On the r-Endings of the Tocharian Middle, in R. Kim—
N. Oettinger—E. Rieken—M. Weiss (eds.), Ex Oriente Lux, Anatolian and Indo-
EuropeanStudiesinHonorof CraigMelchertontheoccasionof hissixty-fifthbirthday,
Ann Arbor: Beech Stave Press: 285–295.
Quintana Cifuentes, Enrique 2013, Gramática de la lengua elamita, Madrid:
Vision Libros.
Reichelt, Hans 1903, Das Pronomen im Mittelpersischen, “Zeitschrift der Deutschen
Morgenländischen Gesellschaft” 57/3: 570–575.
Reiner, Erica 1960, Calques sur le vieux-perse en élamite achéménide, “Bulletin de la
Société de Linguistique de Paris” 55: 222–227.
Reiner, Erica 1969, The Elamite Language, in J. Friedrich—E. Reiner—A. Kammen-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

86
briceño villalobos
huber—G. Neumann—A. Heubeck (hrsg.), Altkleinasiatische Sprachen, Leiden/
Köln: Brill: 54–118.
Rawlinson,HenryC.1848,ThePersianCuneiformInscriptionatBehistun,Decyphered
and Translated; With a Memoir on Persian Cuneiform Inscriptions in General, and on
That of Behistun in Particular, “The Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society of Great Bri-
tain and Ireland” 10: i–lxxi, 1–265, 268–349.
Salemann, C.H. 1895–1901, Mittelpersisch, inW. Geiger—E. Kuhn (eds.), Grundrissder
Iranischen Philologie, Erster Band, i. Abteilung, Strassburg: Verlag von Karl J. Trüb-
ner: 249–332.
Schmitt, Rüdiger 1991, Corpus Inscriptionum Iranicarum. Part i, Inscriptions of
Ancient Iran. Vol. i, The Old Persian Inscriptions. Texts i, The Bisitun Inscriptions of
Darius the Great: Old Persian Text, London: published on behalf of Corpus Inscrip-
tionum Iranicarum by School of Oriental and African Studies.
Schmitt, Rüdiger 2009, Die altpersischen Inschriften der Achaimeniden, Wiesbaden:
Reichert.
Schmitt, Rüdiger 2016, Stilistik der altpersischen Inschriften: Versuch einer Annäher-
ung, Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press.
Sideltsev, Andrei V. 2018, Dream Syntax: Hittite imma and mān as Indefiniteness
Markers, “Zeitschrift der Deutschen Morgenländischen Gesellschaft” 168/2: 301–
332.
Sideltsev, Andrei V.—Yakubovich, Ilya 2016, The Origin of Lycian Indefinite Pro-
nouns and Its Phonological Implications, “Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissen-
schaft” 70/1: 75–124.
Sivan, Daniel 2001, A Grammar of the Ugaritic Language, Leiden/Boston/Köln: Brill.
Stolper, Matthew W. 2004, Elamite, in R.D. Woodard (ed.), The Cambridge encyc-
lopedia of the world’s ancient languages, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press:
60–94.
Sunderman, Werner 1989, Westmitteliranische Sprachen, in R. Schmitt (ed.), Com-
pendium Linguarum Iranicarum, Wiesbaden: Dr. Ludwig Reichert Verlag: 106–113.
Skjærvø, Prods O. 1999, Methodological Questions in Old Persian and Parthian Epi-
graphy, “Bulletin of the Asia Institute”, 13: 157–167.
Skjærvø, Prods O. 2009, Old Iranian, in G. Windfuhr (ed.), The Iranian Languages,
London/New York: Routledge: 43–195.
Tavernier, Jan 1999, Zum altpersischen hy /hya/ “Archív Orientální”, 67: 683–693.
Tavernier, Jan 2007, Iranica in the Achaemenid period (ca. 550–330b.c.). Lexicon
of Old Iranian proper names and loanwords, attested in non-Iranian texts, Leuven:
Peeters.
Tavernier, Jan 2018, The Elamite Language, in J. Álvarez-Mon—G.P. Basello—
Y. Wicks (eds.), The Elamite World, London/New York: Routledge: 416–449.
Tedesco, Paul 1945, Persian čīz and Sanskrit kím, “Language” 21/3: 128–141.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

achaemenid elamite and old persian indefinites
87
Tropper, Josef 1993, Die Inschriften von Zincirli, Münster: ugarit-Verlag.
Ungnad, Arthur 1992, Akkadian Grammar (translated by H.A. Hoffner Jr.), Atlanta,
GA: Scholars Press.
Vallat, François 1977, Corpus des inscriptions royales en Elamite Achemenide, thèse
presentée pour la obtention du doctorat, Paris.
Vallat, François 1987, Le pseudo-pronom personnel *kaš en élamite achéménide,
“Nouvelles Assyriologiques Brèves et Utilitaires (nabu)” 114: 66.
WaK = Schmitt, Rüdiger 2014,WörterbuchderaltpersischenKönigsinschriften,Wies-
baden: Reichert.
Waltisberg, Michael 2011, Syntactic Typology of Semitic, in S. Weninger (ed.), The
Semitic Languages, An International Handbook, Berlin/Boston: De Gruyter Mouton:
303–329.
Yakubovich, Ilya S. 2020, Persian ezāfe as a contact-induced feature, “Voprosy
Jazykoznanija” 5: 91–114.
Yun, Ilsung A. 2006, A case of linguistic transition: the Nerab Inscriptions, “Journal of
Semitic Studies” 51/1: 19–43.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Marta Capano, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_005
chapter 3
Phenomena of Spirantization and Language
Contact in Greek Sicilian Inscriptions: The Case of
τριαιντα
Marta Capano
1
Introduction
This article addresses the issue of spirantization of stops in Sicilian Greek.
In order to understand the realization of this series of phonemes in Hellen-
istic and Roman Sicily, I contend that there are three fundamental elements to
take into account: 1) comparisons with similar developments in other areas of
the Greek-speaking world; 2) transliteration practices of Greek words in other
languages; 3) typological evidence for the change of these sounds. After offer-
ing some considerations on relative chronology, I argue that a specific form
attested in a Greek Sicilian inscription, which was hitherto regarded as the res-
ult of a lapsus scalpri, is in fact an authentic product of the spoken language.
This form, which in my opinion is the result of language contact with Latin,
should be added to the evidence for spirantization of the voiced velar stop in
Sicily in the Roman period.
2
Spirantization in the Greek Phonological System in the Hellenistic
and Roman Periods
Spirantization (also called fricativization) of stops is one of the well-known
changes that has occurred within the history of the Greek language and it
can be regarded as part of the wider process of spirantization that affected
the entire consonantal system. It is not easy to identify the traces of this phe-
nomenon, because the conservativity of writing systems obscures changes,
especially when they concern the introduction of a new sound. When a lin-
guistic change produces a phoneme that was already present in the language,
and already codified in the writing system, this phoneme can be recorded quite
easily, even considering the inherent tendency of writing systems to conser-
vativism. Conversely, when a change introduces a new phoneme, or a new
allophone, this new sound can go unnoticed for a long time in the written codi-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
89
fication. An example of the first case is the change of Ancient Greek [ε:] > [i:]
at the end of the Classical period, after which inscriptions often show etymolo-
gical [ε:] (normally ⟨η⟩) written as ι. An example of the second case is, indeed,
the case of non-sibilant fricatives in Hellenistic and Roman Greek. Another dif-
ficulty for the study of spirantization in the Greek language is presented by the
provenance of the material traditionally used in studies on late Greek phon-
ology, because the regions from which this material comes might not match
the areas where phenomena of spirantization are frequent. For instance, the
linguistic areas in which we have an abundance of material evidence for study-
ing spoken language, such as Egypt—with the major presence of papyri—and
Attica—richer in inscriptions than other Greek speaking areas of the period—
are less subject to some kinds of spirantization.1 Before addressing in detail
the consonantal sounds that underwent spirantization in Greek, we can state
which ones surely did not, namely voiceless stops [p], [t], [k]. If we adopt a
structuralist approach, the exclusion of voiceless stops from spirantization is
little surprising, considering that the “box” of their corresponding fricative ([f],
[θ], [x])—as we shall see in the next section—would be filled by the develop-
ment of voiceless aspirated stops. It is well known that the voiceless aspirated
stops ⟨φ⟩, ⟨θ⟩, and ⟨χ⟩—which still corresponded to [ph], [th], [kh] at the
beginning of the Hellenistic period—underwent spirantization by the end of
the Roman period (Petrounias 2001: 606–609, Horrocks 2010: 170) in most
of the Greek-speaking world, resulting ultimately in [φ], [θ], and [x]. Probably
around the same time, or a little later, the same phenomenon affected also the
voiced velar series, represented graphically as ⟨β⟩, ⟨δ⟩, and ⟨γ⟩, which gradu-
ally became [β] (and later [v]), [ð], and [ɣ]. This description should not give
the impression that all voiced and voiceless sounds were affected at the same
time, or that the change has happened in the entire Greek-speaking world—on
the contrary, the phenomenon was gradual and characterized by a great areal
diversity. In the next sections, I offer an outline of the process of spirantiza-
tion of consonantal sounds in Greek on the basis of the epigraphic evidence
and, when appropriate, literary sources, starting from voiceless aspirated stops
(in the order [th], [kh], [ph]) and then addressing the voiced stops ([b], [d],
[ɡ]).
1 The absence of this phenomenon in areas that have greater quantities of evidence might
explain the perception of scholars such as Teodorsson and Gignac (the former working on
Attica and the latter on Egypt), so important for the description of phonology of Greek of
the Hellenistic and Roman times, that spirantization did not affect Greek until after the 1st c.
ce.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

90
capano
2.1
Voiceless Aspirated Stops
From a geographical point of view, spirantization is first attested inWestGreek,
intheDoricdialect,tobeprecise.WithinDoric,thefirstphonemetobeaffected
by spirantization is the dental voiceless aspirated stop. Well-known literary
sources, such as Aristophanes (Thesm. v. 81, Pax v. 214), Thucydides (V 77.4),
and Xenophon (Hell. iv 4.10) represent sometimes a sibilant ⟨σ⟩instead of the
dentalvoicelessaspiratedfricative(⟨θ⟩)inspeechesfromDoricspeakers,espe-
cially in stereotypical expressions (e.g. ναὶτὼσιώ“for the two gods!”).2 Less than
a century later, the same phenomenon appears in inscriptions from Sparta (e.g.
ig v1 1317 and ig vi1 255, both from the 4th/3rd c. bce). There are two interest-
ing facts to notice: first, the documentation of Laconian spirantization appears
earlierinAtticliterarytextsthaninlocalLaconianepigraphicrecords;secondly,
the practice of writing σ instead of θ disappears after the 4th c. bce, to reappear
onlylater,duringthefirstcenturiesce(e.g.ἀνέσηκεforἀνέθηκεinigvi1294and
ig vi1 307, dated from the second half of the 2nd c. ce).3 The interpretation of
this⟨σ⟩asanattempttoexpressafricativeisunanimousinthescholarship,but
the contextualization of this phenomenon within the Greek language and dia-
lectology is more controversial (cf. Bubeník 1983: 105–110). The spirantization
of a dental segment is by no means an uncommon phenomenon in Ancient
Greek, as it is attested already in Mycenean Greek (Méndez Dosuna 1993),
and it constitutes one of the most significant isoglosses for Eastern/Southern
Greek (respectively in Porzig’s and Risch’s terms; cf. Porzig 1954, Risch 1955).
In this paper, I will distinguish between the aforementioned case of spirant-
ization, which goes under the name of “assibilation”, and the Laconian—and
later widely Greek—phenomenon, which will be called spirantization. There
are two obvious reasons to do so: the first, and most important, is that the
assibilation as attested in Mycenean, Arcado-Cypriot, and Attic-Ionic is con-
ditioned by context, as it appears only before a high vowel (t > s _V[+front]),
anditshouldultimatelybeconsideredacaseof palatalization(seealsoBrixhe
1996:45).Secondly,theareasinwhichthetwophenomenaoriginatedarediffer-
ent, as assibilation seems to have spread from eastern/southern Greek dialects
(Mycenean,Ionian-Attic,Arcado-Cypriot,andLesbian),whilespirantizationof
2 For a collection and an analysis of all literary data from Aristophanes and Thucydides, see
Colvin 1999: 169–170.
3 Thisdiscontinuitymightbeduetotheinfluenceof κοινήspellings,asLaconiansstoppedusing
⟨σ⟩for ⟨θ⟩when they perceived this as a trait of provincialism (Bubeník 1983: 105), but the
main question is why they started to use it again. If we look at one of the later occurrences
of ἀνέσεκεν for ἀνέθεκεν, in ig v1 308, a public inscription from 2nd c. ce Sparta, we notice
that there are many other archaisms, such as Ἀρτέμιτι and Βωρσέᾳ. The inscription should be
read as a proud and conscious imitation of Laconian models, with the archaizing taste of the
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
91
the dental elements, as mentioned, appears earlier in west Greek.4 Moreover,
I separate the Greek assibilation from the “Laconian” spirantization because
I argue that the latter, rather than being realized as a sibilant, was uttered as
a voiceless interdental fricative (cf. e.g. Bubeník 1983: 105). It is likely that
the graphic representation of a voiceless fricative (θ < [th]) overlaps with the
graphic representation of a voiceless sibilant [s] by virtue of the fact that they
were both continuous, fricative, coronal, and non-voiced.
In pre-Hellenistic Greek the grapheme ⟨χ⟩still represented the voiceless
aspirated stop [kh], which was formed by a plosive part, followed by an aspir-
ation. Later on, there probably was a phase [kx], followed by the loss of the
plosive element. If we accept this process as true, it is likely that the sequence
written ⟨κχ⟩and corresponding to [kkh] was one of the first contexts to
undergo spirantization, because on a perception level the plosive component
is still represented by the first velar, while the second element only maintains
the aspiration. This stage is probably represented by readings such as Βάχχος
for Βάκχος that we find around the 2nd c. bce in Attica and in Central Greece
(e.g. ig ii2 1717, 1765, 1998 from Attica, sgdi ii 1732, 1742, 1758 from Delphi, and
IThesp 88 from Boeotia).5 In Asia Minor, apart from some Hellenistic instances
of ⟨χχ⟩for ⟨κχ⟩(mostly later than the 1st c. bce), the first instances of spirant-
ization have been found in inscriptions starting from the 2nd c. bce, where we
see frequent series of exchanges between ⟨χ⟩and ⟨κ⟩, and cases of hypercor-
rections, e.g. γυναιχίfor γυναικίin Sterrett, ej 98,67.6 The evidence, as one can
see, is not abundant, and it is possible that here we are dealing here with a phe-
nomenon that affected Hellenistic Greek only in terms of allophonic variation,
and that the complete spirantization of voiceless aspirated stop did not com-
period. It is likely that the imitation of older inscriptions was produced by the observation of
older monuments, which must have been still standing in the 2nd c. ce.
4 As for the majority of isoglosses, Mycenean is to be paired with East Greek also with regard
to assibilation.
5 Contra Threatte (1980: 470 and 541), who does not consider spellings like βάχχος as instances
of spirantization of [kh], but rather as another case of the assimilation [khkh] > [kkh], and
ultimately analogous to the pronunciation [kth] of ⟨χθ⟩.
6 One should notice, though, that there might be a different explanation for this kind of mis-
take in Asia Minor, and especially in Pisidia. As Brixhe (2016: 111) notices, Pisidic, the language
spokenintheareawheretheinscriptionwiththeformγυναιχίcomesfrom,didnothaveaspir-
ated stops, and the wordswith ⟨χ⟩fromGreekintoPisidic were transcribedusually as normal
velar stop. The exchange between χ and κ might be explained, instead of a case of spirantiz-
ation, as a form of Greek spoken “à la Pisidienne”. An inscription a few centuries later than
Sterrett, ej 98,67, ik 5 from Central Pisidia, shows ⟨κ⟩for ⟨χ⟩twice in the same inscription
(ἐκθρόν, l. 262 and Κρόνου l. 158); in this phase the hypothesis of spirantization seems to be the
most likely explanation.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

92
capano
pletely occur before the Roman period.7 Some further evidence for later spir-
antization is offered by Latin transliterations, which will be the focus of §1.3.2.
The process of spirantization of the voiceless aspirated stops ultimately
affected also the labial segment, but it is unclear when the fricatives became
phonemes and the voiceless aspirated stops became allophones. It is very likely
that the change was not from bilabial aspirated stop [ph] to labiodental fric-
ative [f], but it went through a phase of voiceless bilabial fricative [φ].8 This
intermediate stage of spirantization is harder to isolate in texts, but it can be
detected by the exchange between ⟨φ⟩and ⟨υ⟩, or between ⟨φ⟩and ⟨θ⟩, phe-
nomena that are found at a much later stage than the dental or velar series.
The major chronological gap between the passages [b] > [β] > [v] and [ph] >
[φ] > [f] is also testified by the absence of confusion amongst them. In other
words, when the original voiced bilabial stop ([b] = ⟨β⟩) became a bilabial
fricative [β], the voiceless bilabial aspirated stop [ph] had not yet started the
change into a bilabial fricative. Some scholars (Threatte 1980, Horrocks
2010) have considered spellings such as Ἐφρόνις and Ἐφραῖος, attested in Hel-
lenistic inscriptions from Athens, as signs both of fricative pronunciation of
⟨φ⟩and of the passage [eu] > [ef] of the diphthong ⟨ευ⟩. Even if the evid-
ence for spirantization of the original [ph] in Hellenistic Attica is by no means
abundant we can see the first movements of a change in progress that willcarry
onduringtheRomanperiod.AsIwilldemonstrateinthefollowingsections(cf.
§1.3.), there are external proofs that show that the evolution of [ph] had been
in place already before the early Imperial period.
Spirantization—andespeciallythepassagefrombilabialstoptobilabialfric-
ative in intervocalic position—is typologically quite common (see e.g. Lavoie
2001: 32–36), and besides the fitting parallels in Spanish (Méndez Dosuna
1991–1993: 103) one could also think of the process of spirantization that
affected north-Italian Romance varieties, in which intervocalic stops first
underwent voicing, then spirantization, and finally complete cancellation.9
The relative frequency and typological parallels of spirantization, though, do
not provide an explanation for the diffusion of the phenomenon in Greece,
7 Kristoffersen 2019 argues that the spirantization of Greek voiced stops happened in the
Archaid period, but was limited to the creation of allophones (with the exeptions of Elean
and Laconian, where it affected the phonological system). Unfortunately, Kristoffersen’s art-
icle came out when the present contribution was already submitted for publication and it has
not been possible to keep it fully into account.
8 Kümmel (2007: 65) notices that the intermediate phase is not necessarily required, because
the passage between aspirated stop to fricative is possible simply by cancelling the plosive
element, while considering pertinent the aspirated segment, which is already a fricative.
9 For a wider analysis of the cases, see Kümmel 2007: 65–67.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
93
and there in fact might not have been a single process of diffusion. We shall
see in the next sections that, if voiceless aspirated stops underwent spirantiz-
ation earlier in west Greek, the opposite happened to voiced stops. In other
words, it seems certain that the dental [th] underwent spirantization before
the Hellenistic period in Doric varieties, but not in the Ionic ones, and that
instead the velar and labial aspirated stops underwent spirantization earlier in
Attica. A prudent approach should not associate the rise of spirantization with
only one dialectal branch, but instead interpret it as a potentially pan-Greek
phenomenon. As previously stated, not all varieties have been equally respons-
ive to spirantization, as for instance in Egypt, where Greek retained aspiration
also in later phases. Rather than being a fact of pure conservativism, the lack of
spirantization might be explained by contact with the local Egyptian language,
which had aspirated stops.
2.2
Voiced Stops
If we look at what happened to the voiced stops [b], [d], and [ɡ], which were
originally represented by ⟨β⟩, ⟨δ⟩, and ⟨γ⟩during the Classical period, we
see that they underwent spirantization in many areas of the Greek world,
though not everywhere and not at the same rate (see on this Kristoffersen
2019).10The original voiced bilabial stop, graphically represented as ⟨β⟩, seems
to have undergone spirantization in the Laconian area already in the Hellen-
istic period, as we see from the confusion between the grapheme ⟨β⟩and the
grapheme ⟨ϝ⟩, still used in that area to indicate the velar glide. In ig vi1 865,
from the 2nd c. bce, ϝωρθείας is represented as Βωρθείας, which means that at
thatchronologicalstagethetwosoundswerealreadymistakable.11Thespelling
⟨β⟩for words that originally had a digamma appears also in the anthroponym
Εὐρυβάνασσα (ig vi1 209, 212, 507, 573 and 574, all from the 1st c. bce) and in
the word διαβήτης (e.g. in ig vi1 674, 676, 680, dating to the 1st and 2nd c. ce),
the title of an official in Sparta probably connected to the word ἔτος, which
notoriously presents an initial digamma. As one might expect, external evid-
ence from Laconia for the sound [w] represented by ⟨β⟩can be found in the
Latin transliteration of names with initial ⟨V⟩, as Valerius (ig vi1 450), but to
10
In Calabrian Greek and in Griko, with some diatopic differences, initial γ- is conserved
as a stop before velar vowels (e.g. [ˈɡonato] Bov.), but it palatalizes before [i] and [u] (e.g.
[jiˈneka] Bov.),while internalintervocalic γ—butpalatal vowels—changes into a fricative
sound in Bovese and it is generally cancelled in Griko (e.g. [tro:] from anc. Greek. τρώγω).
11
There are more examples of the same tendency. For instance, there are nine more occur-
rences of exchanges between ϝωρθεία and βορθεία alone, one of which dates to the 2nd c.
bce (ig v1 292), with the rest dating to before the 3rd c. ce (ig v1 294; ig v1 1 301; ig v1 303;
ig v1 305; ig v1 319; ig v1 341; ig v1 1573).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

94
capano
my knowledge there are no examples prior to the 1st c. ce. Conversely, there are
inscriptions from Laconia where medial ⟨β⟩is not spelled out, as in ig v1 716
(Θηαῖος for Θηβαῖος). Cases of un-spelled [b] especially before [u], are attested
elsewhere in the Greek world (e.g., but there are other examples, ik Priene 398,
ca. 350bce, with ουλήιου for ⟨β⟩ουλήιου, or ig ii2 6278, 2nd c. bce, from Attica),
but it is difficult to know whether or not they are significant. In areas other
than Laconia, chronology of early spirantization is more elusive, but Latin can
be helpful. In general, we can say that, until the middle of the 2nd c. ce, Latin
⟨v⟩both in initial prevocalic position and in intervocalic position, phonetic-
ally [w], is often transliterated ⟨ου⟩(cf. 2.2.), but after the middle of the 2nd
c. ce the standard increasingly changes from ⟨ου⟩to ⟨β⟩.12 If we consider the
first occurrences of the Latin initial ⟨v⟩transliterated with Greek ⟨β⟩, though,
chronology can significantly be moved back to the 1st c. bce, thanks to two
occurrences of the phenomenon, both in public and private inscriptions. In
IEleusis 296, a statue base for Livia Drusilla dated a little after 31bce, the name
of the honorand is stated as Λιβίαν, while in ig ii2 8413, an Attic private funer-
ary monument from 16bce, we read the name Vipsanius as Βιψάνιος.13 Some
decades later, in ig ii2 3242, dating to the latter part of the Augustan period,
from the beginning of the 1st c. ce, we find the name Λειβία, with intervocalic
⟨v⟩once again recorded in Greek as ⟨β⟩, once again in Attica, but this time
on a public monument.14 There are a few examples of the Latin ⟨v⟩transliter-
ated as Greek ⟨β⟩in Augustan inscriptions from outside Attica, e.g. igr i 835
from Thasos, dedicated to Livia Drusilla, so we can assume that the feature was
present in other areas of the Greek world, even though it is not always docu-
mented. Considering these data, it seems to me that, although most cases of
12
Particularly interesting is the case of Vibullia mother of Herodes Atticus, that is presented
as Βιβουλλία in ig ii2 3604 and Οὐιβουλλία in ig ii2 4063, both from Athens, in approxim-
ately coeval inscriptions (ca. 150ce). The acceptability of spirantization for [b] in initial
position is less than the intervocalic one. Other occurrences of the same name (which
referred to the same person) come from honorific monuments set up in Ceos (ig xii5 631)
and in Elis (IvO 621) show the spelling ⟨Bιβ⟩, but they do not seem to be later than ig ii2
4063.
13
The inscription can be dated with a certain precision to the last decades of the 1st c. bce,
because the individuals mentioned there have been securely identified (aiuk 2 no. 9) and,
if Byrne’s hypothesis is correct, it might be exactly placed in 16bce, during Agrippa’s visit
to Athens (cf. Byrne 2003: 487–488). Another example, perhaps from the same period,
might be ig ii2 4141, Λιβίον, possibly for the historian Livy, but the identification is not
sure and therefore the date is not certain.
14
The inscription is the rededication of the temple of Nemesis at Rhamnus to Livia, wife
of Augustus, and it is usually dated to the reign of Claudius, around 45/6ce, but recently
Lozano 2004 has proposed to predate it to 20bce.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
95
Greek ⟨β⟩for Latin ⟨v⟩come from later than the 1st c. ce, it is nonetheless cor-
rect to date spirantization also in Attic Greek to a significantly earlier date, at
least at the end of the 1st c. bce.
Some sort of spirantization in the dental series seems to have affected the
voiced dentals, with the process [d] > [ð] at least as an allophone, in the Elis
region. In Elean there are several occurrences of ⟨ζ⟩instead of ⟨δ⟩(καὶτἆλλα
ζίκαια for καὶτἆλλα δίκαια, in ied 20, 475–450bce), interpreted by Striano Cor-
rochano (1989) and Méndez Dosuna (1992–1993) as cases of spirantization.The
same phenomenon sporadically appears in inscriptions from Rhodes (τόζ’ Ἰδα-
μενεύς for τόδ’ Ἰδαμενεύς, in ig xii1 737, ca. 600–575bce) and Phlious (ζέκ[α, but
the reading is uncertain, in seg 11 275).15 Certainly, one could object that these
data are not very rich and interpret the examples above as cases of palataliza-
tion, rather than spirantization, triggered by the presence of the high vowel [i].
However, the occurrences of the grapheme ⟨ζ⟩in place of ⟨δ⟩also in contexts
where the is no high vowel, such as in ζαμιοργία (ied 20), for which palataliza-
tion cannot be invoked as an explanation, point towards a larger usage of ⟨ζ⟩
to register the spirant pronunciation of voiced velar stop. Considering that the
examples above show uniformity even in different phonological context, the
chance that we are facing two separate phenomena (spirantization and palat-
alization) is not entirely convincing, and surely the possibility of a a number of
accidental and independent mistakes is even less persuasive. More secure data
on spirantization of later voiced dental stop come from Egyptian papyri, where
we see exchanges between ⟨δ⟩and ⟨ζ⟩(e.g. ζώτε for δότε in POxy. 1927.4 and
δεῦγος for ζεῦγος in PStrassb. 277.16, examples from Gignac 1976: 76). This kind
of confusion between ⟨δ⟩and ⟨ζ⟩does not appear before the end of the 3th
c. ce, and becomes more frequent after the 5th c. ce., but inscriptions of that
period rarely show the same phenomenon. Moreover, on a typological point of
view, scholars have often highlighted the typological markedness of the phon-
eme [ð] (only 7% of the languages analyzed in Maddieson 1984 present the
phoneme) and the rarity of processes of spirantization of the voiced dental
segment in comparison both with velar and labial.16 Therefore, it is possible
that Greek underwent spirantization of [d] earlier than inscriptions show, or
that this kind of spirantization, that did not involve aspirated stops, happened
earlier in Egypt than in continental Greece.
15
Later, we find the same phenomenon also in Crete (ic iv 181, 2nd c. bce), not long before
spirantization becomes widespread in the Graeco-Roman world.
16
Bybee—Easterday 2019, using a dataset of 81 languages, identified 27 that presented
phenomena of spirantization, of which only 3 present phenomena of spirantization for
the voiced dental stop, while 9 for the labial stop and 7 for the velar stop. Noticeably, 8
languages spirantized in multiple places.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

96
capano
The last voiced stop that we shall consider from a general point of view,
before analyzing the Sicilian situation, is [ɡ]. The first instances of [ɡ] > [ɣ]
are found in South/Eastern Greek, as spirantization appears in Attica at the
end the 4th c. bce. (Threatte 1980: 440). Even if from a linguistic perspective
we are dealing with the “appearance” of a new phoneme, from an epigraph-
ical viewpoint this change is made manifest through “disappearance,” because
spirantization of voiced velar stop is better identified by the absence of the
sign ⟨γ⟩where we expect it. In ig ii2 11375, an Attic metrical inscription from
the second half of the 4th c. bce, the word ὀλίγοις is represented as ὀλίοις, and
we can find more examples from Attica (Threatte 1980).17 Similarly, often
by using occurrences of the adjective ὀλίγος, we can trace the phenomenon in
Pamphylia in the 4th c. bce (Brixhe 1976: 58, inscr. no. 318), in Arcadia and
Phokis in the 3rd c. bce (respectively ig v2 429 and fd, Fouilles de Delphes,
iii 3: 192), in Asia Minor in the 2nd c. bce (for instance, but there are many
examples, ὑπογραφήν with the loss of ⟨γ⟩in ik Priene 306), and in Boeotia in
the 2nd c. bce (Ἀντί⟨γ⟩ων, in ig vii 3376). The Boeotian example is particu-
larlyinterestingbecauseitshowshowfragileisourabilitytodeducetendencies
from mistakes in text. In a comedy of Aristophanes, two centuries before our
first epigraphic record of a Boeotian [ɡ] > [ɣ], a Boeotian character is char-
acterized by an epichoric Greek with spirantization of [ɡ] (ἰώγα for ἔγωγε, in
Acharn. v. 899), in a way that must have been perceived as stereotypically Boeo-
tian by the Athenians. Had we not had Aristophanes, we would probably have
post-datedspirantizationof [ɡ]bymorethanacentury!Itisnoteworthythatin
Atticawemostlyseeomissionof ⟨γ⟩inintervocalicpositionandalsoinfrontof
velar vowel, while we have very few examples of γ > ∅in front of palatal vowel.
I am only aware of ig ii2 1472 (319/318bce) and ig ii2 2165 (from the 2nd c. ce),
17
For a similar situation in contemporary Attic drama, we might consider a fragment from
Plato Comicus (fr. 183 K.-A.), “ὁδ’οὐγὰρ ἠττίκιζεν, ὦΜοῖραι φίλαι, / ἀλλ’ ὁπότε μὲν χρείη διη-
ιτώμην λέγειν / ἔφασκε διηιτώμην ὁπότε δ’εἰπεῖν δέοι / ὀλίγον, ⟨ὀλίον⟩ἔλεγεν”.
18
Pamphylian is notoriously difficult to classify. Many inscriptions show spirantization of
[ɡ] especially between [e] and [a], which has led scholars to keep Hellenistic Greek and
Pamphylian [ɡ] > [ɣ] > ∅traditionally apart (Schwyzer 1950, i 209). Nevertheless, Attic
Greek shows instances of spirantization of the voiced velar in contexts similar to the
Pamphylian ones (e.g. ig ii2 1616 μέα for μέγα, after the middle of the 4th c. bce; ig ii2
9301 Μεαρεύς for Μεγαρεύς, ca. 362bce; Raubitschek, daa 164 Παναθέναια μεάλ[α] per
Παναθέναια μεγάλ[α]) as well as sporadically and later in Boeotia (seg 31 505, from the
1st/2nd c. ce and ig vii 2542, from the late 3rd early 4th ce). Moreover, as Wallace (1983)
noticed, Pamphylianalso showsspirantizationbefore palatal vowel, as in πρεῖϝυς < *pregē-
wos(Brixhe1976,no.87)andπρεεως(Brixhe1976no.141),equivalenttoπρεῖϝυς.Itseems
safetoconsiderPamphylianwithinthegenerallyGreekprocessof spirantization,whether
or not it originated by contact with other Greek varieties or independently in Pamphylian.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
97
and they might be accidental and meaningless mistakes. If we compare this
situationwithModernGreek,where[ɡ]beforefrontvoweldoesnotmergewith
[ɡ] before back vowels, as the first undergoes complete palatalization, becom-
ing a palatal fricative (ɡ > ʝ _V[+front]), while the second one becomes a voiced
velar fricative, we can interpret the aforementioned changes as the first move-
ments towards this change. Already in Classical and Hellenistic Greek, at least
in some areas and on a variational level, [ɡ] followed by both front and back
vowel was undergoing spirantization. The greater evidence for unspelled ⟨γ⟩
before back vowel than before front vowel can be explained on an articulatory
level, because the sequence ɡ_V[+back] is weaker and, therefore, more likely
to be left unwritten.
After this outline of the spirantization of voiced and voiceless aspirated
stops in Greek, it is clear that there is not a single epicenter for the phe-
nomenon,whichisinsteadpolycentric.Datashowthatstopsinvariousdialects
from different parts of the Greek speaking world were undergoing spirantiza-
tion before the Hellenistic koine, and that, while it is true that spirantization
is more frequently attested as the koine spread through the Greek world, it
would be incorrect to attribute spirantization to the koine itself. As I have
described, in the Hellenistic koine voiced velar stops underwent spirantization
before voiced dental stops, but in Laconia the chronology of this change was
the opposite. Therefore, we have to imagine that many waves of spirantization
have affected the Greek language. Moreover, the diffusion of Hellenistic Greek
might have ultimately spread (not everywhere, however!) fricative pronunci-
ations of voiceless aspirated and voiced stops as phonemes, but spirantization
was not exclusively a Hellenistic feature. It is clear that, at the end of this pro-
cess, the entire Greek phonological system was reorganized, as Bubeník (1983:
108) has framed, from a tripartite voiced : voiceless: voiceless aspirated to a
bipartite continuous : non-continuous. Some other questions are unanswered,
as for instance the issue of the phonological value of these spirantizations—
in the Hellenistic period, did fricatives have a phonological value, or were they
only in free variation? It is possible that Bubeník’s hypothesis describes at best
the phonetic realization of clusters such as ⟨σφ⟩, ⟨σθ⟩, ⟨σχ⟩, which in the
Hellenistic koine might have been realized as sibilant followed by a fricative
(Bubeník 1989: 189). On the contrary, in contexts such as after a nasal sound,
it is likely that both voiceless aspirated and voiced stops were conserved longer
without becoming fricative, because from a typological point of view postnasal
consonants seem to resist spirantization better.
2.3
External Evidence for Spirantization in Hellenistic Greek.
As I have already pointed out in the previous section, on a methodological level
some of the crucial pieces of evidence for spirantization are provided by other
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

98
capano
languages, especially on the matter of transliteration of Greek words. In this
section I shall analyze two cases in which comparisons with the evidence from
LycianandLatincanshedlightupontherealizationof voicelessaspiratedstops
in Hellenistic and Early Roman Greek.
2.3.1
Greek and Lycian
IthasbeensuggestedbyBryce(1986:56)thatwecoulduseLycianasanexternal
confirmation of the fact that Hellenistic Greek differentiated between inter-
vocalic and initial position ⟨β⟩, ⟨δ⟩, and ⟨γ⟩. Lycian, indeed, transliterates
Δαρείυς as Ñtarijeus (Melchert 2008: 49) and Δεμοκλείδης as Ñtemuχlida; the
latter in particular shows that the two sounds were indeed different, because
the ⟨d⟩in Ñtemuχlida must represent something different than what ⟨ñt⟩
stands for. Conversely, the transliteration Ñtarijeus for Δαρείυς would not make
sense if Lycian ⟨d⟩had been a stop and not a fricative. Moreover, Lycian voices
voicelessstopsafternasal,whichexplainsthepresenceof ⟨t⟩intheinitial⟨ñt⟩,
to read as [d].19 If we can trust the Lycian transliteration of Δεμοκλείδης, we
have to infer that only the first dental is indeed a stop, while the second one
must have a fricative pronunciation in Hellenistic Greek, at least as spoken in
Anatolia. Moreover, one should keep in mind that both in Modern and Ancient
Greek, as well as in Lycian, voiced stops do not become fricatives when they are
immediately preceded by a nasal, and pronunciations such as [ˈðenðro] have
to be explained as “orthographic pronunciations” (Petrounias 2001: 606).
2.3.2
Greek and Latin
Latin is especially useful for understanding the status of voiceless aspirated
stops ⟨χ⟩and ⟨φ⟩, which, as we have seen in the previous section, are often dif-
ficult to analyze in terms of spirantization. Latin presents many ways to trans-
literate Ancient Greek words, and we can witness different tendencies through
epigraphictextsandsometimesliterarysources.20Itshouldbenotedthatthese
different strategies became more rigid as time went by. It is important to con-
sider that scribal practice during the Middle Ages can conceal changes, nor-
malizing spelling choices, while inscriptions can often offer some important
parallels to the manuscript evidence. The standard transliteration for ⟨χ⟩in
19
As has been noticed, this system corresponds almost completely to present day Modern
Greek, where the word diva, as a loanword from Italian, is transcribed ντίβα and read
[ˈdiva].
20
Among the many good works that deal Latin transliteration of Greek words, to my know-
ledge the most complete is still Biville 1990, but insightful comments are found also in
Adams 2003: 41–43.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
99
Latin is first ⟨c⟩, until the middle of the 2nd c. bce, and then ⟨ch⟩.21 This
plosive representation was probably fairly similar to the reality of the sound
as it has been in the Classical and most of the Hellenistic periods, but there
are instances of a different system, with a simple aspiration (⟨h⟩, as haus for
χάος in Varr. De Lingua Latina 3. fgm. 57; haemosis for χήμωσις in Theod.-Prisc.
Euporist. 36; Hristo for Χριστός in cil iii 10934) and with a sibilant (Eutisi for
Ἐυτυχής in cil viii 16980 and cuimarsus for κώμαρχος in Plaut. Curc. 286).22 All
these examples speak in favor of a late phenomenon.
Similarly to what happens to the voiceless aspirated velar, the bilabial [ph]
is transliterated in Latin first as a ⟨p⟩, and exclusively so until the middle of
the 2nd c. bce, when it starts being transcribed with the classical ⟨ph⟩. The
employment of ⟨f⟩to transcribe ⟨φ⟩does not appear before the 1st c. bce, but
it is already attested in three inscriptions from the Republican period (cil i2
2652, cil i2 753, and cil i2 1413), and it is found also in Pompeii (cil iv 680).
Finally, there are cases of later confusion between the outcomes of ancient
⟨φ⟩and ⟨β⟩, with some consequences even in southern Italian Greek from the
Middle Ages (Biville 1990: 209).23 Evidence from Pompeii seems to suggest
that, before 79ce, the pronunciation of ⟨θ⟩was fricative, as the word λάσθη is
transcribed as lasfe (cil iv 2319).24
3
Spirantization in Sicily
In this section I will address the problem of spirantization of voiced and voice-
less aspirated stops in Sicily during the Hellenistic and Roman period on the
basis of the epigraphic evidence. Sicily is a particularly rich linguistic area
at this chronological stage, because—besides Greek—Italic and indigenous
languages were still residually spoken on the island at the end of the Clas-
sical period, while other languages, such as Punic and Latin, are also attested.
Moreover, Greek in Sicily during the Hellenistic period was spoken in the
form of a Doric κοινά(Mimbrera Olarte 2012) with characteristic features
(Capano 2020a), but at the same time, like in most of the Greek speaking
21
To describe this change, one can compare Bacas as transliteration of Βάχκας in cil i 581,
186bce, to Achaia, as transliteration of Ἀχαία in cil i 626, 145bce. More examples are in
Biville 1990: 210.
22
The examples are derived from a list in Biville 1990: 202–203.
23
Biville offers the interesting example of Bovese, which has flastimáo apparently from βλα-
σφημεῖν.
24
Oscan spellings such as Ἀσάνα for Ἀθᾱνᾶ, Lúvfreis for Ἐλευθέριος, seem to describe the very
same situation (Biville 1990: 200).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

100
capano
world, the concurrent spread of the Hellenistic koine led to the creation of
hybridformsthatenduredduringtheRomanperiod.Inthiscontext,itispartic-
ularly significant to analyze the process of spirantization of the stops, because
it might show distinct tendencies within the same linguistic area, and it might
uncover dynamics of interactions between koine and κοινά. Unlike in section
2, in this case the material will be only epigraphic, because I could not find
instances of spirantization in Sicilian literature, possibly due to the limited
amount of evidence.
3.1
Voiceless Aspirated Stops in Sicily
In Sicilian Greek, aspirated stops in Classical and Hellenistic inscriptions pre-
sent some difficulties,becausetheysometimesappearasvoicelessstops,losing
the aspiration. Examples of deaspiration are found in ενταδε (for ἐνθάδε) in
ig xiv 28, from Imperial Syracuse and in Arena 2002: no. 45, a defixio from
Gela, 475–450bce. For the velar series, a similar situation is shown by Ἀρκα-
γάθ⟨o⟩υ as a genitive of Ἀρχάγαθος (igds i 126). On the other hand, there are
also instances of aspirated stops that do not appear aspirated in other Greek
areas, such as Φερσεφοναι (for Περσεφόναι) in igds ii 80, dated around the 3rd
c. bce, and Φερσεφασσα igds ii 116 (5th/4th c. bce).25 Mimbrera Olarte (2012:
54) has rightly interpreted these examples as a proof of the plosive nature of
⟨φ⟩, and one might also explain them as a case of hypercorrection, which is
plausible in an area where aspiration was so irregular. To this small number of
cases of irregularities, I add the anthroponym Σπονγέος, for Σφογγέος, in seg 42
833, a dedication from Buscemi, 35ce (on which see also 2.2).The deaspiration,
whichcanbeinterpretedasanassimilationof aspirateddentaltothefirstunas-
pirated element, should be then reconnected with the other aforementioned
examples, like ενταδε and Ἀρκαγάθου, and it is to be considered Sicilian. After
this brief outline of Sicilian un-aspirated instances of normally aspirated stops,
one can infer that ⟨φ⟩, ⟨θ⟩, and ⟨χ⟩must have maintained their plosive com-
ponent until at least the end of the Hellenistic period. Regarding the Roman
phase, we have some interesting data, originated in most cases from contact
with the Romans, or more generally of Roman origin. In ISic000578 (= cil x
7396), a Latin inscription from Thermae Himerae, dating to the 2nd–3rd c. ce,
we read the name Epaφruitus and in ISic0356 (= cil x 7072), from 1st/2nd c.
25
As Mimbrera (2008: 209) rightly states, in Sicily ⟨Θ⟩and ⟨Φ⟩are sometime confused (e.g.
Πσιφυρō in igds ii 76 from Akri, 5th c. bce, corresponding to Attic ψίθυρος), that might be
due to their spirantization as well as to the graphic similarities between the two letters.
The early phase in which these exchanges are attested makes highly improbable that this
confusion is instead a case of spirantization similar to those that I analyzed in 2.3.1.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
101
ce Catania, the name Eutυχis, with graphic interference with the Greek letters
χ and φ. There are no good reasons why a Greek scribe should have slipped in
these three letters (considering also the Y), if one does not hypothesize that
these three letters indicate sounds that do not have an immediate parallel in
Latin—in other words, these inscriptions seem to exhibit evidence in favor of
a conservation of the plosive and aspirated pronunciation of ⟨φ⟩and ⟨χ⟩in
Roman Sicily.26 This explanation must be regarded with caution, as we also
have a Greek inscription from the Imperial period (iglp 21, from Lilybaeum)
in which the name Marcus is transliterated as Μάρχος, and here ⟨χ⟩must have
simply represented a velar stop.27 In conclusion, the series of the voiceless
aspirated stops in Sicilian Greek seem to resist spirantization more thanincon-
tinental Greece, while, as we shall see in the next sections, the voiced stops
seem to have undergone spirantization already in the Hellenistic period.
3.2
Voiced Bilabial Stop
As for Sicily, wehavemanyexamplesof thespirantizationof thebilabialvoiced
stop during the Hellenistic period, but we do not have earlier examples. Unfor-
tunately, the usage of initial ϝ disappeared early from Sicilian inscriptions,28
and it is never attested after the 5th c. bce, and for this reason using the confu-
sion between the grapheme ⟨β⟩and the grapheme ⟨ϝ⟩as a diagnostic mistake
(as in Laconian inscriptions, cf. section 2.2) is not often viable approach here.29
Nevertheless, the period immediately following the disappearance of the ϝ, it is
possibletonoticesomeoccurrencesof ⟨β⟩usedinplaceof aninitialvelarglide,
such as the anthroponym Βειδει igds ii 42 (4th–3rd c. bce Syracuse).30 This
reading is also supported by another Sicilian inscription, igds i 126, found in
26
As an anonymous reviewer pointed out (and I thank them for their input), on a general
level the usage of the Greek letters might be read as a sign of the absence of aspirated
plosives in colloquial Latin. This consideration, which I believe is correct, of course does
not invalidate the explanation that I offer in this paper.
27
One might also notice that the inscription iglp 21 is composed of 4 words (Μάρχος Σημ-
βρῶνις | ἥρως ἀγαθός), two of them with problematic spellings.
28
The intervocalic ϝ in Sicily was lost long before the initial ϝ, as we have very few examples
of the grapheme between vowels or between a vowel and a liquid or a nasal (Mimbrera
Olarte 2012: 84).
29
In Sicilian Doric colonies the initial [w] sound was disappearing, so the adoption of the
Milesian alphabet was not the only reason for the graphic loss of ⟨ϝ⟩. The word ϝουλιαδα
(Arena 2002 no. 14, from Gela, 6th c. bce) with a non-etymological initial ϝ, has been in
fact explained as a hypercorrected form, cf. the grammar of Mimbrera Olarte (2012: 82).
The possibility of reading ϝουλιαδα as Βουλιάδας, attested in Leucade, seems quite unlikely.
30
Βειδει is probably to be reconnected with forms like Ϝεῖδος in Epirus. Another possibility to
explain Βειδει is to reconnect it to the anthroponym Βιδύλος, attested in Crete in the 1st c.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

102
capano
Camarina and dating to around the 2nd c. bce. In this inscription, the anthrop-
onym Βασία is clearly a variant of the Italic ϝασία, attested in Metaponton,
Hyettia, and Lebadeia. Conversely, it has been suggested by Dubois (igds i
139) that the Syracusan glossae of the Etymologicum Magnum δερβιστήρ for
δεριστήρ might indicate a fricative pronunciation of [w] that would have been
somehow typical of the Syracusan area. The hypothesis is surely interesting,
but the evidence seems to be a little too thin to be definitive.
As already noticed in section 2.3., the Greek transcription of Latin names is
animportanttoolforunderstandingthepronunciationbehindthewrittencon-
vention, but sometimes reasons of conservatism might conceal changes for a
longtime.If therearesomehintsforustosuspectthatspirantizationof bilabial
stopswasalreadyhappeningintheSyracusanareaduringthe4thc.bce,westill
have some conflicting evidence from the 3rd c. bce, as in ent A1 (in Ampolo
2001) the Latin name Corovius is transliterated as Κορ⟨ο⟩υιος, and about one
centurylaterthenameVibiusisspelledΟὐείβιος(Curbera1997:220).Unfortu-
nately, this hypothesis has to remain speculative, because the stone is now lost
and it is impossible to date the inscription with certainty. In the 2nd c. bce, we
find the first instance of a Latin name with an initial ⟨v-⟩(at that stage surely
[w]) transcribed as a ⟨β⟩, namely the name Βενοῦστα (Venusta) in two defix-
iones from Morgantina, seg 29 930 and 931. Among the many hypercorrected
⟨β⟩for what was clearly fricative (or at least a velar glide [w]), one can mention
theconfusionbetween⟨β⟩and⟨ου⟩,astheincorrect⟨β⟩inΦλαβιανός,attested
in ISic003236 from 1st/2nd c. ce Catania. More evidence for spirantization of
the bilabial stop in Sicily can be found after the first half of the 1st c. ce, when
we find the Latin name Livius transliterated as Λίβιος (ig xiv 488, now partially
lost), and the name Vipsanius as Βιψάνιος (ig xiv 494). In seg 42 833, a dedica-
tionfrom35cefoundinBuscemi,wehaveaninstructivecompresenceof many
Latin names, amongst which I mention Servilius (Σερουιλίου),Valerius Arabicus
(Βαλερίου Ἀραβικοῦ), and Fabia (Φαβία), in which the Latin velar glide (written
as ⟨v⟩) is transcribed both as a ⟨ου⟩and ⟨β⟩, and ⟨b⟩is transcribed always as
⟨β⟩. Although the spelling is conservative in the name Φαβία, the name Βαλε-
ρίου surely represents a pronunciation [waleˈriu], while Fabia might have been
pronounced, at least in Greek, [ˈfaβia]. A few centuries later, we frequently find
cases of transliteration of intervocalic Latin ⟨v⟩as ⟨ου⟩, e.g. Φλάουιος, in ig xiv
bce(MimbreraOlarte 2012:82)ortoΒῖδος,attestedinStephanusof Byzantium(Man-
ganaro 1997: 315). However, Βιδύλος shows a certain formal and spatial difference with
Βειδει, and Βῖδος has a noticeable temporal distance, all of which makes more probable
the hypothesis that Βειδει has to be explained as a coradical form to εἶδος.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
103
278, Imperial period, from Lilybaeum, but at this chronological stage, and also
later, the spelling with a β (e.g. Φλάβιος in ig xiv 455 and imc 87) is just as
acceptable.
3.3
Voiced Dental Stop
As seen in section 2.2, voiced stops have been the last ones to undergo spir-
antization, probably from after the 4th c. ce (Horrocks 2010: 170), and even
later if we consider voiced stops in postnasal position. It is not surprising that
in Greek Sicilian inscriptions, to the best of my knowledge, we do not have any
example of exchange between ⟨δ⟩and ⟨ζ⟩, or between ⟨δ⟩and ⟨θ⟩, that might
be attributable to a process of spirantization. The occurrence of the name
Ζόδωρος, clearly a form for Διόδωρος (e.g. in ig xiv 117, from Syracuse, probably
late Imperial period), more than being an instance of spirantization of [δ] is a
case of a progressive assimilation triggered by the [i], in a similar way to what
happened in Ionic Greek for the name Ζεύς < *di̯eu̯s. (cf. Skt. dyauḥ, etc.).
3.4
Voiced Velar Stop
From Classical and Hellenistic Sicily we havesome evidence for deaspirationof
voiceless stops, but this phenomenon cannot be explained as a spirantization
and will not be explored here in detail.31 Conversely, there is some evidence
for spirantization of voiced velar stop in a decree from Nakone (nak A, in
Ampolo 2001), dating to the 3rd c. bce, where the word αἶγα ‘goat’ is spelled
⟨αια⟩, which is explainable with a fricative pronunciation of the internal ⟨γ⟩.32
The other possible explanation for the word αἶα, i.e. the outcome [j] of inter-
vocalic [ɡ], provides more problems than answers, if the development g > j /
V_V were true, we should imagine a first phase [ˈaiia], followed by a degem-
31
In order to have a wider image of the Sicilian Greek consonantal system, I will briefly
refer here to a peculiarity of the local voiceless stops, that often present deaspiration dur-
ing the Classical and Hellenistic periods. There is some evidence for exchanges between
⟨χ⟩, voiceless aspirated velar, and ⟨κ⟩, both in literary texts (e.g. δέχομαι attested as δέκο-
μαι in Pindar, but with ⟨χ⟩in Epicharmus) and in inscriptions (e.g. ἀνδοκεία in ig xiv 422
fromTauromenion,2nd–1stc.bce).Theseanomaliesseemtocorrespondtotheexchanges
between κύτραν for χύτραν, κιτών for χιτών, mentioned by ancient grammarians for Sicily
(cf. Arhens 1843: 88). These deaspirations are not to be connected with spirantization,
but rather with a typically Sicilian phenomenon concerning all voiceless aspirated stops.
One might argue that deaspiration was considered a diastratically low trait of the lan-
guage already in the Archaic period in Sicily, because we notice sometimes phenomena
of hypercorrected aspirations, such as in igds i, inscriptions 22, 41, and 177.
32
It is interesting to note that even in areas where the occlusive pronunciation is sometimes
retained, as in Italo-Greek, we have occurrences of fricative from the velar stop, e.g. Bov.
[piˈɣadi] from πηγάδιον.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

104
capano
ination. The interpretation of αἶα as a representation of the word αἶγα with a
fricative [ɣ] is therefore preferred. Unless one thinks of a lapsus, there is no
otherpossiblereadingforthephrase,whichreads“οἱδὲἱερομνάμονεςτᾶιθ̣υ̣σ[ί]αι
| θυόντω αἶ⟨γ⟩α λευκάν”, “nowlet the hieromnamonesoffer a whitegoat as a sac-
rifice”.Wemightaddtheadditionalearlycaseof thepersonalnameAθōνυμοςin
igds ii 32, a defixio from Selinous, dated to the 5th c. bce. This personal name
is explained by Bettarini (2005: 7) as the result of an assimilation from Ἀγαθόνυ-
μος that must gave gone through the phases [aɡa-] > [aɣa-] > [a:]. Had the rule
g > j / V_V been in place, we would have expected the form *αιαθόνυμος.33
One thing worth noting is that Sicily in the Classical-Hellenistic periods was
a multilingual environment, while in Roman period it was mostly bilingual,
with two dominant languages (cf. 2. above), and our analysis may profit from
lookingatthesephenomenaalsothroughthelensof languagecontact.Inorder
to exemplify this, I shall now focus on a specific case study. We have seen that
the evidence for a fricative pronunciation of ⟨γ⟩is by no means abundant,
and there seems to be no hard evidence in favor of a [ɡ] > [ɣ] development.
However, as we shall see in the next section, I suggest that we have another case
in a funerary inscription from Roman Syracuse. In the following section, I will
use what I have so far outlined to address what I argue is an interesting case of
Greek-LatincontactinRomanSicilythat,tomyknowledge,hasgoneunnoticed
so far. If my hypothesis is correct, we would have evidence of a numeral τρια-
ιντα, attested in a late Roman funerary inscription from Syracuse. I will argue
that the form represents a case of hybridism, rather than an actual loanword,
and that this phenomenon of interference can be explained as product of a
community with widespread Greek-Latin bilingualism.
4
The Numeral 30. Spirantization and Language Contact
4.1
The Linguistic Context of Hellenistic and Early Roman Sicily
Sicily is a very interesting case of linguistic contact in the ancient world, at first
between local languages—such as Elymian—and then imported languages,
like Greek and Punic.There have been many insightful studies on Greek in con-
tact with local languages in Classical and Hellenistic Sicily, but by the initial
period of Roman domination (2nd c. bce), although Punic was still spoken,
at least to a certain extent (Amadasi Guzzo 2012), Elymian and Oscan had
33
An alternative explanation, offered by Mimbrera (2012: 53), considers the name Aθōνυμος
as the result of an apocope for Aθανώνυμος, is not more convincing.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
105
disappeared. Starting from the late 3rd c. bce, there is yet another context for
linguistic contact in Sicily, when Latin was first introduced to the island after
the Romans took control. There have been many important contributions on
the topic of Greek-Latin contact in Sicily, concerning, for example, grammar
and lexicon (Tribulato 2012), onomastics (Korhonen 2011), and formulae
(Capano 2020a). Linguists do not agree on how much cultural contact and
proximityarenecessarytocauselanguagechange,butitisgenerallyagreedthat
there is permeabity amongst linguistic systems (Hickey 2010) and that lan-
guage contact can happen also in a situation of little contact among speakers.
However, if we consider the Sicilian linguistic landscape in the Roman period,
we see that the interactions among Greek and Latin speaking populations were
very intense, to the point of being described as “intimate” by some scholars
(Joseph 2010, who borrowed the image from Bloomfield 1933). Greek and
Latin coexisted in Sicily for at least 9 centuries, and most of that time they did
so while sharing a political system, a social life, and, in the latest period, a reli-
gion, Christianity. In my recent work (Capano 2020a and 2020b), I consider
all these as external factors for linguistic change, that resulted in phenomena
of interference, loanword, code shift, and creation of hybrid forms. Here, after
having analyzed the process of spirantization in Sicily, I will offer some new
evidence on language contact in Sicily.
4.2
Spirantization and Language Contact: A Hybrid Numeral in
Syracuse
The form τριαιντα is attested on a funerary monument found in the Cata-
combs of Syracuse and dated to the 3rd–4th c. ce, ig xiv 75 (cf. fig. 3.1).34 The
inscription, 6 lines long and roughly cut on a stone that appears to be a reused
Corinthian capital, reads:
Ἐνθάδε
κῖτε Ἀντ-
ωνῖνος
ἐτῶν τρια-
ίντα
κ̣(ατάθεσις) π(ρὸ) δ’ εἰ(δῶν)
Here lies Antoninos, 30 years old. His deposition (was) 4 days before the
Ides.
34
The photo of the inscription comes from the volume by Bisconti—Braconi 2013,
IncisioniFiguratedellatardaantichità,publishedbyPontificioIstitutodiArcheologiaCris-
tiana (piac), and it is reproduced here with the authorization of piac, which I thank.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

106
capano
figure 3.1
The inscription of Antoninos
In an attempt to interpret the numeral in lines 4–5, Carini (1875: 123,
no. xxvii) suggestedtointegrate[κο]inordertorestoretheregularτρια[κο]ντα,
which is attested elsewhere in Sicily, but there is no sign of material loss of the
inscribed surface of the stone. One could assume, as Wessel (1989 no. 1378)
must have done by accepting the reading τριάκοντα, that we are dealing with
a lapsus scalpri, or—in other words—with an error in the transcription from
the arranged text during the engraving process. However, there is an additional
problem to this interpretation. As is clearly visible in the image published by
Sgarlata (2013: 522 fig. 7), and as Wessel carefully noticed, there is an ⟨ι⟩at the
beginning of line 5. This form τριαιντα is hitherto unattested in Greek, but
I argue that here we are not dealing with an error of the stonecutter. Rather,
we can explain this form through language contact, and therefore validate its
authenticity. If we consider the aforementioned example of αἶα (for αἶγα) as a
true case of spirantization already in the 3rd c. bce, it would not be surpris-
ing that, almost 6 centuries later, there is another epigraphical example of loss
of voiced velar stop in internal position. I argue that the numeral τριαιντα
represents in fact τριαγίντα ‘30’, where ⟨γ⟩is not spelled out because it corres-
ponded to a voiced fricative velar in internal position, in the same way as ⟨γ⟩
was missing from the word αἶγα. But what to make of -γίντα? In Ancient Greek,
numeralsbetween30and90wereformedbytheadditionof theproparoxytone
suffix -κοντα to the stem; this means that, for instance, the “regular” word for
‘thirty’ is τριάκοντα, which was indeed restored by Wessel (τρια[κο]{ι}ντα, with
the expunction of ι). As shown by Mimbrera Olarte (2012: 180), Doric Greek
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
107
Sicily presents only one form for ‘30’, i.e. τριάκοντα, that also has the derivat-
ive τριακοστῷ‘the thirtieth’. Interestingly, while the numeral ‘30’ seems quite
stable, there is variation in the Sicilian names for ‘forty’, which is attested as
τετρώκοντα, τεσσεράκοντα, and τεσσαράκοντα, the last of which originated dur-
ing the Hellenistic period.
It is well known that numerals have gone through a series of phonetical
changes between Imperial and Medieval Greek, so much that the Byzantine
and Modern Greek developments of the numeral ‘30’ is τριάντα (Holton—
Horrocks et al. 2019: 1252). In this case, though, we witness the fact that the
development does not match this tendency. One might argue that the inscrip-
tion of Ἀντωνῖνος is indeed a step towards the form τριάντα, reached by the
assimilation of voiceless [t] between sonorants, but this does not explain the
presence of ι at the beginning of line 5. However, the number becomes com-
pletely transparent if we entertain the possibility that it is a case of linguistic
contact with Latin, in which the numeral ‘30’ is represented by triginta, which
appears rarely in Latin inscriptions because of the tendency of Roman epi-
graphy to use numbers (e.g. xxx) rather than numerals. It is a well-known fact
that, during their development, Romance languages underwent major changes
in the denomination of the tens, which must have been *trienta, *quadranta,
*quinquanta at some stage of Late Latin, but at this stage, during the 3rd–
4th c. ce, there is no reason to believe that the Latin numeral 30 had already
underwent a change.If welook forcontemporaryevidence forthenumeral‘30’,
spelledoutinLatin,wecanseeaé1976no.52,afuneraryinscriptionfromRome
dating to 300–350ce, or a funerary inscription from Dalmatia, from the 4th c.
ce.
It is then reasonable, I argue, to interpret tpiainta as [triaˈɣinta] from a
phoneticalpointof view—butitislegitimatetoreadinitaproductof language
contact? We know that Syracuse, and similarly Catania, had a lively bilingual
society (Korhonen 2012, 2018), not only within the same city (where Greek
speaking families live in the same spaces as Latin speaking families) but even
within the same family.35 In this context, one can explain τριαίντα as a hybrid
form between Greek τριάκοντα and Latin triginta, where the first part comes
from the Greek τρια-, but the suffix is the regular Latin -ginta. Since by the
3rd–4th c. ce spirantization must have become widespread, it is, after all, reg-
ular that *τριγίντα would have been pronounced, and thus written, without the
35
TomentionacaseoutsideCataniaandSyracuse,whicharemorestudied,ClaudiusTheseus
in Messina shows that within the same household one could have some funerary inscrip-
tions in Greek and some others in Latin, even in the same generation (Korhonen 2016:
117).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

108
capano
velar segment. If all the above is correct, τριαγίντα is the reflex of a local pro-
nunciation (with spirantization) of the voiced velar stop not only of Greek, but
also of Latin. Unfortunately, at the moment we do not have good parallels in
Latin inscriptions, but we can hope that new inscriptions will show independ-
ent evidence for this Sicilian pronunciation of stops, especially in the Latin
speaking community in Syracuse. The evidence for this phenomenon is very
little, therefore I will not argue that we are dealing with a case of linguistic
change, but instead with a phenomenon of variation. In this case, the interfer-
ence between Latin and Greek resulted in a hybrid form that is not uncommon
in areas of linguistic contact.36 Hybrid words might have never reached the
standard of the language (that is the case of hybrid creations in child speech,
as studied by Matras 2009: 23–25), or even spread widely. I argue that, in the
same way as morphemic loanwords might be favored by the transparency and
easiness in identifying the morpheme, the hybrid form τριαίντα might be facil-
itatedbytheidentifiabilityof thesuffix-ginta,whichalsoappearedin viginta,37
quadriginta, quinquaginta, etc.In other words,the speakerswereable toisolate
the suffix and therefore to reproduce it in other contexts and, because the pas-
sage [ɡ] > [ɣ] already happened before the Roman period, it is likely that the
Greek pronunciation of the Latin suffix in Sicily presented the spirantization
of [g].There is little need to say that loanwords are not restricted to a particular
area of the lexicon and, more broadly, linguistic contact can affect any part of
the language, though not with the same probability.38 Furthermore, numbers
are generally considered to be part of the core lexicon, which is less likely to be
borrowed, but there are cases of loans of numerals; for instance one can think
of the numeral [panʧ], ‘5’, attested in the Abruzzo region in Italy, from Romani
(Indo-Aryan) varieties spoken in the area (Pellis 1936), or of the loanword
of the Semitic numerals ‘one’ (masc.), ‘two’, and ‘six’ into Hurrian (Cecchini
36
To give an example from the formation of the Hellenistic Κοινή, one could think of Arcadic
ἱαρής ‘priest’, a compromise form between Arcadic ἱερής and Doric ἱαρεύς, or, in Sicily,
the personal name Ἰρήνα, a hybrid form between Dor. Ἰράνα and Ion. Ἰρήνη, found e.g.
in ISic000997, from 3rd–4th c. ce Syracuse. One should keep in mind that phenomena of
hybridization can happen within the utterances (Croft 2003: 49), without affecting the
entire language: in this case of ἱαρής and Ἰρήνη, as well as in τριαίντα, we are not referring
to any mixed language, but only to a case of a language shift within the word, that is, the
creation of a new hybrid form.
37
It should be noted the more common and standard form for ‘20’ is viginti, from which e.g.
Italian venti also originates, but viginta is also attested, e.g. Tac. Ann. 12, 23. 1 as a variant,
and in epigraphic texts, e.g. aé 2016, 1938 and edcs 69100228, both from Africa and dated
between the second half of the 5th ce and the first half of the 6th c. ce.
38
For some attempts to create schemes on borrowability, see Moravcsik 1978; on hierarch-
ies of borrowability, see Thomason—Kaufmann 1988 and Matras 2009.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
109
1981: 106–109; Dombrowski—Dombrowski 1991).39 One might argue that
the examples of loss of ⟨γ⟩as instances of spirantization are too rare, but, on
the contrary, I suspect that the scarce evidence could be explained by the fact
that the development of a fricative did not merge with any other phoneme
in Ancient Greek. In other words, in the Greek language during the Roman
period, [ɣ] was not in complementary distribution with any other phoneme.
The development of a new phoneme—on an internal level—might induce the
stonecutter to preserve the original grapheme for the new phoneme, and—on
an external level—prevents the linguist from detecting the change through the
exchange between two letters, as happens, for instance, between ⟨η⟩and ⟨ι⟩.
5
Conclusion
This contribution aimed to shed light on an elusive matter, the development of
fricative sounds from voiceless aspirated and voiced stops in Greek. All schol-
ars easily admit that such a change must have happened,40 but very few have
examined the material to determine where and when this phenomenon took
place. I have tried to delineate the temporal and spatial coordinates of spirant-
ization of stops for most of the Greek-speaking world during the Hellenistic
and early Roman periods, but I am aware that this kind of phenomenon is bet-
ter observed within micro-contexts, ideally within a small area. I nevertheless
have attempted to describe the bigger picture that is needed for better under-
standing the Sicilian situation, because no linguistic area is entirely an island,
not even Sicily (whose connectivity with other areas of the Mediterranean is
becoming increasingly clear). There are good reasons to believe that in Sicily
thevoicedstops[ɡ]and[b]underwentspirantizationintheHellenisticperiod,
before the 3rd and before the 2nd c. bce respectively, while the voiced dental
stop might have started to become fricative at a substandard level during the
Imperial period. Voiceless aspirated stops probably retained their plosive com-
ponent in Sicily longer than in other areas of the Hellenistic world, and did
not become fricative before the late Imperial period. One might object that the
evidence is too thin to support the theory, but I believe that spirantization can
be detected by small hints, as written texts by nature tend to even out variation
and divergence from the norm. Inscriptions, together with papyri, provide our
39
For an extensive case of loanword of numeral, one can refer to the Thai language, that
derives them from Middle Chinese and, for numerals in literary and poetic style, from
Sanskrit (Suthiwan—Tadmor 2009: 605).
40
Of course, arguing otherwise would mean neglecting the Modern Greek evidence!
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

110
capano
best evidence—much more so than literary sources—for language contact,
which most of the time can be detected thanks to patent traces of language
A in language B (by loanwords, phonetic and morphosyntactic interference,
codeswitching …). In this paper, I have argued for a further case of interference
between Latin and Greek, within a substandard context. Moreover, as I hope I
have shown with the case of τριαίντα, not all linguistic features that a linguist
might identify on the stone should be taken as a fruitful innovation. A mistake,
even when it is not accidental and entails linguistic meaning, might very well
be a short-lived innovation, a product of a variation that does not turn into
change, or a change that does not live long. After all, not all linguistic changes
have success!
References
aiuk 2 = Lambert, Stephen 2018, Attic Inscriptions in UK Collections, Athens: British
School at Athens.
Amadasi Guzzo, Maria Giulia 2012, Phoenician and Punic in Sicily, in O. Tribulato
(ed.), Languageand Linguistic Contactin AncientSicily, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press: 115–131.
Ampolo, Carmine (ed.) 2001, Da un’antica città di Sicilia. I decreti di Entella e Nakone.
Catalogo della mostra, Pisa: Scuola Normale Superiore.
Arena, Renato 20022, Iscrizioni greche arcaiche di Sicilia e Magna Grecia vol. ii: Iscri-
zioni di Gela e di Agrigento, Alessandria: Edizioni dell’Orso.
Battistoni, Filippo 2006, The ancient pinakes from Tauromenion: some new read-
ings, “zpe” 157: 169–179.
Bettarini, Luca 2005, Corpus delle defixiones di Selinunte: edizione e commento,
Alessandria: Edizioni dell’Orso.
Biville, Frédérique 1990, Les emprunts du latin au grec. Approche phonétique, Lou-
vain/Paris: Édition Peeters.
Brixhe, Claude 1976, Le Dialecte Grec de Pamphylie: Documents et Grammaire, Paris:
Librarie d’Amerique et d’Orient Adrien-Maisonneuve.
Brixhe, Claude 1996, Phonétique et Phonologie du grec ancien, Louvain-La-Neuve:
Peeters.
Brixhe, Claude 2016, Stèles et langue de Pisidie, Nancy: Association pour la diffusion
de la recherche sur l’Antiquité.
Bubeník, Vit 1983, The Phonological Interpretation of Ancient Greek: A Pandialectal
Analysis, Toronto/Buffalo/London: University of Toronto Press.
Bubeník, Vit 1989, Hellenistic and Roman Greece as a Sociolinguistic Area, Amster-
dam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
111
Buck, Carl D. 1955, The Greek Dialects: Grammar, Selected Inscriptions, Glossary,
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bybee, Joan—Easterday, Schelece 2019, Consonant strengthening: A crosslinguis-
tic survey and articulatory proposal, “Linguistic Typology” 23/2: 263–302.
Byrne,SeanG.2003, RomanCitizensof Athens,StudiaHellenistica40,Leuven/Dudley
(MA): Peeters.
Capano, Marta 2020a, Il greco di Sicilia fra età ellenistica e tarda antichità. Risultati
dell’analisi di un corpus epigrafico, Tesi di dottorato discussa all’Università degli
Studi di Napoli “L’Orientale”.
Capano, Marta 2020b, Dissertation Summary. The Greek language in Sicily between
the Hellenistic Period and Late Antiquity. A contribution from an epigraphic corpus,
“Journal of Greek Linguistics” 20/2 1–15.
Carini, Isidoro 1876, Rassegna archeologica, “aas” 3.1: 121–125.
Cecchini, Serena M. 1981, sty 1 in Ugaritico “Orientalia” 50: 106–109.
Colvin, Stephen C. 1999, Dialect in Aristophanes: The Politics of Language in Ancient
Greek Literature, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Croft,William2003, Mixedlanguagesandactsof identity:anevolutionaryapproach,
in Y. Matras,—P. Bakker (eds.), The Mixed Language Debate: Theoretical and Empir-
ical Advances, Berlin/New York: Mouton de Gruyter: 41–72.
Curbera, Jaime 1997, The Persons Cursed on a Defixio from Lilybaeum, “Mnemosyne”
iv 50/2: 219–225.
Dombrowski,FranzA.—Dombrowski,Bruno W.W.1991, NumeralsandNumeral
SystemsintheHamito-SemiticandOtherLanguageGroups, in A.S. Kaye(ed.), Semitic
StudiesinHonorof Wolf LeslauontheOccasionof his85thBirthday,November14,1991,
Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz: 340–381.
Gignac, Francis T. 1976–1981, A Grammar of the Greek Papyri of the Roman and Byz-
antine Periods. 2 vols, Milano: Istituto Tipografico Cisalpino.
Gignac, Francis T. 1991, Phonology of the Greek of Egypt, influence of Coptic on the, in
A.S. Atiya (ed.),TheCopticencyclopedia.Volume 8, NewYork: Macmillan Publishers:
71–96.
Girgis, Wahib A. 1966, Greek loan words in Coptic (Part ii), “Bulletin de la Société
d’Archéologie Copte” 18: 71–96.
Grossman, Eitan 2018, Did Greek Influence the Coptic Preference for Prefixing? A
Quantitative-Typological Perspective, “Journal of Language Contact” 11/1: 1–31.
Grossman, Eitan 2015, No case before the verb, obligatory case after the verb in Coptic,
in E. Grossman—M. Haspelmath—T.S. Richter (edd.), Egyptian-Coptic linguistics in
typological perspective, Berlin: de Gruyter: 203–225.
Grossman, Eitan—Richter, Tonio S. 2017, Dialectal variation and language
change:Thecaseof Greekloan-verbintegrationstrategiesinCoptic, in E. Grossman—
P. Dils—T.S. Richter—W. Schenkel (eds.), Greek Influence on Egyptian-Coptic: Con-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

112
capano
tact-inducedchangeinanancientAfricanlanguage.ddglcWorkingPapersi.Lingua
Aegyptia, Studia Monographica 17, Hamburg: Widmaier Verlag: 207–236.
Joseph, Brian D. 2010, Language Contact in the Balkans, in R. Hickey (ed.), The
Handbook of Language Contact, Chichester/Malden (MA): Wiley-Blackwell: 618–
633.
Holton, David—Horrocks, Geoffrey—Janssen, Marjolijne—Lendari,
Tina—Manolessou, Io—Toufexis, Notis 2019, The Cambridge Grammar of
Medieval and Early Modern Greek. Nominal Morphology, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Horrocks,Geoffrey2010,Greek:AHistoryof theLanguageanditsSpeakers,Malden
(MA)/Oxford/Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell.
ied = Minon, Sophie 2007, Les Inscriptions éléennes dialectales (vie–iie siècle avant
J.-C.), Vol. i, Textes, Geneva: Drotz.
IEleusis = Clinton, Kevin 2005–2008, Eleusis. The Inscriptions on Stone. Documents
of the Sanctuary of the Two Goddesses and Public Documents of the Deme, Athens:
Βιβλιοθήκη της εν Αθήναις Αρχαιολογικής.
igds i = Dubois, Laurent 1989, Inscriptions grecques dialectales de Sicile (vol. i),
Rome: Publications de l’École Française de Rome.
igds ii = Dubois, Laurent 2008, Inscriptions grecques dialectales de Sicile. (vol. ii),
Rome: Publications de l’École Française de Rome.
ik Central Pisidia = Horsley, Greg H.R.—Mitchell, Stephen 2000, Bonn: Habelt
Verlag.
ik Priene = Blümel, Wolfgang—Merkelbach, Reinhold 2014, Die Inschriften
von Priene. 2 vols, Bonn: Habelt Verlag.
ISic = [http://sicily.classics.ox.ac.uk/inscriptions/]
IThesp = Roesch, Paul 2007–2009, Les Inscriptions de Thespies (IThesp), Fasc. i–xii,
Lyon: Maison de l’Orient et de la Méditerranée Jean Pouillou.
Korhonen, Kalle 2011, Language and Identity in the Roman Colonies of Sicily, in
R. Sweetman (ed.), Roman Colonies in the First Century of Their Foundation, 7–31,
Oxford: Oxbow Books Ltd: 7–31.
Korhonen, Kalle 2012, Sicily in the Roman Imperial period: Language and society, in
O. Tribulato (ed.), Language and Linguistic Contact in Sicily, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press: 326–369.
Korhonen, Kalle 2016, Questioni del bilinguismo siciliano antico in lunga durata,
“Linguarum Varietas” 6: 115–120.
Kristoffersen, Tore R. 2019, The Phonological Status of Voiced-Stop Spirantization
in Ancient Greek Dialects, “Die Sprache” 53/1: 85–113.
Kümmel, Martin J. 2007, Konsonantenwandel. Bausteine zu einer Typologie des Laut-
wandels und ihre Konsequenzen für die vergleichende Rekonstruktion, Wiesbaden:
Reichert Verlag.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

phenomena of spirantization and language contact
113
Lavoie, Lisa M. 2001, Consonant Strength: Phonological Patterns and Phonetic Mani-
festations, New York/London: Garland Publishing, Inc.
Lejeune,Michel1972, Phonétiquehistoriquedumycénienetdugrecancien,Paris:Édi-
tions Klinsieck.
Lozano,Fernando2004,TheaLiviainAthens:Redatingigii23242,“zpe”148:177–180.
Maddieson, Ian 1984, Patterns of sounds, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Manganaro,Giacomo1997, Nuovetavolettedipiomboiscrittesiceliote,“PdP”52:306–
348.
Matras, Yaron 2009, Language Contact, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Melchert, H. Craig 2008, Lycian, in R.D. Woodard (ed.), The Ancient Languages of
Asia Minor, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 46–55.
Méndez Dosuna, Julian 1991–1993, On ⟨Ζ⟩for ⟨Δ⟩in Greek Dialectal Inscriptions,
“Die Sprache” 35: 82–114.
Méndez Dosuna, Julian 1993, A note on Myc. a-ze-ti-ri-ja, Att. σβέννυμι, and palatal-
ization, “Die Sprache” 35: 208–220.
Mimbrera Olarte, Susana 2012, Fonética y morfología del dorio de Sicilia (siglos vii-i
a.c.), Madrid: Consejo Superior De Investigaciones Científica.
Mimbrera, Susana 2012, Sicilian Greek Before the Fourth Century bce, in O. Tribulato
(ed.), Languageand Linguistic Contactin AncientSicily, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press: 191–222.
Moravcsik, Edith 1978, Universals of language contact, in J.H. Greenberg (ed.), Uni-
versals of human language, Stanford: Stanford University Press: 94–122.
Pellis, Ugo 1936, Il rilievo zingaresco a L’Annunziata di Giulianova (Teramo), “Bollet-
tino dell’Atlante Linguistico Italiano” 2/2: 61–85.
Petrounias,EleutheriosB.2007, PronunciationduringtheHellenisticPeriod,inA.-
F. Christidis, (ed.), A History of Ancient Greek: From the Beginnings to Late Antiquity,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 599–609.
Porzig, Walter 1954, Sprachgeographische Untersuchungen zu den altgriechischen
Dialekten, “if” 61: 147–169.
Raubitschek daa = Raubitschek, Anthony 1949, Dedications from the Athenian
Akropolis. A Catalogue of the Inscriptions of the Sixth and Fifth centuries b.c.With the
collaborationof LilianH.Jeffery, Cambridge (MA): Archaeological Institute of Amer-
ica.
Risch, Ernst 1955, Die Gliederung der griechschen Dialekte in neuer Sicht, “mh” 12: 61–
76.
Schwyzer, Eduard 1950, Griechische Grammatik / auf der Grundlage von Karl Brug-
manns Griechischer Grammatik von Eduard Schwyzer; 2. Bd. vervollständigt und her-
ausgegeben von Albert Debrunner; 3. Bd.: Register von Demetrius J. Georgacas.
München: C.H. Beck.
Sgarlata, Mariarita 2013, Parole e immagini nelle catacombe di Siracusa, in F. Bis-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

114
capano
conti—M. Braconi (eds.), Incisioni figurate nella tarda antichità, Città del Vaticano:
Pontificio Istituto di Archeologia Cristiana: 511–523.
Sterrett, John Robert S. 1888, AnEpigraphicalJourneyinAsiaMinor, Papers of The
American School of Classical Studies at Athens 2, Boston: Damrell and Upham.
Striano Corrochano, Araceli 1989, Rodio ετραΤεν, “Emerita” 57/1: 103–111.
Suthiwan, Titima—Tadmor, Uri, 2009, Loanwords in Thai, in M. Haspelmath—
U. Tadmor (eds.), Loanwords in the World’s Languages: A Comparative Handbook,
Berlin: Mouton De Gruyter: 599–616.
Teodorsson, Sven Tage 1978, The Phonology of Attic in the Hellenistic Period, Göte-
borg: Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis.
Thomason, Sarah G.—Kaufman, Terrence 1988, Language Contact, Creolization,
and Genetic Linguistics, Berkeley/Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Threatte, Leslie 1980, The Grammar of Attic Inscriptions. Vol. 1 Phonology, Ber-
lin/New York: Walter De Gruyter.
Tribulato, Olga (ed.) 2012, Language and Linguistic Contact in Ancient Sicily, Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wessel, Karl 1989, Inscriptiones Graecae Christianae veteres Occidentis. Inscriptiones
Christianae Italiae, Subsidia, i, Bari: Edipuglia.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Sonja Dahlgren, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_006
chapter 4
Egyptian Greek: A Contact Variety
Sonja Dahlgren
1
Introduction*
In this paper I explore whether the Greek form used in Egypt in the Roman
period could be considered a contact variety. This means it would be an inde-
pendent variety separate from the standard Greek as we know it from literary
sources that could be called Egyptian Greek.1 I will use Greek documentary
texts from Egypt formerly analysed in Dahlgren (2017) as evidence as many of
them have orthographic variation representative of spoken language.2 From
the form of the misspellings it can be inferred that they represent phonolo-
gical and phonetic transfer from Egyptian-Coptic, which can be verified by
similar misspellings of Greek loanwords in native Coptic texts (Dahlgren
2017). This paper focuses on language use from the Roman period (1st c. ce)
onward, due to the fact that before this there seems to have been no wide-
spread societal bilingualism and Greek phonological development (in Egypt)
was not yet as advanced (see e.g.Vierros 2012: 39–53; 107–117; Clarysse 2010:
64; Horrocks 2010: 165–170). From the beginning of the Roman period, phon-
ological variation intensifies in general, partly tied to the emergence of Coptic
*
I would like to thank Eitan Grossman, Ben Molineaux, Marja Vierros and the reviewer Sofía
Torallas Tovar (who revealed her identity) and the anonymous reviewer for their comments,
in many respects improving the clarity and contents of this paper. The writing of this article
was funded by the project Digital Grammar of Greek Documentary Papyri (PapyGreek, erc-
2017-stg 758481).
1 A thorough introduction to the centuries long interaction between the Greeks and the Egyp-
tians is available in Torallas Tovar 2010.
2 Thetextswerewrittenbyagroupof scribesthatmighthavebeenapprentices,inthemiddleof
their Greek education, with e.g. very fluent handwriting (such as that of experienced writers
of private letters) but with shaky grammar and orthography (Bagnall 2007: 16–17, 21). They
have been assumed to have been school exercises (Bagnall 2007: 21; Fewster 2002: 235)
or drafts of documents later to be rewritten more carefully (Pintaudi—Sijpesteijn 1993:
13). The collection includes abbreviations for horoscopes, petitions, bills, decrees, notes in
relation to bills or deliveries, provisions regarding the priests in the temple etc. (Pintaudi—
Sijpesteijn 1993: 11–12). The fact that the Greek education of the scribes was unfinished is
an advantage here, as that allowed the transfer elements of their native language (L1) to seep
through (Dahlgren 2017: 17).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

116
dahlgren
and partly to the phonological development of Greek itself (Dahlgren 2017:
28–34). Because the Greek front vowel qualities started to raise (Horrocks
2010: 167–170), the documentary texts from this period show new phenom-
ena compared to the misspellings in the centuries prior to the Roman period.
Furthermore, the variation is extended to the transfer of Coptic vowel qual-
ities and stress system (Dahlgren 2016, 2017). This means that the number
of second language (L2) Greek speakers with a linguistic background connec-
ted to Egyptian-Coptic must have increased in the Roman period. Leiwo (2018,
2020) argues that the contact features were accelerated because of the intense
multilingualism the Roman economic activity brought, prosperous business
facilitated by an excellent road network in Roman Egypt. Another factor con-
tributing to this may be an increase in literacy rates by native language (L1)
Egyptians due to the gradual emergence of the Coptic script at this time, a far
easier writing system than the consonantal, and otherwise complex, Demotic
Egyptian script prior to it (e.g. Bagnall 1993: 235–238; Fewster 2002: 225–
226; Richter 2009: 415). Fournet (2020: 42–75), on the other hand, brings the
question back to multilingualism: while Greek only had one version of Koine
throughout Egypt, Coptic had several, quite different dialects. Might this have
been the reason to favour Greek in legal documents?
The main part of this paper focuses on phonological phenomena, but I will
also touch upon some variation in morphosyntax, some of which is directly
caused by Egyptian transfer on the phonetic-phonological level.The Greek lan-
guage went through important phonological changes from the Roman period
onward, including the famous iotacism i.e. the raising and fronting of Greek
front vowels discussed in many studies of Greek phonology (e.g., Gignac 1976,
Horrocks 2010: 167; Torallas Tovar 2010: 261–262 with many examples).
However, as so many of the Greek primary sources from the first centuries ce
come from Egypt, language contact should at least be examined as a cause
behind the more creative spellings. Many of the Egyptian transfer phenom-
ena are observed in this paper through the analysis of the Narmouthis Greek
ostraca (O.Narm., 2nd–3rd c. ce) conducted in Dahlgren 2016 and 2017,
which includes ca. 100 nonstandard Greek (orthographic) variants compared
to ca. 500 similar nonstandard variants of Greek loanwords in native Coptic
texts, from several collections from 3rd to 12th century ce. However, Nar-
mouthis Greek ostraca were not the only texts with nonstandard variation in
phonology and morphology, so comparable evidence from other Greek texts
is also given in this paper,3 contributing to a wider understanding of Egyptian
3 Texts are taken from several collections of Greek in Papyrological Navigator (online platform,
ca. 70 000 texts).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
117
Greek. Egyptian Greek as a contact variety has been studied on a smaller scale
in Dahlgren 2016 and Dahlgren 2017: 148–161. In this paper, I will compare
the structural variation of Egyptian Greek with other similar contact varieties
of conquest-induced (colonial) prestige varieties such as Indian English, the
Celtic varieties of English and Finland Swedish; I will also explore the possibil-
ity of creolisation.
The paper is organised as follows. In Section 1.1 I will outline a theoretical
framework on the beginning of societal-level bilingualism in Roman Egypt. In
Section 2, I will go into details about phonological and morphological variation
inEgyptianGreek:2.1dealswithphonologicalvariation,2.2.withphoneticvari-
ation,whichpartlycausesmorphologicalvariation,and2.3withmorphological
variation. In Section 3, I will present other contact varieties similar to Egyptian
Greek. Finally in Section 4, I discuss various future avenues of research, focus-
ing on the possible creolisation of Egyptian Greek in later periods.
1.1
Beginning of Societal Bilingualism
Egyptian and Greek were in contact for a long period of time. The earliest
Greek presence in Egypt dates to 7th c. bce and concerns trade in Naukratis
(Fischer-Bovet 2008: 33). From the Hellenistic period onward the presence
of Greeks in Egypt strengthened. Alexander the Great conquered Egypt in
332bce and established Greek as the official language of the government, cre-
ating pressure for the Egyptian scribal class to learn Greek (Clarysse 1993:
186–188; 200–201). However, there does not appear to have been wide-spread
bilingualism on a societal level before the Romans arrived. During the Ptole-
maic period, the priestly and scribal classes, to whom literacy was restricted
before the Hellenistic period, learned Greek in order to gain more prestigious
employment in the administration.4 Thus doing, they were able to maintain
their elite position in the society. The sons of the scribal officers learned Greek
to be able to carry on their fathers’ occupation, but it is unclear how extens-
ive the use of the two languages was (Vierros 2014: 234–235). In the Roman
period even official language policy very liberally allowed for the use of two
languages even regarding legal matters, so long as both participants under-
stood the languages used (Torallas Tovar fortch.; see also Crespo 2007 on
Greek usage e.g. as the language of the court and the attitudes of the Egyp-
tian priests on Greek language use, and the conscious effort of the Ptolemies to
4 Of course, there were mixed marriages from early Ptolemaic period onward (3rd c. bce), even
if not very numerous (Clarysse 1992: 51–52), so presumably at least some of the offspring
born out of these would have been bilingual. Bilingualism was also more vividly present in
cities among the Egyptians than the Greeks (Torallas Tovar 2010: 258).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

118
dahlgren
promote the use of Koine). This must speak for a situation in which multiple
languages were used in the society on a regular basis, even if Torallas Tovar
cautiously points out that absolute evidence of the actual linguistic situation
is difficult to attain, despite these sources of information. Furthermore, even
after the Roman conquest, Greek remained the language of the army.5 There-
fore, through the army, people from various linguistic backgrounds used Greek
onaregularbasistoconversewithoneanother(linguisticbackgroundsconsist-
ing of e.g. Aramaic, Arabic, Dacian, Egyptian, Latin, Nabatean,Thracian, Syrian
etc.; Fournet 2003). It seems that an L2 variety of Greek started to develop in
the 2nd century ce because at about this time, the same type of nonstandard
variants are suddenly found in papyri from Fayyum oasis to Eastern Desert gar-
risons, mostly involving phonological variation (see also Leiwo 2018, 2020 for
an analysis of 2nd c. variation in the Eastern Desert). In texts coming from dif-
ferentpartsof therealm,therewasmorewidespreadvariationintheword-final
unstressed vowelreducedtoschwaandstress-related/o,u/ variationaccording
to the Coptic stress system, as well as iotacism that resulted from consonant-
to-vowel coarticulation (Dahlgren 2016; Dahlgren 2017: 148–160). Similar
variation appeared in at least three corpora linked to Fayyum, one of the most
bilingual regions in Roman Egypt, and the Roman army. One of these is the
O.Narm. corpus, written by L1 Egyptian temple scribes (Bagnall 2007, Few-
ster 2002: 222–223). The P.Fay. corpus, also studied in this paper, is also from
Fayyum; this is a collection of private letters written by an army veteran, Lucius
Bellienus Gemellus. We do not know his L1, but his surname is Umbrian, so it
couldhavebeenLatin;judgingbyhislinguisticidiosyncrasies,6itwasnotEgyp-
5 Although Latin seems certainly to have been the official language of the army, it is very clear
that much of what could be considered ‘official’ correspondence and text production contin-
ued to be written in Greek.This seems to have been the case even when the writer clearly was
someone other than whoever the document concerned. Among what was continuously writ-
ten in Greek was especially receipts, but also correspondence in general. By all accounts, it
seemsthattherewasatraditionorapolicytowriteatleastreceiptsforgoodsinGreekassome
of the receipts have bilingual transfer from Latin inflectional system and alphabet to Greek;
therefore, some of the writers were at least used to writing Latin, and might have been Latin
speakers. Of course such policies may have varied between individual record keepers, and
some receipts were indeed written in Latin, although these seem to be in the minority. Over-
all, there seems to have been a linguistic flexibility in place regarding army business records,
but mostly Greek was used, even in situations in which the writer seems to have been a Latin
speaker (Adams 2003: 599–608).
6 In addition to the very regular variation of ⟨i, ei⟩and ⟨y, oi⟩, frequent also to native Greek
writers due to the contemporary phonological development in which these formerly separ-
ate phonemes merged, Gemellus also had a habit of consistently choosing the nonstandard
graphemic variant ⟨oi⟩to depict the phonemic /y/ and vice versa. This occurred even with
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
119
tian (Gignac 1976: 48; Leiwo 2017). The third corpus is O.Claud., from Mons
Claudianus,wheretherelayaRomangarrison;thewriterof theseprivateletters
was an L1 Egyptian produce seller with L2 Greek correspondents in the army
(Leiwo 2005, 2010 and 2017). As can be seen from the map below (Fig. 4.1),
the distance between the Fayyumic corpora and that in the Eastern Desert, in
Mons Claudianus, is not small.
The distance alone goes toward proving that the nonstandard (phonolo-
gical)featuresthatappearedinallthesetextswerenotregionalsemi-standards
but part of an L2 variety because the writers were too far apart for the linguistic
variants to be considered instances of local varieties. Certainly, some (mainly)
orthographic variation did occur, such as the graphemic marking of word-
final schwa with ⟨o⟩especially in Fayyum, when it mostly was marked with
⟨e⟩elsewhere; these were more direct instances of dialectal Coptic phonolo-
gical/orthographic transfer (Dahlgren 2017: 122–124, 150–151). But the more
generally spread nonstandard variants occurring in different corpora with a
distance between them could easily have been diffused by the connection
between government scribes and army personnel, the corner stones of any
colonial conquest. According to Leiwo (2018, 2020), all letter writers along
the military roads linking Roman garrisons were somehow connected to the
Romanarmy.Themajorityof theseletterwritersweresoldiers,whichitself con-
stitutes a connection to Fayyum: this was where soldiers of the Roman army
possessed plots of land in the fertile ground of the oasis, along with the Greek
immigrants that resided there before the Romans (Dahlgren 2017: 27). Nat-
urally, the soldiers might have been in touch with civilians for various reasons,
including commerce (Leiwo 2020); all these contacts would have made the
spread of a contact variety easy.
Traditionally, Greek-Egyptian contact has been studied from the point of
view of bi- and multilingualism (Gignac 1976; Papaconstantinou 2010,
Vierros 2012). However, some research has contributed to assigning the vari-
ation found in Greek in Egypt to transfer effects from Egyptian (Gignac 1991;
Horrocks 2010: 112), implying a more general societal L2 usage. Greek non-
standard usage in Egypt displays typical tendencies of a contact variety, espe-
cially with respect to phonology (details in Section 3). I briefly survey the types
of variation found in Egyptian Greek, and then provide comparisons of similar
types of contact varieties elsewhere in space and time.
suchfrequentwordsasυἱῶι⟨hyiōi⟩‘son(dat.)’(writtenοιειωι⟨oieiōi⟩).Gemellusalso seemed
tofollowtheFayyumicCopticdialectalpracticeof depictingword-finalschwawith⟨o⟩,while
it was usually written with ⟨e⟩in other dialects (Dahlgren 2017: 150–151). Clearly, Gemellus
was a man who liked to follow the standard, even if this was, in fact, nonstandard.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

120
dahlgren
figure 4.1 Map of Egypt. Bouchaud et al. 2017
2
Features of Contact Phonology
L2 Greek in Egypt displayed orthographic variation that is compatible with
descriptions of Coptic phonology, including the loss of voicing contrast in
plosives, the underdifferentiation of /y, u/, the stress-related allophonic vari-
ation of /o, u/, and the reduction of word-final vowel to schwa (Girgis 1966;
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
121
Gignac 1976; Dahlgren 2016; Dahlgren 2017). Parallel evidence of the
same phonological phenomena is found in Greek loanwords in Coptic, in
Coptic texts (Gignac 1991; Dahlgren 2017: 114–138). Many misspellings also
display a tendency to consonantal coarticulation on vowels, an aid for (native
language) speech perception utilised in many consonant-rich languages to give
immediate information on consonant quality through the altered quality of
vowels (e.g. Traunmüller 1999; Dahlgren 2017; Dahlgren 2020 regard-
ing Egyptian Greek). Coptic as an Afroasiatic language had word formation
based on a so-called ‘consonantal skeleton’, which consisted of 1–4 consonants
forming the basic lexical root, an abstract phonological entity,7 while vowels
were used to form grammatical categories (see e.g. Layton 2000: 152 for the
root and pattern formation and Loprieno—Müller 2012: 119–120 for the
diachronic development of this in Egyptian). Therefore, clearly distinguishing
between the manner and place of articulation of consonants would have been
more important for Coptic than Greek. All these features are basic elements of
phonological contact: simplifying and merging structures or transferring fea-
tures that are linguistically significant for L1 but redundant in L2.The linguistic
outcome of the language contact depends e.g. on how early and/or long the
contact is and whether loanwords are received in oral or written form (e.g.
Haugen 1950; Weinreich 1979: 18–19, 28; Dohlus 2005; Andersson et al.
2017).
Orthographic variation is, of course, largely a reflection of spoken language,
but it does display different transfer phenomena, divided into phonological,
phonetic and morphological, described in sections 2.1, 2.2 and 2.3, respectively.
In Egyptian Greek, almost all of the phonological and phonetic transfer is tied
to the transfer of the Egyptian stress system on the L2 Greek, with different
phonetic, phonemic, and even morphologically impacted outcomes depend-
ingonthepositionof thenonstandardvariantintheword.AccordingtoMatras
(2009: 87, 233), prosody is the most difficult aspect of the foreign language to
learn after reaching maturity and the foreign accent is most persistent regard-
ing prosody. Before going into morphological transfer, I will shortly introduce
the phonological and phonetic variation in Egyptian Greek, deriving from the
phonological system of Egyptian-Coptic.The examples given here of the phon-
ological and phonetic variation and the vowel reduction system of Coptic have
been analysed in detail in Dahlgren 2017 and 2020.
7 The basic lexical root was an abstract phonological entity, which was formed into a word
with inflectional affixes, which conveyed deictic markers and grammatical functions such
as gender, number, tense etc. In earlier stages of Egyptian these were mostly suffixes (Lo-
prieno—Müller 2012: 119–120).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

122
dahlgren
2.1
Variation on the Phonological Level: Underdifferentiation of Foreign
Phonemes and Stress-Related Allophonic Variation8
This section deals with what can be said to be purely phonological in nature:
foreign phoneme underdifferentiation resulting in merger of L1 and L2 phon-
emes, and stress-related phoneme distribution. One of the most easily notice-
ablefeaturesof EgyptianGreekistheunderdifferentationof Greekvoicedstops
as voiceless because Egyptian-Coptic did not have this opposition (Lopri-
eno 1995: 40–43). This concerned /k, g/ and /t, d/ more than /p, b/ because
it seems that Coptic had /b/ so it was recognised for Greek as well (Gignac
1976: 64; Loprieno 1995: 40–46). The nonstandard spelling of atelphos in (1) is
one of the many examples of this, the standard /d/ having been replaced with
/t/.
(1)
ατελφω atelphō < ἀδελφῷadelphō ‘brother (dat.)’ (O.Narm.: 103)
Underdifferentiationalsoconcernedthevariationbetween/y/and/u/,asin(2)
and (3), and again for the same reason: this contrast did not occur in Egyptian-
Coptic (e.g. Peust 1999: 201 for Coptic vowel qualities).
(2)
πουρου pourou /puru/ < πυροῦpyroú /pyˈru/ ‘wheat (gen.)’ (O.Narm. 42 &
46)
(3)
ἥμισου hêmisou < ἥμισυ hêmisy ‘half (n.nom./acc.)’ (O.AbuMina. 157; 7th c.
ce)
The near-phonetic spelling pourou is one of the earliest variants for this, and
limited almost exclusively to Fayyum and early Roman period. This limited
usage fits Haugen’s (1950: 216–217) description of a pre-bilingual period,
descriptiveof societalbilingualism,withthefirstsmallgroupsof bilingualstak-
ing up foreign and loanwords and the rest of the (L1) speakers repeating them
in a form that is heavily integrated into L1.The later unrounding of /y/ to [i] and
concurrent advancement of societal bilingualism, with more speakers able to
produce the foreign phonemes, probably fixed this problem (Dahlgren 2017:
68–76; 80–81). Regardless, there are a few quite late attestations of hêmisy writ-
8 The absolute amount of attestations for the various nonstandard, phonological/phonetic-
based misspellings is presented in Dahlgren (2017: 148–161). The frequency of them has been
calculated statistically in Dahlgren—Keersemaekers—Stolk (forthc.). Generally, the
number of attestations per orthographic nonstandard spellings range from a few hundred to
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
123
tenashêmisou,oneof thefewremnantsof /y,u/variationaftertheearlyRoman
period. Perhaps some nonstandard variants were frozen into a particular form
with more usage, but that is merely speculation until further proof of some fre-
quencies can be found.
Another example of variation in the round vowels concerns /o/ and /u/.
Coptic had no unstressed /o/ or /ɔ/; these had allophonic variation with /u/ in
unstressed positions (Peust 1999: 211–213, 250–254). Consequently, unstressed
/o/ was often replaced in Greek loanwords and L2 Greek with /u/. Sometimes,
also /o/ that was originally stressed in Greek seems to have been treated as
unstressed due to Coptic stress transfer. In (4), the genitive marker /u/ has
been retained but the Greek original stressed /o/ replaced with ⟨ou⟩/u/, show-
ing such contact-induced change of a stress position—it appears to be placed
on the second syllable. This also happened vice versa: Greek original stressed
/u/ was replaced with /o/ as in (5). In Coptic, stress was usually placed on
one of the two last syllables, so the stress position of penultima is in accord-
ancewithCopticstressrules,onlymarkedwitha(nonstandard)graphemethat
codesforthestressedroundvowelinCoptic(Dahlgren2017:153;Dahlgren
2020).
(4)
λουγου lougou /lugu/ < λόγου lógou /lugu/ ‘word (gen.)’ (psi 8 884.2, Oxy-
rhynchites 390ce)
(5)
κομιονται komiontai < κομιοῦνται komioúntai /komiuntai/ ‘to take care of’
(bgu 4 1123.6, Alexandria 30bce–14ce)
2.2
Variation on the Phonetic Level: Word-Final Schwa and
Consonant-to-vowel Coarticulation
This section concentrates on phonetic transfer, which is, in fact, the most fre-
quent type of variation in Egyptian Greek (Dahlgren 2017: 165–166), contain-
ing variation within the vowels /a, e, o/ and variation related to iotacism.
Variation related to /a, e, o/ has been analysed by Gignac (1991) as resulting
from the contact with Coptic, which did not have all three phonemes in any
one of its dialects. This no doubt caused problems for perceiving all the dis-
tinctions in Greek words. Furthermore, Coptic regularly used these graphemes
(mostly⟨e⟩)formarkingschwa(Dahlgren2016;2017:62–65;Peust1999:250
severalthousands,dependingonthephenomenon(e.g.stopvariation,/y,u//o,u/and/a,e,o/
variation), with the several variants related to iotacism running as high as tens of thousands
of attestations.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

124
dahlgren
onward), offering further proof for the unspecific phonemic nature of at least
ⲉ⟨e⟩in any of the Coptic dialects. It seems, from several examples, that it was
used to depict a phonetic schwa in L2 Greek production as well, which would
have resulted from the transfer effect of it from Egyptian-Coptic. Unfortunately
for Greek production, these examples often involve verb mood marking, so
that it becomes unclear whether an infinitive or an imperative is meant in a
given context. Considere.g.examples(6)and(7)whicheachhavenonstandard
orthography for what seem to be imperative forms, but easily confusable with
infinitives (see further Leiwo 2010, 2017 and Dahlgren—Leiwo 2020). Note
that the Egyptian-influenced reduction of word-final vowels to schwa is tied to
the word-final -n often deleted in Egyptian Greek (Gignac 1976: 111). This is
an instance where the transfer of the phonetic level influenced morphology,
further discussed in Chapter 4.
(6)
κερασεν kerase(n) < κέρασον keraso(n) ‘to mix (aor.imp.)’ (O.Narm. 115)
(7)
πεμψεν pempse(n) from πέμψον pempso(n) ‘to send (aor.imp.)’ (O.Claud.
2: 2nd c. ce)
The occurrence of the word-final schwa in Coptic is connected to the stress
system of Coptic, which, of course, is a phonological feature of a language.
However, as Coptic was a stress-timed language (Dahlgren 2017: 133–138; see
Auer (2001) for a stress type typology), much like English it reduced the qualit-
ies of unstressed vowels, and vowel reduction is a phonetic phenomenon. This
tendency to vowel reduction in unstressed positions had two manifestations:
fullschwa,reachingitstarget(theword-finalschwaasin(6–7))andconsonant-
to-vowel coarticulation, which was the manifestation of an incomplete schwa
word-medially. In the latter, the vowel quality retains some properties of the
surrounding consonants due to insufficient time between two consonants to
reach the target i.e. schwa (Flemming 2009: 79–86; 89–91). Much of what is
concidered iotacism in Egyptian Greek is, in fact, a result of contact-induced
consonant-to-vowel coarticulation i.e. contextually conditioned vowel reduc-
tion.
Due to Egyptian influence, especially front vowels were susceptible to con-
sonant-to-vowel coarticulation, fronting the vowel quality near front conson-
ants such as dentals or nasals (mostly /n/), and retracting the vowel quality
near consonants that have that ability, such as bilabials (Flemming 2009: 82–
84; 92) or back consonants such as velars, uvulars and pharyngeals.The bilabial
at the beginning of the word is responsible for the variation in (8), retracting
[e̝] to [e].
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
125
(8)
μετροπολι metropoli < μητροπόλει mētropólei [me̝tropoli] ‘the city (dat.)’
(O.Narm. 110)
This phenomenon is studied within Coptology regarding the bivalency of
Coptic eta [e] written either with ⟨i⟩/i/ or ⟨a⟩/a/—variation follows the
consonantal environment (Peust 1999: 229–230; Dahlgren 2017: 106–112).
Coptic texts can have variation within the full range of [i, e, ɛ, æ, a] but in L2
Greek, variation seems to be limited to [i, e, ɛ], as in (9). In lɛbɛnous, the bila-
bial /b/ has affected both the /i/ in the first syllable and the /a/ in the second
syllable, retracting the quality of the first and raising that of the latter.9
(9)
ⲗⲉⲃⲉⲛⲟⲩ[ⲥ] lɛbɛnous < λίβανος líbanos ‘frankincense’ (P.Hamb.Bil.1, 3rd–
4th cent. ce)
There are thousands of examples of the phenomenon in the Greek document-
ary papyri; unfortunately, a full statistical analysis of the exact amount of the
attestationsrelatedtoiotacismfollowingtheconsonantalenvironmentinstead
of free variation is beyondthe scope of this article. However,even these prelim-
inary results should affect how we look at iotacism, the raising and fronting of
Greek original υ, οι, ει, η /y, oi, ei, e:/ to [i], as in Modern Greek.
2.3
Variation on the Morphological level: Greek Inflection of Egyptian
Personal Names and Cases
In this section, I look at variation in morphology, taking as a test case the inflec-
tion of personal names and irregular nouns, both of which are bound to be
affected by L2 usage. Names are less standardised in general (Anderson 2007:
3–5), and irregular forms are difficult to remember by L2 users, often ending in
analogous formations (see e.g. case studies on Russian/Estonian (Ehala 2012)
and English/German bilinguals (Wagner 2017)).
The variation related to Greek cases has been extensively studied before.
Stolk(2015)noticedthatcasesyncretismwastiedtothemergerof thesemantic
roles of genitive and dative, while the development was also affected by the
phonological development of Greek (cf. Gignac 1976: 208; Horrocks 2010:
115–117 and 180–181). However, not all case variation was caused by Greek-
internalreasons.Leiwo(2003:5–8)studiedthecasemarkingintheNarmouthis
Greek ostraca in connection with the preposition pros in a collection of appar-
9 Bilabials cause a ‘trough’ effect on adjacent vowels, and especially high vowels are lowered in
quality; cf. Flemming (2009: 82–84, 92).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

126
dahlgren
ent tax receipts, which in the context required the accusative case (O.Narm.
1–19)10.The distribution of the cases marked in a nonstandard way varied apart
from one aspect: there was an attempt to mark the first element of the phrase
correctly (cf. also Vierros 2012: 140–154).
The failure to produce standard case-marking was plausibly contact-
induced variation as Egyptian had no cases;11 however, it had prepositions.12
In Greek, a preposition could have different meanings depending on the case
in which the complement was; in Egyptian, too, the meaning of a preposition
could vary, but only the context helped in understanding the meaning—the
object, the noun, was always uninflected. It is therefore understandable for the
scribestohavefalteredinchoosing—andremembering—thecorrectcaseend-
ings demanded by the prepositions at hand. However, although it at first glance
seems as though the scribes’ use of the Greek cases is completely chaotic, there
is, when given a thorough examination, some very interesting variation to be
found on the individual level of the writers. This is especially clear concerning
the Greek inflection of Egyptian personal names.
The Greek inflectional system of Egyptian personal names was somewhat
artificial and did not quite follow the Greek noun declension categories. Egyp-
tian names ending with a vowel received a Greek ending of -s, the names that
ended with a consonant were moulded into the Greek form by adding -is or -ês
(both [is]) to the end (there was a tendency to end names ending in a dental
sound with a suffix of -ês Pestman 1993: 485).13 The system is displayed in
Table 4.1 below.
10
Leiwo (2003: 5–8) on O.Narm. 1–19 tax receipts: pros ‘to’ + noun in the accusative. 18 texts
out of the 19 preserve the first word after the preposition (the texts start with the prepos-
ition). Out of these, the first word is in the accusative 11 times if the first word, 3 times if
the constituent occurs later in the text; in the nominative (most usual due to L1 impact)
2 times if the first word, 3 times on a later occurrence; genitive 4 times if the first word, 4
times if it occurs later; and dative (which was merging with the genitive) 1 time if it was
the first word, 3 times if it occurred later.
11
Coptic is typically not described as having cases (see e.g. Layton 2000) and e.g. the func-
tions of accusative and dative are described through direct/indirect objects. Grossman
(2014) presents a different view: not only does Grossman consider Coptic having cases, he
also notices that there is a dichotomy found in African languages. This involves having no
case before the verb, and obligatory case after the verb. He also finds that there is an overt
nominative marker, differing from the accusative and the citation form, and obligatorily
marking highly accessible postverbal subjects. See also Grossman (2018) for some analysis
about the diachronic formation of cases.
12
However, according to Grossman (2014: 208), e.g. nci/nče, which is normally described as
a preposition by some Coptologists, is rather a nominative marker, so the situation is less
than clear here as well.
13
-ês was written with eta indicating a historically long /e/ but, by the Roman period, was
often pronounced as [i], which, no doubt, further added to the confusion in spelling.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
127
table 4.1
The inflection of Egyptian names in Greek
Egyptian names ending
in a vowel
Egyptian names ending
in a consonant
Egyptian names ending
in a dental sound
-s, -tos, -ti, -n
-is, -ios, -ei, -in
-ês, -oû, -êi, -ên
Pana + s
Petosir + is
Pekhut + ês
Pana-s
Petosir-is
Pekhut-ês
Pana-nom
Petosir-nom
Pekhut-nom
Pana-tos
Petosir-ios
Pekhut-oû
Pana-gen
Petosir-gen
Pekhut-gen
Pana-ti
Petosir-ei
Pekhut-êi
Pana-dat
Petosir-dat
Pekhut-dat
Pana-n
Petosir-in
Pekhut-ên
Pana-acc
Petosir-acc
Pekhut-acc
Regardless of the system in place, Egyptian names are often not inflected as
might be expected. One can see how, for instance, in the two following texts by
a single scribe, almost all the nouns and articles are inflected precisely as the
context requires, but the inflection of the Egyptian names varies considerably
in its adherence to the written standard. The preposition peri in this context
requires the subsequent nouns and articles to be inflected in the genitive; the
most problems in these three texts are seen in the Egyptian names ending in
-is in the Greek form, although all the regular nouns ending in -is are inflected
precisely as they should be.
O.Narm. 71. 2nd–3rd c. ce
δ.
περὶμη-
νύσεως Θ-
ερμοῦ̣θ̣ις ἡ̣
καὶΣαραπιάς ˙
περὶΠετοσῖρι̣ς
ὁκαὶΣαραπίωνος
μήνυσας ˙ ------------
οἰκίας Πεκῦσις---
μὴπρὸμήνυσας Ἀ[κ-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

128
dahlgren
η[ς και Ἀκε]ποννις˙---
---]μ̣ήνυσας τὸν
---]η̣ν ὠς συν
---] ὕ̣λην.
[1]
d
4
peri
concerning-prep
mênys-eôs
laying.of.information-sg.gen
Thermuth-is
Thermuth-nom
hê
art.fem.sg.nom
kai
and
[2]
Sarapia-s
Sarapia-nom
peri
concerning-prep
Petosir-is
Petosir-nom
ho
art.masc.sg.nom
kai
and
Sarapiôn-os
Sarapiôn-gen
[3]
mêny-sas
laying.of.information-pst.ptcp.masc.sg.nom
oiki-as
house-sg.gen
Pekys-is
Pekys-nom
mê
not
pro
before-prep
[4]
mêny-sas
laying.of.information-pst.ptcp.masc.sg.nom
Akê-s
Ake-nom
kai
and
Akeponn-is----
Akeponn-nom
[5]
mêny-sas
laying.of.information-pst.ptcp.masc.sg.nom
ton
art.masc.sg.acc?
(---êin
(---?
ôs
?
syn---)
with-prep)
hylê-n.
forest-sg.acc
‘Concerning Thermuthis a.k.a. Sarapias filing a complaint; concerning
Petosiris a.k.a. Sarapion who filing a complaint; concerning the house of
Pekysis; Akeponnis, not having filed a complaint before … filing a com-
plaint the …’14
As we can see from this example, the writer of this document did not have
a problem with inflecting mênysis, a noun ending with -is, on the first line;
14
The translation is mine into English, from the original translation into Italian provided by
Pintaudi—Sijpersteijn 1993.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
129
figure 4.2 ogn i: 72, The Cairo Egyptian Museum
pictures taken from the originals by
dr. angiolo menchetti
neither did he have a problem with inflecting Sarapiôn on the second line. All
the other names, as well as the articles, seem to be in the nominative, however,
not only the ones ending -is; also the one connected to Sarapiôn. Perhaps the
ending -os was taken as a nominative ending?
O.Narm. 72. 2nd–3rd c. ce
πε̣ρ̣ὶ̣[..]
κ̣α̣σις κα-
τὰΣωκωνῶ-
πις καὶτοῦεἰσ-
ακοκεύς ˙-------
κατὰτοῦΣωκω-
νῶπις περὶΘερ-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

130
dahlgren
μοῦθις Ἀκεποννι ⸌ς⸍˙
--------------------------
κατὰτοῦΣωκωνῶ-
πις περὶΤαακηους Φ-
ατρηους ˙--- κατὰτοῦ
Σωκωνῶπις περὶΝ-
εφερῆς ˙-- κατὰΣω-
κωνῶπις περὶἀνακομιτ-
ῆς, περὶσυλήσεως ˙ τέλεσε-
ν τούτους μέχρι Χυὰκ ᾱ
Αἰγυπτίων ὥρᾳς ˙---
κατ̣ὰ̣ Ὡ̣ρίωνος χωλοῦκαὶΚα-
μῆς καὶΠενας ˙ --
κατὰΣωκ̣[ω]νῶπις καὶΣερ-
ήνου [π]ερὶζυτηρᾶς˙ ---
κα̣τ̣ὰΠετοσίρεως ὁκαὶ
[Σα]ραπίωνος περὶ
το]υ̣ χιρισμοῦ.
[1]
peri
concerning-prep
Kas-is
Kas-nom
kai
and
tou
art.masc.2sg.gen
kata
against-prep
Sôkônôp-is
Sokonop-nom
kai
and
[2]
tou
art.masc.2sg.gen
eisakok-eus;
court.official-sg.nom
kata
against-prep
tou
art.masc.2sg.gen
Sôkônôp-is
Sokonop-nom
[3]
peri
concerning-prep
Thermuth-is
Thermuth-nom
Akeponn-is;
Akeponn-nom
kata
against-prep
tou
art.masc.2sg.gen
[4]
Sôkônôp-is
Sokonop-nom
peri
concerning-prep
Taakê-us
Taake-gen
Phatrê-us;
Phatre.gen_Taakês.daughter.of.Phatrês
kata
against.prep
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
131
[5]
tou
art.masc.2sg.gen
Sôkônôp-is
Sokonop-nom
peri
concerning-prep
Nepherê-s;
Nefere-nom
kata
against-prep
Sôkônôp-is
Sokonop-nom
[6]
peri
concerning-prep
anakomitês
recovery-sg.gen
peri
concerning-prep
sylêseôs;
robbery-sg.gen
tele-sen
to.complete-imp.2sg
[7]
toutous
art.masc.pl.acc
mekhri
by
Khyak
Eg.month._Feb-Mar
a
1
Aigypti-ôn
Egyptians-gen
hôra-i
in.hour-dat
s;
6
[8]
kata
against-prep
Hôriôn-os
Horion-gen
khôl-ou
limping-sg.adj.gen
kai
and
Kamê-s
Kame-nom
kai
and
Pena-s;
Pena-nom
[9]
kata
against-prep
Sôkônôp-is
Sokonop-nom
kai
and
Serên-u
Seren-gen
peri
concerning-prep
zytêra-s
payment.of.beer-sg.gen
[10] kata
against-prep
Petosir-eôs
Petosir-gen
ho
art.masc.sg.nom
kai
and
Sarapiôn-os
Sarapion-gen
peri
concerning-prep
[11] tou
art.masc.sg.gen
khirism-ou.
administration-sg.gen
‘Concerning…KasisagainstSokonopisandeisagogeus;againstSokonopis
concerning Thermuthis daughter of Akeponnis; against Sokonopis con-
cerning Taakes daughter of Hatres; against Sokonopis concerning
Nepheres; against Sokonopis concerning recovery from the robbery. Exe-
cute these on 1st Choiak of the Egyptians, on the 6th hour. Against Horion
the lame and Kames and Ponas; against Sokonopis and Serenos regarding
the beer tax; against Petosiris a.k.a. Sarapion concerning administration.’
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

132
dahlgren
table 4.2
Nouns ending in -is
Inflection of Egyp-
tian names ending
in -is
Inflection of third
declension noun
polis (poli-)
Inflection of third
declension noun
elpis (elpid-)
Inflection of third
declension noun
kharis (kharit-)
-is, -ios, -ei, -in
-s, -os, -i, -n
-s, -os, -i, -a
-s, -os, -i, -n
Petosir-is
Petosir-nom
poli-s
city-nom
elpi -s
hope-nom
khari-s
grace-nom
Petosir-ios
Petosir-gen
pole-ôs
city-gen
elpid-os
hope-gen
kharit-os
grace-gen
Petosir-ei
Petosir-dat
pole-i
city-dat
elpid-i
hope-dat
kharit-i
grace-dat
Petosir-in
Petosir-acc
pol -in
city-acc
elpid-a
hope-acc
khari-n
grace-acc
Notice, again, the declension of sylêsis on line six, and the namesTaakês on line
four, Hôriôn on line eight, Serênos on line nine and Sarapiôn on line ten. Still,
none of the names ending in -is are inflected according to the Greek standard
for Egyptian names; in this context, the preposition kata also requires a genit-
ive. Petosiris on line ten is, admittedly, marked by genitive case, but not the one
intended for this type of an Egyptian name, but rather inflected after the model
of a regular (although irregular) noun ending in -is, like polis.
In a third text, (O.Narm. 73), the Greek type names (e.g. Sarapamôn on line
three) are inflected in the genitive as dictated by the preposition and context.
In all three texts, all but one of the Egyptian names ending in -is are left in the
nominative despite the need pressed by the preposition to inflect the names in
the genitive in this context; still the scribe had no problems in inflecting other
nouns ending in -is according to the standard. On the other hand, all the names
that follow the standard Greek declension system, e.g. Sarapiôn, ending in -ôn,
are inflected exactly as they should be.
There are various ways one might try to explain this. It might be the case
that Egyptians were unwilling to inflect names of their own culture, seeing
as they were not, in fact, treated in that manner in their own language. This,
however, leads to the question why they bothered to render the names in the
Greek form at all, then. Most of the Egyptian names in the O.Narm. corpus are
in the Greek nominative form, not in the original Egyptian basic form from
which the Greek type was transcribed and produced into the Greek nomin-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
133
table 4.3
Inflectional endings for Greek nouns ending in -is as perceived by a L2 learner
Inflection of Egyp-
tian names ending
in -is
Inflection of third
declension noun
polis
Inflection of third
declension noun
elpis
Inflection of third
declension noun
kharis
-is, -ios, -ei, -in
-is, -eôs, -ei, -in
-is, -dos, -di, -da
-is, -tos, -ti, -in
Petosir-is
Petosir-nom
pol-is
city-nom
elp-is
hope-nom
khar-is
grace-nom
Petosir-ios
Petosir-gen
pol-eôs
city-gen
elpi-dos
hope-gen
khari-tos
grace-gen
Petosir-ei
Petosir-dat
pol-ei
city-dat
elpi-di
hope-dat
khari-ti
grace-dat
Petosir-in
Petosir-acc
pol-in
city-acc
elpi-da
hope-acc
khar-in
grace-acc
ative form in the first place (e.g. Petosir + -is). Also, one could think this to
be part of the general development of dropping /i/ in the endings -ios (Hor-
rocks 2010: 175) as the /o/ in, for example, in the genitive form of the name
Sokonopis (Sokonopios), is indeed in an unstressed syllable. This, however,
does not explain the nonstandard usage, either, as surely this would also have
affected regular nouns with the same ending. Perhaps the inflectional categor-
ies for Egyptian names simply proved too much for the Egyptian scribes. As we
can see from the examples in Table 4.2, there was much to remember if the
Egyptian name inflectional system was to be remembered alongside the stand-
ard categories, as these provided one with quite enough variation in them-
selves.
Of course, keeping in mind the Egyptian scribes of O.Narm. were not neces-
sarily fluent bilinguals, but rather L2 Greek learners only using Greek for work
or education, they might not have remembered all the possible noun inflec-
tional rules and language historical exceptions, if taught in the first place. In
that case, to them the inflectional endings of nouns in -is probably looked like
in the examples in Table 4.3 above, with a reinterpretation of the morpheme
boundary.
The situation looks quite different now. First of all, these ‘alternative’ inflec-
tional endings of elpis and kharis are similar to the ones used for inflecting
Egyptian names ending in a vowel, for example Panas from table 4.1: nom -s,
gen -tos, dat -ti, acc -n (Table 4.4).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

134
dahlgren
table 4.4
Comparing ‘alternative’ kharis to the inflection of Egyptian
names ending in a vowel
Inflection of Egyptian
name ending in a vowel
Inflection of third
declension noun
Pana + s
kharis
-s, -tos, -ti, -n
-is, -tos, -ti, -in
table 4.5
Comparing alternative polis to the inflection of Egyptian
names ending in a consonant
Inflection of Egyptian
names ending in -is
Inflection of third
declension noun polis
-is, -ios, -ei, -in
-is, -eôs, -ei, -in
Thealternativeinflectionof polis,ontheotherhand,nowlooksquitesimilar
to the Egyptian name inflectional type for names ending in a consonant (-is)
(Table 4.5).
The inflection of polis is an irregular one due to language historical rea-
sons—one can see its inflection differs from the other two -is ending nouns
from the third declension. It was, however, a frequently occurring word, so
probably quite well remembered: a proof of sorts of this is the genitive inflec-
tionof Petosiris, Petosireôs,onlineteninO.Narm.72—if thescribesdidremem-
ber one of the possible inflectional types for names ending in -is, this would
have been a strong candidate. According to the Egyptian name inflectional
rules, Petosiris inflected in the genitive would have been Petosirios. There are
similarslipstowardthestandardinflectionalformwithEgyptiannamesending
in -ês. Following the inflectional pattern of, for example, Periklês or Heraklês,
very famous names indeed, many Egyptian names ending in -ês were inflected
in this fashion, like the genitive form Taakêus of Taakês on line four, text two;
the Egyptian inflection for this would have been Taakeu. The Egyptian inflec-
tion for -ês ending names was the same as for the Greek first declension -ês
ending names such as Persês (‘Persian’) or Hermês, which had a slightly differ-
ent type of inflection from Periklês, and from the other third declension model
for -ês ending nouns, which had a different accusative ending of -ê/-ên instead
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
135
table 4.6
Comparing the inflection of Egyptian names ending in -ês to the
inflection of Periklês
Inflection of Egyptian
names ending in -ês
Inflection of third declension
name Periklês
-ês -ou, -êi, -ên
-s, -ous, -i, -a
Pekhut-ês
Periklê-s
Pekhut-nom
Perikles-nom
Pekhut-ou
Perikle-ous
Pekhut-gen
Perikles- gen
Pekhut-êi
Perikle-i
Pekhut-dat
Perikles-dat
Pekhut-ên
Perikle-a
Pekhut-acc
Perikles- acc
of -a. However, for some reason these were not often confused with each other.
Instead, the Periklês model was favoured. Maybe the famous men had pressed
one inflectional type strongly into the minds of the scribes? See Table 4.6 for a
comparison of the forms.
Quite like the -ês ending nouns’ inflection, for some reason the standard
Greek inflection for -os ending names did not seem to cause a lot of prob-
lems to the Egyptian scribes. The second declension model for the -os ending
nounswashighlyregularandcontainedsuchbasiclevelwordsaslogos(‘word’).
This was nothing like the confusing variety of -is ending nouns which prob-
ably got confused with the inflection for vowel ending Egyptian names; the
problem was that the inflectional types for both the vowel ending Egyptian
names and the consonant ending Egyptian names were taken from the Greek
third declension, the different endings reflecting the different third declension
Greeknounstems.Onceagain:theEgyptiannamesendinginavowel(-sending
in the Greek nominative form) received an inflectional type matching that of
the noun kharis, which had a stem ending in a consonant; the Egyptian names
ending in a consonant (-is ending in the Greek nominative form), on the other
hand, received an inflection matching (roughly) that of polis, a Greek noun
whosesteminthenominativeoriginallyended,despiteappearances,inavowel
(Table 4.7).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

136
dahlgren
table 4.7
Comparing the inflectional endings of Egyptian names to the third declension
nouns
Egyptian names
ending in a vowel
Third declen-
sion noun
Egyptian names end-
ing in a consonant
Alternative third
declension noun
Pana + s
kharis
Petosir + is
polis
-s -tos, -ti, -n
-s, -tos, -ti, -n
-is -ios, -ei, -in
-is, -eôs, -ei, -in
Pana-s
khari-s
Petosir-is
pol-is
Pana-nom
grace-nom
Petosir-nom
city-nom
Pana-tos
kharit-os
Petosir-ios
pol-eôs
Pana-gen
grace-gen
Petosir-gen
city-gen
Pana-ti
kharit-i
Petosir-ei
pol-ei
Pana-dat
grace-dat
Petosir-dat
city-dat
Pana-n
khari-n
Petosir-in
pol-in
Pana-acc
khari-acc
Petosir-acc
city-acc
There was no special inflection type for Egyptian names ending in -ôn, so
these were inflected in the standard third declension manner following, for
instance, the inflection of Poseidôn. Quite a few of the Greek gods’ names were
of this form, so scribes writing Greek were probably very familiar with this
inflection type. It should come as no surprise, then, that names ending in -ôn
were very often inflected precisely according to the standard, like in all these
three texts: see, for instance, the genitive form Sarapamônos for Sarapamôn in
O.Narm. 73, line three.
The reinterpretation of the morpheme boundary is not unique to Egyp-
tian Greek but probably a frequent feature in any language contact situation;
analogous reformations are behind even some of the verb forms in Modern
Greek.TogiveanotherexamplerelatedtoGreek,italsotakesplaceinCappado-
cian Greek, a Greek variety formerly spoken in Turkey (nowadays only spoken
in Greece, by descendants of immigrants from Cappadocia). For example, in
the contact-induced analogical remodelling of the medio-passive paradigm
as an agglutinative inflection, based on the 3sg, in complete accordance with
Watkins’ Law (Janse 2009: 101–102).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
137
3
Similar Contact Varieties: Indian English, Irish and (Highland)
Scottish Varieties of English, Finland Swedish
Egyptian Greek matches Matras’s theory of system convergence (2009: 223–
226; see further analysis in Dahlgren 2017: 73–74): speakers do not maintain
two separated systems of phonological sub-components but instead use one
phonemic inventory and distribution for both languages. There were very few
loanwords from Egyptian, and typically to language contacts of this type, these
weremostlytechnicalorlocaltermssuchasmonthnames(κάκιςkákis<Coptic
ⲕⲁⲕⲉkake; also βᾶρις báris (Torallas Tovar 2004; see also Thomason 2001:
69 on loanword principles)). Besides technical terminology, the contact mostly
involves phonological transfer, while Coptic has loanwords from almost all
Greek grammatical categories (Richter 2009: 406ff.). This asymmetry makes
Egyptian Greek similar to other contact varieties such as Indian English or Irish
and (Highland) Scottish English, and Finland Swedish.
It is generally accepted that borrowing of language structures is easier
between typologically similar languages, while, in principle, anything can
occur in language contact (Thomason 2001; Aikhenvald 2007). It is also
accepted that the prestige language does not borrow much from the indigen-
ous language (e.g. Thomason 2001). Regardless, L2 learners can change the
language: sometimes structural transfer occurs from the indigenous language
to the prestige one, creating a new variety (Thomason 2001: 63). Thoma-
son (2001: 74–75) talks about the type of transfer that usually occurs with
shift-induced transfer, but elaborates that this type of transfer can also occur
without language shift, such as in Indian English. Typically, it starts with phon-
ology and syntax, instead of borrowing, which starts with lexicon. In case of a
contact variety (L2 version of the target language, (tl2)), there may be some
lexical transfer but structural transfer dominates.
Thomason’s description seems to fit Egyptian Greek remarkably well but
also several other contact varieties that have arisen from conquest scenarios,
and include a societal prestige language, that of the conquerors. These include
well-studied cases like Indian English, Irish and (Highland) Scottish Englishes,
and Finland Swedish. All of these contact varieties share some common prop-
erties. All these contact situations were associated with prestigious languages
of conquerors. They involve typologically dissimilar languages. The contact is
long, often several hundred years. The contact has remained relatively stable
with strong cultural attachment to the original culture of the indigenous lan-
guage (maintenanceof cultureand religion;Egyptian,Indian Nativelanguages,
Finnish) on the other hand, and language shift, often aided by urbanisation
on the other (Irish) (Thomason 2001: 15–26); cultural shift can occur without
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

138
dahlgren
language shift, of course, toward urbanisation and industrialisation. Learning
of the L2 has benefits for speakers, e.g. employment opportunities (cf.Thoma-
son 2001: 15–26), which has made the language socially attractive for many L2
speakers, using what is essentially a tl2 variety (Thomason 2001: 75). Most
importantly, the variation seems to be mostly phonological, and furthermore
much of it is stress-related transfer: for example, from the transfer effect of
the Egyptian stress system, there followed vowel reduction that profoundly
changed what Greek words must have sounded like in their native form. These
types of contact effects create the uniquely distinguishable sounds of the con-
tact varieties.
3.1
Indian English
Indian English, like Egyptian Greek, has a rather long history of development.
Itwasusedextensivelyfromthemiddleof 19thcenturyonward,butthecontact
in larger scale started earlier with the East India Company, which was given a
royal charter and consequently started to establish trade centres in India. This
broughtinEnglishmerchantsandstartedtheinteractionwithboththeMoghul
emperors of a number of Indian states and the local Indians in general. Further
along came British missionaries, bringing with them the chance for education.
The British army also had a role in spreading the English language by attract-
ing many Indian soldiers (especially Sikhs), in which context English spread
quickly (Mukherjee 2007: 164). The situation is in many ways similar to the
Hellenistic Egypt after Alexander’s conquest.
English is still an official language in government, along with Hindi, and a
high language in the society of India (Sailaja 2009: 1–6).There are some loan-
words in the Indian English variety from the native languages, not used else-
where in other colonial and post-colonial varieties of English. These include
some numerals (one lakh = 100,000),15 some political and administrative
vocabulary (e.g. dharna ‘a sit-in’; Sailaja 2009: 73), and e.g. the verb air-dash,
created by Indian politicians, which means to go from one place to another
very quickly (often by airplane). (Sailaja 2009: 73–77). Some others
(quite few), technical words specific to India, have landed in English per-
manently: e.g. jungle and verandah16 (Durkin 2014: 386–389; Sailaja 2012:
15
These are taught to children at school (mathematic revision). https://nroer.gov.in/nroer​
_team/file/readDoc/55b23f2881fccb054b6be25f/.
16
Jungle (first surviving written record 1776) comes from Hindi jangal, in turn deriving from
Sanskrit jangala-s. The origin of the word is unknown but it has come to the English
language through Hindi. Similarly, verandah (Hindi varanda) seems to have originated
from Portuguese varanda ‘long balcony or terrace’ (originally of uncertain origin, possibly
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
139
362).17 Mainly, however, transfer from indigenous Indian languages has been
phonological: Indian English has a distinct Indian accent (Sailaja 2012: 360).
English alveolar stops /d, t/ are realised as retroflex stops [ɖ], [ʈ], and pronun-
ciation in general is according to spelling (full) vowels ([ˈsæniti] vs. [ˈsænəti]);
stress patterns are syllable-timed (Deterding 2010: 392–395; Sailaja 2012).
The transfer of the stress system is the biggest cause behind the usage of full
vowels: not many syllable-timed languages reduce vowels in the same way as
(BrE) English as a stress-timed language does (cf. e.g. Auer 2001: 1391–1393).
Many Hindi speakers, by contrast, engage in extensive English code-switching,
and Hindi has borrowed vocabulary from English (Sailaja 2009: 62).
Indian English, as much as it sounds like a L2 variety, is the native language
of almost 200,000 Indians: according to the 1991 census report, there were
178,598 Indians, approximately 0.021% of the total population, who have Eng-
lish as their first language. This is in addition to English constantly remaining
the prestige language of the society, and the numbers pertaining to L2 or L3
speakers of English are much higher: 64,602,299 (8.0%) and 25,440,188 (3.1%),
respectively.In the2001censusinIndia,thenumbershadrisenfurther:226,449
L1 English speakers (0.02%), 86,125,221 L2 speakers and 38,993,066 L3 speak-
ers, the total of all these speakers reaching up to 12.18% speakers of English in
the population (Tropf 2004: 11–15; 20; 36).18 No doubt the increasing number
of speakers is related to the prestige position of English in the Indian society,
with an increasing number of parents opting for (private) English schooling
for their children in order to increase their employment opportunities (Tropf
2004: 16). The kind of work facilitated by English-language education includes
e.g. government jobs, business, and education, not unlike the situation in Hel-
lenistic Egypt.
3.2
Irish and (Highland) Scottish Varieties of English
Irish and (Highland) Scottish varieties of English offer fruitful comparisons to
Egyptian Greek. Much of the transfer is again on the phonological level from
the indigenous languages to English, and the replacement of the English phon-
emes by the (originally) L1 ones and the transfer of the stress system of Irish
related to Spanish baranda ‘railing’ (ultimately from Vulgar Latin *barra ‘barrier, bar’)).
Thewordbecameapartof EnglishthroughitsusageinIndia(firstsurvivingwrittenrecord
1711). The Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed 7th August 2020.
https://www.etymonline.com/word/jungle
https://www.etymonline.com/search?q=verandah.
17
Durkin lists ca. 40 loanwords entering English, but many of these have uncertain origins
in the general South Asian linguistic area.
18
http://www.censusindia.gov.in/2011‑documents/lsi/ling_survey_india.html.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

140
dahlgren
(under focus here) and Gaelic onto English are behind the uniquely recognis-
able character of these varieties. As in Indian English, the history of the contact
is a longstanding one.
Irish English was created by the Norman invasion of the late 12th century,
Tudor conquest and colonisation of 16th century and by mid-19th century Eng-
lish was a majority language in the country (e.g. Hickey 2007). As in Indian
English, some (comparable to) technical vocabulary of e.g. local natural ele-
ments have found their way in the English varieties, but these are mainly used
locally. Such are e.g. glen ‘valley’, loch ‘(sea)lake’, etc. in Ireland and Scotland.
Very few loanwords have been borrowed from the languages to English glob-
ally, but among the few are e.g. whisk(e)y, a phonetic spelling of uisce beatha
(in Irish, uisge-beatha in (Scottish) Gaelic), ‘water of life’;19 and e.g. bog. There
is some syntactic transfer such as reduplication (at all at all) and recent past
construction (I was after doing the laundry when I saw the news; also in High-
land Scottish English due to Gaelic influence), using reflexive pronoun for
emphasis (Is it yourself who did this?) etc. Nevertheless, while these features
might seem peculiar or unidiomatic to speakers from other English varieties,
the Irish/(Highland) Scottish varieties are mostly recogniced by their distinct
phonological features. For instance, in Irish English (standard BrE and AmE)
English dental fricatives [θ, ð] are realised as dental stops [t̪, d̪] (three -tree),
and there is an epenthetic schwa after liquids ( filᵊm); furthermore, stress pat-
ternsaretransferredfromIrishwithstressbeingplacedonthefirstsyllable(e.g.
Hickey 2004, 2007).
Some of these features apply similarly to the Highland Scottish variety of
English, originally deriving from the Northern Irish dialect. Some of the fea-
tures that derive from Gaelic are the same in Scots, which is the main source of
variation in Lowland Scottish English.
Scottish English is a continuum of Scots in the Lowlands at the other end,
and Standard Scottish English (sse) at the other (Stuart-Smith 2008: 48).
sse is phonetically similar to Scots in all varieties, although the lexical distri-
bution of phonemes comes close to standard English varieties in some places
(Maguire 2012: 57). (Standard Scottish) English is the prestige language in
contact with both Scots and Gaelic (Maguire 2012: 62).
The shared phonological transfer features from Gaelic include, among oth-
ers, dental production of /t/, /d/ and /n/, bilabial pronunciations of /f/ and
/v/, and retroflex approximant pronunciations of /r/ that retract the following
19
Online Etymology Dictionary, accessed 7th August 2020.
https://www.etymonline.com/word/whiskey.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
141
alveolar consonants (horse [hɔɻʂ]). On the side of morphosyntax, there is the
extended use of progressive aspect and e.g. emphatic use of reflexive pronouns
(as in Irish). Many of these features are even more pronounced in Highland
Scottish English due to the shift to English having been not only rapid but more
recent in that context; hence, there are also many more transfer features extant
in the variety. Gaelic has, for example, left traces of vowel quantity (allophonic
in sse) and pre-aspiration of voiceless stops (happen [haːhpən]) in Highland
Scottish English (Maguire 2012: 63).20
Like Irish, also Gaelic makes use of the epenthetic schwa after liquids (in
Scots, unlike Gaelic, this is restricted to the sequences /lm, rm, rn, rl/, in
words such as girl [girᵊl], film [filᵊm] and a connection to Gaelic is uncer-
tain; Maguire 2012: 62). Also stress placement is distinctly word-initial. As
with Indian English, the contact situation is also typically asymmetric with the
dominantlanguageof thesocietyreceiving(almost)onlyphonologicaltransfer
from the indigenous language, and the indigenous language simplifying, as in
the case of Irish, grammatically due to the influence of the dominant one. This
will largely be because of lack of usage: there are very few L1 speakers of Irish or
Gaelic in either country, to the extent that almost all Irish teachers in Ireland
are L2 speakers. Many of the speakers of Irish also engage in code-switching
into English (e.g. study by Hickey 2009).
3.3
Finland Swedish
The language contact with Swedish and Finnish started in the 16th century.
Swedish was the main language of the government while most Finnish people
spoke Finnish in their everyday lives. After the Russian conquest (1809),
Swedishatfirstremainedtheonlyofficiallanguageuntil1863whenFinnishwas
added alongside it; after Finnish independence in 1917, Finnish has dominated
as the language of the government but Swedish remains an official language of
the government alongside Finnish. There are a few Finnish calques in Finland
Swedish, e.g. leverlåda < maksalaatikko, literally ‘liver box’, meaning a liver-
basedcasserole.InSweden,thesamedishiscalledkorvkaka(lit.‘sausagecake’).
Another delicacy, if ordered in Sweden by its Finland Swedish name, can cause
some confusion among the staff, as the cinnamon roll, called kanelbulle (‘cin-
namon bun’) in Sweden, has the unfortunate name of örfil in Finland Swedish,
20
Gaelic was spoken throughout Scotland until the beginning of the 19th century, after
which it was restricted to the Highlands and Western Isles. Nowadays it is even more
restricted to Western Isles and isolated pockets in the Highlands. In the Highlands, Eng-
lish has and is replacing it, and in the Lowlands, it has been replaced by Scots (Maguire
2012: 53).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

142
dahlgren
deriving from Finnish korvapuusti (lit. ‘slap on the ear’). But again, phonology
is the most distinctive difference between the varieties.
There are some phonemic differences from the Swedish variety, includ-
ing the realisation of sj as [ʂ] and [ɕ ~ ʃ] when it is velar and palatalised in
Sweden. The most noticeable feature of Finland Swedish is the loss of tonal-
ity, causing certain minimal pairs to only be understood from context. These
include /ˈandɛn/ ‘duck’ vs. /ˌandˈɛn/ ‘spirit’ [ˈandɛn], with the latter one hav-
ing a secondary stress in Swedish spoken in Sweden (Kuronen 2000: 17–24;
Kuronen— Leinonen 2001). By contrast, Finnish has taken a high num-
ber of loanwords from Swedish, while hardly any have entered from Finnish
to Swedish. Nowadays, there is much code-switching to Finnish among the
younger L1 Finland Swedish speakers.
Why are the contact situations so similar? Why is there mostly phonolo-
gical transfer? Explanations are partly sociolinguistic, partly typological. The
conquering group will change the societal situation to serve its own purposes
for administration, education, etc. There is no need for the dominant group
to learn the indigenous language well because the society will function largely
on its terms. The indigenous population, by contrast, will learn the L2 if they
want to be employed in administration, education etc.; there will be marriages,
friendships etc. between the groups (see Clarysse 1992: 51–52 regarding the
Egyptian Greek situation). With enough L2 speakers of the shared language,
inadvertent transfer of the perceptually easiest level of the language will occur
(phonology and phonetics). Phonological level might be the easiest to copy
because it is the most salient, and contains less processing than morphosyn-
tactic patterns. An exception to the rule is Cappadocian Greek, where Turkish
agglutinative noun morphology has in some dialects even replaced the inher-
ited Greek flexion (Thomason 2001: 63–64). Importantly, however, Greek
was not a prestige language in the area where it was originally spoken (Janse
p.c.).
4
Discussion and Conclusions
ItisimportanttokeepinmindthatEgyptianGreekcomestousthroughwritten
level only so there is no definite proof of how far spread the variation presen-
ted in this paper was, because not every writer would let the features of spoken
language penetrate through to the written one (some statistics are available,
however, proving e.g. consonant-to-vowel coarticulation beyond chance level
(Dahlgren—Keersemaekers—Stolk forthc.)). This is the situation now
in modern English and French, for example, where some writers let slip the
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
143
occasional phonetic spelling and imperfect inflection, but most try to adhere
to the written standard (if the nonstandard spellings are not intentionally used
in puns or word play, for example). However, the same type of variation repeats
itself in different parts and periods of Egyptian Greek, with parallel evidence
of the same phonological phenomena in Coptic, so it is probable that there
was at least a semi-standard of Greek influenced by Egyptian spoken in Egypt.
To compare what we know of this proposed contact variety with other similar
ones, Egyptian Greek perhaps most resembles Irish English in that the phon-
emicfeaturesderivefromtheindigenouslanguage,andIndianEnglishinbeing
so heavily affected by stress transfer from the indigenous language. In Egyptian
Greek the simplification of grammar was probably related to the fact that most
of the users of this tl2 were of Egyptian-origin, and therefore themselves spoke
a language which was less fusional than Greek. In Irish English, the process is
different but the result the same: there are very few L1 speakers of Irish left,
and this has allowed English, the L1 language of the majority of all Irish users,
to tamper with the inflectional patterns of Irish, because English is mophosyn-
tactically less complex. Simplification is one of the most frequent phenomena
in language contact according to a rich literature of contact linguistics (Hau-
gen 1950, Weinreich 1953, Thomason—Kaufman 1988, Thomason 2001,
Matras 2009; recent statistical study by Sinnemäki—Di Garbo 2018), so
this is not surprising. We do not know what would have happened to Egyptian
Greek without the Arab conquest of 641ce, which limited Greek usage and had
Egyptians shift to Arabic (Richter 2009: 417–432).
If Greek had continued to be used, would it have stayed the same, a presti-
gious contact variety similar to Indian English and Irish English, or would it
have evolved in time as Finland Swedish when prestige effect had changed
after some centuries of usage? The latter might not have required the inde-
pendence of Egypt from Greek but merely a long enough coexistence of the
languages in contact as in Indian English, English still being used after inde-
pendence. Or would Egyptian Greek have eventually advanced into a creole?
Sometimes,contactvarietiescandevelopintocreoleswithouttheintermediate
phase of pidgins (cf. Kouwenberg—Singler 2018). There is some evidence
mainly deriving through the study of Greek effect on Coptic that could con-
tribute to the study of Egyptian Greek as a mixed language. According to Reint-
ges (2004: 70), Coptic represented a bilingual language variety, with two par-
ent languages, Greek and Egyptian. This idea of a profoundly mixed language
has been rejected by other scholars (e.g. Zakrzewska 2017), at least partly;
Zakrzewska concedes that from a sociolinguistic point of view, for example
considering the abrupt emergence of Coptic in the literary use, this corres-
ponds with a constructed linguistic variety intended for in-group communica-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

144
dahlgren
table 4.8
Coptic integration of the Greek loanverb
Bohairic
Manichaean Lycopolitan
Sahidic
a-f-er-keleuin
a-f-r-keleue
a-f-keleue
pst-3sgm-do-command
pst-3sgm-do-command
pst-3sgm-command
tion (Zakrzewska 2017: 134; 140–141). However, some evidence of a language
use drawing from two pools is available.
In (2.2) I discussed the variation between infinitive and imperative in Greek
due to the confusion laid over the forms by the phonetic variation. The situ-
ation with imperative/infinitive verb inflection was further complicated by
Coptic having the (mostly) same form for imperative and infinitive (Layton
2000: 155; Dahlgren 2017: 119–120; Dahlgren—Leiwo 2020). Furthermore,
there is a longstanding debate over whether Coptic borrowed Greek verbs in
the infinitive or the imperative form because of different representations of
them in Coptic dialects, as in Table 4.8.
Bohairic has the form a-f-er-keleuin and Sahidic a-f-keleue for ‘he com-
manded’, the form constituting a light verb construction (Coptic (e)r- (‘to do’)
as an auxiliary, and a Greek verb in its original form). However, the Bohairic
verb form looks like a Greek infinitive and the Sahidic one like an imperative.
According to Grossman and Richter, both verb forms were actually borrowed
in the infinitive. However, due to a combination of phonetic erosion and mor-
phological reduction with some of the dialects (e.g. Sahidic) first dropping the
Coptic auxiliary (e)r- as the verb started to feel ‘own’ i.e. more integrated to nat-
ive Coptic, the Greek infinitive ending -n would have been dropped, leading
to a form looking like the imperative (Grossman—Richter 2017: 208–223).
I argue that instead of the form being more integrated into L1 morphology
through ‘acceptance’, the process would have been initiated by the reduction
of the word-final syllable, which was a typical Coptic feature, visible also in
L2 Egyptian Greek production (see above in 2.2). After that, more integration
would have followed easily as part of the verb already looked more like a native
word (Dahlgren 2018).
Fayyumic Coptic documents offer more evidence of the profound effect
Greek had on Coptic. 8th century Fayyumic letters use Greek phrases with
Coptic meanings, for example phrases such as tirênê nek ‘peace be with you’,
the Greek loanword eirênê fully integrated into Coptic morphology without
any marking of the foreign element. Furthermore, the phrase was never used
in Greek. There was also heavy truncation of Greek words, the forms match-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
145
ing the shorter form of Coptic words; for instance apókrisis ‘separation’ being
much shortened to apokres (Boud’hors 2017: 425–431; 437–438). The form of
theoriginalwordthismuchaltered,thismightsuggestthatGreekwasnolonger
a prestigious language in the Fayyum as there was no attempt to preserve the
foreign pronunciation.
Itisatypicalfeatureof creolestotruncatewordssothatthesemanticallyless
transparent grammatical morphemes are reduced, as well as to include items
fromthelexifierlanguage,retentionsfromthesubstratelanguagesandinternal
creations (Matras 2009: 281). The phrase tirênê nek might have come about
thisway,evenif GreekwasnotexactlyalexifierlanguageforCoptic.Therewere
also often many spelling forms for the same word (holokottinos/holokottn/holok
etc.). The unsystematic misspellings indicate that the orthography was based
on the phonetic form of the word, which seems to have been fully integrated to
Coptic, rather than being a learned phonological or orthographic form. This is
compatiblewithasystemicconvergence.Towhatextentwasthesamemorpho-
syntaxused?If GreekandCopticsharedformsandphrases,wecouldtalkabout
mixed language(s). In relation to prefixation in Coptic, Grossman (2018) finds
that it is unlikely that Greek affected Coptic morphosyntactic changes, such as
the change from (dominant) suffixation in Egyptian to prefixation in Coptic.
The extent of the mixing in each language should offer interesting new aven-
ues of research. Was the simultaneous simplification of structures an ongoing
phenomenon due to L1 impact with advancing bilingualism during the Roman
period, or only L2 usage? Frequency of any structural changes according to
typical patterns of creolisation is one factor that might prove creolisation, so
more statistical studies are needed of the different linguistic aspects of Egyp-
tianGreek.Theformof EgyptianGreekresemplesthefirststageof creolisation,
comparable to e.g. Hawai’i Creole with phoneme replacement (e.g. full vowels
instead of schwa (commA), stress transfer and simplified grammar (compare
Indian English), and furthermore semantic change of English-original words
(Sakoda—Siegel 2004; Drager 2012). Context helps where grammatical
function disappears (compare Finland Swedish loss of tonality): Coptic had a
morestrictwordorderthanGreek(seee.g.Grossman2014),whichmighthave
helped to distinguish verb mood variation from infinitive in Egyptian Greek,
for example, if there was transfer of the syntactic level as well as the others.
This could have lead to the chain effect of phonology > phonetics > morphology
> syntax, where the phonological system of Coptic created phonetic features
that eliminated the distinction of Greek cases and verb mood by their word-
final vowels, and consequently forced word order to change (cf. Horrocks
2010: 108–109; 172–174) in order to preserve references, all beginning with stress
transfer. Although I here offer more questions than answers, perhaps with the
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

146
dahlgren
help of new technologies21 at our disposal, future studies will offer answers to
these questions.
References
The Greek documentary papyri can be found by their abbreviations in the Checklist of
Editions of Greek, Latin, Demotic and Coptic Papyri, Ostraca and Tablets (Web edition).
http://library.duke.edu/rubenstein/scriptorium/papyrus/texts/clist.html.
Greek and Coptic Text Editions
bgu= AegyptischeUrkundenausdenKoeniglichenMuseenzuBerlin:GriechischeUrkun-
den. 1912, Berlin: Königliche Museen zu Berlin.
O.Claud. 2 = Bingen, Jean—Bülow-Jacobsen, Adam—Cockle, Walter E.H.—
Cuvigny, Hélène—Kayser François—Van Rengen, Wilfried (eds.) 1997,
Mons Claudianus: Ostraca graeca et latina, Vol. 2: Nos. 191–416., Cairo: Institut fran-
çais d’archéologie orientale.
O.Claud. 4 = Bülow-Jacobsen, Adam (ed.) 2009, Ostraca graeca et latina, Vol. 4: Nos.
632–896.ed., Cairo: Institut français d’archéologie orientale.
O.Frangé 8 = Boud’hors, A.—Heurtel, C. 2010. Les ostraca coptes de la tt 29. Autour
du moine Frangé. vol. 1 Textes, Bruxelles: CReA-Patrimoine.
O. Narm. = Pintaudi, Rosario—Sijpersteijn, Pieter J. 1993, Ostraka Greci da Nar-
muthis (ogn i), Pisa: Giardini editori e stampatori in Pisa.
P. Hamb.bil. 1 = Diebner, Bernd J.—Kasser, Rodolphe (eds.) 1989, Hamburger
Papyrus bil. 1. Die alttestamentlichen Texte des Papyrus Bilinguis 1 der Staats- und
UniversitätsbibliothekHamburg:Canticumcanticorum(coptice),LamentationesIere-
miae (coptice), Ecclestiastes (graece et coptice), Genève: Cramer.
psi = Vitelli, Girolamo—Norsa, Medea (eds.) 1927, Papiri greci e latini, Firenze:
Enrico Ariani.
Bibliography
Adams, James N. 2003, Bilingualism and the Latin language, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Aikhenvald, Alexandra Y. 2007, Grammars in Contact: A Cross-Linguistic Perspect-
ive, in A.Y. Aikhenvald—R.M.W. Dixon (eds.), GrammarsinContact.ACross-Linguis-
tic Typology, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 1–66.
21
There are new searchable databases that allow searches of the orthographic level i.e. mis-
spellings, that are linked to the Papyrological Navigator: Trismegistos Text Irregularities
andParatypa,developedintheprojectDigitalGrammarof theGreekdocumentarypapyri.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
147
Anderson, John M. 2007, The Grammar of names, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Andersson, Samuel—Sayeed, Ollie—Vaux, Bert 2017, The phonology of lan-
guage contact, Oxford Handbooks Online.
Auer, Peter 2001, Silben- und akzentzählende Sprachen, in M. Haspelmath,—
E. König—W. Oesterreicher—W. Raible (eds.), Languagetypologyandlanguageuni-
versals. An international handbook, Berlin: De Gruyter: 1391–1399.
Bagnall, Robert S. 2007, Reflections on the Greek of the Narmouthis Ostraca, in
M. Capasso—P. Davoli (eds.), New archaeological and papyrological researches on
the Fayyum, Proceedings of the International Meeting of Egyptology and Papyro-
logy, Lecce, June 8th–10th 2005, 14–21. Papyrologia Lupiensia 14, Galatina (Lecce):
Congedo.
Bagnall, Robert S. 1993, Egypt in Late Antiquity, Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Bouchaud, Charlène—Morales, Jacob—Schram, Valerie.—van der Veen,
Marijke 2017, The earliest evidence for citrus in Egypt, in V. Zech-Matterne—
G. Fiorentino (eds.), agrumed: Archaeology and history of citrus fruit in the Medi-
terranean:Acclimatization,diversifications,uses.Naples:PublicationsduCentreJean
Bérard (généré le 17 août 2020).
Boud’hors, Anne 2017, Greek loanwords in Fayyumic documentary texts, in E. Gross-
man—P. Dils—T.S. Richter—W. Schenkel (eds.), GreekinfluenceonEgyptian-Coptic.
Contact-induced change in an ancient African language (ddglc Working Papers 1.
Lingua Aegyptia, Studia Monographica 17), Hamburg: Widmaier Verlag: 423–439.
Clarysse, Willy 2010, Bilingual Papyrological Archives, in A. Papaconstantinou (ed.),
The Multilingual Experience in Egypt, from the Ptolemies to the Abbasids, Farnham:
Ashgate: 47–72.
Clarysse, Willy 1993, Egyptian scribes writing Greek, “CdÉ” 68: 186–201.
Clarysse, Willy 1992, Some Greeks in Egypt, in J.H. Johnson (ed.), Life in a Multicul-
turalSociety:EgyptfromCambysestoConstantineandBeyond, Chicago:The Oriental
Institute: 51–52.
Clarysse, Willy 1987, Greek Loan-words in Demotic, in S.P. Vleeming (ed.), Aspects of
Demotic Lexicography. Acts of the Second International Conference for Demotic Stud-
ies Leiden, 19–21 September 1984, Studia Demotica i., Leuven: Peeters: 9–33.
Crespo, Emilio 2007. The linguistic policy of the Ptolemaic kingdom, in M.V. Chatzo-
poulos—V. Psilakakou (eds.), Phones charakter ethnikos: actes du ve Congres Inter-
national de Dialectologie Grecque: (Athenes 28–30 septembre 2006), Ἀθήνα: Κέντρον
Ἐλληνικῆς καὶΡωμαϊκῆς Ἀρχαιότητος τοῦἘθνικοῦἸδρύματος Ἐρευνῶν Βασιλἐως Κων-
στανίνου: 35–50.
Dahlgren, Sonja 2016, Towards a definition of an Egyptian Greek variety, “Papers in
Historical Phonology” 1/1. 90–108.
Dahlgren, Sonja 2017, Outcome of long-term language contact: Transfer of Egyptian
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

148
dahlgren
phonologicalfeaturesontoGreekinGraeco-RomanEgypt,Universityof Helsinki,doc-
toral dissertation.
Dahlgren, Sonja 2018, [review to] Grossman, E.—Dils, P.—Sebastian, T.R.—Schen-
kel, W. (eds.), 2017, Greek influence on Egyptian-Coptic. Lingua Aegyptia, Studia
Monographica 17, “Journal of Greek Linguistics” 18/2: 281–291.
Dahlgren, Sonja 2020, The system of Coptic vowel reduction: Evidence from L2 Greek
usage, in N. Kuznetsova—C. Anderson (eds.), The dynamics of vowel reduction and
loss: phonetic mechanisms and outcomes for phonology and morphology, “Italian
Journal of Linguistics” 32/1: 209–226.
Dahlgren, Sonja—Leiwo, Martti 2020, Confusion of form or phoneme?, in D. Rafi-
yenko—I.A. Seržant (eds.), Postclassical Greek. Contemporary Approaches to Philo-
logy and Linguistics. Trends in Linguistics. Studies and monographs. [TiLSM] 335,
Berlin/Boston: de Gruyter Mouton: 283–301.
Dahlgren, Sonja—Keersmaekers, Alek—Stolk. Joanne ( forthcoming), Lan-
guage contact in historical documents: the identification and co-occurrence of Egyp-
tian transfer features in Greek documentary papyri.
Drager, Katie 2012, Pidgin and Hawai‘i English: An overview, “International Journal
of Language, Translation and Intercultural Communication” 1: 61–73.
Deterding, David 2010,VariationacrossEnglishes:Phonology, in A. Kirkpatrick (ed.),
The Routledge handbook of World Englishes, Oxon/New York: Routledge: 385–399.
Dohlus, Katrin 2005, Phonetics or phonology: Asymmetries in loanword adapta-
tions—French and German mid front rounded vowels in Japanese, “zas Papers in Lin-
guistics” 42: 117–135.
Durkin, Philip 2014, Borrowed words: A history of loanwords in English, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Ehala, Martin 2012, Transfer, hybridization and analogy in L2 usage:The case of Esto-
nian object marking, “International Journal of Bilingualism” 16/1: 159–174.
Fischer-Bovet, Christelle 2008, Army and Society in Ptolemaic Egypt, Ph.D. dis-
sertation, Stanford University.
Fewster, Penelope 2002, Bilingualism in Roman Egypt, in J.N. Adams—M. Janse—
S. Swain (eds.), Bilingualisminancientsociety:Languagecontactandthewritten text,
Oxford: Oxford University Press: 220–245.
Flemming, Edward 2009, The phonetics of schwa vowels, in D. Minkova (ed.), Phon-
ological weakness in English. From old to present-day English, New York: Palgrave
Macmillan: 78–98.
Fournet,Jean-Luc2003, Langues,écrituresetculturedanslespraesidia,inH.Cuvigny
(ed.), La route de Myos Hormos. L’armée romaine dans le désert Oriental d’Égypte.
Vol. 2, Cairo: Institut français d’archéologie orientale du Caire: 427–500.
Fournet, Jean-Luc 2020, The Rise of Coptic, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gignac, Francis T. 1976, A grammar of the Greek papyri of the Roman and Byzantine
periods. Vol. i Phonology, Milano: Istituto editoriale cisalpino—La goliardica.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
149
Gignac, Francis T. 1991, Phonology of the Greek of Egypt, influence of Coptic on the, in
A.S. Atiya (ed.),TheCopticencyclopedia,Volume 8, NewYork: Macmillan Publishers:
71–96.
Girgis, Wahib A. 1966, Greek loan words in Coptic (Part ii), “Bulletin de la Société
d’Archéologie Copte” 18: 71–96.
Grossman, Eitan 2018, Did Greek Influence the Coptic Preference for Prefixing? A
Quantitative-Typological Perspective, “Journal of Language Contact” 11/1: 1–31.
Grossman, Eitan 2015, No case before the verb, obligatory case after the verb in Coptic,
in E. Grossman—M. Haspelmath—T.S. Richter (edd.), Egyptian-Coptic linguistics in
typological perspective, Berlin: de Gruyter: 203–225.
Grossman, Eitan—Richter, Tonio S. 2017, Dialectal variation and language
change:Thecaseof Greekloan-verbintegrationstrategiesinCoptic, in E. Grossman—
P. Dils—T.S. Richter—W. Schenkel (eds.), Greek Influence on Egyptian-Coptic:
Contact-induced change in an ancient African language, Hamburg: Widmaier Verlag:
207–236.
Haugen, Einar 1950, The Analysis of linguistic borrowing, “Language” 26/1: 210–231.
Hickey, Raymond 2007, Irish English: History and Present-Day Forms, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hickey, Raymond 2004, A Sound Atlas of Irish English, Volume 1, Berlin: de Gruyter:
57–60.
Hickey,Tina 2009, Code-switchingandborrowinginIrish, “Journal of Sociolinguistics”
13/5: 670–688.
Horrocks, Geoffrey C. 2010, Greek: A history of the language and its speakers,
Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.
Kouwenberg,Silvia—Singler,JohnV.2018,CreolizationinContext:Historicaland
Typological Perspectives, “Annual Review of Linguistics” 4: 213–232.
Kuronen, Mikko 2000, Vokaluttalets akustik i sverigesvenska, finlandssvenska och fin-
ska, Studia Philologica Jyväskyläensia 49. University of Jyväskylä, doctoral disserta-
tion.
Kuronen, Mikko—Leinonen, Kari 2001, Fonetiska skillnader mellan finlands-
svenska och rikssvenska, in L. Jönsson—V. Adelswärd—A. Cederberg—P.A. Petters-
son—C. Kelly (eds.), Svenskans beskrivning 24. Förhandlingar vid Tjugofjärde sam-
mankomsten för svenskans beskrivning, Linköping: Linköping University Electronic
Press: 125–138.
Lambdin, Thomas O. 1958, The bivalence of Coptic Eta and related problems in the
vocalization of Egyptian, “Journal of Near Eastern Studies” 17/3: 177–193.
Lambert, James 2014, Indian English slang, in J. Coleman (ed.), Global English Slang:
Methodologies and Perspectives, London: Routledge: 126–134.
Lambert, James 2018, Anglo-Indian slang in dictionaries on historical principles,
“World Englishes” 37/2: 248–260.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

150
dahlgren
Layton, Bentley 2000, A Coptic grammar. With Chrestomathy and glossary. Sahidic
dialect, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Leiwo,Martti2003,ScribesandLanguageVariation,inL.Pietilä-Castrén—M.Vester-
inen (eds.), GraptaPoikilai.PapersandMonographsof theFinnishInstituteatAthens
Vol. viii, Helsinki: Foundation of the Finnish Institute at Athens: 1–11.
Leiwo, Martti 2005, Substandard Greek. Remarks from Mons Claudianus, in
N.M. Kennel—J.E. Tomlinson (eds.), Ancient Greece at the turn of the millennium.
Recent work and future perspectives. Proceedings of the Athens Symposium 18–20 May
2001, Athens: Canadian Archaeological Institute at Athens: 237–261.
Leiwo, Martti 2010, Imperatives and other directives in the letters from Mons Claudi-
anus, in T.V. Evans—D.D. Obbink (eds.), The language of the papyri, Oxford: Oxford
University Press: 97–119.
Leiwo, Martti 2017, Confusion of mood and tense in Greek private letters of Roman
Egypt, in M. Janse—K. Bentein (eds.), Linguistic variation and change: Tense, aspect
and modality in Ancient Greek, Leiden: Brill: 242–260.
Leiwo, Martti 2020, L2 Greek in Roman Egypt. Intense language contact in Roman
military forts, “Journal of Historical Sociolinguistics” 6/2: 1–31.
Loprieno, Antonio—Müller, Matthias 2012, Ancient Egyptian and Coptic, in
Z. Frajzyngier—E. Shay (eds.), The Afroasiatic languages, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press: 102–144.
Maguire, Warren 2012, English and Scots in Scotland, in R. Hickey (ed.), Areal Fea-
tures of the Anglophone World, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter: 53–78.
Matras, Yaron 2009, Language contact, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Messeri, Gabriella—Pintaudi, Rosario 2001, Corrigenda ad ogn i, “Aegyptus”
81: 253–282.
Mukherjee, Joybrato 2007, Steady states in the evolution of New Englishes: Present-
day Indian English as an equilibrium, “Journal of English Linguistics” 35/2: 157–
187.
Papaconstantinou, Arietta (ed.) 2010, The Multilingual Experience in Egypt, from
the Ptolemies to the ʿAbbāsids, Farnham: Ashgate Publishing, Ltd.
Pestman, Pieter W. 1993, The archive of the Theban Choachytes (second century b.c.):
A survey of the Demotic and Greek papyri contained in the archive, Leuven: Peeters.
Peust, Carsten 1999, Egyptian Phonology. An Introduction to the Phonology of a Dead
Language, Göttingen: Peust und Gutschmidt.
Reintges,ChrisR.2004,CopticEgyptianasabilinguallanguagevariety,inP.Bádenas
de la Peña—S. Torallas Tovar—E.R. Luján—M.Á. Gallego (eds.), Lenguas en con-
tacto: el testimonio escrito, Madrid: Consejo superior de invastigaciones cientificas:
69–86.
Richter, Tonio S. 2009, Greek, Coptic and the ‘language of the Hijra’: the rise and
decline of the Coptic language in late antique and medieval Egypt, in H.M. Cotton—
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

egyptian greek: a contact variety
151
R.G. Hoyland—J.J. Price—D.J. Wasserstein (eds.), From Hellenism to Islam: Cultural
and linguistic change in the Roman Near East, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press: 401–446.
Sailaja, Pingali 2012, Indian English: Features and sociolinguistic aspects, “Language
and Linguistics Compass” 6/6: 359–370.
Sailaja, Pingali 2009, Indian English, Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Sakoda, Kent—Siegel, Jeff 2004, Hawai’i Creole: Phonology, in B. Kortmann—
E.W. Schneider, in collab. with K. Burridge, R. Mesthrie, C. Upton (eds.), A handbook
of varieties of English: A Multimedia ReferenceTool.Vol. 1: Phonology, Berlin: Mouton
de Gruyter: 729–749.
Sinnemäki, Kaius—Di Garbo, Francesca 2018, Language structures may adapt to
the sociolinguistic environment, but it matters what and how you count: A typological
study of verbal and nominal complexity, “Frontiers in Psychology” 9: 1–22.
Stolk, Joanne V. 2015, Case variation in Greek papyri. Retracing dative case syncretism
in the language of the Greek documentary papyri and ostraca from Egypt (300bce–
800ce),doctoraldissertationchapter,Universityof Oslo,Departmentof Philosophy,
Classics, History of Art and Ideas.
Stuart-Smith, Jane 2008, Scottish English: Phonology, in B. Kortmann—C. Upton
(eds.), Varieties of English 1. The British Isles, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter: 48–70.
Thomason, Sarah G. 2001, Languagecontact.Anintroduction, Edinburgh: Edinburgh
University Press.
Thomason, Sarah G.—Kaufman, Terence 1988, Language contact, creolization,
and genetic linguistics, Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Torallas Tovar, Sofía 2010, Greek in Egypt, in E.J. Bakker (ed.), A companion to the
Ancient Greek language, Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell: 253–266.
Torallas Tovar, Sofía 2004, Egyptian lexical interference in the Greek of Byzantine
and Early Islamic Egypt, in P.M. Sijpesteijn—L. Sundelin (eds.), Papyrology and the
History of Early Islamic Egypt, Leiden: Brill: 163–198.
TorallasTovar,Sofía( forthcoming),GreekandEgyptian:Didlinguisticpoliciesexist
in Graeco-Roman Egypt, in E. O’Connell (ed.), Egypt and Empire, London.
Tropf, Herbert S. 2004, India and its languages, Munich: Siemens ag.
Vierros, Marja 2014, Bilingualism in Hellenistic Egypt, in G.K. Giannakis (ed.), Encyc-
lopedia of Ancient Greek Language and Linguistics, Leiden: Brill: 234–238.
Vierros, Marja 2012, Bilingual notaries in Hellenistic Egypt. A study of Greek as a
second language, Brussel: Koninklijke Vlaamse Academie van België voor Weten-
schappen en Kunsten.
Wagner, Thomas 2017, L2 irregular verb morphology: Exploring behavioral data from
intermediate English learners of German as a foreign language using generalized
mixed effects models, “Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching” 7/3: 535–
553.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

152
dahlgren
Weinreich, Uriel 1979 [19531], Languages in contact. Findings and problems, The
Hague: Mouton Publishers.
Zakrzewska, Ewa D. 2017, “A bilingual language variety” or “the language of the
Pharaohs”? Coptic from the perspective of contact linguistics, in E. Grossman—
P. Dils—T.S. Richter—W. Schenkel (eds.), Greek Influence on Egyptian-Coptic:
Contact-induced change in an ancient African language, Hamburg: Widmaier Verlag:
115–161.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Franco Fanciullo, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_007
chapter 5
Substrate Matters
Franco Fanciullo
I would like to start with a personal anecdote. Many years ago, as a young stu-
dent, I was asked during a Historical Linguistics (in Italy, “Glottologia”) examin-
ation whether the Messapic language had the sound that in the Greek alphabet
is represented by the digamma. I should have known, but I could not remem-
ber. Thinking on my feet, I reasoned that in present (Romance) Salento dia-
lects, in some places more than others, [v] can sometimes undergo deletion:
for example, Lat. vīvu (‘alive-M’) / vīva (‘alive-F’) can become ['iu] / ['ia], ūva
(‘grapes’) can become ['ua]. “Chorographic” (i.e., geographic) congruence, the
importance of which was particularly stressed by Merlo, is perhaps the best-
known of the three criteria outlined by Ascoli to diagnose the existence of a
substrate phenomenon.Therefore, I answered that Messapic did not have such
a sound. It was a mistake, of course,1 but one that taught me a valuable lesson.
I was, in fact, directly experiencing the fallacy of the chorographic criterion
(which, to be fair, is not always futile): diatopic congruency cannot corres-
pond eo ipso to phonetic-phonological congruency, though (in our case) the
present inhabitants of Salento do seem to largely descend from ancient Mes-
sapians. There is, indeed, no evidence of any mass extermination during or
after the Roman conquest. On the contrary, the modern place name Tuturano
(an ancient settlement a little south of Brindisi), for instance, is the outcome
of a Latin praedial form (something like [praediu] *t(ha)otor-ānu) which
derives from the Messapic gentilitial name θaotor or similar and suggests that
the owner of the praedium was a Latin-Messapic Mr Θaotor.
I can add that, just as “chorographic” congruency does not work properly
retrospectively, it does not work properly prospectively either: Salento regional
Italian does not show any sign of [v]-deletion, though this deletion is well
attested in Salento dialects. On the other hand, as anyone interested in study-
ing Italo-Romance dialects knows well, the allophones [bb] and [dʤ] (which
are always geminated unless they occur after a consonant) in regional central
and southern Italian is correctly attributed to the influence of the dialects, that
1 As, e.g., nominative deivas (< *deiwo-s) = deus in inscription nr. 81 (from San Cataldo near
Lecce) in Pisani 1964 easily testifies.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

154
fanciullo
is to say, after all, to a type of substrate conditioning: c.-s. It. [bb]ene ≠stand. It.
[b]ene, that is /'bεne/ ‘well’ in both systems; c.-s. It. li[bb]ra ≠stand. It. li[b]ra
(3rd pers. of the verb librare ‘to balance’), that is /'libra/ in both systems (but
c.-s. It. li[bb]ra = stand. It. li[bb]ra ‘libra [pound]’, that is /'libbra/ in both sys-
tems); c.-s. It. [dʤ]irare ≠stand. It. [ʤ]irare, that is /ʤi‘rare/ ‘to turn’ in both
systems; c.-s. It. ma[dʤ]o ≠stand. It. ma[ʤ]o, that is /'maʤo/ ‘sg. of [re] magi
= the three wise men’ in both systems (but c.-s. It fu[dʤ]i = stand. It. fu[dʤ]i
‘you run away’, that is /'fudʤi/ in both systems).2 In the same way, we have
to ascribe to the Sicilian dialect, which characteristically has [rr-] or [ɽɽ-] as
allophones of /r-/ at the beginning of the word (see [rr]osa or [ɽɽ]osa ‘rose’ =
/'rosa/), the same allophone that we find in Sicilian regional Italian (see e.g.
Sic. reg. It. la [rr]ivoluzione [rr]ussa ‘the Russian revolution’).
Against the opinion of the so-called “substratophobes” (but, at the same
time, without any uncritical acceptance of the opinion of the so-called “sub-
stratomaniacs”), it is likely that the current, manifold interaction between dia-
lects and standard Italian is somewhat comparable to the interaction between
Latin and all the other languages that Latin superimposed during its spread. In
fact, not only can we expect that in similar situations we find, ceteris paribus,
similar solutions, but also, much more importantly, we have written evidence
that, just as an Italian can more or less recognise where another Italian comes
from on the basis of (some) of his pronunciation (which, in any case, is a sort
2 Generally speaking, in the most conservative phonology of central and southern dialects, [b]
was the post-consonantal pronunciation (while [v] was the non-postconsonantal one) of /b/
(issued from the collision of Lat. B and V), regardless of the kind of the preceding C, which
could then be also another [b]: e.g., central-southern ⸢z-boltá(re)⸣‘to turn; to sprain’, with
/sb-/from*ex-volv[i]tāre(where/s-/<ex-selects[b]),butalsocentral-southern⸢abbento⸣
‘rest’, with abb- from adventus (where *d from ad- selects [b], after which *-db- > -bb-). It
is precisely with this [bb], final result of etymological */db/, that, in the interaction between
central and southern dialects (where [b] as stop is possible only if in postconsonantal pos-
ition; gemination is only a peculiar aspect of postconsonantal position: the consonant in
secondpositionisprecededbyacopyof itself)andstandardItalian(where[b]canappearnot
onlyafteraconsonant,includinggemination,butalsobetweenvowelsandatthebeginningof
the word), central-southern speakers replaced the non-postconsonantal [b] of Italian: at first,
in the Italianisms that little by little had entered the various dialects, then in regional Italian
with a central-southern substrate (more details in Fanciullo 1997). As for [dʤ] as a central-
southern pronunciation of /ʤ/: generally (more details in e.g., Fanciullo 2018a), Tusc. / It.
/ʤ/ corresponds etymologically, in central-southern dialects, to a /j/ (pronounced [j] in non-
postconsonantal, [ɉ] in postconsonantal position), while geminated [dʤ] is, in these dialects,
the continuation of Lat. -bj- and -vj-. Precisely this last, geminated, [dʤ] has, in the interac-
tion between central-southern dialects and Italian, taken the place of non-postconsonantal
/ʤ/ (= It. not geminated [ʤ)]: at first, in Italianisms that had entered the various dialects,
then in regional Italian with a southern substrate.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

substrate matters
155
of substrate conditioning), the same happened among the Romans. Regard-
ing proprii quidam et inenarrabiles soni (Quintilian, Institutio Oratoria 1,5,33),
thanks to which nonnumquam nationes deprehendimus, that is to say, the way
in which we guess the geographical origin of our interlocutor (since sonis hom-
ines ut aera tinnitu dinoscimus, ib., 11,30), the reader might consult Fanciullo
2018b: 202ff.3
As a consequence, the always present, very complex interaction between
Italian and dialects urges us to be very prudent when we are talking about
substrate. As Filipponio 2015 first noticed,4 the opinion expressed in Adams
2007: 368 is rather hasty. According to Adams, one can expect to find linguistic
interference in situations of bilingualism, but the interference “will disappear
once the substrate language is dead”. In principle Adams is right; but the effects
of original interference will persist.To remain in the field of Italo-romance, the
first-phase Roman dialect, a high-Southern type of Italian dialect, acted as a
substrate for the second-phase Roman dialect (from 16th century), which is
a sort of out-of-Tuscany Tuscan dialect. The first-phase Roman dialect disap-
peared some 400 years ago, but some of its effects (and not only phonetic ones)
are still present in the contemporary dialect: e.g., [bb] for [b] = /b/ and [dʤ] for
[ʤ] = /ʤ/ in non-post-consonantal position; the assimilation of type mo[nd]o
‘world’ (lat. mundu) > mo[nn]o; the different morphemes -amo, -emo, -imo, 1st
pl. of present indicative, different according to conjugation, vs. the sole Tuscan
morpheme -iamo for all conjugations.
Whenwetalkaboutsubstrate(cf.Fanciullo2018b),wemustkeepinmind
that it is a label for at least two concepts:
a)
“substrate” as a specific and unavoidable sub-field of contact linguistics;
b)
“substrate” as a specific theory of linguistic change, formalized in the
second half of the 19th century and in vogue until at least the mid-20th.
3 Here I discuss some documentary evidence, e.g., the case of an eques romanus who was sit-
ting near Tacitus at the circus, who, after talking a while without identifying him, asked him
whether he was italicus […] an provincialis (Tacitus came from northern Italy or from Gallia
Narbonensis: according to his manner of speaking he did not seem to be Romanus). At the
indirect answer of the writer (nosti me et quidem ex studiis), the other asked at once: Tacitus
es an Plinius?—Pliny was also not Romanus as he came from Como, in northern Italy (anec-
dote in Plinius, Epistulae 9,23). In Historia Augusta, Sev. 15,7, one can read about the “terrible”
African accent in the Latin of Septimius Severus’ sister: she was from Leptis Magna, in mod-
ern Libya. I add here that, one century before, the poet Statius commended another Severus,
Lucius Septimius, ancestor of the emperor and also from Leptis Magna, on his becoming, in
Italy, as Italus as an Italus, having retained nothing of African Latin and ways of life (non
sermo Poenus, non habitus tibi, externa non mens: in Silvae 4,5,45–46).
4 Note 34 p. 116.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

156
fanciullo
It is my conviction that the debate between “substratomaniacs” and “sub-
stratophobes”, so lively and so readily rekindled, originates from the lack of this
distinction.
G.I. Ascoli was the first who formulated a substrate-centred theory of lin-
guistic change, which is based on three criteria:
i)
“chorographic” (i.e. geographic): the diatopic distribution of L1 (the van-
ishing language overwhelmed by an incoming language) and L2 (the
incoming language which takes the place of L1) must be the same;
ii)
“intrinsic” (i.e. structural): there must be a structural correspondence
between the element x of L2 that is to be attributed to L1 and the element
y of L1 that is considered to be the trigger to x of L2;
iii)
“extrinsic”: if various languages share the same substrate, an element x in
a L2 will be due to substrate phenomenon if it is found in all languages
which share that substrate.
To assert a (phonological inprimis) legacy from L1 to L2, it is necessary to satisfy
all of these criteria, although for iii) in particular, it is possible that there might
not be enough data.
Ascoli’s criteria were quite reasonable5 in a phase in which the aim of linguists
was to describe in detail how sound changes happen (see e.g. the formulation
of Verner’s law, which took place in the same period) but in which there were
notyetadequateinstrumentstoexplainwhy(eventodayitisdifficulttoexplain
whylanguageschange).InAscoli’stime,Romancelinguisticswasalongwayoff
from its present state. It had not yet dealt with la faillite de l’étymologie phon-
étique (as per Gilliéron’s formulation), and it had not yet ascertained that the
more details you collect, the more difficult it is to reduce linguistic changes
to mere equations. Indeed, Romance languages provide much more data than
languages with restricted corpora, on which 19th- and 20th-century linguistics
(in particular, Indo-European linguistics) had been established. It is not a coin-
cidence, then, that “geo-linguists” like Rohlfs, a data collector for ais, were the
first and most passionate “substratophobes”.6
5 Their aim is very clear: to counteract indiscriminate use of substrate principle, which was not
uncommonevenamongAscoli’sfollowers.Merlo,forinstance,didnothesitateto“reverse”,so
tospeak,aboveallthesecondcriterion,choosingfrommodernRomancevarietiescertainele-
ments which, being unexpected because they differ from standard utterances, he considered
sure indications of past languages, for which documentary evidence is totally lacking (Fan-
ciullo 2018b: 206).
6 See e.g. Rohlfs 1925.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

substrate matters
157
On this basis, I think that Ascoli’s criteria are no longer useful today: not
because they are wrong per se, but because they were conceived in a differ-
ent theoretical framework. Of course, I have nothing against criterion i. (it
would be nonsensical, for instance, to look for traces of Celtic in Calabria), nor
against criterion iii. (although sufficient evidence might be lacking). However,
we ought to remember what I said earlier about the tendency of Salento dia-
lects to delete [v]: these dialects not only did not inherit this tendency from
Messapic(L1),butalsotheydidnotinfluenceregionalItalian(L2).Thisexample
concretely demonstrates that substrate phenomena in L1 and L2 have no neces-
sary cause-effect relationship. Moreover, it is more difficult to explain what
structural congruency means. Unlike most scholars, I am convinced that we
must not necessarily expect to find in L2 a “copy” of what was in L1. Of course,
some “copying” phenomena do appear (recall the southern Italian pronunci-
ation [bb] and [dʤ] for standard Italian /b/ = [b] and /ʤ/ = [ʤ] or the gemin-
ated pronunciation [rr] or [ɽɽ] in Sicilian regional Italian, all of which depend
ondialectinfluence),butif oneknowsreasonablywellboth L1and L2,oneoften
discovers that a substrate heritage undergoes exaptation because of the new
context, which is certainly different from the previous one. Sometimes, sub-
strate may prevent the transfer of certain phenomena from L1 to L2, or promote
the development of traits that are opposite to the ones in L1.
Let’s take a look at an example of exaptation. In southern Italy, Potenza
has a dialect of northern Italian origin which was transplanted to southern
Italy during the Middle Ages and, as a consequence, is nowadays deeply influ-
encedbythesurroundingsouthernItaliandialects.Inotherwords:thepresent-
day Potenza dialect is a southern Italian dialect with a northern Italian lin-
guistic substrate. In this dialect, the morpheme -árə of awtsárə ‘you lift / lift!’,
kandárə ‘you sing / sing!’, purtárə ‘you carry / carry!’, second person plural of
the present indicative and of the imperative (i.), constitutes a minimal pair
with the morpheme -átə of awtsátə ‘lifted’, kandátə ‘sung’, purtátə ‘carried’, of
the past participle (ii.). In i) one may notice, under a southern Italian veneer
(-r- < -ð- < -d-), the northern-Italian heritage of the dental lenition (-d- < Lat.
-T-).SinceinnorthernItaliandialectsthelenitionof -T-affectsboththemorph-
eme of the second person plural and the morpheme of the past participle, in
the Potenza dialect we should expect to find -r- < -ð- < -d- not only in i), where
we actually see it, but also in ii), where instead it is missing. However, we do
not have in the present-day Potenza dialect a case of failed intrinsic evidence
(or failed structural congruency). Rather, we have a sort of morphophonolo-
gical polarization. In fact, some generations ago we had -árə as the morpheme
of the past participle in the Potenza dialect as well, cf., e.g., the original past
participle > noun straššənárə ‘sort of homemade pasta’ (properly: ⸢strascinati⸣,
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

158
fanciullo
the past participle plural of straššəná ‘to drag’), where the preservation of the
original ending has been favoured by the trans-categorization verb > noun. In
other words, in order to allow the distinction between the second person plural
and the past participle, the Potenza dialect preserved the northern Italian out-
come in the second person plural, but adopted the southern morpheme for the
past participle. In fact, it should be noted that, generally and notwithstanding
the lenition of -T-, the morphemes of second person plural (e.g.: Ligurian cantè
< *cantadi < cantātis; Rohlfs, GrammStor. §531) and past participle (e.g.:
Ligurian -ao < -ātu; ib. §620) actually remain different in northern Italian dia-
lects as well.
Now let us look at an example of reverse substrate reaction. One might think
that, just as [bb] = /b/ and [dʤ] = /ʤ/ (which is in southern regional Italian, as
seen above, definitely a direct heritage from dialect substrate), the voiced seg-
ment [ddz-] in cases such as [ddz]appa ‘hoe’, [ddz]io ‘uncle’, [ddz]òccolo ‘hoof’,
[ddz]ùcchero ‘sugar’ (where standard Italian has [tts-]: [tts]appa ecc.), is also
a direct dialectal heritage in Salento regional Italian. That is to say, according
to Merlo’s thinking and terminology, this outcome suggests the inability of the
Salento glottis to utter voiceless [tts]. On the contrary, Salento dialect also has
[tts] ([tts]appa, [tts]íu, [tts]wèkkulu, [tts]úkkaru). The pronunciation [ddz-],
missing in the dialect but compulsory in the regional Italian of the same area,
is a perhaps unconscious but precise distancing of the regional Italian phon-
etics from dialectal phonetics, which is perceived as “rough” and consequently
avoided.7
The lesson is clear. On the one hand, as the interaction between (Regional)
Italian and Italian dialects shows, we have to deal with substrate as a linguistic
heritagefrom L1to L2(a.above).Ontheotherhand,however,thisdoesnotatall
mean that, when we find in a language peculiar features (in primis of phonetic
nature)thataredifferentfromtheoneswewereexpecting,wehavetoautomat-
ically conjecture that they are what remains of earlier languages which have
disappeared and about which we knownothing.Such use of substrateis typical
of a “substratomaniac” approach, such as for instance that adopted by Merlo.
Whenhe commentedonsomeunexpectedvoicedoutcomes(fromLatinvoice-
less stops) from the Potenza dialect8 whose northern Italian origin had not yet
been detected, Merlo wrote: “Meglio ritenere la sonora basilisca una anomalia,
uncasosporàdico,edichiararlasingolarmente,indipendentemente. Forselà,in
7 For more details and examples, see Fanciullo 2018b.
8 These were collected by Salvioni (1912, 532ff.): cuvuzz cucūtia ‘pumpkin’ and giuove jŏcu
‘game’, frittara -āta ‘omelette’ and asciura -ūta ‘gone out [f.]’, savé *sapēre ‘to know’ and
cevuddara cepŭlla + -āta ‘broad beans and onions [cipolle] soup’…
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

substrate matters
159
quel punto, non v’eran Sanniti, ma altre genti, e chi sa quali genti!” (Merlo 1920:
242ff.; the italics are mine). That is, if in the Potenza dialect we do not find the
voiceless outcomes that we usually find in southern dialects, it means that, in
the area where modern Potenza lies, ancient people did not speak Italic (“Sam-
nite”) languages but other, hard to classify, languages.9
As for contacts between Latin and pre-Latin languages, though it is obvious
that pre-Latin elements may have survived in the Romance languages, it is not
easy to establish which ones and in which form, especially because we have
only (when we have it at all!) incomplete knowledge of L1-triggers (e.g., vari-
eties of Celtic in northern Italy, Etruscan in Tuscany, varieties of Oscan and
Umbrian in central and southern Italy). We have seen that “chorographic” con-
gruence alone may be very ambiguous, now confirming (the case of [bb] for
/b/ and [dʤ] for /ʤ/),10 now disproving (the case of [v] in modern Salento
dialects) Ascoli’s first criterion. The claim of structural congruence (that is,
the claim that one finds in L2 a “copy” of what comes from L1) might also be
ambiguous, because the substrate feature may be reused in L2 in a new frame-
work.
That said, let us now turn our attention to a very well-known phenomenon,
which is attested in most present day central and southern Italian dialects—
though not everywhere with the same characteristics. It concerns the assimil-
ation of the nasal + stop clusters, which is total in the case of nasal + voiced
stop > geminated nasal and partial in the case of nasal + voiceless stop > nasal
+ voiced stop. Let us consider whether and how this trait can depend on sim-
ilar phenomena in Italic (Umbrian, Oscan) languages. In his sharp review of
the whole problem in the paper entitled, “L’influsso delle lingue sabelliche sul
latinoossialasostratite11superata”(theitalicsaremine),Seidl(2015)rejectsany
connection between modern and ancient (Italic) assimilations on the basis of
a very strict adherence to Ascoli’s evidence:
A)
both assimilations (total and partial) have documentary evidence in the
Umbrian language of the Iguvine Tables, but Gubbio, which is the epi-
centre of the ancient assimilation process, today lies outside the modern
area of the phenomena (Seidl 2015: 47); thus, Ascoli’s first criterion fails.
9
Cf. also fn. 5.
10
We may add, for instance, [wó] for [wɔ́] (s[wó]no ‘sound’) and [jé] for [jέ] (p[jé]de ‘foot’)
in the Italian varieties spoken in Campania and elsewhere: the utterance of metaphonic
dialectal diphthongs [wó] and [jé] has been transferred to non-metaphonic diphthongs
of Italian, [wɔ́] and [jέ].
11
Sostratite = “substratitis” (as if substratitis were a disease).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

160
fanciullo
B)
if, on the contrary, the modern epicentre of total and partial assimilations
coincides with the area of the ancient Sabellians, ancient Sabellic variet-
ies do not, however, show any documentary evidence of partial assimila-
tion (ib.); thus, Ascoli’s second criterion fails.
Seidl supports his observance of Ascoli’s criteria by arguing that Sabellic (i.e.,
Italic) languages are a “well-documented” substrate (p. 75; at p. 76, however,
these languages become a less secure, “relatively well-documented” substrate).
Nevertheless, one might ask: is our knowledge of the Italic languages enough
to ascertain what really happened between these languages and Latin?
Here I offer a divertissement based on an article of mine currently in press.
Suppose one has, for a modern Romance dialect (let’s call it dialect-x), doc-
umentary evidence similar to that which we have for Restsprachen such as
ancient Italic languages; and suppose one has to decide whether dialect-x has
or does not have assimilation of nasal + stop only on the basis of the following
forms:12
i)
miŋgúćću = hypocoristic of ‘Domenico’, something like ‘[Do]men[i]cuc-
cio’,
ii)
mbíere ‘drink’,
iii)
kwántu quantō ‘how much’,
iv)
kwándu quandō ‘when’,
v)
kwánnu *[hoc]qu[e] annō ‘this year’.
The answer would seem to be rather simple. Conservation of -nt- in kwántu
(iii), -nd- in kwándu (iv), distinguished from / opposed to etymological -nn-
in kwánnu (v), and -mb- in mbíere (ii), which we would surely trace back to
im-bibere: all of this would suggest that we are dealing with the case of a dia-
lect without any kind of assimilation, neither total nor partial. However, what
aboutmiŋgúćću=‘[Do]men[i]cuccio’(i),with[ŋg]for[ŋk],withpartialassimil-
ation? To solve this problem, we would point out that, in miŋgúćću, the voicing
affectsasecondarycluster(miŋgu-<men[i]ku-),andwouldinvokealenitionof
intervocalic [k] before [i]-deletion, since the primary cluster in kwántu would
remain unaffected. This answer, however, would be very far from the facts. We
know dialect-x much better than any Restsprache because it is still spoken and
we know that it actually is a variety with almost mandatory assimilation for
-mb- (both as a primary cluster and from -nv-: mmúkka in + bucca adverb
‘in mouth’ with mmukkáre ‘to feed’ and ‘to bite’, kjúmmu plumbu ‘lead’, mmer-
12
The words, typical of everyday language, are not exempla ficta, but real forms: they belong
to the central Salento dialect of Cellino San Marco.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

substrate matters
161
tikáre ‘to overturn [of means of transport]’ *inverticāre, mmištíre ‘to guess
right’ and ‘to hit the mark’ investīre …); the assimilation for -nd- is much
less mandatory (túnnu [ro]tundu ‘round’ but ránde grande ‘big’, spunnáre
*exfundāre ‘to break through’ but mmundáre mundāre ‘to weed [in agri-
culture]’, tánnu ‘then’, from a *tandō which was analogical on quandō, but
kwándu ‘when’, pènnula ‘⸢pèndola⸣= string of tomatoes hanging for conserva-
tion’butmèndula=⸢mèndola⸣‘almond’…);13andasforpartialassimilation(i.e.,
voicing of post-nasal voiceless stops), dialect-x totally lacks it (ámpa vampa
‘blaze’, sántu m. / sánta f. sanctu ‘saint’, ráŋku ‘cramp’ < *crancu for can-
cru / cancer etc.). What, then, can we say about mbí(e)re ‘to drink’ (without
-mb- > -mm- assimilation) and the anthroponym miŋgúćću ‘Menicuccio’ (with
partial assimilation -ŋk- > -ŋg-)? Only a thorough knowledge of both dialect-
x and the larger context where dialect-x is spoken allows us to state that these
forms, though actually present in our dialect, are misleading: mbí(e)re ‘to drink’
is not derived from im-bibere, but rather from (a)bbíere (which, from *ad-
bibere, is the most common form in Salento dialects), where -bb- > -mb- via
a late dissimilation.14 Instead, miŋgúćću ‘Menicuccio’, with partial assimilation
and, moreover, suffix -úćću (and not, as expected, -úttsu: e.g., in dialect-x, jaḍ-
ḍúttsu⸢gall-uccio⸣=‘cockerel’),isactuallyaformfromoutside,specificallyfrom
Naples (the ancient capital city), which is not surprising when dealing with an
anthroponym.
If a handful of forms (i.e., the ones in i–v), chosen with more or less the same
randomness as the Sabellic forms that have come down to us, can lead us, as
we have just seen, to a very incorrect idea of the linguistic system of which they
are a part, then points A) and B) above demand some remarks as well.
Regarding A): Gubbio, the epicentre of ancient assimilations, is nowadays
more or less ten kilometers outside the modern assimilation area, which,
according to Seidl, goes against Ascoli’s “chorographic” congruence. But in
modern north-eastern Umbria (where Gubbio is located) there occurred,
between the Middle Ages and the modern period, the confluence of quite a few
different linguistic tides (from Tuscany, from northern Italy, and from Rome, at
least). As a consequence, the linguistic conditions of modern Gubbio, more
than twenty centuries later, may scarcely be regarded as the straight continu-
ation of linguistic conditions in ancient Gubbio. Regarding B): in ancient times
13
Regarding the reasons why in dialect-x the assimilation of -mb- / -nv- is almost mandat-
ory, while that of -nd- is not as much (reasons in any case directly or indirectly referable
to the standardizing pressure of Italian), see Fanciullo forthcoming.
14
That is to say that the rule -bb- > -mb- (but also -dd- > -nd- and -gg- > -ŋg-) acted after the
rule -mb- > -mm- (but also -nd- > -nn- and -ŋg- > -ŋŋ-).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

162
fanciullo
Gubbio was the epicentre of the two kinds of assimilation (total: nasal + voiced
stop>geminatednasal;partial:nasal+voicelessstop>nasal+voicedstop),but
today such an epicentre seems to correspond to the area once inhabited by the
Samnites—which would go against Ascoli’s structural congruence. However,
we have seen above that one cannot expect a “copy” from the pattern L1 to
appear in its replica in L2, because the substrate heritage may have acted as
a trigger to or have been involved in processes which were not present in L1
(for more details, see Fanciullo 2018b). For instance, the modern, smaller area
in which partial assimilation takes place lies entirely within the modern, relat-
ively larger area of total assimilation; this may suggest that, whatever its origin,
total assimilation is chronologically prior to partial assimilation, for which it
might have, so to speak, paved the way. In this framework, that total assim-
ilation is genuinely due to substrate and that partial assimilation, instead, is a
Romanceinnovationtriggeredbythetotalone,mightnotbe“linguisticfiction.”
To be clear: it is not my intention to champion the direct continuation
between modern southern-Italian assimilations and those in Italic languages.
I am only trying to prove that meticulous adherence to Ascoli’s criteria, as
demanded by Seidl, is not intrinsically conclusive, and does not provide argu-
ments for or against the derivation of the later assimilations from the former.
And it is not conclusive, because we know very well the point of arrival, the
modern Italo-Romance dialects, but we do not know equally well the possible
starting point, the Italic languages, which are for us Restsprachen, i.e languages
for which we have only random documentary evidence.
Conversely, as we lack compelling arguments, we can leave aside both the a
priori affirmation and the meticulous denial of the role of substrate heritage in
present-day central and southern Italo-Romance assimilations, and examine
them in their diachrony on the basis of the (much or little) evidence we have
about them.
Against the traditional point of view of “substratomaniacs”, the Romance
geographical distribution of the total assimilations (-mb-/-nv- > -mm- and -nd-
> -nn-) seems to have changed over time. If nowadays -mb-/-nv- and -nd-
assimilationscoverthewholeof centralandsouthernItaly,15inVarvaro’srecon-
struction the two assimilations appear as an expanding phenomenon, which
imposes itself first in Rome (from the 13th century), then in Naples (from the
15
The assimilation -mb- / -nv- > -mm-, from a “linea [line] Pitigliano (Toscana)—Orvieto—
Nocera Umbra—Treia (Marche)” southwards; the assimilation -nd- > -nn-, from a line
north of Lazio—Umbria—Ancona, southwards (Rohlfs, GrammStor., §§, respectively,
254 and 253). Southern Calabria, the north-eastern triangle of Sicily and, here and there,
Salento are left out (ib.).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

substrate matters
163
14th–15th centuries), and arrives in Lucania and northern Calabria presum-
ably not before the 16th century.16 Though Varvaro’s reconstruction is based on
archival documents, where one cannot exclude that the standardizing influ-
ence of Latin (graphic maintain of ⟨mb⟩and ⟨nd⟩) can almost partially con-
ceal the real conditions (i.e., potential cases of assimilation), his observations,
on the whole, hit the mark. But a few, though important, earlier cases of assim-
ilation escaped Varvaro’s notice. These predate, and sometimes considerably,
the 13th century, and are documented in areas where, according to Varvaro’s
reconstruction, the phenomenon should have arrived much later: e.g., λινoυάμ-
μακoν instead of λινoβάμβακoν (neuter of Gr. λινoβάμβακoς ‘[made] of linen and
βαμβάκιoν = cotton’) in a Byzantine document of 1191 from Gallipoli (Salento),17
plummeo instead of plumbeo (plummeo nostro sigillo) in a Latin document of
1095 from Oria (againin Salento),and finallya chronologicallyverynoteworthy
bennere instead of vendere ‘to sell’ in a Latin document from Cava (Campania)
that dates to 826. All of this suggests that the “geometric” modern setting has
followed a much less straightforward medieval distribution of assimilations.18
On the other hand, one must consider that, in all the literature for or against
the origin from substrate of such assimilations, no author deals with the par-
allel assimilation -nga,o,u- > [ŋŋ], which is, instead, the precise pendant of
-mb-/-nv- > -mm- and -nd- > -nn- in modern Southern-Italian varieties. Pre-
sumably nobody said anything about -nga,o,u- > [ŋŋ] because this assimilation:
– does not seem to have any documentary evidence in the Sabellic languages,
unlike -mm- < *-mb- and -nn- < *-nd-;
– in modern central and southern Italo-Romance varieties, it is highly recess-
ive, and therefore not much observable: the segments [mm] (< -mb-/-nv-)
and [nn] (< -nd-), though “anti-Italian” originally, do not differ at all from
etymological [mm] and [nn] of standard Italian (and of the dialects), while
the dialectal [ŋŋ] (< -nga,o,u-) is completely alien to Italian—therefore, it
is especially subject to standardizing pressures (nowadays, it is fairly wide-
spread in Sicily dialects and desultory in Calabria and Salento dialects).19
16
Varvaro 1979 = 2004: 191.
17
Wehaveherea Romancephoneticutteranceemerginginthetranscriptionof aGreekword
in a Greek text (Greek does not actually show total assimilation), which is not surprising
in the situation of widespread bilingualism of Norman southern Italy.
18
For instance, it is peculiar that, against the quoted λινoυάμμακoν instead of λινoβάμβακoν
in the Gallipoli diploma of 1191, the present Romance dialect of Gallipoli does not show
total assimilation; for a wider discussion, with more details and references to previous
bibliography, see Fanciullo 2004: 64–71 and Fanciullo forthcoming.
19
Rohlfs, GrammStor. §255, with examples such as Sic. lòŋŋu ‘long’, Sic. and Cal. (g)aŋŋa
(⸢ganga⸣) ‘molar tooth’, Salent. saŋŋu ‘blood’ and so on.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

164
fanciullo
We obtain a very clear-cut outline where modern assimilations:
– appear to have a rather well-balanced structure: on the one hand, total
assimilation affects not only /b/ and /d/, but also /g/; on the other hand,
partial assimilation (voicing of /p, t, k/ when preceded by nasal) is geograph-
ically “included” within the area in which total assimilation take place, and
the latter may then have triggered the former;
– show a considerable diachronic depth, from the point of view of the docu-
mentary evidence, and particularly of Campanian bennere instead of
vendere (which goes back to 826). This depth seems to be confirmed by indi-
vidual cases in the following centuries (see above);
– along the chronological axis, according to Varvaro’s reconstruction, their
previous distribution was rather more limited than the present one, even
if their spread seems to have happened in a slightly more complex way than
Varvaro proposed; of course, even if these assimilations had an Italic ori-
gin, this spread would rather be a Romance phenomenon, no more directly
attributable to a possible pre-Latin influence;
– ultimately stimulate questions within a much larger and articulated frame-
work. Among them, the question as to whether these assimilations are of
Sabellic origin is merely one, and perhaps not even the most important.
References
Adams,JamesN.,2007,Theregionaldiversificationof Latin200bc–ad600,Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
ais = Jaberg, Karl—Jud, Jakob 1928–1940, Sprach- und Sachatlas Italiens und der
Südschweiz, Zofingen: Ringier.
Fanciullo, Franco 1997, Raddoppiamento Sintattico e ricostruzione linguistica nel
Sud italiano, Pisa: Edizioni ets.
Fanciullo, Franco 2004, Dialetti e non solo, Alessandria: Edizioni dell’Orso.
Fanciullo, Franco 2018a, Frammento di fonologia diacronica fra Corsica, Toscana e
sud-Italia (a proposito degli esiti di lat. j, dj, ge,i), “L’Italia Dialettale” 79: 97–128.
Fanciullo, Franco 2018b, Problemi di sostrato. Sicuro che i suoi effetti debbano mani-
festarsi in copia conforme?, “Lingua e Stile” 53/2: 199–218.
Fanciullo, Franco ( forthcoming), Problemi di sostrato: i nessi di nasale + occlusiva
fra italici antichi e moderni italiani, in E. Benelli—S. Marchesini—P. Poccetti (eds.),
Proceedings of the Meeting “Per una definizione delle lingue e delle culture sabelliche
/ Defining Sabellian Languages and Cultures” (Rome, 8–9 February 2018), Roma: Fa-
brizio Serra.
Filipponio,Lorenzo2015, Ilsostratocelticoelafonologiagalloromanzaegalloitalica.
Materiali e metodi, in L. Filipponio—Ch. Seidl (eds.), Le lingue d’Italia e le altre.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

substrate matters
165
Contatti, sostrati e superstrati nella storia linguistica della Penisola, Milano: Franco
Angeli: 95–127.
Filipponio, Lorenzo—Seidl, Christian (eds.) 2015, Le lingue d’Italia e le altre.
Contatti, sostrati e superstrati nella storia linguistica della Penisola, Milano: Franco
Angeli.
Merlo, Clemente 1920, Fonologia del dialetto di Sora (Caserta), “Annali delle Uni-
versità Toscane” 4–5: 121–282.
Pisani, Vittore 1964, Le lingue dell’Italia antica oltre il latino, Torino: Rosenberg &
Sellier.
Rohlfs, Gerhard 1925, Der Stand der Mundartenforschung in Unteritalien (bis zum
Jahre 1923), “Revue de Linguistique Romane” 1: 278–323.
Rohlfs, GrammStor. = Rohlfs, Gerhard 1966–1969, Grammatica storica della lin-
gua italiana e dei suoi dialetti, 3 volumes, Torino: Einaudi.
Salvioni, Carlo 1912, Per la fonetica e la morfologia delle parlate meridionali d’Italia,
Milano: L.F. Cogliati, reprinted as M. Loporcaro—L. Pescia—R. Broggini—P. Vec-
chio(eds.),Salvioni,C.Scrittilinguistici in5volumes,Bellinzona,EdizionidelloStato
del Cantone Ticino, 2008, ii volume: 525–559.
Seidl, Christian 2015, L’influsso delle lingue sabelliche sul latino ossia la sostratite
superata, in L. Filipponio—Ch. Seidl (eds.), Le lingue d’Italia e le altre. Contatti,
sostrati e superstrati nella storia linguistica della Penisola, Mailand: Franco Angeli:
53–79.
Varvaro, Alberto, 1979, Capitoli per la storia linguistica dell’Italia meridionale e della
Sicilia. i, Gli esiti di -nd-, -mb-, “Medioevo Romanzo” 6: 189–216.
Varvaro, Alberto 2004, Identità linguistiche e letterarie nell’Europa romanza, Roma:
Salerno Editrice.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Victoria Fendel, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_008
chapter 6
Natural Language Use and Bilingual Interference:
Verbal Complementation Patterns in Post-Classical
Greek
Victoria Fendel
1
Introduction
Interferences are idiolectal structures resulting from a language user inadvert-
ently drawing on two rather than one language when putting their ideas into
words (Grosjean 2001: 6; Adams 2003: 426; Myers-Scotton 2006: 242).
Interferences are one-off occurrences, they are not regionalisms that recur
(Chambers—Trudgill 1998), they are not interlanguage features that recur
(Selinker1972),theyarenotadiachronicchangeinthemaking(Stolk2015),
theyarelanguageerrorsthatresultfromthecurrentsituationrelatedtoaspects
such as the learner’s ability and nervousness in the midst of situational pres-
sures (Biber—Conrad 2009). Interferences are part of someone’s idiolect.
An idiolect is one person’s language variety influenced by their language bio-
graphy, that is the number of factors that have impacted on how a person uses
language (Hamers—Blanc2000:26and40;Adams2003;Goglia2005:50–
58; Y. Butler—Hakuta 2006: 116–117; Elspass 2012: 165). The way to find
interferences in a corpus language is to establish a pattern for the item in ques-
tion and define and contextualise the outliers. This is what this article does in
order to evaluate two instances of γράφω ὅτι grafо̄ hoti + deontic verb form in
the early fourth-century letter P.Kell.1.65, from the village of Kellis in the Egyp-
tian Oasis Magna.
This article details the verb profile of the lemma γράφω grafо̄ in classical
and post-classical literary and documentary sources (see similarly for different
verbs Jiménez López 2006; Jiménez López 2016). A verb profile is the num-
ber of patterns that a verb can appear in. Each pattern is considered a unique
form-function pairing (a construction). A function is associated with each
frame that the verb appears in. Language users seem to have a certain aware-
ness of the close association of, for example, certain verbal items with specific
constructions according to experimental research (Goldberg 1995: 36).
The verb profile of γράφω grafо̄ in classical and post-classical literary and
documentary sources shows three clearly defined form-function pairings and
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
167
related contexts. These are labelled the collocation, the idiom and the formula
of γράφω grafо̄ below. Drawing on literary and documentary data helps estab-
lish which structures are ‘out of place’ in the papyri and which ones are not.
This makes it possible to distinguish between variations, e.g. archaisms, clas-
sicisms, modernisms, regionalisms, and idiosyncracies, and deviations, which
are not supported by the verb profile.
Deviations can result from the confusion of Greek patterns, second-
language-acquisition-related errors (e.g. the overgeneralisation of patterns or
the insertion of memorised chunks of language without attention to the con-
text), or bilingual interference. In the French-English pair ‘j’ai peur’ and ‘I have
fear’,ratherthan‘Iamscared’,onewouldclassify‘Ihavefear’asmodelledonthe
French expression rather than using native English morpho-syntax (Heine—
Kuteva 2005: 100–103). Yet, the influence of Language 1 (L1 hereafter) on Lan-
guage2(L2hereafter)canbemoresubtle,inthatonlyapatterniscopied,rather
than every word (Matras—Sakel 2007).
Questions to ask specifically with regard to γράφω ὅτι grafо̄ hoti + deontic
verb form in P.Kell.1.65 include: (i) Are the three constructional contexts ob-
served in the post-classical papyri attested in earlier literary Greek? If not,
we may be dealing with a formulaic pattern specific to a colloquial epistolary
context. (ii) Does the verb profile of γράφω grafо̄ support insubordinate com-
plements? If not, we have to consider options such as colloquialism, bilingual
interference, and internal confusion of patterns. (iii) Does γράφω grafо̄ change
meaningand/oradoptnewmeaningsinthepost-classicalperiod,similartoe.g.
καταλαμβάνω katalambanо̄ ‘to visit’ and παρακαλέω parakaleо̄ ‘to ask’, which
adopt new meanings and / or patterns and for which applying the classical
pattern would result in incomprehensible or nonsense translations in postclas-
sical texts? In essence, the article seeks to answer the question of whether the
instances of γράφω ὅτι grafо̄ hoti + deontic verb form in P.Kell.1.65 result from
bilingualinterference,internalconfusion,theintrusionof oralsyntaxintowrit-
ing, or whether they constitute a minor use pattern that is grammatical and
idiomatic in Greek (Heine—Kuteva 2005: 44–62).
The article shows that for the verb profile of γράφω grafо̄ the concepts of
collocation, idiom and formula (i) reflect the fact that there are no one-to-
one form-function pairings in the complementation patterns of γράφω grafо̄,
but rather that there are clusters of forms that map onto a function (appar-
ently guided by the parameters ±object and factive / prospective), and (ii)
that these clusters of patterns are clearly linked to a pragmatic context, which
is particularly obvious in letters, which are divided into free, semi-formulaic
(i.e. discourse markers and hedges) and formulaic contexts (i.e. the epistolary
frame). The verb profile of γράφω grafо̄ does not support the combination of
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

168
fendel
γράφω ὅτι grafо̄ hoti + deontic verb form in P.Kell.1.65. However, it shows (i) that
there is a small number of comparable examples from the same region or other
thoroughly bilingual areas of the country, and (ii) that the letter shows an inter-
esting treatment of personal names along with ungrammatical deviations in
the areas of discourse markers and semi-formulaic expressions. Moreover, the
intended function seems to be that of an urgent request or a plea, a function
that is attested for a frame with γράφω grafо̄ in the literary sources only occa-
sionallyandappearsclearlymorecommonlyinthepost-classicaldocumentary
sources.
As a word of caution, theoretically, cognitively speaking, the difference be-
tween bilingual interference and other types of deviations lies with the interac-
tion of two languages in a uniquely produced structure as opposed to processes
that are motivated by drawing on one language only. In reality, this difference is
often difficult to pin down conclusively.Thus, we can either accept a lot of false
positives or false negatives. The present article takes the cautious approach of
leaning towards accepting false negatives rather than including false positives,
in that there may be cases which could be identified as bilingual interference
if supplementary data emerged in future.
The remainder of the article is divided into five sections. Section 2 addresses
the circumstances in later Roman and early Byzantine Egypt from different
angles. Section 3 introduces the grammatical framework of Construction
Grammar and details the concept of verb profiles. Section 4 addresses the
empirical data. Section 5 considers the relevance of language teaching and
learning in communities of practice to the topic. Section 6 provides a short
summary and conclusion.
2
Egypt in the Later Roman and Early Byzantine Periods
The period of interest is the later Roman and early Byzantine periods in Egypt.
By this time, Greek and Egyptian had coexisted in Egypt for over a millen-
nium entering into varying relationships with each other. Especially over the
course of the Ptolemaic period, the Greek language and alphabet had gained
in prominence not least because the language of the country’s administration
was Greek. Egyptian retreated into the less official spheres. This is evident,
for example, in the requirement that Demotic contracts have Greek subscripts
summarising their content in Ptolemaic times (Depauw 2009) or that Roman
citizens’ wills conform to the Roman format for wills under Roman law dur-
ing Roman times, thus were written in Latin (Garel—Nowak 2017). The fol-
lowing three paragraphs give an intentionally very condensed overview of the
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
169
socio-political, sociocultural and sociolinguistic circumstances in the later
Roman and early Byzantine periods.
A brief word of warning about terminology needs to be prefixed here. Over
the course of its history, Egyptian has been written with different yet related
writing systems, that is, generally speaking, the graphemes used were abstrac-
ted away from the hieroglyphic script in order to facilitate writing Egyptian on
materials other than stone. The name of the writing system used for the every-
day language is, as a rule amongst Egyptologists, used to refer to the stage of
Egyptian in the final stages of the language. Thus, we call the same language,
Egyptian, Demotic during the Ptolemaic and early Roman periods and Coptic
during the later Roman and Byzantine periods. These labels are only labels for
different stages of the same language and reflect changes in the writing system;
the language, Egyptian, itself developed continuously over the millennia.
Socio-politically speaking, the Constitutio Antoniniana in ad212 heralded a
new era. Legally, from ad212 onwards, every inhabitant of the Roman empire
was a citizen (Jördens 2012). Thus, the legal distinction between the Roman
and non-Roman formats of wills fell out of use. Societally, in the Ptolemaic
andRomanperiods,Greek-Egyptiandoublenamesbecameacommonpractice
to show one’s status in society (Depauw—Coussement 2014). These nam-
ing practices show a high degree of fluidity between the once distinct spheres
of the Greek and Egyptian parts of the population (Kraus 2000; Torallas
Tovar 2004a: 164; Torallas Tovar 2010a: 255). Economically, villages and
smaller towns and gradually also larger cities like Alexandria faced a decline in
building activity indicating economic depression (Keenan 2007; Kiss 2007;
van Minnen 2007). The military economy seems to have sustained slightly
longer, in that it could withstand large-scale attacks until the arrival of the
Sassanids in the early seventh century (Foss 2003; Sänger 2011). By and
large, a socio-political restructuring seems to have been in progress. Govern-
mental institutions were losing power and clerical institutions filled the gap
(Wipszycka 2007; Quack 2017a; Fournet 2019, ch. 4). Additionally, smal-
ler local groups could now form more independent close-knit social networks
(Milroy—Milroy 2012) than with stricter government control in place. One
example of such a group is the village community of Kellis whose letters form
part of the bilingual corpus under investigation.
Socio-culturally speaking, the later Roman and early Byzantine periods see
the shift to Christianity especially with the Edicts of Milan (ad 313) and Thes-
salonica (ad 380), which granted Christianity an official status and made it the
official religion of the Roman Empire. The new religion seems to have radi-
atedoutfromtheurbancentresinparticular(Depauw—Clarysse)2013)and
seems to have replaced the inherited Egyptian polytheistic religion compar-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

170
fendel
atively quickly (Houston et al. 2003). Clerical superiors took over in many
spheres of life, not least in the administrative and educational ones. What
crystallises in this period is the thorough mixture of the Greek and Egyptian
cultures in everyday life. This is evident, for example, in the large number of
loanwords referring to everyday objects, both in Greek and in Egyptian: βάις
bais from ⲃⲁ/ ⲃⲁⲉba / bae ‘branch of a palm tree’ and ⲯⲩⲭⲏ, ⲯⲩⲭⲟⲟⲩⲉpsukhē
/ psukhooue from ψυχήpsukhē ‘spirit, soul’ (Förster 2002; Torallas Tovar
2004a, 2004b, 2007, 2017). Matras (2015) argues that the borrowing of inflec-
tional morphology would indicate a shift in linguistic identity due to its essen-
tial status in communicative settings. However, a renegotiation of linguistic
identity does not seem to have taken place in Egypt as functional morpho-
logy (especially inflectional morphology) is not borrowed.1This ties in with the
observation that the Greek and Egyptian words referring to the same concept
areoftenretainedalongsideeachotherbuttakeondifferentfunctionalspecial-
isations: Classical Egyptian 𓇋𓏏
𓆑𓀀jt—Demotic
it—Coptic ⲉⲓⲱⲧ(S) eiōt
/ ⲓⲱⲧ(B) iōt vs πατήρ patēr ⲡⲁⲧⲉⲣpater ‘father’. While the Egyptian lexeme
was used in everyday life, the Greek lexeme was reserved for the religious and
epistolary spheres.
Socio-linguistically speaking, Matras (2009, ch. 3) considers essential for
a language to succeed in a multilingual setting (i) a fully functional writing
system, (ii) educational backing and (iii) political backing. Bagnall’s (1993,
236–237) claim that there was no native writing system for the Egyptian lan-
guage between the mid-second and fourth centuries has been proved wrong
by Quack (2017b: 61) and Choat (2006, 1: 178–187; 2012: 584–585), who show
that a fully functional alphabetic Egyptian writing system existed from around
ad100 already. However, a difference exists between the widely taught and
fully established Greek alphabet and the emergent Coptic alphabet. A similar
kind of inequality exists with regard to educational backing. With the govern-
ment no longer providing funding to the temples in the later Roman period
(Cribiore 2001: 22–23; Houston et al. 2003; Torallas Tovar 2010b: 32–
33), access to learning the Egyptian script became more limited. Monasteries
largely took over in the Greek educational sphere and thus provided continu-
ing access to acquiring the Greek alphabet (Cribiore 2001: 23–24; Choat
1 Occasionally, the definite article is borrowed with the noun, for example Hdt.Hist.2.143 πίρω-
μις pirо̄mis from ⲣⲱⲙⲓrо̄mi ‘man’ and P.Cair.Masp.3.67303 (Aphrodito, ad553) πκωμ pkо̄m
from ⲕⲱⲙkо̄m ‘wooden wagon-box’ (Torallas Tovar 2004a: 192). Yet the definite article
therein becomes part of the word in Greek rather than being borrowed as a definite article.
One-offs also exist, for example the possessive pronoun pa- in P. Neph. 12.11 ἀσπάζομαι Ὧρ πα
Ταϩμουρώ· aspazomai hо̄rpaTahmourо̄ ‘I greet Hor, the one fromTahmouro’.Yet these seem to
be code-switches, that is unnaturalised imports, rather than borrowings, that is naturalised
imports (Hoffmann 1991: 99–100; Myers-Scotton 2006: 253–260).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
171
2009: 347–349; Bucking 2012). Finally, political backing refers to the accept-
ability of a language up to the highest registers, that is the administrative and
officialones(Adams2003:593–597;Crespo2007:40–41;Palme2009;Silk—
Georgakopoulou 2009). Depauw (2012) cites the example of the stele of
Cornelius Gallus (29bc) on which Greek, Latin and Hieroglyphic inscriptions
appear but no Demotic ones. He argues that the everyday Egyptian language
(Demotic) had been denied official status.The inclusion of hieroglyphs is to be
seen as an instance of the emblematic acceptance of Egyptian culture in the
country.Thetrilingualsteleshowsaclearlydifferentpowertriadthanthetrilin-
gual Rosetta stone dating from the beginning of the Ptolemaic period (196bc)
(Wallis Budge 1929). It features inscriptions in Hieroglyphic, Demotic and
Greek. Also relevant is the remark on Greek summaries of Demotic contracts
from above. Apparently, the Demotic language no longer fared well in the offi-
cial sphere.
3
Construction Grammar and Verb Profiles
3.1
Construction Grammar
Cognitive grammars, such as Construction Grammar, rest on the concept that
the human brain relies on a network of associations between forms and func-
tions when processing language. Any formal difference is linked to a func-
tional difference (Goldberg 1995: 3). By not positing underlying structural or
semantic levels, as for instance Lexical-Functional Grammar does, Construc-
tion Grammar is a monostratal theory of grammar (Goldberg 1995: 7). For
example, formally, the difference between ‘to be afraid to’ and ‘to be afraid of’
is the change in the final particle triggering the subsequent change in the form
of the complement of the particle, that is an infinitive after ‘to’ and an ing-form
after ‘of’. While ‘to be afraid to’, semantically speaking, involves a certain inten-
tionality, ‘to be afraid of’ does not (Goldberg 1995: 3).
A construction ‘is posited in the grammar if and only if something about
its form, meaning, or use is not strictly predictable from other aspects of the
grammar’ (Goldberg 1995: 13). Thus, constructions are not the only thing to
be considered and they have to be meaningful. Constructions exist at all struc-
tural levels, for instance, the clause, the phrase or the sentence. The change
in meaning between ‘to be afraid of’ vs ‘to be afraid to’, to use this example,
is to be attributed to the constructional change rather than to polysemy of
the verb phrase or lexical changes (Goldberg 1995: 18). By contrast, there
is no functional difference between ‘try to’ vs ‘try and’ in English (Gries—
Stefanowitsch 2004: 122–123). Hence, no construction can be posited.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

172
fendel
3.2
Verb Profiles
This article applies the general idea of verb profiles to the Greek verb ‘to write’
(Gross 1984; Hanks 1996; Hanks 1996; Hartmann et al. 2013). The concept
of verb profiles encompasses the fact that most verbs appear in more than one
syntactic and consequently semantic environment. For example, English ‘to
tell’:
(1)
Henry always tells the truth.
– nominal
(2a) Henry told Paul that he went rowing yesterday. – clausal, factive, syn-
detic
(2b) Henry told Paul he went rowing yesterday.
– clausal, factive, asyn-
detic
(2c) Henry told Paul: ‘I went rowing yesterday.’
– clausal, factive, inde-
pendent
(3a) Henry told Paul to go rowing.
– infinitival, prospect-
ive
(3b) Henry told Paul that he (should) go rowing.
– clausal, prospective,
syndetic
(3c) Henry told Paul: ‘Go rowing!’
– clausal, prospective,
independent
(1) to (3) show a range of nominal, phrasal and clausal options with English
to tell. Some of these are semantically almost equivalent, some of them show
significant semantic differences. To the right of each pattern shown in (1) to
(3), its structural and semantic properties are indicated.These are used to class
patterns into three categories.
Factivevsprospectivereferstothesemanticsof thecomplementwithregard
to the surrounding context (Schulz 2003). An event / entity described by a
complement is either known or not yet known in the context, thus the com-
plement is either anaphoric or cataphoric. Complements referring to known
entities / events, that is anaphoric ones, are factive; complements referring to
unknown entities / events, that is cataphoric ones, are prospective.
Syndetic vs asyndetic refers to the formal linkage between a verb and its
clausal complement (Bentein 2015).The linkage can be achieved by means of
a subordinating conjunction such as English ‘that’ or Greek ὅτι hoti, yet linkage
can also be achieved without this formal feature. The valency requirements of
the verb, such as ‘to tell somebody something’ above, achieve linkage in these
cases.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
173
Dependent vs independent refers to the syntactic encoding of the prag-
matic status of a clausal complement. A complement clause can take the
form of a dependent clause, which is often clear in the adjustment of pro-
nouns and moods for instance, or an independent clause (Marnette 1996:
2–3 for relevant features). In the case of an independent clause taking on
the function of a verbal complement, only the pragmatics of the structure
reveal this relationship, whereas in the case of a dependent clause functioning
as a complement of the verb, the form of the clause indicates the relation-
ship.
Clausal vs phrasalvs nominal referstothe morpho-syntactic structureof the
complement (Kroeger 2004). As shown above, the complement slot of a verb
can be filled by a clause, a phrase or a noun / pronoun. These changes in the
morpho-syntactic structure of the complement affect semantic changes in the
verb as shown above.
However, the differences between environments cannot only be condi-
tioned syntactically and semantically but also extra-linguistically, that is differ-
ences could be idiolectal, sociolectal, dialectal or register-related. For example,
for English ‘to give’, there seem to be syntactic constraints on (Goldberg
1995:2)andsemanticconsequencestochangingthecomplementationpattern.
Lakoff andJohnson(1980,130)argueregardingdistransitive‘toteachsomebody
something’vsperiphrastic‘toteachsomethingtosomebody’thatthetransferis
conceptualised as achieved and effective in the ditransitive but not in the peri-
phrastic construction. For English ‘to begin’, there seem to be dialectal differ-
ences between complementation patterns. Mair (2002: 115–121) finds modern-
day dialectal differences between British English and American English for
‘begin’ / ‘start’ + infinitive vs -ing. This is a change in progress according to
Mair.
For Greek, extralinguistic factors impact on the choice of complementation
pattern as Bentein (2017) has shown for finite vs infinite complementation pat-
terns, with the latter being more formal than the former, and Hult (1990) for
syndetic vs asyndetic complementation patterns, with the latter being more
informal than the former.
4
Empirical Data
4.1
Data Samples
The article is based on four data samples: (i) the Classical Attic literary corpus
of Xenophon, (ii) the post-classical Koine literary corpus of Plutarch, (iii) the
post-classical documentary corpus of letters on papyrus dating from the fourth
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

174
fendel
tomid-seventhcenturies(excludingthosefrombilingualarchives),and(iv)the
post-classical documentary corpus of bilingual papyrus archives dating from
the fourth to mid-seventh centuries. Data samples (i) to (iii) listed above are
used as the control group, whereas data sample (iv) is the data sample investig-
ated in this article, as it contains the relevant instances of γράφω ὅτι grafо̄ hoti
+ deontic verb form in P.Kell.1.65.
The corpus of letters belonging to bilingual papyrus archives dating from
the fourth- to mid-seventh centuries encompasses the archives of Apa Paieous
and Apa Nepherous, who were successive abbots of the monastery of Hathor
(Kramer et al. 1987; Hauben 2002) in the Herakleopolite nome, the archive of
Apa John, most likely to be identified with the desert monk identified in liter-
ary sources (Butler 1898: 213; Wilcken 1927; Zuckerman, 1995; Fournet
2009: 437; Clackson 2010: 93) in the Hermopolite nome, and the archive of
the village of Kellis, which consists of smaller sub-archives of several prom-
inent writers, in the Daklah oasis in the western desert (Gardner et al.,
2014; Gardner et al., 1999; Worp—Whitehorne 1995). All these capture
the linguistic situation in the fourth century. The final archive of the corpus
is the large archive of the nobleman and landowner Dioscoros of Aphrodito
in the Antaiopolite nome (Fournet 2019: 10–14; Fournet—Magdelaine
2008).
The fourth-century archives primarily represent the networks of prominent
figures in the clerical sphere, be that in a monastery or in the desert. The let-
ters addressed to them are primarily requests for help and support and thus
offer a glimpse at the surrounding demographics. The fourth-century archive
from Kellis represents a most likely Manichaean sphere. Yet, the village archive
of Kellis is also different from the other archives, in that it consists of several
sub-archives, thus the recipient of the letters is not always the same unlike in
theotherfourth-centuryarchives.Thesixth-centuryarchiverepresentsthesur-
roundings of an influential, educated landowner. The letters addressed to him
are requests, reports and complaints.
The reason why the debate about the recipients’, that is the archive own-
ers’, linguistic profile is irrelevant here is that they are not the people whose
linguistic output can be studied. An archive is basically someone’s mailbox. It
contains everything this person received, but unlike modern mailboxes, noth-
ing this person wrote.Thus, archives represent a one-dimensional view of their
social networks. In theory, letters written by the archive owner will have been
part of the recipients’ archives, yet these are often either lost or impossible to
securely identify.
Searches for the lemma γράφω grafо̄ have been carried out in the Thesaurus
LinguaeGraecae (tlg hereafter) and the DukeDatabaseof DocumentaryPapyri
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
175
table 6.1
Table head
Collocation
Idiom
Formula
Misc.
Nominal
Clausal
Other
Infinitival Participial
Other
Clausal
Participial
Other
(DDbDP hereafter)2 as well as in the bilingual letter corpus. The results have
been archived in .excel sheets using the table head shown in Table 6.1.
The category ‘Miscellaneous’ contains all the instances that are (a) nouns
(‘scribe’, etc.), (b) passive, (c) without a direct object of any kind, or (d) too
damaged to be analysed.
4.2
Collocation, Idiom, Formula
The terms collocation, idiom and formula are chosen here to refer to three
clusters of complementation patterns of a verb. While these terms have been
used with many meanings in the research literature, they are chosen here (i)
because they represent the concept that items have a lexical affinity to one or
the other item, (ii) because they represent the concept that complementation
patterns are not always transparent and modular (Cristofaro 2008), and (iii)
they represent the concept that contextual / pragmatic factors influence the
form of the complementation pattern.The term ‘collocation’ is reserved for the
most common pattern of a verb; the term ‘idiom’ is used for a less common
but nevertheless contextually unrestricted pattern; the term ‘formula’ is used
for complementation patterns that are limited to specific pragmatic contexts,
such as epistolary formulae or fixed expressions.
The three patterns with γράφω grafо̄ are exemplified below with instances
that are not part of the bilingual corpus under investigation.
Collocation
(a) nominal:
(4)
Plu.Biogr.et Phi.Lysander.20.1.6
καὶ
kai
and
συνελθὼν
sunelthōn
after.gathering
ἐδεῖτο
edeito
he.asked
γράψαι
grapsai
to.write
περὶ
peri
about
αὐτοῦ
autou
him
πρὸς
pros
to
τοὺς
tous
the
2 The tool finds the lemma less reliably than the tlg, thus instances might have been missed.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

176
fendel
ἄρχοντας
arkhontas
leaders
ἑτέραν
heteran
another
ἐπιστολὴν
epistolēn
letter
ὡς
hōs
as
οὐδὲν
ouden
not
ἠδικημένον
ēdikēmenon
having.been.wronged
οὐδ’
oud’
nor
ἐγκαλοῦντα.
egkalounta
complaining
‘And after gathering, he (sc. Pharnabazos) asked to write another letter
about him to the leaders as he had not been wronged nor was he com-
plaining.’
(b) clausal
(5)
Xen.Hist.Anabasis.2.3.1.1
ὃ
ho
it
δὲ
de
and
δὴ
dē
surely
ἔγραψα
egrapsa
I.wrote
ὅτι
hoti
that
βασιλεὺς
basileus
king
ἐξεπλάγη
exeplagē
had.been.expelled
τῇ
tē
the
ἐφόδῳ,
ephodō
plan
τῷδε
tōde
to.him
δῆλον
dēlon
obvious
ἦν.
ēn
it.was
‘And I wrote it (i.e.) that the king had been expelled by means of the plan,
(as) was obvious to this man.’
Idiom
(a) infinitival:
(6)
Xen.Hist.Hellenica.6.3.12.5
βασιλεὺς
basileus
king
μὲν
men
but
γὰρ
gar
for
δήπου
dēpou
certainly
ἔγραψε
egrapse
wrote
πάσας
pasas
all
τὰς
tas
the
ἐν
en
in
τῇ
tē
the
Ἑλλάδι
helladi
Greece
πόλεις
poleis
cities
αὐτονόμους
autonomous
independent
εἶναι·
einai
to.be
‘For the king wrote / ordered that all the cities in Greece (should) be
autonomous.’
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
177
(b) participial:
(7)
Plu.Biogr.et Phil.Lysander.23.1.5
πρός
pros
to
τε
te
and
τοὺς
tous
the
ἐν
en
in
Ἀσίᾳ
Asia
Asia
φίλους
philous
friends
ἔγραψεν
egrapsen
he.wrote
αἰτεῖσθαι
aiteisthai
to.ask
κελεύων
keleuōn
ordering
παρὰ
para
from
Λακεδαιμονίων
Lakedaimoniōn
Spartans
στρατηγὸν
stratēgon
general
Ἀγησίλαον
Agēsilaon
Agesilaos
ἐπὶ
epi
for
τὸν
ton
the
πρὸς
pros
against
τοὺς
tous
the
βαρβάρους
barbarous
barbarians
πόλεμον.
polemon
war
‘He also wrotetothe friendsin Asia ordering(them) toaskof the Spartans
(that) Agesilaos (be) the general for the war against the barbarians.’
Formula
(a) clausal:
(8)
P.Flor.2.189.9–16 (ad 267, Theadelphia, Arsinoites, Heroninus archive)
ἀλλ’
all’
but
ἐπὶ
epi
as
οὖν
oun
now
ἡ
ē
the
ἀνάγκη
anagkē
necessity
κατε̣πίγει
katepigei
presses
ὡς
hōs
as
καὶ
kai
too
σὺ
su
you
οὐδὲ̣
oude
not
ἀγνοεῖς,
agnoeis
not.know
γράφω
graphō
I.write
σοι
soi
to.you
φίλτατε
philtate
beloved
ὅπως
hopōs
that
τῇ
tē
the
ι̣γ
ig
13
ἀπὸ
apo
during
νυκτὸς
nuktos
night
ἀποστείλῃ[ς]
aposteilē[s]
you.send
τὰ
ta
the
κτήνη
ktēnē
livestock
καὶ
kai
and
τοὺς
tous
the
κοφίνου[ς
kophinou[s
baskets
πρὸς]
pros]
to
ἐμὲ
eme
me
ἵν̣α
hina
that
μὴ̣
mē
not
ὡς
hōs
like
πάρυσυ
parusu
a.year.ago
ὐπ[ηρε]ασῶμεν
up[ēre]asōmen
we.serve
καὶ
kai
and
νῦν
nun
now
τὸ
to
that
αὐτὸ
auto
same
[πάθω]μεν.
[pathō]men
we.suffer
‘But as (ἐπεί) the necessity presses (κατεπείγει), as you too know very well,
I am writing to you, dear friend, in order that on the 13th during the night
you send the livestock and baskets to me in order that we do not do ser-
vice3 like a year ago (πέρυσι) and undergo the same now.’
3 The verbal lemma is not listed in Liddell-Scott-Jones (1996), Lampe (1961) or Trapp—Höran-
der (2001). However, the nominal lemma ὑπηρεσία seems to have lost its original meaning
related to rowing in the post-classical period and retained the meaning of ‘service’.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

178
fendel
(b) participial:
(9)
bgu.12.2184.verso (501–600, Hermopolis, Taurinos archive)
γράφω
graphō
I.write
σημαίνων
sēmainōn
reporting
καὶ
kai
and
παρακαλῶν
parakalōn
asking
τὰ
ta
the
πρακτέα
praktea
to.be.done
παρ’
par‘
by
αὐτῆς
autēs
her
κα[…]
ka[…]
…
τούτου̣
toutou
this
μανθάνειν ⳨
manthanein
to.learn
‘I am writing (thereby) reporting and asking (you) to learn the things to
be done by her …’
Overviewtablesprovidingnumericdataaboutthethreecomplementationpat-
terns and their subcategories are given in Tables 6.2 to 6.5.
table 6.2
Xenophon, historiography, 5th / 4th centuries bc, tlg, lemma γράφω (searches: June 2020)—
98 passages in total
Collocation
Idiom
Formula
Misc.
Nominal
Clausal
Other
Infinitival Participial
Other
Clausal
Participial
Other
34
5
ø
9
ø
ø
3
1
ø
39
9
4
46
≈40%
≈9%
≈4%
≈47%
nb: The sample contains 11 instances of the verb in the middle voice. These are disregarded for the analysis.
table 6.3
Plutarch, historiography, 1st / 2nd centuries ad, tlg, lemma γράφω (searches: June 2020)—36
passages in total
Collocation
Idiom
Formula
Misc.
Nominal
Clausal
Other
Infinitival Participial
Other
Clausal
Participial
Other
14
1
ø
ø
1
ø
1
2
ø
15
1
3
17
≈42%
≈3%
≈8%
≈47%
nb: The sample contains 1 instance of the verb in the middle voice. This is disregarded for the analysis.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
179
table 6.4
DDbDP, s.v. lex γράφω, language: Ancient Greek, provenance: known, ad250–700 (searches:
June 2020)—256 passages in total
Collocation
Idiom
Formula
Misc.
Nominal
Clausal
Other
Infinitival Participial
Other
Clausal
Participial
Other
47
21
3a
7
1
1b
30
2
13
71
9
45
131
≈28%
≈3.5%
≈17.5%
≈51%
a
These are two instances of hoti recitativum (sb 14.11957.9–11 and cpr 7.57.12–14) and one instance of an
accusative for a dative case (Stud. Pal. 20.111.4–7).
b This is a participial instance with a particle added (Stud. Pal. 3(2).2.132.1–5).
nb:The sample contains 2 instances of the verb in the middle voice.These are disregarded for the analysis.
table 6.5
Private letters belonging to bilingual papyrus archives, 4th to mid-7th centuries ad, language:
Ancient Greek (searches: June 2020)—61 passages in total
Collocation
Idiom
Formula
Misc.
Nominal
Clausal
Other
Infinitival Participial
Other
Clausal
Participial
Other
13
1
5a
1
2
2b
5
1
3
19
5
9
28
≈31%
≈8%
≈15%
≈46%
a
These are two instances of hoti recitativum (P. Kell. 1.71.48–49, P. Neph. 18.18–19), one participial instance
(P. Kell. 1.74.24–28), one instance of a lack of case endings (P. Herm. 7.6–8) and one instance of confusion
of Greek patterns (P. Kell. 1.5.18–24).
b These are two instances of an accusativum cum infinitivo structure (P. Cair. Masp. 1.67067.1–2 and 2–4).
nb: The sample contains 1 instance of the verb in the middle voice. This is disregarded for the analysis.
The proportions in the tables show (i) that all three patterns already existed in
classical and post-classical literature, and (ii) that the formula in particular is
attested significantly more often in the documentary texts, a situation that can
be explained by its function (an urgent plea directed at an addressee). What
is not obvious from the tables above but only from inspecting every relevant
instance one by one is that the idiom appears not only least frequently but is
also the one pattern that has a liking for the passive voice of the governing verb.
These instances are not part of the data sample as mentioned and are counted
in the large category ‘Miscellaneous’.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

180
fendel
4.3
Outliers
The category ‘Other’ for the collocation, idiom and formula in Tables 6.2 to 6.5
containsinstancesthatdeviatefromtheestablishednormineachcategory.The
category ‘other’ is empty for the literary texts, as can be expected, but contains
register-related variations up and down as well as potential instances of bilin-
gual interference in the documentary samples. The relevant instances for the
collocation and idiom are all register-related variations and are therefore only
listed in the footnotes to the tables.
The relevant instances for the formula are more interesting. The 13 relevant
instances in the DDbDP sample consist of 6 instances with the optative after
ἵνα hina, which can be interpreted as a classicism, thus a variation upwards
(all in P.Panop.Beatty.1, ad298, Panopolis, official letter), and 3 instances of
syndetic parataxis with καί, which can be interpreted as a colloquialism, thus
a variation downwards (cpr 30.17.8–9, ad643–644, Hermopolis, private let-
ter; P.Herm.5.2–4, ad317–323, Hermopolis, private letter; P.Paramone.14.8–10,
ad500–699, Arsinoites, letter). The remaining 4 instances represent an unex-
pected mismatch between the subordinator and the following verb, that is ὅτι
hoti with the imperative or subjunctive and ὅπως with the imperative.
The 3 instances in the category ‘Other’ of the formula in the bilingual cor-
pus of private letters consist of one instance of asyndetic parataxis (the sub-
junctive), which can be interpreted as a colloquialism, thus a variation down-
wards (P.Neph.12.18–19, ad350–370, Hathor / Herakleopolite nome), and two
instances of an unexpected mismatch between the subordinator and the fol-
lowing verb, that is ὅτι hoti with the imperative or subjunctive.
All six instances showing an unexpected mismatch between the subordin-
ator and the following verb are listed below.
(a) DDbDP:
(10) O.Trim.2.531.15–19 (350–370, Trimithis, Oasis Magna)
γράφω
graphō
I.write
δὲ
de
but
σοί,
soi
to.you
ὦ
ō
oh
ἀ̣δελφὲ
adelphe
brother
Πανᾶ,
Pana
Pana
ὅτι
hoti
that
ὅσα
hosa
everything.that
ἐνεχειρησάμην
enekheirēsamēn
I.entrusted
σοὶ
soi
to.you
[ταχέ]ως
[takhe]ōs
quickly
ποίησον
poiēson
do
ἕως
heōs
until
πέμψω
pempsō
I.will.send
ἐφ’
eph’
to
ὑμᾶς
humas
you
καὶ
kai
and
μὴ
mē
not
ἀμελήσητε
amelēsēte
forget
ἐν
en
in
οὐδενί.
oudeni
nothing
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
181
‘I am writing to you, brother Panas, that you may do quickly whatever I
have entrusted to you until I send (a message) to you all, so you do not
forget4 in any way.’
(11) P.Ross.Georg.3.1.8–9 (270, Alexandria)
νῦν
nun
now
οὖν
oun
thus
ὑμ[ῖ]ν
hum[i]n
to.you
γράφω
graphō
I.write
ὅτ[ι]
hot[i]
that
ἐν
en
in
τάχει
takhei
speed
ὃ
ho
which
ποιεῖται
poieitai
is.done
πέμψατέ
pempsate
send
μοι
moi
to.me
τὸ
to
the
ἐραιοῦν
eraioun
woollen
κολωβειν
kolōbein
tunic
ἵ\να/
h\na/
in.order.that
ἐντός
entos
with
μου
mou
me
αὐτ[ὸ]
aut[o]
it
εὕρω.
heurō
I.find
‘Now, I am writing to you that quickly you may send to me the woollen
(ἐρεοῦν) tunic (κολόβιον), which is being done, in order that I find it with
me.’
(12) sb 3.7244.4–7 (226–275, Arsinoites, Fayyum)
γράφω
graphō
I.write
σοι,
soi
to.you
ὅτι
hoti
that
μὴ
mē
not
ἀμελήσῃς
amelēsēs
you.forget
ὑπάγειν
hupagein
go
[πρὸς]
[pros]
to
Παμοῦθιν,
Pamouthin
Pamouthis
ὅτι
hoti
as
ἐκ
ek
from
λ( )
l( )
l( )
ἕνεκα
heneka
regarding
τῶν
tōn
the
ἀρουρῶν
arourōn
arourae
εἰς
eis
for
μίσθωσιν
misthōsin
rent
ἢ
ē
or
αὐτὸν
auton
him
ἢ
ē
or
τοὺς
tous
the
παρὰ
para
from
Πρωτ[άρχο]υ
Prōt[arkko]u
Protarchos
ἢ
ē
or
τὸν
ton
the
ἀραβατοξότην
arabatoxotēn
Arab.archer
{καὶ}
{kai}
and
τὸ
to
the
κ̣έ̣ρ̣μ̣α̣
kerma
coin
μετεβεβλ[ή]καμεν
metebebl[ē]kamen
we.exchanged
ὁμοῦ.
homou
together
‘I am writing to you that you shall not forget to go to Pamouthis, because
since … we have paid (?) in total a coin in rent for the arourae either to
him or to those from Protarchos or to the Arab archer (ἀραβοτοξότην).’
(13) P.Giss.103.6–9 (300–399, Oasis Magna)
ἀναγκαίω[ς
anagkaiō[s
necessarily
δὲ
de
but
γράφω
graphō
I.write
σοι
soi
to.you
ὅ]πως
ho]pōs
that
ταχέως
takheōs
quickly
ἡ[μᾶς
hē[mas
us
κατάλ]αβεͅ
katal]abe
visit
4 The reason for the change from the singular imperative to the plural subjunctive is unclear.
It parallels however the change from initial σοίto later ὑμᾶς.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

182
fendel
πρὸ
pro
before
τοῦ
tou
the
ε ̣[…
e [
e [
‘Out of necessity I am writing to you that you may quickly visit us before
…’
(b) Bilingual corpus:
(14) P.Kell.1.65.5–8 (301–325, Kellis, Oasis Magna)
ἔγραψά
egrapsa
I.wrote
σοι
soi
to.you
πρὸ
pro
before
τούτου
toutou
this
ὅτι·
hoti
that
τήρησον
tērēson
guard
τὸν
ton
the
τόπον
topon
place
μου
mou
my
ὅ
ho
that
ἐστιν
estin
is
ἐπὶ
epi
under
μισθῷ
misthō
rent
ὄν.
on
being
‘I wrote to you before that you shall guard my place which5 is being rented
out.’
(15) P.Kell.1.65.30–34 (301–325, Kellis, Oasis Magna)
θαυμάζω
thaumazō
I.am.surprised
δέ·
de
but
ἔγραψά
egrapsa
I.wrote
σοι
soi
to.you
ὅτι·
hoti
that
πέμψῃς
pempsēs
you.may.send
τὸ
to
the
μαρφόρτιόν
marphortion
coat
μου
mou
my
καὶ
kai
and
⟦ουκε⟧
[|ouke|]
[|not|]
τὸ
to
the
χιτώνιον,
khitōnion
tunic
καὶ
kai
and
οὐκ
ouk
not
ἠμέλησέ
ēmelēse
it.mattered
σοι·
soi
to.you
πέμψῃς
pempsēs
you.may.send
μοι.
moi
to.me
‘I am surprised (that) I wrote to you that you may send my coat (μαφόρ-
τιον) and tunic, but you did not care. Send (it) to me (sc. now)!’
Noticeably,allsixinstancescomefromthoroughlybilingualareasof Egypt,that
is the Oasis Magna, the Fayyum and the metropolis of Alexandria, and date
from the third and fourth centuries, that is a period of time when, as we have
seen, laxer norms and rules were in place and thus flexibility and freedom were
higher.
5 The writer seems insecure about the correct form of the relative construction (τόπον is mas-
culine, ὅis neuter).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
183
One can discount P.Giss.103.6–9 (ὅ]πως (…) κατάλ]αβεͅ) on the basis that (i)
only part of the verb is preserved and (ii) that even if the reconstruction is cor-
rect, the common orthographic interchange between long and short /e/ means
that a regular subjunctive after ὅπως may be hidden underneath a spelling vari-
ation.O.Trim.2.531.15–19displaysanon-contiguoussequenceof ‘Iwrite’,‘toyou’
and ‘that’ (with ὦἀ̣δελφὲΠανᾶintervening). P.Ross.Georg.3.1.8–9 displays ‘to
you’ preceding ‘to write’, unlike in the other instances. In O.Trim.2.531.15–19 and
P.Ross.Georg.3.1.8–9, syntactic elements are moved into the preverbal position
in the ὅτι hoti clause, potentially for reasons of focus.
By contrast, in sb 3.7244.4–7, P.Kell.1.65.5–8 and P.Kell.1.65.30–34, ‘I write /
wrote to you that’ forms a contiguous sequence and the verb phrase in the sub-
ordinateclauseimmediatelyfollowsὅτιhoti.Thus,theinsertionof amemorised
chunk of language could explain these instances. However, it cannot explain
the instances in O.Trim.2.531.15–19 and P.Ross.Georg.3.1.8–9.
Generally speaking, there are three ways to analyse the pattern γράφω ὅτι
grafо̄ hoti + deontic verb form. Importantly, the same pattern can result from
very different processes (Mithun 2019) as well as from a combination of sev-
eral processes (Cristofaro 2016).
(i)
There is the pattern dubbed insubordination, that is the combination of
a prototypical subordinator with an independent clause (Evans 2007;
Mithun2008;seee.g.Cristofaro2016).Itappearswith ὅτιhoti+indic-
ative to a limited extent (oti recitativum) and ἵνα hina + subjunctive to a
significant extent in Greek (Winter 1955; Hult 1990; Levinsohn 1999;
Sim 2011). However, ὅτι hoti + subjunctive / imperative would still need an
additional step in this analysis.
(ii)
One could argue with the insertion of acquired pieces (or chunks) of lan-
guage without knowledge of their syntactic requirements when embed-
ded (Bybee 2010). This analysis applies most often to formulaic struc-
tures and fixed expressions which have a specific pragmatic function,
such as ‘You know’ in English (Erman 2001) or ‘I want you to know that’
in Greek (James 2008; Porter—Pitts 2013). Yet, this analysis fails for
two instances mentioned above as explained due to their non-contiguous
structure.
(iii) Bilingual interference could have played a role. Coptic does not distin-
guishbetweenprospectiveandfactivecomplementclausesmorphologic-
ally (ϫⲉdje appearsinboth),thusthechoiceof thewrongsubordinatorin
thesenseof theovergeneralisationof onesubordinator(ὅτιhoti),couldbe
explained. Furthermore, Coptic does not make a morphological distinc-
tion between dependent and independent clauses, thus the imperative
/ subjunctive after ὅτι hoti could be accounted for (Layton 2011, vol. 20,
para. 338.a.ii).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

184
fendel
What sets the two passages from the bilingual letter corpus apart from the
other instances is (i) that they are a repetition and thus a re-instantiation of a
pastrequest,(ii)thattheyappearbothinthesameletter,thatistheyseemtobe
part of one writer’s idiolect, and (iii) that this letter contains not just these two
but another eight instances where bilingualism seems to have impacted. The
instances relate to the morphosyntactic treatment of personal names and the
morphosyntactic linking of discourse units.The morphosyntactic treatment of
Egyptian personal names in Greek is a thorny issue (Brunsch 1978; Kramer
et al. 1987, 4: 38; Anderson 2007: 169–170 and 287; Muhs 2010). It will suffice
here to say that the lack of inflectional endings is at the very least unexpected
in Greek (Fewster 2002: 238–239; Vierros 2003: 16–17; Papathomas 2007:
720–721; Torallas Tovar 2010a: 262). The linkage of discourse units is by
comparison more syndetic in Greek than it is in Coptic where linkage is often
achieved pragmatically rather than morphosyntactically (e.g. Hasznos 2006).
Going back to the fact that the same surface level structure can be caused
by different processes or a combination of processes, one could conjecture
that several processes may have interacted resulting in the two structures in
P.Kell.1.65. The use of acquired chunks of language especially in a recurring
fixed expression, the lack of distinction between factive and prospective as
well as dependent and independent complement clauses in Coptic and finally
the availability of insubordinate patterns with ὅτι hoti and ἵνα hina may all have
interacted. Given the bilingual setting and the large number of linguistic struc-
tures that seem to have been influenced by bilingualism in the same letter, it
seems likely that bilingual interference played a role, even if only a reinforcing
one.
5
Language Teaching and Learning in Communities of Practice
Experimental research regarding language learners’ acquisition of verbal com-
plementation patterns in modern multi-language settings shows that there are
facilitating factors to learners acquiring patterns. These include (i) a high fre-
quency of occurrence of the relevant pattern with the verb in question, (ii) the
existence of a parallel in the learners’ L1, and (iii) an awareness of the construc-
tional surroundings of the verb in question. A well-researched language pair is
L1 Spanish and L2 English.
Frequency of occurrence and the existence of a parallel in the L1 are relevant
to the complementation by means of an infinitive vs a gerund in English. The
gerund, which does not exist in Spanish and is low frequency in English, loses
out (Schwartz—Causarano 2007). An L1 parallel was also found to be rel-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
185
evanttomasteryof thepresencevsabsenceof ‘that’afterverbssuchas‘say’and
‘think’, an alternation where no preference can be detected for native speakers.
The L2 speakers will accept the zero ‘that’ option more easily where there is
a Spanish parallel. Overall, the correct application of the pattern seems to be
relatedtothedegreeof languageproficiencyratherthanthelevelof instruction
(Vanpatten 2011; Llinàs-Grau—Bel 2019). Frequency effects are particu-
larly prominent with the basic verbs of a language, that is the most frequent
verbs. L2 learners tend to overuse them while overextending their semantic
scope (Viberg 2002 on L1 English L2 Swedish).
The relevance of the constructional surroundings of a verb ties in with
the verb-island hypothesis (Tomasello 2003). This hypothesis claims that in
child language acquisition every verb and its syntax are acquired separately,
put differently, that every verb is an island. Valenzuela Manzanares and Rojo
Lopez (2008) find this hypothesis to apply to second-language acquisition too.
However, L2 speakers do not always recognise the form of a construction. Con-
structions that modify what learners acquire as the basic verb meaning and are
without a Spanish counterpart pose specific problems (Martinez Vazquez
2004).
The facilitating factors explored, i.e. (i) a high frequency of occurrence of
the relevant pattern with the verb in question, (ii) the existence of a parallel
in the learners’ L1, and (iii) an awareness of the constructional surroundings
of the verb in question, map onto the three factors found to be relevant to
the structure γράφω ὅτι grafо̄ hoti + deontic verb form in P.Kell.1.65. Section 4.3
concluded that the use of acquired chunks of language, the lack of distinction
between factive and prospective as well as dependent and independent com-
plement clauses in Coptic and the availability of insubordinate patterns with
ὅτι hoti and ἵνα hina may all have shaped the structures in P.Kell.1.65.
Firstly, chunking depends on the frequency of occurrence of a piece of lan-
guage (a chunk). Only frequently co-occurring items that form a unit with
one semantic or pragmatic function will be memorised as invariable chunks.
Secondly, bilingual interference is often linked to an L1 (near-)parallel, which
interferes with the expected structure in the L2. If there is no L1 parallel, the
language user can transpose a structure word by word (polysemy copying) into
thetargetlanguage(directinterference).Transpositionbymeansof identifying
a functional pivot (pivot matching), however, is based on similarities between
languages (indirect interference). Thirdly and finally, insubordination is one
example of a constructional environment in which the construction as a whole
carries the meaning rather than any one constituent.
Looking beyond the structure and considering the external context of the
deviating structures discussed in Section 4.3, it appears that all the relevant
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

186
fendel
instances come from a limited number of thoroughly bilingual areas, that is
the Oasis Magna, the Fayyum and the city of Alexandria. As regards language
acquisition, these communities form communities of practice, that is ‘groups
of people who share a concern or a passion for something they do and learn
how to do it better as they interact regularly’ (Unwin et al. 2007; Wenger-
Trayner—Wenger-Trayner 2015: 1). One of the best examples of a com-
munity of practice is a school. For example, Clarysse (1993, 188) found that in
texts from the Ptolemaic period Egyptian scribes preferred a pen made of rush,
whereas Greek scribes preferred a pen made of reed. Apparently, two differ-
ent scribal traditions, two communities of practice, existed. Another example
of several communities of practice existing is Quack’s (2017b) detailed ana-
lysis of local writing systems being developed in Egypt during the Roman
period.
In Kellis (Oasis Magna), the Manichaean community seems to have had
an educational superior, the Teacher, around whom a community of practice
centred (see e.g. P. Kell. Copt. 20.24–26). The Teacher is mentioned in P. Kell.
Copt. 19, 20, 24, 25, and 29; P. Kell. Copt. 31 is written by the Teacher (Gard-
ner 2006). The Teacher seems to have been mobile rather than residing in one
school. Thus, a community of practice influenced by him may have been as
large as the Oasis Magna. In the Fayyum and the city of Alexandria, evidence
suggests that schools existed in monastic contexts. Thus, communities of prac-
tice could have existed here too.
Aspecificpractice,whichcouldbelinguisticorextra-linguistic(suchaswrit-
ing materials), is usually exchanged in a community of practice. This explains
the cluster of deviating but similar instances in the Oasis Magna. Thoroughly
bilingual areas could have Egyptian-Greek schools (Cribiore 1999), such that
both languages were used alongside each other in an educational setting. This
explainsthehigherincidenceof bilingualinterferenceinsuchareas.Boththese
observations taken together further support the hypothesis that in the deviant
patterns in P.Kell.1.65 bilingual interference played a role.
6
Summary and Conclusion
This article has evaluated two instances of γράφω ὅτι grafо̄ hoti + deontic verb
form in the early fourth-century letter P.Kell.1.65 from the village of Kellis in the
Egyptian Oasis Magna. The letter belongs to a bilingual, Greek-Coptic papyrus
archive, documenting the interactions between members of a largely Mani-
chaean community in the eastern desert. This community seems to have had
certain linguistic peculiarities, both with regard to their use of the epistolary
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
187
formulae (Choat 2007; Choat 2010) and with regard to their use of semi-
formulaic / fixed expressions (Worp 2011; Fendel 2019).
In order to decide whether the deviant instances in P.Kell.1.65 resulted from
theconfusionof Greekpatterns,second-language-acquisition-relatederrors,or
bilingual interference, the article detailed the verb profile of the lemma γράφω
grafо̄ in classical and post-classical literary and documentary sources.The verb
profile falls into three form-function pairings termed here the collocation, the
idiom and the formula. The instances in P.Kell.1.65 represent the formula of
γράφω grafо̄, functionally speaking, but seem to be a mixture of the collocation
and the formula, structurally speaking.
Section2providedabroadoverviewof thesituationinearlyByzantineEgypt
from a socio-political, socio-cultural and socio-linguistic perspective. Coptic
seems to have gained in importance vis-à-vis Greek as compared to earlier
periods of their coexistence. Section 3 introduced the idea of a verb profile
by means of English ‘to tell’ and showed how the division into a collocation,
an idiom and a formula in a verb profile emerges. Section 4 established the
verb profile of γράφω grafо̄ based on (i) the Classical Attic literary corpus of
Xenophon,(ii)thepost-classicalKoineliterarycorpusof Plutarch,(iii)thepost-
classical documentary corpus of letters on papyrus dating from the fourth to
mid-seventh centuries (excluding those from bilingual archives), and (iv) the
post-classical documentary corpus of bilingual papyrus archives dating from
the fourth to mid-seventh centuries.
Based on the verb profile, Section 4 evaluated the status of the deviant
instances in P.Kell.1.65. It appears (i) that there is a small number of compar-
able examples from the same region or other thoroughly bilingual areas of the
country, and (ii) that P.Kell.1.65 shows an interesting treatment of personal
names along with ungrammatical deviations in the areas of discourse markers
and semi-formulaic expressions. Therefore, it was suggested that the structure
γράφω ὅτι grafо̄ hoti + deontic verb form has resulted from a combination of
bilingual interference (with an L1 model), chunking of frequently recurring
pieces of language, and the availability of insubordination in Greek. Section
5 showed that these three mechanisms (chunking, bilingual interference, and
insubordination) map onto factors found to facilitate the acquisition of verbal
complementationpatternsinmodernlanguages(i.e.ahighfrequencyof occur-
rence, the existence of an L1 parallel, and an awareness of the constructional
environment). The accumulation of the deviant pattern, γράφω ὅτι grafо̄ hoti
+ deontic verb form, in and around the Oasis Magna could point to a bilingual
community of practice.The figure of theTeacher mentioned in the letters from
Kellis adds further weight to this hypothesis. This also ties in with the above-
mentioned linguistic peculiarities in Kellis and the Oasis Magna pointing to a
close-knit social network.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

188
fendel
References
Adams, James 2003, BilingualismandtheLatinlanguage, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Anderson, John 2007, The grammar of names, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Bagnall, Roger 1993, Egypt in late antiquity, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bentein, Klaas 2015, Minor Complementation Patterns in Post-classical Greek (i–
vi ad): A Socio-historical Analysis of a Corpus of Documentary Papyri, “Symbolae
Osloenses” 89: 104–147. https://doi.org/10.1080/00397679.2015.1095012.
Bentein, Klaas 2017, Finite vs. non-finite complementation in Post-classical and Early
Byzantine Greek:Towards a pragmatic restructuring of the complementation system?,
“Journal of Greek Linguistics” 17: 3–36. https://doi.org/10.1163/15699846‑01701002.
Biber, Douglas—Susan Conrad 2009, Register, genre, and style, Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press.
Brunsch, Wolfgang 1978, Untersuchungen zu den griechischen Wiedergaben
ägyptischer Personennamen, “Enchoria” 8: 1–142.
Bucking, Scott 2012,Towardsanarchaeologyof bilingualism, in A. Mullen—P. James
(edd.), Multilingualism in the Graeco-Roman Worlds, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press: 225–264.
Butler, Cuthbert 1898, The Lausiac history of Palladius, Cambridge: At the Uni-
versity Press.
Butler,Yuko—Kenji Hakuta 2006, BilingualismandSecondLanguageAcquisition,
inT. Bhatia—W. Ritchie (edd.),The Handbook of Bilingualism, Oxford: JohnWiley &
Sons: 114–144. https://doi.org/10.1002/9780470756997.ch5.
Bybee, Joan 2010, Language, usage and cognition, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Chambers, Jack—Trudgill, Peter 1998, Dialectology, 2nd ed. Cambridge Text-
books in Linguistics, Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
Choat, Malcolm 2006, Belief and cult in fourth-century papyri, Turnhout/Sydney:
Brepols.
Choat, Malcolm 2007, Epistolary formulae in early Coptic letters, in N. Bosson—
A.Boud’hors(edd.), ActesduhuitièmeCongrèsinternationald’étudescoptes,Leuven:
Peeters: 667–678.
Choat,Malcolm2009, LanguageandCultureinLateAntiqueEgypt,inP.Rousseau—
J. Raithel (edd.), A Companion to Late Antiquity, Chicester/Malden: John Wiley &
Sons: 342–356.
Choat, Malcolm 2010, Early coptic epistolography, in A. Papaconstantinou (ed.),The
Multilingual experience in Egypt, from the Ptolemies to the Abbasids, Farnham: Ashg-
ate: 153–178.
Choat, Malcolm 2012, Coptic, in Ch. Riggs (ed.), The Oxford handbook of Roman
Egypt, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 581–593.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
189
Clackson, Sarah 2010, Coptic or Greek? Bilingualism in the papyri, in A. Papacon-
stantinou (ed.),The multilingual experience in Egypt: From the Ptolemies to the Abba-
sids, Farnham: Ashgate: 73–104.
Clarysse, Willy 1993, Egyptian Scribes writing Greek, “Chronique d’Égypte” 68: 186–
201. https://doi.org/10.1484/J.CDE.2.308932.
Crespo, Emilio 2007, The linguistic policy of the Ptolemaic kingdom, in M. Chatzo-
poulos—V. Psilakakou (edd.), Phōnēs charaktēr ethnikos: actes du ve Congrès inter-
national de dialectologie grecque (Athènes 28–30 septembre 2006), Athens: Kentron
Hellēnikēs kai Rōmaïkēs Archaiotētos, Ethnikon Hidryma Ereunōn, 35–49.
Cribiore, Raffaella 1999, Greek and Coptic Education in Late Antique Egypt, in
S. Emmel (ed.), Ägypten und Nubien in spätantiker und christlicher Zeit: Akten des
6. Internationalen Koptologenkongresses, Münster, 20.–26. Juli 1996, 6, Wiesbaden:
Reichert, 279–286.
Cribiore,Raffaella2001,Gymnasticsof themind:GreekeducationinHellenisticand
Roman Egypt, Princeton/Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Cristofaro, Sonia 2008, A constructionist approach to complementation: Evidence
from Ancient Greek, “Linguistics” 46: 571–606. https://doi.org/10.1515/LING.2008.019.
Cristofaro,Sonia2016, Routestoinsubordination,inN.Evans—H.Watanabe(edd.),
Insubordination, Amsterdam: John Benjamins: 393–422.
Depauw, Mark 2009, Bilingual Greek-Demotic Documentary Papyri and Hellenization
in Ptolemaic Egypt, in P. Van Nuffelen (ed.), Faces of Hellenism. Studies in the History
of the Eastern Mediterranean (4th century b.c.–5th century a.d.), Leuven: Peeters:
120–139.
Depauw, Mark 2012, Language use, literacy and bilingualism, in Ch. Riggs (ed.), The
Oxford Handbook of Roman Egypt, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 493–506.
Depauw, Mark—Clarysse, Willy 2013, How Christian was Fourth Century Egypt?
Onomastic Perspectives on Conversion, “Vigiliae Christianae” 67: 407–435. https://doi​
.org/10.1163/15700720‑12341144.
Depauw, Mark—Coussement, Sandra 2014, Identifiers and identification methods
in the ancient world: Legal Documents in Ancient Societies iii, Leuven: Peeters.
Elspass,Stephan2012,Theuseof privatelettersanddiariesinsociolinguisticinvestiga-
tion, in J. Conde-Silvestre—J. Hernández-Campoy (eds.),TheHandbookof Historical
Sociolinguistics, Malden (MA): John Wiley & Sons: 156–169.
Erman, Britt. 2001, Pragmatic markers revisited with a focus on you know in adult and
adolescent talk, “Journal of Pragmatics” 33: 1337–1359. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0378​
‑2166(00)00066‑7.
Evans, Nicholas 2007, Insubordination and its uses, in I. Nikolaeva (ed.), Finiteness:
theoretical and empirical foundations, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 366–431.
Fendel, Victoria 2019, The paradox of Kellis (Western Egyptian Desert), “Journal for
Graeco-Roman Studies” 58: 101–133. https://doi.org/10.23933/jgrs.2018.58.3.101.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

190
fendel
Fewster, Penelope 2002, Bilingualism in Roman Egypt, in J.N. Adams—M. Janse—
S.Swain(eds.), BilingualisminAncientSociety:Languagecontactandthewrittentext,
Oxford: Oxford University Press: 220–245.
Förster, Hans 2002,Wörterbuch der griechischenWörterin den koptischendokument-
arischen Texten, Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Foss, Clive 2003, The Persians in the Roman near East (602–630ad), “Journal of the
Royal Asiatic Society” 13: 149–170.
Fournet, Jean-Luc 2009, The multilingual environment of late antique Egypt: Greek,
Latin, Coptic, and Persian documentation, in R. Bagnall (ed.), The Oxford Handbook
of Papyrology, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 418–451.
Fournet, Jean-Luc 2019, The rise of Coptic: Egyptian versus Greek in late antiquity.
Rostovtzeff Lectures. Princeton, Oxford: Princeton University Press.
Fournet, Jean-Luc—Magdelaine, Caroline (eds.) 2008, LesarchivesdeDioscore
d’Aphroditécentansaprèsleurdécouverte:histoireetculturedansl’Egyptebyzantine:
actes du Colloque de Strasbourg, 8–10 décembre 2005, Paris: De Boccard.
Gardner,Iain2006, Aletterfromtheteacher:Somecommentsonletter-writingandthe
Manichaean community of ivth century Egypt, in L. Painchaud—P.-H. Poirier (eds.),
Coptica—Gnostica—Manichaica: Mélanges offerts à Wolf-Peter Funk, Québec: Les
Presses de l’Université Laval: 317–323.
Gardner, Iain—Alcock, Anthony—Funk, Wolf-Peter—Hope, Colin—
Bowen, Gillian 1999, Coptic documentary texts from Kellis, Oxford: Oxbow.
Gardner, Iain—Alcock, Anthony—Funk, Wolf-Peter—Hope, Colin—
Bowen, Gillian 2014, Coptic documentary texts from Kellis, Oxford: Oxbow.
Garel, Esther—Nowak, Maria 2017, Monastic Wills: The Continuation of Late
Roman Legal Tradition?, in M. Choat—M. Giorda (eds.), Writing and Communica-
tion in Early Egyptian Monasticism, Leiden/Boston: Brill: 108–128.
Goglia, Francesco 2005, Communicative strategies in the Italian of Igbo-Nigerian
immigrants in Padova (Italy): a contact linguistic approach, Manchester: University
of Manchester.
Goldberg,Adele1995,Constructions:aconstructiongrammarapproachtoargument
structure, Chicago/London: University of Chicago Press.
Gries,Stefan—StefanowitschAnatol2004, Extendingcollostructionalanalysis,
“International Journal of Corpus Linguistics” 9: 97–129.
Grosjean, Francois 2001,The bilingual’s language modes, in J. Nicol (ed.), One mind,
two languages: bilingual language processing, Malden, Mass./Oxford: Blackwell: 1–
22.
Gross, Gaston 1984, Lexicon-grammar and the Syntactic Analysis of French, in Pro-
ceedings of the 10th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, Strouds-
burg, PA, USA: Association for Computational Linguistics: 275–282, https://doi.org/​
10.3115/980431.980549.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
191
Hamers, Josiane—Blanc, Michel 20002, Bilinguality and bilingualism, Cam-
bridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hanks, Patrick 1996, Contextual Dependency and Lexical Sets, “International Journal
of Corpus Linguistics” 1: 75–98.
Hartmann, Iren—Haspelmath, Martin—Taylor, Bradley (eds.) 2013,Valency
Patterns Leipzig. Online database, Leipzig: Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary
Anthropology.
Hasznos, Andrea 2006, A Case Where Coptic is more Syndetic than Greek, “Acta Anti-
qua Academiae Scientiarum Hungaricae” 46: 91–97. https://doi.org/10.1556/AAnt.46​
.2006.1‑2.11.
Hauben, Hans 2002, Aurêlios Pageus, alias Apa Paiêous, et le monastère mélitien
d’Hathor, “Ancient Society”: 337–352.
Heine, Berndt—Kuteva, Tania 2005, Language contact and grammatical change,
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Hoffmann, Charlotte 1991, An introduction to bilingualism, London: Longman.
Houston, Stephen—Baines John—Cooper Jerrold 2003, Last Writing: Script
Obsolescence in Egypt, Mesopotamia, and Mesoamerica, “Comparative Studies in
Society and History” 45: 430–479.
Hult, Karin 1990, Syntactic variation in Greek of the 5th century a.d., Göteborg: Acta
Universitatis Gothoburgensis.
James, Patrick 2008, Retention and retreat: complementary participles and infinitives
with verbs of perception and declaration in the Roman and Byzantine documentary
papyri, Thesis, University of Cambridge. https://doi.org/10.17863/CAM.31210.
Jiménez López, Maria 2006, Persuadir en griego: el marco predicativo de πείθω, in
E. Crespo—J. de la Villa,—A Revuelta (eds.), Word Classes and Related Topics in
Ancient Greek. Proceedings of the Conference on “Greek Syntax and Word Classes,”,
Louvain-la-Neuve: Peeters: 163–191.
JiménezLópez,Maria2016, Funcionessemánticasalternantesydiátesisverbal:elcaso
de παρασκευάζω, in E. Borrel Vidal—P. Gómez Cardó (eds.), Omnia mutantur: Canvi,
transformacióypervivènciaenlaculturaclàssica,enlessevesllengüesienelseullegat,
Barcelona: Universidad de Barcelona Edicions: 199–210.
Jördens, Andrea 2012, Status and Citizenship, in Ch. Riggs (ed.), The Oxford Hand-
book of Roman Egypt, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 247–259.
Keenan, James 2007, Byzantine Egyptian villages, in R. Bagnall (ed.), Egypt in the Byz-
antine world, 300–700, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 226–243.
Kiss,Zsolt2007, Alexandriainthefourthtoseventhcenturies,inR.Bagnall(ed.), Egypt
in the Byzantine world, 300–700, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 187–206.
Kramer, Bärbel—Shelton, John—Browne, Gerald 1987, Das Archiv des Neph-
eros und verwandte Texte, Mainz am Rhein: Philipp Von Zabern.
Kraus,Thomas2000,(Il)literacyinnon-literarypapyrifromGraeco-RomanEgypt:Fur-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

192
fendel
ther aspects of the educational ideal in ancient literary sources and modern times,
“Mnemosyne” 53: 322–342. https://doi.org/10.1163/156852500510633.
Kroeger, Paul 2004, Analyzing Syntax: A Lexical-Functional Approach, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Lakoff, George,—Johnson, Mark 1980, Metaphors we live by, Chicago/London:
University of Chicago Press.
Lampe, Geoffrey 1961, A Patristic Greek lexicon, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Layton, Bentley 20113, A Coptic grammar: with chrestomathy and glossary: Sahidic
dialect, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Levinsohn, Stephen 1999, Ὅτι Recitativum in John’s Gospel: A Stylistic or a Pragmatic
Device?, “Work Papers of the Summer Institute of Linguistics, University of North
Dakota Session 1999” 43: 1–14.
Liddell, Henry—Scott Robert—Jones Henry 19969, A Greek-English lexicon,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Llinàs-Grau, Mireira—Bel, Aurora 2019, On the Acceptance of the Null That by
Bilingual Catalan/Spanish L2 Learners of English, “Languages” 4: 1–16.
Mair, Christian 2002,Three changing patterns of verb complementation in Late Mod-
ern English: a real-time study based on matching text corpora, “English Language and
Linguistics” 6: 105–131.
Marnette, Sophie 1996, Réflexions sur le discours indirect libre en français médiéval,
“Romania” 114: 1–49. https://doi.org/10.3406/roma.1996.2193.
Martinez Vazquez, Montserrat 2004, Learning Argument Structure Generaliza-
tions in a Foreign Language, “Vigo International Journal of Applied Linguistics” 1:
151–165.
Matras, Yaron—Sakel, Jeanette 2007, Investigating the mechanisms of pattern
replication in language convergence, “Studies in Language”, 31/4: 829–865. https://doi​
.org/10.1075/sl.31.4.05mat.
Matras, Yaron 2009, Language contact, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Matras, Yaron 2015, Why is the borrowing of inflectional morphology dispreferred?, in
F. Gardani—P. Arkadiev—N. Amiridze (eds.), BorrowedMorphology, Berlin/Boston:
Mouton de Gruyter: 47–80.
Milroy, James—Milroy, Lesley 20124, Authority in language: investigating stand-
ard English, London: Routledge.
van Minnen, Peter 2007, The other cities in Later Roman Egypt, in R. Bagnall (ed.),
EgyptintheByzantineworld,300–700, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 207–
225.
Mithun, Marianne 2008, The Extension of Dependency Beyond the Sentence, “Lan-
guage” 84: 69–119.
Mithun, Marianne 2019, Sources and mechanisms, in G. Kaltenböck—K. Beije-
ring,—M. Sansiñena (eds.), Insubordination:theoreticalandempiricalissues, Berlin/
Boston: Mouton de Gruyter: 29–54.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
193
Muhs, Brian 2010, Language contact and personal names in early Ptolemaic Egypt, in
D. Obbink—T. Evans (eds.), The language of the papyri, Oxford: Oxford University
Press: 187–197.
Myers-Scotton, Carol 2006, Multiple voices: an introduction to bilingualism,
Malden, MA: Blackwell Pub.
Palme, Bernhard 2009, The Range of Documentary Texts: Types and Categories, in
R. Bagnall (ed.), The Oxford Handbook of Papyrology, Oxford: Oxford University
Press: 358–394.
Papathomas, Amphilochios 2007, Höflichkeit und Servilität in den griechischen
Papyrusbriefen der ausgehenden Antike, in B. Palme (ed.), Akten des 23. Interna-
tionalenPapyrologenkongress,Wien,22.–28.Juli2001,Vienna:VerlagderÖsterreichis-
chen Akademie der Wissenschaften: 497–512.
Porter, Stanley—Pitts, Andrew W. 2013, The Disclosure Formula in the Epis-
tolary Papyri and in the New Testament: Development, Form, Function, and Syntax,
in S. Porter—A.W. Pitts (eds.), The Language of the New Testament: Context, History,
and Development, Leiden/Boston: Brill: 421–438.
Quack, Joachim 2017a, On the Regionalization of Roman-Period Egyptian Hands, in
J. Cromwell—E. Grossman (eds.), Scribal Repertoires in Egypt from the New Kingdom
to the Early Islamic Period, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 184–211.
Quack, Joachim 2017b, How the Coptic script came about, in E. Grossman—P. Dils—
T. Richter—W. Schenkel (eds.), Greek influence on Egyptian-Coptic: Contact-induced
change in an ancient African language, Hamburg: Widmaier: 27–96.
Sänger, Patrick 2011, The Administration of Sasanian Egypt: New Masters and Byz-
antine Continuity, “Greek, Roman, and Byzantine Studies” 51: 653–665.
Schulz, Petra 2003, Factivity: its nature and acquisition, Tübingen: Max Niemeyer.
Schwartz, Michael—Causarano, Pei-ni 2007, The role of frequency in sla: an
analysis of gerunds and infinitives in esl written discourse, “Arizona Working Papers
in sla and Teaching” 14: 43–57.
Selinker, Larry 1972, Interlanguage, “International Review of Applied Linguistics”
10: 209–231.
Silk, Michael—Georgakopoulou, Alexandra 2009, Standard languages and
language standards: Greek, past and present, Farnham: Ashgate.
Sim, Margaret 2011, Marking thought and talk in NewTestament Greek: new light from
linguistics on the particles “hina” and “hoti.”, Cambridge: James Clarke.
Stolk, Joanne 2015, Case variation in Greek papyri. Retracing dative case syncretism
in the language of the Greek documentary papyri and ostraca from Egypt (300bce–
800ce), PhD thesis, Univeristy of Oslo.
Tomasello, Michael 2003, Constructing a language: a usage-based theory of lan-
guage acquisition, Cambridge, Mass./London: Harvard University Press.
Torallas Tovar, Sofía 2004a, Egyptian lexical interference in the Greek of Byzantine
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

194
fendel
and early Islamic Egypt, in P. Sijpesteijn—L. Sundelin (eds.), Papyrology and the his-
tory of early Islamic Egypt, Leiden: Brill: 163–198.
TorallasTovar, Sofía 2004b,Thecontextof loanwordsinEgyptianGreek, in P. Báde-
nas de la Pena—S.TorallasTovar—E. Luján—M. Ángeles Gallego (eds.), Lenguasen
contacto: El testimonio escrito, Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Cientí-
ficas: 57–67.
Torallas Tovar, Sofía 2007, Egyptian loanwords in Septuaginta and the papyri, in
B. Palme (ed.), Akten des 23. Internationalen Papyrologenkongresses, Wien, 22.–28.
Juli 2001, Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften: 687–
692.
Torallas Tovar, Sofía 2010a, Greek in Egypt, in E. Bakker (ed.), A Companion to the
Ancient Greek Language, Oxford: John Wiley & Sons: 253–266.
Torallas Tovar, Sofía 2010b, Linguistic Identity in Graeco-Roman Egypt, in A. Papa-
constantinou (ed.), The Multilingual Experience in Egypt, from the Ptolemies to the
Abbasids, Farnham: Ashgate: 17–43.
Torallas Tovar, Sofía 2017, The Reverse Case: Egyptian Borrowing in Greek, in E.
Grossman—P. Dils—T. Richter—W. Schenkel (eds.), Greek Influence on Egyptian
Coptic:ContactinducedchangeinanancientAfricanlanguage, Hamburg:Widmaier:
97–113.
Trapp, Erich—Hörandner Wolfram 2001, Lexikon zur byzantinischen Gräzität:
besonders des 9.–12. Jahrhunderts, Wien: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften.
Unwin, Lorna—Hughes, Jason—Jewson, Nick 2007, Communities of practice:
critical perspectives, London: Routledge.
Valenzuela Manzanares, Javier—Rojo López, Anna 2008, What can language
learners tell us about constructions?, in S. De Knop—Teun De Rycker (eds.), Cognit-
ive approaches to pedagogical grammar: A volume in honour of Rene Dirven, Berlin:
Mouton de Gruyter: 197–230.
Vanpatten, Bill 2011, Stubborn syntax: How it resists explicit teaching and learning,
in C. Sanz—R. Leow (eds.), Implicit and explicit language learning: conditions, pro-
cesses, and knowledge in sla and bilingualism, Washington, DC: Georgetown Uni-
versity Press: 9–21.
Viberg, Åke 2002, Basic Verbs in Second Language Acquisition, “Revue francaise de
linguistique appliquée” 7: 61–79.
Vierros, Marja 2003, Everything is Relative. The Relative Clause Constructions of an
Egyptian Scribe Writing Greek, in M. Vesterinen—L. Pietilä-Castrén (eds.), Grapta
Poikila, Helsinki: Finnish Institute at Athens: 13–23.
Wallis Budge, Ernest 1929, The Rosetta Stone in the British Museum, London: Har-
rison & Sons.
Wenger-Trayner, Etienne—Wenger-Trayner, Beverly 2015, Introduction to
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

natural language use and bilingual interference
195
communities of practice, Resources for social learning, https://wenger‑trayner.com/​
resources/.
Wilcken,Ulrich1927,UrkundenderPtolemäerzeit(ältereFunde),Berlin:MoutonDe
Gruyter.
Winter, Paul 1955, Ὅτι Recitativum in Luke i 25, 61, ii 23, “The Harvard Theological
Review” 48: 213–216.
Wipszycka, Ewa 2007, The institutional church, in R. Bagnall (ed.), Egypt in the Byz-
antine world, 300–700, Oxford: Oxford University Press: 331–349.
Worp, Klaas 2011, (δια)φυλάσσω + dat.: A linguistic regionalism in inscriptions from
Christian Egypt?, “Analecta Papyrologica” 23–24: 237–239.
Worp, Klaas—Whitehorne, John 1995, Greek papyri from Kellis, Oxford: Oxbow.
Zuckerman, Constantine 1995, The Hapless Recruit Psois and the Mighty Anchorite,
Apa John, “The Bulletin of the American Society of Papyrologists”: 183–194.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Laura Massetti, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_009
chapter 7
Where Does Dionysus Ὕης Come From?
Laura Massetti
1
Dionysus’s Disappearence and Dionysus Ὕης*
The Greek god Dionysus is “the divine stranger par excellence of the ancient
world” (Weaver 2004: 35). As such, he is the protagonist of several theoxeny
myths1 in which he is refused hospitality, the most well-known of which is the
Pentheus story, preserved in extenso in Euripides’ Bacchae. After this refusal,
an epiphany of the god effects a punishment. At the same time, the motif of
Dionysus’s refusal is often crossed and merged with that of the disappearing
god. As a consequence of being offended, the god disappears with disastrous
consequencesfortheworld.2Aftersearchingforthedisappearedone,theother
gods manage to restore his/her place among the deities by means of a sacri-
fice.
In the case of Dionysus, a subgroup of narratives involving both the
theoxeny-themeandthedisappearing-godoneissetduringthegod’schildhood
and go as follows. Dionysus is persecuted by someone, such as a powerful sov-
ereign.3 In order to escape from him, he plunges into the sea, where he receives
help from a female deity. He is later able to come back and take revenge on
the perpetrator(s) of his persecution. One of the earliest attestations of such
an account is found in the sixth book of the Iliad:
*
This paper was writtenin the frameworkof the project‘Family Myths. Phraseology and Inher-
ited Indo-European Thematic Structures in Greek Myth’. This project has received funding
from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the
Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 793479. A special thank goes to Esther Man-
fredi, who carefully read and reviewed my article. I am responsible for all remaining mis-
takes.
1 Cf. Kearns 2016.
2 On the motif of the ‘disappearing god’ cf. Burkert 1979, 123–148. For comments on Greek
stories involving Dionysus’s disappearance, cf. Otto 1965; Kerényi 1976. For the link be-
tween these narratives and the mystery cults cf. Graf—Johnston 2007; Cole 2007;
Faraone 2010, 2013.
3 For comments on these stories cf. Otto 1965; Kerényi 1976. For the link between these nar-
ratives and the mystery cults cf. Graf—Johnston 2007; Cole 2007; Faraone 2010, 2013.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

where does dionysus υης come from?
197
Il. 6.130–140
οὐδὲγὰρ οὐδὲΔρύαντος υἱὸς κρατερὸς Λυκόοργος
δὴν ἦν, ὅς ῥα θεοῖσιν ἐπουρανίοισιν ἔριζεν·
ὅς ποτε μαινομένοιο Διωνύσοιο τιθήνας
σεῦε κατ’ ἠγάθεον Νυσήϊον· αἳδ’ ἅμα πᾶσαι
θύσθλα χαμαὶκατέχευαν ὑπ’ ἀνδροφόνοιο Λυκούργου
θεινόμεναι βουπλῆγι· Διώνυσος δὲφοβηθείς
δύσεθ’ ἁλὸς κατὰκῦμα, Θέτις δ’ ὑπεδέξατο κόλπῳ
δειδιότα· κρατερὸς γὰρ ἔχε τρόμος ἀνδρὸς ὁμοκλῇ.
τῷμὲν ἔπειτ’ ὀδύσαντο θεοὶῥεῖα ζώοντες,
καίμιν τυφλὸν ἔθηκε Κρόνου πάϊς· οὐδ’ ἄρ’ ἔτι δήν
ἦν, ἐπεὶἀθανάτοισιν ἀπήχθετο πᾶσι θεοῖσιν
No, for not even the son of Dryas, mighty Lycurgus, lived long, he who
strove with heavenly gods; he drove down over the sacred mount of
Nysa the nurses of raging Dionysus, and they all together let their wands
fall to the ground, struck with an ox-goad by man-slaying Lycurgus; but
Dionysus fled, and plunged beneath the wave of the sea, and Thetis
received him, who was filled with fear, in her bosom, for mighty terror
had got hold of him at the man’s shouts. Then at Lycurgus did the gods
who live at their ease grow angry, and the son of Cronos made him blind;
and he lived not for long, since he was hated by all the immortal gods.
Murray—Wyatt 1924
Ancientcommentators,logographersandlexicographersconnectedLycurgus’s
persecution with the figure of ‘Dionysus of the rain’ (Gk. Ὕης) and with the
Hyades, Dionysus’s ‘rainy’ nurses, cf.
Pher. fr. 96 D
Ὕης ἐπίθετον Διονύσου, ὡς Κλείδημος· ἐπειδὴ, φησίν, ἐπιτελοῦμεν τὰς θυσίας
αὐτῷκαθ’ ὃν ὁθεὸς ὕει χρόνον· ὁδὲΦερεκύδης τὴν Σεμέλην Ὕην λέγει καὶτὰς
τοῦΔιονύσου τροφοὺς Ὕαδας.4 Ἀριστοφάνης δὲσυγκαταλέγει ξενικοῖς θεοῖς
τὸν Ὕην.
Hyes: epithet of Dionysus, as Kleidemos says: because we make sacrifices
to him according to the time in which the god makes it rain (lit. ‘the god
4 Cf. also Schol. Arati Phaen. 172 M Ἡδὲπροσωνυμία ἐστὶν, ὅτι τὸν Διόνυσον ἀνεθρέψαντο “Their
name is (Hyades) because they raised Dionysus.”
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

198
massetti
rains’).PherecydescallsSemele Hye;andthenursesof Dionysus Hyades.
Aristophanes classifies Hyes among the foreign gods.5
Schol. 25 in Il. 18.486 H.
Καλοῦνται δὲὙάδες ἢαἴτιοιὄμβρωνκαὶὑετῶνκαθίστανται. […] Αὗται θρέψα-
σαι τὸν Διόνυσον […] ΛυκοῦγοςδὲμέχριτῆςθαλάσσηςσυνεδίωξετὸνΔιόνυσον.
[…] Φερεκύδης, καθάπερ προείρηται, τὰς Ὑάδας Δωδωνίδας Νύμφας φησὶν
εἶναι, καὶ, Διονύσου τροφούς. Ἃς παρακαταθέσθαι τὸν Διόνυσον τῇἸνοῖδιὰτὸν
τῆς Ἥρας φόβον. Καθ’ ὃν καιρὸν καὶαὐτὰς Λυκοῦργος ἐδίωξε
They (scil. a group of stars) are called Hyades or are thought to cause
rain and precipitations. […] They raised Dionysus […] Lycurgus chased
Dionysus up to the sea. […] As already stated, Pherecydes says that the
Hyades are the Nymphs from Dodona and nurses of Dionysus.They gave
custody of Dionysus to Ino because they were afraid of Hera. On that
occasion Lycurgus chased them too.
Hyg. Astr. 2.21
Hyades Pherecydes Atheniensis Liberi nutrices esse demonstrat […] Hae
dicuntur a Lycurgo fugatae, et praeter Ambrosiam omnes ad Thetim pro-
fugisse, ut ait Asclepiades.
Hyades: Pherecydes of Athens attests that they were Liber’s nurses […]
It’s commonly said that they were made to run away by Lycurgus and all
of them, except Ambrosia, as Asclepiades reports, fled to Thetis.
It has long been proposed that Dionysus’s name might be etymologically re-
lated to the semantic field of ‘water’ and ‘humidity’, since the god is associ-
ated with the notion ‘fertility’ and ‘watery/moist fruits’.6 According to Peters
(1989: 217–220), this very connection might lie at the basis of Dionysus’s name,
which he understands as *Dih/i̯e-hnūso- (with a first member to Gk. δίε/ομαι
and a second member to Gk. νῦσα ‘spring’, reflecting *snuh2-ti-h2).7 However,
5 Phot. Lex. (p. 616.11 Porson) = Etym. Gen. B (Etym. Magn. 775.2) = Suid. (4.683.1 Adler).
6 For the association between Dionysus and the liquid element in Cornutus see Filoni 2018:
528–530, 560, 575.
7 Similarly, Janda (2000: 259–273) has proposed a Transponat [*Dih1-e-snuh2-ti-o-] ‘(the one)
who makes the water flow’. On the variants of Dionysus’s name, Thess. Διεννυσ°, Cycl.-Ion.
Διενυσ° and Myc. *Diu̯ohnūso-, all reshaped on Διὸς νῦσος* cf. García Ramón 1987: 185–186.
Different etymological interpretations for the name of the god have also been proposed by
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

where does dionysus υης come from?
199
the Greek sources about Dionysus Hyes do not allow us to recover a clear link
between Dionysus’s disappearance and the rain. In this paper, I focus on the
figure of Dionysus Hyes and the Lycurgus’s episode, by cross-referencing (a)
a Greek tradition, which displays comparable narrative patterns as Iliad 6.130–
140;(b)Greekritualsinvolvingthesearchforandtheinvocationof disappeared
Dionysus. I argue that, from a thematic point of view, the narrative concern-
ing young Dionysus’s escape parallels an Anatolian ritual-mythological text in
a remarkable way, namely: cth 671, “Sacrifice and Prayer to the Storm-god of
Nerik”. Through this analysis the paper aims to show that the reference to the
Anatolian myth and ritual provides the missing link between Dionysus ‘of the
rain’ and the Lycurgus episode.
2
Myths of Disappearence and the Agrionia Festivals
As already anticipated, the main events of Iliad 6.130–140 resemble those of
several other ‘Dionysiac’ stories.8 In this context, I would like to shortly present
oneGreeknarrativeavatar,namely:Perseus’spersecutionagainstDionysusand
his nurses in Argos. In this connection, I will also endeavour to point out how
the main events of Dionysus’s persecution(s) parallel the ritual gestures of the
Agrionia festivals. The Agrionia, “a (spring) festival in the Dorian and Aeolic
area, which is a festival of dissolution and inversion, with a women’s uprising,
madness and cannibalistic fantasies” (Burkert 1985: 163–165), is often con-
Dunkel 1995: 12–13: Diu̯oh-nūso- (thematized) ‘son of the Sky-god’ < *Diu̯oh-suHnu(h1)-,
Szemerényi 1974: 572, and Blanc 2001: 139. Macedo 2012: 39–40, leads the second com-
pound member °hnūso- to an ie root *sneu̯H- ‘to turn’, as Dionysus is the ‘dancing god’ par
excellence.
8 For parallels between Il. 6.130–141, Il. 1.590–594, 18.394–405 (in both cases Hephaestus disap-
pears in the depth of the sea) cf. Faraone 2013.The two Iliadic parallels display macroscopic
phraseological similarities. Significantly, one ancient commentator (Schol. 16 in Il. 6.130 D.)
merges the two episodes: Ὁδὲὑπὸδέους εἰς τὴν θάλασσαν καταδύνει, καὶὑπὸΘέτιδος καὶΕὐρυ-
νόμης ὑπολαμβάνεται. Ὁοὖν Λυκοῦργος οὐκ ἀμισθὶδυσσεβήσας, ἔδωκε τὴν ἐξ ἀνθρώπων δίκην.
[…] Τῆς ἱστορίας πολλοὶἐμνήσθησαν, προηγουμένως δὲὁτὴν Εὐρωπίαν πεποιηκὼς Εὔμηλος. In
commenting on Iliad 6, the scholiast mentions Thetis and Eurynome as helpers of Dionysus,
although there is no mention of Eurynome in Iliad 6. However, Eurynome and Thetis figure
as helpers of Hephaestus in Il. 18.398, cf. Εὐρυνόμη τε Θέτις θ’ ὑπεδέξατο κόλπῳ“Eurynome
and Thetis received me into their bosom.” Given the mention of Eumelos and the Europia,
it is possible that the commentator is referencing Eumelos’s version. Other possible narrat-
ive avatars for Dionysus’s persecution are: Ino and Melicertes, Perseus or Acrisius persecuting
Dionysus and Semele inBrasiae(Paus.3.24.3–4), Hypsipyle/Thoasand Oinoe (a.r. Arg. 1.619–
627).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

200
massetti
nected with stories about Dionysus’s persecution. The story featuring Perseus
attacking Dionysus can be recognized as one of these myths. It is preserved by
a few sources. According to an anonymous Iliadic commentator, ‘Perseus kills
Dionysus’, cf.
Schol. in Hom. Il. 14.319
[…] ὅτι Διόνυσον ἀνεῖλεν εἰς τὴν Λερναίαν ἐμβαλὼν λίμνην
Because he (: Perseus) killed Dionysus, by throwing him into Lerna’s lake
Moreover, in his Periegesis, Pausanias locates the tomb of the maenad Chorea
and the collective grave of the other maenads, who had fought against Perseus,
close to the temple of Zeus Nemeios and Tyche in Argos:
Paus. 2.20.4
τὸδὲμνῆμα τὸπλησίον Χορείας μαινάδος ὀνομάζουσι, Διονύσῳλέγοντες καὶ
ἄλλαςγυναῖκαςκαὶταύτηνἐςἌργοςσυστρατεύσασθαι, Περσέαδέ, ὡςἐκράτει
τῆς μάχης, φονεῦσαι τῶν γυναικῶν τὰς πολλάς· τὰς μὲν οὖν λοιπὰς θάπτουσιν
ἐν κοινῷ, ταύτῃδὲ—ἀξιώματι γὰρ δὴπροεῖχεν—ἰδίᾳτὸμνῆμα ἐποίησαν9
The tomb near this (: the temple of Tyche) they call that of the maenad
Chorea, saying that she was one of the women who joined Dionysus in
his expedition against Argos, and that Perseus, being victorious in the
battle, put most of the women to the sword. To the rest they gave a com-
mon grave, but to Chorea they gave separate burial because of her high
rank
As underlined by Auffarth (2006), “the battle of Perseus against Dionysus and
his host of women could be an aetiology for the Agrionia in Argos”. Indeed, the
festival involved the simulation of four main ritual gestures, which may nicely
correlate with the main facts/events of the tale. Plutarch provides a variety of
examples of the individual ritual gestures from the Agrionia festival of Orcho-
menos, namely:
(a)The ‘pursuit’ and/or simulation of the killing of Dionysus and/or Dionysus’s
nurses, cf.
9 Cf. also Paus. 2.22.1, 23.7–8.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

where does dionysus υης come from?
201
Plut. Aet. 263eff.
καὶγίνεται παρ’ ἐνιαυτὸν ἐν τοῖς Ἀγριωνίοις φυγὴκαὶδίωξις αὐτῶν ὑπὸτοῦ
Διονύσου ξίφος ἔχοντος. ἔξεστι δὲτὴν καταληφθεῖσαν ἀνελεῖν, καὶἀνεῖλεν ἐφ’
ἡμῶν Ζωίλος ὁἱερεύς.
Also every year in the Agrionia (scil. of Orchomenos, Boeotia) there takes
place their (the maenads’) flight and their pursuit by the priest of
Dionysus carrying a knife. It’s possible to kill the one who falls behind,
and the priest Zoilus killed one on occasion of a festival of ours.
(b) The search for the god, who has ‘run away’ and (c) the identification of his
hiding place, cf.
Plut. Quaest. 717
οὐφαύλωςοὖνκαὶ[b]παρ’ἡμῖνἐντοῖςἈγριωνίοιςτὸνΔιόνυσοναἱγυναῖκεςὡς
ἀποδεδρακότα ζητοῦσιν, εἶτα παύονται [c] καὶλέγουσιν ὅτι πρὸς τὰς Μούσας
καταπέφευγεν καὶκέκρυπται παρ’ ἐκείναις
It is not an accident that [b] in the Agrionia, as it is celebrated here, the
women search for Dionysus as though he had run away, then desist [d]
and say that he has taken refuge with the Muses and is hidden among
them
Minar—Sandbach—Helmbold 1961
(d) The sacrifice: in discussing the analogies between the Greek traditions
about ‘disappeared Dionysus’ and the Egyptian ones about ‘disappeared Osiris’,
Plutarch mentions a chthonic sacrifice in honor of the Greek god,10 which was
performed in Argos.11 He does not frame this ritual in an ‘Agrionia-context’;
however, it is legitimate to imagine that the ritual was connected with a local
Dionysiac story, in which the god had plunged into waters, perhaps that of
Dionysus’s death due to Perseus’s persecution or another of his katabaseis.
Plut. De Iside 35
Ἀργείοις δὲβουγενὴς Διόνυσος ἐπίκλην, ἐστίν· ἀνακαλοῦνταιδ’ αὐτὸν ὑπὸσαλ-
πίγγων ἐξ ὕδατος, ἐμβάλλοντες εἰς τὴν ἄβυσσον ἄρνα τῷΠυλαόχῳτὰς δὲσάλ-
10
For the ‘chthonic’ traits of this sacrifice cf. Bachvarova 2016: 86–95.
11
For comments to Plutarch’s De Iside cf. Griffiths 1970, Nagy 2013. On the interpretatio
Graecaof theEgyptianaccountcf.Herrmann1957.OnOsirisandDionysuscf.Fratean-
tonio 2011.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

202
massetti
πιγγας ἐν θύρσοις ἀποκρύπτουσιν, ὡς Σωκράτης ἐν τοῖς περὶὉσίων εἴρηκεν.
(Socr. Arg. fr. 5.10) […] καὶθύουσιν οἱὍσιοι θυσίαν ἀπόρρητον ἐν τῷἱερῷτοῦ
Ἀπόλλωνος, ὅταν αἱΘυιάδες ἐγείρωσι τὸν Λικνίτην.
… while among the Argives Dionysus bears the name ‘born of a bull’, and
they summon him with trumpets from the water after throwing a lamb
into the deep for the Gate-Keeper, but they cover the trumpets with
thyrsus-rods as Socrates has said in his work Concerning the Holy Ones.
[…] while the Holy Ones offer a secret sacrifice in the temple of Apollo,
whenever the Thyiades wake the god of the sacred basket.
The above mentioned ritual gestures correlate with the main events of the
myths associated with the Agrionia, as shown in the following table:
Ritual gestures (similar / complementary)
Mythical event
(a) [pursuit] / [killing]—[Dionysus + nurses] [aggression]—[maenads]
Lycurgus attacks / Perseus kills Dionysus and his
nurses
(b) [search for the hidden god]
[god]—[hide] in [water]
Dionysus hides (Lycurgus) / dies (Perseus) in the
sea
(c) [identification of hiding place]
[goddess’s help]
Thetis (Lycurgus) / (?)
(d) [sacrifice]
[compensation]
Lycurgus is blinded / Institution of the Agrionia (?)
3
Summary
To sum up: the narrative of Perseus killing Dionysus and his nurses in Argos
is the narrative avatar of Iliad 6.130–140 (Lycurgus kills Dionysus’s nurses and
compels the god to hide in the depth of the sea). Moreover, this very account is
likely to be the aetiological myth of the Argive Agrionia. As parallels from other
Agrionia festivals show, the main events of Dionysus’s persecutions match the
ritual gestures of the festival: pursue/killing, search for the disappeared god,
identification of his hideout and, most likely, a sacrifice, which aimed at bring-
ing back the god among mortals and immortals.
Even though the reference to the Argive tradition and festival helps us frame
the episode of Iliad 6 e Graeco ipso, i.e., within other Greek narrative and ritual
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

where does dionysus υης come from?
203
avatars, it is still unclear why ancient Greek sources connected Lycurgus’s epis-
ode with ‘Dionysus of the rain’. The answer to this question must be sought
elsewhere.
4
An Anatolian Parallel: “Sacrifice and Prayer to the Stormgod of
Nerik” (CTH 671)
The ritual sequence of the Greek Agrionia strikingly parallels that of an Anato-
lian ritual and mythological text: cth 671, “Sacrifice and Prayer to the Storm-
god of Nerik”.12 The city of Nerik, founded by the Hattic speakers of Narak and
later taken over by Ḫattušiliš i, worshipped a local Storm-god (DU uruNerik).
This deity was believed to be the son of DWuruntemu and the Sun-goddess of
Arinna. The text of cth 671 can be dated to New Hittite (nh, cf. Haas 1970: 141)
and its origin is probably non-Indo-European. Indeed, it exhibits a prominent
Hattic component, namely: Hattic theonyms and a non-Anatolian invocation
of the Storm-god. Just like the Greek Agrionia festival, the Hittite ritual aims at
restoring the place of the disappeared god to the world.13The cause of the god’s
disappearance is referred to in the ‘mythological section’ of the text, which,
however, is only partially preserved. In following the sequence of information
provided by the Hittite text, I will first of all focus on the ritual section in this
context.
4.1
The Sacrifice
The text opens with a chthonic sacrifice to the Storm-god, cf.
§1 (Vs. 2–4)
nu-kán I udu DU uruNe-ri-ik bal-[an-ti iii uduḫi.a
a]naDereš.ki.galDÚ-ru-zi-mu-iadingirmešuk-tu-ri-ia-aš-šabal-an-
ti uduḫi.a-kan ḫa-at-te-eš-ni gam-an-da ḫu-u-kán-zi […]
(scil. the gudu-priest) sacrifices one sheep to the Storm God of Nerik
and [… sheep] to the erešh.ki.gal goddess, to (the god) Uruzimu, and
to the eternal deities. They slaughter the sheep down in a pit.
12
I print the text as edited by Haas 1970. On cth 671, cf. also Deighton 1982: 74–84 and
Freu—Mazoyer 2007: 344–349.
13
The main events of cth 671 partially match those of other mugawar-texts (: invocations
of the disappeared gods, cf. Burkert 1979: 123–142; Atterer 2011). However, cth 671
exhibits two major differences on a narrative and on a ritual level. On a narrative level,
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

204
massetti
4.2
The God Disappears
As the following selected passages make clear, the Storm-god went down into
a pit and should now be summoned from the river Maraššanta, cf.
§3 (Vs. 12)
DU uruNe-ri-ik-wa-za-kán ša-a-it
nu-wa-ra-aš-kán ḫa-at-te-eš-ni gam-an-da pa-a-it […]
The god of Nerik is angry and went down into a pit
§5 (Vs. 26–28)
na-ak-ki-ia-iš-wa-kán íd[Ma-ra-aš-š]a-an-ta-za pár-ki-ia […]
ḫa[l-l]u-u-wa-za ḫ[u-u-u]n-ḫu-e-eš-na-za ugu e-ḫu egir-pa-wa-[za
O noble (one), rise from the Maraššanta River […] come up from the
deep wave.
4.3
The God Hides
The river Maraššanta is probably imagined as a way to the underworld. Indeed,
in performing the over mentioned sacrifice, the priest summons a number of
underworld deities and invites them to open the gate to the Dark Earth (: the
underworld),14 cf.
§4 (Vs. 18–21)
ḫal-zi-ia-an-du-wa-ra-[an …..]x-wa-za-kán
ge6-i ki-pi na-a-ú
ú-id-du-wa-ra-aš [… ge6-aš] ki-aš
gišká.galḫi.a a-pa-ši-el ḫi-es-du
pí-ra-an-wa-aš-ši-ia […. ú-i]d-du
DU uruNe-ri-ik [… ú-i]d-du
Let them summon [him …]. Let him turn himself […] to the Dark Earth.
Let him come […]. Let him open the gates of the Dark Earth […]. Before
him/it [let …]. Let them [bring(?)] the Storm God of Nerik up from the
Dark Earth […]
the so-called ‘search motif’ (: the gods make several attempts to find the disappeared god)
is not preserved in the text. On a ritual level, the chthonic sacrifice is found only in this
text, not in other mugawar.
14
On the ‘dark earth’ and its connection with the netherworld in Greece and in the Near
East cf. Oettinger 1989–1990, Dardano 2013: 142–143.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

where does dionysus υης come from?
205
§7 (Vs. 38)
[D]Ú-ru-un-te-mu-u[n … giškáḫi.a a-pa-ši-la] ge6-aš ki-aš ḫé-e-eš-du
Wuruntemu (: chthonic deity) […]. May (s)he open [the gates] of the
Dark Earth.
4.4
The Feelings of the God and His Divine Helper
Let’s now turn to the mythological section of the text. This part of cth 671
seems to make brief reference to the facts that led to the disappearance of the
Storm-god. The god is said to have descended into a pit because of a negative
feeling: while in §3 (Vs. 12), he is described as angry (Hitt. DU uruNe-ri-ik-wa-za-
kán ša-a-it “The god of Nerik is angry”), in §11 he is said to have been ‘scared’.
This negative feeling is reminiscent of Dionysus’s fear in Iliad 6, cf.
§11 (Rs. 1–4)
[a-na dumumeš-melutti
i]š-ḫa-nu-wa-an-ti iš-ḫar-wa-an-ti li-li[škit] […]
[DU uruNe-ri-ik-ma-aš-kán] dingirlim
pí-ra-an ú-i-ri-te-eš-ta […]
gišd]a-ḫa-an-ga-za ar-ḫa [i-ia-a]n-ni-eš
a-ru-na-aš-ša-aš ix-aš wa-ap-pu-ú-i gam-[an pa-a-it]
[na-ak-k]i-ia-aš-aš íd-[aš wa-ap-pu]-wa-aš kat-ta-an pa-a-it DÚ-ru-zi-
mu-za […]
Because of the bloody, bloodstained mortals he disappeared […] The
Storm-godof Nerikgotscaredof thedeity[…]hewentdowntotheshore
of the nine seas, down to the bank of the noble river. Wuruntemu …
In cth 671 the disappearance of the Storm-god is connected with the river
Maraššanta, which is described as “close to the soul of the Storm God of Nerik”.
In particular, the Storm-godis said tohaveonce changedthe course of theriver.
So, in order to favor the return of the disappeared deity, the Storm-God of the
Sky asks the river to swear an oath: he shall never alter his course. A last pas-
sage from the mythological section preserves a few interesting phraseological
details.Thetextconcludeswiththereturnof thedisappearedgod:whilehewas
deserting the world of the living he slept and had ‘sweet dreams in the bosom
of the goddess Teš(i)mi’.15 Once again, the reference to the ‘bosom of a female
15
On the name and nature of the goddess cf. Otten 1950: 122–126; Soysal 1998: 60; Ta-
racha 2009: 56.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

206
massetti
goddess’ strikingly recalls the image of a scared Dionysus, who finds shelter ‘in
Thetis’s bosom’ (Il. 6.136), cf.
§18 (Rs. 56–59)
DTe-ši-mi-wa-kán a-aš-ši-ia-an-ti gi-nu-wa ša-ni-iz-zi-uš ti-eš-ḫu-uš šu-
up-pa-ri-ia-an-zae-eš-taa-ra-a-i uruNe-ri-qa-aš DU-aš DTe-ši-mi-eš(?!)-wa-
ta geštin-aš mu-re-eš mi-li-it ma-a-an kán-kán-an-za
In the bosom of the beloved goddess Tesimi (lit. in the beloved bosom)
youdreamt(lit.slept)sweetdreams.Standup,Storm-godof Nerik;Tesimi
for you hangs here a winegrape (which is as sweet as) honey.
4.5
The God Returns
Finally, when the Storm-god comes back to the city of Nerik, mild rain falls
from the sky. The Anatolian text thus provides a direct link between the disap-
pearance-return of the god and the atmospheric phenomenon ‘rain’. This par-
ticular connection is missing in the Greek tradition concerning Dionysus Hyes,
cf.
§19 (Rs. 60)
e-ḫu uruNe-ri-qa-aš DU-aš ne-pí-ša-za-kán gam me-e-uš ḫé-e-uš ú-it
Come, Storm-god of Nerik, mild rain came from the sky
AsfortheGreektextsdiscussedabove,thesetof correlationsbetweentheritual
gestures and the main events of the Anatolian story can be summarized as fol-
lows:
Ritual gestures (similar / complementary)
Mythical event
(a) [cause of negative feeling]
[fear], [anger]
the Storm-god of Nerik got scared (wiritešta)
He is angry (šāit)
(b) [hiding in water]
[invocation] from [water]
The Storm-god hides in the Maraššanta river (ídMaraššan-
taza parkiya)
(c) [identification of hiding place]
[goddess’s help]
The Storm god sleeps in the bosom of the goddess Teš(i)mi
(DTešmi⸗wa⸗kan āššiyanti ginuwa)
(d) [sacrifice]
[compensation]
Sheep is slaughtered into a pit
Invocation of the god and the Gate-keeper
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

where does dionysus υης come from?
207
5
Conclusions
It has now become clear that the Anatolian text cth 671 and some Dionysiac
myths and rituals share a series of similarities, namely:
– The disappearance of the god is connected with a traumatic event, which
troubles the deity: Dionysus and the Storm-god of Nerik experience ‘fear’
and/or ‘anger’, cf. Gk. φοβηθείς (var. χολωθείς) … δειδιότα· κρατερὸς γὰρ ἔχε
τρόμος “scared (var. enraged) … filled with fear, for mighty terror” (Il. 6.135–
137); Hitt.DU uruNe-ri-ik-wa-za-kánša-a-it “thegodof Nerikisangry”,Hitt.DU
uruNerik-ma-aš-kan] dingirlim piran wiritešta […] “The Storm-god of Nerik
got scared of the deity” (cth 671);
– Both Dionysus and the Hittite Storm-god conceal themselves or die in the
water, cf. Gk. δύσεθ’ ἁλὸς κατὰκῦμα “he plunged into the sea-wave” (Il. 6.136);
Hitt. DU uruNe-ri-ik-wa-za-kán … ḫa-at-te-eš-ni gam-an-da pa-a-it “the god of
Nerik … went down into a pit” (cth 671).
– The ritual which aims at ‘restoring’ the place of the god involves an invoca-
tion of the deity from the water (a pit or a river), cf. Gk. ἀνακαλοῦνται δ’ αὐτὸν
… ἐξ ὕδατος (Plut. De Iside 35); Hitt. udu.ḫi.a-kán ḫa-at-te-eš-ni gam-an-da
ḫu-u-kán-zi (cth 671). Water is often imagined as a way to the netherworld;
as a consequence, rituals of the ‘return’ also involve a chthonic sacrifice to
the Gate-keepers of the Underworld, cf. Gk. ἐμβάλλοντες εἰς τὴν ἄβυσσον ἄρνα
τῷΠυλαόχῳ(Plut. De Iside 35); Hitt. udu.ḫi.a-kan ḫa-at-te-eš-ni gam-an-da
ḫu-u-kán-zi … ge6-aš] ki-aš gišká.galḫi.a a-pa-ši-el ḫi-eš-du “they slaughter
the sheep down into a pit … Let him (the Gate-keeper) open the gates of the
Dark Earth” (cth 671);
– During their absence from the world, the Greek and the Hittite gods seek
refuge with a female goddess, who lovingly receives the god(s) in her bosom,
like a mother, cf. Il. 6.136 Θέτις δ’ ὑπεδέξατο κόλπῳ“and Thetis received him
in her bosom”, or like a lover, cf. DTešmi⸗wa⸗kan āššiyanti ginuwa […] ēšta “in
the bosom of Tesmi, your beloved (you slept)” (cth 671).
In the light of these correspondences it is remarkable that both Dionysus and
the Storm-god of Nerik share a connection with the rain: Lycurgus’s persecu-
tion is connected with ‘Dionysus of the Rain’ (Ὕης), while the rain comes after
the Storm-god of Nerik has come back.
These parallels might thus constitute a case of mythological/ritual borrow-
ing from the Ancient Near East to Greece through the mediation of Hittite.
The connection between Dionysus and the rain is unclear within Greek, but
it makes sense in the light of the proposed thematic matches. Not only did
Dionysus assume the same leading role as the Hittite Storm-god within a
disappearance-myth,healsotookoveraconnectionwiththeatmosphericphe-
nomenon, which originally belonged to an Anatolian atmospheric deity.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

208
massetti
Finally, the comparison between Dionysus and the Storm-god of Nerik may
count as a further parallel between the Greek god and an Anatolian deity. As
underlined by Taylor (2003) and Bachvarova (2008), Dionysus seems to share a
number of traits and associations with some Anatolian deities, such as HLuw.
“Tarḫunza (Storm-god) of the vineyard” (cf. CLuw. Winiyanta-, Bo 2447 iv 16).
The common traits between Dionysus and the Storm-god of Nerik can thus
count as a further case of Greek-Anatolian ‘religious contact’ reflected in the
rituals and literary texts of two neighbouring traditions.
References
Atterer, Maria 2011, Typologische Analyse hethitischer Mythen. Schlange undWetter-
gott, Hamburg: Verlag Dr. Kovač.
Auffarth, Christoph 2006, Agrionia, in H. Cancik—H. Schneider (edd.), Chr. F.
Salazar (trans.), Brill’s New Pauly, online: http://dx.doi.org.ezp‑prod1.hul.harvard.ed
u/10.1163/1574.9347_bnp_e108780 (access: 06/19/19).
Bachvarova,MaryR.2008,SumerianGalaPriestsandEasternMediterraneanReturn-
ing Gods: Tragic Laments in Cross-Cultural Perspectives, in A. Suter (ed.), Lament:
Studies in the Ancient Mediterranean World and Beyond, Oxford: Oxford University
Press: 18–52.
Bachvarova, Mary R. 2016, From Hittite to Homer. The Anatolian Background of
Ancient Greek Epic, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Blanc, Alain 2001, Διόνυσος (ion-att.), Διώνυσος (Hom.), in A. Blanc—Ch. de
Lamberterie—J.L. Perpillou (edd.), Chronique d’étymologie grecque nº 6, “RPh” 75:
139.
Burkert, Walter 1979, Structure and History in Greek Mythology and Ritual, Berkeley
and Los Angeles: University of California Press.
Burkert, Walter 1985, Greek Religion (orig. Griechische Religion der archaischen und
Klassische Epoche), Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Burkert, Walter 1997, Homo necans. Interpretationen altgriechischer Opferriten und
Mythen, 2. Auflage, Berlin: de Gruyter.
Cole, Susan G. 2007, Finding Dionysus, in D. Ogden (ed.), A companion to Greek Reli-
gion, Oxford/Malden: Wiley-Blackwell: 327–341.
Dardano,Paola2013, Linguaomericaefraseologiaanatolica:vecchiequestionienuove
prospettive, in: M. Mancini—L. Lorenzetti (edd.), Le lingue del Mediterraneo antico.
Culture, mutamenti, contatti, Roma: Carocci: 125–150.
Deighton, Hilary J. 1982,The‘Weather-God’inHittiteAnatolia.Anexaminationof the
archaeological and textual sources, Oxford: B.A.R.
Dolcetti, Paola 2004, Testimonianze e frammenti: Ferecide di Atene, Alessandria:
Edizioni dell’Orso.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

where does dionysus υης come from?
209
Dunkel, George E. 1995, More Mycenaean survivals in later Greek: ὦνος, ὦμος, ζωμός,
Διώνυσος, and κῶμος, in H. Hettrich (ed.), Verba et structurae. Festschrift für Klaus
Strunk zum 65. Geburtstag, Innsbruck: Institut für Sprache und Literatur der Uni-
versität Innsbruck: 1–21.
Faraone, Christopher A. 2010, Rushing and Falling into Milk. New Perspectives on
the Golden Tablets, in R. Edmonds (ed.), Further along the Path: Recent Studies in the
Orphic Gold Leaves, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 304–324.
Faraone, Christopher A. 2013, Gender Differentiation and Role Models in the Wor-
shipof Dionysus:TheThracianandThessalianPattern,inA.Bernabé(ed.), Redefining
Dionysus, Berlin: de Gruyter: 120–134.
Filoni, Andrea 2018, Alle fonti di Cornuto, “Aitia” 8/2: Online (published 31.12.2019).
Frateantonio, Christa 2011, ,Das hat nichts mit Osiris zu tun‘. ZurVerweigerung des
Dionysos/Osiris-Synkretismus bei Pausanias, in R. Schleisier (ed.), A different god?
Dionysos and Ancient Polytheism, Boston/Berlin: de Gruyter: 447–464.
Freu, Jacques—Mazoyer, Michel 2007, Les débuts du Nouvel Empire Hittite. Les
Hittites et leur histoire, Paris: L’Harmattan.
García Ramón, José Luis 1987, Sobre las variantes Διεννυσος, Δινυσος y Διννυσος del
nombredeDioniso:Hechosehipótesis,inJ.T.Killen—J.L.Melena—J.-P.Olivier(edd.),
Studies in Mycenaean and Clasical Greek presented to John Chadwick, “Minos” 20/22:
183–200.
Graf, Fritz—Johnston, Sarah I. 2007, RitualTextsfortheAfterlife.Orpheusandthe
Bacchic Gold Tablets, second edition, London/New York: Routledge.
Griffiths, John G. 1970, Plutarch’s De Iside et Osiride, Cambridge: Univ. of Wales
Press.
Haas,Volkert 1970, DerKultvonNerik.EinBeitragzurhethitischenReligionsgeschich-
te, Roma: Päpstliches Bibelinstitut.
Haas, Volkert 1994, Geschichte der hethitischen Religion, Leiden/New York, NY/Köln:
Brill.
Haas, Volkert 2006, Die hethitische Literatur, Texte, Stilistik, Motive, Berlin/Boston:
de Gruyter.
Herrmann, Siegfried 1957, Isis in Byblos. “zäs” 82: 48–55.
Janda, Michael 2000, Eleusis: das indogermanische Erbe der Mysterien, Innsbruck:
Institut für Sprachen und Literaturen der Universität Innsbruck.
Kearns, Emily 2016, Theoxenia. Oxford Classical Dictionary, online: https://oxfordre​
.com/classics/classics/view/10.1093/acrefore/9780199381135.001.0001/acrefore‑978
0199381135‑e‑6380. (Uploaded: March 2016, consulted: 01.06.2020).
Kerényi, Karl 1976, Dionysos: Archetypal Image of Indestructible Life, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Macedo, José Marcos 2012, Breve nota sobre a etimologia de Dioniso, “Synthesis” 19:
29–41.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

210
massetti
Minar, Edwin L.—Sandbach, Francis H.—Helmbold, William C. (transl.)
1961, Plutarch. Moralia, Volume ix: Table-Talk, Books 7–9. Dialogue on Love, Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Murray, Augustus T. (transl.)—Wyatt, William F. (rev.) 1924, Homer. Iliad,
Volume i: Books 1–12, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1924.
Nagy, Gregory 2013, Comments on Plutarch’s Essay on Isis and Osiris, online: http://​
nrs.harvard.edu/urn‑3:hlnc.essay:Nagy.Comments_on_Isis_and_Osiris.1999‑.
(Uploaded: 28.08.2013, consulted 20.12.2019).
Oettinger, Norbert 1989–1990, Die ‘dunkle Erde’ im Hethitischen und Griechischen:
Alfred Heubeck zum Gedächtnis (20.7. 1914–24.5. 1987), “wo” 20/21: 83–92.
Otten, Heinrich 1950, Die Gottheit Lelvani der Boğazgöy-Texte, “jcs” 4: 119–136.
Otto, Walter Fr. 1965, Dionysos: Myth and Cult (orig. Dionysos: Mythus und Kultus),
Bloomington/London: Indiana University Press.
Peters, Martin 1989, Sprachliche Studien zum Frühgriechischen, (unpubl.) Habilita-
tionsarbeit, Vienna.
Soysal, Oğuz 1998, A forgotten Hittite fragment of the ki.lam Festival, “jcs” 50: 59–65.
Szemerényi, Oswald 1974, The origin of the Greek Lexicon: Ex oriente lux, “jcs” 94:
144–157.
Taylor,PatrickJ.2003,StudiesinAncientAnatolianLanguageandCulture,Ph.D.Dis-
sertation, Harvard University.
Taracha, Piotr 2009, Religions of Second Millennium Anatolia, Wiesbaden: Har-
rassowitz.
Weaver, John B. 2004, Plots of Epiphany: Prison-Escape in Acts of the Apostles, Berlin:
de Gruyter.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Robin Meyer, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_010
chapter 8
Alignment Change and Changing Alignments:
Armenian Syntax and the First ‘Death’ of Parthian
Robin Meyer
1
Introduction
It is no secret to historical linguists and Indo-Europeanists that Classical
Armenian, although occupying its own branch on the Indo-European family
tree, is a language heavily influenced by its Iranian neighbours, chief amongst
which Parthian. After Hübschmann’s establishment of the fact that Armenian
is not an Iranian language,1 great progress has been made over the course of
the twentieth century in the separation, categorisation, and analysis of Iranian
and native elements in the Armenian lexicon and, to a lesser extent, its mor-
phological inventory.2 Similarly, early Armenian literature, history, and society
have been in the focus of academic discussion, yielding exemplary pieces of
interdisciplinary work like Nina Garsoïan’s translation of and commentary on
the Epic Histories attributed to P‘awstos Buzand.3
Almost inevitably, however, not all Classical Armenian resources have been
used to their fullest yet; the study of Armenian comparative and diachronic
syntax, for instance, and the socio-linguistics of the language have thus far not
received the attention they deserve.
This paper sets out to exemplify what information can be gleaned from syn-
tactic analysis, and how it can be used to obtain a clearer picture of the socio-
linguistic situation in preliterary and fifth-century Armenia. It uses as its basis
the example of contact-induced alignment change in the Classical Armenian
periphrastic perfect, and will make use of the material gathered in a corpus
study of fifth-century ce historiographical texts. The diachronic development
of the syntax of the perfect suggested here proposes two particular diachronic
analyses:
1 Hübschmann 1875.
2 For overviews, cf. Meyer (fthc.), Schmitt 1983. Key contributions to the field include Ben-
veniste 1957; 1964, Bolognesi 1960, Hübschmann 1897, Meillet 1911.
3 Garsoïan 1989.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

212
meyer
1.)
The tripartite alignment of the perfect is an extension of an erg–abs pat-
tern borrowed from Parthian;
2.)
This alignment pattern is in a state of change already in the fifth century
ce under system pressure from nom–acc alignment in the other tenses.
On the socio-linguistic side—based on considerations of the documentary
evidence of Parthian, the historical interactions of Armenians and Parthians,
and the Armenian literary evidence—the paper further proposes the follow-
ing:
3.)
The Parthian ruling class adopted Armenian as its main language of
communication, leading to the eventual (near) death of Parthian and
explaining the documentary gap between Inscriptional and Manichaean
Parthian.
Following this introduction, section 2 will give a brief overview of the contact
between Armenian and the Iranian languages, focusing on the linguistic data
in general. Section 3, in turn, will outline the construction of the perfect tense,
and present a contact-based explanation thereof.The diachronic development
of the morphosyntactic alignment of the perfect is delineated in section 4 on
the basis of statistical trends gleaned from the abovementioned corpus study.
Turning from linguistics to (language) history, section 5 explores the contact
between Armenian and Parthian from a socio-historical perspective, leading
to the discussion of the ‘death’ of Parthian at the hand of Armenian in section
6. Finally, section 7 synthesises the linguistic and historical accounts.
2
Iranian–Armenian Contact in General
While the modern concept of Iranian–Armenian contact goes back to the work
of Hübschmann in the late nineteenth century, earlier scholars had already
come to the realisation that Armenian was replete with Iranian loanwords.4
The study of such loanwords, and based on which the discovery of regu-
lar phonological correspondences, accounts for a large amount of twentieth-
century scholarship in this field. The exploration of morphological, phraseo-
logical, and syntactic elements borrowed from Iranian languages has played a
lesser role to date.5 What follows is a very concise summary of the key findings
in Iranian–Armenian contact.
4 BasedonlexicalmaterialfromClassicalandcontemporaryPersian,JohannJoachimSchröder
distinguishes words introduced by the language of the Arsacids into Armenian from those
native to that language more than 150 years before Hübschmann; cf. Bolognesi (1988: 563),
Schröder (1711: 46).
5 One of the few questions discussed previously with regard to Iranian syntactic borrowings
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

alignment change and changing alignments
213
The Iranian loan lexicon of Armenian is vast and extends beyond the com-
mon array of technical and cultural vocabulary well into the realm of basic
vocabulary items and closed classes like prepositions and numerals.6 Exem-
plarily, consider items like Arm. p‘aṙk‘ ‘(royal) glory’ < WMIr. frẖ/farrah/ ‘id.’,
next to basic terms like Arm. seaw ‘black’ < Pth. sy’w /syāw/, Arm. hazar ‘1,000’
< WMIr. hz’r /hazār/, or Arm. vasn ‘on account of, because of’ ~ Pth. wsn’d
/wasnāδ/, mp wšn /wašn/.7
Asregardslexisandphonologicalcorrespondencesinloanwords,twoobser-
vations can be made which will inform the discussion in later sections. First, it
is evident that Parthian is the dominant model or donor language.8 Middle Per-
sian, the other Iranian language with which Armenian is in contact, provides
exclusively cultural, political, and administrative items, not infrequently as a
Doppelentlehnung (‘double loan’), e.g. in the case of Arm. spayapet and spara-
pet ‘general-in-chief’, the former of which is a Middle Persian loan, the latter a
Parthian one.9 Secondly, within the Parthian loans, two distinct layers of loan
words can be identified on the basis of phonological divergences. Pth. w /ō/, y
/ē/, and r- /r-/ are reflected in early Armenian loans as oý/u, ḗ/i, and er- respect-
ively,10 but in later loans as o, e, and ṙ.11
in Armenian is the potential Iranian origin of certain types of Armenian relative clauses
(Ajello 1973; 1997: 251; Benveniste 1964: 35); as it turns out, the evidence for borrowing
is slim.
6
Based on the data collected by Hübschmann, Belardi (2003: 98–102) calculated that more
than a third of the lexical items therein is of Middle Iranian origin, whereas less than a
quarter is etymologically Armenian. Given the more recent corrections to Hübschmann’s
work, these figures may be imprecise, but still indicate the general composition of the
Armenian lexicon.
7
The Armenian form does not correspond perfectly to either its Parthian or Middle Per-
sian counterpart, nor to the Old Persian form op vašnā ‘by grace of’. Szemerényi (1966)
suggests an origin in Pth. *wsn /wasn/, which later underwent univerbation and phonolo-
gical reduction with Pth. r’d /rāδ/ ‘for, owing to’.
8
Certain phonological and morphological correspondences hint at the existence of third
West Middle Iranian language, which is not attested in writing; cf. Olsen 2005, Gippert
2005; 2009, Korn—Olsen 2012, Korn 2016: 409–411.
9
Such double forms can be differentiated on a phonological basis, since Parthian and
Middle Persian differ in their treatment of certain Old Iranian sounds. In the case of Arm.
spayapet (< mp) and sparapet (< Pth.), the this difference is expressed in the different
treatment of Old Iranian intervocalic /d/ (cp. Av. spāda- ‘army’), where OIr. *-d- > mp -y-,
Pth. -δ-. The latter, in turn, is regularly expressed in Armenian loans as Arm. -r-.
10
The alternative forms given refer to stressed and unstressed variants.
11
Examples of the earlier layer: Arm. boyž ‘cure, remedy’, bužem ‘to cure, heal’ < Pth. bwj-
/bōž-/ ‘to save, redeem’; Arm. dēmk‘ (gen dimac‘) ‘face’ < WMIr. dym /dēm/; and Arm.
eram ‘troop, flock’ < WMIr. rm /ram/ ‘flock; Manichaean community’. Examples of the
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

214
meyer
Ascomparedtothelexicon,Armenianmorphologyhasundergonerelatively
speaking little influence from Parthian or other Iranian languages; only deriv-
ation and compounding seem to be affected. Apart from the borrowing of a
few common derivative suffixes such as -akan (cp. CIr. *-ākana-) or -ik (cp. CIr.
*-ika-) as seen in Arm. sovorakan ‘usual’ or Arm. spasik ‘servant’, the main ele-
mentof noteisthecompoundingstrategyArmenianhasadopted,whichallows
for the complete borrowing of Parthian compounds, semi-calques (in which
Armenian and Parthian items are compounded), or straightforward calques (in
which the structure of a Parthian compound is imitated with Armenian lexical
material).12
The two most understudied aspects of the influence of Parthian on
Armenian concern phraseology and syntax. The former largely consist of light
verb constructions, prevalent also in many modern Iranian languages.13 Syn-
tactical loans have thus far been found in the use of the intensifier and ana-
phoric pronoun Arm. ink‘n ‘-self’, which is used analogically to Pth. wxd/wxad/,
as well as in the use of the Armenian complementiser (e)t‘ē ‘that’ to introduce
direct and indirect questions (unusually including wh-questions) paralleled by
the Parthian use of kw /kū/.14 The most complex way in which Parthian has
influenced Armenian, however, lies in the construction of the periphrastic per-
fect tense, which is discussed in more detail below.
Even this cursory summary of the most salient interactions between the two
languages in question shows that they must have been in contact for an exten-
ded period of time, and that the contact itself was pervasive. Its impact on
Armenian and Parthian society, as will be argued below, cannot be underes-
timated.
later layer: Arm. tohm ‘family, seed’, cp. Pth. twxm /tōxm/; Arm. den (gen deni) ‘religion,
faith’ < Pth. dyn /dēn/; and Arm. ṙazm ‘fight, battle’ < WMIr. rzm /razm/.
12
Note the following examples: for borrowing, Arm. vattohmak ‘of low birth’ < mp wttwhm
/wattōhm/ (with an optional suffix -ak); for semi-calques, Arm. č‘arabaxt ‘unfortunate’, cp.
mp wtb’ht / watbāxt/; for calques proper, Arm. jerbakal ‘prisoner (lit. taken by the hand)’,
cp. Pth. dstgrb /dastgraβ/, with an exact correspondence of jerb- (cp. jeṙn ‘hand’) and dst
as well as -kal (cp. kalay, suppletive aorist of unim ‘to have, hold’) and -grb (cp. Pth. gyrw-
/gīrw/ ‘to take, seize’).
13
Examples of such constructions are Arm. heṙi aṙnel ‘to make remote, remove’, cp. Pth. dwr
kr /dūr kar-/, np dūr kardan, or Arm. pʿoł harkanel ‘to sound the trumpet’, cp. mp n’y pzd
/nāy pazd-/.
14
For a detailed discussion, cf. Meyer 2013; 2017: 219–252.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

alignment change and changing alignments
215
3
Iranian–Armenian Contact in Particular: The Perfect
InordertounderstandhowParthianhasinfluencedthesyntaxof theArmenian
perfect, a set of comparanda need to be established first.
To begin with, the syntax of synthetic tenses in classical Armenian (prs, ipf,
aor) shows, like that of many other early Indo-European languages, nom–
acc syntax; that is to say, intransitive subjects and transitive agents are both
morphosyntactically marked in the same manner (nom), while the direct
object of transitive verbs is marked differently (acc).15 In all instances, the verb
agrees in number and person with the subject or agent. Examples (1–2) illus-
trate this behaviour.
(1)
Non-perfect, intransitive (subject: nom; subject agreement)
ew
conj
duk‘
2.nom.pl
darjayk‘
return.2.pl.aor.ind.mid
i
to
molorut‘iwn
error.nom/acc.sg
kṙapastut‘ean
idolatry.gen.sg
naxneac‘=n
ancestor.gen.pl=det
jeroc‘
2.pl.poss.gen.pl
‘And you have returned to the errors of idolatry of your ancestors’ (pb i.14)
(2)
Non-perfect, transitive (agent: nom; direct object: acc; subject agree-
ment)
ew
conj
duk‘
2.nom.pl
z=ordis
obj=son.acc.pl
ew
and
z=žaṙangs
obj=heir.acc.pl
ew
and
z=gorcakic‘s
obj=associate.acc.pl
ew
and
z=nmanołs
obj=follower.acc.pl
noc‘in
3.dem.emph.gen.pl
spanēk‘
kill.2.pl.aor.ind.act
‘And you killed their sons and heirs and associates and followers’ (pb i.14)
In the perfect—a periphrastic tense composed of the participle in -eal and,
optionally,acopula—thesamebehaviourcanbeobservedinintransitiveverbs,
at least with regard to the use of nom, as example (3) shows.
(3)
Perfect, intransitive (subject: nom; subject agreement)
ew
conj
duk‘
2.nom.pl
mtealk‘
enter.ptcp.nom.pl
ew
and
hałordealk‘
participate.ptcp.nom.pl
15
Passives also operate along these lines.The logical object is promoted to subject and takes
nom; the logical agent is demoted to an optional adjunct prepositional phrase, Arm. i +
abl.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

216
meyer
table 8.1
Summary of the Classical Armenian alignment pattern
Subject
Agent
Object
Agreement
Synthetic tenses
nom
nom
acc
Sitr, Atr
Analytic tenses
nom
gen
acc
Sitr, Øtr
ic‘ēk‘
be.2.pl.prs.sbjv.act
i
into
harsanis
union.acc.pl
Astuacut‘ean
god-head.gen.sg
‘… and that you may enter into and share in the union of the God-head’
(Ag. §719)
Transitive verbs in the perfect behave differently, however. While the object is
stillexpressedasacc,theagentof theverbismarkedbygen;if acopulaoccurs,
it shows neither object nor subject agreement, but appears in an invariant 3.sg
form. (4) provides an example of this pattern.
(4)
Perfect, transitive (agent: gen; object: acc; Ø-agreement)
ew
conj
du
2.nom.sg
ink‘nin
self.nom.sg
isk
indeed
k‘ezēn
2.abl.sg
vkayes
witness.2.sg.prs.ind.act
inj
1.dat.sg
t‘ē
comp
oč‘
neg
erbek‘
ever
asac‘eal
mention.ptcp
ē
be.3.sg.prs.ind.act
noc‘a
3.gen.pl
c‘=k‘ez
to=2.acc.sg
z=ayd
obj=dem.nom/acc.sg
vasn
concerning
imoy
1.sg.poss.gen.sg
tanǰeloy=s
torture.prs.inf.gen.sg=det
i
by
k‘ēn
2.abl.sg
‘Andyouyourself areindeedwitnesstomethatthey[thegods]havenever
mentioned this to you, about my being tortured at your hands’ (Ag. §71)
As a result, Classical Armenian is best analysed as showing a tense-sensitive
split-alignmentpattern,withanom–accalignmentinallsynthetictenses,and
tripartite alignment—in which intransitive subject, transitive agent, and direct
object are all marked differently—in analytical tenses like the perfect.Table 8.1
summarises this situation.
Three further observations need to be made. First, Armenian does not con-
sistently distinguish nom and acc forms across all paradigms; in all nominal
and most pronominal singular paradigms, nom and acc are identical. The
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

alignment change and changing alignments
217
1./2.sg pronouns are the exception in differentiating Arm. es, du ‘I, you (nom)’
from is, k‘ez ‘me, you (acc)’. The formal ambiguity is lessened in a large num-
ber of cases owing to the existence of a proclitic definite object marker Arm.
z=. Nonetheless, at least on the surface, the alignment of the perfect can on
occasion appear to be erg–abs. Examples (5–6) illustrate this surface erg–
abs pattern and the use of the z= for differential object marking.
(5)
Perfect, transitive (agent: gen; object: nom=acc; no copula)
ew
conj
nora
3.gen.sg
tueal
give.ptcp
hraman
order.nom/acc.sg
ark‘ayagund
royal-guard
banakac‘=n
army.dat.sg=det
‘And he gave an order to the royal army …’ (Ag. §829)
(6)
Perfect, transitive (agent: gen; object: obj + acc; Ø-agreement)
ew
conj
tesin
see.3.pl.aor.ind.act
zi
comp
zawrut‘ean=n
power.gen.sg
Astucoy
God.gen.sg
paheal
preserve.ptcp
ēr
be.3.sg.pst
z=marmins
obj=body.acc.pl
noc‘a
3.gen.pl
‘And they saw that the power of God had preserved their bodies’ (Ag.
§223)
The second observation concerns the usage of gen subjects and nom agents
in the perfect. Although the basic pattern stands as laid out above, there are
occasional instances of unexpected intransitive subjects marked as gen and
transitive agents marked as nom, as indicated by (7–8).
(7)
Perfect, intransitive (subject: gen)
manawand
moreover
oroc‘
rel.gen.pl
nayec‘eal
look.ptcp
i
to
mxit‘arut‘iwn
consolation.acc.sg
aṙak‘elakan
apostolic
banic‘n
word.gen.pl
t‘ē
comp
‘Moreovertheyconsideredtheconsolationof theapostolicwords,namely
that …’ (Kor. 22)
(8)
Perfect, transitive (agent: nom; object: acc; no copula)
ew
conj
and
there
matuc‘eal
present.ptcp
t‘agawori=n
king.dat.sg=det
išxank‘=n
noble.nom.pl=det
ekealk‘
come.ptcp.nom.pl
z=bereal
obj=bring.ptcp
patasxani=n
answer.nom/acc.sg=det
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

218
meyer
ołǰunaber
bearing-greetings
t‘łt‘oyn
letter.dat.sg=det
‘And there the nobles, upon arrival, presented to the king the answer they
had brought to his letter of greeting’ (Ag. §819)
Third, it has been argued that languages exhibiting tripartite alignment,
whether wholesale or split, are in the process of morphosyntactic re-align-
ment.16 This is, self-evidently, true of Classical Armenian, whose medieval and
modern forms are exclusively nom–acc. One expression of this transitional
state is the lack of verbal agreement; a number of languages exhibiting tripart-
ite alignment exhibit similar invariant 3.sg forms, likely as the result of a lack
of agreement licensing with cases other than nom.17
These two latter points, in particular, corroborate the assumption that the
alignment observed in Classical Armenian is a snapshot of an unstable trans-
itional state. The question that arises is that of the point of origin from which
the language embarked upon this trajectory.
Traditional explanations18 have for the most part failed to observe correctly
thealignmenttypeof Armenianinthefirstplace,andhaveaccordinglyignored
its implications for previous and subsequent developments. Barring one,19
they also sought to explain the Armenian pattern language-internally, and fre-
quently did not take into account or were unable to explain satisfactorily the
whole gamut of data.20
Considering all the observations made above in addition to the potential
influence of contact languages, an investigation into the morphosyntactic
alignment pattern of Parthian suggests itself. The latter also exhibits tense-
sensitive split alignment; in Parthian, the past tense—formed similarly with a
copula and a participial form of the verb—exhibits erg–abs alignment, a pat-
tern that Armenian, too, could be argued to show in certain surface analyses,
16
For some general observations on tripartite alignment, cf. Dixon 1994: 40, 55, 70. Some
instances of tripartite alignment as a transitional state are discussed by Skalmowski (1974)
and Payne (1980: 150).
17
Such languages include Talyši and Hindi; cf. Comrie 1978: 342, Payne 1979: 442, Pirejko
1966.
18
Amongst these must be counted Benveniste 1957, Bolognesi 1960, Meillet
1936.
19
A Kartvelian origin was suggested already by Meillet (1899: 385); in spite of the clear coun-
terarguments made by Deeters (1927), Meillet still includes his original reasoning in later
work (1936: 95). For other, unsuccessful attempts at making a Kartvelian connection, cf.
Meyer (2017: 122–124) with bibliography.
20
For a concise analysis of the issues with previous approaches, cf. Meyer 2016.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

alignment change and changing alignments
219
as illustrated in (5) above. Furthermore, Parthian too has optional object mark-
ers like Pth. w /ō/. Two key differences between the Armenian and Parthian
alignment patterns exist, however. In Parthian, verbal agreement in the past
tense is with the object; in the case of 3.sg objects, however, the copula is most
commonly left unexpressed in the simple past.21 The second point of differ-
ence concerns the nominal and pronominal system: Parthian has arguably lost
most case distinctions.22 The difference between erg and abs is only evident
in some pronouns and pronominal clitics.
In spite of these differences—erg–abs alignment, not tripartite; different
agent marking case; different verbal agreement—Parthian–Armenian contact
provides the most straightforward explanatory model to account for the align-
ment pattern of Classical Armenian. The diachronic and interactional mech-
anisms behind this explanation are laid out in what follows.
4
Alignment Change: erg–abs > tri > nom–acc
Broadly speaking, Armenian alignment change is likely to have taken place as
follows:
(1)
Pattern replication: in contact with Parthian, Armenian creates a peri-
phrastic perfect tense based on the Parthian model; this construction
follows the original erg–abs pattern and, based on the later advent of
an invariant 3.sg copula, does not contain a finite verbal form. The erg
function is fulfilled by gen, while abs is expressed as nom.
(2)
Grammaticalisation: the replicated Parthian construction is adapted to
the requirements and ‘abilities’ of Armenian: in parallel to the rest of the
verbalsystem,theoriginalabs=nomforthelogicalobjectisreanalysedas
acc in the transitive construction, but left unchanged in the intransitive
one; an optional copula with Ø-agreement is introduced.
21
In other tenses or moods, however, a 3.sg copula is found, so for instance in the pluperfect
or subjunctive; cf. Durkin-Meisterernst 2014: 376, 392–400.
22
Manichaean Parthian certainly has lost this distinction. A consequent execution of the
dir–obl and indeed the sg–pl distinction is found only in inscriptional Parthian (first
century bce until 3rd century ce), and in the psalter fragments (Skjærvø 1983: 49, 176)
and even there only in kinship terms, the personal pronouns of the 1.sg; and in the plural
for nouns, pronouns and adjectives. Some examples: br’d /brād/ (dir), br’dr /brādar/
(obl); pyd /pid/(dir), pydr /pidar/(obl);’z/az/(dir),mn/man/(obl).Giventhetimein
which Parthian and Armenian were interacting most actively, however, it is not implaus-
ible that a degree of morphological distinction between dir and obl could still have been
in effect.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

220
meyer
(3)
Actualisation:thecopulabecomesmoreprevalent;theadapted,tripartite
pattern begins to destabilise as the incidence of nom agents rises.
(4)
Disappearance: the tri pattern is ousted in favour of nom–acc align-
ment.
This outline requires some explanations, which are provided below stage-by-
stage.
The creation of the periphrastic perfect tense in stage (1) by pattern rep-
lication requires that at least some of the constituent parts of the Armenian
pattern have something in common with the Parthian model. In this specific
case, this common core is the participle, which as a verbal adjective was used
attributively as well as predicatively prior to the creation of the perfect.23 Since
this is also true for Parthian, the participle and its adjectival use act as the pivot
for the creation of the new Armenian perfect construction; the latter derives its
meaningandstructurefromtheParthianmodelbytwoprocess,pivotmatching
and polysemy/polyfunctionality copying.24
In the resulting erg-abs alignment pattern, the Parthian obl had to be
expressed in Armenian. By the same set of processes, that is pivot matching
and polysemy copying, the Armenian gen took on this function. It was best
suited to this role since, like the Parthian obl, it also expresses possession or
appurtenance.25
The structure of the earliest instances of the perfect indicate that the use of
the copula was not part of the pattern replication process in stage (1). In the
earliest texts, Koriwn’s Life of Maštoc‘, the copula is almost completely absent.
ThisiscorroboratedbythefactthatthecopulainArmeniannevershowsobject
agreement. On this basis, it must be assumed that the Parthian model pattern
had a 3.sg object and thus lacked an overt copula.
23
The participle on its own, esp. when used attributively, does not have transitive force but
reflects the historically intransitive-passive morphology of the participle; cf. Meyer 2014:
391–394.
24
Pivot matching is the process of ‘identifying a structure that plays a pivotal role in the
model construction, and matching it with a structure in the replica language, to which
a similar, pivotal role is assigned in a new, replica construction’ (Matras—Sakel 2007:
830); polysemy copying denotes the realization of ‘the potential of a structure in the rep-
lica language to cover the (lexical or grammatical) semantics represented by the model’
(2007: 852). If sufficient semantic aspects are shared, the replica language can replicate
those uses from the model language which were not previously part of the replica lan-
guage’s grammar; also cf. Heine 2012, Heine—Kuteva 2005: 100.
25
Cf.Durkin-Meisterernst2014:292.Armeniancouldnotsimplyhaveadoptedthemor-
phologically largely unmarked pattern of Parthian nouns, as Armenian word order is far
less constrained than that of Parthian.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

alignment change and changing alignments
221
In stage (2), the post-contact adaptation of the replicated pattern takes
place. The two adaptations—the development of erg-abs into tri and the
rise of an optional copula—both result from different expressions of system
pressure.
As regards argument marking, this pressure is exerted by the other, non-
perfect tenses, all of which exhibit nom–acc. Owing to the formal identity of
nom and acc in the singular of the nominal and most of the pronominal sys-
tem, a reanalysis of direct objects marked nom in the periphrastic perfect as
acc is a logical grammaticalization process. It is possible that this process was
further aided by the existence of the dom clitic z= mentioned above.
The gradual advent of the copula in the perfect must be due to the fact that
in all other, non-perfect tenses, predicates containing lexical verbs are always
finite. Since participles are adjectival in character, the choice of the copula to
express this finiteness is analogical to copulas used with predicative adject-
ives. The use of a copula further allows for the creation of—or could have been
prompted by the need for—pluperfect and future perfect constructions, using
a past or future tense of the copula, respectively. Where possible, the copula
agrees with the subject in number and person. In transitive verbs, however,
the copula invariably shows Ø-agreement, occurring only in the 3.sg. Like the
rise of the copula itself, the reason for the invariability of this form must find a
language-internal explanation, too. Given that the occurrence of invariant cop-
ulas finds parallels in other languages with tri alignment or, more broadly, in
transition between erg-abs and nom–acc, a correlation between such align-
ment patterns and lack of verbal agreement seems plausible.The most obvious
explanation stipulates that, while system pressure results in the creation of a
copula for the periphrastic perfect, in the absence of verbal agreement licens-
ingwithanythingbutasubjectmarkednom,thenewlycreatedcopuladefaults
to the least-marked form, in this case 3.sg.
Statistics concerning the incidence of the copula corroborate that it must
have developed gradually post-contact, as indicated in stage (1) above already,
since its relative frequency steadily rises over the course of the fifth century
(see Figure 8.1).
By stage (3), the copula has become essentially obligatory in the periphrastic
perfect.26 At the same time, however, statistical analysis indicates that the pat-
tern replicated in stage (1) and grammaticalised in stage (2) is not completely
stable from the very beginnings of its attestation. Next to the obligatorification
26
On obligatorification as a possible, but not universally necessary pathway of grammatic-
alisation, cf. Hopper—Traugott 2003: 32, Heine—Kuteva 2007: 34.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

222
meyer
figure 8.1 Incidence and trend of perfects with copula in fifth-century texts
Note: It is difficult to establish specific dates of publication for these texts. Here
and in Figure 8.2 below, they are arranged in the most commonly accepted chro-
nological order.
of thecopula,otheractualisationprocessesaretakingplace.Alreadyinsomeof
the earliest sources, analogically extended alignment patterns like in examples
(7–8) above can be found; here, either the use of nom for intransitive subjects
is extended to agents of transitive verbs (resulting in apparent nom–acc align-
ment), or the use of gen for transitive agents extended to subjects of intransit-
ive verbs (creating an apparent erg-abs pattern). As Figure 8.2 illustrates, the
latter pattern is declining over time whilst the former gains currency; this trend
is, once more, in keeping with the pressure exerted by the other, non-perfect
tenses, and shows the beginning of the grammaticalization S-curve leading up
to stage (4), in which tri alignment has been ousted in favour of nom-abs
in all tenses. The rising incidence of the nom–acc-type non-standard pattern
even in the earliest texts underlines the transitional nature of tri alignment in
Armenian, as its decline begins while the standard construction is still in the
process of actualising core elements like the copula.
This delineation addresses all of the key questions regarding the perfect
construction when compared to its Parthian model: Why a gen agent? Why
a 3.sg copula? Why an acc object? It provides a relative chronological order of
the development of the perfect, from its replication on the basis of a Parthian
model via the grammaticalisation and actualisation of a tri pattern in Ar-
menian to the decline and eventual loss of this pattern in favour of nom–acc
alignment.
An absolute chronology is more difficult to arrive at, however. The syntactic
patterns found in Koriwn suggest that stage (1) must have taken place and ter-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

alignment change and changing alignments
223
figure 8.2 Incidence of non-standard alignment patterns in fifth-century texts
minated prior to the literary attestation of Armenian. Stage (2) clearly takes
place over the course of the 5th century ce, and may be overlapping with stage
(3) for a significant period of that time; stage (3) is likely to last longest (fifth to
eighth centuries ce), since the complete loss of tri alignment, and thus stage
(4) is not effected until the eighth century. The latter parts of stage (3) are in
need of further statistical exploration and evaluation.
5
The Socio-Historical Context
The scenario laid out in §§3–4 above relies on the assumption that con-
tact between Parthians and Armenians in the relevant time period was close
enough to facilitate not only lexical and morphological borrowing, but also
pattern replication of syntagmata like the Parthian past tense. This and the
following section seek to support this assumption first with clear historical
evidence of such close contact, and secondly with an outline of the probable
socio-linguistic situation obtaining in late pre-literary Armenia.
There are five aspects of particular historical significance that support close
ties between Armenians and Parthians in this period:
1)
Governance: Parthian rule over Armenia for almost four centuries;
2)
Religion: conversion of Armenia to Christianity in the early fourth cen-
tury;
3)
Society: clear evidence of Parthian–Armenian intermarriage and tutel-
age;
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

224
meyer
4)
Foreign Policy: frequent military conflicts with the neighbouring Sasani-
ans, suggesting Parthian identification with the Armenians;
5)
Language: absence of any documentary evidence in the Parthian lan-
guage from this time and region.
Each of these aspects deserves a few explanatory notes.
The Armenian Kingdom was ruled for almost 400 years by Parthians in par-
ticular, and prior to that had been under general Iranian rule since the days of
Darius i.27 Parthian rule over Armenia began in 53ce, when the Parthian King
Vologaeses i installed his younger brother, Trdat i on the Armenian throne;28
from this point onward, a member of the junior branch of the Arsacid Parthian
ruling house would reign over Armenia until the transformation of the king-
domintoaSasanianmarzpanatein428ce.Parthianruleisfurthercementedby
the establishment of a hereditary dynasty in the beginning of the third century
ce, just prior to the fall of the Arsacid Empire. Xosrov i (r. 198–217ce), having
succeeded his father Vałarš ii, passed on the crown to Trdat ii and thus estab-
lished a largely unbroken succession until the end of Armenian autonomy.
The existence of a Parthian-speaking ruling family, further compounded by the
presence of other noble families of Parthian origin,29 makes Parthian the overt
prestige language at court and for the upper echelons of society, thus motivat-
ing the acquisition and imitation of Parthian by Armenian-speakers, or indeed
of the Parthians’ idiolectal use of Armenian.
Next to the fall of the Arsacid Empire in 224ce, which resulted in the rise
of the Middle Persian-speaking Sasanians and the delegation of the Parthi-
ans to second rank in their old domain, the Christianisation of the Armeni-
ans by Gregory the Illuminator is the single most important process aligning
the Parthian nobility with their Armenian subjects. If the historiographic lit-
erature is to be believed, the pivotal moment in this process—the conversion
of King Trdat iii—is particularly relevant since it involves the conversion of
the ethnically Parthian ruler of Armenia adopting Christianity at the hands of
anotherParthian,Gregory.30Thischangeinducedafurtherseparationbetween
theArmeniansandtheirParthianrulersontheonehand,andtheneighbouring
Sasanian Empire on the other hand, whose Zoroastrian religion the former had
27
For an overview of Armenian history prior to Arsacid rule, cf. Garsoïan 1997a.
28
This installation was ratified later in the treaty of Rhandeia (61ce), according to which
the rule over Armenia would fall to an Arsacid who was nominated and invested by Rome.
Trdat i, although he had reigned since 53ce, was only crowned by Nero in 66ce.
29
Overviews of the genealogy of Arsacid and other Armenian families can be found inTou-
manoff 1969; 1976.
30
This is the version of the Christianisation of Armenia as told by Agat‘angełos; for a critical
perspective, cf. Garsoïan 1997b: 81–84.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

alignment change and changing alignments
225
shared until this point.31 Whether Trdat iii’s decision to adopt Christianity was
wholly motivated by religious concerns is unclear, since political calculations
mayhavefavouredsuchaseparationfromtheSasaniansaswell.32Bythebegin-
ning of the fifth century, Christianity had succeeded in developing sufficiently
strong roots in Armenia to warrant translation of the Bible into Armenian; this
required the creation of an alphabet suitable for writing the language and her-
alded the beginning of the Armenian literary tradition. In the centuries and
millennia to come, Christianity and their language would develop into two of
the primary pillars of Armenian identity; that the former’s foundation was laid
and subsequently maintained by Parthians suggests, if perhaps not quite yet
an Armenian-Parthian identity, but at least a willingness on part of the ruling
class to identify with their subjects.
This willingness also finds expression in certain customs in the higher ech-
elons of Armenian society, particularly among the naxarar (‘noble’) famil-
ies. Two of these customs are particularly suitable for creating or fostering
multilingualism: intermarriage between Armenian and Parthian families, and
the dayeak (‘tutor’) system, an ‘institution […] whereby naxarar youths were
raised by foster-fathers of their own social class’.33 A prominent and traditional
instance of this kind of tutelage can be found in the relationship between
the Armenian Arsacid dynasty and the Mamikonean family; the latter’s head
held the hereditary office of sparapet (‘commander-in-chief’) and would also
act as dayeak for the heir-apparent to the Arsacid throne. The same two fam-
ilies have also been known to intermarry, so e.g. in the case of Vardanduxt,
daughter of Manuēl Mamikonean, and King Aršak iii in the late fourth cen-
tury.34 While political considerations are more likely to have been the prime
reason for establishing such familial ties than linguistic ones, at least one his-
toriographicsourcesuggeststhatclearcommunicationbetweenpowerfulmar-
ried couples and by extension their families was of importance: ‘only through
intermarriage will they [the Armenians and Iranians] communicate with each
other’.35
31
Conversion is, of course, a process, and not accomplished overnight: Agat‘angełos details
Gregory’seffortstospreadChristianityintheearlythirdcentury insomedetail;Koriwn,in
turn, writes about Mesrop Maštoc‘, who lived a century later and was still engaged in the
(re-)Christianisation of the country. For the purposes of the court and the ruling classes,
as well as for international politics, however, the principle cuius regio, eius religio applies.
32
Boyce 1979: 84.
33
Garsoïan 1989: 521.
34
For a fuller discussion with bibliography of the relevance of intermarriage and tutelage,
cf. Meyer 2017: 307–309.
35
ŁP §12.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

226
meyer
While many of the contemporaneous historiographic sources touch on all
of the above aspects, most of them chiefly deal with politics and warfare. In
this context, too, the Parthian rulers of Armenia side with their subjects for the
most part and over the centuries try to set themselves apart from their Sas-
anian neighbours, often in armed conflict. In the third century, the Armenians
fought back numerous Sasanian incursions under King Trdat ii (r. 217–252);36
RomanlossesandSasaniansuccessesinthemiddleof thecenturyledtoashort
period of Sasanian rule over Armenia (c. 258–287), which had temporarily lost
its importance as a buffer state between East and West.37 Once Trdat the Great
(r. c. 298–330), another Arsacid Parthian king, had ascended the Armenian
throne, however, he pursued a stringently anti-Sasanian policy, not only by
making Christianity the de facto state religion, as outlined above, but also by
spending‘thewholeperiodof hisreigndevastatingthelandof thePersianking-
dom’.38Acrosstheboard,thegeneraldepictionof theSasaniansinfifth-century
Armenian historiographic literature is negative, whilst the Arsacids are on the
whole portrayed not only in a positive light, but indeed as the natural rulers of
Armenia.39
By considering together these aspects of Parthian–Armenian relations—
long-term Parthian ruler over Armenia; a shared religion; ties of marriage and
tutelage; and a largely anti-Sasanian foreign policy—the conclusion suggests
itself that the Parthian ruling class had integrated well with its Armenian sub-
jects, likely to the extent of identifying with them at the exclusion of their
Sasanian cousins. This is fruitful ground for extensive and deep language con-
tact. The final question to consider, namely that of the specifics of this contact
situation, will be dealt with in what follows.
6
Changing Alignment: The First ‘Death’ of Parthian
The socio-historical setting laid out above, when taken together with the large
number of Parthian lexical borrowings into Armenian and the Armenian syn-
tactic patterns replicated on the basis of Parthian models, suggests that the
36
Ag. §23.
37
For a concise account of this uncertain and disputed time period, cf. Garsoïan 1997b:
73–75.
38
Ag. §123.
39
For a discussion of the term Arm. bnak tēr ‘natural lord’, cf. Garsoïan 1976: 180, 196–197;
1989: 517. This positive depiction is, of course, likely due to the patronage of the writers by
the Parthian ruling class.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

alignment change and changing alignments
227
most plausible contact situation is a superstrate shift, viz. the adoption of a
language of the socio-economically less powerful speech community (here:
Armenian) by a socio-economically more powerful speech community (here:
the Parthian ruling class).40 This kind of scenario is also applicable to, e.g.,
Britain in the centuries after the Norman Conquest in 1066, when the French
ruling class over time adopted English as their main means of communication,
all the while Norman French left its imprint on the English language.41 In par-
ticular, both the Parthian–Armenian and the French–English context have two
things in common: the comparatively small number of superstrate language
speakers and the loss of a power-base during contact.42
Next to the linguistic and socio-historic data presented above, there is one
further indication that the Arsacid Parthians adopted Armenian as their lan-
guage: the lack of any Parthian-language documents from the Armenian King-
dom in the almost four centuries of their rule.43 After the fall of the Arsacid
Empire in 224ce, Parthian quickly lost its relevance even in its former core ter-
ritory; the last multilingual Sasanian inscriptions in which Parthian figures are
those of Narseh (r. 293–303). Indeed, there is a considerable attestation gap
between the last epigraphic attestation of Parthian (late third century ce) and
its literary use the as the liturgical language of Manichaeism in the documents
from Turfan (ninth–tenth century ce).44 Judging by the form of the language
usedinthelatter,Parthianwasnolongerspokennativelyatthattime;its‘death’
mustfall somewhereinthistimeperiod,viz.betweenthefourthandninthcen-
turies.45
40
For a general overview of language shift in contact situations and associated concepts, cf.
Thomason—Kaufman1988:37–46,110–146,Thomason2003;2008,Myers-Scotton
2002: 48–51.
41
For a full discussion, cf. Meyer 2017: 332–336.
42
Thepercentageof NormanFrenchspeakersinBritainisunlikelytohaveexceededtenper-
cent of the populace; more conservative estimates suggest closer to one percent (Berndt
1965: 147); no specific numbers for Parthians in Armenia are available, but since they con-
stituted only a part of the ruling elite, they are unlikely to have made up a significant
percentage of the populace. As for the loss of a powerbase, the fall of the Parthian Empire
in 224 might be compared to the loss of Normandy in 1204.
43
The Parthian inscriptional evidence in general is very limited. Next to the Nisa ostraka,
therearethreelettersfromAvromanandonefromDuraEuropos,anumberof inscriptions
of Arsacidkingsfromthetimeof theParthianEmpire,andArsacidcoinlegends(Durkin-
Meisterernst 2014: 4). The inscription of Artašēs I at Zangezur may be Parthian, but is
written largely in Aramaic heterograms and belongs to an earlier dynasty, the Orontids
(Périkhanian 1966).
44
The date of original composition of these texts may, of course, be much earlier (Durkin-
Meisterernst 2014: 7–9).
45
There are significant differences of opinion on the subject of the demise of Parthian
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

228
meyer
The Armenian data suggests that the Arsacid rulers of Armenia were one of
the first Parthian speech communities to switch to the locally dominant lan-
guage as their primary means of communication. This is backed up not only
by the linguistic and socio-historical material presented above, but also by the
fact that all of the literature about the Arsacid dynasty in Armenia comes from
sources in Armenian, not Parthian. While the absence of evidence is not evid-
ence of absence, based on what is known at present it stands to reason that
this first localised ‘death’ of Parthian in Arsacid Armenia is owed to the shift of
Parthian-speakers to Armenian and the resulting demise of Parthian over the
course of a few generations.
Whenthisshiftislikelytohavecommencedisadifficultquestion,asthedata
is insufficient to make such determinations. The establishment of a hereditary
Arsacid dynasty in Armenia in the early third century, the Fall of the Arsacid
Empireatthehandof theSasaniansin224,andtheChristianisationof Armenia
at the end of that century make it a likely candidate for a terminus a quo; the
invention of the Armenian alphabet and subsequent beginning of a literary
tradition entail a plausible terminusantequem.The resulting time period, from
themiddleof thethirdtotheendof thefourthcentury,iscertainlylongenough
for a superstrate shift like this to take place.46
7
Conclusions
This paper set out to advocate three points: the Iranian origin of the Armenian
perfect; the transitory nature of its tripartite alignment pattern; and the super-
as a ‘living’ language, ranging from the end of the fourth century as a terminus post
quem non (Christensen 1930: 4–5; Ghilain 1939: 28) to the seventh century (Durkin-
Meisterernst 2014: 3).
46
TheParthiansof thegenerationinwhichthisshiftbeganwerelikelyunbalancedbilinguals
with Parthian as a dominant language. Their social status lent prestige to their idiolectal
form of Armenian, sufficiently so to be adopted as the general language of court. The
next generation are initially brought up with Parthian as their heritage language, and
come into contact with Armenian either in the context of residing with their dayeak
(tutor), acquiring the Partho-Armenian idiolect of their parents, or both. This, or a sub-
sequent generation, in their lifetime would have shifted to Armenian entirely, speaking
either the idiolect of generation 1, or their own Parthian-influenced version of Armenian.
Their usage—including the use of Parthian patterns such as the periphrastic perfect—is
in time adopted by native Armenian speakers of the ruling classes as well, and crystal-
lises as the Classical Armenian used in fifth-century literature (Meyer 2017: 328–329).
This is, by necessity, only a hypothetical and speculative account, but seems to fit the data
best.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

alignment change and changing alignments
229
strate shift of Parthians to Armenian. An attempt has been made to show that
the explanations proffered here are a cogent account not only of the develop-
mentof theperiphrasticperfectitself,butalsoof theArmeniansocio-linguistic
situation in and before the fifth century ce; one caveat, frequently implied
in the above description and analysis, bears repeating here expressis verbis:
much of the linguistic and extra-linguistic evidence concerning pre-literary
Armenian and ancient socio-linguistics in general is based on indirect, cir-
cumstantial, or external evidence and inferences; since the linguistic evidence
remaining from this time period—synchronic as well as diachronic—is imper-
fect, so any understanding of the data cannot be more than an approximation
of the truth.
That being said, all of the arguments brought forward here have good evid-
entiary support: the conclusions drawn concerning the contact-based origin of
the perfect have contemporary parallels in other constructions gained through
pattern replication; the delineation of the development of the perfect itself is
backed by statistics; and the explanation of the Parthian superstrate shift has
historical parallels in similarly constituted historical linguistic communities.
Further corroboration, mitigation, or refutation of these points will have to be
found in the course of further research. The study of perfect syntax in sixth-
and seventh-century texts will indicate whether the trends evident in the fifth
century continue at pace. Comparisons of Armenian and Middle Iranian syn-
tax will unearth whether other structural similarities may be due to language
contact between the two languages. Potential archaeological finds of Parthian
documents from the first half of the first millennium ce could indicate that
Parthian had not died a ‘localised death’ as mooted here.
Until such time, however, the conclusions presented here may stand, and
Iranian–Armenian language contact must be seen in a new light, namely as
even closer than thought until a few years ago. The reasoning presented here
also emphasises, once more, that only the consideration of both linguistic and
extra-linguistic data can yield anything resembling the full picture of historical
socio-linguistics, and that, furthermore, extra-linguistic data can have a mean-
ingful impact on the diachronic reconstruction of a syntactic pattern.
Acknowledgements
Versionsof thispaperwerepresentedattwoconferences,VariationandContact
intheancientIndo-EuropeanLanguages(Oxford,May2018)andthe8thInterna-
tional Conference on Iranian Linguistics (Yerevan, October 2018). I am grateful
to James Clackson, Theo Maarten van Lint, Wolfgang de Melo, and Elizabeth
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

230
meyer
Tucker for their constructive comments and suggestions on this topic, and
equally to the anonymous reviewers for their constructive criticism; all errors
of fact or omission are, of course, mine.
Abbreviations and Transliteration
Abbreviations in glossing follow the Leipzig Glossing Rules; Armenian is trans-
literated according to the Hübschmann-Meillet-Benveniste system as used by
the Revue des Études Arméniennes.
Ag.
Agat‘angełos, History of Armenia Thomson (1980)
Eł.
Ełišē, The History of Vardan and the Armenian War Thomson (1993)
Kor.
Koriwn, Life of Maštoc‘ Maksoudian (1985)
ŁP
Łazar P‘arpec‘i, History of the Armenians Kouymjian (1985)
pb
P‘awstos Buzand, The Epic Histories Garsoïan (1984)
References
Ajello, Roberto 1973, Sulla “frase relativa nominale” e su alcuni procedimenti formali
di unione di determinato e determinante in armeno classico, “Studi e saggi linguistici”,
13: 141–184.
Ajello, Roberto 1997, Armeno, in A. Giacalone Ramat—P. Ramat (eds.), Le lingue
indoeuropee, Il Mulino: Bologna: 225–254.
Belardi, Walter 2003, Elementi di armeno aureo, Rome: Il Calamo.
Benveniste, Émile 1957, Motsd’empruntiraniensenarménien, “Bulletin de la Société
Linguistique de Paris” 53: 55–71.
Benveniste, Émile 1964, Élements parthes en arménien, “Revue des Études Arméni-
ennes” 1: 1–39.
Berndt, Rolf 1965,ThelinguisticsituationinEnglandfromtheNormanconquesttothe
loss of Normandy, “Philologica Pragensia” 8: 145–163.
Bolognesi, Giancarlo 1960, Le fonti dialettali degli imprestiti iranici in armeno,
Milan: Società Editrice Vita e Pensiero.
Bolognesi, Giancarlo 1988, La stratificazione del lessico armeno nell’opera di J.J.
Schröder, in J. Albrecht—H.Thun—J. Lüdtke (eds.), EnergeiaundErgon:sprachliche
Variation, Sprachgeschichte, Sprachtypologie. Studia in honorem Eugenio Coseriu,
Narr: Tübingen: 561–571.
Boyce, Mary 1979, Zoroastrians: Their Religious Beliefs and Practices, London/Boston:
Routledge/Kegan Paul.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

alignment change and changing alignments
231
Christensen, Arthur 1930, Contributions à la dialectologie iranienne, Copenhagen:
Bianco Lunos.
Comrie, Bernard 1978, Ergativity, in W.P. Lehmann (ed.), Syntactic typology: studies
in the phenomenology of language, Austin/London: University of Texas Press: 329–
394.
Deeters, Gerhard 1927, Armenisch und Südkaukasisch: ein Beitrag zur Frage der
Sprachmischung, Leipzig: Verlag der Asia Major.
Dixon, Robert M.W. 1994, Ergativity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Durkin-Meisterernst, Desmond 2014, Grammatik des Westmitteliranischen
(Parthisch und Mittelpersisch), Vienna: Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der
Wissenschaften.
Garsoïan, Nina G. 1976, Prolegomena to a study of the Iranian aspects in Arsacid
Armenia, “Handes Amsorya” 90: 177–234.
Garsoïan, Nina G. (ed.) 1984, Buzandaran patmutʿiwnkʿ= (The epic histories): also
known as, Patmutʿiwn Hayocʿ (History of Armenia), Delmar (NY): Caravan Books.
Garsoïan, Nina G. 1989, The Epic Histories (Buzandaran Patmutʿiwnkʿ), Cambridge
(MA): Harvard University Press.
Garsoïan, Nina G. 1997a, The Emergence of Armenia, in R.G. Hovannisian (ed.), The
Armenian People from Ancient to Modern Times, vol. 1: The Dynastic Periods, from
Antiquity to the Fourteenth Century, New York: St Martin’s Press: 37–62.
Garsoïan, Nina G. 1997b, The Aršakuni Dynasty (a.d.12–[180?]–428), in R.G. Hovan-
nisian (ed.), The Armenian People from Ancient to Modern Times, vol. 1: The Dynastic
Periods, from Antiquity to the Fourteenth Century, New York: St Martin’s Press: 63–
94.
Ghilain,Antoine1939, EssaisurlalangueParthe,sonsystemeverbald’aprèslestextes
manichéens du Turkestan Oriental, Leuven: Bureaux du Muséon.
Gippert, Jost 2005, Armeno-albanica, in G. Schweiger (ed.), Indogermanica: Fests-
chrift Gert Klingenschmitt. Indische, iranische und indogermanische Studien. Dem
verehrten Jubilar dargebracht zu seinem fünfundsechzigsten Geburtstag, Taimering:
VWT-Verlag: 155–165.
Gippert, Jost 2009, Anetymologicaltrifle, inW. Sundermann—A. Hintze—F. de Blois
(eds.), Exegisti monumenta. Festschrift in Honour of Nicholas Sims-Williams, Wies-
baden: Harrassowitz: 127–140.
Heine, Berndt 2012, On polysemy copying and grammaticalization in language con-
tact, in C. Chamoreau—I. Léglise (eds.), Dynamics of Contact-Induced Language
Change, Berlin: De Gruyter Mouton: 125–166.
Heine, Berndt—Kuteva, Tania 2005, Language Contact and Grammatical Change,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Heine, B.—Kuteva, Tania 2007, The genesis of grammar, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

232
meyer
Hopper, Paul J.—Traugott, Elizabeth C. 2003, Grammaticalization, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Hübschmann, Heinrich 1875, Ueber die stellung des armenischen im kreise der indo-
germanischen sprachen, “Zeitschrift für vergleichende Sprachforschung auf dem
Gebiete der Indogermanischen Sprachen” 23/1: 5–49.
Hübschmann, Heinrich 1897, Armenische Grammatik. 1. Theil: Armenische Etymo-
logie, Leipzig: Breitkopf & Härtel.
Korn, Agnes 2016, A partial tree of Central Iranian, “Indogermanische Forschungen”
121: 401–434.
Korn, Agnes—Olsen, Birgit A. 2012, On Armenian -agin: additional evidence for
a third West Middle Iranian dialect?, “Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft”
66/2: 201–220.
Kouymjian, Dickran (ed.) 1985, History of the Armenians and The Letter to Vahan
Mamikonean, Delmar, NY: Caravan Books.
Maksoudian, Krikor H. (ed.) 1985, Vark‘ Maštoc‘i, Delmar, NY: Caravan Books.
Matras, Yaron—Sakel, Jeanette 2007, Investigating the mechanisms of pattern
replication in language convergence, “Studies in Language” 31/4: 829–865.
Meillet, Antoine 1899, Recherches sur la syntaxe comparée de l’arménien i, “Mém-
oires de la Société Linguistique de Paris” 11/6: 369–388.
Meillet, Antoine 1911, Sur les mots iraniens empruntés par l’arménien, “Melanges de
la Sociéte Linguistique de Paris” 17: 250–252.
Meillet, Antoine 1936, Esquisse d’une grammaire comparée de l’arménien classique,
2. éd, Vienna: Impr. des Pp. Mékhitharistes.
Meyer, Robin 2013, Armeno-Iranian Structural Interaction: The Case of Parthian wxd,
Armenian ink‘n’, “Iran and the Caucasus” 17/4: 401–425.
Meyer, Robin 2014, Remodelling the Historical Morphology of the Classical Armenian
-eal participle, “Banber Matenadarani” 21: 385–398.
Meyer, Robin 2016, Morphosyntactic Alignment and the Classical Armenian Peri-
phrastic Perfect, in S.W. Jamison—H.C. Melchert—B. Vine (eds.), Proceedings of the
26th Annual ucla Indo-European Conference: Los Angeles, October 24th and 25th,
2014, Bremen: Hempen: 117–133.
Meyer, Robin 2017, Iranian-Armenian language contact in and before the 5th cen-
tury ce. An investigation into pattern replication and societal multilingualism, DPhil
Thesis, University of Oxford.
Meyer, Robin (n.d.), Languages in Contact: Armenian and Iranian, in A. Orengo—
I. Tinti (eds.), Armenian Linguistics, Handbuch der Orientalistik, Vol. 23, Leiden:
Brill.
Myers-Scotton, Carol 2002, Contact Linguistics: Bilingual Encounters and Gram-
matical Outcomes, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Olsen, Birgit A. 2005, On Iranian dialectal diversity in Armenian, in O. Hackstein—
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

alignment change and changing alignments
233
G. Meiser (eds.), Sprachkontakt und Sprachwandel: Akten der xi. Fachtagung der
Indogermanischen Gesellschaft, 17.–23. September 2000, Halle an der Saale, Wies-
baden: Reichert: 473–481.
Payne, John R. 1979, Transitivity and Intransitivity in the Iranian Languages of the
U.S.S.R., in P.R. Clyne—W.F. Hanks—C.L. Hofbauer (eds.), The Elements: A Para-
session on Linguistic Units and Levels, April 20–21, 1979, including Papers from the
Conference on Non-Slavic Languages of the ussr, April 18, 1979, Chicago: Linguistic
Society: 436–447.
Payne, John R. 1980, The Decay of Ergativity in Pamir Languages, “Lingua” 51: 147–186.
Périkhanian, Anahit 1966, Une inscription araméenne du roi Artašēs trouvée à
Zanguézour (Siwnikʿ), “Revue des Études Arméniennes” 3: 17–29.
Pirejko, Lilja A. 1966, Талышский Язык, in V.V. Vinogradov (ed.), Языки Наро-
дов ссср. Индоевропейские языки, Москва: Институт Языкознания / Академия
Наук ссср: 302–322.
Schmitt, Rüdiger 1983, Iranisches Lehngut im Armenischen, “Revue des Études
Arméniennes” 17: 73–112.
Schröder, Johann J. 1711, Aramean lezuin gandzi, Hoc est: Joh. Joachimi Schröderi
Thesaurus Linguae Armenicae, Antiquae Et Hodiernae: Cum varia Praxios materia,
cujus elenchum sequens pagella exhibet, Amsterdam.
Skalmowski, Wojciech 1974, Transitive verb constructions in the Pamir and Dardic
languages, in J. Kuryłowicz—J. Safarewicz—W. Smoczyński (eds.), Studia Indoeuro-
pejskie, Krakow: Polska Akademia Nauk, Zakład Narodowy im. Ossolińskich: 205–
212.
Skjærvø, Prods O. 1983, Case in inscriptional Middle Persian, inscriptional Parthian
and the Pahlavi Psalter, “Studia Iranica” 12/1: 69–94, 151–181.
Szemerényi, Oswald 1966, Iranica ii, “Die Sprache” 12: 190–226.
Thomason, Sarah G. 2003, Contact as a Source of Language Change, in B.D. Joseph—
R.D. Janda (eds.), Handbook of Historical Linguistics, Malden, MA: Blackwell: 687–
712.
Thomason, Sarah G. 2008, Social and Linguistic Factors as Predictors of Contact-
Induced Change, “Journal of Language Contact” 2: 42–56.
Thomason, Sarah G.,—Kaufman, Terence 1988, Language Contact, Creolization,
andGeneticLinguistics,Berkeley/LosAngeles/Oxford:Universityof CaliforniaPress.
Thomson, Robert W. (ed.) 1980, Patmutʿiwn Hayotsʿ, Delmar, NY: Caravan Books.
Thomson, RobertW. (ed.) 1993,Thehistoryof Vardanand the Armenian war, Delmar,
NY: Caravan Books.
Toumanoff, Cyrille 1969, The Third-Century Armenian Arsacids: a Chronological
and Genealogical Commentary, “Revue des Études Arméniennes” 6: 233–281.
Toumanoff, Cyrille 1976, Manuel de généalogie et de chronologie pour l’histoire de
la Caucasie chrétienne, Rome: Edizioni Aquila.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Katharine Shields, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_011
chapter 9
Rewriting the Law: Diachronic Variation and
Register in Greek and Hittite Legal Language
Katharine Shields
1
Introduction*
Ancient Greek legal inscriptions and the Hittite Laws are both texts that were
repeatedlymodifiedandrewritten.Amendmentsandadditionsareoftenexpli-
citly signposted and the texts situate themselves as part of a legal tradition:
even the earliest versions of the Hittite Laws state that the punishment was
formerly (kāru) something else, but has now been changed and—often—
reduced. A late version of the text, KBo 6.4, also known as the ‘Parallel Text’
contains additional provisions not present in the earlier versions. Greek legal
inscriptions also have amendments and additional provisions added after the
initial composition, including the Gortyn Code, itself already a compilation
and re-inscription of earlier laws.1 Elsewhere, legal texts are republished by
decree, such Drakon’s law on homicide (ig i3 104), originating from the late
C7th,2 which was reinscribed in 409/8.
The (re)writing and amendment of these texts provides useful material for
investigating the diachronic development of register, i.e. “situationally defined
varieties”3 of a language. The language used in legal texts is generally con-
sidered to be hyper-conservative: it has repeatedly been shown that in English
legal language changes advance slowly, and there is little variation among the
texts.4 Since later Hittite scribes sometimes modernised the language of Old
Hittite (oh) texts they copied,5 and “as a rule the Greeks took no care to repro-
*
I would like to thank Michele Bianconi, Stephen Colvin, Mark Weeden and the anonymous
reviewers for their helpful comments.
1 Gagarin 1982: 130; Gagarin—Perlman 2016: 336.
2 Stroud 1968: 65–70.
3 Biber 1995: 1.
4 “Some registers (e.g. legal documents) have well defined norms so that there is relatively little
variation among the texts within the register” Biber 1995: 31; “Changes in legal language are
slow to take effect, the genre being one of the most conservative of all varieties of language
use.” Hiltunen 1990: 60.
5 On the Laws, Hoffner notes: “Some post-os manuscripts appear to have closely emulated the
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

rewriting the law
235
duce the precise form of an original document”6 the ‘updated’ orthography,
morphology and syntax in these copies can provide valuable evidence for lan-
guage change, and the selective preservation of more archaic features can be
interrogated for indications of what the ancient copyists might have thought
was language belonging to a particular genre.
Although both the Greek and Hittite texts discussed in this chapter can be
described as ‘legal’, they come from very different contexts, and consequently
there are some significant differences in the characteristics which are usu-
ally used to define registers,7 such as the relationship between addressor and
addressee, and the setting and the purpose of the text: the Greek texts are pub-
lic inscriptions, and even if the entire population would not have been able
to read them, they were available and visible in public places to a much lar-
ger number of people than the Hittite texts, which were written on clay tablets
and stored in official archives. While these inscribed laws were a part of the
legal system in Ancient Greece, there is no evidence that the Hittite Laws were
used in the same way—perhaps they rather belong to a genre of scholarly texts
belongingtotheMesopotamianintellectualtraditionof collectinginformation
in lists, along with omens, oracles and astronomical observations.8 Nonethe-
less, they share many similarities in content, as well as both being written texts.
In this paper I will discuss two features associated with the revision and
replication of legal texts: the use of clause connecting enclitic particles with
the conjunctions takku and mān in the Hittite Laws, and asyndeton in Greek
inscriptions.
2
takku, mān and Clause Connecting Enclitic Particles in the ‘Parallel
Text’ of the Hittite Laws
The Hittite Laws (henceforth Laws) is a text which appears in copies on tablets
from the whole period of attested Hittite (approximately C16th–C13th bce).
The original author of the text is not known, although modern scholars have
attributed it to various early Hittite kings.9 The copies were written by trained
spellinghabitsof their(hyp)archetypes.whileothersseemtohavebeenmorereadytoreplace
older spellings with those current in their time.” 1997: 230.
6 Robertson 1976: 9, emphasis mine. Inscriptions survive “in rival versions which are plainly
indifferent to verbal accuracy”. ibid.
7 See for example Biber 1994: 40–41.
8 Guinan 2014; Zorman 2017.
9 Hattušili i, or Muršili i: Carruba 1962. Telipinu: Archi 1968, Goetze 1928, Güterbock
1954.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

236
shields
scribes, and the tablets were found in the context of official archives. There are
two ‘series’ of the Laws, ‘If a man’ and ‘If a vine’.10 Fragments of at least twenty
copies of each series survive, the majority from the New Hittite (nh) period.
A handful of Old Script (os) copies (most importantly KBo 6.2++ for the first
series, kub 29.25++ for the second) show that the content of the text largely
remained stable, with the exception of the ‘Parallel Text’ (henceforth pt) ver-
sion (KBo 6.4).This nh version of the text has been significantly rewritten: new
conditions have been added and others have been modified or removed, the
order of the paragraphs has been changed, and the formulas karū … kinun=a …
(‘formerly…butnow…’)andkarūkiššanēššer (‘formerlytheyusedtoactinthis
way’), frequent in the main version of the Laws, never appears in the pt.The pt
isalsotheonlycopyof theLawswherethenameof thescribe(mḪanikkuili)sur-
vives in the colophon. This scribe is known from the colophons of three other
tablets, all ritual compositions.
Although the content of the Laws largely remains stable, there are nonethe-
less differences between the earlier and later copies reflecting several hundred
years of linguistic change. Many features showing an ‘updated’ form of the lan-
guage are found in the pt, including the replacement of ⟨iC⟩with ⟨eC⟩such
as in the verb ēšša-/īšša-,11 and the replacement of transitive medio-passive
forms with active ones.12 But alongside these ‘modernised’ forms, many archaic
features no longer found in original nh compositions are still present in later
copies of Old Hittite compositions. One of the most noticeably archaic features
of the Laws is the use of the conditional conjunction takku, which appears at
the start of most paragraphs. The majority of the laws follow an ‘if … then …’
arrangement: the most common structure has the present tense in both the
protasis and the apodosis, and the apodosis is usually asyndetic, with the typ-
ical structure being something like takku … (kuiški) 3sg. pres., Ø … 3sg pres., as
in the following example:13
10
The titles are known from the colophons of KBo 6.6 and kub 13.11 (ták-ku lú-aš) and KBo
6.13 (ták-ku gišgeštin-aš).
11
§xxx iii.18 e-eš-ša-i, but i-iš-ša-i in the os version (KBo 6.2 ii.20), and iš-š[a-i in a nh copy
(KBo 6.3 ii.39). Again in pt §xxxi iii.26 e-eš-ša-[i, i-iš-ša-i in the os version (KBo 6.2 ii.25),
and iš-ša-i and e-eš-ša-i in nh copies (KBo 6.3 ii.46, KBo 6.5 iv.4). See Hoffner 1997: 239ff.
for a list of differences in orthography between the os and post-os manuscripts.
12
KBo 6.3 i.37 and KBo 6.5 i.16 iš-kal-la-a-ri (nh copies, no os version survives), but iš-gal-la-i
in §xiv i.37.
13
Hittite text and paragraph numbers follow Hoffner 1997.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

rewriting the law
237
⸢ták⸣-ku lú.u19.lu-an el-lam ⸢kir14⸣-še-et ku-iš-ki wa-a-ki 1 ma.na
kù.babbar pa-a-i
‘If anyone bites off a free person’s nose, (s)he will pay 1 mina of silver’
KBo 6.3 i.33, ns
3
takku and mān
Two conditional conjunctions (meaning ‘if’) are found in the Laws, takku, and
mān. takku is the older form, elsewhere found almost exclusively in oh texts,
and it is always clause initial. mān in Old Hittite has a temporal meaning,
‘when’,14 but it also develops a conditional function. As takku drops out of use
in post-Old Hittite, mān becomes the primary conditional conjunction, while
maḫḫan takes over the temporal function.15 It is remarkable that even in the
latest versions of the Laws, takku continues to be used at the start of each
paragraph almost without exception, and this has already been highlighted
as a feature of the language of the laws by Sternemann: “Die Einleitung der
Gesetzparagraphen durch takku… war anscheinend so typisch, daß es bis in
die jüngste Fassung (KBo vi 4) hinein tradiert wurde.”16 takku is overall about
ten times more frequent than mān across all copies of the text.
The most obvious difference between the use of takku and mān is that—
with one possible exception—mān is used only to add additional conditions,
not at the start of a law paragraph: this is true even in the pt. The one apparent
exception occurs in §64:17
1. ma-a-an anše.kur.ra tu-u-ri-ia-u-wa⟨-aš⟩ku-iš-ki
2. ta-a-i-ia-zi ut-tar-še-et qa-tam-ma-[pát]
‘If anyone steals a harnessed horse, the matter is the same.’
KBo 6.8 ii.1–2, ns
14
For other functions of oh mān when not clause-initial, chd s. v. mān 1–4.
15
Hoffner—Melchert 2008: 416–417. maḫḫan found in ns copies only always has the
meaning ‘like, as’.
16
“Die Einleitung der Gesetzesparagraphen durch takku wurde als stilistisch wichtig
empfunden, so daß sich takku hier bis in die jüngsten Abschriften halten konnte, während
im Paragraphinneren bereits in alter Sprache ein teilweiser Ersatz durch mān zu beo-
bachten ist.” Sternemann 1965a: 262. See also Tischler 1991 takku s. v.
17
Two other copies of this law, where it does not begin a new column, use takku: KBo 6.2
iii.43 (os), KBo 6.3 iii.48 (ns).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

238
shields
This law refers back to the compensation set out for stealing a plow ox in the
previous paragraph (§63), and begins a new column of the tablet. The appar-
ently exceptional use of mān rather than takku here is at least partly explain-
able if we imagine that the scribe might have considered it to be an additional
condition to the previous law, running over onto a new column but not begin-
ning a new paragraph.18
takku is also used to introduce additional conditions within the main body
of a law in all manuscripts. These additional conditions may provide further
information about the crime or situation that is the subject of the law, or fur-
ther consequences for not abiding by the penalty set out, as in the following
examples:
27. ták-ku lú.u19.lu-an ku-iš-ki ku-uš-ša-ni-ez-zi na-aš la-⸢aḫ-ḫa pa-iz-zi⸣
n[a-aš a-ki]
28. ták-ku ku-uš-ša-an pí-ia-a-an šar-ni-ik-zi-il [nu.gál]
29. ták-ku ku-uš-ša-na na-at-ta pí-ia-a-an 1 sag.du [pa-a-i]
‘If anyone hires a person, and he (the person) goes on a military cam-
paign and he dies, if the hire has been paid, there will be no compens-
ation, but if the hire has not been paid, he (the hirer) will give one
slave.’19
KBo 6.2 ii.27–29, os
19. ták-ku šaḫše-e-li-ia na-aš-ma a.šà-ni giškiri6-ni pa-i[z-zi ta še]-⸢e-li⸣-
ia-aš
20. iš-ḫa-a-aš a.šà-na-aš giškiri6-aš wa-al-aḫ-zi na-aš a-ki na-an iš-ḫi-iš-
ši
21. egir-pa pa-a-i ták-ku-an ú-ul-ma pa-a-i na-aš lúní.zu-aš ki-i-ša
18
§27 KBo 6.3 i.75-ii.1 and §28 KBo 6.5 ii.1-iii.5 begin a new column without starting a new
law paragraph. There are also several other examples of the paragraph divisions vary-
ing between manuscripts, e.g. §126, §182. On the photographs of KBo 6.8, it seems that
there is no space for a gap to be left at the end of the last line—šu-wa-a-ez-zi (or šu-ú-
wa-a-iz-zi, etc.) would take up all the space left in the break—to suggest that the scribe
definitely intended a new paragraph at the start of the next column. Kitazumi 2019
argues that the use of paragraph dividers is pragmatic and dependent on choices of indi-
vidual scribes, with further examples of variation in the use of divisions across copies of
the same text.
19
takku is also used for additional conditions in the ns versions of this law in KBo 6.3+ and
KBo 6.5, which both also add financial compensation.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

rewriting the law
239
‘If a pig enters a grain heap,20 a field or a garden, (and) the owner of the
grain heap, field or garden strikes it, and it dies, he will give it back to its
owner. But if he does not give it (back), he will be considered a thief.’
KBo 6.3 iv.19–21, ns
Lesscommonly,mānisalsousedforadditionalconditionsprovidingadditional
information about the situation or the penalty. The following table shows con-
ditional uses of mān in post-oh copies of the first series of the Laws, excluding
the Parallel Text.
In place of takku in os version
§40 KBo 6.3 ii.41
§41 KBo 6.3 ii.46, KBo 6.5 iv.5
§64 KBo 6.8+ ii.121
In place of našma ‘or if’ in os version
§5 KBo 6.3 i.12
mān already in os version
§53 KBo 6.6+ i.13, KBo 6.6+ i.17, KBo
6.8+ obv.2, KBo 6.8+ obv.6
§71 KBo 6.3 iii.65
No os version survives
§27 kub 26.56 ii.9
§171 KBo 6.13 i.14, KBo 6.26 ii.4
§19322 KBo 6.26 iii.42, kub 29.34 iv.20
mānreplacestakkufromtheosversionrelativelyrarely,andnotconsistently—
in §40 and 41, takku is retained in one New Script (ns) copy,23 even though the
othernscopiesusemān.Thisisalsotrueforthept,althoughmānismuchmore
common in the pt than the previous versions (about half of the examples are
in this copy alone).24 mān in the os version is never replaced by takku in a ns
copy. The following table shows takku and mān introducing additional condi-
tions in the Parallel Text.
20
Or ‘harvest, harvested goods’. chd Š3.
21
See discussion in the previous section.
22
Hoffner 1997: 152 restores ma-a-an in the oh version (kub 29.25+) presumably on the
basis of the nh copies.
23
kub 29.14+ iii.11/8, iii.14.
24
14× in the pt, as opposed to 4× in KBo 6.2 (os), 4× in KBo 6.3+, 3× in KBo 6.8+, 2× KBo 6.6+
and KBo 6.26, 1× KBo 6.5, kub 26.56, KBo 6.13, kub 29.34 (all ns).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

240
shields
takku
mān25
takku in main version (os or ns)
3
§xxxviii iv.21, iv.22, iv.25
§xxxix iv.33
1
§xxx iii.20
mān in main version (os or ns)
-
1
§xli iv.4326
New condition not found in main ver-
sion
9
§iii i.7
§iv i.9, i.10, i.13
§v i.15
§vi i.17
§vii i.19
§ix i.26
§xi i.32
11
§vii i.18
§x i.28, i.29
§xi i.31
§xxxiv iv.1
§xxxv iv.6, iv.927
§xxxvi iv.13
§xxxvii iv.18, iv.20
§xxxix iv.29
Incorporating two separate laws
(introduced by takku) in main version
2
§ii i.3
§xxxix iv.30
-
mān is in fact slightly more common than takku for introducing conditions for
which there is no precedent (9 examples vs 11), and both can even be found
in the same law paragraph (§xi); but where there is a previous version with
takku, pt is more likely to continue to use the older form, with mān only repla-
cing takku once. It is not surprising that the older form is used when the text is
clearly based on the main version, but it is remarkable that it is also used fre-
quentlywhenthereisnoprecedentinthemainversion.28Thattakkucontinues
to be used relatively frequently even where the content is original might sug-
gest some sort of “conscious archaizing”29 on the part of the nh author, who
25
There is one more probable attestation of conditional mān—KBo 6.4 iii.29—but the con-
text is too broken to include it here.
26
KBo 6.2 ii.54 (oh) ma-a-am[-ma-an], KBo 6.4 iv.43 (ns) ⸢ma⸣-a[m-ma-an…], mān=man,
conditional conjunction and potential particle. pt breaks away here.
27
The content of this appears to be derived from both §45 and §71, although none of the
conditions occur exactly as they do in either of the source laws.
28
Carruba—Souček—Sternemann 1965: 5; Sternemann 1965a: 262, contra Hoff-
ner 1997: 19 n. 16.
29
Hoffner—Melchert 2008: 404.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

rewriting the law
241
is not only imitating the structure and content of the model text, but also its
most unusual linguistic features.
4
Clause-Linking Enclitics
The enclitics -a/-ma and -a/-ya unsurprisingly never occur with takku when
it is law initial, since they indicate either contrast/change of topic (-a/-ma)
or parallel (-a/-ya) with the previous clause or a constituent in the previous
clause, and each law begins a new separate discourse unit.30 The distribu-
tion of these enclitics in clauses expressing additional conditions should non-
etheless be investigated, since their position following subordinating conjunc-
tions changes over time: in oh they are attached not to mān or takku but to
the second accented word in a clause, although enclitic pronouns and local
particles can be attached directly.31 In nh, when takku has fallen out of use,
mān=ma instead becomes the regular word order,32 with the exception of mān
ūl=ma, ‘but if not’, “a fixed idiom” regularly used instead of spelling out a neg-
ative condition.33 The following table shows all the examples of takku or mān
followed by -a/-ma or -a/-ya or with the particle nu- in the pt.
takku
§ii i.3
[ta]kku munus-za=ma
§iii i.7
takku kešširaš=ma
§iv i.10
takku munus-za=ma
§iv i.11
takku ūl=ma
§ix i.26
takku arad-iš=ma
§xi i.32
takku=aš ūl=ma
30
Sternemann 1965b: 399. For the topicalising function of -a/-ma, see Rieken 2000 and
Melchert 2009. In the following examples with mān in the pt, the scope of -a/-ma and
-a/-ya is the whole clause. In i.10 and i.26 with takku it is likely that =ma only has scope
over the word it is attached to (the contrast is between munus or arad-iš and lú(-aš) in
i.9 and i.22), but no fronting is possible since takku must be in clause initial position.
31
chd L-N 97 s. v. -ma f 2′ a′ 1″; Sternemann 1965b: 398; Hoffner—Melchert 2008:
395–396, 400.
32
Hoffner—Melchert 2008: 396. Kloekhorst 2011, following Melchert 1998, ar-
gues that -ma must be attached to the first stressed word in a clause and takku and mān
were originally unstressed, although in nh mān gains stress.
33
chd L-N 97 s. v. mān 7 h.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

242
shields
mān34
§x i.28
n=aš mān
§x i.29
mān=aš ūl=ma
§xi i.31
n=aš mān
§xxxiv iv.1
mān é-ri=ia
§xxxv iv.6
mān en-⟪iš⟫=šin=ma
§xxxv iv.9
mān=za ūl=ma
§xxxvi iv.13
mān=an=kan lugal-uš=ma
§xxxvii iv.18
mān en a.šà a.gàr=ma
In the pt, the enclitic conjunction continues to be postponed without excep-
tion, although by nh the word order mān⸗ma is preferred. In other ns texts
from oh models, where this word order would not have been permitted in the
original, the enclitic conjunctions, if they are postponed, are not postponed
with any consistency, whether mān is used with a conditional or temporal
meaning. An example is found in the Palace Building ritual (cth 414.1): ma-a-
an-ma lugal an-da-anpár-naú-iz-zi.35 Elsewhere this text contains a number
of archaic features, including the use of takku rather than mān as a conditional
conjunction. mān⸗ma can also be found in texts belonging to genres that—
much like the Laws—are considered to be linguistically conservative, and are
heavily influenced by Akkadian models, such as oracles: ma-a-an-ma ka-a-aš
ù-tum ú-ul ḫul-lu-uš.36
Despite this, the enclitic is always postponed with both mān and takku in
the pt—the nh order of constituents is never found with takku, and although
n=aš mān (which never occurs in the main version of the text) appears twice,
the enclitic is never attached to mān, both in clauses expressing the ‘new’ addi-
tional conditions and those which already occur in previous versions. Perhaps
the postponement of enclitic clause-coordinating conjunctions is a particu-
lar feature of Hittite legal language, the continued use of takku influencing
the constituent order used with mān, which elsewhere in the language has
changed.
34
[mān] āššu=ma i.6 §iii not included. See also n. 25.
35
kub 29.1 i.50 Mouton 2016: 98. Here mān has a temporal function.
36
cth 570 Liver Oracle kub 49.90.9 “Si ce rêve n’(était) pas mauvais” Mouton 2007: 179.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

rewriting the law
243
However, some examples of mān with a postponed enclitic conjunction can
be found in ns copies of Middle Hittite (mh) instruction texts, such as the
Instructions for Priests andTemple Personnel (cth 264).37 But even within the
same paragraph this is extremely inconsistent: in §6 we find mān=at úl=ma
(kub 13.5 ii.7), mān lúú-ba-rù=ma (kub 13.5 ii.11), and mān=ma=aš (kub 13.5
ii.14, kub 13.4 ii.1). The first example is an unsurprising example of the fixed
idiom mentioned above, the second preserves the old word order, while in
the third -ma is attached directly onto mān as expected in nh. Parts of this
text have been compared to the Laws in both content and structure,38 and it
is possible that the scribe preserves more instances of this feature because it
is appropriate to the content, although the variation throughout the text sug-
gests that the association was not as nearly as strong as for the scribe of the
pt.
Since the pt text can be ascribed to a particular scribe, mḪanikkuili, there is
one additional question, the answer to which might suggest that he is delib-
erately choosing an archaic construction because it belongs to this genre: in
other types of texts, which word order does he use? Three other texts naming
him as the scribe in the colophon also survive, all rituals (VBoT 24, KBo 10.34,
KBo 12.105++). Unfortunately, none of them contain any examples of a compar-
able construction with mān and a clause-linking enclitic.
What does not seem to be unusual for this particular scribe, moreover, is
that he has written a significantly revised version of a traditional text: Gordin
calls his work “uniquely creative”.39 But unlike all other versions of the Laws,
the fact that it is a revised version is never made explicit within the text itself.
The karū … kinun=a … and karū kiššan ēššer formulas, common in all other os
and ns versions of the Laws, never occur in the pt. If one takes the view that
mḪanikkuili is aiming at originality and creativity, one might suggest that his-
torical exemplars show conventionality, not creativity, and that the scribe here
is simply not interested in the sort of traditional authority which is created by
invoking an existing or previous legal tradition. It is extremely unlikely that
this law collection was ever one that was used in practice:40 one might take the
rewritten version as an intellectual or scholarly exercise—by imitating well the
37
These instruction texts, however, are probably direct copies of older texts, so the patterns
of archaisms vs innovations are likely to be different to texts based on older models but
composed by nh scribes.
38
Alaura 2016: 1.
39
Gordin 2015: 182.
40
Although this does not necessarily mean that it did not reflect some of the real practices
surrounding or was inconsistent with the principles of law enforcement.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

244
shields
key features of the language of the previous versions of the text, mḪanikkuili is
demonstrating his thorough mastery of the genre.41
5
Asyndeton in Greek legal Inscriptions
Legal inscriptions in Greek begin in the late C7th bce on Crete: by the end of
the C5th they number in the hundreds across a huge geographical area and
in many dialects. In this section, I will focus on two particular types of legal
inscriptions: firstly, the laws from Crete, in particular Gortyn, until the end of
the 5th century, and, secondly, legal texts republished by decree in the 5th and
4th centuries in Athens and Cyrene, which claim to be based on older mater-
ial.The use of asyndeton shows that these republished laws did indeed contain
older material.
Connective particles are extremely common in Greek and sentence-level
asyndeton is unusual. Reference grammars usually say that asyndeton occurs
when the connection is made clear by the context, or through use of an ana-
phoric pronoun or demonstrative adverb, or repetition of a significant word
or phrase.42 Denniston describes ‘full asyndeton’ (“at the colon or full stop,
between sentences”, as opposed to ‘half asyndeton’, “between words and
clauses”),43 and gives examples of its use with anaphoric or cataphoric pro-
nouns, with repetition, “when a writer forecasts the nature of a statement
which he is about to make”, when describing circumstances and results, and
as part of general rhetorical or narrative style, with examples mainly from
orators.44 Sicking’s discussion of particles in Lysias i includes asyndeton and
lists situations where asyndeton is found in this text: when resuming speech
following an interruption and after quoting direct speech, following the intro-
duction of a character with a demonstrative, and with οὕτως.45
41
“Imitation of archaic characteristics appears to be common in some compositions whose
long-standing scholarly tradition was acknowledged by the scribes.” Gordin 2015: 336.
42
Some grammars also suggest a distinction between ‘formal’ and ‘stylistic’ asyndeton. The
former is used to describe situations where the connection between sentences is indic-
ated by other means, such as a demonstrative adverb or repetition of a word or phrase,
the latter where asyndeton is used for emotional or rhetorical effect, such as in rapid
speech. Denniston—Dover 1954: xliii; Smyth 1956: 484, although “grammatical asyn-
deton cannot always be separated from rhetorical asyndeton,” and this distinction is not
relevant for the arguments presented here. The cgcg is almost silent on asyndeton.
43
Denniston 1960: 99.
44
Denniston 1960: 99ff.
45
Ophuijsen 1993: 41.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

rewriting the law
245
6
Crete
The Gortyn Code is the longestearly Greekinscription,collecting togetherlaws
on a range of subjects. Gagarin argues that asyndeton in this inscription marks
the beginning of a new provision, where what was previously inscribed as a
separate law has been included in a larger text, and that asyndeton with a sim-
ilar function can be found in other inscriptions from Gortyn.46 Asyndeton is
used as a structuring device to indicate a change of theme (e.g. vi.46, vii.15),
specifying a different type of offence or different status of people involved (e.g.
iii.37 or viii.30), or, once, to specify that a law does not apply retroactively (a
switch from substantive to procedural law, V.1). It is also used to indicate where
each amendment begins, often with a gap at the end of the previous line.47
In other early Cretan legal inscriptions, asyndeton can also have all these
functions. In the 7th and 6th centuries, asyndeton is used to separate differ-
ent provisions or a change in content within a law: the increase in the uses of
asyndeton in the later period is a result of the increasing length and complex-
ity of the laws, which requires more variation—the use of asyndeton for a new
provision extends to the change between procedural and substantive law. The
following table shows instances of asyndeton in legal inscriptions from Crete
prior to 400 bce.
c. 650–600
c. 600–500
c. 500–450
c. 450–400
At the start of an inscription or after an
enactment formula
seg 27.631 A.1
seg 27.620 1
seg 23.530 1
bch 70 600,4 1
bch 70 590,2 1
ic iv 22.1
ic iv 64
ic ii xii.16 Ab1
ic ii xii.16 Ac1
ic i x.2 2
seg 41.739 1
ic iv 43 Ba.1
ic iv 43 Bb.1
ic iv 43 Aa.1
ic iv 43 Ab.1
ic iv 47 A.1
seg 35.991 A.1
seg 35.991 B.1
ic iv 76 B.1
ic iv 78.1
ic iv 80.1
Indicating a change of content, including
procedural to substantive, or vice versa
seg 27.631 B.11 ic iv 14 g-p.1
ic iv 21.2
ic iv 21.3
ic iv 21.4
ic ii xii.11
ic iv 41 ii.16
ic iv 41 iii.7
ic iv 42.9
ic iv 53 B.3
ic iv 46 6
ic iv 75 C.3
ic iv 76 B.8?
ic iv 77 B.4
ic iv 77 B.10
ic iv 80.12
46
Gagarin 1982.
47
The ‘amendments’ begin at X.33. Gagarin—Perlman 2016: 413. It seems that each new
amendment was started on a new line (with the exception of the amendment at xi.31,
since only one letter from the previous amendment appears on that line), although this
does not happen in the main body of the laws.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

246
shields
(cont.)
c. 650–600
c. 600–500
c. 500–450
c. 450–400
Connection expressed through adverb,
demonstrative etc.
ic iv 43 Ba.3
ic ii v.9 11
Connection expressed through repetition
of significant word or phrase
ic iv 42.3
In the rest of the laws from Crete, asyndeton is common at the start of an
inscription, but also including after an enactment formula, and where several
separate laws are inscribed on one stone. There is an example of asyndeton
with a demonstrative in one of the later inscriptions:
ic iv 43 Ba.1–7
θιοί. τὰν ἐ[ν] Κησκόραι καὶ
τὰν ἐμ Πάλαι πυταλιὰν ἔ⟦ε⟧-
δοκαν ἀπόλις πυτεῦσαι. α-
ἴτις ταύταν πρίαιτο ἢκα-
ταθε[ῖ]το, μὴκατέκεθαι το͂ -
ι πριαμένοι τὰ[ν ὀ]νάν…
Gods. The polis have given the farmland at Keskora and Pala for growing.
If someone buys or gives a mortgage on it, the purchase is not to be valid
for the purchaser …48
Theconnectionwiththeprevioussectionof text,whichstatesthatthepolishas
made certain areas of land available for growing, is made explicit through the
use of the demonstrative pronoun, referring back to the area of land defined
in the previous sentence. Similarly, ic ii v.9 11 uses κατὰτὰαὐτὰ, ‘in the same
way’, to create a link between the previous regulations about irregularities with
payment for sacrifices and a different festival or group of priests (τοῖς Κυδαντεί-
οις) who are also to be given payment for sacrifices.49 As in the Gortyn Code,
asyndeton can also be used to indicate a change of content in the law, includ-
ing a change from substantive to procedural matters.50 These examples cover
48
Trans. Gagarin—Perlman 2016.
49
“The asyndeton in line 11 does suggest a new provision, but the expression kata ta auta ‘in
the same way’ (11) ties the two together.” Gagarin—Perlman 2016: 171.
50
A switch between procedural and substantive content also occasionally happens without
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

rewriting the law
247
largely the same range of contexts where grammars generally say asyndeton is
used, and consequently the use of asyndeton is not an aspect of a special legal
register in inscriptions from Crete.
7
Athens and Cyrene
Elsewhere,legaldocumentsarerepublishedthe5thand4thcenturiestorestate
orreinforcetheirauthority:eitherbecause,asinthecaseof thefoundationdoc-
ument of Cyrene, such a long time has passed from the original enactment, or
because a proliferation of inscriptions means it is no longer clear which laws
are in force,51 or because of political upheaval. This latter reason is particu-
larly important for the Athenian documents reinscribed after the restoration of
the democracy after the originals were undermined or even physically erased
under two periods of oligarchic rule.52 The authenticity of the sections of such
inscriptions claiming to be older has often been doubted, and some of the lan-
guage is probably not original.53The use of asyndeton suggests that the revised
laws are indeed based on older texts.
ThethreeinscriptionswhichwillbediscussedhereareDrakon’slawonhom-
icide, the original supposedly 7th century, republished by decree in 409/8, the
laws about the Council of 500 (ig i3 105), republished in 409 and probably
originating from the very late 6th or early 5th century, and the foundation doc-
ument of Cyrene (seg ix.3), republished in the 4th century, also supposedly
originating from the 7th century.
Drakon’s homicide law,
ig i3 104, original C7th,
republished 409/8.
Foundation document of
Cyrene, seg ix.3, original
C7th?, republished C4th.
Laws about the Coun-
cil of 500, ig i3 105,
republished 409.
At the start of an inscription
or after an enactment formula
1, 2, 3, 3, 3, 4, 4
1, 2, 2, 11, 11, 23, 24
34
Indicating a change of content
20, 44, 46
42, 44
Connection expressed through
adverb, demonstrative etc.
40
asyndeton in the Gortyn Code, such as at i.56. Asyndeton is only one of the strategies used
to introduce a change in content in these inscriptions.
51
Volonaki 2001: 139.
52
Walbank 1978: 8; Volonaki 2001: 138–141.
53
This has been argued especially for the foundation document of Cyrene. Graham 1960;
Meiggs—Lewis 1969: 7–9.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

248
shields
Like the Cretan laws, asyndeton is used in and after an enactment formula,
even when the enactment formula occurs part way through the inscription.
Enactment formulas in Athens in the late 5th and early 4th century are gener-
ally much more extensive than those from Crete,54 and do not contain clause-
level connectives:
ig i3 104, 1–4, Athens 409/8
Διόγν[ε]τος Φρεάρριος ἐγραμμάτε[υε]·
Διοκλε͂ς ἐ͂ρχε·
ἔ̣δοχσεν τε͂ι βουλε͂ι καὶτο͂ι δέμοι· Ἀκα[μ]αντὶ̣ς ἐπ[ρ]υ̣τάνευε, [Δ]ι̣ό[γ]-
νετος ἐγραμμάτευε, Εὐθύδικος [ἐ]πεστάτε, . . Ε . . . ΑΝΕΣ εἶπε·
Diogenes of Phrearrhii was the secretary; Diocles was the archon. Re-
solved by the council and the people. Acamantis was the prytany;
Diognetuswasthesecretary;Euthydicuswasthechairman;…phanespro-
posed:55
ic iv 78, 1, Gortyn c. 450–400
θιοί. τάδ’ ἔϝαδε τοῖς Γορτυνίοις πσαπίδονσ̣[ι]·
Gods. These things pleased the Gortynians voting.56
A comparison could be made between the asyndeton following an enactment
formula and the asyndeton that Sicking identifies in Lysias marking the trans-
ition between narrative and reported direct speech and vice versa: the verb εἶπε
is commonly the last word of the enactment formula at the start of the inscrip-
tion. The form of the substantive part of a law or decree is often accusative +
infinitive or nominative + imperative, and the choice of infinitive or imperative
structure is influenced by semantic and pragmatic factors.57 The accusative +
infinitive construction is the usual form of indirect statements following verbs
of speaking, including λέγω.58 In both inscriptions and legal speeches, asyn-
deton functions to mark the shift between two different levels of text, that
54
Here I am including under ‘enactment formula’ what is sometimes otherwise called the
‘prescript’ (Rhodes—Lewis 1997: 5), e.g. information about the date and the name of
the proposer.
55
Trans. Osborne—Rhodes 2017.
56
Trans. Gagarin—Perlman 2016.
57
Rhodes—Lewis 1997: 5; Elvira Astoreca 2016.
58
Not all enactment formulas use εἶπε or indeed any verb of speaking.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

rewriting the law
249
existing in the immediate situation of the speech or the inscription, and that
repeating or reporting speech which existed in a prior (or hypothetical) set-
ting.59
The further instancesof asyndetonin theCyrenefoundationinscription can
be explained similarly. In line 20, asyndeton marks a shift in types of proced-
ural content from what should be engraved on the stone to who should pay
for it. In line 44, the text moves from describing the content and implementa-
tion of the original agreement to the performance of the curse mentioned in
the agreement, which took place prior to the original agreement being written
into a decree.60 In line 46, the oath itself begins: although it is not introduced
by a form of λέγω etc., it seems to be reproducing the form of the oath spoken
by those performing it. Here the asyndeton marks a shift in the temporal frame
of the of the text, and from narrative to reproduced speech.
In ig i3 105, the same sequence as in 42, ἄνευ το͂ δέμο το͂ Ἀθεναίον πλεθύοντος
‘without the Athenian people assembled en masse’, can also almost certainly
be restored with asyndeton in 34–35, 36, 37, and 40–41.61 Ryan claims “that
[these] were copied verbatim from another document cannot be doubted”,62
since in line 43 damage from the original seems to have been copied, rather
than τοι being reinserted where it is clearly required.63 Although these regu-
lations concern one general topic, restrictions on the powers of the Council
of 500, there is only the repeated sequence ἄνευ το͂ δέμο το͂ Ἀθεναίον πλεθύον-
τος making the connection between the individual regulations explicit.64 If in
the C6th–5th Athenian laws—from which the material for the re-inscription
59
Jones 1975: 112–114 on the text of Athenian decrees being proposed in speech.
60
Whether the text of this section is original or authentic or not does not particularly matter
for the chronology of events referred to within it. Edition of this inscription from Dobias-
Lalou 2017. The shifts between different types of content here have long been noted: “…
such an abrupt transition … no indication of a change of type of content within the one
general heading.” Meiggs—Lewis 1969: 8.
61
It is possible that the same sequence also appears in 45–46 without the preposition.
62
Ryan 1994: 122.
63
The use of other archaic features such as the letter h and the enactment formula in line 32
show that this text was not entirely updated. See similarly the use of h in only the rein-
scribed section of ig i3 104.
64
Similar sequences are found occasionally in other Attic inscriptions as part of individual
provisions within inscriptions:
ig i3 14 28–29
[ο]ὐδὲτο͂ν μενόντον ἐχσελο͂ [ἄ]ν[ευ] τε̣͂ς β̣[ο]-
[λε͂ς] τ̣ε͂ς Ἀθεναίον καὶ[το͂] δ̣έμ̣ο·
… nor will I exile those who remain without the Athenian council and the people.
However, in these inscriptions the sequence is never repeated more than twice, and
never introduces a new sentence with asyndeton. Rather, it usually appears following the
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

250
shields
must originate—asyndeton is used at the start of an inscription or in or after
an enactment formula,65 then this supports the suggestion that these were all
originally separately enacted provisions,66 similar to some of the examples of
laws collected in inscriptions from Crete.
8
Conclusion
The constituent order patterns used with takku and mān in the Hittite Laws
should be considered a register feature. The position of the clause-connecting
enclitic particles is preserved consistently in the Laws (both in copies of the
main text and in the Parallel Text), but elsewhere in the language has changed:
itiskeptonlysporadicallyincopiesof arelatedtext(theInstructionTexts),and
not at all in versions of other types of texts such as rituals or oracles. That the
scribe of the Parallel Text chose to preserve this feature in a text which was
not merely a straightforward copy but involved some level of inventiveness
suggests that the position of the enclitics -a/-ma and -a/-ya was a significant
feature of the legal register and the tradition in which he was writing.
While the use of asyndeton does not belong to a special legal register in
Greek, it does nonetheless provide evidence for republication based on older
material. Asyndeton creates gaps between different levels of the texts, and the
shift between the enactment formula and the content of the law is mirrored in
the shift between the oath and the narrative description in the Cyrene founda-
tion inscription. Comparisons between the texts at Gortyn and the laws about
the Council of the 500 in Athens show that they seem to use asyndeton in
the same way when collecting previously separately enacted laws or regula-
tions together.That a higher frequency of asyndeton is a feature of inscriptions
which collect previously published laws together, already familiar for Cretan
inscriptions, explainswhyasyndetonin ig i3 105 is morecommon than in other
legal inscriptions which contain a number of separate provisions on the same
topic or are of a similar length.
description of the action one must not carry out without the assembly of the people, as in
the example from ig i3 14. See also ig i3 40 9–10, ig i3 65 21–22, ig i3 70 5–6, ig i3 157 9–10.
65
Examples of this can be found in inscriptions from the late 6th and early 5th century such
as ig i3 1, 5, 34, and 36.
66
“These laws need not have all been originally enacted at the same time,” but no particular
explanation for this is provided. Osborne—Rhodes 2017: 512.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

rewriting the law
251
References
Alaura, Silvia 2016, ProverbsandRhetoricalStrategiesin§7’of theHittiteInstructions
for Priests and Temple Personnel (cth 264), in Š. Velhartická (ed.), Audias fabulas
veteres. Anatolian Studies in Honor of Jana Součková-Siegelová, Leiden: Brill: 1–15.
doi: https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004312616_002
Archi, Alfonso 1968, Sulla formazione del testo delle leggi ittite, “Studi Micenei ed
Egeo-Anatolici” 6: 54–89.
Biber, Douglas 1994, An Analytical Framework for Register Studies, in E. Finegan—
D. Biber (eds.), Sociolinguistic perspectives on register, Oxford: Oxford University
Press: 31–56.
Biber, Douglas 1995, Dimensions of register variation: a cross-linguistic comparison,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Carruba, Onofrio 1962, Review of J. Friedrich 1959, Die hethitischen Gesetze, “Kraty-
los” 7: 155–160.
CHD = Güterbock, Hans G.—Hoffner, Harry A. (eds.), 1980—, The Hittite dic-
tionary of the Oriental Institute of the University of Chicago, Chicago: Oriental Insti-
tute of the University of Chicago.
Denniston, John D. 1960, Greek prose style, Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Denniston, John D.—Dover, Kenneth J. 19542, The Greek particles, Oxford: Clar-
endon Press.
Dobias-Lalou, Catherine 2017, Inscriptions of Greek Cyrenaica: GreekVerse Inscrip-
tions of Cyrenaica, doi: https://doi.org/10.6092/UNIBO/IGCYRGVCYR
ElviraAstoreca,Natalia2016,Theuseof theimperativeinAtheniandecrees,Leiden
University dissertation. Retrieved from https://openaccess.leidenuniv.nl/handle/18
87/42889
Gagarin, Michael 1982, The Organization of the Gortyn Law Code, “Greek, Roman
and Byzantine Studies” 23/2: 129–146.
Gagarin, Michael—Perlman, Paula 2016, The laws of Ancient Crete c. 650–400
bce, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Goetze, Albrecht 1928, Das Hethiter-Reich: Seine Stellung zwischen Ost und West,
Leipzig: J.C. Hinrichs.
Gordin, Shai 2015, Hittite scribal circles: scholarly tradition and writing habits, Wies-
baden: Harrassowitz Verlag.
Graham, Alexander J. 1960, The Authenticity of the Opkion των οικιστηρων of
Cyrene, “The Journal of Hellenic Studies” 80: 94–111. https://doi.org/10.2307/628379
Guinan, Ann K. 2014, Laws and Omens: Obverse and Inverse, in J. Fincke (ed.), Divin-
ation in the Ancient Near East, Winona Lake, Indiana: Eisenbrauns: 105–122.
Güterbock, Hans G. 1954, Authority and Law in the Hittite Kingdom, “Journal of the
American Oriental Society” 16–24.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

252
shields
Hiltunen, Risto 1990, Chapters on legal English: aspects past and present of the lan-
guage of the law, Helsinki: Suomalainen Tiedeakatemia, Academic Bookstore.
Hoffner, Harry A. 1997, The laws of the Hittites: a critical edition, Leiden: Brill.
Hoffner, Harry A.—Melchert, H. Craig 2008, A grammar of the Hittite lan-
guage, Winona Lake, Indiana: Eisenbrauns.
ic = Guarducci, Margherita 1935–1950, Inscriptiones Creticae, 4 vols, Rome: Libre-
ria dello Stato.
ig i3 = Lewis, David M.—Jeffery, Lilian H.—Erxleben, Eberhard—Hallof,
Klaus (eds.) 1967, Inscriptiones Graecae, Vol. i. Inscriptiones Atticae Euclidis anno
anteriores, Editio tertia, Berlin: De Gruyter.
Jones, A. Hugo M. 1975, Athenian democracy, Oxford: Blackwell.
Kitazumi, Tomoki 2019, Typologies of setting paragraph dividers in the Hittite texts, in
Y. Hazırlayan—A. Süel (eds.), Acts of the ixth International Congress of Hittitology,
Çorum, September 08–14, 2014, Ankara: Uyum Ajans: Vol. i, 417–458.
Kloekhorst, Alwin 2011, Accentuation and Poetic Meter in Hittite, in M. Hutter—
S. Hutter-Braunsar (eds.), Hethitische Literatur: Überlieferungsprozesse, Textstruk-
turen, Ausdrucksformen und Nachwirken; Akten des Symposiums vom 18. bis 20. Feb-
ruar 2010 in Bonn, Münster: Ugarit-Verlag: 157–176.
Meiggs, Russell—Lewis, David M. 1969, A selection of Greek historical inscriptions
to the end of the fifth century b.c., Oxford: Clarendon.
Melchert, H. Craig 1998, Poetic Meter and Phrasal Stress in Hittite, in L. Oliver—
H.C. Melchert—J.H. Jasanoff (eds.), Mír curad: studies in honor of Calvert Watkins,
Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenschaft der Universität Innsbruck: 483–494.
Melchert, H. Craig 2009, Discourse Conditioned Use of Hittite -ma, in E. Rieken—
P. Widmer (eds.), Pragmatische Kategorien: Form, Funktion und Diachronie: Akten
der Arbeitstagung der Indogermanischen Gesellschaft vom 24. bis 26. September 2007
in Marburg, Wiesbaden: Reichert: 187–195.
Mouton, Alice 2007, Rêveshittites:contributionàunehistoireetuneanthropologiedu
rêve en Anatolie ancienne, Leiden: Brill.
Mouton, Alice 2016, Rituels, mythes et prières Hittites, Paris: Les Éditions du Cerf.
van Ophuijsen, Johannes M. 1993, οῦν, ἀρά, δή, τοίνυν: The linguistic articulation of
arguments in Plato’s Phaedo, in C.M.J. Sicking,—J.M. van Ophuijsen (eds.),Two stud-
ies in Attic particle usage: Lysias and Plato, Leiden: Brill: 67–164.
Osborne, Robin—Rhodes, Peter J. (eds.) 2017, Greek Historical Inscriptions 478–
404bc, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Rhodes, Peter J.—Lewis, David M. 1997, The decrees of the Greek states, Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Rieken, Elisabeth 2000. Die partikeln -a, -i̯a, -ma im Althethitischen und das Akkado-
gramm Ú, in M. Ofitsch—C. Zinko (eds.), 125 Jahre Indo-Germanistik in Graz: Fest-
band anlässlich des 125jährigen Bestehens der Forschungseinrichtung ‘Indogerman-
istik’ an der Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz, Graz: Leykam: 411–420.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

rewriting the law
253
Robertson, Noel 1976, False Documents at Athens: Fifth-Century History and Fourth-
Century Publicists, “Historical Reflections / Réflexions Historiques” 3/1: 3–25.
Ryan, Francis X. 1994, The Original Date of the δη̂μος πληθύων Provisions of ig i3 105,
“The Journal of Hellenic Studies” 114: 120–134. https://doi.org/10.2307/632737
seg = Supplementum Epigraphicum Graecum.
Smyth, Herbert W. 1956, Greek Grammar, Cambridge (MA): Harvard University
Press.
Sternemann, Reinhard 1965a, Temporale und konditionale Nebensätze des Hethit-
ischen (1. Teil), “Mitteilungen Des Instituts Für Orientforschung” 11: 231–274.
Sternemann, Reinhard 1965b, Temporale und konditionale Nebensätze des Hethit-
ischen (2. Teil), “Mitteilungen Des Instituts Für Orientforschung” 11: 377–415.
Stroud, Ronald S. 1968, Drakon’sLawonhomicide, Berkeley: University of California
Press.
Tischler, Johann 1991, Hethitisches etymologisches Glossar, Teil iii Lieferung 8, Inns-
bruck: Institut für Sprachen und Literaturen der Universität Innsbruck.
Volonaki, Eleni 2001, The Republication of the Athenian Laws in the Last Decade of
the Fifth Century b.c., “Dike” 4: 137–168.
Walbank, Michael B. 1978, Athenian proxenies of the fifth century, b.c., Toronto:
Samuel Stevens.
Zorman, Marina 2017, Areal features of Hittite conditionals, “Diachronica” 34/2: 253–
277.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Elizabeth Tucker, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_012
chapter 10
Lexical Variation in Young Avestan: the Problem of
the ‘Ahuric’ and ‘Daevic’ Vocabularies Revisited
Elizabeth Tucker
The Young Avestan language exhibits a striking example of lexical variation,
which has been noted and debated by scholars for more than a century and a
half.*To put it simply, some areas of theYoung Avestan core vocabulary consist
of double terms, for instance two sets of nouns for parts of the body or two sets
of verbs for moving and speaking.
The names for these lexical variants ‘Ahuric’ and ‘Daevic’ derive on the one
hand from the name of Zarathushtra’s god Ahura Mazdā (cf. Avestan common
nounahura-‘lord’,Vedicásura-‘lord’1),ontheotherfromAvestandaēuua-‘false
god’, (cf. Old Persian daiva- ‘false god’,2 but Vedic devá-, Latin deus, etc. ‘god’).
These labels go back at least to Ferdinand Justi’s Handbuch der Zendsprache of
1864, and they are enshrined in the individual lemmata of Bartholomae’s 1904
Altiranisches Wörterbuch. The terminology arose from the prevailing 19th cen-
tury opinion that the sacred language of the Avesta has a linguistic reflection of
Zoroastrian dualism.3This was succinctly stated as follows by James Darmester
(1892–1893, i: 93–94, note 74):
*
I am grateful to all the organisers of the 2018 Pisa and Oxford conferences entitled ‘Variation
and Contact in the Ancient Indo-European languages: between Linguistics and Philology’ for
their invitation to participate. My contribution in Oxford represented a much revised version
of papers delivered at the 225th Meeting of the American Oriental Society in New Orleans in
March 2015 and at an Ancient India and IranTrust workshop, Cambridge, in April 2015. Mem-
bers of the audience in Oxford, Cambridge and New Orleans made valuable comments from
whichthiswrittenversionhasgreatlybenefitted.InadditionIacknowledgethecontributions
and corrections of two anonymous reviewers.
1 In the Ṛgveda ásura- is a title of some individual gods such as Varuṇa and Agni; only in later
Vedic texts are ásuras (in the plural) supernatural beings who are hostile to the gods.
2 In all Middle and New Iranian languages the inherited Indo-European word means ‘demon’.
Thefirstelementof someProperNamessuchasSogdian Dēwāštīč (δyw’štyc)ismoreplausibly
interpreted as an Indo-Aryan loan with the sense ‘god’rather than a survival of the prehistoric
Indo-Iranian meaning in Iranian.
3 The older literature on Zoroastrian dualism, and more recent opinions, is reviewed by Ah-
madi (2015). Cf. also the collection of papers in Swennen (ed., 2015).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

lexical variation in young avestan
255
“L’Avesta, reflétant le dualisme du système religieux dans le détail du
lexique, a deux mots différents pour le mȇme acte ou le mȇme objet, suivant
qu’il s’agit d’un ȇtre ohrmazdéen ou d’un ȇtre ahrimanien.”
In other words, Young Avestan employs a different lexeme according to
whether something belongs—in the dualistic system of early Zoroas-
trianism—to the good creation of Ohrmazd (Av Ahura Mazdā-) or to the
opposing evil creation represented by the demons (Av daēuua- ‘false god’) led
by Ahriman (YAv aŋra mainiiu-). Some of the oppositions that were regularly
citedby19thcenturyscholars(e.g.Justi1864,Darmesteter1892–1893,Jack-
son 1898: 627–628) are shown in the table below:
‘head’
‘eye’
‘ear’
‘mouth’
‘hand’
‘foot’
ahuric
vaγδana-
dōiθra-
uši-
āh-, staman-
zasta-
pād-/pad-
daevic
kamǝrǝδa-
aši-
karǝna-
zafar-/zafan-
gauu(a)-
zbaraθa-
‘man’
‘woman’
‘son’
‘house’
‘army’
‘smell’
ahuric
nar-
nāirī-/nāirikā-
puθra-
nmāna-
spāδa-
baoδi-
daevic
mairiia-
jahī- / jahikā-
hūnu-
gǝrǝδa-
haēnā-
gaṇti-
‘go’
‘run’
‘fly’
‘speak’
‘eat’
‘cut’
‘die’
‘be born’
ahuric
i-, gam-
tak-
vaz-
mrauu-
xvar-
θβarǝs-
raēθ-
zan-
vaš-
daevic
zbar-
duuar-
pat-
dauu-
gah-
karǝt-
mar-
hū-
drauu-
From a linguistic point of view, it is a limited type of diglossia that does not
makemuchsenseintermsof semanticfields:therearevariantsforseveralparts
of the body and for humans and their activities, but why in addition are there
two nouns for ‘house’ or ‘army’ or ‘smell’ (with no other traces of diglossia in
these semantic areas)?
However, such lexical contrasts are used to striking effect in some Young
Avestan passages where repetition in the narrative is built up around the
variants. For instance, in Haδōxt Nask 2 the account of the fate of the truth-
follower’s soul immediately after death is followed by a parallel account
employing daevic terms for what happens to the soul of the lie-follower:
ahuric para. iriθiieiti vs. daevic auua.miriieite ‘dies’
vaγδana- vs. kamǝrǝδa- ‘head’
nišhiδaiti vs. haṇduuaraiti ‘approaches’
mraot̰vs. adauuata ‘spoke’, etc.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

256
tucker
The Zamyād Yašt description (Yt 19.47–50) of the contest for the Xvarənah
‘the (Kingly) Glory’ between Ahura Mazdā’s fire and the daevic dragon Aži
Dahāka contains an even more elaborate example. Here the moves and threats
of the two opponents are described in identical sequence save for the differ-
ences in the lexicon:4
(1)
Yt 19.47 aδāt̰ fraš́a hąm.rāzaiiata ātarš mazdā̊ ahurahe uiti auuaθa
maŋhānō: aētat̰xvarənō haṇgərəfšāne yat̰axvarətəm. āat̰hē paskāt̰fradu-
uarat̰ažiš θrizafā̊ duždaēnō uiti zaxšaθrəm daomnō:
‘Then the fire of Ahura Mazdā went straight ahead thinking thus as fol-
lows: “I will take possession of this unseizable Glory.” And behind him
ran the three-mouthed dragon of the evil religion speaking a threat as
follows:’
19.48 iṇja auuat̰ haṇdaēsaiiaŋvha ātarš mazdā̊ ahurahe: yezi aētat̰ niiās-
ā̊ŋhe yat̰ axvarətəm frā θβąm paiti apāθa⟨iieni⟩nōit̰ apaiia uzraocaiiāi
ząm paiti ahuraδātąm θrāθāi aṣ̌ahe gaēθanąm. aδa ātarš zasta paiti apa
.gəuruuaiiat̰.
‘“Inja, you take note of that you Fire of Ahura Mazdā. If you reach out for
this which is unseizable I shall make you ?? forth, afterwards you will not
be able to blaze up on the Ahura-created earth to protect the creatures of
Truth.” Then Fire drew away his hands again.’
19.49aδāt̰fraš́ahąm.duuarat̰ažišθrizafā̊duždaēnōuitiauuaθamaŋhānō:
aētat̰ xvarənō haṇgərəfšāne yat̰ axvarətəm. āat̰ hē paskāt̰ hąm.rāzaiiata
ātarš mazdā̊ ahurahe uiti vacə̄biš aojanō:
‘Thenthethree-moutheddragonof theevilreligionranforward,thinking
as follows: “I will take possession of this unseizable Glory.” Then behind
him the Fire of Ahura Mazdā went straight ahead, speaking in words as
follows:’
19.50 tiṇja auuat̰haṇdaēsaiiaŋva aže θrizafəm dahāka: yezi aētat̰niiāsāͦŋ-
heͦ yat̰ axvarətəm frā θβąm zadaŋha paiti uzuxšāne zafarə paiti uzrao-
4 Thereiseventheinterestinghintfromthedifferentexclamationsinja/tinjathatthetwomyth-
ological characters speak variant forms of the same language.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

lexical variation in young avestan
257
caiieni. nōit̰ apaiia afrapatāi ząm paiti ahuraδātąm mahrkāi aṣ̌ahe
gaēθanąm. aδa ažiš gauua paiti apa.gəuruuaiiat̰…
‘“Tinja, take note of that, three-mouthed Aži Dahāka. If you reach out
for this which is unseizable, I will rise forth towards you towards your
buttocks, I will blaze up towards your mouth, afterwards you will not
be able to fly forth to the Ahura-created earth to destroy the creatures
of Truth.” Then the dragon drew away his hands again …,’ (Text and trans-
lation based on Hintze 1994: 249–268, Humbach 1998: 128–130)
The notion of far-reaching Avestan lexical diglossia was bolstered in scholarly
opinion for a long time by some Young Avestan passages from the Vidēvdād
which were considered to show awareness of this linguistic variation. Here
double names, one of which meets with approval, the other of which is con-
demned, are given to animals such as hedgehogs, tortoises and cocks:
Vidēvdād 13.1–2 kat̰ tat̰ dąma spǝṇtō.mainiiǝ̄uš… vīspǝm paiti ušā̊ŋhǝm
ā hū.vaxšāt̰ hazaŋraja aŋrō.mainiiǝ̄uš paiti.jasaiti. āat̰ mraot̰ ahurō
mazdā̊ spānǝm sīždrǝm uruuīsarǝm yim vaŋhāparǝm yim maṣ̌iiāka auui
.dužuuacaŋhō dužakǝm nąma aojaite
‘Which is that creature of the Holy Spirit … comes every morning up until
the rising of the sun killing thousands of the creatures of the Evil Spirit?
And Ahura Mazda said “the timid dog with wide spines, the Vaŋhāpara,
which people of very bad speech call (verb aog-) the Dužaka”.’
Vidēvdād 13.5–6 kat̰ tat̰ dąma aŋrō.mainiiǝ̄uš… vīspǝm paiti ušā̊ŋhǝm
ā hū.vaxšāt̰ hazaŋraja spǝṇtō.mainiiǝ̄uš paiti.jasaiti. āat̰ mraot̰ ahurō
mazdā̊daēumyimzairimiiaŋurǝmspitamazaraθuštrayimmaṣ̌iiākaauui
.dužuuacaŋhō zairimiiākǝm nąma aojaite
‘Which creature of the Evil Spirit … comes every morning up until the
rising of the sun killing thousands of creatures of the Holy Sprit? And
Ahura Mazdā said “the demon Zairimyaŋhura, o Spitamid Zarathushtra,
which people of very bad speech call (verb aog-) Zairimyāka”.’
Vidēvdād 18.14–15 kō asti sraošahe … sraošāuuarǝzō āat̰mraot̰ahurō maz-
dā̊ mǝrǝγō yō parō.darš nąma spitama zaraθuštra yim maṣ̌iiāka auui
.dužuuacaŋhō kahrkatās nąma aojaite. āat̰hō mǝrǝγō vācim baraiti upa
ušā̊ŋhǝm yąm sūrąm
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

258
tucker
‘Who is the priest of Sraoša… then Ahura Mazdā said “It is the bird called
Parō.daršwhichpeopleof verybadspeech(auui.dužuuacaŋhō)call(verb
aog-) Kahrkatāt, o Spitamid Zarathuštra; and this bird raises its voice
towards the strong dawn (3rd part of the night)”.’ (texts and translations
based on Benveniste 1931 and Andrés-Toledo 2016: 282–285)
The animals themselves are firmly assigned to either the good creation of the
Holy Spirit (spəṇta mainiiu-) or the bad creation of the Evil Spirit (aŋra mai-
niiu-), and so the pairs of names are not distinguishing a good hedgehog from
an evil hedgehog, or a good tortoise from an evil tortoise! Rather they have
been taken to show that there were two speech communities which had dif-
ferences in their lexicon and one group was condemned by the other as having
‘bad speech’. It is the speech of the latter which has been supposed to be the
source of all the daevic words in the Avestan lexicon. However, it was poin-
ted out already by Benveniste (1931) that these passages are more likely to
refer to learned priestly speech versus common speech,5 not to ahuric versus
daevic terms.6 In the one case where a Younger Avestan Yašt gives a double
name, one of the two appears to be a euphemistic/ apotropaic name for a
witch:
(5)
Tištrya Yašt (Yt 8.51) auuaŋ́hāi pairikaiiāi… yā dužiiāiriiā yąm maṣ̌iiāka
auui.dužuuacaŋhō huiiāiriiąm nąma aojaite
‘(To withstand) that witch … Bad Harvest which people of very bad
speech call by the name Good Harvest.’
Since the publication of Bartholomae’s Altiranisches Wörterbuch in 1904, with
its carefully constructed lemmata, there has been evidence that the concep-
tion of the two opposing vocabularies does not adequately cover all the facts of
the Avesta. In addition to the synonyms that are involved in contrasts there are
other words of similar meaning which appear neutral, and, even worse, a num-
ber that are capable of changing sides. Hence some 20th century publications
5 For instance, kahrkatāt- (Vd 18.14) appears onomatopoeic like ‘cockadoodledoo’, whereas
parō.darǝs- literally ‘before-seer’ refers to the cock’s apparently divinely inspired foresight
that dawn is about to break. The verb of speaking, aog-, which is used for the people ‘of very
bad speech’ is ahuric or neutral, not dauu- which is normally used for daevic speech.
6 Kellens (1977: 56, n. 3) attempted to revive the notion that the Young Avesta refers to daevic
speech by distinguishing passages where auui.dužuuacaŋhō should be read from those with
simply dužuuacaŋhō. His claim was that only dužuuacaŋhō refers to daevic speech.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

lexical variation in young avestan
259
(e.g. Güntert 1914: 11–12; Toporov 1981: 209–214) replace diglossia by triglos-
sia, postulating a third set of synonyms that could be used for either:
‘head’
‘eye’
‘ear’
‘mouth’
‘go’
‘say’
ahuric
vaγδana-
dōiθra-
uši-
staman-
tak-, car- vaš-
neutral sarah-
cašman- gaoša-
āh-
i-, gam-
aog-, mrauu-
daevic
kamǝrǝδa- aši-
karǝna- zafar- / zafan- duuar-
dauu-
In some respects this picture is more accurate, but the hypothesis of triglossia
has masked inconsistencies in the Avestan evidence that have never been fully
investigated.
Most of the scholarly effort during the 20th century was directed towards
finding a historical linguistic explanation for the contrasting functions. There
was a diachronic problem because in both the daevic and ahuric categories
there were words that are clearly inherited from Indo-Iranian, and in many
cases also from Indo-European; while others, spread over both categories, are
peculiar to Iranian or Avestan alone. No clear diachronic pattern emerges:
Ahuric
e.g. Avestan zasta- ‘hand’: op dasta-, Vedic hásta-, Hittite keššar, Grk.
χείρ
puθra- ‘son’: op puça-, Vedic putrá-, Oscan puklum
vaz- (middle) ‘to fly’: Vedic vah-, váhati, Latin vehor, Grk. ϝεχέτω
zan- ‘to be born’: Vedic jan-, jā́yate, Grk. γίγνομαι, Latin gigno
But Avestan ahuric vaγδana- ‘head’, staman- ‘mouth’, vaš- ‘to speak’ are without
cognates,7 and dōiθra- ‘eye’ is an Avestan neologism built with the inherited
suffix *-tra- on the Indo-Iranian root *dhī- ‘to see, to envisage’.
Daevic
e.g. Avestan aš(i)- ‘eye’: Vedic akṣī́ (dual), Grk. ὄσσε, ocs oči, Latin oculus
hūnu- ‘son’: Ved. sūnú-, Gothic sunus, ocs synь, Lithuanian sūnùs
pat- ‘to fly’: Ved. pat-, pátati, op (ud)apatatā, Grk. πέτομαι, Hitt. pattai-/
patti-
mar- ‘to die’: Ved. mṛ-, mriyáte, op amariyatā ‘died’, Latin morior
7 It is difficult to compare staman- m. ‘mouth’ with Greek στόμα as stāman- would be expec-
ted via Brugmann’s Law. vaš- ‘to speak’ has been linked with verbs of speaking in Balochi and
Ormuri, but these are more likely to continue the more frequent Old Iranian root vac- (cf.
Cheung 2007: 404), and in footnote 30 below an origin via an inner Avestan innovation will
be suggested.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

260
tucker
But Avestan kamǝrǝδa- ‘head’, dauu- ‘to speak’ only have cognates in later
Iranian languages, while zbaraθa- ‘leg’, duuarǝθra- ‘foot/leg’ are Avestan neolo-
gisms derived from Indo-Iranian roots.
In spite of the unclear nature of the Young Avestan evidence and the avail-
able comparisons, a number of diachronic hypotheses for the genesis of the
ahuric/ daevic variants have been proposed, which in most cases envisage a
remote prehistoric background to the synchronically attested distribution of
lexemes.
Frachtenberg (1908) proposed an origin in double vocabularies referring to
humans and animals, with variants similar to French mourir / crever, German
sterben/krepierenfor‘todie’.ButintheAvestathedivideahuric/daevicextends
to the animal kingdom: a dog is an animal of the Good Creation and when it
dies the verb is the same as for humans (raēθ-Vd 5.39, 8.1, 4, versus mar- for evil
beings); vaγδana- is attested for the head of a camel (Yt 14.13), an ahuric animal,
in addition to an ahuric human head.
A suggestion first put forward by Gray (1927: 438–440), and then developed
by Burrow (1973), identified the daevic terms as loanwords from Indo-Aryan,
e.g. karǝna- ‘ear’ and ‘deaf’ (Sanskrit kárṇa-/ karṇá-), aš(i)- ‘eye’ (Sanskrit akṣī́
dual), hūnu- ‘son’ (Sanskrit sūnú-), gǝrǝδa- ‘house’ (Sanskrit gṛhá-), gah- ‘to eat’
(Sanskrit ghas-). They were explained as lexemes used by *daiva-worshipping
Indo-Aryans which contrasted with those used by the ahura-worshipping Ira-
nians. This is a very interesting hypothesis in view of the evidence for Indo-
Aryans, the Mitanni, in the Ancient Near East during the 2nd part of the second
millenniumbce.However,thesupposed‘loanwords’donotshowanyphonolo-
gical features which set them apart from words that were inherited by Avestan
from Indo-Iranian. Nor are they exclusively Indo-Aryan lexemes as some have
cognates in other Iranian languages e.g. Avestan daevic karǝna-, Sogdian krn,
New Persian karr ‘deaf’; Avestan daevic, kamǝrǝδa- ‘head’, Zoroastrian Middle
Persiankamāl,Khotanesekamala‘head,person’,Yidγakyɛmalγo‘skull’;Avestan
daevic gǝrǝδa- ‘house’, Old Persian *gṛda-(or *gṛdya-) ‘household’, reconstruc-
ted from loanwords in Elamite (kurtaš, very frequently attested) and Aramaic
(grd).
Toporov (1981: 209–214), updating Güntert (1914), argued that daevic words,
which have cognates in Sanskrit but not in other Indo-European languages,
continue the colloquial Indo-Iranian language. On the other hand, ahuric
words continue the Indo-European inherited poetic language. Obviously there
is a temptation to see a development similar to the Homeric ‘language of the
gods and language of men’ (see Watkins 1970). But this is extremely diffi-
cult to work out in detail as the cognates of the ahuric words do not always
appear more elevated or poetic, and very few daevic words only have cog-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

lexical variation in young avestan
261
nates in Sanskrit and not in the rest of Indo-European. Moreover, the Vedic
cognates of the daevic words are not noticeably more frequent in the ‘pop-
ular registers’ of the Atharvaveda and rv 10. On the other hand, it will be
argued below that in some cases Vedic usage may provide indications of a
pejorative sense which could have existed in the Indo-Iranian parent lan-
guage.
However, none of the theories outlined above are capable of providing a
full account of all the known Young Avestan evidence. The most apposite com-
ment is that of Watkins (1995: 316, ftn. 7) “the question is complex and still not
settled.”
Younger Avestan passages such as those illustrated above, from the Zamyād
Yašt (ex. (1).) and Haδōxt Nask 2, which show contrasting words in parallel
contexts, are very rare. Throughout the Young Avesta the daevic vocabulary is
easy to recognize as it refers to the villains and, as Toporov emphasised, it is
the marked member of any lexical oppositions. But in identifying the oppos-
ing ahuric terms scholars have often combined contexts from different Young
Avestan texts. Sometimes opposing terms can be identified with certainty from
different passages, e.g. daevic bizǝṇgra- ‘two-legged’ (of aṣ̌əmaoγa- ‘confuser
of Truth, heretic’, Y 9.18, Vd 5.35) and caθβarǝ.zǝṇgra- ‘four-legged’ (of wolves,
Y9.18,Vd 18.38) versus bipaitištāna- ‘two-legged’ (of righteous men and women,
Y 19.8, Vd 15.19) and caθβarǝ.paitištāna- ‘four-legged’ (of the goddess Anāhitā’s
horses Yt 5.131, the cow Y 19.8), but favourable cases such as this are also very
rare and even here there can be complications.8
Thus the conventional lists of ahuric versus daevic vocabulary are to a large
extenttheconcoctionsof modernscholars,culledfromanassortmentof Young
Avestan texts.
What was missed in the early published collections of vocabulary which
have then been used as the basis for historical linguistic reconstructions is
the variability of the vocabulary oppositions from text to text, especially in
the case of the older Young Avestan Yašts. If the different texts which make
up the Young Avesta are considered individually, a series of different contrasts
emerge:
8 There are at least two other words for a daevic leg, or part thereof, which occur outside
compounds: the apparent neologisms zbaraθa- from zbar- ‘to move crookedly’ (Y 9.29), and
duuarəθra- from duuar- ‘to run’ (Yt 11.2): see exx. (7). and (8). In addition there is the problem
that -zəṇgra-/ -zaṇgra- has usually been interpreted as a daevic noun created within Avestan
on the basis of ahuric zəṇga-/ zaṇga- ‘ankle’ (cf. Vedic jáṅghā- f. ‘lower part of leg, shin’),
although the model for such a creation is unclear.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

262
tucker
Nouns
(i) ‘head’
Hōm Yašt
daevic kamǝrǝδa-
: ahuric -sāra-
Yašt 10
kamǝrǝδa-
:
sarah-
Hadōxt 2
kamǝrǝδa-
:
vaγδana-
(ii) ‘woman’
Yašt 17
daevic jahikā-
: ahuric vantā- ‘woman’
Hadōxt 2
jahikā-
:
nāirikā-
Yašt 5
strī-
:
xšaθrī-
Vidēvdād 18
kū.nāirī-
:
nāirikā-
(iii) Verbs of movement
Hōm Yašt
daevic pat-
: ahuric fra-car- or fra-stā-
Yašt 8
pat-
:
ā-i-
Yašt 19.56–64
us-pat-
:
zgad-
Yašt 8
nižduuar-
:
auua-i-
Yašt 5.17
duuar-
:
tak-
Yašt 19.47–50
hąm-duuar- :
hąm-raz-
Yašt 19.40–42
zbar-
:
tak-
(iv) Verbs of speaking
Hōm Yašt, Yašt 19
daevic dauu-
: ahuric aog-, mrauu-
Yašt 17, Vidēvdād 19
dauu-
:
fra-vaš-
It cannot be claimed that all these oppositions are equally valid: when the text
itself lacks parallel passages that employ variant lexemes there is an element
of subjectivity in deciding what contrasts with what. But such text by text pairs
do show why the lists in different modern studies are not exactly the same: it
all depends on which Young Avestan texts the author based his findings. They
also show why there have been such problems explaining the origins of the
supposed ‘two vocabularies’, as there are not two or even three sets of lexical
contrasts but multiple sets. A global explanation which accounts linguistically
for all the oppositions in the same way is simply impossible.9
Although it is the marked member of the lexical oppositions and shows
slightly more consistency across the Young Avesta, the daevic vocabulary itself
9 Previous treatments of the subject have all attempted some sort of overarching linguistic
explanation, but the two most detailed, by Güntert (1914) and Gray (1927), acknowledge that
not every lexical opposition can be accounted for in the same fashion.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

lexical variation in young avestan
263
varies from text to text. This fact is particularly apparent from the words
employed for body parts in what might be called in broad termsYoung Avestan
‘curses’, where a ‘divine being worthy of worship’, a yazata such as Haoma or
Mithra or Sraoša, is asked to hinder the proper functioning of the limbs of evil-
doers. For instance:
(6)
Hōm Yašt (Y 9.28) gǝuruuaiia hē pāδauue zāuuarǝ pairi šē uši vǝrǝnūiδi
skǝṇdǝm šē manō kǝrǝnūiδi
‘Seize the strength from his feet, cover around his ears, cause destruction
to his mind.’
(7)
Hōm Yašt (Y 9.29) mā zbaraθaēibiia fratuiiāͦ, mā gauuaēibiia aiβitūtuiiāͦ,
mā ząm vaēnōit̰ašibiia, mā gąm vaēnōit̰ašibiia
‘Let him not be able to advance with his legs, let him not have strength
for his hands, let him not see the earth with his eyes, let him not see the
cow with his eyes.’
(8)
Srōš Yašt (Yt 11.2) (Sraošǝm yazamaide)… druuatō druuatiiāͦsca…aši ⟨uši⟩
karǝna gauua duuarǝθra zafarǝ … pairi.uruuaēštǝm.
‘(Sraoša we worship) … best at crushing the eyes, ⟨ears⟩, ears, hands, feet
(legs?), mouth … of the male and female lie-follower.’
(9)
Mihr Yašt (Yt 10.48) aθra narąm miθrō.drująm apąš gauuō darǝzaiieiti
pairi daēma vāraiieiti, apa gaoša taošaiieiti
‘There he (Mithra) binds the hands of the men who break the contract
behind them, he turns off their sight, he deafens their ears.’
In this last ‘curse’gauua- ‘hand’10 is consistently daevic in other Young Avestan
contexts (see exx. (1)., (7)., (8).). daēman- is daevic in the Yašt to Vǝrǝθraγna (Yt
14.56), but later in the Mihr Yašt (Yt 10.107) it is ahuric. gaoša- ‘ear’ is normally
ahuric but it is also used in another Mihr Yašt ‘curse’, which is even more out of
step in its vocabulary:
10
Kellens (1974: 331–332) explains the form gauuō as a thematic acc. pl. (transmitted in place
of *gauuə̄) because of clearly thematic gauuaēibiia at Y 9.29.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

264
tucker
(10) Yt 10.23=10.63 apa aēšąm bāzuuāͦ aojō tūm grantō xšaiiamnō barahi apa
pāδaiiāͦ zāuuarǝ apa cašmanāͦ sūkǝm apa gaošaiiāͦ sraoma
‘When angered you (Mithra) are able to carry away the force of their (the
contract- breakers’) arms, the strength of their feet, the clearness of their
eyes, the hearing of their ears.’
pad-/ pād- (pāδaiiāͦ thematic genitive dual) is very occasionally daevic else-
where (cf. Y 9.28, ex. (6). above), but uγra.bāzu- ‘strong armed’, baēuuarǝ
.cašman- ‘having ten thousand eyes’, hazaŋra.gaoša- ‘having a thousand ears’,
srut̰.gaoša- ‘having hearing ears’ are epithets of Mithra himself in this same
longYašt! It appears that in ex. (10). the daevic vocabulary convention is simply
ignored.11
Much attention has been paid to Young Avestan passages where there are
accumulations of daevic vocabulary: for example, the description of the three-
mouthed, three-headed, six-eyed dragon killed by Thraētaona in the Hōm Yašt
(Yasna 9.8). However, less attention has been paid to passages where it is
strangely absent: for example, in the ZamyādYašt (Yt 19.41) the Gandarǝβa (Skt.
Gandharva) is characterised by daevic lexemes (apatat̰vīzafārō ‘flew with his
mouth open’), but in the Ardvisur Yašt (Yt 5.38) his home is not daevic (ahuric
nmāna-, not gǝrǝδa-!).
In a real diglossic situation one would expect the use of daevic vocabulary
to be more or less mandatory when the forces of evil are mentioned, but this is
often not the case.The ZamyādYašt (Yašt 19) makes great use of daevic vocabu-
lary(see,forinstance,theextendedpassageYt19.47–50,ex.(1).),butabruptlyin
its last section about the Saviour, the Saošiiaṇt Astvat̰.ərəta, the daevic vocab-
ulary stops and the most evil powers in Zoroastrianism are characterised by
a series of epithets with prefix duš- (cognate with Sanskrit duṣ- and Greek
δυσ-):
(11) Yt 19.95–96 frānamāite aēšmō xruuidruš dušxvarənāͦ. “Wrath of the
bloody club, of bad glory will flee.”
11
The internal contradictions within the Mihr Yašt itself with regard to the ahuric/daevic
lexicon raise interesting questions about the composition of this 143-stanza poem. Do
they provide additional evidence for the work of different composers or at least different
oral traditions that have been amalgamated? (See Skjærvø 1994 for a general discussion
about the creation of such Yašts).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

lexical variation in young avestan
265
vanāt̰aṣ̌aakąmdrujimyąmdušciθrəmtəmaŋhaēnīm.“He(the Saošiiaṇt-)
will defeat through Truth the Evil Lie, who (is) of bad lineage, (is) made
of darkness.”
frānamāite dužuuarštāuuarǝš aŋrō mańiiuš axšaiiamnō “Aŋra Mainyu
the doer of bad deeds will flee, being without power.”
A striking literary effect is achieved through these repetitions of duš-/ duž- at
the close of the Zamyād Yašt. There are no inhibitions in other Young Avestan
compositions about attaching this prefix to ahuric or neutral terms: in the late
Ardabehesht Yašt (Yt 3) the normally ahuric neologism dōiθra- ‘eye’, literally
‘instrument of seeing’ (root dī- ‘to see’), becomes ‘the Evil Eye’ when prefixed
with duž—(duždōiθra- Yt 3.8, 11; duždōiθra. duždōiθrō.təma- ‘the most evil-
eyed one of the evil-eyed’ Yt 3.15. Contrast aγaši- ‘the Evil Eye’ Vd 20.3, 7 with
the daevic word for ‘eye’).
A further example where the lack of daevic vocabulary merits comment
involves one of the most picturesque conflicts between good and evil in the
ancient Yašts, the battle between the rain-bringing star Tištrya and the Demon
of Drought Apaoša. The two antagonists take the form of horses, and the con-
trastsintheappearanceof thetwohorsesarebeautifullyconveyedbylinguistic
means, but without, apart from the initial verbs of movement (ahuric auuāiti,
daevic nižduuaraiti ‘goes down’), ahuric/daevic lexical contrasts. This Tištrya
Yašt passage starts:
(12) Yt 8.20 āat̰ paiti auuāiti, spitama zaraθuštra, tištriia raēuuāͦ xvarǝnaŋvāͦ
auui zraiiō vourukaṣ̌ǝm aspahe kǝhrpa aurušahe srīrahe zairi.gaošahe
zaraniiō.aiβiδānahe.
Yt 8.21 ā.dim paiti.yąš nižduuaraiti daēvō yō apaošō aspahe kǝhrpa sāma-
he kauruuahe kauruuō.gaošahe kauruuahe kauruuō.barǝšahe kauruuahe
kauruuō.dūmahe daγahe aiβiδātō.tarštōiš.
Then Tištrya the rich the glorious goes down, O Spitamid Zarathuštra, to
the Vourukaṣ̌a Sea in the form of a beautiful white horse with golden ears
and a golden bridle.
Opposing him the Demon Apaoša runs down in the form of a mangy
black horse, with mangy ears, mangy, with mangy back, mangy, with
mangy tail, bald, shying at its bridle’.
The cases outlined above where there is a failure to employ daevic vocabu-
lary and the evil creation is characterised (if at all) by other linguistic devices
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

266
tucker
all point in the same direction: daevic vocabulary and daevic/ahuric lexical
oppositionsareamatterof stylisticchoicebyindividualoralcomposers.Rather
than any sort of linguistic diglossia or triglossia, the wider Young Avestan evid-
ence reveals a literary convention of differentiating the good and evil creations
by linguistic means, and the use of lexical oppositions is just one (albeit the
most frequent) of these means. The exact choice of lexemes, and the vocab-
ulary oppositions thus created must, at least in so far as the ancient Yašts are
concerned, have been worked out by individual composers or built up in the
various strands of oral transmission.
In Young Avestan texts which are generally regarded as late compositions,
that is the shorter Yašts which are often concocted from other Yašt material,
and especially in the Vidēvdād ‘the Law which Sets the Demons Apart’, the
daevic/ahuric lexical contrasts have become more stable, and the same set of
lexemes occur from text to text. The following table shows the restricted set of
vocabulary oppositions which are used consistently:
Ahuric
vaγδana-
nmāna-
nar-
nāiri(kā-)
raēθ-
vaz-
Daevic
kamǝrǝδa-
gǝrǝδa-
mairiia-
jahi(kā-)
mar-
pat-
Meaning
‘head’
‘house’
‘man’
‘woman’
‘to die’
‘to run, fly’
It is above all the Vidēvdād that has created the impression that there is a rigid
system of oppositions between two vocabularies, but its daevic vocabulary is
in fact quite limited and it involves some stereotyped pairings with verbs and
their subjects:
hąm.duuar- ‘to run together’ of daēvas
duuar- ‘to run’ of druj- ‘the Lie’ (preverbs apa-, upa-, pairi-; but apa-
duuar- is used of other evil beings in imprecations)
present dvąsa- from dvan- ‘to fly’ (preverbs apa-, upa-, fra-) of druj-nasu-
‘the corpse witch’
pat- ‘to fly, to move rapidly’ of animals and adolescent humans.
Isuggestthathereweareseeingtheendproductof aconventionof theAvestan
compositional tradition which earlier was quite fluid and could be realised in
different ways. Or if theVidēvdād is not a relatively late Avestan text but merely
apoorlypreservedAvestantext,12thegreaterrigidityintheuseof lexicaloppos-
itions may be conditioned by its different literary genre. Its very title ‘The Law
12
See Skjærvø (2007: 112–116) for arguments in favour of this view. The often repeated one
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

lexical variation in young avestan
267
which Sets the Demons Apart’ shows that here differentiation between good
and evil is intrinsically important to understanding the meaning.
However, even in this part of the Young Avesta, a number of lexemes which
are normally cited as daevic also occur in what appears to be their old inherited
value without any pejorative connotation.
(13) Vidēvdād 3.33 vīspō aŋhuš xvāṣ̌e juuaiti axvāṣ̌e framiriieite
‘All life lives by eating, dies through not eating’.
(14) Vidēvdād 5.12 aētaδa hē uzbaoδąm tanūm nidaiθiiąn… vīspəm ā ahmāt̰yat̰
frā vaiiō patąn
‘Here they should deposit his lifeless body … for all the time until birds fly
forth (at the coming of spring)’
These two Vidēvdād examples involving the inherited verb ‘to die’ and pat- ‘to
fly’ of birds perhaps contain old gnomic expressions, which were passed down
in the oral tradition before the establishment of rigid lexical conventions.
Occasional non-daevic employment of words that are usually daevic is also
encountered in the more ancient long Yašts. For instance, haēnā- which nor-
mally means ‘enemy army, army of Lie-followers’ is used in the inherited sense
‘missile’ in a passage of the Ardvīsūr Yašt. This is the most frequent meaning of
its Vedic cognate sénā- in the Ṛgveda (rv 2.33.11, 5.30.9, 7.3.4, etc.), in addition
to ‘army’ which is continued in Classical Sanskrit:
(15) Yt 5.120 yeŋ́he caθβārō aršāna hąm.tašat̰ahurō mazdāͦ vātǝmca vārǝmca
maēγǝmca fiiaŋhumca … yeŋ́he auuauuat̰ haēnanąm nauua satāiš haza-
ŋrǝmca
‘… whose (the goddess Anāhitā’s) four stallions Ahura Mazdā fashioned,
the wind, the rain, the mist and the hail … of whom there are as many
missiles as one thousand and nine hundred’.13
that Avestan was already a dead language when the Vidēvdād was assembled is clearly
untenable.
13
Two further examples from the Vidēvdād vis à vis the old Yašts may be added. karəna- is
normally considered a daevic noun, or rather two nouns meaning respectively ‘daevic ear’
(Yt 11.2) and ‘deaf’ (Yt 5.93), corresponding toVedic kárṇa- and karṇá- (cf. Bartholomae
1904: 455). But, as pointed out already by Gray (1927: 429), karəna- also occurs in composi-
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

268
tucker
If hapax legomena are excluded only a small strangely assorted group of lex-
emes are applied exclusively to daevic beings across the whole Young Avesta.
These consistent words are:
aš(i)- ‘eye’
kamǝrǝδa- ‘head’
jahi(kā)- ‘harlot, evil woman’
mairiia- ‘villain, evil man’
hūnu- ‘son’ and hū- ‘give birth’
gah- ‘to eat’
dauu- ‘to speak’
duuar- / drauu- ‘to run’
To these may be added four lexemes which are frequent as daevic terms, and
are only used in a non-daevic sense once or twice:
haēnā- ‘army’
mar- ‘to die’
pat- ‘to fly, to move quickly’
zbar- ‘to move crookedly, to zig zag’
If my argument is correct and the words which have been considered to rep-
resent daevic vocabulary are to some extent the result of lexical choices made
by individual composers, which then helped to build a more fixed set of daevic
lexemes in the later Avesta, we may wonder what guided the earlier Avestan
composers in their choices?
Avestan inherited an extensive lexicon from Indo-Iranian, and this must
have contained many synonyms or near synonyms just as the Vedic lexicon
does. There are pieces of evidence to suggest that the early Young Avestan
composers may have done no more than select lexemes with a less favour-
able/slightly pejorative meaning to characterise daevic beings. At least four
Rgvedic words which have a mildly pejorative flavour correspond to invariably
daevic lexemes in Avestan:
tion as the second element in the name of a sacred tree, gaokarəna- ‘ox-eared’ (Yt 1.30, Vd
20.4).
zbar- is a daevic verb of movement (Yt 15.50, Yt 19.42), and zbaraθa- the leg of an evil
being, but zbarah- n. appears to refer to a geographical feature atVd 19.4, 11, perhaps a ‘hill’
(Bartholomae 1904: 1699) or a bend in a river (Redard 2021: 40).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

lexical variation in young avestan
269
márya- ‘young blood, young man’ (rv 7.56.16, 10.30.5, etc.): YAv mairiia-
‘villain, daevic man’
hasrā́- ‘harlot’ (rv 1.124.7 of Uṣas in simile!) ~ YAv jahi(kā-) ‘harlot,
daevic woman’
ghas- ‘to feed’ (sometimes of wild animals feeding, e.g. rv 10.95.15 of
wolves, śs 11.2.2 vighasá- ‘gnawing apart’ of flies and birds feeding on
corpses): YAv gah- ‘to feed’ (daevic)
vṛ́kadvaras- ‘having the gait of a wolf’ (rv 2.30.4): YAv duuar- ‘to run’
(daevic).14
hvṛ- hvárate ‘go crookedly, to zig zag’ (rv 1.141.1, 10.16.80): YAv zbar- ‘to
move crookedly’ (daevic)
sū- ‘to give birth’ is used in the rv of human females and animals,15 and
belongs to a lower register than jan- (Avestan ahuric zan-): Avestan
hū-, hūnu-.16
The derogatory use by Darius of some Old Persian words may be indicative of
a shift in their meaning in prehistoric Iranian vis à vis the Indo-Iranian parent
language, or it could be a case of parallel drift in both Avestan and Old Per-
sian.
op hainā- ‘enemy army’: YAv haēnā- ‘enemy army, daevic army’
op ud-pat- (middle) ‘rebel, rise up’: YAv us-pat- ‘rise up’ (daevic)
op zurah- ‘evil’, zurakara- ‘evil-doer’: YAv. zbar- ‘move crookedly’
(daevic)17
Güntert’s detailed study dating from 1914 of the cognates within Iranian needs
toberepeatedtakingaccountof thewealthof MiddleIranianevidencethathas
become known and interpreted since then. In one or two cases the cognates of
daevic words have a pejorative meaning in later Iranian languages:
14
Young Avestan neologisms such as duuarǝθra lit. ‘two instruments of running, daevic
legs/feet’ appear to have been created on the basis of such inherited roots with pejorative
sense. Likewise zbaraθa-.
15
Except at rv 3.38.5 where ásūta is used to indicate the paradox of an androgynous creator
bull.
16
Because of its derivation inherited hūnu- may have appeared to be ‘son, Mummy’s boy’
versus puθra.
17
op marīka- (DNb 50, 55, 59) appears simply tomean ‘young man’ (Schmitt 1999: 129–131),
but its morphology differs from that of Avestan mairiia-, Vedic márya-.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

270
tucker
Sogdian krn, Khotanese kārra, New Persian karr ‘deaf’: YAv karǝna-
‘daevic ear’, and ‘deaf’, or ‘with deformed ears’(?)18
Awromani Kurdish duắy /du- ‘to talk nonsense, prattle’, Khufi war-δaw-
/ war-δawt , Sariqoli war-δɛw-/ war-δɛwd ‘to mumble, babble’, Shughni
(dialect of Bajui) warδawax̌ ‘babbling, prattle’ (see Cheung 2007:
65): YAv dauu- ‘to speak’ (daevic).
But in at least one case, kamǝrǝδa- ‘head’, Middle Iranian evidence has made
theAvestandaevicmeaningmoredifficulttounderstand.WhereasZoroastrian
Middle Persian kamāl continues the Avestan daevic sense, there is no indic-
ation of a pejorative meaning from Khotanese kamala ‘head, person’, even
less so from the Bactrian divine name καμιρδο.19 The long-standing etymology
of Avestan kamǝrǝδa- analyses it as -mǝrǝδa- cognate with Sanskrit mūrdhan-
‘head’, Old English molda ‘top of head’, with a pejorative prefix ka- (Bartho-
lomae 1904: 440).20 Since the inherited Indo-Iranian pejorative prefix ka- was
infrequent21 possibly the noun’s original morphology quickly became opaque
in Iranian languages which were not influenced by the Avestan usage, and so it
became a normal word for ‘head’ without evil connotations.
Obviously I am applying similar or, in some cases, exactly the same reas-
oning to the selection of these lexemes to describe daevic beings as has been
proposed by previous scholars, particularly by Güntert (1914) and by Toporov
18
The twoYoung Avestan occurrences of karǝna- appear to correspond respectively toVedic
kárṇa-‘ear’andkarṇá-‘long-eared’.Themeaning‘deaf’issuggestedforthelatterbyitslater
Iranian cognates (Sogdian krn, Khotanese kārra, New Persian karr ‘deaf’). But since karṇá-
means‘long-eared’intheṚgvedaandAtharvaveda(rv2.34.3,sś5.13.9=ps8.2.8,ps15.23.1),
and in Yt 5.93 karǝna- occurs in a list of people who are forbidden to participate in the
offerings to Anāhita because of bodily defects, a meaning ‘with prominent/deformed ears’
is equally likely.
19
I am grateful to Nicholas Sims-Williams for pointing out to me the particular problem of
this Bactrian divine name. Yidγa kyɛmalγo ‘skull’ could also have developed from a noun
‘head’ of neutral meaning.
20
See Mayrhofer 1986–2000: 368 on the loss of the laryngeal in composition from Indo-
Iranian * mṛHdhan-.
21
Some demon names in the Vidēvdād, kaxužī-, kaxvarǝδa-/ kaxvarǝiδī- may also show this
pejorativeprefixka-,butthesecondelementisunclearinbothcases.InVediconlykapūya-
‘stinking awfully’ from the Chandogya Upaniṣad seems quotable for ka- (Wackernagel-
Debrunner ii,1: 82–84), but this could be because ka- was early on replaced by kat- or
kim- in the Indic branch (e.g. rv 5.32.6 katpayá- ‘swelling horribly’). Only one example of
the pejorative prefix ku- is attested in Avestan (kūnāirī- Vd 8.31,32), but there are more in
earlyVedic,e.g.kúyava-‘bringingbadharvest’(rv2.19.6,7.19.2,etc.),kunakhín-‘havingbad
nails’ (śs 7.65.3), kúmanas- ‘ill-humoured’ (ms 4.2.13). This pejorative prefix may have also
been more widespread in some Eastern Old Iranian dialects, eclipsing inherited ka-.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

lexical variation in young avestan
271
(1981).ButsinceIviewitasagradualdevelopmentreflectingthetastesof differ-
entcomposers,andtheirliterarystyles,itdoesnotseemnecessarytotakea‘one
size fits all approach’ and propose the same linguistic history for every daevic
lexeme. The synchronic picture in the Young Avesta is complex and unstable,
with the exception of the Vidēvdād and the later Yašts, and so the diachronic
background likewise has to be reconstructed word by word.
I will conclude with an additional tentative hypothesis about the origin of
this literary convention in theYoung Avesta. It is conceivable that the use made
by Zarathushtra22 in the Gāthās of a number of words may have sowed the
seeds for the Younger Avestan composers’ practice of characterising the Good
and Evil Creations by different lexical items. There are numerous passages in
the Gāthās where the actions of daēuuas and their followers are described in
unfavourable terms (e.g. Y 30.6, Y 32.3, Y 49.4), but in so far as we can tell from
the very small Gāthic corpus23 there are no regularly occurring lexical char-
acterisations for the forces of evil.24 However, in the highly crafted poetry of
the Gāthās every word is chosen very carefully, and the contrast between syn-
onyms must be significant.25 Three lexemes employed for evil people contrast
with those employed for the truthful or for Ahura Mazda himself.
hunu- (= hūnu-) ‘son’ (Y 51.10) “he is the son of the Lie’s creation”; but
puθra- (Y 44.7) is a father’s good son.
ašibiiā ‘with his eyes’ (dual, Y 32.10) are the eyes of someone who says
the worst thing; but cašman- (Y 31.8, 13; 45.8; 50.10) is the ‘eye’ or ‘vis-
ion’ of Ahura Mazdā and Zarathuštra.
hə̄n-duuar- ‘to run together’ (Y 30.6) of the daēvas who ran together
towards Fury.
These three words which occur only once in the Gāthās but refer to evil beings
areusedconsistentlyinadaevicsensethroughoutthewholeYoungAvesta.The
compound verb hə̄n-duuar - is particularly interesting since this is the same
compoundhąm-duuar-whichisregularlyusedwiththedaēvasassubjectinthe
22
I use the traditional name Zarathushtra for the poet of the Gāthās because of the demon-
stration by Jamison (2007: 30–49) that an individual poetic persona is created via stylistic
devices within the poems themselves, and has not merely been retro-projected from later
Zoroastrian tradition. See also Hintze (2002).
23
The other Old Avestan text, the Yasna Haptaŋhāiti, never mentions the forces of evil and
so cannot provide any evidence.
24
One word, ašibiiā (Y 32.10), was interpreted by Gershevitch (1975) as daevic, and in this he
has been followed by Schwartz (2006a, 2006b). See further below on Schwartz’s views.
25
This point was emphasized by Stanley Insler when I presented an earlier version of this
paper at the American Oriental Society Meeting in 2015 in New Orleans.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

272
tucker
Vidēvdād. The Hōm Yašt curse mā ząm vaēnōit̰ašibiia, mā gąm vaēnōit̰ašibiia
(Y 9.29, ex. (6).) has usually been regarded26 as a verbal reminiscence of Y 32.10
yə̄ acištəm vaēnaŋ́hē aogədā gąm ašibiiā huuarəcā ‘the one who has professed
the worst in order to see the cow and the sun with his eyes’ (Insler 1975: 42).
Conversely, āh- ‘mouth’, zasta- ‘hand’ and gə̄uša-/gaoša- ‘ear’ never refer to
the evil creation in the Gāthās, and belong to the ahuric vocabulary in the
Young Avesta. The same applies to cašman- ‘eye’ and puθra- ‘son’ which are the
‘good’ synonyms for ‘evil’ aš(i)- and hunu- in the Gāthās.27 In the cases where
Zarathustra uses the same lexemes for both good and evil beings, for instance,
aog-‘tospeak’orspāda-‘army’(whichoccursonlyinthedualforthetwooppos-
ing armies of good and evil at Y 44.15), this appears to have given licence for
Young Avestan composers to use such lexemes for both or neutrally.28 Even
if it is not possible to reconstruct from the restricted Gāthic corpus the exact
reasons for the choice of words in ‘daevic’ and ‘ahuric’ contexts found in these
poems there is no doubt that their lexical usage could have influenced later
Avestan composers29 because of the reverence with which the Gāthās were
preserved and sometimes directly quoted.30
26
Schwartz (2006a, 2006b) has arguedat length that both the Gāthās and theYoung Avestan
Hōm Yašt draw on a much more ancient pre-Zarathushtrian composition in praise of
Haoma. Although the details about the use the Gāthās may have made of this hypothet-
ical proto-type Hōm Yašt are interesting, Schwartz’s theory fails to convince me in the
face of the simpler explanation for the similarities between some passages of the attested
Young Avestan Hōm Yašt (Y 9–11) and the Gāthās: namely that the younger composition
was influenced by the older, which had been canonized in the Zoroastrian tradition at an
early date.
27
Theexception,asnotedabove,istheuseof cašman-and gaoša-ina‘curse’of theMihrYašt
(Yt 10.23=10.63), which is aberrant in respect of the whole Young Avesta, and contradicts
the use of these words in epithets of Mithra himself.
28
One case presents a difficulty for this generalisation as in Young Avestan raod- ‘to howl’
is a daevic verb (Y 9.24, Vd 3.32, Vd 19.45), but the soul of the cow is the subject of Gāthic
raostā (Y29.9). On the other hand, an evil Kavi is the subject of urūdōiiatā (Y 44.20) which
Humbach (1991, ii: 162) tentatively connected with raod-.
29
Theremayevenbeacasewhereanewwhollyahuricverbof speakingwascreatedinYoung
Avestan on the basis of a Gāthic passage. vaš-/vaš́- (medium tantum, fra-vaš- Yt 14.54, Yt
17.18, 21, vaš- Vd 5.17, 22, Vd 19.6ff., Vd 22.6), whose etymology is problematic, could have
been extrapolated from vašiietē / vaš́iietē at Y 44.11. Humbach (1991, ii: 155) proposed that
the Old Avestan form is cognate with rv vacyáte ‘issues forth, wells forth’ from vañc- ‘to
twist’ (used of poems, rv 1.142.4, 3.39.1, etc.).This may be correct, but as theYoung Avestan
composers were without the benefit of Vedic comparisons they may have understood the
line yaēibiiō mazdā θβōi vašiietē daēnā as ‘for whom your religion speaks/is spoken/ is
taught, O Mazdā’. The Pahlavi version, Bartholomae (1904: 1330), Insler (1975: 247), etc.,
all translated it in this way! Gray (1927: 431) suggested a comparison between YAv vaš—
‘say’ and Balochi gvašag, Ormuri γwacī, but these could continue the more frequent Old
Iranian verb of speaking vac- (cf. Cheung 2007: 404).
30
The quotations were noted in the lemmata of Bartholomae (1904). Recent studies about
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

lexical variation in young avestan
273
My suggestion is that the mere fact that such words were used in a cer-
tain way in the Gāthās had influence on the Young Avestan tradition, as they
provided a kernel of opposing lexemes. The two groups were enlarged piece by
piece in accordance with the choices of indiviual composers in the separate
traditions of the Yašts, but in the Vidēvdād a more rigid dualistic lexical con-
vention was established.
ThisstudyhasfocussedonthelanguageinthetransmittedAvestantextsand
theirliteraryconventions.Ithasdeliberatelyavoidedanyspeculationaboutthe
religious background to these conventions as this is still, and will continue to
be, an area of controversy. The literary explanation proposed here for a phe-
nomenon which has often been regarded as an interesting example of lexical
variation in a language of the 1st millennium bce underlines the principle in
historical linguistics that a detailed philological analysis of what is actually
found in the texts should precede attempts at a diachronic linguistic interpret-
ation.
Abbreviations
Avestan
YAv
Young Avestan
Y
Yasna
Yt
Yašt
Vd
Vidēvdād
Vedic
rv
Ṛgveda
av
Atharvaveda
śs
Śaunakasaṃhitā of the Atharvaveda
ps
Paippalādasaṃhitā of the Atharvaveda
ms
Maitrāyaṇīsaṃhitā of the Black Yajurveda
Old Avesta / Young Avesta intertextuality include the contributions by Cantera, Kellens
and Skjærvø in Pirart (ed., 2013). Whatever view is taken about controversial topics such
as the date and authorship of the Gāthās, their influence upon the Young Avesta is indic-
ated by solid textual facts.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

274
tucker
References
Ahmadi, Amir 2015, The Daēva Cult in the Gāthās An ideological archaeology of Zoro-
astrianism, London/New York: Routledge.
Andrés-Toledo, Miguel Ángel 2016, The Zoroastrian Law to Expel the Demons:
Wīdēwdād 10–15, Wiesbaden: Harrassowitz.
Bartholomae, Christian 1904, Altiranisches Wörterbuch, Strassburg: Trübner.
Benveniste, Émile 1931, Une différenciation de vocabulaire dans l’Avesta, in W. Wüst
(ed.), Studia Indo-Iranica: Ehrengabe fürWilhelm Geiger, Leipzig: Harrassowitz: 219–
226.
Burrow, Thomas 1973, The Proto-Indoaryans, “Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society”
105: 123–140.
Cheung, Johnny 2007, Etymological Dictionary of the Iranian Verb, Leiden: Brill.
Darmesteter, James 1892–1893, Le Zend-Avesta, 3 vols, (Annales du Musée Guimet),
Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve.
Frachtenberg, Leo J. 1908, Etymological Studies in Ormazdian and Ahrimanian
Words in Avestan, in J.J. Modi (ed.), Spiegel Memorial Volume, Bombay: British India
Press: 269–289.
Gray, Louis H. 1927, The ‘Ahurian’ and ‘Daevian’ vocabularies in the Avesta, “Journal of
the Royal Asiatic Society” 59: 427–441.
Güntert, Hermann 1914, Über die ahurischen und daevischen Ausdrücke im Avesta
(Sitzungsberichte der Heidelberger Akademie der Wissenschaften (phil.-hist.
Klasse), Band 5, No. 11), Heidelberg: Carl Winters Universitätsbuchhandlung: 1–34.
Hintze, Almut 1994, Der Zamyād-Yašt, Wiesbaden: Ludwig Reichert.
Hintze, Almut 2002, On the Literary Structure of the Older Avesta, “bsoas” 65: 31–51.
Humbach, Helmut 1991, The Gāthās of Zarathushtra and Other Old Avestan Texts, 2
vols, Heidelberg: Carl Winter.
Humbach,Helmut—Ichaporia,Pallan1998, ZamyādYašt,Wiesbaden:Harrasso-
witz.
Insler, Stanley 1975, The Gāthās of Zarathustra (Acta Iranica 8), Tehran/Liège: Brill.
Jackson, Abraham V.W. 1896–1904, Die Iranische Religion, in W. Geiger—E. Kuhn
(edd.), Grundriss der Iranischen Philologie, Band 2, Strassburg: Trübner: 612–708.
Jamison, Stephanie W. 2007, The Rig Veda Between Two Worlds (Collège de France,
Publications de l’Institut de Civilisation Indienne, Fascicle 74), Paris: De Boccard.
Justi, Ferdinand 1864, Handbuch der Zendsprache, Leipzig: F.C.W. Vogel.
Kellens, Jean 1974, Les noms-racines de l’Avesta, Wiesbaden: Ludwig Reichert.
Kellens, Jean 1977, Une représentation trifonctionelle de l’adolescence, “mss” 36: 53–
57.
Mayrhofer, Manfred 1986–2001, EtymologischesWörterbuch des Altindoarischen, 3
vols., Heidelberg: Carl Winter.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

lexical variation in young avestan
275
Pirart, Eric 2013, Le sort des Gāthās et autres études iraniennes in memoriam Jacques
Duchesne-Guillemin (Acta Iranica 54), Leuven: Peeters.
Redard, Céline 2021, Études avestiques et mazdéennes vol. 8. Vidēvdād 19, Leuven:
Peeters.
Schmitt, Rüdiger 1999, Bemerkungen zum Schlussabschnitt von Dareios’ Grabinsch-
rift DNb, “Altorientalische Forschungen” 26: 127–139.
Schwartz, Martin 2006a, The Hymn to Haoma in Gathic Transformation: Traces of
Iranian Poetry before Zarathushtra, in A. Panaino (ed.), The Scholarly Contribution of
Ilya Gershevitch to the Development of Iranian Studies (Seminar held in Ravenna on
11th April, 2003), Milan: Associazione Culturale Mimesis: 85–106.
Schwartz, Martin 2006b, The Gāthās and other Old Avestan Poetry, in G.-J. Pinault
(ed.), La Langue Poetique Indo-Européenne: Actes du colloque de travail de la Société
des Études Indo-Européennes, Paris 22–23 octobre 2003, Leuven: Peeters: 459–498.
Skjærvø, Prods O. 1994, HymnicCompositionintheAvesta, “Die Sprache” 36: 199–243.
Skjærvø, Prods O. 2007, The Vidēvdād: its Ritual-Mythical Significance, in V.S.
Curtis—S. Stewart (edd.), The Age of the Parthians, London: I.B. Tauris: 105–142.
Swennen, Philippe (ed.) 2015, Démons iraniens: actes du colloque international
organisé à la Université de Liège les 5 et 6 février 2009 à l’occasion des 65 ans de Jean
Kellens, Liège: Presses Universitaires de Liège.
Toporov, Vladimir L. 1981, Die Ursprünge der indoeuropaischen Poetik, “Poetica” 13:
189–251.
Wackernagel—Debrunner ii,1 = Wackernagel, Jacob 1905, Altindische Gram-
matik Vol. ii, part 1, Einleitung zurWortlehre. Nominalkomposition, Göttingen: Vand-
enhoeck & Ruprecht.
Watkins, Calvert 1970, Language of gods and language of men: remarks on some
Indo-European metalinguistic traditions, in J. Puhvel (ed.), Myth and Law Among the
Indo-Europeans, Berkeley: University of California Press: 1–17.
Watkins, Calvert 1995, How to Kill a Dragon in Indo-European, Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Roberto Batisti, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_013
chapter 11
Greek ἄγυρις ‘gathering’ between Dialectology and
Indo-European Reconstruction
Roberto Batisti
1
Background: Cowgill’s Law and irregular o ~ u variation in Ancient
Greek*
In a number of cases, Ancient Greek shows a u vowel as a reflex of pie *o.
Most instances have been explained by Warren Cowgill (1965: 156f.) with the
sound law that now bears his name.1 In its broadest formulation (cf. Sihler
1995: 42), Cowgill’s Law states that pie *o became Gk. u between a resonant
and a labial, in either order. The exact scope of the law, however, has sub-
sequently been questioned. In an important article, Brent Vine (1999) formu-
lated a restricted version of Cowgill’s Law proper, which he subdivided into two
rules:
1)
o > u / Kw_N, N_ Kw (e.g. *nokwt- > νυκτ- ‘night’, *nogwnó- > γυμνός ‘naked’2)
2)
-nom- > -num- (e.g. *h3nh3-men- > *onomn̥ > ὄνυμα ‘name’)
He then added two new, separate rules describing the shift *o > u in other envir-
onments:
3)
*-oli̯- > -υλλ- (e.g. *bholi̯om > φύλλον ‘leaf’: Lat. folium ‘id.’)
4)
*-Tu̯oR- > *-Tu̯uR- (e.g. *kwetu̯ores > Lesb. πέσσυρες ‘four’), perhaps more
generally *-Cu̯oC- > *-Cu̯uC- (*su̯opnos > ὕπνος ‘sleep’)
As Vine himself (1999: 582f.) pointed out, these “analyses […] have the highly
desirable morphological consequence of eliminating altogether the problem-
*
I am grateful to the audience in Oxford for their comments, and to the organizers of the Col-
loquium for making this splendid gathering of scholars possible. My thanks also go to Nicola
Serafini for sharing with me a pre-publication version of his paper on the ἀγύρται that origin-
ally sparked my interest in that word’s vocalism back in 2014. I am also indebted to Federico
Alpi for discussion of Armenian matters, and to Nicole Edmea Pollan for polishing up my
English. This paper has benefited greatly from the comments of the two anonymous referees.
It goes without saying that I alone take full responsibilities for the views presented here.
1 Lesspreciseareapproacheslikethatof Joseph(1979),whoadmitsa“sporadic”changeo>u“in
the context /C_C, where one of the consonants is a labial or a velar, and the other consonant
is a sonorant […] or both are labial or velar”.
2 With the additional changes *-gwn- > -μν- and *n- > *ŋ- (by assimilation?) > γ-.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
277
aticnotionof anunconstrained‘alternateSchwundstufe’,orirregularu-colored
propvoweltreatments”.Nevertheless,thesenotionshavenotdisappearedcom-
pletely from the literature, possibly because several words with u for expected
o fall outside of the law’s scope. While in many cases substrate origin might be
the source of irregular variation,3 the phenomenon is more disturbing in words
with a good inner-Greek or pie etymology. The aim of this paper is to offer a
new analysis for one of the most problematic forms (apparently) showing an
‘irregular υ’ that still resists explanation.
2
The Data
Thefemininei-stemnounἄγῠριςmeans‘gathering,assembly,multitude,crowd’
(Hom.+), with later, more specialized meanings such as ‘army formation, corps’
(Them. Or. 11.149c), ‘collection’ (Orph. L. 416).4 In the Homeric poems, ἄγυρις is
a near-synonym of ἀγορή, but not its perfect equivalent; while in the epics the
latter only refers to gatherings of humans, the former may be used for collec-
tions of any kind of things and beings:5
Il. 16.661
… ἐπεὶβασιλῆα ἴδον βεβλαμμένον ἦτορ
κείμενον ἐν νεκύων ἀγύρει …
… as they saw the king struck to the heart,
lying in a pile of corpses …6
Il. 10.464
πέμψον ἐπὶΘρῃκῶν ἀνδρῶν ἵππους (v.l. ἄγυρίν) τε καὶεὐνάς
lead us to the horses (v.l. assembly-place) and the tents of the
Thracian men7
Il. 24.141
ὣς οἵγ’ ἐν νηῶν ἀγύρει μήτηρ τε καὶυἱὸς
πολλὰπρὸς ἀλλήλους ἔπεα πτερόεντ’ ἀγόρευον
thus among the gathering of ships mother and son
exchanged many winged words
3 Cf. Beekes, edg: xxxi.
4 lsj9: 16, Suppl. 5.
5 LfgrE i: 101. All translations are mine unless otherwise indicated.
6 West (2000: 129), following Paley, considers vv. 661f. to be interpolated.
7 Here ἄγυριν, which would be supported by the parallel of Od. 3.31, is transmitted by Z and
reported as a variant reading in A, but most other manuscripts have ἵππους: see the appar-
atus by West (1998: 307), who prints ἵππους.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

278
batisti
Od. 3.31
ἷξον δ’ ἐς Πυλίων ἀνδρῶν ἄγυρίν τε καὶἕδρας
they came to the gathering and the companies of the men of Pylos
More common than the simplex (which, after these Homeric passages, only
occurs once in Classical literature at Eur. ia 753) are the compounds ὁμήγυρις,
-ᾱγ- (Hom.+, mainly poetic) ‘assembly, meeting (esp. of gods)’ (→ὁμηγυρίζομαι
‘assemble, call together’, Od. 16.376) and πανήγυρις, -ᾱγ- (Aesch.+, also in prose)
‘general assembly, festival’. The stem ἀγυρ° forms several nominal derivatives,
e.g. ἀγυρμός (Dion. Hal.+) ‘gathering’, ἄγυρμα (ab 327) ‘collection’, and the agent
noun ἀγύρτης (Eur.+), -τήρ (Manetho) ‘collector; beggar’, which developed a
specialized meaning ‘begging priest’, with pejorative connotation ‘charlatan,
swindler’.8 From the former meaning derives ἀγυρτάζω (Str.+) ‘collect (by beg-
ging), gather’ (already in Od. 19.284 χρήματ’ ἀγυρτάζειν πολλὴν ἐπὶγαῖαν ἰόντι “to
gather wealth by roaming over the wide earth”); from the latter, ἀγυρτικά(Str.+)
‘vulgar lies’, ἀγυρτώδης (Eudem. Rhet.) ‘plebeian, vulgar’, etc.9 The lexica pre-
serve a denominative verb ἀγυρίζειν· συνάγειν, ἀγυρτάζειν (Hesych. α 864 C.) and
its derivative ἀγυρισμός ‘collection’ (Sud. α 386 A.).10
Therelationshipof thisword-familytotheverbἀγείρω<*ager-i̯e/o-‘gather’11
and its nomen actionis ἀγορά‘assembly (place)’ is usually taken for granted, but
the vocalism has long been considered problematic.12 Explanations proposed
so far (most recentlyby Hawkins 2013, on which see §2.2.1 below)focus on the
phonological side of the problem, assuming either a dialectal or a pan-Hellenic
sound change to account for the υ. Less attention has been paid to the morpho-
logical derivation. A typical point of view is expressed by Nikolaev (2015: 262),
who analyses ἄγυρις as a deverbative nomen actionis from the root of ἀγείρω,
with either o- or zero grade. After evaluating previous solutions, and pointing
out their weaknesses (§2), I am going to propose a different path of derivation
that does not call for any special phonetic development (§3); subsequently, I
will discuss the implications of my new proposal for the etymological relation-
ship to ἀγείρω (§4).
8
On the ἀγύρται in Ancient Greece, see Giammellaro 2006, 2012 and Serafini 2016.
9
See Bonsignore (2013: 78–82) on the insulting nature of the epithet Μητρὸς ἀγύρτης for a
priest of Cybele in ap 6.218 (Alcaeus of Messene) and in other literary sources, sometimes
in the compound form μητραγύρτης.
10
On this word-family see also Hawkins 2013: 76.
11
See §4 for a more in-depth analysis.
12
E.g. Buck 1955: 45, Hamp 1981a: 84. Most recently, an assessment of the unsolved diffi-
culties inherent to this form can be found in a lengthy footnote by Sowa (2019: 193n. 12).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
279
3
Phonological Solutions
Two possibilities have generally been considered: ἀγυρ- could reflect zero-
grade *agr̥- with a peculiar vocalization of the syllabic liquid, or o-grade *agor-
with vowel raising.
3.1
*r̥ > υρ?
Most authorities13 treat ἀγυρ- as a legitimate outcome of *agr̥-,14 following in
the lead of Schwyzer (1939: 351), who stated that “ρυ (λυ) bzw. υρ υλ stehen in
einer Anzahl von Fällen für idg. r̥ l̥”. Most of Schwyzer’s examples, however,
are now explainable as o-grades via Cowgill’s Law (e.g. μύλη ‘mill’, μύλλω ‘have
sexual intercourse’ lit. ‘grind’: Lat. mola ‘millstone’); others are of dubious ety-
mology and do not inspire much confidence (e.g. κύρτος ‘weel, cage’: κάρταλλος
‘basket’, Lat. crātis ‘wickerwork, hurdle’?).
It is well known that the vocalization of pie syllabic liquids took place in the
individual Greek dialects, with different outcomes for both the timbre and the
place of the vowel.The regular Aeolic reflex is -ρο-/-ορ-; o-coloring is also found
in Arcado-Cypriot, possibly already in Mycenean, and as a conditioned reflex
after a labial in Cretan; but *r̥ > υρ does not appear to be the regular treatment
in any given dialect, not even as a conditioned change (except, perhaps, after
*Kw-: see Van Beek 2022: 21–27). It would be methodologically unsound, then,
to assume that this outcome just appeared sporadically in a handful of forms,
with no identifiable phonological or geographical distribution.
Tomyknowledge,onlySzemerényi(1964:86n.4)hastakenissuewithazero-
grade *agr̥-i- from the morphological point of view, observing that in an i-stem
an o-grade of the root would be more at home and comparing “κόπις, στρόφις,
τρόφις, φρόνις, etc.”;15 but apart from the validity of this point, his own solution
is unlikely (see §2.2.1 below).
3.2
o > u?
Starting from an o-grade of the root, one can either think of a change o > u of
Proto-Greek date, comparable to Cowgill’s Law if not strictly part of it, or of a
13
E.g. H. Seiler in LfgrE I s.v., Lejeune 1972: 197 n. 1; dge s.v.
14
At any rate, since forms like ἀγύρτης, ἀγυρμός and the like “can readily be derived within
Greek from ἄγυρις” (Hamp 1981: 84), they are not necessarily independent testimonia for
a phonological development *agr̥- > ἀγυρ-. In fact, most forms with υ are late and built
from ἀγύρτης (Hawkins 2013: 76).
15
On these formations, which included both nomina agentis and nomina actionis, see now
Nikolaev 2015.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

280
batisti
later, dialectal phenomenon, if one wishes to explain the ἀγυρ- forms as inter-
dialectal borrowings.
3.2.1
Proto-Greek o > u
The change o > u in ἀγυρ- cannot be explained via Cowgill’s Law as we know it,
since*g_r isnotavalidenvironmentforanyversionof thelaw,and*gw_r,which
could conceivably be one, is ruled out by the velar in ἀγερ-, ἀγορ-, Myc. a-ke-re,
a-ko-ra: a labiovelar would have produced alphabetic Gk. **ἀδερ-, **ἀβορ-, and
would still be attested in Mycenean.16 On the other hand, it is possible that
we are dealing with a hitherto unrecognized sound change, distinct from, but
typologically similar to, the ones codified by Cowgill and Vine.
This is the solution recently explored by Hawkins (2013: 28–45, 76–97) in
his discussion of words with irregular *o > u. After a convincing rejection
of most alleged examples, he narrows down his analysis to a small group of
words (including ἄγυρις) where the conditions for the raising can allegedly be
captured by the context /_ri̯. The raising would have been followed either by
eventual loss of /j/ with compensatory lengthening, or by resyllabification to
[i].
3.2.1.1
Phonetic Motivation
Hawkins’ proposal is at first quite attractive, since it operates with a regular
sound change in a well-defined context—Hawkins follows Vine in refusing to
work with an “unconstrained‘alternate Schwundstufe’”—and it is based on the
apparently very close parallel of *-oli̯- > -υλλ-. On further analysis, however, this
proposal shows some problematic sides, starting with the typological plaus-
ibility of its phonetic mechanism. It is generally agreed that in Greek *-li̯- was
phonetically palatalized to a stronger degree than other *-Ri̯- clusters, probably
yielding a long palatal lateral [ʎː], as suggested by its almost universal geminate
reflex in most dialects regardless of the preceding vowel.17 This reconstruction
is supported by the typological observation that laterals and nasals are cross-
linguistically much more likely to undergo palatalization than rhotics, which
are, in fact, among the sounds more likely to block this process.18 It is plaus-
16
Similarly, Rasmussen’s (1985: 39ff.) root *h2gu̯er- with zero-grade *h2gur- > ἀγυρ- needs
the problematic assumption of a development *h2gu̯e/or- > *h2ge/or-.
17
See Hellemans (2005: 217–225), with literature.
18
For the universal resistance of rhotics to palatal coarticulation, see the surveys by Hall
2000 and Bhat 1978: 66. On the cross-linguistic avoidance of [rj] sequences see Hall—
Hamann 2010.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
281
ible that a strongly palatalized lateral affected the articulation of a preceding
vowel; according to Bruce Hayes (ap. Vine 1999: 588 n. 68) the change *-oli̯- >
*-oľľ- > -ull- had a ‘compensatory’ nature: “/o/ before palatalized /ľ/ may have
developed into a segment with a final raised portion […] when /ľľ/ depalatal-
ized to /ll/, this preceding segment […] could have developed toward /u/ as a
way of maintaining contrast”.19
As Vine himself pointed out (1999: 569), it should not be considered prob-
lematic that /r/ behaved differently. It should also be noted that *-ni̯- clusters,
which were probably palatalized to a lesser degree than *-li̯-, but still more
than *-ri̯-, had generally the same outcome as the latter, i.e. the apparent ‘meta-
thesis’20 *-Ri̯- > -i̯R- after /a, o/, but *-Ri̯- > -ːR- by compensatory lengthening
after /e, i, u/: *φάν-jω > φαίνω, but *κρίν-jω > κρῑ́νω.Thus, given that *-ri̯- patterns
with *-ni̯- against *-li̯- for the sake of ‘metathesis’, it would be strange if for the
sake of o-raising it patterned with *-li̯- against *-ni̯- (as there are no Cowgill’s
Law-like effects from the latter).
3.2.1.2
Evidence and Counter-Evidence
Another weakness of Hawkins’ proposal is the scarce attention paid to poten-
tialcounterexamples.Hawkins(2013:97)onlybrieflydealswithμοῖρα‘part,por-
tion, destiny’ < *(s)mor-i̯a, assuming restoration after the transparently related
μόρος ‘fate’. This is in itself perfectly possible, but other counterexamples do
not lend themselves so easily to this kind of analogical solution. To be sure, the
sequence*-ori̯-isnotverycommoninreconstructableProto-Greek,butatleast
some forms have reliable ie etymologies:
1)
κοίρανος21 ‘ruler, leader, commander’ is an old derivative of pie *kor-i̯o-
‘Männerbund’ (←*koro- ‘army, war’22); the formation is paralleled by Old
Norse herjann and British Coriono-tōtae. While the base κοιρ(ο)- itself is
not unknown in Greek onomastics (Κοίρων, Κοιρωνίδαι, Κοιρόμαχος, Κοιρα-
τάδας), and possibly produced other derivatives in Mycenaean (ko-re-te =
19
There are parallels for a conditioned raising even when the palatal feature is not lost; cf.
the Florentine (and Standard Italian) ‘anaphonesis’ e > i /_ʎː (Lat. consĭlium, famĭlia >
Flor./It. consiglio, famiglia for expected conséglio, faméglia).
20
Hawkins refers to Kiparsky (1967), who assumed abrupt metathesis with no intermediate
steps. More realistic, in my opinion, is the approach of Hock (2004), who treats the differ-
ent outcomes of *-Ri̯- as part of the across-the-board palatalization of consonants before
yod in prehistorical Greek, explaining the i-infection of a previous [-high, -front] vowel by
gradual phonetic anticipation of the consonant’s palatal quality.
21
Frisk, gew i: 894; Chantraine, delg: 553; Beekes, edg: 732.
22
nil: 440ff.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

282
batisti
κοιρητήρ?),23 there is almost no trace in Greek of a simple *κορ(ο)- that
could propel analogical restoration of -οιρ-.24
2)
χοῖρος ‘pig(let)’, has less certain connections, but on the strength of Alba-
nian derr ‘swine’ a pie *ǵhori̯o- can be reconstructed;25 in this case, too,
no related root *χορ- was available in Greek to serve as a starting point for
analogy.
3)
Lesb. ὄνοιρος ‘dream’26 may represent zero-grade *h3nr̥-i̯o- (cf. Cret. ἄναι-
ρος, with unexplained—assimilated?—initial) as opposed to full grade
*h3ner-i̯o- of other dialects (Att. ὄνειρος).27 Since the outcome of sec-
ondary, dialectal *-ori̯- < *-r̥i̯- was not necessarily the same of Common
Greek *-ori̯-, this form is less relevant for our purposes. It is also conceiv-
able, however, that ὄνοιρος goes back to the same lengthened-grade form
*h3nōr-i̯o- as Arm. anurǰ, with the resulting long diphthong shortened by
Osthoff’s Law (but see Van Beek 2022: 419).
4)
Even less can be made of μάγοιρος ‘cook’ (: Att. μάγειρος, Dor. μάγῑρος),
labelled as ‘Aeolic’ in Greg. Cor. p. 606 (cf. lsj9: 1071). The word has no
reliable etymology, making an interpretation of the different vocalisms
difficult.28
5)
οἰρών ‘furrow, limit’ presupposes a noun *οἶρος < *soHiro- (cf. Skt. sīra-
‘plough’?), thus with a diphthong of different origin.29
On the other hand, the solution via Cowgill’s Law-style raising is not too com-
pelling for Hawkins’ few examples other than ἄγυρις:
1)
μορμύρω ‘roar and boil’ (of water) and πορφύρω ‘heave, surge, swirl’ (of
the sea), ‘grow red’, may show the same kind of dissimilating reduplica-
tion as γογγύζω ‘murmur, mumble’ and ποππύζω ‘smack the lips, cluck’, as
Hawkins himself admits; moreover, such words can easily be onomato-
23
But see García Ramón 2010 against this connection.
24
Kaczyńska (2007) rightly calls attention to Hesych. κ 3655 L. κόρος· †πλῆθος ἀνθρώπων,
which probably represents pie *koro-; still, it would be the only attestation of this word
in Greek, and moreover it is not clear that a synchronic connection with κοίρανος would
have been felt.
25
A rival etymology from pie *ghoi̯ro-, based on Arm. gēr and Russ. žir ‘fat’, is mentioned by
Frisk (gew ii: 1107f.) but judged less favourably by Chantraine (delg: 1266f.) and Beekes
(edg: 1640f.). Hyllested’s (2017: 189) suggestion that Finnic karja ‘wild boar’ is a loan from
Proto-Germ. *garjaz would strengthen the reconstruction of pie *ǵhori̯o-.
26
Hamm 1957: 16 and 28.
27
Frisk, gew ii: 393; Chantraine, delg: 802; Beekes, edg: 1082.
28
Frisk, gew ii: 156; Chantraine, delg: 656; Beekes, edg: 888f.
29
Frisk, gew ii: 368; Chantraine, delg: 786; Beekes, edg: 1060.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
283
poeic, or at least phonosymbolically deformed, which reduces their use-
fulness in the establishment of a regular sound change.30
2)
πτύρομαι ‘be scared, frightened’ is less likely to be strictly speaking ono-
matopoeic, but it is hard to see how it could be related to πτοέω ‘terrify’ <
*pi̯oh2-éi̯e/o-. Frisk (gew ii: 616) suggested a contamination between the
root of πτοέω, πτήσσω and the ending of ὀδύρομαι, μύρομαι, but this solu-
tion is rightly rejected by Hawkins (2013: 92 n. 305).31 One wishes—with
Oreshko (2013: 175)—that Hawkins had elaborated this point further.
3)
σφυρίς(σπ-)‘basket’,ismentionedonp.96as“discussedabove”,butIcould
notfind anyexplicitdiscussionof thiswordintheforegoingpages.32Frisk
(gew ii: 773) and Chantraine (delg: 1041), both operating unproblemat-
ically with u-coloured zero-grade reflexes, derived it—either directly or
via a noun *σπυρός—from the root*sper- of σπεῖρα, σπάρτον, while Beekes
(edg: 1387) rejects this derivation and assigns it to Pre-Greek on account
of the variation σπ-/σφ-. Hawkins presumably wishes to derive the word
from *sp(h)or-id-, but does not specify its etymological connections; does
he assume it contains the o-grade of *sper-?
All in all, then, the combined weight of the examples supporting Hawkins’ rule
cannot be deemed much higher—either quantitatively or qualitatively—than
the weight of the counterexamples discussed above.
3.2.1.3
Phonological Environment
The law’s phonological environment also calls for comment. Hawkins needs
to assume that in ἄγυρις and σφυρίς “syllabic ι was restorable”, i.e. that the law
operatedonobliquestems*agor-i̯-,*sphor-i̯-withzero-gradeof thesuffixbefore
a vowel, and then spread analogically to the rest of the paradigm. This raises
30
On the onomatopoeic value of such forms see Skoda (1982: 92–95) and Tichy (1983: 277–
288), assuming dissimilation *mur-mur- > μορμυρ- and *phur-phur- > πορφυρ-. According
to Tichy (1983: 285), these two verbs were “erhaltene Vertreter eines umfangreicheren
onomatopoetischen Teilsystems […], das durch den Vokalismus ọ̆-u und den Bezug zum
Wasser charakterisiert war”. Perpillou (1996: 25–31) points out that vocalism o…u is espe-
cially common in Greek words denoting strong noises, and that such a sequence need not
be etymological, but is sometimes obtained through formal readjustments: “ces formes
sontenfaitenglobéesetaubesoinréorientéesdansunsystèmeexpressif oùlavaleuraffect-
ive des timbres est déterminante” (emphasis mine). At least μορμύρω has ie comparanda
(Lat. murmurō, Arm. mṙmṙim/-am < *murmur-) showing that the u was ancient, and the o
alikelyproductof dissimilation.Onpresentswithfullrootreduplicationplussuffix*-i̯e/o-,
and their propensity for irregular dissimilatory changes in the reduplication syllable, see
now Willi (2018: 163–165). On πορφύρω see now Rodríguez-Piedrabuena—Jiménez
Delgado 2021: 257.
31
Cf. already Chantraine (delg: 950); Beekes (edg: 1251).
32
The word appears only on p. 77, where Hamp’s pre-Hellenic solution is rejected.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

284
batisti
some problems for σφυρίς, which contains the suffix -ίδ- and shows no traces
of having been previously inflected as an i-stem. Were the law extended to syl-
labic /i/, it would incur the same problems as Szemerényi’s (1964: 85–87) rule
of height assimilation *o … i > u … i, which is even less acceptable and would
be easy to disprove.33
3.2.2
Dialectal o > u
The idea that the vocalism in ἄγυρις is dialectal, specifically Aeolic, harks back
to ancient scholarship. A typical explanation is given by Eustath. ad Od. 2.7:
γίνεται ἡλέξις ἐκ τοῦἀγείρω. ἐξ αὐτῆς δέ, οὐμόνον ἀγύρτης κατὰτοὺς παλαι-
ούς, ὁἀγείρων ὄχλον καὶἀπατεὼν καὶἀλαζών, καὶὄνομα δὲβόλου κυβευτικοῦ,
ἀλλὰκαὶἄγυρις. αἰολίζουσα οὐμόνον τῇτροπῇτοῦο εἰς υ, ἀλλὰκαὶτῷτόνῳ.
ὡς γὰρ ἑορτὴἔροτις Αἰολικῶς, οὕτω καὶἀγορὰἄγυρις.
The word (scil. ἀγορά) comes from ἀγείρω. From it are derived not only
ἀγύρτης, which according to the ancients (means) the gatherer of crowds,
a cheat and a charlatan, and the name of a throw at dice, but also ἄγυρις.
This form is Aeolic not only inthechangeof o to u, but also in the accent.
For just as ἑορτή(is) ἔροτις in Aeolic, so ἀγορά(is) ἄγυρις.
Similar remarks are often found in the lexicographical tradition,34 and are even
repeated by lsj9 s.v. ἄγυρις “Aeol. for ἀγορά” (sic). A closer look at the data
afforded by modern dialectology makes this simple explanation untenable.
Several instances of o > u are indeed attested in East Aeolic35 (which is the
dialect normally meant by ‘Aeolic’ in ancient scholarship), but none suits the
case under consideration:
1)
A sporadic change is attested in literary Lesbian before /m/ (e.g. ὔμος :
ὁμός, ὔμφαλος : ὀμφαλός) and possibly before /p/ (ὐπίσσω : ὀπίσ(σ)ω).36
In the inscriptions, it is assured for a single lexical root (ὔμο-, alternat-
ing with ὄμο-), but the development seems to be genuine.37 This condi-
33
Szemerényi resorted to this “well-known” rule in order to derive πυκινός from *poki-nó-. It
was partly based on isolated dialect forms (Hom. ἄλλυδις, ἄμυρις, Epidaur. ὑπωρυφία), and
partly on cases now explained via Cowgill’s Law (φύλλον, μύλλω), but contradicted by his
own parallels for *ἀγορις (see §2.1 above).
34
E.g. An. Ox. ii 399.5 ἄγυρις· τὸγ’ υ ψιλὸν Αἰολικῶς, Et. Gud. 7.9 ἄγυρις Αἰολικόν, Et. Or. 27.6
κατ’ Αἰολέας ἄγυρις καὶπανήγυρις.
35
Bechtel 1921: 27f., Buck 1955: 27, Hamm 1958: 27.
36
Hoffmann (1893: 400f.) restricted the change to originally unaccented syllables.
37
Blümel 1982: 44–46, Hodot 1990: 57–59.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
285
tioned raising before /m/ was shared by Arcadian (υμειος : ὅμοιος, στυμεον :
στόμιον) and Mycenean (tu-ma-ko /Stumargos/ besides to-ma-ko /Stomar-
gos/ ‘White-Mouthed’).38 The phonetic environment, however, does not
match that of ἄγυρις.
2)
γίνυμαι, ὄνυμα are products of ‘classic’ Cowgill’s Law in the context /n_m,
while the vocalism of Att. γίγνομαι, ὄνομα is secondary.39
3)
ἀπύfor ἀπό, also found in Mycenean and Arcado-Cyprian, is probably an
old inherited variant.
4)
ὔσδος (ὔσδων Sapph. 2.5 V., ὄσδω Sapph. 105a.1codd.: ὔσδῳL.-P., V.) for ὄζος
‘branch’ is probably a hyper-Aeolism influenced by grammatical doctrine,
if not a mere scribal error (Nickau 1974).
Apart from the lack of precise parallels, the fundamental problem with any
theory explaining the ἀγυρ-forms as Aeolic lies in their dialectal distribution,
which has been studied by Adrados 1957 and Wathelet 1970. To be sure,
ἄγυρις itself is not at home in Classical Attic; it is only attested once in a lyric
passage in tragedy (Eur. ia 753 ἄγυρις Ἑλλάνων στρατιᾶς “the gathering of the
Greekarmy”),whereitcanbeaHomerismgiventheIliadictheme.Ontheother
hand, ἀγύρτης and πανήγυρις (-ᾱ́γ-) are Panhellenic words, and at least ἀγυρμός
seems old even in Attic, as it denoted the first day of the Eleusinian Mysteries.
This evidence led Adrados (1957: 86) to conclude that “no es de creer que la
solución υρ […] sea específicamente eolia”. Wathelet reviewed a dozen putat-
ive examples of ‘Aeolic’ o > u in the Homeric language, but concluded that most
of them are unreliable. Regarding ἄγυρις, he too observed that in light of Att.
πανήγυρις and Dor. παναγυριος (Schwyzer Del.3 74, l. 103; Messenian: Andane, 1st
century bc), παναγυρ[ιε]ς (Schwyzer Del.3 253, l. 78; Coan: Halasarna, 3rd/2nd
c. bc), “une origine uniquement éolienne est […] fort douteuse” (1970: 166).40
4
A Morphological Solution
To sum up, it seems impossible to derive ἄγυρις from either a zero- or an o-
grade preform by regular sound change at any stage of the history of Greek.
It may seem unavoidable to admit that “in some cases a rather free variation
38
García Ramón 2018: 37.
39
Blümel 1982: 49f.
40
Cf. already Lambert (1903: 49): “ἄγυρις ne peut être revendiqué comme création
éolienne”. Hawkins (2013: 77) adds that, conversely, ἀγορ-forms are attested in the Aeolic
domain. See now also Sowa (2019: 194 n. 12) on the difficulty of attributing ἄγυρις “to either
epigraphical or literary Lesbian”.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

286
batisti
between υ- and ο-form was possible” (Oreshko 2013: 175). However, before
giving up the possibility of principled explanation, I would like to tackle the
problemfromadifferentanglebyassumingthatthephonologyisregular,while
the derivational history of the word is somehow different from how it is usually
reconstructed.
4.1
The *thamu- Cluster
A key to understanding the formation of ἄγυρις may come from a word ex-
tremely close in both form and meaning, namely the i-stem feminine noun
θάμυρις ‘assembly’. As a common noun, it is only preserved by Hesychius (θ
90 L.), with the gloss πανήγυρις, σύνοδος ἢπυκνότης τινῶν. καὶὁδοὺς θαμυρὰς
τὰς λεωφόρους. ἔστι δὲκαὶκύριον ὄνομα “assembly, meeting, or thick concen-
tration of something. And highways (are called) hodoi thamurai. It is also a
personal name”. And indeed, Θάμυρις (Att. Θαμύρας) was the name of a myth-
ical Thracian bard known for trying to compete with the Muses, who by way
of punishment blinded him and took away his singing and playing ability.41 As
a negative example of punished hybris, he was well-known enough to become
proverbial.42 His story, first told in the Iliad (2.591–600), was later taken up by
Attic drama: Thamyras was the hero of a lost Sophoclean tragedy and of a play
by Antiphanes Comicus (3rd c. bc); he also features in the pseudo-Euripidean
Rhesus (vv. 915–925). It is precisely the wordplay in Soph. fr. 245 that suggests
that his was a ‘speaking name’, still fully understood by the audiences of 5th
century Athens:
μουσομανεῖδ’ ἐλήφθην
ἀνάγκαι, ποτὶδ’ εἴραν
ἔρχομαι, ἔκ τε λύρας
ἔκ τε νόμων, οὓς Θαμύρας
περίαλλα μουσοποιεῖ.
And I was seized by a compulsion
to be mad for music, and went
to the place of assembly, under the force of the lyre
and the force of the measures, with which Thamyras
makes music supremely.
transl. Wilson 2009
41
On the figure of Thamyris in Greek culture, see Wilson 2009 and Kárpáti 2016.
42
Cf. Hesych. θ 92 L. Θάμυρις μαίνεται· παροιμία, ἐπὶτῶν κατὰσύνεσιν παράλογόν τι πραττόντων
≈Sud. θ 42 A.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
287
Wilson, following Lloyd-Jones, accepts at v. 2 Campbell’s conjecture δ’ εἴραν
(: ποτὶδειράν, ποτίδειραν codd.), which brings into the text a rare Ionic word
for ‘(place of) assembly’ (εἴρη, meaning ἀγορά, or τὴν ἐκκλησίαν καὶτὴν μαντείαν
according to Eustath. ad Il. 18.531). He observes that “this ‘place of assembly’—
and perhaps of prophecy—will be where Thamyras played his lyre”, invoking
“the linguistic and epigraphic evidence for the meaning of the name Θάμυρις
itself” (Wilson 2009: 69). There has been some debate on the derivational
relationship between the pn and the noun θάμυρις: was Θάμυρις extracted a
posteriori from the name of a corporation of *Θαμυρίδαι ‘singers at public gath-
erings’, like Homer from the Homeridai (←*ὅμαρος or *ὅμαρις ‘public gather-
ing’?) according to the hypothesis of Durante 1976 and West 1999,43 or was
it a Kurzform of *Θαμυρικλῆς uel sim.?44 The existence of the Thamyridai could
be supported by the θαμυρίδδοντες* mentioned in a Boeotian inscription (gen.
pl. -όντων: seg xxiii 53.2; Thespiae, c. 400–350bc) and variously interpreted
as ‘Thamyris-worshippers’ or simply ‘gatherers’ ~ ‘presidents of the assembly’
(Chaniotis 2009: 221f., cf. Hesych. θ 91 L. θαμυρίζει· ἀθροίζει, συνάγει).45 More
likely,thenameThamyrisissimplyidenticaltothenounθάμυρις,46characteriz-
ing the bard as a personification of the “centripetal force of song, the gathering
into union and collectivity” (Wilson 2009: 50f.).47
Now, θάμυρις is part of a word-family centred on the u-stem adjective θαμύς
‘thick, packed, crowded’,48 attested in the singular only by Ap. Dysc. Adv. 153.4,
43
On the importance of assemblies—featuring poetic contests—among Indo-European
peoples, see West 2007: 72–74.
44
Cf. Ἄριστις, Δᾶμις, Κάλλις as diminutives of compound names in Ἀριστο°, Δημο°, Καλλι°
(Masson 1987).
45
Roesch (1982: 140) does not rule out that “le choix du verbe θαμυρίζειν, qui ne semble
pas attesté ailleurs, ait été dicté par le double sens de θάμυρις”; similarly Clay 2004: 153,
Wilson 2009: 51.
46
There is no reason to think, with B. Mader (LfgrE ii: 969) and De Lamberterie (1990: 670),
that the name itself is Thracian. But even if it were, it seems clear that it underwent folk-
etymological identification with the noun θάμυρις.
47
Wilson (2009: 68 n. 91) even speculates that “Sophocles may have […] punned, with ety-
mological force, on the name of Thamyras at some point in the play, associating the idea
of ‘populous gathering’ with him via terms such as θαμά, θαμέες, θαμίζω”. Wilson’s explan-
ation of the name is accepted by Kárpáti 2016: 188.
48
See De Lamberterie 1990:664–675.Rootunknown: not *dheh1- (τίθημι ‘put’, θωμός θημών
‘heap’), which has a zero-grade θε- (pace Szemerényi 1964: 88). Nikolaev (2009: 476)
draws up an interesting comparison with Lat. femur, gen. feminis/femoris ‘thigh’, also
withoutagoodetymology,whichwouldgobacktoaheteroclite*dhemu̯r̥/-n-‘thickmuscle’
built on the loc. *dhm̥ -u̯-én ‘in thickness’ of a u-stem noun *dho/em-u- ‘thickness’, which
also acted as derivational basis of the adj. *dhém-u-, *dhm̥ -éu̯-s seen in Gk. θαμύς. As a
formal and semantic parallel, Nikolaev cites Gk. αὐχήν, Aeol. ἄμφην (Theocr. 30.28) ‘neck’
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

288
batisti
but normally found in the plural m. θαμέες (Hom.), f. θαμειαί. Other traces of
a u-stem surface in the comparative θαμύντεραι· πυκνότεραι (Hesych. θ 89 L.,
metri causa for *θαμύτεραι) and in the pn Θαμυκλῆς ‘he who acquires lasting
glory’. Hesychian “ὁδοὺς θαμυράς” attests an adjective θαμυρός*, with a ‘complex
Caland suffix’ *-u-ró- besides the simple *-u- of θαμύς (cf. pairs like λιγύς : λιγυ-
ρός ‘clear-toned, shrill’). Further related forms include an adverb θαμά‘thickly,
frequently’ (→θαμίζω ‘frequent, haunt’), the adjective θαμ(ε)ινός ‘crowded’, and
perhaps the noun θάμνος ‘bush’.
4.2
The *agu- Cluster
The striking accentuation of θαμειαίis shared by, among others, the noun ἄγυια
pl. ἀγυιαί‘street(s)’ (Hom+, mainly but not exclusively poetic; see Christol
1979, Du Bouchet 2004: 62–90). According to a recent analysis by Lun-
dquist(2021:279–285),ἀγυιαίimpliesanoldadjective*ἀγύς.Buildingonwork
by De Lamberterie (1990: 644–646), Lundquist argues that the oxytonesis in
formssuchasθαμειαίandἀγυιαίisanarchaism,reflectingtheallegedpieaccen-
tuation of feminine u-stem adjectives (cf. Ved. -vī́< pie *-u̯-íh2), in contrast to
Classical -εῖα(ι) remade after the masculine/neuter stem. The same archaism
is also preserved in a few other fossilized forms: the placename Πλαταιαί(vs.
paradigmatic πλατεῖαι ‘broad’), ταρφειαί‘thick, close’, ὀργυιαί‘length of the out-
stretched arms’ (cf. ὀρέγω ‘stretch’ < *h3reǵ-). These forms differ in the ablaut
of the suffix: -υιαίwould preserve the inherited zero grade, while -ειαίadop-
ted the ablaut (but not the accent) of the masc./neut. oblique stem -έ(ϝ)-.49
Forms frozen in the singular (θάλεια, λάχεια, λίγεια) or backformed from the
plural (ἄγυια, ὄργυια) shifted instead to default recessive accentuation;50 but
even in the singular ἄγυια and ὄργυια remained finally accented in the oblique
cases (ἀγυιᾶς, -υιᾷ, ὀργυιᾶς, -υιᾷ, cf. Ved. gen.-abl. sg. pṛthivyā́s, dat. pṛthvyái).
< *h2m̥ ǵh-u̯-én-, Arm. awjik‘ ‘collar’ < *h2m̥ ǵh-u̯-ii̯ā, from pie *h2emǵh-u- ‘narrow’ (Ved.
aṁhú°, Goth. aggwu-). For the designation of the thigh as ‘thick (muscle)’, one could add
the Homeric formula παχέος παρὰμηροῦ(Il. 16.473 = Od. 10.439, 11.231), and compare Il.
16.314f. πρυμνὸν σκέλος, ἔνθα πάχιστος | μυὼν ἀνθρώπου πέλεται.
49
The variant -αιαίis ambiguous in this respect, as it could reflect either e-grade *pl̥th2-eu̯íh2
or zero-grade *pl̥th̥2-u̯íh2.
50
Dieu (2016: 323–357) also argues for old suffixal accent, although he suspects that ἄγυια
owes its accentuation to the analogical influence of ὄργυια (343–346). According to other
analyses, these nouns reflect instead an old mobile paradigm: cf. Sihler 1995: 349f. (Pre-
pie **-éu̯-ih2/**-u-i̯éh2-, differently levelled in Gk. and Indo-Ir.); Jasanoff 2018: 15 (pie
*R(é)-u-ih2/*R(z)-u-i̯éh2-, preserved in Gk. relic forms but lost in Vedic). The question of
ablaut in the root is immaterial in our case, since both zero-grade *h2ǵ- and full-grade
*h2eǵ- would yield Gk. ἀγ-.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
289
Outside Greek, a possible cognate of ἄγυια is found in Armenian acu ‘garden
bed’ (Martirosyan, edail: 18; 2013: 109).51 Martirosyan reconstructs an us-
stem *aǵ-us-ih2, which is a definite morphological possibility,52 but the out-
come of *aǵ-u-ih2 would arguably be the same, in Armenian53 as well as in
Greek. If this word-equation is correct, the adjective *aǵ-ú- could be of at
least‘Greco-Armenian’date,possiblyacommoninnovation.54Inviewof “ὁδοὺς
θαμυράς”, the meaning of *ἀγυιαί(scil. ὁδοί) could have been ‘crowded (streets)’,
rather than ‘the leading ones’ uel sim., usually—but quite problematically—
assumed by those analysing it as a perfect participle of ἄγω (see further §4
below).55
The striking formal and semantic parallelism between the families θαμύς :
θαμειαί: θάμυρις and *ἀγύς : ἀγυιαί: ἄγυρις56 suggests that the last form, just
like θάμυρις, may owe its -υ- to derivation from an old u-stem adjective. As
for the derivational path leading from this adjective to an i-stem noun, the
intermediate step was probably an adjective in -ro-. In fact, it seems likely that
θάμυρις ‘gathering’ was derived from θαμυρός* ‘frequented’57 according to the
well-known pattern forming i-stem abstract nouns from o-stem adjectives, first
recognized by Schindler (1980):
1)
*h2aḱro- ‘high’ (Gk. ἄκρος ‘topmost’)
→*h2e/oḱri- ‘height, top’ (Ved. °áśri- ‘edge’, Gk. ὄκρις ‘point’; Gk. ἄκρις, Lat.
ocris ‘peak’);
2)
*n̥bhró- ‘wet’ (Ved. abhrá- ‘rain-cloud’, Gk. ἀφρός ‘foam’)
→*n̥bhri- ‘wetness’ (Lat. imber ‘rain’);
51
For the semantic shift ‘road, path’ > ‘garden bed’, Martirosyan adduces the parallel of Arm.
marg ‘meadow’, dial. ‘garden bed’, from an Iranian source (Parth. marγ ‘wood, meadow’)
cognate with Skt. mārga- ‘(wild) path, road’.
52
For an analysis of Greeknouns in-υια asreflexesof pie us-stems, withVedic and Germanic
comparanda, see e.g. Malzahn 2014 and Schaffner 2019.
53
Cf. Arm. (y)artcu ‘wide, broad; mighty, victorious’ < *pl̥th2uih2 (: Ved. pṛthvī́-, Gk. πλατεῖα).
54
Middle Irish ág ‘battle’ was probably inflected as a u-stem, but its original stem-class and
ablaut grade are doubtful (Repanšek 2013: 76f.).
55
Lat. agēa ‘gangway in a ship’ (Enn. fr. 512 S.) is suspected of being a loan from Gk. ἄγυια or,
rather, a West-Gk. byform *ἀγειᾰ‘street’. Du Bouchet (2004: 89) observes that it is unlikely
that the suffix was remade after dialectal pf. ptc. in -εῖα, since the word probably was never
a participle and it did not look like one. On the other hand, if it was still perceived as a u-
stem adjective, it could have participated in the general remodeling of -υῖα to -εῖα.
56
Interestingly, the parallelism partly extends to the family of ταρφύς*, f. pl. ταρφειαί‘thick’,
another near-synonym of θαμύς, and like it confined to epic and poetic language. In the
sense ‘close, compact, crowded’ these words were replaced in later Greek by the family of
πυκνός.
57
In view of θαμυρός, it seems unlikely that θάμυρις was formed after πανήγυρις, as suggested
by the etymological dictionaries and by De Lamberterie (1990: 669), who briefly hints at
the solution presented here, only to reject it.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

290
batisti
3)
*dhegwhro- ‘hot, burning’ (Gk. τέφρα ‘ashes’)
→*dhegwhri- ‘heat’ (Lat. febris ‘fever’).
By the same token, ἄγυρις could conceivably be an abstract noun built to an
adjective *aguró- ‘collected’, ‘crowded’.58 Such an adjective is admittedly unat-
tested; however, it might lie behind the denominative verb ἀγυρέω virtually
attestedinHesychius.Thegloss,transmittedbythemanuscriptasἀγυρεῖ·ἀθροι-
σματεῖσυγκροτεῖand printed by Latte as α 863 ἀγύρει· [ἀθροίσματι. ἢ] συγκροτεῖ,
is now separated by Cunningham, no doubt correctly, into 862a ἀγύρει· ἀθροί-
σματι “in a gathering” and 862b ⟨ἀγυρεῖ·⟩συγκροτεῖ“collects”.59
The connection between ἀγυιαίand ἄγυρις may be reinforced by semantic
considerations. In his lexical study of ἄγυια, Du Bouchet (2004: 67–90) has
shown that, while in certain dialects (Elean, Delphic) it apparently became the
unmarked word for ‘street’, its oldest attestations show connotations that are
quite compatible with the hypothesis just proposed. In Homeric usage, ἄγυια
is specifically the urban street, characterized as a “lieu de circulation et de ren-
contre” (68). In later poetry, it is typically employed “pour désigner le lieu où
les rejouissances publiques ont lieu, […] souvent lié à l’agora […], lieu de la vie
judiciaire […] ou commerciale” (72, my emphasis). Even Attic, where the word
was otherwise obsolete, preserved the archaic religious formula κνισᾶν ἀγυιάς
‘to fill the streets with the smoke (of sacrifices)’, which describes “des célébra-
tions auxquelles participe la ville tout entière” (73). In other words, one may
say that, not unlike the ἀγορά, the ἀγυιαίwere a place apt for (παν)αγύρεις—
an association that would be easily explainable if these terms were ultimately
related.60
5
Back to ἀγείρω: Deeper Etymological Connections
A new account of ἄγυρις must still explain the closeness in form and mean-
ing to ἀγείρω, which can hardly be accidental.The present ἀγείρω, Lesb. ἀγέρρω
can be traced back to Proto-Gk. *ager-i̯e/o-.61 According to Kümmel (liv2: 276),
58
The shift from an abstract meaning ‘multitude, gathering’ to more concrete or individu-
alizing ones ‘crowd, pile, collection’ is trivial and paralleled by other formations in -i-, as
shown by the examples above.
59
The reading ἀγυρεῖwas already in Schmidt’s edition, and is quoted by lsj9: 16.
60
It is suggestive that all three words occur together in Luc. Prom. 14, quoting Arat. Phaen.
1.2f.: ἁπανταχοῦδὲβωμοὺς καὶθυσίας καὶναοὺς καὶπανηγύρεις· ‘μεσταὶδὲΔιὸς πᾶσαι μὲν
ἀγυιαί, / πᾶσαι δ’ ἀνθρώπων ἀγοραί’ “everywhere there are altars, sacrifices, temples, and
festivals: ‘all the streets are full of Zeus, / and all the market-places of men’”.
61
Compare the similar-sounding *h1ǵer-i̯e/o- > ἐγείρω ‘awaken, rouse, stir up’, some of whose
forms were in fact confused with those of ἀγείρω.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
291
the Homeric thematic aorist ἀγέροντο, ἀγρόμενοι is the most archaic form;62
the -i̯e/o- present is analogical to the s-aor. ἤγειρα, itself a Neubildung. Both
creations are already Mycenean: py Cc 660 a-ke-re (= Att. ἀγείρει), pyVn 493.1 a-
ke-ra2-te (= Att. ἀγείραντες).63The nomenactionis ἀγορά‘assembly(place)’,Myc.
a-ko-ra (kn, py; cf. adj. a-ko-ra-jo [kn]) was created after the common and pro-
ductive pattern φέρω : φορά, φθείρω : φθορά, etc.
The root is apparently confined to Greek, but allows reconstruction as pie
*h2ǵer-,64 and a possible Tocharian cognate is now mentioned by Adams (2013:
162;cf.livAddendas.v.):Toch.Bkār-‘gather’couldrepresentano-gradepresent
*h2ǵor-. Other potential traces of *h2ǵer- augmented with further root exten-
sions or suffixes have been detected in other ie branches:65
1)
*h2ǵr-em- in Ved. grā́ma- ‘troop; inhabitants of a place; village, hamlet’
(EWAia i: 508), Lat. gremium ‘lap’, PSl *gramada, *grъmada ‘heap, pile’,
Lith. grùmulas ‘lump’? (edlil: 272, edsil: 190, edbil: 191);
2)
*h2ǵr̥-tro- in Proto-Germ. *kurþra ~ *kurdra ‘flock’? (edpg: 312);
3)
*h2ǵr̥-nó- in Ved. gaṇá- ‘flock, troop, multitude’ < *gṛṇá-? (EWAia i: 459).
It is often assumed that *h2ǵer- was not a primitive root in pie, but somehow
derived from *h2eǵ- ‘drive, lead’ (: Gk. ἄγω, Lat. agō, Skt. ajati etc.; iew i: 4–6,
liv2: 255f.) via a root extension *-(e)r- (Borghini 1980), or as a denominat-
ive verb from an -r-stem neuter noun *h2eǵ-r- (Anttila 2000) or a thematic
derivative *h2eǵ-er(-o)- (Bammesberger 1982). More speculatively, Cowgill
(1978) suggested that ἀγείρω was built on the strong stem of a heteroclitic noun
*h2eǵ-r/n-, with the weak stem preserved in ἀγών ‘gathering’ > ‘games’; but he
unnecessarilydoubtedtheconnectiontoἄγωonsemanticgrounds.Thesamer-
extension that underlies *h2ǵer- was possibly the basis for thematized *h2eǵro-
‘field’ (Gk. ἀγρός, Lat. ager,Ved. ájra-, Goth. akrs, etc.), but an assessment of the
62
According to Willi (2018: 339 n. 72), ἀγέροντο, ἀγέρεσθαι may be substitutes for older
*ἄγροντο, *ἀγρέσθαι.
63
These forms are of course much discussed in the context of the Mycenean treatment of
*-Rs- and *-Ri̯-clusters. The vexata quaestio whether these spellings represent /agēr-/ with
compensatory lengthening, /agerr-/ with gemination, or an intermediate stage /agerj-/,
/agerh-/ or /agehr-/, though of great import for the historical phonology of Greek, is not
immediately relevant here, and will be left open.
64
liv2: 276; Beekes, edg: 10. Implausible Semitic etymologies in Semerano 1994: 6 and
Vernet Pons 2012. Hamp 1981a, 1981b, 1991 resorts to ‘Pelasgian’, i.e. a hypothetical Pre-
Greek ie substrate language. At any rate, ἀ- is hardly the zero grade of ἐν, as per iew ii:
382f. s.v. i. ger, gere. The very existence of a zero-grade variant *n̥ of the pie local particle
*en ‘in’ has most recently been doubted by Van Beek 2018.
65
On the other hand, it remains very dubious that Gk. γάργαρα ~ γέργερα ‘heaps, lot, plenty’,
γαργαίρω ‘swarm with’ or Lat. grex ‘herd, flock’ belong here.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

292
batisti
exactrelationshipbetweentheseforms(andἀγρέω‘take,seize’,ἀγρετός*‘taken’,
ἄγρα‘hunting’)isnotoriouslycomplicated,andcannotbepursuedhere;seethe
discussion and the bibliography in nil: 267–277 s.v. *h2eĝ-.66
According to Lundquist (2017: 53), the root *h2eǵ- is also the most likely can-
didate for the etymology of *ἀγύς, ἄγυια. The idea of a relationship between
ἄγω and ἄγυια is not a new one, and in fact it dates back to antiquity. It was
rejected as folk-etymology by Szemerényi (1964: 206–208) and Christol (1979:
69–71),67 but, as Lundquist (2021: 285) remarks, these authors object “mainly
to the semantics of ἄγυια if taken from a perfect participle”. More recently,
Malzahn (2014: 168f.) defended the connection, though reconstructing an us-
stem *h2ǵ-us-ih2.68 The case for a genuine etymological relationship is further
strengthened,inMartirosyan’sview(edail:18),bytheparallelismbetweenGk.
ἄγω ‘lead’: ἄγυια ‘street’ and Arm. acem ‘lead, move, bring’: acu ‘garden bed’. It
remainstobeseenwhatsemanticdevelopmentcouldleadfromarootmeaning
‘to drive’ to an adjective meaning ‘compact, thick’. In fact, u-stem adjectives are
typical members of the Caland system. The root *h2eǵ- does build a good num-
ber of Caland-like formations in the ie languages,69 but unlike typical Caland
roots do it does not express a basic, non-verbal and non-relational adjectival
meaning.70 This advises caution in deriving *ἀγύς and related forms from this
root, even though it is not impossible that this kind of derivation was extended
to roots that did not originally take part in the Caland system: u-stem adjectives
were a closed class in historical Greek, but may have enjoyed some degree of
productivity at a prehistorical stage.71
If the above reconstruction is correct, ἄγυρις—derived from *ἀγύς via
*ἀγυρός—would be related to ἀγείρω after all, but only inasmuch as both would
be distant derivatives of the very productive root *h2eǵ-. Even if ἀγυρ° forms
were not originally derived from *h2ǵer-, in historical times they were doubt-
less attracted to the system of ἀγείρω.72 This connection, strongly supported
66
Cf. also Vine 1998: 50; Anttila 2000: 133–155 and passim.
67
Beekes (1998: 25f.) took the extreme view that this and all nouns in -υια are Pre-Greek.
68
More generally, Malzahn (2014) prefers to see Greek isolated words in -υια as derivatives of
us-stems rather than u-stems, while leaving open the possibility that at least in some cases
the former may presuppose the latter. The analysis as us-stems is most recently endorsed
by Schaffner (2019).
69
Cf. Höfler 2016: 2, with a list of nominal formations.
70
Cf. Rau 2009: 77–109.
71
Cf. De Lamberterie 1990: 960.
72
The equivalence was already fully in place in the Homeric language, where ὁμηγερέες
‘assembled’(v.l.-ηγυρ-!)coexistswithὁμήγυρις‘assembly’;cf.the figuraetymologicaὁμηγυ-
ρίσασθαι…εἰςἀγορήν‘summontoassembly’(Od.16.376).Thisalsoanswerstothequestion,
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
293
by the closeness in form and meaning, was fated to become unavoidable after
*ἀγύς was lost and ἄγυια acquired a specialized meaning. In other words, ἀγυρ-
was felt by now as a possible stem variant of ἀγείρω besides ἀγερ- and ἀγορ-.
Evidence in this direction comes from the dialectal variants ἄγερσις, °άγορσις,
ἄγορρις, ἄγαρρις discussed by Van Beek (2022: 134 f). These look like parallel,
more transparent formations built from the ‘neo-root’ ἀγερ-/ἀγορ-/ἀγr̥-73 with
the common abstract-forming suffix -σις < *-ti-. It should be noted that ἄγῠρις
did not contain -σις, as it was an i-stem, not a *-ti-stem. Blass (1890: xiii–xiv)
found it difficult to reconcile all these forms precisely because he started from
the false premise that all of them contained -σις: “man muss […] wie hier [i.e.
in ἄγορρις, ἄγαρρις] das doppelte ρ, so in πανήγυρις und ἄγυρις das einfache auf
ρσ zurückführen. Nach welchem Lautgesetze?” There was in fact no sound law
involved, just a different suffix.
6
Conclusions
I have proposed that ἄγυρις ‘gathering’ is an i-stem nominalization of a them-
atic adjective *ἀγυρός ‘tightly packed, crowded’, in turn derived from a u-stem
adjective *ἀγύς of similar meaning, whose feminine plural survived substant-
ivized as ἀγυιαί‘streets’. It is possible that this adjective belonged to the root
*h2eǵ- ‘drive’, which is also the probable ultimate origin of the verb ἀγείρω
‘gather’. If this was the case, ἄγυρις was indeed related to ἀγείρω, but not as a
direct derivative.
If theaboveiscorrect,ἄγυριςanditsfamilycanbeexplainedwithrecourseto
well-attested processes of morphological derivation, and with no need to pos-
tulate a special dialectal development, or an irregular Proto-Greek u-coloured
raisedbyananonymousreferee,of whytheagentnounἀγύρτης,-τήρandtheaction/result
nouns ἀγυρμός, ἄγυρμα show an athematic stem ἀγυρ- if the ultimate origin of the family
was an o-stem adj. *ἀγυρός. In fact, one would not expect such forms to be derived from
an adjective at all, but rather from a verbal stem. In my opinion, these nouns show that
ἀγυρ- was already felt as a possible stem variant of ἀγερ-/ἀγορ-, probably after ἄγυρις was
interpreted as an abstract of ἀγείρω.
73
Arcad. °άγορσις (ig v 2,3.26), ἄγορρις (Hesych.; of uncertain dialectal appurtenance, cf.
Sowa 2019: 193f.), W. Ion. ἄγαρρις (ig xiv 759, Naples) can all reflect zero-grade *agr̥-ti-
(the first two, in principle, also an o-grade). E. Ion. ἄγερσις (Hdt. 7.5.48; sig 2660.3, Mile-
tus) copies the full grade of ἀγείρω similarly to other ti-stem nouns with secondary full
grade after the present, e.g. ἔγερσις ←ἐγείρω, φεῦξις (besides older φύξις) ←φεύγω (Vine
2004: 358). The recourse to all possible ablaut grades also speaks against the antiquity of
these formations. Cf. also ἀγερμός besides ἀγυρμός.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

294
batisti
reduced grade. Moreover, the proposed etymology brings additional evidence
for a prehistorical u-stem adjective *ἀγύς, already suggested on independent
grounds by Lundquist (2021) and potentially supported by Armenian data.
Methodologically, while it is true that when facing irregular variation an
“explanation […] in terms of Greek dialectology or areal linguistics” is often
preferable to one in terms of ie reconstruction (Oreshko 2013: 175), I argue
that in the present case the dialectological explanations pursued so far may
prove inferior to one grounded in Greek and pie derivational morphology.
Appendix: The pn Ἄγυρις and the Place-Name Ἀγύριον
In onomastics, Ἄγυρις is mentioned by Diodorus Siculus (14.9.2, 78.7, 95.4–
96.1) as a tyrant of Agyrion in Sicily (5th/4th century bc).74 The pn could be
a diminutive of a compound with a first member Ἀγυρι° or Ἀγυρο° (see §3.1. on
Θάμυρις), which perhaps not coincidentally echoed the name of the town. The
place-name Ἀγύριον is transmitted with variants (Ἀγούριον Ptol. 3.4.7, Ἀγύρινα
Steph. Byz. α 52 B.) which could suggest foreign origin. I think, however, that
it could well mean ‘place of (festive) gathering’, either as a Greek formation
(←ἄγυρις) or as folk-etymological reinterpretation of a native name. The town
was renowned for its ancient cult of Heracles, who was honored—jointly with
Iolaos and Geryon—with splendid gatherings (ἀπαντήσεις, πανηγύρεις!). These
festivalshadtheimportantfunctionof bringingtogetherGreeksandSicels,free
menandslaves,andAgyrionwas“unlieuderencontreparticulièrementadapte”
for such “rituels intégrateurs proposés par les colons grecs, un moyen d’attirer
les Sicules en voie d’hellénisation” (Jourdain-Annequin 1992: 132, emphasis
mine). In particular, Agyrion laid claim to having been the first polis to bestow
divine honours on Heracles.75 The first, spontaneous gathering of the inhabit-
ants to greet the hero on his arrival was a key moment in the foundation myth
of the local cult,76 and could well have been remembered in the name of the
town itself.77
74
Diodorus(98.2.7)alsomentionsonceakingAgyrisof Cyprus;thenamecouldbeamistake
for Anaxagoras.
75
This tradition was in competition with a Delphic and an Athenian one; see Giangiulio
1983: 833–845.
76
The myth is told at length by Diodorus (4.24.1), himself a native of Agyrion.
77
“Gli abitanti chiamavano porta Eraclea quella, davanti alla quale radunatisi essi avrebbero
accolto solennemente al suo arrivo il dio […] e fatti i sacrifici in suo onore. Il termine
impiegato da Diodoro, ἀπαντήσεις, evoca gli assembramenti e le festose accoglienze che
sarebbero state tributate al dio al suo arrivo dalla popolazione di Agyrion” (Manganaro
1991: 218, emphasis mine).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
295
References
delg = Chantraine, Pierre 1969–1980, Dictionnaire Étymologique de la Langue
Grecque. Histoire des mots, Paris: Klincksieck.
dge = Adrados, Francisco R. et al. (edd.) 1980-, Diccionario griego-español, Madrid:
csic.
edail = Martirosyan, Hrach K. 2009, Etymological Dictionary of the Armenian
Inherited Lexicon, Leiden/Boston: Brill.
edbil= Derksen, Rick 2015, Etymological Dictionary of the Baltic Inherited Lexicon,
Leiden/Boston: Brill.
edg = Beekes, Robert S.P. 2010, Etymological Dictionary of Greek, Leiden/Boston:
Brill.
edlil = de Vaan, Michiel 2008, Etymological Dictionary of Latin and the other Italic
Languages, Leiden/Boston: Brill.
edpg = Kroonen, Guus 2013, Etymological Dictionary of Proto-Germanic, Leiden/
Boston: Brill.
edsil = Derksen, Rick 2008, Etymological Dictionary of the Slavic Inherited Lexicon,
Leiden/Boston: Brill.
EWAia = Mayrhofer, Manfred 1992–2001, Etymologisches Wörterbuch des Alt-
indoarischen, Heidelberg: Winter.
gew = Frisk, Hjalmar 1954–1961, Griechisches etymologisches Wörterbuch, Heidel-
berg: Winter.
iew= Pokorny, Julius 1957–1969, Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch,
Tübingen/Bern/München: Francke.
LfgrE = Snell, Bruno et al. (edd.) 1955–2010, Lexikon des frühgriechischen Epos, Göt-
tingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
liv2 = Rix, Helmut—Kümmel, Martin J. et al. (edd.) 2001, LexikonderIndogerman-
ischen Verben, Wiesbaden: Reichert.
liv Addenda = Kümmel, Martin J., Addenda et corrigenda zu liv2, http://www.oriind
ufa.uni‑jena.de/iskvomedia/indogermanistik/liv2add.html
(last updated 17/04/2019).
lsj9 = Liddell, Henry G.—Scott, Robert—Jones, Henry S., 1940. A Greek-
English Lexicon, rev. H. Stuart-Jones et al., Oxford: Oxford University Press.
nil = Wodtko, Dagmar S.—Irslinger, Britta S.—Schneider, Carolin 2008,
Nomina im indogermanischen Lexikon, Heidelberg: Winter.
Adams, Douglas Q. 2013, A Dictionary of Tocharian B. Revised and greatly enlarged,
Amsterdam/New York: Benjamins.
Adrados, Francisco R. 1957, Sobre los orígenes del vocabulario ático, ii, “Emerita” 25:
81–121.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

296
batisti
Anttila, Raimo 2000, Greek and Indo-European Etymology in Action. Proto-Indo-
European *aǵ, Amsterdam/Philadelphia: Benjamins.
Bammesberger, Alfred 1982, Ἀγών und ἀγείρω, “Die Sprache” 28: 27–30.
Bechtel, Friedrich B. 1921–1924, Die griechischen Dialekte, Berlin: Weidmann.
van Beek, Lucien 2018, Ἄτλας ἀστεμφής: Traces of local particles in Greek compounds
and the origins of intensive alpha, “Glotta” 94: 38–81.
van Beek, Lucien 2022, The Reflexes of Syllabic Liquids in Ancient Greek. Linguistic
Prehistory of the Greek Dialects and Homeric Kunstsprache, Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Beekes, Robert S.P. 1969, The Development of Proto-Indo-European Laryngeals in
Greek, The Hague/Paris: Mouton.
Beekes, Robert S.P. 1998, Hades and Elysion, in J. Jasanoff—H.C. Melchert—L. Oliver
(edd.), Mírcurad.StudiesinHonorof CalvertWatkins, Innsbruck: Institut für Sprach-
wissenschaft: 17–28.
Bhat, Darbhe N.S. 1978, A general study of palatalization, in J.H. Greenberg (ed.),
Universals of Human Language, 2. Phonology, Stanford: Stanford University Press:
47–92.
Blümel,Wolfgang1982, DieaiolischenDialekte.PhonologieundMorphologiederins-
chriftlichen Texte aus generativer Sicht, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Bonsignore, Chiara 2013, Μητρὸς ἀγύρτης: sguardo greco e realtà orientale in un epi-
gramma di Alceo di Messene (a.p. 6.128 = 21 G-P), “arf” 15: 67–90.
Borghini, D. 1980, Homérique ἄγω, ἄγρει, ἀγείρω et les dérivés grecs de la racine i.-e.
*ǝ2eg, “lama” 6: 1–26.
Du Bouchet, Julien 2004, Recherches sur les noms de la rue en grec ancien, PhD Diss.
Paris X—Nanterre.
Buck, Carl D. 1955, The Greek Dialects, Chicago/London: Chicago University Press.
Chaniotis, Angelos 2009, Epigraphic Bulletin for Greek Religion 2006, “Kernos” 22:
209–243.
Chantraine, Pierre 1933, La formation des noms en grec ancien, Paris: Champion.
Christol, Alain 1979, Ἄγυια. Étude synchronique et diachronique d’un champ séman-
tique, “RPh” 53: 59–79.
Clay, Diskin 2004, Archilochos Heros. The Cult of the Poets in the Greek Polis, Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Cowgill,Warren 1965, EvidenceinGreek, inW.Winter (ed.), EvidenceforLaryngeals,
The Hague: Mouton: 142–180.
Cowgill, Warren 1978, Agṓn : ageírō. A new r/n-alternation, in M.A. Jazayery et al.
(edd.), Linguistic and Literary Studies in Honor of A.A. Hill, vol. iii, The Hague/Paris/
New York: Mouton: 29–31.
Dieu, Eric 2016, L’accentuation des noms en *-ā (*-eh2) en grec ancien et dans les
langues indo-européennes. Étude morphologique et sémantique, Innsbruck: Institut
für Sprachen und Literaturen.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
297
Durante, Marcello 1976, Sulla preistoria della tradizione poetica greca. Parte
seconda: Risultanze della comparazione indoeuropea, Roma: Edizioni dell’Ateneo.
García Ramón, José Luis 2010, Reconstructing ie lexicon and phraseology: inher-
ited patterns and lexical renewal, in S.W. Jamison—H.C. Melchert—B. Vine (eds.),
Proceedings of the 21st Annual ucla Indo-European Conference, Bremen: Hempen:
69–106.
García Ramón, José Luis 2018, Ancient Greek dialectology: old and new questions,
recent developments, in G.K. Giannakis—E. Crespo—P. Filos (edd.), Studies in
Ancient Greek Dialects: From Central Greece to the Black Sea, Berlin: De Gruyter: 29–
106.
Giammellaro, Pietro 2006, Fuori e dentrola città. Saperi marginali e religione istitu-
zionale nella Grecia antica, in G. Regalzi (ed.), Mutuare, interpretare, tradurre: storie
di culture a confronto. Atti del 2° incontro ‘Orientalisti’ (Roma, 11–12 dicembre 2002),
Roma: La Sapienza: 169–214.
Giammellaro, Pietro 2012, Agyrtai. Pratiche magiche, itineranza e marginalità reli-
giosa nella Grecia antica, in M. Piranomonte—F.M. Simón (edd.), Contesti Magici—
Contextos Mágicos (Atti del Convegno Internazionale Contextos Mágicos—Contesti
Magici, Roma, 4–6 Novembre 2009), Roma: De Luca: 279–282.
Giangiulio, Maurizio 1983, Greci e non-Greci in Sicilia alla luce dei culti e delle leg-
gende di Eracle, in aa.vv., Forme di contatto e processi di trasformazione delle società
antiche.AttidelconvegnodiCortona(24–30maggio1981),Pisa/Roma:ScuolaNormale
Superiore: 785–846.
Hall, Tracy A. 2000, Typological generalizations concerning secondary palatalization,
“Lingua” 110: 1–25.
Hall,TracyA.—Hamann,Silke2010,Onthecross-linguisticavoidanceof rhoticplus
high front vocoid sequences, “Lingua” 120: 1821–1844.
Hamm, Eva-Maria 1957, Grammatik zu Sappho und Alkaios, Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
Hamp, Eric P. 1981a, ἀγοστός, ἀγείρω, “Živa Antika” 31: 83–84.
Hamp, Eric P. 1981b, Some Greek forms in σ, “Živa Antika” 31: 95–96.
Hamp, Eric P. 1991, Prehellenic μύλη, σπυρίς, ἄγυρις, “Lingua Posnaniensis” 32/33: 87.
Hawkins, Shane 2013, Studies in the Language of Hipponax, Bremen: Hempen.
Hellemans, Geert 2005, Étude phonétique et graphique du [ j] ( jod) en grec mycén-
ien, PhD diss. Leuven.
Hock, Hans H. 2004, Fish, push, and Greek R+y clusters: a return to Danielson 1903, in
K. Jones-Bley et al. (edd.), Proceedings of the 15th ucla Indo-European Conference,
Washington DC: Institute for the Study of Man: 155–167.
Hodot, René 1990, Le dialecte éolien d’Asie. La langue des inscriptions, viie s. a.C.–ive
s. p.C., Paris: Éd. Recherche sur les Civilisations.
Hoffmann, Otto 1891–1898, Die griechischen Dialekte in ihren historischen Zusam-
menhange mit den wichtigsten ihren Quellen, Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

298
batisti
Höfler, Stefan (in press), Ein Potpourri aus ‘süß’ und ‘schleimig’: Caland-Wurzeln,
Wortbildung, Etymologie und Co., in M. Malzahn (ed.), Proceedings of the 15th Facht-
agung der Indogermanischen Gesellschaft, September 13–16, 2016, Vienna.
Hyllested, Adam 2017, Again on pigs in ancient Europe: the Fennic connection, in
B.S.S. Hansen et al. (edd.), Etymology and the Indo-European Lexicon. Proceedings of
the14thFachtagungderIndogermanischenGesellschaft,17–22September2012,Copen-
hagen, Wiesbaden: Reichert: 183–196.
Jasanoff, Jay H. 2018, The Prehistory of the Balto-Slavic Accent, Leiden/Boston: Brill.
Joseph, Brian D. 1979, Irregular [u] in Greek, “Die Sprache” 25: 46–48.
Jourdain-Annequin, Colette 1992, À propos d’un rituel pour Iolaos à Agyrion: Hér-
aclès et l’initiation des jeunes gens, in A. Moreau (ed.), L’initiation. Actes du colloque
international de Montpellier, 11–14 avril 1991, i. Les rites d’adolescence et les mystères,
Montpellier: Université Paul Valéry: 121–141.
Kaczyńska, Elwira 2007, Greek (Hesychian) κόρος ‘great number of men’ and related
words, “Emerita” 75: 273–278.
Kárpáti, András 2016, Thamyras’ song contest and the Muse figures, in L. Bravi et al.
(edd.),Tralyraeaulos.Tradizionimusicaliegeneripoetici,Pisa/Roma:FabrizioSerra:
167–198.
Kühner, Raphael—Blass, Friedrich 1890, Ausführliche Grammatik der griechis-
chen Sprache, Erster Teil: Elementar und Formenlehre, Hannover: Hahn.
Lambert, Charles 1903, Étude sur le dialecte éolien; sa place dans l’ensemble des dia-
lectes grecs, Dijon: Damidot frères.
de Lamberterie, Charles 1990, Les adjectifs grecs en -υς. Sémantique et compa-
raison, 2 vols., Louvain-la-Neuve: Peeters.
Lejeune, Michel 1972, Phonétique historique du mycénien et du grec ancien, Paris:
Klincksieck.
Lundquist, Jesse 2021, παλίντονος. Reconstructing the prehistory of accents (Homeric
-ειαί, -εια, -υιαί), “Indogermanische Forschungen” 126: 261–304.
Malzahn, Melanie 2014, Pūṣan, Pan, and Neuter Stems in *-us(-), in C. Melchert—
E. Rieken—T. Steer (edd.), Munus amicitiae: Norbert Oettinger a collegis et amicis
dicatum, Ann Arbor: Beech Stave Press: 160–180.
Manganaro, Giacomo 1991, Note diodoree, in E. Galvagno—C. Molè Ventura (edd.),
Mito storia tradizione. Diodoro Siculo e la storiografia classica. Atti del Convegno
Internazionale Catania-Agira 7–8 dicembre 1984, Catania: Edizioni del Prisma: 201–
226.
Martirosyan, Hrach K. 2013, The place of Armenian in the Indo-European language
family. The relationship with Greek and Indo-Iranian, “Journal of Language Relation-
ship/Вопросы языкового родства” 10: 85–138.
Masson, Olivier 1987, Remarques d’onomastique cyrénéenne: quelques noms mas-
culins en -ις, “qal” 12: 245–248 (= 1990, Onomastica Graeca Selecta, vol. 2, Paris:
Université de Paris-X: 613–616).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

greek αγυρις ‘gathering’
299
Nickau, Klaus 1974, Planudes und Moschopulos als Zeugen für Sappho, “zpe” 14: 15–17.
Nikolaev, Alexander 2009,TheGermanicwordfor‘sword’anddelocativalderivation
in Proto-Indo-European, “jies” 37: 461–488.
Nikolaev, Alexander 2015, Hittite wattaēš ‘birds’, “mss” 69: 257–267.
Oreshko, Rostislav 2013, Review of Hawkins 2013, “Hephaistos” 30: 173–178.
Rasmussen,JensE.1985, MiscellaneousmorphologicalproblemsinIndo-Europeanlan-
guages, i–ii, “Lingua Posnaniensis” 28: 27–62 (= Selected Papers on Indo-European
Linguistics. With a Section on Comparative Eskimo Linguistics, vol. 1, Copenhagen:
Museum Tusculanum: 100–145).
Rau, Jeremy 2009, Indo-European Nominal Morphology: The Decads and the Caland
System, Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachen und Literaturen.
Repanšek, Luka 2013, The historical morphology of primary u-stems in Celtic, MA diss.
Aberystwyth.
Rodríguez-Piedrabuena, Sandra—Jiménez Delgado, José M. 2021, On the
etymology of πορφύρα ‘purple’, “Glotta” 97: 246–261.
Roesch, Paul 1982, Études béotiennes, Paris: De Boccard.
Schaffner, Stefan 2019, Zur Wortbildung von griechisch ἄγυια, Ἅρπυια, ὄργυια und
Verwandtem, “mss” 73: 157–183.
Schindler, Joachim 1980, Zur Herkunft der altindischen cvi-Bildungen, in M.
Mayrhofer et al. (edd.), Lautgeschichte und Etymologie. Akten der vi. Fachtagung der
Indogermanischen Gesellschaft, Wiesbaden: Reichert: 386–393.
Schwyzer, Eduard 1939, Griechische Grammatik. Bd. 1: Allgemeiner Teil, Lautlehre,
Wortbildung, Flexion, München: Beck.
Semerano, Giovanni 1994, Leoriginidellaculturaeuropea.Vol.ii:Basisemitichedelle
lingue indoeuropee. Dizionario della lingua greca, Firenze: Olschki.
Serafini, Nicola 2016, Sacerdoti mendicanti e itineranti: gli agyrtai nell’antica Grecia,
“mh” 73: 24–41.
Sihler, Andrew L. 1995, New Comparative Grammar of Greek and Latin, New York/
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Skoda, Françoise 1982, Le redoublement expressif: un universal linguistique. Analyse
du procédé en grec ancien et en d’autres langues, Paris: Peeters.
Sowa,Wojciech 2019, Macedonian βίῤῥοξ (Hsch. Β 627), in G.K. Giannakis et al. (edd.),
StudiesinGreekLexicography.InHonorof JohnN.Kazazis,Berlin/Boston:DeGruyter:
187–203.
Szemerényi, Oswald 1964, Syncope in Greek and Indo-European and the Nature of
Indo-European Accent, Napoli: Istituto Universitario Orientale.
Tichy, Eva 1983, OnomatopoetischeVerbalbildungendesGriechischen,Wien:Verlag des
Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Vernet Pons, Eulalia 2012, Sumerio é.kur, acadio ekurru, arameo ˀeg/kūrā, griego
ἀγορά: una nueva aportación etimológica, in A. Agud et al. (edd.), Séptimo centenario
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

300
batisti
de los estudios orientales en Salamanca, Salamanca: Ediciones Universidad de Sala-
manca: 159–169.
Vine, Brent 1998, Aeolic ὄρπετον and Deverbative *-eto- in Greek and Indo-European,
Innsbruck: Institut für Sprachwissenschaft.
Vine, Brent 1999, On ‘Cowgill’s law’ in Greek, in C. Luschützky—H. Eichner (edd.),
Compositiones Indogermanicae in memoriam Jochem Schindler, Prague/Vienna:
Enigma Corporation: 555–600.
Vine, Brent 2004, On pie full grades in some zero-grade contexts: *-tí-, *-tó-, in J.
Clackson—B.A. Olsen (edd.), Indo-European Word Formation. Proceedings of the
Conference Held at the University of Copenhagen, October 20th–22nd 2000, Copen-
hagen: Museum Tusculanum: 357–379.
Wathelet, Paul 1970, Les traits éoliens dans la langue de l’épopée grecque, Roma: Edi-
zioni dell’Ateneo.
West, Martin L. 1998–2000, HomeriIlias, 2 vols., Stuttgart/Leipzig:Teubner; Munich/
Leipzig: Saur.
West, Martin L. 1999, The invention of Homer, “cq” 49: 364–382.
West, Martin L. 2007, Indo-European Poetry and Myth, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Willi, Andreas 2018, Origins of the Greek verb, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Wilson, Peter 2009, Thamyris the Thracian: the archetypal wandering poet?, in
R. Hunter—I. Rutherford (edd.), Wandering Poets in Ancient Greek Culture. Travel,
Locality and Pan-Hellenism, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press: 46–79.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

© Brian D. Joseph, 2022 | doi:10.1163/9789004508828_014
chapter 12
Here’s to a Long Life! Albanian Reflections of
Proto-Indo-European Semantics
Brian D. Joseph
1
Introduction
The study of diachronic semantics, taking in both semantic reconstruction
and semantic change, has long been one of the less systematic enterprises
in historical linguistics. While some advances have been made in the area of
shiftsingrammaticalmeaning,diachroniclexicalsemanticsisperhapslesswell
understood. Metaphor appears to be a powerful force in semantic change, and
boththelinguisticcontextandthepragmatic/socialmilieu(Christiansen—
Joseph 2016) can play a key role as well. These observations have meant that
some seemingly unusual changes have to be recognized that would be inex-
plicable without an understanding of the cultural milieu in which the change
takes place; the shift of earlier English bede (later bead) from ‘prayer’ to ‘small
round glass or ceramic object with a hole through it’ is a classic case of this
sort. Nonetheless, a confounding aspect in the study of semantic change is the
fact that proper attention to the cultural and pragmatic milieu can also reveal
instances of semantic persistence (see immediately below), sometimes over
long stretches of time. In what follows, I examine a far-reaching example of
such persistence in the Balkans, with particular attention to Albanian. First,
though,bywayof providingsomebackground,Ipresentsomeknowninstances
of such lexical reflections of earlier semantics, and then zero in on the details
of usage for various present-day Albanian and Balkan words and phrases that
reveal aspects of what can plausibly be reconstructed as Proto-Indo-European
cultural semantics having to do with an interest in longevity, as reflected in
continuations of the language more than six millennia later.
Thesemantic“reflections”—“echoes”,touseanothermetaphor—referredto
here can be defined as traces in later usage of earlier semantics (whether dir-
ectly attested or reconstructed). Such reflections are seen in change leading to
new grammatical semantics, as with Albanian nonactive (medio-passive) -h-
(e.g.la-h-em‘Iwashmyself /Iamwashed’)fromtheProto-Indo-European(pie)
stem-forming suffix *-sḱ-, which seems to have had a presential orientation in
pie, based on its inchoative/iterative sense in, for instance, Latin, Hittite, and
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

302
joseph
Ionic Greek, but also on its function as a simple marker of present tense, as
(ultimately) in Sanskrit and Avestan. In Albanian, despite the clear shift in the
value of this -h- morpheme, from presential marker to nonactive marker, non-
etheless it betrays its original present-oriented semantics in that it is restricted
to non-past forms.1 There thus has been persistence of the presential orienta-
tion despite the shift in the primary function of *-sḱ-.
The occurrence of such semantic reflections—traces in a certain sense—is
akin to what Hopper 1991 calls the “principle of persistence”, whereby original
lexical semantics “persist” after an item enters the grammatical arena. But we
can also see semantic persistence in the purely lexical domain. For instance, as
discussed in Joseph—Karnitis (1999, 2006) there is an Indo-Iranian root *muč-
with the meanings ‘losbinden/untie; abstreifen/strip off’ (liv 443; iew 744),
that gives rise to a wide range of meanings in Indic:
– Vedic Sanskrit: ‘untie, loosen, unfasten, loosen, set free; release (streams);
undo, dissolve; cause to disappear, strip off’
– Classical Sanskrit: ‘loosen, set free, release, let go, let loose, deliver; relax (the
throat); slacken (reins); let live, spare; leave, quit, give up; die; set apart; dis-
miss; cast, throw, hurl, discharge; emit, drop, shed, let fall; utter, give forth;
give away, grant, bestow; put on (middle voice); void (excrement); sacrifice;
deceive, cheat’ …
But, Proto-Indo-Iranian (PIIr) *muč- is highly restricted in Iranian, occurring
in only two forms in Avestan, both, significantly, it is argued, with shoe-/foot-
related meanings:
framuxti- ‘taking off of footwear’ (1×: Fragments 6.27)
paitišmuxta- ‘having shoes’ (3×: Yashts 5.64, 5.78, 10.125)
And, there is some shoe-/foot-related meanings for derivatives of this root in
Sanskrit, e.g. Classical Sanskrit vi-ava-√muc- ‘take off shoes’, but also in late
Vedic, with upa-√muc-
kārṣṇī upānahau upa muñcate
(ts 5.4.4, repeated 5.6.6)
‘(two) black-antelope leather-sandals he-puts on’
vārāhī upānahau upamuñcate
(tb 1.7.9)
‘(two) pig’s leather-sandals he-puts-on’
1 The past nonactive is marked rather by a particle u (see footnote 10) occurring together with
the active forms, e.g. u la ‘I washed myself / I was washed’.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

here’s to a long life!
303
vārāhyā upānahā upamuñcate
(śb 5.4.3.19)
‘(two) sow’s leather-sandals he-puts-on’
Based on these facts, Joseph and Karnitis make the suggestion that PIIr *muč-
had the range of meaning seen in Sanskrit, but among those was meanings
was a use referring specifically to shoes/feet, as with upa-√muc- and vi-ava-
√muc-; echoes of that original shoe-/foot-related meaning then carried over
into Iranian, giving the Avestan distribution of derivatives of this root. In this
account, there is thus “persistence” of earlier lexical semantics, and a distribu-
tional “echo” of that original meaning.2
2
An Extended Case Study from Albanian: Etymological Details
Albanian has a negative prefix as-, with the meaning ‘no-, not (in compounds)’,
as in asnjë ‘none’ (cf. një ‘one’), asgjë ‘nothing’ (cf. gjë ‘thing’), askund ‘nowhere’
(cf. kund ‘somewhere’). It can be equated etymologically with Ancient Greek οὐ
‘not’, as argued explicitly in Joseph 2002 and 2005,3 fleshing out a suggestion
for the Albanian free word as ‘and not; neither’ made in Pedersen 1900 and in
Cowgill 1960, though with no details. Now, Greek οὐ, especially in its exten-
ded prevocalic form οὐκ, is argued by Cowgill to derive from a pie emphatic
negative phrase *(ne) … H2oyu kwid ‘not ever; not on your (long) life’, consisting
of the negative marker *ne, the noun *H2oyu meaning ‘long life; vital energy’
(cf. Vedic Sanskrit āyu- ‘long life’, Greek ἀεί/αἰεί‘always’), and *kwid (as in the
Sanskrit particle cid ‘even’), serving as an emphatic; he argues also for connect-
ing Armenian oč‘ ‘not’ with οὐκ as well, so that he derives it from this same pie
collocation.4
All of the elements needed to make this etymological connection work for
Albanianas-areavailable.Forinstance,theseveralphonologicaldevelopments
2 In §5 below, some further thoughts are offered on the nature of semantic persistence.
3 Many of the etymological and derivational details from these earlier works concerning as-
and *ne … H2oyu kwid are repeated here for the sake of completeness in the exposition, but
some new material is added here including the overall thrust of viewing these developments
through the lens of semantic persistence.
4 Pedersen (1900: 321) mentions Latin haud ‘not’ inthecontext of a discussion of the etymology
of Albanian negation, including as, but he claims to be uncertain about whether it belongs,
and in any case does not develop the idea at all. See now Garnier 2014 for a fully developed
account of haud as belonging to the family of Greek οὐκ, etc. Adding Latin into the equation
gives a solid basis for viewing *(ne) … H2oyu kwid as being an element in pie and not just a
dialectally created collocation within the family.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

304
joseph
needed to go from pie *H2oyu kwid to Albanian as- all have solid parallels else-
where in Albanian historical phonology:
– loss of initial *H2, e.g. ag ‘dawn’ < *H2eug- (cf. Grk αὐγή‘sunlight; dawn’)
– assibilation of *kw before front vowels; e.g.:
si ‘how’ from *kwiV- (cf. Latin quia ‘why’)
sjell ‘bring’ from *kwel- ‘turn’
sorrë ‘blackbird’ from *kwērsnā (cf. Sanskrit kṛṣṇa- ‘black’)
– final syllable reduction, instantiated as full truncation for at least (some)
high vowel syllables, e.g. kam ‘I have’ < *kap-mi, elb ‘barley’ < *albhit (cf. Grk
ἄλφι ‘type of grain’, ἄλφιτον ‘pearl barley’)
– loss of intervocalic *-y-, e.g. tre ‘three’ < *treyes (with final syllable truncation
too)
– *o > a, e.g.
natë ‘night’ < *nokwt-i-
asht ‘bone’ < *Hosteyo-
darkë ‘evening meal’ < *dorkwom (cf. Greek δόρπον ‘evening meal’)
– *ou > a, with loss of labial glide in diphthong, e.g.:
hedh ‘throw’ < *sḱeud- (cf. OEng sceotan ‘shoot’)
ag ‘dawn’ < *H2eug- (cf. Grk αὐγή‘sunlight; dawn’)
ar ‘gold’ (borrowing from Latin aurum ‘gold’)
Putting these developments together, we get:
*H2
o
y
u
kw
id
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇓
⇓
Ø
a
Ø
Ø
s
øø
The loss of *ne in this collocation can be likened to the loss of ne in colloquial
French, as in J’aime pas ce restaurant ‘I do not like this restaurant’, with only
pas marking negation, from an earlier bipartite negation marking ne … pas.
Moreover, even this loss has a parallel within Albanian, based on the etymo-
logy of the Albanian verbal negation marker s’ ‘not’ as being from *ne … kwid
(or possibly *ne … kwe) with truncation of *ne.5
An important detail here is that the function of prefixal/compound as- is
to mark a simple negation within a compound.6 In this way, this usage is
consistent with the use posited for *ne … H2oyu kwid. Furthermore, there is
5 This account would mean that s’ is not derived from the present-day negative word as ‘and
not’ (even if it might show some connection to it); see also footnotes 7 and 8.
6 By “simple negation”, I mean negation serving simply as a logical operator, i.e. giving from X
the reading ‘not X’ (in logical notation, ¬ X).
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

here’s to a long life!
305
evidence for such a neutral sentential negation usage in Albanian from the
question tag aspo, ‘n’est-ce pas; nicht wahr; eh?’, arguably from as- in an ori-
ginal (highly elliptical) neutral sentence negation use plus po ‘yes’, thus literally
“no—yes?”.Thus, under the analyses offered here, the simple negative function
of as- matches Greek οὐκ and Armenian oč‘, and so the source of these three
forms, pie *(ne) … H2oyu kwid, is very likely to have been (or, better, to have
become) a neutral (non-emphatic/non-temporal) sentential negator even in
pie.
Itcanthusbeconcludedthereverylikelywasafreewordas*inpre-Albanian
for simple negation, and that it is the source of the prefixal/compound as-,
an element that has that same function of signaling simple negation (as seen
with gjë ‘thing’ ~ asgjë ‘nothing’), albeit restricted now to certain compounds.
This early free word negator as* should be kept distinct from the currently
existing free word as, which, although a marker of negation, nonetheless func-
tions quite differently, inasmuch as it has a different meaning, namely ‘and
not; neither; not even’, and shows semantics that go beyond simple negation
due to its coordinative sense.7 This modern free word as may thus well have
an entirely different etymological source from prefixal/compound as-, and in
fact can be seen as a univerbation of a ‘but’ (a borrowing from Latin aut)
with s’ ‘not’. Such an derivation offers a better account of the semantics of
as.8
Thus on a phraseological level, prefixal/compound as- shows that both
Albanian and Greek share an ancient metaphor involving ‘long life’ in nega-
tion. What is relevant for the issue of persistence of original meaning is that
there are traces of Indo-European ‘long life’ phraseology to be found in the
present-day Balkans, centering on Albanian. In particular, there are numerous
indications—reflections, i.e. echoes or persistences—of an interest in longev-
ity on the part of early Balkan Indo-European speakers, as revealed through
various lexical items and phrases. I turn now to these echoes.
7 Hackstein 2020: §1b also details several specialized uses of the free word as, such as the
doubled use (as … as) for ‘neither … nor’ and what he calls the “inchoative negative focus
particle” meaning ‘not even’. All of these uses go beyond the simple negation function of s’,
and thus suggest separating it from the compound negator as-.
8 As an aside, I note that the need to distinguish compound prefixal negator as- from the
present-day free word as is a reason for being cautious in claiming evidence of “grammatical-
ization” based just on existing forms; in this account, the re-creation of a free word as (from
a ‘or’ + s’ not’) gives the impression of a connection (ultimately an ahistorical one) between
the present-day free word as and the (present-day) compound/prefixal as-.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

306
joseph
3
Albanian and Balkan Reflections Concerning Longevity
3.1
Reflection 1: Albanian jetë ‘life’
The first reflection is the Albanian word itself for ‘life’, namely jetë ‘life’. While
it may reflect an internal Albanian etymology from jes-/ jet- ‘exist’, Hamp 1968
argues that it shows some influence from, with reanalysis triggered by, Latin
aetas ‘age’; thus, via those contact effects, jetë belongs to the lexical family of
*H2oyu, inasmuch as aetas is related to aevus ‘period of time’. Interestingly, and
perhaps importantly, jetë offers a further reflection, or perhaps even a renewal,
of the ancient “long life” semantics in the Albanian composite form përjetë
‘forever’ (literally “for life”) and the derivative përjetësi ‘eternity’. Admittedly,
there is surely a degree of some “naturalness” of semantic extension involved
here, as there are independent instances with similar composition and similar
semantics, such as German fürs Leben ‘for life; forever’, but still this expres-
sion shows the possibility of longevity semantics being associated with jetë in
Albanian.
3.2
Reflection 2: Albanian ‘for eternity’
A second and perhaps more overt reflection is the Albanian phrase për (në)
jetë të jetëve ‘for eternity’. This phrase is literally “for (a) life(time) of lifetimes”,
with the lexeme jetë repeated in different cases, first accusative (singular) and
thengenitive(plural).Structurally,thisexpressionisreminiscentof OldPersian
“king of kings” phraseology, though it may well be independent of it (note that
itis a Biblical usage;cf. Revelations17:14).Evenmoretelling,however,thisstruc-
ture with an accusative and genitive of the same word repeated and having a
meaning suggestive of the endurance of an entity, or in the case of negation,
of the absence of an entity, over a long stretch of time, provides a link to the
use of “long life” in negation (*(ne) … H2oyu kwid). The connection comes via a
colloquial expression in Albanian, kurrën e kurrës ‘never at all; not in a million
years’, an emphatic ‘ever’-based negative phrase which is literally the adverb
kurrë ‘never’, treated as a noun and occurring as accusative and then repeated
as a genitive, i.e. ‘never.acc of a-never.gen’. Thus one sees here both parallel
structure to për (në) jetë të jetëve and parallel “eternal” semantics.
Interestingly, this Albanian phrase kurrën e kurrës is matched semantically
by the Modern Greek expression ποτέτων ποτών (poté ton potón) ‘never at all’,
which is literally “never of-the nevers.gen.pl”. The Greek phrase itself actually
matches për (në) jetë të jetëve structurally, through its repetition of the ‘ever’
word—here ‘never’ (ποτέ)—and also through its use of the genitive plural, and
through the order of the words, with the genitive form occurring second.9
9 There is no way to tell directly what case the first word, ποτέ([poté]) ‘never’ is in, as there is
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

here’s to a long life!
307
Moreover, the synchronically odd nominalization of the adverbs Albanian
kurrë and Greek ποτέin these apparently linked phrases ties in with ‘ever’
and *H2oyu in another way besides the parallel accusative-genitive(plural)
structure. In particular, Hamp 1983 draws attention to the grammatical oddity
in English of for ever—it is significant that ever is based ultimately on pie
*H2oyu—with for apparently as a preposition and ever as a noun. The Oxford
EnglishDictionary (s.v.) talks about a “quasi-substantive” ever and there is some
evidencethatitwassomewhatnoun-like,viathereanalysisof foreveranday—
where ay originally meant ‘always’ and is ultimately connected to the *H2oyu
complex of forms—as for ever and a day, where both ever and day would be
nouns if one follows the usual assumption in syntactic studies that coordina-
tion is possible only between like categories. It can be speculated, therefore,
that the Balkan nominalization process is picking up on an old property of
*H2oyu, as seen in English (quasi-substantive) ever, even if these Albanian and
Greek phrases are just the result of a playful nonce formation; the effect of
these phrases, after all, is stylistically like English expressive never in a million
years!.
In this regard, an important detail is that there are adverbials from case
forms of *H2oyu-, e.g. Aeolic Greek αἰέν ‘always’ (from an endingless locative)
and from case forms of derivatives of **H2oyu-, e.g. αἰεί‘always’ (from a locative
of an s-stem form, *H2e/oy-w-es-i), but no clear evidence of an adverbial use of
*H2oyudirectly,e.g.inVedic.Still,thehypothesiscanbeputforward,admittedly
quite speculatively, that some instances of Greek αὖ, an adverb of ‘repeated
action’, could possibly be from *H2oyu or *H2eyu where the meaning ‘again,
anew, further’ might be construed as deriving from ‘continued/sustained activ-
ity’ (of the sort associated with longevity); this would contrast with the more
‘standard’ etymology (e.g. as in Beekes 2010: s.v.) connecting it with Sanskrit
preverb ava-.
One can wonder too about the Sanskrit jātu (1× in Rigveda, more frequent
in later texts) as a parallel for a bare u-stem (admittedly a -tu-stem) neuter used
adverbially; in its one Rigvedic occurrence (10.27.11) it seems to mean ‘from
birth’ (so Jamison – Brereton 2014, given below), but that in a sense is a
way of saying “forever” or at least for an individual’s “forever”; Griffith 1896
translates it as ‘ever’, and Monier-Williams (1899: s.v.) gives the translation for
Classical usage as ‘ever’):
no indication of case (unlike the overt accusative case marker -n in the Albanian kurrën), but
many adverbs in Greek have the same form as accusative plurals, so it is not unreasonable to
think of ποτέas an accusative here, like its Albanian counterpart.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

308
joseph
yasyānakṣā duhitā jātu āsa
kastāṃvidvānabhimanyāte andhām |
kataro meniṃprati taṃmucāte
ya īṃvahāte ya īṃvā vareyāt
‘(A father) who has a daughter blind from birth—who, knowing her (as)
blindwillhavedesignsonher.(Ontheotherhand,notknowingherstate),
which of the two will unleash (the power of) violated exchange against
him—the one who marries her or the one who woos her (on the bride-
groom’s behalf)’ (cf. Griffith: ‘When a man’s daughter hath been ever eye-
less …’)
A speculative interpretation here is that jātu, from √jan- (thus *ǵṇH1-, zero-
grade to *ǵenH1) could point to an (unattested) adverbial āyu*, based on the
shared neuter -u-stem morphology and the shared meaning ‘ever’; possibly
relevant here is the fact of meanings for the two forms that are in the same
semantic sphere—‘life’ for *H2oyu and ‘birth’ for jātu—coupled with the fact
that forms with parallel meanings in pie often have parallel morphology, as
with shared *-u-stem inflection for words for ‘sweet’, from different roots, seen
in Sanskrit madh-u- and Greek ἡδ-ύ-.
3.3
Reflection 3: A Greek greeting
A third reflection of the original ‘long life’ semantics of *H2oyu can be seen in
the Modern Greek greeting γεια σου ([ja su]), literally, “health to-you” (or “(to)
your health”). The first part, γεια, is from Ancient Greek ὑγιεῖαν ‘health.acc’,
and thus is connected (ultimately) to ὑ−γιής ‘long-lived; healthy’ and therefore,
in the analysis of Weiss 1994, indirectly to the ‘long life’ nexus. Moreover, this
greeting is also used as a drinking toast in Greek, in fact the most common
toast, a detail which becomes important once some additional considerations
are discussed.
3.4
Reflection 4: An Albanian greeting
A fourth reflection is evident in the Albanian greeting tungjatjeta ‘hello’. This
expression is literally “të u ngjattë jeta” “for-you may be-lengthened life-the”,
with a 2sg dative of interest të, the past nonactive marker u,10 the 3sg form
of the optative of a causative/factitive verb ngjat- ‘lengthen’ derived from gjatë
10
The nonactive u derives from old reflexive marker (*we, the regular Albanian form of the
pie reflexive *swe) contracted with the augment; see Hamp 2019 for details.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

here’s to a long life!
309
‘long, broad’, and definite form of jetë ‘life’. This greeting shows, by overt jux-
taposition of ‘long’ and ‘life’, a union of the semantics of the pieces in the
metaphor underlying as- in the account given above (*ne…H2oyu kwid). There
is more, however, since tungjatjeta has also been used dialectally as a toast in
drinking,11 so that functionally it has the exact same range as Greek γεια σου.
This suggests a persistent, perhaps millennia-old, Balkan interest in ‘long life’,
expressed through everyday exchanges among acquaintances and friends, and
in the sharing of drink.
Admittedly a wish for long life is a likely universal of humanity, though it is
not always expressed in exactly this way in Indo-European circles. In Vedic, for
instance, a similar wish is expressed via reference to śatam śarádas ‘hundred
autumns’,thus withadifferenttrope.Possiblyrelevanthereisthesuggestionby
Southern 2004 that the Vedic interjected call śam yoḥ‘health (and) blessing’
might have been a drinking toast; if correct, this phrase would be of interest
here since yoḥis relatable to the base of āyu, from *H2y-ew-, and thus to Greek
οὐκ and ὑγιεῖαν, as well as Albanian as-.
It can be noted here, with regard to both γεια σου and tungjatjeta as toasts,
that archaisms are found in toasts in Slavic; Friedman (2012: 33) observes:
At some late stage in Common Slavic … what was the l-participle
developed an optative usage in the third person singular to replace the
third singular imperative which … was lost. …The popular Bosnian/Croa-
tian/Serbian/Montenegrin toast živ( j)eli [‘may we/you live!’] as well as
the use of invariant bilo in the meaning of ‘any’ … are examples of such
[archaic] optative usage.
This typological parallel means that finding an archaic semantic reflection in
these Greek and Albanian toasts should not be considered unexpected.
4
One Further Closing Example: (From drinking to …) Eating
With all the discussion of drinking, it is perhaps appropriate to turn to reflec-
tions of earlier semantics in the Albanian verb for ‘eat’, present tense ha with
suppletive participle ngrënë ‘eaten’ and suppletive past tense hëngra ‘(I) ate’.
The present stem derives from a preverb *Ho- with the root *H1ed- (as in Eng-
11
I have this on the authority of Eric P. Hamp (p.c.), who witnessed this use of tungjatjeta
during fieldwork in northwest Geg territory.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

310
joseph
lish eat, Latin edō, etc.) and the participle ngrënë derives from a preverb *en-
with the root *gwrō- (as in Latin vor-ō ‘swallow’, Greek βι-βρώ-σκω ‘devour’), a
formation also seen in the past tense (Hamp 1971). Suppletion here may reflect
a different aspect or other nuance of what eating involves; given the mean-
ings associated in Greek and Latin with *gwrō-, ngrënë (and hëngra) may reflect
some sort of completed aspect, swallowing to complete the act of eating or tak-
ing in a large quantity or mass as a whole, leaving ha to some other dimension
of the act.
A suggestion here is that originally ha was something like ‘take a bite’, either
as a momentary aspectual sort of thing or referring to the biting part of eat-
ing. This meaning can be motivated by the connection between *H1ed- and the
word for ‘tooth’ as a present participle (cf. Greek variant ἐδοντ- for ‘tooth’) with
‘tooth’ as “the biting (thing par excellence)”, and other connections between
*H1ed- and ‘pain’ words, as argued by Schindler (1975: 62), shown in derivatives
such as Greek ὀδύνη, ὠδίν- for ‘pain’, ‘birth pangs’; the German metaphorical es
beisst (literally “it bites”) for ‘it stings’ or ‘it is painful’ points to the same linkage
of pain with biting.
In this case, then, even though ha and ngrënë do not preserve the original
semantics, since both mean simply ‘eat’, the suppletion would be a reflection
of an original semantic distinction between the roots involved, a distributional
fact of present-day Albanian that has an explanation in ancient semantics.
5
Conclusion
By way of concluding, it is perhaps sufficient to turn to Dunkel 1993, who
discusses various ways in which the Hittite lexicon reveals its Indo-European
heritage. He points to several instances of what he calls (p. 105) “new forms
but old meanings” in which we see “the preservation of the structure of old
phraseology despite the formal renewal of its surface expression”. He goes on
to suggest (p. 115) that “semantic structure is at times more stable than form,
i.e.meaningmaysurvivewhileitsmorphicrealisationshifts”.Thatsumsupsuc-
cinctlywhatisshownherebytheseveralexamplesfromtheBalkansthatbegan
with a pie semantic structure of ‘long life’ and underwent various shifts in
their realization while nonetheless retaining echoes, traces, reflections—what
have you—of their original semantics, and thus showing a certain stability—
persistence—over long stretches of time.12
12
Joseph 2019 is a companion piece to this paper, with other instances of persistence in
Albanian of pie semantic features.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

here’s to a long life!
311
References
Beekes, Robert S.P. 2010, Etymological Dictionary of Greek, Leiden: Brill.
Christiansen, Bethany J.—Joseph, Brian D. 2016, On the Relationship between
ArgumentStructureChangeandSemanticChange,“Proceedingsof theAnnualMeet-
ingof theLinguisticSocietyof America”Vol.1,26:1–11(url:http://journals.linguistic
society.org/proceedings/index.php/PLSA/article/view/3726; doi: http://dx.doi.org/​
10.3765/plsa.v1i0.3726).
Cowgill, Warren 1960, Greek ou and Armenian oč‘, “Language” 36: 347–350.
Dunkel, George 1993, Periphrastica homerohittitovedica, in B. Brogyanyi—R. Lipp
(edd.), Comparative-Historical Linguistics. Indo-European and Finno-Ugric. Papers in
honor of Oswald Szemerényi iii, Amsterdam: John Benjamins: 103–118.
Friedman, Victor A. 2012, Conjunction Calquing—A Heartland Balkanism, in
T. Kahl—M. Metzelin—H. Schaller (edd.), Balkanismen heute—Balkanisms Today
—Balkanizmy segodnja, Vienna: Lit Verlag: 31–37.
Garnier, Romain 2014, Italique commun *né=χe=ái̯ud “jamais de la vie”, “Wékwos” 1:
95–110.
Griffith, Ralph 1896, The Hymns of the RigvedaTranslated with a Popular Comment-
ary, Kotagiri (Nilgiri).
Hackstein, Olav 2020, The System of Negation in Albanian: Synchronic Constraints
and Diachronic Explanations, in B. Demiraj (ed.), Altalbanische Schriftkultur—aus
der Perspektive der historischen Lexikographie und der Philologie der Gegenwart.
Akten der 6. Deutsch-Albanischen Kulturwissenschaftlichen Tagung (27. September
2019, Buçimas bei Pogradec, Albanien) [Albanische Forschungen Bd. 44], Wiesbaden:
Harrassowitz: 13–32.
Hamp, Eric 1968, Albanian jetë ‘life’, in J. Corominas (ed.), Essays in Romance Philo-
logy from the University of Chicago in honor of the xii International Congress of
RomanceLinguisticsandPhilology,Bucureşti,15–20April1968,Chicago:Departments
of RomanceLanguagesandLiteraturesandof Linguistics,Universityof Chicago:41–
47.
Hamp, Eric 1971, i. ha = Indo-European *ed-; ii. ‘viscum album’, “Studia Albanica” 8:
153–155.
Hamp, Eric 1983, for()ever and ever, “American Speech” 58: 374–376.
Hamp, Eric 2019, Albanian and the Proto-Indo-European Augment, in B. Joseph—
D. Dyer—M. Johnson (edd.), The Current State of Balkan Linguistics: Celebrating
Twenty Years of the Kenneth E. Naylor Lectures (= Balkanistica 32.1), Oxford (MS):
University Printing Services: 223–232.
Hopper,Paul1991,Onsomeprinciplesof grammaticalization,inE.Traugott—B.Heine
(edd.), Approaches to Grammaticalization, Volume i, Amsterdam: John Benjamins
Publishing Company: 17–35.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

312
joseph
iew = Pokorny 1959.
Jamison, Stephanie W.—Brereton 2014, The Rigveda. The earliest religious poetry
of India, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Joseph, Brian D. 2002, More on the pie and post-pie dimensions to Albanian-Greek
negation parallels, paper presented at 21st Annual East Coast Indo-European Con-
ference (eciec), University of Pennsylvania 13 June 2002.
Joseph, Brian D. 2005, Some ancient shared metaphors in the Balkans, “Studia Alban-
ica” 42: 45–48.
Joseph, Brian D. 2019, Echoes of Indo-European Cultural Semantics in Albanian, in
A. Balas—S. Giannopoulou—A. Zagoura (edd.), Proceedings of the 5th Patras Inter-
national Conference of Graduate students in Linguistics (picgl5), Patras, May 27–29,
2018, Patras: Department of Linguistics, University of Patras: 23–33.
Joseph, Brian D.—Karnitis, Catherine S. 1999, Evaluating Semantic Shifts: The
case of Indo-European *(s)meuk—and Indo-Iranian *muc-, “Ohio State University
Working Papers in Linguistics” 52: 151–158.
Joseph, Brian D.—Karnitis, Catherine S. 2006, The Specialized Semantics of
*(s)meuk—in Iranian, “Indogermanische Forschungen” 111: 355–364.
liv = Rix 2001.
Monier-Williams, Monier 1899, Sanskṛit-English Dictionary, etymologically and
philologically arranged with special reference to cognate Indo-European languages,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Pedersen, Holger 1900, Die gutturale im Albanesischen, “Zeitschrift für vergleichen-
de Sprachforschung” 36: 277–340.
Pokorny, Julius 1959, Indogermanisches etymologisches Wörterbuch, Bern: Francke.
Rix, Helmut 2001, Lexikon der indogermanischen Verben (2nd edn.), Wiesbaden: Dr.
Ludwig Reichert Verlag.
Schindler, Joachim 1975, Armenisch erkn, griechisch ὀδύνη, irisch idu, “Zeitschrift
für vergleichende Sprachforschung” 85: 53–65.
Southern, Mark R.V. 2002 [2006], Grain, the staff of life: Indo-European *(h2)yew-os,
“Münchener Studien zur Sprachwissenschaft” 62: 173–217.
Weiss, Michael 1994, Life Everlasting: Latin iūgis “everflowing”, Greek ὑγιής “healthy”,
Gothic ajukdūþ “eternity”andAvestan yauuaēǰī- “livingforever”, “Münchener Studien
zur Sprachwissenschaft” 55: 131–156.
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

Index
agreement
nominal agreement
7, 215
verbal agreement
219
alignment
ergative-absolutive
7
archives
Anatolian archives
235
Egyptian archives
174
Persian archives
77n100
assimilation (cultural)
28
assimilation (phonetic)
6, 100, 103, 107, 155,
159, 284
bilingual letters
175, 184
bilingualism
104, 115, 117, 117n4, 122, 155, 184
borrowing
134, 144, 170, 170n1, 280
borrowability of numerals
108
lexical borrowings
226
syntactic borrowings
212n5
borrowing (cultural)
7
borrowings of literary motifs
13, 32
borrowing of religious features
207
clitics
64, 74, 74n85, 217, 241–243, 250
pronominal clitics
219
codeswitching
110
collocation
175
compensatory lengthenings
64, 280,
281
compounds
52, 62, 67, 67n56, 214, 261n8,
271, 278n9, 287n44, 294, 304
conjunctions
7, 69n67, 235, 237, 241,
243
contact
substrate
145, 153–157, 162
superstrate
227–229
theory of language contact
2, 13, 137, 143
copula
7, 215, 216, 218–221
Cowgill’s Law
276, 282
deities
21, 24, 28, 196, 204
Anatolian deities
23–28, 203–208
Greek deities
15, 196
Iranian deities
23, 23n20, 254–255, 261,
267
Near-Eastern deities
28, 33
diachrony
219, 301
diachronic changes
7, 22, 78, 211
diachronic variation
234, 260
diglossia
255, 257, 266
formula
xiii, 7, 15, 31, 69, 167, 175, 180, 243,
248, 250, 290
genitive
genitive agents
7
grammaticalisation
68, 69n67, 221, 221n26,
222
idiolects
166, 184, 224
idiom
69, 73n78, 167, 243
interference
108, 166, 168, 180, 183, 185,
186
lexical interference
223
morphological interference
110
phonetic interference
2, 101, 110
shift-induced transfer
137
syntactic interference
184
L1
116, 118, 121, 122, 139, 142, 143, 145, 156, 158,
162, 167, 184, 185
L2
6, 118–125, 133, 137, 139, 142, 145, 156
language death
212, 227, 229
lexical oppositions
261, 262
loanwords
105, 108, 110, 115, 122, 137, 140, 170,
212, 260
multilingualism
116, 119, 225
negation
49, 51, 53, 58, 60, 65, 75, 76, 304,
306
nominalisation
293, 307
non-active →Vedi passive
7, 179, 301
non-linguistic causes for language contact
religious causes
208, 223
socio-political causes
170, 223, 224, 227
numerals
54, 73–75, 75n88, 77, 104, 106, 108,
138, 213
perfect
212, 216, 221, 229, 289
periphrastic perfect
x, 211, 214, 219, 221,
229
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

314
index
pie
ix, x, 1, 20, 52, 67, 71, 75n88, 276–277,
279, 281–282, 288–289, 291, 294, 301–
305, 307–8, 310
pragmatics
173, 175, 183, 248, 301
prefixation
60, 145
pronouns
69, 241
anaphoric pronouns
244
demonstrative pronouns
246
indefinite pronouns
49, 58, 64, 65, 70,
72, 73
interrogative pronouns
59, 67
reflexive pronouns
140
relative pronouns
64, 72
resumptive pronouns
77
reconstruction (cultural)
ix, 11–13, 33
reconstruction (linguistic)
ix, 2, 12, 162, 261,
301
reduplication patterns
60, 62n39, 66n53,
67n56, 140
register
7, 48, 171, 180, 234, 235, 247, 250, 261
relative clauses
57, 66, 67, 70
ritual
7, 15, 68, 203
sociolinguistics
3, 142
synonyms
258, 277
tam
aspect
141, 310
tense
215, 216, 236, 309
textual genres
235, 243
legal
22, 242, 248
legal documents
116, 234, 235, 244, 247
literary
90, 143, 180, 266
liturgic
227
narrative
244
poetic
260
private letters
118, 167
typology
13, 33, 57, 88, 92, 124, 137, 142, 280,
309
variation
22, 97, 107
allophonic variation
91, 120
morphological variation
117, 125
morphosyntactic
116
orthographic variation
115, 183
phonetic variation
144
phonological variation
115, 117, 123
sociolinguistic variation
ix
verbal complementation patterns
184, 187
asyndetic
172, 173
clausal
172, 173, 176
dependent
173
factive
172
independent
173, 183
infinitival
167, 184
nominal
173
syndetic
172, 173
writing supports
inscriptions
68, 89, 94, 98, 108, 109, 171,
227, 234, 248, 250
manuscripts
4, 5, 234n5
papyri
109, 125, 167, 173
tablets
55, 66, 75, 77, 235
writing systems
Armenian alphabet
228
Coptic alphabet
170
cuneiform
48, 48n2, 65
Greek alphabet
153, 168, 170
Linear Elamite
48n2
- 978-90-04-50882-8
Downloaded from Brill.com09/13/2022 10:51:45AM
via Wikimedia

