COMPUTER VISION AND IMAGE UNDERSTANDING
Vol. 65, No. 3, March, pp. 425–433, 1997
ARTICLE NO. IV960492
DIALOGUE
The Geometry of Visual Space: About the Incompatibility
between Science and Mathematics
ZYGMUNT PIZLO*
Department of Psychological Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907-1364
AND
AZRIEL ROSENFELD AND ISAAC WEISS
Center for Automation Research, University of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742-3275
Received November 12, 1993; accepted November 21, 1995
of objects by light rays emitted by the sun. Again, the
rectilinearity of the light rays was the crucial assumption.
We address the problem of a geometrical model of vision.
This problem is interesting for at least two reasons. First, any
The concept of straight visual and light rays was used by
theory of vision (human or computer) must decide which geom-
Euclid to discuss several aspects of vision, namely, visual
etry should be used to represent perceived objects (e.g., Euclid-
angle, visual acuity, motion parallax, binocular vision, and
ean vs projective). We believe that this representation should
eye movements (see [1]).
be compatible with geometrical properties of the imaging device
We will consider only monocular vision and 2D shapes
(eye or camera). Second, the analysis of geometrical properties
(but in 3D space) (see, for example, [2] and [3], for the
of vision will examine the usefulness of standard geometries
treatment of the geometry of binocular visual space). We
and can lead to progress in mathematics itself. We analyze the
will show later that our conclusions apply also to binocular
geometry of image formation and show that human vision
visual space and to 3D shapes. The central problem of our
appears to involve a new branch of geometry whose properties
paper is the following: when are shapes perceived as the
are quite different from the properties of traditional geometries.
We formulate these properties and use them to derive models
same? This is a problem of ‘‘shape constancy,’’ which has
of shape perception. Finally, we provide perceptual interpreta-
received widespread attention in human and computer vi-
tions for our theoretical analyses.
1997 Academic Press
sion (see [4] for a recent review and treatment of shape
constancy). Shape constancy refers to the fact that the
percept of the shape of a given object remains constant
1.
INTRODUCTION
despite changes in the object’s retinal image. The retinal
image may change because of changes in the orientation
The problem of the geometry of visual space has a long
of the object relative to the observer. Shape constancy is
tradition. It was probably addressed for the ﬁrst time by
illustrated in Fig. 1. If the reader perceives the line draw-
Euclid in his treatise on optics (ca. 300 B.C.). According
ings in (a) and (b) as representing the same shape differ-
to Euclid, vision is based on straight visual rays emitted
ently oriented in 3D space, shape constancy has been
by the eye that reach out the objects (centrifugal theory).
achieved. As Cassirer [5] pointed out, the phenomenon of
Although this theory was wrong, it enabled Euclid to derive
shape constancy is crucial in deciding which geometry is an
valid geometrical conclusions because the conclusions
adequate model of vision. This is the case for the following
rested on the rectilinearity of the rays not on their direction
reason. Shape constancy represents, in fact, a perceptual
(we will show, however, that the theory of vision requires
invariant (the retinal image varies but the percept does
taking the directionality of visual (or light rays) into ac-
not) and, therefore, this constancy can be considered an
count). Euclid also analyzed the formation of shadows
invariant of the geometry which underlies vision. Note
further that different geometries have different invariants
and the invariants are often used to characterize the corre-
* E-mail: pizlo@psych.purdue.edu.
425
1077-3142/97 $25.00
Copyright 1997 by Academic Press
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.

426
DIALOGUE
the treatment of the history of geometry in art). They noted
that the image on the human retina is formed according to
perspective. Figure 2 illustrates perspective transformation
between planes, i.e., from 2D to 2D. Note that this illustra-
tion does not represent the real situation of image forma-
tion in the human eye or in a camera for two reasons.
First, in real life perspective involves a mapping from 3D to
2D. This mapping is many-to-one, and hence the inference
about the 3D scene on the basis of a 2D image is mathemat-
ically intractable; i.e., given a retinal image it is not possible
to uniquely determine a 3D scene (or its properties) that
gave rise to it. Therefore, we concentrate here on a simpler
case, namely, on mapping from a plane, arbitrarily oriented
in 3D, to the retina, which is one-to-one. This mapping,
which is from 2D to 2D, is tractable. Speciﬁcally, it is well
known that there are general case invariants for the case
of mapping from 2D to 2D, including mapping from sur-
faces in 3D to 2D [10, 11], but not for the mapping from
an arbitrary set of points in 3D to 2D [12]. Moreover, this
simpler case represents many properties of the true 3D
case that are important for the following discussion and
also for real life situations. Namely, in real life, vision
involves images of objects that have continuous surfaces,
rather than haphazard sets of points in 3D. Second, the
human retina is curved rather than ﬂat. Note that this is not
a problem in computer vision applications since a camera
FIG. 1.
A polygon (a) and its perspective image (b).
image is ﬂat. This does not seem to be a problem in human
vision either, because the central part of the retina, charac-
terized by an eccentricity of less than 20 deg, can be well
approximated by a plane. Beyond 208 of eccentricity, where
sponding geometries [6]. (See [7] for a recent review of
this planar approximation does not hold, visual perception
geometric invariants in computer vision.) Therefore, the
of patterns is rather poor. First, straight lines are perceived
analysis of shape constancy is likely to contribute to our
as curved (see Helmholtz [13] pp. 154–191, who showed
knowledge about the geometry of visual space.
that these perceptual distortions can be explained by as-
We will argue that human visual space cannot be fully
suming that the visual system interprets retinal images as if
modeled by any standard geometry. For example, Fig. 1
they were formed on a ﬂat rather than a spherical surface).
shows that the visual space of an observer cannot be Euclid-
Second, shape and pattern identiﬁcation and discrimina-
ean because shape constancy is achieved even though (b)
tion are known to strongly deteriorate with eccentricity [9,
is a non-Euclidean transformation of (a). We will show
14]. Therefore, the peripheral area is probably not im-
that visual space has properties that can be represented
portant in shape and pattern perception. We can assume,
by a composition of Euclidean transformations and some
therefore, that using Fig. 2 as a representation of the geom-
subset of perspective transformations.
etry of image formation in the human eye (or camera) is
We will begin with the theoretical analysis of the geome-
try of image formation. After this analysis is presented,
we will compare this geometry to traditional geometries.
Then we will discuss possible models of shape constancy
based on the new geometry, and ﬁnally we will analyze
perceptual implications of these models.
2.
IMAGE FORMATION
In the ﬁfteenth century and later the problem of the
geometry of image formation was raised by artists who
tried to represent 3D scenes in paintings (e.g., Alberti,
FIG. 2.
Schematic illustration of image formation (see text for details).
Brunelleschi, and Leonardo Da Vinci—see [8] or [9] for

DIALOGUE
427
adequate for the purpose of analyzing the properties of
visual space.
We want to point out one aspect of Fig. 2. In Fig. 2, the
retina (f) and the object (fo) are on the opposite sides of
the nodal point V (i.e., the center of projection). This is
an unconventional way of representing image formation;
usually the image and object planes are drawn on the same
side of the center of projection because this simpliﬁes the
notation (i.e., a point with positive coordinates in the object
plane is projected to a point with positive coordinates in
the image plane). However, it is Fig. 2 which more correctly
FIG. 3.
A one-dimensional illustration of image formation. It is seen
represents image formation. This is the case because ac-
that only one part of the object plane can give rise to the image on the
cording to the rules of optics, the object point and its image
retina and that the order of points changes if they cross inﬁnity on the
are always on the opposite sides of the center of the convex
object plane or the vanishing point on the retina.
lens forming an image. This fact is usually neglected, but we
will show that it is important in formulating a geometrical
model of image formation and vision as well.
The basis for our new geometrical representation is the
xf 5 ((cos s cos t)xo 2 (sint)yo)/((sin s)xo 1 C)
(2)
model of visual perception discussed in this and the follow-
ing sections.
yf 5 ((cos s sin t)xo 1 (cos t)yo)/((sin s)xo 1 C).
Without loss of generality we can ﬁx the retina (image
plane) f in 3D space. Let the retina have the equation
However, Eq. (2) is still too general. Namely, for a given
slant s, tilt t, and distance C the coordinates (xo, yo) and
z 5 0. This implies that perspective between the object
plane fo and the retina f is characterized by six degrees
(xf, yf ) cannot vary from 2y to 1y. The coordinates must
satisfy the constraint of optics, namely, that the object and
of freedom: the position of the center of projection (cx,
cy, f) and three parameters characterizing the object plane:
image points are on opposite sides of the center of the
convex lens (center of projection V) forming the image (it
two angles (slant s and tilt t) plus distance from the center
of projection. Let O(0, 0, 0) be the origin of the retinal
is worth pointing out that the directionality of light is the
chief one of several factors determining this constraint. If
coordinate system and VF'f, where F(cx, cy, c) [ fo.
Finally, following the notation of Pizlo and Rosenfeld [15],
lightwerepropagatedinbothdirections atonce,orifitwere
emittedbytheeye,asEuclidassumed,eithertherewouldbe
let the ordinate yo in the object plane have the direction
of the cross product of the vectors normal to the retina
no constraint on the location of the image and object planes
with respect to the center of projection, or this constraint
and object planes. The perspective transformation between
the object plane fo represented by coordinate system (xo,
would be different). It is clear that this constraint can be
represented by the requirement that all object points have
yo) and the retina f represented by coordinate system (x,
y) is then described by
z coordinates in 3D space greater than f (note that in geo-
metrical perspective, which has nothing to do with light or
x 2 cx 5 2f((cos s cos t)(xo 2 cx)
lenses, this constraint does not exist). By adding this con-
straint to Eq. (2) we obtain a transformation which ade-
2 (sin t)(yo 2 cy))/((sin s)(xo 2 cx) 1 c 2 f)
(1)
quately represents image formation. We call this transfor-
y 2 cy 5 2f((cos s sin t)(xo 2 cx)
mation ﬁxed center directional perspective (FCDP). Next
we discuss implications of the constraint z . f.
1 (cos t)(yo 2 cy))/((sin s)(xo 2 cx) 1 c 2 f).
PROPOSITION 1.
In image formation the transformation
Note, however, that in the eye or in the camera the center
involves proper subsets of spaces (e.g., of planes). Speciﬁ-
V of projection (nodal point) is ﬁxed relative to the retina
cally, the object cannot cross the line at inﬁnity and its image
(image plane). This means that cx, cy, and f are constants.
cannot cross the vanishing line, which is a projection of the
Therefore, image formation in vision systems (the human
line at inﬁnity on the object plane (this constraint does not
eye or a camera) is represented by perspective with a ﬁxed
apply only when s 5 08 and c . f because in such a case
nodal point, which means that image formation has only
all object points and all image points are on the opposite
three parameters that represent the object plane. Without
side of the nodal point).
loss of generality we can put cx 5 cy 5 0. Let C 5 c 2 f,
xf 5 2x/f, yf 5 2y/f (note that (x2
f 1 y2
f)1/2 5 tan(E), where
Proof.
This is the case because only points on one side
of the vanishing line on the image plane are images of
E is the eccentricity and is widely used in the human vision
literature). Then, Eq. (1) takes the form
object points satisfying the constraint z . f. This fact is

428
DIALOGUE
four points no three of which are collinear can be
transformed projectively into any other four points, no
three of which are collinear. This implies that in projecti-
vity the vertices of a concave quadrilateral ABCD can
be transformed into the vertices of a convex one (e.g.,
ABCD9 and vice versa), which means that D after trans-
formation does not have to stay inside traingle ABC
(this implication also holds for a general perspectivity).
We want to point out that this last statement is not
equivalent to saying that a projectivity can transform a
FIG. 4.
A convex quadrilateral cannot be a retinal image of a concave
concave quadrilateral ABCD into a convex one ABCD9
one.
(or vice versa) [4], because a projectivity which transforms
points A, B, C, D into points A, B, C, D9 would transform
a segment BC which does not cross inﬁnity into a segment
which does cross inﬁnity. Consider a line BD and let
illustrated in Fig. 3 for the 1D case (here a vanishing point
the intersection of BD with AC be denoted by P. Since
is used instead of a vanishing line).
the order of points in image formation must be preserved,
the order BDP is preserved which means that D must
PROPOSITION 2.
The order of a triplet of points cannot
stay inside ABC and, therefore, a concave quadrilateral
change in image formation, whereas in a general perspectiv-
will be transformed to concave one (and, vice versa, a
ity or projectivity it can.
convex quadrilateral will be transformed into a convex
Proof.
This fact results from the ﬁrst one. It is neces-
one).
sary, however, to specify exactly what we mean by the
This third proposition is similar to the conclusion pre-
order of a triplet of points, because the projective plane
sented by Hartley [16]. However, he derived his conclusion
is closed and it contains inﬁnity. As a result any straight
from an engineering assumption, namely, that objects that
line is also closed. In such a case any order of three points
give rise to images in a camera must be in front of the
is equivalent to any other. Here, we talk about the order
camera. Our analysis, on the other hand, is based on the
of points on an open line, i.e., a line which does not contain
properties of optics including the directionality of light, as
inﬁnity. Note that the only case in which the order can
well as on a modiﬁed deﬁnition of order and convexity.
change in a general perspectivity (or projectivity) is when
Therefore, our analysis is more general. Moreover, in our
the image crosses the vanishing line. For example, given
approach the constraint z . f is added to a perspectivity
three collinear image points A9, B9, and C9, if C9 is on the
with a ﬁxed center of projection, whereas in Hartley’s the
other side of the vanishing line from the other two points,
corresponding constraint that objects are in front of a cam-
the corresponding point C on the object plane will cross
era is added to a general projectivity. The mathematical
inﬁnity and the resulting order on the object plane will be
implications of the difference between projectivity and
B, A, C (see Fig. 3). Since an object cannot cross inﬁnity,
FCDP will be discussed in the next section and the percep-
the order in image formation is preserved.
tual implications of this difference will be illustrated in the
last section.
PROPOSITION 3.
Convexity of a set is preserved in image
Interestingly enough, although perspective has been
formation but not in general perspectivity or projectivity.
known in art since at least the ﬁfteenth century, it did not
attract the broader attention of mathematicians until the
Proof.
This results from preserving the order of points.
Again, we have to specify what we mean by convexity of
nineteenth century. At that time projective geometry was
formulated following the discovery of hyperbolic non-
a set. Convexity is usually deﬁned in the following way: a
set is convex when a line segment connecting any two
Euclidean geometry by Lobachevsky and Bolyai (in fact,
projective geometry was originated in the seventeenth cen-
points in this set also lies entirely in it. However, because
the projective plane is closed there are always two line
tury by Desargues, who studied properties of conic sections
under perspective, but this early work was largely unno-
segments connecting any pair of points in this plane
(one of them crosses inﬁnity) and only one of them can
ticed by contemporary mathematicians). It was shown that
projective transformation is closely related to perspec-
satisfy the deﬁnition of convexity (unless the entire plane
is the set of interest). Therefore, we require that the
tive—speciﬁcally, that any perspective transformation, or a
composition of an arbitrary number of them, is a projective
line segment in the deﬁnition of convexity does not cross
inﬁnity. Consider a quadruple of points A, B, C, and D
transformation [17]. In the next section we analyze FCDP
in detail by comparing it to several traditional geome-
such that D is inside the triangle ABC (Fig. 4). Thus,
the quadrangle ABCD is concave. It is known that any
tries—projective, Euclidean, and afﬁne.

DIALOGUE
429
3.
THE RELATION BETWEEN FCDP AND
T 5 I. If axiom (4) does not hold, one obtains a semigroup.
However, as pointed out in the previous section, a composi-
TRADITIONAL GEOMETRIES
tion of perspectivities is a projectivity, rather than a per-
3.1.
Projective Geometry
spectivity. Similarly, a composition of FCDPs is not an
FCDP but a projectivity. This means that the closure axiom
A projective transformation from 2D to 2D is repre-
is not satisﬁed and FCDP does not constitute a group
sented by the equations
of transformations (or even a semigroup). Moreover, the
inverse of an FCDP is not an FCDP, which means that
x 5 (axo 1 byo 1 c)/(dxo 1 eyo 1 1)
(3)
axiom 4 is not satisﬁed either (see [15], for the analysis of
y 5 (fxo 1 gyo 1 h)/(dxo 1 eyo 1 1).
the differences between FCDP and inverse FDCP). In
other words, if stimulus A is a retinal (or camera) image
of stimulus B, it may not be possible to obtain B as a
Note that (3) has the same form as (2) and (1), but (3)
has eight parameters, whereas (1) has six parameters and
retinal image of A.
The fact that FCDP is not a group implies that if it
(2) has only three. This means that projectivity is more
general than FCDP and, therefore, projective geometry is
preserves any properties, they must be different from tradi-
tional invariants. Traditional invariants (projective, afﬁne,
not a good model of image formation. The difference in
the number of free parameters implies that projective and
or Euclidean) are intrinsic properties of a given ﬁgure (i.e.,
of a set of points or of a curve). Therefore, an invariant
FCDP transformations require correspondences between
different numbers of points in order to be uniquely deter-
can be calculated independently for the ﬁgure and for its
image and the value of this invariant will be the same. In
mined. Projectivity (3) has eight free parameters and re-
quires four points (no three of which are collinear) in order
the case of FCDP this does not work. Consider a ﬁgure
F1, its FCDP image F2 and a FCDP image F3 of the ﬁrst
to determine the transformation uniquely. FCDP has only
three free parameters and therefore can be determined by
image F2. As we have already pointed out, this second
image F3 is not a FCDP of the original ﬁgure F1. However,
fewer than four points; in fact, three noncollinear points
are sufﬁcient to determine a ﬁnite number of FCDPs, and
any traditional invariant, characterizing a transformation
which belongs to a group, would have the same value for
there are at most four such FCDPs [18]. (Note that some-
times there may be no FCDP transforming one triplet of
each of these three ﬁgures: F1, F2, and F3. But this would
be a projective, not an FCDP invariant because a composi-
points into another. This can happen when, for example,
the points on the object plane and the points on the image
tion of two FCDPs is a projectivity, not an FCDP (speciﬁ-
cally, a composition of two or more general perspectivities
plane are on the same side of a plane, which is orthogonal
to the image plane and contains the center of projection.)
is a general projectivity [17], a composition of two FCDPs
is a special case projectivity, and a composition of three
It is worth pointing out that this claim holds only for FCDP
and does not hold for general perspective (1). For general
or more FCDPs is a general projectivity). Therefore, either
FCDP does not have invariants at all or the invariants must
perspective, three points may not be sufﬁcient to determine
a ﬁnite number of transformations. For example, when the
be different from all known invariants. This fact explains,
perhaps, why mathematicians have stayed away from per-
object plane is parallel to the image plane (slant equals
zero) the distance c of the object plane from the image
spective in general and from FCDP in particular.
Consider now the concept of distance in the projective
plane can be arbitrary because it can always be compen-
sated by choosing an appropriate value of f, so that the
and FCDP geometries. In the general case projective space
is not metric and distance is not deﬁned. However, by
ratio f/(c 2 f) is unchanged (see Eq. (1)). This point was not
made clear in [18], probably because general perspective is
introducing, e.g., some reference points, the distance dp
between points A1 and A2 can be deﬁned as
commonly confused with another transformation, which is
a composition of Euclidean and FCDP (see our section on
models of recognition).
dp(A1A2) 5 K ? log(A1A2M1M2),
(4)
Next, consider the invariants of the transformations.
Note that the projective transformations form a group (the
where K is constant M1 and M2 are reference points that
are collinear with A1 and A2, and (A1A2M1M2) is a cross
Euclidean and afﬁne transformations also form groups).
Namely, let T’s denote transformations and s denote com-
ratio of the points A1, A2, M1, M2. The cross ratio is a
projective invariant, which means that it is preserved under
position of transformations. Then (1) a composition of two
projectivities (T1 s T2) is a projectivity (closure axiom);
any projective transformation (3). Hence projective dis-
tance (4) is not affected by this transformation. Now con-
(2) projectivity is associative, i.e., (T1 s T2) s T3 5 T1 s
(T2 s T3); (3) there is an identity projectivity I, such that
sider FCDP. We showed above that FCDP does not have
an invariant that would be an intrinsic property of a given
T s I 5 I s T 5 T; and 4) for every projectivity T there
is an inverse projectivity T9, such that T s T9 5 T9 s
ﬁgure. It follows that it is not possible to deﬁne a distance

430
DIALOGUE
that would be preserved under FCDP but not under a
be compared with respect to generality. This is further
evidence that FCDP does not belong to Klein’s hierarchy
more general transformation. This is the case because if
such a distance existed, the distance itself would be an
of geometries (as already pointed out).
Euclidean space is metric and the distance de between
intrinsic invariant, but we just showed that there are no
intrinsic invariants for FCDP. If distance were deﬁned in
two points A1(x1, y1) and A2(x2, y2) is measured ac-
cording to
FCDP, it would depend on context, e.g., on the standard
and comparison shapes in which this distance is measured.
One implication of this fact is that the space deﬁned by
de(A1A2) 5 [(x1 2 x2)2 1 (y1 2 y2)2]1/2.
(6)
FCDP cannot be metric because for two given points A
and B the distance d(AB) between them may not be equal
Euclidean distance is not affected by Euclidean transfor-
to itself if the context changes.
mations, i.e., rotation and translation.
The ﬁrst treatment of FCDP was provided by Pizlo and
Now, consider afﬁne geometry. Afﬁne is a linear trans-
Rosenfeld [15]. They showed that FCDP has invariants
formation; it is more general than Euclidean and less gen-
(more exactly approximate invariants) and they formu-
eral than projectivity. An afﬁne transformation is repre-
lated these invariants (these invariants also hold for a com-
sented by the equations
position of Euclidean and FCDP transformations; see the
section on models of shape constancy). These new invari-
x 5 axo 1 byo 1 c
(7)
ants are not equivalent to projective invariants. They are
y 5 fxo 1 gyo 1 h.
preserved in any FCDP image formed according to formu-
las (2) but they are not preserved under arbitrary projective
transformation (formulas (3)). These new invariants do
It is seen that an afﬁne transformation has six parameters.
not involve distance (distance is not invariant in FCDP).
It is obvious that FCDF is neither equivalent to nor more
Instead, they involve shape. Speciﬁcally, they are calcu-
general than afﬁne because FCDP has fewer parameters
lated from a pair consisting of a given shape and its image,
than afﬁne. Interestingly, FCDP is not less general than
rather than separately for each of them. This method of
afﬁne, either. This fact follows from the observation that
calculating invariants does not assume that the transforma-
afﬁne is a linear transformation and, therefore, a trapezoid
tions form a group.
is not equivalent to any rectangle. However, a rectangle
To summarize, we have established by analysis of the
can give rise to a trapezoid on the retina, which means
geometrical properties of FCDP representing image for-
that a rectangle can be equivalent to a trapezoid in FCDP.
mation that it is less general than projectivity. FCDP does
This means that FCDP is not less general than afﬁne. We
not form a group, it does not have a distance, but it has
conclude that afﬁne is not an adequate model of image
invariants, although the invariants are not intrinsic proper-
formation and that, like Euclidean, afﬁne cannot be com-
ties of a ﬁgure. This means that FCDP does not belong to
pared to FCDP as regards generality.
Klein’s hierarchy of geometries and therefore, it cannot
In the next section we discuss three models of shape
be equivalent to any traditional geometry, including Eu-
constancy based on FCDP. As pointed out in the Introduc-
clidean or afﬁne. However, for completeness of our treat-
tion, shape constancy is a phenomenon which seems to be
ment, we will brieﬂy compare FCDP to Euclidean and
especially useful in studying the geometry of visual space.
afﬁne geometries.
4.
MODELS OF SHAPE CONSTANCY
3.2.
Euclidean and Afﬁne Geometries
Assume that an observer (human being or computer)
Consider ﬁrst Euclidean geometry. A Euclidean trans-
stores a representation of a shape in its memory and the
formation is less general than pojectivity and it is repre-
task is to recognize the shape from a new, unknow viewing
sented by the equations
direction. Consider ﬁrst the simplest model in which FCDP
is used directly to recognize shape (we call this model
x 5 (cos f)xo 2 (sin f)yo 1 «
(5)
FCDP). This model requires the memory representation
y 5 (sin f)xo 1 (cos f)yo 1 c.
to be the retinal image of a frontal view (slant s 5 08; tilt
is not determined) of the standard shape in exactly the
same position and orientation on the object plane as the
It is seen that a Euclidean transformation, like FCDP,
has three parameters, but they are different. Speciﬁcally,
shape to be recognized (comparison shape). Only then will
Eq. (2) be satisﬁed (up to size/distance scaling). This is
FCDP is a nonlinear, whereas Euclidean is a linear trans-
formation. This means that FDCP and Euclidean are not
the case because FCDP uses only three parameters for the
object plane: slant, tilt, and distance from the observer.
equivalent; moreover, neither of them is more general than
the other. In other words, FCDP and Euclidean cannot
The other three parameters determining 2D translation

DIALOGUE
431
perceived as identical, are not equivalent in the FCDP
model, whereas in E-FCDP they are.1 Second, E-FCDP
allows recognizing shapes only in images that can be pro-
duced on the retina (or camera). For example, Fig. 6. shows
a projective image of Fig. 1a. Note that both Fig. 1b and
Fig. 6 are ‘‘good projective’’ transformations of Fig. 1a
according to a recent terminology of Hartley [16]. It is
probably clear to the reader that Fig. 1b, but not Fig. 6,
FIG. 5.
Rectangles A and B have identical shapes and they look
represents the same shape in 3D as Fig. 1a. In fact, only
identical.
Fig. 1b could be a retinal image of Fig. 1a; Fig. 6 could not.
We can therefore conclude that E-FCDP is an adequate
model of shape constancy and other types of transforma-
tions, including Hartley’s [16] ‘‘good projectivity,’’ are not.
and rotation on the object plane are ﬁxed, and if they are
In fact, Pizlo and Rosenfeld’s invariants of E-FCDP were
not the same in the standard and comparison shapes, Eq.
shown to predict the performance of a human observer in
(2) will not be satisﬁed. In other words, according to this
recognition of ﬂat shapes from perspective images (recall
model a shape will not be perceived as the same when it
that our discussion is restricted to the planar case) [4, 15,
is translated or rotated on the image plane. In fact, this
22–24]. Moreover, it was shown how this model can be
model can be used even when these assumptions about
generalized to the case of solid shapes. If a solid shape
the standard shape are not satisﬁed, but the 2D position
has ﬂat or approximately ﬂat faces, these faces can be
and orientation as well as the 3D orientation of the stan-
recognized individually and this can be the basis for recog-
dard shape must be known.
nizing the entire solid shape (see [15] for simulation re-
The second model does not assume that the 2D position
sults). In fact, a human observer is very reliable in discrimi-
and orientation of the comparison and standard shapes
nating polyhedra (polyhedra have ﬂat faces) but not shapes
are identical. However, it still assumes that the slant of
that do not have visible ﬂat faces [24]. This agreement
the standard shape is zero. This means that the relation
between psychophysical results and the performance of
between the two shapes is represented by a six parameter
Pizlo and Rosenfeld’s invariants provides further support
transformation, which is a composition of a Euclidean
for our claim that E-FCDP is an adequate model of human
transformation on the object plane and FCDP (we call this
shape constancy and of human visual space.
model E-FCDP). The six parameters in this model (three
Finally, consider distance. As we pointed out distance
rotational and three translational) represent the motion of
cannot be deﬁned in E-FCDP because these transforma-
an object in space. This model is often incorrectly called
tions do not form a group and, as a result, if distance
general perspective (e.g., [19]). As in the case of the ﬁrst
existed it would have to depend on context (shape). Inter-
model, it is sufﬁcient that the 3D orientation of the stan-
estingly, this implication of our model agrees with well-
dard shape is known, rather than that slant s 5 08.
known phenomena in human vision called size illusions
The third model does not assume anything about the
(e.g., the Mu¨ller–Lyer illusion) in which perceived size
standard shape. Thus, this model has eight parameters, two
depends on context. Such context dependence of size is
more (s, t) than E-FCDP. This implies that the relation
not consistent with the concept of a metric space because
between the standard and the comparison shapes is equiva-
metric axioms (e.g., d(AB) 5 d(BA)) would not be satis-
lent to a projective transformation (we call this model
ﬁed.2 In fact, it was shown in psychophysical experiments
projective). Hence, the recognition problem is equivalent
that distance judgments are usually not reliable and not
to solving the projective transformation (see Duda and
accurate, especially when depth is involved [3, 24, 26–31].
Hart’s [20] second view problem).
It is important to point out that some of these results
In the next section we analyze the usefulness of the three
showing poor performance in distance judgments come
models in human and computer vision applications.
from monocular viewing and others from binocular viewing
and the stimuli were either 2D or 3D patterns. This implies
5.
PERCEPTUAL IMPLICATIONS
that the properties of binocular visual space are not signiﬁ-
cantly different from the properties of monocular visual
We will show that E-FCDP is the best candidate for
being a model of shape constancy in both human and
computer vision applications. First, E-FCDP allows for
1 Note, however, that in some cases rotating an object around the visual
arbitrary position and orientation of a comparison object
axis does produce some change in the perceived shape [21].
on the object plane, whereas FCDP does not. For example,
2 See, however, [25] for an attempt to preserve the concept of metric
rectangles A and B in Fig. 5, which have identical shapes
visual space by proposing that properties of visual space (e.g., curvature)
can be locally changed by context.
(they differ only by 2D translation and rotation), and are

432
DIALOGUE
6. F. Klein, Elementary Mathematics from an Advanced Standpoint:
Geometry, Dover, New York, 1939.
7. I. Weiss, Projective invariants of shapes, in Proceedings, DARPA Im-
age Understanding Workshop, Cambridge, MA, 1988, pp. 1125–1134.
8. M. H. Pirenne, Optics, Painting and Photography, Cambridge Univ.
Press, New York, 1970.
9. M. Kubovy, The Psychology of Perspective and Renaissance Art,
Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, UK, 1986.
FIG. 6.
Projective transformation of the polygon in Fig. 1a. Assuming
that the origin of the coordinate system is at the center of the polygon
10. I. Weiss, Geometric invariants and object recognition, Int. J. Comput.
in Fig. 1a and the distance between the endpoints of the ‘‘wings’’ equals
Vision 10, 1993, 201–231.
1.3, the projective transformation used was
11. C. A. Rothwell, D. A. Forsyth, A. Zisserman, and J. L. Mundy,
Extracting projective structure from single perspective views of 3D
x 5 (0.7xo 2 yo 1 0.8)/(24.5xo 2 4.5yo 1 5.5)
point sets, in Proceedings, IEEE International Conference on Com-
y 5 (2xo 1 yo 1 1)/(24.5xo 2 4.5yo 1 5.5).
puter Vision, 1993, pp. 573–582.
12. J. B. Burns, R. Weiss, and E. M. Riseman, View variation of point
set and line segment features, in Proceedings, DARPA Image Under-
space. This conclusion is probably not surprising; after all,
standing Workshop, 1990, pp. 650–659.
closing one eye does not dramatically change the visual
13. H. von Helmholtz, Treatise on Physiological Optics, Dover, New
York, 1962 (edited by J. P. C. Southall, translation of German edi-
scene. These facts justify the claim in the Introduction that
tion, 1910).
our theoretical analysis of a monocular view of a ﬂat object
14. G. W. Menzer and J. B. Thurmond, Form identiﬁcation in peripheral
may reveal properties that also hold for the case of a
vision, Percept. Psychophys. 8, 1970, 205–209.
binocular view of a solid object.
15. Z. Pizlo and A. Rosenfeld, Recognition of planar shapes from per-
To summarize, we have analyzed mathematical proper-
spective images using contour-based invariants, CVGIP: Image Un-
ties of image formation and showed that it requires a geom-
derstanding 56, 1992, 330–350.
etry different from traditional geometries. Then, we
16. R. I. Hartley, Cheirality invariants, in Proceedings, DARPA Image
showed how this new geometry (E-FCDP) can be used in
Understanding Workshop, 1993, pp. 745–753.
models of shape constancy. Speciﬁcally, we pointed out
17. C. E. Springer, Geometry and Analysis of Projective Spaces, Freeman,
that shape, but not distance, seems to have a natural place
San Francisco, 1964.
in this geometry. This fact has an interesting implication
18. W. J. Wolfe, D. Mathis, C. W. Sklair, and M. Magee, The perspective
view of three points. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Machine Intell. 13,
for both human and computer vision, namely, efﬁcient
1991, 66–73.
perception and recognition of shape is possible when it
19. J. L. Mundy and A. Zisserman, Introduction—Towards a new frame-
does not involve reconstructing the metric structure of an
work for vision, in Geometric Invariance in Computer Vision (J. L.
object. This explains, perhaps, why the reconstructionist
Mundy and A. Zisserman, Eds.), pp. 1–39, MIT Press, Cambridge,
approach formulated by David Marr [32] was not very
MA, 1992.
successful in computer vision and could not serve as a
20. R. O. Duda and P. E. Hart, Pattern Classiﬁcation and Scene Analysis,
model of human vision, either.
Wiley, New York, 1973.
We close this paper by recalling Coolidge’s [33] conclu-
21. I. Rock, Orientation and Form, Academic Press, New York, 1973.
sion, which expresses our motivation that led to this paper:
22. Z. Pizlo, Shape constancy in human beings and computers based on
‘‘But let us hope that we still never completely lose all
a perspective invariant, Ph.D. thesis, University of Maryland, College
Park, MD, 1991.
interest in concrete problems, and it is by no means demon-
strated that the solution of such problems will always come
23. Z. Pizlo, Geometry of visual space, Invest. Ophthalmol. Visual Sci.
34, 1993, 708 (abstract).
from
applying
some
previously
discovered
general
24. M. Salach-Golyska, Z. Pizlo, S. Vyain, and J. Standish, 3D shape
method’’ (p. 423).
perception, Invest. Ophthalmol. Visual Sci. 34, 1993, 1082 (abstract).
25. A. Watson, A Riemann geometric explanation of the visual illusions
REFERENCES
and ﬁgural after-effects, in Formal Theories of Visual Perception
(E. L. J. Leeuwenberg and H. F. J. M. Buffart, Eds.), pp. 139–169,
1. M. H. Pirenne, Vision and art, in Handbook of Perception: Seeing
Wiley, New York, 1978.
(E. C. Carterette and M. P. Friedman, Eds.), pp. 433–490, Academic
Press, New York, 1975.
26. J. M. Foley, The size-distance relation and intrinsic geometry of visual
space: Implications for processing, Vision Res. 12, 1972, 323–332.
2. R. K. Luneburg, Mathematical Analysis of Binocular Vision,
Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, 1947.
27. A. A. Blank, Metric geometry in human binocular perception: Theory
and fact, in Formal Theories of Visual Perception (E. L. J. Leeuwen-
3. T. Indow, A critical review of Luneburg’s model with regard to global
berg and H. F.J. M. Buffart, Eds.), pp. 83–102,Wiley, New York, 1978.
structure of visual space, Psychol. Rev. 98, 1991, 430–453.
28. J. T. Todd and F. D. Reichel, Ordinal structure in the visual perception
4. Z. Pizlo, A theory of shape constancy based on perspective invariants,
and cognition of smoothly curved shapes, Psychol. Rev. 96, 1989,
Vision Res. 34, 1994, 1637–1658.
643–657.
5. E. Cassirer, The concept of group and the theory of perception,
Philos. Phenomenological Res. 5, 1944, 1–35.
29. J. T. Todd and P. Bressan, The perception of 3-dimensional afﬁne

DIALOGUE
433
structure from minimal apparent motion sequences, Percept. Psy-
31. S. P. McKee, D. M. Levi, and S. F. Bowne, The imprecision of
stereopsis, Vision Res. 30, 1990, 1763–1779.
chophys. 48, 1990, 419–430.
32. D. Marr, Vision, Freeman, New York, 1982.
30. J. T. Todd and J. F. Norman, The visual perception of smoothly
curved surfaces from minimal apparent motion sequences, Percept.
33. J. L. Coolidge, A History of Geometrical Methods, Oxford Univ.
Press, London, 1940.
Psychophys. 50, 1991, 509–523.

