New Developments in the
Science of Learning: Using
Research to Help Students Learn
Science and Mathematics
Rodney R. Cocking
National Science Foundation
Jose P. Mestre
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
Ann L. Brown
University of California, Berkeley
Researchers in cognitive science are producing exciting new knowledge about how the
human brain functions and how people acquire knowledge and develop understanding.
At the same time, educators and policy makers are working hard to reform science and
mathematics education around high standards for student learning. The interaction of these
two trends has made it possible and desirable to design science curricula and instructional
practices grounded in solid research about how people learn. The ultimate success of these
advances depends on whether they will produce change in real learning environments.
The series of papers in this special issue represent some of the best current thinking about
how to accomplish that goal. Four papers (Carey, Miller, Gelman, and Schauble & Lehrer)
present a range of developmental issues that are involved in effective learning. They
discuss the facilitation of symbolic cognitive representation that is needed for science and
mathematics. Two papers (Dunbar and Bransford et al.) identify and discuss issues of
expertise and experts’ learning and the supporting environments that enable scientiﬁc
thinking. A set of three papers on tertiary learning (Redish, Chapman, and Larkin) round
out the discussion of the development of students’ scientiﬁc reasoning. A set of commentar-
ies (Simon, Glaser, and Shulman) on the growth of scientiﬁc thought conclude the dis-
cussion.
Two major trends are converging to create powerful new opportunities to improve
the teaching and learning of science. First, researchers in cognitive science are
Direct all correspondence to:
Rodney R. Cocking, 2811 Sam’s Creek Road, New Windsor, MD 21776-
8011 ,rcocking@nsf.gov..
Journal of Applied Developmental Psychology 21(1): 1–11
Copyright 2000 Elsevier Science Inc.
ISSN: 0193-3973
All rights of reproduction in any form reserved.
1

2
COCKING, MESTRE AND BROWN
producing exciting new knowledge about how the human brain functions and how
people acquire knowledge and develop understanding. Second, educators and policy
makers are working hard to reform science and mathematics education around
high standards for student learning. The interaction of these two trends has made
it possible and desirable to design science curricula and instructional practices
grounded in solid research about how people learn.
The Committee on Developments in the Science of Learning was appointed
by the National Research Council to study, synthesize, and report on recent advances
in the science of learning [see the Committee’s report, How people learn: Mind,
brain, school & experience (Bransford, Brown, & Cocking, 1999)]. Some of the
most promising applications of research to practice are occurring in science and
mathematics education. The Committee held a day-long interdisciplinary discussion
to explore these developments. The meeting brought together cognitive scientists,
educational researchers, leading science educators, and others to review what is
known about how young people learn and to discuss how this knowledge can be
used to improve science education.
This special issue contains the papers and remarks presented at this workshop.
The authors addressed a range of issues, including the impact of the “cognitive
revolution” on science education; the nature of concepts and conceptual change in
learners and teachers; the importance of model-based reasoning in science learning;
the cognitive restructuring of science and mathematics education; and the role of
new technologies in supporting science education. Several cross-cutting themes and
key ﬁndings can be drawn from these papers, and the remainder of this introduction
gives an overview of these major themes and ﬁndings.
THE COGNITIVE REVOLUTION AND SCIENCE EDUCATION
The nature of human thinking is one of the great questions of science, as Herbert
Simon observed in his paper in this issue. Until recently, this question did not
receive the same level of research attention as other great scientiﬁc questions, in
part because we lacked powerful means of attacking it.
Today we are in the midst of a cognitive revolution that has greatly enriched
our understanding of how humans think and learn. This revolution is being propelled
by new tools, new perspectives, and new relationships between researchers and
practitioners. Its results are a rich store of knowledge that is changing how we teach
science and other subjects.
Among the drivers of the cognitive revolution are new technologies and tools
that let us peek into aspects of the brain never before observed or recorded. As
Simon explains, new “top-down” techniques, such as eye movement analysis and
computer simulations of thought processes, allow researchers to observe and model
the step-by-step progress of human thinking on a scale of fractions of a second.
New “bottom-up” techniques, such as magnetic resonance imaging and single-cell
recording, enable researchers to track neural processes and analyze brain chemistry.
By linking these top-down and bottom-up techniques, scientists are discovering
more about the neurological bases of human thought.
This cognitive revolution has also been motivated by fresh perspectives on

3
USING RESEARCH
fundamental research issues. As several authors in this issue note, the last wave of
science education reform that occurred during the 1960s was based on several
assumptions that have since been repudiated. Thirty years ago, reformers believed
they could solve the problems of teaching by solving the problems of learning, to
paraphrase Lee Shulman in this issue. Now the problems of teaching are a distinct
and lively area of research in themselves. Researchers can draw from an extensive
scientiﬁc literature on both learning and pedagogical issues.
These ﬁndings have led to new perspectives on instruction that start with what
the child knows, rather than what the child lacks. It has not been that long in the
evolution of developmental science since young children were viewed as blank
slates, devoid of conceptual notions and incapable of abstract thought. Now we
know that even infants have a sophisticated cognitive architecture. As discussed in
more detail later, preschool children possess a host of concepts and theories—some
essentially sound, others misguided—to explain and organize the world around
them. These ﬁndings have spawned other vital lines of investigation, such as how
children develop an understanding of complex domains such as science and how
novices become experts in any domain.
The cognitive revolution also has been fueled by new kinds of relationships
among cognitive scientists, scientists in other disciplines, and educational prac-
titioners. Thirty years ago, education reformers paid little attention to the work of
cognitive scientists, and researchers in the nascent ﬁeld of cognitive science worked
far removed from classrooms. Today, cognitive science and education reform have
matured to the point where they are cross pollinating. Scientists and educators on
the cutting edge of their professions are working together to design more effective
teaching methods, instructional materials, and learning environments. Cognitive
researchers are spending more time testing and reﬁning their theories in real class-
rooms, from preschools to college physics laboratories. Through these partnerships,
researchers can learn from the wisdom of practitioners, can observe ﬁrst hand the
thought processes of reﬂective teachers and students, and can see how different
settings and classroom interactions inﬂuence applications of their theories. Prac-
titioners, for their part, can learn more about research ﬁndings, play a role in
research design and development, examine their own beliefs, and help students
learn better. Some discipline-based scientists, although relatively few in number,
are also studying the science of learning in order to design better ways to teach
such subjects such as physics, chemistry, and mathematics.
Children’s Conceptual Understanding
Research in cognitive science over the past 30 years has produced several key
ﬁndings that are central to redesigning science education. Perhaps the most signiﬁ-
cant are ﬁndings about how young children think, what they know, and how they
approach learning. Recent research on learning has demonstrated that far from
being empty vessels, young children come to formal education with prior beliefs,
intuitive knowledge, and concepts that signiﬁcantly inﬂuence their learning.
Different Underlying Concepts.
Some of the ideas children hold are incom-
plete understandings based on true scientiﬁc concepts, others are false beliefs based

4
COCKING, MESTRE AND BROWN
on true concepts, and still others are logical extensions of false concepts that are
incompatible with scientiﬁc theory. In an example cited by Susan Carey in this
issue, children who insist that cars are alive do not have the same concepts of life
and death as an adult; instead, they have constructed a framework, based on their
observations, in which movement or activity is the essential feature of life.
These types of misconceptions are not the result of faulty education, but rather
are inevitable occurrences when children’s naive concepts or theories do not map
onto the confusions unless the underlying concept is also addressed. Indeed, as
Kevin Miller notes in this issue (paraphrasing Vosniadou & Brewer, 1992), children
will go through mental gymnastics to try to reconcile seemingly contradictory new
information with their existing beliefs. After learning about the solar system, chil-
dren sometimes conclude that there are two earths, the seemingly ﬂat world in
which they live and the round ball ﬂoating in space that their teacher talked about.
A feature of young children’s logic is that it can simultaneously accommodate
conﬂicting or incompatible viewpoints.
Good teachers are able to diagnose and understand a student’s underlying
concepts and use them as a scaffold for more complex learning. Effective instruction
helps children distinguish between fruitful errors and misconceptions, between
errors that are on the right path but stem from incomplete understanding, and
plainly wrong ideas that will have to be replaced with more accurate notions.
Carey, in this issue, suggests that seemingly excellent curricula based on logical
sequences of concepts are often not enough to change underlying concepts that are
incorrect. Students also need opportunities to build new explanations by developing
models, thinking about analogies, and conducting experiments.
Children’s Understanding of Numbers.
Rochel Gelman’s research, presented
in this issue, provides further insight into how children’s existing mental models
can be used to build mature understanding. Even very young children have a natural
interest in numbers and will seek out number information. By the time children
are 3 or 4 years of age, they have an implicit understanding of natural numbers,
including skeletal principles for counting, generating cardinal values, and adding
and subtracting cardinals. In Gelman’s experiments with preschoolers, most of the
children could detect important errors in counting a row of objects. They showed
an understanding of certain basic counting principles, such as one-to-one correspon-
dence, stable ordering of number tags, and the capacity of the last tag to represent
the cardinal value of a set. In response to more difﬁcult requests to count objects
in special ways, most preschoolers tried out different strategies, self-corrected, and
eventually determined how many objects were in a set. By contrast, children with
Down’s syndrome rarely initiated alternative strategies.
Gelman’s ﬁndings suggest that when children have an existing mental structure
that is open to interpreting data, practice with objects can be a useful teaching
method. Where no such structure exists, educators must create one, and this requires
teaching both the principles of a domain and the language of that domain.
Children’s Understanding of Models.
The research of Leona Schauble and
Richard Lehrer, presented in this issue, similarly indicates that children have a
natural desire to develop models for interpreting the world around them. Children

5
USING RESEARCH
use objects all the time to stand in for another, for example, when a child pretends
that a banana is a telephone. But children do not necessarily choose objects that
highlight scientiﬁcally important features or relationships. Nor do they understand
all the aspects of modeling necessary to learn science, such as the conscious separa-
tion of a model and the thing it represents, the explicit consideration of measurement
error, and the awareness of possible alternative models. The research ﬁndings
indicate that instruction in the use of models can help children extend their naive
use of models into complex, multifaceted applications.
In general, research studies about children’s prior knowledge reafﬁrm how
important it is for educators to recognize what a child already believes and under-
stands and to use that as a starting point for instruction. Teachers must also be
able to help students transform their naive ideas into more sophisticated scientiﬁc
understanding, to change incorrect concepts, and to develop mental structures for
unfamiliar concepts.
THINKING AND WORKING AS SCIENTISTS DO
Another important set of research ﬁndings relates to how scientists think and reason
and how young people can be taught these scientiﬁc skills and habits of mind.
Students of science need educational experiences that will prepare them to engage
in scientiﬁc thinking and inquiry instead of just absorbing received wisdom from
textbooks and teachers.
Using Representational Systems
One fundamental part of scientiﬁc reasoning has already been mentioned: the
ability to reason from models. Scientists use visual imagery, or thinking in the
“mind’s eye.” They often rely on models as well as graphs, symbols, and other
representational systems to help them represent problems and facilitate solutions.
Students should be able to use representational tools in similar ways. To do
so, they must understand the important features and underlying regularities of a
given representational system. But these features are not always obvious or readily
grasped.
Kevin Miller’s cross-cultural research on numbering systems, presented in this
issue, shows how different kinds of representational systems provide different levels
of support to learners. For example, English-speaking children face a disadvantage
in learning numerals, compared with Chinese-speaking children, although both
cultures use a base-10 system. The problem for English speakers arises primarily
because the English names for the “teen” numbers are formed in a way that obscures
their relationship to the base-10 system and differs from the naming rules for higher
numbers (English). By contrast, Chinese names for the teen numbers consistently
follow the same rules as other numbers (Chinese). These ﬁndings highlight the
importance of presenting representational systems so as to make their essential
features as clear and prominent as possible.
Schauble and Lehrer recommended that students learn how to reason from
models. Constructing, evaluating, and revising models makes students’ reasoning

6
COCKING, MESTRE AND BROWN
processes public and easy to inspect and reveals something about their emerging
theories. But model-based reasoning relies on noncomputational forms of math not
typically taught in elementary school. Beginning in the early years of education,
students need systematic practice with models that have a purpose, including oppor-
tunities to evaluate and revise models. Teachers can provide these opportunities
by giving students certain kinds of problems without answers and encouraging
them to build models to ﬁnd an answer. As children manipulate objects, substitute
components, and discuss advantages or shortcomings of various object-substitutes
as they build models, they are critically evaluating essential functional and structural
properties. Model-based instruction must be handled carefully, however, or the
very power of models can lead to obfuscation.
Scientiﬁc Thinking
Scientists typically use other kinds of thinking and reasoning. Kevin Dunbar’s
research on scientists doing cutting-edge research in laboratory settings has identi-
ﬁed several such thinking skills: how to use unexpected ﬁndings, or chance results,
to develop hypotheses and reach theoretical insights; reasoning by analogy as a
means of rethinking concepts and making intuitive leaps; and reasoning as a group in
lab meetings (also called distributed reasoning), in which several people contribute
different theories for interpreting the same information.
Orville Chapman has identiﬁed, in this issue, several other skills that scientists
regularly use, including making careful observations; collecting, organizing, and
analyzing data; measuring, graphing, and understanding spatial relations; paying
attention to and regulating one’s own thinking; and knowing when and how to
apply one’s knowledge to solve problems.
These skills, which are essential to the practice of science, are not taught
routinely in schools, and certainly not in elementary schools. As a result, many
students lack competence in these areas. The research of Chapman, Dunbar, Schau-
ble and Lehrer, and others suggests that science education should include explicit
instruction in these thinking skills early in the curriculum and in an integrated
fashion. Schools should also provide numerous situations where students can put
these skills into practice.
How can this be done? Educators and researchers can design speciﬁc instruc-
tional strategies and tools that encourage students to think like practicing scientists,
based on principles from cognitive science research. Chapman described how he
signiﬁcantly improved student comprehension in an undergraduate chemistry class
by teaching students explicitly the strategies that experts use to recognize nuclear
magnetic resonance spectra patterns and by exposing them to scores of these pat-
terns. This not only taught the students about molecular structure, but it also
strengthened their pattern recognition skills, which are a critical part of scientiﬁc
expertise.
RESTRUCTURING EDUCATION BASED ON COGNITIVE RESEARCH
Researchers and practitioners are using knowledge from the science of learning to
redesign teaching methods and instructional tools in science and mathematics. In

7
USING RESEARCH
general, these research-based methods seek to build on student strengths rather
than compensate for weaknesses, encourage students to regulate their own learning,
and center instruction around well-chosen problems. Often students draw informa-
tion from group interactions, textbooks, homework, and lectures, and use it to
develop coherent structures. The teacher then checks and provides guidance on
what students are constructing.
These research-based methods of teaching are being implemented in classrooms
across the nation. Studies indicate that students taught with these approaches are
learning better and faster than those taught by traditional methods. In addition to
reforming education for all students, learning environments based on cognitive
research can also broaden access to science and math among culturally diverse
students. But as discussed below, these strategies must be implemented carefully
to produce the desired effects. And in some cases, the research base itself must be
sharpened.
A New View of the Learner
At the heart of the new teaching strategies is a view of the learner that is
different from the perspectives held by many teachers and university faculty. As
described by Edward Redish in this issue, these cognitive models of teaching are
based on several critical assumptions about learners: that individuals can support
incomplete or even contradictory ideas at the same time; that the use of knowledge
depends on its context; that spontaneous thought is rarely self-aware; and that for
most students, scientiﬁc thought and mathematically logical thinking do not occur
spontaneously and must be taught explicitly. These characteristics stand in contrast
to the traditional “broadcast model” of instruction, as mentioned by Larkin in
this issue, which erroneously assumes that knowledge is binary (either you know
something or you don’t); that previous knowledge is not relevant; that students are
motivated to learn and are aware of their own thought processes; and that scientiﬁc
thinking is obvious and natural.
Illustrations of Research-Based Strategies.
Learning by examples is one type
of teaching method founded on cognitive research. As discussed in the Simon paper,
demonstrations in the Pittsburgh Public Schools and in Chinese schools have shown
that when students are exposed to sets of appropriately chosen examples, they
acquire genuine understanding of the concept being taught. Appropriate examples
are those that not only help students identify and internalize the processes they
must apply to solve problems, but also help them learn the cues they must look
for at each step to know which process to apply next.
Discovery learning is another teaching technique informed by cognitive re-
search. Discovery learning sets students to work on interesting situations that moti-
vate them to discover for themselves certain underlying concepts and connections.
Research on curiosity tells us that people will stop attending to a stimulus if it is
so simple that it becomes boring or so complex that it appears chaotic and meaning-
less. A well-designed discovery learning experience can introduce children to what
scientists do and how they confront problems and can be more motivating than a
traditional lecture approach. But discovery learning is not an automatic motivator.

8
COCKING, MESTRE AND BROWN
Research indicates that to be effective, discovery learning experiences must strike
the right balance between simplicity and complexity, build on the previous knowl-
edge and experience of the learner, and offer opportunities for discovery at a pace
that sustains student interest.
Collaborative learning, where students work in small groups, is an instructional
reform that has gained currency. But collaborative learning must be implemented
with particular care with diverse groups of students. Although students want to
demonstrate their competence publicly, some young people may fear an ego loss
if they are seen to be struggling, especially if they are ethnic minority students who
are barraged by negative cultural messages about the ﬁxed nature of intelligence.
Environmental stereotypes are powerful, debilitating, and difﬁcult to change, and
they become magniﬁed in certain kinds of group interactions.
Several new teaching methods emphasize language and communication skills
as a critical part of conducting science. As Lee Shulman observes in this issue, the
social acts of discussing, questioning, presenting, and defending are central to the
learning process and the real work of science. By making private understanding
more public, these forms of expression compel students to clarify their own thinking
and open them to ideas from others. These methods can help teachers determine
what students know and recognize when students have illusory understanding.
Teachers and students can change misconceptions and deepen partial knowledge
into genuine comprehension. However, classroom dialogue is more difﬁcult to
manage than traditional lecture methods, especially in large classrooms.
John Bransford, Sean Brophy, and Susan Williams discuss how new tools of
technology can be used to promote, among other things, knowledge-centered in-
struction. One such tool, Classtalk, was used in physics classes. Students’ understand-
ings of concepts were reﬁned as they ﬁrst discussed and recorded their initial
responses to questions and then listened to others discuss their understandings of
the problems that had been posed. Other approaches to promoting in-depth learning
using technology include the Algebra Tutor and the Jasper interactive learning
environment, for high school students and ﬁfth-graders, respectively.
Writing is a form of communication that helps students reﬁne and articulate
ideas, as the Chapman paper emphasizes. Just as scientists beneﬁt from publishing
their work and exposing it to review and criticism, so do students learn important
scientiﬁc skills from the writing process. Teachers can build a culture of communica-
tion by dividing their classes into smaller groups that encourage productive dis-
course, subjecting student work to peer review, encouraging students to publish
and defend their work, and similar approaches.
Technological Tools.
Technology can help bring about changes in teaching
and learning that are consistent with cognitive research. In an example highlighted
by John Bransford et al., students are using networked computers to retrieve infor-
mation, pose questions, and work with other students on common problems. With
exploratory environments and computer simulations, students can build models
and attempt to solve real-world problems that would not be feasible to tackle with
traditional tools. One such example challenges students to draw on their knowledge
of geometry, architecture, algebra, statistics, and other domains to design a safe

9
USING RESEARCH
school playground. Research suggests that students learn more from exploratory
environments when they are connected with each other than when they explore
them alone.
Technology also can connect students with an array of learning resources,
including data, experts, and other students. Learners can publish their work and
review the ﬁndings of others. They can conduct international collaborative experi-
ments, such as measuring environmental factors or monitoring certain kinds of
ecosystems. Research indicates that students absorb more from these types of
collaborative experiments if they ﬁrst learn the fundamental principles underlying
the experiment, carefully choose their tools, and obtain feedback via the Internet
before collecting their data. In sum, Bransford et al. show how the new technologies
can promote instruction that is learner centered, knowledge centered, assessment
centered, and community centered.
IMPEDIMENTS TO WIDER USE
Although many are quite successful, the research-based approaches described in
this issue are affecting limited numbers of students. Why aren’t widely accepted
ﬁndings from cognitive research having a greater impact on practice? The authors
in this interdisciplinary discussion cite several factors that impede wider application.
University Teaching
The teaching methods used by many university faculty are a major roadblock
to the spread of newer strategies. Universities are the gatekeepers of knowledge
and pedagogy and the places where elementary and secondary teachers receive
their preparation. Both Larkin and Redish observe that university faculty tend to
use the broadcast model of instruction, most often in the form of a lecture and a
“cookbook lab.” These approaches may work for a small percentage of students
who are already scientiﬁcally minded and who most closely resemble the professors
themselves, but generally they are not effective with the large majority of students
who still need to become scientiﬁcally literate.
Faculty in the sciences tend to teach the way that they were taught. They have
few regular opportunities to gain exposure to new ideas about instruction or to
access research from the science of learning. Most universities have few or no
faculty who are well trained in both the science of learning and a disciplinary-based
science. Furthermore, university cultures do not place a high premium on effective
teaching. They promote and reward marginal reforms rather than deep restructur-
ing, and few universities have substantive efforts in place to develop the pedagogical
skills of faculty.
Obstacles at the K–12 Level
Barriers to research-based reform of science education also exist in elementary
and secondary schools. K–12 teachers face a major challenge when they try to
implement small-group learning methods in large classrooms of diverse students.

10
COCKING, MESTRE AND BROWN
Many teachers end up falling back on the lecture format simply to have some
control over a large group.
Reforms also may fail to take ﬂight because the curriculum that is actually
taught in schools is not the same as the curriculum described in published frame-
works. Powerful social factors that are not part of the described curriculum can
positively or negatively inﬂuence instruction. These include the effectiveness of the
school principal, the availability of meaningful professional development, and the ex-
tent to which student learning is a highly valued goal of the school and the com-
munity.
Sometimes research-based reforms are not successful because they are applied
out of context or incompletely. The frequent misinterpretations of constructivist
learning theory is one example. In the name of constructivism, some teachers will
assign group projects that are not substantive and do not teach anything useful
or will leave students to discover everything for themselves without appropriate
guidance. These poorly implemented efforts can turn people against the underlying
principles of constructivism. In sum, research-based techniques must be imple-
mented carefully. Collaborative learning, for example, must be implemented in
ways that do not reinforce societal stereotypes or magnify problems with students’
self concepts. Discovery learning does not mean turning people loose in a forest,
but rather artfully arranging learning experiences in ways that sustain student
interest.
Overcoming Obstacles
These ﬁndings about current teaching speak to the need for professional devel-
opment for both K–12 teachers and university faculty. Some universities, like a
Carnegie-Mellon program described by Larkin, offer sabbaticals to faculty members
for them to study the science of learning and to rethink the courses they teach. A
“seedbed” model can be effective (see Redish in this issue), whereby the university
maintains a group of faculty who are experts in the pedagogy of their disciplines.
These faculty develop courses and help colleagues improve teaching.
Stronger bridges between disciplinary scientists who want to improve teaching
and cognitive scientists and education researchers who know how to do the job are
also needed. Strategies for forging these links include publishing cognitive research
ﬁndings in places where scientists will read them, implementing strong professional
development efforts for new and tenured faculty, and developing a cadre of disci-
pline-based researchers in the science of learning. Additionally, Glaser, in this issue,
calls for bidirectional research, application, and evaluation models so that research
and practice inform each other more effectively.
CONCLUSIONS
The ultimate success of these exciting advances in cognitive science depends on
whether they will produce change in real learning environments. We now have an
incomparable opportunity to combine research on the human mind with the reform
of science education in potent ways to help children learn. The series of papers in

11
USING RESEARCH
this special issue represent some of the best current thinking about how to accom-
plish that goal. Four papers (Carey, Miller, Gelman, and Schauble & Lehrer) present
a range of developmental issues that are involved in effective learning. They discuss
the facilitation of symbolic cognitive representation that is needed for science and
mathematics. Two papers (Dunbar and Bransford et al.) identify and discuss issues
of expertise and experts’ learning and the supporting environments that enable
scientiﬁc thinking. A set of three papers on tertiary learning (Redish, Chapman,
and Larkin) round out the discussion of the development of students’ scientiﬁc
reasoning. A set of commentaries (Simon, Glaser, and Shulman) on the growth of
scientiﬁc thought conclude this special issue.
REFERENCES
Bransford, J. D., Brown, A. L., & Cocking, R. R. (Eds.). (1999). How people learn: mind, brain, school
and experience. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Vosnı`adou, S., & Brewer, W. F. (1992). Mental models of the earth: A study of conceptual change in
childhood. Cognitive Psychology, 24, 535–585.

