Original Article
EELAM: Energy efﬁcient lifetime aware multicast route selection for
mobile ad hoc networks
N. Papanna a,⇑, A. Rama Mohan Reddy b, M. Seetha c
a Dept. of CSE, Sree Vidyanikethan Engineering College, Tirupati, India
b Dept. of CSE, S.V University College of Engineering, Tirupati, India
c Dept. of CSE, GNITS, Hyderabad, India
a r t i c l e
i n f o
Article history:
Received 2 August 2017
Revised 15 December 2017
Accepted 24 December 2017
Available online 26 December 2017
Keywords:
Ad hoc networks
Multicast routing
Adaptive genetic evaluation
a b s t r a c t
MANET (Mobile Ad hoc Network) consists the nodes that are self-energized and shall be able to accom-
modate limited energy levels, and usually the nodes transmit the data using the intermediate nodes to
the ones that are not in hop levels. In such conditions, the lifetime of the intermediary nodes turn out
to be a critical factor, and hence only when the routes are having maximum residual energy and the ones
that have high, spend minimal energy for transmitting the data is very important. In terms of route selec-
tion, the emphasis is much on multicast routing and the route discovery, and the efﬁcient nodes selection
has to take place with emphasis on QoS. Hence, the energy efﬁcient multicast route discovery process has
gained signiﬁcant importance, and there are many potential solutions depicted in the process. Energy
Efﬁcient Lifetime Aware Multicast (EELAM) Route Selection strategy for MANETs is the proposed multi-
cast route discovery approach that is developed using the adaptive genetic algorithm. EELAM works
based on tree topology that differentiates to other tree based on multicast routing topologies by adapting
evolutionary computation strategy deﬁned as genetic algorithm, which shall play a critical role in terms
of selecting optimal intermediate nodes with maximal residual energy and minimal energy usage. The
ﬁtness function that devised for the adaptive genetic algorithm targeted for improving the energy con-
sumption ratio, improving the residual batter life and towards improving the multicasting scope. The
process and the methods that are adapted are contemporary and is different to the traditional genetic
algorithms, and still the outcome as depicted in the experimental results reﬂect the fact that the
EELAM is the best of in its class that can support in addressing the limitations in the current solutions
and towards managing improved route discovery.
 2017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University. This is an
open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
1. Introduction
MANETs the mobile ad hoc networks constitutes usage from
varied range of computing devices like the laptops, mobiles and
other computing solutions. The network connects of the mobiles
take place in the form of node connects and predominantly
used in the current scenario. Alongside the classiﬁed range of
communication, even in the routine communication too, the role
of mobile communication has become an integral part. Network
partition results as a part of network topology being classiﬁed in
the MANET [1].
Among the key factors that depict the outcome for a system,
energy-efﬁcient-multicast plays a very vital role for MANETs. One
of the critical issues that envisaged in the process is that as the
mobile nodes usually operated on limited batteries, often switch-
ing is leading to more battery consumption, and it could lead to
affecting the nodes in a signiﬁcant manner, as the data transmis-
sion between the nodes might get impacted and it could lead to
more challenges.
There are numerous studies that have been carried out earlier in
terms of solutions for nodes that are aware of energy consumption,
in the routing protocol for MANETs [2]. In MANET, there are varied
was of power-aware algorithm solutions that are proposed to
ensure that node energy is saved [3].
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aci.2017.12.003
2210-8327/ 2017 The Authors. Production and hosting by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of King Saud University.
This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
⇑Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: n.papanname@gmail.com (N. Papanna), ramamohansvu@
yahoo.com (A. Rama Mohan Reddy), smaddala2000@yahoo.com (M. Seetha).
Peer review under responsibility of King Saud University.
Production and hosting by Elsevier
Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Applied Computing and Informatics
journal homepage: www.sciencedirect.com

Power aware metrics are critical objective of majority of the
studies, which focused on increasing the node and lifetime of the
network [4]. The power aware routing metrics, those depicted in
[5] are resourceful for transmitting data to the destination from
the source.
In another model that has been depicted in a study on conserv-
ing energy in the transmission, MTPR has been projected which
works on minimizing the utilization of power for transmission
from the nodes to the participating nodes in a path. From the
inputs depicted in the study, it is imperative that the required
power for transmission is relative to the distance between corre-
sponding two nodes. This model reﬂects on multicast routs with
large number of nodes, and the crux is that it is not considering
the leftover energy of the battery of the nodes involved in the
route, hence it lasts the focus on lifetime of each node.
In the other model of MBC [6], the solution is about minimizing
the path cost and hence worked on the reverse modeling of the
residual energy of the nodes depicted in corresponding path.
Compared to the wired networks, the complexity of multicast-
ing in the wireless networks are much higher because of the inter-
ferences and mobility related issues. Multicast is an active
communication
and
the
concerted
correspondence
process
between various nodes. Flooding based multicasting is one pre-
dominant strategy that evinces control packet overhead as high,
and emphasized to generate minimal levels of data trafﬁc in the
network. However, the challenge is that the issue of scalability is
a major constraint in the case of both the solutions. In the case
of multicast protocols, there are varied factors that inﬂuence the
solutions for MANETs, and categorically the issue of node mobility,
is a key issue. The crux in the process is about the need for more
bandwidth in terms of updates, by taking more of control message
packets and high consumption of power.
In the proposed paper, the focus is on developing an energy efﬁ-
cient multicast algorithm for MANETs. In the proposed solution,
the factor is that the data packets transmitted from source to the
group destinations using a node, and such nodes relies on the path
with higher efﬁciency of residual battery powers and relay-
capacities. The other objective of the proposal is to minimize the
process overhead to select possible multicast routes between
source and destination. In regard to this, the depicted model is con-
cluding the routes from destination to source, which is novel that
compared to other contemporary models.
The proposed model explained in detail in the further sections
constituting Section 2 as the related work, followed by Section 3
as discussion of outline of the proposed algorithm. In terms of
experimental setup and the related performance analysis, Section 4
depicts the process outcome, followed by Section 5 depicting the
conclusion and the scope of further research work.
2. Related work
In the process of increasing the network lifetime, the power-
aware routing plays a vital role, and there are certain solutions that
developed earlier for the same. In the case of Broadcast Incremen-
tal Power (BIP) algorithm [7], the process is that the system
exploits the nature of wireless communication environments and
the addresses that are essential in the process of handling the
energy efﬁcient operations in the system. Emphasis in the model
is depicting multicast tree that broadcasts with minimal energy
consumption. This model is fundamentally designed on the basis
of Prim’s algorithm [7].
Genetic Algorithm based multicast routing [8,9] are focused
towards achieving the stability and energy efﬁcient outcome in
terms of mobile ad hoc network routing is an effective system that
can make signiﬁcant difference in terms of energy consumption.
The key purpose of this model is towards evaluating the signal
strength for stable levels in the hop links and shall be used further
towards concluding the ﬁtness in terms of stability and energy
usage in the multicast tree. One of the signiﬁcant constraints in
this process is that though it aims at reducing the cost of battery
life, still in terms of complexity observed in the process could be
attributed to Genetic Algorithm. The other GA based multicast tree
routing protocol [10] for HAP-satellite architecture [11] is depicted
in contemporary literature. The QoS metrics called cost, band-
width, and delay are consider to assess the ﬁtness of the newly
formed multicast trees (chromosomes). The cost metric denotes
the energy consumption. The other contemporary model [12] that
builds over Genetic algorithm is aimed to detect dynamic shortest
path, and dynamic multicast route. The Link-stability, and energy
efﬁciency is two critical objectives of the model depicted in [13],
which is also based on genetic algorithm.
The probabilistic evolutions and evolutions complexity are the
constraints of these GA based models, which are carried from tra-
ditional GA evolution process. Henceforth probabilistic route accu-
racy in regard to routing quality factors is often evinced, which is
due to the probabilistic evolutions of the traditional Genetic
Algorithm.
The evolutions carried in GA are probabilistic, since the initial
chromosomes (multicast routes) are formed randomly. In addition,
the parent chromosomes those were used as input to crossovers
also being retained along with newly formed chromosomes due
to crossover process.
In regard to overcome this, and to achieve route discovery
deterministic process, this manuscript is preparing initial chromo-
somes using the route discovery process called EACNS [14]. Later
the process of the genetic algorithm is using these chromosomes
in crossover process. Moreover, among the parent chromosomes
and newly formed chromosomes, the best ﬁt will be survive and
rest will be pruned from the chromosome list, which is progressive
evolution strategy. Due to this the number of evolutions are deter-
ministic and limits the evolutions process complexity.
Profoundly the algorithms that are designed with intension of
power efﬁciency was based on cluster-based or by adapting the
tree-based models. In the later model, emphasis is on developing
tree-based solutions that are highly efﬁcient in power manage-
ment,
and
depending
on
source,
they
further
classiﬁed
as
multicast-source or single-source algorithms. Some of the power
efﬁcient single-source multicast models deﬁned are MIP, S-REMIT
and RBIP [15].
In [16] G-REMIT was proposed as an alternative tree-based mul-
ticast to enable routing between multiple sources and sinks. The
critical objective of the model is to achieve multicasting with min-
imal energy consumption. REMiT is another model with emphasis
towards reducing the consumption levels of energies and improv-
ing network lifetime. L-REMit model proposed with objective of
reﬁning the lifetime of the network for the source-based trees. G-
REMiT model is more about reducing the energy consumption
amidst the group-shared trees.
In [17,18], the study has discussed contemporary solutions
those enables multicasting. The emphasis of these models is to
enhance the network life time. The MLMH [18] depicted a metric
called EEM (Energy Efﬁciency Metric), which is the result of aggre-
gate hop-count values and relative levels of increment of lifetime.
Lifetime-Aware-Multicast-Tree (LAM) works on maximizing the
lifetime by identifying a route with minimal levels of energy con-
sumption and exploits the multicast lifetime [19]. The other
method of Prioritized-overlay-multicast algorithm shall work
towards improving the effectiveness and efﬁcacy of the superim-
pose multicast in MANET, by ensuring that there is effective role
–based-prioritized trees [20].
N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128
121

The other method MAODV proposed in [21] is an extended ver-
sion of AODV that targets improvisation of the process, where all
multicast group constituted as a tree that leads by the root node
that broadcasts the data packets to the nodes involved in corre-
sponding tree. Any corrections, rectiﬁcations and repairing of the
tree carried out using the MAODV protocol core. MP-MAODV dis-
cussed in [22] is an extended model of MAODV and works on mul-
tipath selection and establishment, and handling the process of
multipath route maintenance along with other functions like load
distribution. The MP-MAODV is capable to build multicast tree
with multiple sources and multiple sinks that enables bidirectional
sharing. In addition, the MAODV is one of the shortest routing with
least levels of hops routing, however, the MP-MAODV is much rig-
orous in terms of establishing the maximum possible number of
multicast routes between so node and multiple sinks that is
adapted in the backup route.
Multicasting via the application of time reservation, as well as
adaptive control for energy efﬁciency (MC-TRACE) [23] is generally
an energy efﬁcient real-time multicast routing procedure for data
communication in MANETs. It is worth pointing out that MC-
TRACE is generally the extended MH-TRACE [24] that generally
supports multicasting routing ability.
Efﬁciency in the consumption of energy gained through allow-
ing the nodes, which are idle and can be switched to sleep node
frequently and through the elimination of majority of redundant
data receptions. The MC-TRACE depicts signiﬁcance to minimize
the transmission delay and battery dissipation, whereas the band-
width efﬁciency is similar that compare to ODMRP [25]. The ability
of minimal energy consumption appeared in MC-TRACE evincing
the greater possibility of signiﬁcant QoS in multicast routing, as
well as bandwidth efﬁciency. However, the lack of robust architec-
ture is the main challenge.
High stable power conscious multicast algorithm (HSPMA) [26]
which is mainly aimed at improving the lifespan of the network
and
the
node,
considering
the
two
main
metrics,
residual
battery-capacity as well as the relay-capacity which is vital for car-
rying out multicasting. Lowering the energy dissipation at nodes
corresponding to multicast route leads to maximal lifespan of the
network. Multicast group size may become a huge challenge when
it comes to the determination of the performance of the network.
In addition, the additional control information is vital when com-
parison done between the power conscious routing protocols and
the regular protocols that do not take into consideration energy
as one of the main concerns. The network’s life span increased by
about 20 percent on average. However, there is the creation of
added control trafﬁc.
Lu and Zhu [27] addressed a novel multicast routing protocol
called EDCMRA that aimed to achieve Energy-efﬁciency and delay
sensitive data transmission. The EDCMRA is based on Genetic Algo-
rithm that is considering the energy dissipation and delay as ﬁt-
ness metrics in objective function to select optimal routes. The
algorithm uses the Possible Multicast trees those traced in route
request process as initial input chromosomes, and uses the com-
mon subtree of the any of given two multicast tress as crossover
point. It is a highly efﬁcient and effective algorithm, but the pro-
cess time is inversely proportionated to the network size.
EGMP (Efﬁcient geographic multicast protocol) [28] petitions
the network into set of virtual zones to achieve effective manage-
ment of group membership. In order to this, a network wide zone
oriented bidirectional tree is formed in each virtual zone. The
experimental study that compared the ERGMP with ODMRP and
SPBM evincing that the ratio of packets delivered through EGMP
is considerably high that compared to OBMRP and SPBM. The min-
imal control packet overhead is observed in multicasting process of
the EGMP than the other two protocols. However, there is gener-
ally less efﬁciency with regards to the usage of energy.
The fuzzy oriented demand on multicast routing protocol
(FBODMRP) [29] has been proposed as a highly efﬁcient means of
delivering information from the node at the source to different
nodes, which are the receivers. The main objective of FBODMRP
mainly entails establishing small, high quality as well as highly
efﬁcient forwarding group. When FBODMRP is compared to
ODMRP, it is worth pointing out that fuzzy based approach results
into higher packet delivery ratio, very low control information uti-
lization as well as delays in the environment, which is highly
dense. In addition, power saving option is greater if there is need
for low control overhead. As future work, the fuzzy rules may
use over the cognitive networks. This depicted model plays a role
in increasing the rates of packet delivery by 40 percent, and the
ratio of delay and energy dissipation reduced relatively to 35 and
45 percent. However, the loss rate is proportionating to network
density.
MANETs uses omni directional antennas. At the same time, they
are having limited energy resources in the protocol, which have
been proposed. In the suggested distributed minimum energy mul-
ticast (DMEM) [30] focus is mainly on the reduction of the total RF
energy which is highly vital for multicast communication. It is
worth pointing out that the DMEM algorithm is highly effective
in performance and in the delivery of the results. In an environ-
ment of low mobility, the protocol generally accomplishes the best
of medium, as well as a huge volume multicast groups. For the
higher mobile networks, it is worth pointing out that DMEM is
generally regarded to be highly effective efﬁcient and effective
with regards to saving energy, as well as when it comes to ensuring
that the overheads are adequately and effectively controlled. This
model is highly efﬁcient both with regards to saving energy and
also operation overhead. However, In case there is link breakage,
there is the dwindling of process’ performance.
Least energy for every bit for multicasting [31] in the MANET
generally concerns linear program in which the least energy for
every bit achieved through the adoption of network coding. The
process time required for an optimal network coding solution is
30th part of the time taken by an optimal routing strategy. Future
research should characterize with an average gain. Generally, net-
work coding is having a number of beneﬁts when a comparison is
done between it and optimal routing with regards to energy, as
well as computational efﬁciencies. However, the characterization
of admissible rate region is highly complex.
In the case that multicast transmission from multiple sources to
multiple sinks, the main challenge, which is faced generally, entails
the development of MEM tree to enable the conveyance of multi-
cast data. This results into the minimization of the whole con-
sumption of power for packet conveyance within the tree. There
is the building of least energy multicast tree. However, it is only
appropriate to the ad hoc networks that build by symmetric place-
ment of the nodes.
The model depicted in [32] is a multicasting process that entails
the all-to-all transmission. Critical objective of the model depicted
is multicast sessions, which is framing the multiple sessions from
the overall transmissions required. The nodes related to each mul-
ticast session contains a message for sharing with the other node.
There is a reduction in the total energy that consumed, however, it
demands exclusive construction of multicast routing tree.
The model depicted in [33] is considering the node mobility and
energy dissipation as critical objectives, which is referred as mobil-
ity based energy efﬁcient multicasting (M-EEMC). M-EEMC is cou-
pled with tree, as well as mesh based routing techniques for the
minimization of the levels of consumption of energy. Performance
assessment of the protocol, which proposed with ODMRP generally
points out that M-EEMC is delivering better ration of packet deliv-
ery and brings about lesser energy dissipation as well as lesser
122
N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128

packet delay. There is the dissipation of minimal amounts of
energy. However, it involves a complicated set of algorithm.
The limits observed in regard to these benchmarking models is
that the multicast scope of a node is not considered and no evi-
dence of accurate selection of multicast route with minimal energy
consumption and maximum lifetime, which are signiﬁcant in
establishing stable route.
Hence, the contribution of this manuscript aimed to establish
a best-ﬁt multicast route that consumes minimal energy to
transmit and retains maximum lifetime of the route. In order
to this, the proposal relied on adaptive genetic algorithm that
uses multicast scope, energy consumption ration and reserve
battery ratio in ﬁtness assessment. The adaptive genetic algo-
rithm adapted for optimal multicast route selects the sub-trees
with dynamic number of nodes and optimal ﬁtness as crossover
points to perform mutations, which is signiﬁcant to reduce the
computational overhead that usually found in traditional Genetic
Algorithm strategies.
The suggested protocols EEMPMO in [34] makes use of the idea
of zone building and they generally construct a multicast tree with
alternative root node that replaces the primary root node as and
when required. The depicted tree is capable to perform bidirec-
tional transmissions [35]. Because the root node charged with
the responsibility of routing, there is the dire need for more energy
consumption in comparison to the other nodes. Performance and
reliability, which pertains to reduced overhead, as well as usage
of lesser power, as well as lesser bandwidth is gathered though
the use of the protocol which was proposed. The scalability, as well
as less control overhead are the critical strength of the EEMPO.
However, the procedure involved in selection of highly appropriate
node as the standby node may result into various kinds of delay in
performance, however, it may enhance the protocol’s overall
efﬁciency.
3. Adaptive genetic algorithm based multicast route selection
An adaptive genetic algorithm (GA) is a method for solving both
constrained and unconstrained optimization problems based on a
natural selection process that mimics biological evolution. The
algorithm repeatedly modiﬁes a population of individual solutions.
At each step, the genetic algorithm randomly selects individuals
from the current population and uses them as parents to produce
the children for the next generation. Over successive generations,
the population ‘‘evolves” toward an optimal solution.
Generates a population of points at each iteration. The best
point in the population approaches an optimal solution.
Adaptive Generic Algorithms (AGAs) is one of the afﬂuent algo-
rithms, and pc (probabilities of crossover) and the mutation (pm),
certainly determines the level of accuracy and the quantum of
speed that the genetic algorithms can attain. Rather than taking
any ﬁxed values in to account, in the case of the adaptive algo-
rithms, the emphasis is on gathering inputs from the population
diversity as well as in terms of sustaining the convergence capac-
ity. In the AGA model [36], the ﬁtness values of the solutions are
vital in terms of determining pc and pm values for the solutions,
whereas, in the case of CAGA [37], the decision of pc and pm
depends more on the optimization states of the population. The
scope of combining GA with the other set of optimization methods
shall be more proﬁcient as the GA is very effective in ﬁnding good
global solutions, but the challenge is about its limitations in terms
of ﬁnding the absolute optimum using the last few mutations.
Some of the other techniques like the hill climbing method and
other such solutions are certainly effective and efﬁcient in ﬁnding
the most favorable in a conﬁned region, but in the case of
alternating GA and the hill climbing methods can result in more
effective outcome.
Of the adaptive genetic algorithm properties explored, the
genetic algorithm used here in this manuscript evinces the adapt-
ability at cross over point selection, such that maximum number of
nodes in sequence having ﬁtness more than the given threshold.
This strategy of crossover point selection defuses the number of
evolutions, hence the computational complexity will be evinced
minimal that compared to traditional GA [37]. The Energy efﬁcient
and lifetime aware multicast route discovery strategy that pro-
posed here in this manuscript explored following.
3.1. Formation of chromosomes (Genotype)
All possible Multicast Routes to transmit data between selected
source and multiple destination nodes has to be discovered ini-
tially. The multicast routes formed as tree structures, which built
from the selective nodes. Let MT ¼ ft1; t2; . . . ; tjMTjg be the set of
Multicast Routes selected by route request process adapted from
MAODV [21]. Further, these set of Multicast Routes used as initial
chromosomes for adaptive genetic evolution. In order to identify
the ﬁtness of the newly formed chromosomes from the crossover
process, the ﬁtness function is derived, which uses proposed
heuristics derived in our earlier contribution called EACNS [14]
that briefed in following section.
3.2. The metric used to estimate the ﬁtness of the multicast tree
The Metrics used to estimate the ﬁtness of the multicast tree
MT ¼ ft1; t2; . . . ; tn1; tng are
 Ratio of Energy Consumption: Metric deﬁnes usual energy con-
sumption per unit of transmission at the egress node levels. The
metric value derived based on mean of consumed energy for
unit of transmission amidst nodes to the nodes that connected
at successor levels, and the values expected to be minimal.
 Reserved Battery Life: It details the lifetime of a node that is part
of the routing process. The metric estimates battery life essen-
tial for routing and the idle time value of battery life, battery life
impacted because of contingency like max battery consumption
(mbc), which deducts mbc based on the estimated battery life
(ebl). Resulting value of the assessment has to be positive and
higher that the deﬁned threshold.
 Multicast Scope: It deﬁnes the feasible quantum of child nodes.
The combination of these metric values such that a node having
max number of child nodes with minimum energy consumption
and maximum reserve battery life represents corresponding node
is optimal.
Similarly the combination of these metric values such that
the average of child nodes is maximum with average of energy
consumption is minimum and average of reserve battery life is
maximum
represents
the
corresponding
multicast
tree
is
optimal.
The assessment of these metrics at each node carried out as
follows.
3.2.1. Assessing energy consumption ratio
The energy consumption at every node is the average of energy
consumption observed to transmit a unit of data to all child nodes
from the corresponding node.
ecðtiÞ  / // is vector contains the energy utilization ratio of all
nodes in multicast tree ti
N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128
123

1. For each Node fn9n 2 tig Begin
ecn!CNn  u
// a vector denoting energy utilization essential
for transmission of a frame to all child nodes denoted as set
CNn
2. For each child node fcn9cn 2 CNng Begin
qw ¼ wðtn!cn
d
Þk // desired frequency qw is exponential of the
number of frequency ranges, the number frequency ranges
from the Euclidian distance tn!cn observed between node n
and corresponding child node cn is tn!cn
d , here d is the
frequency range observed at node n and notation k is the
exponential loss of the frequency.
ecn!cn ¼ ðqw  eÞ þ ðe0  kÞ
ð1Þ
//Here in Eq. (1)
 The notation ecn!cn represents the energy consumed for
transmission of a frame from node n to corresponding
child node cn
 e is energy essential for transmitting a frame under fre-
quency w
 e0 is the energy consumption resulting because of overhead
of other factors [27].
ecn!CNn  ecn!cn
// energy consumption between node n and corresponding
child node cn is added to the set ecn!CNn
End //End of loop in line 2
necti  hecn!CNni // mean energy consumption amidst n and
all corresponding child nodes CNn is moved to the set necti
that contains usual energy consumption observed for all
nodes in multicast tree
End // end of loop in line 1
ecti ¼ Pjnecti j
j¼1
fej9ej 2 nectig// the energy consumption to
transmit a frame by multicast tree ti
3.2.2. Assessing reserve battery life
The reserve battery life of a given node estimated as follows.
Initially, the product of energy consumption ratio, max quan-
tum of frames to be transmitted and aggregate number child
nodes will measure and further the resultant value of this pro-
duct will deduct from the actual battery life of the corresponding
node.
For every Node fn9n 2 tig Begin
rbln ¼ mbln  ðhecn!CNn i  fc  jCNnjÞ
//The product of energy consumption ratio node n, max
number of frames to be transmitted, and the aggregate of
child nodes is diffused from the max battery life mbln of
node n that referred as preserved battery life rbln of the
node n.
End
Further, the average of reserve battery life observed for all
nodes in given multicast tree considered as the tree level
reserve battery life rblti
3.2.3. Assessing multicast scope
rblðtiÞ  u
//A vector comprises the information of
reserve battery life of all the nodes in Li
nnlðLiÞ  u
// A vector which constitutes size of all
probable neighbor nodes from slðLiÞ interlinked to every
node fsnd9snd 2 Lig based on deﬁned metric constraints
mcsti  /// is an empty set contains the multicast scope of
each node in the given tree
1. For each Node fn9n 2 tig Begin
mcln ¼ 1
// max possible nodes to connect as child nodes to the
node n that initialized with 1
2. For each child node fcn9cn 2 CNng begin
ifððmbln  ðhecn!CNni  fc  mclnÞÞ > rblnÞ Begin
mclnþ ¼ 1
End
Else Begin
mcln ¼ 1
mcsti  mcln
Go to loop in line 1
End
3. End // of loop in line 2
4. End // of loop in line 1
The given tree level multicast scope is the average of multicast
scope observed at each node of the corresponding tree hmcstii.
3.3. Fitness function
This section explores the process of estimating the tree level ﬁt-
ness in regard to energy efﬁciency and route longevity, which is as
follows.
For given parent trees tp; tq and the resultant child trees ti; tj,
assess the values for metrics, energy consumption ratio (see Sec-
tion 3.2.1), reserve battery life (see Section 3.2.2 and multicast
scope (see Section 3.2.3)
1.
ifðrblti > rblsÞ Begin
// if the reserve battery life of the multicast tree ti is more
than the threshold rbls given
i. ifðecti < ectp _ ecti < ectqÞ Begin
The energy consumption ratio of the tree ti is less than the
energy consumption ratio of target tree tp or tq then the
ﬁtness of tree ti is optimal
End // of if in line i
ii.
Else
ðecti ¼ ectp _ ecti ¼ ectqÞ ^ ðmcsti > mcstp _ mcsti > mcstqÞ
Begin
Conﬁrm that the tree ti is with optimal ﬁtness
iii.
End //of else in line ii
2. End // end of if in line1
3. Else Begin
The ﬁtness of the tree ti is not optimal, hence tree ti is not
prone to select for routing
4. End // of else in line 3
In the similar passion explored above ﬁnd the ﬁtness of the tj
124
N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128

3.4. Adaptive GA for multicast route selection
The optimal energy efﬁcient multicast route among the possible
multicast routes discovered done by using evolutionary computa-
tion strategy called Adaptive Genetic Algorithm (GA) [36]. Selec-
tion of distinct range of nodes in sequence as crossover points
reduces the computational overhead of GA, which applies set of
initial multicast routes as MT ¼ ft1; t2; . . . ; tjMTjg. The algorithm
description follows and the same is visualized in ﬂowchart (see
Fig. 1).
3.4.1. The optimal multicast route discovery function
AGA-Main (MT) Begin
Let tMT be the clone of given set of multicast trees MT
depicted by EACNSLet MT  / be the empty set used to
store the multicast trees formed by AGAFind cross over
points (common node sequence with ﬁtness greater than
the given threshold in given both multicast trees) that is
not begin at ﬁrst node in both input multicast trees as
follows.
1. 8jtCLj
i¼1 fti9ti 2 tMTg Begin // for each multi cast tree ti
2. 8jtMTj
j¼1 ftj9tj 2 tMT ^ i–jg Begin// for each multicast tree tj,
which is not the other tree ti
3. for eachffmtgp9fmtgp 2 ti ^ p ¼ 1tojtijgBegin //node
sequence as sub tree fmtgp with optimal ﬁtness in
multicast tree ti
4. for eachffmtgq9fmtgq 2 tj ^ q ¼ 1tojtjjgBegin //node
sequence as sub tree fmtgq optimal ﬁtness in multicast tree
tj
5. If ðfmtgp  fmtgq ^ p–1Þ Begin// if subtree fmtgp of tree ti
is identical to subtree fmtgq of tree tj
 The subtree that be present before the crossover point
fmtgp in ti and the sub tree that is present after the cross-
over point fmtgq in tj are allied with crossover point fmtgp
that leads to new multicast tree tp such that the multicast
tree tp which wasn’t present in MT
tp  ti
 
tp  tj
!
 The sub tree that exists before the crossover point fmtgp in
tj and the sub tree that exists after the crossover point
fmtgp in cluster ti are connected with crossover point
fmtgp that forms new multicast tree tq such that the mul-
ticast tree tq does not exist in MT
tq  tj
 
tq  ti
!
 Estimate the ﬁtness of the ti; tj; tp; tq (see Section 3.3)
 If ðf tp  1Þ //if ﬁtness of the tree tp is qualiﬁed then add tp
to MT
MT  tp
 If ðf tq  1Þ //if ﬁtness of the tree tq is qualiﬁed then add tq
to MT
MT  tq
End If // of step 5
6. End For //of step 4
7. End For //of step 3
8. End For//of step 2
9. End For//of step 1
10. MT  MT [ MT
11. Multicast Tree set MT is redeﬁned by eliminating
multicast trees that are close to other multicast tree if any,
using the following steps
12. 8jMTj
i¼1 fti9ti 2 MTg Begin
13. 8jMTj
j¼1 ftj9tj 2 MT ^ i–jg Begin
14. If ðti,tjÞ then // ti and tj roughly equal depending on
number of nodes that are in common to both trees
MT  MT n ti // delete ti from MT
15. End If //of step 14
16. End For //of step 13
(continued on next page)
Fig. 1. The optimal multicast route discovery function.
N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128
125

17. End For //of step 12
18. If ðMT–tMTÞ then AGA-Main (MT)
19. End Function AGA-Main
This signiﬁes each stable and optimal clusters, and then select
the multicast tree from MT under contextual requirements.
3.4.2. Selecting best ﬁt multicast route
Upon completion of the adaptive genetic algorithm process, the
resultant multicast trees can be ordered in the priority of descend-
ing order of energy consumption and ascending order of multicast
scope in sequence and then the best ﬁt Multicast Route among the
MT will be selected.
4. Empirical analysis and results exploration
In terms of conducting the experimentation of the process, in an
area of 1000 mts  1000 mts, set of nodes placed in a random man-
ner, and using the Network Simulator [38] the testing process has
been carried out. In the testing process, an ad hoc network simu-
lated with randomly placed nodes with pause time of 2 s interval
during their mobility from present location. Metrics that consid-
ered for the simulation depicted in Table 1.
In the placement of each node, with 25%, 50%, 75% and broad-
cast range with four distinct multicast groups are spawned, which
can lead to process that is more emphatic. Also, the power sum is
normalized in order to reduce the minimum heuristic solution to 1.
The results that discussed about average numbers over 100 sets
and routes formed with the range of nodes between 10 and 45.
4.1. Performance analysis
Many metrics like energy consumption, thorough put delay, and
the network lifetime processes are adapted, which could affect the
network performance to great extent. Also, the outcome from the
experimental results is depicted for the ﬁve models, and the com-
parative analysis of all the ﬁve models has also been depicted in
the experimental results.
4.2. Network lifetime
For the experimental study, nodes in the range of 10 to 45 cho-
sen, and the nodes have been deployed within the deﬁned area.
Around 5–20 packets/sec has been sent between the nodes, and
all the nodes moved at 2 mts/sec. The group quantum and the
age of network depicted in Fig. 2, while engaged, the results afﬁrm
the performance of EELAM in keeping most of nodes alive for
longer tenure, than the other models. When the group size has
been managed to 40, the output from EELAM is about managing
the nodes alive for a period of 8530 sec, which is signiﬁcantly high
that compared to the other benchmarking models (see Fig. 2). Fig. 3
reﬂects the kind of nodes that are alive during the simulation time
(indicating in the multicast routes selected under each of the
benchmarking models). The outcome from EELAM results has been
depicting the better performance among the models that observed
at different time intervals (see Fig. 3).
4.3. Energy consumption
In Fig. 4, the emphasis is on Energy Consumption ratio for var-
ied time instances that presumes no energy consumption occurs
initially. The results depicted n Fig. 4 evincing that EELAM is opti-
mal that compared to other benchmarking models. The node level
energy dissipation in EELAM is linearly proportionate to transmis-
Table 1
Metrics and the related values adapted for simulation.
Metric
Value
Simulation time
2000 s
Network Range
1000  1000 mts
Transmission power
1400 mW
Voltage
5 V
Trafﬁc type
CBR
CBR packet size
512 bytes
Mobility
model Random waypoint
Frequency
2.4 GHz
Channel capacity
2 Mbps
Transmission range
150 mts
Idle power
830 mW
Node mobility
0–20 mts/sec
Receiving power
1000 mW
Pause time
1 sec
Group size
3, 6, 9, 12, 15
Fig. 2. Max life time of the routes with divergent number of nodes observed for
EELAM and benchmarking models.
Fig. 3. Percentage of nodes alive in selected route observed for EELAM and
benchmarking models at different intervals.
Fig. 4. Comparison of Energy Consumption Ratio observed for EELAM and
benchmarking models at divergent time intervals.
126
N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128

sion time. Hence, the EELAM evinced the less consumption that
compared to the other models.
4.4. Throughput
When dense number (here in experiments 45) mobile nodes are
involved in route with varied node mobility speeds in range of 0 to
30 mts/sec and transmitting 5 packets per second, it is imperative
that the mobility is vice versa to throughput. In the tests, results
EELAM has worked well in the range of node mobility ranges 0–
30 mts/sec and other models considered evinced signiﬁcant down-
fall in throughput proportionate to the increase in speed (see
Fig. 5). From the review of the experimental results, it is imperative
that the minimal fall in throughput along with the increasing
mobility of the nodes evinced for EELAM.
4.5. End-to-end delay
End-to-end delay can be termed as time consumption for a
packet to travel amidst source to destination. In the test condition
with mobile nodes positioned in various locations in the deﬁned
areas, and with the node mobility capability of 8–30 mts/sec,
transmitting the data at 5 packets/sec. Fig. 6 depicts the delay at
different time intervals observed for multicast routes traced by
EELAM and other benchmark models. The EELAM has transmitted
the data at signiﬁcantly low that compared to the other (see Fig. 6).
Using the metrics of Reserve Battery Life, Packet Delivery Ration
and End-to-End delay ratio, the EELAM performance also analyzed
for multicast trees formed by divergent number of nodes. From the
metric volumes that are obtained in the networks build with diver-
gent count of nodes reﬂecting the fact that EELAM is scalable and
robust. Inputs and metrics observed depicted in Figs. 7–9.
5. Conclusion
Energy Efﬁcient and Lifetime aware Multicast (EELAM) route
discovery for mobile ad hoc networks is the model that designed
to address the issues pertaining to curtailing the consumption of
energy and maximizing the route lifetime. The proposed topology
EELAM is effective in terms of assessing the optimality of the mul-
ticast tree by ensuring that three crucial metrics Reserve Battery
Life, Energy Consumption Ratio and multicast scope evaluated.
The adaptive genetic algorithm is used to identify energy efﬁcient
lifetime aware multicast tree, which is balancing the process over-
head by selecting sub-trees having dynamic number of nodes with
optimal ﬁtness as crossover points and further reﬁning input chro-
mosomes by comparing the ﬁtness with child chromosomes
formed. The signiﬁcance of the EELAM assessed through the simu-
lations build by network simulator called NS2. In order to this, the
routing performance metrics, such as packet delivery ratio, end-to-
end delay, throughput versus mobility, and energy consumption
Fig. 5. Comparison of throughput observed for EELAM and benchmarking models at
divergent mobility speed.
Fig. 6. Comparative analysis of end-to-end delay observed for EELAM and bench-
marking models at divergent time intervals.
Fig. 7. Comparison of End-to-End Delay observed for routes formed by divergent
count of nodes.
Fig. 8. Comparative analysis of Packet Delivery Ratio observed for routes formed by
divergent count of nodes.
Fig. 9. Energy Reserves Ratio observed at different simulation intervals.
N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128
127

ratio used. The results obtained for these metrics from the multi-
cast route discovered by EELAM compared to the other bench
marking models such as EACNS, EDCMRA, HSPMA, and MC-
TRACE. These metrics were also compared between the multicast
routes formed with divergent count of nodes those discovered by
EELAM, which is in order to evince the scalability and efﬁcacy of
the proposed model. Insights learnt from this model motivating
us to redeﬁne the Adaptive Genetic Algorithm, such that the ﬁtness
function can use fuzzy reasoning to estimate the ﬁtness of the
given multicast route.
References
[1] Mario Cˇagalj, Jean-Pierre Hubaux, Christian Enz, Minimum-energy broadcast
in
all-wireless
networks:
NP-completeness
and
distribution
issues,
in:
Proceedings
of
the
8th
Annual
International
Conference
on
Mobile
Computing and Networking, ACM, 2002.
[2] Intae Kang, Radha Poovendran, Maximizing static network lifetime of wireless
broadcast
ad
hoc
networks,
in:
IEEE
International
Conference
on
Communications, 2003, ICC’03, vol. 3, IEEE, 2003.
[3] Jeffrey E. Wieselthier, Gam D. Nguyen, Anthony Ephremides, Algorithms for
energy-efﬁcient multicasting in static ad hoc wireless networks, Mob.
Networks Appl. 6 (3) (2001) 251–263.
[4] Wei-Hsiang Cheng, Chung-Yi Wen, Kai-Ten Feng, Power-controlled hybrid
multicast routing protocol for mobile ad hoc networks, in: IEEE 63rd Vehicular
Technology Conference, 2006, VTC 2006-Spring, vol. 3, IEEE, 2006.
[5] Suresh Singh, Mike Woo, Cauligi S. Raghavendra, Power-aware routing in
mobile ad hoc networks, in: Proceedings of the 4th Annual ACM/IEEE
International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, ACM, 1998.
[6] Weifa
Liang,
Xiaoxing
Guo,
Online
multicasting
for
network
capacity
maximization in energy-constrained ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Mob.
Comput. 5 (9) (2006) 1215–1227.
[7] Jeffrey
E.
Wieselthier,
Gam
D.
Nguyen,
Anthony
Ephremides,
On
the
construction of energy-efﬁcient broadcast and multicast trees in wireless
networks, in: INFOCOM 2000, Nineteenth Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE
Computer and Communications Societies, Proceedings, IEEE, vol. 2, IEEE, 2000.
[8] Shengbo Yang, Chai Kiat Yeo, Bu-Sung Lee, Toward reliable data delivery for
highly dynamic mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 11 (1)
(2012) 111–124.
[9] Youngmin Kim, Sanghyun Ahn, Jaehwoon Lee, An efﬁcient multicast data
forwarding scheme for mobile ad hoc networks, in: ICOIN, 2005.
[10] Floriano De Rango et al., Multicast QoS core-based tree routing protocol and
genetic algorithm over an HAP-satellite architecture, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol.
58(8) (2009) 4447–4461.
[11] Ernestina Cianca et al., Integrated satellite-HAP systems, IEEE Commun. Mag.
43(12) (2005) supl-33.
[12] Hui Cheng, Shengxiang Yang, Genetic algorithms for dynamic routing
problems in mobile ad hoc networks, in: Evolutionary Computation for
Dynamic Optimization Problems, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 343–
375.
[13] Floriano De Rango, Francesca Guerriero, Peppino Fazio, Link-stability and
energy aware routing protocol in distributed wireless networks, IEEE Trans.
Parallel Distrib. Syst. 23 (4) (2012) 713–726.
[14] N. Papanna, A. Rama Mohan Reddy, M. Seetha, Exploratory assessment based
child nodes selection (EACNS): energy efﬁcient multicast routing topology for
mobile ad hoc networks, in: Proceedings of International Conference on
Communication and Networks, Springer, Singapore, 2017.
[15] B. Wang, S.K.S. Gupta, S-REMiT: an algorithm for enhancing energy-efﬁciency
of multicast trees in wireless ad hoc networks, Proc. IEEE (2003) 3519–3524.
[16] Bin Wang, Sandeep K.S. Gupta, G-REMiT: an algorithm for building energy
efﬁcient multicast trees in wireless ad hoc networks, in: Second IEEE
International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications, 2003,
NCA 2003, IEEE, 2003.
[17] Pariza Kamboj, A.K. Sharma, Power aware multicast reactive routing protocol
(PAMRRP), IJCSNS 8 (8) (2008) 351.
[18] Sufen Zhao, Liansheng Tan, Jie Li, A distributed energy efﬁcient multicast
routing algorithm for MANETs, Int. J. Sensor Networks 2 (1-2) (2007) 62–67.
[19] Wen-Lin Yang, Constructing energy-efﬁcient multicast trees with delay
constraints in ad hoc networks, in: Advanced Information Networking and
Applications, 2005, AINA 2005, 19th International Conference on, vol. 1, IEEE,
2005.
[20] Juan J. Gálvez, Pedro M. Ruiz, Antonio F.G. Skarmeta, Spatially disjoint
multipath routing protocol without location information, in: Local Computer
Networks, 2008, LCN 2008, 33rd IEEE Conference on, IEEE, 2008.
[21] Elizabeth M. Royer, Charles E. Perkins, Multicast operation of the ad-hoc on-
demand distance vector routing protocol, in: Proceedings of the 5th Annual
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking,
ACM, 1999.
[22] N. Kamal, A study of energy efﬁciency of multicast routing protocols for manet,
2013.
[23] Bulent Tavli, Wendi Heinzelman, Energy-efﬁcient real-time multicast routing
in mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Comput. 60 (5) (2011) 707–722.
[24] Bülent Tavli, Wendi B. Heinzelman, MH-TRACE: multihop time reservation
using adaptive control for energy efﬁciency, IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun. 22 (5)
(2004) 942–953.
[25] Sung-Ju Lee, William Su, Mario Gerla, On-demand multicast routing protocol
in multihop wireless mobile networks, Mob. Networks Appl. 7 (6) (2002) 441–
453.
[26] Golla Varaprasad, High stable power aware multicast algorithm for mobile ad
hoc networks, IEEE Sens. J. 13 (5) (2013) 1442–1446.
[27] Ting Lu, Jie Zhu, Genetic algorithm for energy-efﬁcient QoS multicast routing,
IEEE Commun. Lett. 17 (1) (2013) 31–34.
[28] Xiaojing Xiang, Xin Wang, Yuanyuan Yang, Supporting efﬁcient and scalable
multicasting over mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 10 (4)
(2011) 544–559.
[29] Alireza shams Shaﬁgh, Kamran Abdollahi, Marjan Kouchaki, Improving
performance of on demand multicast routing protocol by fuzzy logic, World
Appl. Sci. J. 13 11 (2011) 2323–2337.
[30] Song Guo, Oliver Yang, Localized operations for distributed minimum energy
multicast algorithm in mobile ad hoc networks, IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib.
Syst. 18 (2) (2007) 186–198.
[31] Yunnan Wu, Philip A. Chou, Sun-Yuan Kung, Minimum-energy multicast in
mobile ad hoc networks using network coding, IEEE Trans. Commun. 53 (11)
(2005) 1906–1918.
[32] Weifa Liang et al., Minimum-energy all-to-all multicasting in wireless ad hoc
networks, IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun. 8.11 (2009).
[33] N. Fareena, A. Shunmuga Priya Mala, K. Ramar, Mobility based energy efﬁcient
multicast protocol for MANET, Proc. Eng. 38 (2012) 2473–2483.
[34] Pariza Kamboj, Ashok K. Sharma, Energy efﬁcient multicast routing protocol
for MANET with minimum control overhead (EEMPMO), Energy 8.7 (2010).
[35] Ajita Sethi et al., A survey of QoS multicast protocols for MANETs, J. Network
Commun. Emerg. Technol. (JNCET) 6(3) (2016). www.jncet.org.
[36] Mandavilli Srinivas, Lalit M. Patnaik, Adaptive probabilities of crossover and
mutation in genetic algorithms, IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybernet. 24 (4) (1994)
656–667.
[37] Jun Zhang, Henry Shu-Hung Chung, Wai-Lun Lo, Clustering-based adaptive
crossover and mutation probabilities for genetic algorithms, IEEE Trans. Evol.
Comput. 11 (3) (2007) 326–335.
[38] Teerawat Issariyakul, Ekram Hossain, Introduction to Network Simulator NS2,
Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.
128
N. Papanna et al. / Applied Computing and Informatics 15 (2019) 120–128

