Geometry and the visual brain
Jean Lorenceau *
UPR 640-LENA CNRS, 47 Bd de l’Hopital, 750113 Paris, France
Abstract
Receptive ﬁelds structure of neurons in primary visual cortex suggests that they process visual stimuli in the frequency domain, in
a way similar to the frequency analysis performed in the auditory system. As a consequence, both psychophysicists and elec-
trophysiologists have long probed the visual system using extended sine wave gratings that are well localized in the frequency
domain but poorly deﬁned in visual space. Meanwhile, how the brain processes the geometrical properties and the spatial and
temporal relationships between stimulus parts has received less attention. Recent progress in visual neuroscience that uncovered
long-range horizontal connections between cortical neurons and revealed the complex architecture of primary visual cortex and
feedback connectivity led to new insights concerned with the processing of geometrical properties of visual stimuli in V1. This paper
presents a short historical perspective of the emergence of new issues related to the cortical architecture and its functional conse-
quences on the processing of geometrical properties.
 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
Keywords: Receptive ﬁeld; Fourier analysis; Phase; Geometry; Long-range horizontal connections
1. Introduction
Early in the 20th century, Wertheimer [32] observed
that two static ﬂashes presented in succession with
appropriate temporal and spatial separations elicit a
perception of visual apparent motion. This seminal
study, indicating that the visual system does more than
simply registering external events, had inﬂuential theo-
retical consequences and launched the idea that the
‘‘whole is more than the sum of its parts’’. From
Wertheimer’s work emerged a scientiﬁc attempt to de-
ﬁne general principles underlying perceptual organiza-
tion, the gestalt psychology [19,20]. In vision, ﬁgure/
ground segregation and perceptual grouping of indi-
vidual ‘‘tokens’’ into a ‘‘whole’’ was found to strongly
depend upon their spatial and temporal relationships,
whatever the exact nature of these ‘‘tokens’’. General
principles, such as good continuity, proximity, closure,
symmetry, common fate, synchronicity etc. appeared as
strong
determinants
of
perceptual
organization.
Importantly, the general model underlying the Gestaltist
approach is a geometrical one, stressing the spatial
relations between parts rather than concerned with the
intrinsic processing of the parts themselves. However,
the early attempt of the gestaltist school to oﬀer a
plausible neuronal account of their ﬁndings failed, as
their idea of an isomorphism between the external
Euclidean space and the internalization of geometrical
rules whereby spatial relations between neurons would
mimic the geometry of the stimulus was not conﬁrmed
experimentally.
In contrast with the Gestaltist approach, Fechner, at
the end of the 19th century, aimed at establishing the
quantitative relationships between physical stimulus in-
puts and perceptual outputs of sensory systems, in order
to deﬁne and measure the elementary sensations pro-
cessed by the human brain. Within this elementarist
framework, less emphasis is put on perceptual organi-
zation and grouping of ‘‘tokens’’ and more on how the
central nervous system processes the ‘‘tokens’’ them-
selves, measuring detection thresholds to probe the
transfer function of sensory systems. The relationships
between the physical inputs and perception thresholds
were found to follow simple, although disputed, math-
ematical equations, among which the Bouguer–Weber’s
law on discrimination thresholds or the Fechner’s law
according to which sensation grows as a function of the
logarithm of the physical input intensity. Incidentally, at
about the same time, Ramon and Cajal discovered that
neurons are independent autonomous brain elements,
* Tel.: 33-1-42-16-14-05.
E-mail address: Jean.Lorenceau@chups.jussieu.fr (J. Lorenceau).
0928-4257/$ - see front matter  2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.jphysparis.2003.09.012
Journal of Physiology - Paris 97 (2003) 99–103
www.elsevier.com/locate/jphysparis

invalidating the dominant reticularist view according to
which neurons form a continuous single brain circuit.
This ﬁnding, ﬁtting well with the elementarist approach
of Fechner, suggested a piecewise functioning of the
brain whereby each neuron would independently per-
form some speciﬁc computation of its inputs.
Advance in electrophysiology soon allowed Hartline
[16] to record the responses of frog’s optic nerve in re-
sponse to visual stimulation. His discovery that retinal
ganglion cells are selectively activated by localized dis-
tributions of luminance or chromatic contrast gave birth
to the notion of ‘‘receptive ﬁeld’’ deﬁned as the small
region of visual space that need be illuminated to elicit a
response from the recorded cell [22]. Subsequent studies
showed that this notion extends to primary visual cor-
tex, where neurons have elongated receptive ﬁelds and
are retinotopically organized, such that neighboring
neurons analyze neighboring regions of the visual ﬁeld
[17]. These pioneering studies yielded the view that the
primary visual cortex consists in a mosaic of indepen-
dent ﬁlters acting in parallel. This advance in the
understanding of the electrophysiological properties of
neuronal processing led psychophysicists to look for the
potential perceptual consequences of these new ﬁndings,
as the spatial structure of receptive ﬁelds provided
strong experimental constraints to deﬁne a model of the
stimulus relevant to biological vision. Indeed, the center-
surround spatial structure of retinal receptive ﬁelds
implies that each ganglion cell is band pass in the fre-
quency domain. As a matter of fact, Fourier’s theorem
states that any image can be decomposed into a sum of
sinusoidal waves of diﬀerent frequency, amplitude and
phase. This raised the question of whether the cortex
analyses images in visual space or in its equivalent fre-
quency space. As the Fourier analysis is a linear oper-
ation, determining whether the visual system itself
behaves as a linear spatial frequency analyzer appeared
of great interest as it could provide a powerful tool to
study biological vision. In the frequency domain, the
most elementary stimulus, represented by a single point,
is a sinusoidal distribution of luminance contrast, con-
sisting of a simple extended oriented grating. It was
therefore relevant that, in their seminal study, Campbell
and Robson [6] used oriented one-dimensional gratings
to probe the relations between the center-surround
structure of neurons’ receptive ﬁeld and human contrast
sensitivity. Their results brought support to the view
that the visual system decomposes visual inputs into
spatial frequency bands, each band being selectively
processed by a sub-population of neurons composing a
‘‘spatial frequency channel’’. Consistent with this view,
electrophysiological recordings indicated that cortical
visual neurons are selectively tuned to diﬀerent spatial
frequencies [9,10,23]. The idea that the visual system
decomposes a spatial distribution of light into diﬀerent
spatial frequency bands selectively processed by a set of
spatial frequency analyzers working independently and
in parallel at diﬀerent scales had a huge impact on
subsequent research. Based on this ﬁltering model of
visual processing, studying the visual system required
that the spatial frequency content of the stimuli was
precisely controlled and speciﬁed.
Accordingly,
psychophysicists
and
electrophysio-
logists used gratings at diﬀerent spatial frequency, orien-
tation and contrast to probe early vision, as they were
mostly concerned with the eﬀects of the energy spectrum
on contrast sensitivity and neuronal selectivity. Numer-
ous psychophysical studies used a variety of methods to
assess the number and bandwidth of spatial frequency
channels underlying visual perception, the degree of over-
lap and independence between channels, etc. [2,3,33].
Subsequent studies of motion or texture perception drew
on what soon became the standard model to oﬀer dif-
ferent schemes whereby the outputs of ‘‘ﬁlter neurons’’
were combined to yield units endowed with more com-
plex capabilities [1,31].
More recently, the development of multiscale analysis
and wavelet transform that use Gabor ﬁlters that are
well localized both in space and in the frequency domain
provided new tools to describe the morphological
properties of images while modeling more accurately the
response proﬁle of cortical cells [8]. However, the
extraction of the geometrical properties of images with
the wavelet transform remains a diﬃcult problem.
As mentioned above, the Fourier decomposition of a
two-dimensional (2D) image result in both an energy
spectrum, describing the distribution of amplitude in
diﬀerent spatial frequency bands at diﬀerent orienta-
tions, and a phase spectrum, that contains information
about the position of diﬀerent spatial frequencies in vi-
sual space (Fig. 1a). One issue with this representation
of images in the Fourier domain is that the position and
geometrical relationships between diﬀerent parts of an
image, although they are somehow embedded in the
phase spectrum, are diﬃcult to visualize and analyze.
This is mainly because the phase of each spatial fre-
quency component is expressed relative to an arbitrary
origin (absolute phase), but does not directly represent
the phase between diﬀerent spatial frequencies (relative
phase) that gives information about their spatial rela-
tionships. This latter information is highly relevant to
image processing as it characterizes both the diﬀerent
features in an image, such as edges and borders and the
relative positions between diﬀerent distant parts of the
image, such as contour alignments, curvature, etc.
As a matter of fact, psychophysical studies showed
that human observers rely heavily on the phase spec-
trum to recognize objects and scenes, and to a lesser
extent on the energy spectrum. For instance, when
blending, through image synthesis, an energy spectrum
of an image A with the phase spectrum of an image B,
the resulting image B0 is more easily recognized than
100
J. Lorenceau / Journal of Physiology - Paris 97 (2003) 99–103

image A0 (Fig. 1b; [25]). These experiments are strong
evidence that phase information is more important for
object recognition and the analysis of natural images
than
the
amplitude
spectrum,
consistent
with
the
observation that, although the amplitude spectrum may
greatly vary, perceptual organization remains stable.
Electrophysiological recordings in primary visual cortex
showed that simple cells are sensitive to the phase of a
grating with optimal spatial frequency and orientation
as their responses depend on the position of a grating
within their receptive ﬁeld. However, complex cells
proved to be phase insensitive, providing the same
response independently of the position of an optimally
oriented sine wave grating within their receptive ﬁeld.
Since these cells provide the main output for subsequent
processing in other extracortical areas, this raises the
question of whether the sensitivity of simple cells to
spatial phase is used to process images [28].
At this point, the notion of phase, as represented in
the Fourier domain, need to be clariﬁed. The phases of
diﬀerent spatial frequencies may correspond to the dis-
tribution of luminance intensity in a single location of
visual space and be processed by neurons with overlap-
ping receptive ﬁelds; alternately, phase information may
indicate that diﬀerent spatial frequencies are present
in diﬀerent locations of the visual space and stimulate
Fig. 1. (a) Two photographs (a and b) and their Fourier transform: amplitude and orientation of the frequency spectrum (top) and phase spectrum
(bottom). (b) Two images resulting from an inverse Fourier transform, combining the amplitude spectrum of image a with the phase spectrum of
image b and reciprocally. The phase spectrum carries the information suﬃcient to recognize images.
J. Lorenceau / Journal of Physiology - Paris 97 (2003) 99–103
101

distinct neuronal populations with non-overlapping
receptive ﬁelds [24]. Although this distinction may be
irrelevant in the standard linear ﬁltering model that as-
sumes that ﬁlters at an early stage work independently
and in parallel––the integration of their outputs being
left for neurons at a ‘‘higher’’ stage––it is not irrelevant if
neurons already interact within primary visual cortex. In
this latter case, the architecture of V1 and the spatial
distribution of neurons within the cortical tissue––the
intrinsic geometry of the visual brain––becomes of pri-
marily importance.
As a matter of fact, the classical view that the dis-
tribution of neurons in primary visual cortex is purely
retinotopic has recently been revised, as it was found the
cortical surface presents fractures and singularities,
called pinwheels, where neurons change rapidly their
orientation selectivity as well as their positions in visual
space [4]. These ﬁndings have important functional
consequences in the light of the fact that the notion that
neurons are immune to stimulation outside the spatially
restricted region––the receptive ﬁeld––has also been
challenged by psychophysical and electrophysiological
studies showing that the responses of V1 neurons to
oriented stimuli presented within their receptive ﬁeld can
be markedly modulated by stimuli falling in surrounding
regions, which by themselves fail to activate the cell.
These inﬂuences, that can be mediated by feedback
projections from higher cortical areas as well as by long-
range horizontal connections within V1, call to a revi-
sion of the mere notion of receptive ﬁeld (see Angelucci
et al., Hayes and Field this issue). Indeed, anatomical
studies indicate that horizontal connections link cortical
regions over distances up to 6–8 mm, tend to connect
cells with similar orientation preferences and more spe-
ciﬁcally cells whose receptive ﬁelds are topographically
aligned along an axis of collinearity [12,14,30]. The non-
trivial architecture of divergent feedback connections
and experimental evidence also indicates that feedback
exerts long-range modulation of neuronal activity at a
lower processing level. Thus, this circuitry––feedback
from other areas and horizontal connections within a
single
area––together
with
the
highly
complicated
architecture of primary visual cortex provide a possible
physiological substratum to compute various geometri-
cal properties of the incoming image.
In support of a functional link between neurons
through horizontal connections in primary visual cortex,
a number of psychophysical studies uncovered strong
contrast dependent center-surround interactions, either
facilitatory or suppressive [7,26,27], that occur when one
or several oriented test stimuli are presented together
with surrounding oriented stimuli. For instance, con-
trast sensitivity is improved by similar ﬂankers collinear
and aligned with the test stimulus. Changing the relative
distance, orientation, spatial frequency or contrast of
the ﬂankers modulates the change in sensitivity, allow-
ing the analysis of the architecture of these spatial
interactions [26,27]. In addition, the ability to detect the
presence of a speciﬁc conﬁguration of oriented bars
immersed within a surrounding textures of randomly
oriented elements with similar characteristics is better
for conﬁgurations of collinear and aligned elements than
for parallel conﬁgurations. Field et al. [11] proposed
that perceptual ‘‘association ﬁelds’’ are involved in this
contour integration process, and suggested that the
architecture of horizontal long-range connections may
underlie these eﬀects. It is worth noting that the stan-
dard ﬁltering model is unable to account for these
ﬁndings (see Hess et al., this issue). Furthermore, the
notion of association ﬁeld is supported by studies
showing that these long-range interactions are decreased
or suppressed in amblyopic patients who suﬀer from a
disorganization
of horizontal connectivity. Electro-
physiological recordings revealed that similar center-
surround interactions are already present at the cellular
level in primary visual cortex [18,21]. The additional
ﬁnding that the activity elicited by a visual stimulus
propagates slowly along horizontal connections [5,15]
has important functional, perceptual and theoretical
consequences [13,29], as the functional architecture of
V1 cannot be viewed as a pure spatial circuitry but must
incorporate the temporal dimension.
Overall, these studies are compatible with the view
that long-range connections play a functional role in
perceptual contour integration, and further suggest that
they may constitute a physiological substrate that
implement some of the gestalt rules at an early pro-
cessing stage. In this respect, using Fourier analysis, and
its amplitude spectrum in particular, as a tool and a
model to specify the stimulus characteristics may not be
fully adapted to embrace the capability of the striate
cortex to process geometrical aspects of images, that
carry the information relevant to ﬁgure/ground segre-
gation, visual binding, motion analysis or object recog-
nition. The articles of the present issue explore in details
geometrical models of the functional architecture of
primary visual cortex and its consequences on the pro-
cessing of geometrical characteristics of images. They
should be of great interest for researchers aiming at
understanding biological vision.
References
[1] E.H. Adelson, J.E. Bergen, Spatiotemporal energy models for the
perception of motion, Journal of the Optical Society of America 2
(1985) 284–299.
[2] S.J. Anderson, D.C. Burr, Spatial and temporal selectivity of the
human motion detection system, Vision Research 25 (8) (1985)
1147–1154.
[3] C. Blakemore, F.W. Campbell, On the existence of neurones in the
human visual system selectively sensitive to the orientation and
size of retinal images, Journal of Physiology (1969) 203–237.
102
J. Lorenceau / Journal of Physiology - Paris 97 (2003) 99–103

[4] T. Bonhoeﬀer, A. Grinvald, The layout of iso-orientation domains
in area 18 of cat visual cortex: optical imaging reveals a pinwheel-
like organization, Journal of Neuroscience 13 (10) (1993) 4157–
4180.
[5] V. Bringuier, F. Chavane, L. Glaeser, Y. Fregnac, Horizontal
propagation of visual activity revealed in the synaptic integration
ﬁeld of area 17 neurons, Science 283 (1998) 695–699.
[6] F.W. Campbell, J.G. Robson, Application of fourier analysis to
the visibility of gratings, Journal of Physiology 197 (1968) 551–
566.
[7] M.W. Cannon, S.C. Fullenkamp, Spatial interactions in apparent
contrast: inhibitory eﬀects among grating patterns of diﬀerent
spatial frequencies, spatial positions and orientations, Vision
Research 31 (11) (1991) 1985–1998.
[8] J.G. Daugman, Uncertainty relation for resolution in space,
spatial frequency, and orientation optimized by two-dimensional
visual cortical ﬁlters, Journal of the Optical Society of America A
2 (7) (1985) 1160–1169.
[9] R.L. De Valois, K.K. De Valois, Spatial Vision, Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 1988.
[10] C. Enroth-Cugell, J.G. Robson, The contrast sensitivity of retinal
ganglion cells of the cat, Journal of Physiology 187 (1966) 517–
552.
[11] D.J. Field, A. Hayes, R.F. Hess, Contour integration by the
human visual system: evidence for a local association ﬁeld, Vision
Research 33 (1993) 173–193.
[12] C.D. Gilbert, T. Wiesel, Columnar speciﬁcity of intrinsic hori-
zontal and corticocortical connections in cat visual cortex, Journal
of Neuroscience 9 (7) (1989) 2432–2442.
[13] S. Georges, P. Series, Y. Fregnac, J. Lorenceau, Orientation
dependent modulation of apparent speed: psychophysical evi-
dence, Vision Research 42 (25) (2002) 2757–2772.
[14] C.D. Gilbert, Horizontal integration and cortical dynamics,
Neuron 9 (1992) 1–13.
[15] A. Grinvald, E.E. Lieke, R.D. Frostig, R. Hidesheim, Cortical
point-spread function and long-range lateral interactions revealed
by real-time optical imaging of macaque monkey primary visual
cortex, Journal of Neuroscience 14 (1994) 2545–2568.
[16] H.K. Hartline, The receptive ﬁeld of optic nerve ﬁbers, American
Journal of Physiology 130 (1940) 690–699.
[17] D. Hubel, T. Wiesel, Receptive ﬁelds of single cells in the cat’s
striate cortex, Journal of Physiology 148 (1959) 574–591.
[18] M.K. Kapadia, M. Ito, C.D. Gilbert, G. Westheimer, Improve-
ment in visual sensitivity by changes in local context: parallel
studies in human observers and in V1 of alert monkeys, Neuron 15
(1995) 843–856.
[19] K. Koﬀka, Principles of Gestalt Psychology, Harcourt Brace, New
York, 1935.
[20] W. Kohler, Gestalt Psychology, Liveright, New York, 1929.
[21] J.J. Knierim, J.C. Van Essen, Neuronal responses to static texture
patterns in area V1 of the alert macaque monkey, Journal of
Neurophysiology 67 (1992) 961–980.
[22] S.W. Kuﬄer, Discharge patterns and functional organization of
the mammalian retina, Journal of Physiology 16 (1953) 37–
68.
[23] L. Maﬀei, A. Fiorentini, Spatial frequency rows in the striate
visual cortex, Vision Research 17 (1977) 257–264.
[24] M.C. Morrone, D. Burr, Feature detection in human vision: a
phase dependent energy model, Proceeding of the Royal Society of
London 235 (1988) 221–245.
[25] L.N. Piotrowski, F.W. Campbell, A demonstration of the
importance and ﬂexibility of spatial-frequency amplitude and
phase, Perception 11 (1982) 337–346.
[26] U. Polat, D. Sagi, Lateral interactions between spatial channels:
suppression and facilitation revealed by lateral masking experi-
ments, Vision Research 7 (1993) 993–1000.
[27] U. Polat, D. Sagi, The architecture of perceptual spatial interac-
tions, Vision Research 1 (1994) 73–79.
[28] L. Shams, C. von der Marlsburg, The role of complex cells in
object recognition, Vision Research 42 (2002) 2547–2554.
[29] P. Series, S. Georges, J. Lorenceau, Y. Fregnac, Orientation
dependent modulation of apparent speed: a model based on
center/surround interactions, Vision Research 42 (25) (2002)
2781–2798.
[30] L.C. Sincich, G.G. Blasdel, Oriented axon projections in primary
visual cortex of the monkey, Journal of Neuroscience 21 (2001)
4416–4426.
[31] A. Sutter, J. Beck, N. Graham, Contrast and spatial variables in
texture segregation: testing a simple spatial-frequency channels
model, Perception and Psychophysics 46 (4) (1989) 312–332.
[32] M. Wertheimer, Experimentelle stuidien uber das Sehen von
Beuegung, Zeitschrift fuer Psychologie 61 (1912) 161–265.
[33] H.R. Wilson, J.R. Bergen, A four mechanism model for threshold
spatial vision, Vision Research 19 (1979) 19–32.
J. Lorenceau / Journal of Physiology - Paris 97 (2003) 99–103
103

