Elie Cartan and pan-geometry of multispatial hyperspace
Jakub Czajko
P.O. Box 700, Clayton, CA 94517-0700, USA
Accepted 16 May 2003
Abstract
Elie Cartan has proved that highest dimensionality of any simple geometric space is three and that an exterior
diﬀerentiation of a 3D+ geometric object gives bivector, which may correspond to some two 2D surfaces as if the 3D+
geometric object comprised two 3D objects. Since one cannot increase the dimensionality of a 3D space even though
more than four independently varying physical magnitudes do exist, then an expansion of dimensionality requires a
multispatial hyperspace that contains many simple geometric 3D spaces. Presence of such a hyperspace prompts for an
entirely new concept of vectors with an isometric operation of vector multiplication of traditional vectors (3-tuples).
This new operation on 3-vectors implies presence of a 3D mass-based linear vector space and consequently thus a 9D
geometric hyperspace for classical mechanics alone. Also an outline of entirely new, synthetic approach to physics and
mathematics is introduced. This synthetic approach can be used to design a computer-aided knowledge extracting
system, which could generate entirely new scientiﬁc knowledge.
 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
1. Physical reasons for multispatial hyperspace
Mathematical consequences of Special Theory of Relativity (STR) imply a spatial structure of time ﬂow (SSTF) [1].
The SSTF suggests unanticipated nonradial (tangential and binormal) gravitational potentials, whose existence has
been conﬁrmed in several formerly unexplained experiments [2–4]. The nonradial potentials cause nonradial eﬀects of
gravity (NEG), which explain an inaccurate local prediction of the Einsteins General Theory of Relativity (GTR) [2] in
agreement with many independent experiments [5]. The SSTF simpliﬁes mathematical physics (MP) by splitting impact
of artiﬁcial motion and gravity [3]––a move deemed impossible by Einstein, who founded his GTR on the Principle of
Equivalence (PE) which substitutes the eﬀects of accelerated artiﬁcial motion with the action of an amalgamated
gravitational pseudoﬁeld. Presence of NEG restricts the GTR to essentially global, radial happenings and reveals cracks
in some algebraic, topological, vectorial and tensorial methods when applied to certain discrete phenomena of physics.
Despite its evident inability to handle near surface phenomena [2–4], the GTR is a formidable cosmological theory.
For only from the standpoint of the universe as a whole one can disregard such nuances as conservation of energy and
choose to investigate an amalgamated gravitational pseudoﬁeld instead [3]. For happenings near surfaces of stars or
planets, the latter must be treated as discrete objects, not as masses dissolved into the amalgamated pseudoﬁeld. For
exact predictions near surfaces of masses, the GTR should include the NEG [2–4]. Just as the Newtons theory the GTR
did not really explain the phenomenon called gravity, but it accounts for some of its radial consequences. Even if only
one single particle would have to be considered, gravity should have also some nonradial impacts besides the radial
one––for diﬀerential geometry sake. The GTR emerged in mathematically relaxed German-speaking scientiﬁc com-
munity. Were it not for the fact that pure mathematics (PM) did not care about physics, the GTR might not survived
E-mail address: sunswing77@yahoo.com (J. Czajko).
0960-0779/$ - see front matter  2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/S0960-0779(03)00254-6
Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
www.elsevier.com/locate/chaos

critique of its theoretical foundations in more mathematically sophisticated circles. In this and subsequent papers I will
expose theoretical nonsenses that virtually concealed the necessity for both the SSTF and NEG.
I must begin my critique with Descartes. His analytic geometry is a great tool, but it must not serve as a model for
happenings in the physical reality, because it has terrible misgivings that have never been disclosed before. The whole
nonsense concealed a part of physical reality and paved the way for some abstract algebraic alternatives to diﬀerential
geometry. In order to understand that, however, I should explain the meaning of certain forgotten and/or suppressed
mathematical results. It took a lot of tweaking for the PM to conceal the SSTF, which nature endorsed in many ex-
periments [2–4]. In order to advance physics we must remove obscurity from mathematics. Yet mathematics should rely
on physics, unless it would like to become an art.
Unlike some cosmological theories, physical and geometrical ones should be formulated in terms of local diﬀer-
entials and be deﬁned in inﬁnitesimally small vicinities. The SSTF does not contradict the GTR, but complements it for
local phenomena. However, the SSTF reveals presence of structural, essentially geometrical laws of physics, which can
form deeper common mathematical infrastructure of physics [3]. The infrastructure should be the same for classical
mechanics (CM), quantum mechanics (QM) and all their derivatives. The SSTF calls thus for unprecedented conceptual
restructuring of the PM and MP. It needs a Pan-Geometry (PG) to deal with multispatial hyperspace (MH) [1,3]. For
the very essence of the SSTF is existence of a multispatial infrastructure of our physical reality, wherein geometrical and
physical dimensions are distributed among multiple 3D geometric spaces.
The SSTF changes virtually everything about physics, especially gravity. For gravity operates in an abstract hy-
perspace that comprises at least two dual 3D linear vector spaces (LVSs), one of which is the usual length-based space
(LBS) whereas the other is a pure time-based space (TBS) [3]. This new and quite unexpected interpretation has been
developed in [1,3] upon El Naschies idea of conjugate complex time [6–10]. Physics needs entirely new pan-geometric
paradigm that would extend the single-space paradigm of former geometry onto multispatial reality. Dual spaces are
well-known features of LVSs. They look like two faces of a vector space over the same topological manifold in a
multispatial structure of a hyperspace, rather than in a single LVS [3]. The old single-space paradigm was just an un-
tenable geometric oversimpliﬁcation, deﬁed by––formerly unexplained––nonradial and mixed experiments [2–4]. Those
experiments challenged not just single theories, but the whole set of former mathematical and physical paradigms.
From the viewpoint of diﬀerential geometry the NEG is unavoidable [2–4] and its omission produced twisted
mathematics. Moreover, ‘‘undesirable’’ rules of diﬀerential geometry were set aside. That is why we must develop
nonpostulative, synthetic mathematics (SM), which would supply balance checks for the PM as well as synthetic
methods (complementary to analyses) to create new mathematical knowledge. Only declarations are allowed in the SM,
but no existential postulates. Even the very abstract mathematical existence is not a matter of a clever deﬁnition or a
smart postulate, but that of an actual construction, which requires resolution of logical contradictions. Only non-
contradictory objects can actually exist. If an abstract object exists (i.e., is constructible) and yet its existence appears
somewhat contradictory, then the mathematics that indicates the contradiction must be invalid and so it should be
revised. Existential postulates can ‘‘create’’ nonexistent reality.
The traditional postulative algebraic and topological approach to geometry and physics is inadequate. It has built
almost Ptolemaic infrastructure of our physics. Mathematics must not be arbitrarily postulated, but discovered. Or else,
it may create veiled nonsenses, one of which will be shown below. The nonsense is over 300 years old, but it was never
contested. It stems from the art-like methods that the PM deployed in deﬁance of experiments and often against logic.
Its elimination opens totally new approach to geometry. Such nonsenses have eventually turned against the PM and MP
and put them in a theoretical limbo, loudly complaining about ‘‘weird’’ nature. However, if it is nature that sets ipso
facto standards of scientiﬁc soundness, then perhaps PM and MP lost touch with the actual physical reality.
There is no shred of evidence that time is really one-dimensional; neither is there a theoretical reason for that. Rate
of time ﬂow is aﬀected in three linearly independent ways (dimensions) [3]. Once time is allowed to ﬂow in its own 3D
TBS––which is a dual LVS to the usual 3D LBS––everything begins making sense [1,3]. Evidently the nature is designed
for spatial ﬂow of time in a multispatial hyperspace. Experimental evidence conﬁrmed it and theoretical evidence, some
of which will be shown below, suggests that it is necessary. For if I can devise new, logically necessary operations, which
were impossible to design before, then this fact constitutes theoretical evidence. Flow of time was already perceived as
spatial, though still linear (one-dimensional). The STR has made time ﬂow virtually two-dimensional as dependent on
speed [1]. For if time ﬂow depends on speed (i.e., inverse time or frequency or time rate), then it is essentially a 2D
geometric eﬀect. The STRs is still imprecise, however [1]. The GTR has not really enhanced the STR, but found an
excuse for our inability to accept its consequences by shifting focus from physics to cosmology. I have extended the ﬂow
of time into third time-based dimension, as dependent also on changes to speed (i.e., accelerations) [3]. The SSTF is
basically pure geometry in some time-based coordinates. However, it is physics that points to the geometric, 3D spatial
ﬂow of time. Yet the new physics that includes the SSTF needs physically meaningful mathematics and so it is im-
perative that we develop the SM.
480
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

El Naschie, who investigated hierarchy of spaces, has demonstrated that discrete ﬁnite dimensionality is an ex-
pectation value of that on an inﬁnite-dimensional Cantorian manifold [11,12]. His result shows how to make transition
from a semi-structured topological manifold to fully geometric LVS. Geometric space is not a primitive notion that
could be declared in an arbitrary fashion and then equated to whatever one may wish. Reasonable deﬁnition of geo-
metric space should come out of investigation of properties of geometric objects immersed in the space. Topology is
obsessed with the constituents of spaces (points and their immediate surroundings). Although true in its own right,
topology does not reﬂect features of geometric objects, unless one could actually squeeze them to nothing. Physics and
geometries are concerned with preservation or transformation of geometric objects. Physically meaningful geometry
should take into account all conservation laws of physics, which must have geometric foundation and origin anyway.
My goal here is to show a ‘‘kings way’’ to certain consequences of some geometric results of Elie Cartan. His ideas
were so diﬃcult to grasp that even he himself did not realize what he actually obtained [1]. The allegedly exact language
of PM obscures meaning of mathematical ideas. I will show that the alleged exactness may actually hide logical
nonsense, which the PM silently proliferated and the MP wholeheartedly embraced. This is the main reason for the
synthetic approach to both mathematics and physics. But far more important reason for the SM is reality check for the
PM and MP. The SM aims at making mathematics comprehensible not only for those who may consider themselves
mathematically challenged, but for professionals too. Postulates put restrictions on a part of the mathematical, and
eventually also physical reality. If a postulate is made just to ease derivation, it can cut oﬀa big chunk of the reality for
no scientiﬁc reason. The SSTF was hidden behind quite unwarranted assumptions and certain arbitrary, common sense
postulates. Physical reality does not have to comply with our intuitions, but it should satisfy restrictions of (many-
valued) logic.
Physics is mathematics in disguise. Faulty mathematics can lead to utterly confused physics. I will try to show
detailed analyses and proofs, wherever an exact proof is possible. However, some conclusions I have drawn are so
advanced, that one cannot prove them from what has been achieved in the past. For they seem to defy even most liberal
scientiﬁc common sense and our imagination. Euclidean method of derivation is inadequate for dealing with some facts
of modern physics. We need experimental evidence, for the nature is the supreme judge of all scientiﬁc theories and
abstract reasonings. Our mathematics should be operationally complete, because nature seems to operate ﬂawlessly on
such abstract structures as the multispatial hyperspace. If something can exist even though we cannot derive it from
what is known, then we should look to nature for conﬁrmation of its existence. If the nature conﬁrms its existence, then
we must rewrite not only the former physics that was unable to predict it, but also the former mathematics that ignored
it.
We should not deﬁne geometrical objects arbitrarily, or just postulate their properties if we could obtain them
synthetically from the presumption that they must be (ﬂawlessly) operated on. New and incomplete theories may be
inconsistent at any given time and can contain apparent contradictions. The desire for unearned completeness caused
misrepresentations and instigated misguided interpretations of some physical theories. The best example here is the
celebrated Kaluza–Klein theory. Kaluza was right that the GTR could be expanded onto ﬁve abstract dimensions.
However, when Edward Kasner proved that such an immersion needs six dimensions arranged in two triples [3,13], his
result was simply ignored. Inasmuch as it was not supposed to be expansion onto single 6D space, but into two distinct
orthogonal 3D LVSs, his result did not ﬁt the old ideas of space. Perhaps the extra dimensions are not really com-
pactiﬁed. Maybe we did not know where to look for them. An alternative to the compactiﬁcation is to spread all those
extra dimensions over several 3D spaces. The assumption that one would have discovered the badly needed extra
physical dimensions, if these had not been ‘‘concealed’’ (i.e., compactiﬁed) has eﬀectively derailed the search for them.
I set seven objectives for this paper: to show that usual vectors in 3D space span multiple spaces and are 3D images
of multispatial hypervectors, and to introduce a vector multiplication of vectors and to show that the operation is
isometric (i.e., that it preserves length of its operands). For those who by now might have forgotten that PM does not
know how to multiply vectors by vectors, this may come as a surprise. The long awaited operation on the usual vectors
(3-tuples) can be seen as theoretical evidence for both the SM and SSTF. It also explains how gravitational forces
emerge from potentials. My ﬁfth and most diﬃcult objective is to show that the new SM suggests an existence of a 3D
mass-based vector space within 9D hyperspace. None of these objectives could be presented without the ideas, which I
developed in my previous papers [1–4]. However, some topics discussed in these papers could not be ﬁnished without
the results to be obtained in the present paper.
My sixth objective is to show that abstract notions carry deﬁnite although often multifaceted meaning and abstract
operations are physically delimited. They are not arbitrary. We may not always comprehend everything at once, but we
should not operate without an understanding of their consequences. And last but not least, I must dismantle some
prejudices of the former PM as we go. The reign of the old Euclidean, purely derivative mathematics is not quite over
yet, but we need desperately the checks oﬀered by new synthetic methods to make old analyses accountable. Postulating
existence of abstract objects and then deriving their properties from postulates was irresponsible, because it did not
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
481

preclude introducing of half-baked notions such as vectors seen as algebraic 3-tuples, which were then used to paint
half-true picture of physical reality. Arbitrary existential postulates of former mathematics have eliminated parts of our
physical reality and we are not always aware of that.
The PMs pursuit of art-like status has created maimed and distorted image of our physical reality. From arbitrary
axioms one may derive not only what is true, but also any nonsense. Abstract inferences may inadvertently extend some
features of the physical reality we live in far beyond of what can exist, while transparently cutting oﬀsome other
features that could exist. Because we still maintain centuries old mathematical nonsenses, we are often unable to explain
physical phenomena of relatively simple types. Such nonsenses may invalidate some previous results of sciences. But
their most disastrous consequence is that they severely restricted our capability to comprehend the physical world
around us. Therefore we must get rid of them.
2. Problems with single-space approach to geometry
Since DesCartes has successfully algebraized geometry, mathematicians replaced some of their thinking with op-
erating [14]. Comprehension of diﬀerential geometry coupled with complex numbers was so diﬃcult, that the trend
gained momentum and resulted in topologization of mathematics. Topological treatment of manifolds made of in-
distinguishable points is very meaningful, but any reduction of geometry to topology must eventually fail, because
methods of topology are not rich enough to represent all diﬀerential structures of geometry. Diﬀerential geometric
structures can be pictured or analyzed, but not truly modeled by topology alone, wherein spaces and sets became
synonymous [15]. It seems as if space, which is actually a construct (structural object) [1,3] and also a method of
handling geometric objects, is identiﬁed with its substance (a point-set manifold). Topology deﬁnes space as a manifold
that is still tied to motion [16] and presumed as diﬀerentiable [17]. However, simply postulating diﬀeromorphism did not
really enhance topology. If the notion of space includes vector space, then it is a set over a set-manifold [18] (superset).
Hence linear vector space is a very compound abstract structure of a diﬀerent kind than the underlying manifold. Most
of geometric and physical spaces are basically vector spaces. This fact calls for more geometric, rather than just a
topological approach to such spaces. Topology may provide a representation for geometric spaces, which can be re-
duced to topological ones, but not a model for handling geometric objects.
Since Hilberts sixth problem was simply stated as ‘‘mathematical treatment of axioms of physics’’ [19], physics was
supposed to get axiomatized so that mathematics would solve all its problems at once. However, when real logical
problems with motion emerged, mathematicians said that there is no compelling reason to believe that mathematical
description of motion is still physically meaningful in inﬁnitesimally small vicinity [20]. In other words: physics should
not count on topology. Since physical and geometric objects should not vanish or be destroyed by abstract operations,
they must persist or be transformed into diﬀerent images (representations) of these objects. In topology, however, one
can always squeeze and distort geometric objects far more than physics could ever tolerate. Neither topology nor al-
gebra assures conservation of physically meaningful vectors under abstract operations. A force vector could not vanish
without a physical reason––i.e., without an opposite force vector. Only another vector can nullify physical vector.
In plain algebraic approach to geometry, vectors are viewed as n-tuples of numbers [21] and LVSs are then deﬁned in
terms of group operations over (mathematical) number ﬁelds [22], where numbers and points of abstract ﬁelds are
interchangeable. In more abstract algebraic approach to geometry, vector spaces are deﬁned in terms of transforma-
tions, but still over abstract mathematical number ﬁelds [18], where the (real) numbers ﬁeld is seen as a topological
manifold. Yet topological manifold itself is a construct whose points are determined by family of open sets (patches)
[23]. Hence LVS, as an algebraic construct over a topological construct, is a higher-level abstract construct, structurally
diﬀerent than the manifold. Metric space is a set with metric [24]. In set-theoretical setting one can equate coordin-
atization with parametrization [25] and deﬁne duality without any reference to them [26], or assign dimensions to spaces
spanned by n-tuples [27]. Such ideas work in topology, but they paint wrong picture of LVSs. This may be caused by
ambiguous language [28] and by lack of balance checks. PM is plagued by arbitrary postulates, axioms and deﬁnitions.
It does not model any reality, but makes derivations, some of which are then hailed as proofs of existence. The SM aims
at modeling, not just deriving attributes of the physical reality.
Speaking of algebraic n-tuples as points of abstract n-dimensional spaces can be misleading. Between algebraic 2-
tuples (complex numbers), 4-tuples (quaternions) and 8-tuples (octonions) no self-contained 3-tuples, 5-tuples, 6-tuples
or 7-tuples exist. Nevertheless, we have 3D geometric spaces, but a self-contained 2D space is impossible to construct,
and self-contained 4D or 5D geometric spaces cannot exist either, for a double-3D hyperspace must embrace them
[3,13]. Such a 6D hyperspace is a structure composed of two dual spaces, however. One can talk about algebraic or
topological nD space, which is an abstract topological manifold, but there is no way to construct them as physically
meaningful geometric vector spaces. Although the terms space, set and manifold are used interchangeably, the latter
482
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

refers to a superset, i.e., set of subsets (patches) in topology. Hence geometric vector space could be called super-
superset in topological and set-theoretical terms.
By topological space is meant an arbitrary set together with a family of its subsets [29]. A diﬀerentiable manifold is
just a topological space on which derivatives can be deﬁned [30]. Riemann was fully aware of the fact that his ideas on
geometry in manifolds border on philosophy [31]. Topological manifold covered by domains of d-dimensional coor-
dinate systems is called d-dimensional [32]. This follows the ingenious Poincares idea of inductive dimensionality [33],
which just assumes unlimited dimensionality by default or induction, if you will. The problem is that we actually have
three distinct theories of dimension in topology [34] and no one of them is addressing the needs of physics. One can
entertain supermanifolds (with its supervector spaces that can be without basis [35]), on which it is problematic even to
deﬁne tangent vectors [36]. However, tangent vector space is necessary to establish diﬀerential properties of objects
independently of local coordinates [37]. Moreover, the process of reduction of vector ﬁelds by applying Lie transfor-
mation is not unique [38]. Hence the cherished topological ideas of geometric space and dimensionality cannot stand the
scrutiny of logic––they induce contradictions. It is not good enough just to postulate a diﬀerentiable manifold. One has
to construct it. Poincare is right that one can enumerate dimensions, but he is not associating them in a unique way with
physically meaningful properties of constructible geometric objects. Yet he is wrong in his silent assumption that all
dimensions should belong to the same space. The assumption was quite self-evident and remained uncontested under
the former paradigm of single-space reality, but now it is time to reevaluate it.
I will recall Elie Cartans forgotten proof that highest-dimensional simple geometric space has at most three distinct
dimensions. If so then a 6D space must be abstract geometric structure of an entirely diﬀerent kind. What is then wrong
with the whole mathematical picture? Perhaps nothing. Yet we were unable to interpret it before. The SM should help
us discover deeper logical foundations of both the abstract and the physical reality. It requires thinking in object-
oriented terms, however. Such dissimilarities between geometrical and algebraic pictures of our physical reality are not
accidental. Physical reality is quite diﬀerent from what we thought it is. The analytic methods of former PM are suitable
for disassembling objects, whereas the SM should help us also with assembling and instantiating physical objects.
Mathematics is not an art where one can project our preconceived concepts on the physical reality and create simple
though surreal picture of the latter.
3. Elie Cartan vs. Riemann or geometry vs. algebra
Elie Cartan has proved that highest possible dimensionality of any simple geometric space is three (see [1,3,39,40]
and Refs. therein). Yet Riemann had argued that no natural limit seems to prevent extension of the notion of geometric
dimensionality onto an abstract, essentially algebraic one [41]. Though his arguments are valid, both of them can be
right only if the higher than three dimensions belong to distinct 3D spaces. The Elie Cartans result excludes the al-
gebraic approach to dimensionality that had been proposed by Grassmann, Riemann and embraced by Cliﬀord, as well
as the idea of unlimited inductive dimensionality that has been postulated by Poincare. If geometric dimensionality
would be as inductive as Poincare has envisioned it, this Elie Cartans result would not be possible. Equating diﬀerential
and algebraic methods of geometry was a mistake. The PM misinterpreted the notion of geometric space, for it treats
spaces as sets rather than as structural objects, even though it was clear that spaces are also methods for handling
objects immersed within them. Hence geometric spaces are objects too. Note that methods are objects in object-oriented
parlance, just as steering systems are object-methods for handling the movements of cars. Even the physical space of
motion resembles multispatial structure of hyperspace [3]. Hence it must not be treated as a simple 3D or 4D space, as
former PM and MP used to do. I will show elsewhere that some images (representations) of an algebraic bispatial 6D
hyperspace resemble relativistic 4D space–time, but this does not mean that 4D algebraic space–time is simple geometric
space.
Elie Cartan has not challenged Riemanns views. However, if one cannot extend dimensionality of single 3D geo-
metric space, then a family of simple spaces must supply the higher than third dimensions, since dimensions are at-
tributes of spaces. Since one can ﬁnd more than four quite independently varying magnitudes, then the Riemanns
intuition may be correct, although not the easy way he used to assume. Evidently the geometric dimensionality must be
somehow expandable, but the postulative algebraic and topological approach is not the way to go. If the geometric
dimensionality is properly attributed to spaces, then a set of coupled simple 3D spaces should form an abstract mul-
tispatial hyperspace, which is an operational hyperstructure of a diﬀerent kind than simple spaces. Mixing types of
abstract structures could invite back the old set-theoretical paradoxes that once plagued mathematics.
We used to think that all representations of the same object are equivalent, whether formulated in algebraic or
geometrical terms. However, this is not always true. In fact, algebraic and geometric models can be very diﬀerent. This
was the main problem with former exact sciences. If we want to move forward, we must change our old paradigms and
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
483

then restructure the whole conceptual environment we have inherited. For most self-evident paradigms of former ge-
ometry are merely simplistic abstractions of ancient postulates. They appear broken and so are former theories of exact
sciences. Defective paradigms must never be mended. They should be abandoned as quickly as possible, for they paint
distorted pictures of the physical reality we live in.
Although philosophically true, the claim that physics determines geometry is not factually valid; neither our in-
complete physics nor our still unﬁnished geometry can provide model for each other as of now. Ideally they should, but
this has not materialized yet. According to an ingenious interpretation of the GTR, geometry instructs matter on how
to move and matter in turn instructs geometry on what to conserve [42], for matter and geometry are tied together.
What I am saying is that there exists an additional geometric structure, which also inﬂuences matter. The extra structure
is aﬀected by nonphysical structural laws, and is distinct from the metric structure, which is ruled by known operational
laws. Does it mean that, contrary to the GTR [42, p. 431], a prior geometry exists? No. The extra geometry is not prior.
It has always coexisted with matter. Yet I have discovered it only recently. From the premise that no prior geometry
exists one cannot conclude that the GTR got everything right. Physics supports geometry, but is not a substitute for the
latter. In this paper I will formulate new abstract operational law, which fulﬁls the dream about vector multiplication of
vectors. As great as the GTR is, it crowned unﬁnished classical physics by means of incomplete mathematics. The NEG
exposed incompleteness of the, hardly aspiring for completeness, QM and the allegedly ﬁnal and completely understood
CM.
Before one could explain logical discrepancies between mathematical and physical pictures of reality, they may be
attributed to a prior geometry. The presence of multispatial hyperspace may appear as prior geometry, because former
physics has not developed the mathematical ideas that prompted me to introduce hyperspace. However, I am not
introducing any prior geometry here, but am admitting quite new geometrical features, which the previously ignored
nonradial and mixed experiments implicitly indicated [2]. The GTR is large-scale cosmological theory of an amal-
gamated gravitational ﬁeld. It provides thus only general, almost statistical account of gravity that is valid wherever all
massive bodies can be seen as dissolved into the amalgamated pseudoﬁeld. Since such a condition is unacceptable for
local phenomena, the GTR has to be appended in local settings [2]. Neither the GTR nor the STR can account for
certain rotational phenomena such as the Sagnac eﬀect [3,43] or mixed and nonradial eﬀects of gravity [44]. We must
not ignore experimental data or theoretical facts. The single-space picture of physical reality never really existed outside
of some pure-mathematical minds.
Former geometry is incomplete and so is former physics. In a strict sense, gravitational ﬁeld is not a separate entity
generated by mass, but it is always present wherever mass exists. Both are properties of matter and aﬀect each other.
Yet the radial linear curvature of space–time alone was insuﬃcient to account for all the eﬀects of gravity that are
known today. Hence one must consider also nonradial (tangential and binormal) aspects of the curvature, which were
regarded as nonessential at the time when the GTR was created [2,3]. These aspects imply presence of the NEG, which
was unknown back then. They expand the linearly acting radial gravity into three dimensions. Even travel along
equipotential surfaces is not toll-free as we used to think, for gravity aﬀects energy also in nonradial directions [2].
Laws of former physics have been formulated algebraically, with disregard for diﬀerential geometry and only with
lip service for such abstract discrete geometrical structures as vector spaces. Vectors were used for visualization of
physical eﬀects, but their hidden consequences were simply ignored. The aforesaid result of Elie Cartan was considered
so insigniﬁcant that it was almost totally dismissed. Yet in conjunction with another his result, which will be discussed
below, it could raise the question of whether algebras and geometries are really in sync. I would not care about syn-
chronizing of any algebraic and geometric pictures of the physical reality, were it not for the fact that if these stay out of
sync, then we are unable to decide which one of them is true. The synchronization is thus not a goal in itself, but just a
way to ascertain proper understanding of their results, which must be assured by experimental evidence. Physics cannot
judge between algebra and geometry, but it should provide experimental conﬁrmation giving us ‘‘second opinion’’.
Space and time are abstract methods by which we handle material objects. The methods are aﬀected not only by
properties of matter alone. Yet the way an object is embedded in surrounding it space depends on the objects properties
as well as on some properties of the space, which is our method here, in the object-oriented parlance of computer
sciences (wherein method means a formal, legitimate way of handling an object). Distribution of mass alone is in-
suﬃcient for representing gravitational phenomena [2]. This was conﬁrmed by formerly unexplained experiments [1–5].
I am not saying that physics––or the GTR in particular––is totally wrong, but that it is logically incomplete without the
NEG [2–4]. The state of incompleteness is the most stable feature of all theories. Hence no theory should be treated as a
sacred cow, no matter how great was its origin. Physics is manifestation of pure logic or pregeometry ([42, p. 1212]), but
we did not arrive yet at the point where the pregeometry has been manifested, and former physics is far from being
complete. The pregeometry is still insuﬃcient, however, for we need the pan-geometry of multispatial hyperspace to
explain nonradial and mixed experiments [1–4]. If geometry could be reduced to physics or algebra, then the latter two
would account for some geometric aspects such as duality that are not rooted in either of them, but are peculiar to
484
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

geometry. The duality is not a sensu stricto geometric feature. It belongs to the external shell of PG that encompasses
geometry, even though it manifests itself in geometries. Nothing in geometry requires duality, which appears as su-
perﬂuous feature.
Mathematical ideas of Elie Cartan are very diﬃcult to explore. Synthetic approach makes them comprehensible
[1,3]. They virtually revolutionized mathematics without us realizing that for over half a century. He stirred a Co-
pernican revolution when it comes to its scope and physical implications. Its signiﬁcance for physics is enormous,
though still underestimated. Its mathematical consequences remain unexplored. Even he himself was not aware of the
extent of his impact on sciences. In hindsight, however, neither his ideas nor the former ones are inherently right or
wrong, I suppose. It is the domain where they apply that counts. He has found the limits beyond which our inborn ideas
and common sense imagination may not apply.
Yet that was just a prelude to his more stunning achievement. Elie Cartan might have asked himself the following
question: Since the highest possible dimension of any simple geometric space is three, then what would a 3D+ geometric
object look like? I am not saying 4D, because this would imply that the 4D object exists, in which case one may get any
answer if it could not exist, but am saying any higher than 3D object. We must not postulate existence of anything.
Since Stokes theorem provides switch between any 2D and 3D geometric object, it was natural to try to upgrade it to a
3D–4D switch. And that is exactly what Elie Cartan did. His approach is so subtle, however, that no (pure-) mathe-
matical mind––himself included––was able to interpret it. But it is the unbelievable implication of his result that tacitly
made it anathema. For he would have to admit that perhaps some properties of objects depend on the way they are
represented. No respected scientist could dear to issue such a ‘‘truth in research’’ kind of disclosure, of course, and none
was required. It was natural thus to tweak and twist both physical and mathematical formulas in order to show that
nature is not acting crazy, despite the fact that QM provided some compelling evidence to the contrary. It is not up to
mathematics, however, to defend the common sense, which is indefensible anyway. Eventually we must face the actual
reality just as it is. We must not deﬁne the reality by postulating its properties, but we should explore the conditions of
its existence and discover what it should look like. Twisted mathematics is diﬃcult to discern and I will show it later.
Physics is much more transparent, however, and therefore its faults are easy to see.
Nonetheless, the tweaking and twisting was unnecessary. We got classical examples that could provide some logical
templates for the allegedly strange phenomena of QM. Although I would not consider it strange that water, for ex-
ample, rushes through all open ﬂoodgates at once, we do have conceptual problem with picturing single photon that
goes through two slits at once, in two-slit experiment. It is because, if we always think of every photon as of a point-like
particle, we tend to apply the very logic that is appropriate for point-like objects: a massive ball does not go through all
open slots at once. However, the concept of multispatial hyperspace has an inherent duality of representations included,
for a point in one space may look like a line or surface in another space [3]. When a photon knocks out electron of a
solid surface, it surely behaves just as a point-like object would, but this particular behavior does not ﬁx its mode of
existence, so to say. Is mixing of objects, methods, properties and behaviors improper only for computer programmers
who design object-oriented applications? If all physical and mathematical theories were devised with geometric objects
in mind, like most objects on my computer screen, maybe we would not face so many daunting problems.
One can imagine a set of paradigms in which the seemingly strange world of QM appears normal. Let us ﬁnd them
and explore their consequences. When I discovered the SSTF it was a shock and unbelief at ﬁrst. Yet when I asked
myself what could it mean, I realized that it implied just a multispatial structure of our physical reality, whose con-
sequences have been suggested in some formerly unexplained experiments and observations [1–4]. Instead of asking why
is the nature acting weird, I prefer to ask questions we could try to answer, at least in principle. If I do not see any
rationale behind the natures behavior, then what would I need in order to see it? What should the allegedly weird
physical reality look like to appear rational? The idea of hyperspace originated from synthesis of requirements posted
by few strange results of formerly quite unexplained experiments and observations. It has not been arbitrarily postu-
lated; neither is it supposed to be axiomatized. I would not prevent an axiomatization for the sake of a comparison,
however. Carefully crafted axiomatic system could be very helpful for certain analytic purposes, of course. Never-
theless, the idea that a set of axioms could serve as a container of true information about objects seems repulsive to me.
Another stumbling block of the QM––nonlocality––is also quite legitimate and very natural in the hyperspace [3].
There is no problem with the nature. We may have problems with former paradigms that inﬂuence our thinking.
Sometimes we are virtually paralyzed by our paradigms and cannot ﬁnish the (logical) sentence that we have started.
The ingenious generalization of Stokes theorem by Elie Cartan is the best example of that. It is tremendous break-
through in mathematical thinking, though unrecognized at ﬁrst. It is a pinnacle of diﬀerential geometry and it opens the
door to pan-geometry [1], for Elie Cartan has realized that there is very profound conceptual diﬀerence between interior
and exterior diﬀerentiation, where the latter can be thought of as referring to some encapsulating geometrical objects.
The idea behind it is simple, but some of its consequences are mindboggling. Going up and down the hierarchy of
structural objects is not exactly the same experience.
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
485

The most astonishing, although misunderstood, experiment in mathematics was performed by Elie Cartan. The
essence of his ingenious experiment can be summarized as follows: Even though I cannot see what kind of animal is the
higher than 3D geometric object, if I would skin it, I could get an idea of what it looks like. For linear diﬀerentiation in
mathematics is like peeling a tomato. We can ‘‘diﬀerentiate’’ an abstract tomato without really ‘‘seeing’’ it, simply by
keeping the analytic ‘‘knife’’ always tangent to its surface, as if using touch instead of sight, so to say. I am not trying to
be too exact here, of course, but am conveying the message that in some instances one could simulate an operation on
an object without being able to deﬁne the object, just by using an analogy, for analogy is the very essence of mathe-
matical thinking [45]. It is analogy that really matters for comprehension of most scientiﬁc ideas. Formal derivations are
merely comments, or post factum documentaries. Even a computer program can select derivation trees for proofs,
without any understanding of the subject matter being proved.
Said that, we could let computer programs generate quite new knowledge. A fairly sophisticated computer program
should also be able to discover all that which I did, perhaps in a matter of hours rather than years, even though it may
take years to design such a program. Nonetheless, the really amazing part is that some of the most unanticipated
discoveries might have happened during the programs debugging and testing phases. The search for logical gaps and
inconsistencies in scientiﬁc notions can be performed by certain computer-aided knowledge extracting system (CAKES)
that would query a knowledgebase and generate leads to be evaluated by experts. A knowledge generator program
could also oﬀer alternatives and options based on such extracted leads. The formal synthesis of sets of alternatives could
then be accomplished automatically. Evaluation of its results is up to human mind, of course, for the system would
replace just the brain, not the mind. Once designed, the actual synthesis would require mostly mindless computations.
4. Slam-dunk: Elie Cartan reﬁnes the Stokes theorem
The often misunderstood result of Elie Cartans generalization of the old Stokes theorem is this: He actually asked
what would be the diﬀerential of a higher than 3D geometrical object, and obtained a bivector (as the value of cross-
product of two vectors) [39,40]. One could expect that a simpler 3D object (or a triple vector product, for that matter)
should result, if geometric dimensionality would be inductive as topology assumed after Poincare (see [1,3,33,46] and
Refs. therein). This unexpected result threatened the former geometric paradigm of single-space structure of our
physical reality. Since each of the two vectors of the bivector could correspond to a surface, then the lowering of
geometric dimensionality of a 3D+ object by diﬀerentiation gives two tied surfaces, as if the 3D+ object was actually
composed of two 3D objects in two separate geometric spaces. This generalization of Stokes theorem reveals a mul-
tispatial structure rather than single 4D space [1]. It suggests existence of two 3D spaces arranged in a 6D bispatial
hyperspace. Presumably he did not grasp broad consequences of his result, for he never challenged the single-space
paradigm of former geometries. He virtually discovered, or perhaps at least sighted, an entirely unanticipated abstract
mathematical infrastructure of the physical world we live in. Unfortunately, he probably dismissed the sighting as an
abstract theoretical mirage.
The two results of Elie Cartan uphold each other. They provide theoretical evidence for actual existence of the
abstract hyperspace. The multiplicative character of bivector in conjunction with rules for diﬀerentiation of scalar
composite functions strongly suggest compound hierarchical structure of the multispatial hyperspace he stumbled
upon. Synthesizing the essence of his results I have attained thus new insight into abstract geometry, without any
references to physics. The fact that physics also points to that [1] makes me even more conﬁdent that my conclusion is
correct. For I have devised quite new physical predictions––based on some abstract structural (mathematical) re-
quirements for the hyperspace––and found them experimentally conﬁrmed [2–4]. Several formerly unexplained ex-
periments and apparently confusing observations point to presence of the multispatial hyperspace as their cause. As a
matter of fact, Ed Kasner has already showed [3,13] that an algebraic approach to Einstein equations suggests that
dimensionality should not grow inductively as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,. . ., but in a discrete sequence, namely as 1, 2, 3, 6. His
result was also overlooked, because it was quite incompatible with the predominant then pure-mathematical mindset of
single-space geometry [3].
PM used to water down the Elie Cartans results to the level of algebraic geometry, trading oﬀintegrity for con-
tinuity of mathematical thinking since antiquity. In PM the bivector is treated merely as its value, which equals to the
area between its two vector components, rather than as really geometric object. To paraphrase the situation: The PM
does not answer the question why were apples packed in two separate bags, even though one single bag was supposed to
be large enough to hold them all, but instead it tells us how large area would the apples cover, which––even though
quite correct––was not really the question asked there. The PM is very evasive when it comes to dealing with any reality.
The basically algebraic approach of Grassmann, Riemann, Gibbs, Cliﬀord, Ricci and Levi-Civita was very inspira-
tional, but geometrically oﬀtarget (I shall discuss Hamilton and Cayley elsewhere). In the history of development of
486
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

mathematical ideas they had played important roles [47]. However, we must not discard the breathtaking achievements
of Elie Cartan and Ed Kasner, which were too subtle even for the PM. It is not just geometry vs. algebra, for Galois
group theory was ignored for almost a century too. It is really about arbitrary postulates vs. abstract experiments. The
supreme reign of derivations from postulated/assumed notions is over.
The overlooked results challenged former physics. Instead of investigating the shocking consequences of these results
and changing its attitude towards geometry, the PM just tried to suppress them. However, I have resolved the apparent
contradiction between the highest-dimensional simple space (3D) and the obvious need for 3D+ geometrical objects by
conjecturing existence of multispatial structures [1,3] and investigating experimental evidence in favor of their physical
existence [1–4]. This conclusion cannot be proved directly, because it does not follow from any conceivable set of
axioms of former geometries, for nobody foresaw multispatial hyperspace. Axioms were designed so that they tend to
aﬃrm contemporary paradigms. Hence one could not derive from them anything really new that would contradict the
assumptions of the former paradigms, upon which they were built. In fact, the G€odels undecidability theorem [48]
supports this assertion.
Technically the PMs approach to mathematics is not at fault. However, it is actually misrepresenting mathematics
and physics by creating the illusion that they have no outstanding foundational problems. Henri Cartan and the other
giants of twentieth century French mathematics have formalized some axioms and compiled them into coherent the-
ories, published under the name of long gone mathematician Nicolas Bourbaki. They did really marvelous though
incomplete job. They have showed that one can present PM as if it was already quite complete [49], while tacitly
omitting all its really tough issues. Yet by ignoring diﬃcult questions they were actually building new mathematical
Almagest, a splendid abstract mathematical model of physical reality that is conceptually out of sync with the very
reality it was supposed to model. To match the elegance of Bourbakis PM presentation with totally new ideas and
conjectures would be a formidable job. Nonetheless, the SM should rather trade elegance for truth, which was never
fashionable anyway.
The PMs old concept of proof as a derivation from primitive notions and axioms is inadequate for issues of ex-
istence. If something follows from an assumption, this does not mean that it can be constructed and consequently exist.
Hence synthetic reasonings should aid proofs in order to preserve the integrity of conclusions derived from axioms and
primitives. If the derived object exists or is constructible, and yet it creates a real or apparent logical conﬂict, then one
should question the validity of its set of premises. These cannot be both valid and lead to mandatory though invalid
consequences. If a resolution of contradictions makes an existential claim necessary, this fact may indicate existence.
Yet it is the construction that assures the possibility of actual existence. The PM has built axiomatic systems, based
upon which one could prove or disprove almost anything by using formal derivations. However, no derivation from
axioms and primitives can guarantee that what seems to follow could be constructed and consequently that it can exist.
The ancient Euclidean methodology of mathematics was already dead on arrival.
Old perceptions of the mathematical infrastructure of physical reality may not count. They have been purposely
oversimpliﬁed during development of physical conjectures––and that was all right. Yet to claim that our physical reality
should be built upon those old, simplistic mathematical assumptions would be arrogant at best. Mathematics should be
founded upon physics and then entirely new physics should be created upon the new mathematics. Mathematics cannot
aﬀord to ignore experimental feedback from physics. Mathematics deﬁnes the shape of physical reality. We should
deduce true mathematics from logical constraints placed on the physical reality. After Poincare, the PM used to count
dimensions consecutively, which is quite admissible, but its subsequent claim that they can be added one by one was
unwarranted. We must not impose our ideas on nature. We can always enumerate dimensions consecutively, but one
should not deny the fact that they seem to come in triples [3]. The way we count them does not count.
The generalization of the Stokes theorem by Elie Cartan was not deﬁcient. Yet it produced results incompatible with
the old, single-space paradigm of geometry. Hence the single-space paradigm is entirely wrong. Although not incorrect,
the usual, formal algebraic presentation of his abstract results concealed their true meaning. Unwilling to recognize its
own achievements, the PM became math-magic, a sort of. The pursuit of consistency created virtual censure of
mathematical thinking. Science is an ongoing work in progress and therefore its theories could be inconsistent at any
given time. Yet their controversies should be openly discussed. This is a vivid example where synthetic approach to
mathematics reveals quite unexpected features, which were hidden behind the arbitrary postulative formalism of the
PM. If open questions are the door to unknown mathematical features of physical reality, then by expelling such
questions from mathematical writings the PM has eﬀectively shut the door to its own and the MPs future progress.
Though unquestionable, the results obtained by Elie Cartan run contrary to our traditional perception of geometry,
and of the physical world around us. His unanticipated geometric results are tantamount to the discovery of quite new
world where physical reality blends with an ingenious design that was beyond our wildest imagination. Suddenly we got
answers to questions that no one would dear to ask before. From as abstract as why the matter always moves, to as
direct as how come the sun survived its diﬀerential rotation [2]. Elie Cartan saw mathematics as handmaid for other
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
487

sciences––or as a tool to justify their theoretical framework, I suppose. For otherwise he would have realized how
strange a message is really conveyed by his results. Once one deploys deﬁnite mathematical model, a concrete foun-
dation is being laid for the subject to be modeled. After choosing a mathematical model, physics is not much more than
an experimental comment. We should bear this in mind when making our choices. Physical reality is almost ﬁxed by its
underlying geometrical infrastructure. That is why PM needs feedback from physics.
5. Multispatial structure of the hyperspace
Exterior derivative of an encapsulating geometric object (in the sense of Elie Cartan) may appear as lower-
dimensional object [1,3,39,40]. However, if the exterior object should comprise both the primary geometric object and
its dual [1,3], then geometric dimensionality is not really strictly inductive set (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, . . .) as topology postulated.
Since all three distinct directional derivatives should exist in each LVS, then the exterior object should possess at least
six quite distinct directions (hence also six dimensions), where each triple must belong to one of the two dual 3D LVSs.
Evidently the geometric dimensionality itself seems quantized [1,3]. All geometric dimensions come packaged in triples
(3, 6, 9, . . .) within 3D LVSs [3]. One just cannot add one or two geometric dimensions to a space. Only whole 3D LVS
can be added to the multispatial structure of the hyperspace that holds many 3D LVSs as its components [1,3].
Geometric dimensions are localizers akin to abstract symmetries and as such they may form abstract algebraic groups.
Evidently geometric dimension always comes as a certain class property of some class of abstract objects called
(geometric) LVSs––never by itself. However, dual space is just another abstract spatial structure over the same man-
ifold. It is a distinct image, but not a separate object. Dual space is just another face of the same ‘‘coin’’ (manifold). This
feat creates apparent physical nonlocality.
The duality of LVSs is based on inverse transpose [3]. Hence what seems nonlocal in primary space can still be local
in its dual one. Such an apparent nonlocality would not involve any interaction at a distance in the dual space, even
though in the primary space two twin particles may be separated. That is why one particle can almost instantaneously
adjust its state to a change of its twin particle state. It does it in the dual space wherein they still appear as staying
together. The mechanism of the adjustment is not quite clear to me; neither is it in the former QM. However, the
multispatial hyperspace does replace former magic with merely a wonder. The design of hyperspace is a wonderful
feature, without the logical problems of an action at a distance or an instantaneous interaction. The almost instan-
taneous adjustment of spins, for example, is like a switch that turns on one light bulb while turning oﬀanother (coupled
to it) light bulb at the same time. The single switch causes that both these coupled events are triggered in parallel, not
consecutively.
Theoretically the 3D LVS cannot exist as a standalone space [3]. Since it evidently exists, it should be paired with its
3D dual counterpart. This is a known fact in theory of LVSs. For every simple 3D LVS comes hand in hand with its
dual 3D LVS, and the two LVSs are joined like two faces of the same coin. Together, they create a (3 + 3)D ¼ 6D
hyperspace over single 3D topological manifold [3]. We have six dimensions to consider, but it is still a 3D manifold
with two diﬀerent and quite distinct vector bases that are mutually exclusive. As it stands now, however, even such a
pair of LVSs forms an operationally incomplete spatial structure and so it is theoretically unstable. For duality of LVSs
requires an inverse transpose [3], which may pose problems with zeros. To attain both geometric and algebraic stability,
even the hyperspace must be somehow codetermined by an abstract extra structural symmetry. I will show elsewhere
that this is indeed the case. The 6D multispatial hyperspace changes not only geometries, but also algebras.
The aforementioned issues are very sensitive and I am (pain-) fully aware of that. They have been solved in a way
that probably no one ever expected (myself included), and will be published shortly. Nonetheless, we have arrived at the
point where I can enhance the notion of traditional 3D vector (3-tuple). However, I could not deﬁne something before it
is fully explored. We do not need an exact deﬁnition of vectors and numbers to communicate our ideas, as PM used to
claim. If the reader would not have an operational idea of what vectors and numbers are, then she/he would not be
reading this paper, I suppose. The idea that one has to deﬁne something and then try to extract its properties from that
deﬁnition is just another conceptual absurd, which the PM carelessly propagated. Complete deﬁnitions of objects
should result from investigation of stability of objects, not only from some abstract operations performed on them.
Though an initial deﬁnition is necessary, it should not be treated as container of proven knowledge about the deﬁned
object [50]. Deﬁnitions may then evolve with increasing knowledge.
Former PM usually deﬁned algebraic linear vector spaces by the following speciﬁcation of operations on vectors X,
Y, Z and real numbers r and s [51]:
Commutativity : X þ Y ¼ Y þ X
ð1aÞ
Associativity of addition : ðX þ YÞ þ Z ¼ X þ ðY þ ZÞ
ð1bÞ
488
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

Additive identity : X þ 0 ¼ 0 þ X ¼ X
ð1cÞ
Existence of additive inverse for any X : X þ ðXÞ ¼ 0
ð1dÞ
Associativity of scalar multiplication : rðsXÞ ¼ ðrsÞX
ð1eÞ
Distributivity of scalar sums : ðr þ sÞX ¼ rX þ sX
ð1fÞ
Distributivity of vector sums : rðX þ YÞ ¼ rX þ rY
ð1gÞ
Existence of scalar multiplication identity : 1X ¼ X
ð1hÞ
with vectors treated as n-tuples of scalars that belong to a real number ﬁeld Rn. The number of dimensions was coupled
to the number of independent linear combinations of the LVSs base vectors [52]. Algebraically speaking the deﬁnition
is perfect, but when it comes to object-like approach to vectors it sounds like a deﬁnition of certain coordinate-based,
scalar representation of geometrical vectors. None of such standard sets of deﬁnitions of vectors and LVS is adequate
for the synthetic approach to mathematics and physics, however. Let an abstract algebraic 3-tuple be called traditional
3D vector for now, and then by investigating their representations and by operating on such 3-tuples we will learn the
actual meaning of physically meaningful geometrical vectors seen as objects. Although valid, the axioms (1a)–(1h) are
insuﬃcient, because they do not support all object-like attributes of vectors.
MH seems somewhat incompatible with the operations on vectors that are known thus far. However, the very way
vectors were presented by the MP is artiﬁcial. Not everything you have learned about them is wrong, but there are many
things missing and their former reckless interpretation left much to be desired. Vectors are not necessarily what the MP
would like them to be. They could be only what the nature can operate on. We have to discover the actual meaning of
vectors, if these should reﬂect physical reality. With no preconceived ideas about what vectors are, I will do whatever
nature and logic forces me to do. Then I will show that the notion of vectors can lead to operations we surely dreamed
about, but were unable to devise. The fact that the conclusions lead to consistent new operations on vectors constitutes
virtual theoretical evidence that my conclusions are correct. In this and few subsequent papers I will show that nature
too performs such operations, for we need both theoretical and experimental physical evidence for existential claims.
Mathematics needs truth. Beauty and elegance are less essential.
The demand for extra 3D spaces has emerged from mathematical analysis of physical phenomena, but the statutory
lack of interest in physical reality that was maintained by the PM, has stagnated its development. The PM did not
investigate its most fundamental questions, because it was not really interested even in its own abstract mathematical
reality. In order to create new physics, one must ﬁrst resolve mathematical inconsistencies and logical conﬂicts, whether
actual or apparent. For even in certain well-established formulas of such allegedly complete branches of classical
mathematics as analytic geometry and vector calculus, we will see unbelievable misgivings and undisclosed disastrous
logical inconsistencies. We must eliminate them in order to proceed with advanced investigations of physical phe-
nomena.
6. Vectors in multispatial structure of hyperspace
Cartesian representation of a 2D plane in 3D Euclidean space is written as:
ax þ by þ cz þ d ¼ V þ d ¼ 0
ð2Þ
where the coeﬃcients a, b, c, d can be normalized by the common factor:
ða2 þ b2 þ c2Þ1=2 ¼ ðV  VÞ1=2
ð3aÞ
so that the value of the vector n normal to the plane (2) equals to:
jnj ¼ jdj=ðV  VÞ1=2 ¼ d
ð3bÞ
which gives the planes distance to the local center of coordinates [53]. V is the algebraic stack vector [54] that represents
the stack of parallel planes (2). Nonetheless, those types of vectors are not their inherent attributes. Types of vectors are
not speciﬁed among the aforementioned properties of vector spaces, but depend on the vectors particular represen-
tations, just as a straight line can be deﬁned in terms of points or in dual terms of intersecting planes.
Eq. (2) is logically ‘‘dubious’’, however. For it raises extremely serious conceptual problem in a 3D coordinate
system. For if its three ‘‘regular’’ coeﬃcients a, b, c are related to coordinates, then where is the coeﬃcient d repre-
sented in the whole system? Since it is evidently not a local coordinate and moreover, it counterbalances (nulliﬁes) the
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
489

traditional 3D local vector V, then what kind of magnitude does the d really represent in this setting? Only another
vector can nullify a vector, if these two should be physically meaningful. Of course, one could enclose the vector in
vertical bars (as in the Eq. (3b)) and bar any mention of the apparent contradiction, as the PM used to do. However, I
want to resolve this conﬂict. Diﬃcult issues should not be seen as an embarrassment, but as an opportunity for an
enhancement.
If I would replace all Latin letters in the Eq. (2) with corresponding to them Greek ones, then I can rewrite its
(normalized and ﬁxed) representation with usual directional coordinate versors (i.e., unit base vectors: j, k, l) as follows:
ja þ kb þ lv þ d ¼ W þ d ¼ 0:
ð4Þ
where ﬁxing the equation hides the variables x, y, z for the sake of simplicity. Since presence of varying coordinates x, y,
z would not aﬀect our reasoning here, I will omit them in order not to needlessly obscure the whole picture. Except for
literal substitution nothing else has changed there. But now the logically dubious algebraic Eq. (2) turned into geo-
metrically incorrect Eq. (4), for the coeﬃcient d is nowhere represented within the Cartesian coordinate system ðj; k; lÞ,
even though the coeﬃcient d has not been distinguished from the coordinates a, b, v; neither is d a coordinate in another
coordinate system. Yet the pseudoscalar d somehow nulliﬁes the ﬁxed traditional 3D vector W, which should not be
possible for physically meaningful object-like vectors.
Eq. (2) appears somewhat invalid in geometry. The Cartesian analytic geometry is actually an algebraic approach to
geometry, not really geometry per se, for it deals with coordinates of geometric objects rather than with the objects
themselves. In other words, analytic geometry is actually algebraic representation of the Euclidean geometry. Since
substitution of variables in the formerly uncontested algebraic formula (2) produced wrong geometric formula (4), both
of them must be somehow logically deﬁcient. Yet the PM has never disclosed presence of this peculiar controversy, as
far as I can tell. What is then hidden behind the conspicuous disparity of former algebraic and geometric represen-
tations of the same geometric object?
Acceptance by algebra does not preclude an equation from being incorrect in geometrical context. Algebra is devoid
of many rules that are enforced in geometries. What would be a transgression of geometric laws is not being enforced in
algebra, because algebra has not enacted such laws. Hence no algebra, or topology for that matter, should impose its
relaxed methods on no-nonsense geometries. Algebras are too simplistic for geometries [1–3]. Nevertheless, all geo-
metric and algebraic representations of the same object should be consistent. If simple translation from an algebraic
language into a geometric one gives incorrect representation, then something went terribly wrong with the former PM.
Postulative algebraic methods turned operations on numbers and variables into manipulations of notions, ideas and
minds. It is not inadmissible to devise some logically inconsistent abstract equations, but mathematical foundations for
physics should be more reliable than that.
Poncelet emphasized that, in geometry, the imaginary unit i designates such variables that cannot be represented in
a given geometric system, if you will [1,55]. The imaginary unit indicates foreign, or somehow incompatible, variables.
Even the position of the coordinate center itself should be quite independently determined from outside of the coor-
dinate system. The three coordinates that are relative to the given system are obviously insuﬃcient to determine an
object in 3D space. They determine it in its coordinate system alone. Standalone simple 3D geometric space is unstable.
If Eqs. (4) and (2) should be geometrically correct too, then I must write them symbolically as:
W þ FormVectðdjiBÞ ¼ 0 ) ifWg þ ConvBasefFormVectðdjiBÞgjA ¼ 0
ð5aÞ
V þ FormVectðdjiBÞ ¼ 0 ) ifVg þ ConvBasefFormVectðdjiBÞgjA ¼ 0
ð5bÞ
where
fWg ¼ fja þ kb þ lvg ¼ fa; b; vgjA;
with A ¼ fj; k; lg
ð5cÞ
and FormVectðdjiBÞ ¼ id
when
B ¼ Null
ð5dÞ
Here the algebraic 3-tuple fWg ¼ fa; b; vg corresponds to the whole vector W represented in the base A. The
imaginary unit makes any tuple basically direction-independent. FormVect is an abstract operator that splits a scalar
into a foreign vector with an imaginary base B. ConvBase is an operator that changes base of a tuple from B to A. For
the terms d and d should represent certain foreign traditional vectors (3-tuples) in a foreign 3D space, if they are
supposed to nullify the primary vectors W and V, respectively, as Eqs. (2), (4) and (5) seem to indicate. And vice versa,
the primary vectors should denote oﬀsets of these foreign vectors in the foreign space where d and d are represented.
This issue will be discussed in more detail elsewhere, because we do not have all elements in place yet. Nonetheless, I can
show that this approach retrodicts results of CM and predicts quite unexpected features. They will also be elaborated
elsewhere, because I must develop theoretical apparatus needed for that. Eq. (5d) is just an abstract restatement of the
aforementioned Poncelets thesis when the foreign vector base B is Null (or nonexistent) and so the id is a directionless
and ‘‘baseless’’ quasi-vector.
490
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

The vector W, for instance, denotes local vector in the coordinate system deﬁned by the versors ðj; k; lÞ, whereas the
symbol fWg denotes the vector W as 3-tuple (i.e., a set of its coordinates). However, the coordinate versors themselves
are imaginary. Therefore if I must compare the vectors W and V with their foreign counterparts FormVectðdjiBÞ and
FormVectðdjiBÞ, then I should consider the vectors also as tuples with imaginary unit i, just as the foreign vectors
formed from scalars in the Eqs. (5). For otherwise I would inadvertently create complex vectors. Algebraic vectors
written as tuples of coordinates (without versors) must be appended with imaginary unit. Hence in order to compare
vector V with d, I must write them as imaginary tuples ifVg and ifFormVectðdjiBÞg. This is similar to treating a local
vector-tuple irrespective of the local directions, which are irrelevant to any foreign space anyway. To compare any
primary and foreign vector requires treating them both algebraically as some imaginary tuples, regardless of their
directions in their respective spaces. The imaginary unit i is just direction-independent abstract versor or a compound
3-versor that points to outside of the primary space, geometrically speaking. Algebraically the i, j, k, l act alike. With
two 3-tuples Eqs. (5) make both algebraic and geometric sense. Two equal tuples have corresponding components
equal, if represented in exactly the same base. When seen as a traditional algebraic vector, the term fdg is just an
abstract algebraic tuple: fFormVectðdjiBÞg ¼ fd1; d2; d3gjiB.
Now we can merge together the results of Poncelet and Elie Cartan. If I would reformulate the normal vector in Eq.
(3), then the oﬀset will equal to:
jnj ¼ jidj=½ðifVgÞ  ðifVgÞ1=2
ð6Þ
The dot product of imaginary vectors, that corresponds to a pseudoscalar in the Eq. (3) I will call henceforth biscalar.
Taken together, however, the two sets of Eqs. (5) and (6) also suggest that one may also write the biscalar as follows:
jFj ¼ s½ifVg  ifVg
ð7Þ
where s is a constant. Eqs. (5) indicate that the pseudoscalars d and d actually represent (foreign) veiled imaginary
quasi-vectors, which would require an extra 3D vector space, if we insist that they too should be housed somewhere.
Since the oﬀset can be measured (or evaluated), but cannot be represented within the primary 3D space, then even the
Cartesian 2D plane in the Eq. (2) is actually represented within two distinct 3D geometric spaces (primary and a foreign
one) at once, both erected over the same manifold.
The rationale for my reasoning is simple: From the apparent contradiction that the oﬀset cannot be represented in the
primary space and that it must be a vector (since it counterbalances a vector), it easily follows that there must exist
another space coupled with the primary one, for the contradiction to disappear. This logical synthesis is so simple when it
comes to its abstract associations, that even fairly sophisticated computer program should be able to come up with one
like it. Computers can generate and examine trees of notions with associations between various classes of such notions
and then oﬀer entirely new concepts based on formal logical synthesis of conceptual associations between them. This
process of automatic conceptual synthesis is technically feasible and it should work for exact and semi-exact sciences.
From logical analysis I synthesized very intriguing geometric conclusions. These conclusions are not tailored to what
we knew, but to the overriding principle of logical consistency and the feasibility of ﬂawless operations. Multispatiality
is necessary for fully analytic representation of 2D plane is a 3D space. Single standalone 3D geometric space is thus
underdetermined (unstable). Hence multispatiality is unavoidable. For if the traditional 3D vector V in the Eq. (2) is
nulliﬁed by a number d, then the number d must somehow acquire a vector status, although perhaps not in the primary
space that houses the vector V. Even the traditional 3D vectors must somehow span multiple 3D spaces. This con-
clusion was not simply postulated, but synthesized from the logical contingency for validity of all Eqs. (2)–(5). I have
obtained the properties and character of the coeﬃcients d and d from preconditions for validity of the equations in
which they are featured. By operating on objects I probed their behavior. Since Eqs. (2), (4) and (5), (6) should represent
essentially the same geometrical object, then only Eqs. (5) and (6) are acceptable, for both geometric and algebraic
representations of the same geometrical object should be in sync. The multispatial hyperspace sits thus at the highest
level in the hierarchy of abstract spaces known thus far.
Although Eqs. (5) look like quaternions, geometric implementation of a structure with two triples of independent
parameters needs a 6D hyperspace composed of two 3D single linear vector spaces [3]. The imaginary unit i turns the
formerly incomplete Eqs. (2) and (4) into valid Eqs. (5) and (6), which are both algebraically and geometrically correct.
Since the other scalars a, b, v are represented on coordinate axes, then the scalar d should be either included in these or
distinguished from them. We have no other choice here. However, the actual meaning of the distinction has profound
consequences for physics and mathematics. The fourth parameter deﬁnes an oﬀset with respect to the primary coor-
dinate systems center. But if it also creates symmetry, as it does, then with respect to what? A space is equated to
another space of the same kind. Geometric objects can only be equated to (or counterbalanced by) objects of the same
type. Henceforth I will call the 4-tuple (composed of the traditional 3D vector coupled with a biscalar) a hypervector,
because it obviously spans distinct 3D spaces within the multispatial hyperspace.
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
491

Traditional vectors are parts of hypervectors that span mutually dual LVSs. Writing equations is about balancing.
The former paradigm of single-space reality disregarded the very fact that equations with geometric objects do
not equate them to zero, null, or nothing, but to objects of the same type so that the diﬀerence is zero. Hence even the
old analytic geometry virtually needs the multispatial hyperspace in order to give consistent representations of 3D
vectors, lines, planes and surfaces. Algebraic representations of geometric objects must be unambiguous. Compliance of
algebra with geometry should be on our target, for we just cannot always deduce valid conclusions from inconsistent
premises. If it takes multispatiality to attain consistency, so be it. Multispatiality emerges from all three requirements:
logical, algebraic and geometrical. Single-space reality paradigm was an oversimpliﬁcation. It is indefensible even at the
level of Cartesian analytic geometry, which by the way seems to ﬁnally agree with the abstract theory of geometric
LVSs.
7. Isometry deﬁnes vector multiplication of vectors
Isometric transformations must preserve length [56,57]. This should apply to physically meaningful vectors too. If
abstract isometry is taken seriously, then all admissible operations on object-like quantities should comply with it.
Isometry of operations should be the overriding principle for physically meaningful geometries. The length of the re-
sulting object-vector produced by physically meaningful product should equal to the product of the lengths of its
operands. Yet the very concept of LVSs sustains a lame duck kind of theory, for vector multiplication of vectors was
never deﬁned therein and no consistent explanation of what it could mean was ever given. Only scalar multiplication of
vector by real number was consistently deﬁned (see [58] and p. 42 in [56]) in addition to two standard products of
vectors, namely the dot and cross vector products. One can check that for traditional 3D vectors (d ¼ 0) the following
abstract operation of vector multiplication could exist:
S  T ¼ S  T  jS  Tj
ð8Þ
It could mean actual vector multiplication of vectors whose result would be isometric (i.e. length preserving), were it not
for the fact that the dot product ðS  TÞ is just a pseudoscalar, whereas the cross product ðS  TÞ is evidently a 3D
traditional vector. Eq. (8) is certainly formally and algebraically valid, but it is not operationally isometric. Is opera-
tional isometry really too much to ask for, if the Eq. (8) is supposed to be also physically meaningful?
Eq. (8) becomes operationally correct, once it is rewritten as follows:
S  T ¼ S  T þ iðS  TÞ
ð9Þ
which means that vector multiplication of two 3D vectors comprises vector and dot products and gives geometric sum
of bivector and biscalar (hence a hypervector in a multispatial hyperspace). The result looks like a complex vector-
related object, because the imaginary unit is superimposed on the unit versors ðj; k; lÞ present in the dot product. Al-
though the vectors S and T are local, their dot product (as a pseudoscalar) is a foreign (not local) geometric object,
according to Poncelet. Eq. (9) is evidently isometric, for we get:
jS  Tj ¼ ½jSj2jTj2 sin2ðS; TÞ þ i2½jSj2jTj2 cos2ðS; TÞ1=2 ¼ jSjjTj
ð10Þ
The mathematics in hyperspace is almost perfect, for even algebra complies with geometry. Note that bivector is
identiﬁed with the plane element (area) whose value jSjjTj sinðS; TÞ is the same as the value of both cross and wedge
products of the given vectors, and that bivectors were deﬁned algebraically as ordered pairs of vectors, whereas biscalar
was identiﬁed with the negative value of their dot product, namely ½jSjjTj cosðS; TÞ. The former algebraic treatment
of bivectors was not incorrect and it ﬁts a very nice schema [59]. But both algebraic and geometrical pictures of bi-
vectors should be in sync, which is achieved in the hyperspace. Evidently the multispatial structure of the abstract
hyperspace is also indispensable for consistent theory of LVSs.
The PM has already recognized the fact that the exterior product is distinct and conceptually diﬀerent kind of
operation from the cross product, and it has instituted wedge product as the algebraic counterpart of the exterior one.
Yet geometric role of exterior product was misunderstood. For even the PM does not deny that surface integrals (where
the wedge product is being used) are quite diﬀerent from double integrals––see p. 662 in [53]. However, we should
operate on whole structures––whether geometric or algebraic––rather than arbitrarily reduce them to merely algebraic
operations on single values. This result also suggests an incompleteness of the supersymmetric approach to physics that
uses Z2-graded algebra [60], which deals with traditional 3D vectors. I will discuss this issue elsewhere, along with the
purely algebraic hypersymmetric approach that is based on similarly structured Z3-graded algebra [61,62], although still
under the old single-space paradigm.
492
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

Eq. (8) deﬁnes vector multiplication of traditional vectors and so it can expand the theory of LVSs, which will be
done elsewhere. The lack of this operation marked an incompleteness of the former theory of LVSs. It is very important
operation for future physics, for it allows us to explain many curiosities in former physics. Former mathematics could
not come up with the abstract vector multiplication of vectors, which is very simple operation, because it has suppressed
even rational critique of logical inconsistencies of its clever, though deliberately postulative formalism. The formulation
of an isometric operation of vector multiplication of vectors obviously supplies us with sound theoretical evidence in
favor of the multispatial hyperspace. The simple correction to Cartesian geometry that makes it both algebraically and
geometrically valid opens a new mathematical world, which is consistent with the idea of multispatial hyperspace and
the spatial ﬂow of time. I will show elsewhere that the star product deﬁned by the Eq. (9) is valid also for hypervectors
(as 4-tuples). The star product does look good on paper, but is it implemented in physically meaningful operations
performed by nature?
8. No existential proofs in exact sciences
Axioms and deﬁnitions should not be regarded as containers of truth about geometric objects. They are more like
conveyors of what we now think the truth is, given the known circumstances. Hence no abstract derivations from them
could really constitute a valid proof of existence. They may be viewed as consistent leads. Having devised several such
leads in various formally independent and diﬀerent representations, the actual proof can emerge from resolving con-
tradictions that crop up from comparisons of consequences of those representations. Though still circumstantial, such
proof is the best one can get at any given time. The idea of proof as the process from which an abstract eternal truth
emerges is a wishful thinking. Proofs may evolve as our knowledge increases. This is the essence of the synthetic ap-
proach to strict derivations. PM must admit ﬂexibility in order to became truly exact science. Mathematical proofs must
be amendable as new discoveries reveal phenomena that were unanticipated before. They may also be expandable
because of the new meaning that its old premises could acquire, not because these were somewhat incorrect. Exact
sciences are subject to aging too.
Physically meaningful vectors should comprise also pseudoscalar as their fourth component in order to be geo-
metrically and operationally consistent. This is what state vectors in QM sometimes evaluate to. This interpretation of
vectors is needed for mathematics as well as for physics. Former purely algebraic interpretation of vectors as just n-
tuples is logically untenable. To be fully operational vectors must live in a multispatial hyperspace rather than inhabit
only single spaces. Even the old Cartesian analytic geometry requires a hyperspace. Without the synthetic approach, the
old PM and MP cannot properly handle physically meaningful geometrical objects.
Nothing was inherently wrong with the algebraic approach to vectors. But algebraic n-tuples cannot replace
physically meaningful geometric vectors. Algebras and topologies are not the problem. It was the tendency to reduce
geometry to algebraic or topological sets that did upset the balance between these diﬀerent approaches. Yet the––a
priori assumed––equivalence of all mathematical representations created even more serious problems. One of them is
the apparent ability to design negative proofs that could disprove existential claims by assumptions disguised as
contradictions, which are not intrinsic, but are set in arbitrary, postulative deﬁnitions. With the exception of logical
contradiction, negative existential proof is impossible. One must not postulate existence of objects; neither should one
deﬁne away something that is not logically contradictory––certainly not by using fancy deﬁnitions.
Having multiple spaces in the hyperspace may introduce extra independent variables/parameters. However, John
von Neumann has ‘‘proved’’ that such hidden parameters are impossible, because they contradicted an assumed def-
inition [63]. This was the real ‘‘power’’ of PM: a clever deﬁnition could postulate away undesirable hidden parameters.
A celebrity called the proof silly [64]. One can ﬁnd an example of an event, which was announced with such precon-
ditions that it could not take place as deﬁned [65]. The QMs reliance on unfounded assumptions is disappointing [66].
The tweaking has turned against the PM and the MP. For it created an artiﬁcial world tailored to preconceived ideas
about the physical reality we live in.
David Bohm has formulated QM that admits hidden variables, but he did not ﬁnd any one of them. He did not show
what are those hidden variables and how could we actually measure or identify them. But he realized the possibility of
their existence. His common sense approach recognized the fact that thermodynamical quantities, for instance, are
merely averages of certain hidden variables that just cannot be observed by thermodynamics methods alone [67]. He
suspected more fundamental set of laws [68] and deﬁned a ﬂuctuating quantum potential [69]. He realized that ex-
periments suggest nonlocality [70] and insisted that the QM account is inadequate for individual systems. Yet he still
concurred that if two observables do not commute, then they cannot be deﬁned together, and that no wave function can
exist that would be simultaneous function of all the operators which are signiﬁcant for given physical situation, see p. 66
in [69].
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
493

Presence of hyperspace suggests that relationships between variables could be more intricate. This prompts for
redeﬁnition of the notions of functional dependency and determination. Does the Eq. (7) mean that the value of the
primary vector F depends on the dot product of the foreign vectors V, which are deﬁned in another space? No. The
foreign vectors determine the vector F. It can only exist whenever they do exist and vice versa, but it depends on
something that vary in the space wherein it is represented. The two foreign vectors are just another representation
(image) of the vector F in a diﬀerent space. If for whatever reason these two foreign vectors would change, the vector F
would also change almost instantaneously, because any change to the foreign vectors is also a change to the primary
one. This would appear as an almost instantaneous, apparently nonlocal change, which may happen when there is no
physical interaction between the primary and these foreign vectors. Physical interactions propagate at the speed of light.
Without physical interaction, however, change to one image (spatial representation) of an object will also induce change
to another image of that object.
Contrary to Einsteins claim that gravity propagates at the speed of light, certain measurements show diﬀerent
speeds––depending on the particular experimental or observational setting––which fact suggests that apparent nonlocal
aspects of gravity actually can propagate almost instantaneously [71], while its purely physical eﬀects travel at the speed
of light. When its propagation appears instantaneous, it is because there is no propagation of gravity at all in those
cases. We observe visual changes only at the speed of light, of course, but this fact does not preclude higher speeds of
propagation of abstract (i.e., nonphysical) events. Actually the question seems irrelevant to the GTR [72]. Similarly no
mass-energy increase is being ‘‘performed’’ for each particular observer, but each observer sees diﬀerent slice of energy
spatialized in the TBS [4]. When considered in the multispatial hyperspace, even apparent action at a distance seems to
make sense.
9. Biscalars in multispatial hyperspace
The aforementioned fact that objects in a 3D space actually need all four independent parameters to be unam-
biguously and fully determined signiﬁes the importance of parametrization. In CM the usual LBS was parametrized by
time. The notion of independent variables in CM is based upon their presumed uniform and steady change. When the
Einsteins STR showed varying time rates, the old belief in mathematically ordered world was shattered. Nevertheless,
mathematics did not crumble, even though its idea of arbitrary variability was defeated. By clever formulation of
axioms and deﬁnitions, however, the PM stalled doubts about functional relationships.
The variable that a function can depend upon is given only in a particular context. Geometric functional relationship
relies on a spatial representation and on its parametrization, where the parameter is often viewed as basically inde-
pendent linear variable, which does not belong to the spaces primary system of coordinates. The space of motion, for
example, was treated as the LBS with time as its independently varying parameter, but time-duration is not represented
as a coordinate within the LBS and neither is mass or energy or force. To say that radial force of gravity physically
depends on distance between two bodies was a grave misconception. The variability of the force is inversely propor-
tional to the square of distance, but the gravitational force evidently depends on both masses of the bodies in question.
Although no one ever contested that, we do not seem to realize what this actually means in an inﬁnitesimally small
surrounding. Since no functional relationship in physics is arbitrary and none of them should be ignored or misrep-
resented, then we should try to ﬁnd out what does it mean. What does the inverse square law of (radial) propagation of
gravity really tell us about our physical reality? Note that the inverse square law does not really refer to gravity, but to
its propagation from a central source––it is the same for a light bulb. The inverse square law is not a physical law, but a
structural (mathematical) law.
Since topological spaces are actually manifolds, over which the LVSs are constructed [1,3], if two LVSs diﬀer, their
diﬀerences may arise either from their structures or from a topological diﬀerence between the manifolds or from both.
The main result of topology was that the volume of objects does not matter [73]. Sometimes called miraculous mul-
tiplication of spheres, it was generalized into Banach-Tarski paradox, which showed that the curious ‘‘feature’’ stems
from one-to-one correspondence between a set and some part of it, and so the paradoxical decomposition emerged [74].
What was a minor fault soon became a major feature of topology, which could cause a disaster when applied to certain
discrete physical phenomena.
Since rate of time ﬂow, which is a parameter in LBS, is represented as 3D variable in TBS, which is parametrized by
distance, the LBS and TBS are called mutually dual (symmetric) spaces. Hyperspace of motion comprises the two dual
spaces. Twin spaces give spatial representations for variables other than the parameters. In this sense twin spaces could
be thought of as separated by a chain of dual spaces. Hence the terms dual and twin do not really designate spaces,
but relationships between pairs of spaces. Since geometric objects seen as varying in dual and twin spaces are not
directly represented in the primary space in question, their images must somehow be ‘‘encoded’’ via the fourth quasi-
494
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

dimension. The hyperspatial geometric object is as if sliced into simple single-space images, which are coupled together
by those quasi-dimensions that provide links between these spaces.
Let an operator InstVect (instantiate vector) switches between two 3D spaces via a fourth quasi-dimension. Note
that operators are not geometric objects, but algebraic ones. Just as the cross (outer) product of two vectors erects a
new, linearly independent local vector in the very same 3D LVS, so also the dot (inner) product of two vectors generates
a new foreign vector in a twin LVS, even though the products vectorial status seem to change to a pseudoscalar in the
same (primary) LVS, indeed. The pseudoscalar is just one representation, not really the only result of the dot operation.
Both cross and dot products of vectors do generate vectors, but the dot product actually spans two LVSs. If true, this
new interpretation could expand the notion of both projective and abstract duality. Eq. (7) suggests that the expansion
is justiﬁable and actually unavoidable. Although not entirely wrong, the former postulative approach to vectors
concealed this undocumented new feature. Eq. (7) has been formulated algebraically in terms of values, of course, but it
suggests that its geometric treatment in terms of vectors is not impossible. We cannot be constrained to algebra.
Nonetheless, I will not postulate that possibility, but show that the nature has already realized it.
One cannot reduce mathematics to logic or geometry to algebra without loss of comprehension of the original
subject. If vector denotes physically meaningful geometrical object, then it cannot be just dissolved by abstract oper-
ations, unless these operations would carry deﬁnite physical meaning, which they do not by their abstract deﬁnitions.
Only other vector of the same class could nullify a vector. I am not saying that the dot product of vectors was defective,
but that it may point to an incompleteness of former understanding of vector calculus. Treating geometrical vectors as
merely algebraic n-tuples of numbers was a logical mistake and misunderstanding of geometric issues. The SM does not
discard previous mathematical achievements, but it exposes their veiled contradictions. It does not try to squeeze new
mathematical results in traditional conceptual structures, but it expands the structures to comply with results of
physical experiments.
10. Evolution of abstract and physical duality
A vector in one space could be a pseudoscalar in its twin space, and vice versa. By the same token, quaternion-like
objects can be viewed as vectors deﬁned on top of bispatial structures. Distance and time duration are dual [3]. The
duality is very powerful idea. It has virtually exploded the former geometry. It indicates that 3D vectors are indis-
pensable parts of compound abstract geometric structures, which may comprise diverse components [3]. Although
duality was ﬁrst observed in projective geometry, its meaning was downplayed by the PM. The projective duality
principle (PDP) for plane states that in theorems about planar incidence relations, points and lines are interchangeable.
For any two points determine a line and two lines intersect in a single point. Similarly for a 3D space PDP states that
points and planes are interchangeable [75–77]. The PDP is an amazing mathematical curiosity [78]. There was no
apparent reason for it. The PDP appears as just a fancy, superﬂuous geometric feature, until one casts it into an abstract
multispatial hyperspace, where duality seems indispensable. The PDP suggests that the complexity of physical reality is
above of, and far beyond our imagination.
Although Poncelet may have already discovered duality [79], Gorgonne has formulated it as the principle we know
[80]. It applies to curves [81], cylinders [82], space structures [83,84], invariance of postulates [85], all nonEuclidean
geometries [86], generalized projective geometry [87,88], intersections and sums [89], generalized hyperplanes [90–92],
topology [93,94], theory of LVSs [95], algebra [96] and many other branches of mathematics. Though it can be proved in
various ways [97], the actual reasons for its emergence were unknown. If vectors can produce vectors and also scalars
and yet not vanish themselves, then certain new, abstract generalization of the PDP is thus necessary. In hyperspace the
PDP can be upgraded to form an abstract duality principle (ADP), which should state that every single point in one
simple space can be represented by a vector, hence a line or even by a plane in another simple space of the hyperspace.
In the sense the PDP can be obtained from the ADP by a transformation between spaces. In fact, in algebraic terms of
the exterior and the wedge products, duality operator gives quite identical result as the imaginary unit i would (see p.
108 in [42]). This fact indicates that conversions between dual and twin spaces are very real, indeed, and that there is
actually nothing imaginary about them. I shall discuss this issue in more detail elsewhere.
Obviously one cannot just transform a vector into a point, but a conversion would do that. Conversion is more than
just a mathematical transformation, for it involves deﬁnite representation, which depends on space. What is then the
space in which vector can be represented by point and yet still keep its vector status? Any manifold can have multiple
spatial representations in LVSs, for every LVS is solely determined by its base. One can change base vectors in a LBS
and obtain TBS (its dual LVS) wherein distance can be measured by time-duration interval [3]. This feature is utilized in
astronomy without any mention of LVSs. Although this is so natural, the PM stumbled upon this issue, because it did
not distinguish between spaces and point-set manifolds or structure and substance. Substance supports the structure
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
495

that preserves the substance. In physics substance always has to be conserved. It cannot just disappear without a
physical reason. Yet the aforementioned paradoxical decomposition of spheres makes substance in topology literally
immaterial and makes spatial structures ‘‘unsubstantiated’’ (unconstrained). Vector spaces unconstrained by matter
(manifolds) defy laws of physics.
Although physically meaningful geometry must be spatio-temporal [98], time cannot be fourth dimension in the
strict geometric sense of the term [1,3,4,99]. Abstract notion of space is founded on ﬁve underlying intuitive notions:
distance, vicinity, continuity, compartment (or range) and closeness (proximity) [100]. Spatial dimensionality appeared
as a limitless parameter [101–104]. In topological sense dimensionality can be arbitrary large [105]. The latter is true as
long as it is applied to set-point manifolds. Although set-point manifolds are often called topological spaces, their
identiﬁcation with geometric spaces was taken for granted because the term space was used indiscriminately and
ambiguously therein. Topology did not really generalize geometry, but oversimplify the latter in general, less exact
terms. Topology cannot encapsulate geometry, because most geometrical objects can possess features unrelated to
constituents of their underlying manifolds.
11. Dual representation of potentials and forces
Eq. (7) suggests that, with the exception of our ignorance, there is nothing that would prevent us to write the Eq. (7)
in the following form:
F=G ¼ InstVect½ðiVÞ  ðiVÞ
ð11aÞ
where G is the gravitational constant. If true, the Eq. (11a) should retrodict some already known facts of physics. If the
vector F is the radial force of gravity, then the vectors V should be (collinear) radial potentials from two massive bodies
M and m separated by a distance R, and so we can write:
F=G ¼ InstVect½ðiVMðRMmÞÞ  ðiVmðRmMÞÞ
ð11bÞ
Here the local radial potentials from the two masses VMðRMmÞ ¼ M=RMm and VmðRmMÞ ¼ m=RmM appear just as
functions of the common distance RMm ¼ RmM ¼ R and the masses are just parameters. This form is known in the
CM. Nonetheless, the two local radial gravitational potentials should be actually functions of the two masses, which are
responsible for them (or generate them), namely: VMðMÞ ¼ M=RMm and VmðmÞ ¼ m=RmM.
Hence I can rewrite the Eq. (11b) with potentials as function of the masses:
F=G ¼ InstVect½ðiVMðMÞÞ  ðiVmðmÞÞ
ð11cÞ
In the Eq. (11c) the radial distance R is just a parameter, for these two local potentials only vary with the distance R
between the massive bodies M and m, but they depend on the masses that produce them. The CM has never considered
potentials and forces as formal, mathematical functions of these masses, even though it explicitly assumed that physical
dependence. Mass is thought of as being enclosed within a surface, which can be represented by a vector normal to the
surface, so that there is no conceptual problem with this representation. In fact, this is its physically correct repre-
sentation. We should distinguish between functional dependence and just variability. CM was successful, because it was
dealing with practically constant masses.
However, the Eq. (11c) implies existence of a mass-based space (MBS). If TBS exists [1,3] then MBS can also exist,
for mass and energy are two faces of the same thing, since time rate is related to energy. Hence the hyperspace of CM
comprises three 3D LVSs: LBS, TBS and MBS - with nine distinct dimensions. The mass-length-time (MLT) system of
the CM appears as a 9D hyperspace with three 3D spaces. Hence the Eq. (11c) can be written as:
F=G ¼ InstVect½ðiMðRjMlÞÞ  ðimðRjmmÞÞ=R2
ð11dÞ
with both masses M and m represented in their respective mass-based vector bases Ml and mm and parametrized by
distance R treated as a scalar therein.
Since the InstVect operator must not aﬀect values, then one should keep the well-known classical relationship be-
tween gravitational and ‘‘regular’’ force:
jFj ¼ GjMðRjMlÞmðRjmmÞ=R2j ¼ mjaj
ð11eÞ
where the a is the radial acceleration due to the gravitational force F. I can equate the values of dynamical (gravi-
tational) and kinematical accelerations:
496
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

jaj ¼ GMðRjMlÞ=R2 ¼ d2sðtÞ=dt2
ð12aÞ
However, by analogy to the Eq. (12a), an entirely diﬀerent expression for the value of the same acceleration follows
from the Eq. (11e). Mass is actually a measure of resistance to motion, rather than that of static quantity of matter [2].
Since G ¼ const, for a uniform and linear distribution of the mass we get:
jaj ¼ Go2MðRjMlÞ=oR2
ð12bÞ
In the MBS the mass M looks like a distance s in the LBS, while the radius R looks therein like a time-duration pa-
rameter t in the LBS. If mass/energy varies in mass/energy-based coordinates of a 3D space that is parametrized by
distance, the distance parameter resembles time-duration in LBS. Twin spaces in the multispatial representation of
motion are literally intertwined.
Eq. (12b) is a powerful reminder that there is much more to geometry and physics that the PM and MP had dis-
closed. The multispatial hyperspace gives consistent geometric and algebraic interpretation of traditional vectors, which
seem to span multiple simple 3D spaces. The existence of the MBS predicted by the new mathematical formulations of
vectors complies with the old CM. Nonetheless, it unveils diﬀerent physical reality that had been hidden behind the
postulative abstract formalism of the MP and PM. Hence the abstract structure of hyperspace is real and should not be
disregarded. It shows that we do posses extra abstract symmetries at a very high level of the whole (not so classical)
hierarchical structure of the 9D MLT hyperspace.
The new interpretation of vectors shows how duality makes what appears as compactiﬁcation of dimensions.
Although the ‘‘extraneous’’ dimensions were not really rolled up to disappear, they are not represented in a single
simple geometric space, but spread in a multispatial hyperspace. One can give thus a new meaning to the appar-
ent compactiﬁcation of dimensions, namely that three dimensions from the 3D dual linear vector space appear also in
the primary 3D space disguised as pseudoscalar of the generalized hypervector. In particular the equations (12) answer
the question how the distances from the usual length-based space are mapped onto the inverse square distance
[106,107]. This is a cross-spatial mapping, however. This particular mapping has nothing to do with curling of the extra
dimensions. It is due to dual spatial representations in hyperspace. Hence the alleged compactiﬁcation of higher
than four dimensions, or its some other ingenious alternatives such as braniﬁcation [108], does not really put them
away. The extra dimensions can be positively identiﬁed in the multispatial hyperspace, which relies on an abstract
hyperspatial duality and on symmetries. Under certain conditions even QM can tolerate duality and supersymmetry
[109].
The existence of multispatial hyperspace explains, or at least makes viable, some facts that were considered as cu-
riosities in physics and mathematics. There is no way to wrap a M5 manifold around a M4 one [110]. There is no evidence
for supersymmetric baryons [111] and no compelling reason for compactiﬁcation [112]. In the meantime the super-
symmetry that was based on a Z2-graded algebraic structure has been upgraded to certain Z3-graded hypersymmetry
[51,52]. The hyperspace, however, shifts that old geometric paradigm of single-space physical reality to that of a mul-
tispatial structure. It allows us to formulate new structural laws for the dynamics of time itself [1–4], which is convenient
for QM [113] and desirable even for cosmology [114]. Spatial ﬂow of time enhances the old idea of DAlembert, who once
contemplated time as a fourth dimension [115]. It suggests existence of a time–space as a quasi-dual counterpart of space–
time [1,3], which could also support quantization of tachyons [116]. This will be discussed elsewhere.
12. Summary and conclusions
From Elie Cartans generalization of the Stokes theorem one can conclude that higher than three-dimensional object
is composed of 3D objects. The conclusion was reinforced by his other result, which showed that the highest dimen-
sionality of simple geometric spaces is three. Since we observe more than four independently varying physical mag-
nitudes, the simplest general conclusion is that structure of physical reality should resemble a multispatial hyperspace,
which comprises several simple 3D geometric spaces. Hence multidimensionality is a logical consequence of multi-
spatiality in the sense that each 3D vector space of the hyperspace brings in to the hyperspace a distinct triple of di-
mensions, which come as proper attributes of the space.
The presence of multispatial hyperspace implies a new interpretation of vectors. It suggests that traditional 3D
vectors can span multiple spaces. This feature is theoretically aﬃrmed by the fact that an isometric operation of vector
multiplication of traditional vectors has been devised upon it. All these imply existence of a 3D mass-based geometric
space, whose presence fully complies with well-known facts of classical mechanics. Hence having at least 9D hyperspace
for the mechanics alone, one can expect 27 distinct dimensions (due to symmetries imposed by abstract operations), and
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
497

many more if uniqueness is not enforced. Synthetic approach to mathematics and physics reveals thus unexpectedly
marvelous design of our physical reality.
The mathematical formalisms of both analytic geometry and the theory of linear vector spaces contain veiled
contradictions that indicate presence of a hyper-reality, which shapes the infrastructure of both the mathematical and
the physical reality. They also suggest existence of hierarchical multispatial structures. In some instances old respected
mathematical theories virtually demand that pan-geometry of multispatial hyperspace should be developed, for the
sanity of their apparently illogical consequences. When confronted with experimental evidence, the curious references to
hyper-reality produced predictions that comply with results of formerly unexplained experimental data [1–4]. Formerly
inconsistent abstract mathematical operations become permissible and quite meaningful within an abstract multispatial
hyperspace. Some formerly unexplained results of theoretical and experimental physics make sense when cast onto the
multispatial structure of the hyperspace.
I was greatly inﬂuenced by abstract ideas of El Naschie who eﬀectively deals with spatial issues on both manifolds
and in purely discrete systems [117,118,11,12]. In fractal terms one can build analogies between QM and space–time
[119]. I was also greatly impressed by ingenious analytic works on general relativity and related issues done by several
Russian scientists ([120,121] and Refs. in [3]). Yet the common sense dogma that sees proper geometric higher-
dimensional spaces as impossible [122] prompted me to distinguish between geometric spaces and manifolds (topo-
logical spaces) on the foundation of a synthetic, object-oriented approach to geometric objects.
The new synthetic approach distinguishes between physical and abstract interactions, where the latter may
sometimes appear as almost instantaneous [123]. This distinction allows us to understand also apparent nonlocality
as an actionless coupling of distinct representations (images) of a geometric object. Being represented in two quite
distinct spaces at once, when one image is manipulated in one space, its other image in another coupled space may be
almost instantaneously changed also, because it is actually the same object seen as two distinct images in these
two separate spaces spanned over the same physical manifold. Hence change made to one image of the object also
aﬀects the other image of the very same object, and so it may appear as almost instantaneous nonlocal change of the
other image. Since nonlocality cannot be simply refuted [124], it must thus have physically meaningful and presumably
quite reasonable mathematical explanation of the way it works. Although there is no action at a distance, even the
apparent classical action at a distance can be pictured in terms of such coupled images. One could thus represent the
gravitational force as an imaginary function, which is quite feasible [125]. Without synthesis and a conceptual visu-
alization, pure mathematics is like music that could never be performed [126]. The insane prohibition on visualization in
mathematics resulted in sloppy algebraic and topological reductionism and caused veiled though uncontested
nonsenses.
According to Plato, philosophers (and also scientists in modern parlance) would not trade science for governing. Yet
great Newton left science for administration. He did that after suﬀering a mental breakdown while still tackling sci-
ences. When people see that their work can still be improved, they tend to have motivation for work. However, when
they got correct results even though they know that their assumptions were not quite right, they get crazy, because they
suspect that a substantial improvement could ruin their already correct results. In my personal opinion, Newton re-
alized that there were more variables to determine gravity than his theory utilized. There was the issue of volume, which
is quite irrelevant to the radial eﬀects of gravity, which he discovered. He computed gravitational attraction forces
without volumes and yet all heavenly bodies complied with his calculations. He hesitated for over 20 years before
publishing his Principia in 1687. He would have to wait some 313 years more for my papers, which conﬁrmed his doubts
by discovery of nonradial eﬀects of gravity [1,2]. Fortunately, he did not wait that long, for I would never guess them
without his Principia.
Although I was standing ﬁrm on the earth, I too built my theories upon the works of many giants. Some of those
works provided just tools while others supplied also ideas. Having tools, anyone can erect a theoretical shack, but to
build more than a shack, one needs ideas. One of such suppliers of great inspirational ideas is El Naschie. As I have
mentioned above, I am painfully aware of incompleteness of this presentation and I am writing a paper that will soon
complement this one. The missing idea in question here is that of an inﬁnite-dimensional manifold (IDM), which El
Naschie has proposed as fractal Cantorian space–time that may underlie physics as a whole [127]. At the fundamental
level of indistinguishable points we need the IDM. Had Newton invented IDM, he could have overcome his justiﬁable
doubts. In this paper I have demolished 300+ years old nonsense, but to incorporate the IDM I must expel even much
more entrenched mathematical absurd. It is not just fancy extension of mathematics––we must have the IDM in
physics. I could not move forward without it, even though I was not a fan of inﬁnity. El Naschie is physically minded
and presumably that is why he introduced his ideas gently, with all due respect to mathematics. Nevertheless, I intend to
be bold and destructive, wherever necessary, and am going to merge the unﬁnished business of Elie Cartan on bilinear
groups [128] with the IDM. The Hausdorﬀdimension deﬁned on fractal space–time is a bridge between semi-structured
manifold and discrete geometries [129] that yields concrete physical magnitudes [130–133], even though El Naschie
498
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

blends space and time so that time appears spatialized [134,135]. I was so preoccupied with purely geometric aspects of
physics that I did not realize how important may number theory be for both geometry and physics, until I could not
ﬁnish this paper. Although the method of moving tripod is used for diﬀerential forms of all degrees [136], 3D Euclidean
space is insuﬃcient even for construction of Finsler spaces, which require a 5D space [137]. With generalized Stokes
formula [138] the 27 lines for surfaces of 3rd degree [139] could suggest 27 discrete dimensions. We need the IDM as a
deeper foundation for physics. In few theoretical studies on complexity the concept of abstract plects has been in-
troduced [140]. Since the term plect may indicate both complexity and simplicity, it is tempting to expand it on
multiplects that would convey the message of complex, multilayered hierarchical structure of those plects. Such mul-
tiplects may help visualize the multispatial structure of hyperspace.
References
[1] Czajko J. On conjugate complex time I: Complex time implies existence of tangential potential that can cause some equipotential
eﬀects of gravity. Chaos Solitons & Fractals 2000;11:1983–92.
[2] Czajko J. On conjugate complex time II: Equipotential eﬀect of gravity retrodicts diﬀerential and predicts apparent anomalous
rotation of the sun. Chaos Solitons & Fractals 2000;11:2001–16.
[3] Czajko J. On conjugate complex time III: Superstrings and complex Lorentz transformation. Chaos Solitons & Fractals
2001;12:951–67.
[4] Czajko J. Complex conjugate time in macro-experiments. Chaos Solitons & Fractals 2002;13:17–23.
[5] Merat P et al. Observed deﬂection of light by the sun as a function of solar distance. Astron Astrophys 1974;32:471–5.
[6] El Naschie MS. On the nature of complex time, diﬀusion and the two-slit experiment. Chaos Solitons & Fractals 1995;5:
1031–2.
[7] El Naschie MS. On conjugate complex time and information in relativistic quantum theory. Chaos Solitons & Fractals
1995;5:1551–5.
[8] El Naschie MS. Time symmetry breaking, duality and Cantorian space–time. Chaos Solitons & Fractals 1996;7:499–518.
[9] El Naschie MS. Wick rotation, Cantorian spaces and the complex arrow of time in quantum physics. Chaos Solitons & Fractals
1996;7:1501–6.
[10] El Naschie MS. A note on quantum gravity and Cantorian space–time. Chaos Solitons & Fractals 1997;8:131–3.
[11] El Naschie MS. Fractal gravity and symmetry breaking in a hierarchical Cantorian space–time. Chaos Solitons & Fractals
1997;8:1865–72.
[12] El Naschie MS. Hyperdimensional geometry and the nature of physical space–time. Chaos Solitons & Fractals 2000;10:155–8.
[13] Kasner E. An algebraic solution of Einstein equations. Trans Am Math Soc 1925;27:101–5.
[14] Neumann PM, Stoy GA, Thompson EC. Groups and geometry. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1994. p. 116ﬀ.
[15] HausdorﬀF. Mengenlehre. Berlin: 1935. p. 94.
[16] Gabrilovitsch L. €Uber mathematischen Denken und den Begriﬀder aktuellen Form. Berlin: 1914. p. 16.
[17] Laugwitz D. Zur Role der pythagoreischen Metrik in der Physik. Z Naturf 1954;9a:827–32.
[18] Bourbaki N. Elements de mathematique: Groupes et algebres de Lie. Paris: Hermann; 1960. p. 20.
[19] Fang J. Hilberts problems. Phil Math 1969;6:38–9.
[20] Hilbert D, Bernays P. Grundlagen der Mathematik I. Berlin: Springer-Verlag; 1968. p. 16.
[21] Lightstone AH. Linear algebra. New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts; 1969. p. 183ﬀ.
[22] van der Waerden BL. Algebra I. New York: Fred. Ungar; 1970. p. 61.
[23] Frankel T. The geometry of physics. An introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1997. p. 13.
[24] Wilder RL. Introduction to the foundations of mathematics. New York: Wiley; 1963. p. 177.
[25] Hermann P. Vector bundles in mathematical physics. Benjamin; 1970. p. 26.
[26] Halmos PR. Finite-dimensional vector spaces. Princeton: Van Nostrand; 1958. p. 23.
[27] Williamson RE, Crowell RH, Trotter HF. Calculus of vector functions. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1968. p. 62.
[28] Bourbaki N. Elements de mathematique: Theorie des ensembles. Paris: Hermann; 1970. p. E IV.69.
[29] Engelking R, Sieklucki K. Topology. A geometric approach. Berlin: Heldermann Verlag; 1992. p. 332.
[30] Dodson CTJ. Categories, bundles and space–time topology. Orpington: Shiva Publishing; 1980. p. 66.
[31] Scholz E. The concept of manifold 1850–1950. In: James IM, editor. History of topology. Amsterdam: Elsevier; 1999. p. 25–64.
p. 26.
[32] Bishop RL, Crittenden PJ. Geometry of manifolds. New York: Academic Press; 1964. p. 2.
[33] Poincare H. Pourquoi lespace a trios dimensions? Rev Metaphys Morale 1812;20:483–504.
[34] Engelking R. General topology. Berlin: Heldermann Verlag; 1989. p. 382.
[35] De Witt B. Supermanifolds. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1987. p. 17.
[36] Choquet-Bruhat Y. Graded bundles and supermanifolds. Napoli: Bibliopolis; 1989. p. 74.
[37] Choquet-Bruhat Y, Dewitt-Morette C, Dillard-Bleck M. Analysis, manifolds and physics. Amsterdam: North-Holland; 1977. p.
117ﬀ.
[38] Yanguas P. Lowering the dimension of polynomial vector ﬁelds in R2 and R3. Chaos 2001;11(2):305–18.
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
499

[39] Cartan E. La methode du repere mobile, la theorie des groupes continues et les espaces generalises. Paris: Hermann; 1935.
p. 39ﬀ.
[40] Cartan E. Les systemes diﬀerentiels exterieurs et leurs applications geometriques. Paris: Hermann; 1945. p. 34ﬀ.
[41] Riemann B. Ueber die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen. In: Weber H, editor. Bernhard Riemanns
gesammelte mathematische Werke. New York: Dover; 1953. p. 272–82. see, p. 272ﬀ.
[42] Misner CW, Thorne KS, Wheeler JA. Gravitation. New York: Freeman; 1973. p. 369.
[43] Kupryaev NV. The sagnac vortex optical eﬀect. Rus Phys J 2001;44:858–62.
[44] Szekeres G. Eﬀect of gravitation on frequency. Nature 1968;220:1116–8.
[45] Gonseth F. Les mathematiques et la realite. Essai sur la methode axiomatique. Paris: 1936 [p. 323].
[46] See p. 392 in [34].
[47] Diek A, Kantowski R. Some cliﬀord algebra history. Available at: http://www.nhn.ou.edu/~ski/papers/Cliﬀord/history.ps.
[48] G€odel K. On formally undecidable propositions of principia mathematica and related systems I. New York: Dover; 1992.
p. 1, 40.
[49] Cartan HP. Notion de topologie. Espaces topologiques, espaces metriques. Available at: http://chronomath.irem.univ-mrs.fr/
Anx3/TopoMetrique.html.
[50] Janiszewski Z. Sur le realisme et lidealisme en mathematiques. In: Janiszewski Z, editor. Oeuvres choisies. Warszawa: PWN;
1962. p. 309–17.
[51] Vector Space: http://mathworld.wolfram.com/VectorSpace.html.
[52] Espace vectoriel: http://folium.eu.org/algebre/struct/espace_vectoriel/espace_vectoriel.html.
[53] Rodin B. Calculus with analytic geometry. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ: Prentice-Hall; 1970. p. 364ﬀ.
[54] Weinreich G. Geometrical vectors. Chicago: The Chicago University Press; 1998. p. 15.
[55] Poncelet JV. Traite des proprietes projectives des ﬁgures. Paris: 1822. p. 28.
[56] Banach S. Theorie des operations lineaires. In: Banach S, editor. Oeuvres II. PWN: Warszawa; 1979. p. 13–219. see, p. 154.
[57] Banach S. Die Theorie der Operationen und ihre Bedeutung f€ur die Analysis. p. 434–41 in: [56], see p. 436.
[58] Banach S. Theorie des operations dans les ensembles abstraits et leur application aux equations integrales. p. 305–48 in: [56], see
p. 306.
[59] Smith T. Associative triangles, cross products, and ‘‘reﬂexivity’’ of octonions. Available at: http://www.innerx.net/personal/
tsmith/clcrotc.html.
[60] Freed DS. Five lectures on supersymmetry. Providence, RI: Am Math Soc; 1999. p. 5ﬀ.
[61] Abramov V, Kerner R, LeRoy B. Hypersymmetry: A Z3-graded generalization of supersymmetry. J Math Phys 1997;38:
1650–69.
[62] Kerner R. Z3-graded algebras and the cubic root of the supersymmetry translations. J Math Phys 1992;33:403–11.
[63] von Neumann J. Mathematical foundations of quantum mechanics. Princeton: Princeton University Press; 1996. p. 324.
[64] Gardner M. The colossal book of mathematics. New York: Norton; 2001. p. 568ﬀ.
[65] Bell JS. Speakable and unspeakable in quantum mechanics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1989. p. 15ﬀ.
[66] Friedrichs KO. Unobserved observables and unobserved causality. Comm Pure Appl Math 1981;34:273–83.
[67] Bohm D. Quantum theory. Mineola, NY: Dover Publ; 1989. p. 29.
[68] Bohm D. Causality and chance in modern physics. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press; 1957. p. 59.
[69] Bohm D. Wholeness and the implicate order. London: Routledge; 1999. p. 76ﬀ.
[70] Bohm D, Hiley BJ. The undivided universe. London: Routledge; 1999. p. 144ﬀ.
[71] Van Flandern T. The speed of gravity––what the experiments say. Phys Lett 1998;A250:1–11.
[72] Carlip S. Aberration and the speed of gravity. Phys Lett 2000;A267:81–7.
[73] HausdorﬀF. Grundz€uge der Mengenlehre. Leipzig: 1914. p. 469.
[74] Czyz J. Paradoxes of measures and dimensions originating in Felix Hausdorﬀs ideas. Singapore: World Scientiﬁc; 1994.
p. 51.
[75] Verdina J. Projective geometry and point transformations. Boston: Allyn and Bacon; 1971. p. 24ﬀ.
[76] Hopkins EJ, Hails JS. An introduction to plane projective geometry. Oxford: At The Clarendon Press; 1953. p. 5.
[77] Blattner JW. Projective plane geometry. San Francisco: Holden Day; 1968. p. 25.
[78] Busemann H, Kelly P. Projective geometry and projective metrics. New York: Academic Press; 1953. p. 20.
[79] Boyer CB. A History of mathematics. New York: Wiley; 1991. p. 536.
[80] Gerhardt CI. Geschichte der Mathematik in Deutschland. M€unchen. 1877. p. 275.
[81] Pl€ucker J. Ueber ein neues Prinzip der Geometrie und den Gebrauch allgemeiner Symbole und bestimmter Coeﬃcienten. In:
Schoenﬂies A, editor. Julius Pl€uckers gesammelte mathematische Abhandlungen. Leipzig 1895. pp. 159-177 [see, p. 174ﬀ].
[82] Weeks JR. The shape of space. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1985. p. 232.
[83] Loeb AL. Space structures. Their harmony and counterpoint. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley; 1976. p. 42.
[84] StolﬁJ. Oriented projective geometry. San Diego: Academic Press; 1991. p. 92.
[85] von Neumann J. Continuous geometry. Princeton: Princeton University Press; 1960. p. 3.
[86] Simon M. Nichteuklidische Geometrie in elementarer Behandlung. Leipzig, 1925. p. 32.
[87] Sprague AP. Dual-linear, linear diagrams. In: Johnson NL, Kallaher MJ, Long CT, editors. Finite geometries. New York:
Marcel Dekker; 1983. p. 413–8.
[88] Goodstein RL, Primrose EJF. Axiomatic projective geometry. Leicester: Leicester University Press; 1962. p. 2ﬀ.
500
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

[89] Baer R. Linear algebra and projective geometry. New York: Academic Press; 1952. p. 96.
[90] Bumcrot RJ. Modern projective geometry. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston; 1969. p. 75.
[91] Couturat L. Les principes des mathematiques. Hildesheim: Georg Olms Verlagsbuchhandlung; 1965. p. 134ﬀ.
[92] van der Waerden BL. Einf€uhrung in die algebraische Geometrie. Berlin: 1939. p. 7ﬀ.
[93] Bourbaki N. Elements de mathematique VI: Integration. Paris: Hermann; 1956. p. 55.
[94] Whitehead JHC. Duality in topology. In: Whitehead James IM, editor. Mathematical works of JHC Whitehead, vol. 4. New
York: Macmillan; 1963. p. 163–77 [see, p. 165ﬀ].
[95] Narici L, Beckenstein E. Topological vector spaces. New York: Marcel Dekker; 1985. p. 187.
[96] MacLane S. Duality for groups. In: Eilenberg S, MacLane S, editors. Collected works. Orlando: Academic Press; 1986.
p. 163–94. p. 173ﬀ.
[97] Young JW. Projective geometry. Chicago: Open Court; 1930. p. 25.
[98] Chudinov EM. Mathematical problems of physics. Moscow: 1981. p. 7 [in Russian].
[99] Bell ET. Mathematics. Queen and servant of science. McGraw-Hill; 1951. p. 136.
[100] Lukyanets VS. Physical–mathematical spaces and reality. Kiev: 1971. p. 25 [in Russian].
[101] Sieben K. Dreidimensionale Wirklichkeit. Stuttgart [p. 5].
[102] Hurewicz W. €Uber dimensionserh€ohende stetige Abbildungen. J Reine Angew Math 1933;71:169.
[103] Weyl H. €Uber die Gleichverteilung von Zahlen mod. Eins Math Ann 1916;77:313.
[104] Montgomery H. Space. Philos J 1969;6:127–40.
[105] Cantor G. Une contribution a la theorie des ensembles. Acta Math 1883;2:311–28.
[106] Witten E. Duality, space–time and quantum mechanics. Phys Today 1997;(May):28–33.
[107] Coon SA, Holstein BR. Anomalies in quantum mechanics: The 1=r2 potential. Am J Phys 2002;70:513–9.
[108] Giddings S. ‘‘Braniﬁcation:’’ an alternative to compactiﬁcation. Available at: http://www.phys.lsu.edu/mog/mog15/node11.html.
[109] Simon D. Duality and supersymmetric quantum mechanics. J Phys A: Math Gen 2002;35:4143–50.
[110] DuﬀMJ. Ten to eleven: It is not too late. In: Wess J, Akulov VP, editors. Supersymmetry and quantum ﬁeld theory. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag; 1998. p. 59–63. see, p. 62.
[111] Albuquerque IF et al. Search for light supersymmetric baryons. Phys Rev Lett 1977;78:3252–6.
[112] Freund PGO. Higher-dimensional uniﬁcation. Physica 1986;15D:263–9.
[113] Blanchard P, Jadczyk A. Events and piecewise deterministic dynamics in event-enhanced quantum theory. Phys Lett
1995;A203:260–6.
[114] Chaichian M, Kobakhlidze AB. Mass hierarchy and localization of gravity in extra time. Phys Lett 2000;B488:117–22.
[115] Yaglom IM. Felix Klein and Sophus Lie. Boston: Birkh€auser; 1988. p. 73.
[116] Pant MC et al. Dirac spinors and Tachyon quantization. Can J Phys 2000;78:303–15.
[117] El Naschie MS. Radioactive decay and the structure of Eð1Þ quantum space–time. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 1999;10:17–23.
[118] El Naschie MS. On the irreducibility of spatial ambiguity in quantum physics. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 1998;9:913–9.
[119] Ord GN. Fractal space–time: A geometric analogue to relativistic quantum mechanics. J Phys A: Math Gen 1983;16:1869–84.
[120] Vlasov AA et al. Gravitational eﬀects in the ﬁeld theory of gravitation. Theor Math Phys 1980;43:375–401.
[121] Logunov AA, Loskutov YuM. Nonuniqueness of the predictions of the general theory of relativity. The relativistic theory of
gravitation. Sov J Part Nucl 1987;18:179–87.
[122] Mirman R. The reality and dimension of space and the complexity of quantum mechanics. Int J Theor Phys 1988;27:
1257–76.
[123] Kogbetliantz E. Sur la vitesse de propagation de la gravitation. Ann Phys (Paris) 1931;16:71.
[124] Schaﬁr RL. Comment on an alleged refutation of non-locality. ArXiv:quant-ph/0201065 v.1. 16-Jan-2002.
[125] Nahin PJ. An imaginary tale. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1998. p. 115.
[126] Needham T. Visual complex analysis. Oxford: Clarendon Press; 2001. p. vii.
[127] El Naschie MS. Modular groups in Cantorian Eð1Þ high energy physics. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 2003;16:353–66.
[128] Cartan E. Groupes Bilineaires. In: Elie Cartan: Oeuvres Completes. T. 1 p. 2, Paris: Gauthier-Villars; 1953. p. 7–105.
[129] El Naschie MS. On John Nashs crumpled surface. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals, in press.
[130] El Naschie MS. VAK, Vacuum ﬂuctuation and the mass spectrum of high energy physics. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals
2003;17:797–807.
[131] El Naschie MS. Kleinian groups in Eð1Þ and their connection to particle physics and cosmology. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals
2003;16:637–49.
[132] da Cruz W. The Hausdorﬀdimension of fractal sets and fractional quantum hall eﬀect. Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 2003;17:
975–9.
[133] Marek-Crnjac L. On the mass spectrum of the elementary particles of the standard model using El Naschies golden ﬁeld theory.
Chaos, Solitons & Fractals 2003;15:611–8.
[134] El Naschie MS. The Cantorian interpretation of high energy physics and the mass spectrum of elementary particles. Chaos,
Solitons & Fractals 2003;17:989–1001.
[135] El Naschie MS. Complexity theory interpretation of high energy physics and the elementary particles mass spectrum
[manuscript].
[136] Cartan E. Sur les Formes Diﬀerentielles en Geometrie. In: Elie Cartan: Oeuvres Completes. T. 1 p. 2, Paris: Gauthier-Villars;
1955. p. 905–07.
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502
501

[137] de Rham G. La Theorie des Formes Diﬀerentielles Exterieures et lHomologie des varietes Diﬀerentiables. In: De Rham G,
editor. Oeuvres Mathematiques. Geneve: Lenseignement Mathematique Universite de Geneve, p. 475.
[138] Cartan E. Exposes de Geometrie. Paris: Hermann; 1971. p. 15.
[139] Cartan E. Le Principe de Dualite et la Theorie des Groupes Simples et Semi-simples. In: Elie Cartan: Oeuvres Completes. P.1,
Paris: CNRS; 1984. p. 555–68.
[140] Gell-Mann M. Lets Call It Plectics. Complexity 1995–96;1(5)––also on http://www.santafe.edu/sﬁ/People/mgm/plectics.html.
502
J. Czajko / Chaos, Solitons and Fractals 19 (2004) 479–502

