The Lessons of Swedenborg; or, The Origin of 
William Blake's The Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
JOSEPH VISCOMI 
On the 27th of Tanuary last [1788] a chapel, called the New Terusalem Church, was opened 
in Great Eastcheap, London, by a sect of mystics, who consider Swedenborg as a prophet 
sent from God to establish the true doctrines of Christianity. They have a set form of prayer, 
on the model of that of the established church, and read chapters taken from the writings 
of Swedenborg as lessons.-Analytical Review 2 (1788): 98 
[Blake] ... would allow of no other education than what lies in the cultivation of the fine 
arts & the imagination-H. C. Robinson (Bentley, Blake Records 543) 
gj 
his is the second of three essays on the evolution of William 
Blake's The Marriage of Heaven and Hell.' The first argues 
that Blake began Marriage with plates 21 through 24, began 
executing the work without a completed manuscript, and that Marriage's 
disjointed structure is partly the result of its production history. It reveals 
that Marriage evolved through four to six distinct printmaking sessions in 
the following order: 21-24; 12-13; 1-3, 5-6, II, 6-IO; 14-15,4; 16-20; and 
25-27.2 Marriage'S structure may also have been partly influenced by liter-
ary models, such as Menippean satire, or by the Higher Criticism's theory 
"that the Old Testament was a gathering of redacted fragments" (Essick, 
"Representation"). These models, though, if present, appear to have come 
into play only after Blake wrote and etched plates 21-24, which constitute 
a sustained attack on the Swedish mystic Emanuel Swedenborg (1688-
1772).3 Because the four plates form an autonomous text and are quarters 
cut from the same sheet of copper, and because that sheet was the first 
of seven cut, the text appears to have been conceived as an independent, 
anti-Swedenborgian pamphlet. It became instead the intellectual core of 
what became the Marriage, helping to generate twenty of its subsequent 
twenty-three plates. The only extant printing of plates 21-24 supports the 
pamphlet hypothesis: 

The present essay, which extends the first, argues that plates 21-24 do, 
indeed, form an autonomous text; that they are, unlike the other textual 
units, thematically, aesthetically, and rhetorically coherent; and that their 
textual and visual coherence supports the hypothesis that they were ini-
tially conceived as an independent pamphlet. Throughout its examination 
of plates 21-24, it identifies the primary Swedenborgian texts and themes 
that Blake refers to and/or satirizes. The third essay, by tracing many of 
these themes and texts through the remaining textual units in the order 
in which the units were produced, reveals how Marriage evolved through 
its production. By examining visual and verbal connections heretofore ob-
scured, particularly those between printmaking and Swedenborg, it helps 
to reveal Blake's mind at work, locate where in practice execution and 
invention appear to intersect, and distinguish Blake's original from final 
intentions. The last essay reveals that Marriage, in effect, is a series of 
variations on themes raised on plates 21-24 instead of on plate 3, as is 
commonly thought (e.g., Bloom, Introduction; Miller; Nurmi; Punter), that 
Swedenborg, though mentioned only on plates 3, 19, 21, and 22, figures 
pervasively throughout Marriage, and that graphic allusions, which usually 
set into play the reflexivity associated with formalism, serve to evoke or 
communicate the unrepresentable-the spirit incarnate in a creative work 
of art. 
The present essay, then, necessarily refers backward and forward, sup-
porting theories already presented while also providing the textual and 
thematic grounds for a new reading of Marriage. But it stands firmly on 
its own as well, for it provides the first reading of plates 21-24 as they 
appear to have been initially written, that is, as an autonomous text pre-
ceding the composition of-and without the visual and verbal referents 
provided by-the Marriage. Read closely in this light, the aesthetic issues 
underlying Blake's theological critique of Swedenborg, as well as Blake's 
idea of himself as visionary artist and the relation between original artistic 
creation and prophecy, come into sharp focus. 
"Swedenborg is the Angel sitting at the tomb" (Marriage, plate 3) 
The Swedenborgian New Jerusalem Church emerged in 1788 from a 
separatist group of the Theosophical Society. The society was founded in 
London in 1783 by Robert Hindmarsh and other Swedenborgians to pro-
mote "the Heavenly Doctrines of the New Jerusalem, by translating, print-
ing, and publishing the Theological Writings of the Honourable Emanuel 
Swedenborg" (Hindmarsh 23). It had evolved from a group of Sweden-
borgians meeting in the early 1780s at the house of the Rev. Jacob Duche 
in Lambeth (Paley 16), and it was modeled after the Manchester Printing 
174 Joseph Viscomi 

Society, which began in 1782 to print and publish Swedenborg's works 
in English (Hindmarsh 7). Blake may have attended one of the society's 
weekly Thursday night meetings, for he refers to "the society" in his anno-
tations to paragraph 414 of his copy of Sweden borg's Wisdom of Angels Con-
cerning Divine Love and Divine Wisdom (1788) (Erdman, Complete Poetry and 
Prose of William Blake 608, hereafter cited as E). It is not clear, however, if 
Blake is talking about the Theosophical Society as originally constituted or 
the separatist group, that "part of the general body" led by Hindmarsh and 
others that had by April 1787 resolved itself "into a new Society for pro-
moting the establishment of an External Church." The proposal to estab-
lish a sectarian religion of Swedenborgianism was, of course, a matter of 
debate (Hindmarsh 55 passim; Schuchard 44-46; Thompson 129 passim). 
The proposal, presented 17 April 1787, was "negatived by a small majority, 
on the grounds that the proper time for separating from the Old Estab-
lishment was not yet arrived. A few individuals of the Society, however, 
thought otherwise." The first regular meeting of this "new Society," which 
called itself "The Society for Promoting the Heavenly Doctrines of the 
New Jerusalem Church," was held on 7 May 1787, when it resolved unani-
mously to find a place of worship. They continued to meet with the larger 
group until 5 November 1787 and opened their rented Eastcheap chapel as 
the New Jerusalem Church on 27 January 1788 (Hindmarsh 54-55, 59n).5 
As a reader of Swedenborg, Blake almost certainly received the Circular 
Letter sent by the separatist group on 7 December 1788 to "all the readers 
of the Theological Writings of the Hon. Emanuel Swedenborg, who are de-
sirous of rejecting, and separating themselves from the Old Church ... and 
of fully embracing the Heavenly Doctrines of the New Jerusalem" (122). 
The Letter called for the General Conference that Blake and Catherine 
Blake attended during Easter Week (13-17 April) of 1789. The Letter's 42 
"propositions" were resolved unanimously at the conference, and these 
32 "resolutions," along with prefatory and concluding remarks, were pub-
lished as the conference's Minutes by Hindmarsh in 1789 (see n32).6 
Because Swedenborg's writings were discussed at Swedenborgian meet-
ings and at the five-day conference, Blake's familiarity with Sweden-
borgianism was, no doubt, more extensive than the three books that he is 
known to have read and annotated (A Treatise Concerning Heaven and Hell, 
Wisdom of Angels Concerning Divine Love and Wisdom, and Wisdom of An-
gels Concerning Divine Providence). Books read at the Theosophical Society's 
weekly meetings included "the untranslated writings of Swedenborg ... 
particularly . . . the Apocalypsis Revelata, which treats so copiously of the 
consummation or end of the Christian Church, the Last Judgment, the 
Second Coming of the Lord, and the Descent of the New Jerusalem, or 
the establishment of the New Church upon earth." Works read in transla-
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
175 

tion included the Treatise on Influx, or the Intercourse between the Soul and 
Body, the Treatise Concerning Heaven and Hell, and True Christian Religion, 
Containing the Universal Theology of the New Church (Hindmarsh 25). Hind-
marsh's splinter group no doubt kept up the practice of forming study 
groups throughout 1788. Indeed, it was encouraged in resolution 30 of the 
1789 General Conference, which recommended that "all the readers and 
lovers of the Theological Works of Emanuel Swedenborg ... form them-
selves into societies distinct from the Old Church, and to meet together 
as often as convenient, to read and converse on the said Writings, and to 
open a general correspondence for the mutual assistance of each other" 
(Minutes 129).1 
John Flaxman, the sculptor and Blake's close friend since the early 
1780s, was an ardent Swedenborgian and may have been the first to intro-
duce Blake to the mystic's theological writings. According to Erdman, 
"what most attracted Blake in the new psychology and the new religion" 
was their "positive benevolism, their invitation to mine beneath the codi-
fied meanings with which kings and priests had restrained and perverted 
Life, and their promise that the infinite vital power of the genius in every 
man could be released through Love" (Blake 128). According to Schuchard, 
Blake probably "found a congenial-even inspirational-milieu among 
Masonic Illumines," who she claims "were the driving force behind the 
Swedenborgian movement" (40). Thompson notes that Blake found con-
firmation for "thinking in 'correspondences' (but this, under other names, 
is of the very nature of poetry) ," as well as encouragement to "speak of 
objectifying his insights as visions or as conversations with spirits" (134)' 
And no doubt Blake found attractive Swedenborg's comments about the 
spirituality of sex ("conjugal Love in itself is spiritual" and "is only from 
the Lord," True Christian Religion n. 847). Nevertheless, whatever had 
drawn Blake to Swedenborg had lost its appeal by the time he read Wisdom 
of Angels Concerning Divine Providence (1790). In his annotations, he ac-
cused Swedenborg of "priestcraft" and "predestination" (E 610), the latter 
accusation requiring Blake to "interpret ... in a deliberately hostile sense" 
(Paley 21), since proposition 21 of the Circular Letter and nn. 479-85 of 
True Christian Religion expressed clear opposition to the concept of pre-
destination. The accusation of priestcraft, which appears directed more at 
Swedenborgians than Swedenborg, is on firmer ground when used to ex-
plain, at least in part, why Blake broke with Swedenborg. Exactly when and 
how quickly or slowly this break occurred, however, are matters of debate. 
Erdman believes that Blake changed his mind when, in Divine Providence, 
he "discovered the more conservative side of Sweden borg" (Blake 128). Pre-
sumably, this discovery was made the year of the book's publication, which 
jibes with Blake's own internal dating on plate 3 of the Marriage (fig. 1).8 
176 Joseph Viscomi 

Figure I. The Marriage of Heaven and Hell (Plate 3, Copy F, 
Pierpont Morgan Library, New York, PML 63935). 
But Erdman dates Marriage circa 1790-1793 (E 801), because he detects 
allusions in "A Song of Liberty" to a historical event that occurred in fall 
1792 and mistakenly assumed that a 1793 engraving was printed with 
Marriage copy B, one of the first copies printed.9 While Erdman recognizes 
that the Marriage plates were executed out of order, he does not comment 
on how execution reflects composition or how the plates could be recon-
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
177 

structed into sheets and grouped to reveal the chronology of production. 
Hence his dates of composition give the impression that Marriage was in 
progress for three or more years and that Blake composed all the various 
units of Marriage before etching the plates. They give, in other words, the 
impression of Blake working in a conventional manner, writing and revis-
ing the manuscript over a long period, and finally etching plates, albeit out 
of order, from a fair copy of the completed manuscript. Even when "A Song 
of Liberty" is treated as a coda to the Marriage and the latter is dated 1790, 
the fact that Marriage was never issued without "Song" implies, at the very 
least, that Blake was in no hurry either to etch or issue the work. Ferber 
neatly expresses this sense of composition, inferring from plate 3 that Blake 
left "the New Church ... [in] 1790" but "wrote and engraved" the Marriage 
"between 1790 and 1793" (91, 89). A three-year composing process sug-
gests more than dawdling, indecisiveness, or substantial revising. It also 
suggests that Blake's hostile attitude toward Swedenborg evolved slowly 
through the composing of Marriage, an impression bolstered by Marriage 
as it is now read, with Swedenborg being mentioned only on plates 3 and 
19, and then perfunctorily so, before the vociferous, ad hominem attack 
on plates 21-2+ A 1790 date, however, combined with a chronology of 
production that places plates 21-24 as the first Marriage plates written and 
executed, means just the opposite, that Marriage originated in and evolved 
quickly from anger rather than culminating in it-and that Blake was 
anything but tentative about expressing his temper or criticism. 
Obviously, I agree with Erdman that the Marriage was a work in progress 
(my study on its evolution demonstrates that), but I believe that it was 
composed and executed in sections over months, not years. In the first 
essay, which examines how and why plate production reflects composition, 
I relied on earlier arguments, mostly technical, for dating Marriage 1790, 
because my intention was to give a sense of the intensity with which Blake 
could work. Here, where the objective is to give a sense of his relation with 
Swedenborg, dating Marriage correctly is even more crucial. Did Blake re-
ject Swedenborg very gradually or abruptly? Did he discover his deepest 
objections in writing Marriage, or did he voice these objections in an illumi-
nated text that grew to include subjects more overtly political, theological, 
and metaphysical, subjects that Swedenborg came to represent and that he 
would develop in the Lambeth books? Examining the events in the New 
Church in 1789-91 will help answer these questions and strengthen the 
argument that Marriage was composed and executed in its entirety in 1790. 
If, as Erdman believes, Blake's change of mind began with Sweden-
borg's Divine Providence, then it began nearly a year after the first General 
Conference and possibly not until after the second General Conference, 
held in April 1790. Howard agrees, suspecting that Blake was disgusted by 
178 Joseph Viscomi 

the "changes in the nature of the [Swedenborgian) movement" from Theo-
sophical Society to Church, particularly as expressed by the second Confer-
ence (23 passim). To support their claims that "Blake, always a scorner of 
sectaries, quite evidently did not join those ceremonially inclined who were 
endeavoring to establish the New Church as a sect with an ordained priest-
hood" (Erdman, Blake 128), both scholars point to Blake's antinomian re-
sponse to external worship, moral law, and clerics, and to his statement that 
"The Whole of the New Church is in the Active Life & not in Ceremonies 
at all" (E 605). Paley concurs, stating that "events within the New Jerusa-
lem Church c. 1790-91 almost certainly contributed to Blake's rejection 
of Swedenborgianism." These events and issues included the preparation 
of a "catechism," the approval of "minister's garments," a "hymn book," a 
"form and order of worship," and the affirmation of the necessity of "living 
according to the Ten Commandments" (22). Yet if the break began in 1790 
or later, then Blake apparently did join "those ceremonially inclined" -at 
least for a year or more. Or are we to assume that he was ignorant of the 
Circular Letter's origin and intent? Did Blake not know it came from the 
group that had opened "a chapel, called the New Jerusalem Church" in 
January 1788? The seeds to all the events that Erdman, Howard, and Paley 
see as contributing to Blake's gradual rejection of Swedenborgianism were 
present in the Circular Letter of December 1788 and the Minutes of the 
1789 conference. These include the catechism (resolution 10), external 
forms of worship (propositions 34 and 35, resolutions 22 and 23), strict 
adherence to the Ten Commandments (resolution 10), and Swedenborg as 
divinely inspired (resolution I), all subjects criticized in Marriage. 
Either Blake's doubts about Swedenborg set in earlier than supposed, 
possibly within a few months after the first General Conference (1789), 
or other events contributed to his change of mind-or both. A close ex-
amination of Blake's annotations to Divine Love and Divine Wisdom (1788) 
reveals his earliest recorded doubts-and his willingness to suspend criti-
cism (e.g., "surely this is an oversight," E 602). There is no evidence he 
attended the New Jerusalem Church before or after its first conference, 
or that he would have wanted to join a group that had "a set form of 
prayer, on the model of that of the established church" (Analytical Review 
2 [1788): 98).10 Blake signed the Minute Book at the first session of the 
General Conference as a sympathizer and not as a member of the Church 
(pace Davies 49).11 He signed in "as a prerequisite to attendance" (Bentley, 
Blake Records 35), which does not prove staunch support; we do not know 
if Blake stayed for the whole five days of the conference, or if "events at 
the General Conference" itself shook his faith, as Bellin and Ruhl suggest 
(121). We do know that there was a whole lot of shaking going on shortly 
after that first conference, or, as Thompson puts it: "There was a thun-
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
I79 

dering row and probably two or three different rows. First sex and then 
the French Revolution reared their ugly heads" (136). While unraveling the 
various disputes is difficult, since the pages from 4 May 1789 to II April 
1790 are missing from the New Church's Minute Book, Thompson and 
Paley reconstruct persuasively. In particular, the latter, notwithstanding 
his belief that Blake may have changed his mind as late as 1791, provides 
the evidence that strongly suggests that he did so much earlier. 
The most controversial debate within the New Church in 1789 was over 
translating Swedenborg's Conjugial Love [sic], which contains passages that 
describe the nakedness of angels in an overtly sexual heaven, and passages 
permitting bachelors of the Church to take mistresses and married men 
with "unchristian wives" (i.e., wives who are not members of the New 
Church) to take concubines (Paley 22-24). The controversy led to the ex-
pulsion of Hindmarsh and five other prominent and founding members of 
the New Church, an act that Blake must have regarded with alarm, making 
him "all the more aware of the gap that separated him from the majority of 
English Swedenborgians" (Paley 24; see also Thompson 137).12 Augustus 
Nordenskjold and Carl Bernhard Wadstrom, two of the expelled, had been 
planning with other abolitionists to "set up a free community of whites and 
blacks on the west coast of Mrica" on the principles of the New Church, 
including those governing marriage and concubinage as they interpreted 
them (Paley 17). Blake was almost certainly aware of and interested in the 
plan. Moreover, like Blake, Nordenskjold and Wadstrom were ardent sup-
porters of the French Revolution, the political event that the majority of 
Swedenborgians feared and rejected (Paley 22), placing themselves firmly 
(and, by 1791, publicly) on the side of the state and its established church. 
Blake appears to have been sympathetic to those exiled and may have read 
their expulsion as an omen. In this light, the word "marriage" in the title 
and Blake's overtly sexual imagery throughout Marriage-but particularly 
on plate 3, which alludes to the French Revolution, and on plate 21, which, 
as will be shown, was the first image drawn and pictures Blake in all his 
naked and divine humanity-reflects his sympathies as well as his criti-
cisms of the Church's conservative positions. 
Blake appears more likely to have become disillusioned with Sweden-
borg in 1789 than later, probably within a few months after the first 
General Conference, if not by the conference itself, and for ideological 
as well as theological reasons. Signs of that break are already present in 
"The Divine Image" in Songs of Innocence (1789).13 The break was certainly 
completed by or in 1790, the publication date of Divine Providence, though 
Blake's expression of it may have been motivated by the second Gen· 
eral Conference. An earlier rather than later date for Blake's rejection of 
180 Joseph Viscomi 

Swedenborgianism is consistent with the technical evidence that indicates 
Marriage was composed and executed in 1790. 
Blake's criticism of Swedenborg was not without precedent-and the 
precedents further support the thesis that Blake's rejection of Sweden· 
borgianism was completed by or in 1790. The Analytical Review, published 
by Joseph Johnson, Blake's friend and sometimes employer, had been criti· 
cizing Swedenborgian texts since 1788 (Mee 5In35; Howard 31). They were 
"unintelligible," "ingenious reveries" that should never "be treated seri· 
ously" (3 [17891: 459).'4 Johnson's reviewers displayed the defensiveness 
of the attacked as well as the skepticism of the rationalist. If Sweden· 
borg's claims were true, then they, in their faith and concept of God, were 
mistaken. The reviewers' feigned weariness in the face of Swedenborg's 
voluminous output also signified impatience with claims that the New 
Church and its doctrines were new. Reviewers sought to discredit such 
claims by citing Swedenborg's sources or accusing him of excessive repeti· 
tion (5 [1789]: 64)· Citing precedent was also an indirect way to undermine 
Swedenborg's claim to have been divinely inspired (Minutes [resolution I]: 
125; True Christian Religion n. 779). For example: "'(T]here is nothing 
(saith Solomon), new under the sun.' What! not Swedenborgianism?-
NO. If its principles be analysed, it will be found to be nothing more 
than a repetition of the mystical doctrine of Plato concerning the abstract 
contemplation of the First Good, Intellect, and the World of Ideas, and of 
a whole train of ancient and modern Theosophists .... Why then all this 
boast of a new religion? and why is Emanuel Swedenborg to be followed 
as a second Messiah?" (8 [1790]: 332-33).15 
Blake's critique of Swedenborg may have been partially motivated or 
shaped by discussions with friends in the Johnson circle, and/or by any of 
the critiques in the Analytical Review. Like Johnson'S reviewers, Blake ap· 
pears a little defensive. He dismisses Swedenborg-however, not because 
he talked to angels but because he believed them. In this, he constructs a 
critique far more radical than those in the Analytical Review, for he not only 
cites Swedenborg's sources to discredit Swedenborg's claim to be new, but 
he also discredits the sources. He attacks both new and old church, thereby 
setting up a conflict other than the one imagined by Swedenborgians or 
their critics. Blake's conflict, dramatized by angels and devils, is between 
Religion and Art, and the satiric inversion of the dramatis personae is in 
part suggested by Swedenborg himself If he talks to angels, then Blake 
talks to devils. With angels and devils come the associated metaphors of 
place and vision, of being above the surface or below it, of seeing only the 
surface or appearance of things or seeing the infinite, which is hid. These 
metaphors provide the grounds for accusing Swedenborg of copying the 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
181 

letter of the Word and not, as he claimed, its indwelling spirit. Blake's dis-
tinguishing of the true from false ironically mimics Swedenborg's mission 
while raising the aesthetic contraries of authentic and fake, original and 
imitation. Thus the issue becomes not only whether Swedenborg is new, or 
whether such claims constitute boasting and intellectual vacuity, but also 
what originality means and how it is established and recognized. Sweden-
borg's ultimate failure is not that his writings are old, but, as we will 
see, that they are not old enough, failing to originate from those sources 
manifest in the works of "Ancient poets" and real biblical prophets. 
Blake's criticism of Swedenborg in pamphlet form may have been moti-
vated by the Circular Letter, the pamphlet that invited him to the first Gen-
eral Conference, or by that conference's Minutes, which were published in 
1789 as a pamphlet by Hindmarsh. Whatever its initial motivation, Blake's 
entering into ongoing religious, political, and aesthetic debates was char-
acteristic, and doing so through a privately printed pamphlet would not 
have been unusual for him-or the period.16 
"Uprose terrible Blake in his pride" (E 500) 
The primary objectives of plates 21-24 are to undermine Swedenborg's 
credibility and to champion Blake as visionary artist. The former objective 
requires Blake to demonstrate that Swedenborg's "spiritual" or "internal 
sense" of scripture was not divinely inspired and that the New Church 
was neither "new" nor "distinct from the Old [Christian] Church" (Minutes 
[resolutions I, IS, 21, 30, 32]: 125-27). The latter objective requires Blake 
to expose the spiritual meaning of imitation and to position himself as 
authentic visionary whose readings of the Word revealed its original poetic 
sense. He realizes both objectives simultaneously in the opening illustra-
tion. Our gaze is immediately transfixed by a beautiful, young naked man 
sitting on top of a mound with a skull under his left knee (fig. 2). Turned 
toward us, with legs apart and genitalia prominently displayed, he looks 
heavenward, in a gaze reminiscent of the piper's in Innocence's frontispiece 
and that of the tiny figure in "The Divine Image" raised by the Lord. The 
gaze returns in Marriage with the Eagle and Leviathan, both emblems of 
creative energy and genius (see essay 3), and the entire figure will be used 
again in America plate 8 (1793) and Death's Door in The Grave (1808). The 
juxtaposition of heavenly gaze and overt sexuality startles. In Marriage, the 
figure is read as the resurrected supine body of plate 14, where it lies in 
flames under a hovering female. But, as argued in the first essay, plate 21 
was written and executed many plates before plate 14, and hence when 
composed, the naked man almost certainly had no visual or textual referent 
other than "I," the first word of plate 21. If Blake speaks in his own voice, as 
r82 
Joseph Viscomi 

Figure 2. The Marriage of Heaven and Hell (Plate 21 , second state, 
Copy c, Pierpont Morgan Library, New York, PMl 17599). 
is strongly suggested by the concluding "Note" on plate 24 referring to his 
forthcoming "Bible of Hell," then the figure is probably meant to represent 
Blake. But what is Blake's idea of himself? Is he the New in opposition to 
the Old, the Regenerated Man in opposition to the so-called New Church? 
Blake pictures himself about to rise, as picking himself up, a gesture 
suggesting his readiness to assert himself and announce the beginning of 
the new age. In picturing himself, though, he uses traditional and Sweden-
borgian iconography. In light of the former, Blake is the rising, transfigured 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
183 

Christ. The mound and skull indicating a tomb are characteristic of Gol-
gotha, "the place of the skull," which, according to medieval legend, was 
the burial place of AdamP Christ is the second Adam or "last Adam" (I Cor. 
15.45-49), whereas Adam is the original from which all humans have 
sprung. Blake's identifying himself with Christ and the original becomes 
clearer two plates later, when the devil, proclaiming an incarnational God, 
describes Christ as one who, presumably like Blake and Adam, "acted from 
impulse; not from rules" (plates 23-24). The connection between Blake, 
Christ, and Adam will be further clarified on plate 3, where Christ's resur-
rection is connected to Adam's return: "Swedenborg is the Angel sitting at 
the tomb; his writings are the linen clothes folded up. Now is the domin-
ion of Edom, & the return of Adam into Paradise." 18 The passage associates 
Swedenborg with death, as an angel left behind attending an empty tomb. 
The unused garments are Swedenborg's writings, which are closed, or 
"folded," and thus unread - or no longer read or needed. Also cast off are 
external forms of worship, in that Swedenborg likens the New Church's 
ceremonial laws to its clothing (True Christian Religion n. 55). More signifi-
cant, the image of unused clothing suggests a naked Christ - which is how 
he is pictured on plate 21. Ironically, a naked Christ is Swedenborgian, 
for "those in the inmost heaven . . . are not clothed . . . because they are 
in innocence, and innocence corresponds to nudity" (Treatise Concerning 
Heaven and Hell n. 179). Nudity also suggests man's prefallen state (see 
Gen. 3.7, 21), and thus Adam's return to that shameless, paradisiacal state. 
In all his naked glory, Blake proceeds immediately to attack Sweden-
borg's credibility by accusing his primary sources of being vain, insolent, 
and mechanical. He states: "I have always found that Angels have the 
vanity to speak of themselves as the only wise; this they do with a confident 
insolence sprouting from systematic reasoning" (plate 21). By implying 
that angels are too vain and arrogant to be "wise," and that their ap-
proach to the Wor~ld is grounds for insolence, not insight, Blake criticizes 
Swedenborg, two of whose book titles begin with the words "the wisdom 
of angels concerning" and whose interpretation of the Bible's "internal 
sense" is based on his "science of correspondences" or system of analogies 
that links every perceived thing and event to its spiritual counterpart and 
cause.19 According to Swedenborg, angels understand this science, and 
so did the "most ancient people" of Adam's Church, "who were celestial 
men," but "at this day that knowledge has been so entirely lost that it is 
not known what correspondence is" (Treatise Concerning Heaven and Hell 
n. 87). "Thus Swedenborg boasts that what he writes is new" (plate 21). 
Blake's stunningly self-assured opening sentence presupposes not only 
an awareness of "news from the spiritual world" (see nI4), but also his 
own visionary powers, an assertion meant to erase as well as amplify the 
184 Joseph Viscomi 

differences between himself and Swedenborg.20 Blake agrees that powers 
once ours are now lost, but not with Swedenborg's claim that he exercises 
them well or exclusively. Blake places Swedenborg in the angel's "party," 
which is characterized by a lack of vision and is foiled by the "Devils 
party" (plate 6), whose members include the creative minds and mys-
tics Blake admired, such as Paracelsus, Boehme, Dante, Shakespeare, and 
Christ (plates 22-23). To this party, Blake will add Milton, Isaiah, Ezekiel, 
and, most tellingly, the "Ancient poets," his version of Swedenborg's "most 
ancient people." With "enlarged & numerous senses," they "animated all 
sensible objects with Gods or Geniuses ... placing it under its mental 
deity. Till a system was formed." To Blake, the original system of corre-
spondences was an inherently creative process resulting in "poetic tales," 
which, however, were eventually perverted into "forms of worship" by a 
"Priesthood" able to "abstract the mental deities from their objects." "Thus 
men forgot that All deities reside in the human breast" (plate II). Yet while 
visionary powers possessed by all are forgotten by most, they are exercised 
by more than Swedenborg allows and thus are not grounds for vanity or 
conceit. Being so aligns one with the "Priesthood."21 
The conflict between priests and poets on plate II recapitulates that 
between angels and devils, which, as expressed on plates 21-24, is one 
between originality and imitation, creativity and systematic reasoning. In-
deed, Swedenborg's angelic sources are suspect not only because they 
are insolent and vain, but also because they are copyists-and poor ones 
at that. What "Swedenborg boasts ... is new" is "only the Contents or 
Index of already publish'd books." Swedenborg fails, in other words, to 
see that what he records is both public knowledge and woefully incom-
plete, amounting merely to the systematic portions of books published by 
others. Swedenborg, then, is a mere imitator, one who "only gives us a sort 
of Duplicates of what we had, possibly much better, before; increasing the 
mere Drug of books, while all that makes them valuable, Knowledge and 
Genius, are at a stand" (Edward Young 10). "Thus Swedenborg," by fol-
lowing the lead of followers, necessarily fails at being "new." An "Ancient 
poet" he is not, for he fails to embody the "Poetic Genius," which Blake 
identifies as "the Spirit of Prophecy," the ultimate source from which "The 
Religions of all Nations are derived." He also identifies it as the "True 
Man," "the true faculty of knowing" (E I, 2), and, in his annotations to 
Swedenborg's Divine Love and Divine Wisdom (1788), as "the Lord" and 
"the Lord's Divinity" (E 603); in his later writings and prophecies, he 
identifies it as Imagination (e.g., E 663-64). The concept of the Poetic 
Genius will enter Marriage explicitly on plates 12-13, the next two plates 
Blake executed (see essay I), where it is identified as "the first principle" 
of "human perception." But implied throughout plates 21-24, particularly 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
185 

in the members of the devil's party, is the idea that Swedenborg's work is 
unoriginal because it does not originate-grow or sprout-from the ori· 
gin, does not manifest the "Poetic Genius," or "the Lord" Christ. It lacks, 
in other words, Imagination, the source of perception and vision. 
Angelic sources cannot compete with "Poetic Genius." For Blake, great 
works of art, not metaphysics, manifest God, and if for Blake "God is a 
Man ... and finds his being in human acts of creation," then anyone "who 
achieves greatness in art is God to the extent of being himself constituted 
by his own creative acts"(Bloom, Introd. 20). In manifesting God, great 
works of art manifest the origin of creativity and prophecy; or, put another 
way, the most original works originate or sprout from or are closest to the 
origin of creation, which, as Blake will dramatize on Marriage plates 6, 
14, and 15, is hell. Even with Shakespeare and Dante as models, though, 
the creative mind will be at best a glorious follower if it follows the letter 
instead of the spirit-or, in terms of Marriage's topographical metaphor, 
if it fails to visit "hell" or the "abyss." Blake changed the location in later 
works, but he retained the idea of having to visit the origin: "The Man who 
never in his mind & Thoughts traveld to Heaven Is No Artist" (E 647). 
The idea that by "travelling" to the origin of creativity one can return to 
the glory of the ancients without imitating them was not new. Edward 
Young had argued that the modern poet should not imitate Homer's work 
but take "the same method, which Homer took, for arriving at a capacity 
of accomplishing a work so great. Tread in his steps to the sole Fountain 
of Immortality; drink where he drank, at the true Helicon, that is, at the 
breast of Nature: Imitate; but imitate not the Composition, but the Man. 
For may not this Paradox pass into a Maxim? viz. 'The less we copy the 
renowned Antients, we shall resemble them the more'" (20-21). 
The idea that Swedenborg lacked imagination, that he did not go deep 
enough or visit hell, is represented by his refusal to talk to devils. "He 
conversed with Angels who are all religious. & conversed not with Devils 
who all hate religion, for he was incapable thro' his conceited notions." 
Hence, he "has not written one new truth" but "has written all the old fals· 
hoods" (plate 22). Failure to converse with devils means relying exclusively 
on systematic reasoners at the expense of poetic genius. It also punctures 
any claim to speak as an authority on Hell-or on much of anything else. 
He has not "written one new truth"; by "new truth," Blake presumably 
means unknown or no longer known, since throughout the Marriage-and 
Swedenborg's writings-truth is something to be recovered or returned 
to, like the truths of the most ancient people/poets, always there but hid· 
den or forgotten until displayed by the authentic artist/prophet. It is not 
possible, then, to write new truths, in the sense of creating them, but it is 
possible to create new and original works of art that manifest and express 
186 Joseph Viscomi 

truths. Blake seems to accuse Swedenborg of claiming the impossible and 
failing at the possible. 
As a "conceited" angelic agent thinking he already knows all there is to 
know, Swedenborg becomes the model for the "devourer," who "only takes 
portions of existence and fancies that the whole" (plate 16). Rather than 
possessing truth exclusively, Swedenborg excludes the very acts that could 
assist him in seeing fully. That truth and perception are impeded and 
falsehood propagated by one's "notions" or system of thought is a major 
theme in Marriage that not coincidentally echoes Swedenborg's relentless 
attack on the Christian Church. "As long as men adhere to, and are influ· 
enced by, the Faith of the Old church, so long the New Heaven cannot 
descend to them" (Minutes [resolution 71 127). Of the "Notions," "common 
Beliefs," and "prevailing Opinions" that constituted this "Faith" and pre-
vented the masses from "understanding the spiritual Sense of the Word" 
(True Christian Religion nn. 768-69), two of the most fundamental are 
believing "Redemption to have consisted in the passion of the cross" and 
professing one God while actually praying to a "Trinity of Divine Persons" 
or "Trinity of Gods" (True Christian Religion nn. 132, 172).22 Just as Blake 
vociferously denies and satirically inverts Swedenborg's claims of possess· 
ing original knowledge, he ironically turns Swedenborg's recognition that 
precepts determine perception against him, subjecting Swedenborg to his 
own rationale. Why should Swedenborg be believed when his sources, like 
those of the Old Church he criticized, were much repeated but erroneous? 
What lessons has he to teach Blake when all his knowledge concerning 
God is derived not from the Poetic Genius but from systematic reasoners 
and incomplete or abridged texts? 
Vainly basking in light not worth sharing undermines Swedenborg's 
credibility as seer. Yet he "shews the folly of churches & exposes hypo· 
crites" (plate 22). Blake compliments, though, to expose a greater fault. 
Swedenborg believes "that all are religious. & himself the single one on 
earth that ever broke a net" (plates 21-22), but, as noted, such exposition is 
neither new nor grounds for boasting or thinking oneself singular-or free 
of Religion's entangling net. Indeed, Swedenborg's believing himself free 
only underscores how thoroughly pervasive the net is. Blake's compliment 
also raises the specter of hypocrisy, of prophet become priest, for Sweden-
borg "conversed" only "with Angels who are all religious," his "conceited 
notions" preventing him from imagining value among those different 
from himself (plate 22). Swedenborg's claim to have broken from "the 
religious" is as inherently contradictory as the Old Church professing one 
thing and believing another. In short, the claim is either false or hypocriti-
cal. In either reading, Blake again denies the New Church's claim that it is 
"new" and "distinct from the Old Church." Far from being distinct or origi-
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
r87 

nal, Swedenborg and his followers are like what they criticize, a similarity 
determined by Swedenborg's angelic sources representing organized reli-
gion and by the absence in Swedenborg's discourse of the Poetic Genius. 
Like revolutionaries before and after him, Swedenborg became what he 
criticized, co-opted by the establishment he sought to expose as usurpers 
of truth. That Swedenborg serves orthodoxy in the name of resistance, 
that his sources are tainted, and that he belongs to the very world he 
criticizes would have seemed preposterous to both Swedenborgians and 
their critics. Blake reduces the visionless and insufficiently visionary to the 
same "party" because the perception of both "sprouts" exclusively from 
"angelic" texts, on the letter of the Law instead of the genuine indwelling 
spirit of the Word. As implied by the devil metaphor, Swedenborg, like the 
churches before him, failed to read "infernally," to go sufficiently below 
the surface or consult what they feared most, satisfied instead with mere 
portions of what is already known, with "the Contents or Index of already 
publish'd books." In criticizing Swedenborg in this light, Blake criticizes 
all churches, old and new, and creates on plates 21-24 a set of dialec-
tics or contraries that manifest the essential opposition between Blake 
and Swedenborg. These contraries include devils and angels, art and reli-
gion, liberation and oppression, original and imitation, and they appear to 
have assisted in generating others in subsequent plates, including energy 
and reason, prophets and priests, producers and devourers. Contraries, as 
Blake will acknowledge on plate 3, "are necessary to Human existence," 
and "Without [them] is no progression." Failure to acknowledge their co-
existence-that is, failure to perceive below the morally defined surface 
of good and evil-results in "a recapitulation of all superficial opinions" 
(plate 22), which necessarily retards both social and individual progress.23 
Blake's accusation that Swedenborg conversed only with angels, whose 
incomplete vision he copies, needs to be read in light of assertions made 
by Swedenborg, who states "that from the first Day of my Call to this 
Office, I never received any Thing appertaining to the Doctrines of [the 
New] Church from any Angel, but from the Lord alone, whilst I was read-
ing the Word" (True Christian Religion n. 779). These claims are expressed 
in tlle first resolution of the 1789 General Conference, which states that 
Swedenborg's theological works "are perfectly consistent with the Holy 
Word, being at the same time explanatory of its internal sense in so 
wonderful a manner, that nothing short of Divine Revelation seems ade-
quate thereto," and that they "contain the Heavenly Doctrines of the New 
Church," which "he was enabled by the Lord alone to draw from the Holy 
Word, while under the Inspiration and Illumination of his Holy Spirit" 
(Minutes 126). Swedenborg's claim to be divinely inspired while reading 
scripture, of knowing its "internal sense" and the doctrines of the New 
188 Joseph Viscomi 

Church from the Lord himself, underlies two essential claims made by the 
New Church. First, "That Now is the Second Advent of the Lord, which 
is a Coming, not in Person, but in the power and glory of the Spiritual 
Sense of his Holy Word, which is Himself"; and second, "That this Second 
Coming of the Lord is effected by means of his servant Emanuel Sweden-
borg, before whom he hath manifested Himself in Person, and whom he 
hath filled with his Spirit, to teach the doctrines of the New Church by the 
Word from Him" (Circular Letter [prop. 39, 40]: I24; see also Minutes [res. 
251: I28, and True Christian Religion nn. 776-79). By posing as Christ and 
opposing Swedenborg, Blake denies Swedenborg's claim to be divinely in-
spired and a genuine prophet of the Lord. Blake thereby undermines the 
very foundation of the New Church while sanctioning his own readings 
and announcements as genuinely prophetic. 
Indeed, Blake, Jeremiah-like, chastises his readers for believing Sweden-
borg's idea of himself. Blake's tone is assertive, with the "rebellious 
optimism" and "disputatious confidence of All Religions are One and There 
is No Natural Religion" (Eaves, Essick, and Viscomi II6). "Now hear a plain 
fact ... And now hear the reason ... Have now another plain fact" (plate 
22). The tone is itself an anti-Swedenborgian gesture, very much not in the 
spirit of the president's request to the first General Conference "that each 
member in delivering his sentiments, will ever keep in mind the necessity 
of humility, and guard against every domineering spirit that might attempt 
to infest his mind, by persuading him that he alone is in the true light, 
or that his judgment is superior to that of others" (I26). Blake will have 
none of that, believing instead that "Severity of judgment is a great virtue" 
(E 585). He is not all accusation, though, for he allows angels and Sweden-
borg to implicate themselves. They fail to heed the president's admonition 
against vanity and, despite being the "only wise," miss Blake's "plain" facts. 
Their failure to see unadorned truth implies either blindness or decep-
tion-or both. It also reinforces the ideas that perception is determined by 
preconceptions-or "notions" -and that Swedenborg, presumably unlike 
Blake in his text, preaches to the converted and thus "propagates" rather 
than challenges his audience's preconceptions. 
By revealing Swedenborg's sources as biased and incomplete and 
Swedenborg as a nondiscriminating copyist, Blake sets into play an aes-
thetic, as opposed to a religious, hierarchy. At top and bottom are 
originality and imitation, qualities manifest in master artist and student. 
To Blake, Swedenborg's prodigious publication record is inconsequential 
because his models are insubstantial and unoriginal, exactly the criticism 
he will level against those students and artists preferring color to line 
(i.e., working in the Flemish and Venetian painting styles).24 Swedenborg's 
writings are less valuable than the theosophical "writings of Paracelsus or 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
189 

Jacob Behmen [Boehme]," which, in tum, are less valuable than "those of 
Dante or Shakespear." From the texts of the former, "Any man of me-
chanical talents" can "produce ten thousand volumes of equal value with 
Swedenborg's," and from the latter texts "an infinite number." The value 
of what is produced, however, must be kept in perspective: "Let him not 
say that he knows better than his master, for he only holds a candle in sun-
shine" (plate 22).25 At the heart of Blake's poetically described break with 
mimetic tradition is Joseph Addison's adage that "an Imitation of the best 
Authors is not to compare with a good Original" (I: 484). 
If Swedenborg appears more than a follower or journeyman prophet, 
Blake implies, it is only in the way that a man "a little wiser than the 
monkey" appears superior (plate 21). Blake's analogy also implies that 
Swedenborgians, in their unquestioning admiration of their master, are 
like monkeys, imitation humans taking the imitation prophet as the real 
thing, the candle as the sun. While he is not the great man they believe 
him to be, they are, ironically, right to want to adore the great, as Blake ex-
plains in the following "Memorable Fancy" (plates 22-24). This narrative 
parodies Swedenborg's Memorable Relations, which "contain particular 
Accounts of what had been seen and heard by the Author in the spiritual 
World, and have in general some Reference to the Subjects of the Chap-
ters preceding them" (translator's note in True Christian Religion, 3rd ed., 
I795),26 While Blake parodies the form of Swedenborg's Memorable Rela-
tions, he examines seriously the nature of God, one of Swedenborg's most 
persistent subjects. Blake's debaters, like those in many of the Memorable 
Relations, are a devil and angel, who, in presenting mutually exclusive 
ideas of God, provide "infernal" and "internal" readings of the Word. 
"The Devil Quotes Scripture" (anon.) 
The devil's God is incarnate, the very kind Swedenborg warns against: "Let 
everyone beware of falling into that execrable Heresy, that God hath in-
fused himself into Man, and that he is in them, and no longer in himself" 
(Divine Love and Divine Wisdom n. I25). Resolution IO from the Minutes, 
in support of propositions I, 23, and 42 in the Circular Letter, states "that 
the Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ is the Only God of Heaven and Earth, 
and that his Humanity is Divine. That in order [for] salvation, man must 
live a life according to the Ten Commandments, by shunning evils as 
sins against God" (127; see also True Christian Religion nn. 283-331). The 
question of God's Divine Humanity, along with that of the Trinity, were 
central issues of Swedenborgianism. The devil, however, appears to have 
been reading Blake instead, particularly There is No Natural Religion plate 
b12, which states: "Therefore God becomes as we are, that we may be as 
190 Joseph Viscomi 

he is." The devil also appears aware of Blake's "The Divine Image," which 
expresses the antinomian idea that human virtues embody the divine (see 
1lI3). Like the angel (and Swedenborg), the devil believes in the Divine 
Humanity, that is, that Christ's humanity is divine, but, like Blake, he also 
believes that Humanity itself is Divine because Christ was human. Thus, 
we should love most the greatest humans, for in them God is most appar-
ent or manifest. This logic underlies the devil's assertion: "The worship of 
God is. Honouring his gifts in other men each according to his genius. and 
loving the greatest men best, those who envy or calumniate great men hate 
God, for there is no other God." 27 To what sounds like an artist defending 
his outsider status, the angel shouts: "Thou Idolater, is not God One? & is 
not he visible in Jesus Christ? and has not Jesus Christ given his sanction to 
the law of ten commandments and are not all other men fools, sinners, & 
nothings?" (plate 23). The angel's God is the external, powerfuL vengeful, 
and thoroughly orthodox creature of the Old Testament and Decalogue, 
having nothing to do with inferior beings like man. His Christ is strictly 
by the book, echoing resolution 10 and the first of Swedenborg's five "Par-
ticulars of Faith," that "God is One, in whom is a Divine Trinity, and that 
He is the Lord God and Saviour Jesus Christ" (True Christian Religion n. 3). 
To refute the angel's concept of God, the devil reads the acts of Christ 
in their "infernal sense" (for the acts, see Eaves, Essick, and Viscomi 220 
nn. 15-20; see also Blake's "The Everlasting Gospel" [Erdman, Complete 
Poetry 518-25]). He argues the antinomian position that Christ had broken 
the externally imposed moral code and was "all virtue" because he "acted 
from impulse, not from rules" (plates 23-24). By being so, regardless of 
consequences, he is the model for the poets/prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel 
and the poet/artist Blake (plates 12-13 and 6, ro, 14, and 15). Like Christ, 
their job is to raise others "into a perception of the infinite" (plate 13) 
and not merely to describe the infinite or visionary potential, which, Blake 
implies, is at most Swedenborg's great accomplishment. Because "Jesus 
Christ is the greatest man, you ought to love him in the greatest degree," 
and not because he sanctioned Mosaic law or is powerful,28 As Bloom 
notes, "Greatness here means artistic greatness" (Introd. 20), but Blake 
appears also to be punning on Swedenborg's idea of the "Greatest Man." 
According to Swedenborg, "the universal heaven resembles the human 
form" and is called by angels "the Grand (Maximum) and Divine Man," 
and "a man in the greatest and most perfect form is heaven" (Treatise Con-
cerning Heaven and Hell nn. 59-60).29 The angels' failure to see Christ as 
a man provides more evidence that angelic "notions" or preconceptions of 
heaven and hell determined their-and Swedenborg's-perception. Blake 
will continue to express and dramatize this idea on Marriage plates 3, 12-
13, 6-7,4, and r6-20. 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
I9I 

The truth of the devil's argument is evinced by the angel's fiery con-
version: he "stretched out his arms embracing the flame of fire & he was 
consumed and arose as Elijah" to "become a Devil." Temporary conversions 
occur in Swedenborg's Memorable Relations; devils granted permission to 
visit heaven for debate are always convinced of the angels' positions, but 
they forget the truth after returning to hell. Blake reverses such encoun-
ters, with the angel converted on his own turf and perception affected 
by the argument and not the environment. The "consumed" angel puns 
on Swedenborg's "consummation," used in its sense of "last judgment," 
which is also how Blake will use it on plate 14 ("the whole creation will be 
consumed and appear infinite and holy.") Blake also inverts Swedenborg's 
use of the Elijah metaphor to describe angelic conversion: "I was permitted 
to see how the spirits of that earth [Jupiter], after they have been prepared, 
are taken up into heaven and become angels. There then appear chariots 
and horses bright as with fire, by which they are carried away like Elijah" 
(Earths in Our Solar System n. 82). The angel's conversion dramatizes the 
ironically rationalist proverb from Hell: "Truth can never be told so as to 
be understood and not be believ'd" (plate IO)-a proverb, as we shall see, 
probably written but not yet executed on copper. The conversion suggests 
what might have happened to Swedenborg had he talked to devils, refutes 
the predestinarianism that Blake (falsely) accused Swedenborg of defend-
ing (see n7), and implies that changing one's mind-as Blake had about 
Swedenborg-could be positive, the topic explicitly addressed in the Levia-
than episode of plates 17-19. Most significantly, conversion-the raising 
of others into a perception of the infinite-provides the model for the 
relation between Blake's illuminated text and its reader, and, in general, 
between original art and its audience.3o 
As the devil triumphs over the angel, Blake triumphs over Swedenborg, 
and this parallel identifies Blake-as well as Jesus, Elijah, Shakespeare, 
and Dante-as a member of the devil's party, thereby strengthening the 
ideas that Religion's contrary is Art and that Jesus is the ideal artist. 
Like Swedenborg, Blake resembles the company he keeps; he appears to 
represent himself as genius worthy of respect and admiration, as artist 
wrongly neglected for following his own impulses. In presenting himself 
as Swedenborg's contrary, the original to his imitation, Blake presents 
himself as a master. The sign of his mastery, though, lies not only in his 
tone, the manner in which he corrects Swedenborg and his followers as 
though they were wayward students, but also in the form of his text. It 
reproduces the appearance of handwriting and drawing in metal, but it 
does so not as facsimile or imitation. The appearance results from Blake's 
actually writing and drawing with the tools of the writer and artist, in pens 
and brushes with a liquid medium directly on the copper plate, a tech-
I92 
Joseph Viscomi 

nique Blake termed "illuminated printing" and that he knew was original 
and new. In the Note that ends the text, Blake announces more works in 
this technique and from the infernal perspective. 
"The Bible of Hell" 
Recall that resolution 30 of the General Conference recommended that 
"all the readers and lovers of the Theological Works of Emanuel Sweden-
borg ... form themselves into societies distinct from the Old Church ... 
meet together as often as convenient, to read and converse on the said 
Writings, and to open a general correspondence for the mutual assistance 
of each other" (Minutes 129). In the Note, Blake acknowledges having 
formed his own reading group, where he and his "particular friend," 
the converted angel (or new devil), read the Bible in its "infernal or dia-
bolical sense," that is, in its original poetic sense. Blake reveals that he 
studies the Bible directly and not through Swedenborg and that he, un-
like Swedenborg, talks to devils and trusts the ability of others to read as 
visionaries. His reading, though, is apparently for the "mutual assistance" 
of the group's members, since sharing the "infernal sense" or teaching 
this mode of reading, Blake says teasingly, is conditional: "The world shall 
have [it] if they behave well" (plate 24). He promises the world, however, 
"The Bible of Hell," a title shockingly confrontational, without conditions 
or reading instructions, "whether they will or no" (plate 24). Presumably, 
this "Bible" will consist of Blake's "Writings," expressing the wisdom of 
devils to counter the wisdom of angels. Blake offers his works with the 
spiritual authority he denies Swedenborg and with the bravado of an artist 
independent of audience and market, an independence proclaimed three 
years later in Blake's prospectus for illuminated books.31 Such indepen-
dence exemplifies acting from impulse and not rules, behavior that Blake 
will continue to remind us in Marriage characterizes artists and prophets. 
The work Blake announces as forthcoming combines in its title both 
prophecy and art; like the latter, it is not financially predicated, but it is, 
like the former, predicated on the needs society is unaware of having. The 
visionary artist's prophetic responsibilities raise the themes of limited and 
illimited perception and the relation between art and audience, topics that 
will also be further explored throughout Marriage. 
In effect, of course, Blake's audience has already been given a taste of 
the "infernal sense" via the devil's reading of Christ's life. Of course "in-
fernal" is meant to parody Swedenborg's "internal" sense, but the manner 
in which Blake announces it and "The Bible of Hell" is itself parodying 
Swedenborg and Swedenborgians. Resolution 25 of the first General Con-
ference states "that the Second Advent of the Lord, which is a Coming in 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
193 

the internal sense of his Holy Word, has already commenced, and ought 
to be announced to all the world" (Minutes 128). And so it has, though 
not as the Swedenborgians imagined. The Note's two· part message ap-
pears modeled on Swedenborg's announcement in True Christian Religion: 
"Inasmuch as the Lord cannot manifest himself in Person . . . and yet 
he foretold that he should come, and establish a New Church, which is 
the New Jerusalem, it follows, that he will effect this by a Man, who not 
only can receive the Doctrines of that Church in his Understanding, but 
also publish them in Print" (n. 779). Moreover, the last resolution of the 
Minutes announced yet another conference, and announcing forthcoming 
books at the end of pamphlets and books was typical of Hindmarsh, who 
listed Swedenborg's books in translation, Latin, and in press.32 
Given that "The Bible of Hell" is announced at the end of plate 24 and 
that plates 21-24 precede the composition of the Marriage, it is reasonable 
to suppose that Blake is referring to the Marriage itself, as it was antici-
pated at the time of his anti-Swedenborgian text, or to the Proverbs of 
Hell, which presumably Blake was compiling at the time of the announce-
ment (they were executed in the third stage of the Marriage's evolution). 
Or it may refer to a work that was to include the Proverbs of Hell, which 
were clearly meant as an ironic inversion of the Bible's Book of Proverbs, 
"the archetype of wisdom literature" (Villalobos 248). Blake's proverbs, as 
Lansverk has recently demonstrated, continue the attack on Swedenborg, 
particularly on his dualism and passivity (61 passim).33 Indeed, Blake's fore-
grounding proverbs was itself an anti-Swedenborgian gesture, for Proverbs 
was one of the Biblical texts that Swedenborg excluded from his list of 
thirty-three chosen books of Holy Writ for "not having the Internal Sense" 
(Circular Letter [prop. 12]: 122). If, as will be argued, the announcement is 
directed at "all the readers" and critics of Swedenborg, then foregrounding 
the proverbs strengthens the hypothesis that they were meant as the "Bible 
of Hell" or its first volume. So does ending plate 24 with a proverblike 
statement-"One Law for the Lion & Ox is Oppression"-which appears 
to provide a taste of what will come, whether we "will or no." 34 
As argued in essay I, Marriage appears to have grown from what were 
originally two separate projects: an anti-Swedenborgian pamphlet and the 
anticipated "Bible of Hell," stitched together with introductory material 
and a few more parable-like stories (e.g., "Memorable Fancies"), creating 
a disjointed structure that Blake may have had in mind for "The Bible 
of Hell," possibly in parodic imitation of the "fragment-hypothesis of the 
Higher Criticism, the theory that the Old Testament is a gathering of 
redacted fragments" (Essick, "Representation"; see also his William Blake 
142 passim). Blake appears to have changed his mind about publishing 
an independent pamphlet-or a collection or "Bible" of individual pam-
I94 Joseph Viscomi 

phlets-and decided instead to publish a group of interrelated variations 
on themes raised in some form or another on plates 21-24. If this is what 
happened, then Marriage came into being in form and content through 
its production, with many of its units modeled on the structure of plates 
21-24 and their objects of satire broadened from Swedenborg to the socio-
religious system he came to represent. 
In proposing that the proverbs may have been the original "Bible of 
Hell" or its first projected volume, I do not mean to dismiss completely the 
commonly held view that it refers to The [First] Book of Urizen, The Book of 
Ahania, and The Book of Los. These works of 1794 and 1795 are so identified 
because Marriage was thought to be in progress till 1793, and because, like 
the Bible's, their texts were divided into two columns and offer a counter-
myth to Genesis (or the First Book of Moses). They may indeed have been 
influenced by Blake's initial idea for a series of discrete, infernal texts with-
out being the works he had in mind when the project was first announced 
in 1790. Still four and five years away, these works were certainly not the 
next ones taken up, let alone in progress in 1790. An analogous situation is 
that of Songs of Innocence and Songs of Experience, separated by four or five 
years. Did Blake know in 1789 that he was going to complement the earlier 
work with Songs of Experience? Or did the intervening work, particularly 
the Marriage, affect Blake's understanding of his own earlier work, seeing 
in Songs of Innocence a mental state requiring a "contrary"? Not only did 
Blake often change his mind about projects, but he regularly revised those 
he did produce. Indeed, Blake so consistently revised works he returned 
to that Essick, describing Blake's tendency to continue invention through 
execution, has coined the phrase "creative revisionism" (William Blake 163) 
to describe this aspect of his work. The second states of Our end is come 
and Joseph of Arimathea come immediately to mind, the latter reinterpret-
ing a figure from the Sistine Chapel that he had engraved as a student, 
and the former being retitled The Accusers. The inclusion of poems from 
Songs of Innocence into Songs of Experience also exemplifies Blake's willing-
ness to revise his first thoughts. Or are we to think that Blake planned 
to move from Marriage to Urizen but was interrupted by unplanned-
and unbiblical-Iooking - Gates of Paradise, Visions of the Daughters of Albion, 
America, and Europe? To imagine that Blake put aside one original project 
or manuscript to work on four others is to ignore how gradually his my-
thology and powers as a mythologist evolved from book to book-and how 
the books themselves evolved. It is to imagine a composing process and a 
Blake far different from the ones I am proposing in this three-part study. 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 195 

Nebuchadnezzar 
When printed as a separate unit, plates 21-24 have the feel and look of a 
pamphlet, and, like good satire, they parody the form and language of their 
subject. The sections of each chapter in Swedenborg's True Christian Reli-
gion, for example, consist of distinct (and mostly numbered) paragraphs 
setting forth the facts, followed by one or more "Memorable Relations." 
Throughout the text are the translator's notes commenting from the bot-
tom of the page. Blake's text consists of eight (unnumbered) paragraphs, 
followed by "A Memorable Fancy" and a Note that identifies the type of 
reading given by the devil and updates the reader about past and forthcom-
ing events. These three features-statement, narrative, and note-provide 
the well-defined beginning, middle, and end of the effective pamphlet. 
Rhetorically, these features can also be viewed as exposition, confirmation, 
and conclusion, with the exposition introduced by an entrance.35 The en-
trance, which must catch the audience's attention, is beautifully and yet 
confrontationally realized by the illustration of Blake's divine humanity 
(illus. 2); the exposition, which sets forth the facts, defines the terms, and 
presents the issues to be proved, consists of distinct paragraphs forcibly 
explaining why Blake thinks Swedenborg is neither new nor original. The 
following narrative, in which an angel and devil debate the nature of God, 
functions as the confirmation in that it sets forth through the two parties 
the arguments for and against Swedenborg's idea of God, the central issue 
dividing the two visionaries. The text closes with a Note notifying readers 
about Blake's own study group and teasingly promising more infernal 
readings and infernal texts. As first written and printed, with Nebuchad-
nezzar not yet executed (see TI4), the Note was the entire conclusion; it 
restates Blake's basic premise that "infernal sense" is better than "internal 
sense," and it leaves the reader wanting-or fearing-more. 
Two other textual units in the Marriage (plates 5-10 and 16-20) ap-
pear to have been influenced by the structure of plates 21-24. They, too, 
include statement, "Memorable Fancy," and Note, but Blake placed these 
other Notes (on plates 6 and 17) bifore the "Memorable Fancies," thereby 
preventing their units from having a sense of full closure. These other 
Notes were written in the third person and are more like the translator's 
notes that comment on Swedenborg's texts. Compared to these and the 
other units, plates 21-24 appear more of a piece and fully cognizant of the 
four-page pamphlet format. The Note, by virtue of the narrator's "I" and 
the converted angel "who is now," returns the reader to the "I" and "now" 
. of plates 21 and 22, the beginning of the text. When reading the four 
plates on a conjugate sheet folded as a pamphlet (as in Marriage copy K), 
196 Joseph Viscomi 

the reader necessarily returns to plate 21 (page I) after reading plate 24 
(page 4), moving from defeated oppression to the liberated New Man. 
The inclusion of the vignette below the Note may have been an after-
thought, determined in part by the text running short, leaving the bottom 
half of plate 24 blank. Adding a vanquished, long-bearded man at the 
bottom of the plate (fig. 3) created a stark contrast with the resurrected, 
youthful figure and made good thematic and aesthetic sense. That old man, 
though, was not chosen randomly or merely to create a visual dialectic be-
tween new and old, or liberty and defeat. He is the mad Nebuchadnezzar, 
the Babylonian king who "was driven from men, and did eat grass as oxen" 
(Dan. 4.33). He was also "a traditional archetype of the regal oppressor," and 
a "depiction of him in his madness could hardly fail to strike viewers ... as 
an attack on George III, the most celebrated lunatic of the times" (Carretta 
162).36 As obvious-and probably more pertinent-to Swedenborgians was 
the connection between Nebuchadnezzar and Swedenborg, who believed 
the "four Churches" that preceded the New Church "are described by the 
Statue that appeared to Nebuchadnezzar in a Dream, Chap. ii. and after-
wards by the four Beasts ascending out of the Sea, Chap. vii" (True Chris-
tian Religion n. 760). Swedenborg points specifically to Nebuchadnezzar's 
dream in Daniel 2-44 as foretelling the New Church as the last and eternal 
church: "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a 
kingdom, which shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be 
left to other people, but it shall break in pieces and consume all these king-
doms, and it shall stand forever." This passage, reprinted in the Minutes of 
the first General Conference (130), was no doubt well known to Blake. 
Traditionally, Nebuchadnezzar represents God's power to chasten and 
subdue the proud, but that reading presupposes the angel's vindictive God 
and not Blake's Christ. In fact, Nebuchadnezzar accepts Jehovah when he 
recognizes Daniel's gift of interpretation (2-47). Despite his admittance, 
Nebuchadnezzar afterward continued to worship golden idols (Dan. 3.2-
14). He cast into a fiery furnace Daniel's three friends, but seeing them 
walk unharmed with "the form" of a fourth man, who "is like the Son of 
God" (Dan. 3.25), he again converts, and he threatens to kill anyone who 
speaks against Daniel's God.37 One year after Daniel interprets another of 
his dreams, he is driven mad and loses his kingdom (4.31-33). But while 
this is the Nebuchadnezzar that Blake pictures, he appears to have in mind 
the king's next stage: 
And at the end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lifted up mine eyes unto 
heaven, and mine understanding returned unto me, and I blessed 
the most High, and I praised and honoured him that liveth for ever, 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
197 

Figure 3- The Marriage of Heaven and Hell (Plate 24, second state, 
Copy c, Pierpont Morgan Library, New York, PMl 17599). 
198 
Joseph Viscomi 

whose dominion is an everlasting dominion, and his kingdom is from 
generation to generation. 
And all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing and he 
doeth according to his win in the army of heaven and among the inhabi-
tants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What 
doest thou? 
At the same time my reason returned unto me; and for the glory of my 
kingdom, mine honour and brightness returned unto me; ... and I 
was established in my kingdom .... (Daniel 4.34-36; italics mine) 
The return of Nebuchadnezzar's reason enables him to return to society, 
but it also prevents him from understanding God other than as a perverted 
extension of himself, as a powerful creature indifferent and unanswerable 
to man. His God recalls that of the preconverted angel: "Thou Idolater, is 
not God One? ... and has not Jesus Christ given his sanction to the law of 
ten commandments and are not all other men fools, sinners, & nothings?" 
(plate 23). 
An ironic inversion of the angel's conversion, Nebuchadnezzar's mad-
ness invalidates the angel's theological position and, like the angel's 
original vanity, dramatically refutes the reliability of Sweden borg's sources. 
The dreams of demented kings eating grass are not, after all, a solid basis 
for claiming one's Church prophetically realized. Indeed, while Sweden-
borg claims that Nebuchadnezzar's dream prophesies "dominion" for the 
New Church, Blake will prophesy on plate 3 that "Now is the dominion 
of Edom, & the return of Adam into Paradise," implying salvation lies in 
returning to the state represented by the "most ancient church" of Adam, 
rather than joining the Swedenborgian New Church. And Blake will imply 
on plates 14 and 15, through the "infernal method" of the "Printing house 
in Hell," that his and not Swedenborg's writings will be the means of 
returning and will pass from "generation to generation." 
The single, defeated figure of Nebuchadnezzar, by representing both 
Swedenborg and George III, fuses (New) church and state, conflates reli-
gious doctrine that conditions thought with political law that restricts 
action. His dehumanized form represents and results from his antihuman 
act of oppression and points to its contrary, the Human Divine pictured 
on plate 21. The postures of these two contrary figures form part of Blake's 
criticism of Swedenborg's doctrine of correspondence. Blake presents 
himself as newly resurrected, youthful and vibrant, out in the open, open 
physically, and with eyes open to the heavens (illus. 2). In stark contrast, 
he places Nebuchadnezzar in a constricted space before the trunks of giant 
trees (see fig. 3), self-enclosed though aware of the reader's scorn (cf. the 
"Application" in There is No Natural Religion and the color print of Newton 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and HeU 199 

for similar gestures of limited perception). These postures correspond to 
those who, according to Swedenborg, understand "what correspondence 
is" and those who do not. The latter have "removed [themselves] from 
heaven by the love of self and of the world," having "regard only to worldly 
things" and "reject[ing] ... spiritual things" as being "too high to be sub-
jects of thought." The former are best exemplified by "the most ancient 
people," who were of Adam's Church and "who spoke with angels, and the 
Lord Himselfwas often seen by them and instructed them" (Heaven and 
Hell n. 87). Picturing Swedenborg, who claims the lost knowledge of corre-
spondence, as "removed from the world" and himself as sensually looking 
heavenward, like Adam and those of his church-these are among Blake's 
most brilliant satiric inversions, inversions that appear to have provided 
the models for Los and Urizen. 
Conclusion: "If this is your Heaven, give me Hell" 
The pamphlet's objectives are clear-to denounce Swedenborg and to 
champion Blake-and it clearly realizes both and more. It denies Sweden-
borg's claims that the New Church is "distinct" and that his "internal 
sense" of the Word is divinely inspired. It accuses him of being like the 
church he criticizes, of reading unimaginatively, and of writing unorigi-
nally. It shifts the debate from metaphysics to aesthetics and tarnishes 
Swedenborg by painting him as an oxymoron, the proud copyist, while 
identifying true prophecy as Art and Blake as that greatest artist, Christ. It 
dramatizes the major divisive issue between Blake and Swedenborg as a 
debate between a devil and angel about the nature of God - whether God is 
incarnate or external and abstract, associating the former kind with imagi-
nation and art and the latter with reason and law. And it announces "The 
Bible of Hell," an announcement reflecting Blake's confidence in him-
self, since it had yet to be executed. This bold confidence is evident from 
the start, in Blake's tone, through his idealized self-portrait, and by the 
literary and prophetic company he keeps. And it is evident in Blake's pub-
lishing his thoughts in a radically original and autographic form. Indeed, 
the aesthetic issue of originality is raised by, as well as in, the pamphlet 
when Blake compares himself to Swedenborg and announces both a new 
mode of reading and new texts to read. Blake's belief in originality was 
especially remarkable in an age, and as a member of a profession, more 
respectful of imitation, and around it he built his history and theory of art, 
which consistently equates originality with individual genius, liberty, and 
the nation's spiritual health. In short, the pamphlet reads like a dramatic 
manifesto on aesthetics in which the central debate is over God. 
Blake moved from defending Swedenborg against his critics, denounc-
200 Joseph Viscomi 

ing them as "mercenary & worldly" with "no idea of any but worldly 
gain" (E 606), to criticizing Swedenborg and his sources without joining 
Swedenborg's conventional critics. By the end of Marriage, though, Blake 
seems to be thanking Swedenborg for helping to generate the work and 
to illuminate Blake's mind to himself. At the foot of Marriage plate 20, 
Blake wrote what was probably the last line of Marriage proper (see n2): 
"Opposition is true Friendship." Between the axiom ending the pamphlet 
and this one lies Marriage and Blake's complex and sometimes ambiva-
lent attitude toward Swedenborg, an ambivalence perhaps evinced in the 
deletion through coloring or color printing of that line from most copies 
of Marriage. Years later, in Milton, Blake states, "0 Swedenborg! strongest 
of men, the Samson shorn by the Churches" (E II7), and in A Descriptive 
Catalogue: "'The Words of this visionary are well worthy the attention of 
Painters and Poets; they are foundations for grand things; the reason they 
have not been more attended to, is, because corporeal demons have gained 
a predominance" (E 546). Late in his life, Blake told Robinson that he 
read the Bible in its "spiritual sense" and that Swedenborg "was a divine 
teacher" who had "done much & will do much good[;] he has correct[e]d 
many errors of Popery and also of Luther & Calvin." But Blake also told 
Robinson that Swedenborg was "wrong in endeavor[in]g to explain to the 
rational faculty what the reason cannot comprehend." Blake continued to 
pair Dante and Swedenborg, and though he considered "their visions of 
the same kind," he still believed the former "was the greater poet" (Bent-
ley, Blake RecordSJI2).38 
To C. A. Tulk, a Swedenborgian, Blake is reported to have said that "he 
had two different states; one in which he liked Swedenborg's writings, and 
one in which he disliked them. The second was a state of pride in himself, 
and then they were distasteful to him, but afterwards he knew that he 
had not been wise and sane. 'The first was a state of humility, in which 
he received and accepted Swedenborg" (Bentley, Blake Records 38). Paley 
suspects that these states may refer to literal and metaphorical readings 
(31), whereas Bentley finds that "the last two sentences read suspiciously 
like a New Church rationalization of Blake's extremely vocal mockery" in 
Marriage (38m). And yet, the report of Blake's recollection of his "pride" 
rings true, at least as regards the pamphlet. In accusing Swedenborg of 
being vain, proud, imitative, and self-deluded, Blake reveals a curious mix 
of pride, anger, confidence, authority, and defensiveness, a mix that forces 
readers to ponder the source of Blake's anger and his intended audience. 
'The idea that Blake broke with Swedenborg out of disappointment over 
the importance given to ceremony and priests does not explain his con-
temptuous critique. We all hear a "strong sense of outrage," but can we, 
like Bloom, say that it is caused by Blake's finally realizing "how lim-
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
201 

ited the affinity [with Swedenborg] actually was" (lntrod. I)? I hear an 
anger disproportionate to disagreement and suspect it was fueled by a 
sense of being fooled, of having signed on and been temporarily a joiner, 
something he had not been before or after his attending the first Gen-
eral Conference. Blake seems to be redirecting anger outward and away 
from himself. He creates an angel who changes his Swedenborgian mind, 
but he himself seems too proud to admit explicitly that he changed his 
own views. The closest he comes is on plate 3, where he implies that 
Christ/Blake cast off the linen garments that were Swedenborg's writings, 
implying that he had once worn them, albeit as a dead body, but now does 
not. Instead, he insists in his opening sentence that he has always found 
angels to be vain, implying that he had always thought the same about 
their mouthpiece-or at the very least that he has never been fooled by 
angels but has only recently found Swedenborg to be one, to be of the very 
party Swedenborg himself criticized. But with whom is Blake trying to set 
the record straight? Who was the pamphlet's intended audience? 
In 1862, Samuel Palmer wrote Anne Gilchrist, recommending that she 
exclude Marriage from the Life of William Blake (1863). He did not think 
the British press or public had the requisite sense of irony to understand 
Blake's seemingly unchristian statements. He believed one would need to 
know that "Blake wrote often in anger and rhetorically" -that if provoked 
by a pretender's cant, he would adopt the ironic stance of "If this is your 
Heaven, give me Hell" (Bentley, Blake Records 319). Indeed, Andrew Cooper 
finds the work so ironic and "disjointed," and the devil so peremptory, that 
he cannot imagine Blake having any "real interest in reaching an audience" 
(51-52). Howard, on the other hand, argues that Blake intended to reach 
the widest possible audience, one consisting of both angels and devils, and 
that he wrote with members of the New Jerusalem Church as well as the 
anti-Swedenborgian Johnson circle in mind (20). This perfectly reasonable 
hypothesis has been recently questioned by Mee and Scrivener on the 
grounds that Blake's "bold assertions of visionary experience" (Scrivener 
103) and his "enthusiasm ... would probably have alienated the intellectu-
als ... as much as similar features of Sweden borg's writings" (Mee 51). 
If we focus on just the pamphlet, the idea that Blake intended 
Marriage for a diversely constituted audience of Swedenborgians, ex-
Swedenborgians, and critics may become more palatable. Blake appears to 
be addressing the "readers of Swedenborg," for whom his first sentence 
needs no context other than the one they themselves bring. His former 
Swedenborgian associates would be dismayed by encountering a man who 
is intent on exposing as a lie the Minute's claim that "there was not a 
single dissentient voice among us" (130), and on informing them that 
they were mistaken about him as well as about Swedenborg. To exclude 
202 Joseph Viscomi 

Swedenborgians in favor of their critics would be to assume that Blake was 
preaching to the converted, that he did not take seriously the prophetic 
mantle he defines-or want his many Swedenborgian allusions, puns, and 
inside jokes to be understood. But neither can a lay audience be excluded. 
Blake's friends in the Johnson circle, such as Sharp and Priestly, along 
with some of the writers of the Analytical Review who had low opinions of 
Swedenborg in particular and "news from the spiritual world" in general, 
would at one level be impressed and/or entertained, finding more evidence 
of Blake's genius, wit, and originality-and temper. 
On the one hand, Blake seems always keen on speaking his mind and 
on differentiating true from false: "The Vision of Christ that thou dost 
see / Is my Visions Greatest Enemy," and "Thy Heavens doors are my Hell 
Gates" (E 524). Blake has it both ways: by parodying Swedenborgian rheto-
ric, imagery, and events, he attacks Swedenborg even more roughly than 
the Analytical Review does, but he does not attack Vision. His critique is 
analogous to the reviewers' criticism of Swedenborg's conception of God 
but not God. On the other hand, Blake's visionary episodes are fictions 
and were not presented as authentic or quasi-autobiographical episodes. 
It could be argued that Blake's personal advocacy of vision is not easily 
discernible through the layers of irony and parody, and thus that his work 
was safe for rationalist consumption. It cannot be argued, however, that 
his attack on religion and the religious is obscure. This criticism would 
have been more offensive than his pseudovisionary episode, which could 
be read less as millenarian enthusiasm and more as typical underworld 
satire, as "news from hell" or a "dialogue of the dead" (Tannenbaum 74). 
To Blake, both Swedenborg's followers and critics are like conceited 
angels worshiping Nebuchadnezzar's God. His refusal to differentiate 
Swedenborgians from rationalists and other systematic reasoners strongly 
suggests that he would not have retreated from or feared to offend one or 
the other. To believe that he acted so cautiously is to dismiss the nature of 
satire, which is to tweak the noses of even those who cheer you on, smugly 
thinking they are on the side of the angels. Indeed, they are. Mostly, 
though, it is to ignore entirely "terrible Blake in his pride." 
Notes 
I The first essay is entitled "The Evolution of William Blake's The Marriage of Heaven 
and Hell and the third, "The Caves of Heaven and Hell: Swedenborg and Printmaking 
in Blake's Marriage." 
2 Plate 4 was written and executed late, but exactly where in the chronology of plate 
production is not clear; plates I4-I5 may have been executed as part of the third stage, 
along with plates I-3, 5-u, or, with plate 4, they may have constituted a fourth stage in 
the evolution of Marriage. Plates 25-27 ("A Song of Liberty") may not have been written 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
203 

and executed as part of Marriage, though the text was executed on three copper plates 
left over from the production of Marriage and apparently executed very near or at the 
same time as Marriage's final section (see essay I). Before plates 25-27 were printed as 
part of Marriage, they were printed at least twice as separate monochrome pamphlets, 
i.e., copies M and L, the former untraced but described in an auction catalog as missing 
the "Chorus" on plate 27. Assuming that the "Chorus" was not masked, the printing 
sequence (M, L, Marriage) is indicated by plate 27 being in its first state in copy M. 
3 Blake's Swedenborg is so distorted and one-dimensional that his reasons for taking 
him seriously seem puzzling. As Michael Ferber rightfully reminds us, however, 
Swedenborg was much admired in Europe and America in the late eighteenth cen-
tury and throughout the nineteenth. Even many nonfollowers respected and praised 
him-Goethe, Coleridge, Balzac, and Emerson among them (90). The extent of his 
extraordinary, prolific career and influence can be gauged by the essays in Larsen; for 
Blake's knowledge of and relation to Swedenborgianism, see Davies, Howard, Paley, 
Thompson, and Bellin and Ruhl; to see how thoroughly Swedenborg permeates Mar-
riage, both thematically and rhetorically, see Eaves, Essick, and Viscomi II9 passim 
and the third essay of this study. The present essay cites Swedenborg frequently and 
generously to give a sense of his rhetoric and Blake's ear for satirizing it. 
4 Referred to as Marriage copy K, this printing is neither an incomplete copy of Marriage 
nor a set of proofs. Plates 21 and 24 are in their first states, with the former missing 
white lines in the hill and the latter missing the illustration of Nebuchadnezzar and 
the axiom. I suspect that Blake added these features while still thinking in terms of 
the four-plate unit rather than the larger work of which it became part, because sec-
ond states usually followed first quickly, as is evinced by the first and second states of 
plate 27, in copies M and L respectively (n2). In any event, plates 21 and 24 are not 
proofs, for they were printed as a unit with plates 22 and 23, which were in their final 
states, and the four plates were as carefully printed as copy L. Indeed, plates 21-24 
were printed in black ink on both sides of one conjunct half sheet of paper, which when 
folded formed a pamphlet with the following configuration: 21/22-23/24. The two 
plates of the inside form were carefully aligned to one another and registered onto the 
paper, and the plates of the outside form were registered to them. Equally revealing, the 
borders of all four plates were carefully wiped of ink so they would not print, a feature 
Blake employed almost without exception when printing illuminated books between 
1789 and 1795, but one unnecessary for pulling working proofs. For a detailed descrip-
tion of Marriage copy K and two separate printings of "A Song of Liberty," see essay I. 
5 The name "New Jerusalem" is from Revelation 3.12 and 21.2, passages that Sweden-
borg believed prophesied the "New Church," the fifth and final Church, which he 
claimed superseded the old Christian Church, itself preceded by three Churches iden-
tified with Adam, Noah, and Israel. Swedenborg dates the end (or "Last Judgment" 
or "Consummation") of the old Christian Church and beginning of the New Church 
as 1757 (True Christian Religion nn. 753-790 [references to Swedenborg's works are by 
section number(s) when preceded by "n." or "nn."]; see note 8). For the Theosophical 
Society'S appeal to and initial links with Freemasonry, the Universal Society, and the 
"Illuminati" - and speculation as to why Hindmarsh sought to cover those links - see 
Schuchard 42-45 and Thompson 129-45. 
6 
For an account of the first General Conference, see Hindmarsh 79-84, 97, lOI-8, 
reprinted with the Minutes and Circular Letter in Bellin and Ruhl I2I-3I. 
7 Most of the propositions in the Circular Letter are derived from True Christian Religion, 
parts of which Blake probably read as well as heard. He acknowledged that The spiri-
204 Joseph Viscomi 

tual Preceptor, his untraced tempera painting, was "taken from the Visions of Emanuel 
Swedenborg, Universal Theology n. 623" (A Descriptive Catalogue, E 546). 
8 
Blake proclaims confidently on plate 3 that "it is now thirty-three years since [the] 
advent" of "a new heaven," explicitly alluding to Swedenborg's proclamation that a 
"Second Advent" and a "New Heaven" began in 1757 and that he is the Lord's vehicle 
(True Christian Religion nn. 772-778)- Blake would have known these central doctrines 
as they were expressed in propositions 38-40 of the Circular Letter or in resolution 25 
of the Minutes (see below). When added to 1757, the number "thirty-three" yields 1790, 
the "now" of Blake's passage. Blake was born in 1757, making 1790 his thirty-third 
year; in Marriage copy F, Blake penned in the date to anchor the allusion. Of course, 
"thirty-three" more obviously alludes to Christ's death and resurrection, an allusion 
confirmed by the plate'S second sentence: "And lo! Swedenborg is the Angel sitting at 
the tomb; his writings are the linen clothes folded up." "Thirty-three years" identifies 
Blake's life with Christ's and aligns both with the recently revived "Eternal Hell," the 
creative energy symbolically manifest in the French Revolution and the Marriage. 
Technically, the 1790 date applies to the set of plates that plate 3 belongs to; the 
plates preceding it may be earlier, as I speculated in Blake 237, though I believe this 
is unlikely, given the echoes on plates 21-24 of passages in the first issue of The New 
Jerusalem Magazine and in the Analytical Review 5 (both 1790; see note 23 and below). 
Following plate 3 and its associated plates were plates 14-15, 4, 16-20, and 25-27, 
which seem materially and textually to have been executed not long afterward. 
9 
Erdman's dates were followed by most editors and scholars (e.g., Ostriker, Stevenson, 
Keynes, Grant and Johnson, Bentley). For the full argument for dating Marriage 1790 
and not c. 1790-93, see Eaves, Essick, and Viscomi II3-16 and Viscomi, Blake ch_ 26_ 
10 
The Church's first service (January 1788) consisted of a "ceremony written by Hind-
marsh" and "conducted by his father, a former Methodist minister" (Bellin and 
Ruhl I21). 
II There were seventy-seven signers at the conference, fifty-six of whom were identified 
as church members, and then an additional eighteen names, which is the list the 
Blakes were on (Thompson 133). 
12 
In August 1789, the expelled members (save Hindmarsh) formed The Universal 
Society for the Promotion of the New Jerusalem Church. In 1790, they published six 
issues of The New Jerusalem Magazine. The same year, the increaSingly conservative 
Hindmarsh began publishing a competing journal, The New Magazine of Knowledge 
Concerning Heaven and Hell, which ran for twenty issues. Hindmarsh's magazine 
was part of his successful attempt to regain control over the Eastcheap congregation 
(Thompson 14°-42)- The concubine issue raised its head again one hundred years 
later, in America, and had similar repercussions (Meyers 46 passim)_ 
13 
Thompson persuasively reads "The Divine Image" as an anti-Swedenborgian poem, 
showing that it expresses the concept of incarnation-of God being embodied in 
human virtues (146 passim)-which Swedenborg rejects (Divine Love and Divine Wis-
dom n. 125)- Its counterpart, "A Divine Image," certainly is anti-Swedenborgian, as is 
"To Tirzah" (Thompson 149 passim), and both of these poems (pace E 800; Bent-
ley, Blake Books 414-17) could have been written and executed c. 1789-90 (see essay 
I, TIl7). 
14 The dismissive and caustic tone in the brief review of Peter Provo's Wisdom's Dictates, 
a collection of maxims mostly taken from Swedenborg, was typical: "The disciples of 
Baron Swedenborg having determined that the best means of propagating the doc-
trines of the New Jerusalem church will be by publications from the press, we are 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
205 

likely to have our patience frequently exercised by attending to long communications 
from the spiritual world. Well, we must read, though it be often with weary and dis-
tracted attention" (5 [1789]: 352). The review of The Wisdom of Angels Concerning Divine 
Love and Divine Wisdom is equally sarcastic: "More news from the spiritual world! 
If this be not angelic wisdom, it is something so wholly beyond the comprehension 
of our weak intellects, that it must needs relate to beings of a very different order. 
But our business is analysis: yet, gentle reader, what can we do, when the different 
chapters or sections, are 432 in number, and the table of contents occupies 22 pages!" 
(5 [1789]: 352). In place of analysis, the reviewer quotes verbatim the contents page for 
pt. 2, apparently believing it was self-evidently opaque. 
15 
Joseph Priestley, one of johnson's most prolific authors, wrote Letters to the Members 
of the New jerusalem Church in 1791. Though printed in Birmingham, the letters were 
revised in London and sold at Johnson's shop. Like johnson's reviewers, Priestley 
found precedent for Swedenborg's doctrines, and, as Howard points out, Priestley 
conversed with Hindmarsh and other Swedenborgians before publishing his letter 
(30). Presumably, he also spoke to ex-Swedenborgians as well. Two such creatures in 
the Johnson orbit were William Sharp and his fellow engraver, William Blake. Sharp 
had joined the Theosophical Society in 1784, though by 1790 he was a follower of 
Richard Brothers. The appendix to his Letters suggests that Priestley may have spoken 
with Blake. It reproduces much of n.6I of Swedenborg's Concerning the Last judgment 
and the Destruction of Babylon (London, 1788), the source of Blake's Leviathan imagery 
on Marriage plates 17-19. A recently discovered letter by Keri Davies from September 
1794 (presented at the Blake 1794-1994 conference at Strawberry Hill, July 1994) 
verifies what has long been suspected, that Blake sold or at least showed copies of 
illuminated books at johnson's shop in the early I790s. 
16 When printed, Marriage copy K was, at four pages, the second longest continuous illu-
minated text; the longest was Thel, at five pages of text (plates 3-7) plus a title but still 
minus the motto and concluding plate (see essay I). It belonged to an age of published 
sermons, essays, and lectures, of pamphlets on religious, aesthetic, political, and eco-
nomic debates and controversies (see Aspinall 152, 436-38, and the bibliographies in 
Hole and Wood). Johnson himself was a prolific publisher of pamphlets, as the exten-
sive "catalogue of Books and Pamphlets" published in the Analytical Review indicates. 
In 1790, he had hired Mary Wollstonecraft, whose "daily occupation" was "translating 
from the French the political pamphlets of the day, which at this time met with a 
ready and rapid sale, and in writing criticisms on them as well as upon other subjects, 
for the Analytical Review" (Knowles I: 162). Blake expressed his respect for the form 
when complimenting Paine, whom he credited with "overthrow[ing] all the armies of 
Europe with a small pamphlet" (E 617), referring presumably to Common Sense (1776). 
17 The association between Adam and Christ is commonplace in paintings and prints 
of the Crucifixion, which invariably place a skull at the foot of the cross to represent 
Adam. (In the reworked version of this image, America plate 8, the skull is more 
clearly drawn.) Adam is also mentioned or implied on Marriage plates 2 and 3-
18 
Blake conflates John 20.5-12 and Luke 24-12 with Mark 16.6 and Matthew 28.3-6, in 
that the former evangelists record two angels (in shining garments) and linens at the 
resurrection, and the latter record one angel (also dressed) but no linens. The resurrec-
tion imagery is possibly an allusion to Easter Week, when the New Church's first and 
second General Conferences were held. Throughout the Marriage, Blake associates 
Swedenborg with heaven, angels, and passivity and Christ with devils, hell, and energy 
(plates 6, 22-23). In this light, the "new heaven" embodies the tombed or dead rather 
than living Christ. "Tomb" may allude also to the fact that Swedenborg's tomb was 
206 Joseph Viscomi 

opened twice in I790' only to reveal the unresurrected mystic and an overwhelming 
stench (Paley 25-26). 
19 The word "systematic" suggests that Blake may also be alluding to Swedenborg's 
claim that he was "prohibited [from] reading dogmatic and systematic theology" until 
"heaven was opened" to him. This claim accompanied his denial of having read 
Boehme and was published "early in 1790" in New Jerusalem Magazine (p. 73; qtd. 
in Paley 27). Swedenborg, however, apparently did read Boehme in his youth, and 
Blake appears to have read Swedenborg "through hazes which arose probably from 
similar Behmenist fires" (Thompson 133 and nI2; on Blake and Boehme, see also 
Davies, Punter, and Aubry). Blake, however, inverts Swedenborg's causality, implying 
that Swedenborg's heaven grew out of-or sprouted from-"systematic reasoning." A 
vision "owing to your metaphysics" (plate 19) is how Blake will later articulate the 
concept of perception determined by precepts. Blake may have derived his vegetation 
metaphor of "sprouting" from the Circular Letter's proposition 7, which addresses the 
same concept: doctrines of the Old Church "ingraft in ... infant minds principles 
diametrically opposite to those of the New Church, and consequently hurtful to their 
salvation" (122). 
20 "The Lucianic or News from Hell tradition" (Tannenbaum 75) would have prepared 
Blake's audience for "news from the spiritual world," as would the Swedenborgian 
context, which presupposes discussions with angels-and vice versa. Note 846 of True 
Christian Religion, which was read at the first General Conference (Bellin and Ruhl 
126), begins: "I was once raised up as to my Spirit into the Angelic Heaven, and intro-
duced to a particular Society therein; and immediately some of the wise Ones of the 
Society came to me and said, What News from Earth?" 
21 As Linnell explains, "Blake claimed the possession of some powers only in a greater 
degree that all men possessed and which they undervalued in themselves & lost 
through love of sordid pursuits-pride, vanity, & the unrighteous mammon" (Bentley, 
Blake Records 257; see also 317). 
22 These two errors "hath perverted the whole Christian Church, so that nothing spiri-
tual is left remaining in it" (Circular Letter [prop. 4]: 122). Hindmarsh identified them 
as fundamental (9 passim, 24, 51), and they are mentioned in resolutions 2, 5, 9, ro, 
22, 23, and 26 of the Minutes. Blake agreed with Swedenborg about the atonement, 
likening the Crucifixion to blood sacrifice (see Book of Los [E 90-94] and Ghost of Abel 
[27°-72]), and he appears to agree with Swedenborg about the Trinity. "Know that 
after Christs death, he became Jehovah. But in Milton; the Father is Destiny, the Son, 
a Ratio of the five senses. & the Holy-ghost, Vacuum!" (Marriage plate 6). 
23 
The Marriage associates this progress with the coexistence and healthful tension of 
contraries (plate 3). It also, however, links it to an awareness of the Poetic Genius, a 
single point of origination from which all is derived. As essay I notes, the metaphysical 
framework of contraries, which theoretically implies a "dialectical symmetry" (Eaves, 
Essick, and Viscomi 121) and thus the idea that opposing views are equally valid-or 
invalid, partisan, and ironic-is undercut in practice by the satiric convention of tum-
ing the world upside down. Just as Blake and the devil's positions are favored, so, too, 
is the concept of Poetic Genius over contraries. As a philosophical satirist, Blake sets 
out to restore Poetic Genius to its "rightful hegemony" (Tannenbaum 88). Moreover, 
that the devil speaks for Blake on plates 21-24 is indicated by Blake's reworking "many 
of the same themes some years later and in his own voice in 'The Everlasting Gospel' " 
(Thompson 173). For the view that Blake never "speaks straight" (Bloom, "Dialectic" 
49) and Marriage lacks an authoritative voice, see Gleckner 71-II6, Cooper, and Miller. 
24 
For Blake's criticism of the Venetian and Flemish schools of painting, see his anno-
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
207 

tations to Reynold's Discourses (c. 1808) (E 635-62), Descriptive Catalogue (1809) (E 
528-51), and Public Address (c. 1810) (E 578-82). 
25 
Blake will again allude to Swedenborg's many volumes on Marriage plate 19, where, 
carrying them as an anchor or heavy weight, he "sunk from the glorious clime, and ... 
into the void." 
26 At the opening of the first General Conference, n. 851 of True Christian Religion, which 
defines a Memorable Relation, was read (Bellin and Ruhl 126). "I am aware that many, 
who read the Memorable Relations . . . will conceive that they are the Fictions of 
Imagination; but I protest in Truth that they are not Fictions, but were really seen and 
heard ... in a State when I was broad awake; for it hath pleased the Lord to manifest 
Himself to me, and to send me to teach the Things relating to his New Church ... for 
which Purpose he hath opened the Interiors of my Mind, or Spirit, by Virtue of which 
Privilege it was granted me to have Commerce with Angels in the spiritual World, and 
at the same Time with Men in the natural World." 
27 
Blake echoes Lavater's axiom: "He who hates the wisest and best of men, hates the 
Father of men, for, where is the Father of men to be seen but in the most perfect of 
his children?" Blake substituted the word "love" for "hate," underlined the last fifteen 
words and wrote: "this is true worship" (E 596). Lavater also wrote: "He who adores 
an impersonal God, has none; and, without guide or rudder, launches on an immense 
abyss that first absorbs his power, and next himself." Blake underlined the sentence 
and wrote: "most superlatively beautiful" (E 596). In the Marriage, Blake's opposition 
to the idea of an impersonal, external God is expressed at the bottom of plate II, where 
a man flees a sky God by swimming in an "immense abyss," and, just above that, 
worshippers kneel before a headless figure standing with a sword. To Swedenborg's 
Divine Love n. II, that "In all the Heavens there is no other Idea of God than that of 
Man," Blake responds: "man can have no idea of any thing greater than Man ... But 
God is a man not because he is so perceived by man but because he is the creator of 
man" (E 603). The concept of an incarnate God expressed on Marriage plate 23 was 
echoed on plate 3 and restated explicitly and precisely on plate 16 as "God only Acts & 
Is. in existing beings or Men." See also jerusalem 91: 4-12 (E 251). 
28 To Lavater's claim that the "greatest of characters ... was he, who ... could see objects 
through one grand immutable medium, always at hand, and proof against illusion 
and time, reflected by every object, and invariably traced through all the fluctuation of 
things," Blake wrote: "[T]his was Christ" (E 584). 
29 Blake describes heaven as "One Man" when perceived from a distance and a "Mul-
titude of Nations" when perceived nearby in Vision of the Last judgment and Vala 
1:469-75 (E 556-57, 310-II). On plate 23, though, could Blake be punning on the 
London location of the Swedenborgians' General Conferences, which were held in a 
hired chapel in Great East Cheap (also spelled Great Eastcheap)? 
30 Thompson argues that Blake's angel, who turns "blue," "yellow," and finally "white 
pink," alludes to a Memorable Relation published in the first issue of The New jerusa-
lem Magazine (Jan. 1790), which records a devil whose face turned from "white living" 
to "dead pale" to "black" (141). For another possible reference to this issue of the 
magazine, see nI9. 
31 
"No Subscriptions for the numerous great works now in hand are asked, for none 
are wanted; but the Author will produce his works, and offer them to sale at a fair 
price" (E 693). Blake priced Marriage at 7s. 6d. (E 693), the same price as Divine Provi-
dence, which Hindmarsh began advertising in 1789 as being "now in Press ... 6s. to 
subscribers and 7s.6d. to nonsubscribers." 
208 Joseph Viscomi 

32 
Publishers regularly affixed lists of publications and announcements of forthcoming 
works at the back of their books. But the Swedenborgian context suggests that Blake 
may be alluding to Robert Hindmarsh, Swedenborg's publisher, who published his 
Catalogue of the Printed and Unprinted Works of the Han. Emanuel Swedenborg in I785 for 
30d. He appended an updated list of books and their prices to all the Swedenborgian 
books he printed and/or sold. The last page of Extracts from the Doctrines of the New 
Jerusalem Church (Birmingham, I789), a thirty-six-page pamphlet, lists twenty-one 
books in translation. The last pages of Short Account of the Hon. Emanuel Swedenborg 
and His Theological Writings (London, I790) list thirty-four books, including ten in 
Latin. Both lists include the Minutes of a General Conference of the Members of the New 
Church held in Great East Cheap, London, in April, 1789, which is priced in the latter list 
at six pence. By I795, at the back of the third edition of True Christian Religion, forty-
five books were listed, including ten in Latin and excluding the Minutes. Little wonder 
reviewers complained about yet "more news from the spiritual world:' 
33 
Lansverk's study is the most extensive to date on Blake's proverbs and their relation to 
the Bible and other predecessors, and on the proverbial form of expression in Blake's 
other illuminated books. For the literary, biblical, and performative contexts of the 
proverbs, see also Niimi, Villalobos, Holstein, and Edwards. On thematic grounds, 
Nurmi and Ferber have speculated that the Proverbs of Hell may have been intended 
as or to form part of Blake's Bible of Hell (79, I02 respectively), though neither ex-
plains why the former are in the work that announces the latter. Lansverk argues that 
Marriage is itself sprinkled throughout with maxims, parables, fables, and riddles, 
making it Blake's version of the Book of Proverbs (95). 
Blake's proverbs are actually closer to aphorisms than proverbs (Edwards 46), and as 
such they appear to have been influenced in part by Lavater's Aphorisms on Man (I788). 
Blake may have read or been familiar with Dr. Trusler's Proverbs Exemplified of I790' He 
probably knew of the Swedenborgian Psalms of David, with a Summary Exposition of the 
Internal Sense, published in I789 and sold by Hindmarsh for three shillings. He seems 
certainly to have known Peter Provo's Wisdom's Dictates, "a collection of maxims and 
observations concerning divine, and spiritual truths .... Extracted ... particularly from 
[the works] of Emanuel Swedenborg," published in I789 and sold by Hindmarsh for IS. 
6d. and, as noted, briefly reviewed in Joseph johnson's Analytical Review 5 (I789): 352. 
34 
According to W. M. Rossetti, Blake wrote on the verso of an undated drawing "in 
title-page form, 'The Bible of Hell, in Nocturnal Visions collected. Vol. I. Lambeth:" 
(Gilchrist 2: 240). This apparent sketch for a title page, untraced since 1876 (Butlin 
22IV), confirms that Blake intended "The Bible" to be a separate work, as announced 
on plate 24. No such work is extant, but the phrase "visions collected" calls to mind 
"I collected some of their Proverbs" (plate 6), raising the possibility that Hell's Bible 
was to be the seventy proverbs-that is, a collection of challenging infernal truths-or 
that it was to be a collection of various infernal texts, a series of discrete and similarly 
printed illuminated pamphlets written from the infernal perspective that included the 
proverbs. 
Announcing enthusiastically works not yet completed, started, or ever executed 
seems characteristic of Blake. His French Revolution (I79I), printed as a sixteen-page 
pamphlet, exists in a single copy and was advertised as being one of seven books, all 
of which were supposedly "finished, and will be published in their Order" (E 286). 
But no evidence exists to prove they were ever written. In his advertisement for illu-
minated books (I793), Blake announced the "small book of Engravings" entitled The 
History of England (E 693), of which there is no trace. Imagining new projects as being 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
209 

multivolumed also appears characteristic of Blake, who titled The Book of Urizen as the 
"First Book" and Milton as being "in 12 Books." 
35 
These four parts represent Aristotle's reduction of the seven parts of the classical 
oration (Lanham II2). The first to discern a structure to the seemingly structureless 
Marriage was Max Plowman, who defined it as being in three parts-a prologue, six 
chapters, and an epilogue-and defined the chapters as consisting of statement fol-
lowed by illustrative narrative framed by illustrations (xxiii). Nurmi also sees a tripart 
structure at work, with the thematic focus moving from perception to contraries and 
back to perception (76). 
36 
George III lapsed into porphyria-induced madness in the fall of 1788, which lasted 
until early spring 1789. The progress and treatment of the king's madness was ex-
haustively reported in the press (Carretta 162). Erdman has argued convincingly that 
Blake used the mad king (as well as Shakespeare's Lear) around 1789 as a model for 
Tiriel, who was "King of the west" (E 284; Blake 121-23). Tiriel as tyrant and hypocriti-
cal lawgiver anticipates Urizen, and, as is suggested by the borrowing of the axiom on 
plate 25 from Tiriel (E 285), he may have influenced the idea to depict Swedenborg as 
a demented king. Blake was apparently reading Swedenborg when composing Tiriel, 
for Tiriel's brother Ijim was probably derived from Jiim, mentioned in True Christian 
Religion n. 45, which describes "diabolical Love" as "the Love of Self." 
37 
Daniels' friends were named Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. Blake is believed to 
have executed a painting entitled Shadrach and his companions coming from the Fiery 
Furnace, c. 1825, which is now untraced (Butlin 776). This episode is echoed in Mar-
riage plate 6: "the Jehovah of the Bible being no other than he who dwells in flaming 
fire. Know that after Christs death, he became Jehovah." If Christ is of the devil's party, 
then so is Jehovah, and the angel's vindictive God is inferred from Mosaic Law and not 
vision. 
38 
See Paley 28-31 for a discussion of Swedenborg in Blake's later works. 
Works Cited 
Addison, Joseph. The Spectator. Ed. Gregory Smith. Everyman's Library, 4 vols. London: 
Dent; New York: Dutton, 1961-63. 
Aspinall, Arthur. Politics and the Press c. 1780-1850. London: Home & Van ThaI, 1949. 
Aubrey, Bryan. Watchmen of Eternity: Blake's Debt to Jacob Boehme. New York: UP of 
America, 1986. 
Bellin, Harvey, and Darrell Ruhl, eds. Blake and Swedenborg: Opposition Is True Friendship. 
New York: Swedenborg Foundation, 1985. 
Bentley, G. E., Jr. Blake Records. Oxford: Clarendon, 1969. 
---. Blake Books: Annotated Catalogues of William Blake's Writings in Illuminated Printing. 
Oxford: Clarendon, 1977. 
Bloom, Harold. "Dialectic of The Marriage of Heaven and Hell." William Blake's "The Mar-
riage of Heaven and HelL" Ed. Harold Bloom. New York:'Chelsea, 1987. 49-56. 
---. Introduction. William Blake's "The Marriage of Heaven and Hell." Ed. Harold Bloom. 
New York: Chelsea, 1987. 1-24. 
Butlin, Martin. The Paintings and Drawings of William Blake. 2 vols. New Haven: Yale UP, 
1981. 
Carretta, Vincent. George III and the Satirists from Hogarth and Byron. Athens: U of Georgia 
P,1990 . 
Circular Letter. London, 1788. Rpt. Bellin and Ruhl. 122-25. 
210 Joseph Viscomi 

Cooper, Andrew, M. Doubt and Identity in Romantic Poetry. New Haven: Yale UP, 1988. 
Davies, J. G. The Theology of William Blake. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1948. 
Eaves, Morris. The Counter Arts Conspiracy: Blake in the Age of Art and Industry. Ithaca: 
Cornell UP, 1992. 
Eaves, Morris, Robert N. Essick, Joseph Viscomi, eds. The Early Illuminated Books. Prince· 
ton: Princeton UP, 1993. 
Edwards, Gavin. "Repeating the Same Dull Round." Unnam'd forms: Blake and Textuality. 
Ed. Nelson Hilton and Thomas Vogler. Berkeley: U of California P, 1986. 26-48. 
Erdman, David V. Blake: Prophet against Empire. Princeton: Princeton UP, I954. 
---, ed. Complete Poetry and Prose of William Blake. Commentary Harold Bloom. Rev. 
ed. New York: Doubleday, I988. 
Essick, Robert N. William Blake and the Language of Adam. Oxford: Clarendon, I989. 
---. "Representation, Anxiety, and the Bibliographic Sublime." Huntington Library 
Quarterly. Forthcoming. 
Ferber, Michael. The Poetry of William Blake. London: Penguin, 1991. 
Gilchrist, Alexander. Life of William Blake. 2 vols. London: Macmillan, I863; 2nd ed., 1880. 
Gleckner, Robert F. Blake and Spenser. Baltimore: John Hopkins UP, 1985. 
Grant, John E., and Mary Lynn Johnson. Blake's Poetry and Designs. New York: Norton, I979. 
Hindmarsh, Robert. Rise and Progress of the New Jerusalem Church. Ed. Rev. Edward Made· 
ley. London, I861. 
Hole, Robert. Pulpits, Politics and Public Order in England: 1760-18]2. Cambridge: Cam· 
bridge UP, I989. 
Holstein, Michael E. "Crooked Roads without Improvement: Blake's Proverbs of Hell." 
Genre 8.I (I975): 26-41. 
Howard, John. "An Audience for The Marriage of Heaven and Hell." Blake Studies 3 (I970): 
I9-52. 
Keynes, Geoffrey, ed. The Complete Writings of William Blake. London: Oxford UP, I966. 
Knowles, John. The Life and Writings of Henry Fuseli. 3 vols. London: H. Colburn and 
R. Bentley, I831. 
Lanham, Richard A. A Handlist of Rhetorical Terms. Berkeley: U of California P, I968. 
Lansverk, Marvin D. L. The Wisdom of Many, the Vision of One: The Proverbs of William Blake. 
New York: Peter Lang (series 4. English Language and Literature, vol. I42), I994. 
Larsen, Robin, et aI., eds. Emanuel Swedenborg: A Continuing Vision, a Pictorial Biography 
and Anthology of Essays and Poetry. New York: Swedenborg Foundation, I988. 
Mee, Jon. Dangerous Enthusiasm: William Blake and the Culture of Radicalism in the 1790s. 
Oxford: Clarendon, I992. 
Meyers, Mary Ann. A New World Jerusalem: The Swedenborgian Experience in Community 
Construction. Westport: Greenwood, I983. 
Miller, Dan. "Contrary Revelation: The Marriage of Heaven and Hell." Studies in Romanticism 
24 (winter I985): 49I-509· 
Minutes of the First General Conference of the Members of the New Jerusalem Church. London: 
Hindmarsh, I789. Rpt. Bellin and Ruhl. I25-30. 
Niimi, Hatsuko. "The Proverbial Language of Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell." Studies 
in English Literature (I982): 3-20. 
Nurmi, Martin, K. William Blake. Kent: Kent State UP, I976. 
Ostriker, Alicia, ed. William Blake: The Complete Poems. New York: Penguin, I977. 
Paley, Morton. "'A New Heaven Is Begun': William Blake and Swedenborgianism." Blake / 
An Illustrated Quarterly I3 (I979): 64-90. Rpt. in Bellin and Ruhl. I5-34. 
Plowman, Max, ed. The Poems and Prophecies of William Blake. New York: Everyman's 
Library, I927. 
Blake's Marriage of Heaven and Hell 
2II 

Priestley, Joseph. Letters to the Members of the N= Jerusalem Church, formed by Baron 
Swedenborg. Birmingham: Thomson, 1791. 
Punter, David. Blake, Hegel, and Dialectic. Amsterdam: Rodolphi, 1982. 
Schuchard. Marsha Keith. "The Secret Masonic History of Blake's Swedenborg Society." 
Blake / An Illustrated Quarterly 26 (1992): 40-50. 
Scrivener, Michael. "A Swedenborgian Visionary and The Marriage of Heaven and Hell." 
Blake / An Illustrated Quarterly 21 (winter 1987-88): 102-4-
Stevenson. W. H .. ed. Blake: The Complete Poems. 2nd ed. London: Longman, 1989. 
Swedenborg, Emanuel. A Treatise Concerning Heaven and Hell. London: Phillips, 1778. 
---. A Treatise Concerning the Last Judgment and Destruction of Babylon. London: Hind-
marsh, 1788. 
---. True Christian Religion, Containing the Universal Theology of the New Church. 2nd ed. 
London: Hindmarsh, 1786; 3rd ed., 1795. 
---. The Earths in Our Solar System. Which are Called Planets. Boston: Massachusetts 
New-Church Union, 1910. 
---. A Compendium of the Theological Writings of Emanuel Swedenborg, including Wisdom 
of Angels Concerning Divine Love and Wisdom; Wisdom of Angels Concerning Divine Provi-
dence; Apocalypse Revealed. Compo Samuel M. Warren. 1875; rpl. New York: Swedenborg 
Foundation. 1974. 
Tannenbaum. Leslie. "Blake's News from Hell: The Marriage of Heaven and Hell and the 
Lucianic Tradition." ELH 43 (1976): 74-99· 
Thompson. E. P. Witness against the Beast: William Blake and the Moral Law. New York: New 
Press. 1993. 
Villalobos, John. "William Blake's 'Proverbs of Hell' and the Tradition of Wisdom Litera-
ture." Studies in Philology 87 (spring 1990): 246-59. 
Viscomi, Joseph. Blake and the Idea of the Book. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1993. 
---. "The Evolution of William Blake's The Marriage of Heaven and Hell." The Hunting-
ton Library Quarterly 58'3-4 (1997). 
---. "The Caves of Heaven and Hell: Swedenborg and Printmaking in Blake's Marriage." 
Blake in the Nineties. Ed. David Worrall and Steve Clark. London: Macmillan, 1998. 
Wood. Marcus. Radical Satire and Print Culture: 1790-1822. Oxford: Clarendon, 1994. 
Young. Edward. Conjectures on Original Composition. London. 1759. 
212 
Joseph Viscomi 

