4 Sets and set theories
I imagine a set as an abyss.¹
Georg Cantor
Why do we occupy ourselves with set theory in an introduction to the philosophy of
mathematics, more exactly: with different set theories? We have seen in Chapters 2 and 3
how set theory did arise as a distinct mathematical discipline and how it developed
as a framework for almost all mathematical branches. It was just the step towards the
actual infinity and a boundless extension of the possibility of building sets that required
a hundred years ago a mathematical theory of sets. Nowadays set theory together
with logic constitutes the foundations of mathematics – as a distinct mathematical
discipline and as the foundation of practically all mathematical branches. In this
chapter we want to reflect on set-theoretical foundations of mathematical thinking
and talking and to indicate the set-theoretical framework within which mathematics is
nowadays developed. We point to limitations and problems as well as ask questions of
foundational type.
An important object of set theories are infinite sets. Set theory is – so to speak –
a mathematical theory of the infinite. The concept of the infinite was from the very
beginning an important notion of mathematics and caused big difficulties. All the time
one tried to study it in detail and to explain it. This has been done – as we have seen –
till the 19th century – within philosophy and theology. Then the infinite became –
through the concept of a set – an object of mathematics. The concept of a set replaced
the unclear concept of a magnitude that so far was the basic one. Since the concept
of a set is nowadays fundamental for the mathematical concepts of natural and real
numbers, it is in fact the basic notion of mathematics.
Set theory provides a precise language in which (almost) all mathematical notions
can be formulated. This has not only methodological but also ontological consequences.
Since all mathematical concepts can be defined by set-theoretical notions, the question
about the existence and the nature of mathematical objects can be reduced to the
question concerning the existence and the nature of objects of set theory, hence of sets.
This shows how important set theory is with respect to the philosophy of mathematics.
It is in particular the matter of the reduction of the ontological questions.
We will consider here neither the history of the infinite in mathematics nor the
development of the concept of a set and of set theory itself. We limit ourselves to general
remarks. We did it already in Chapter 2 while writing about philosophical views on
1 Eine Menge stelle ich mir vor wie einen Abgrund.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110468335-005

254
|
4 Sets and set theories
mathematics and its objects as well as in Chapter 3 when we wrote systematically about
opinions concerning the infinite.
Recall that from the antiquity till the end of the 19th century a great majority
of mathematicians rejected the actual infinite or at least were in opposition to it. It
seemed that the potential infinity would suffice the aims of mathematics. The infinity
of processes, sets or magnitudes consisted only in the possibility that they can be
prolonged or enlarged.
One of the consequences was for example the fact that the mathematics of the
ancient Greece was far from constructing the concept of an irrational number. The
theory of proportions and the method of exhaustion of Eudoxus of Cnidus (ca. 408–
355 BC) are characteristic for a method avoiding the concept of a value of the limit
and of the actual infinite. Note that the method of exhaustion did not in fact mean
that infinite sequences of polygons can be grasped as a whole and that a curvilinearly
bounded figure can be finally exhausted by them. To show for example that the area
of a circle is proportional to the square of the radius one used such sequences to give
then an indirect proof and to reject in finitely many steps the supposition that they are
not proportional (cf. [385, pp. 120–169]).
4.1 Paradoxes of the infinite
One of the reasons for rejecting or objecting the actual infinite in the past were para-
doxes connected with it. Some of them are attributed to Zeno of Elea (ca. 490–ca.
430 BC). We know them from Physics by Aristotle. Among them are: the dichotomy
(continued bisection), the arrow (impossibility of motion), Achilles and the tortoise
(Achilles cannot overtake the tortoise) and the moving rows or stadium (relativity
of motion). They concern the difficulties with the infinite in case of a partition into
infinitely many parts and infinite summation. They also indicate problems with the
idea of a combination of infinitely many infinitely small objects.
Another paradoxical property has been indicated by Proclus Lycaeus (Proclos
Diadochos) in his Commentary on the First Book of Euclid’s Elements (cf. Section 2.5).
He has noticed that an infinite set can have exactly as many elements as a proper part
of it:
“A diameter divides a circle into two equal parts. However, if one diameter
generates two semicircles and if infinitely many such diameters will be drawn
then there will be twice as many semicircles as infinitely many diameters.”
([285, p. 158].)
For him this was the reason to reject the existence of actual infinite magnitudes and to
accept only the potential infinity. He wrote the following.

4.1 Paradoxes of the infinite
|
255
“the magnitudes can be partitioned into infinite but not into infinitely many
parts (ad infinitum, sed non in infinita). The latter would mean that there were
actually infinitely many parts, the former – that only potentially; the latter
admits the infinite a substantial existence, the former only the rising.”
(Loc. cit.)
The paradox indicated by Proclus was probably known already to Plutarch (ca. 46–
120 BC). Later it appeared over and over again. It occurred in the works of scholastics
of the 14th century, for example Thomas Bradwardinus (ca. 1290–1349). In the 13th
century it was used as the base of argumentations that should show the impossibility
of the existence of an eternal world. In the year 1638 Galileo Galilei (1564–1642)
formulated a paradox named today after him – it was based on the same pattern. He
noticed that on the one hand the square numbers 1, 4, 9, 16, . . . form a part of the
natural numbers but on the other there are exactly as many square numbers as natural
numbers. He evaluated this in the following way:
“This is one of the difficulties that arise when we try to grasp the infinity by
our finite minds and to attribute to it the same properties as those ascribed to
the finite and the bounded; by me this is not correct – one cannot speak that
one infinite quantity is greater, smaller or equal to the other.” (Discorsi [128,
p. 33].)
In a similar way also Isaac Newton (1642–1727) argued in a letter written in 1692:
“The infinities, when considered without any restrictions or limitations are
neither equal nor unequal nor are they in any relation to each other.”
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) who knew the paradox of Galileo Galilei wrote:
“There is nothing more absurd than the idea of an actually infinite number.”
At another place however he affirmed:
“I accept the actual infinite – instead of assuming that the nature detests it as
is sometimes stupidly claimed – in the sense that I am of the opinion that the
actual infinity is available everywhere in the nature to stress the perfection of
the creator.”
Bernard Bolzano added in his Paradoxien des Unendlichen (1851) to paradoxes of the
Proclus–Galilei-type a variant saying that a one-to-one correspondence between the
reals of the open interval (0, 5) and the reals of a greater interval can be established
(cf. Section 2.12).

256
|
4 Sets and set theories
All those paradoxes contradict the principle found by Euclid and saying that the
whole is greater than its part [109, Book I, Axiom 9]. Richard Dedekind and Georg
Cantor turned this seemingly negative property into a positive one. They treated it as
the property of infinite sets distinguishing them from finite sets and raised it to be the
core of the definition of infinite sets (cf. Sections 2.14 and 2.15). This opened the way
to today’s set theory – now we will write about it.
4.2 On the concept of a set
We make now some remarks on the word “set” and the status of the concept of a set.
4.2.1 Collecting together versus putting together
The word “set” can have two meanings: the collective one and the distributive one.
In the collective meaning a set is – as a collection of objects – a certain given whole
consisting of those objects. Its elements are parts of it. According to this a library can
be seen as a set of books/texts and a chain is a set of links. In this meaning a set of
concrete sensually perceptible objects is itself a sensually perceptible object quasi
going ahead its elements. The expression “x is an element of the set A” means here
“x is a part of A”. A theory of sets in the collective sense has been developed by the
Polish logician Stanisław Leśniewski (1886–1939) – it is called “mereology”.
Mathematics decided for the concept of a set on the total separation of parts from
the whole and on the complete separation of parts among themselves, hence the second
meaning of the word “set”. Parts become “abstract” elements. Set theory understands
sets not as putting together but as collecting together. This leads to extensionality.
Relationships between elements should be reconstructed – extensionally – as sets, i.e.,
as set-theoretical relations. The connection to the whole is an abstract membership
relation.
The sentence “Venus is an element of the set of all planets of the solar system”
means – in the distributive meaning of “set” – simply: “Venus is a planet”, and the
sentence “3 is an element of the set of natural numbers” means “3 is a natural number”.
Planets and numbers are primary here and they build the set of planets and of natural
numbers, resp. elements are ahead of sets. Hence a set in the distributive sense is not
a sensually perceptible object even when its elements are concrete objects. A set is here
an abstraction.
Both described meanings are principally different. This can be clearly seen by
noticing that there are sentences which are true by one of the meanings and false by
the other. Since the word “set” is nowadays used almost exclusively in the distributive
sense, the term “totality” or “system” is sometimes applied to see this better. Consider
for example the proposition: “A tenth part of Venus is an element of the solar system”.

4.2 On the concept of a set
|
257
This can be seen as true in the collective meaning but is false in the distributive meaning.
The membership in the collective meaning is transitive: If x is an element of a totality y
that is an element of a totality z then x is an element of the totality z”. By the distributive
meaning it is generally not transitive.
Set theory deals only with sets in the distributive sense – Cantor characterized
them in his famous “definition of sets” (cf. Section 2.14) as collections. This concept
of a set enabled the step towards the actual infinity and is fundamental for today’s
mathematics. The idea of putting together which historically – starting from the primary
continuum – stood in the foreground was one of the obstacles on the way to the infinite
(cf. Section 3.3.5).
The philosophical question that can be asked now is: how and in what sense
are there those sets – meant in the distributive sense. This is connected with the old
problem of universals.
4.2.2 Sets and the problem of universals
One meets the problem of universals – that in the Middle Ages generated the quarrel
of universals – for the first time in the works of Plato. It concerns the question: what
does in fact correspond to general notions like “line”, “number” or “man”, “beauty”,
“goodness” etc. Answers given in the history of philosophy can divided into four groups.
The following characterizations describe simultaneously the four main positions in
the quarrel of universals.
Plato is the representative and the founder of the radical realism. It is assumed here
that universals are self-dependent realities and they exist independently of objects
and subjects. In Plato’s ontology universals are ideas. They form an own world over
the material-physical one. Consequently, for example, beside a single man there exists
a man as such, i.e., a man in general, by Plato the idea of a man.
A bit less extreme is the moderate realism dating back to Aristotle. Also here univer-
sals have their own existence. However, they are not self-dependent and independent
of the material world. They exist objectively only as properties of concrete single objects.
For example a man as such, a man in general has no independent existence – he is
a summary of essential properties specific for concrete men. “Man” is the whole of the
characteristic properties of men.
One should stress that both those positions towards universals award the universals
an external reality independent of the knowing subject.
In the Middle Ages within the Christian philosophy emerged a new position –
the conceptualistic one. Its founder was Jean Roscelin (ca. 1050–ca. 1120), a monk
from Compiégne (better known by his Latinized name Roscellinus Compendiensis or
Rucelinus). According to this position universals exist only in the human mind, they
are only concepts. Therefore the name of the position – it comes from the Latin word

258
|
4 Sets and set theories
conceptus, concept. Hence there are no real objects like a man as such or a line as such.
Concepts “man” and “line” are constructs of the mind and do exist only in it.
Still further goes William of Ockham (also Occam, from Latin: Gulielmus Occamus;
before 1300–1349/1350). His position is called nominalism. According to him uni-
versals exist neither as such nor as general concepts in mind. Only single concrete
objects do exist really. The source of the assumption that there is something outside
of objects is the misinterpretation of the language. There is neither a man as such nor
the concept of a man but only a general name (Latin: nomen) “man” in the language –
it is a linguistical abbreviation for the description of single men. Universals, general
concepts are fictions. They have no existence.
The quarrel of universals in the Middle Ages – especially together with other
problems and questions of a theological nature – were sometimes intense. It is actual
also today in a moderate form and is still not settled. Mathematics provides an example:
what does it study? Does it study a real world – independent of things that are sensually
perceptible, consisting of ideal objects like numbers, functions etc, is it a rational world
of concepts or even a fictitious language game?
Since nowadays practically all mathematical concepts can be defined in set theory,
they are reducible to the concept of a set. Consequently, the problem of the ontologi-
cal status of mathematical objects has been reduced to the problem of sets, and the
mathematical quarrel of universals to the universal “set”.
Three of four positions in the quarrel of universals described above have their
counterparts in the problem of the way of existence of sets. They are: platonism,
(neo)conceptualism and (neo)nominalism.
The main thesis of mathematical platonism is: everything that is not contradic-
tory does exist. In the case of sets this means: for any well-formulated and consistent
property there exists a set of all objects fulfilling this property. The set of those objects
possesses an independent existence just as well as its elements. Its existence is indepen-
dent of the existence of its elements. To avoid contradictions one introduces some
restrictions concerning properties when necessary. An example for this is the Compre-
hension Axiom in the Zermelo–Fraenkel system ZF of set theory – we write about this
later – or in the theory of types (cf. Section 2.19). So set theory, and consequently also
the whole mathematics, becomes a science about such legitimate and for itself existing
objects, and its aim is to describe the world of those objects like the aim of zoology is
to describe the world of animals.
This platonism in mathematics does not mean – and this should be stressed –
that sets are treated as ideas like by Plato. The way of existing of sets does not cor-
respond there to the way of existing of their elements. Their existence comes up to
the existing elements. Sets possess another independent existence – just as sets of
elements. Example: The set of natural numbers exists apart from its elements, i.e.,
natural numbers. Sets are not forms of some real concrete objects as it was the case for
ideas by Plato.

4.2 On the concept of a set
|
259
Cantor – as we saw in Chapters 2 and 3 – was a representative of this platonic
position. His firm conviction of the independent existence of the infinite contributed in
an essential way to risk the step towards the actual infinity and to enforce it. In today’s
philosophy of mathematics the platonic position is represented for example by Kurt
Gödel who in Russell’s Mathematical Logic wrote:
Classes and concepts may, however, also be conceived as real objects [...]
existing independently of our definitions and constructions. It seems to me
that the assumption of such objects is quite as legitimate as the assumption of
physical bodies and there is quite as much reason to believe in their existence.
([138, p. 137].)
Today’s mathematical conceptualists ascribe the existence only to such sets –
and generally such mathematical objects – that are constructible, more exactly: such
objects that can be constructed on the base of recognizably existing objects. Axioms
postulating the existence of non-constructible sets are rejected. The attitude is strongly
connected with constructivism. This position is represented for example by intuition-
ism (cf. Section 2.20). Moreover, in the ontology of conceptualism four versions of
constructivism can be distinguished: (1) the objective version in which the existence
of constructions is independent of the constructing subject, (2) the intensional version
in which the constructed objects have an intensional existence, (3) the mentalistic
version in which constructions exist as mental products in the mind of a constructing
mathematician, and (4) the finitistic version in which the existence of constructions is
given only in the real, material signs, i.e., in the inscriptions on a table or in printed
characters (cf. Sections 2.21).
Nominalism, the third new position, assumes the existence only of special indi-
vidual single objects. Statements about other objects, for example about sets, are
statements about those individuals. Hence the question about those individuals and
their existence arises. In answers to this question formal and factual nominalism can
be distinguished. The former is represented for example by N. Goodman (cf. A World
of Individuals [148, p. 17]). The formal nominalism rejects complex sets that cannot
be directly comprehended. It approves individuals of any type. It is only required that
everything which is accepted as existing should be treated as an individual object. The
factual nominalism distinguishes certain objects and treats only them as existing. Other
objects – eventually also individual objects – are excluded. As an example of such
a type of nominalism can serve reism of the Polish philosopher Tadeusz Kotarbiński
(1886–1981) in which only physical objects (bodies) possess the existence.
Notice that in the modern philosophy of mathematics there is no counterpart of
the moderate realism. According to it a set could be intensionally treated as a property,
as a property common to all its elements. Consequently, sets would exist as properties
of their elements. Hence their existence would be derived from the existence of their
elements and therefore not independent. However, there is a difficulty connected with

260
|
4 Sets and set theories
so-called coextensive properties. They are properties that are intensionally different
but extensionally determine the same sets of objects. For example the property Φ1
of natural numbers to be divisible by 5 and the property Φ2 of ending in 0 or 5 in
the decimal expansion. If the position of the moderate realism were accepted, all
coextensive properties should be found and treated as being equal.
Let us mention that there is still at least one more, comfortable position towards
the existence of sets and mathematical objects. One can treat the problem of existence
simply as a philosophical pseudoproblem having in fact no influence on teaching
and research in mathematics. Such a position was represented for example by Rudolf
Carnap (1891–1970) and it is probably popular among mathematicians. Recall – in
contrast to this – Georg Cantor whose platonism and the firm conviction of the real
existence of infinite sets was not without influence on the origin of set theory, on the
development of mathematics and on the transformation of mathematical thinking.
Notice also that it was just this transformation that ultimately made that modern and
comfortable – in connection with problems of existence – position possible.
4.3 Two set theories
The founder of set theory as a mathematical discipline was Georg Cantor (cf. Chapter 2).
In his works published between 1874 and 1897 he formulated the base of set theory.
He described fundamental properties of sets and proved main theorems.
The beginnings of set theory, i.e., some of its aspects can be found earlier. We find
an early text on relations and relata in the works of Joachim Jungius (1587–1657) in
his Logica Hamburgensis [195] in 1638. Elements of the algebra of sets can be found
already by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz. His ideas have been later carried on by Johann
Heinrich Lambert (1728–1777) and Leonhard Euler (1707–1783). In particular Euler
has given the geometrical interpretation of connections between sets (Euler’s diagrams).
William Hamilton (1788–1856) and Augustus De Morgan (1806–1871) attempted
to study relations in a formal way, and George Boole (1815–1864) was the founder
of the purely formal algebra of sets called today Boolean algebra. This theory allows
various interpretations not only as an algebra of sets. Also Charles Sanders Peirce
(1839–1914) and Ernst Schröder (1841–1902) developed a theory of relations and the
algebra of sets. Until the first half of the 19th century one does not find explicitly an
independent concept of a set being not only a formal, linguistic instrument. One finds it
by Bernard Bolzano in the first volume of his Wissenschsaftslehre (1837) and later in his
Paradoxien des Unendlichen (1851) (cf. Section 2.12). Some considerations concerning
infinite sets one finds in the works of Richard Dedekind (cf. Section 2.15) and Paul Du
Bois-Reymond (1831–1889) devoted to analysis. In [87] Dedekind developed a theory
of “chains”. All those investigations were in fact – from the point of view of set theory –
fragmentary. Only Cantor developed set theory – in the real sense.

4.3 Two set theories
|
261
Cantor’s set theory however was founded on an intuitive unclear concept of a set.
Various characterizations of it (cf. Section 2.14) show this in detail. Aside from the
philosophical way of speaking which uses other not defined concepts to explain the
very concept of a set, there appear also concepts that should be made precise: what do
“determine”, “well-differentiated”, “law” or “collecting together” mean?
Associations and intuitions connected with the concept of a set were different for dif-
ferent authors. O. Becker wrote in Grundlagen der Mathematik in geschichtlicher Entwick-
lung [16, p. 316] that Emmy Noether reports on an anecdote attested by F. Bernstein:
Dedekind spoke out with respect to the concept of a set: he imagines a set as
a closed sack containing quite specific things which one does not see and of
which one knows nothing except that they are given and determined. Some
time later gave Cantor his imagination of a set: He raised his immense figure,
described a circle with his arm and said looking far away: ‘I do imagine a set
as an abyss’. [89, Volume III, p. 449]
The usage of intuitive and imprecise concepts of a set that thanks to the step into
the infinite enabled an unregulated and unlimited building of sets led to antinomies in
Cantor’s development of set theory. The most important antinomies are: the antinomy
of the greatest ordinal coming from Cantor and C. Burali-Forti, the antinomy of the set
of all sets of Cantor and the antinomy of irreflexive classes of Russell. We wrote about
them in Chapter 2.
The discovery of those antinomies at the turn of the 19th and 20th centuries shook
Cantor’s set theory. It became clear that set theory cannot be based on intuition alone.
The concept of a set must be made mathematically precise. This could be done only by
developing an axiomatic set theory or by founding it on logic. One looked for systems
that would eliminate the known antinomies. The results can be divided into two groups:
axiomatic theories and theories in the framework of the theory of logical types. We
present two set theories that are very different from the point of view of the intellectual
approach. We wrote in Section 2.19 about the logical theory of types developed by
Russell and Whitehead – now we make only remarks about it here and there and
indicate its connections to other approaches.
4.3.1 Set theory according to Zermelo and Fraenkel
Cantor’s explanations of the concept of a set link the concepts “set”, “collecting
together” and “element”. They indicate the challenge of an axiomatization: to describe
how sets are built of elements and in this to implicitly explain the very concept of a set.
In his early explanation of the concept of a set from the year 1883 Cantor spoke about
“totality (Inbegriff) of certain elements that can be collected by a law as a whole”. This
type of collecting together (Latin: comprehensio) by a “law” is the general principle

262
|
4 Sets and set theories
of abstraction according to which Cantor and others built sets without clear rules,
bounds – and without any doubts.
Principle of abstraction or comprehension. Let Φ be a property (determining a law of
collecting together). Then there exists a set x of elements y such that Φ(y).
In a formal way:
∃x∀y[y ∈x ↔Φ(y)].
By such building of sets they look like this:
x = {y | Φ(y)}.
Ernst Zermelo (1871–1953) saw in such a generous unbounded way of collecting, the
reason of antinomies. In such a way huge collections could arise that lead to antinomies.
He avoided antinomies by restricting the formation of sets and limiting the size of them.
Restrictions of such a type are characteristic for the approach to the first axiomatization
of set theory given by Zermelo [383] in 1908. Zermelo replaced the principle of an
unbounded abstraction by the following axiom.²
Axiom (of Comprehension).
∀z∃x∀y[y ∈x ↔y ∈z ∧Φ(y)].
This means:
Let Φ denote a property. If a set z is given then there exists a set x of elements y
from z such that Φ(y).
The restriction of the building of sets is immediately recognizable. Only in a given set z
one can build sets by singling out elements y. It should be clear what one speaks about.
Sets are a priori subsets. Set terms now look like this:
x = {y ∈z | Φ(y)}.
By such a selection from given sets neither Russell’s antinomy of a set of sets being not
their own elements nor consequently the set of all sets can arise. This can be easily
seen: Consider the property “y ∉y”. When one wants to build a set r by the property
“y ∉y” according to the Comprehension Axiom then there is a set z given from which
one selects elements y, i.e. r = {y ∈z | y ∉y}. We ask – as in Chapter 2: Has r the
property r ∈r or r ∉r? One gets the following contradictions: (a) r ∈r →r ∉r. In
fact, r as an element of itself has the property y ∉y of its elements. (b) r ∉r →r ∈r.
In fact, because r ∉r hence r has the property y ∉y of elements y of r, it belongs to
its elements. However, now the situation is not antinomic – we conclude that r ∉z.
Indeed assume that there is a set m of all sets. We build the subset r = {y ∈m | y ∉y}.
2 The Comprehension Axiom is frequently called Separation Axiom distinguishing it explicitly from
the unrestricted comprehension principle above.

4.3 Two set theories
|
263
For this r one gets the above contradictions (a) and (b) and one concludes r ∉m. But
this contradicts our assumption that m is the set of all sets.
The system of Zermelo formulated in 1908 has later been extended by Abraham
H. Fraenkel (1891–1965) and Thoralf A. Skolem (1887–1963) and it is called today
Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZF). If the Axiom of Choice is added then the system is
denoted as ZFC. There are eight axioms of ZF.
We shall describe now the axioms of ZF and comment on them. They set in a prag-
matic way the requirements for manipulating sets familiar to the concept of a finite set
and commonly used by handling such sets. They should hold also for infinite sets from
the moment when the Axiom of Infinity will be formulated.
Note that the system ZF is formulated in the language of the first-order predicate
calculus (cf. Section 5.1.1). For example instead of the usual symbol ⇐⇒common
for the mathematical practice we use the symbol of logical equivalence ↔. Small
Latin letters denote set variables. The only nonlogical predicate is the membership
relation “∈”. We try to avoid fully formal formulations but we give axioms in formal
setting that we shall often prepare and simplify and always explain.
The first axioms says that sets are determined by their elements and only by them.
This means that sets are equal if and only if they have the same elements – so to say: if
they “range” over the same elements, i.e., when they have the same “extension”.
Axiom (of Extensionality).
∀z∀y[∀z(z ∈x ↔z ∈y) →x = y].
This axiom determines the fundamental principle of set-theoretical thinking that is
not intensional but purely extensional, quantitative. If an intensional component were
added then sets would be determined not only by their elements but also by their
meaning. For example The sets {a} and {m} where a is the evening star and m is the
morning star would be different though a = m. Or: The set of divisors of 27 and the
powers of 3 smaller than 81 can be distinguished by their meaning though they have
the same elements. However, such differentiations are impractical and inexpedient.
One should distinguish for example various empty sets.
The extensional element in the concept of a set grants the set-theoretical and
consequently also the mathematical thinking in principle a static and discontinuous
character. The latter has been discussed in detail in Chapter 3 in connection with the
concept of the continuum. The static character is expressed when for example a process
is mathematically presented. Think for example about the process of counting. To grasp
it one starts from a set whose elements are provided in a static way (usually this set is
called ℕ). The process is simulated set-theoretically when a construction of a successor
of a given set is added. This construction of a successor being a correspondence, a func-
tion, is again a set, a static “register” of pairs. In this set of pairs the movement, the
activity originally included in the concept of correspondence and function is canceled.
Or think about geometrical mappings, e.g., about rotations in the space defined as

264
|
4 Sets and set theories
functions from ℝ3 into itself, i.e., as (infinite) tables of values. It is far from the intuitive
idea of a rotation.
Notice that we speak in the sequel exclusively about sets – this is proper for set
theory. Sets are determined by their “definite and well-differentiated” elements. This
is expressed by the Axiom of Extensionality. And just sets themselves suit best to be
again elements. Set theory avoids the problem of unclear “objects of our intuition or
our thinking” by allowing as elements of sets only sets. So called “urelements” that can
be introduced to set theory make the language more complicated and – from a mathe-
matical point of view – are an unnecessary ballast. In nonmathematical applications
however the acceptance of them can be useful.
The following axiom states something simple: it claims that any two objects can
be collected to a set, i.e., to a new, abstract object, a pair.
Axiom (of Pairing).
∀x∀y∃z∀u(u ∈z ↔u = x ∨u = y).
Such sets look as set terms as follows:
z = {a, b}.
If a = b then one gets the singleton {a} that should be distinguished from a. This
distinction can be in a nice way illustrated by a hat that once is outer and later inside
a box {
}. (Try to put the latter on your head.)
The Union Axiom states that if there are two or more sets given then a set y, the
union of them, can be built – it collects elements of all given sets.
Axiom (of Union).
∀x∃y∀z[z ∈y ↔∃u(z ∈u ∧u ∈x)].
If x = {a, b} then one writes y = a ∪b. If x consists of many sets then the term looks
like
y = ⋃x = {z | ∃u(z ∈u ∧u ∈x)}.
The following Power Set Axiom allows to collect all subsets of a given set x to a new
set P(x). It is a powerful axiom. If the number of elements of x is n then P(x) has 2n
elements. Imagine this in the case when x is infinite. Here occur the problems of the
actual infinity that we see again and again. In Chapter 2 some remarks have been made,
in particular in connection with the continuum hypothesis.
Axiom (of Power Set).
∀x∃y∀z[z ∈y ↔∀u(u ∈z →u ∈x)].
The variable y denotes here the power set
P(x) := {z | z ⊆x}.

4.3 Two set theories
|
265
The Comprehension Axiom (called sometimes: Separation Axiom) mentioned
already above, which plays an important role in the system ZF, is in fact a schema of
axioms: for every property – given by an expression φ – there is an appropriate axiom.
Axiom (Schema of Comprehension).
∀y∃z∀u(u ∈z ↔u ∈y ∧φ(u)).
Properties are connected with relations that can have many variables and are usually expressed by
complicated expressions. We give this schema again in full generality for (n + 1)-ary expressions φ.³
Axiom (Schema of Comprehension).
∀x1∀x2 . . . ∀xn∀y∃z∀u(u ∈z ↔u ∈y ∧φ(u, x1, x2, . . . , xn)).
Here φ is a formula of the language of set theory in which the variable z is not free (cf. Section 5.1) and
such that the variables x1, x2, . . . , xn of φ are different from u. Note that this axiom does not exclude
the impredicative definitions of sets. They are definitions that refer to totalities to which the set being
defined belongs itself. We wrote about such definitions of sets and problems connected with them in
Chapter 2, e.g., in Section 2.16 devoted to Poincaré.
The following Axiom of Infinity elevates the common description of handling finite sets
and the forming of new sets to a higher level, into the realm of the infinite.
The Axiom of Infinity is an existential axiom. The existence of a set x with the
following two properties is claimed:
(1) The “first” and the simplest element of x should be the empty set y. It is determined
by the property ψ of having no element:
ψ(y) := ¬∃z(z ∈y).
One defines
0 = y :↔ψ(y),
and 0 is uniquely determined, hence it is the empty set. 0 is a subset of every set.
(2) In the set x should a type of a counting process be possible: If u ∈x then also the
“successor” u ∪{u} should be in x.
Axiom (of Infinity).
∃x[0 ∈x ∧∀u(u ∈x →u ∪{u} ∈x)].
Infinite sets having this property are called inductive. Together with x there exists the
empty set 0, further the element 0∪{0} = {0}, then {0}∪{{0}} = {0, {0}} and {0, {0}, {0, {0}}}
etc. The “smallest” inductive set is denoted by ω. Intuitively it consists of the just given
sequence of sets:
ω = {0, {0}, {0, {0}}, . . .}.
3 The Comprehension Axiom Scheme is frequently called Separation Axiom Scheme.

266
|
4 Sets and set theories
If one puts
0 = 0,
1 = {0} = {0},
2 = {0, 1},
3 = {0, 1, 2},
. . . ,
m + 1 = m ∪{m},
. . .
then it is clear that ω is a sequence of sets that proceeds like the natural numbers.
ω is the set of natural numbers in the set theory.
In the following schema the so-called Replacement Axiom will be formulated. Its
necessity has been recognized by Skolem, D. Mirimanoff and Fraenkel only in 1922 or
shortly before. The Replacement Axiom describes the transition from given sets u to
a new set w that arises when functions, more exactly set-theoretical operations, F are
applied to elements x of u and the images F(x) are collected together. Operations are
unique assignments on the universe of all sets (that itself is no set) given by expressions
φ(x, y) that assign in a unique way sets y to sets x. An example is the construction P of
the power set that assigns to a set x its power set P(x).
The uniqueness of such operations is in a formal way expressed in the first part of
the following formula.
Axiom (Schema of Replacement).
∀u[∀x∀y∀z(x ∈u ∧φ(x, y) ∧φ(x, z) →y = z) →∃w∀v(v ∈w ↔∃x(x ∈u ∧φ(x, v)))].
It looks a bit confusing. So we denote by F the operation given here by φ and use set
terms. Then one gets the following formulation.
Axiom (Schema of Replacement).
∀u∃w(w = {F(x) | x ∈u}).
The meaning of the word “replacement” can be easily seen here: If F is given then
one can move from the given set u to a set w of images of elements of u and quasi
“replace” in transition u by w. For example P: The Replacement Axiom gives for the
set ω the set w whose elements are power sets P(n) of elements n ∈ω. Or: one can
define recursively a function f on ω by putting f(0) = ω and f(n+1) = P(f(n)). This gives
the set {ω, P(ω), P(P(ω)), . . .}. Just by the example of this set Fraenkel and Skolem
have recognized the necessity of the Replacement Axiom.
We come now to the last axiom of ZF set theory, to the Foundation Axiom formulated
by Zermelo in 1930 and connected with some ideas of Mirimanoff and von Neumann.
It expresses a further natural expectation of sets that can be built by using the hitherto
introduced axioms. We expect that the construction of sets begins by “simple” objects
(that are already sets) and rises from sets to sets, then from sets of sets to sets etc. A set
can then contain objects, sets, sets of sets and arbitrary “higher” sets as elements. If
a set is given then one can trace back the complexity of its elements and in a finite
number of steps find elements that are of a relatively “simplest”, “lowest” type. This

4.3 Two set theories
|
267
means that there is no not interrupting chain of membership relations of the type
⋅⋅⋅∈xn ∈xn−1 ∈xn−2 ∈⋅⋅⋅∈x1.
Since objects, elements, are always sets, one can say this in such a way: in every
nonempty set x there are elements y such that no element of y is an element of x. This
is expressed by the Foundation Axiom.
Axiom (of Foundation).
∀x[x
̸= 0 →∃y(y ∈x ∧∀z(z ∈y →¬z ∈x))]
or
∀x[x
̸= 0 →∃y(y ∈x ∧y ∩x = 0)].
Since ∈can be treated as a relation restricted to x, this means: Every nonempty set
contains a ∈-minimal element.
What has been positively said in connection with this axiom, can be also restric-
tively formulated in such a way: sets are sets of elements, and in a real set theory those
elements are again sets. They again are sets of elements being sets of sets of etc. Hence
in a concept of sets a non-interrupting, infinite regress of membership is included.
The Foundation Axiom says “finished”, the regress is interrupted – “ultimately”. The
foundation axiom – though it actually looks “harmless” and rather technical – is in
fact theoretically strong.
This will become “palpable” in the following equivalent formulation of the axiom.
One simply requires that the formation of sets begins by the simplest set 0 and the
world of sets is constructed according to the formulated principles of building sets.
There arises a hierarchy of sets – the so-called von Neumann hierarchy in which a not
interrupted regress of membership is prevented per se.
The von Neumann hierarchy plays an important role in set theory. It makes the
above-indicated composition of sets explicit from stage to stage. The hierarchy begins
with 0 = 0 in the first level V0. Then there is the set whose element is just the empty
set: {0}. This is the power set of the empty set, hence P(0). It forms the next level V1. By
applying the power set construction one moves to the level V2 = P(P(P(0))) and so on
from level to level. If Vn is reached then Vn+1 = P(Vn). The ascent in the hierarchy Vn
for finite n is exemplified by Fig. 4.1. Recall the set-theoretical natural numbers 0 = 0,
1 = {0}, 2 = {0, 1} etc.
The first transfinite levels after all finite n are
Vω = ⋃{Vn | n ∈ω},
Vω+1 = P(Vω),
. . . ,
Vω+(m+1) = P(Vω+m)
etc., till the transfinite level
V2ω = ⋃{Vω+n | n ∈ω},
V2ω+1 = P(V2ω),
. . . ,
V2ω+(m+1) = P(V2ω+m)
etc., unlimited to high and always higher transfinite levels.

268
|
4 Sets and set theories
V0
V1
V2
V3
V4
0
{0}
{0, 1}
{0, 1, 2, {1}}
{0, 1, 2, 3, {1}, {2}, {{1}}, {0, {1}}, {1, {1}}, {{1}, 2}, {0, 1, {1}}, ⋅⋅⋅}
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.
.
Fig. 4.1. Start of the hierarchy of sets.
It is claimed that all sets can be grasped in this way, i.e., that every set appears on
one of the levels and that there are no “exotic” sets not originating from 0 and built by
those systematic construction of sets. This is expressed in an equivalent way by the
foundation axiom referring to this hierarchy.
Axiom (of Foundation). Every set x belongs to a level Vα for some ordinal α.
Already the first steps of the hierarchy Vn for n ∈ω are a strong demand for our
imagination. Further steps to Vω and even further require the actual infinite and go
beyond the usual imagination. The universe V of sets arising by applying axioms of
building new sets is enormously large. The unlimited process beyond the finite into
the transfinite indicates radically the explosive power of the Axiom of Infinity together
with the Power Set Axiom.
Axioms listed so far form the system of ZF set theory. If the Axiom of Choice (AC) –
usually treated with a certain reservation – is added then the resulting theory is denoted
as ZFC. We shall write in a separate section about some problems connected with this
axiom that are reasons of this reservation. Here let us say only few words.
The Axiom of Choice describes something usual: If several sets are given then it is
unproblematic to choose one element from each of those sets. The Axiom of Choice
allows also that infinitely many sets are given. How should one choose an element
from each of infinitely many sets? It can be laborious even if the number of sets is finite
but great. In the case of infinitely many sets it is practically impossible. It will again
become visible how big the notional step up to the Axiom of Infinity is.
Axiom (of Choice).
∀x[∀y∀z(y ∈x ∧z ∈x →y
̸= 0 ∧z
̸= 0 ∧(y = z ∨y ∩z = 0))
→∃w∀v(v ∈x →∃u(w ∩v = {u}))].
This means:
For any system x of nonempty pairwise disjoint sets v there is a set w having
exactly one element from every set v ∈x.

4.3 Two set theories
|
269
4.3.2 Von Neumann, Bernays and Gödel set theory
Also in the case of BG or NBG set theory formulated by von Neumann⁴ [355, 356] in
1925 and 1928, Bernays [30, 31] in 1937 and Gödel [137] in 1940, the point is to
avoid the known antinomies. According to von Neumann the reason of them is not the
existence of “very large” sets but the fact that “large sets” can be treated as usual sets.
The point is not to bound from the very beginning the process of building new sets and
the size of set-theoretical objects as it is done in ZF set theory by the Comprehension
Axiom but to grade the arising totalities.
Consider for example the domain V of all sets – and assume that it is an object,
i.e., a set as any other. Then obviously V ∈V. This is strange. In fact, the formation
of V assumes that V is already given. Further {V} and {V, {V}} are also elements of V
and should be built before V would be “ready”. This does not suit our conception of
forming sets. It is difficult to accept V as “definite” and as a “whole” as Cantor required
with respect to objects of set theory. One should be – at least initially – careful and
treat V not as a usual set and handle it as an object similar to others. What is the
consequence of this? One should not allow V without further ado as an object in the
process of building sets, as a potential element of a set.
What is the source of Russell’s antinomy? The point is the totality R = {y | y ∉y}.
The contradictions (a) R ∈R ⇒R ∉R and (b) R ∉R ⇒R ∈R arise only when the
question R ∈R is asked. If it is not provided then there is no antinomy. This means that
one is requested to exclude R as an object from the process of building sets.
Objects of NBG set theory are called classes. Among them are sets. Sets are those
classes that can be members of other classes. Proper classes are those classes that
cannot be members of other classes – as for example R.
Definition. A class x is called a set if there is a class K such that x ∈K. We write
“mg(x)”. A class is called proper if K is not a set.
We use small Latin letters as set variables, and Latin capitals as class variables. This
has been used already in the definition and when we spoke about V and R. For R it is
clear by our above considerations: if R were a set then by (a) and (b) one would get
a contradiction. In the case of V this follows from the comprehension axiom of NBG
set theory formulated below.
First however we secure the building of classes. Since classes are collections of
sets only, we restrict properties used in forming classes to properties of sets. If in
a property a quantifier occurs then it should refer to sets only (set theory in which there
is no such restriction is KM set theory – named after Kelley and Morse). To each such
4 It is interesting to note that von Neumann chose as primitive notions not the concept of a set and
the membership relation but the concept of a function. The formulation of axioms in [355, 356] were
difficult to comprehend and did not correspond to the intuitive understanding of sets. Bernays and
Gödel formulated then the axioms in a simpler way by using again the concept of the membership.

270
|
4 Sets and set theories
property φ corresponds an axiom. Hence one has again a schema of axioms describing
the collecting, the “comprehension” of objects into classes.
Axiom (Schema of Comprehension).
∃Z∀u(u ∈Z ↔mg(u) ∧φ(u)).
To indicate more exactly set and class variables in properties and expressions we write
this axiom schema explicitly again for (n+1)-ary properties φ. Note that the unbounded
variables in φ can be class variables denoted here – according to our convention – by
capital letters Xi.
Axiom (Schema of Comprehension).
∀x1 . . . ∀xn[mg(x1) ∧. . . ∧mg(xn) →∃Z∀u(u ∈Z ↔mg(u) ∧φ(u, x1, . . . , xn))].
For the class Z we used the “class-term” as it was done above for sets:
Z = {u | φ(u)}.
The comprehension schema ensures, e.g., the empty class. It suffices to consider an
unsatisfiable property – for example x
̸= x – and one gets
0 = {x | mg(x) ∧x
̸= x}.
The class of all sets is
V = {x | mg(x) ∧x = x},
and Russell’s class is
R = {x | mg(x) ∧x ∉x}.
Notice that the originally set curly brackets “{” and “}” in the class term become “class
curly brackets”.
The distinction between sets and classes is the fundamental idea of NBG set theory.
The fact that to each property corresponds a class makes the notation easier. Instead
of speaking about properties φ and expressions φ(u, x1, . . . , xn) that belong to the
domain of logic one can use classes K that are objects of the NBG set theory. We have just
seen that for example the class of all sets V and Russell’s class R are objects of this set
theory being proper classes. In ZF set theory one can speak about them only indirectly
as about domains outside set theory. Notice that NBG set theory is an extension of ZF
set theory – in fact the domain of sets is extended by classes.
The following axioms of NBG set theory require that particular ways of building
classes should lead to sets. This is the reason why we speak here not about NBG
class theory but about set theory. With regard to contents the axioms differ not so
much from the axioms of ZF. However, in thinking, speaking and writing there are –
as a consequence of the fundamental idea – differences. We give here the axioms

4.3 Two set theories
|
271
respecting the difference “classes – sets” without detailed comments and explanations
(they are similar to those made in the case of ZF). We finish with some remarks on the
connection between NBG and ZF.
The Axiom of Extensionality is similar to the case of ZF. The only difference is that
here one speaks about the equality of classes whose elements are sets. The different
variables make it clear.
Axiom (of Extensionality).
∀X∀Y[∀z(z ∈X ↔z ∈Y) →X = Y].
One can collect only sets to pairs. This should be explicitly formulated. If x and y are
sets then one can without further ado build the class {x, y}. It is required that {x, y} is
a set.
Axiom (of Pairing).
∀x∀y[mg(x) ∧mg(y) →∃z(mg(z) ∧∀u(u ∈z ↔u = x ∨u = y))].
No axiom is needed to build a union of two classes or a union of classes.
Definition. Let A and B be classes. Then the class
A ∪B := {u | u ∈A ∨u ∈B}
is called a union of A and B.
Definition. If A is a class of sets then the class
⋃A := {u | ∃x(x ∈A ∧u ∈x)}
is called union of A.
It should be ensured that if a and b are sets then also a ∪b is a set and that if A is a set
then also ⋃A is a set. We do this generally for union of sets. Since it concerns only sets
the appropriate axiom is the same as it was in ZF set theory.
Axiom (of Union).
∀x[mg(x) →∃y(mg(y) ∧∀z(z ∈y ↔∃u(u ∈x ∧z ∈u)))].
Briefly:
∀x(mg(x) →mg( ⋃x)).
The Comprehension Axiom Schema ensures that for any property φ restricted to sets
there exists a class Z of elements fulfilling this property. If the elements u come from
a given set v from which one separates u then this class should be a set. This is required –
as in the case of ZF set theory – by the Comprehension Axiom (Separation Axiom).

272
|
4 Sets and set theories
Since elements u ∈v having the property φ form in any case a subclass Z of v one can
formulate the Comprehension Axiom simply as follows.⁵
Axiom (of Comprehension).
∀z∀v(mg(v) ∧z ⊆v →mg(z)).
It should be added that a subclass of a class A is a class such that all its elements are
also elements of A.
Subclasses of classes X can be proper classes. So “power classes” of classes –
analogue to power sets – cannot be considered. However, if x is a set then – according
to the above-formulated Comprehension Axiom – subclasses y of x are sets. So one can
make the following definition.
Definition. Let x be a set. Then P(x) := {y | y ⊆x} is said to be the power class of x.
Now the Power Set Axiom states that power classes of sets are sets.
Axiom (of Power Set).
∀x[mg(x) →∃y(mg(y) ∧∀z(z ∈y ↔∀u(u ∈z →u ∈x)))].
Briefly:
∀x(mg(x) →mg(P(x)).
The Axiom of Infinity of NBG set theory corresponds literally to this axiom of ZF. How-
ever, the property mg(x) must be inserted into the requirement of an inductive class.
About inductive classes we can speak exactly as it was done above with respect to
inductive sets.
Axiom (of Infinity).
∃x[mg(x) ∧0 ∈x ∧∀u(u ∈x →u ∪{u} ∈x)].
Briefly: There exists an inductive set.
Another formulation will be given in order to use the expression possibilities of NBG
set theory. One can speak about the class ω of (set-theoretical) natural numbers – it
can be described like the set ω of ZF indicated above. It is not necessary to require first
by an Axiom of Infinity the existence of an inductive set.
Definition. ω := {x | ∀X(is inductive class →x ∈X)].
This is a typical case of an impredicative definition (cf. Section 2.16 about Poincaré).
One can easily define ω predicatively as a class by properties of elements, namely as
a class of special “finite” sets (cf. [23, p. 75]). The Axiom of Infinity is now short and
concrete: the (set-theoretical) natural numbers form a set.
5 The Comprehension Axiom is frequently called Separation Axiom.

4.3 Two set theories
|
273
Axiom (of Infinity).
mg(ω).
Turn now to the variant of the Replacement Axiom Schema for NBG set theory. It is
about operations F and images under those operations. In the framework of classes
this can be easily formulated. Operations are definite objects of NBG, namely simply
functions on the universal class that do not have to be described by properties φ as it
was in the case of ZF. The following formulation demands generally for a function F
that images of elements of sets x are again sets: If x is a set then {F(y) | y ∈x} is a set.
In symbols:
Axiom (of Replacement).
∀F[F is a function →∀x(mg(x) →∃v(v = {F(y) | y ∈x} ∧mg(v)))].
One can see that the expression possibilities of NBG allow to formulate a single Replace-
ment Axiom instead of the Replacement Axiom Schema as it was in the case of ZF.
The Foundation Axiom of NBG is a literal translation of the Foundation Axiom of
ZF set theory.
Axiom (of Foundation).
∀X[X
̸= 0 →∃y(y ∈X ∧y ∩X = 0)].
Above we spoke about the meaning and plausibility of this axiom.
Also the Axiom of Choice in the formulation for ZF set theory can be translated into
the case of classes: For every class X of nonempty disjoint sets y there exists a class W
containing exactly one element from every set v ∈X and nothing more.
Axiom (of Choice (AC)).
∀X[∀y∀z(y ∈X ∧z ∈X →y
̸= 0 ∧z
̸= 0 ∧(y = z ∨y ∩z = 0))
→∃W∀v(v ∈X →∃u(W ∩v = {u}))].
To exploit the expression possibilities of NBG set theory a stronger formulation is often
used which secures the choice of elements from all nonempty sets. This is done by
a function F on the universal class V assigning to every nonempty set x a (not exactly
determined) element. This axiom is denoted by GC (Global Choice).
Axiom (of Choice (GC)).
∃F[F is a function ∧∀x(x
̸= 0 →F(x) ∈x)].
The extension of NBG obtained by augmenting one of the Axioms of Choice is denoted
by NBG + AC or NBG + GC, respectively.

274
|
4 Sets and set theories
4.3.3 Remarks
Though the fundamental ideas of ZF and NBG set theories are different, they are nev-
erteheless in a certain sense equivalent:
–
sentences about sets provable in ZF are also provable in NBG and vice versa (cf.
[102, pp. 214 ff.]).
–
ZF and NBG are equi-consistent, i.e., ZF is consistent if and only if NBG is consistent.
However, generally the expressing possibilities of NBG are more convenient for
the mathematical everyday practice than those of ZF.
In NBG one can speak about classes that are not objects of ZF set theory. So one
can speak for example about the class G of all groups, which is a proper class – as can
easily be shown – hence no object of ZF. To say that g is a group one can write g ∈G in
NBG, and if ZF forms the base of considerations then this must be paraphrased. NBG
provides for example a (partial) basis for the theory of categories and functors – not
provided by ZF set theory.
If one forgoes the Axiom of Infinity then in the resulting NBG set theory the infinite
is not excluded. It turns out that in such, say, NBGe set theory (in which one can resign
further axioms except the Foundation Axiom) sets are just finite classes. The domain
of the infinite is the domain of proper classes [23, p. 88]. In ZF set theory, without the
Axiom of Infinity the infinite is eliminated. There are no infinite objects there.
It has often been stressed that we do not know whether both set theories that
form today the foundation of almost all domains of mathematics are consistent. More-
over, some concrete essential problems as for example the continuum hypothesis (see
below) cannot be decided in those set theories. They are in a certain sense too weak
to describe all ideas concerning sets and on the other hand too strong to secure their
consistency. Nevertheless, they seem to correspond to the intuitive concept of a set
though they come from purely pragmatic considerations and are based on probably
random axioms describing the formation of sets. Evidences of the acceptance of those
systems of axioms provides another system, namely the system of Scott (1967) that
first looks about for conceptual necessities and the hierarchical structure of sets. For
example W. Felscher wrote about it in [117, Volume III, pp. 83 ff.]. Scott’s system is
comparable with both axiomatic systems presented above. Ebbinghaus develops in
his handbook [102] explicitly the set-theoretic axioms as open and understands the
formulating of ZF set theory as a step-by-step approximation of the intuitive concept of
a set that in principle cannot be axiomatically grasped.
Besides the set theories ZF and NBG described above there exists a third impor-
tant, logically formulated approach to a theory of sets trying to avoid antinomies in
another way. B. Russell outlined it already in The Principles of Mathematics in 1903
and developed it together with A. N. Whitehead in the famous Principia Mathematica in
1910–1913. It is based on the hierarchy of logical types. We wrote about this concep-
tion in Chapter 2 in Section 2.19 devoted to logicism. Recall here only that the theory
of types consists of distinguishing properties according to “types” forming levels of

4.3 Two set theories
|
275
an infinite hierarchy. The key to avoiding antinomies is the fact that properties belong
to exactly one level of the hierarchy and that there are no “mixed properties”, e.g.,
properties being simultaneously properties of individuals of the lowest level and of
the level of properties of such properties. The substantial expression problems of this
approach for mathematical practice have been indicated.
The axiomatic set theories ZF and NBG coming from Zermelo and von Neumann
as well as the type-theoretic approach of Russell play in the discipline “theory of sets”
an important role. They are, say, the standard in set-theoretical investigations. We
refer here to Chapter 2, in particular to the sections devoted to logicism, formalism
and intuitionism as well as the following sections of this chapter. Till the 1950s the
version of set theory in the framework of the theory of types in Russell’s setting was
popular. Today it seems that the Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory with the Axiom of Choice
(ZFC) – in spite of its smaller expressing power – enjoys much more popularity as
a background of the mathematical practice and teaching than NBG set theory. This is
certainly a consequence of the fact that it exists since 1908 while the NBG set theory,
more exactly a variant of it, became known outside the very “theory of sets” only in
the 50s and 60s thanks to the popular handbook of topology by J. L. Kelley [206].
4.3.4 On modifications
Set theory denoted by QM developed by Quine and Morse is based on the same axioms
as NBG. However, in the Comprehension Axiom are now properties allowed that are not
limited to sets in which also classes as variables may occur and stand in the scopes of
quantifiers. It is just the set theory that has been used in the handbook of topology [206]
mentioned above. The QM set theory is stronger than the presented ones, i.e., there are
propositions about sets that are provable in QM but neither in ZF nor in NBG. Also the
problem of the consistency of QM is different. It cannot be obtained from the proof of
consistency of ZF even if this would be given.
In 1956 Wilhelm Ackermann (1896–1962) proposed another approach to avoid
antinomies. His set theory follows slightly modified principles. A weaker version of the
limitation of size is taken into account in its axioms. Ackermann’s set theory, denoted
by A, speaks – similarly to NBG set theory – about classes. It is assumed like in the
Comprehension Axiom of NBG that every subclass of a set is a set. But contrary to NBG
not every element of a class is immediately a set – as it was per definitionem in the
case of NBG. The primitive notions of Ackermann’s theory A are the predicate “set”
and the membership relation ∈. The aim of Ackermann was to describe the step by
step composition of the world of sets by a theory of sets in which it is not assumed
from the very beginning that all sets are given. It was shown that exactly the same
propositions about sets are provable in Ackermann’s set theory A as in the Zermelo–
Fraenkel theory ZF. Hence the theories A, ZF and NBG are equivalent with respect to
the domain of sets.

276
|
4 Sets and set theories
In the 60s a group of Czech mathematicians around Petr Vopěnka proposed a theory in which
so-called semisets occur (cf. The Theory of Semisets [358]). In this theory the universe of objects is
larger than in ZF, NBG or QM. Sets, classes and just semisets are considered there where a semiset
is a subclass of a set being not a set. This is an essential difference with respect to NBG in which the
Comprehension Axioms claims that a subclass of a set is a set.
In the 70s Vopěnka and his collaborators proposed still another set theory called alternative set
theory (cf. [357]). Its aim was to provide a framework the starting point of which are concrete phenomena
of the reality and which would be a basis for the reconstruction of mathematics. It is a non-formalized
theory though some important parts of it are axiomatizable. It is similar to the theory of semisets. In
some aspects it is connected with Robinson’s and Laugwitz’s approach to nonstandard analysis (cf.
Sections 3.3.7 till 3.3.9 and Chapter 6) and with the ideas of ultraintuitionism (cf. Section 2.20). There
are two sorts of objects in this theory: sets and classes. Sets are clearly defined, well-differentiated,
unchangeable finite objects. Classes are in contrast considered as idealizations of properties that
therefore can be infinite. Large parts of the mathematics can be reconstructed in the alternative set
theory. At the same time it allows to formulate conceptions that cannot be adequately or only with
difficulties formulated in other set theories. As examples can serve the differential and integral calculus
in Leibniz’s formulation with the infinitely small or the paradox of a bold man⁶, the old paradox of
moving⁷ and generally domains between being continuous and being discrete.
Also Russell’s proposal to avoid paradoxes has been developed and modified. Let us mention
systems of Quine known as New Foundations (NF) in 1937 and Mathematical Logic (ML) in 1940. The
former was an attempt to combine Zermelo’s idea of limitation of size and Russell’s idea of types. In the
latter von Neumann’s idea of distinguishing between classes and sets (as in NBG set theory) is applied.
4.4 The Axiom of Choice and the Continuum Hypothesis
The Axiom of Choice is perhaps the most considered and discussed axiom in set theory
and in mathematics. The interest in it is similar to the interest in the parallel postulate
of Euclid that accompanied mathematics till the 19th century. The axiom AC has been
formulated above. It says:
For every family of nonempty disjoint sets there exists a “selection set” con-
taining exactly one element of each of those sets.
This statement seems to be highly plausible and it is often unconsciously applied.
It is for example usual to assume that equivalence classes have representatives and
that they form a set. The choice of such representatives from the classes of a partition
provides an equivalent formulation of the axiom. There are many such equivalent
formulations. Some of them will be given below.
The plausibility of the Axiom of Choice has its source in the finite that is character-
istic for our thinking. If the Axiom of Infinity is assumed then it is consequent, even
necessary to transfer the self-evident choice of elements from sets to infinite collec-
6 When does a man loosing his hair become bold?
7 Arrow paradox – the moving arrow rests at any moment and hence it does not move.

4.4 The Axiom of Choice and the Continuum Hypothesis
|
277
tions. However, if a family of sets from which elements should be chosen is given and
infinite then there is a problem. This indicates again the challenge hidden in the Axiom
of Infinity. The problem of the Axiom of Choice – and simultaneously its strength –
consists of its nonconstructivity. It is not said – what in the finite case is no problem –
how the choice should be done. If one recalls Cantor’s explanations of the concept
of a set (cf. Section 2.14) then it is clear that the formation of the choice set is out of
the ordinary. There is neither a “law” through which the elements “can be united to
a whole” nor are the elements that should be collected “definite”.
The necessity of an axiom of choice has been noticed for the first time apparently by
Giuseppe Peano in a work from 1890 in which the problem of the existence of solutions
of special systems of ordinary differential equations was discussed. He came in a proof
to the point where an element from every set of a family of sets A1, A2, A3, . . . of reals
should be chosen. He wrote there:
“However, since one cannot apply infinitely many times an arbitrary law by
which one assigns (on fail correspondre) to a class an individual of that class,
we have formulated here a definite law by which, under suitable assumptions,
one assigns to every class of a certain system an individual of that class.”
[267, p. 210]
In 1902 Beppo Levi applied explicitly the Axiom of Choice in a work devoted to the
cardinality of the set of all closed sets of reals. Prior it was applied by various mathe-
maticians, among them by Cantor, but without being conscious of doing something
special. So far it was not treated in the classical mathematics and in logic as a special
principle of forming sets.
In 1904 Zermelo gave the first explicit formulation of the Axiom of Choice and
used it in his proof of the well-ordering theorem (see [381]). In 1906 Russell gave the
formulation of the axiom used today. He called it the “multiplication axiom”.
The Axiom of Choice plays an important role in mathematics. This role is greater
than thought by mathematicians not working in the foundations of mathematics.
Many mathematical statements use it or some principles equivalent to it. Among those
equivalent principles are among others: (1) Zermelo’s Well-Ordering Theorem: Every set
can be well ordered. (2) Tukey’s Lemma: For any property Φ of subsets of a given set A
being of finite character⁸ the following holds: Every subset of A having the property Φ
is contained in a maximal set with property Φ. (3) Kuratowski–Zorn Lemma: A partially
ordered set such that every chain (linearly ordered subset) of it has an upper bound
containing a maximal element.
8 The property Φ is of finite character if and only if Φ(0) and for arbitrary sets B ⊆A one has
Φ(B) ↔∀C(C ⊆B ∧C finite →Φ(C)). This means: the property Φ is of finite character if it transfers
from sets B to its finite subsets and vice versa.

278
|
4 Sets and set theories
Now we give examples of some mathematical theorems in proofs of which the
Axiom of Choice plays an essential non-eliminable role. In set theory itself the Axiom of
Choice is needed for the following statements: (a) Every infinite set contains a countable
subset. (b) The union of countably many countable sets is countable. (c) The set of reals
is not a union of countably many countable sets. (d) The Cartesian product of nonempty
sets is nonempty. (e) Every two sets are comparable with respect to their cardinality. In
topology the Axiom if Choice is needed in particular in the proof of Tichonov’s theorem
stating that the product of compact topological spaces is compact. It was shown that
Urysohn’s Lemma⁹ is equivalent to the Axiom of Choice. In measure theory AC is used
in the proof that there exist Lebesgue nonmeasurable sets of reals. In analysis the
Axiom of Choice is needed in order to prove that the definition of continuity in the
sense of Heine¹⁰ is equivalent to the ε-δ-definition of continuity of Cauchy. Moreover,
the implication that if a function is continuous in the point x0 in the sense of Heine
then it is also continuous in the sense of Cauchy, is equivalent to the “countable Axiom
of Choice”, i.e., to AC for countable families of sets. In functional analysis one uses
the Axiom of Choice (in the form of Tukey’s Lemma) in the proof of the existence of
a basis for an arbitrary vector space and in the proof of the Hahn–Banach Theorem.
In algebra AC is applied in the proof of the theorem stating that every field F has
exactly one (up to isomorphism) algebraically closed extension. Also this theorem is
equivalent to AC for countable families. The Axiom of Choice is also needed to show
that a subgroup of a free group is free or that every group has a maximal Abelian
subgroup.
This is only a small selection of theorems in the proofs of which the Axiom of Choice
is needed. There exists an extensive book [182] where hundreds of such examples are
given and classified.
The Axiom of Choice seems to be indispensable for the mathematical practice. On
the other hand it leads to some paradoxical consequences. Its best known paradoxical
consequence is certainly the Banach–Tarski theorem on the paradoxical decomposition
of a sphere from 1924. They have shown – using some ideas of Felix Hausdorff – that
a sphere can be decomposed into a finite number of parts which then can be put back
together to yield two identical copies of the original sphere.
Let S be a 3-dimensional sphere of diameter 1 and let X, Y ⊆K. The sets X and Y are said to be
congruent (briefly: X ≡Y) if and only if there exists a rotation δ of K such that δ(X) = Y. They are said
to be congruent by decomposition (briefly: X ≈Y) if and only if there exist disjoint sets X1, X2, . . . , Xn
and Y1, Y2, . . . , Yn such that X = X1 ∪X2 ∪⋅⋅⋅∪Xn, Y = Y1 ∪Y2 ∪⋅⋅⋅∪Yn and Xi ≡Yi for every
i = 1, 2, . . . , n. The Banach–Tarski theorem states now that there exist disjoint subsets X and Y of K
9 Let X be a topological space in which closed disjoint sets can be separated by open sets. If A, B ⊆X
are disjoint and closed then there exists a mapping f : X →[0, 1] with the value 1 on S and the value 0
on B.
10 The definition of Heine says: a function f is continuous at x0 if and only if for any sequence xn such
that lim xn = x0 it holds lim f(xn) = f(x0).

4.4 The Axiom of Choice and the Continuum Hypothesis
|
279
such that X ≈K and Y ≈K. It can be also shown that the same holds for a closed or open ball without
the middle point. R. M. Robinson proved that 5 is the minimal number of parts into which a sphere
can be decomposed in such a way that they form (in the sense of the relation ≈) two spheres. Banach
showed that there exists no paradoxical decomposition of a figure on the plane.
The decompositions from the Banach–Tarski theorem seem to contradict our intu-
ition originating from our experience with measuring. However, this experience is
based on the contact with and perception of “normal” sets, first of all polygons and
polyhedrons. Sets from the theorem are mostly pathological, in particular Lebesgue
nonmeasurable – their existence is proved by using the Axiom of Choice. How the proof
looks like and how one ball can be transformed into two balls is sketched for example
in [217] by K. Kuhlemann. He tells there a short story of “Downfall of Mathemagica” (Der
Untergang von Mathemagika) with many mathematical and philosophical allusions.
The reason for our doubts towards the Axiom of Choice are not only its paradoxical
consequences. In fact, it has a completely different character than other axioms of ZF
or NBG: it is not constructive. It postulates the existence of a set without giving any
information about it. Moreover, the set postulated by the axiom is in no way uniquely
determined – in contrast to sets required by other axioms of ZF or NBG. In the case
of equivalence classes for example there are generally various sets of representatives.
This is the reason why the Axiom of Choice is strictly rejected by constructivists and
intuitionists.
Since the Axiom of Choice generates some problems (primarily of the philosophical
nature) and, on the other hand, it is indispensable in many branches of mathematics,
some mathematicians treat theorems proved with the help of it in a special way and
explicitly mark this fact.
The outstanding position of the Axiom of Choice in mathematics is the reason of
great interest paid to it in the foundations of mathematics. The situation concerning
the Continuum Hypothesis is similar. Recall what it says. By a theorem of Cantor
the cardinality of a set A is smaller that the cardinality of its power set P(A), briefly:
̄̄A < ̄
̄
P(A). The operation of a power set generates an infinite sequence of cardinals, the
hierarchy of beths (ℶ). There is also another hierarchy of cardinals, the hierarchy of
alephs (ℵ). It is the hierarchy of cardinals of well-ordered sets. By the Axiom of Choice,
more exactly by the Well-Ordering Theorem of Zermelo equivalent to it, it follows that
this hierarchy contains all cardinals. The first elements of those hierarchies are equal by
definition, i.e., ℵ0 = ℶ0. The Continuum Hypothesis, briefly CH, states – what can be
expected – that also the second elements are equal, i.e., ℵ1 = ℶ1, hence ℵ1 = 2ℵ0. The
Generalized Continuum Hypothesis, briefly GCH, is the statement that the hierarchy
of alephs and the hierarchy of beths are equal. This means that for all ordinals α it
holds ℵα = ℶα, i.e., ∀α(ℵα+1 = 2ℵα). Sometimes the Continuum Hypothesis is given in
another form. It can be shown that the set of all subsets of the set ℕof natural numbers,
hence the set P(ℕ) and the set of reals ℝare equipollent. So one can formulate the
Continuum Hypothesis in the following way: every infinite set of real numbers is
equipollent either to the set of natural numbers ℕor to the set of all real numbers ℝ.

280
|
4 Sets and set theories
The Generalized Continuum Hypothesis then looks as follows: every family of subsets of
an infinite set A is equipollent either to a subset of A or to the whole set P(A). Note that
the latter formulations are equivalent to the former if the Axiom of Choice is assumed.
The last remark indicates that there are interconnections between The Axiom of
Choice and the Continuum Hypothesis. In 1926 Alfred Tarski and Adolf Lindenbaum
conjectured and in 1947 Wacław Sierpiński proved that the Generalized Continuum
Hypothesis GCH (in the second formulation) implies the Axiom of Choice. It is worth
noting that this proof was purely combinatorial and did not use any transfinite princi-
ples.
A particular problem connected with the Axiom of Choice and with the Continuum
Hypothesis is their status in the set theory ZF. What is the connection of those principles
and the axioms of set theory? If it were shown that they are consequences of other
axioms – that are not so problematic and not connected with any controversies – then
their philosophical and methodological position would be strengthened and they
would be seen less critically. However, it has turned out that the situation is different:
in 1938 Kurt Gödel proved that GCH (thus also CH) and AC are relatively consistent
with other axioms of ZF. This means that if ZF is consistent then the theories ZF + GCH
and ZF + AC are also consistent. Or: if GCH or AC added to other axioms of ZF led to
inconsistency then the inconsistency would be provable already in ZF alone. Hence
neither the negation of GCH nor the negation of AC can be proved in ZF. Gödel proved
this by constructing a model of ZF in which AC and GCH are satisfied. This is a model
of the so-called “constructible sets” – they are generated from the empty set by given
set-theoretical operations iterated infinitely many times. In Section 4.4.1 we give the
universe of constructible sets in another but equivalent formulation.
Gödel’s result does not solve the problem completely. Only in 1963 Paul J. Cohen
completed the answer to the question by a new method called the method of forcing.
He proved the following:
(i)
It is not true that (CH →GCH).
(ii) It is not true that (AC →GCH).
(iii) AC and CH (and a fortiori GCH) do not follow from other axioms of ZF.
(iv) Neither AC implies CH nor CH implies AC in ZF.
Hence the consequence of Gödel’s and Cohen’s results is: AC and GCH are relatively
consistent with and independent of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory. Consequently, a set
theory ZF with the Axiom of Choice and the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis is
as possible as a set theory without them or even with the negation of one or both
of them. If one takes into account that set theory is the base and foundation of the
whole mathematics and that many theorems of analysis and algebra are dependent
on the Axiom of Choice then one should realize that various different mathematics,
in particular various different forms of analysis are possible. Which of them would be
or is correct? How should this situation be handled? This can be compared with the
situation in geometry after the discovery of non-Euclidean geometries. The point is
here whether the parallel postulate or its negation should be assumed. Today both

4.4 The Axiom of Choice and the Continuum Hypothesis
|
281
Euclidean or non-Euclidean geometries are developed and applied in mathematics.
The case of set theory is more serious – here the point is the foundation of the whole
mathematics.
If one treats Cantor as the author of the Continuum Hypothesis and as the first
who applied the Axiom of Choice then one speak about Cantorean and non-Cantorean
set theory as well as about Cantorean and non-Cantorean mathematics. However, the
analogy with geometry does not help any more. One cannot simply choose this or that
mathematics according to these or those conditions or requirements. One expects –
independently of our philosophical views – a clear situation. One can be calmed down
by the hope – indicated above as well as in Section 2.23 about Gödel – that we are still
on the way to a set theory that would adequately describe our intuitions of a set and
solve problems connected with the Axiom of Choice and the Continuum Hypothesis
in this or another way. After all there were and are researches in the foundations of
mathematics.
4.4.1 Search for new axioms
Since the position of the Axiom of Choice in set theory is not quite clear and its conse-
quences are ambivalent – beside “positive” there are also, as we have seen, unwanted
consequences of AC – and its role in mathematics is not beyond dispute one looks for
other alternative principles. One of them is the Axiom of Determination (AD) introduced
by Jan Mycielski and Hugo Steinhaus in the paper A Mathematical Axiom Contradicting
the Axiom of Choice (1962).
To formulate this axiom consider a play between two persons. Let a set M, an ordinal α and
a set A ⊆M2α be given. Hence elements of A are sequences of elements of M of the length 2α.
We define a play Gα
M(A) in the following way: Players I and II choose elements from the set M and
player I begins. He chooses an element v0 ∈M, player II chooses an element w0 ∈M. Then player I
chooses an element v1 ∈M, player II chooses an element w1 ∈M etc. After α steps they will build
a sequence ⟨v0, w0, v1, w1, v2, w2, . . .⟩of length 2α, hence an element of M2α. The first player wins if
this sequence belongs to the set A, otherwise wins player II.
A strategy is a mapping τ assigning to every sequence u = ⟨u0, u1, . . .⟩with ui ∈M of length < 2α
an element τ(u) ∈M. A strategy τ is said to be a winning strategy for player I in the play Gα
M(A)
if and only if for any sequence w = ⟨w0, w1, . . .⟩of length α chosen by player II the sequence
v ∗w = ⟨V0, w0, v1, w1, . . . , ⟩of length 2α belongs to the set A. The sequence v = ⟨v0, v1, . . .⟩
of elements chosen by player I is determined in the following way v0 = τ(0), v1 = τ(⟨v0, w0⟩),
v2 = τ(⟨v0, w0, v1, w1⟩), etc. In a similar way a winning strategy for player II is defined. The play
Gα
M(A) is said to be determined if and only if one of the players has a winning strategy.
The Axiom of Determination (AD) now says the following.
Axiom. For any set A ⊆ωω the play Gω
ω(A) is determined.
Recall that ω is here the sequence of natural numbers and ωω is the set of all infinite sequences of
natural numbers. Note that by theorems of the arithmetic of ordinals it holds: 2ω = ω. So one can say
briefly:

282
|
4 Sets and set theories
(AD)
For any set A of infinite sequences of natural numbers there is a winning strategy for the
play Gω
ω(A).
What are the consequences of the Axiom of Determination? In the system ZF + AD the following
statements can be proved:
(i)
Every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
(ii)
The Axiom of Choice for countable families of real numbers.
(iii)
There exists a pre-well-ordering (i.e., a transitive and founded relation) on the set ℝ.
(iv)
Every filter on the set ℕof natural numbers is principal.
(v)
ℵ1 is a measurable cardinal.
(vi)
ℵ3 is a singular cardinal.
(vii)
For any set X of real numbers either ̄̄X ≤ℵ0 or ̄̄X = 2ℵ0. This means that the Continuum
Hypothesis holds.
Again the question about the status of the Axiom of Determination in the system ZF
can be asked. Note that the main problem of the consistency of AD with respect to
the axioms of ZF is so far unsolved. R. Solovay proved that if the theory ZF + AD is
consistent then the theory ZF + AC + “there exist uncountable measurable cardinals” is
also consistent. This result indicates how difficult the problem of relative consistency
of AD is.
It has been noticed above that the Axiom of Choice leads to the construction of not
Lebesgue measurable sets. This indicates a conflict with the first of the consequences
of AD listed above. So AD and AC are contradictory. Which of them should be chosen,
what should be used as the foundation of mathematics – ZF with AC or ZF with AD?
In looking for the – philosophical – arguments for a decision one should take into
account that both, i.e., the Axiom of Choice and the Axiom of Determination hold in
the case of the finite. They are formulated in the language of set theory by formulas
of a similar form (structure), i.e., as formulas of the form ∀[∀∃→∃∀]. Add that the
Axiom of Choice AC can be formulated as a special form of the Axiom of Determination.
In fact, Mycielski proved that in ZF the following sentences are equivalent:
(a) The Axiom of Choice.
(b) ∀M∀A ⊆M2[the play G1
M(A) is determined].
Note that the theory ZF + “∀M∀α∀A ⊆M2α [the play Gα
M(A) is determined]”, hence the deter-
minancy of described plays in all generality, is inconsistent! Even for any single α ≥ω the theory
ZF + “∀M∀A ⊆M2α [the play Gα
M(A) is determined]” is inconsistent. It is worth noting that the Axiom
of Determination speaks only about the play Gα
M(A) for M = α = ω and that in this case 2ω = ω.
Hence AD is not a general set-theoretical principle. It does not concern arbitrary
sets but only ω and ωω and subsets A ⊆ωω. So it is an axiom that concerns only the
Baire space ωω, and it cannot be generalized without inconsistency. This distinguishes
it from the Axiom of Choice that concerns generally the concept of a set. “Visually” this
induces acceptance of AC and the rejection of AD. However, AD has some “beautiful”
consequences – for example: all sets of real numbers are Lebesgue measurable. So we
see that today there are no convincing philosophical arguments towards the acceptance
or rejection of one of those axioms.

4.4 The Axiom of Choice and the Continuum Hypothesis
|
283
The results of Gödel and Cohen on the consistency and the independence of the
system ZF of the Axiom of Choice and of the Continuum Hypothesis described above
still show something else. They show that the characterization of sets given by axioms
of ZF is too weak to decide, for example some properties of sets expressed by AC or
GCH. Hence the question about a stronger systems of axioms arises. Some new strong
axioms of infinity have been proposed – they postulate the existence of large cardinals.
The simplest one claims the existence of inaccessible cardinals, i.e., cardinals closed
with respect to the operations of the power set and the union of sets.
More exactly: A cardinal m is said to be inaccessible if and only if (a) ℵ0 < m, (b) if n < m
then 2n < m, (c) if ̄̄A < m and F is a mapping of A whose values are cardinals smaller than m, then
Σx∈AF(x) < m. One can iterate the inaccessible cardinals into the transfinite and obtain in this way the
sequence of Mahlo cardinals. It was described for the first time by Friedrich Paul Mahlo in 1911.
The study of large cardinals has been intensified since 1960. Various types of such
cardinals have been introduced, for example measurable, compact, supercompact etc.
cardinals. All this leads to the following two questions:
(1) How can those axioms postulating the existence of large cardinals be justified?
(2) What are their consequences with respect to the Continuum Hypothesis?
In the literature there are various answers to question (1). Gödel suggested to rely on
the intuition. He wrote in the paper What is Cantor’s Continuum Problem? [139, p. 265
in the version from 1964]:
“also there may exist, besides the usual axioms, the axioms of infinity [which
assert the existence of large cardinals – authors’ remark], [...] other (hitherto
unknown) axioms of set theory which a more profound understanding of the
concepts underlying logic and mathematics would enable us to recognize as
implied by these concepts.”
However, he said neither how such a intuitive “profound understanding” can be
achieved nor whether this or that definite axiom should be accepted or rejected.
Gödels set-theoretical visions have been of a large extent and at the same time
optimistic. We read (loc cit):
“There might exist axioms so abundant in their verifiable consequences, shed-
ding so much light upon a whole field, and yielding such powerful methods
for solving problems (and even solving them constructively, as far as that is
possible) that, no matter whether or not they are intrinsically necessary, they
would have to be accepted at least in the same sense as any well-established
physical theory.”
A. Kanamori and M. Magidor suggest in the paper The Evolution of Large Cardinal
Axioms in Set Theory [198] introducing new axioms of infinity according to two princi-
ples: either in a “theological” way, i.e., metaphysical-philosophically motivated and

284
|
4 Sets and set theories
justified or in a purely formal way taking into account only their “aesthetic value” seen
in “beautiful” consequences and interesting interrelations. A clear position towards
this proposal has been formulated by P. J. Cohen. He rejected any platonic realism and
recommended pure formalistic arguments in set theory (cf. Comments on the Founda-
tions of Set Theory [75]).
There are attempts to justify the existence of large cardinals by general principles,
in particular by the reflection principle. The latter has been formulated by Azriel
Levy for properties of the first-order logic and later generalized by Paul Bernays for
properties of the second order. It states that any property that holds for the universe V
of all sets holds also for a certain level Vα of the cumulative hierarchy of sets (see
above). Recall that the universe V is a union of the levels Vα over all ordinals α. From
the reflection principle for the second-order logic follows for example the existence of
Mahlo cardinals.
And now about question (2): Do new axioms of infinity together with axioms of ZF
enable to solve the Continuum Hypothesis? It seems that the Continuum Hypotheses
CH and GCH are on the one hand consistent with and on the other independent of
every Axiom of Infinity proposed so far, which means: if K is a new Axiom of Infinity
such that ZF + K is consistent then the theories ZF + K + GCH as well as ZF + K + ¬GCH
are also consistent. Hence the axioms proposed so far do not give anything new with
respect to the Continuum Hypothesis. The expectations and hopes of Gödel have not
been realized so far.
In this situation one can ask which levels of the infinity are really needed for the
“finite mathematics”, i.e., for the mathematics about finite objects as natural numbers
or finite sets. Gödel claimed in his famous paper Über formal unentscheidbare Sátze
der ‘Principia Mathematica’ und verwandter Systeme. I (cf. [136, footnote 48a, p. 191],
English translation in [140]) the following: “For it can be shown that the undecidable
propositions constructed here become decidable whenever appropriate higher types
are added (for example, the type ω to the system P)¹¹. An analogous situation prevails
for the axiom system of set theory.” Since Gödel’s undecidable sentences are of finite
character, i.e., they speak about finite objects, in particular about natural numbers,
one can state that unbounded transfinite iterations of the power set operation are
necessary for the completeness and justification of finite mathematics. New results of
J. Paris, L. Harrington and L. Kirby on new “independent”, i.e., undecidable sentences
of a mathematical, more exactly combinatorial or number-theoretical and not – as it
was the case in the proof of the First Incompleteness Theorem of Gödel – of a meta-
mathematical content, show that Gödel was right. The new independent sentences
can be proved with the help of transfinite methods that exceed the arithmetic. They
11 P is the system from the Principia Mathematica [370] together with constants for natural numbers –
authors’ remark.

4.4 The Axiom of Choice and the Continuum Hypothesis
|
285
show also that at least the first level of the transfinite in Cantor’s set theory should be
necessarily assumed and accepted for the mathematics of finite objects.
Let us still mention a theorem due to Kreisel. It states that a sentence φ of the
language of Peano arithmetic, hence a sentence about natural numbers provable in the
theory ZF + AC + GCH is also provable in the set theory ZF itself. Hence the set theory
ZF + AC + GCH is a conservative extension of ZF with respect to natural numbers.
This means that the extension of ZF by the Axiom of Choice and by the Generalized
Continuum Hypothesis does not prove any new arithmetical theorems. Briefly: AC and
GCH have no meaning for our knowledge about natural numbers.
Another approach to extend the axioms of ZF goes back to Gödel. Above we already
hinted at it briefly. The point is to prove the relative consistency of the Axiom of Choice
and of the Continuum Hypothesis. Gödel constructed to this end a model by limiting
the formation of sets. The limitation is done from outside. Consider how it works in the
case of building a new hierarchy by a limited power set operation. By building new
subsets, only so-called “constructible” or “definable” sets are allowed. Let x be a set.
Then a subset y of it is said to be definable if and only if there is an expression φ and
elements z1, . . . , zn such that y = {z ∈x | φ(z1, . . . , zn)}. Instead of the power set
operation P a new operation D is introduced now – it collects the definable subsets of
a given x:
D(x) = {y | y ⊆x ∧y definable}.
The relation D(x) ⊂P(x) holds. With the help of D and ⋃the constructible hierarchy L
arises:
L0 = 0,
Lα+1 = D(Lα),
Lγ = ⋃{Lβ | β < γ},
where α is an arbitrary ordinal and γ is a limit ordinal, i.e., an ordinal without a prede-
cessor. The hierarchy L is the “universe” of all definable sets as V is the universe of all
sets. The Axiom of Constructibility states now that both these universes coincide, i.e.,
that every set is definable.
Axiom (of Constructibility). V = L.
If ZF is consistent then ZF + V = L is also consistent and the Axiom of Choice, even
the Axiom of Global Choice (GC) as well as the Generalized Continuum Hypothesis are
provable in ZF + V = L.
The Axiom of Choice holds because all sets are now “constructible” and in this
way the “non-constructive part” of this axiom is reduced. This was the aim of Gödel’s
construction. One of the consequences of the limitation of the universe expressed by
V = L is the fact that now the Continuum Hypothesis also holds.
Note that V = L is independent of the axioms of ZF together with the Axiom of
Choice since ZFC + ¬V = L is consistent if ZF is consistent. And again the following

286
|
4 Sets and set theories
question can be asked: which set theory ZF + V = L or ZF + ¬V = L should be chosen and
accepted? And again the answer is difficult. In fact, on the one hand only the limitation
of building sets to definable sets seems reasonable. It is in a sense an extension of the
fact that in the finite every set is in principle built by a certain property. On the other
hand the limitation expressed by the Axiom of Constructibility seems to be a bit artificial.
The axiom V = L and the Power Set Axiom do not fit together. The requirement that all
subsets of, say, ω or even of ℝare definable does not satisfy our intuitive expectations.
Think for example of the so-called “infinite non-periodic decimal fractions” and lawless
sequences connected with them that are used to describe real numbers.
The aim of Gödel by constructing L was not to propose a new set theory. His aim
was the construction of inner models in order to prove the relative consistency of AC
and GCH. We have indicated above – when we spoke about the large cardinals – that
Gödel himself did not lean towards the restriction of set formation – just the opposite,
he leaned towards its extension.
4.4.2 Further remarks and questions
Almost all problems and questions considered by us so far are connected with the actual
infinite postulated by the Axiom of Infinity. Without the actual infinite there would
be no problems. In fact, the set theory ZF without the Axiom of Infinity is consistent
(cf. [115, p. 9]). However, without the infinite mathematics would not go too far. It
would be restricted to elementary arithmetic (cf. [23]). Above we have over and over
again repeated and stressed that mathematics has created real numbers only thanks to
the fact that it has accepted the actual infinite and made it an object of mathematics.
But the question is: do we really need the infinite in mathematics to such an extent in
which set theory makes it possible?
Do we need for applied mathematics a mathematics in which the actual infinite
sets of arbitrary magnitude are assumed? – We disregard the problem that the concept
of an applied mathematics is fuzzy and clouded. – The widespread hypothesis, though
not verified, says that the answer to this question is negative. Already Hermann Weyl
has shown in his monograph Das Kontinuum [365] in 1918 that large parts of the
classical mathematical analysis can be developed in a conservative extension of the
Peano Arithmetic (PA). New investigations due mainly to Solomon Feferman and Gaisi
Takeuti led to the construction of a conservative extension of the arithmetic PA in which
the whole classical and modern applied analysis can be formulated. In particular one
can formulate there the theory of measurable sets and functions, the general theory of
measure and integral as well as fragments of functional analysis. Further support of this
hypothesis is provided by results of the so-called reverse mathematics (cf. Section 2.22).
It has been shown there that there are weak theories – weaker than theories of Feferman
and Takeuti – being conservative extensions of Skolem’s Primitive Recursive Arithmetic
(PRA) in which important and large parts of analysis and algebra can be reconstructed.

4.5 Final remarks
|
287
Should the actual infinite be restricted to what is practically necessary? Note that
in the modern mathematics there are many domains being far from applications but
essentially based on transfinite set theory. The rejection and cancelation of such set
theory would mean an impoverishment of mathematics. The infinite is and remains
a fundamental object of investigation of mathematics.
There are attempts to look for the foundations of mathematics not in set theory
but in category theory developed by Samuel Eilenberg (1913–1998) and Saunders
MacLane (1909–2005) in the 1940s. When based on this theory mathematics becomes
a knowledge of categories and functors. A category is an abstract object consisting
of a class of items and of morphisms between those items that can be connected.
Functors are mappings between categories. E. Kleinert discusses in [210, pp. 65 ff.]
the complementary relations between concepts of set theory and of category theory.
The approach based on the category theory though technically useful and effective
in many domains of mathematics (e.g., in topology) does not seem to be elementary
and to correspond to the mathematical intuition to such a degree as today’s set theory.
Hence its meaning is still not the same as the meaning of set theory. Set theory is
to a large extent the fundamental mathematical theory providing foundations of the
whole mathematics.
4.5 Final remarks
In retrospect we would like to give a survey of what the axioms of both set theories do
in fact state. The axioms say how sets in fact are and how we handle them. Since set
theory constitutes the background of mathematics, the whole mathematical thinking is
affected by set-theoretical principles. We think in sets – and rarely realize it. We would
like to try to consider mathematical thinking being stamped by set theory.
Let us begin by the ontological question discussed at the very beginning. The
general question concerns the nature and way of existence of mathematical objects.
Above there have been remarks that – since sets are the fundament of all mathematical
objects – the ontological questions can be reduced to the question concerning sets.
What are sets?
In Subsection 4.2.2 devoted to the problem of universals we have presented the most
important conceptions concerning the way of existence of mathematical concepts
applied to sets. After giving an insight into the axiomatic of set theory and its problems
we ask the question about the nature of sets.
What are sets? The first conception is that given by Cantor in his “definition of
a set”. Sets consists of objects. From single objects, from single wholes new wholes
will be built. This is an activity and achievement of thinking being represented by the
concept of a set. So sets are themselves abstract objects of thinking. Their nature is

288
|
4 Sets and set theories
not independent of objects collected by them into wholes even if their existence is
autonomous. There are many conceptions concerning mathematical objects – as has
been shown in Chapter 2. They should be taken into account when the philosophical
question about sets is asked.
The situation is however strange – and typical for questions about the ultimate
reasons and foundations. In fact, just sets are objects that should give us information
on what mathematical objects are. We expected from set theory a general solution of
the ontological problem. So philosophically we are in a sort of an inescapable – but
informative – vicious circle.
This circle is clearly seen in the consequent set-theoretical procedure, namely in
considering from the very beginning sets only as sets of sets. At first glance this gives
not much in attempts of explaining the concept of a set. However, we shall point to
principles according to which sets are built of sets and the interrelations between them
are arranged. The question “What are sets” becomes the question “How are sets”? This
is the insight that determined for a long time set theory as well as the very mathematics.
Only axioms describing interrelations between sets can provide us information on
the nature of sets. Some remarks have been made already when axioms of ZF were
presented – they will now be partially collected and extended. Nobody can say what
sets are.
Comments on set-theoretical axioms
Contrary to the case of the concept of number, in the case of the concept of a set one
cannot refer to the old philosophical tradition. One finds there no information about
sets. Sets were since the antiquity till the modern times mathematically meta-linguistic
companions and there was no philosophical reflection on them. The concept of a finite
set has been subordinated to a number.
The concept of a set entered temporarily the mathematical consciousness only in
connection with the infinity and its paradoxes and disappeared again after the rejection
of the actual infinite. It was unimaginable to treat the continuum as a set. Even in the
context of the infinity sets were strongly connected with the concept of a number and
subordinated to it. The impossibility to imagine an infinite number was one of the
arguments against infinite sets. The concept of a set entered the consciousness of
mathematicians only in the 19th century – again and now definitely in connection
with the infinity. Problems connected with the concept of a set are today first of all
problems concerning infinite sets. Only infinite sets required a new mathematical
discipline – set theory. Its axioms characterize the nature of sets. Compare in particular
the handbooks [92, 102, 117] where the concept of a set is discussed in detail.
The Axiom of Extensionality says that sets are characterized by their extensions.
Those extensions can exceed – this is a consequence of the Axiom of Infinity – any
imagination. Countable sets are treated as being clear and perspicuous – especially
when a listing of their elements is given. However, there are problems with uncountable

4.5 Final remarks
|
289
sets. It is not known how many levels higher than the countable sets they are. This
concerns also the real numbers that are so fundamental for every mathematics. For
a normal mathematician the orientation in the higher cardinalities is not clear. Recall
for example inaccessible singular cardinals mentioned above. Even in the case of the
universe V of sets the set theory provides no help. The universe V is in the genuine
sense of the word indescribably large. There is no property that could characterize this
universe. Every property is by the reflection principle satisfied already in a particular
level Vα.
The size of sets is restricted by the Axiom Schema of Comprehension. It makes
it possible to bound the domain of sets or to distinguish between sets and not-sets.
A result of this is that after the old antinomies eliminated by this axiom schema no
new antinomies appeared so far. However, the Power Set Axiom unfolds in the domain
of infinite sets an inconceivable effect. It acts by transfinite exponents on the size of
sets. Already the first step into the infinity leads to the problems connected with the
Continuum Hypothesis.
The Replacement Axiom Schema allows the development of new transfinite dimen-
sions. It was just the background of developing it as a principle of building new sets.
The point is to secure the projection of ω beyond ω. The name “replacement” does
not express its whole meaning. It is a question of replacing and transferring given and
known sets and structures into unknown transfinite domains. It can be said that the
Replacement Axiom secures in the universe of sets our ideas of sets being represented
by given and known sets and structures. Reasons for this axiom are not necessarily
expectations coming directly from our practical, finite experience with sets. Replace-
ment and transfer are in the case of the finite self-evident to such a degree that they are
unrecognized as principles. The reasons are in fact theoretical needs and requirements
coming from the extension of sets into “the uncertain”, into the infinite. Perhaps this
can also explain why the necessity of this axiom has been recognized so late (1922).
The Foundation Axiom is in fact not an axiom securing the formation of new sets – it
concerns the reasonable formation of sets and of the universe of sets. It meets concerns
of a natural finite expectation and reflects our idea of the complexity of building sets
that should always begin by – relatively – simple prime objects and further proceed to
complex elements. The foundation requires the breakup of an infinite regress of the
membership being included in the very concept of a set, namely to be a set of sets,
hence a set of sets of sets, etc.
In the best way, namely explicitly, the hierarchical structure of the “reasonable”
universe of sets is described by the levels Vα – the first levels of this hierarchy have
been described above. The requirement of the hierarchical structure of the universe of
sets is equivalent to the Foundation Axiom.
The Axiom of Choice plays an exposed role among the axioms of set theory – above
it was discussed in detail. Now we would like to explicate its special role slightly further.
The selected sets that arise by the Axiom of Choice throw another liberal light
on the concept of a set in set theories with AC. Neither the elements that are chosen

290
|
4 Sets and set theories
are definite nor the very set arising by an infinite choice is well defined. No law deter-
mines its creation. The selected set is claimed and is determined because the Axiom of
Extensionality says so.
One of the properties of the Axiom of Choice is that in the finite it does not appear
in fact as a special principle of building sets. In a set theory without the Axiom of
Infinity (cf. [23]) it trivially holds. It turns to be a principle only when sets, i.e., families
of sets are infinite – which was observed first by Peano. The forming of a selected set is
hardly noticeable in the finite case because it is not identifiable by a construction rule.
The non-constructive character of the choice becomes a great unsolvable problem in
the case of the infinite. Example: the principle of well-ordering is obvious in the finite
case but the well-ordering of the reals being a consequence of the Axiom of Choice that
has for the first time kindled the controversy concerning this axiom (cf. [382]) acted
as a long lasting provocation (cf. [323]). The waves have been calmed because one is
nowadays careful in applying AC and AC turned out to be useful and even necessary in
many branches of mathematics.
It seems to be consequent to currently adjust this principle – hardly noticeable in
the finite case and simultaneously indispensable – at the moment when infinite sets
are accepted. In fact, the acceptance of this axiom grows in mathematics.
We have seen that the search for new axioms of set theory that could help to solve
in one or another way problems connected with the Axiom of Choice or the Continuum
Hypothesis lead to interesting results, but so far they were not very successful. The
discussion of the new axioms is open. Even worse: generally there is no broad agreement
concerning the question which farther properties should be linked with the concept of
a set and in which way the so far existing set theories should be reformed or completed.
To think mathematically
Sets are determined – as the Axiom of Extensionality states – by their elements. They are
as registers of their elements, hence static. If sets form the foundation of mathematical
concepts then in principle everything in mathematics stops and stands still. First of all,
remember the old intuitive flowing continuum which changed into a stationary set of
single elements identified with the set ℝ. We spoke about it exhaustively in Section 3.3.
To formulate something or to make it precise generally means to reduce it to sets.
This influences the thinking. To think mathematically means always to think set-theore-
tically. Although the set-theoretical thinking is determined not only by axioms we have
just commented on, but also by the fact of reducing everything that is mathematical
to a single relation, the membership relation. It is a priori for every element uniquely
registered in sets. Hence to think mathematically and set-theoretically means insofar
to think in a bookkeeping way. It is very precise. Mathematics becomes – figuratively
speaking – a “filing cabinet”. However, it provides valuable and useful insights into
“documents” via mathematical concepts, proofs, propositions and instruments.

4.5 Final remarks
|
291
A fundamental certificate of our mathematical thinking are natural numbers. They
have early been treated by mathematicians as sets, namely as finite cardinals and
also today are often associated with this idea. Long ago – since Cantor, Frege and
Russell – this was borrowed from other disciplines and dominated in empiricism (cf.
Section 2.24.2). Still more serious and hardly conscious anymore is the characterization
of natural numbers via set-theoretical Peano axioms (cf. Subsection 5.3.1) in which
sets play an important role. In the induction axiom the quantifiers refer to all subsets
of the set of natural numbers as if they were all given.
Our structural thinking at general begins with sets that form the basis of structures.
Structures are not built anymore. The elements of structures are taken as being ready
in given sets. They are not constructed anymore and we do not build structures on
them in contrast to the intuitional approach in pre-set-theoretical epochs. Today we
are talking about elements.
In fact, ways of mathematical thinking are abstract. They reduce and deform
the reality, processes and continua. They are destructive – however they produce in
this way something effectively constructive. What has been lost is mathematically
set-theoretically reconstructed. What was before unrecognized and not understood
becomes in the reconstruction visible in detail. Processes and movements will be
grasped as functions, while functions and relations are sets with a variety of properties,
and continuity is precisely described. Those are the basic elements of the mathematical
turn of the 19th century and main powers of the unprecedented development of math-
ematics.
The mathematical type of thinking can be seen with reservation and criticized
as being only abstract, formal and far from the reality. However, the fact that mathe-
matical methods and propositions have an everyday real meaning is reality. This is
universally shown by highly visible and unmanageable applications. Mathematical
and set-theoretical thinking opens new approaches. It allows for example – to turn
to the natural numbers – deep insights into the complexity of the “real” concept of
number that arises by the reconstruction of what has been set-theoretically abstracted
(cf. [20]).
The mathematical thinking begins nowadays, as always, with natural numbers –
through them it is (by a quasi real standard model) strongly connected with the reality.
Because of this, one can say, sets have been “invented” in order to understand numbers.
This is clearly indicated by Dedekind’s way of thinking in his works about natural and
real numbers (cf. [85, 87]).
One can observe a striking turn in the development of set theory – a turn to natural
numbers whose foundation were just sets. In fact, natural numbers form in return –
closely viewed – the foundation of sets in a certain sense. They provide – in a set-
theoretic garment – elements of set-theoretical hierarchy and shed some light at the
question about the nature of sets. On the other hand sets allow sophisticated insights
into numbers and the concept of number which would not exist without sets.

292
|
4 Sets and set theories
Infinity
“Definitions of a set” (cf. Section 2.14) were formulated by Cantor in order to describe
and to justify the forming of infinite sets. The implicitly formulated principles included
in those definitions originated from ideas and the experience with finite sets. All those
principles lead in a system ZF of set theory without infinite sets to a consistent system.
Hence axioms of ZF without the Axiom of Infinity describe in an appropriate way our
finite concept of a set. Problems arise only when a step towards the actual infinity is
made. In the previous sections and chapters we got to know reasons that led towards
the actual infinity. The step towards the infinity provided the foundation and produced
the clarity, freedom and range in which nowadays mathematics is developed. However,
the consistency of ZF or NBG set theories – as was mentioned several times – is in
principle not verifiable. So infinity is what it always was, namely transcendent – also
for a rational mathematical thinking. The infinite remains for set theory, for the theory
of the infinite, mysterious.

