CHAPTER 5 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach 
5-1 History and Formulation 
5-2 Lattice Gas and Binary Alloy 
5-3 One-dimensional Model and Transfer Matrix 
5-4 Transfer Matrix for the Two- and Higher-dimensional Models 
5-5 The Onsager Solution of the Two-dimensional Model 
5-6 Correlation Functions, Eigenvalue Degeneracy, and Long-range Order 
PROBLEMS 
5-1 History and Formulation 
The Ising model is perhaps the simplest system that undergoes a nontrivial 
phase transition, and for reasons that will become clear, now occupies an 
almost unique place in theoretical physics. The literature on the Ising model is 
enormous; since the original contribution of Ising (1925) almost 500 research 
papers have been published on the subject. 
The 1925 paper of Ising was essentially his Ph.D. thesis. He succeeded in 
solving the one-dimensional model exactly and found to nobody's surprise 
these days that there was no phase transition. In this paper Ising gives credit 
to his supervisor Wilhelm Lenz for inventing the model, but curiously enough 
Lenz has never been associated with the model since. 
The model was originally proposed as a model for ferromagnetism, the 
"spins" being scalar spins capable of only two orientations, "up" or 
" down," as discussed in Section 4-5. It was a great disappointment, especially 
to Ising, that the model did not exhibit ferromagnetism in one dimension. 
Ising, in fact, gave arguments why the model should not exhibit ferromag­
netism in two and three dimensions (we know now that this is not the case), 
so it was natural that the model was subsequently neglected. It was taken up 
again in the 1930s by Bragg and Williams (1934, 1935), Bethe (1935), Peierls 
II6 

Sec. 5-1 History and Formulation 
117 
(1936a, 1936b), and others, but mainly as a model for a binary alloy (spin 
up corresponding to an atom of type A and spin down to an atom of type B) 
rather than of a ferromagnet. 
Peierls (1936a) gave a proof of the existence of ferromagnetism for the two-
dimensional model which was unfortunately incorrect. The error was only 
noticed recently (by Fisher and Sherman) and the proof has since been made 
completely rigorous by Griffiths (1964). 
The major breakthrough came from Kramers and Wannier (1941), who 
formulated the model as a matrix problem and from symmetry considerations 
actually succeeded in locating the critical point exactly for the two-dimen-
sional model. They did not, however, solve the problem completely; this was 
left to Onsager (1944), who obtained the complete solution (i.e., the partition 
function) for the two-dimensional model, in the absence of an external 
magnetic field. The Onsager solution was really the first nontrivial dem­
onstration of the existence of a phase transition from the partition function 
alone. 
After Onsager, papers began to flow forth. Since an excellent review has 
recently been published [Brush (1967)], we shall not dwell further on the 
history at this stage. We shall, however, have a little more to say on the 
historical side as we progress, but first let us define the model precisely. 
Consider a lattice (e.g., the two-dimensional square lattice shown in 
Figure 5.1) with spins μΡ capable of two values, +1 (spin up) and —1 (spin 
down), located on the vertices P of the lattice. If there are N vertices, or 
lattice sites, there are a total of 2N possible configurations of spins (two for 
each site) on the lattice, a configuration {μ} being specified by the N spin 
variables, i.e., 
{ μ }  =  ( μ Ρ :  P  a lattice point). 
In a configuration { μ }  the interaction energy is defined by 
where the starred sum is over nearest-neighbor lattice points P and Q. J is 
the " coupling constant" and H is the external magnetic field. The first term 
in Equation 1.1 represents the interaction energy between spins and the 
second term the interaction between the individual spins and the external 
field. 
Ε{μ}= -J Σ* μρμ<ι~ ΗΣμρ> 
(1.1) 
ρ, Q 
P 

n 8 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
Figure 5.1. Two-dimensional square Ising lattice. Spins occupy the 
vertices P of the lattice. 
For example, the interaction energy for the two-dimensional lattice shown 
in Figure 5.1 with lattice points denoted by 
is given by 
(1.2) 
In one dimension the lattice becomes a chain of N spins, as shown in Figure 
5.2, and 
(1.3) 
In most cases it is convenient to consider periodic lattices instead of the 
open lattices above (Equations 1.2 and 1.3). For example, in one dimension 
Fig ure 5.2. One-dimensional Ising chain. 

Sec. 5-1 History and Formulation 
119 
we consider a ring of spins, as shown in Figure 5.3, with spin N coupled to 
spin 1. The interaction energy is then given by Equation 1.3 with N — 1 
replaced by N in the first sum, with the convention that 
In two 
dimensions we achieve periodicity by wrapping the lattice on a torus so that 
FIGURE 5.3. Closed Ising chain with spin Ncoupled to spin 1. 
the Hth column is coupled to the first column and the /wth row is coupled to 
the first row. The interaction energy is given by Equation 1.2 with m — 1 
and n — 1 replaced by m and n, respectively, with the convention that 
(1.4) 
The generalization to higher-dimensional lattices is straightforward. 
Notice that the interaction energy between two nearest-neighbor spins P 
and Q is 
if both spins are up or both spins are down 
(1.5) 
if one spin is up and the other spin is down. 
So if 
we get a lower energy for a parallel configuration. The " ground-
state energy" (i.e., the minimum 
in this case is, therefore, from 
Equation 1.1, 
for periodic lattices 
(1.6) 

120 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
(for open lattices we have boundary terms), where q is the coordination number 
of the lattice (i.e., the number of nearest-neighbor sites of a given site), so 
ΣΡ,<2 — Nq/2. The minimum energy (1.6) (when J > 0) is achieved when all 
spins are up (down) for H > 0(H < 0), and in the absence of an external field 
(H = 0) the minimum is achieved either when all spins are up or all spins are 
down. For example, the square lattice has q = 4 and it is to be noted that for 
the open lattice (Equation 1.2) N in the first term of Equation 1.6 is to be 
replaced by N — [(« + m)j2] (where N = mri). The boundary term -  
(n + m)/2 
is, of course, negligible compared with N for large m and n. 
Since for J > 0 the ground state is achieved when all spins are parallel, we 
say that J > 0, corresponds to ferromagnetism. Similarly J < 0 corresponds to 
antiferromagnetism since from Equation 1.5 we get a lower energy for an 
antiparallel configuration. The antiferromagnetic ground state is not always 
easy to find, however, as the reader may easily convince himself by consider­
ing a few examples. [For the one-dimensional chain and the two-dimensional 
square lattice it is easy, but what about the triangular lattice in two dimen­
sions? (See Problem 1.)] 
We have now defined the model. The statistical-mechanical problem is to 
evaluate the partition function defined by 
where the energy Ε{μ} is given by Equation 1.1. The sum over {μ} denotes a 
sum over all possible configurations μΡ = +1 of the lattice. For example, 
for the one-dimensional open chain (Equation 1.3). 
As we will see in Section 5-3, the evaluation of ZN (Equation 1.8) is trivial, 
especially when H = 0. For the two-dimensional model the problem is 
extremely complicated and has only been solved in the zero-field case (see 
Appendix D). The three-dimensional problem is unsolved even for H = 0! 
In the next section we give two different interpretations of the Ising model, 
the first as a lattice gas, which in view of our discussion in previous chapters 
will contain more familiar terminology. As was pointed out in Chapter 4, 
however, the magnetic interpretation is somewhat less cumbersome, so most 
of our subsequent discussion will be devoted to it. The second interpretation 
as a binary alloy is included only for historical interest. 
Zn = Σ exp(-££M), 
(1.7) 
(1.8) 

Sec. 5-2 Lattice Gas and Binary Alloy 
121 
5-2 Lattice Gas and Binary Alloy 
The term lattice gas was first coined by Yang and Lee (1952b) and Lee and 
Yang (1952), although the interpretation of the model as a gas was, in fact, 
known earlier. 
The definition is as follows: Consider a lattice of V sites (V = "volume") 
and a collection of N particles. The particles are placed on the vertices of the 
lattice such that not more than one particle can occupy a given lattice site, 
and only particles on nearest-neighbor lattice sites interact. The interaction 
potential between two lattice sites P and Q is, therefore, 
OO 
if P  and Q  are occupied and P = Q  (the " hard core ") 
φ(ρ, Q) = 
-A 
i f P  a n d  Q are nearest-neighbor occupied sites 
(2.1) 
O 
otherwise. 
If we now introduce parameters tP for each lattice site P of the lattice such 
that 
(1 
if site P is occupied 
Ή 
, 
. 
. , 
Ρ·2) 
I1O 
if site P is unoccupied, 
the total interaction energy in a given configuration 
{i} = (tP: P a lattice site) 
is given by (see Equation 1.1) 
E { t } =  - A l d U p t a ,  
(2.3) 
P. Q 
where, as before, the starred sum is over nearest-neighbor lattice sites P and 
Q. The condition that the total number of particles is N can be written as 
Σ ί Ρ  =  Ν  
(2.4) 
P 
and the canonical partition function is given by 
Z(N, V,T) = Σ exp(-/?£{'})· 
(2.5) 
{<) 
To remove the restriction 2.4 on the sum over the configurations 
{i}(2v in total), it is convenient to consider the grand-canonical partition 
function defined by 

122 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
(2.6) 
Since the maximum number of particles that can be accommodated on the 
lattice is V, the upper limit on the sum in Equation 2.6 is 
and from 
Equations 2.3 and 2.5 it is obvious that 
(2.7) 
where the configuration sum is now unrestricted. We now show that the 
grand-canonical partition function for the lattice gas (Equation 2.7) is 
equivalent to the canonical partition function (Equation 1.7) for the Ising 
magnet. To do this we define the variables 
by 
(2.8) 
Since 
is either 0 or 1 the variables 
are either 
Substituting Equation 2.8 into Equation 2.7 shows after an elementary cal-
culation that 
(2.9) 
where 
(2.10) 
and we have used the facts that (see Equation 1.6) 
(2.11) 
and 
(2.12) 
for periodic lattices (or more generallyif we ignore boundary terms which are 
in any case negligible in the limit 
The sum over configurations {/1} 
in Equation 2.9 is just the canonical partition function for the Ising magnet 
(Equation 1.7), so it is now straightforward to set up a correspondence 
between the thermodynamic quantities for the gas and the magnet. 

Sec. 5-2 Lattice Gas and Binary Alloy 
123 
Thus for the lattice gas the pressure p from Equation 2.9 is given by 
(2.13) 
where 
is the Ising magnet (canonical) free energy per spin, i.e., 
(2.14) 
and Z(V, T) is the canonical partition function Equation 1.7 with V in place 
of N. 
The density p, defined by 
(2.15) 
is likewise given in terms of the magnetization m from Equations 2.8 and 2.9 
by 
i.e., 
(2.16) 
where m is defined by 
(2.17) 
Similarly, the isothermal compressibility 
defined by 
(2.18) 
is related to the isothermal susceptibility 
(2.19) 
by (see Problem 2) 
(2.20) 
and for the specific heats 
(2.21) 

124 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
Thermodynamically, as we have mentioned, there is a relation between 
magnetic and gas-liquid systems. As we have just seen, this relationship 
takes the form of precise identities for the lattice gas and Ising magnet, but 
it goes without saying that these identities are not generally valid. 
We conclude this section with a brief mention of the binary-alloy inter-
pretation of the Ising model. 
For a binary alloy we take the parameters tP for the lattice gas to be 
if site P is occupied by an A atom 
(2.22) 
if site P is occupied by a B atom. 
Then if eAA, eBB, and eAB denote the coupling (interaction) constants for 
nearest-neighbor A atoms, nearest-neighbor B atoms, and nearest-neighbor 
A and B atoms, respectively, the interaction energy is given by 
(2.23) 
for a particular configuration {t} of A and B atoms. It is left as an exercise 
for the reader to set up an isomorphism between the binary alloy and the 
magnet. It is almost obvious, for example, that the binary alloy with the same 
number of A and B atoms corresponds to a magnet with zero external field. 
From this point on we shall mean the Ising magnet when we refer to the 
Ising model (or problem). 
5-3 One-dimensional Model and Transfer Matrix 
Let us consider first the one-dimensional open-chain model (Equation 1.3) 
with zero external field. The problem is to evaluate the partition function 
(Equation 1.8) 
(3.1) 
where 
Because of the one-dimensional structure (cf. the Tonks gas) 
we can separate off and sum over the Nth spin 
to get 
(3.2) 

Sec. 5-3 One-dimensional Model and Transfer Matrix 
125 
where we have used the fact that since 
(3.3) 
for either 
The recurrence relation (3.2) together with the 
obvious fact that 
(3.4) 
gives 
(3.5) 
The free energy per spin 
in the thermodynamic limit is given by 
(3.6) 
which is a completely analytic function of v, and hence temperature 
for all positive temperatures. Hence, as expected, there is no 
phase transition. 
It is obvious that the elementary device leading to the recurrence relation 
(3.2) will not work if there is an external magnetic field, or in dimensions 
greater than one even with H = 0. Although it is possible to solve the open-
chain problem in an external field, it is considerably easier to consider the 
(closed) periodic chain (Figure 5.3). In the limit 
we would expect 
identical results, and this, as we will see, is the case. 
For the periodic chain 
in an external magnetic field H the 
problem is to evaluate 
(3.7) 
where 
If we define 
(3.8) 

126 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
we can write 
(3.9) 
which has the form of a matrix product. Indeed, if L is the 2 by 2 transfer 
matrix with elements 
defined by Equation 3.8, i.e., 
(3.10) 
we have, after summing in Equation 3.9 over 
that 
(3.11) 
where 
denotes the 
elements of the matrix L raised to the Nth 
power. ZN (Equation 3.11) is therefore the sum of the diagonal elements of 
i.e., the trace of 
Now since the trace of a matrix is the sum of its eigenvalues 
and the eigenvalues of 
are the eigenvalues of L raised to the Nth power, we 
have that 
(3.12) 
where 
and 
are the eigenvalues of the matrix L (Equation 3.10). The 
eigenvalue equation is 
(3.13) 
which gives 
(3.14) 
for the eigenvalues of L. 

Sec. 5-4 Two- and Higher-dimensional Models 
127 
Noting that 
is strictly less than unity for all 
we have that 
(3.15) 
When B = 0 the right-hand side of Equation 3.15 is log(2 cosh v), which is 
precisely the expression (Equation 3.6) for the open chain. Further, from 
Equation 3.14 with B = 0, 
(3.16) 
so, from Equation 3.12, the partition function for the finite chain is given by 
(3.17) 
which obviously differs from the open-chain-result, Equation 3.5. In the 
thermodynamic limit, however, only the maximum eigenvalue 
contri-
butes. We will see that this is generally the case in applications of the transfer-
matrix method. 
Note that the magnetization per spin computed from Equation 3.15 is 
is given by 
(3.18) 
In zero 
field 
the (spontaneous) magnetization is zero, as expected, 
for all finite temperatures 
5-4 Transfer Matrix for the Two- and Higher-dimensional Models 
The advantage of the matrix method is that it can be easily generalized to two 
or more dimensions. Let us consider first the two-dimensional problem on a 
square lattice wrapped on a cylinder (i.e., periodic in columns but not rows), 

128 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
as shown in Figure 5.4. The interaction energy is given by (Equation 1.2 
with 
(4.1) 
If we now denote a column configuration by 
(4.2) 
(there are a total of 
possible configurations for each column), we can write 
E{n} as a sum of two terms—the interaction energy of columns and the 
interaction energy between nearest-neighbor columns—i.e., if we define 
FIGURE 5.4. Two-dimensional Ising lattice wrapped on a cylinder. 

Sec. 5-4 Two- and Higher-dimensional Models 
129 
(4.3) 
to be the interaction energy of the jth column, and 
(4.4) 
to be the interaction energy between the jth and 
columns, we can 
write 
(4.5) 
The partition function can then be written as 
(4.6) 
where from Equations 4.3 and 4.4 with 
(4.7) 
with 
(4.8) 
Alternatively, we can take the symmetric matrix (as we did for the one-
dimensional model) 
(4.9) 

130 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
The final result is, of course, the same. 
in Equation 4.6 denotes the 
component of the 
matrix L with elements 4.7, raised to the 
nth power, i.e., by analogy with Equation 3.12, 
(4.10) 
where 
are the eigenvalues of the 
matrix L. If 
now, in the thermodynamic limit, we allow n to approach infinity before m 
(this is convenient rather than necessary), we have for the free energy per 
spin 
So the problem has again been reduced to finding the largest eigenvalue of a 
matrix, but notice the dramatic effect of dimensionality: In one dimension 
we had only to find the largest eigenvalue of a 2 by 2 matrix, but in two 
dimensions we have to find the largest eigenvalue of a 
by 
matrix and 
then let m approach infinity! 
The manipulation leading to Equation 4.11 can be repeated essentially 
word for word in three and higher dimensions. Thus in three dimensions, 
for example, we define 
to be the configuration of the jth (two-dimensional) 
plane and build the lattice up by planes. 
then represents the interaction 
energy of a plane and 
the interaction energy of nearest-neighbor 
jth and 
planes, and so forth. The interested reader can fill in the 
details for himself. 
The two-dimensional problem with H = 0 was solved by Onsager (1944) 
in one of the most celebrated articles of modern times. The corresponding 
problem in three dimensions and the two-dimensional problem with 
are unsolved. 
There have been many simplifications in the derivation of the Onsager 
result since 1944, but even the simplest are rather complicated. We shall 
present in the following section only a statement and discussion of Onsager's 
result. A detailed derivation based on Equation 4.11 is given in Appendix D. 

Sec. 5-5 The Onsager Solution of the Two-dimensional Model 
131 
5-5 The Onsager Solution of the Two-dimensional Model 
By a masterly application of Lie algebras and group representations, Onsager 
found the largest eigenvalue of the transfer matrix, Equation 4.7, with H = 0, 
to be 
(5.1) 
where yk is defined by 
cosh 
cosh 2v coth 
(5.2) 
and 
(5.3) 
A derivation of this result is given in Appendix D. 
The free energy per spin 
in the thermodynamic limit is then given, from 
Equations 4.11 and 5.1, by 
(5.4) 
In the limit 
the sum in Equation 5.4 approaches an integral (see 
Equation 5.2), so that 
(5.5) 
Use of the identity 
(5.6) 
allows us to write 
(5.7) 

132 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
which gives the symmetric Onsager formula 
(5.8) 
From Equation 5.8 the internal energy U is given by 
(5.9) 
The integral in Equation 5.9 diverges logarithmically (at the origin 
when 
To see this, note that in the neighbor-
hood of the origin 
so when 
(5.10) 
where in the last step we have transformed to polar coordinates 
etc.). 
There is a singularity, or phase-transition point, therefore, when 
(5.11) 

Sec. 5-5 The Onsager Solution of the Two-dimensional Model 
133 
i.e., when 
given by 
sinh 
_ 
(5.12) 
In Equation 5.9 for the internal energy U, the integral, Equation 5.10, is 
multiplied by 
which is zero at the critical point 
It 
follows that the internal energy is continuous at 
and that in the neigh-
borhood of vc, 
(5.13) 
where A is a constant. From this result it follows that the specific heat, 
defined by 
(5.14) 
has a symmetrical logarithmic divergence (i.e., 
at the 
critical point 
as shown in Figure 5.5. 
FIGURE 5.5. Zero-field specific heat C of the two-dimensional square 
Ising model. C diverges logarithmically on both sides of the critical 
point 

134 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
To obtain the " Onsager logarithm " it is not necessary, as shown above, 
to evaluate the integrals exactly. The integral 5.9 can, however, be evaluated 
exactly and one finds that 
(5.15) 
where 
(5.16) 
and 
is the complete elliptic integral of the first kind defined by 
(5.17) 
The analysis required for Equation 5.15 is straightforward and is left as an 
exercise for the reader (see Problem 5). The specific heat is obtained from the 
definition 5.14 and the properties of elliptic integrals (see Problem 6). It is 
given by 
(5.18) 
where 
is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind, defined by 
(5.19) 
In the neighborhood of 
(see Problem 7) 
(5.20) 
so from the exact result (Equation 5.18) we obtain a logarithmically divergent 
specific heat. 
As remarked previously, the two-dimensional model in an external field 
is an unsolved problem. Nevertheless, by various indirect means a number 
of people have obtained an expression for the spontaneous magnetization, or 
what is thought to be the spontaneous magnetization. Thermodynamically 
the spontaneous magnetization is defined by 

Sec. 5-5 The Onsager Solution of the Two-dimensional Model 
135 
(5.21) 
with the limit H-* 0+ taken after the thermodynamic limit. An exact 
evaluation of m0, therefore, really requires the solution of the H Φ 0 problem. 
Indirect methods based on alternative definitions of spontaneous magnetiza­
tion, which we shall not go into here, suggest that 
but we stress that nobody has actually proved that this expression agrees with 
the definition (Equation 5.21). 
The expression 5.22 was first derived by Onsager in the middle 1940s, but 
in true Onsager fashion he has not to this day published his derivation. He 
tantalized numerous people by writing down Equation 5.22 in various places 
[Onsager (1949)], and it was not until 1952 that C. N. Yang [Yang (1952a)] 
gave the first published derivation. Yang's derivation and others given 
recently [e.g., Montroll et al. (1963)] are extremely complicated. In view of 
the simplicity of the final result, this fact is both surprising and frustrating. 
The two-dimensional problem has been reformulated and solved by many 
people in a variety of ways, in the hope that a new derivation would light the 
way for a solution to the three-dimensional problem. This hope has unfortu­
nately not materialized as yet, although many interesting results and inter­
relations between mathematics and other branches of physics have emerged. 
Most notable among these is the relation between the Ising problem and 
combinatorial mathematics. Some new results in combinatorics have been 
obtained by this pursuit, but unfortunately little has been added to our 
knowledge of the Ising model. We shall devote Chapter 6 to the combinatorial 
approach to the Ising problem. 
In conclusion we remark that all methods to date can be applied with only 
mild variations to other two-dimensional lattices (e.g., triangular and hex­
agonal) and to lattices with different coupling constants in different directions. 
Although the critical points are different in each case, the critical behavior 
is the same—a logarithmically divergent specific heat and a £ power law for 
the spontaneous magnetization. We shall have more to say about this lattice 
invariance of critical behavior in Chapter 6. 
[1-(sinh2v)~4]1/8 
T <TC 
(5.22) 
m0 = 
O 
T> Tc, 

136 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
5-6 Correlation Functions, Eigenvalue Degeneracy, and 
Long-range Order 
The pair-correlation function <μ4 μ,> is defined in general by 
<μ*μι> =Z*1 Σ μ*μ; exp(-βΕ{μ}\ 
(6.1) 
(/0 
where Ε{μ}, Equation 1.1, is the interaction energy, i.e., 
Ε{μ}= -J Σ*»ρμ<ϊ ~H Σ He- 
(6·2) 
Ρ, Q 
ρ 
Similarly, one defines three spin-correlation functions <μ*μιμ,„>, etc. 
The one spin-correlation function <μ*> is essentially the magnetization 
(=JV-1 Yik <μ4> = <μ^> for periodic lattices), which vanishes for finite N 
when H = 0 because of the symmetry of the interaction energy under the 
transformation μΡ~* —μΡ, all lattice points P. 
In zero field the pair-correlation function is of particular interest since it 
in a sense measures the " degree of order " of the lattice. Thus if rkl denotes 
the distance between lattice points k and I and 
p= Iim 1 ΐιη<μ*μ,> 
(6.3) 
rjcj-» CO N-* oo 
exists and is nonzero, we say that there is long-range order, which is to say 
that spins μ* and μ; are not independent of one another when separated by 
an infinite distance. 
It seems reasonable that if long-range order exists, there will be a phase 
transition (i.e., a nonanalytic point of the free energy). This, in fact, must be 
the case if there is long-range order at (sufficiently) low temperatures and 
zero long-range order at (sufficiently) high temperatures, since an analytic 
function cannot be nonzero in one region and identically zero in another 
region. On the other hand, if there is a nonanalytic point of the free energy, 
it is conceivable that there will be no long-range order at any temperature. 
This is indeed the case for an antiferromagnet, where <μ*μ(> oscillates in 
sign, but for a ferromagnet the question is still open. There is a suggestion 
that one can have a ferromagnetic transition (divergent susceptibility as 
T-* Tc+ for the two-dimensional Heisenberg model) with zero long-range 
order at all temperatures. There is also a suggestion that one can have a 
nonzero spontaneous magnetization without long-range order, but at the 
moment there is no proof of either statement. Since most of the recent work 

Sec. 5-6 Correlation Functions 
137 
on the existence and nonexistence of phase transitions in lattice models is 
based on long-range-order considerations, it would be extremely valuable to 
settle these questions. The interested reader is referred to the article by 
Griffiths (1966), where the problems are stated most clearly. 
For the one-dimensional model the evaluation of 
is straightforward, 
particularly for the open chain (see Problem 8). We shall consider here the 
slightly more complicated closed-chain problem in order to facilitate the 
discussion of the two-dimensional problem. 
In one dimension with periodic boundary conditions (i.e., a closed chain of 
N spins with 
(6.4) 
where 
Defining as before (Equation 3.8) the transfer 
matrix L with components 
(6.5) 
Equation 6.4 can be written, assuming 
as 
(6.6) 
Summing over all 
in Equation 6.6 except 
and 
gives 
(6.7) 
where E (ji, n') denotes the 
component of the matrix L raised to the 
jth power. Now 
(6.8) 
where 
and 
are, respectively, the eigenvalues and corresponding eigen-
vectors of the matrix L. For example, when H = 0 (see Equations 3.10 and 
3.16), 
(6.9) 
and 
(6.10) 

138 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach 
Ch. 5 
In general, from Equations 6.7 and 6.8 and the fact that (Equation 3.12) 
(6.11) 
we have 
(6.12) 
where 
(6.13) 
Now for fixed k and /, since 
(6.14) 
Also, since 
(6.15) 
In zero field, from Equation 6.10, 
(6.16) 
Hence, from Equations 6.9 and 6.15, 
(6.17) 
For finite N and H = 0 it is easily verified from Equations 6.9, 6.10, and 
6.12 that 
(6.18) 
As expected, from Equation 6.17, 
(6.19) 
for all 
there is no long-range order in one dimension for any 

Sec. 5-6 Correlation Functions 
139 
finite temperature. (At zero temperature corresponding to 
there is, 
of course, long-range order; in fact, there is complete order.) 
In two dimensions the above derivation can be repeated essentially word 
for word with only slight changes in notation. Thus consider the pair-
correlation function 
of two spins in the &th row and the 
Zth and 
columns, respectively. Since the 
transfer ma-
(Equation 4.7) transfers from one column with configuration 
to the neighboring column with configuration 
we can write, by analogy with Equations 6.6 and 6.7, 
(6.20) 
where a and a' denote, respectively, the configurations of the Zth and (Z + r)th 
colums. Using (see Equation 6.8) 
(6.21) 
where 
and 
are, respectively, the eigenvalues and corresponding eigen-
vectors of the matrix L, enables us to write 
(6.22) 
where it is to be noted from periodicity that the scalar product does not 
depend on k. Now since (Equation 4.10) 
(6.23) 
we have in the 
with r and m fixed, 
(6.24) 
Since the principal eigenvector 
in zero field is symmetric 
term in Equation 6.24 vanishes, so the question of the 
existence of long-range order is now a question of the degeneracy of the 
maximum eigenvalue 
of L. For finite m we can appeal to a theorem of 

140 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
Frobenius [see Gantmacher (B1964)], which states that the maximum eigen-
value of a finite matrix whose components are all positive (see Equation 4.7) 
is strictly nondegenerate. It then follows that there is no long-range order for 
an infinite 
by finite (m) lattice. That is, from Equation 6.24, since the 
term vanishes and 
(6.25) 
In the limit 
however, as shown in Appendix D, 
becomes asympto-
tically degenerate for 
for temperatures below the critical tempera-
ture). Precisely, we have 
(6.26) 
It follows from Equation 6.24 that 
(6.27) 
i.e., there is long-range order below 
and zero long-range order above Tc, 
as one might have expected. 
It is clear that, in general, whenever one has a formula such as Equation 
6.24 that long-range order exists if and only if the maximum eigenvalue 
is asymptotically degenerate 
for 
all m]. Thus from Equation 6.24 
(6.28) 
where in the second step we have made use of Parseval's theorem. It follows 
from Equation 6.28 that if 
is not asymptotically degenerate, there is zero 
long-range order. Similarly, from Equation 6.24), 
(6.29) 

Sec. 5-6 
Correlation Functions 
141 
it follows that there is long-range order if A1 is asymptotically degenerate and 
Iimm^ 
μφ2) Φ 0, which proves the assertion. 
It has been suggested by Kac (1968) that the phenomenon of eigenvalue 
degeneracy may well be a general mathematical mechanism for a phase transi­
tion to long-range order. The idea is to construct from the Hamiltonian 
of the system under consideration an operator whose largest eigenvalue gives 
the (limiting) free energy of the systems, such that a phase transition occurs 
if and only if the largest eigenvalue is asymptotically degenerate. This program 
has been carried through for a number of model systems [e.g., Kac (1968) 
and Thompson (1968a)], so it may well turn out that eigenvalue degeneracy 
provides a general mathematical mechanism for phase transitions. 
To conclude this section we present a physical interpretation of the principal 
eigenvector φ,. 
Consider a particular column of the lattice and denote by Ρ(σ) the prob­
ability that the column is in a particular configuration σ. By definition 
Ρ(σ) = Ζ-ΙΣ'εχρ(-βΕ{μ}), 
(6.30) 
w 
where the primed sum is over all configurations of the lattice with the column 
configuration σ held fixed. In terms of the transfer matrix (see Equation 4.6) 
we can write 
Π(σ, σ) 
η σ )  = T r t U ) -  
< 6 · 3 1 )  
and in view of Equations 4.10 and 6.21 (with σ' = σ) we have 
Iim Ρ(σ) = φ\(σ). 
(6.32) 
n-*co 
φ\(σ), therefore, provides us with another measure of the degree of order of 
the lattice. Physically one would expect φ\(σ) to be concentrated around 
"ordered configurations" at low temperatures (Γ< Tc) and equally spread 
among all configurations at high temperatures (T > Tc). 
One final point to note is that we have considered above only pair-correla­
tion functions for two spins in the same row. We could equally well have 
considered the pair-correlation function for two spins in the same column. 
The final result for this situation (see Problem 9) is 
Iim <μΜ//*+,,,> = Σ ^lOKftfc+r^iO). 
(6·33) 

142 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach Ch. 5 
where σ = (μ1}..., μη) denotes the configuration of the Zth column. Eigen­
value degeneracy now does not seem to play any role in the discussion of 
long-range column order. It does, however, appear in a devious way through 
the ordered-disordered form of φ\{σ) described above. Note also that by 
symmetry, Equations 6.33 and 6.24 are identical in the limit m, η -* oo. This 
rather peculiar identity seems to be extremely difficult to prove directly. 
P R O B L E M S  
1. Consider the lattice shown in Figure 5.6 with spins μΡ = ± 1 on the (six) 
vertices. What is the minimum (i.e., antiferromagnetic ground state) of the 
expression ££ _ Q μΡ μβ, where the sum is over nearest-neighbor lattice points 
P and Q, and for what configurations is the minimum achieved? 
μρ = ±1 
FIG URE 5.6. Six-spin antiferromagnetic Ising lattice. 
2. Derive the relations between susceptibility and compressibility, Equation 
2.20, and between specific heats, Equation 2.21 for the Ising magnet and the 
lattice gas. 
3. Compute the grand-canonical partition function Zc(z, V, T) for the one-
dimensional lattice gas with interaction energy 
ν 
=
 
— Σ  
i - ι  
V 
where 
= 1 or 0, tv+, = J1, and Σ 
= 
an^ 
i = l 
(a) show that for J > 0 the zeros of Z0(z, V, T) lie on the unit circle in the 
complex ζ plane. 
(b) Compute the pressure as a function of z. 

Problems 
143 
4. Consider a 2 by N lattice with the iVth column coupled to the first and 
with interaction energy 
for the configuration shown in Figure 5.7. By 
transferring from one column to the next, show that the partition function 
can be written as 
where 
FIGURE 5.7. 
A 2 by AT Ising model. 
5. By performing one of the 
integrations in Equation 5.9 for the internal 
energy U of the two-dimensional Ising model, derive Equation 5.15 for U 
in terms of the complete elliptic integral of the first kind, 
6. Derive the result, 

144 
The Ising Model: Algebraic Approach 
Ch. 5 
where 
is the complete elliptic integral of the second kind. 
7. By writing 
show that 
8. By summing successively over the Mh, 
show that 
By differentiating with respect to 
and setting 
all 
show that the two-spin correlation function for the open 
chain is given by 
9. Derive Equation 6.33 for the pair-correlation function of two spins in a 
column. 

