I Analytical Part: Analysis of Logical Languages


Section One
The Language of the Syllogistic
1 The Language of the Assertoric Syllogistic
§ 1 Syllogistic Propositional Schemata
I understand by a syllogistic propositional schema an expression which is suited
to present relations between concepts as they occur within a concept pyramid.
Let α, β, γ, etc. be concepts of various generality, and let there be an order be-
tween them such that β and γ divide the concept α, so that they are subordinated
to it and are at the same time coordinated with each other. In the same way, let δ
and ϵ be subordinated to the concept β and coordinated with each other. Then
the order just described is based on α, as a higher concept to β and γ, being the
most general concept, while δ and ε, as lower concepts to β, are less general than
α or β.19 The hierarchy of these five concepts can be presented in a diagram
which resembles a fragment of a pyramid
When one represents the conceptual relations portrayed in this diagram with ex-
pressions that resemble propositions except that all concept expressions are re-
placed with ‘α’, ‘β’, ‘γ’, ‘δ’, and ‘ε’, i.e., with concept variables, then the resulting
expressions are those I will call syllogistic propositional schemata. As we can eas-
ily see from the relations illustrated in Figure 1, these are expressions like:
(1)
‘every β is an α,’
(2)
‘every γ is not a β,’
(3)
‘some α is a γ,’
(4)
‘some α is not a δ,’
Figure 1
One already finds examples of conceptual hierarchies in Plato’s dialogues. The investigations
of conceptual hierarchies carried out in Plato’s Sophist, 218e–221c, were especially important for
the emergence of syllogistic. Cf. Kneale & Kneale 1975, 9–10, 44, and 67.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110784930-001

(5)
‘if some α is an ε, then that α✶is a β,’
(6)
‘if some α is a β, then that α is not a γ,’
(7)
‘either some α is a β, or that α is a γ,’
(8)
‘if some α is a β, then either that α is a δ, or that α is an ε.’
These propositional schemata can be appropriately called ‘syllogistic’ schemata
insofar as they represent judgment forms which are of fundamental interest for
the syllogistic theory of deductive inference.20
The syllogistic has always taken a special interest in such judgment forms be-
cause there are deductive inferences whose validity depends on certain arrange-
ments of propositions which partake in these forms. Since Aristotle, inferences of
this kind are called syllogisms. A syllogism is present, for example, when ‘every δ
is an α’ is inferred from two premises of the form ‘every δ is a β’ and ‘every β is
an α’. Likewise, there is a syllogism when from two premises of the form ‘if some
α is an ε, then that α is a β’ and ‘some α is an ε’, ‘that α is a β’ is inferred. The
validity of syllogisms is independent of the conceptual content of the propositions
that comprise them. That is, it is totally immaterial for the validity of syllogisms
what names or nominal phrases appear (via concept variables) in the schemata
of their premises and conclusion. Only the logical form of syllogisms is decisive
for their validity. And logical form is represented by some arrangement of syllo-
gistic propositional schemata.
That a syllogism possesses validity on the basis of its logical form alone im-
plies that this validity can be made intelligible by explaining the meaning of the
non-variable expressions which occur in the syllogistic schemata of the proposi-
tions that comprise it. Appropriate definitions which explain the meaning of
these expressions will of course be needed to make intelligible the validity of
rules which correspond to syllogistic inferences.
I will leave aside for now the question as to what precise content these defini-
tions should have. For so far I have neither established a survey of what syllogistic
propositional schemata there are, nor have I clarified the systematic relevance of
these schemata for the theory of deductive inference. Hence it may suffice prelim-
inarily to stipulate that the definitions we seek have the task of making explicit the
Further below, I will come to speak about the fact that syllogistic propositional schemata can,
in certain circumstances, result in truth-functional propositional schemata without themselves
being truth-functional. Hence, one can read out not only syllogistic but also truth-functional
propositional schemata from Figure 1.
✶TN: The convention ‘that . . .’ is often used to represent the author’s phrase “das in Rede ste-
hende . . .” (lit. ‘the . . . being discussed’, or ‘the . . . in question’). See below (§ 15) for further
discussion of this phrase.
4
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

meaning tied to the expressions of syllogistic propositional schemata insofar as
they are suited to represent conceptual hierarchies.
§ 2 In Search of a Universal Language of Deductive Logic
We can see that the task of the syllogistic consists in making intelligible, using
definitions, the validity of rules according to which propositions conforming to
propositional schemata follow from other such propositions. Provided it fulfills
precisely this task, we can regard the syllogistic as a subdomain of deductive logic,
namely, as a subdomain of the theory of valid deductive inference.
Yet we can also ask whether the syllogistic is an irreducible, indispensable
subdomain of deductive logic.
Without doubt, deductive logic would get along without the syllogistic if it
were possible to reduce all syllogistic rules of deductive inference to non-syllogistic
rules. In that case, such non-syllogistic rules would be understood as forms of de-
ductive inference which cannot be rendered by arranging syllogistic propositional
schemata, or – to the extent that they could be rendered by such arrangements –
whose validity does not depend on (or not only on) the meaning of the expressions
that occur in syllogistic propositional schemata.
To be able to decide on the question whether syllogistic rules can be reduced
to non-syllogistic rules, we must establish how far it is possible to translate the
language of syllogistic propositional schemata into a language that can render
both syllogistic as well as non-syllogistic forms of inference. If it should be possi-
ble to reduce all syllogistic rules to non-syllogistic rules, then it may also be possi-
ble to deal with a sphere of deductive logic in a uniform formal language, which
encompasses the syllogistic and is thus greater than it. This language, if its sphere
encompassed the whole of deductive logic, would be considered a universal lan-
guage of deductive logic.
In the following sections I intend to test the pertinent possibilities of such a
translation.
At the basis of this test, I will set a criterion by which the language of the
syllogistic can be distinguished from non-syllogistic formal languages. This crite-
rion consists in the fact that the only object variables which the syllogistic lan-
guage requires are concept variables, so that all remaining expressions occurring
in the language are used only to present relations between concepts as they be-
long to a hierarchical order as in the diagram in Figure 1. As for concept variables
(‘α’, ‘β’, etc.), they are to be regarded as substitutes or placeholders for any
1 The Language of the Assertoric Syllogistic § 2
5

nomina apellativa, or for nominal phrases of any complexity that can be prefixed
by a definite or indefinite article. I call these expressions concept expressions or – if
they are not composed of several words (like, e.g., ‘horse’) – concept words. When a
concept expression is represented by a syllogistic concept variable, it is called a
term.21 Accordingly, a concept is to be regarded as that for which a term stands.
Whatever else concepts may be does not need to be further explained for the pur-
poses of the syllogistic. From the perspective of the syllogistic, concepts are what
comprise the conceptual content or the logical material of a judgment. The remaining
expressions belonging to the language of the syllogistic which occur in syllogistic
propositional schemata make up the logical vocabulary of this language. From the
standpoint of the syllogistic, the logical form of propositions or judgments depends
on these, while their conceptual content depends on the interpretation conferred on
the concept variables of each propositional schema that expresses their logical form.
For the moment, I do not need to make a final decision on the question as to
which expressions can be counted among the logical vocabulary of syllogistic. No
complete survey of this vocabulary is required at the outset of this investigation,
since for the time being there is no telling how large the sphere of the syllogistic is.
Rather, we must first know whether the syllogistic is possible as a systematically
relevant, independent, irreducible sphere of deductive logic at all. This question
can already be discussed to some extent with the logical vocabulary that occurs in
propositional schemata (1) to (8), enumerated in § 1. Only when this vocabulary has
proved to be dispensable or indispensable for deductive logic will we be able to
deal with the question of how it relates to other parts of the syllogistic vocabulary.
§ 3 The Logical Vocabulary of the Assertoric Syllogistic
The logical vocabulary that occurs in the propositional schemata (1) to (8) consists
in the following seven expressions:
‘every . . .’,
‘. . . is a . . .’,
‘. . . is not a . . .’,
“Term” is a literal translation of the metaphor “ὅϱος” used by Aristotle. John Stuart Mill, in
his work A System of Logic (1843, Vol. 1, Ch. 1, § 3) called concept expressions “general names”, in
order to distinguish them from proper names and identifying labels, so-called “singular” or “indi-
vidual” names. Following Mill, modern logicians sometimes call syllogistic terms general terms in
order to distinguish them from singular terms. See Quine 1959, 65 (§ 12). The reasons for which I
do not follow this custom will become clearer in what follows; see especially §§ 33–35 below.
6
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

‘some . . .’,
‘if . . ., then . . .’,
‘that . . .’,
‘either . . ., or . . .’
It will be helpful to organize these seven expressions from a logico-semantic
perspective.
As for the expressions ‘every . . .’, ‘some . . .’, ‘that . . .’, the traditional syllogis-
tic literature uses them for what is called the quantitative determination – or sim-
ply the quantity – of a judgment.22 These three expressions (or their equivalents)
determine whether a given judgment is universal, particular, or singular.
The collocations ‘. . . is a . . .’ and ‘is not a . . .’ establish a judgment as affirma-
tive or negative. Affirmation and negation can be regarded as the logical forms of
a judgement’s qualitative determination – what is traditionally called the logical
quality of a judgment.23
Finally, if a proposition contains the collocations ‘if . . ., then . . .’ or ‘either
. . ., or . . .’, it is a hypothetical or disjunctive statement, respectively. The special
role of these expressions is to indicate a logical relation between two or (as is pos-
sible in the case of the disjunctive statement) more than two parts of a state-
ment.24 The clauses of a hypothetical or distinctive judgment stand in a logically
relevant relation to the extent that the truth or falsity of the judgment depends in
a definite way on the truth or falsity of each of the relevant clauses. Thus, a hypo-
thetical judgment says that it is impossible that the statement of its antecedent is
true and the statement of its consequent false. That is, it says that there is a conse-
quence relation between the statement of the antecedent and the consequent. A
disjunctive judgment says, first, that no more than one of its sub-propositions can
be true and, second, that it is impossible that one of its sub-propositions is false
but none of the remaining sub-propositions true. In this way, it renders an oppo-
sition within a totality of alternative statements.25
Apuleius Madaurensis, “Peri hermeniae” (Opera 3, 1908, 177) is the locus classicus here.
This tradition goes back to Apuleius as well; see the passage just cited in note 22.
‘Relation’ as a name of a logical criterion for classifying judgments goes back to a terminology
introduced by Kant; see CPR, § 9. It has sometimes been seen as appropriate from the standpoint
of modern logic to polemicize with unnecessary sharpness against the classification of the forms
of judgment which Kant carried out in his “arbitrarily compiled table of judgments” (Menne
1985, 11). We will deal with the question of the substantiality of this polemic in the course of the
following investigation.
The words ‘hypothetical’ and ‘disjunctive’ are used in various ways in the literature on mod-
ern logic. I use them here and in what follows exclusively to designate syllogistic relations. I give
a more precise explanation below in § 47. Already in the conception of the ancient Peripatetics
1 The Language of the Assertoric Syllogistic § 3
7

In this way, the logical vocabulary used in § 1 to formulate the syllogistic
propositional schemata (1) to (8) can be divided, from a logico-semantic perspec-
tive, into three groups of expressions which we can take as the logical constants
of the syllogistic.
§ 4 Additions to the Logical Vocabulary of the Assertoric Syllogistic
Given the criterion mentioned in § 2, according to which the language of the syllo-
gistic is distinguished from non-syllogistic formal language in that its only object
variables are concept variables, it is not hard to realize that a list of the logical con-
stants of syllogistic would be incomplete if it contained only the seven expressions
enumerated. This enumeration is indeed incomplete, since the propositional sche-
mata (1) to (8) reflect only a special case of hierarchical conceptual arrangement. I
had illustrated this arrangement in § 1 as a fragment of a pyramid in Figure 1.
and of Stoic logic, the junctor of the hypothetical proposition, ‘if . . ., then . . .’, portrays that a
“consequence” (ἀκολουϑία) obtains. Kant followed this conception as well (cf. CPR, § 9). The hy-
pothetical ‘if . . ., then . . .’ should not, as often occurs in modern logic books, be confused with
(truth-functional) subjunction (which is also sometimes called a conditional; in German it corre-
sponds instead to the colloquial propositional connective ‘nicht. . ., ohne daß. . .’ [‘not. . ., with-
out. . .’]) (See §§ 30 f.). It is hence unfounded when Günther Patzig, in his essay “Die logischen
Formen praktischer Sätze in Kants Ethik” (1994, 212), writes that the truth value of ‘if p, then q’
depends “only on the truth value of the connected statements.” Patzig adds as a comment:
“A factual implication obtains between the statements p and q when the new statement produced
by the ‘if-then’ junctor is true; logical implication obtains when this molecular statement is logi-
cally true. Only in this last case does it make unambiguous sense to speak of ground-consequence
relations in terms of derivability. Kant did not see through the fuzziness of his contemporary
logic, reflected in its fuzzy terminology; [. . .].” But this comment does not improve the matter.
Rather, according to modus ponendo ponens, q is derivable from p if and only if ‘if p, then q’ is
true. And ‘if p, then q’ is true if and only if q (factually or logically) follows from p. It is not neces-
sary that ‘if p, then q’ is logically true for this consequence relation to obtain. Neither does the
truth value of ‘if p, then q’ depend only on the truth values of p and q: if q is true or p false, q
need not follow from p. Frege also made note of this situation in order to distinguish between
the ‘if-then’ of the “hypothetical” judgment and that of the subjunction sign (i.e., his conditional
stroke). See Frege 1879/1967, § 5; Frege 1882a, 102 (1968, 93). The terminological fuzziness of which
Patzig here accuses Kant rests entirely on his own side, namely, in his confusion of subjunctive
and hypothetical judgments. Incidentally, we can see here how much caution and restraint is
needed in using the maxim which Patzig (1970, 85) recommends for the interpretation of philo-
sophical texts, namely, the maxim: to assume that “wherever” it “is not possible” in such a text
“to translate [its propositions and its context] into the Fregean concept-script or one of the later
notations influenced by it,” it “is not worth-while” to want “to proceed with the effort of philo-
sophical interpretation, because the text is not sufficiently thought out.”
8
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

There are, however, hierarchical conceptual relations which are not considered in
this diagram. First of all, only dichotomies are considered in it, without allowing for
conceptual divisions into three or more lower concepts.26 Second, this diagram
leaves out of consideration the case where the dichotomy consists in an analytic
concept division. I speak of an analytic concept division in the following sense. Let
α be a concept to which β is subordinated. Then every β is an α. And if, moreover,
some α is not a β, but instead a γ, δ, or whatever else, then it belongs to some α not
to be a β. Another way of saying this is that it falls under the concept not-β. Of two
concepts which related to each other as β and not-β, I say that each is the antonym
of the other. I call the division of a concept into a subordinate concept and its anto-
nym analytic.27 Every concept division into two or more lower concepts can be re-
placed by an analytic concept division without its validity being altered. Hence a
propositional schema like (7) (‘either some α is a β, or that α is a γ’) can be replaced
by:
(9) ‘either some α is a β, or that α is a not-β’.
This can be illustrated by the following diagram:
This diagram should not be misunderstood as if it said that the concept for which
‘not-β’ stands is subordinated to the concept for which ‘α’ stands in the same way
as the concept for which ‘β’ stands is subordinated to it. That is, the scope of the
concept not-β is too great on any interpretation of α and β to be contained in the
scope of the concept α. Hence, Figure 2 should not be interpreted as always corre-
sponding to a propositional schema of the form ‘every not-β is an α’. Instead, Fig-
ure 2 should be interpreted so that it expresses a conceptual relationship that can
be stated by the propositional schema
(10) ‘some α is a not-β’.
not-β
Figure 2
The two-membered disjunctive judgment, as already indicated in § 3, is a special case.
As far as I know, it was Kant who introduced the expression ‘analytic division’ with the mean-
ing just mentioned. Cf. Kant, Critique of Judgment, Ak. 5: 197.
1 The Language of the Assertoric Syllogistic § 4
9

Judgments conforming to (10) are distinguished from affirmative judgments in
that they attribute a predicate to an object by denying another predicate of it at
the same time. They are, however, also distinguished from negative particular
judgments by the fact that they can be converted in the manner of affirmative
particular judgments, so that from a judgment conforming to schema (10), we can
derive a judgment that corresponds to the schema
(11) ‘some not-β is an α’.
Judgments corresponding to schema (11) present a concept of the form not-β as
satisfied (non-empty), since they affirm of an object (with the predicate α) the
predicate not-β. In this way they attribute to the concept not-β a scope that is so
large that, with the exception of the conceptual scope of β, the scope of every other
concept is at least partially contained in it. I call this type of ascription of concep-
tual scope, following the nomenclature introduced by Kant, limitation.28 Judg-
ments which determine the scope of a concept through limitation can accordingly
be called limitative judgments. There are not only particular limitative judgments,
that is, judgments whose form correspond to the schema (10), but also universal
and singular limitative judgments, i.e., judgments of the form ‘every α is a not-β’
or ‘that α is a not-β’. Thus, a proposition corresponding to propositional schema
(9) entails a singular limitative judgment of the form ‘that α is a not-β’ as a clause.
Judgments of this form, as well as their corresponding universal limitative judg-
ments, are like negative judgments in that they deny to objects a predicate β; but
they are also like affirmative judgments in that convertible particular judgments
are derivable from them.29
The form of the limitative judgment can be understood as a logical quality,
and as such should be grouped together with the forms of the affirmative and
negative judgment.
However, the limitative form plays only a subordinate role in the syllogistic,
since limitative judgments can in many (or even most) cases be treated as special
cases of affirmative judgments. Namely, the propositional schema of an affirmative
judgment can be readily produced in all cases by transformation, simply by replac-
ing the concept expression schema ‘not-α’ in the schema of the limitative judgment
with a lower-case Greek letter, e.g., with ‘β’ here. After all, the expression schema
‘not-α’ stands merely for specific conceptual contents, which can also be represented
by ‘β’. Considered in this way, the schema of a limitative proposition contains a
Schmid, “Limitation” (1798, 315). Cf. Sigwart 1889, 153.
I will treat the relevant conversion rules systematically in the third section of Part III of this
book.
10
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

schema for a concept expression instead of a concept variable. This schema does
not represent any arbitrary term but can rather stand only for such concept expres-
sions which designate the antonym of another concept in terms of their content.
However, this way of considering them does not warrant us in regarding the linguis-
tic expressions that can be used to represent antonyms as non-syllogistic vocabu-
lary. For according to the criterion which I adduced above to distinguish syllogistic
from non-syllogistic modes of expression, every limitative propositional schema can
be considered as a syllogistic one, since they contain no object variables apart from
concept variables and no expression occurs in them apart from what is necessary to
represent conceptual hierarchies. Considered in this way, a limitative propositional
schema is distinguished from other syllogistic propositional schemata only in that
its logical vocabulary is suited to present conceptual relations that cannot be pre-
sented with the vocabulary of other syllogistic propositional schemata.30
Thus, the list of logical constants that syllogistic utilizes is to be expanded
with the expression by which the propositional schemata (9) and (10) are distin-
guished from the schemata of affirmative and negative propositions, namely with
the expression
‘. . . is a not- . . .’.
If we pay attention to the constellation of words which occur in the logical con-
stants used for affirmation, negation, and limitation, ‘. . . is a . . .’, ‘. . . is not a . . .’,
‘. . . is a not- . . .’, then it is striking in comparing these constants that affirmation
is expressed by the lack of a negating expression (‘not’) or by the lack of a priva-
tive prefix (‘not-’). In colloquial contexts, there is no lack of words for express-
ing or emphasizing an affirmation or the affirmative character of a proposition.
In German, for example, the word ‘doch’ is available, a word which can be used
syntactically just like ‘not’ and which serves to indicate a discrepancy between
an affirmative statement and its previous denial or an expected denial. Even in
symbolic logical languages, there is no lack of expressions which aid in making
affirmations explicit. Thus, in traditional presentations of syllogistic since the
Middle Ages the first two vowels A and I of the Latin verb affirmo are used to desig-
nate the affirmation of a universal or particular statement, while both vowels E
and O of the verb nego serve to designate the negation of such statements.
Syllogistic rules which can be applied to affirmative judgments remain valid when these judg-
ments are replaced by limitative judgments. This does not mean, however, that all valid syllogis-
tic rules which hold for limitative judgments are reducible to other rules.
1 The Language of the Assertoric Syllogistic § 4
11

§ 5 Categorical Form
Just as the absence of ‘not . . .’ and ‘not- . . .’ can indicate an affirmation, so the
absence of ‘if . . ., then . . .’ and ‘either . . ., or . . .’ in proposition schemata (1) to
(4) (‘every β is an α,’ ‘every γ is not a β,’ ‘some α is a γ,’ ‘some α is not a δ’) can
indicate the schemata of categorical propositions. However, since in accordance
with § 2 concept variables can stand for nominal phrases of arbitrary complexity
and can be composed of propositions of arbitrary complexity, it is possible that
categorical propositions can consist of several sub-propositions, including hypo-
thetical or disjunctive propositions. Thus, e.g., the following inference consists of
nothing but categorical propositions:
Every dog who wags his tail when he approaches his master is a brave animal.
No dog who is berated by his master is a brave animal.
Therefore: No dog who is berated by his master is a dog who wags his tail when he
approaches his master.
This is a typical categorical inference, which is valid not according to the rules of
hypothetical but of categorical inference. It is inessential for the form of the cate-
gorical judgment whether it is represented by a proposition composed of sub-
propositions or not. What is essential for its form is rather that this proposition
satisfies two conditions: first, that it is not part of a hypothetical or disjunctive
proposition, but rather has logical independence; and second, that it renders a re-
lationship between exactly two concepts which can be represented by logical con-
stants such as, e.g., ‘every . . . is a . . .’, and in that way possesses logical simplicity.
In this connection, it is necessary to distinguish grammatically simple proposi-
tions from logically simple propositions. Propositions are grammatically simple when
they are not composed of other propositions (with the help of relative pronouns or
conjunctions); they thus neither consist of several main clauses nor are they proposi-
tions, which consist of a main clause and at least one subordinate clause. By contrast,
propositions are logically simple only if they connect two concept expressions with
the help of logical constants. The logical simplicity of propositions in no way pre-
cludes that they consist of several propositions grammatically.31
The view espoused by Frege in § 4 of his Begriffsschrift that “The distinction of judgments
into categorical, hypothetical, and disjunctive seems to me to have only grammatical signifi-
cance,” ultimately depends on a (unfortunately significant) confusion of grammatical and logical
simplicity. For a more precise discussion, see M. Wolff 2006, 272–85.
12
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

In the syllogistic tradition of logic, the designation categorical proposition
was introduced for logically simple propositions which are not part of a hypothet-
ical or disjunctive proposition. Their syntactic position outside of a hypothetical
or disjunctive proposition guarantees categorical propositions a certain type of
logical independence, which in addition to logical simplicity is the second essential
characteristic of categorical propositions. If one dispenses with this second char-
acteristic and considers, as sometimes happens, logical simplicity as a sufficient
mark of categorical propositions, then we get the view that hypothetical and dis-
junctive propositions can consist of categorical sub-propositions. However, with
this view a characteristic property of categorical propositions is lost, namely that
they do not, like hypothetical or disjunction propositions, attribute predicates to
objects or say something of something conditionally, but rather unconditionally,
indeed categorically (from the Greek κατηγοϱεῖν = to say something of some-
thing). Let p be a logically simple subject-predicate proposition and let it occur,
e.g., in two places of a modus ponendo ponens inference, namely, as the anteced-
ent of the first premise ‘if p, then q’ and as the second premise p, so that q is the
conclusion. Then, in terms of content, the same proposition p may be present in two
places, but what p says of objects unconditionally (categorically) in the second
premise, p says only conditionally in the first premise (namely, only on the condi-
tion that q is not denied, but is a true proposition).32 Hence, in terms of content,
categorical judgments lie “at the basis of all other [judgments],” as Kant says in the
Prolegomena, § 39 (Ak. 4: 325). For as logically simple subject-predicate-judgments
they provide as it were the fabric for logically complex judgments. But they per-
form their function as categorical judgments only in virtue of the syntactic position
they require as logically independent judgments.33
Likewise, in ‘if p, then q’ q is stated on the condition that q. Incidentally, this also comports
with Kant’s conception of the hypothetical judgment. See his Logic, § 25, remark 2 (Ak. 9: 106).
The view that Günther Patzig advances in his essay “Die logischen Formen praktischer Sätze in
Kants Ethik” (1994, 214) that Kant’s conception of the hypothetical judgment as a “conditional”
mode of judgment is “incompatible” with Kant’s “standard explanation,” according to which the
hypothetical judgment states a “consequence” of the statement of the consequent from that of
the antecedent (CPR, § 9), is unfounded. Kant’s standard explanation implies this conception, as
one can easily make clear and as the ancient Peripatetics had already seen. For the relevant
references to sources in the ancient literature, see Prantl (1855, vol. 1, 383–88).
The marks of logical simplicity and logical independence can of course also be applied to hy-
pothetical and disjunctive judgments. That is, there are logically simple and logically indepen-
dent hypothetical and disjunctive propositions, namely, judgments in which the logical constants
of the respective hypothetical or disjunctive proposition occur exactly once. But the marks of log-
ical simplicity and logical independence are not constitutive for these judgments, since there can
also be logically complex and thus logically dependent hypothetical and disjunctive judgments.
1 The Language of the Assertoric Syllogistic § 5
13

As the form of logically independent subject-predicate propositions, categori-
cal form, much like the hypothetical or disjunctive form, has to do with a logical
relation, yet it is one whose relata are not judgments, as with the hypothetical or
disjunctive relation, but rather concepts. Every categorical judgment has to do
with an ordered pair of concepts, one of which is to be regarded as the subject
concept, the other as the predicate concept of the judgment. The logical distinction
between the subject and predicate concept of a judgment corresponds to the
grammatical subject-predicate distinction but does not coincide with it. Grammat-
ically, every simple declarative proposition that is not composed of other proposi-
tions can be analyzed into subject and predicate. The grammatical subject of a
proposition stands for that about which the proposition says something. The
grammatical predicate stands for what it says about something. ‘All humans are
mortal’, for example, is a declarative proposition which says of all humans that
they are mortal. Hence, the component ‘all humans’ is its grammatical subject,
while the remainder of the proposition, ‘are mortal’, is its grammatical predi-
cate.34 But the dissection of a proposition into grammatical subject and grammati-
cal predicate does not coincide with the analysis of a logically simple proposition
into its logical subject, its logical predicate, and its logical constants.35 From a logi-
cal perspective, the proposition ‘All humans are mortal’ says the same thing as
‘Every human is a mortal being’. In the conception of the syllogistic tradition,
‘human’ is here the logical subject, ‘mortal being’ the logical predicate. Accord-
ingly, in the traditional conception the proposition has the logical form ‘every S is
a P’. Logical subject and logical predicate, whose positions are designated here
with ‘S’ and ‘P’, have, grammatically, a common form: they are both expressions
that can be preceded by a definite or indefinite article; and because of their com-
mon grammatical form their positions in the proposition can be interchanged.
They are distinguished merely by this syntactic position. They are thus distin-
guished in that the logical subject is part of a grammatical subject, and the logi-
cal predicate is part of a grammatical predicate. Since the logical subject can
Traditional grammar, taking its orientation from Latin, counts not only auxiliary verbs and
predicate names (predicatives) as belonging to the predicate, but also adverbs, object expres-
sions, and any other expression that belongs to a subject-predicate proposition but not to its
grammatical subject.
Frege pointed out in his 1879 Begriffsschrift that the subject-predicate distinction that is stan-
dard in the syllogistic is not directly applicable to functional expressions in quantificational
logic. From this finding, he could have actually concluded that one should speak of logical subject
and predicate only in the sense in which the syllogistic intends the distinction between subject
and predicate. This would have been reasonable as well. In §§ 27–28 below, I will show how the
traditional grammatical subject-predicate distinction can be applied to quantified functional
expressions.
14
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

exchange its position in the proposition with that of the logical predicate, every
subject concept of a categorical proposition is suited to act as predicate concept
in other categorical propositions. This is why certain categorical judgments can
be joined together in a modus Barbara inference and why it is permissible to
pass immediately (by mere conversion) from ‘no α is a β’ to ‘no β is an α’.
Unlike the forms of the hypothetical and disjunctive judgment, the categorical
form presents no occasion to extend the list of logical constants assembled above.
For this form is expressed not by using a certain logical vocabulary but only by
the syntax according to which, within a logically simple proposition that is not
part of a hypothetical or disjunctive proposition, pairs of expressions which are
represented by concept variables are ordered.
The fact that categorical judgments are logically simple and logically indepen-
dent subject-predicate propositions that do not occur as part of hypothetical or
disjunctive propositions, does not preclude them from taking the position of a
subordinate clause. For it changes nothing pertaining to logical form (i.e., the logi-
cal simplicity and independence of categorical propositions), when they are em-
bedded in the expression ‘it is true that . . .’, ‘it is possible that . . .’, and ‘it is
necessary that . . .’. Nor does anything change in the logical form of hypothetical
and disjunctive propositions through such an embedding.
2 The Language of the Modal Syllogistic
§ 6 The Logical Vocabulary of the Modal Syllogistic
One can understand the expressions
‘it is true that . . .’,
‘it is possible that . . .’,
‘it is necessary that . . .’
in such a way that they are equivalent to ‘it is actually (in fact) true that. . .’, ‘it is
possibly true that . . .’, or ‘it is necessarily true that . . .’, respectively. Understood in
this way, these logical constants express distinctions in alethic modality. Propositions
which are introduced by one of the three enumerated modal expressions are called
assertoric, problematic, and apodictic, respectively.36
As such, these expressions must be distinguished from similar sounding expressions of deon-
tic or epistemic modality, i.e., from expressions like ‘it is permissible that . . .’, ‘it is forbidden
that . . .’ or ‘it can be supposed that . . .’, ‘it is known that . . .’, etc. See Appendix 9.
2 The Language of the Modal Syllogistic § 6
15

These expressions, which did not previously occur in my list of logical con-
stants, can be counted among the syllogistic vocabulary for the following reasons.
Concerning first the expression ‘it is true that . . .’, all previously enumerated
propositional schemata ((1) to (11)) can be embedded in it. In this way they are
converted (from being schemata of implicitly assertoric propositions) into sche-
mata of (explicitly) assertoric propositions. Such a conversion changes nothing in
the truth of the propositions corresponding to the logical form of schemata (1) to
(11). Namely, every true non-modalized (i.e., not introduced by one of the three
modal expressions) proposition A is an expression from which a proposition of
the form ‘it is true that A’ logically follows.37 For if A is true, the statement that A
is true cannot be false. In addition, all valid inferences maintain their validity
when one adds to their premises as well as to their conclusions (so long as they
are not apodictic or problematic propositions) the prefix ‘it is true that . . .’. For
the same reason, the validity of all inferences is preserved if one sets aside this
prefix in all places of its occurrence. Since this prefix only emphasizes a property
which is presupposed anyway in every (including every non-modalized) premise
of an inference, one often already designates non-modalized premises as asser-
toric. This is precisely the reason that the label ‘assertoric syllogistic’ has arisen
for that part of the syllogistic which entirely disregards inferences from modal-
ized, especially apodictic or problematic, premises. Connected with this is the fact
that the expression ‘it is true that . . .’ (or an equivalent expression) has mostly
not been treated as a logical constant in traditional treatments of the syllogistic at
all. Even so, this does not speak against regarding it as a part of the logical vocab-
ulary of the syllogistic.
There is a systematic reason for the adoption of the expressions ‘it is necessary
that . . .’ and ‘it is possible that . . .’ in the list of logical constants as well. For
just as the proposition ‘it is true that p’ can be directly deductively derived
from p, so can the proposition ‘it is possible that p’, and p in turn can be
If one takes only the propositional schemata (1) to (11) into consideration, one may say that
this consequence relation also goes in the other direction. But this does not mean, strictly speak-
ing, that the same holds for propositions of arbitrary content. Rather, whether a proposition of
the form ‘not p’ follows logically from a proposition of the form ‘it is true that p’ depends on the
meaning of the negation sign. As will emerge below (in § 10), there is a truth-ambivalent, para-
consistent use of negation which precludes the logical equivalence of ‘A’ and ‘It is true that A’.
Hence the expression ‘it is true that . . .’ is not, or at least not in all cases, simply redundant, as is
often supposed. This issue can be set aside for the moment. However, it is not unimportant to
take heed of it in a precise way. Alfred Tarski has shown that this equivalence is not applicable
without contradiction to every colloquial statement. He thereby questioned “even the possibility
of a consistent use of the expression ‘true statement’ that thereby agrees with the principles of
logic and the spirit of common speech”. See Tarski 1935, 458.
16
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

derived from the proposition ‘it is necessary that p’. In other words: ‘it is possi-
ble that p’ is a logical weakening of the proposition p according to the scholas-
tic rule ab esse ad posse valet consequentia, just as p is a logical weakening of
the proposition ‘it is necessary that p’ according to the scholastic rule a necesse
esse ad esse valet consequentia. Since these rules can be directly applied to
every syllogistic propositional schema and remain valid in this application, it
has not been merely convenient but also always standard to adopt the expres-
sions ‘it is possible that . . .’ and ‘it is necessary that . . .’ into the logical vocab-
ulary of the syllogistic.
Alethic modalities are called de dicto modalities because they state the actual,
possible, or necessary truth of propositions (dicta). Yet statements about the possi-
ble or necessary truth of propositions can also be understood as statements about
the possibility or necessity of the states of affairs these propositions are about. If
the propositions are categorical propositions, the prefixes added to them ‘it is pos-
sible that . . .’ and ‘it is necessary that . . .’ can also be understood as dealing with
de re possibility or de re necessity, respectively. Thus, a proposition of the form ‘it
is possible that every α is a β’ can be understood such that it means the same
thing as: ‘for every α it is possible to be a β’ or ‘every α is possibly a β’. Quite
generally, problematic categorical propositions can be understood as attributing
to a thing (res) a possibility. Analogously, apodictic categorical propositions can
be understood as saying of something (de re) that a predicate belongs to it
necessarily.
Within the syllogistic, categorical modal statements are of interest to the
same extent as it is of interest when we consider hierarchical conceptual arrange-
ments to distinguish cases in which objects of a certain kind fall under a concept
β in all thinkable circumstances (and thus necessarily) from cases in which this
does not hold under all thinkable circumstances (thus not necessarily). For con-
ceptual divisions cannot be conducted only on the basis of problematic categori-
cal propositions without further ado. Thus, e.g., the proposition ‘for every human
it is possible to sleep’ does not preclude this proposition from being true as well:
‘for every human it is possible not to sleep’. If a stable classification system is to
be rendered in a conceptual division, it is not enough to present conceptual rela-
tionships in non-modalized form according to the pattern of Figure 1 in § 1. For
categorical statements whose logical form corresponds to one of syllogistic sche-
mata (1) to (4) are as such only suited to classify objects through the subordination
of concepts conditionally. Thus, a proposition of the form ‘every α is a β’ indeed
subordinates the concept α under the concept β, but its form does not preclude that
it is possible that objects that fall under the concept α do not fall under the concept
β. In that way, it does not yet say anything at all about whether β is a stable super-
ordinate concept of α and suited to classify the objects falling under α. It rather
2 The Language of the Modal Syllogistic § 6
17

leaves it open whether β stands for a contingent property of the objects falling
under α. Namely, non-modalized statements are not always statements which, if
true, always follow from corresponding apodictic statements, so that they would be
logical weakenings of such statements. Rather, if a non-modalized proposition (e.g.,
a proposition of the form ‘every α is a β’) is true and β stands for a contingent prop-
erty of the objects falling under α, then a problematic proposition of the form ‘for
every α it is possible not to be β’ is also true. And the latter proposition stands in
contradiction to the apodictic strengthening of the first non-modalized proposition,
i.e., to a corresponding proposition of the form ‘for every α it is necessary to be a
β’. In contrast, if a non-modalized proposition (e.g., a proposition of the form ‘every
α is a β’) is true and β stands for a necessary (non-contingent) property of the ob-
jects falling under α, then there must be a corresponding apodictic proposition
(namely, a proposition of the form ‘for every α it is necessary to be a β’) from
which the non-modalized proposition follows as the latter’s logical weakening.38
As these considerations show, the inclusion of the modal expressions ‘it is
necessary that . . .’ and ‘it is possible that . . .’ as well as the inclusion of the de re
variants of these expressions (‘. . . necessarily . . .’ or ‘. . . possibly . . .’) in the logi-
cal vocabulary of the syllogistic is already demanded because we depend on the
use of modal vocabulary to make explicit the just described double meaning of
non-modalized syllogistic propositional schemata and to correct corresponding
ambiguities in the use of non-modal logical constants. Once this modal vocabulary
is introduced into the syllogistic, the question immediately arises about which de-
ductive inferences depend for their validity on the meaning of the expressions of
this vocabulary alone. The same question comes up with respect to the rest of the
logical vocabulary of the syllogistic, and I will return to it in Part II of this book.
But are all modal expressions relevant for the syllogistic already captured in
the logical vocabulary I have described so far? One could suppose that by forming
antonyms of ‘true’, ‘possible’, and ‘necessary’ three further logical constants can
be immediately produced, namely: ‘it is non-true that . . .’, ‘it is impossible that
. . .’, and ‘it is non-necessary that . . .’. These constants can be interpreted so that
they are equivalent in sequence with the expressions
Wolfgang Wieland (1966, 55) has argued that in the Aristotelian syllogistic the weakening
rule, according to which a non-modalized proposition of the form A follows from an apodictic
proposition of the form ‘it is necessary that A’, is invalid, since Aristotle always uses assertoric
and non-modalized statements in his doctrine of necessary inferences “when he wants to assert
the realization of one – among several – possibilities.” Ulrich Nortmann has criticized this view
with convincing arguments in Ebert & Nortmann 2007, 441–43. The validity of the mentioned
weakening rule in no way precludes there being assertoric and non-modalized statements in
which the realization of a possibility, which can also not be realized, is claimed.
18
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

‘it is false that . . .’,
‘it is impossibly true that . . .’, and
‘it is contingent(ly true) that . . .’.
I would like to consider these somewhat more precisely one by one, in order to
examine how much interest they may have for the syllogistic.
A proposition of the form ‘it is false that p’ is equivalent to ‘it is not true that
p’, in any case so long as one assumes the validity of the bivalence principle, ac-
cording to which there is no other truth value besides true or false. On this as-
sumption, the expressions ‘it is non-true that . . .’, ‘it is false that . . .’, and ‘it is not
true that . . .’ can be interchanged and are not to be regarded as special logical
constants but simply as expressions of de dicto negation, i.e., negation of an ex-
plicitly assertoric proposition. I will get into the reasons for regarding the biva-
lence principle as valid in the syllogistic in § 8 below, as well as in Appendix 8.
The use of a de dicto negation is dispensable in the syllogistic for the same reason
that the use of ‘it is true that . . .’ is dispensable. Since ‘it is true that p’ follows
logically from p, likewise ‘not p’ (i.e., the de re negation of p) follows from ‘it is not
true that p’. Nothing in the validity of syllogistic inferences alters when all de
dicto negations that occur in their premises and conclusions are replaced with de
re negations.39
Neither is a new logical constant introduced with the expression ‘it is impos-
sible that . . .’. After all, since a proposition is possibly true if and only if its truth
is not impossible, this expression merely denies the possible truth of a proposi-
tion. It is thus equivalent to ‘it is not possibly true that . . .’. Moreover, as an ex-
pression of the negation of a problematic proposition, it is equivalent to the
apodictic expression ‘it is necessarily true that not . . .’. For the impossibility of
the truth of a proposition consists just in that its negation is necessarily true.
Accordingly, that the negation of a proposition is possibly true can be ren-
dered by the negation of an apodictic proposition. The modal expression ‘it is not
necessarily true that . . .’ is thus equivalent to ‘it is possibly true that not . . .’.
The expression ‘it is contingently true that . . .’ is different from this in that it
does not only negate the necessary truth of a proposition (and thereby immedi-
ately assert the possible truth of a negative proposition corresponding to it), but
beyond this also negates the impossible truth of this proposition (and thereby im-
mediately asserts the possible truth of the negative proposition corresponding to
it). In this way, the expression ‘it is contingently true that . . .’ combines both
problematic de dicto expressions, ‘it is possible that . . .’ and ‘it is possible that
The fact that de re and de dicto negations are not used equivalently in every respect and in all
circumstances does not need to concern us further for now. I will return to this issue in §§ 8–10.
2 The Language of the Modal Syllogistic § 6
19

not . . .’, and is thus logically stronger than either of these expressions on their
own. Yet it should be noticed that this combination cannot pertain to every arbi-
trary pair of problematic propositions of which one is the contrary of the other.
Rather, this combination pertains always only to such pairs of propositions in
which both problematic propositions are both either universal or particular or
singular. Thus, e.g., the (universal) propositional schema ‘it is contingently true
that every α is a β’ combines the (universal) propositional schema ‘it is possibly
true that every α is a β’ along with (likewise universal) propositional schema ‘it is
possibly true that not every α is a β’, yet not the (particular) propositional schema
‘it is possibly true that not every α is a β’. Similarly, the (particular) propositional
schema ‘it is contingently true that some α is a β’ implies the (likewise particular)
propositional schema ‘it is possibly true that some α is not a β’, but not the (uni-
versal) proposition schema ‘it is possibly true that not any α is a β’. Only when the
quantity of both propositional schemata agrees is the de dicto contingency (repre-
sented by ‘it is contingent(ly true) that . . .’) equivalent to a corresponding de re
contingency, represented by ‘. . . is contingently a . . .’. For only in this case are
both problematic de re expressions ‘. . . is possibly a . . .’ and ‘. . . is possibly not a
. . .’ combined by the de re expression ‘. . . is contingently a . . .’. Accordingly,
every proposition of the form ‘it is contingent(ly true) that A’, as well as every
proposition which contains such a proposition as a clause, can be regarded as ab-
breviating a combination of a pair of propositions that are problematic or contain
such propositions as clauses.40
From my analysis of the three expressions
‘it is false that. . .’,
‘it is impossibly true that. . .’, and
‘it is contingent(ly true) that. . .’,
The fact that contingent propositions are equivalent to a pair of problematic propositions en-
ables one to recognize that the modality of contingent propositions is a second kind of possibility.
Along the same lines, Aristotle distinguishes in An. pr. 1. 13 two meanings of the word “possible.”
According to the first meaning, the possible is the contingent, namely, “[what] is not necessary
but nothing impossible will result if it is put as being the case” (An. pr. 32 a 18–20 [1989, 18]).
According to the second meaning, the possible is a logical weakening of the necessary; according
to this meaning, one can say of the necessary “that it is possible” (32 a 20–21 [1989, 18]). In the
literature on Aristotle, the modality of contingent propositions is called ‘two-sided possibility’,
while the modality of simple problematic propositions is called ‘one-sided possibility’. The kinds
of possibility statement distinguished in this way can be regarded as logical weakenings of two
kinds of assertoric statement: on the one hand, of statements which deal with the factual or ac-
tual, which is the realization of a possibility, but which might not have been realized; on the
other hand, of statements which deal with the factual or actual but as itself a logical weakening
of apodictic statements.
20
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

we find that, if one assumes the validity of the bivalence principle, they contain
no logical vocabulary whose meaning could not be made explicit by means of the
logical vocabulary I have already introduced. There is thus no compelling reason
to add these expressions to the vocabulary that expresses the distinction between
assertoric, problematic, and apodictic propositions.
There is, however, also no reason to reduce the modal vocabulary any further
than this. It may be true that the expressions ‘it is possible that not . . .’ and ‘it is
not necessary that . . .’ are equivalent, just as the expressions ‘it is not possible that
. . .’ and ‘it is necessary that not . . .’ are equivalent, and thus that the expressions
‘it is necessary that . . .’ and ‘it is not possible that not . . .’ and likewise the expres-
sions ‘it is possible that . . .’ and ‘it is not necessary that not . . .’ are pairwise equiv-
alents. But since neither the expression ‘it is possible that . . .’ nor ‘it is necessary
that . . .’ has a noticeable privilege over the other, they have equal interest for
the syllogistic and hence should be adopted in its list of the logical constants.41
Accordingly, if A is a syllogistic propositional schema, then the expressions ‘it is
necessary that A’ and ‘it is possible that A’ can be regarded as equally legitimate
propositional schemata.
Finally, concerning distinctions in the de dicto and de re use of modal expres-
sions (e.g., the use of ‘possibly’ in ‘it is possibly true that . . .’ and ‘. . . is possibly a
. . .’), it suffices to establish for the time being that though these distinctions may
well concern grammar, they need not affect the meaning of these expressions
The content of this list agrees with the content of the table of judgments with which Kant
claimed to provide a systematic division and complete enumeration of elementary logical forms.
This agreement is not accidental, but rather rests on the fact that Kant developed the content of
the table of judgments on the basis of a description of what he called the ‘logical use of the un-
derstanding’ – the usus logicus intellectus. Kant understood this latter as consisting in the use of
concepts in judging insofar as these concepts are related to each other in subordination relation-
ships. See M. Wolff 1995, 192–94. The twelve forms of the table of judgments are in Kant’s view
elementary logical forms in the sense that they can be combined into more complex forms. Each
of the proposition schemata (1) to (11) enumerated above represents a complex logical form; and
if the issue is the logical form of a judgment, then we typically mean a form composed of several
elementary forms. The fact that Kant’s table of judgments is only supposed to contain elementary
forms has sometimes been missed by logicians. Thus, Arthur N. Prior (1967b, 549) supposes that
Kant’s division according to quality is “absurd”: “where would one put, for example, the forms ‘X
is-not not-Y’ and ‘Not-X is Y’?” If we interpret the examples of propositional schemata Prior
brings in as schemata of predicative propositions (not as examples of schemata for identity prop-
ositions), then the first example (according to Kant’s approach) pertains to assertoric, quantita-
tively indefinite, categorical propositions, in which the forms of negative and limitative
judgments are combined. The second example pertains to assertoric, quantitatively indefinite,
categorical, affirmative propositions, which result from infinite propositions through conversion,
just as particular propositions result from universal propositions through conversion.
2 The Language of the Modal Syllogistic § 6
21

when they are applied to syllogistic propositional schemata. This holds in any case
for the modal expressions of problematic, apodictic, and contingent propositions.
De dicto and de re expressions of the same modality are to that extent equivalent.
(See also Appendix 7.)
§ 7 The Indispensability of the Logical Vocabulary of the Modal Syllogistic
However, to pursue the question of whether the logical vocabulary of the syllogis-
tic can be translated into a non-syllogistic formal language that is suitable for
other parts of deductive logic, we do not need to draw attention to modal expres-
sions, or at least not in the first instance. For even to make explicit the meaning
of (non-modal) syllogistic vocabulary with the help of a non-syllogistic formal lan-
guage, one will in no way be able to dispense with the use of the modal vocabu-
lary of the syllogistic. We can preliminarily clarify this relative indispensability of
the expressions of the modal syllogistic in the following way.
I already pointed out in § 3 that the ‘if-then’ connection of the hypothetical
proposition expresses a consequence relation that obtains between a proposition p
and a consequent q if and only if it is impossible that the statement of its anteced-
ent is true and the statement of its consequent false. For this reason, we should
understand a hypothetical proposition of the form ‘if p, then q’ as equivalent to a
proposition of the form ‘it is impossible that p and not q’. The propositional schema
‘it is impossible that A and not B’ is, as it seems, not a syllogistic propositional
schema (even if A and B are themselves such schemata). For it contains at least one
logical constant, namely ‘. . . and . . .’, which according to § 1 should not (or not
without further ado) be assumed to belong to the logical vocabulary of the syllogis-
tic. In this way, it does look as though one can translate the schema of a hypotheti-
cal proposition into a language which contains non-syllogistic vocabulary. But it is,
at least so it seems, also unavoidable in this translation to make use of the vocabu-
lary of the modal syllogistic. For though ‘it is impossible that . . .’ can be replaced
by a different modal expression, namely by ‘it is necessary that not . . .’, it cannot (so
it seems) be replaced by an expression in which no constant of the modal syllogistic
occurs at all. This fact leads us to expect that at least hypothetical propositional sche-
mata can be translated into a non-syllogistic language only if this language has
adopted the modal vocabulary of the syllogistic.
Modern, non-syllogistic modal logic can be described such that it makes use
of at least one of the syllogistic expressions of alethic modality, but it connects
this usage with the use of a truth-functional vocabulary. It arose from the seman-
tics of the hypothetical proposition and originated in the logical work of Clarence
Irving Lewis as the logic of strict implication. Following Hugh MacColl, Lewis
22
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

interpreted the form of the hypothetical proposition ‘if A, then B’ as equivalent to
‘it is impossible that A is true and B false’.42 He assumed (Lewis & Langford 1932,
123) that according to this interpretation the form could be presented in symbolic
notation with an expression which corresponds to the following schema:
‘~ ◇(A & ~ B)’.
In this schema, ‘. . . & . . .’ stands for logical conjunction (‘. . . and . . .’), the tilde
‘~ . . .’ expresses negation, and the diamond sign ‘◇. . .’ can be considered an ab-
breviation for ‘it is possible that . . .’. The logical constants ‘. . . & . . .’ and ‘~ . . .’ are
used in this schema as truth-functional signs. That is, ‘A & B’ and ‘~ A’ are schemata
for truth functions. Truth functions are to be understood as those functions whose
values are truth values and whose arguments are statements which have a truth
value. If p, q, and r are statements which are true or false, then p & q and ~ r are
functions whose truth value depends only on the truth values of p, q, and r. In con-
trast to ‘. . . & . . .’ and ‘~ . . .’, however, neither ‘◇. . .’ nor ‘if . . ., then . . .’ is a
truth functional sign. Namely, if a proposition fills the empty place of ‘◇. . .’, then
its truth will be counted by the prefixed modal sign as possible truth, and its possible
truth obviously does not depend on which truth value it actually has. Similarly, the
truth of a hypothetical proposition does not depend on the truth values of its sub-
propositions alone. For such a proposition is true, as we have seen, only if it is not
possible that its consequent is false and its antecedent true.
Lewis called the relation he accepted between the clauses of a hypothetical
proposition of the form ‘if A, then B’ strict implication, and to abbreviate ‘~ ◇(A
& ~ B)’ he introduced the expression
‘A ⥽B’.
Modern axiomatic modal logic has come about because Lewis, on the basis of the
definition of strict implication, established various axiomatic systems whose
basic formulas include the three logical constants ‘. . . & . . .’, ‘~ . . .’, and ‘◇. . .’
as the only as undefined signs.43 ‘It is necessary that . . .’ is replaced in this lan-
guage by ‘~ ◇~ . . .’; ‘it is impossible that . . .’ is rendered in this language with
‘~ ◇. . .’.
We must thus ask of the three signs ‘. . . & . . .’, ‘~ . . .’, and ‘◇. . .’ how they
relate to the logical vocabulary of the syllogistic.
See MacColl 1903, 356. Cf. Hughes & Cresswell 1977, 214.
Kneale & Kneale 1975, 549–50. For details, see Appendix 5 below.
2 The Language of the Modal Syllogistic § 7
23

3 Analysis of Expressions of Negation
§ 8 The Bivalence Principle
At first glance, apparently only ‘. . . & . . .’ is a sign that cannot be read as an ab-
breviation for one of the constants of the syllogistic as enumerated above. As a
truth-functional sign, it connects two propositions to each other so that the propo-
sition which arises out of this connection is true if and only if the connected pro-
positions are true, while it is false whenever one of its sub-propositions is false.
By contrast, the signs ‘~ . . .’, and ‘◇. . .’ suggest a comparison with syllogistic
vocabulary. If it is defined no further, ‘◇. . .’ can simply mean the same thing as
the expression of the modal syllogistic ‘it is possible that . . .’. In systems of modal
logic which use the defined sign ‘□. . .’ (‘it is necessary that. . .’) as an abbrevia-
tion of ‘~ ◇~ . . .’, however, it is standard to equate the meaning of ‘◇. . .’ with
the meaning of ‘~ □~ . . .’.44 Whether ‘◇. . .’ and ‘□. . .’ in these systems are
equivalent to the modal expressions of the syllogistic depends partly on how
‘~ . . .’ as a sign for truth-functional negation relates to syllogistic negation, and
partly on how ‘~ ◇. . .’ and ‘~ □. . .’ relate to the syllogistic modal expressions ‘it is
impossible that . . .’ and ‘it is not necessary that . . .’.
Regarding the relationship of the sign for truth-functional negation to syllogis-
tic negation, we first need an answer to the question of whether ‘not A’ taken as a
syllogistic schema of a negative proposition is a truth-functional expression or not.
One should not dismiss this question in the opinion that every negation of a
proposition is a truth-functional negation.45 For this opinion is not tenable with-
out further justification. Consider, for example, the following propositions:
(a)
‘the greatest number is not greater than a thousand’ and
(b)
‘the greatest number is greater than a thousand’.
Proposition (a) negates (the content of) proposition (b) in a certain respect. But
proposition (a) does not contain a de dicto negation of proposition (b), and thus
does not say explicitly that (b) is false; rather, proposition (a) contains only a de
re negation regarding the greatest number.46
The sign ‘□. . .’ was introduced as an abbreviation for ‘~ ◇~ . . .’ by Ruth C. Barcan (1946, 12).
Cf. Hughes & Cresswell 1977, 347.
Very many logic books unfortunately do just this, as if there were only truth-functional negations.
In those which do not do this, a systematic treatment of kinds of negation is for the most part lacking.
The distinction encountered here between two kinds of negation is similar to the distinction
Fred Sommers has introduced between “denying a predicate” and “negating a sentence”, though
not exactly. Predicate negation for Sommers consists in the use of terms of the form ‘not-α’. See
24
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

To be able to analyze what it is to negate a proposition (or its content) without
negating it in the sense of a de dicto negation, we first should know what it would be
to say that proposition (b) is false. To say a proposition is false means at least: saying
it is not true. Supposing the word ‘false’ is used as synonymous with ‘not true’, it suffi-
ces for the truth of a de dicto negation that the negated proposition is not true.
Of course, no one is prevented from using the word ‘false’ in a different way:
one may treat both propositions (a) and (b) as if they were not false but rather
meaningless – namely, neither true nor false – since they deal with something that
does not exist. Yet then one assumes a usage in which ‘false’ and ‘not true’ are not
synonyms. We should not attempt here to decide which usage is correct, since
one can use words however one likes. But we can (and should) stick to a usage
once we have chosen it (at least in a scientific treatment).
In the following, I will use ‘false’ and ‘not true’ as equivalent expressions and
precisely for that reason will assume that a declarative proposition which is not true
is false. I call this assumption, since it is fundamental, the bivalence principle. This
principle should be considered a semantic principle: it stipulates the meaning of the
word ‘false’, since it lets the falsity of a proposition consist in its not being true.
It follows from the bivalence principle that there is no truth value besides the
true and the false.47 This too follows from it: a proposition containing a de dicto
negation of proposition (b) is for its part already true if (b) is not true. Even proposi-
tion (a) is true or false, according to the bivalence principle. As a de re negation, it
does not need to be true if (b) is not true.48
§ 9 The Principle of Excluded Middle
The bivalence principle should not be confused with the principle of excluded mid-
dle.49 The latter principle does not merely stipulate the meaning of a word and is
thus not merely a semantic principle. It is also less fundamental than the bivalence
Sommers 1982, viii; 326–27; 340. De re negation is what Aristotle speaks about in De Interpretatione
17 a 26 (1984, 27), when he says: “[A] negation is a statement denying something of something.”
To avoid misunderstandings, one should say more precisely: The bivalence principle says
that for expressions which are used as declarative propositions, i.e., as judgments, there is no
truth value apart from true and false and that they must have at least one of these two values. I
provide a more extensive discussion of the bivalence principle below in Appendix 8. I will argue
there that the formality of formal logic is incompatible with the invalidity of this principle.
It is a widespread error to think that even “purely formally” “the negation of a false proposi-
tion [must] be true.” Patzig 1970, 83.
The confusion of the two principles can be found again and again, e.g., in Pirmin Stekeler-
Weithofer’s article “Satz vom ausgeschlossenen Dritten” (1992, 1198). By contrast, compare the
3 Analysis of Expressions of Negation § 9
25

principle. It plays the role of a basic logical supposition, by which it is assumed that
of two propositions of which one contradicts (or contradictorily negates) the other,
exactly one is true; tertium non datur [‘there is no third’]. Whether this supposition
is universally valid and thus holds for all negations depends on whether there are
negations which are not truth-functional (or contradictory negations).50
For truth-functional negations the principle of excluded middle is universally
valid and fundamental. This can be shown in the truth table for ~ A:
~ A
A
F
T
T
F
De dicto negations as well, provided they explicitly state that an affirmative prop-
osition is false, satisfy the principle of excluded middle and are contradictory or
truth-functional negations. It is a sufficient and necessary condition of their truth
that the negated proposition is not true. And it is false for its part if and only if
the negated affirmative proposition is true.
However, one can illustrate the fact that there are non-contradictory (non-
truth-functional) negations with the example of propositions (a) and (b) from § 8.
According to the bivalence principle both (a) and (b), as declarative proposi-
tions, have (at least) one of the two truth values. They also admit an interpreta-
tion which is incompatible with the principle of excluded middle, because they
do not contradict each other but are contrary, i.e., they are both false, even
though proposition (a) negates proposition (b). They are ostensibly to be taken as
singular propositions, which as such can only be true when they refer to a defi-
nite singular object. Since there is no question of a greatest number – whether
greater than a thousand or not – neither (a) nor (b) refers to a definite singular
object. Hence it is neither true that the greatest number is greater than a thou-
sand, nor is it true that the greatest number is not greater than a thousand.
What I have determined regarding the pair of propositions (a) and (b) holds
quite generally for any pair of singular propositions of the form ‘that α is a β’ and
clear and distinct manner in which Richard Purtill distinguishes between the two principles in
his articles “Principle of Bivalence” (1995a, 644) and “Principle of Excluded Middle” (1995b, 645).
Aristotle formulated the principle of excluded middle (without calling it thus) just so that it ap-
plies only to pairs of contradictory propositions: “But then neither is it possible for there to be any-
thing in the middle between contradictories, but it is necessary either to affirm or to deny one
thing, whatever it may be, of one thing” (Metaphysics 4. 7, 1011 b 24–25 [2016, 78]). Aristotle does
not provide an independent criterion for contradictoriness. (Cf. also Metaphysics 10. 7, 1057 a 33 ff.)
26
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

‘that α is not a β’. These pairs consist exclusively of false propositions if and only
if (with the same interpretation of α and β) a universally negative proposition is
true which states that no α is a β. The principle of excluded middle finds no appli-
cation to these pairs of propositions taken in general.
Note well that the principle of excluded middle is applicable to every pair of
propositions of which one truth-functionally or contradictorily negates the other.
This holds even with a pair of propositions which relate to each other as A and ~ A,
and A is the syllogistic schema of a singular affirmative proposition. In no interpre-
tation of the concept variables occurring in A can both A and ~ A be false. If one
replaces, e.g., the false proposition
(a) ‘the greatest number is not greater than a thousand’
with the truth-functional expression
(a′) ‘~ [the greatest number is greater than a thousand]’,
then a true proposition takes the place of a false one. For the sub-proposition
standing in the brackets of (a′) is false, and consequently (a′) is true according to
the principle of excluded middle.
§ 10 Truth-Functional and Non-Truth-Functional Negation
In order to make it clear that proposition (a) – as a false proposition – is not sup-
posed to be the translation of (a´), but rather a non-contradictory and non-truth-
functional negation of (b), we require an unambiguous terminology. Let A be a
formula which corresponds to the syllogistic schema of an affirmative or negative
proposition. Then I will use the designation ‘N A’ for the non-truth-functional ne-
gation of A. By ‘N A’ it is asserted that A is false, without also asserting, were A
equal to N B, that B is true. The meaning (or the use) of
‘N . . .’
can be fixed by way of definition51 so that, for every interpretation in which A
and B are true or false proposition, the following holds:
A definition as it is made here (and in what follows, for the use of logical constants other
than N) I call a use-definition, where it is permitted to make use in the definiens of the sign whose
use is the subject of the definition.
3 Analysis of Expressions of Negation § 10
27

(1)
N A is true if A is false or there is a false proposition B, with A = N B, and it is
possible that N A and N B are both true;
(2)
N A is false if A is true or there is a true proposition B, with A = N B, and it is
possible that N A and N B are both false. (Cf. § 43, def. 2)
In distinction from ~ B, according to this definitional stipulation N B does not
have the opposite truth value of B in every interpretation in which B is a false
proposition. Let us assume an interpretation in which B is true or false, without a
proposition C existing with B equivalent to N C. Then the truth table for N B
shows that if B has the value F, it is indeterminate what value N B has.
N B
B
?
T
?
F
Since with the meaning I have given to the bivalence principle, it is strictly uni-
versally valid, this table does not mean that there is a third truth value of N B
besides true and false, called ‘?’. It means rather only that the value assigned to N
B, if B has the value F, is indeed, according to the bivalence principle, T or F, but
it is not fixed by the value of B alone which value N B has. To be sure, the state-
ment that N B is true, just like the statement that ~ B is true, entails the statement
that B is false. But it is not at all the case that the statement that B is false would
also preclude that N B is also false. N B and B could also both be true. Let ‘B’ ab-
breviate the proposition ‘N A’. Then, if A and N A are both false, A and N A should
both be negated, so that, according to the bivalence principle, B and N B are mu-
tually compatible and both true. Considered in this way, both lower rows of the
columns for N B and B in the truth table above are integrated into the four lower
rows of the columns for A (= N B) and B in the following table:
. . .
NNN A
NN A
N A
A
B
. . .
. . .
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
T
T
. . .
. . .
F
T
T
F
F
T
T
F
F
F
Incidentally, this table (which could be continued to the left) displays how the
truth value of N A, with A = N B, develops according to its definition. The case in
28
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

which A and B both have the value T occurs precisely when there is a proposition C,
with B = N C, and both C and N C are false. What this table does not capture is the
fact that the value T for B in the first row and value F for A in the lowest row are
definitionally compatible with their respective opposite values. Accordingly, a prop-
osition of the form N B can, in precisely determined limit cases, be truth-ambivalent,
i.e., both true and false. That is, the proposition is true in these cases insofar as it
correctly negates a false proposition B, and false insofar as it is itself correctly ne-
gated by NN B. We call such attribution of opposite truth values to one and the
same proposition ‘paraconsistent’ and a logic which in a restricted and regulated
way admits such attribution a ‘paraconsistent logic’.52
We can also indirectly extract the following from the last table: the truth val-
ues of ~ A and N A concur exclusively in cases in which A and N A have opposite
truth values and there is no proposition B of which A is the negation. If A is true,
then both N A and ~ A are false, and NN A and ~ ~ A are both true.53 Yet an assess-
ment in which NN A is true only says that N A is false, but not also that A is true.
For A and N A could both be false. Hence, the true values of A and NN A could be
different, while the true values of A and ~ ~ A are always the same.
Now it is of the greatest logical significance that the negation designated by
‘N . . .’ under a certain assumption turns into a truth-functional negation. Namely,
‘~ A’ is ostensibly interchangeable with (or substitutable for) the expression
‘N A’
if and only if in every interpretation in which A is true or false, the expression
‘either A or N A’
is a true proposition. With ‘either A or N A’ it is supposed that not both A and N A
are false. On this supposition, the meaning of ‘N A’ turns into the meaning of
A paraconsistent logic in the strict sense explicitly annuls, in a restricted and regulated way, the
principle of the incompatibility of opposite truth values, which is tacitly assumed as universally valid
in truth-functional logics. Those logical systems which are at least compatible with the invalidity of
this principle can be called paraconsistent in a broader sense. It should thus be kept in mind that the
invalidity of this principle is compatible with the unrestricted validity both of the bivalence principle
as well as of the principle of excluded middle for contradictory propositions. As will emerge in what
follows, the “elementary” syllogistic (of § 15) can be understood as a paraconsistent logic. The Aristo-
telian syllogistic can also be presented as a paraconsistent system in the broader sense just now dis-
cussed. On the origin of the label ‘paraconsistent logic’ see Appendix 6 below.
When A is true and not equivalent to N B (for arbitrary B), it follows from A, according to the
just established meaning of ‘N A’, that NN A is true.
3 Analysis of Expressions of Negation § 10
29

‘~ A’. We can also carry out this transformation by replacing the expression
‘either A or N A’ with
‘if NN A, then A’.54
That is, ‘~ A’ may be substituted for ‘N A’ if one assumes (in every interpretation in
which A is true or false) that ‘if NN A, then A’ is a true proposition, hence, so that the
principle duplex negatio affirmat (‘double negation affirms’) holds. In the following,
this assumption is called the principle of the affirmative use of double negation.
We must now ask how the negation designated by ‘N . . .’ is related to that
negation which is contained in my list of the logical constants of the syllogistic
(see § 3).
Here our concern is the negation which appears in the syllogistic schemata of
universal and particular negative propositions. This can be quite adequately ren-
dered using the sign ‘N . . .’. In line with the way we have fixed the meaning of
the logical constants as they appear in particular and universal affirmative pro-
positions (thus in the contradictory opposites of the just mentioned negative pro-
positions), the rules for the use of ‘N . . .’ can also be fixed so that the syllogistic
schemata of these propositions are each equivalent to their respective double
non-truth-functional negations:
Thus, the schema of the universal negative proposition ‘every α is not a β’ is
equivalent to ‘no α is a β’. ‘No α is a β’ is the contradictory of ‘some α is a β’. Two
propositions are contradictories of each other when they can be neither both false
nor both true. Hence, as the contradictory of ‘no α is a β’, ‘some α is a β’ is equiva-
lent to the non-truth-functional negation of ‘no α is a β’, and thus equivalent to
‘N [no α is a β]’.
In contrast, ‘no α is a β’ is equivalent to the simple non-truth-functional negation
of ‘some α is a β’, i.e., it is equivalent to
‘N [some α is a β]’.
The schema of the particular affirmative proposition ‘some α is a β’ is accordingly
equivalent to ‘NN [some α is a β]’.
To be sure, this expression (which permits the interpretation that NNN B follows from N B) is not
equivalent to the expression ‘either A or N A’. For the latter also entails the supposition that NN A
follows from A, if A is not equal to N B (for arbitrary B). But this supposition is already valid on logi-
cal grounds (see note 53 above and § 44, rule (I. 1)) and thus does not need to be cited explicitly.
30
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

As for the schema of the particular negative proposition ‘some α is not a β’, it
is equivalent to ‘not every α is a β’ and is the contradictory opposite of ‘every α is
a β’. ‘Every α is a β’ is, as the contradictory opposite of ‘not every α is a β’, equiva-
lent to the elementary negation of ‘not every α is a β’, and ‘not every α is a β’ is
thus equivalent to the elementary negation of ‘every α is a β’, i.e., equivalent to
‘N [every α is a β]’.
The schema of the universal affirmative proposition ‘every α is a β’ is accordingly
equivalent to ‘NN [every α is a β]’.
§ 11 The Strong Logical Square of Assertoric Opposition
In order to present the logical relations between the schemata of universal and par-
ticular propositions in a clear manner, I have followed the tradition in organizing
these schemata in a square in such a way that the positional relations between them
correspond directly to logical relations. In deference to the traditional nomenclature,
I call these relations the relations of the logical square of assertoric opposition.
The following relations are hereby intended:
1.
Propositions are equivalent when they (with the same interpretation of the
concept variables α and β) come from schemata which are assigned to the
same corner of the square.55
NN [every α is a β]
every α is a β
N [some α is a β]
no α is a β
some α is a β
NN [some α is a β]
some α is not a β
N [some α is a β]
Figure 3
All propositional schemata which appear in Figure 3 can of course be replaced by other
equivalent expressions. This is particularly relevant for expressions which are in the plural.
These are expressions like ‘all α are β’, ‘all β are not β’, ‘some [einige, rather than irgendein;
WCW] α are β’ and ‘some α are not β’. For reasons of clarity, I will use the expressions appearing
in Figure 3 as the standard expressions of the syllogistic propositional schemata.
3 Analysis of Expressions of Negation § 11
31

2.
Propositions are contradictories of each other when they (with the same in-
terpretation of the concept variables α and β) come from schemata which are
opposed diagonally to each other.
3.
Propositions are contraries of each other when they (with the same interpre-
tation of the concept variables α and β) come from schemata which are as-
signed to different upper corners of the square.
4.
A proposition that comes from a schema (with any interpretation of the concept
variables α and β) which is assigned to one of the lower corners of the square is
subaltern to a proposition which (with the same interpretation) comes from a
schema that is assigned to the corner of the square standing vertical to it.
5.
Propositions are subcontraries of each other when they (with the same inter-
pretation of the concept variables α and β) come from schemata which are
assigned to different lower corners of the square.
That the first two relations enumerated here obtain stems directly from what was
said already in § 10; the fact that the three remaining relations obtain of course
also stems from what was said, though indirectly. This will emerge from the fol-
lowing considerations.
A contrary relation, as it is mentioned in the third point, obtains between two
propositions if and only if they can both be false, but not both true. A universal
affirmative proposition of the form ‘every α is a β’ is already false if not all objects
that fall under α are a β, but only some. But this is precisely the condition on
which a universal negative proposition of the form ‘no α is a β’ (with the same
interpretation of the concept variables) is false as well.
A proposition is the subaltern of another if and only if the truth of the first
follows from that of the second, but it does not follow from the fact that the first
is true that the second is. Now a universal proposition cannot be true unless the
proposition which is its contrary is false. Precisely for this reason the particular
proposition which is the contradictory of the latter contrary proposition must be
true. Conversely, though, a particular proposition cannot be true unless the uni-
versal proposition which is its contradictory is false. But precisely for this reason
the universal proposition opposed to this contrary does not need to be true. Thus,
the particular proposition stands in a subaltern relationship to the proposition
which is the contrary of its contradictory opposite.
Finally, two propositions are subcontraries if and only if both can be true, but
not both false, or when, in other words, one of the two propositions follows from
the non-truth-functional negation of the other. Now the non-truth-functional nega-
tion of a particular proposition is equivalent to the proposition that is its contradic-
tory, from which follows the particular proposition that is the subaltern of this
32
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

universal proposition. Hence, the particular proposition which is the subaltern of
this universal proposition follows from it immediately.
§ 12 The Weak Logical Square of Assertoric Opposition
With the exception of the contradictory relation, all relations of the logical square
of assertoric opposition remain preserved when we replace the expressions for
the schemata of universal propositions in Figure 3 with expressions for the sche-
mata of singular propositions in the following way:56
We have already seen in § 9 that the schemata of singular propositions which ap-
pear in Figure 4 are schemata of pairwise equivalent or pairwise contrary singu-
lar propositions.57 Hence the upper horizontals in Figure 4 correspond to the
same logical relation as the upper horizontals in Figure 3. The same holds for the
that α is a β
this α is a β
N [that α is a β]
N [this α is a β]
some α is a β
NN [some α is a β]
some α is not a β
N [every α is a β]
Figure 4
On the logical relationship between singular and universal propositions, see Leibniz (1840, IV.
17, § 8). On this, see Kneale & Kneale 1975, 323. – Kant alluded to this logical relationship with the
remark, “that in the use of judgments in syllogisms singular judgments can be treated like uni-
versal ones” (CPR, A 71/B 96). Treating ‘like’ is of course not equating. It therefore rests on a con-
fusion when Russell (1960, 40) claims of traditional logic, among whose representatives Kant is
surely to be counted, “The first serious advance in real logic since the time of the Greeks was
made independently by Peano and Frege – both mathematicians. Traditional logic regarded the
two propositions ‘Socrates is mortal’ and ‘All men are mortal’ as being of the same form; Peano
and Frege, who pointed out the error did so for technical reasons [. . .] but the philosophical im-
portance of the advance which they made is impossible to exaggerate.” Following Leibniz, Kant
seems to have seen the distinction between the universal and singular forms of judgment in that
with the latter the form of the particular judgment coincides with the universal.
Of course, each of these four expressions have other equivalents. Along the lines of non-
singular propositions, I would also like to accept plural expressions like ‘these α are (not) β’ or
‘those α are (not) β’ as syllogistic schemata of singular propositions, assuming that plural expres-
sions are also used for particular propositions. For reasons of clarity, I use the expressions ap-
pearing in Figure 4 as standard expressions.
3 Analysis of Expressions of Negation § 12
33

lower horizontals, since the same schemata are assigned to them in both figures.
Finally, both verticals in Figure 4 correspond to a subaltern relation. For when a
singular affirmative proposition of the form ‘this α is a β’ is true, at least some α
must be a β; just so, it must be that not every α is a β if a singular negative propo-
sition of the form ‘N [this α is a β]’ is true. Only the diagonals in Figure 4 stand for
a different (and indeed weaker) logical relation than the diagonals in Figure 3.
They do not correspond to contradictoriness, but subcontrariety. That is, they
each connect schemata of two propositions which cannot both be false, but both
can be true: from the non-truth-functional negation of one proposition it follows
that the other proposition is true; yet from the truth of one of the two proposi-
tions the non-truth-functional negation of the other does not follow.
The system of logical relations which correspond to the positional relations
in Figure 4 agree so much with the system depicted in Figure 3 that the designa-
tion ‘logical square of assertoric opposition’ could perhaps be used for both sys-
tems. But to avoid confusion, I will call the system illustrated by Figure 3 the strong
logical square of assertoric opposition, while the system illustrated by Figure 4
should be called the weak logical square of assertoric opposition.
As the expressions assigned to the right verticals in Figures 3 and 4 show, all
syllogistic schemata of negative propositions can be understood as expressing not
truth-functional but rather non-truth-functional negation. That is, they show that
‘not A’, whenever A is a syllogistic schema, is equivalent to ‘N A’, not to ‘~ A’.
§ 13 The Logical Square of Modal Opposition
As a result of what we have said, we should certainly not take syllogistic modal
expressions like ‘it is necessary that not A’ and ‘it is possible that not A’ as if they
were equivalent to ‘□~ A’ and to ‘◇~ A’, respectively. It would not even be cor-
rect to say that they are equivalent to ‘□N A’ and to ‘◇N A’. For ‘□. . .’ and ‘◇
. . .’ are used such that they are equivalent to ‘~ ◇~ . . .’ and to ‘~ □~ . . .’, re-
spectively. In contrast, the expressions ‘it is necessary that N A’ and ‘it is possi-
ble that N A’ stand in relations that are precisely analogous to those of the
square of assertoric opposition, and which I would like to call relations of the
logical square of modal opposition:58
These relations correspond to those Aristotle presents in De Interpretatione 13, 22 a 14 ff.
34
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

That is, for propositions which conform to the schemata in Figure 5, the fol-
lowing points also hold:
1. If schemata are assigned to the same corner of the square, they are equiva-
lent. 2. If schemata are diagonal to each other, they are contradictories. 3. If sche-
mata are assigned to different corners of the upper horizontals, they are contraries.
4. If schemata are assigned to different corners of the lower horizontals, they are
subcontraries. 5. If schemata are assigned to lower horizontals, they are related as
subalterns to the schemata standing vertically above them.
If we place the sign of non-truth-functional negation before every expression
of the right side in Figure 5 (in order), then we get the following four proposi-
tional schemata:
‘N [it is necessary that N A]’,
‘NN [it is possible that A]’,
‘N [it is possible that N A]’,
‘NN [it is necessary that A]’,
of which the first and last schemata must again be equivalent expressions. Since
moreover ‘NN [it is possible that A]’ is equivalent to ‘it is possible that A’ and ‘NN
[it is necessary that A]’ is equivalent to ‘it is necessary that A]’ (as the left side of
Figure 5 shows), then ‘N [it is necessary that N A]’ is also equivalent to ‘it is possi-
ble that A’ and ‘N [it is possible that N A]’ to ‘it is necessary that A’.
To abbreviate ‘it is necessary that . . .’, when this expression should not be
understood in the sense of ‘□. . .’, but rather in the sense of ‘N [it is possible that
N. . .]’, I use ‘L . . .’. Accordingly, ‘NLN . . .’ is equivalent to ‘N [it is necessary that
N . . .]’ and will be abbreviated by ‘M . . .’ (‘it is possible that . . .’) in what follows.
In this notation, the syllogistic propositional schemata ‘it is necessary that not A’
and ‘it is possible that not A’ are rendered respectively with ‘LN A’ and by ‘MN A’.
In this notation, ‘NLN . . .’ and ‘~ □~ . . .’ are different ways to understand
and abbreviate one and the same expression, namely, ‘it is not necessary that not
. . .’. They are distinguished from each other simply because the word ‘not’ is
it is necessary that A
NN [it is necessary that A]
it is necessary that N A
N [it is possible that A]
it is possible that A
NN [it is possible that A]
it is possible that N A
N [it is necessary that A]
Figure 5
3 Analysis of Expressions of Negation § 13
35

understood differently. The same holds for ‘NMN . . .’ and ‘~ ◇~. . .’; these, too,
are abbreviations of one and the same expression, namely, ‘it is not possible that
not . . .’, only the negation sign is understood differently in them.
4 Symbolic Abbreviations
§ 14 Syllogistic and Non-Syllogistic Modal Expressions
This notation makes it possible in certain circumstances to replace modal-logical
expressions in which the signs ‘◇. . .’, ‘□. . .’ or ‘~ . . .’ occur with expressions in
which a certain configuration of ‘M . . .’, ‘L . . .’ and ‘N . . .’ appear instead. Thus
‘◇A’ and ‘□A’ are in turn equivalent to
‘M A’ and
‘L A’,
assuming that the principle of the affirmative use of double negation holds for
non-truth-functional negation, thus assuming that A follows from NN A. This
equivalence in meaning can be easily made clear if one only considers that ‘~ A’,
under the just mentioned assumption, may be translated into ‘N A’ and that ‘◇~
A’ and ‘□~ A’ are equivalent to ‘~ [it is necessary that A]’ and ‘~ [it is possible that
A]’, respectively. When A follows from NN A, the just named expressions may be
replaced with ‘N [it is necessary that A]’ and ‘N [it is possible that A]’, respectively,
i.e., with expressions which according to § 13 are equivalent to ‘MN A’ and ‘LN A’.
These are thus expressions into which we may under the stated assumption con-
vert ‘◇~ A’ and ‘□~ A’; and we may under this assumption with equal right con-
vert ‘NMN A’ and ‘NLN A’ into ‘~ ◇~ A’ and ‘~ □~ A’ respectively as well, and
consequently ‘L A’ and ‘M A’ into ‘□A’ and ‘◇A’ respectively.
Even the expression for strict implication, ‘A ⥽B’ can in certain circumstan-
ces be replaced by a configuration of signs in which, besides ‘. . . & . . .’, only con-
stants of the syllogistic occur. Since ‘A ⥽B’ only abbreviates ‘~ ◇(A & ~ B)’, ‘A ⥽B’
is equivalent to
‘NM (A & N B)’,
36
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

on the assumption that A follows from NN A for every interpretation of A. Namely,
on this assumption non-truth-functional negation behaves like truth-functional
negation.59
The assumption that A follows from NN A is the assumption that a hypotheti-
cal proposition of the form ‘if NN A, then A’ is true. Hence, the supposition dis-
cussed in § 7 that ‘if . . ., then . . .’ expresses exactly the same thing as ‘. . . ⥽. . .’
needs to be corrected. If both these expressions were really equivalent, then ex-
plaining strict implication by means of an expression in which ‘if . . ., then . . .’
occurs would be out of the question. This occurrence points to a circulus vitiosus.
This circle is inevitable if one wants to interpret the hypothetical proposition ‘if
A, then B’ as an expression which implicitly makes use of the signs ‘◇. . .’ and
‘~ . . .’. There are, to be sure, still good reasons to hold with Lewis that ‘if A, then
B’ is equivalent to
‘it is impossible that A and not B’.
But apparently this expression, insofar as it is supposed to represent the same
thought as ‘if A, then B’, calls for a reading that is inevitably lacking in Lewis’
formula ‘~ ◇(A & ~ B)’. We find a better match for this reading by replacing the
signs ‘◇. . .’ and ‘~ . . .’ in this formula with logical constants of the syllogistic,
namely with ‘M . . .’ and ‘N . . .’ respectively, though without assuming that a hy-
pothetical proposition of the form ‘if NN A, then A’ is true.
But which logical vocabulary is best suited to represent the meaning of ‘if . . .,
then . . .’? This is a question which I cannot answer before answering the ques-
tion whether dyadic truth functions – among which belongs the logical constant
‘. . . & . . ..’ – are elements of a language into which one can adequately translate
the language of the syllogistic. (I will return to this question only in § 30.)
However, it has now already become clear that neither ‘◇. . .’, ‘□. . .’, nor
‘~ . . .’ belong among these elements. Moreover, it has already become apparent
that there are elements of the language of the syllogistic – namely ‘M . . .’, ‘L . . .’,
and ‘N . . .’ – which cannot without more ado be replaced by logical vocabulary of
another language without loss, and in any case not by the logical vocabulary of a
truth-functional language.
A simple way of abbreviating ~ ◇(A & ~ B) from NM (A & N B) will result from the relations
between the forms of the hypothetical proposition and strict implication and will be considered
below in the last paragraph of § 30. Further details are also in Appendix 5.
4 Symbolic Abbreviations § 14
37

§ 15 Other Expressions in the Language of Elementary Syllogistic
Concerning the remaining elements of the syllogistic language, it will prove useful
in what follows to introduce abbreviating expressions for them as well. I will use
the following notation:
I use the relational constants with empty places ‘A ( )’, ‘E ( )’, ‘I ( ), and ‘O ( )’
for the four forms of (in order) the universal affirmative, universal negative, par-
ticular affirmative, and particular negative statement.60 I use these letters in def-
erence to a traditional terminology (see § 4 above), which here is reshaped into a
functional notation to enable combination with other functional expressions
(which will prove to be useful in what follows). The empty places of these expres-
sions are always to be filled with an ordered pair of concept expressions which
can be represented by variables (‘α’, ‘β’, etc.). The sequence of concept expres-
sions within the empty places is always ordered so that the expression of the
predicate concept precedes the expression of the subject concept. Accordingly,
‘A (α, β)’ should be read as an abbreviation of ‘α is a predicate of every β’ (or for
‘α is said of every β’); ‘E (α, β)’ stands for ‘α is not a predicate of a β’ (‘α is said of
no β’); ‘I (α, β)’ and ‘O (α, β)’ mean in turn ‘α is a predicate of some β’ (‘α is said
of some β’) and ‘α is not a predicate of every β’ (‘α is not said of some β’). Order-
ing the sequence of concept expressions in this way has the advantage of dis-
playing the transitivity of the subordination relation in conceptual hierarchies.
To designate the forms of singular affirmative and singular negative state-
ments, I propose the relational constants ‘Ạ( )’ and ‘Ẹ( )’ respectively. The corre-
spondence of the pointed capital letters with the constants for forms of universal
statements is meant to suggest the logical affinity described in § 12 above: that Ạ
(α, β) and Ẹ(α, β) have a similar place in the logical square of assertoric opposi-
tion as A (α, β) and E (α, β).
Concerning the representation of Ạ(α, β) and Ẹ(α, β) in normal language
(read: ‘α is a predicate of that β’ or ‘α is said of that β’ and ‘α is not a predicate of
These forms are sometimes equated with the forms of the categorical judgment. See, e.g.,
Mautner 1996, 66–67: “In aristotelian logic, a categorical proposition is a proposition of one of
these four forms: All S is P / Some S is P / No S is P / Some S is not P. / Thus defined, every categori-
cal proposition is either universal affirmative, or universal negative, or particular affirmative, or
particular negative.” Since Aristotle himself did not yet use ‘categorical’ as the designation of a
judgment, it seems that “aristotelian logic” must here mean the logical tradition following Aristo-
tle. – The equation of categorical statements with the four above-mentioned forms is neverthe-
less systematically misleading for two reasons. First, from a traditional perspective, of course,
these forms also include non-categorical statements, namely the sub-statements of hypothetical
and disjunctive judgments. Second, in the traditional conception there are besides the four men-
tioned forms also singular categorical statements.
38
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

that β’ or ‘α is not said of that β’, respectively), one may for convenience replace
the use of the phrase ‘that . . .’✶with the less cumbersome use of the demonstra-
tive pronoun ‘this . . .’. Yet it should be made clear that the use of the demonstra-
tive pronoun has the disadvantage of allowing two possible misunderstandings to
arise which concern the formal semantics of the syllogistic vocabulary.
The first misunderstanding would be to suppose that it belongs to the form of
singular statements to be able to treat only such objects which one can show; for
demonstrative pronouns are often used in connection with pointing gestures. How-
ever, a meaningful statement can also be singular in its syllogistic form if it deals
with an object which is neither showable nor perceptible but is rather an abstract
ens rationis which may not even exist. This is the kind of object at issue in a singu-
lar statement like ‘this number does not exist’ – a statement which is true, for ex-
ample, when it is about the greatest natural number. It corresponds to a statement
of the form Ẹ(α, β), with ‘number’ in the place of β and ‘exist’ in the place of α.
The second misunderstanding would be to suppose that singular propositions
of the form Ạ(. . ., β) and Ẹ(. . ., β) have, as demonstratives, a changeable object-
reference with repeated occurrence in the same context (‘this flower is blue; this
is red. . .’). But the expression ‘that β . . .’, as it is used in these propositions must
be understood so that it always refers to the same object with repeated occur-
rence in the same context. It is used both anaphorically as well as kataphorically;
i.e., it points back to places within an already given context when the same β is
discussed in propositions of the form I (. . ., β), Ạ(. . ., β), or Ẹ(. . ., β), or it points
forward to such a place within an (at least potentially) subsequent context. To
that extent, the use of the expression ‘that β . . .’ resembles the use of a proper
name.61 For example, ‘Socrates’ in a proposition like ‘Socrates is mortal’ refers to
some bearer of this name, namely, to precisely the bearer this proposition is dis-
cussing. Which bearer this is can of course depends on the context of this proposi-
tion – if there is such a context. Since the possibility of referring to a certain
individual is presupposed by the use of a proper name, but the determinacy of
the reference depends on the occurrence of the name in several places of a com-
mon context, the use of a proper name also has an anaphoric-kataphoric charac-
ter.62 This is seen in the fact that, if the same proper name occurs in different
✶TN: the more “cumbersome” expression used in the original where I use “that . . .” is “das in
Rede stehende . . .”.
I will give more a precise account of the reason for this similarity in § 33.
The view proposed here and in what follows about the use of proper names is close in some
ways to conception developed by Fred Sommers (following W.V.O. Quine), according to which
proper names and individual identifiers are anaphoric expressions which relate back to state-
ments of the form ‘some S is a P’. See Sommers 1982, 5.
4 Symbolic Abbreviations § 15
39

places of a common context, e.g., in an inference chain, it refers to the same indi-
vidual in all these places unless several bearers of this name are explicitly distin-
guished from each other in this context. In just the same way, which object the
expression ‘that β . . .’ refers to in propositions of the form Ạ(. . ., β) or Ẹ(. . ., β)
depends on how the β in question is determined in other places in the context, to
which the expression points anaphorically or kataphorically.
In place of the three negative expressions ‘E ( )’, ‘O ( )’, and ‘Ẹ( )’ one may
write ‘N I ( )’, ‘N A ( )’, and ‘N Ạ( )’ respectively; that is, the relations of the logical
square of assertoric opposition admit a more parsimonious collection of basic
signs.
So that we have a symbolic expression for the form of a limitative judgment,
I replace ‘not-α’, ‘not-β’, etc. with ‘N α’, N β’, etc.
Finally, the two-place relational constant ‘H ( )’ serves to abbreviate the hypo-
thetical propositional connection ‘if . . ., then . . . .’. Corresponding abbreviations
for n-membered disjunctive propositional connections, i.e., for ‘either . . ., or . . . .’,
‘either . . ., or . . . ., or . . . .’, etc., are made possible by the use of the n-place rela-
tional constant ‘D ( )’, with n ≧2. The formula ‘H (A, B)’ is accordingly a proposi-
tional schema which is equivalent to ‘if A, then B’, while ‘D (A, B)’ and ‘D (A, B, C)’
stand for ‘either A, or B’ and for ‘either A, or B, or C’ respectively.63
I use non-italicized Latin uppercase letters A, B, C, etc. here and in what fol-
lows as meta-variables. They represent a formula for which there is an interpreta-
tion as a true or false proposition. They can stand in just as much for categorical
as well as hypothetical or disjunctive propositional schemata.
From now on I will call a formal language in which only concept variables
occur as object variables and in which there are no constants other than the logi-
cal constants of the syllogistic previously enumerated the elementary syllogistic
language. A language which is distinguished from the elementary syllogistic lan-
guage only by replacing at least one concept variable with a special interpretation
of this variable, I will call an extended language of the syllogistic. A logical system
which makes do with the use of the elementary syllogistic language and in which
the rules of the logical squares of §§ 11–13 are valid unrestrictedly, I will call the
elementary syllogistic.
Since ‘D (A, B)’ is equivalent to ‘H (A, N B)’ and H (N A, B)’, the possibility – see § 6 above – of
replacing ‘D ( )’ with a truth-functional expression without loss of meaning depends on the possi-
bility of translating ‘H ( )’ into a truth-functional language. In any case, so long as we have not
decided whether this possibility obtains, it is convenient to have a special notation to designate
the syllogistic ‘either . . ., or . . .’.
40
Part I Section One The Language of the Syllogistic

