GREGORY R. JOHNSON  
 
Kant, Swedenborg & Rousseau. The Synthesis of  
Enlightenment and Esotericism in Dreams of a Spirit-Seer 
 
 
Metaphysics is the finding of bad reasons for what we believe upon instinct, but to find these 
reasons is no less an instinct.  
 
 
 
Francis Herbert Bradley, Appearance and Reality1 
I argue that the Swedish seer Emanuel Swedenborg strongly influenced the central 
doctrines of Immanuel Kant’s critical philosophy.2 In 1762, Kant carried out exten-
sive investigations of Swedenborg’s reputation as a clairvoyant. In the fall of 1763, 
Kant began reading Swedenborg’s eight volume Arcana Coelestia (Secrets of 
Heaven). At the end of 1765, Kant published his Dreams of a Spirit-Seer (Träume 
eines Geistersehers), in which the outlines of the critical philosophy first appear, 
while he systematically dissembles his debts to Swedenborg behind a mask of 
ridicule and irony.3 
 
But in order to argue that Swedenborg influenced Kant, one must take into 
account the influence of another thinker who deeply impressed Kant at the same 
time he was reading Swedenborg: Jean-Jacques Rousseau. In 1762, Rousseau 
published Emile, or On Education (Émile, ou de l’éducation) and On the Social 
                             
1 Francis Herbert Bradley: Appearance and Reality. A Metaphysical Essay. 2nd ed. Oxford 1897, 
p. x. 
2 See also Gregory R. Johnson: A Commentary on Kant’s ‘Dreams of a Spirit-Seer’. Ph. D. Diss. 
Washington, D.C. 2001; idem: Kant on Swedenborg in the ‘Lectures on Metaphysics’. The 
1760s and 1770s. In: Studia Swedenborgiana 10/1 (1996), pp. 1–38; idem: Kant on Sweden-
borg in the ‘Lectures on Metaphysics’. The 1780s and 1790s. In: Studia Swedenborgiana 10/2 
(1997), pp. 1–26; idem: Kant’s Early Metaphysics and the Origins of the Critical Philosophy. 
In: Studia Swedenborgiana 11/2 (1999), pp. 29–54; idem: The Kinship of Kant and Sweden-
borg. In: The New Philosophy 99 (1996), pp. 407–423; idem: ‘Swedenborg’s Positive’ Influ-
ence on the Development of Kant’s Mature Moral Philosophy. In: On the True Philosopher and 
the True Philosophy. Essays on Swedenborg. Ed. by Stephen McNeilly. London 2002, pp. 21–
38; idem: The Tree of Melancholy. Kant on Philosophy and Enthusiasm. In: Kant and the New 
Philosophy of Religion. Ed. by Chris L. Firestone, Stephen R. Palmquist. Bloomington 2006, 
pp. 43–61; idem: ‘Träume eines Geistersehers’–Polemik gegen die Metaphysik oder Parodie 
der Popularphilosophie. In: Kant und Swedenborg. Zugänge zu einem umstrittenen Verhältnis. 
Ed. by Friedemann Stengel. Tübingen 2008, pp. 99–122; and idem: From Swedenborg’s Spirit 
World to Kant’s Kingdom of Ends. In: Aries. Journal for the Study of Western Esotericism 9/1 
(2009), pp. 83–99. 
3 Immanuel Kant: Träume eines Geistersehers, erläutert durch Träume der Metaphysik. In: 
Immanuel Kants gesammelte Schriften. Ed. by Preussische Akademie der Wissenschaften. 
Vol. 2. Vorkritische Schriften II: 1757–1777. Berlin 1905, henceforth cited as AK2 followed by 
the page number. In English: Immanuel Kant: Dreams of a Spirit-Seer and Other Writings. Ed. 
by Gregory R. Johnson. Trans. by Gregory R. Johnson, Glenn Alexander Magee. Westchester, 
PA 2002. Cf. Gregory Johnson: Did Kant Dissemble His Interest in Swedenborg? In: The New 
Philosophy 102 (1999), pp. 529–560.  

Kant, Swedenborg & Rousseau 
209 
Contract, or Principles of Political Right (Du contrat social, ou Principes du droit 
politique),4 and by 1764, Kant was intensely engaged with Rousseau’s thought. In 
his famous Remarks (Bemerkungen) of 1764–1765, Kant claimed flatly that Rous-
seau revolutionized his thinking.5 
 
Rousseau’s influence on the formation of the critical philosophy has long been 
widely accepted by Kant scholars. Indeed, the figure of Rousseau looms so large in 
Kant’s intellectual development that there hardly seems room for another major 
influence like Swedenborg. Therefore, to make a persuasive case that Swedenborg 
influenced Kant, one must simultaneously discuss the influence of Rousseau on 
Kant and demarcate their separate contributions.  
 
I argue that Rousseau, in the “Profession of Faith of a Savoyard Vicar” 
(“Profession de foi du vicaire savoyard”) in Emile, IV,6 made possible Kant’s 
appropriation of Swedenborg by reconfiguring the very notion of Enlightenment to 
make it critically receptive to belief in a Providential God, freedom of the will, and 
immortality of the soul. I argue that the method of Dreams of a Spirit-Seer is Rous-
seauian, while the doctrinal contents are Swedenborgian.7 
 
 
I Beyond Dogmatism and Skepticism 
 
I have argued elsewhere that Dreams of a Spirit-Seer is a kind of dialogue between 
three authorial personas: an “ironic metaphysician”, an “enlightened skeptic”, and 
a “pragmatic metaphysician”.8 Dreams part I, chapters 1 and 2 are the work of the 
ironic metaphysician. Dreams part I, chapter 1 is dedicated to raising the question 
to which Swedenborg is the answer: How do we account for the existence of living 
beings, particularly free and rational beings, in the mechanistic and materialistic 
cosmos of Newtonian science? The ironic metaphysician’s philosophy of nature is 
that of Kant himself, before his transformative encounter with Rousseau.  
 
After reading Rousseau, it was incumbent upon Kant to reconcile his mechanis-
tic philosophy of nature with Rousseau’s commitment to human freedom. Hence 
the question of Dreams part I, chapter 1, which I characterize as: “How can one be 
                             
4  Jean-Jacques Rousseau: Émile, ou de l’éducation. Ed. by Michel Launay. Paris 1966. In En-
glish: Jean-Jacques Rousseau: Emile, or On Education. Trans. by Allan Bloom. New York 
1979; idem: Du contrat social, ou Principes du droit politique. Amsterdam 1762. In English: 
On the Social Contract, or Principles of Political Right. London 1764. 
5 Immanuel Kant: Bemerkungen in den Beobachtungen über das Gefühl des Schönen und 
Erhabenen. Ed. by Marie Rischmüller. Hamburg 1991.  
6 Rousseau: Émile (see note 4), pp. 345–409. In English: Rousseau: Emile (see note 4), pp. 266–
313.  
7 Beyond that, I would argue that Rousseau did not merely prepare the methodological ground-
work of Kant’s appropriation of Swedenborg, but also sketched some of the Swedenborgian 
teachings on the nature of the soul that Kant found compelling. 
8 Johnson: ‘Träume eines Geistersehers’ – Polemik gegen die Metaphysik oder Parodie der 
Popularphilosophie (see note 2), pp. 99–122. 

Gregory R. Johnson 
210 
a Newtonian and a Rousseauian at the same time?” Dreams part I, chapter 2 an-
swers this question by setting forth a philosophical reconstruction of Swedenborg’s 
dualistic vision of the cosmos, a vision expansive enough to find room for both 
Newtonian mechanism and Rousseauian freedom.  
 
Dreams part I, chapter 3 marks the emergence of a new, skeptical authorial 
persona who offers a loosely Epicurean critique of the spirit world of Dreams part 
I, chapter 2. Taken together, Dreams part I, chapters 1 and 2 offer a dualistic on-
tology and anthropology, whereas Dreams part I, chapter 3 offers a materialistic 
and reductionistic ontology and anthropology.  
 
Because these two teachings are mutually contradictory, they cannot both repre-
sent Kant’s considered judgment. Kant’s own position is represented by the ‘prag-
matic’ perspective introduced in Dreams, part I, chapter 4, which Richard Velkley 
describes thusly:  
Kant now introduces a mode of argument characteristic of his ‘critical’ thought: moral experi-
ence points to a realm of hypotheses that elude theoretical validation, but that also transcend 
theoretical confutation, as theory itself stringently can show. Thus morality opens up the possi-
bility of a metaphysics of a new sort, concerned with objects produced by or implied by the ac-
tivity of a free will (‘noumenal’ objects) and transcending the whole realm of sense (‘phenom-
ena’) to which theoretical science is limited.9 
The pragmatic perspective on the spirit world is the final perspective in the book. 
Furthermore, it is the first sketch of Kant’s mature critical philosophy.  
 
 
II The Rousseauian Origins of Kant’s Dialectic 
 
The argument structure of Dreams is dialectical. Its form of dialectic is both a 
descendant of Pyrrhonian skepticism and the grandfather of Hegelian dialectic. Its 
most immediate offspring, however, is the argument structure of the Transcenden-
tal Dialectic of the Critique of Pure Reason (Kritik der reinen Vernunft).10 And its 
most immediate ancestor is Rousseau’s “Profession of Faith of a Savoyard Vicar.”  
 
The classical Pyrrhonian pattern of argument is to match every positive argu-
ment for a given philosophical position with a negative counter-argument, every 
thesis with an antithesis.11 The purpose of this activity is not, however, to lay the 
groundwork for a speculative philosophical synthesis, but rather to induce a skepti-
                             
 9 Richard Velkley: Freedom and the End of Reason. On the Moral Foundations of Kant’s Criti-
cal Philosophy. Chicago 1989, p. 108. Velkley is referring specifically to the moral arguments 
of the second part of Dreams I.2, but his remarks apply to the whole sweep of Dreams I, and 
particularly to its final conclusion in Dreams I.4. 
10  Immanuel Kant: Kritik der reinen Vernunft. Ed. by Raymund Schmidt. Hamburg 1956. In 
English: Critique of Pure Reason. Trans. by Norman Kemp Smith. New York 1929.  
11 For a useful discussion of Pyrrhonism and its influence on modern philosophy, see Richard H. 
Popkin: The History of Skepticism from Erasmus to Spinoza. Berkeley 1979. 

Kant, Swedenborg & Rousseau 
211 
cal suspension of judgment, the epoche, which is supposed to be followed by ata-
raxia – peace of mind. In Rousseau’s “Profession”, the Savoyard Vicar describes 
how fate gave him a Pyrrhonian education:  
A few such experiences lead a reflective mind a long way. Seeing the ideas that I had of the 
just, the decent, and all the duties of man overturned by gloomy observations, I lost each day 
one of the opinions I had received. Since those opinions that remained were no longer suffi-
cient to constitute together a self-sustaining body, I felt the obviousness of the principles grad-
ually becoming dimmer in my mind. And finally [I was, G.R.J.] reduced to no longer knowing 
what to think.12 
When he turned to the works of the philosophers for enlightenment, all he found 
were arguments and counter-arguments set forth by ignorant dogmatists and all-
knowing skeptics, all of them displaying more vanity than wisdom, leading him to 
the Pyrrhonian conclusion that, “Insoluble objections are common to all [systems, 
G.R.J.] […]”.13 
 
Unlike the Pyrrhonians, however, the Vicar did not find the skeptical epoche a 
source of inner peace, but instead found himself plunged into despair. Unlike Pyr-
rho, but like Descartes, he came to regard skepticism not as the cessation of philo-
sophical inquiry, but as a motivation to begin it: “I was in that frame of mind of 
uncertainty and doubt that Descartes demands for the quest for truth. This state is 
hardly made to last. It is disturbing and painful. It is only the self-interest of vice or 
the laziness of soul which leaves us in it.”14 And further: 
Although I have often experienced greater evils, I have never led a life so constantly disagree-
able as during those times of perplexity and anxiety, when I ceaselessly wandered from doubt 
to doubt and brought back from my long meditations only uncertainty, obscurity, and contra-
diction about the cause of my being and the principle of my duties. 
How can one systematically and in good faith be a skeptic? I cannot understand it. These skep-
tic philosophers either do not exist or are the unhappiest of men. Doubt about the things it is 
important for us to know is too violent a state for the human mind, which does not hold out in 
                             
12 Rousseau: Emile, or On Education (see note 5), p. 267. “Peu d’expériences pareilles mènent 
loin un esprit qui réfléchit. Voyant par de tristes observations renverser les idées que j’avais du 
juste, de l’honnête, et de tous les devoirs de l’homme, je perdais chaque jour quelqu’une des 
opinions que j’avais reçues; celles qui me restaient ne suffisant plus pour faire ensemble un 
corps qui pût se soutenir par lui-même, je sentis peu à peu s’obscurcir dans mon esprit 
l’évidence des principes, et, réduit enfin à ne savoir plus que penser” (French ed. [see note 5], 
p. 346). The Vicar explicitly refers to his crisis as a state of Pyrrhonism (French ed., 
p. 407/Bloom trans., [see note 5], p. 311).  
13 Ibid., p. 269. “Les objections insolubles sont communes à tous, parce que l’esprit de l’homme 
est trop borné pour les résoudre; elles ne prouvent donc contre aucun par préférence: mais 
quelle différence entre les preuves directes! celui-là seul qui explique tout ne doit-il pas être 
préféré quand il n’a pas plus de difficulté que les autres?” (French ed. [see note 5], p. 349). 
14  Ibid., p. 267. “J’étais dans ces dispositions d’incertitude et de doute que Descartes exige pour 
la recherche de la vérité. Cet état est peu fait pour durer, il est inquiétant et pénible; il n’y a que 
l’intérêt du vice ou la paresse de l’âme qui nous y laisse” (French ed. [see note 5], p. 347). 

Gregory R. Johnson 
212 
this state for long. It decides in spite of itself one way or the other and prefers to be deceived 
rather than to believe nothing.15 
The Vicar resolves, therefore, to seek a philosophical position beyond the clash 
between both dogmatism and skepticism. The first conclusion he draws from the 
strife of systems is that the “prodigious diversity” (“prodigieuse diversité”) of 
philosophical sentiments has two causes: “the insufficiency of the human mind” 
(“l’insuffisance de l’esprit humain”) and “pride” (“orgueil”).16 Of the insufficiency 
of the mind, he writes: 
We do not have the measurements of this immense machine [the cosmos, G.R.J.]; we cannot 
calculate its relations; we know neither its first laws nor its final cause. We do not know our-
selves; we know neither our nature nor our active principle. We hardly know if man is a simple 
or a compound being. Impenetrable mysteries surround us on all sides.17 
Our pride is evidenced by the fact that,  
we want to penetrate everything, to know everything. […] The only thing we do not know is 
how to be ignorant of what we cannot know. We are a small part of a great whole whose limits 
escape us and whose Author delivers us to our mad disputes; but we are vain enough to want to 
decide what this whole is in itself and what we are in relation to it.18 
The first thing a philosophy must do to escape the oscillation between dogmatism 
and skepticism is set aside our proud attempt to know the secrets of heaven and 
have the humility to confess what we do not and cannot know. Genuine philosophy 
begins with a Socratic knowledge of our own ignorance.19 Philosophy must begin 
                             
15 Ibid., p. 268. “Quoique j’aie souvent éprouvé de plus grands maux, je n’ai jamais mené une vie 
aussi constamment désagréable que dans ces temps de trouble et d’anxiété, où, sans cesse er-
rant de doute en doute, je ne rapportais de mes longues méditations qu’incertitude, obscurité, 
contradictions sur la cause de mon être et sur la règle de mes devoirs.” 
 
“Comment peut-on être sceptique par système et de bonne foi? je ne saurais le comprendre. 
Ces philosophes, ou n’existent pas, ou sont les plus malheureux des hommes. Le doute sur les 
choses qu’il nous importe de connaître est un état trop violent pour l’esprit humain: il n’y ré-
siste pas longtemps; il se décide malgré lui de manière ou d’autre, et il aime mieux se tromper 
que ne rien croire” (French ed. [see note 5], p. 347). 
16 Ibid., p. 268; French ed. (see note 5), p. 348. 
17 Ibid., p. 268. “Nous n’avons point la mesure de cette machine immense, nous n’en pouvons 
calculer les rapports; nous n’en connaissons ni les premières lois ni la cause finale; nous nous 
ignorons nous-mêmes; nous ne connaissons ni notre nature ni notre principe actif; à peine sa-
vons-nous si l’homme est un être simple ou composé: des mystères impénétrables nous envi-
ronnent de toutes parts […].” (French ed. [see note 5], p. 348). 
18 Ibid. “[N]ous voulons tout pénétrer, tout connaître. La seule chose que nous ne savons point, 
est d’ignorer ce que nous ne pouvons savoir. Nous aimons mieux nous déterminer au hasard, et 
croire ce qui n’est pas, que d’avouer qu’aucun de nous ne peut voir ce qui est. Petite partie d’un 
grand tout dont les bornes nous échappent, et que son auteur livre à nos folles disputes, nous 
sommes assez vains pour vouloir décider ce qu’est ce tout en lui-même, et ce que nous sommes 
par rapport à lui” (French ed. [see note 5], p. 348). 
19 I refer, specifically, to a genuine, not a feigned or dissimulated or “ironic” knowledge of one’s 
own ignorance. Kant explicitly mentions Socrates in Dreams part II, chapter 3 (Kant: Dreams 
of a Spirit-seer and Other Writings [see note 3], p. 59; AK2 [see note 3], p. 369). 

Kant, Swedenborg & Rousseau 
213 
with self-knowledge, with a reflective turn to the subject to determine both its 
powers and the limits beyond which its powers cannot extend: 
Who am I? What right do I have to judge things, and what determines my judgments? […] 
Thus my glance must first be turned toward myself in order to know the instrument I wish to 
use and how far I can trust its use.20  
Second, the Vicar claims that the “first fruit” of self-knowledge is, “to learn to 
limit my researches to what was immediately related to my interest, to leave my-
self in profound ignorance of the rest, and to worry myself to the point of doubt 
only about things it was important for me to know”.21 This is not a counsel of 
vulgar pragmatism, of non-intellectual self-gratification. Instead, he is advocating a 
new type of philosophical inquiry that takes its bearings from the practical realm. 
Philosophical dogmatism seeks to unveil what truly is by means of theoretical 
reason. Once we recognize that this task is futile and that the attempt only leaves 
reason vulnerable to skepticism, the primacy of theoretical reason must give way to 
the primacy of practical reason. Theoretical apprehension of the True must be 
subordinated to the practical apprehension of the Good. The highest wisdom phi-
losophy seeks is phronesis, not sophia. The realm in which phronesis reveals the 
good is the realm of practice.  
 
Third, the faculty by which the Vicar proposes to know the Good is not theoreti-
cal or technical-instrumental reason, but is instead variously described as “good 
sense” (“bon sens”) and “the simplicity of my heart” (“la simplicité de mon 
coeur”), “the inner light” (“la lumière intérieure”), and “conscience” (“con-
science”), which is “the voice of the soul” (“la voix de l’âme”).22  
Too often reason deceives us. We have acquired only too much right to challenge it. But con-
science never deceives; it is man’s true guide. It is to the soul what instinct is to the body; he 
who follows conscience obeys nature and does not fear being led astray.23  
Rousseau distinguishes conscience not only from reason, but also from passions 
and instincts, just as Kant distinguishes practical reason from both pure reason and 
                             
20 Rousseau: Emile, or On Education (see note 5), p. 270. “Mais qui suis-je? quel droit ai-je de 
juger les choses? et qu’est-ce qui détermine mes jugements? S’ils sont entraînés, forcés par les 
impressions que je reçois, je me fatigue en vain à ces recherches, elles ne se feront point, ou se 
feront d’elles-mêmes sans que je me mêle de les diriger. Il faut donc tourner d’abord mes re-
gards sur moi pour connaître l’instrument dont je veux me servir, et jusqu’à quel point je puis 
me fier à son usage” (French ed. [see note 5], p. 350). 
21 Ibid., p. 269. “Le premier fruit que je tirai de ces réflexions fut d’apprendre à borner mes 
recherches à ce qui m’intéressait immédiatement, à me reposer dans une profonde ignorance 
sur tout le reste, et à ne m’inquiéter, jusqu’au doute, que des choses qu’il m’importait de sa-
voir” (French ed. [see note 5], pp. 348f.). 
22 Ibid., pp. 266, 269, 286; French ed. (see note 5), pp. 345, 349, 372. 
23 Ibid., pp. 286f. “Trop souvent la raison nous trompe, nous n’avons que trop acquis le droit de 
la récuser; mais la conscience ne trompe jamais; elle est le vrai guide de l’homme: elle est à 
l’âme ce que l’instinct est au corps; qui la suit obéit à la nature, et ne craint point de s’égarer” 
(French ed. [see note 5], pp. 372f.). 

Gregory R. Johnson 
214 
from the incentives of the body. Rousseau’s conscience and Kant’s practical reason 
are equivalent to Plato’s thymos, the middle part of the soul in the Republic, the 
part of the soul which responds to values and is therefore the locus of self-love 
(Rousseau’s amour de soi-même); it is also the locus of honor and the partial and 
parochial attachments we form toward what is our own (Rousseau’s amour pro-
pre); finally, if properly cultivated (or sufficiently uncorrupted) it is the locus of 
our attachments to cosmopolitan, universal, and objective goods – and even to the 
Good itself.  
 
Having established conscience as the oracle of the good, the Vicar then adopts 
the following philosophical method:  
I am resolved to accept as evident all knowledge to which in the sincerity of my heart I cannot 
refuse my consent; to accept as true all that which appears to me to have a necessary connec-
tion with this first knowledge; and to leave all the rest in uncertainty without rejecting it or ac-
cepting it and without tormenting myself to clarify it if it leads to nothing useful for practice.24 
According to the Vicar, self-knowledge shows us that we can have no certain, 
theoretical knowledge of the existence of a benevolent God who providentially 
orders the world; of man’s exalted place in the cosmos between beast and God and 
the appropriateness of religious veneration; or of the freedom of the will and the 
immateriality and immortality of the soul. (Note the overlap with Kant’s three 
objects of ultimate concern: God, freedom, and immortality.)25 Self-knowledge 
also reveals, however, that we can have no certain, theoretical knowledge of the 
non-existence of God, freedom, immortality, etc. We are free, therefore, to deter-
mine our beliefs on these matters by means other than theoretical reason.  
 
Furthermore, a survey of what is important to us, a catalog of the needful things, 
shows us that we must come to a decision on these matters, because whatever 
decision we adopt will have dramatic implications for how we lead our lives. We 
are, therefore, licensed to risk believing in God, freedom, immortality, etc. – not on 
the grounds of apodictic theoretical reason, but on the grounds of practical reason, 
of fallible, imperfect, but humanly indispensable moral faith.  
 
It is by means of this essentially pragmatic reconfiguration of philosophy that 
the Vicar wards off the atheistic, Epicurean materialism of his day. The Vicar’s 
dualistic and theistic worldview, which had fallen into ruin when its foundations in 
faith had been sapped by world-weary cynicism and its foundations in theoretical 
                             
24 Ibid., pp. 269f. “[J]e reprends sur cette règle l’examen des connaissances qui m’intéressent, 
résolu d’admettre pour évidentes toutes celles auxquelles, dans la sincérité de mon coeur, je ne 
pourrai refuser mon consentement, pour vraies toutes celles qui me paraîtront avoir une liaison 
nécessaire avec ces premières, et de laisser toutes les autres dans l’incertitude, sans les rejeter 
ni les admettre, et sans me tourmenter à les éclaircir quand elles ne mènent à rien d’utile pour 
la pratique” (French ed., p. 350). 
25 Kant: Kritik der reinen Vernunft (see note 10), p. 29 (B xxxii–xxxiii). In English: Critique of 
Pure Reason (see note 10), p. 31.  

Kant, Swedenborg & Rousseau 
215 
reason had been destroyed by philosophical skepticism, rises again on the founda-
tion of practical reason.  
 
We find essentially the same pattern of argument in Dreams. The ironic meta-
physician of Dreams I.1 and I.2 sets forth the thesis: a dualistic, theistic worldview 
derived from Swedenborg. The enlightened skeptic of Dreams I.3 sets forth the 
antithesis: a skeptical, deflationary Epicurean materialism, which, in spite of its 
self-subverting rhetoric and question-begging arguments, somehow saps the 
foundations of Kant’s Swedenborgian metaphysical system. The pragmatic meta-
physician of Dreams I.4, who expresses Kant’s most considered judgments, then 
sets forth the synthesis: presupposing the essential validity of the content of the 
ironic metaphysician’s Swedenborgian vision, he grants the force of the skeptical 
critique of the allegedly dogmatic form of the metaphysician’s arguments, then he 
proposes to reconstruct the metaphysician’s Swedenborgian vision on the grounds 
of practical rather than theoretical reason.26  
 
What is most revealing about the argument structure of Dreams is the fact that 
Kant’s Swedenborgian metaphysical vision does not collapse when its dogmatic 
foundations are removed. It remains suspended in mid-air, so to speak, while he 
inserts new foundations beneath it. This levitation act clearly indicates that Kant’s 
Swedenborgian vision was not merely the conclusion of a philosophical argument, 
but a ‘core conviction’, a tenet of what Lewis White Beck called Kant’s “personal 
philosophy”.27 To support his personal philosophy, Kant adopted and discarded 
                             
26 The Pyrrhonian pattern of opposing arguments and counter-arguments is found in the 
Transcendental Dialectic of the Critique of Pure Reason, where Kant does not, however, pro-
pose a synthesis on the grounds of practical reason, but instead employs the distinction be-
tween the phenomenal and noumenal realms first sketched in Dreams to explain the insolubil-
ity of the antinomies. In the Critique of Pure Reason, as well as in the Critique of Practical 
Reason, Kant does, however, argue that although theoretical reason provides no grounds for 
knowledge of God, freedom, and immortality, practical reason provides grounds for a moral 
faith in them.  
27 Lewis White Beck: General Introduction to Kant’s Latin Writings. Translations, Commen-
taries, and Notes. 2nd rev. ed. Ed. and trans. by Lewis White Beck with Mary J. Gregor, Ralf 
Meerbote and John A. Reuscher. New York 1992, pp. 3f.: “[In Kant, G. R. J.] we must distin-
guish between philosophical principles he was prepared to elaborate and publicly defend in 
lectures and publications (his ‘official philosophy’) and philosophical opinions which had be-
come almost second-nature and which were seldom brought into the open and publicly de-
fended before his students and the learned world (his ‘personal philosophy’). In Kant this dis-
tinction is quite marked, because much of his official philosophy is explicitly directed against 
arguments for positions in his personal philosophy, but not against these positions themselves. 
Even in his pre-critical period, when the arguments and the beliefs were in greater harmony, he 
wrote at the end of a long and complex argument for the existence of God, ‘It is thoroughly 
necessary that one be convinced of God’s existence; but it is not nearly so necessary that it be 
demonstrated.’ His personal philosophy survived even the Copernican Revolution which de-
stroyed arguments for its tenets. Some of them appeared as regulative principles of theoretical 
reason, some as postulates of pure practical reason and objects of ‘rational faith’; still other 
parts of his personal philosophy are presented in his essays on political and historical topics 
which were rather independent of the epistemology of the official philosophy, and some of it 
can be found here and there in his unpublished notes, letters, and table-talk. It has been argued, 

Gregory R. Johnson 
216 
numerous arguments, but he never discarded the core convictions that guided him. 
Kant did not measure his core convictions by his arguments, but his arguments by 
his core convictions. 
 
 
III Theoretical Agnosticism  
 
Dreams I.4 consists of only five relatively short paragraphs. Paragraph one begins 
by justifying the very peculiar strategy of countering the first two chapters with the 
third. We first encounter the image of the “scales of understanding” (“Verstandes-
waage”). This image immediately brings to mind the Pyrrhonian attempt to offset 
arguments with equal yet opposite counter-arguments in order to induce the 
epoche, the state of balance, equanimity, and indifference.28 To reach this state of 
balance, however, we must be assured that the scales are honest. To determine the 
honesty of the scales used in trade, all we need to do is make the wares and 
weights change pans. If the results are the same, then we know that the scales are 
honest. If the results are different, then we know that one arm of the scale has an 
unfair mechanical advantage over the other.  
 
To determine the honesty of the scales of the understanding is a more complex 
matter, and the presentation is somewhat jumbled. First, Kant claims: “I have puri-
fied my soul of prejudices; I have destroyed every blind attachment that ever crept 
in to secure safe passage for the host of bogus knowledge […].”29 Second, he as-
serts, come what may, that, “nothing is important to me, nothing venerable, but 
what through the path of probity takes its place in a tranquil soul open to all argu-
ments”.30 These two claims presumably state the purpose of countering chapters 
one and two with chapter three: to purify the soul of prejudice, to produce a tran-
quil and balanced mind. The goal of this Pyrrhonian epoche is not, however, the 
peace of mind and the cessation of philosophical inquiry, but the creation of a new 
starting point for inquiry: a mind purified of prejudice, a judgment determined 
solely by reason and reality. But if the skeptic is correct to deny that theoretical 
                             
for instance, that Kant privately held a belief in a ‘spirit world’ (not just the mundus intelligi-
bilis of the Inaugural Dissertation) even after he had attacked Swedenborg in his Dreams of a 
Spirit-Seer.”  
28  Kant makes similar use of the image of scales twice in the Critique of Pure Reason, first at A 
589 = B 617 (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, p. 565; Critique of Pure Reason, p. 499); second at A 
767 = B 795 (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, p. 700; Critique of Pure Reason, p. 611). 
29  Kant: Dreams of a Spirit-Seer and Other Writings (see note 3), p. 37. “Ich habe meine Seele 
von Vorurteilen gereinigt, ich habe eine jede blinde Ergebenheit vertilgt, welche sich jemals 
einschlich, um manchem eingebildeten Wissen in mir Eingang zu verschaffen” (AK2 [see 
note 3], p. 349). 
30 Kant: Dreams of a Spirit-Seer and Other Writings (see note 3), p. 37. “Jetzo ist mir nichts 
angelegen, nichts ehrwürdig, als was durch den Weg der Aufrichtigkeit in einem ruhigen und 
vor alle Gründe zugänglichem Gemüte Platz nimmt” (AK2 [see note 3], p. 349). 

Kant, Swedenborg & Rousseau 
217 
reason has the power to answer the question of the spirit world, then the only rea-
son we can count on is practical reason.  
 
Third, Kant resolves to adopt as his own any position that refutes one of his own 
convictions: “The judgment of one who refutes my arguments is my judgment, 
after I first have weighed it against the pan of self-love, and, afterwards, in the pan 
of self-love against my presumed arguments and found it to have a greater merit”.31 
Kant’s attitude toward self-love is ambiguous. On the one hand, the fact that sub-
stantive reasons outweigh self-love clearly indicates the primacy of objective cog-
nition over subjective motives and is consistent with the Rousseauian concern with 
the power of vanity to distort philosophical judgment. On the other hand, the fact 
that Kant is willing to weigh other people’s opinions against his self-love in the 
first place, and to weigh them against his self-love before he weighs them against 
his own opinions, prefigures the primacy of practical reason which he develops 
later in the chapter. Practical reason does not, of course, appeal to base vanity and 
self-love, but as we shall see, it does appeal to the noble soul’s esteem for itself as 
a basis for affirming belief in an afterlife. 
 
Fourth, Kant appeals to the idea of ‘sensus communis’, describing it in much 
the same terms as the Critique of Judgment (Kritik der Urteilskraft):  
Formerly, I regarded the universal human understanding [allgemeinen menschlichen Verstand] 
only from the standpoint of my own: now I put myself into the position of a foreign and exter-
nal reason and observe my judgments, together with their most secret motives, from viewpoints 
of others. The comparison of both observations presents stark parallaxes [Parallaxen], but it is 
the only means to prevent optical deception and to place concepts in the true position in which 
they stand with respect to the cognitive faculty of human nature.32  
A parallax is a merely apparent displacement of an object due to the change of the 
observer’s position; it is an optical illusion, but it is apparently less serious than the 
illusions to which one is prone when confined to only one viewpoint. This is how 
to avoid the danger of vanity and open the mind to reason.33  
                             
31 Ibid. “Das Urteil desjenigen, der meine Gründe widerlegt, ist mein Urteil, nachdem ich es 
vorerst gegen die Schale der Selbstliebe und nachher in derselben gegen meine vermeintliche 
Gründe abgewogen und in ihm einen größeren Gehalt gefunden habe” (AK2 [see note 3], 
p. 349). 
32 Ibid. “Sonst betrachtete ich den allgemeinen menschlichen Verstand bloß aus dem Standpunkte 
des meinigen: jetzt setze ich mich in die Stelle einer fremden und äußeren Vernunft und be-
obachte meine Urteile samt ihren geheimsten Anlässen aus dem Gesichtspunkte anderer. Die 
Vergleichung beider Beobachtungen gibt zwar starke Parallaxen, aber sie ist auch das einzige 
Mittel, den optischen Betrug zu verhüten und die Begriffe an die wahre Stellen zu setzen, darin 
sie in Ansehung der Erkenntnisvermögen der menschlichen Natur stehen” (AK2 [see note 3], 
p. 349).  
33 Kant uses similar language in his letter to Marcus Herz of June 7, 1771: “You know very well 
that I am inclined not only to try to refute intelligent criticisms but that I always weave them 
together with my judgments and give them the right to overthrow all my previously cherished 
opinions. I hope that in that way I can achieve an unpartisan perspective, seeing my judgments 
from the standpoint of others, so that a third opinion may emerge, superior to my previous 
ones” (Immanuel Kant: Correspondence. Ed. and trans. by Arnulf Zweig. Cambridge 1999, 

Gregory R. Johnson 
218 
 
The opening sentences of the first paragraph clearly refer to the skeptical inter-
lude of Dreams I.3, in which the ironic metaphysician himself dons the persona 
and assumes the perspective of “a foreign and external reason”, namely the en-
lightened skeptic, in order to view his theory of the spirit world from an external 
point of view.34 And, although the arguments of the enlightened skeptic seem ques-
tion-begging and rhetorically self-subverting, the ironic metaphysician seems pre-
pared to abandon the dogmatic groundwork of his vision of the spirit world – but 
not his vision itself – emerging instead as a pragmatic metaphysician. This is the 
clearest evidence that the skeptical arguments of Dreams I.3 are not Kant’s own 
arguments; they are the arguments of an assumed persona. 
 
 
IV Practical Faith  
 
After a brief apology for treating the matter of spirits in a serious and solemn 
fashion, paragraph one continues with a startling admission. The attempt to balance 
the scales of the understanding by countering dogmatic arguments with equally 
weighty skeptical arguments has failed. It has failed because the scales of the un-
derstanding are not, from the point of view of strict rational probity, entirely hon-
est:  
I do not find that any attachment or other inclination insinuated prior to examination has 
robbed my mind of its readiness to be guided by any kind of arguments, except one. The scale 
of reason is not, after all, wholly impartial, and one of its arms, which bears the inscription: 
“Hope for the Future”, has a mechanical advantage, that causes even weak arguments that fall 
into the pan belonging to it to lift up the speculations that have a greater weight on the other 
side. This is the only inaccuracy that I cannot easily remove and that in fact I never want to re-
move.35  
                             
p. 126). In German: “Daß vernünftige Einwürfe von mir nicht blos von der Seite angesehen 
werden wie sie zu wiederlegen seyn könten sondern daß ich sie iederzeit beym Nachdenken 
unter meine Urtheile webe und ihnen das Recht lasse alle vorgefaßte Meinungen die ich sonst 
beliebt hatte über den Haufen zu werfen, das wissen sie. Ich hoffe immer dadurch daß ich 
meine Urtheile aus dem Standpunkte anderer unpartheyisch ansehe etwas drittes herauszube-
kommen was besser ist als mein vorigtes” (Kant‘s gesammelte Schriften [see note 3]. Vol. 10. 
Zweite Abteilung: Briefwechsel I: 1747–1788. 2nd ed. Berlin 1922, p. 116f.). 
34 Kant: Dreams of a Spirit-Seer and Other Writings (see note 3), p. 37. “[E]iner fremden und 
äußeren Vernunft” (AK2 [see note 3], p. 349). 
35 Ibid., p. 38. “Ich finde nicht, daß irgendeine Anhänglichkeit, oder sonst eine vor der Prüfung 
eingeschlichene Neigung meinem Gemüte die Lenksamkeit nach allerlei Gründen vor oder 
dawider benehme, eine einzige ausgenommen. Die Verstandeswage ist doch nicht ganz unpar-
teiisch, und der eine Arm derselben, der die Aufschrift führet: Hoffnung der Zukunft, hat einen 
mechanischen Vorteil, welcher macht, daß auch leichte Gründe, welche in die ihm angehörige 
Schale fallen, die Spekulationen von an sich größeren Gewichte auf der andern Seite in die 
Höhe ziehen. Dieses ist die einzige Unrichtigkeit, die ich nicht wohl heben kann, und die ich in 
der Tat auch niemals heben will” (AK2 [see note 3], p. 349f.). 

Kant, Swedenborg & Rousseau 
219 
“Hope for the future” refers, of course, to hope for a future life, hope that the soul 
is immortal. The scale of judgment is biased in favor of this hope, so that any ar-
guments that support it are weightier and command more credence than even more 
logically rigorous arguments against the immortality of the soul. The paragraph 
then continues with the observation that:  
all stories about apparitions of departed souls or about spirit influxes and all theories about the 
presumptive nature of spiritual beings and their connection with us, only weigh appreciably in 
the pan of hope, while in that of speculation they appear to consist of mere air.36  
Paragraph one ends and paragraph two begins with the observation that hope for a 
future life is the chief cause of belief in ghost stories, and when the light is poor, 
hope often causes us to mistake ambiguous phenomena for ghosts. Hope for the 
future is also the basis for the philosophers’ rational conceptions of spirits, which 
they incorporate into their systems. The author then admits that, “One also proba-
bly notices that my pretentious doctrine of spirit community takes the very same 
direction followed by common inclination”.37 Here Kant admits that he is (or was) 
the ironic metaphysician of Dreams I.1–2, that the ironic metaphysician’s theory of 
the spirit world is his own theory. (Contrast this with his claim in the previous 
paragraph that the skeptical arguments of Dreams I.3 are merely a “foreign and 
external” point of view which he has adopted in order to test his own arguments.)  
 
Kant then goes on to show how systematically his theory is biased in favor of 
hope for the future. He notes that his theory explains only “how the human spirit 
leaves this world; in other words, our state after death”.38 But he offers no treat-
ment of how spirits come into the world, i.e., how they are generated. Nor does he 
discuss how spirits are present in the world through their connection to the body. 
The “very good reason” for this is simply the fact that, “I do not understand this at 
all, and consequently I might as well have been content to be just as ignorant in 
regard to the future state, had not partiality toward a pet opinion served as a rec-
ommendation for the arguments that offered themselves, as weak as they may 
be”.39 This Lieblingsmeinung is, of course, our hope for a future life. The pressing 
                             
36 Ibid. “[A]lle Erzählungen vom Erscheinen abgeschiedener Seelen oder von Geistereinflüssen 
und alle Theorien von der mutmaßlichen Natur geistiger Wesen und ihrer Verknüpfung mit uns 
nur in der Schale der Hoffnung merklich wiegen; dagegen in der der Spekulation aus lauter 
Luft zu bestehen scheinen” (AK2 [see note 3], p. 349f.). 
37 Ibid. “Man sieht es auch wohl meinem anmaßlichen Lehrbegriff von der Geistergemeinschaft 
an, daß er ebendieselbe Richtung nehme, in den die gemeine Neigung einschlägt” (AK2 [see 
note 3], p. 350). 
38 Ibid., p. 38f. “Denn die Sätze vereinbaren sich sehr merklich nur dahin, um einen Begriff zu 
geben, wie der Geist des Menschen aus dieser Welt herausgehe, d.i. vom Zustande nach dem 
Tode; wie er aber hineinkomme, d.i. von der Zeugung und Fortpflanzung, davon erwähne ich 
nichts […].” (AK2 [see note 3], p. 350). 
39 Ibid. “Denn die Sätze vereinbaren sich sehr merklich nur dahin, um einen Begriff zu geben, 
wie der Geist des Menschen aus dieser Welt herausgehe, d.i. vom Zustande nach dem Tode; 
wie er aber hineinkomme, d.i. von der Zeugung und Fortpflanzung, davon erwähne ich nichts; 

Gregory R. Johnson 
220 
moral importance of this belief encourages Kant to engage his poetic faculties, to 
venture risky and speculative arguments for the immortality of the soul, the kinds 
of arguments that he would not venture on topics of lesser moral significance.  
 
Such a method does, however, seem to invite the charge of self-deception or 
wishful thinking, especially from the point of view of a rigorously rational concep-
tion of intellectual probity. In the footnote to the paragraph, Kant counters this 
charge with a strikingly Rousseauian argument:  
The emblem of the ancient Egyptians for the soul was a butterfly, and the Greek name signifies 
the same.40 One can easily see that the hope, which makes death only a transformation, has 
occasioned such an idea together with its symbol. But this does not at all invalidate the confi-
dence that the concepts arising from this are right.41 
Even if hope for the future does urge the idea of immortality upon us, this tells us 
only of the origin of the concept. It says nothing about the concept’s truth, which is 
determined not by its origins, but by its relationship to reality. To deny the truth of 
a concept because its conception is not logically immaculate is simply a case of 
what was later to be dubbed ‘the genetic fallacy’.  
 
Then comes the Rousseauian assertion that, “Our inner feeling [innere Emp-
findung] and the judgments of what is analogous to reason grounded thereupon 
lead, provided they are uncorrupted, precisely where reason would lead, if it were 
                             
ja sogar nicht einmal, wie er in dieser Welt gegenwärtig sei, d.i. wie eine immaterielle Natur in 
einem Körper und durch denselben wirksam sein könne; alles um einer sehr gültigen Ursache 
willen, welche diese ist, daß ich hievon insgesamt nichts verstehe und folglich mich wohl hätte 
bescheiden können, ebenso unwissend in Ansehung des künftigen Zustandes zu sein, wofern 
nicht die Parteilichkeit einer Lieblingsmeinung denen Gründen, die sich darboten, so schwach 
sie auch sein mochten, zur Empfehlung gedienet hätte” (AK2 [see note 3], pp. 250f.). 
40 In Metaphysik K2 (early 1790s), Kant states, “Psyche means papillon. In this naming of the 
soul there lies an analogy with a butterfly, which is hidden pre-formed in the caterpillar, which 
is nothing more than its husk. This teaches that in this world dying is nothing more than regen-
eration.” (Immanuel Kant: Lectures on Metaphysics. Ed. by Karl Ameriks. Trans. by Karl 
Ameriks, Steve Naragon. Cambridge 1997, p. 395). “ψυχη heisst Papillon. Es liegt also in die-
ser Benennung der Seele eine Analogie mit einem Schmetterling, der präformiert in der Raupe 
steckt, die nichts weiter als der Balg desselben ist. Dies lehrt, dass das Sterben diesseits nichts 
weiter als Regeneration ist” (Immanuel Kants gesammelte Schriften [see note 3]. Vol. 28/2,1: 
Vorlesungen über Metaphysik und Rationaltheologie. Berlin 1970, p. 753). Kant’s claim about 
the Greek etymology of psyche is correct. See Aristotle: Historia animalium (551a, 14); The-
ophrastos: Historia plantarum (II, iv, 4); and Plutarch: Moralia (2.636c). Swedenborg also 
speaks of the soul as a butterfly which, upon death, emerges from the cocoon of the body 
(Emanuel Swedenborg: Arcana Coelestia. 8 vols. Vol. 7. 3rd ed. London 1949–1973, no. 8848, 
p. 216).  
41 Kant: Dreams of a Spirit-Seer and Other Writings (see note 3), pp. 38f., note. “Das Sinnbild 
der alten Ägypter vor die Seele war ein Papillon, und die griechische Benennung bedeutete 
ebendasselbe. Man siehet leicht, daß die Hoffnung, welche aus dem Tode nur eine Verwand-
lung macht, eine solche Idee samt ihren Zeichen veranlaßt habe. Indessen hebt dieses keines-
weges das Zutrauen zu der Richtigkeit der hieraus entsprungenen Begriffe” (AK2 [see note 3], 
p. 351, note). 

Kant, Swedenborg & Rousseau 
221 
more enlightened and more extensive”.42 Following Rousseau, Kant posits a third 
cognitive faculty that is as distinct from pure reason as it is from merely corporeal 
feeling. This faculty is described as “inner” feeling to distinguish it from gross 
bodily feeling. The judgments grounded upon inner feeling are characterized as 
“analogous to reason” to distinguish them from the judgments of reason proper, 
i.e., pure reason, theoretical reason. This new faculty is also distinguished from 
theoretical reason by being more enlightened and expansive, meaning that it can 
know truths that lie beyond the boundaries of pure theoretical reason.  
 
Since this faculty takes its bearings by such morally and practically-oriented 
“inner feelings” as hope for the future, it is not unreasonable to call it practical 
reason. Whereas theoretical reason reaches an agnostic deadlock on the question of 
the immortality of this soul, revealing its inherent incapacity to reach beyond the 
bounds of experience, practical reason, motivated by the moral hope in a future 
life, can give us new grounds for believing in the immortality of the soul. Here we 
see sketched such important teachings of the Critique of Practical Reason (Kritik 
der praktischen Vernunft) as the feeling of respect for the moral law, which is 
characterized as a non-corporeal feeling that reveals our obligation to live by the 
noumenal moral laws in our phenomenal life, and the moral argument for belief in 
the immortality of the soul.  
 
In paragraph two, Kant claims that his ignorance of the soul’s entrance into and 
presence in the world prevents him from wholly dismissing ghost stories. He then 
adds that, while he is skeptical of each ghost story individually, he ascribes cre-
dence to all of them taken together. Then he refers to Dreams I.2, saying that, “as 
far as I am concerned at least, the scales are tipped far enough to the side of the 
arguments of the second chapter to make me serious and undecided in giving a 
hearing to the many strange stories of this kind”.43 The tone of this suggests a 
change of attitude toward the arguments of Dreams I.2. At first their plausibility 
rested upon the strength of their admittedly suppositious arguments. Now they 
seem plausible because theoretical reason, having reached an agnostic deadlock 
has nothing to say against them, whereas moral hope for the future finds them quite 
satisfying.  
 
 
                             
42 Ibid. “Unsere innere Empfindung und die darauf gegründete Urteile des Vernunftähnlichen 
führen, solange sie unverderbt sind, ebendahin, wo die Vernunft hinleiten würde, wenn sie er-
leuchteter und ausgebreiteter ware” (AK2 [see note 3], p. 351, note). 
43 Ibid., p. 39. “Ebendieselbe Unwissenheit macht auch, daß ich mich nicht unterstehe, so gänz-
lich alle Wahrheit an den mancherlei Geistererzählungen abzuleugnen, doch mit dem gewöhn-
lichen, obgleich wunderlichen Vorbehalt, eine jede einzelne derselben in Zweifel zu ziehen, 
allen zusammengenommen aber einigen Glauben beizumessen. Dem Leser bleibt das Urteil 
frei; was mich aber anlangt, so ist zum wenigsten der Ausschlag auf die Seite der Gründe des 
zweiten Hauptstücks bei mir groß gnug, mich bei Anhörung der mancherlei befremdlichen Er-
zählungen dieser Art ernsthaft und unentschieden zu erhalten” (AK2 [see note 3], p. 351). 

Gregory R. Johnson 
222 
V Conclusion  
 
Paragraphs three and four state the overall conclusions of Dreams part I. First is 
the claim that, “this reflection, if properly used by the reader, completes all philo-
sophical insight about such beings [spirits, G.R.J.] […]”.44 The claim to have com-
pleted any line of inquiry invites the charge of hubris. Kant explains, however, that 
while it is impossible to complete any empirical inquiry, because it is impossible to 
anticipate what will emerge as experience unfolds, it is nevertheless possible to 
complete a rational or philosophical line of inquiry:  
But with the philosophical concept of spiritual being it is completely different. It can be com-
pleted, but understood negatively, namely by fixing securely the limits of our insight and con-
vincing us that the various appearances of life in nature and their laws are all that is granted to 
us to know, but the principle of this life, i.e., spiritual nature, which one cannot know but rather 
suppose, can never be positively thought, since no data can be found in the whole of our sensa-
tions and that one must make use of negations in order to think of something so very different 
from all sensuous things, but even the possibility of such negations rests neither upon experi-
ence nor on inferences, but rather rests upon fiction, in which reason divested of all means of 
help takes its refuge. On this basis the pneumatology of mankind can be called a doctrine of 
our necessary ignorance with respect to a supposed kind of being and as such is easily adequate 
for its task.45 
Here we have, in outline, the critical pneumatology of the Critique of Pure Reason, 
Second Division, Book 2, Chapter 1, “On the Paralogisms of Pure Reason” (“Von 
den Paralogismen der reinen Vernunft”). Rational pneumatology has been brought 
to completion not by an exhaustive investigation of its subject matter, but by a 
propaedeutic reflection on the power of reason to carry out the task. Such reflec-
tion reveals that reason is capable of empirically investigating the appearances of 
life and soul in nature, but it is incapable of passing beyond empirical phenomena 
to investigate the spiritual beings that may lie behind such appearances, because 
such beings are so very distinct from everything sensuous.  
                             
44 Ibid. “Da ich mich jetzt beim Schlusse der Theorie von Geistern befinde, so unterstehe ich mir 
noch zu sagen, daß diese Betrachtung, wenn sie von dem Leser gehörig genutzt wird, alle phi-
losophische Einsicht von dergleichen Wesen vollende, und daß man davon vielleicht künf-
tighin noch allerlei meinen, niemals aber mehr wissen könne” (AK2 [see note 3], p. 351). 
45 Ibid., pp. 39f. “Allein mit dem philosophischen Lehrbegriff von geistigen Wesen ist es ganz 
anders bewandt. Er kann vollendet sein, aber im negativen Verstande, indem er nämlich die 
Grenzen unserer Einsicht mit Sicherheit festsetzt und uns überzeugt, daß die verschiedene Er-
scheinungen des Lebens in der Natur und deren Gesetze alles seien, was uns zu erkennen ver-
gönnet ist, das Principium dieses Lebens aber, d.i. die geistige Natur, welche man nicht kennet, 
sondern vermutet, niemals positiv könne gedacht werden, weil keine Data hiezu in unseren ge-
samten Empfindungen anzutreffen seien, und daß man sich mit Verneinungen behelfen müsse, 
um etwas von allem Sinnlichen so sehr Unterschiedenes zu denken, daß aber selbst die Mög-
lichkeit solcher Verneinungen weder auf Erfahrung, noch auf Schlüssen, sondern auf einer Er-
dichtung beruhe, zu der eine von allen Hülfsmitteln entblößte Vernunft ihre Zuflucht nimmt. 
Auf diesen Fuß kann die Pneumatologie der Menschen ein Lehrbegriff ihrer notwendigen Un-
wissenheit in Absicht auf eine vermutete Art Wesen genannt werden und als ein solcher der 
Aufgabe leichtlich adaequat sein” (AK2 [see note 3], pp. 351f.). 

Kant, Swedenborg & Rousseau 
223 
 
Because of our lack of empirical data, we can speak of spiritual beings only 
hypothetically, and the only predicates we can apply to them are negative ones, 
i.e., ‘not determined’, ‘not material’, etc. Furthermore, these negative predicates 
are based neither upon experience nor upon inferences, but upon our poetic-fictive 
faculty. Rational pneumatology is, therefore, not a positive body of doctrine, but 
rather a negative doctrine of the limits of reason and the necessity of ignorance 
when dealing with spiritual beings that supposedly transcend experience.  
 
There is, however, a positive side to this doctrine: “that henceforth one can have 
all kinds of opinions but no more knowledge of [spirits, G. R. J.].”46 Stripped of the 
aids of experience and inference and denied all knowledge of spirits, but impelled 
by practical necessities, we are entitled to take refuge in the realm of opinion and 
to make use of our poetic-fictive faculty to affirm the immortality of the soul. Thus 
Kant’s resolution to set aside the whole of rational psychology and turn his atten-
tion to practical matters does not imply a lack of interest in psychology as such; 
instead, it implies the search for practical grounds for the investigation of the soul. 
Thus Kant, having abandoned the dogmatic perimeter, falls back, retrenches, and 
offers a renewed defense of his Swedenborgian vision of the spirit world on moral-
practical grounds. This remarkable synthesis of Rousseau and Swedenborg – of 
enlightenment and esotericism – is the foundation of Kant’s critical philosophy. 
                             
46 Ibid., p. 39. “[U]nd daß man davon vielleicht künftighin noch allerlei meinen, niemals aber 
mehr wissen könne” (AK2 [see note 3], p. 351). 

