v 
DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE: 
KNOWING BY DOING 
A. A NEW IDEAL OF KNOWING 
1. Contemplative and Ergetic Knowledge 
When we see things or know them, says Malebranche, we see and 
know them in God. God's knowledge is the sum total of his always 
"clear and distinct" ideas.' Some of these ideas of singulars God also 
endows with existence (Malebranche, like most rationalists and em-
piricists of his century, was a Nominalist). 2 Inasmuch as we possess 
clear and distinct ideas-of mathematics, for example-and even 
when we intuit objects extra animam, we participate in God's intel-
ligence; no complicated psycho-physical mechanism is needed to 
mediate between our knowledge and its objects. Berkeley adopted 
a similar solution to guarantee the validity of our empirical knowl-
edge, that is, of that being (esse) which (unlike Malebranche's affir-
mation of an external world) is nothing but "perceiving" (percipi). J 
No less radical a case for the identity of God's mental acts and ours 
was made by Spinoza: a clear and distinct concept of the self and its 
mental acts involves the awareness that they are but so many mod-
ifications of one divine attribute, cogitation; and that they stand in 
a one-to-one correspondence with physical states, which are but so 
many modifications of the only other known attribute, namely ex-
tension.4 
'Malebranche, Recherche 3.2.6, OC, I:437-47 Eclaircissements IO, OC, 3:I2I ("quenous 
voyons toutes chases en Dieu"). "Quae utique vetus est sententia, et si sano sensu intel-
ligatur, non omnino spernenda": Leibniz, GP, 4:426. 
• Nicholas Malebranche: The Search After Truth, trans. Lennon, pp. 759-86I (philosoph-
ical commentary}, esp. p. 76I, 8I3-I5. By "Nominalist," to repeat, I do not mean a 
thinker who denies the validity of relations or other universals, but rather a thinker who 
maintains that only singulars exist. 
3 McCracken, Malebranche and British Philosophy, pp. 205-53; 208 n. I 5 (literature since 
Luce, Berkeley and Malebranche). The link was stated early, not only polemically: Burt-
hogge, An Essay Upon Reason, p. I09. It is not surprising that Leibniz should say of 
Berkeley, as he did of Malebranche (above n. I), "multa hie recte et ad sensum meum": 
Kabitz, "Leibniz und Berkeley," p. 636. 
• Above II.F. r. 

A. A NEW IDEAL OF KNOWING 
291 
For all of them, it seems, the difference between divine and hu-
man knowledge became quantitative rather than qualitative. God 
may possess infinite knowledge, ours is finite; God· knows all at 
once intuitively, our thinking processes are discursive. Yet what we 
know, we know exactly as God knows it-it is, in fact, the same act 
of knowledge by which we and God know something. Even Des-
cartes, who conceded to God the right and might to invalidate 
mathematical truths, stated that he preferred the term idea over 
others because "it was the term commonly used by philosophers for 
the forms of perception of the divine mind."s This divine form of 
perception now became ours. Divine knowledge, in the Thomistic 
tradition, was above all introspective. By knowing itself, the divine 
intellect knows ipso facto everything other than itself; its knowl-
edge is the simple unity of the "knower and the known." 6 To Des-
cartes this mode ofknowledge became also the characteristic mode 
of human knowledge, inasmuch as it contains clear and distinct 
ideas; these are innate, we know them by introspection. And if,· as 
Descartes believed, some of our ideas about God are also "clear and 
distinct," it would follow that we know God in the same way as he 
knows himself-at least partially. Descartes did not say so, but Male-
branche, who understood this implication, tried to avoid it by dis-
claiming a "clear and distinct" notion of the self. 7 Malebranche 
held, however, that we know God's infinity clearly and distinctly; 
in the Scotistic tradition, he let this knowledge be established by the 
s Above n.A.n. I2. 
6 Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theol. I q. I4 a.6: "Sic igitur dicendum est quod Deus seip-
sum videt in seipso, quia seipsum videt per essentiam suam. Alia autem a se videt non in 
ipsis, sed in seipso, inquantum essentia sua continet similitudinem aliorum ab ipso." Cf. 
ibid. a. I: "species cogniti est in cognoscente" (also In Ar. de anima J.Slect. IJb). Male-
branche quotes I q.I5 a.2; 5 q.q a.6; Recherche 4.II.3, OC, 2:97. Maimonides, Guide 
r.68 (shehu hasechel hamaskil vehamuskal; Buxtdorf, Doctor perplexorum, p. I2I: "Deum 
esse intellectum, intelligens et intelligibile"). On the Aristotelian principle of knowledge 
of same by same (o!J.otov riji O!J.Oil!J) see Schneider, Der Gedanke der Erkenntnis des Gleichen 
durch Gleiches in antiker und patristischer Zeit, pp. 65-76 (Thomas). 
1 Malebranche, Recherche 3.2.7 §4, OC I:45I-53; Eclaircissements II, OC, 3:I63-71. 
"Consciousness" is here not only in a middle status between sensations and ideas. It is 
the precondition of sensations, accompanies them, we know it through them. This is an 
interesting predecessor of Kant's notions of consciousness, as the reply, "which always 
accompanies my perceptions (Vorstellungen)." But Malebranche does not employ it to 
guarantee the intelligibility of the world. To the contrary: consciousness is the paradigm 
and source of sensations and error. 

292 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
ontological proo£ 8 Earlier I discussed the transparency of God in 
the seventeenth century; here we find its ultimate expression-let 
me call it the contemplative rationale for the (partial) identity of hu-
man and divine knowledge. 
Of Guelincx and Malebranche-but not of Spinoza-the oppo-
site can equally be said: that they did as much to deepen the gap be-
tween the human and divine intellect as they did to narrow it. In 
contrast 1 > our passive knowledge, they claimed, God's knowledge 
is in some respects knowledge through and by doing. This is true not 
only of entities created ex nihilo, but also, and especially, of causes 
and forces. There are no other causes or forces in nature except for 
God's always active will.9 Every single instance of an impact of one 
physical body on another, every instance of interaction between 
soul and body are instances of immediate divine causation, includ-
ing our knowledge of it. Divine causation replaced both mechanical 
and psycho-physical causation altogether. Rather than being actors 
in the world, human beings and angels turned into mere "specta-
tors."10 Let me call it the pragmatic, or ergetic rationale for the difference 
between the divine and human knowledge. 
These two models of knowledge-passive the one, active the 
other-pertain to altogether different domains. Contemplative 
knowledge is knowledge of ideas and their necessary relations. 
' Recherche 4· I I .2, OC, 2:95: "Or, cette idee simple et naturelle de l'etre ou de l'infini 
renferme !'existence necessaire: car il est evident que l'etre (je ne dit pas un tel etre) a son 
existence par lui-meme .... II se peut faire que les corps ne soient pas, parce que les corps 
sont de tels etres, qui participent de l'etre, et qui en dependent." This is both his answer to 
the Gaunilo-style objection that one can prove, eodem modo the existence of an "infinitely 
perfect body": and his correction to Descartes's version of the ontological proof: neces-
sary being can be only attributed to a perfect being, or being-as-such. Malebranche also 
says (3.2.6) that infinity can be known, but not comprehended by the soul; which only 
means that though we have a clear idea of infinity, we do not have such an idea of its con-
tent. Henrich, Der ontologische Gottesbeweis, pp. 23-28, ranks him as a successor of Des-
cartes in that he commences with the necessary (rather than most perfect) being (above 
n.A.2 and n. 10). But inasmuch as Malebranche recognized a deficiency in the proof and 
corrects it the way he does, he comes closer to the Cambridge Platonists or Leibniz. 
• Recherche 3.2.5 (existence); indeed, Malebranche can explicitly do away with forces 
(which Descartes only implicitly may have done, above II. E. r): "All natural forces are 
therefore nothing but the will of God" (6.2. 3); to opine differently leads to "the most 
dangerous error of the ancients," namely, polytheism. Cf. also Cassirer, Das Erkenntnis-
problem, r:559-67. 
' 0 Arnold Guelincx, fvwlh creawov sive Ethica 1.2.2.8; I4. Ibid. 1.2.2.4: "Qua fronte 
dicam, id me facere, quod quomodo fiat nescio?" That is, doing is knowing, there can 
be no act without knowledge. 

A. A NEW IDEAL OF KNOWING 
293 
Contrary to Descartes, Malebranche scorns the assumption that 
God could have "created" eternal truths: God is the sum total of 
them. Knowledge by doing, that which we named factual or ergetic 
knowledge, pertains to the domain of actual beings and their inter-
action. It is the domain of the contingent. The distinction between 
potentia Dei ordinata and absoluta, it seems, acquired an entirely new 
meaning: in the domain of thought (or ideas), there was no room 
for any exception to "order."" In the domain of reality, there was 
no other cause than God's absolute, incessant actus voluntatis, in 
which regular constellations function merely as an "occasion."' 2 
Human knowledge is knowledge of the former only; the latter, 
namely actual beings and their interaction, can only be known to 
the creator in the manner of their creation. We do not know things, 
not even ourselves; we know ideas alone, among which only one 
idea involves its being of necessity. 
2. Malebranche's Sources 
Were both rationales, both modes ofknowledge such a break with 
the medieval tradition? Malebranche was knowingly indebted to the 
Augustinian tradition, to the conviction that all true knowledge has 
its source in divine illumination. In the presence of mathematical, 
immutable truths in our mind, Augustine saw an eminent proof for 
the vestiges of the divine intellect in ours. '3 But illumination can at 
best account for just the positive half of Malebranche's epistemol-
ogy. As to the distinction between knowledge of ideas and knowl-
edge of beings, it bears a superficial resemblance to the Thomistic 
synthesis between the Augustinian/Neoplatonic and the Aristote-
" Malebranche, Eclaircissements ro, OC, 3:198: "Les verites sont immutables et neces-
saires, aussi bien que les idees. II a toujours ete voui que 2 fois 2 sont 4, et il est impossible 
que cela devienne faux"-impossible even to God; the order of ideas is "coeternelle" and 
"necessaire" with God (OC, 3:86). Malebranche polemicizes here and in other similar 
instances against Descartes's notion of created truth. Cf. Reiter, System und Praxis: Zur 
kritischen Analyse der Denkformen neuzeitlicher Metaphysik im Werk von Malebranche, pp. 
124ff., esp. 134-38. 
"Recherche 6.2.3, OC, 2:312. For the origins of the term (and other terms for indirect 
causation) cf. Specht, Commercium, pp. 29-56 (Scholasticism, Descartes); 144-45 (Cor-
demoy); 162-75 (Guelincx, Malebranche). 
''E.g., Augustine, De libero arbitrio 2.8; 12. Malebranche recognized his indebtedness 
and insisted on the difference: e.g., Recherche 3.2.6, OC, 1:443 (quotes De trinitate 14.1 5). 
See also Moraux, "Saint Augustin et Malebranche," in La Philosophie et ses problemes: Ou-
vrage en homage a Mgr. ]olivet, pp. 109-36. 

294 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
lian account of knowledge. Thomas also distinguished between 
God's knowledge offorms and of beings (singulars). The forms are 
represented in God's mind as eternal, divine ideas: to know them, 
God needs only to reflect upon himself. We recall also how Thomas 
secured God's knowledge of singulars: it is the most immediate 
mode of knowledge, namely knowledge by doing, by giving being 
(esse dare); it needs neither the senses nor another medium. 14 God 
imparts it on separate intelligences, which cannot even infer the ex-
istence of singulars, as we do, from sense data, through the media-
tion of sensible species. It follows that God, the only being capable 
of giving being, is also the only being to have an immediate knowl-
edge of singulars qua singulars. 
Further possible medieval links to the Occasionalists come to 
mind. In the last chapter we noted some of the similarities and dif-
ferences between Descartes's notion of intuition and the Scotistic-
Terministic tradition. Since Duns Scotus the human intellect was 
made to share with the divine the same kind of immediate existen-
tial knowledge. The cognitio intuitiva intellectiva secures knowledge 
of singulars (at least qua existents) without the mediation of species. 
We may possess, according to Duns Scotus, such knowledge al-
ready here on earth; some of us will certainly possess it in the bea-
tific vision promised thereafter. IS Ockham went further: every cog-
nition of singulars is, of necessity, intuitive. In exceptional cases he 
admitted de potentia Dei absoluta the possibility of an intuitive cog-
nition of non-existent things-although he refused to call it an evi-
dent cognition. 16 It is a cognition of a most peculiar structure, not 
always grasped by commentators. Whenever (if ever) it takes place, 
God functions both as its cause and as its object. Perhaps Ockham 
meant to say that, ifl have such an intuitive cognition, say, of a non-
existent chair, I would be seeing (in a Wittgensteinian idiom) God 
"as" a chair. Now Ockham's exceptional case became the ordinary 
human mode of cognition to Malebranche. There is no way to as-
certain whether the chair I see matches the existing one "out there." 
' 4 Above III.B.3 and n. 37. Cf. Connell, The Vision in God, pp. 73-91 (angelic knowl-
edge in Thomas); 91ff. (Scotus); 146-48 (Augustine). Connell, to put it in my terms, 
looks only for the origin of the contemplative similarity-not for that of the ergetic dis-
similarity (knowledge by doing). And he emphasizes traditions concerning abstractive 
rather than intuitive knowledge. 
'' Above III.B.3 and n. 42. 
' 6 Above III.B.3 and n. s6. 

A. A NEW IDEAL OF KNOWING 
295 
The chair I see is in part an idea of God-inasmuch as I can see it as 
a modification of the etendue ideal. l7 In part this chair has predicates 
and properties that are not at all divine-a projection of sensations, 
associations, and linguistic habits. Whatever the chair I conceive has 
in excess of spatio-temporal modifications is a mere image. Again 
we are reminded of Aureoli's esse apparens and its problems. 18 In 
short, many aspects of Malebranche's contemplative rationale for 
the identity of human and divine knowledge seem to have been an-
ticipated in the fourteenth century, the first time in which a sus-
tained epistemological debate took place in the Middle Ages in a 
well-defined terminological horizon. 
Similarities should also be noted between Spinoza's or Male-
branche's epistemology and the Averroist doctrine of unitas intellec-
tus, condemned in the Middle Ages and revived in some Renais-
sance philosophies; the Averroists drew the radical consequences 
from the Aristotelian identification of knowledge, the known, and 
the act of knowing. l9 The reduction of all causality to God's inces-
sant activity had indeed its precursor in the extreme voluntarism of 
the Ishari'a, transmitted to the West through Averroes and Mai-
monides. Many learned contemporaries of Guelincx and Male-
branche reminded them of that dubious pedigree. 
These various traditions are not irrelevant to the understanding of 
Guelincx and Malebranche. Retracing the different roots of their 
surprising and extreme positions has many merits, not the least of 
which is that it makes us aware of other sources than the Cartesian 
mind-body problem, even though the latter was the soil in which 
the terminology of occasions first grew. 20 Yet, the hunt after similar 
traditions in the past can easily obscure the novelty of the problems 
that Guelincx and Malebranche confronted, and the boldness of 
their solution. All the medieval traditions I mentioned are con-
cerned with the knowledge of entities and their properties. The Oc-
casionalists, notably Malebranche, were much more concerned 
with the knowledge of relations: the relations of ideas to ideas, of 
ideas to things, of things themselves. Truth is nothing but the "rap-
•1 Above pp. 88-89. 
' 8 Tachau, "Vision," pp. 6o-78. 
' 9 Above n. 6. Already Renan, Averroes et l'Averroisme, pp. 125-26, compared the 
Averroists to Malebranche in respect to the unitas intellectus. 
20 Specht, Commercium, above n. 12. 

V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
port" between ideas. 21 Malebranche's epistemology addressed a to-
tally different ideal of knowing than the Middle Ages; a new vision 
of a universal method which is mathematically oriented and over-
arches all disciplines; and results in a "mechanical" explanation of 
all phenomena. The Occasionalists, I shall argue, sought to preserve 
this idea even though they recognized its theological dangers. They 
set out to save it by extricating its thorns. 
3· The New Method as Ergetic Knowledge 
Descartes captures the imagination of his and later generations with 
a vision of a new method of scientific inquiry. It was, and remained, 
much harder to characterize than to praise. Several catch phrases are 
easy to hand, but they seem vague and slippery. The new method 
purported to be universal, a canon of principles and procedures 
overarching all disciplines. Descartes claimed that it was a tool for 
the discovery of new truths, not only for the exposition of old ones; 
a genuine ars inveniendi whose practitioners, unlike the Lullian art, 
know what they talk about because they start with simple intuitions 
and combine them according to infallible rules. 22 The method pro-
ceeded by resolution and composition. It succeeded in uniting al-
gebra and geometry, in the mathematization of mechanical laws and 
the mechanization of natural phenomena. It had built philosophy, 
physiology, and psychology on a new foundation. Most "mechan-
ical philosophers" of the seventeenth century embraced many of 
these hopes and claims; but what, precisely, did they mean? How 
did mathematics become the paradigm and language of science? 
What were the connotations of"machine" and "mechanical"? 
To begin with, the application of mathematics to other disci-
plines always depended on the willingness to overcome the classical, 
Aristotelian injunction against the mixing of entities of different 
genera. 2 J The vice of metabasis-the transportation of methods from 
one discipline to another-became, in the seventeenth century, a 
virtue. The success of the "new science" of mechanics led to its em-
" Recherche 1.2.2, OC, 1:52-53 (truth as the rapport of two entities among them-
selves); 6. r. 5, OC, 2:286-ST "II y a des rapports ou des verites de trois sortes. II y en a 
entre les idees, entre les choses et leurs idees, et entre les choses seulement"; cf. Reiter, 
System und Praxis, pp. 206-209. 
" Below n. 24. 
2 ' Above n.B.2; below v.B.2 (metabasis). 

A. A NEW IDEAL OF KNOWING 
297 
ulation in other disciplines. Hobbes and Spinoza envisaged even a 
mechanistic theory of social order. But the success of mechanics, 
Galileo's analysis of terrestrial motions, and Newton's synthesis of 
those and Kepler's law of planetary orbits, would have been impos-
sible without a slow and gradual change of mathematics itself. The 
classical Greek view of mathematics as an inventory of (ideal) math-
ematical entities and their absolute properties-a perception that 
forbade the representation of one kind of mathematical entities by 
another-eventually receded before a new perception of mathemat-
ics as a science of relations and structures: 
But for all that I had no intention of trying to master all those partic-
ular sciences that receive in common the name of Mathematics; but 
observing that, although their objects are different, they do not fail to 
agree in this, that they take nothing in consideration but the various 
relationships or proportions which are present in these objects, I 
thought that it would be better if I only examined those proportions 
in their general aspect. 24 
Because mathematics turned into a formal language of relations, 
not only could numbers be represented by figures and vice versa, 
but also nonmathematical relations-motions, forces, intensities-
could be expressed in a mathematical language. 
These were, in part, medieval developments; I shall try to assess 
their role and impact. Yet deeper still, we detect in both Descartes's 
vision of a new method and in others' of the seventeenth century an 
entirely new ideal of knowing-of acquiring knowledge-into 
which all the ideals of knowledge I discussed earlier seem to merge. 
This new ideal, somewhat elusive yet powerful down to our own 
days, was the ideal of knowing through doing or knowing by con-
struction. Francis Bacon, who still believed in the task of science to 
discover the "forms" of things, also believed that to discover a form 
is the same as being able to produce the thing in question. 2 s This is 
24 Descartes, Discours 2, AT, 6:I9-20; Philosophical Works, ed. Haldane and Ross, I:93 
(translation). Rule I of the Regulae ad directionem ingenii-probably his earliest work-
already implies the advocation of metabasis: the sciences, unlike the arts, should not be 
studied "in isolation from each other": all sciences are interconnected. This was clearly 
recognized by Ortega y Gas set, Der Prinzipienbegri.ff bei Leibniz und die Entwicklung der 
Deduktionstheorie § 22. 
· 
2 ' F. Bacon, Novum Organon 2. I, in The Works of Francis Bacon, ed. Ellis et al. I: "Super 
datum corpus, novam naturam sive novas naturas generare et superinducere, opus et in-
tentio est humanae potentiae. Datae enim naturae formam, sive differentiam veram, sive 

V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
the reason why "science is power." Descartes, whose geometrical 
interpretation of matter-in-motion was so radical that it barred him 
from the understanding of forces, nonetheless believed that he 
could reconstruct the making of the universe, as it is, by merely 
combining the "clear and distinct" ideas of an original mass and the 
laws of motion. He could succeed where Plato's construction of the 
universe failed, because his mathematics (so he believed) could deal 
with change; and it could do so because it was another mathematics, 
constructive in a much broader sense than ancient geometry. Glan-
vill, invoking the Platomic image of the Geometer-God, added that 
"the Universe must be known by the Art whereby it was made."26 
Hobbes thought that the task of science is first to destroy the world 
and assume the existence of the self only with its "phantasms," and 
then reconstruct the world systematically with the help of an arbi-
trary, unequivocal system of signs. For the same reason he believed 
that the science of politics is closer to our understanding than the 
science of nature: we, who "made the commonwealth ourselves," 
can more easily reconstruct its making mentally. Giambattista Vico 
epitomized the ergetic ideal of knowledge in his famous phrase 
"verum et factum convertuntur." We know for certain only those 
things that we have constructed ourselves; Vico, who reacted 
against the claims of the "mechanical philosophers" of nature, in-
sisted that we only have such a knowledge by construction of a so-
ciety; and that only God knows nature in the manner ofknowledge 
by doing. 
This new, ergetic ideal of knowing stood squarely against the old, 
contemplative ideal. Common to most ancient and medieval episte-
mologies was their receptive character: whether we gain knowledge 
by abstraction from sense impressions, or by illumination, or again 
by introspection, knowledge or truth is found, not constructed. Im-
plicitly or explicitly, most "new sciences" of the seventeenth cen-
naturans naturantem ... invenire, opus et intentio est humanae scientiae." Cf. ibid. 5; 
2.4I (only genetic knowledge is true knowledge). Cassirer, Das Erkenntnisproblem, 2: I I-
28; Rossi, Francis Bacon: From Magic to Science, pp. I4-I6 (the alchemical pedigree of this 
terminology). 
26 J. Glanvill, Plus Ultra or the Progress and Advancement of Knowledge, p. 25. This can be 
read as a mere repetition of an old topos, namely that God made everything mensura et 
numero et pondero (Sapientia Sa/om. I I:2I): cf. Curti us, Europiiische Literatur, pp. 493-94, 
527-29 ("Gott als Bildner"). Or it may also reflect the new ideal of knowledge-by-con-
struction. 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
299 
tury assumed a constructive theory of knowledge. 27 Guelincx and 
Malebranche, I believe, rebelled first and foremost against the im-
plicit dangers of this new constructive ideal of knowledge by con-
fining it to the realm of ideas and their combinations. For the 
mechanical interpretation of nature could easily lead to the pre-
sumption that we know the making of the universe in the man-
ner of the creator. The Occasionalist reserved knowledge by doing 
for God alone, and he did so much more radically than any medieval 
author because they, too, shared the admiration of the mathematical 
science of nature. Ancient and medieval science confined the oper-
ation of machines to artifacts, and conceded to us knowledge by 
doing at least of the latter. This distinction collapsed with the "me-
chanical philosophy" of the seventeenth century, and the image of 
the machinelike universe in its modern guise threatened to erode the 
wall between human and divine knowledge much more thoroughly 
than any contemplative concept of knowledge could. The Occa-
sionalists faced the danger by conceding that, indeed, all knowledge 
of reality is through acting, and by boldly asserting that, therefore, 
all knowledge of reality is solely God's. 
B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS, MATHEMATIZATION 
AND MECHANIZATION 
1. Construction and Motion in Ancient Greece 
In reviewing the various possible antecedents of "knowledge by 
doing," it seems as ifl have omitted the oldest and most immediate 
paradigm. "To do," "to produce," "to construct," "to generate" 
were terms used for constructions in Greek geometry.' Construc-
tions were a distinctive feature of geometry from its beginnings that 
were not forgotten in the Middle Ages. But their means and role be-
came gradually restricted. Proclus Diadochus, in his commentary 
on the first book of Euclid, tried to systematize and reconcile var-
ious attitudes toward the status of constructions. The opinions he 
quotes go back six or even eight hundred years before his time. 
27 H. Arendt, The Human Condition, esp. pp. 294-304, developed several lines of 
thought close to those in this chapter-except that I do not venture a diagnosis of "mod-
ern man." She also refers to the verum-factum principle, and to Hobbes, and so does Lii-
with, "Vicos Grundsatz" (above IV.A. 1). 
' The Works of Archimedes, trans. and ed. Heath, pp. clxxiv f. 

300 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
Some, he says, wanted to reduce all "problems" (of construction) 
to "theorems," because geometrical entities cannot suffer genera-
tion or corruption (Speusippus). Others (Menaechmus) wanted to 
reduce all theorems to problems, because some constructions pro-
vide "that which is sought for," others make us see the qualities of 
a mathematical object. Both, he concludes, are right: 
The followers of Speusippus ... because the problems of geometry 
are of a different sort than those of mechanics, since the latter are con-
cerned with perceptible objects that come-to-be and undergo all kinds 
of change (alulJT}Ta yap rairra Kat yi:veuw exovra Kat rravroiav f.LB-
ra{3olo.:iw). The followers ofMenaechmus are also right because the dis-
covery of theorems does not occur without stepping down (rrpoo<'lov) 
into matter, I mean intelligible matter (iJATJv ... vo7Jrrjv). Ih going 
forth into matter and shaping it, our ideas are correctly said to resem-
ble acts of production (yevi:ueuw). For the movement of our thought 
in projecting its own idea is a production . . . of the figures in our 
imagination and their properties. But it is in the imagination that the 
constructions, sectionings, positions, comparisons, additions, and 
subtractions take place, whereas the contents of our understanding 
(s~avoias-) remain fixed, without any generation or change. 2 
Problems and theorems differ nonetheless. If we view both as add-
ing a predicate to a subject, then constructions add only possible 
predicates (an equilateral triangle can, but need not, be inscribed 
into a circle), while theorems add necessary predicates (the basis an-
gles of such a triangle are necessarily equal). Proclus also refers to a 
tradition that goes back to Oenopides through Zenodotus and Po-
seidonius: constructions only prove existence, theorems prove prop-
erties. 
Constructions actually served as existence-proofs in Greek ge-
ometry, though only in geometry and even there not solely. 3 
2 Procli Diadochi in primum Euclidis Elementorum librum commentarii, ed. Friedlein, pp. 
78-79. I followed (with few changes) the translation of Morrow, Proclus: A Commentary 
of the First Book of Euclid's Elements, p. 64. 
' Zeuthen, "Die geometrische Konstruktion als Existenzbeweis," pp. 222-28. That 
this is true of geometry only has been rightly emphasized by Szabo, The Beginning of 
Greek Mathematics, pp. 3 I7-22: in arithmetics, Euclid proves the existence of a prime 
greater than any given prime (Elements 9.20) without being able to construct it (p.! + I 
is not necessarily a prime). Becker, Grundlagen der Mathematik in geschichtlicher Entwick-
lung, pp. 94-95, shows that even in geometry a distinction between abstract and con-
structive existence-proof has later been drawn (based on Philoponos, Aristotelis Physico-
rum libros ... commentaria, p. I I2.27-29). 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
JOI 
Whether or not Oenopides was the first to use them as existence-
proofs, it seems that he was the first Greek mathematician we know 
of to have separated geometrical from mechanical problems. He 
was credited by Proclus with the solution of two fundamental con-
struction problems (Euclid, Elements 1. I2: to draw a perpendicular 
to a line from a given point which is not on it; Elements I. 23: to con-
struct a rectilinear angle on a given point on a straight line equal to 
a given rectilinear angle). On the face of it, these problems seem too 
simple for the level of constructions already reached by the end of 
the fifth century. His achievement, it has been conjectured, was that 
he demanded of constructions to employ a circle and straightedge 
only and that he showed how it can be done. 4 It is more or less taken 
for granted that the restriction to lines and circles reflects their status 
as "the most beautiful and perfect" figures. s This may be so, but it 
is insufficient as an explanation why constructions with circles and 
straightedges help to separate geometry from mechanics-if indeed 
this was the purpose of Oenopides. It must be shown why circles 
and lines and all figures that can be generated from them could be 
held to be "nonmechanical" in a specific sense, whereas others 
could not. 
There existed, at least since the quadratrix of Hippias of Ellis, a 
family of figures composed of"mixed lines." Sometimes they were 
simply called "generated by two motions." 6 The motion involved 
in the generation of the quadratrix (to which later mathematics 
added the cochloid and the spiral) is not mere displacement, as is the 
motion involved in the generation of a circle by a rotating line or 
later in the generation of"revolving bodies." Such motions do not 
• Proclus, In primum Euclidis, ed., Friedlein, pp. 283, 333 (in the name ofEudemus). 
Heath, History of Greek Mathematics, 1:175; Fritz, Schriften zur griechischen Logik, 2:154-
61; Szabo, The Beginning, pp. 273-79 (identity with Euclid's first three postulates). 
' Fritz, ibid., 2: I 56: "Vielmehr kiinnen Kreis und Gerade nur deshalb gewahlt worden 
sein, wei! sie als die 'schiinsten und vollkommensten' Kurven betrachtet wurden." My 
argument is that, though simpler, I do not see why compass and straightedge are less 
"mechanical" devices than those one has to use to solve problems, say, of "verging" 
(vevcn~). unless one takes into consideration not just "motion" (displacement), but also 
the rate of motion (motion in time). Moreover: the straight line, by definition, cannot ·be 
"perfect" since it is unlimited. 
• Simplicius, In Arist. physic. comment., ed. Diels, p. 6o. 7-18; according to Iamblichus, 
he says, Carpus actually called his curve "generated by double motion." Proclus, In pri-
mum Euclidis, pp. I04-I06, speaks of"mixed" motion. In the discussion of the cylindrical 
helix he actually speaks of two different, non-uniform motions. 

302 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
take time, and could in fact be imagined as instantaneous. If motion 
is required to explain the generation of straight lines and circles (but 
many Greek mathematicians did not think so), then it is-to use 
again the language df Proclus-an "imaginary motion" only 
Kiv'Yjcn<; cf>avraunKiJ), a mere displacement. 7 The higher curves, how-
ever, are generated by motion-in-time, that is, by genuine Kiv'Yjut<;. 
The quadratrix is generated by two adjacent sides of a square ABCD, 
one moving from B to A parallel to the basis AD, the other rotating 
with equal speed from AB to AD. The point Pat the intersection of 
both lines describes the quadratrix. Perhaps other constructions that 
used "kinematic means" already existed in the time ofOenopides. 8 
Perhaps the restriction to line and straightedge was meant to bar 
motion-in-time from geometry. But whether or not such consid-
erations capture the reasons behind the initial moves to separate ge-
ometry from mechanics, they were prominent later. Curves gener-
ated by motion-in-time remained second-class citizens. They were 
not regarded as legitimate means to solve the problems they were 
capable of solving, for example, the trisection of an angle. Physical 
motion-motion-in-time-had no place in geometry; the "intelli-
gible matter" of which Proclus spoke cannot be conceived as gen-
erated in time. The term is not even restricted to the Platonic-Neo-
' Proclus, In primum Euclidis, p. I 8 5. 8ff. But Proclus does not explicitly say that the 
imaginary motion does not involve time. He explicates, at this place, Euclid's first three 
postulates; Euclid, of course, refrained from the language of motion when defining cir-
cles and lines (Szabo, The Beginning, p. 277). So did Aristotle, e.g., Metaphysics 
B2. I94a3-7 (straight or curved independent of motion). But Heron did not: Heath, Math-
ematics in Aristotle, p. 93 (with comparison to Gauss). That Proclus nonetheless meant 
motion without time may be inferred from an analogous case. Creation-in-time, he says 
of Plato's demiurge (below v.B.n.66), serves only to distinguish theoretically parts of a 
composite timeless whole. Construction as imaginary motion nonetheless emphasizes 
the activity and spontaneity of mind; knowledge, in the Neoplatonic tradition, was active 
in the sense that it was a kind of intrinsic motion. 
8 Proclus, In primum Euclidis, pp. 272.7 (Hippias and Nicomedes), and 356. I I, only at-
tributes him with describing the properties of the quadratrix, not using it to trisect the 
angle (note: eTepOL Be eK Twv 'I1T1raiov etc.). Pappus does not even mention Hippias: 
Pappi Alexandri Collectionis quae supersunt 4.3o-32, ed. Hultsch, pp. 250.33-258. I9; "Ki-
nematic means": Becker, Mathematische Existenz: Untersuchungen zur Logik und Ontologie 
mathematischer Phiinomene, p. 250 (both vevuL~ and the quadratrix). Whether to attribute 
the strict rules governing construction to a Platonic reform (as Becker wants) or to a slow 
recovery from the Parmenidean-Zenonian challenge I am not competent to decide. None 
of these authors distinguishes between motion and motion-in-time. On other construc-
tion see Thomas, Selections Illustrating the History ofGreek Mathematics, I: From Thales to 
Euclid, pp. 257-363, esp. pp. 263-67, 335-47. 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
303 
platonic tradition. Aristotle, too, uses it to distinguish between the 
substrate of mathematical and physical objects.9 He insists, though, 
that they have no separate existence. Mathematical properties are 
won by abstracting from bodies their physical properties qua matter 
that undergo change, that is, motion-in-time. It may well be the 
source ofMalebranche's etendue intelligible. 10 The cardinal difference 
between his and the Greek tradition is that his "ideal extension" en-
compasses, of necessity, motion-in-time. It was construed to sanc-
tion the reunification of geometry and mechanics in the seventeenth 
century rather than to separate them. In the balance of this section I 
want to show, in very rough outlines, how the ideals of mathema-
tization and mechanization converged into a new methodical ideal 
of knowing by construction that the Greeks rejected almost from 
the outset. 
2. The Prohibition of METABASIS 
Not only was time, at least in many quarters, excluded from the def-
inition of"mathematical objects"; these were also barred from rep-
resenting or explaining genuine temporal processes. In the begin-
ning of the second chapter I discussed briefly the early failure of the 
ideal of the mathematization of nature in Antiquity." Plato's geo-
metrical-mechanical construction of the cosmos provided no more 
than a metaphor; he admitted himself that the imperfect and 
changeable material entities can be represented by mathematical en-
tities only imperfectly. Aristotle added that, since mathematical en-
tities abstract from the main physical property-change-there is 
little use of mathematics in physics. The usefulness of mathematics 
for physics became confined to static structures: bodies at rest (bal-
ance) or periodic motion that is, in a sense, "both rest and mo-
tion"-the regular, uniform, simple celestial motions. Aristotle 
further barred any analogy between celestial and terrestrial motions 
on mathematical grounds. The uniform motion of a point along a 
curve is incomparable with its motion along a line, straight or bro-
• Aristotle, Metaphysics zro. 1036aro; H6. 1045a34· Proclus, In primum Euclidis, p. 52, 
objects to the Aristotelian location of the "imagination (with mathematical entities) in 
the passive intellect. Cf. Mueller, "Aristotle on Geometrical Objects," pp. 156-71. 
' 0 Above, II.F.2; V.A. 1-2. 
" Above, II. B. I. 

V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
ken. 12 The various constrictions that Aristotle imposed on a math-
ematical conceptualization of change are just different versions of 
his strict injunctions against transitions from one genus to an-
other-JA,eTa/3aaw eis ai\.,Ao yevo<;. IJ Just aS in nature a specific differ-
ence can appear only in one genus, so also in the sciences arguments 
and methods of one should not be "carried over" into another 
(which is not subaltern to it). To try and explain the causes for 
change mathematically is like trying to prove a mathematical theo-
rem from the immortality of the soul. Aristotle, unlike Plato, did 
not believe in an overarching scientific method common to all sci-
ences. 14 Genuine disciplines are autonomous and require different 
principles (&pxiJ). For the very same reasons, arithmetical proposi-
tions themselves cannot be explained geometrically; because the 
one deals with numbers, the other with magnitudes. IS More yet: 
even with geometry, only figures "of the same kind" can be com-
pared to each other-lines to lines, curves to curves, areas to areas. 16 
So deep-seated is Aristotle's fear of mixing genera that one wonders 
whether its roots are not deeper than the ontological commitment 
to a rational, unique, non-arbitrary classification of the world. Are-
cent anthropological theory stressed the fear of mixed, not clearly 
definable objects sensed by many cultures and expressed by prohi-
bition of access or usage. 17 
The theory of proportionality, about which Aristotle makes 
some interesting historical remarks, 18 does not transgress this pro-
hibition-though it may seem so. Proportions are not mathematical 
objects (i.e., numbers or magnitudes) and not even absolute prop-
erties of mathematical objects; they are relations only, and relations 
can be compared across separate genera or even domains of inquiry. 
"Aristotle, Physics X4.248aio-b7. On the one hand it is absurd not to assume that a 
body can move with the same motion on a circle and a straight line. On the other hand 
we must accept this conclusion because the line and the circle are incommensurable (oil 
a1Jp.f31\7JTa, &a1Jp.f31\7Jra). Aristotle even denies that we could say of a curve that it is longer 
than a line! 
'' Above, n.B.2 and nn. Io-IJ. 
'• Wieland, Die aristotelische Physik, pp. I87-202, 202-30. 
'' Aristotle, Posterior anal. A7. 75a38-b8. 
'6 Metaphysics I I. I053a24-30: &d 8f: crovexe~ ro p.i:rpov etc. 
'7 Douglas, Purity and Danger, passim; Leach, "Anthropological Aspects of Language: 
Animal Categories and Verbal Abuse," in Mythology, ed. Maranda, pp. 39-67; 47: "taboo 
inhibits the recognition of those parts of the continuum which separate the things." 
' 8 Below n. 21. 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
305 
To say that a given area is "bigger than" a given line is meaningless; 
to say that two areas have the same ratio as two lines is not. Aristotle 
even seems to regard the proposition that a curve is longer than 
its subtended line objectionable, .t9 which Euclid does not: it is the 
foundation of the method of exhaustion. If so, then Aristotle will 
have distinguished between the incommensurable (acrop.p.erpia) and 
the incomparable (ar:nlp.oA:ryra). 20 But he stresses the proportionality 
of incomparables: previous generations, he says, did not recognize 
the "commensurable generality" of proportions and permitted only 
proportionalities "of lines and lines, numbers and numbers, areas 
and areas." 21 It may be that out of the mathematical theory of pro-
portionality Aristotle later developed a theory of"focal meanings" 
attributed to him by Owens, Patzig, and others22-a theory that en-
abled him (if indeed he held it) to develop metaphysics, or the sci-
ence of being qua being, as a universal science. At times he even 
speaks of a universal mathematics, 2 J and I believe that it is not a sci-
ence with definite objects and properties but a science of relations or 
perhaps even universal-formal algorithms of the kind employed, 
for example, in his theory of mixtures. 24 
Mathematics-as Aristotle recognizes-is, of course, a language. 
A good part of geometry consists of the representation of figures 
"of the same kind." By analogy, however, some properties of fig-
ures can stand for a few well-defined, nonfigural properties. Lines 
do, in the tenth book of Euclid's Elements, represent numbers be-
cause both share the property of iteration. Aristotle would presum-
ably not object; he even permits lines to represent time because both 
share the character of a continuum. Circles and lines can also, of 
course, represent the path of bodies in motion. But "motion-in-
'• Above n. 12. 
20 Metaphysics AI.983ar6; Physics H4.248ar8; above n. 12 and m.c.n. 12. 
"Aristotle, Posterior anal. A5.74ar6-b4, esp. ar9-25; cf. the comments of Heath, 
Mathematics in Aristotle, pp. 41-44 and Livesey, "Metabasis," pp. 47-48. 
22 Above II.B.n. r r. 
2 ' Metaphysics EL. ro26a23-7; M2. I077a9-ro; Heath, Mathematics in Aristotle, pp. 223-
24, thinks of a kind of algebra. 
24 Degener. et corrupt. B5.JJ2b6-JJJars; or Ethica Nicom. EJ-5.IIJraro-riJ4ars; or 
again in the logical writings Aristotle uses letter schemata with strict rules of operation. 
The transformation of elements in the Meteorology is actually a kind of Abelian group. It 
may be that Aristotle refers to both mathematical and nonmathematical formalism, in-
asmuch as it is a formalism, by the name of"catholic mathematics." 

]06 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
time" cannot be represented in one figure or symbol. A line may 
represent either the length and shape of a distance traversed or the 
time, but not both. Our expression of velocity as distance over time 
is, indeed, seen from the vantage point of Aristotle, a metabasis, a 
mixing of categories. Much less could the distribution or intensity 
of a quality be represented: quality and quantity are different cate-
gories. And finally, the rate of change-acceleration or retarda-
tion-is an altogether impossible notion, "there cannot be motion 
of motion or becoming of becoming or in general change of 
change." 2s 
Had Aristotle admitted geometrical figures generated by motion-
in-time, they could have represented physical motions-in-time, 
perhaps even accelerations. There existed, as we saw, a tradition of 
figures generated by combined angular and linear uniform motions: 
Aristotle, and even Euclid, were conspicuously silent about them. 
The so-called revolving bodies of Euclid, I argued, are no excep-
tion: their motion means displacement only, of the same character 
involved in demonstrating the congruency of discrete figures; it 
could, for that matter, be thought of as instantaneous. Aristotle, 
following Eudoxus, represented the apparent retrograde motion of 
the planets with a hippopede. But the hippopede is not a figure gen-
erated necessarily by motion (as two concentric spheres around 
different axes). It can also be interpreted as the line described on the 
surface of a sphere by a cylinder internal to it. 26 Such were the con-
strictions of metabasis. 
A century and a halflater, Archimedes freed himself from some 
of these constrictions-but not, it seems, from all. He already felt 
secure enough with the method of exhaustion to have curves be rep-
resented by lines. He employed mechanical considerations in the 
finding-though not in the proof-of theorems. 27 The spiral of Ar-
chimedes, moreover, is not only generated by motion-in-time; it is 
perhaps the first curve to be generated by two diffirent uniform mo-
tions, namely by the combined angular and radial motion of a point 
., Physics E2.225b1s: on OVK BCT'Tt KWT,uews KiV'T/CTtS ovlle -yiveuews -yiveuts, ovll' 
o>.ws p,eTa{3o>.'ijs p,eTa(3o>.:r,. Aristotle may be thinking of the fallacy of self-reference. 
•• Neugebaur, A History of Ancient Mathematical Astronomy, 2:677-80; Thomas, Greek 
Mathematical Texts, 1:14 (from Simplicius's commentary on De caelo). 
•1 Archimedes, ed. Heath, supplement, pp. 7, 13-14 ("to investigate problems in math-
ematics by use of mechanics"). Archimedes distinguishes between investigation and 
proof, but he believed that the former is of universal value worthy of publication. 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
307 
(a line rotating uniformly around one of its term points and a point 
uniformly moving outwards along that line). 28 The resulting mo-
tion amounted to a uniformly accelerated motion which the school-
men of the fourteenth century were to call motus uniformis di.fformis. 
Nicole Oresme recognized this kinship. 29 Yet Archimedes did not 
explore any further the road that led to an adequate representation 
of non-uniform motion. 
3. Aristotle's Prohibition Eroded; the 
Intension and Remission of Forms 
Held firmly in early Middle Ages, the injunction against crossing 
methods eroded in the fourteenth century both in theory and in 
fact. The doctrine was incompatible with the Terministic theories 
of science. Ockham refused to derive the unity of a discipline from 
the alleged unity of its subject matter. Science is an arrangement of 
propositions that answer a given canon of questions, an aggregate 
of habitus brought under one aspect. The same proposition may en-
ter different proof-schemata in different "sciences." There was no 
need to challenge Aristotle's injunction head on: more and more 
disciplines could simply be declared to be scientiae mediae.Jo 
Among the instances of actual, constructive transference of 
methods, the medieval science of motion is of particular relevance 
to our discussion. Much has been written on the medieval interest 
in the quantification of qualities, or the "intension and remission of 
forms," which led also to new ways of representing motion. It was 
a home-grown interest, nourished by many sources: theological 
(the infusion of caritas), philosophical (what does a change in quality 
mean), medical-pharmaceutical (the compounding of drug effects), 
optical (the intensification of light), and methodological-mathe-
28 Ibid., pp. 151-88, esp. p. 154. Only in the seventeenth century was circular motion, 
even if uniform, recognized as acceleration. 
29 Oresme, Tractatus de conjigurationibus qualitatum et motuum 1.21, in Nicole Oresme and 
the Medieval Geometry of Qualities and Motions, ed. Clagett, pp. 225f. Oresme speaks al-
ternately of uniformly difform, difformly difform curves and motions. Clagett believes 
(p. 450) that the knowledge of Archimedes' spiral is derived from a medieval compila-
tion. On Descartes and spirals below v.B.5. 
' 0 Miethke, Ockhams Weg, pp. 245-60; Livesey, "Metabasis," pp. 333-57. Livesey also 
shows how, in the fourteenth century, more and more sciences fall under the category of 
scientiae mediae. 

308 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
matical (how to represent change).l' Analogies were freely ex-
changed from one domain to another. I shall attend to only one as-
pect of this immensely rich subject: the growing employment of 
mathematics as a language, its implications and the awareness of it. 
The philosophical problem, briefly stated, was simply that a 
quality (form) as such is equal to itself in all of its instantiations;J 2 
yet experience tells us that some qualities are present in different de-
grees in different subjects or even change degree within the same 
subject, as when something gets hotter and colder. To say that a 
subject "participates" more or less in a quality is to assume the antic 
status of qualities; to say that the quality is present in a subject in 
different states of actualization is to say that no subject is really hot 
unless hottest. But grace is present in the begraced before it may be 
increased. It could, of course, also be said that some qualities in-
clude, in their very essence, a possible range of change-an answer 
leading to an infinite regress not unlike the third man's paradox. 3J 
Of particular importance was the solution of Duns Scotus and his 
followers. As a common property, he held, a form is always the 
same and equal to itself. But contracted into an individual being, it 
is represented (or instantiated) as a concrete instantiation that was 
later called a Jormalitas. Ifl may be allowed a simile, the Jormalitates 
relate to their form as shadows of a figure to that figure-with a def-
inite or indefinite range-except that, in this case, only the shadows 
"exist." The formalitas is a projection of a form into the individual, 
and thus an accidental property of that form. The range of a form in 
its individual instantiations could now be interpreted, as Franciscan 
theologians traditionally did even prior to the theoretical justifica-
tion, as the addition of parts of that form-qua formality-which 
'' On the ancient antecedents (the &1rA6~ of the Stoics; Galen, Philoponos) Sambursky, 
Das physikalische Weltbild, pp. 423-30; medical sources: Me Vaugh, "The Medieval The-
ory of Compound Medicines;" id., "Arnald of Villanova and Bradwardine's Law," pp. 
56-64; other sources: A. Maier, "Die Struktur der materiellen Substanz," Studien, 3:3-3 s; 
id., "Die Calculationes des 14. Jahrhunderts," ibid. p. 263; E. Sylla, "Medieval Quanti-
fications of Qualities: The 'Merton School,' "pp. 9-39, esp. pp. 12-24. 
32 Gregory ofRimini, Lectura I d. 17 q.2, ed. Trapp, 2:321: "secundum proprietatem 
sermonis loquendo nulla forma augmentatur nee intensive nee extensive, sicut sa tis bene 
pro bat ratio, nee etiam suscipit magis et minus ... quoniam forma, verbi gratia albedo, 
non fit magis albedo quam fuit prius" etc. He sums up, in this question, the current so-
lutions (succession theory, addition theory) in great detail. 
" A. Maier, "Das Problem der intensiven Grosse," in Zwei Grundprobleme, pp. 3-43. 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
309 
coalesce ad unum.34 This particular account of intensification lent it-
self almost naturally to a geometrical or arithmetical representation. 
The very notion of"form" underwent significant changes during 
the fourteenth century. Forms ceased to be the ontological back-
bone of the world and the sole instruments for its cognition. Scotus 
joined those who dissolved the unity of substantial forms; instead, 
many forms were said to coalesce in one substance-down to the 
individual form. After Ockham and largely due to his influence, 
epistemological discussions shifted ground from an assimilatory to a 
causal account of cognition: the act of cognition ceased to be seen as 
an identity with or a becoming one of the forms of things with the 
intellect, a process mediated by sensible and intelligible species (ade-
quatio rei ad intellectum). Rather, objects were now supposed to cause 
in us intuitive and abstractive notions (notitiae), which function 
as terms (incomplexa) of propositions. Only the latter can be true or 
false, and hence the object of science: be they mental propositions 
(Ockham), actual written or spoken ones (Holcot), or propositional 
objects (complexe significabilia: Rimini, Pierre d' Ailly). In the Ter-
ministic discourse, forms were reduced to either qualities or rela-
tions of singulars. 
It is, then, clear why the attention offourteenth and fifteenth cen-
tury schoolmen could have shifted from philosophical questions of 
justification to the logico-mathematical questions of representa-
tion. The Mertonian tradition, though representing intensities by 
extension-lines, areas-seldom mixed the categories, that is, sel-
dom let a figure represent combined intensive and extensive prop-
erties.Js Nicole Oresme's method of"configuration of forms" did 
both in the framework of a general theory of representation. As-
suming that the extension of quality be represented (or imagined) 
by a line, and the various intensities of that quality as the different 
heights to every point on the line, then the figure bounded by the 
line and the curve linking all heights represents the precise distri-
bution of that quality in the line (such will be the figure representing 
' 4 Duhem, Systeme 7:462ff.; Maier, ibid., pp. 44-58, denies, against Duhem, all links of 
the problems of intensio et remissio and the latitudo formarum. It ought to be emphasized 
that the so-called addition theory did not require a Scotistic commitment; e.g., Gregory 
ofRimini, above n. 32· 
" Sylla, "Medieval Concepts of the Latitude of Forms: The Oxford Calculators," pp. 
223-83, esp. p. 278; id, "Medieval Quantifications" (above n. 3 r). 

310 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
accelerated motion). Assuming that a quality is extended over an 
area, then the qualitative configuration will be represented, in the 
same way, by the volume bounded by the surface of a solid. As to 
the distribution of a quality extended over a three-dimensional fig-
ure, Oresme remarks with a sigh that we unfortunately lack a 
fourth dimension by which it could be reptesented separately; but it 
can again be mapped into sp>~ce, and the subject thus may be said to 
have "two bodies"-a doctrine not unknown to medieval theolo-
gians andjurists.J6 
Here, in the theory of Ores me, the symbolic character of geom-
etry becomes more pronounced-beyond the already considerable 
flexibility of the Calculatores. It is just a matter of perspective, or use-
fulness, whether a figure (say, an area) represents an area or some-
thing else (e.g., velocitas total is). If the latter, then, to stay with the 
same example, time and distance are truly united in one symbol. 
Oresme's part in the later emergence of analytic geometry is con-
testable. But his part in the transformation of geometry into a for-
mal language, capable of describing changing variables, is not. 
What place did the "Nominalism" of the fourteenth century have 
in these developments? We recall that, for Ockham, mathematical 
notions were altogether connotative. Extension, number, time, de-
gree were, altogether, concepts addressing relations between sin-
gulars rather than naming singular objects or absolute properties of 
them. Such connotative notions, if construed without redundan-
cies, are not without afondamentum in re; but they should not be hy-
postatized either. The Terminists ceased to view mathematics as an 
inventory of mathematical objects and their absolute properties; 
this was a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for the growing 
awareness of the formal nature of mathematical expressions. 
To Ockham, as well as to some of the Calculatores, it may have 
seemed as if only such mathematical arguments that have a meaning 
in the interpretation of nature were worthy of consideration. 
' 6 Oresme, De con.figurationibus 1.4, ed. Clagett, p. 176: "Et quamvis qualitas superfi-
cialis ymaginetur per corpus, et non contingat esse vel ymaginari quartam dimensionem, 
tamen qualitas corporalis ymaginatur habere duplicem corporeitatem: unam veram ad 
extensionem subiecti secundum omnem dimensionem, aliam vero solum ymaginatam 
ab intensione ipsius qualitatis infinities replicabilem secundum multitudinem superfici-
erum subiecti." The "body" so integrated over the superficies of all bodies will have, of 
course, a volumen; but will it have a definite.figura? On the "two bodies" in medieval po-
litical theory above rv.o. 5 and n. 90. 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
311 
Others, however, admitted willingly that their models were mental 
constructs only. Various modes of representation were applied for 
different problems; more often than not they amounted to no more 
than a device for visualization. But again they prove how far Aris-
totle's prohibition had eroded. The contiguity of two qualities, each 
of which still occupies a range from zero to infinity, was represented 
by the horned angle.J7 It was, perhaps, the most elegant way to vis-
ualize the Scotistic coalescence of Jormalitates in an individual sub-
ject. Concentric circles, or a triangle, or even a simple line could 
represent the order of perfections in respect to God, the ens perftctis-
simum. Even Kant, we shall see, constructed simple, nongraded per-
fections as so many degrees of an overarching property, namely 
"reality"; the ens realissimum thus was synonymous with the ens per-
fectissimum. 38 
Not all the kinematic speculations of the fourteenth century were 
introduced as purely imaginary constructs. The study of fractional 
and irrational exponents was promoted by Bradwardine's so-called 
dynamical "rule," one of the few attempts of fourteenth-century 
schoolmen to apply the new mathematical-logical techniques to a 
real physical question. The Peripatetic theory of motion postulated 
a direct proportion between force and velocity, and an inverse pro-
portion between the velocity and the resistance of the medium. If 
so, then any force, however small, acting on any resistant object, 
however large, must move it some distance, for F/ R is always a pos-
itive magnitude. Even a fly must be capable of moving an elephant. 
Thomas Bradwardine solved the problem by assuming that incre-
ments of velocity depend on an exponential increase of the ratio of 
force to resistance.J9 The rule, which enjoyed wide acceptance, is of 
course useless to a classical physicist. Yet, an important change is 
" Murdoch, "Mathesis," pp. 238-46, esp. pp. 242ff. 
''Johannes de Ripa, Questio de gradu supremo, ed. Combes and Vignaux, pp. 143-222 
(and above 11.0.2); and Murdoch, "Mathesis." On Kant below VI.A.2; A. Maier's dis-
sertation on Kant's category of reality and the problem of intensive magnitudes may have 
led to her later interest in the Scholastic origins of this notion and to medieval science. 
' 9 Crosby, Thomas Bradwardine, His Tractatus de Proportionibus: Its Significance for the De-
velopment of Mathematics, p. 112; A. Maier, Die Vorliiufer Galileis, pp. 86-100; Murdoch, 
"Mathesis," pp. 225-33; Clagett, Mechanics, pp. 421-503. It is true that "Given the me-
dieval convention of expression, Bradwardine's solution appears supremely simple and 
straightforward: double the velocity, double the force-resistance proportion" (Murdoch 
and Sylla, "The Science of Motion," in Science in the Middle Ages, ed. Lindberg, p. 233). 
On the other hand, it is the proportion of a proportion rather than a simple proportion. 

312 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
indicated by it. Hitherto, forces could be represented as velocities or 
"motions" directly, and an increase of force could be represented by 
a proportional addition or subtraction oflines representing motion. 
Bradwardine's law permits force to be represented only indirectly: 
increase of force is measured by the rate of increase of velocity-very 
similar to Oresme's interpretation of impetus discussed earlier, and 
perhaps its source of inspiration. 
4· Mathematics, Reality, and Harmony 
From the vantage point of modern physics it may seem as if the 
mathematization of physics in the seventeenth century involved, in 
one respect, also its de-mathematization. Hitherto mathematics (or 
better, geometry) dictated to physics which formulae and figures 
ought to be looked for in nature: simple proportions, perfect geo-
metrical figures. In the seventeenth century, it seems, natural phi-
losophy emancipated itself from the tyranny of mathematics-and 
was, therefore, capable of using much more mathematics, or even 
generating new mathematics, taking its cue from problems of phys-
ics. Instead of being told by mathematics which constructs it ought 
to use, physics now turned to mathematics with concrete problems 
to be solved for a formula or figure--not necessarily the simplest or 
even a perfect one in mathematical terms. If circles do not describe 
celestial orbits, then the ellipse, a less perfect but more general fig-
ure, does. Again, the physicist of the seventeenth century employs 
mathematics rather as a language than as an inventory of real enti-
ties. And it seems further that some of this shift in the relationship 
between mathematics and physics is already noticeable in Brad war-
dine's rule. It substituted Aristotle's simple proportion with a pro-
portion of a proportion. But this account is far too simplistic, and 
calls for many qualifications. 
The Calculatores introduced a new style of mathematical kinematic 
reasoning. But they and their followers did not analyze the free fall 
of bodies with their new tools, or the real motion of projectiles. 
They may have felt that most real motions are too complex to de-
scribe kinematically. They certainly did not abandon the Aristote-
lian tradition that assigned to natural motions a geometrical repre-
sentation by the "perfect" or "simple" figures of circle and straight 
line, and restricted the intelligible real motions to those constructa-
ble by the aid of compass and straightedge. The perfection of the 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
313 
universe, its harmony, was still conceived as a static, geometric con-
sonance; it consisted of a maximum of geometrical symmetry. At 
best one can attribute to some theoreticians of the fourteenth cen-
tury an awareness of the discrepancy between the simple geometric 
representation of simple motion and the complexity of actual math-
ematical-kinematic analyses, not unlike the discrepancy between 
the geometric description of celestial motions and their exact phys-
ical interpretation. 
Nicolaus Cusanus expressed this resignation more strongly in 
that he refused to attribute even to natural motions a perfect geo-
metrical shape. He also stated quite clearly that mathematics is an 
artificially constructed language, that mathematical entities are entia 
rationis generated by us. As the ultimate conceptual abstraction, 
mathematics is our best tool for understanding nature; it also forces 
us to realize why, in the domain of the infinite, all our categories 
collapse: an infinite circle is eo ipso also a straight line. Both the suc-
cess and failure of the mathematical conceptualization are an image 
of God's ideas-of the world he created "by measure and weight," 
and of himself as a coincidentia oppositorum. The descent from the 
paradoxical mathematics of the infinite to the domain of finite mag-
nitudes that are distinct and particularized because they obey the 
principle of noncontradiction is analogous to God's contraction 
into the creation. 4o Yet, Cusanus also epitomized the medieval re-
luctance to employ measurements in nature because they can never 
be precise. Together with the ideal of absolute rigor, the seven-
teenth century also gave up the ideal of absolute exactness of meas-
urement-only in such a way, as Anneliese Maier observed, were 
the exact sciences made possible. 4' 
The analysis of real motions, in kinematic or dynamic terms, had 
to wait until physical thought was emancipated from the tyranny of 
geometry and of geometrically perfect constructions. The parabola 
that describes the motion of projectiles, the ellipse that describes 
planetary orbits, are neither perfect figures nor even constructable 
from perfect figures without "mechanical" means. The seventeenth 
century did not abandon the notion of perfection, or harmony, of 
the cosmos; it replaced the geometric-statical symmetry of the Pla-
4o Nicolaus Cusanus, De docta ign. 2.4; 6, ed. Wilpert, 1:44-46, 48-50 (34-38); above 
II.D.3. 
4' A. Maier, Metaphysische Hintergrnnde, pp. 308-402, esp. 402. 

3I4 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
tonic and Peripatetic tradition with a notion of dynamic conso-
nance. With the growing insight into the symbolic-formal character 
of mathematics, "simplicity" came to mean generality rather than 
absolute symmetry. 
Some of the more general preconditions for the transition toady-
namic notion of universal consonance were mentioned in the sec-
ond chapter. Here I wish merely to draw attention to the important 
role of the abandonment of the obsession with constructable figures 
both in the detailed examination of concrete motions and in the 
general conceptions of universal "perfection." The gradual, by no 
means complete, loosening of this obsession is well illustrated by 
the changes in Kepler's cosmological-physical views from the My-
sterium cosmographicum to the Harmonices mundi. The Mysterium, as 
Kepler remarked later, confined its search after harmony to the 
"matter," that is, shapes and sizes of the orbits so as to fit into the 
hierarchy of the regular bodies. But these, he says in the Harmonices, 
are merely the "building blocks," not the form and life of the cos-
mos that was built-he alludes to the Timaeus-"after the well ar-
ticulated image of a living body." The harmonic relations are the 
"forms," corresponding to the relations between constructable pol-
ygons-constructable with compass and straightedge. These ac-
commodate the actual motions of the planets, whose orbits are not 
"constructable," whose regularities must be explained by the me-
chanical, physical "forces" of attraction and repulsion. 42 The new 
"harmony" is constructed from motions-in-time. 
None of this was anticipated by the natural philosophers of the 
fourteenth century. But they had a role in shifting mathematics 
from an inventory of ideal entities into a symbolic formalism capa-
ble of many interpretations. Jakob Klein described this shift for the 
•• Kepler, Harmonices Mundi Libri V, 5·9 prop. 49, in Gesammelte Werke, ed. Caspar, 
6:36o-63. Cf. Koyre, The Astronomical Revolution, pp. 256ff. (physical model), 326-43 
(Harmonices); Koestler, The Sleepwalkers, pp. 388-98. Note that Kepler, Harmonices I 
prop. 1-49, pp. 20ff., uses Euclid's tenth book to distinguish between degrees of"know-
ing" (scire) of geometrical figures which is equivalent to their commensurabililty or con-
structability with compass and straightedge. The essence of harmonies (expressed by ra-
tional proportions between polygons), as against the perfect bodies, is that they express 
motion-in-time (music). Kepler still viewed the ellipse as a less perfect figure than a cir-
cle. Yet it is worth noting that· Baroque architecture showed a predilection for elliptic 
figures as no period before did. Wolflin, Renaissance und Barock, pp. 45-52. It expresses a 
new sense of dynamic harmony or "unity within variety." 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
315 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries:43 it was not completed even 
then. Upon this transformation depended the ability of mathemat-
ics to describe processes with the aid of function. The Calculatores 
and their followers had in some instances a beginning notion of 
both. 
5. Mathematics as Language 
The use of mathematics in the actual interpretation of natural proc-
esses and its growing formal-symbolic character went hand in 
hand, even if mathematicians in the seventeenth century sometimes 
emphasized the one aspect, sometimes the other. The program of 
Descartes's analytical geometry consisted of the translation of al-
gebraic into geometric terms (introduire ... termes d'Arithmetique en 
la Geometrie) or "expressing" (exprime) geometrical figures algebra-
ically. 44 The injunction against metabasis within mathematics was 
openly violated; the barrier that seemed most fundamental to the 
Greeks, and was not even disputed in the Middle Ages-the sepa-
ration of numbers and continuous magnitudes-was removed. 
More yet, Jules Vuillemin has shown that Descartes augmented the 
distinction between "geometric" and "mechanical" curves with a 
distinction between mechanical and "graphic" curves; the first two, 
being solutions to algebraic equations to the second respective nth 
degree, he accepted as legitimate; the latter, discontinuous curves he 
rejected. Amongst the second category were the spiral and the quad-
ratrix; he was often induced to attend to them by problems of mo-
tions, forces, and intensities. 4s In short, analytical geometry was, in 
., Klein, Greek Mathematical Thought, pp. I soff. See also Bochner, "The Emergence of 
Analysis in the Renaissance and After," pp. I I-56, esp. pp. 22-25 (operations on real 
numbers). 
44 Descartes, La Geometrie I, AT 6:370; Klein, Greek Mathematical Thought, pp. I97-
2I I, shows that the geometrical "imagination" corresponds to the actual shape of bodies 
impressing our senses (esp. p. 2IO). "Geometry" to Descartes is first and foremost con-
structive geometry. See also Mahoney, The Mathematical Career of Pierre de Fermat (1601-
1665), p. 44· On Descartes' limitations see Belaval, Leibniz, pp. 29Iff. 
•s Vuillemin, Mathematiques et mt!taphysique chez Descartes, pp. 79-98 (classification, 
construction) 35-55 (spirals). Spirals were already dealt with, in extenso, by Toricelli 
and others. On the liberalization of means of construction in the seventeenth century 
(Viele, Kepler) and on Descartes's classification see also Bos, "Arguments on Motivation 
in the Rise and Decline of a Mathematical Theory: The 'Construction of Equations,' 
I637-ca. I750," pp. 33I-8o (reviewing the Greek sources he also fails, however, to distin-
guish between motion and motion-in-time). 

316 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
Descartes's eyes, only an example of the heuristic force ofhis new 
universal method, valid in geometry as well as in optics, in physics 
as well as in psychology. What to the ancients was a cardinal vice, 
and to the Middle Ages a lesser one, now became a virtue: the trans-
portation of models and arguments from one discipline to another. 
Hobbes, though not himself a subtle practitioner of the art, 
viewed mathematics as a purely mental construct, an artificial lan-
guage throughout. The artificial nature of mathematical concepts 
guarantees their absolute unequivocation. Mathematics is the para-
digm for all other sciences because we created it ourselves out of 
nothingness: its veracity is entirely convertible into its construction. 
This, Hobbes believed, is true of every genuine science; in mathe-
matics, however, it is more clearly apparent: truth lies in the consis-
tency of our arbitrary construction. Mathematics, like thought in 
general, is nothing but computation. 
No one in the seventeenth century came closer to the understand-
ing of the formal-symbolic properties of mathematical reasoning 
than Leibniz. In arithmetic and geometry he saw instantiations-we 
would say models-of a sci entia generalis de relationibus which he set 
out to construct. 46 Relations, as we recall, were in his eyes mere ab-
stractions, without an ontic status, though indispensable for the or-
dering of phenomena. In other words, formal algorithms won 
priority over mathematical entities or properties. His version of the 
differential and integral calculus was, indeed, such a general-formal 
algorithm which he did not always know how to interpret. 47 Even 
more fundamental was Leibniz's characteristica universalis that was 
meant to serve as an ars inveniendi for all sciences. Simple ideas, he 
once hoped, could be assigned prime numbers; their combination 
would yield all compound ideas that there could be. 48 In his mature 
system Leibniz abandoned the hope of identifying simple proper-
ties;49 but he did not abandon the hope of identifying formal algo-
46 G. Martin, Leibniz, pp. 57-65. 
47 Boyer, The History of the Calculus and Its Conceptual Development, p. 212. 
48 Dissertatio de arte combinatoria (r666), GP, 4:27ff., esp. 43ff.; cf. GP, TI87; Kneale, 
Logic, pp. 325-27; Schmidt-Biggemann, Topica universalis: Eine Modellgeschichte huma-
nistischer und barocker Wissenschaft, pp. r86-2r r. 
49 Leibniz to De Voider (I 703), GP, 2:249: "Doctrinam de Attributis quam hodie sibi for-
mant (presumably Descartes, Spinoza, Malebranche) non admodum probo: quasi unum 
aliquod simplex praedicatum absolutum, quod Attributum vacant, substantiam consti-
tuat: neque enim ulla ego in notionibus in venia praedicata plane absoluta, aut quae con-
nexionem cum aliis non involvant." Cf. above II.H.4. 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
317 
rithms that would serve all possible inference-schemata. God, who 
already possessed a scientia generalis, created the world by "calculat-
ing his ideas."5o The formalization of mathematics was, in a sense, 
its mechanization. Pascal and Leibniz actually constructed a com-
putation machine; the latter saw it as a crude model of an algorithm 
for a general science. 5' 
6. The Three Meanings of Mechanization 
Whether or not God's mind (or thought in general) is an ideal cal-
culating machine, the physical universe was certainly viewed as one. 
It was an ideal dock-whether, as Newton thought, a clock that 
needed periodical rewinding or, as Leibniz insisted, a clock that runs 
perpetually with equal precision. The clock metaphor, however, 
now entailed altogether different features of the universe than its 
medieval or ancient predecessors. 
The comparison of the universe to a great machine is an old met-
aphor that referred to the regular circular motion of the heavens. 52 
In Antiquity and during the Middle Ages it was often much more 
than a metaphor. Complicated astronomical clocks were designed 
and built that visualized, represented, and facilitated the computa-
tion of celestial orbits. The Platonic academy seems to have pos-
sessed an armillary sphere: it underlies the creation of the universe 
so GP, 7:191: "Cum DEUS calculat et cogitationem exercet, fit mundus." It is a marginal 
note to the following exchange in a Dialogus (written 1677): "B. Quid tum? cogitationes 
fieri possunt sine vocabulis. At non sine aliis signis. Tenta quaeso an ullum Arithme-
ticum calculum instituere possis sine signis numeralibus." 
'' Cf. Leibniz to Arnauld (n.d.; long before the sustained correspondence), GP, 1:81: 
"Habeo Machinas duas designatas, alteram Arithmeticae, alteram Geometriae prove-
hendae .... Hoc si ad omnes figuras cogitabiles transtulerimus, non video, quid possit 
ad usum desiderari." Pascal's claims were much more moderate: La Machine arithmetique, 
in Oeuvres completes, pp. 349-58. Cf. Goldmann, Le dieu cache, pp. 251-57. 
" In Latin, machina can mean any artifact from the simple wheel to the system of the 
universe. Chalcidius translated Timaeus 32c (Tov KOU/LOV ~vUTau•~). 41d (~vcrrqua~ Be 
To 1rav) as "is tam machinam visibilem"; "coagmentataque mox universae rei machina"; 
ed. Waszink and Jansen, in Plato latinus, ed. Klibansky, 4:25.7; 36. 18; and the commen-
tary p. 301. 19 (mundi machinam). It may account for the fact that the metaphor was partic-
ularly favored by the school of Chartres; cf. Stock, Myth and Science in the Twelfth Cen-
tury: A Study of Bernard Silvester, pp. 74 (machina Fortune-meaning the same as rota 
fortunae, the wheel of fortune), 199 (machine corpore), 208. Later usages: e.g., R. Bacon, 
Questiones supra Iibras quatuor physicorum, ed. Delmore, in Opera hactenus inedita Rogeri Ba-
coni, 8:201.2-3: "ordinatio corporum universi et mundi machine congruentia, scilicet ne 
sit vacuum." 

318 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
by the demiurge in the Timaeus. 53 A gradual, incessant technologi-
cal improvement marks the history of these engineering devices 
down to the Middle Ages; they preceded the time clock and were its 
paradigm. From the fourteenth century onwards, the mechanical 
clock-now made much more precise through the use of the es-
capement-became the most admired man-made artifice, the para-
digm of a perfect machine. 54 
In fact, the celestial motions of Aristotle, or even Ptolemy, could 
be represented by a mechanical device with reasonable accuracy. Ki-
nematically, Aristotle allows the resolution of circular motions into 
circular motions only, or linear into linear. The apparent complex-
ity of celestial motions needs, and must, be resolved into circular 
motions. Moreover, in both Eudoxian and Ptolemaic astronomy 
each planetary orbit is calculated and represented independently of 
the others. The system that combines them has only to provide a 
mechanism such that the motion of one planet not interfere--or in-
fluence--the motion of the others. Dynamically no forces need to 
be represented in the mechanical device because the spheres are 
moved by an agent separate from them-souls or the later separate 
intelligences. In short, ancient and medieval cosmology was suscep-
tible to a mechanization in a literal sense of the word. Early modern 
cosmologies were not. The irony of the attribution of a "mechani-
zation of the world picture" to the seventeenth century-and it is by 
no means wrong-lies in the simple, often overlooked circumstance 
that cosmologies based on the "new science" of mechanics were in-
capable of being represented by actual mechanical devices. Kine-
matically they resolved the circular or elliptical orbits into rectilin-
ear components. Dynamically they assumed forces intrinsic to the 
system, and the system was conceived as a balance of motions and 
" Cornford, Plato's Cosmology, p. 74 (to Timaeus 36c; cf. 40c and Ep. 2.3 12d). Farring-
ton, Greek Science, pp. 4o-41 has argued that Presocratic cosmologies-notably Anaxa-
goras'-were conceived "under the influence of techniques" watched in workshops. 
Then, perhaps, they were a kind of"knowledge by doing" in an even stronger sense than 
Plato's-but still not consciously so. 
' 4 Solla Price, "Clockwork before the Clock," pp. 8 wff. Id., Science since Babylon, pp. 
49-70. Against his thesis (the escapement as a perfecting of the astronomical clock; the 
need for timekeeping as a result, rather than a consequence, of the mechanical clock) 
Landes, Revolution in Time: Clocks and the Making of the Modern World, pp. 54-66. The 
importance of timekeeping as the expression of a sense of historicity unique to western 
Europe was already extolled by Spengler, Untergang des Abendlandes, 1:19, 171-75. 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
319 
forces. It may be that today we could simulate the planetary system 
using electromagnetic fields; but it could not be done with the tech-
nological means of the seventeenth century. Needless to say, the 
machinelike working of an organism was likewise impossible to 
represent by a clock en detail. 
Should we say, therefore, that the "mechanical philosophers" ac-
tually de-mechanized their universe, that the clocklike universe be-
came for them a mere metaphor? Not at all. Ultimately, the me-
chanical, man-made devices had to remain, in the ancient and 
medieval perception, a metaphor only, because they represented 
natural through coerced, artificial motions. This distinction may 
have shifted in the later Middle Ages from the realm of immediate 
experience to the realm of reasoning; but it remained fundamental. 
It was abolished in early modern physics-hesitantly at first, radi-
cally thereafter. The mechanization of nature became neither a real-
ity nor a metaphor, but a model and a paradigm. 
But a model or a program for what? In a minimal sense "mechan-
ical causes" stood for the desire to eliminate all but efficient causes 
from the interpretation of nature; to interpret all physical phenom-
ena as "matter-in-motion." In this sense, the seventeenth century's 
ideal of mechanization was rooted in classical Atomistic thought. 
Now, it may seem as if the physics ofDemocritus was quantitative, 
while Aristotle's was qualitative. This is only true in respect to un-
realized potentialities: the ancient Atomists never cared for a math-
ematical analysis of motion. The "shape, size, and order" of atoms 
moving in the void sufficed to explain why some ofthemjoined to-
gether and others did not. The clinamen of the Epicureans intended 
to explain why atoms collide and form vortices. No further analysis 
was called for. To the contrary, from Atomistic quarters came the 
strongest attack on the very foundations of mathematics and appar-
ently also on the foundations underlying Greek mathematical as-
tronomy.ss 
While early medieval authors lost all sense of difference between 
Atomistic and Aristotelian physics-Isidore of Seville embraces 
both atoms and elements in peaceful coexistences6-Scholastics re-
" Above II.B. nn. I, 7· 
' 6 Isidore of Seville, Etymologiae 13.2-3 (Lindsay). It is interesting to see how, without 
intending to do so, Isidore blurs the differences between the quantitative theory of matter 
of the Atomists and the qualitative elements of Aristotle. What the Atomists regarded as 

320 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
stored some of the original argumentative context of the doctrine, 
though most of them were not interested in material invisibles. 
They tended, though, to restrict final causation to conscious acts 
only; and some of them warned, as also once Maimonides, against 
the presumption that mankind is the ultimate goal of creation. 57 The 
revival of Atomistic or corpuscular doctrines in the seventeenth cen-
tury owes much less to Atomist doctrines than to a new, more spe-
cific sense of "mechanical." 
7· Mechanization as Constructive Knowledge 
In this, the narrower sense of the term, "mechanical" stood for the 
explanation of a given set of phenomena as a closed, semi-autarkic, 
balanced system of motions and/ or forces; a system that sustains it-
self, at least for a while. Whether the elements of such a system were 
corpuscles or atoms was, in this respect, of secondary importance. 
The balance and interaction of motions and forces had to be con-
structively proven: that such-and-such putative motions coalesce in 
one rather than another way had to be shown through a mathemat-
ical analysis and synthesis, resolution and composition. 58 I do not 
think that Buridan's expansion of impetus mechanics to the heav-
enly motions can be seen as an early suggestion of such a system. 59 
It allows planets to follow their orbits automatically. But their mo-
tions are still conceived as independent of each other; indeed, lack of 
friction and of any other influence or interaction allows the impetus 
given to each heavenly body to actualize the nature of impetus as a 
res natura permanens. Buridan's cosmology was "mechanistic" in the 
first rather than in the second meaning of the word. 
an indirect proof for the existence of atoms-the random movements of dust particles 
that are seen if a ray of light penetrates a room through a window-Isidore takes to be a 
metaphor only. What they took as metaphor (letters as elements) he takes literally. Both 
theories of matter do not stand as different theories. Both seemed, perhaps, true to him 
because the words existed, and with them the vis verbi (Etym. 1.29. r). 
57 Maimonides, Guide 3.13; cf. above III.B.n.25 (Thomas); Descartes, Principia phil. 
3.3, AT, 8.r, p. Sr. 
' 8 "Eine Maschine," as defined by C. Wolff, Deutsche Metaphysik §557, p. 337, "ist ein 
zusammengesetzes Werck, dessen Veranderungen in der Art der Zusammensetzung 
gegriindet sind ... und dem nach ist die Welt eine Maschine"; quoted by Schmitt-Big-
germann, Maschine und Teuftl: Jean Pauls ]ugendsatiren nach ihrer Modellgeschichte, p. 69. 
s9 Above m.c.2. Oresme may have alluded to this (not his) theory when he compared 
the motions of the spheres to that of a clock with escapement: Ores me, Le Livre du ciel 
2.2, ed. Menut and Denomy, p. 288; Oresme, ed. Clagett, p. 6 and n. ro; White, Medieval 
Technology and Social Change, pp. 125, 174. 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
321 
Medieval cosmology never involved the search after clues for the 
making or breaking of the universe. Aristotle's doctrine of the eter-
nity of the world-not in some form or forms, but with all of its 
forms-was an integral part of his physics and metaphysics. It is 
true that medieval schoolmen learnt how to preserve the Aristote-
lian cosmology and yet argue that it is compatible with creation out 
of nothingness. 60 Yet no medieval author had to reconstruct the 
early history of the universe in order to comprehend its present 
structure. The first chapters in Genesis had to be reconciled with 
cosmological theories, but added little to their understanding. That 
God chose to create the universe in six days rather than momentar-
ily, in ictu tempore, had symbolical rather than cosmogonical reasons. 
Nachmanides even goes so far as claiming that the story of creation 
elucidates the miraculous, unnatural order of the elements now. 6 ' 
Early modern cosmologies, by contrast, involved cosmological 
speculations almost inevitably. They had to account for the rational 
construction of the complex balance of the motion that the universe 
presents now, and they did so from Descartes to Kant and Laplace. 
Descartes, as once Plato in the Timaeus, calls his reconstruction of 
the mechanical processes governing the primordial random motion 
of particles a "plausible narrative." And elsewhere he says: 
I resolved . . . to speak only of what would happen in a new world if 
God now created, somewhere in an imaginary space, matter sufficient 
wherewith to form it, and if He agitated in diverse ways, and without 
any order, the diverse portions of that matter .... Further I pointed 
out what are the laws of Nature, and ... tried to show that they are 
of such a nature that even if God had created other worlds, He could 
not have created any in which these laws would fail to be observed. 
After that, I showed how the greatest part of matter of which this 
chaos is constituted, must[!], in accordance with these laws, dispose 
and arrange itself in such a fashion as to render it similar to our heav-
ens; and how meantime some of its parts must form an earth, some 
planets and comets, and some others a sun and fixed stars .... I did 
not at the same time wish to infer from all these facts[!] that this world 
has been created in the manner which I described; for it is much more 
probable that at the beginning God made it such as it was to be. But it 
6o Above m.o.n. r8. 
6 ' Nachmanides, Perush hatora to Gen. 1:9, ed. Chawel, 1:14: air, not fire, is the most 
subtle of elements; its proper place ought to be above fire; divine decree keeps it under 
fire. Cf. Funkenstein, "Nachmanides," p. 45 (hidden miracles). 

322 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
is certain, and it is an opinion commonly received by the theologians, 
that the action by which He now preserves it is just the same as that by 
which He at first created it. . . . [The] nature [of all things] is much 
easier to understand when we see them coming to pass little by little, 
than were we to consider them all complete to begin with. 62 
In other words, ifleft to itself, matter, endowed with a constant 
"quantity of motion," can be shown to have formed our universe 
inevitably. Contrary to Newton, Descartes cannot even conceive of 
another world obeying the same laws of nature as ours. The "imag-
inary space" is truly imaginary-while Newton, we recall, needed 
an infinite space so as to permit God, if he so wishes, to create other 
worlds with or without the same laws that govern our universe. 63 
And Descartes can be caught red-handed calling his reconstruction 
"facts." Throughout this passage, one senses the echo of Aristotle's 
distinction between poetry and history: the former is more valua-
ble, because it constructs events as they could always be. 64 Most im-
portant, however, is Descartes's assertion-not at all accepted "by 
all theologians"-that the logic of creation is the same as the logic 
of the preservation of the order of the universe; that there can only 
be one way of its construction and, therefore, of its reconstruction. 
Later, in the Principia, Descartes compared his hypothetical world 
and the God-made actual world to two clocks (horologiae) which are 
identical on the outside but have a different mechanism inside. 65 
This can be read in two different ways. It can mean that construc-
tion of the world could be explained by yet another mechanism-
this, however, he ruled out in the Discours. It could also mean that 
the world created by the same principles of mechanics in one act of 
God and the slowly constructed world of his hypothesis should be 
compared to two watches; but if so, Descartes's analogy is mislead-
ing; because the difference in this case is just a difference in the rate 
of assembling the parts of the construct. This is the sense in which 
some Greek commentators in Antiquity understood Plato's account 
of the construction of the world. "The cosmos itself," Proclus 
6' Descartes, Discours 5, AT, 6:42-44; cf. Principia 3.46, AT, 8. I, pp. IOiff. On the 
Cartesian theory of vortices, cf. Aiton, The Vortex Theory, pp. 3o-58. As to its later ca-
reer, Aiton shows that it was not refuted; it just faded away as scientists lost confi-
dence in it. 
6' Above III. E. r. 
6• Aristotle, Poetics I45Ihi-IO. 
6' Descartes, Principia 4.204, AT, 8. I, p. 327· 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
323 
quoted them, "exists everlastingly; but the discourse distinguishes 
that which becomes from its maker and introduces in temporal or-
der things that coexist simultaneously, because whatever is gener-
ated is composite."66 The "temporal order" of the whole universe 
was really an accidental property in any Greek cosmology (save, 
perhaps, the Atomistic). The structure of the world was eternal. 
Not so in Descartes's cosmology. Change, motion-in-time, was 
not only the property of"matter" as against the structure of the uni-
verse: it was a structural property of the universe as a whole. We 
may imagine this "time" as short as we wish, even condensed to an 
instant-it must still be there. Descartes, if consistent, cannot inter-
pret his cosmology the way Proclus interpreted Plato's: motion-in-
time underlies the very constructing principles of the world. This, 
too, is captured by the simile of the clock. The simile was to have 
important-and sometimes different-usages later. Already here, 
in spite or even because of its ambiguity, it testifies to the extent of 
the claims of a mechanical explanation of nature. Even those "me-
chanical philosophers" of the seventeenth century who shunned 
such extreme claims retained some of them. Medieval schoolmen 
believed that we know something about the static structure of the 
"fabric of the world" together with many facts about it; but that 
only God has the ultimate kowledge propter quid, that only God 
knows the universe in the way it was made. The mechanical philos-
ophers of the seventeenth century came close to believing that, even 
if we can never hope to know all the facts about the universe, we 
know nonetheless enough of its dynamic principles to reconstruct 
its making in the way that God does. 
The mechanical clock, in whose perfection the scientists and 
craftsmen of the seventeenth century invested so much energy, was 
the most suitable analogue to natural, mental, and social processes 
for more than one reason. A clock is a machine that, once wound, 
works of itself. Its work is not a work on something-pulling, 
pushing, or lifting another object. Its work is performed by the very 
regularity of its motions. So also does the universe--and the uni-
verse, moreover, is, by definition, the most precise time-telling de-
vice. Organisms are clocks too: a ~ealthy body has a regular heart-
66 Proclus, In Timaeum 1.382 (quoting Porphyry and Iamblichus against Plutarch and 
Atticus). Cf. also above n. 7 (imaginary motion), n. 9 (abstraction). 

324 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
beat, and the circulation of the blood had recently been made 
susceptible to a mechanical explanation. The train of thoughts or as-
sociations of ideas could be shown to be an inevitable process: per-
haps like motion, perhaps themselves motion. Both connotations, 
the mental and the physical, were captured by the simile of two syn-
chronized clocks. Guelincx introduced it into the mind-body de-
bate of the seventeenth century, 67 and it became the most popular 
symbol and commonplace of this debate. 
Moreover, the mechanical clock, which became the handiest ex-
ample of the superiority of European culture over others, was also 
the supreme example of knowledge-by-construction. The knowl-
edge of its construction is identical with the knowledge of its recon-
struction. The Chinese, who lacked this knowledge, were incapable 
of repairing the European clocks of which they were so fond and 
which they imported in ever-growing numbers in the seventeenth 
century. 68 This may have led the authors of the Logique du Porte Ro-
yale to another famous simile. A Chinese Aristotelian, given a 
clock, will attribute its regular beat to its "sonorific quality."69 We 
who know how clocks are made can dispose with the "obscure 
qualities" of the school-both in the understanding of the mechan-
ics of clocks and in the understanding of the mechanics of nature. 
8. Mechanization and Cosmology 
Medieval cosmologies, such was the conclusion of the section be-
fore last, never involved of necessity a rational account of the for-
mation of the universe, because their knowledge of the universe was 
not knowledge-by-construction. I am, of course, aware of the long 
tradition of philosophical reflections on the first chapters of the 
Book of Genesis, in commentaries on the Hexaemeron and outside 
them. Most of them drew a sharp line between creation and conser-
vation, opus conditionis and opus restaurationis:70 the universe was cre-
ated out of nothingness, its order established during the six days of 
creation for all time. This seemed to be the plain sense of the Scrip-
67 Guelincx, Annotationes ad Ethicam tr. I s.z §2, p. 33 n. 19, in Opera Philosophica, ed. 
Land 3:2II-I2; Specht, Commercium, pp. 173-74 n. 97· 
68 Landes, Revolution in Time, pp. 39-44· 
69 Arnauld, La Logique au /'art de penser 1.9, trans. Dickoff and James, p. 69. 
7o Hugh of St. Victor, De sacramentis, pro!. 2.3, Migne, PL 176: 183-84; De scripturis 2, 
Migne, PL 175:!!. 

B. CONSTRUCTION AND METABASIS 
325 
tures, unto which the philosopher might graft the cosmology of 
Aristotle. Two reasons, then, coalesced to render the question of 
the formation of the universe minor, if not redundant: (i) Aristotle's 
cosmology envisages an eternal ~niverse--in its whole and all of its 
essential parts; and though medieval schoolmen corrected Aristotle 
as to the eternity of the universe, many of them retained enough of 
his cosmology so that their conceptual framework did not encour-
age the vision of a developing universe; (ii) the Scriptures them-
selves concentrate the work of creation into the first six days only, 
and even in those, it was stressed time and again, the order of crea-
tion did not follow from any intrinsic necessity: God could have 
created all at once. That he did not do so may have had pedagogical 
or other reasons. 7' 
Assuming that-as I argued further-Descartes's rational ac-
count of the formation of the world was an archetype of knowl-
edge-through-construction. Was it also a portent of physics to 
come? Did not, for example, Newton reject the Cartesian vortices 
because he did not wish "to feign hypotheses"? At least in the Eng-
lish horizon, it seems, knowledge-by-construction was confined to 
the experimental tradition (and may have been prepared by alchem-
ical and magical practices); cosmogony was not perceived as a nec-
essary part of astrophysics. And yet, Newtonian physics led-in-
evitably, I believe--to the Kant-Laplace hypothesis, a resuscitated 
version ofDescartes's vortices with the Newtonian vocabulary. The 
mechanical account of the present state of the solar system (let alone 
the universe at large) assumed eo ipso a potential history of the cos-
mos. Even if one assumes, as Newton did, that all the planets and 
stars were created simultaneously and simultaneously set in mo-
tion, to keep the solar system in a perpetual balance, God has, as 
Newton concluded, to undo from time to time the effects of his-
tory-to restore the balance between gravitational and inertial 
forces which otherwise slowly tilt in favor of the former to cause the 
collapse of all matter into itself. 72 
In other words, the problem posed by the mechanical, construe-
1• So already Philo, De opificio mundi J. 13-14, ed. Cohen and Wendland. That the 
world was created all at once was held, in the ancient Jewish exegesis, by R. NeJ:temya 
(Genesis Rabba 12.3, ed. Theodor and Albeck). Only the derivatives (toladot) appeared 
successively during six days. 
1> Above n.G.2. 

326 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
tive cosmologies of the seventeenth century was not-as was the 
case in the Middle Ages-to account rationally for the universe hav-
ing a beginning in time. Indeed, we encounter outside the horizon 
of Scholasticism in the seventeenth century only few and uninter-
esting discussions of that matter. The eighteenth century's materi-
alists were to revise it (and plead for the eternity of the world); Kant 
later placed the dispute among his antinomies. But if creatio ex nihilo 
ceased to be a problem, its problematics reappeared in a new guise, 
namely, how to account for the conservation of the universe that-at 
least in principle--was capable of intrinsic changes. 
Descartes drew his rational account of the history of the universe 
so as to permit, at some phase, a stable balance of motions. Male-
branche accepted the Cartesian account-but only, as Proclus once 
accepted Plato, as an account of possible constellations, not as a de-
scription of reality. Only God knows how he made the universe. 
Newton accepted the potential historicity of the universe, but both-
ered the Almighty to intervene and undo its effects. His universe, 
his physics, knew no conservation of force. 73 His fierce rejection of 
the vortex theory had good physical reasons, which he lays out in 
the Principia; it was also rooted in the wish to have God intervene 
unpredictably in the course of the world, and therefore, perhaps, 
also by the wish to pose a limit to our knowledge-through-con-
struction. Leibniz remained, more suo, ambiguous. He rejected fu-
riously the image of the universe as a mundane clock in need of re-
winding. He also rejected, in physicis, perpetual motion, and did not 
deny that the universe has an intrinsic history. To the contrary, 
every possible world contains its history in its very concept, as 
much so as the monads that make it. But is such a possible world-
like its monads-also eternal, governed by its own "principle of ac-
tivity," read: conservation of forces? We look for an answer in 
vain. 74 
73 Ibid. 
74 Monads are eternal by nature, i.e., suffer no process of coming-to-be (generation) 
or disintegration (corruption). God alone can create them out of nothingness or annihi-
late them. Possible worlds must, by definition, have the same property. If one of its mo-
nads is taken away, a possible world does not change: it turns ipso facto into another 
world. "Creation in time" is as meaningless as "annihilation" if time is merely a reference 
structure between monads or between predicates within monads (above u.H.4). Leibniz 
held, therefore, to his own version of a creatio continua. He spoke of "Fulgations conti-
nuelles de Ia Divinite de moment a moment" (Monadology §46, GP, 6:614) as the source of 

C. CONSTRUCTION OF NATURE AND SOCIETY 
327 
In conclusion: applying knowledge-through-construction to the 
whole world was as inevitable as it was dangerous. It was dangerous 
because it makes mankind. be "like God, knowing good and evil." 
Many seventeenth-century philosophers shunned its inevitable con-
sequences; but only the Occasionalists had the courage to deny cat-
egorically that this kind of knowledge reveals reality. 
C. THE CONSTRUCTION OF NATURE AND THE 
CONSTRUCTION OF SOCIETY 
1. The Dialogue with Hobbes's Social Theory 
The ideals of a mathematical and mechanical explanation of nature 
converged, in the thought of the "mechanical philosophers," into 
an ideal of knowing through construction. The vice of applying 
methods and procedures of one science to another was transformed 
into a virtue. The science of mechanics became a paradigm for a 
new psychology, a new medicine, and a new social theory.' Hobbes 
praised himself as the founder of the latter. No other thinker of the 
seventeenth century argued as consistently as he did for the con-
structive character of all human manifestations-language, science, 
political order. No one stressed more forcefully that all knowledge 
is knowledge by doing. 
The core of his political theory lies in the novel insight that nei-
ther a social instinct (inclinatio ad societatem) nor indeed an urge for 
perfection, social or otherwise, is part of the basic endowment of 
human nature. Social organization ofhuman beings-unlike some 
beasts-is not a natural product, but rather altogether an artifact. 
The continuous dialogue with Hobbes is, I believe, the distinguish-
ing mark of modern political theories. The most important political 
thinkers since the seventeenth century did not reject him outright 
even if they were profoundly irritated by his claims. Instead, they 
absorbed the full force of his arguments before transforming them 
into a different, sometimes even a contrary, theory. Giambattista 
beings, or sometimes of emanation (Ecclaircissement des dijficultes etc. GP, 4:553) as the 
mode of perpetual creation. Medieval Aristotelians also maintained that the world is eter-
nal by nature, even if God created it; some even ascribed this view to Aristotle 
himself. 
' Schofield, Mechanism and Materialism: British Natural Philosophy in the Age of Reason, 
esp. pp. 4o-87 (iatromechanics). 

328 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
Vico is a most revealing example. He refused to accept the paradig-
matic role of mechanics precisely because he endorsed the principle 
that truth and what is made are identical, verum et factum convertun-
tur. 2 Since we did not make nature, we cannot hope to understand it 
properly, either; but the science of humanity is entirely open to our 
investigation because-here Vico agrees entirely with Hobbes-so-
ciety is a human artifact, because "we made the commonwealth 
ourselves." Our second, historical nature is entirely our own mak-
ing. Another example for the fundamental importance ofHobbes's 
social theory may stand here for many others. When Marx denied 
that exchanging wares is a perpetual manifestation of a natural 
"propensity to barter" that elevates man above beast,J he did to eco-
nomic theories what Hobbes did to political ones. Economic order 
became altogether a human, albeit necessary, artifact. 
2. Atomism, Gassendi, and Hobbes 
Hobbes's insistence on the thoroughly positive, thetic character of 
laws was not an altogether new position. Vico, among others, rec-
ognized that the modern brand of political realism stood within a 
long tradition. 4 The contra position of cpv(nr; and vof..tor; was intro-
duced by the Sophists and adopted by the Atomists.s Strangely 
enough, few of Hobbes's modern interpreters have commented on 
the obvious link between the revival of the classical corpuscular-
mechanistic cosmology in the seventeenth century and the revival of 
the radically thetic interpretation of social institutions likewise char-
'Above IV.A. r. 
' Smith, The Wealth of Nations 1.2, ed. Cannan, p. 13 (propensity to barter). 
• De uno principio, in Opere, 2:32: "Quare adhuc Carneadem de iustitia an sit in rebus 
humanis, aequis momentis in utramque partem dissertare, adhuc Epicurum, Nicolaum 
Macchiavellum De principe, Thomam Obbesium De cive, Benedictum Spinosam in 
Theologo politico et nuper Petrum Baylaeum in magno Dictionario gallice conscripto, ilia 
obstrudere vulgo audias: ius utilitate aestimari, temporique locoque servire; imbecillos 
postulare ius aequum; at 'in summa fortuna,' ut Tacitus ait, 'id aequius quod validius.' Ex 
quibus colligunt et concludunt metu contineri societatem humanam, et leges esse poten-
tiae consilium, quo imperitae multitudini dominetur." Cf. also SN §no9 where Vico 
sees the belief in Providence guiding the course ofhuman institutions vindicated and Epi-
curus, Hobbes, and Machiavelli, who believed in "chance," and Zeno and Spinoza, who 
believed in "fate," refuted. The distinction is important: Hobbes, determinist as he might 
have been, appeared to Vico as a philosopher of"chance" because of his insistence on the 
arbitrary character of human institutions. Cf. Hugo Grotius, De iure belli ac pacis I, pro-
legomena 2, p. 2; 16, p. 10. 
'Guthrie, History ofGreek Philosophy J:55-I47· 

C. CONSTRUCTION OF NATURE AND SOCIETY 
329 
acteristic of the Atomists. 6 A superficial comparison between Epi-
curus and Hobbes cannot fail to reveal the congruence between 
some of their main positions. These similarities should be stated be-
fore they are discarded (and justly so) as peripheral. Epicurus's &va-
YKTJ and Hobbes's determinism have the same positional value in 
their respective systems; the elimination of theological considera-
tions. Hobbes, however, could do without the complementary as-
sumption of the slight original declination 1rapeyKAtCTt~ of the atoms 
to account for chance or free will, 1 much as he could abandon the 
strictly corpuscular theory itself. Both ascribe an actual and de-
numerable material substrate for every discrete entity, including the 
soul (Epicurus) or even God (Hobbes). The epistemology of both 
consists in the sensualistic interpretation of impression, "images" 
(simulacra), and their mechanical association. A similar account of 
man's emotional economy leads both systems to an abrogation of 
man's social nature. 8 To their grim description of the natural state 
corresponds the rejection of idealizations of primitivity as an a urea 
aetas and the famous, detailed description found in Lucretius of the 
bestial, anarchic state of primordial man and the rise of religion out 
of dream images and frights.9 The strictly contractual origin oflaws 
is likewise a part ofEpicurus's doctrine, the stress on the function 
of political order as a crime preventing agency only, and even the 
demand for an unconditional submission to authority. ' 0 
Hobbes had direct access to both Diogenes Laertius and Lucre-
tius, and we can only speculate as to the depth ofhis doxographic 
knowledge (which he must have possessed even if we see a grain of 
6 Cf., however, Strauss, Natural Right and History, pp. I 88ff, who sees the main differ-
ences as (i) that between merely ethical and mainly political interests, and (ii) Hobbes's 
adherence to a new concept of natural right. The first difference is merely of intention; 
the second is not convincing. 
1 Bailey, The Greek Atomists and Epicurus; Sambursky, Das physikalische Weltbild, pp. 
328-35, esp. p. 334; Zeller, Dei Philosophie der Griechen, 3.2:39o-429 (esp. pp. 408, 421 
and n. s). 
8 Zeller, ibid., 3.2:455, 471 n. r; cf. Gassendi, below n. 12. On the theory of motivation 
see also Schwarz in Charakterkopfe aus der Antike, ed. Stroux, pp. 149ff. (Ethics); and 
Kafka and Eibl, Der Ausklang der antiken Philosophie und das Erwachen einer neuen Zeit, pp. 
58-67 (the assumptions common to Epicurus and the Stoics; these are the reasons that it 
was easy to mistake Hobbes's doctrine of affections to be of Stoic origin). 
• Aboven.c.n.7. 
'"Diogenes Laertius, 10.150, in H. Usener, Epicurea (Leipzig r887), p. 78.8. On the 
history of conventionalism in Antiquity see Strauss, Natural Right and History, pp. 8r-
II9. 

330 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
truth in Clarendon's ironic remark that he was a "man of ... some 
reading, and somewhat more thinking")" and as to the part, if any, 
this knowledge had in the formation ofhis thought. Nevertheless it 
is important to note that a revival of Epicurus's doctrines, even in 
politicis, was conceived by Gassendi and was well underway when 
Hobbes elaborated his political ideas. 12 Hobbes knew of Gassendi 
after his third visit to France; we may at least assume some mutual 
stimulation. Again, a superficial examination will reveal a number 
of common features to Hobbes's and Gassendi's systems even apart 
from the Atomistic substratum ofboth. Both shared an interest and 
conviction in the new mechanics. Gassendi's formulation of the in-
ertial principle is earlier (at least in publication) than Descartes's and 
closer to the formulation adopted by Hobbes. IJ Two points in Gas-
sendi's ethics and political theory merit particular stress in light of 
Hobbes. Defending Epicurus's alleged abrogation of all natural hu-
man ties, Gassendi stressed the advantage of seeing man's inclina-
tion toward his fellow men, or even toward his family, as an out-
come not of blind instinct (caeco quodam impulsu naturae) but of 
education and self-elevation. l4 Social attitudes, Gassendi seems to 
indicate, are not innate, but a product of man's labor on himself. 
This is the essence ofHobbes's (and Vico's) opinion later. Indeed, a 
long section of Gassendi's De iusticia, iure et legibus may already 
" Edward, Earl of Clarendon, A Brief Survey of the Dangerous and Pernicious Errors to 
Church and State in Mr. Hobbes' book entitled Leviathan, p. 2. 
"Gassendi's literary plans to make Epicurus acceptable date back to 163 r: see Rochot, 
Les Travaux de Gassendi sur Epicure et sur l'Atomisme, pp. 3 rff. In 1647 his De vita et moribus 
Epicuri appeared, and in 1649 the commentary on the tenth book ofDiogenes Laertius. 
His main positions and plans were well known during this time. Hobbes's first encounter 
with Gassendi (through Mersenne) occurred during his stay in 1634-1637· The "first 
tract" may have been written before; but the interest in problems of sensation, his first 
reading ofGalileo's Dialogo, occurred during this crucial time. Some share might be at-
tributed to the encounter with modern Epicureanism. For the date of the composition of 
the "tract," see Watkins, Hobbes' System of Ideas, pp. 4o-46. On Gassendi's (and Epicu-
rus's) influence in France, see Spink, French Free- Thought from Gassendi to Voltaire, pp. 85-
r68. Cf. also above n. r r. 
' 3 Cf. Brandt, Thomas Hobbes' Mechanical Conception of Nature, pp. 282-85, 327; Dijk-
sterhuis, The Mechanization of the World Picture, pp. 429-30; and Lasswitz, Geschichte der 
Atomistik vom Mittelalter his Newton, pp. r5o-54. 172-73. 
' 4 Pierre Gassendi, Syntagmatis philosophia t. 2 par. 3, p. 754· Gassendi's social philos-
ophy is thus much clearer than as interpreted by Borkenau, Der Ubergang vom feudalen 
zum biirgerlichen Weltbild, pp. 43D-34· Cf. Sarasohn, "The Influence of Epicurean Philos-
ophy on Seventeenth-Century Political Thought: The Moral Philosophy of Pierre Gas-
sendi." 

C. CONSTRUCTION OF NATURE AND SOCIETY 
331 
show the influence of the confrontation with Hobbes. A review of 
the pessimistic descriptions of man's natural state concludes with 
the remark that the brutal status natura/is is not necessarily a histori-
cal reality but a necessary fiction.. ' 5 Its purpose is to understand so-
ciety as it would be now without legal agreements, rather than to 
describe society as it once was;' 6 in other words, it is a limiting case, 
much as the (mechanical) principle of inertia is not a description of 
any existing motion, but an imaginary limiting case of motions 
considered under the ever-diminishing impact of outer forces. 
Unlike Gassendi, Hobbes did much more than justify or revive a 
broken (if not forgotten) tradition. The many affinities to Epicu-
rus's ethics do not bear on the determining concepts and concerns 
of Hobbes's political thought. Hobbes is first and foremost con-
cerned with political power and collective security, that is, in the 
state rather than in the happiness or autarky of the individual. But 
beyond the differences in interest, (i) Hobbes's contraposition of 
"nature" and "convention" is far more radical and far more me-
thodical than any of the doctrines ofhis forerunners. And Yet, (ii) 
precisely this elaborated contraposition enabled Hobbes to antici-
pate a mediating formula. Finally, (iii) Hobbes's methodological 
and conceptual borrowings from the new science of mechanics were 
sufficient to lend his concepts ofboth "nature" and "society" a new 
appeal and greater precision. 
3· Mediating Nature and Convention 
No classical or medieval author ever drew the line between the 
realm of nature (matter-in-motion, sensation) and the realm of con-
vention, of artificial constructs, as sharply as Hobbes did. And yet 
'' Gassendi, Syn. phil., p. 795: "Itaque quicquid sit de ilia seu suppositione, seu fictione 
status, in quo seu Epicurus, seu alii vixisse aliquando discunt primos hominos, tam esse 
protecto vidatur ipsa societas hominum, quam illorum est origo, antiqua; ac non eo qui-
dem solum et modo, quo bruta generis eiusdem sociabilia inter se sunt; verum illo etiam, 
quo qua tenus sunt et intelligentes, et ratione praediti, agnoscunt non posse ullam inter se 
societatem esse securam, nisi ea conventionibus, pactique mutuis constabitur." Gassendi 
maintained, even after his turn from skepticism to Epicureanism, the insistence on the 
hypothetical structure of science, as did Hobbes, albeit not an Atomist. Cf. Gregori, Scet-
ticismo e Empirismo: Studio su Gassendi, esp. pp. 179ff. Cf. also Popkin, Scepticism, pp. 
roo-12, 145-54. 
' 6 Among modern interpreters of Hobbes, Macpherson, The Political Theory of Pos-
sessive Individualism: Hobbes to Locke, pp. 17-29, stresses this aspect of the natural state 
most. 

332 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
he sought to mediate between them-in his theory of science as well 
as in his political thought. With great vigor Hobbes set out to prove 
that even though all human institutions-language, religion, law-
have their origin in nature, they should nonetheless be understood 
as artificial constructs through and through. They belong to nature 
inasmuch as "foresight" can be reduced to sensations and sensations 
to matter-in-motion; yet they derive, I shall argue, their validity not 
from nature, but from human imposition. Only a deliberate, voli-
tional act, and not any aetiological rationale, will lend to human in-
stitutions-beginning with language itself-what they need in or-
der to be absolutely valid and endure: absolute univocation. l7 
The first instance in which Hobbes can be shown to have sought 
a mediation between nature and imposition is his theory of conatus 
(endeavor). Endeavor is "the beginning of motion," a measure of 
motion in an instant before it translates into distance. 18 It is not mo-
tion or action, but the tendency to act or react-a force. In simple 
bodies under impact, conatus translates into a preservation of motion 
with due changes in direction, just as anticipated by Descartes's 
laws of motion. In elastic, complex bodies it translates in part into a 
complex pattern of inner motions, which result in the acquisition of 
force. With this somewhat vague but fruitful notion, Hobbes 
thought he had solved Descartes's inability to account for either 
elastic bodies or other forms of delayed reaction. Leibniz admitted 
his indebtedness to Hobbes. The particles of motion that hit or pen-
' 7 Hobbes's pronouncements to the effect induced much-discussed revisions in the 
interpretation of his ethical and political doctrines. Taylor, "The Ethical Doctrine of 
Hobbes," pp. 406-24, interpreted Hobbes's theory of obligations, and correspondingly, 
his insistence on mala per se, as almost foreshadowing Kant's categorical imperative, 
while Warrender, The Political Philosophy of Hobbes: His Theory of Obligation, chose to see 
in Hobbes's natural laws divine precepts. For a discussion, seeS. M. Brown, "The Tay-
lor Thesis," in Hobbes Studies, ed. K. C. Brown, pp. 31-34, 57-71; and Watkins, Hobbes' 
System of Ideas, pp. 85-89. My suggestion is, again, that both the absolute and the relative 
character of obligations are but aspects of the notion-the natural genesis of obligations 
both demands their imposition as absolutely binding and relativizes their validity in 
praxi. This view of Hobbes's mediation between teleological and mechanistic models is 
close to that of Polin, Politique et philosophie chez Thomas Hobbes, pp. 7ff., 12-23, srff., 
176ff. 
' 8 Thomas Hobbes, De corpore 3. r 5-r6, in Opera Philosophica quae La tine scripsit omnia, 
ed. Molesworth, vol. I. On the formation of the notion in Hobbes's writings before De 
corpore cf. Brandt, Thomas Hobbes' Mechanical Conception of Nature, pp. 294-303. Cf. also 
Watkins, Hobbes' System of Ideas, pp. r2o-37 (causality and volition). The link to Leibniz 
was already seen by Honigswald, Hobbes und die Staatsphilosophie, pp. 81-83. 

C. CONSTRUCTION OF NATURE AND SOCIETY 
333 
etrate our organs of sensation likewise cause "inner motions." 
These translate into phantasms, a complex local pattern of inner 
motion, and thought. They cause another mode of inner or initial 
motion-force-that we know as volition. Volition is thus both de-
pendent and relatively independent of the outer world. It receives its 
formative challenge from matter-in-motion and translates back into 
the same, but it does so through the mediation of a complex pattern 
of inner motion-harder to predict the more complex it is. The 
dominating role of motions and conatus is the preservation of the 
state which a body is in-conatus suum perseverare motum-which 
pertains not only to motions, but also to the balance of motions 
within complex bodies. '9 In short, will and mechanical causality are 
not at odds. 
Hobbes's commitment to the basic matter-in-motion character 
of our "phantasms" forbade him to view them as a "picture" of 
reality in our imagistic sense. They rather represent reality inas-
much as causal regularities in the sensatum cause regularities in the 
sensation. He never assumed a one-to-one correspondence between 
phantasms and things, nor did he doubt the overall validity of our 
sensations and memories of sensations. Man and beast alike have 
them, and even higher animals can associate an impression to an-
other if they succeed each other regularly. One then turns into a 
"natural sign" of the other. The association of impressions is the ba-
sis of all intellectual activity. But even the animals with the highest 
intelligence are incapable of converting natural or "inner" signs into 
arbitrary, conventional, and hence communicable signs. Rain may 
always follow clouds, and an animal may run for shelter when it sees 
clouds. But clouds do not predict rain. Only an arbitrary act can 
make clouds into a sign for rain; which would then be unambiguous 
only if "clouds" would signify only rain, and not clouds. 20 Better 
' 9 He did not, however, distinguish circular from rectilinear inertia; Brandt, Hobbes, 
pp. 303ff. Neither did Galilee. 
"" "Natural signs," we learn in De corpore 1.2.2, are such things that can be used to sig-
nify other things that follow them regularly. But Hobbes warns against any inference 
from signs as to such regularities (ibid. I. 5· r): clouds may be a sign for rain, but they do 
not predict it. Only an arbitrary act makes such (ambiguous) signs into univocal 
"names" (ibid. 1.2.4), and yet the objective causal nexus guarantees a rough approxi-
mation of our system of names to the order of things. The very same structure permeates 
Hobbes's epistemology and theory of science. We do not perceive things in themselves, 
only their phantasms; yet Hobbes's belief in the strict chain of material causes guarantees 

334 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
yet is an arbitrary sign which by nature is tied neither to clouds nor 
to rain. The unequivocation of arbitrary signs is the basis for man's 
ability to calculate with them, to anticipate the future. "Foresight" 
is grounded on the hurn.an capability to construct an artificial sys-
tem of signs. An unequivocal language is the best guarantee for so-
ciety, for the body politic, for science. 
The most interesting feature in Hobbes's theory oflanguage--
which assimilates reminiscences of the medieval theory of supposi-
tions with Nominalistic traditions-is, I believe, its anti-substantial 
character, diametrically opposed to current meta-linguistic theo-
ries, be they rationalistic or empiricistic. "SeP" merely means that 
S is the name of P whether S stands for an element in the phantasm 
or for another name. "S is" or "S exists" is a meaningful proposi-
tion only if understood elliptically, as a shorthand for "S is some-
thing," that is, "Sis a body" (body is the most universal category, 
or name of names, of all enduring elements in sensation). 2 ' There is 
no bigger danger in science than the danger of hypostatization, of 
endowing names of names with properties of names or the con-
verse. Our world, that of the common man as that of the scientist, 
is a construct. This is our confinement as well as our opportunity, 
because truth lies only in propositions, and to be true is the same as 
to be constructable. Truth is fact in the original sense of the latter-
that which can be done. Earlier I tried to show the important critical 
functions that the "method of annihilation" had in late medieval 
Scholasticism. For Hobbes, the imagination of the self toto mundo 
destructo became a prerequisite for the reconstruction of a termino-
our knowledge of the outer world. Truth is sometimes seen as a property of sentences 
only in virtue of the consistent usage of names; at other times, it rests on basic intuition. 
His theory of science emphasized at times the thetic-arbitrary beginnings of science 
(from definitions), at times the hypothetical-experimental beginnings. Cf. Pacchi, Con-
venzione e ipotesi nella formazione dellafilosofia naturale di Thomas Hobbes, esp. pp. 194-21 s. 
Rather than seeing such assertions as expressions of very distinct phases of development, 
we can regard them, without denying changes of emphasis, as aspects of the following 
state of things: although there is a general congruence between phantasms and things, it 
is not a one-to-one relation; the congruence is guaranteed by the strict material causation 
in the universe; the task of systematic knowledge is at times to remove mistaken or abun-
dant "names" and connections between names, at times to anticipate (infer) new connec-
tions. Language and science have their origin in nature, although they are arbitrary 
throughout. Only when made arbitrarily univocal can language help to "understand" 
nature. 
2 ' De corpore r. 3. 2-4 (proposition as relation between two natures-whereby the copula 
is redundant). 

C. CONSTRUCTION OF NATURE AND SOCIETY 
335 
logically consistent, scientific world view out of the remaining 
phantasmata. 22 
4· The Source of Absolute Obligations 
On the one hand, then, language has its own ongm in "natural 
signs"; on the other, the natural connections among regular se-
quences of events are always ambiguous, and no "sign" is actually 
natural. Inasmuch as they are part of our language, they are always 
arbitrary, disregarding their origin. Whatever is, is by "nature" 
("nature," however, is again a mental construct); but the definite 
meaning of human institutions cannot be derived from an appeal to 
the laws of nature, nor do these suffice as a condition of their valid-
ity. Natural necessities (the weakness and equal vulnerability of all 
men in the state of nature, and hence the fear of death) may have 
generated our submission to contractual obligations, conferring our 
"rights" to the sovereign; but necessities of nature do not and can-
not explain why such obligations must be severed altogether from 
considerations of expediency; in other words, why they must be ab-
solutely binding. 23 The absolute allegiance to the sovereign knows 
no exception, allows no rebellion. And yet, should a rebellion suc-
ceed, and Hobbes sees most states as dominions by acquisition, the 
very same allegiance is due to the new, illegitimate sovereign. 
This peculiar, almost dialectical relationship between nature and 
convention, as a clue to the understanding of the structure of all hu-
man artifacts, is the core of Hobbes's argument. The argument 
draws its strength precisely from the fact that it is not utilized in the 
analysis of the state only, but to explain all manifestations of soci-
ality, actual and potential. The most obvious instance in which 
Hobbes can be shown to seek for a mediation between "nature" (ne-
cessity) and "imposition" (volition) is his theory of conatus. Only a 
few among Hobbes's contemporaries, and fewer still among his 
later interpreters, have grasped this consistent dualism and its me-
22 De corpore 2. 7, r. On the principle of annihilation in the Middle Ages above III.B.J. 
The importance of annihilation both in Hobbes's epistemology and social theory-as a 
precondition for reconstruction-has been stressed by Goldsmith, Hobbes's Science ofPol-
itics, pp. r6-r7, 84-85. Descartes: above, III.D.J. To Boyle, conceiving "that all the rest 
of the universe were annihilated" rendered a criterion to distinguish primary from sec-
ondary qualities: Origins of Forms and Qualities According to the Corpuscular Philosophy, in 
Works, 3:22-23. 
2 ' Above n. 17. 

V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
diation; most of them tend to stress either the materialistic-egotistic 
or the "Nominalistic"-voluntaristic aspect ofhis thought. Hobbes's 
concept of nature, natural laws, and language allowed him to deny 
a one-to-one correspondence of words and things, of imposed con-
structs and the fully determined chain of physical motions, and yet 
to insist on an overall congruence between both. So also the state. It 
is, we believe, neither a simple mechanical compound nor an organ-
ism; it has no discrete body. Its "matter" and "artificer" are the di-
verse human beings who constitute it. 24 Bodies, simple or complex, 
are distinguished by their force, or "natural resistance," which al-
lows them to endure and maintain their integrity. The state has no 
such natural durability: its endurance cannot be calculated with the 
help of any physical laws. The contract on which it is founded is an 
ens rationis. The state is a creatio continua and always in danger of dis-
solution. It is a condition of man fighting against nature (including 
his own) with the aid of devices and designs taken from nature and 
driven by natural necessities. 
It might be objected that the classical question of whether social 
entities exist cf>vcret or Oscret was in Antiquity raised not only in po-
liticis but also in all spheres of human activity, including language. 
Yet, never before was the disjunction elaborated or its dialectical 
structure stressed so consistently as by Hobbes. One important dif-
ference between the cultural philosophy of Epicurus and that of 
Hobbes is that the former was interested in the natural substrate of 
language;25 Hobbes, while not denying it a natural origin, is rather 
interested in the validity of language. In the concept of "natural 
signs" as a product of both the natural sequence of images and an 
artificial function, even though this function is itself a product of 
causal necessity, Hobbes finds another model for analyzing other 
human constructs, including "natural laws" and obligations. 
'4 Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, ed. Oakeshott, p. 5. The analogy of the human body, 
with which Hobbes commences, is not to indicate that the state is a natural body, but that 
it is an imitation thereof, much as its constitutive act, the covenant, "resembles thatfiat, 
or the let us make man, pronounced by God in the creation" (ibid.). 
'' Whereby "nature" differed from society according to its different impressions. 
Steinthal, Geschichte der Sprachwissenschaji bei den Griechen und Romern, pp. 32 5-29; for a 
detailed description of the genesis and background of the controversy the book is still 
most useful, in spite of its strongly Hegelian vocabulary. See also Cassirer, The Philoso-
phy of Symbolic Forms, trans. Mannheim, r:r48. 

C. CONSTRUCTION OF NATURE AND SOCIETY 
337 
Hobbes's state is likewise both: a product of natural (determined) 
causality and an arbitrary construct. 
As against the traditional way of posing the question, Hobbes is 
interested both in the physical mechanism by which the social order 
is constructed and in the unique laws that govern these constructs 
qua constructs. 26 In the main tradition of political thought, those 
who did not derive social order from necessity or nature or natural 
law did not investigate much further; having once postulated the 
thetic character of legal institutions, they went no further. They 
knew that human laws were not merely a reflection of nature, but 
they did not inquire into the question of what devices could be ap-
plied for their validation. Hobbes's inquiry begins where the clas-
sical positivistic tradition ended. 
The contra position, albeit for the sake of an ultimate mediation, 
of nature and society could not have been defended without the new 
laws of motion and the new method of eliciting them represented 
by (if not originating in) Galileo's mechanics. The new laws of mo-
tion had, since the seventeenth century, two paradigmatic func-
tions. Hobbes's theory of science as a systematization of mental 
constructs corresponds immediately to his theory of society as an 
autonomous (though necessitated) human construct, and his con-
cept of the state of nature is nothing but a limiting case analogous to 
the inertial principle. Both are derived by severing a phenomenon 
(body, society) from its actual context and seeing it "in itself." 27 
At the same time, the laws of motion could be taken as the ulti-
mate laws to which social phenomena could be reduced if, indeed, 
there is nothing but matter-in-motion; or at least they could be 
taken as a material metaphor or paradigm of the laws governing so-
ciety. The conception of the relationship between physical and po-
litical bodies will, throughout the seventeenth century, oscillate be-
tween the merely methodological and the material analogy. Hobbes, in 
our interpretation, tended toward the former, which does not ex-
clude the metaphorical use of mechanical terms. Whether we read 
"6 De cive preface, English Works, 2:xiv: "For everything is understood by its constitu-
tive causes. For as in a watch, or some such small engine, the matter, figure and motion 
of the wheels cannot be known, except it be taken assunder and viewed in parts; so also 
to make a more curious search into the rights of states and duties of subjects, it is neces-
sary ... that they be so considered as if they were dissolved." 
•1 Above m.c.n. ro (Clauberg). 

V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
him correctly or not, Hobbes himself based his claim to have 
founded "civil philosophy" on his methodological ingenuity, not 
on the novelty ofhis opinions. 
5· The State as a Physical Body: Spinoza 
Hobbes's provisional argument for the separation between natural 
and social phenomena could be reversed on his own premises. Spi-
noza agreed with Hobbes on many physical and anthropological 
principles. He reversed the emphasis, however. A more subtle ac-
count of man's emotional balance (enabling him to dethrone fear 
from the almost absolute monopoly it held in Hobbes's system) and 
a more realistic outlook of the state (as only one of the many social 
formations) enabled him to place society once more within nature, 
to deal with the state as a complex physical body (or balance of 
power), and to ascribe also to the state the conatus suum conservandi 
motum which Hobbes seems to have denied that it possesses. 
Although, properly speaking, extension (or substance as ex-
tended) is but one in number, Spinoza insists on the existence of def-
inite physical bodies-on the right to see not only in simple but also 
in compounds or compound of compounds discrete physical enti-
ties. 28 Physical bodies are defined by the conatus suum conservandi mo-
tum, which depends in part on their individual quantitas motus, that 
is, balance of motions. Descartes's general formula of conservation 
of momentum in the universe (m·v), is used, we recall, as a defini-
tion of single bodies, as a physical principium individuationis. As long 
as the body retains its basic "proportion," its specific balance of mo-
tions, it remains one body (an individuum) even if parts of it are re-
placed by others. 29 Organic bodies are mechanical complexes capa-
ble of assimilating other bodies or regenerating substitutes (not 
necessarily copies) of a lost element. Spinoza did not abandon alto-
gether the Cartesian relativization of single bodies or movements; 
he gave it a positive meaning, much as he did in the case of corre-
sponding ideas. Every piece of extension in motion may be seen as 
one, or many, bodies, depending on our point of view. A worm in 
our blood will recognize the blood, not as one body, but as a uni-
verse full of many (microscopic) entities; neither do we recognize 
•• Above n.F. r; Gueroult, Spinoza, r :529-56. 
•• Spinoza, Ethics 2 prop. 13 lemma 4; and above n.F. r.n. 12. 

C. CONSTRUCTION OF NATURE AND SOCIETY 
339 
the facies totius universi as what it is-one huge organism. The unity 
of an individuum is its form of organization and consciousness 
thereof.Jo 
These reflections have grave implications-psychological, an-
thropological, political, and ethical. Some of these Spinoza shared 
with Hobbes; in many cases he is more consistent. Against Hobbes, 
he can view society literally as an organism of sorts, as a bodyY 
(i) He agrees with Hobbes that man's emotions and actions are a 
function of his conatus esse conservandi only, but he draws a different 
picture of the emotional economy and its political relevance. Spi-
noza emphasizes the inner conflict of affections due to their origin 
in inadequate self-consciousness. Hobbes regarded man as one soul, 
one person, one body; Spinoza's definition of a body and its image 
allows him to see in man many bodies, many sometimes conflicting 
ideas, and soulsY For Hobbes, fear of death was the only emotion 
powerful enough to force man into the social contract and keep him 
within the state; Spinoza allows for a whole gamut of sometimes 
contradicting manifestations of self-interest-ambition, gain, fear, 
care of others-to participate in the creation and maintenance of the 
res publica.JJ Society cannot be maintained by fear alone, especially 
abstract fear as the realization of what would happen without laws. 
Society is a balance of more or less enlightened self-interests, and 
only if they converge is the body politic durable. The prudent sov-
ereign is he who does not attempt to eliminate such private interest 
and opinions (which cannot even be achieved through terror) but 
30 Above II.F.n. 13. 
3 ' Spinoza, however, does not explicitly declare societies to be physical bodies; the 
nearest expression to this effect is in the Tractatus Theologico-Politicus 3, Van Vloten-Land, 
2:124: "Ad quod nullum certium medium ratio et experientia docuit, quam societatem 
certis legibus formare certamque mundi plagam occupare, et omnium veres ad unum 
quasi corpus, nempe societatis, redigere." Yet, our analysis has shown that every single 
corpus short of the whole universe is only a body in a relative sense. 
'' Epistula 24, Van Vloten-Land, Opera 3:107: "Unde sequi videtur, sicut corpus hu-
manum ex millenis compositum est corporibus, ita etiam humanam mentem ex millenis 
constare cogitationibus; et, quemadmodum humanum corpus in millena resolvitur, 
unde componebatur, corpora, sic etiam mentem nostram, ubi corpus deserit, in tam 
multiplices, ex quibus constabat, cogitationes resolvi." 
" On Spinoza's theory of passions and its consequences on his political theory, see 
Wernham, Spinoza: The Political Works, pp. 6-r r. Lack of any reference to Spinoza's the-
ory of bodies is the only omission in this excellent analysis. See also Wartofsky, "Action 
and Passion: Spinoza's Construction of a Scientific Psychology," in Spinoza: A Collection 
ofCritical Essays, ed. Grene, pp. 329-53. 

340 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
utilizes these private interests, without his subjects' awareness, to 
his own purpose. In this part of his doctrine Spinoza perhaps found 
use for Maimonides' "cunning of God," in a manner reminiscent 
of Mandeville's "private vices, public virtues," or Vico's "provi-
dence."34 This is true for monarchies, aristocracies, and republics 
alike: the quality (or power) of a constitution depends not on the 
form of government so much as on the coordination of private in-
terest it achieves, its delegation of power, and systems of mutual 
control of instances. 
(ii) Society, both Hobbes and Spinoza assume, is antagonistic. 
Yet Hobbes's sovereign is exempt from this antagonism: either the 
state has the power by delegation of natural rights or it is no state at 
all. Such delegation by social contract, Spinoza seems to maintain, 
has no absolute meaning. The state has, identically with its subjects, 
as many rights as it has the power to enforce them. The sovereign 
merely participates in the antagonistic, permanent libido domi-
nandi.Js Of course, he can enforce his will by sheer terror; such per-
manent slavery Spinoza sees as the basis of the endurance of the 
Turkish Empire.36 Yet, when such a state collapses, it collapses to-
tally; no change of design, no accommodation is possible. If not a 
reign of terror, a constitution has to, in order to endure, perma-
nently reconcile all self-interests of all individuals, groups, and the 
sovereign himself. At any rate, Spinoza's state has no surplus dig-
nity over its constituents; nor is its unity of a higher ontological level 
than that of individuals, groups, or estates. A complex physical 
body in general may be stronger or weaker than each of its parts, 
more primitive or better developed. 
•• Above IV.A. 1. 
" Wernham, Spinoza, pp. 28-3 S· In his Political Theory ofPossessive Individualism, Mac-
pherson presents Hobbes's analysis of the state as close to the Marxist analysis of the an-
tagonistic structure of the bourgeois society. Certainly, Spinoza offers even a better anal-
ogy. The Marxist analysis of the modern state insists on the inclusion of the state within 
the antagonistic members of society. The bourgeois state only appears as an embodiment 
of collective aspirations and as being above the antagonism of society. In fact, it is the 
guardian of the right to antagonize, that is, exploit, radically as never before. The sepa-
ration between state and society is a bourgeois myth. Marx, Zur ]udenfrage, in Die Frnh-
schriften, ed. Landshut, pp. 171-207 (with a strong leaning on Hegel's dialectics of being 
and appearance--Sein und Schein). 
' 6 Spinoza, Tractatus Theologico-Politicus preface and ch. 7. 

C. CONSTRUCTION OF NATURE AND SOCIETY 
341 
(iii) The more enlightened a society is, the clearer its self-image 
and the consciousness of its deficiencies will be. 37 An enlightened 
society will always seek to achieve greater consistency by comply-
ing with its basic "pattern" or by <;hanging its pattern if necessary. 
Spinoza' s Tractatus Politicus is a reflection on how to define these pat-
terns for existing constitutions. Aristocracies, for example, consist 
of a given proportion between patricians and subjects, which must 
not be smaller than one to fifty;3 8 Spinoza implies that De Witt's 
administration failed because of a lack of this proportion. In order 
to achieve the greatest consent, an aristocracy must keep the patri-
ciate mobile-a mercantilistic oligarchy suits this idea best-and 
highly decentralized. Spinoza's ideal constitutions were, in Vico's 
language, polities of merchants and shopkeepers. 39 
(iv) Rigid, completely unified political organisms are not neces-
sarily more durable. The simpler a body, the more dependent on 
outside circumstances; a balanced, closed system becomes all the 
more durable the richer its inner movements, since its power of re-
generation, or "replacement," is increased. Tyrannies, or rigid con-
stitutions, could last longer than complicated systems of balanced 
particular interests, but for outer pressures and circumstances; in 
the face of those, a rich, flexible system has the better chance. A 
rigid "unification" is as useless as total anarchy. A stone might last 
longer than an organism, yet if it does collide and break, it will have 
lost its identity totally. If a human organism suffers the loss of a 
hand, it can replace its function through other organs. A tyranny 
that loses its tyrant is gone; a republic, a monarchy, or a polity with 
enough organized delegation of powers and active groups has a bet-
ter capacity to withstand outer crisis. This is, in the long run, why 
the Israelite theocracy failed: it was too rigid; it collapsed when ex-
ternal pressures loosened. In short, Spinoza's political theory is a 
commentary on his fundamental axiom ordo et connexio idearum idem 
est ac ordo et connexio rerum. 4o 
37 Spinoza, however, assumes (Ethics 3 prop. 58; 4 props. 35-37) that the wiser a man 
is, the more he recognizes the similarities and similarities of interest between himself and 
his fellow men. 
38 Tractatus Politicus ch. 8, ed. Wernham, Spinoza, p. 379· 
39 SN §335, quoted in Wernham, Spinoza, p. 343· 
"" Above II.A.n.6. 

342 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
6. "Mechanical Philosophy" and Revolutions 
The history of social theories since Antiquity is not devoid of fresh 
starts and novel approaches. Nor were the best of them short of sys-
tematic arguments. The constant search for a new and specific 
method to ground every new interpretive effort is nevertheless an 
effort peculiar to modern times. The methodological consciousness 
of political theories of the seventeenth century and long after took 
the natural sciences as a model. Not only was the metoda risolutivo 
e compositivo or its equivalents copied; the vocabulary of post-Gali-
lean mechanics was applied to "political bodies." Instead of the or-
ganological metaphors describing society and its institutions in the 
early tradition of political thought, or the corporational terminol-
ogy that replaced them in the later Middle Ages, mechanical meta-
phors start their eminent career. In the seventeenth century Hobbes 
and Spinoza stand for the most consistent attempts to integrate nat-
ural sciences and social theory. Their argument is interesting in it-
self. It also teaches us something about the possibilities and limita-
tions of scientific analogies. For historians of the age, they are 
instructive in yet another way. They reflect a persistent and influ-
ential mood of the times. 
The mechanical analysis (methodological or material) of "social 
bodies" assumed more than it could prove. Mechanical terms were, 
in their use for political theory, in no way better grounded than the 
organological-biological or corporational terms they replaced. But 
they served as a most adequate expression for a new conviction. So-
ciety and its institutions ceased to be an immediate product or reflec-
tion of nature. They became artificial bodies, a product of man's de-
liberation and labor, not of his alleged "social instincts." As such, 
they were believed to be capable of a thoroughly rational design. 
In a certain way, the motif was inherited from the political 
thought of the previous centuries. Der Staat als Kunstwerk may or 
may not have been, as Burckhardt believed, the reality of Renais-
sance Italy; it certainly was a typical Renaissance dream. 4 ' The last 
in a certain kind of utopias, and the most interesting, was Campa-
nella's civitas solis, a design for the perfect polis. The utopian city is 
artificial in all respects. It represents the perfect environment, ca-
•' Manuel and Manuel, Utopian Thought in the Western World, pp. rso-8o; Feldon-
Eliav, Realistic Utopias. 

C. CONSTRUCTION OF NATURE AND SOCIETY 
343 
pable of transforming man's nature by transforming his circum-
stances. The reformation or transformation of man is its goal. In 
summing up this tradition, Campanella's utopianism has become at 
the same time a prototype of future utopian ideologies. Ideologies 
can often be defined not merely by their positive contents, but also 
by a systematization and forced unification of the adversary's point 
of view: "dialectical materialism" in the vulgar version of Lenin 
most clearly reveals its logic through the alleged unity and conti-
nuity of "idealism" that it postulates. Campanella found a conti-
nuity of diabolic logic in the "Aristotelian" point of view: exiit Ma-
chiavellismus ex Peripatesimo. 42 Aristotle, believing in the eternity of 
the world and hence in the periodical repetition of all its constella-
tions, could not but assume the unchangeable nature of man also. 
To accept mankind "as it is" means to confine political theory to a 
"realistic" and deplorable logic of raison d'etat. 43 But science can 
prove that the world progresses to its goal, and mankind must be 
perceived as capable of perfection. 44 The polity that can and will 
breed a new type of man, not least by planned eugenics, is a true 
outcome of poiesis, an act of designed creation after the pattern of 
eternal ideas. Whether Campanella drew these conclusions or not, 
his civitas sol is is a true picture of the cosmos, shaping matter by im-
itating the ideas. 
Hobbes and Spinoza, to name only them, when negating utopian 
thinking, did not simply return to the Aristotelian and medieval tra-
dition of political realism. True, they insisted again on the assess-
ment of"man as he is" as the only basis of any possible political the-
ory; nor did they believe in a possible transformation of human 
nature or of the anthropological conditions of society. But they re-
tained, against the Aristotelian or medieval tradition, the belief in 
the power of man to affirm the state or to negate it, to design all its 
.., Campanella, Atheismus triumphatus, p. 20; cf. the introd. to Metaphysica, ed. DiNa-
poli, 1.22 and also 3. II4: "Qui vero negant religionem, sunt indocti, sophistae, ac sce-
lesti, exitium mundi, ut Aristotelici, Sadducei, Averroistae, Epicurus et Machiavellus." 
Cf. Vico's list of the adherents of raison d'etat (above IV.A.n. 3). It should be added that 
Campanella's Metaphysica had some influence on Vico; cf. K. Werner, Giambattista Vico 
als Philosoph und gelehrter Forscher, p. 145 (the doctrine of primalitates: posse, nosse, vel! e). 
43 Meinecke, Die Idee der Staatsraison in der neueren Geschichte, pp. 115-29. 
44 On Campanella's "scientific" eschatology see also Doren, "Campanella als Chiliast 
und Utopist," in Kultur und Universalgeschichte, pp. 242-59; and Bock, Thomas Campa-
nella, politisches Interesse und philosophische Spekulation, pp. 229-98, esp. pp. 265ff. 

344 
V. DIVINE AND HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
institutions or to change them deliberately. Society is an artifact and 
only inasmuch as man's mind is a part of nature and obeys natural 
laws can society be called natural. Some implications of this new 
sense are obvious; some were actually drawn, some were not. If the 
state originates in a necessary fiction and thus has neither a body nor 
an innate conatus suum esse conservandi, then it takes more than a vir-
tuous monarch nourished by a wise instruction (speculum regale) to 
sustain it. Maintaining society must be, for Hobbes, a continuous 
effort of all society; the making of the state is a creatio continua. Or, 
if we regard a polity, with Spinoza, as a complex body or a self-cor-
recting balance of adverse forces, then the sovereign is hardly a 
demiurge, but he should certainly be a decent mechanic. The deter-
mining force of society is not nature (as instinct or climate) but a 
man-made constitution. Certainly constitutions, since only of func-
tional value, might be changed when appropriate. A possible im-
plication of the mechanization of politics was the preparation of the 
rational idioms of revolution. Political theory began to conceive 
revolutions as neither illnesses of the organism nor as quasi-natural 
catastrophes (revolutiones),4s but as deliberate changes of design. 
7· Teleology and Mechanism 
The description of states as "balance of power" is not far from "in-
visible hand" explanations discussed in the last chapter. The latter 
were rather evolutionary, the former static, and both were instances 
in which a genuine mediation between causal ("blind") mechanism 
and goal-oriented structures was sought during the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries-and earlier. The need for such a mediation 
was, of course, felt urgently in many other domains-certainly by 
those who subscribed to Descartes's program to resolve all organic 
phenomena into "matter in motion." That an automaton must be a 
self-regulating, self-correcting, and self-reduplicating mechanism 
was vaguely understood by Spinoza (who tried to specify the con-
ditions under which elements of a "complex body" turn into func-
tional elements that can be replaced by other members of the body) 
and Leibniz (who assumed a dual, teleological and mechanical, 
structure to every representation of forces). Yet, none of these at-
tempts amounted to a viable cybernetic model, with identifiable 
4s Above I.C.n. 1. 

C. CONSTRUCTION OF NATURE AND SOCIETY 
345 
and constructable material elements and precise recursive rules of 
transformation. Such models have become today a powerful heuris-
tic tool in understanding language, life, and society; they may yet 
enable us to understand organisms by constructing simple ones out 
of inorganic compounds. They are a precise mediation between me-
chanical causality and functional, quasi-teleological structuredness. 
The "mechanical philosophers" since the seventeenth century 
lacked such models; at best, they hoped for them. Some, like Vico, 
restricted their search to the social domain only. Others, like Kant, 
set the limit of mechanical explanation to lifeless matter: we may be 
able to account precisely for the past and present state of the ma-
chine of the heavens; we cannot describe the mechanisms of even the 
smallest leaf. And Kant has also defined the elusive structure: we as-
sume, but cannot construct, a Zweckmiissigkeit ohne Zweck, a goal-
orientedness without a goal. 46 A teleological explanation that would 
be mechanical at one and the same time is denied to our discursive 
intellect (intellectus ectypus); it is the mark of such an intellect that it 
assumes a given multiplicity to a rule. The multiplicity is, then, 
contingent. It could be otherwise, and the difference between the 
real and the possible is the driving force of our scientific investiga-
tion. A superior intellect (intellectus archetypus) may be free of such 
impediments. It may conceive of the parts as constituting the whole 
and the whole nonetheless as determining the parts: no gap exists 
for it between the possible and the real, because it creates that which 
it thinks ofin the immediate sense of the term. 47 
The only domain, then, in which a serious effort was made to de-
scribe such quasi-cybernetic systems was the consideration of so-
cial-later of economic-processes. The emerging idea of such sys-
tems distinguishes, we can now say, between the medieval version 
of"the cunning of God" and their modern counterparts-the "hid-
den plan of nature," "the cunning of reason." The task was thus de-
fined: to discover mechanisms of"accommodation," of adjustment 
and survival. Tantae molis erat Romanam condere gentem. 
• 6 Immanuel Kant, Kritik der Urteilskra.fi, Werke, ed. Weichschedel, ro:299, 319 
(beauty), 325, 473, 544· 
47 Ibid. §77, ro:526. 

