Appendix 8
On Bivalence
(To §§ 6 to 9)
From the perspective of ‘logical pluralism’ (Beall & Restall 2006) there is no reason
to single out a two-valued logic from any many-valued logic. But one will have to
decide in favor of a two-valued logic if one understands the basis of the bivalence
principle, and if one demands that logic be formal in a narrow, clear, and clearly
explicable sense (as I have specified it above in § 82 and § 83). In what follows, I
first (1) attend to the question of the grounds of the validity of the bivalence princi-
ple. I then (2) turn to the connection between bivalence and formality.
(1) The bivalence principle is to be understand so that it states that for expres-
sions which as declarative propositions are used as judgments there are exactly
two truth values: the true (T) and the false (F). The supposition that there are no
more than these two values does not rest on some profound discovery, but rather
merely on a linguistic stipulation of the meaning of ‘true’ and ‘false’. The biva-
lence principle consists in this stipulation. It stipulates that a proposition may be
taken as false if and only if it is not true.268 Even a meaningless proposition like
‘Ten is a wicked number’ (which as a meaningless proposition is not true) is to be
regarded as false according to this stipulation. If one prefers to say that, because
it is meaningless, it is rather neither true nor false, then one has decided on a dif-
ferent use of the word ‘false’ and has with this use already assumed that there is
a third truth value (namely, that of the meaningless) and thus that the bivalence
principle should not hold.
According to the bivalence principle, ‘true’ should not be understood as im-
plying a time-dependent but rather a timeless being the case or truth.269 According
to this principle, what is true today will not be false tomorrow, and what is not
true today will still be false tomorrow. This means that the truth of even time-
related statements, e.g., true predictions, is not time-dependent. If one says of a
prediction that it has become true, then one helps oneself to a usage according to
which ‘true’ means a time-dependent truth, which the bivalence principle ex-
cludes. Connected with this alternative usage is the notion that the truth of a pre-
dictive statement as it were matures with time and comes to completion only
The bivalence principle thereby also stipulates that a proposition is not false if and only if it
is true.
For a discussion of the distinction between time-dependent and timeless truth, compare von
Wright 1974, esp. 174–77.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110784930-020

with the arrival of the foretold event; only with the event does it become actual
and as it were complete and mature truth. If one says that a prediction has be-
come true, that is not supposed to mean that it was false up to the arrival of the
event it foretold and then immediately changes to a true statement. Rather, it is
supposed to mean that there is a time at which it is neither (entirely) true nor
(entirely) false. To think in this way that a time-dependent statement about the
future can have the property of being neither true nor false is certainly allowable
and not perverse. Yet in thinking this way one has given the word ‘true’ a mean-
ing which it does not have according to the bivalence principle. To this extent,
‘many-valued’ logics do not invalidate the validity of the bivalence principle and
give no cause to call in question the ‘correctness’ of two-valued systems of logic.
Yet ‘many-valued’ logics have been developed precisely in the opinion that the
bivalence principle can have no or only a restricted validity, since statements
which refer to future contingents (contingentia futura) are capable of being nei-
ther true nor false. Underlying this opinion is the conviction that if one accepts
the principle of two-valuedness for statements about the future and believe that
what is true tomorrow is also already true today, then one will have to suppose
that the future is inescapably predetermined by the past.270 According to this con-
viction, logic oversteps its domain of competency, since in assuming the bivalence
principle, it commits itself to a deterministic picture of the world.
In truth, however, the bivalence principle is perfectly compatible with inde-
terminism. In order to see this, one need only assume for the sake of argument
that determinism is false. On this assumption, the statement that as a result of an
event that was not predetermined a sea battle will take place tomorrow is, accord-
ing to the bivalence principle, true or false. If this statement is not false, according
to the bivalence principle it is true, and this entirely independently of what time
it is made. But if it is true, indeterminism is true as well, since along with the
statement it is indeed supposed that there is an event that is not predetermined
which results in the sea battle having taken place. Hence, even if one is unsympa-
thetic to determinism, one need not abandon the bivalence principle. Statements
about contingentia futura do not require us to introduce a logic which accepts, in
According to a reading that Ockham (1957) in his Tractatus de Praedestinatione Dei et de Futu-
ris Contingentibus gave to chapter nine of Aristotle’s De Interpretatione, Aristotle had there rejected
the principle of two-valuedness with respect to statements about the future. The development of a
many-valued logic by Jan Łukasiewicz in the 1920s was based on the idea that the bivalence princi-
ple must favor fatalism. See Łukasiewicz 1970, especially the essays “On Three-Valued Logic” (1920),
“On Determinism” (1922), and “Philosophical Remarks on Many-Valued Systems of Propositional
Logic” (1930).
360
Appendix 8

addition to the values 1 (= T) and 0 (= F), an intermediate value like the indefinite
(= ½) or probability values.
The time-dependent truth of a predication precisely does not consist in its
being always already fixed in advance that it will be the case. An event’s being
fixed in advanced (or predetermined) means of course that its arrival follows un-
avoidably from preceding events on the basis of natural laws or that its arrival
cannot be prevented by a decision, no matter how powerful. ‘It is already fixed
today that p’ is thus neither equivalent to, nor even entailed by, the statement ‘It
is true that p’. To be sure, preceding events on the basis of natural laws are caus-
ally relevant for the truth of p, but whether the arrival (and truth) of p already
follows solely on the basis of natural laws from preceding events, or whether
there are additional factors on which this arrival depends according to rules
which are not natural laws but of another kind instead (rules of traffic, war, con-
vention, morality, etc.), is not yet settled simply on the basis of the truth of p. The
proposition ‘What is true tomorrow is already true today’ can thus be understand
so that it is free from any deterministic inflection and says simply, for any arbi-
trary statement p: if it is true tomorrow that tomorrow it will be the case that p,
this means that the statement that, on the day that is (today) called ‘tomorrow’, it
is the case that p is true, and it is true not only tomorrow and today but entirely
independently of the time at which it is stated.
Even if the statement contains a relative time specification like ‘tomorrow’,
this does not alter the fact that it has a timeless truth value all the same. For state-
ments with relative time specifications get their meaning from the point in time
within which they are positioned and can be transformed into equivalent state-
ments with absolute time specifications, i.e., into statements with a specification
of the type ‘On January 15, 2009 . . .’. To that extent, even statements with relative
time specifications have a time-independent truth value.271 The fact that these
time specifications can refer to the future does not make it necessary to assume
more than two timeless truth values. But these values must be understood as
timeless if one accepts the bivalence principle in its complete generality.
By way of summary, one can say that the bivalence principle only stipulates
a certain usage, by stipulating that ‘false’ is equivalent to ‘not true’ and that
‘truth’ means a timeless being the case of statements. In light of the fact that the
words ‘true’ and ‘false’ can also be used differently, one should not hope to decide
That there are declarative propositions whose truth value can only be decided in the future
does not need to mean that they have up until this decision either no truth value at all or only a
truth value lying between true and false or a probability value. Rather, according to the bivalence
principle, if a decision about the truth value of a declarative proposition has not yet been made, or
will never be made, or is not even possible, this value may be unknown, but it is not indefinite.
On Bivalence
361

which usage is ‘the correct’ one. For one can use words as one pleases, so long as
one sticks to the meaning that one has given them (see § 8 above). Whether the
bivalence principle should hold or not is to that extent only a question of linguis-
tic convention.
As a principle of propositional logic, it can remain safely in effect.
(2) Yet as a principle of a strictly formal propositional logic, it should remain in
effect. This can be seen in the following way.
Variables in propositional logic are characterized by the fact that they stand
for arbitrary declarative propositions. From a logical point of view, arbitrary de-
clarative propositions have the property of being true or false. For only by refer-
ence to this property can it be said what a valid inference from declarative
propositions consists in at all. The values T and F must therefore be taken into
account in every logic. But in formal logic, no more than these two values can be
taken into account. For if one wanted to demand of formal logic that it distin-
guishes declarative propositions which are neither true nor false from those
which are true or false, one would have to ascribe to it a capability of specifying
criteria according to which the sphere of non-true declarative propositions could
be further divided into false and non-false propositions, so that the designation
‘false’ would apply only to a part of non-true propositions. However, formal pro-
positional logic has no such criteria at its disposal. For as formal propositional
logic, it does not bring into consideration actual declarative propositions but only
variables which stand for arbitrary declarative propositions. In order to distin-
guish, e.g., false from meaningless or false from indefinite or false from probable
declarative propositions, formal logic would have to abandon its formal stand-
point and bring into consideration declarative propositions with respect to prop-
erties from which it precisely abstracts in its propositional variables. That is, it
would have to apply criteria for dividing declarative propositions which concern
the content of propositions, which are not at its disposal due to its formal stand-
point. Thus, one cannot reasonably demand of a strictly formal propositional logic
that it goes beyond the distinction between true and false.
The same thing holds for a strictly formal predicate logic. To be sure, as predi-
cate logic it goes beyond propositional logic insofar as it considers the truth of
statements as an applying to something, namely, an applying to that about which
statements say something, i.e., an applying of predicates to subjects of statements
(see § 27, § 33, and § 65, remark). A strictly formal predicate logic does not go be-
yond the dissection of declarative propositions into predicates and subjects. For
this reason, the concept variables it uses, α, β, etc., can stand for arbitrary and thus
even empty concepts. And the bivalence principle suffices for the assessment of
362
Appendix 8

statements with empty concepts.272 That is, in a strictly formal predicate logic, un-
like in the (‘classical’) predicate logic of the calculus of functions, such statements
do not need to be eliminated from consideration from the outset (see § 35); they
can rather simply be treated as false. The task of distinguishing between false and
meaningless (or nonsensical) singular statements only arises by introducing the
postulate of non-empty domains, i.e., by introducing the not universally valid (and
not formal) rules (VI. 5) and (VI. 6) (see § 72). The validity of these rules is assumed
in the predicate logic of the logical calculus of functions, but not in a strictly formal
predicate logic.
In this way, the unrestricted recognition of the bivalence principle belongs
among the marks by which formal logic, both in its propositional as well as its
predicate-logical parts, is distinguished quite essentially from non-formal logics.
In this respect, it is not a matter of ‘arbitrary’ decision but is rather tied insepara-
bly to the formality of formal logic.273
Aristotle seems to have assessed the situation similarly. He formulates the bivalence princi-
ple in De Interpretatione 8. 18 a 34 ff. by saying that every affirmative and negative proposition is
either true or false. It is consistent with this that he means that one says either something true or
something false when one says something about something (Metaphysics 4. 7, 1011 b 27 ff.), and
that one must either ascribe or deny some predicate to an object (Metaphysics 4. 7, 1011 b 24); a
predicate either applies or does not apply to an object (De Interpretatione 18 a 35 ff.). Christopher
Kirwan (1971, 118) comments on the cited passage in Metaphysics 4. 7 with the following words:
“‘The present King of France is neither wise nor not wise; for the expression “the present King of
France” is not being, or on the occasion of utterance cannot correctly be, used to refer to anyone’:
Aristotle nowhere comments on this kind of case, but he might have held that the sentence
makes no assertion, or asserts nothing ‘of one thing’, and is therefore no exception to the rule
that we must assert or deny one thing of one thing (cf. De Interpretatione 8).”
Compare here the concerns with Ignacio Angelelli (2005, 445) has raised in his review of the
first edition of the present book, published in the Bulletin of Symbolic Logic.
On Bivalence
363


