Section Two
The Language of the Calculus of Classes
1 A Translation Program
§ 16 The Vocabulary of the Calculus of Classes
The standard work Principles of Mathematical Logic by David Hilbert and Wil-
helm Ackermann contains in its second chapter, “The Calculus of Classes,” a par-
agraph with the heading “Systematic Derivation of the Traditional Aristotelian
Inferences” (Hilbert & Ackermann 1967, 57–63 [1950, 48–54]). It is supposed to be
shown here that all universally valid rules of the categorical syllogistic, so far as
they apply to non-singular statements, can be reduced to non-syllogistic rules of
inference belonging to the calculus of classes. This program, which in its outlines
is committed to the model provided by Ernst Schröder in his three volume Lec-
tures on the Algebra of Logic [Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik] of 1890–95
for the interpretation of syllogistic rules, is guided by the conviction that “the
calculus of classes” makes possible “a more systematic treatment of logical ques-
tions than traditional logic” (Hilbert & Ackermann 1967, 65 [1950, 55, modified]) –
whereby ‘traditional logic’ is here a name which has become standard for a de-
ductive logic that uses the language of the categorical syllogistic. Carrying out
Schröder’s program assumes that the vocabulary of this language, so far as it
applies to non-singular statements, can be replaced successfully and without
loss by the vocabulary of the calculus of classes. I will now lay out what vocabu-
lary that is supposed to be.
Yet before I do, I would like briefly to discuss the label ‘calculus of classes’.
Hilbert and Ackermann (1967, 42 [1950, 44]) use this term to designate a sub-
sphere of mathematical logic which, along with set theory – of which it forms
only “a relatively small excerpt” (Hilbert & Ackermann 1967, 153 [1950, 139]) – was
developed out of Boolean algebra. The calculus of classes, like set theory, occupies
itself with the investigation of set-theoretical operations, but limits itself to such
operations in which only relations between classes are taken into consideration;
relations between classes and elements of classes are thus disregarded. In other
words, the calculus of classes is occupied with the relations of the inclusion, inter-
section, union, identity, and complementarity of classes, yet not with the relation
of elementhood, which is the fundamental relation of set theory. Otherwise, clas-
ses are the same for the calculus of classes as sets are for set theory. That is,
“class is just another expression for set” (Hilbert & Ackermann 1967, 153 [1950,
13]), and furthermore both expressions are widely held to be equivalent to what
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110784930-002

is called the scope (or extension) of a concept in the older logic literature.64 A dis-
tinction between sets and classes, as it is sometimes made within presentations of
set theory, is disregarded at least within the calculus of classes.65
Now, regarding the systematic derivation of syllogistic rules from relations of
the calculus of classes, as well the translation of syllogistic expressions into the lan-
guage of classes which is foundational for this derivation, Hilbert and Ackermann
follow Ernst Schröder in his view that we can read A, E, I, and O propositions as
dealing with class inclusions. This reading is suggested by the fact that the syllogis-
tic schema ‘A (α, β)’ can be reasonably translated by the propositional schema ‘the
scope of the concept β is contained in the scope of the concept α’. If we replace
here the expressions ‘the scope of the concept α’ and ‘the scope of the concept β’
with class variables, i.e., with the Latin lower-case letters ‘a’ and ‘b’ respectively,
and further symbolize the relational expression ‘. . . is contained in . . .’ with the
inclusion sign ‘. . . ⊂. . .’, we get the expression ‘b ⊂a’. This may be translated ‘the
class b is contained in the class a’ (or ‘b is a subclass of a’). This schema is appar-
ently equivalent to the propositional schema ‘A (α, β)’.
Following Schröder, Hilbert and Ackermann suppose that not only the schema
of A, but also those of E, I, and O propositions can be reasonably replaced by expres-
sions dealing with class inclusions. Just as one replaces ‘A (α, β)’ with ‘b ⊂a’, one
can apparently with equal right replace ‘O (α, β)’ with the truth-functional negation
of ‘b ⊂a’, thus with the expression ‘~ (b ⊂a)’, which means something like ‘b is not
a subclass of a’. For, in the same way that ‘O (α, β)’ is the contradictory of ‘A (α, β)’,
so every formula ~ A is the contradictory of A. Concerning ‘E (α, β)’, this proposi-
tional schema means something like ‘every β is not an α’. A proposition whose form
corresponds to this schema is true when the scope of the concept β is contained in
the scope of the antonym of α: if a is the scope of the concept α, then the scope of
the concept not-α is the complementary class of a. If one designates this with ‘a’,
then one may represent the propositional schema ‘the scope of the concept β is con-
tained in the scope of the concept not-α’ with ‘b ⊂a’. Finally, since ‘I (α, β)’ is the
This holds in any case so long as we understand by scope of a concept the objects that fall
under this concept, and not also, as in the logic of Port-Royal (e.g.), the concepts which are subordi-
nated to this concept.
Thus it is not unusual for the concept of a class to be defined by that of the set, by taking a class
as the scope of a condition S (x) of a subset {x ∈A: S (x)}; see Halmos 1976, 22. There is also the
opposite procedure of defining the concept of a set by the concept of a class; so that in some presen-
tations of set theory a set is defined as that class which is the element of another class. On this con-
ception of sets, the calculus of classes has to do essentially with classes, while according to the first
mentioned conception this calculus could just as well be called the ‘calculus of sets’.
42
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

contradictory of ‘E (α, β)’, and ‘~ (b ⊂a)’ is the contradictory of ‘b ⊂a’, ‘~ (b ⊂a)’
relates to ‘b ⊂a’ as ‘I (α, β)’ to ‘E (α, β)’.
§ 17 The Strong Logical Square of Assertoric Opposition in the Language
of the Calculus of Classes
Summarizing these considerations, Hilbert and Ackermann write:
We provide [. . .] symbolic presentation of the four forms A, E, I, O of a judgment. [. . .] If a is
the class corresponding to α and b to β, then the judgment [‘All β are α’] is presented by ‘b ⊂a’.
We can also express the judgment ‘Some β are α’ as ‘It is not true that all β are not α’. It is
therefore presented symbolically with ‘~ (b ⊂a)’. For ‘No β is α’ we can also say that ‘All β
are not α’ and represent it with ‘b ⊂a’. Finally, for ‘Some β are not α’ we can say ‘It is not
true that all β are α’, which is represented by ‘~ (b ⊂a)’.
And Hilbert and Ackermann add:
From this notation result the traditional doctrines about opposition and inversion which
concern these forms of judgment. Namely, from the four judgments, the last was expressed
as the opposite [Gegenteil] of the first, the second as the opposite of the third. Furthermore,
both middle judgments in β and α (b and a, for us), are symmetric. Namely, the judgments
‘~ (b ⊂a)’ and ‘(b ⊂a) are equivalent to the judgments ‘~ (a ⊂b)’ and ‘a ⊂b’. (Hilbert &
Ackermann 1967, 59 [1950, 49–50])66
When the authors speak of the “traditional doctrines” of “inversion” in this quota-
tion, they mean conversion rules according to which propositions of the form E (α,
β) and of the form I (α, β) may be transformed into logically equivalent propositions
of the form E (β, α) and I (β, α) respectively.67 What Hilbert and Ackermann are re-
ferring to here is the fact that all syllogistic conversion rules remain in force when
one replaces E and I propositions with expressions for class inclusions: the class var-
iables may be interchanged in these expressions just as one can interchange concept
variables in the corresponding syllogistic formulas.
And further: when Hilbert and Ackermann speak of “traditional doctrines of
opposition” they mean everything the syllogistic teaches about the relations of the
In this quotation, I have adapted the symbolic notation Hilbert and Ackermann use to the
conventions I have introduced.
What are meant are rules of conversio simplex, which are dealt with below in § 55 together
with a further inversion rule, conversio per accidens, according to which one may move from A
(α, β) to I (β, α). This rule shortens a procedure in which, on the basis of a further rule that results
from one of the relations of the strong logical square (the subalternation rule), one first moves
from A (α, β) to I (α, β) in order to then to apply conversio simplex to I (α, β).
1 A Translation Program § 17
43

strong logical square of assertoric opposition. With this they point to the follow-
ing logical situation. According to Figure 6, it is possible to replace the four propo-
sitional schemata in Figure 3 (see § 11 above) with (moving clockwise) ‘b ⊂a’,
‘b ⊂a’, ‘~ (b ⊂a),’ and ‘~ (b ⊂a)’ (except here with ‘a’ standing for the scope of
β and ‘b’ for the scope of α), without affecting anything in the logical relations
which are expressed by the positional relationships in Figure 3.
Now it must nevertheless be assumed here that there is no interpretation for ‘a’ and
‘b’ in which b stands for an empty set or the scope of an empty concept and that
neither of the expressions ‘b ⊂a’ and ‘b ⊂a’ stand for a false proposition. Other-
wise, there would not be a contrary relationship between them; and, consequently,
the contradictory opposites of these propositions, namely, propositions conforming
to the schemata ‘~ (b ⊂a)’ and ‘~ (b ⊂a)’, would be subcontraries nor subalterns of
‘b ⊂a’ and ‘b ⊂a’ respectively. This would mean that the logical relations indicated
in Figure 6 do not correspond to the logical relations expressed in Figure 3.
This assumption agrees, of course, with a supposition the syllogistic also already
implicitly employs. Namely, the syllogistic also assumes in its use of the subaltern
rules that result from the relations of the strong logical square that there is no
interpretation of α and β in which A (α, β) is a true proposition but β occurs as an
empty concept, i.e., has a scope of zero. Hilbert and Ackermann rightly point out
this out when they write regarding Aristotle’s syllogistic, “According to Aristotle, a
statement ‘All β are α’ holds as correct only if there are objects which are β” (Hil-
bert & Ackermann 1967, 62 [1950, 53]). (This is something that needs more discus-
sion and which I will return to in more detail in § 18 and § 19.)
The propositional schemata appearing in Figure 6, then, are only to be re-
garded as adequate translations of the syllogistic schemata of A, E, I, and O proposi-
tions if the logical relations that obtain between them correspond exactly to the
relations of the logical square of assertoric opposition. Assuming that there is no
interpretation of ‘a’ and ‘b’, where ‘b ⊂a’ and ‘b ⊂a’ both express true propositions
that deal with b as a null class, we find an exact correspondence between these
relations. For, under this assumption, though two propositions of the form b ⊂a
and b ⊂a can both be false, they cannot both be true; they are therefore contraries.
The truth-functional negations of both propositions, accordingly, are subcontraries,
~ (
~ (
ì –)
ì )
ì –
ì
Figure 6
44
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

since though they are both true if their contradictories are both false, they cannot
both be false, since it is not possible that their contradictories are both true. Finally,
just for this reason they are subalterns to the expressions from Figure 6 standing
above them vertically. For there is no interpretation of ‘a’ and ‘b’ in which one of
these expressions stands for a true proposition unless the expression which is the
contradictory of the (true) proposition’s contrary is true as well.
Now, within the calculus of classes, one admittedly does not typically make use
of the assumption that there is no interpretation for ‘a’ and ‘b’ in which either ‘b ⊂a’
or ‘b ⊂a’ stands for a true proposition and yet b is the scope of an empty concept or
an empty set. Rather, the inclusion relation is usually understood – as it was by Hil-
bert and Ackermann – so that interpretations of ‘b ⊂a’ and ‘b ⊂a’ are permitted in
which these schemata represent propositions which are both true and yet deal with
the null class. I will call this understanding the set-theoretical conception of class-
inclusion. On this conception, it is not only not a necessary condition for the truth of
statements of the form b ⊂a and b ⊂a that b is not the null class; on the contrary,
the opposite condition, that b is the null class, is even sufficient for their truth.
I call this conception set-theoretical because a theorem of set theory underlies
it. This theorem states that the null class is a sub-class of every class (or that the
empty set is a sub-set of every set).68 Expressed symbolically: Ø ⊂a (and Ø ⊂a), for
arbitrary a. If we assume the validity of this theorem, then it holds immediately for
b = Ø that b is a subset both of a as well as of ā (for arbitrary a). Expressed symboli-
cally: b ⊂a and b ⊂a.
Under the assumption of this theorem, it would be entirely inappropriate not to
admit everywhere the interpretation of class variables in which b is the null class.
Hilbert and Ackermann then write, “Our deviation from Aristotle on this point is
justified by, e.g., the consideration for mathematical applications of the logic [of the
calculus of classes], in which taking the Aristotelian conception as a basis would be
inappropriate” (Hilbert & Ackermann 1967, 62 [1950, 53]). What is labeled here the
‘Aristotelian conception’ is the view that statements of the form b ⊂a and b ⊂a are
true only if b ≠Ø. The latter view is opposed to the set-theoretical conception and
states that the subject concept of propositions of the form A (α, β) and E (α, β) cannot,
if true, be a concept whose scope is the null class.
Now given the assumption of the set-theoretical theorem that the null class is
contained as a sub-class in every class, we can express that a given sub-class is not
the null class by means of the truth-functional negation of a class-inclusion. For
example, under this assumption the formulas which appear in Figure 6 ‘~ (b ⊂a)’
In Schröder (1890, Vol. I, 238), this theorem is worded: “the nothing” is “the subject to every
predicate.”
1 A Translation Program § 17
45

and ‘~ (b ⊂a)’ each express that b is not the null class. The language of the calculus
of classes is capable, under this assumption, of making explicit those suppositions
which are implicitly contained in expressions for class inclusions according to the
so-called ‘Aristotelian’ conception. If we want to say that b is not the null class, we
thus simply write: ‘~ (b ⊂b)’. Then, if we add this formula to proposition schemata
such as ‘b ⊂a’ or ‘b ⊂a’, we can make explicit what, according to the “tacit Aristo-
telian assumption”, is implicitly stated by a proposition of the form b ⊂a or b ⊂a
(Hilbert & Ackermann 1967, 63 [1950, 53]).69
Thus, to express that the concept β in ‘A (α, β)’ and ‘E (α, β)’ does not have a
scope that coincides with the null class, one can replace ‘b ⊂a’ and ‘b ⊂a’ with pairs
of propositional schemata, namely with ‘~ (b ⊂b)’ and ‘b ⊂a’ and with ‘~ (b ⊂b)’
and ‘b ⊂a’ respectively. The expressions in the following Figure 7 thus render in a
precise way what was actually meant by the expressions in Figure 6.
Of course, the relations of the logical square continue to obtain in Figure 7, just
as in Figure 6, only if one assumes that there is no interpretation of the class vari-
able ‘b’ where b is the scope of an empty concept, in which ‘~ (b ⊂b)’ is thus a
false proposition.
2 The Problem of Implicit Existence Assumptions
§ 18 The Problem of the Empty Class
At least at first glance, it looks as if the language into which Hilbert and Ackermann
translate syllogistic expressions is in a completely advantageous position: it is
~ (
ì –)
~ (
ì )
~ (
ì
ì
–), (
)
~ (
ì
ì
–), (
)
–
Figure 7
69 Following Ernst Schröder (1890, Vol. II/1, 220), Hilbert and Ackermann (like Bertrand Russell;
see § 56 below) maintain here (1967, 63 [1950, 53]) that it is impossible to correctly present the
syllogistic modes Darapti, Falapton, Bamalip, and Fesapo in the language of syllogistic. They say
that one cannot treat them like standard Aristotelian syllogisms as inferences with two premises;
they require a third premise of the form ~ (a ⊂a) for their correct presentation. This additional
premise is supposed to have the task of making explicit the existential implication which is con-
tained in the remaining premises of each of these inferences on the view of the syllogistic.
46
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

apparently suited to make explicit class-logical assumptions which are implicitly
contained in the syllogistic propositional schemata, but which cannot be expressed
in the elementary language of the syllogistic itself. If it is the case that an A or E
proposition is true only on the condition that the scope of its subject concept is not
zero, then A or E propositions should in truth be understood as complex proposi-
tions; they then admit a logical analysis in which they are equivalent to pairs of (or
to logical conjunctions of) propositional schemata as they occur in Figure 7. On this
analysis, syllogistic conceptual relations are reducible to class-logical relations,
which prove to be the more elementary.
In the elementary language of the syllogistic, by contrast, both A and E proposi-
tions appear to be simple and elementary propositions, which are not further reduc-
ible. There is no vocabulary in this language with which it would be possible to
distinguish concept variables as signs for empty or non-empty concepts. At first
glance, it may seem that this lacuna should be taken as a deficiency in the language.
Yet we must now examine whether it was correct after all to suppose with Hil-
bert and Ackermann (see § 17 above) that not only A but also E propositions should
be understood such that they cannot be true when their subject concept has a null
scope. For whether syllogistic expressions admit the analysis Hilbert and Acker-
mann proposed for them depends on this supposition.
As we have seen, they suppose that the “traditional theories of opposition” are ten-
able only on the condition that relations between A, E, I, or O propositions with non-
empty subject concepts are considered; i.e., they suppose that on this condition do these
relations correspond to the relations of the strong logical square, and only on this con-
dition are the rules of the strong logical square, which depend on these relations, valid.
§ 19 Alternative Theories
The view held by Hilbert and Ackermann, following Ernst Schröder, about the pre-
suppositions of the validity of the rules of the strong logical square corresponds to
a version of the theory of the existential import of categorical statements which
was developed in the logic books of the nineteenth century. In his book Studies
and Exercises in Formal Logic, one of the last significant contributions to the syllo-
gistic, John Neville Keynes gave the theory a comprehensive presentation (cf.
Keynes 1928, 210–48). Keynes discusses various versions of this theory.
In his view, four alternative possibilities serve to interpret categorical propo-
sitions: A, E, I, and O statements, if they occur as categorical statements, can be
interpreted so that they either
2 The Problem of Implicit Existence Assumptions § 19
47

(i)
all imply that their subject concept, the antonym of their subject concept,
their predicate concept and the antonym of their predicate concept are non-
empty concepts, or
(ii)
all imply that their subject concept is a non-empty concept, or
(iii) all imply neither that their subject concept nor their predicate concept is a non-
empty concept, or, finally,
(iv) imply, if they are particular, that their subject concept is a non-empty con-
cept, but if they are universal, do not imply this.70
If, according to one of these four interpretations, the subject concept of a categori-
cal statement must be a non-empty concept to be true, this means that it contains
an implicit existence assumption with respect to the objects it deals with. One can
then say that it has existential import in this respect.
Keynes (1928, 227–31) shows that none of the four alternative interpretations
allow all relations of the strong logical square to be preserved:
Assuming interpretation (i), the relations of contradictoriness and subcontrari-
ety fall away, so that only the relations of subalternation and contrariety remain in
effect. That is, on this assumption, it is already enough for statements of the form A
(α, β), O (α, β), E (α, β), and I (α, β) to be false that α is an empty concept. In that case,
no two of these four statements can ever form a pair of subcontrary or contradictory
statements.
For similar reasons, the same consequences result in the case of interpretation
(ii). But while in the case of interpretation (i) a statement of the form ‘either O (α, β),
or there is no α, or no Nα, or no β, or no Nβ’ is the contradictory of a statement of
the form A (α, β), in the case of (ii), a statement of the form ‘either O (α, β), or there
is no β’ constitutes the contradictory.
Assuming interpretation (iii), the subalternate and subcontrary relations remain
intact, but the relations of contradictoriness and contrariety fall away. On this as-
sumption, ‘A (α, β)’ says merely that there is no β that is not an α, without saying that
a β exists. A statement of the form O (α, β) says on this assumption that some β is not
an α, if there is a β. As a consequence, a statement of the form A (α, β) is not the
contradictory of a statement of the form O (α, β). For if no α exists, it is not the case
that one of the two statements is false. In this case, however, two statements of the
form A (α, β) and E (α, β) are also compatible with each other and hence not contrar-
ies. For, if neither A (α, β) nor E (α, β) implies that there is a β, what is said with both
As Keynes notes, interpretation (i) corresponds to the view maintained by William Stanley
Jevons, (ii) to John Stuart Mill’s view, and (iv) is the interpretation John Venn favored, since it
was best suited within the framework of “symbolic logic.” See Keynes 1928, 220.
48
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

statements taken together is merely that there is neither a β that is an α, nor a β that
is not an α. And both of these taken together means only that there is no β at all.
In the fourth and last case (iv) it is supposed that particular but not universal
categorical statements implicitly say that there is an object which falls under the sub-
ject concept of the statement. Under this supposition, the sub-alternate relationship
dissolves. For here a particular statement is already false if the existential statement
which it implies is false, and yet the universal statement from which the particular
statement follows according to the rule of subalternation can be true in this case,
since it implies no corresponding existence assumption. The relationship of contrari-
ety dissolves under this supposition as well. For the supposition allows that two
statements of the form A (α, β) and E (α, β) are compatible with each other. That is, if
neither of the two statements implies an existence statement, each of them only de-
nies that there are definite objects with the predicate β. And indeed the universal
affirmative statement denies that there are β’s which are not α, while the universal
negative statement denies that there are β’s which are an α. Finally, the relationship
of subcontrariety is dissolved as well if it is supposed that particular statements
imply that their subject concept is satisfied. For it suffices for statements of the form
I (α, β) and O (α, β) to be false if their subject concepts are not satisfied.
Among the four alternatives considered, interpretation (iv) is the only one
in which the contradictory relationship between A (α, β) and O (α, β) or be-
tween E (α, β) and I (α, β) remains intact. Keynes sees this relationship as the
most important among all logical relations of opposition, and this assessment is
the reason he gives preference to interpretation (iv) over the remaining three
interpretations of categorical propositions: from his perspective it is best suited
for what he calls “ordinary formal logic” (Keynes 1928, 220). It corresponds, as
one easily recognizes, exactly to that interpretation in which A, E, I, and O pro-
positions express set-theoretically conceived class inclusions, so that they corre-
spond in turn to propositions of the form b ⊂a, b ⊂a, ~ (b ⊂a) and ~ (b ⊂a).
Now were one to suppose that the four alternatives considered exhausted all
alternatives available for A, E, I, and O propositions, then one would have to con-
clude from the findings presented by Keynes that the relations of the strong logi-
cal square between propositions of the form A (α, β), I (α, β), E (α, β), and O (α, β)
do not obtain in all circumstances, but rather only on the specific condition that
these propositions contain implicit existence assumptions, and this such that the
truth of these assumptions is beyond question. Since these assumptions can be
explicitly made as referring to conceptual scopes, these propositions admit a logi-
cal analysis which corresponds exactly to the translation into the language of the
2 The Problem of Implicit Existence Assumptions § 19
49

calculus of classes carried out by Hilbert and Ackermann. This is the view that
most modern logicians have followed.71
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes
§ 20 Grounds for a Modification of the Translation Program
However, the enumeration of the four alternatives considered by Keynes is in-
complete. A fifth interpretation of categorical propositions, which Keynes (1928,
219) mentions in a footnote72 but otherwise did not consider further, says that
only affirmative but not negative categorical statements implicitly say that there is
an object which falls under their subject concept. Manley Thompson (1953) has ar-
gued at length that the relations between any A, E, I, and O propositions in the
strong logical square obtain without exception if one takes the fifth alternative as
a basis, thus if one assumes that not the quantity of a categorical statement (as in
the case of interpretation (iv)), but only its quality decides whether an existential
implication is present.73 According to this assumption, the existential import of
statements depends exclusively on their affirmative form. I would like to call this
assumption the principle of qualitative existential import. – If this principle is as-
sumed, we can show that the relations of the strong logical square are strictly
and universally valid as follows:
First, the relation of contradictoriness remains preserved, since a negative
proposition and a proposition it denies can neither be both true nor both false, so
long as the negative proposition states nothing other than that the proposition it
denies is false. But according to the principle of qualitative existential import,
negative categorical propositions are to be understood such that they contain no
other statement than that of the falsity of the statement they deny.
Second, the relation of subalternation remains preserved. For statements which
stand in this relationship are of the same quality and, therefore, according to the
Peter F. Strawson is among the logicians who suppose that the syllogistic quite generally pre-
supposes that concepts are non-empty, or that A, E, I, and O propositions imply that the objects of
which they treat exist. He saw in the syllogistic a kind of ‘logic of normal language’ which is in-
commensurable with mathematical logic and maintained a doctrine which goes by the promising
name of free logic. See Strawson 1952, 165–79; Lambert 1998; and Bencivenga 1998.
According to Keynes’ note, this fifth interpretation is represented by Friedrich Ueberweg.
The assumption formulated by Ueberweg and Thompson corresponds to an old scholastic
principle. Cf. Prior 1967a, 143. Thompson (1953, 61) also pointed out the recognition of this princi-
ple by Kant and Charles S. Peirce.
50
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

principle of qualitative existential import, they are not distinguished from each
other with respect to their existence implications. Hence, universal statements can-
not be true unless the statements which stand in a subalternate relationship to them
are also true.
Third, the relation of contrariety holds as well: two universal statements which
are distinguished from each other only by their quality cannot both be true, since
each of them implies a subalternate statement which is the contradictory of the
other; however, they can both be false if the subject concept is not empty, and they
are both false if not everything that falls under the subject concept also falls under
the predicate concept.
Fourth and finally, the relation of subcontrariety also remains preserved:
two particular statements distinguished from each other only by their quality
can both be true, but not both false. They are both true when they refer to dif-
ferent objects that fall under their subject concept. By contrast, both cannot be
false. For if one of them is false, the statement which is its subaltern must also
be false, so that the particular statement which is its contradictory counterpart
must be true.
Thus, assuming the principle of qualitative existential import, the relations of the
strong logical square between any A, E, I, and O propositions hold without exception.
Incidentally, this principle agrees in part – though only in part – with what Hil-
bert and Ackermann called the “tacit Aristotelian assumption.”74 This principle says
that an (affirmative) statement ‘all β are α’ is only correct when there are objects
which are β. It does not say, however, that this holds for either of the negative state-
ments ‘no β is an α’ and ‘not all β are an α’.
The principle of qualitative existential import really only expresses the fact
that the truth conditions of categorical propositions are different in kind depend-
ing on whether they are affirmative or negative propositions. The truth of an af-
firmative categorical proposition consists in the applying of its predicate to the
objects or object which it treats. By contrast, the truth of a negative categorical
proposition, understood as the non-truth-functional negation of an affirmative cat-
egorical proposition, consists in the fact that this proposition, together with its
double non-truth-functional negation, is false. If A is an affirmative categorical
proposition, then the principle of qualitative existential import says merely that
the truth of A depends on there being objects to which A applies, while by con-
trast the truth of N A does not assume the existence of such objects.
That Aristotle himself did not make use of the “tacit assumption” which is here imputed to
him and that his syllogistic did not rely on it, I have shown in my 1998, 131–70.
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes § 20
51

Of course, ‘existence’ must be understood here in a very broad sense of the
word, namely, such that existence coincides with belonging to the (non-empty) do-
main of individuals (“universe of discourse”: Boole 1854, 166) to which the affirma-
tive categorical proposition implicitly relates. A proposition like ‘All Olympian
gods are mentioned in the Iliad’ can be true, even if Olympian gods do not belong
to the domain of objects treated by the modern sciences or monotheistic religion,
for example. It merely belongs to the necessary truth conditions of such a proposi-
tion that the objects it deals with occur among the objects mentioned in Homer’s
works. Likewise, a proposition like ‘A regular ten-sided polyhedron is an empty
chimera’ does not assume that such figures occur, e.g., in physical space or among
the objects of stereometry. For such a proposition to be true merely requires that
its objects exist in that world to which it refers, namely in the world of chimeras.
Now, compare the following propositions with both propositions just men-
tioned: (1) ‘All Olympian gods are gods’ and (2) ‘A regular ten-sided polyhedron has
ten sides’. Whether they are true or false depends in each case on how they are to
be understood. If what they say is that the predicate of being a god is attributed to
all Olympian gods, or that the predicate of being ten-sided is attributed to a regular
ten-sided polyhedron, then both propositions can be true, and this due to the fact
that their objects belong to (non-empty) domains to which the propositions refer.
These domains can in both cases be characterized as the world of attributions. –
Yet both propositions could also be false.75 If proposition (1) is supposed to say that
Olympian gods are gods, then this proposition is false if the world of gods to which
it refers is an empty domain or contains no Olympian gods. And if proposition (2)
is supposed to say that a regular ten-sided polyhedron has the property of being
ten-sided, then this proposition is false if the domain of objects which have ten
sides is either empty or does not contain a regular polyhedron. However we under-
stand these propositions and whatever domain of individuals they refer to – their
truth depends, in all circumstances, on whether their respective domain is non-
empty. Quite accordingly, the non-truth-functional negation of either proposition
can be true entirely independently of whether the given domain is empty or not.
It follows directly from the principle of qualitative existential import that affirmative propo-
sitions of the form X (α, α), with X = A, X = I, or X = Ạ, are false if instead of α the expression of an
empty concept appears. If one calls propositions of this form ‘analytic’, then we must suppose
that there are false analytic propositions. Analyticity and analytic truth, then, must be distin-
guished from each other. Analytic propositions which deal with objects that do not exist may
only be taken as true in so far as they are reinterpreted as propositions which refer to the world
of attributions. Analytic judgments are only true in all circumstances if they are understood as
judgments of attribution. I will return to this point in § 21 and § 57.
52
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

Now we can also formulate the principle of qualitative existential import with-
out speaking of existence if we talk about conceptual scopes instead. In this manner
of speaking, the principle says that an affirmative (in distinction to a negative) cate-
gorical statement is true only if its subject is not an empty concept, i.e., not a concept
whose scope is zero.
If we suppose for the time being that the scope of an empty concept (= zero) is
the same as the null class, and decide to present the relations of the strong logical
square according to the principle of qualitative existential import in the language of
the calculus of classes, then it proves necessary to subject Hilbert and Ackermann’s
translation of the schemata ‘A (α, β)’, ‘I (α, β)’, ‘E (α, β)’, and ‘O (α, β)’ to a modification.
Since, according to the principle of qualitative existential import as well, a proposi-
tion of the form A (α, β) is true if and only if the scope of the concept β is not empty
(thus not the null class) and is contained in the scope of α, it is equivalent to a propo-
sition of the form b ⊂a & ~ (b ⊂b). But a proposition of the form E (α, β), unlike A
(α, β), does not assume that the scope of β is greater than zero, such that ~ (b ⊂b)
holds. Hence it does not correspond to a proposition of the form b ⊂a & ~ (b ⊂b),
but rather to a proposition of the form b ⊂a. Finally, if we render I (α, β) and O (α,
β) (as the contradictories of E (α, β) and A (α, β), respectively) with truth-functional
negations as in Figure 7 of § 17, we can render the relations of the strong logical
square with the diagram in Figure 8.76
According to the way Figure 8 renders them, these relations remain in effect
for any interpretation of the class variables a and b. Thus, a small modification
of the translation program followed by Hilbert and Ackermann seems to have a
chance of success.
–
~ (
ì
ì
ì
–
–
) & (
)
~ (
ì
ì
ì –)
~ (~ (
) & (
))
Figure 8
In this diagram, I needed to use the symbol for logical conjunction, although it does not be-
long to the language of the calculus of classes. The negation of a pair of propositional schemata,
as occurred twice in Figure 7, can be presented only as the negation of a logical conjunction.
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes § 20
53

§ 21 The Null Class and Empty Conceptual Scopes
In fact, syllogistic propositional schemata can be translated perfectly into the lan-
guage of the calculus of classes, according to the procedure presented at the end of
§ 20, only if we assume that empty conceptual scopes are simply the same as the null
class. But this assumption is inadmissible. Strictly speaking, it is not at all possible in
the language of the calculus of classes to express that a concept – understood as that
for which a syllogistic concept variable stands – is not empty but rather satisfied.
An expression of the form ~ (b ⊂b), as it was used in Figure 8, states merely that b
is not a subclass of every class, in particular that b is not the subclass of the comple-
mentary class of b. This implies that b is not the null class. But this in no way pre-
cludes that the concept whose scope is designated by ‘b’ is empty nonetheless. This
can be clarified as follows.
As a set-theoretical theorem, the supposition that the null class is a subclass
of every class follows from two set-theoretical axioms, the axiom of choice and
the axiom of extensionality. In addition, it must be assumed that some set exists.
The axiom of choice states: For any set a and for every condition S (x), there
exists a set b, whose elements are exactly the x from a for which S (x) holds. This
axiom tacitly supposes that the condition S (x) may be unsatisfiable. It follows
from this that a proposition may be false which states of every x from a that S (x)
holds. For example, ‘S (x)’ may stand for the condition that x ≠x; and it may be
supposed that x ≠x does not apply to the x from a.
From the axiom of choice, it follows that a set exists which has no elements.
For given the assumption that some set exists (whatever it may be), it follows from
the axiom of choice that there is a set, for example the set {x ∈a : x ≠x}, which
has no elements.
In connection with this, the axiom of extensionality ensures that there is no
more than one set which has no elements. For this axiom states: sets are identical
only if it holds for every object that it either belongs as an element to all or none of
these sets. It follows from the axiom of extensionality that empty sets are identical
with each other, since there is no object that is an element of any of these sets.
Hence they are also identical with the set {x ∈a : x ≠x}, which was already sup-
posed to be empty and which was already shown to exist. It is called the null set or
the null class and is designated by ‘Ø’.
Now from the proposition that the null class exists, it can be derived that it is
the subclass of every class or subset of every set, or symbolically: Ø ⊂a, for arbi-
trary a. In carrying out this derivation, one usually argues something like this (see
Halmos 1976, 19): it cannot be false that the null class is a subclass of every class.
For if Ø ⊂a were false, then an element must be contained in Ø that does not
belong to a. But since there is no element contained in Ø, neither can it contain an
54
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

element that does not belong to a. Of course, this argumentation assumes that
there could only be one reason that a proposition like ‘Every element of the null
class is an element of every class’ (namely, an affirmative proposition of the form
A (α, β)) is false, which is that a counterexample exists by which the proposition
can be refuted. However, according to the principle of qualitative existential im-
port, a quite different reason for the falsity of such a proposition can be given,
namely, that what the proposition treats simply does not exist (so that a counterex-
ample does exist either). According to this principle, the supposition that every ele-
ment of the null class is an element of every class is simply false prima facie,
precisely because elements of the null class do not exist.
However, seen in the light of day, the set-theoretical theorem that the null class is
a subclass of every class is in no way incompatible with the principle of qualitative
existential import. Rather, it even assumes this principle. It only requires for its deriva-
tion the use of an additional logical rule which is dispensable within the syllogistic,
namely, the rule that from a false proposition any arbitrary proposition may be imme-
diately derived (whether or not it is affirmative or negative): ex falso quodlibet.✶
According to the principle of qualitative existential import, the following is al-
ready a false proposition: ‘Some object has the predicate of being an element of the
null class.’ For the predicate of being an element of the null class is clearly incompat-
ible with the implicit existence assumption of affirmative propositions. Thus, accord-
ing to the rule ex falso quodlibet, any arbitrary proposition may be immediately
derived from the supposition that an object is an element of the null class. Accord-
ingly, it is true that if some object is an element of the null class, the predicate of
being an element of an arbitrary class a, whatever may be meant by ‘a’, may be at-
tributed to this object. The set-theoretical theorem expresses precisely this situation:
Ø ⊂a, for arbitrary a.77
We will see at a later point, in § 30, that it is not necessarily appropriate to
regard the rule ex falso quodlibet as a strictly and universally valid logical rule.
Actually, one can already recognize in its wording (‘From the false anything regu-
larly follows’) that it should not be counted among the rules of formal logic (in the
narrow sense of this term); that is, if we want to count among these rules only
those whose validity depends only on the meaning of logical constants that occur
in the expressions to which they are applied. As I said (and as we will see further
✶TN: ‘From the false anything follows’.
Usually, the same situation is portrayed something like this: the statement ‘if some object is
an element of the null class, then it possesses the predicate of being the element of an arbitrary
class’ is true, assuming the if-then-relation in this statement is understood as truth-functional, i.e.,
assuming it is accepted as a sufficient truth-condition for this statement that its antecedent is
false. Cf. J. Schmidt 1966, vol. 1, 61.
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes § 21
55

below, in Part II of this essay), we do not need to make use of this rule in the
syllogistic. But when this rule is not enlisted, it is not the case that the scopes of
empty concepts (as represented by variables in syllogistic propositional schemata)
coincide with the null class as a subclass of every class. Accordingly, empty con-
ceptual scopes are simply not the same as the null class of axiomatic set theory.
At this point, one could perhaps object that any difference between empty con-
ceptual scopes and the null class had already precluded out by the axiom of exten-
sionality. For it does indeed state that empty sets – and ultimately the scopes (or
extensions) of empty concepts must be counted among them – are identical. But this
objection rests on a misunderstanding. To prevent this misunderstanding from aris-
ing, the axiom of extensionality should be made more precise and formulated as
follows: sets are identical if and only if, for every element of the given non-empty do-
main of individuals, it is an element either of all or none of these sets. In the axiom-
atic system to which the axiom of extensionality is supposed to belong, it does need
to be specified which non-empty domain is given. For the axioms should hold re-
gardless of which domain is given. But this obviously does not mean that the axiom
of extensionality supposes the identity of all sets which are empty with reference to
a certain non-empty domain. The axiom states nothing about how sets relate to
each other insofar as they are empty relative to different domains. Suppose, for ex-
ample, a pink Ferrari occurs only in the imaginary world of a certain crime novel;
thus suppose things of our everyday world are contained in the set of pink Ferraris
just as little as in the set of round squares; then, in relation to the everyday world,
both sets are identical according to the axiom of extensionality. But it does not fol-
low from the axiom that both sets are also identical with respect to the imaginary
world of the crime novel. Otherwise, the commissar appearing in that world would
have no chance from the outset of clearing up his case.
Accordingly, in axiomatic set theory as properly understood, there can be no
talk of an absolute identity of empty sets at all. Consequently, neither can it claim
the absolute but only the relative uniqueness of empty sets.78 The supposition that
empty conceptual scopes should not be identified with the empty set that is the sub-
class of every set is completely compatible with this claim.
Taken as a subclass of every class, an empty set is exactly the same as a set
whose elements are objects to which only contradictory predicates apply. If a and
a are the scopes of the concept α and its antonym Nα, then the null class can be
understood as the scope of a concept under which falls every object to which,
Correspondingly, axiomatized set theory as properly understood does not claim that the com-
plement class of the null class is an absolute universal class, i.e., the class of all objects. The so-
called universal class is always only the class of all objects of a certain, given domain of
individuals.
56
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

with an arbitrary interpretation of ‘α’, both the predicate α and the predicate Nα
apply.79 Considered in this way, the null class is to be understood as the scope of a
certain empty concept. This concept could be called the concept of inconsistently
determined objects.
We can distinguish other empty concepts from this concept without difficulty.
While the concept of inconsistently determined objects is empty simply because
inconsistently determined objects are impossible on logical grounds, other con-
cepts are empty without there being a logical reason for this. Non-existence can
clearly also have contingent reasons, or at least reasons which lie outside of logic.
For example, suppose α stands for the concept expression ‘present king of
France’ and β stands for the concept word ‘bald’. Then, according to the principle
of qualitative existential import, we must suppose, if α has a scope of zero, that
the proposition ‘that α is a β’ is false. And according to the rules of the weak logical
square it is to be supposed that the non-truth-functional negation of this proposi-
tion, namely the proposition ‘that α is not a β’ is likewise false. Both suppositions
taken together are in no way equivalent to the supposition that, in the given inter-
pretation, the α is both β and not β. This would be the case only if from the falsity
of two propositions p and N p, both N p and NN p always followed, and thus both
N p and p. But p may not be inferred from NN p, since, as we have already seen in
§ 10, the principle of the affirmative use of double negation is not valid for non-
truth-functional negation. For this reason, the scope of the concept of the present
king of France can be empty without our having to suppose that there are objects
that fall under it that are determined inconsistently.
To clarify with yet another, perhaps more difficult example, let us also consider
the proposition ‘An Olympian god is a god’. Let us assume that the concept of an
Olympian god is empty. Then, according to the principle of qualitative existential
import, this proposition is false. Nevertheless, according to the rules of the strong
logical square, its negation, namely ‘No Olympian god is a god’, can be true. It may
perhaps seem that this proposition makes use of an empty concept of inconsistently
determined objects, since it speaks of a god which is not a god. But the truth of this
proposition depends merely on the fact that even affirmative propositions which
If one defines the null class as the intersection of a class and its complement class, then it is
trivial to assume that the null class is a subclass of every class. For it is trivial to assume that the
intersection of two arbitrary classes is a subclass of each of these classes, from which it follows
that the intersection of an arbitrary class a and its complement must be a subclass of a. – But the
above definition itself would not be trivial if it were understood as saying the scope of an empty
concept is the same as the intersection of a class and its complement class.
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes § 21
57

look like so-called analytic truths80 can be false if the objects they deal with do not
exist, as the principle of qualitative existential import allows. The proposition ‘No
Olympian god is a god’ expresses the non-existence of Olympian gods, without im-
plicitly assuming that Olympian gods are objects to which an arbitrary pair of con-
tradictory predicates may be attributed.
Both examples we have considered should suffice to make clear that interpreta-
tions of concept variables in syllogistic propositional schemata are available in which
they stand for expressions for concepts with a null scope, without this scope being
understood as the subclass of every class. Strictly speaking, the scopes of empty con-
cepts should not be equated with what is called the null class in set theory. Hence, an
expression of the form ~ (b ⊂b), as it is used in Figures 7 and 8, actually denies that
b is the null class. However, it does not yet express that b is the scope of a satisfied
concept. For even if b is not the null class, this is still far from ruling out that b is the
scope of an empty concept.
For this reason, it is simply impossible to subject a syllogistic propositional
schema to a logical analysis in which conceptual relations are reduced to class-
logical relations and logical constants are translated into the language of the calculus
of classes.
The tacit Aristotelian assumption that is tied to syllogistic expressions accord-
ing to the principle of qualitative existential import, cannot be adequately repre-
sented in this language at all. Consequently, neither the translation of the syllogistic
expressions carried out by Hilbert and Ackermann nor the modification of this
translation considered above at the end of § 20, is able to make possible a “system-
atic derivation” of the modes of inference of the categorical syllogistic.
The translation program followed by Hilbert and Ackermann has thus failed
definitively.
§ 22 Translation of Class-Logical Propositional Schemata into the Language
of the Syllogistic
It is now relatively easy to convince oneself that it is, quite to the contrary,
completely possible to represent, in a language that contains no logical constants
Already above in note 75 I have pointed out that analyticity and analytic truth should not be
identified without further ado. In the recent philosophical literature, one becomes used to seeing
this equation. It is noteworthy that Kant, from whom the modern distinction of analytic and non-
analytic (synthetic) propositions derives, nowhere made such an identification – even if he is
mostly interpreted as doing just this.
58
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

other than those of the elementary syllogistic, exactly what all the class-logical ex-
pressions mean that Hilbert and Ackermann used to derive the modes of infer-
ence of the categorical syllogistic within the calculus of classes.
To this end, consider in turn the expressions for inclusion relations as they ap-
pear above, for example in Figure 7, starting with the propositional schema ‘b ⊂a’.
According to the set-theoretical conception of the inclusion relation, this expression
is further analyzable as a propositional schema which implicitly entails four more
elementary propositional schemata, namely:
(1) Either b is the null class, or b is not the null class.
(2) If b is the null class, then b is a subclass of a.
(3) If b is the null class, then b is a subclass of a.
(4) If b is not the null class, then b is a subclass of a.
Subschema (1) is equivalent to the statement that the class b is either the null class
or not the null class. Understood in this way, it is a case of applying the principle of
the affirmative use of double negation. That is, the disjunction in (1) precludes a
case in which b is neither the null class nor not the null class. Concerning the sub-
statements (2) and (3), together they express a consequence of the set-theoretical
theorem that the null class is a subclass of every class. On the basis of this theorem,
a sufficient condition for the truth of a statement of the form b ⊂a is that b is the
null class. Finally, concerning the sub-statement (4), it expresses the hypothetical
weakening of a categorical proposition of the form A (α, β). That is, while this later
type of proposition says that the scope of the (non-empty) concept β is contained in
the scope of the concept α, its hypothetical weakening simply says: if something is a
β, then it is an α. (4) is a modification of this weakening and says: if not every object
which belongs to the scope of the concept β is an element of the null class, then
every β (i.e., every object belonging to the scope of the concept β) is an α.
The other propositional schemata as they occur above in Figure 7 can be ana-
lyzed in a similar way as well. Concerning the schema ‘b ⊂a’, just like the schema
‘b ⊂a’ it is reducible to four propositional schemata, corresponding to schemata
(1) to (4), if one exchanges the signs ‘a’ and ‘a’ in all places of their occurrence.
Concerning the truth-functional negation of ‘b ⊂a’, according to the set-theoretical
conception, it expresses two things; first:
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes § 22
59

(5) The class b is not the null class,
and second:
(6) The class b is not a subclass of a.
The propositional schema ‘~ (b ⊂b)’ can likewise be reduced to schemata (5) and
(6) if one exchanges ‘a’ in (6) with ‘b’.
We can readily render all of proposition schemata (1) to (6) in a formal lan-
guage in which only the logical constants of syllogistic are used. Of course, to this
end one must expand the language of the syllogistic, since one now requires in addi-
tion to concept variables also a conceptual constant which can represent the con-
crete conceptual content that occurs in each of proposition schemata (1) to (6). A
propositional schema such as ‘b is the null class’ is distinguished from a syllogistic
propositional schema not only with respect to the type of variables that appear in it,
but rather also by the occurrence of a specific conceptual content; that is, ‘b is the
null class’ is equivalent to the syllogistic propositional schema ‘every element of b is
an element of the null class’. We may here replace the concept expression ‘element
of b’ with the concept variable ‘β’ if b is interpreted as the scope of the concept β.
By contrast, the concept expression ‘element of the null class’ clearly stands for a
concept with concrete content. We could also represent it with the concept expres-
sion ‘inconsistently determined object’ (see § 21). To abbreviate this or the expres-
sion ‘element of the null class’, I will use the conceptual constant ‘ε0’. Accordingly,
we may abbreviate the propositional schema ‘every element of b is an element of
the null class’ with ‘A (ε0, β)’.
Concerning propositional schema (1), the thought contained in it that the
class b is either the null class or not the null class can be rendered with the pro-
positional schema ‘either every β is an element of the null class, or not every β is
an element of the null class’. We can abbreviate this schema with the syllogistic
formula ‘D (A (ε0, β), N A (ε0, β))’.
Propositional schema (2) comes to ‘If every β is an element of the null class,
then every β is an α’. Written as a syllogistic formula, it is: ‘H (A (ε0, β), A (α, β))’
(where a is interpreted as the scope of α).
Correspondingly, propositional schema (3) means ‘If every β is an element of
the null class, then every β is a Nα’. Written as a syllogistic formula, it is: ‘H (A (ε0, β),
A (Nα, β))’.
(4) should be translated as ‘If not every β is an element of the null class, then
every β is an α’; abbreviated: ‘H (N A (ε0, β), A (α, β))’.
(5) comes to ‘Not every β is an element of the null class’; in symbolic notation,
it says: ‘N A (ε0, β)’.
Finally, (6) can be translated by ‘Not every β is a Nα’, which says in symbolic
notation: ‘N A (Nα, β)’.
60
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

According to this analysis, the expressions in the left column of the following
Table 1 are reduced to expressions in the right column of this table. (I disregard
the case (as a special case) in which b = a, and hence α = β.)
One can see that this analysis is correct by assuming that ~ A designates the contradic-
tory of A. Accordingly, the expressions of the first and fourth rows of the left column
are contradictories of each other; the same holds for the expressions of the second
and third rows of this column. The expressions appearing in the right column of the
same rows stand in exactly corresponding relationships to each other. Consider first
one of the sub-formulas which stand next to the schema ‘b ⊂a’ in the first of the four
rows on the right, namely, ‘H (N A (ε0, β), A (α, β))’. A proposition of this form is false
on the condition that its antecedent is true and its consequent false. Precisely this con-
dition is expressed by both sub-formulas in the fourth row on the right. Conversely,
two propositions of the form N A (ε0, β) and N A (α, β) cannot both be true if a propo-
sition of the form H (N A (ε0, β), A (α, β)) is true. Thus, propositions whose formulas
are expressed by the schemata of the first and fourth rows of Table 1 respectively
cannot all be true at once. They can, however, all be false at once. For, assuming a
proposition is false whose form corresponds to one of the two schemata of the fourth
column on the right, one of the propositions whose form corresponds to the schemata
of the first rows cannot be false as well. Three cases are thinkable here:
Table 1
b ⊂a
D (A (ε, β), N A (ε, β))
H (A (ε, β), A (α, β))
H (A (ε, β), A (Nα, β))
H (N A (ε, β), A (α, β))
b ⊂a
D (A (ε, β), N A (ε, β))
H (A (ε, β), A (Nα, β))
H (A (ε, β), A (α, β))
H (N A (ε, β), A (Nα, β))
~ (b ⊂a)
N A (ε, β)
N A (Nα, β)
~ (b ⊂a)
N A (ε, β)
N A (α, β)
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes § 22
61

(a)
Two propositions of the forms N A (ε0, β) and N A (α, β) are both false;
(b)
only the first of these propositions is false;
(c)
only the second of these propositions is false.
In case (a), the consequent of a proposition of the form H (N A (ε0, β), A (α, β)) is true,
but its antecedent is false. But the hypothetical proposition as a whole must be true.
For, on the basis of the principle of the affirmative use of double negation, whose
validity is expressed by the first sub-formula of the first row on the right, that is by
‘D (A (ε0, β), N A (ε0, β))’, a proposition of the form A (ε0, β) must be true. Now the
null class is a subclass of every class, according to the set-theoretical theorem whose
validity is expressed by the second and third sub-formulas of the first row on the
right. From this it follows that, if a proposition of the form N A (ε0, β) is false, a prop-
osition of the form A (α, β) must be true. Thus, in this case a proposition of the form
H (N A (ε0, β), A (α, β)) is true. But every proposition whose form corresponds to one
of the remaining sub-formulas in the first row on the right is true as well – at least
assuming the validity of the principle of the affirmative use of double negation and
the validity of the principle that the null class is a subclass of every class.
Consider now case (b). It is distinguished from case (a) only in that it supposes
that a proposition of the form N A (α, β) is true. In this case, too, all propositions are
true whose form corresponds respectively to one of the four schemata in the first
row on the right. That a hypothetical proposition of the form H (N A (ε0, β), A (α, β))
is true when both of its sub-propositions are false holds if the principle of the affir-
mative use of double negation is valid and the null class is a subclass of every class.
Finally, in case (c) as well, all the propositions are true whose form corresponds
to each of the four schemata in the first row on the right. In this case, it is supposed
that a hypothetical proposition of the form H (N A (ε0, β), A (α, β)) consists only of
true sub-propositions. In this case, too, the hypothetical proposition as a whole is
true – assuming that the principle of the affirmative use of double negation is valid
and the null class is a subclass of every class. On this assumption, all propositions
are true whose form corresponds respectively to one of the remaining sub-formulas
of the first row on the right.
In summary, one can thus establish that propositions whose forms are ex-
pressed respectively by the schemata of the first and fourth rows can be neither all
true at once nor all false at once. There is thus a contradictory relationship between
the formulas of the first row on the one hand and the formulas of the fourth row
on the other, both in the right as well as the left column of Table 1. In just the same
way, we can show that there is likewise a contradictory relationship between the
formulas of the second and third rows of the right column.
There are therefore good reasons to suppose that the relations which corre-
spond to the expressions in the left column of Table 1 are appropriately analyzed
62
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

when they are reduced to syllogistic relations which correspond to the expression
in the right column of this table.
§ 23 Reduction of Class-Logical Modes of Inference to Syllogistic Modes
of Inference
At this point, we return again for a moment to the derivation attempted by Hilbert
and Ackermann. They held that the class calculus makes possible “a more system-
atic treatment of logical questions than traditional logic” (Hilbert & Ackermann
1967, 65 [1950, 55]), by which they meant the syllogistic.
Underlying this view was the conviction that one could reasonably substitute
every premise of a categorical syllogism with one or more premises, each of which
is an expression from the calculus of classes, and that, on the basis of this substitu-
tion, it was to be possible to reduce all syllogistic rules to rules of the calculus of
classes. This conviction has proved to be erroneous. By contrast, it is possible to
properly substitute every premise which consists of an expression for a class inclu-
sion by a series of syllogistic premises. It is therefore reasonable to suppose that a
reduction of the modes of inference of the calculus of classes to the modes of infer-
ence of the categorical syllogistic is possible.
Accordingly, we should expect a more systematic treatment of logical questions
from the framework of the syllogistic than from the framework of the calculus of
classes.
In the attempt to derive class-logical rules from the syllogistic modes of infer-
ence, we have struck upon a path which is exactly the opposite of the one taken by
Hilbert and Ackermann. For example, to derive the rule that from two premises of
the form b ⊂a and c ⊂b a conclusion of the form c ⊂a may be inferred, according
to Table 1 (§ 22) the first premise schema (‘b ⊂a’) should be replaced immediately
by four premise schemata, namely by ‘D (A (ε0, β), N A (ε0, β))’, ‘H (A (ε0, β), A (α, β))’,
H (A (ε0, β), A (Nα, β))’, and ‘H (N A (ε0, β), A (α, β))’. Now the inference schema
D (A (ε0, β), N A (ε0, β))
H (A (ε0, β), A (α, β))
H (N A (ε0, β), A (α, β))
A (α, β)
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes § 23
63

is a special application of the syllogistic rule of the constructive dilemma, whose
general form can be represented with this schema:81
D (A, C)
H (A, B)
H (C, B)
B.
The rule of the constructive dilemma may immediately be applied to three of the
four premise schemata that take the place of ‘b ⊂a’ in Table 1. This means that the
first premise schema ‘b ⊂a’ may be replaced by the schema ‘A (α, β)’. Analogously,
the second premise schema ‘c ⊂b’ may be replaced by ‘A (β, γ)’.
Now according to the modus Barbara an inference of the form
A (α, β)
A (β, γ)
A (α, γ)
is universally valid. From two premises of the form b ⊂a and c ⊂b, therefore, a
proposition of the form A (α, γ) may be derived. For this reason, then, an infer-
ence of the form
b ⊂a
c ⊂b
c ⊂a
must also be valid. For a proposition of the form c ⊂a – as we have already seen
above, in § 16 – is directly derivable from a proposition of the form A (α, γ), so long
as it is assumed that a is the scope of a concept α and c the scope of a concept γ. But
this assumption would already be used in order to convert the two premise sche-
mata ‘b ⊂a’ and ‘c ⊂b’ into syllogistic expressions. Accordingly, the validity of the
rule according to which from b ⊂a and c ⊂b, we may infer c ⊂a, relies on the
For the proof of this rule’s validity, see below in § 49. Note of course that the mode of infer-
ence (II. 24) there called the constructive dilemma only permits the inference to a conclusion of
the form NN B. If it is assumed that the principle of the affirmative use of double negation is
valid, so that D (B, N B) holds, (compare § 10) then from this conclusion we may immediately
infer one of the form B.
64
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

validity of syllogistic modes of inference. It would be easy to show that the validity
of all remaining rules of the calculus of classes, as they deal with inferences whose
premises and conclusions involve only with negated or non-negated class inclusions,
can be reduced to the validity of syllogistic rules in a similar way.
However, the attempt to reduce the modes of inference of the calculus of clas-
ses to the syllogistic modes of inference, which is indicated here only by way of ex-
ample, quickly comes up against natural limits. I would like to point them out in
the following paragraphs.
§ 24 Advantages of a Transformation of the Language of the Calculus
of Classes into the Language of the Calculus of Functions
These limits begin to become apparent as soon as one draws attention to the fact
that the language of the calculus of classes is richer than the language in which Hil-
bert and Ackermann attempted in vain to present syllogistic modes of inference. In-
deed, this language contains still other logical constants than those I have taken into
consideration up to now. There are thus modes of inference that can be fully treated
within this language which cannot be presented in the language of syllogistic, or
at least not without further explanation. While the symbols ‘. . . ⊂. . . .’, ‘ . . . ’, and
‘~ . . .’ correspond to syllogistic expressions, namely the logical constants ‘A (. . ., . . .)’,
‘N . . .’, and ‘N . . .’, such equivalents are lacking for the remaining logical constants of
the calculus of classes: the symbols ‘. . . = . . . .’, ‘. . . ∩. . .’, and ‘. . . ∪. . .’, which are
used as signs for the identity, intersection, and union of classes, respectively.
As to the meaning of ‘. . . = . . .’, it can admittedly be reduced to the meaning
of the inclusion sign. For ‘a = b’ combines the content of ‘a ⊂b’ and ‘b ⊂a’ in one
expression. That is, a = b is equivalent to a ⊂b & b ⊂a, so that two statements of
the form a ⊂b and b ⊂a can be abbreviated by ‘a = b’. An inference of the form
a = b
b = c
a = c
can to that extent be reduced to two inferences of the form
a ⊂b
b ⊂c
and
b ⊂a
c ⊂b
a ⊂c
c ⊂a.
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes § 24
65

As far as the connectors ‘. . . ∩. . .’ and ‘. . . ∪. . .’ are concerned, they join class
variables together so that the schema of an expression that is itself a class designator
arises. Thus, an expression of the form a ∩a designates the null class and an expres-
sion of the form a ∪a the complement of the null class, i.e., the entirety of individu-
als of the given domain (the ‘universal class’). Stated generally, ‘a ∩b’ is the schema
used to designate a class which consists of all elements which belong to both a and
b; ‘a ∪b’ is the schema to designate a class which consists of all elements which
belong to at least one of the classes a and b.
The signs of intersection and union are distinguished from the signs of inclusion
and identity by the fact that they connect two class variables not to a propositional
schema, but rather to a schema for a designator, i.e., a schema of an expression
which itself stands for a class. Since classes are scopes of concepts, these signs serve
(whether taken by themselves or in combination with each other or in combination
with the complement sign) to designate scopes of specific, namely complex concepts
and at the same time to indicate the logical form of their composition. The forms
indicated by means of ‘. . . ∩. . .’ or ‘. . . ∪. . .’ can be called logical to the extent
that they are relevant for the validity of inferences, as, e.g., in the following:
a = b ∪b
c = d ∪d
a ∩c = d ∪d.
In the elementary language of the syllogistic, there seem to be no logical constants
that can indicate the logical form of the composition of concepts, because concept
variables are the only conceptual expressions which occur in it. In this language,
concept variables represent not only every conceptual content, but they also occupy
the syntactic places of a proposition, where the parts of a complex conceptual ex-
pression could be linked by logical constants. Already for this reason, we can hardly
expect that the language of the syllogistic is rich enough to be able to represent all
logical relations which can be presented in the language of the calculus of classes.
Of course, the position can also be taken that the logical form of the composi-
tion of concepts, as it is indicated by ‘. . . ∩. . .’ or ‘. . . ∪. . .’, does not yet find
its most appropriate expression in the language of the calculus of classes either.
Even if it is a question of explaining or defining the relations of the intersection
and union of classes, we can hardly avoid using a vocabulary that brings explic-
itly into play elements of classes in addition to classes and objects or individuals in
addition to conceptual scopes. Thus, the intersection of two classes a and b is to
be seen as the set of objects x, for which it holds that x ∈a and x ∈b. Symbol-
ically expressed:
66
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

a ∩b = {x: x ∈a & x ∈b}.
Similarly, the union of two classes a and b can be conceived as the set of objects x
for which it holds that x ∈a or x ∈b. Symbolically expressed:
a ∪b = {x: x ∈a ∨x ∈b}.
These definitions bring a new type of variable into play, namely individual varia-
bles (‘x’, ‘y’, etc.), in addition to the elementhood designator (‘. . . ∈. . .’) familiar
from set theory, as well as the set designator ‘{x: . . .}’ as an abbreviation for the
expression ‘the set of all x such that: . . .’. Moreover, they also make use of the
truth-functional propositional connectives for logical conjunction (‘. . . & . . .’) and
adjunction (‘. . . ∨. . .’). Neither of these logical constants belongs to the language
of the calculus of classes. Neither do they belong to the traditional vocabulary of
the syllogistic.
As for logical conjunction, I have indicated in § 7 that it was used by C.I. Lewis
so that he could with its help read the hypothetical ‘if . . ., then . . .’ of the syllogistic
as strict implication.
As for adjunction, it is to be clearly distinguished from syllogistic disjunction.
If ‘p’ and ‘q’ stand for two statements which are true or false, then D (p, q) is
true only if exactly one of the two statements p and q is true, indeed such that:
H (p, N q) and H (N p, q) (see above § 6). The adjunction p ∨q states, by contrast,
that at least one of the statements p and q is true and at most one of them is false.
It is, like logical conjunction, a truth function. This can be gathered from the fact
that the second of the two De Morgan’s laws, a ∩b = a ∪b and a ∪b = a ∩b, has a
counterpart in the logical equivalence of A ∨B and ~ (~ A & ~ B). Hence, ‘. . .
∨. . .’ can be taken as an abbreviation of ‘~ (~ . . . & ~ . . .)’.
Now the translation of expressions from the calculus of classes into a lan-
guage that makes use of individual variables and truth-functional propositional
connectives can be both extended and completed if one also translates class-
logical schemata, i.e., expressions containing an inclusion sign, into this language.
This can be easily accomplished simply by saying that ‘a ⊂b’ is equivalent to
‘(∀x) (x ∈a ⊃x ∈b)’.
In this expression, too, a truth-functional propositional connective appears, namely
the sign for subjunction (‘. . . ⊃. . .’). It works for the abbreviation because ‘A ⊃B’ is
equivalent to ‘~ (A & ~ B)’. The connective used as a prefix, ‘(∀x) . . .’, is the universal
quantifier and serves to abbreviate the expression ‘for every x such that: . . .’.
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes § 24
67

We can translate arbitrarily complex expressions of the calculus of classes into a
language containing individual variables, truth-functional propositional connectives,
and quantifiers. For example, we can render ‘~ (a ∩c ⊂b)’ with the expression
‘(∃x) ~ ((x ∈a & x ∈c) ⊃x ∈b)’,
whereby the prefix ‘(∃x) . . .’ is to be treated as the existential quantifier, which is
simply an abbreviation for ‘~ (∀x) ~ . . .’.
The language in which individual variables, quantifiers, and truth-functional
connectives are used can still be further improved in logical respects. To do so, we
can not only make redundant the use of logical constants of the calculus of classes
(except for the sign for truth-functional negation), but also the use of class variables,
and thus replace connectives of the type ‘x ∈a’ with other connectives. We can see
the point of such a replacement by considering that the relation of elementhood,
more precisely the relation between an individual x from a domain X and a class of
which x is an element, is also to be taken as a relation between x in X and the set
{T, F}, i.e., the set of truth values. Let a be a certain class, e.g., the set of square
roots of 4. Then ‘x ∈a’ stands for the propositional schema ‘x is a square root of 4’,
in which ‘x’ is a placeholder for an expression which is suited to designate an indi-
vidual from the given domain of individuals X, e.g., an element of the domain of
natural numbers. For x = 2 and for x = – 2, ‘x is a square root of 4’ has the truth
value T; but for all other individuals of the given domain, the value F. Therefore, the
expression ‘x is a square root of 4’ for every x in X takes one of the two truth values.
The supposition that there is an interpretation of ‘x’ in which ‘x is a square root of 4’
is a true or false proposition hence assumes that there is a relation F of X to Y such
that there is for every x in X exactly one y in Y, with Y = {T, F} and with (x, y) ∈F.
A function f : X →Y (in words, a function f from X to Y) is defined as a relation f
of X to Y such that there is for every x in X exactly one y in Y with (x, y) ∈f. If Y =
{T, F}, then the function of X to Y is called a propositional function, and we write ‘F:
X →T’ and ‘(x, y) ∈F’ instead of ‘f : X →Y’ and ‘(x, y) ∈f ’. A propositional function
F : X →Y is accordingly defined by the fact that its domain of values contains only
the two truth values as elements. Instead of ‘(x, y) ∈F’, one can also write ‘F (x) = y’.
The first formula expresses that F is the set of the ordered pairs consisting of x and y.
The second formula says that F, in the argument place x, takes the value y. Both for-
mulas express that y is the value the function F takes depending on which individual
of the given domain x is.
Since the interpretation by which the expression ‘x is a square root of 4’ is trans-
formed into a true proposition corresponds to an operation on the basis of which the
right side ‘= y’ of the above equation ‘F (x) = y’ may be replaced by ‘= T’, it is legiti-
mate to regard ‘x is a square root of 4’ as equivalent to the functional expression
68
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

‘F (x)’ and thus to use the latter as an abbreviation of the former. If one puts another
class designator than the set of the square roots of four in place of ‘a’ in ‘x ∈a’,
then ‘x ∈a’ accordingly turns into an expression that can be represented with func-
tional expression ‘G (x)’. Since there are arbitrary many possibilities to substitute for
‘a’, one needs correspondingly many functional expressions which can stand for ‘x
∈a’. To this end, I will avail myself of an index-notation and write F1 (x) instead of
F (x), ‘F2 (x)’ instead of G (x), and so on. Nevertheless, I will for the sake of simplicity
continue to use expressions ‘F (x)’, ‘G (x)’, etc. as well, so that they correspond not to
class variables but rather class constants. If a functional expression is supposed to
correspond to a class variable, then I will write ‘Fi (x)’, ‘Fj (x)’, etc., and add ‘with
i ≧1’ or ‘with i ≠j, j ≧1’, etc., respectively; or I will replace ‘Fi (x), with i ≧1’
with ‘Φ (x)’, and ‘Fj (x), with i ≠j, j ≧1’ with ‘Ψ (x)’, etc.
The advantage of replacing expressions of the type ‘x ∈a’ with functional
expressions of the type ‘Φ (x)’ stems from the fact that functional expressions can
have more than one argument place. By replacing ‘4’ in ‘x is a square root of 4’
with an individual variable, we get the expression ‘x is a square root of y’. Corre-
sponding to this expression is a functional expression of the form F (x, y). For
when there is an operation by which an expression is transformed into a true or
false proposition, there is a function F from X to {T, F} such that for every ordered
pair (x, y) in X there is exactly one element z in {T, F} with F (x, y) = z.
(Propositional) functions with more than one argument are called polyadic
functions. We similarly distinguish between monadic, dyadic, triadic, etc. proposi-
tional functions. Polyadic functions can only be designated by functional expres-
sions with two, three, or more than three argument places.
The admission of n-place functional expressions with n > 1 provides the logi-
cal advantage of enabling the presentation of modes of inference and types of
consequence whose validity depends on one relation between objects following
from another such relation.
If, e.g., from the proposition ‘There is something of which everything consists’
the proposition ‘For everything there is something of which it consists’ is derived,
then this consequence (whose inversion is not valid without further addition) is to
be seen as an application of a consequence rule that can be represented by means
of a two-place functional expression, namely through the consequence schema
(∃y) (∀x) Φ (x, y)
(∀x) (∃y) Φ (x, y).
This schema merely expresses a rule according to which quantifiers, provided
they appear in a certain order, may exchange their places. That this rule can be
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes § 24
69

applied to the proposition ‘There is something of which everything consists’ rests
simply on the fact that the functional expression that can render ‘x consists of y’,
namely ‘F (x, y)’, admits a two-fold quantification. Quite generally, the fact that n-
place functional expressions can be quantified n-fold opens up a space for the
presentation of logical rules of which there is no counterpart in the framework of
the calculus of classes.
Finally, we can enhance still further the logical capability of using func-
tional expressions by admitting individual constants in addition to individual
variables. Individual constants – for which I use italicized lowercase Latin let-
ters from the beginning of the alphabet in what follows – are to be seen as (ab-
breviations for) proper names or as (abbreviations for concrete) designators of
certain individuals of the given domain. By this means, once again, the space
for the formulation of logical rules is expanded in a manner for which there is
no expression in the language of the calculus of classes. The simplest cases are
the rules expressed by the following two schemata:
(∀x) Φ (x)
Φ (a)
Φ (a)
(∃x) Φ (x).
The functional schema ‘Φ (x)’ here can stand both for polyadic propositional
functions like F (b, x) or F (x, b, c) and for complex propositional functions like
F (x) & G (x). Accordingly, in these cases, the functional schema ‘Φ (a)’ would
stand for F (b, a), F (a, b, c), or F (a) & G (a).
I call the formal language one attains when one uses no other expressions than
(1) the truth-functional negation sign,
(2) truth-functional propositional connectives,
(3) individual variables and constants,
(4) quantifiers, and
(5) functional expressions,
the language of the calculus of functions.82 This language is distinguished from the
languages of the syllogistic and the calculus of classes mainly by the fact that its task
Hilbert and Ackermann use the label ‘calculus of functions’ in the first two editions of their
work Principles of Mathematical Logic [Grundzüge der theoretischen Logik]. Ackermann replaced
it in all later editions with the designation ‘predicate calculus’. I prefer ‘calculus of functions’,
and indeed for reasons which should become clear in the following. Still more felicitous appears
to me ‘the logical calculus of functions’, the designation used by Kurt Gödel (1933a, 433–43). By
‘calculus of functions’ here and in the following, I always mean the logical calculus of functions,
i.e., the calculus of classical propositional and predicate logic.
70
Part I Section Two The Language of the Calculus of Classes

is presenting truth functions and propositional functions. Propositional functions
and truth functions deal with functions of a similar kind. Namely, every truth func-
tion is a function f: X →Y with X = {p1, . . ., pn} and Y = {T, F}. Here {p1, . . ., pn}, with
n ≧1, is the set of statements, i.e., the set of everything that has one of the two truth
values. Propositional and truth functions are thus distinguished from each other
only in that their argument domains are different.
3 Limits of the Language of the Calculus of Classes § 24
71

