7
AFTER THE WAR
7.1 The Foundations of Mathematics
7.1.1 Introduction and Overview
The origins of modernism in mathematics, and its eventual acceptance by large
sections of the mathematical profession, have now been traced in numerous disci-
plines of mathematics as well as in the philosophy of mathematics and the relations
of those subjects with logic. At least another book could be written describing de-
velopments after the First World War, but this is not the place. Accordingly, this
chapter takes those topics in the foundations of mathematics that simply cannot be
left in midair and traces their implications for the subject as a whole in the interwar
period.1
It would also take a book to describe and analyze the changes caused by the war
itself. It must be enough here to note the obvious: some 40 percent of young French
mathematicians were killed or wounded in the war, along with comparable numbers
of scientists, a blow from which it took France more than a decade to recover. By
then, mathematics had moved ahead fast in Germany, which, like Britain and per-
haps Italy, had done a better job of using its intellectuals safely. The next generation
of French mathematicians, notably those who formed the Bourbaki group in 1930,
looked to Germany for inspiration and consciously brought German structural
mathematics back to France. There, in their hands, it ﬂourished precisely at the time
it was being dismantled by the Nazis in Germany itself. After the war, British mathe-
matics took hesitant steps into a modern algebra, while modern analysis ﬂourished
there as it did in the Soviet Union and, for example, in Poland. But the heartland of
the modernist movement in mathematics was undoubtedly Germany, more speciﬁ-
cally Go¨ttingen and the schools that grew up after the war that subscribed to its view
of mathematics.
1 Those readers meeting friends at the Vienna station will of course share a taxi with Alberto Coffa and
consult his stimulating work (Coffa 1991) and the literature it generated. I have ventured some remarks
about Schlick and Carnap below, but mostly this chapter returns us to Go¨ttingen and points beyond.

Other discontinuities were caused by the war and the straitened economic cir-
cumstances that followed. Links to philosophy, issues of language, and similar broad
cultural questions were severed, or rather they became the exclusive concern of the
mathematicians themselves. This did not render them any less intense. Indeed, as will
be described below, in the 1920s the German mathematics profession was riven by
what is called the ‘‘foundational crisis’’ (‘‘Grundlagen Krise’’), a sometimes bitter
dispute about whether mathematics could be regarded as rational. Undoubtedly part
of the intensity was caused by the collapse of German society at the end of the war and
the slow, hesitant recovery that never restored German professors to the high status
they had enjoyed before 1914. The mere passage of years, with its inevitable process of
handover from one generation to the next, took place in this much altered world.
This chapter pursues the interrelation between three themes: mathematics, logic,
and human thought. It begins with the gradual clariﬁcation of logic and its relations
with set theory and then with mathematics. There was certainly no feeling that
Russell and Whitehead had succeeded and that mathematics had ﬁnally been reduced
to logic, but there was a widespread feeling that something like their way of formal-
izing mathematics while heading off the paradoxes was the right place to start any
study of mathematics and logic. Accordingly, many writers, Hilbert prominently
among them, were willing to use some sort of theory of types (and some axiom of
reduction to make mathematics work).
It was also possible to deepen the investigation of logic itself. For example, Zermelo’s
otherwise impressive axiomatization of set theory relied on an undeﬁned term, ‘‘deﬁ-
nite.’’ Plainly, this word meant some sensible restriction on the kind of expressions one
was allowed to write—but what, exactly? In making this restriction precise, numerous
writers, most notably the Norwegian Thoralf Skolem, came to separate out a core of
logic (later called ﬁrst-order logic) that could be taken to be logic per se, and various
extensions (such as second-order logic). Roughly speaking (more precision will be given
below), ﬁrst-order logic is obviously acceptable but is not strong enough to give you all
and only the mathematics you expect. Second-order logic will give you what you want
but is so much more powerful that it cannot stand as a truly simple logical basis for
mathematics. Indeed, Quine regarded it as essentially equivalent to set theory itself.
Zermelo’s axioms for set theory turned out to be inadequate for mathematics, and
they too were reﬁned, most memorably by Abraham Fraenkel. The resulting system
of axioms, the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms (often called ZF), are still not proven to be
consistent, but no one is worried any longer. They are adequate for large amounts
of the mathematics used, for example, in science. Some of mathematics, and certain
of the higher reaches of set theory, require other axioms that we have already dis-
cussed: the axiom of choice and the continuum hypothesis. It was to turn out that
these axioms are independent of ZF. In each case, if ZF is consistent, so is ZF with
one of these axioms added, and so is ZF with the negation of one of these axioms
added. But there is no widely accepted argument to this day that says that, for exam-
ple, the axiom of choice is true.2
2 The independence of the continuum hypothesis from the axioms of Zermelo-Frankel set theory (ZF)
was established in two stages: in 1939 Go¨del established that the theory formed from ZF with the
continuum hypothesis as an extra axiom is consistent (Go¨del 1939). In 1964 Paul Cohen established that
the theory formed from ZF with the negation of the continuum hypothesis as an extra axiom is also
consistent (Cohen 1964; see also his 1960).
AFTER THE WAR

407

Skolem’s work, and still more that of Go¨del, highlights another distinction that
came into focus only in the postwar period: the distinction between syntax and
semantics. A study of what can be written in mathematics, and on what can be
(formally, logically, validly, . . . ) deduced from what has been written emphasizes
syntax. But one can also ask, of a mathematical system deﬁned by some axioms, if the
axioms are consistent because the axioms are satisﬁed by some set of objects. When
that is the case, the objects are said to form a model for the axiom system, the axioms
are said to be true in this model, and the emphasis is on the semantics of the theory
(what the axioms ‘‘are about’’). With clarity on the issue of syntax and semantics
came the realization that the existence of (essentially unique) models for this or that
system of axioms depended intimately on the logic being used.
It might be argued that all these debates were victories for mathematical logic, a
technical subject akin to but perhaps even more scrupulous than mathematics, over
old-style philosophy of mathematics. The central philosophical debate throughout
the 1920s about the nature of mathematics grew out of the foundational crisis.3 It
was initiated and advanced by the views of Brouwer, who was supported for a time
by Hermann Weyl. Brouwer saw very strict limits on what the human mind can say
about inﬁnite sets, and his philosophy of intuitionism imposed grave limits on what
can be done in mathematics, so much so that eventually Weyl abandoned it in order
to pursue his mathematical analysis of quantum mechanics. But the philosophy
alarmed Hilbert, whose proof theory and later philosophy of ﬁnitism has been said to
be an attempt to outﬂank Brouwer by conceding as much as possible of the philos-
ophy while securing all of classical mathematics. For a mixture of reasons, to be
discussed below, something like Hilbert’s views eventually triumphed, and a widely
held view today is that it was all a storm in a teacup. After all, such people say, in-
tuitionism and classical logic differ in only one axiom, and whenever it can be found
an intuitionist proof yields more information than a classical one. Such was the view
of Heyting, Brouwer’s most able follower in mathematical logic, but I shall argue
below that this represents a trivialization of Brouwer’s views (as indeed Heyting
came eventually to concede).4
If Hilbert’s aim had been to ground mathematics securely in some formally im-
peccable system, be it logic of whatever kind or some mixture of logic and set theory,
then in 1930 that dream was forever shattered by Kurt Go¨del. Go¨del showed, if one
may speak imprecisely, that any fragment of mathematics large enough to contain
arithmetic (addition and multiplication of natural numbers) is either inconsistent or
incomplete. That is to say, if it is not self-contradictory then there will be true state-
ments that cannot be proved within the system. Any such statement can of course be
taken on as an axiom, but then there will be another. Hilbert’s hopes of showing that
all mathematical statements could be decided, if only in principle, thus collapsed.
Much more precision is needed if Go¨del’s result is to be seen to be the theorem it is,
that is, a proved result, and with that precision it would seem as if there is just a
chance that Hilbert’s program for mathematics and logic could still be made to work.
3 Described in detail and from different points of view in Hesseling 2003, Mehrtens 1990, and Volkert
1986.
4 The wise also know that category theory, currently the best way to establish mathematics without
establishing set theory ﬁrst, leads more naturally to intuitionistic logic than classical logic, which is
interesting but says nothing about the limitations of the human mind.
408

CHAPTER 7

Indeed, Go¨del explicitly held out that thin hope. But no one has found a way to do it,
and most probably no one today expects that a way will be found. The situation is
that ordinary logic does not do enough, and no other generally acceptable starting
point has been found.5
The second main topic of this chapter is the mechanization of thought. With the
work of Charles Babbage on programmable computers, the age-old fascination with
artiﬁcial life and machines that can think started to sound more and more plausible.
By the same token, ideas about how humans actually think became more and more
informed by ideas about how logical calculation gets done. Boole’s book on an
algebra for logic was, after all, grandly entitled The Laws of Thought. Faced with the
complexity of Boole’s rules, Stanley Jevons in England and Allan Marquand in the
United States made machines to carry out his deductions, and Venn diagrams were
speedily invented for the same purpose. Logical deduction at a level hitherto ex-
empliﬁed by Sherlock Holmes became mechanized.
What about mathematics—could at least some parts of it be automated? Among
David Hilbert’s Paris problems in 1900 was one calling for an explicit method for
telling if polynomial equations have integer solutions.6 By the 1920s, as part of his
proof theory, Hilbert listed three speciﬁc targets for a proper understanding of the
nature of mathematical deduction. One by one, starting with Go¨del’s incompleteness
theorem, they were all shown to be unattainable. The third and last, called the
decision problem, which called for a proof that every mathematical problem has
a solution, was shown to be unsolvable by Alan Turing, and for this he introduced a
most eloquent illustration of what it is to follow a mathematical procedure—the
Turing machine, as it is nowadays called. The Turing machine is a universal com-
puter. It can be programmed to do in a ﬁnite amount of time anything any kind of
digital computer can do (although it takes geological periods of time to do anything
worthwhile—never anywhere else does ﬁnite time seem so long). More to the point,
Turing was able to show that there are certain things even Turing machines cannot
do, and so certain problems are forever undecidable. Whether or not there are limits
on what humans can think (we may not be Turing machines, after all), there are
limits on what conventional computers can do.7 Turing’s work ﬁtted in very well
with the work of two American logicians, Alonzo Church and Emil Post, who had
more formal ideas about what could be computed, and the result is a semi-
philosophical view about the limits of mathematics known as Church’s thesis.
Turing, meanwhile, went on to propose a test for determining if a machine was
displaying intelligence, the so-called Turing test. It is often misrepresented in popular
accounts, so it is worth discussing here as part of the debate about machine versus
human intelligence. Somewhat earlier, McCulloch and Pitts had come up with a
5 It has now become particularly easy and pleasurable to follow these developments. In addition to the
books by Moore and Ferreiro´s and the source book by van Heijenoort already mentioned, there is the
second volume of the source book edited by Ewald (1996), the source book with extensive commentaries
edited by Mancosu (1998), the history of intuitionism and its reception by Hesseling, Gnomes in the Fog
(2003), and Giaquinto’s book The Search for Certainty (2002), which is a lucid yet trenchant guide to the
technical and philosophical issues.
6 Hilbert allowed that a problem might have an afﬁrmative solution, a negative solution, or be proved
to be insoluble. However, this Paris task was eventually shown to be impossible by Julia Robinson and
Yuri Matjasevich in the 1970s.
7 See the more precise discussion below.
AFTER THE WAR

409

theory of how neurons might operate in the thinking human mind. Their theory of
neural networks inﬂuenced the other major mathematician involved in the birth of
the computer, John von Neumann, and was later shown to have some afﬁnity to the
behavior of real neurons by Donald Hebb, a distinguished neuroanatomist.
I turn ﬁnally to take stock. First, I address the ways in which the philosophy of
mathematics, or, more accurately, the default philosophy of the working mathe-
matician has become Platonist. I consider what this might mean, what else it might be
or have been, and the sense in which it is the natural philosophy for modernist
mathematics. Two interesting positions here are Schlick’s perceptive criticism of
Platonism in 1918, and Bernays’ typically sensitive account of what it is. It seems that
his paper of 1935 may be the ﬁrst to coin the term ‘‘mathematical Platonism.’’ In this
context it is also interesting to see how Go¨del’s avowed Platonism contrasts with
Carnap’s philosophy of linguistic frameworks.
Two closing sections round out the account. One is an assessment of the degree to
which modernism ‘‘won’’ in mathematics—not wholly, but largely, I believe. The
second is the voice, again, of Plato’s ghost, calling out that all was not resolved. The
modernist revision of mathematics accomplished much, but did it leave answers, or
only deeper questions?
7.1.2 Hilbert and Proof Theory
As early as 1900, and certainly by 1904, Hilbert knew that a major problem lay in the
path of his attempt to capture the essential reason mathematics was correct. It was one
thing to demonstrate that this or that family of geometrical axioms could be satisﬁed
by a suitable set of objects when these objects were points, lines, planes, and so forth
and they were deﬁned by coordinates and equations, in short, in terms of numbers. The
consistency of an axiom system for a geometry simply reduced to the consistency of
arithmetic. But what guaranteed that consistency? On what grounds could axioms for
arithmetic be defended? If the answer was set theory then there were two problems.
First, set theory was possessed by paradoxes and could not be taken as unproblematic.
Second, even if set theory were sorted out, at some stage and very likely soon, it would
be necessary to say that some foundations were absolute, or else one would be doomed
to chase through an inﬁnite regress. But what could those foundations be?
In his Axiomatisches Denken (or, Axiomatic Thinking) of 1918, Hilbert observed
that the theory of the integers and the theory of sets must both be axiomatized. To
do this, nothing other than logic could be invoked, and therefore ‘‘it appears nec-
essary to axiomatise logic itself and to prove that number theory and set theory are
only parts of logic.’’ This project was, he said, inseparable from several others. The
consistency of these theories belonged with several other problems with an ‘‘episte-
mological tint,’’ such as the solvability, in principle, of every mathematical question;
the subsequent checkabiltity of the results of a mathematical investigation; the re-
lation between content and formalism in mathematics and logic; and the decidability
of a mathematics question in a ﬁnite number of operations. Axiomatizing logic
required clearing up these questions and the interconnections. Hilbert’s position was
therefore close to logicism, but also vastly more ambitious.
In 1922, in his ‘‘Neubegru¨ndung der Mathematik’’ (or, ‘‘New grounding of
Mathematics’’), Hilbert began to sketch out what became known as his ‘‘proof
410

CHAPTER 7

theory,’’ a remarkable attempt to subject proof to a mathematical and logical
analysis. The new approach was a consideration of certain ‘‘extra-logical discrete
objects which exist intuitively as immediate experience before all thought.’’ These
objects are signs, such as repetitions of a single stroke. For Hilbert, the objects of
number theory were the signs themselves. In a deliberate echo of the Gospel ac-
cording to St. John, Hilbert wrote: ‘‘The solid philosophical attitude that I think is
required for the grounding of pure mathematics—as well as for all scientiﬁc thought,
understanding, and communication—is this: ‘in the beginning was the sign’ ’’ (p.
163). In this philosophical tangle—can numbers really just be marks on paper?—
note the emphasis on communication. At the very least, one can object to Hilbert’s
ideas on the grounds that they are not about mathematics but the way it is written,
which is something else.
Hilbert then introduced other signs in an obvious way. Starting from the initial
claim that 1 is a number, he introduced the sign ‘‘þ’’ and said that 1 þ 1 is a number,
as is 1 þ 1 þ 1 and so on, and these may be abbreviated by the signs 2, 3, and so on.
The sign ‘‘¼’’ is one of those that serves to make assertions, thus 2 þ 3 ¼ 3 þ 2 is the
assertion that 2 þ 3 and 3 þ 2 are abbreviations for the same number sign, to wit
1 þ 1 þ 1 þ 1 þ 1. The sign ‘‘>’’ as in 3 > 2, is the assertion that the number 1 þ 1 þ 1
extends beyond the sign 1 þ 1. In this way, one can write a considerable amount of
elementary arithmetic without any axioms, but one cannot write down or make
assertions about inﬁnitely many objects. To do that, one had to formalize the entire
theory of mathematics, and its content had to be imitated by formalisms. This formal
ediﬁce is to be made up of axioms, formulas, and proofs, and it is with them that
contentual thought is done.
Hilbert suggested that there would be signs of various kinds: signs for individual
objects, such as those mentioned above and ? for logical implication; signs for
variables, variable functions, and variable formulas; and signs to aid communication
(such as a single symbol to mean a formula). The idea, although Hilbert did not put it
in these terms, is that anything expressed like this would count as mathematics, and
if we found enough of it on another planet we could infer that it was mathematics
and hope to understand what it said. In particular, certain arrangements of signs on
the page would be proofs, and the aim of proof theory was to study operations with
proofs themselves. So a proof is a perfectly concrete thing, a collection of marks on
paper. To show that the enterprise was feasible, Hilbert then showed that a certain
system of ﬁve axioms was provably consistent, and that a system of sixteen axioms
both generated arithmetic and could be shown (he claimed without proof) to be
consistent. Here he was not in fact correct, but that was not fatal to the enterprise.
The possibility that mathematics was an intellectual activity which could be ex-
pressed in a way that was provably consistent was now very much alive.
Hilbert’s idea was that a valid mathematical argument could be displayed as an
arrangement of symbols on paper. Certain expressions, called formulas, would each
occupy a line and they would follow each other according to certain rules (the
axioms), which could be written down in advance. The rules would be things that we
could give meanings to, but the way they followed each other would be mechanically
checkable. Each step would be an exempliﬁcation of an axiom. The axioms would
generate a set of initial statements or formulas and generate the rest of the formulas
from these. Hilbert did not use this metaphor, but you could imagine taking an
axiom system and simply listing all its initial statements, all the statements that were
AFTER THE WAR

411

derivable in a single step from these, then those in two steps, and so on. You could
put together a conclusion drawn at one stage (a derived formula, if you prefer) with
one drawn at another, all according to the axioms. Now, the most fundamental
requirement of an axiom system is that it be consistent. An inconsistent axiom system
can be recognized, said Hilbert, by its ability to generate a nonsense, such as 0 = 0.
So, to see if an axiom system is consistent, it is possible to argue as follows. First,
characterize in some way all the formulas that can be validly produced. For example,
the simple axiom system mentioned above cannot produce formulas with more than
two occurrences of the ? symbol. Second, show that the formula 0 = 0 can only be
generated by an argument that produces an impossible formula. For the simple
axiom system, Hilbert showed that the formula 0 = 0 can only be generated from a
formula involving three occurrences of the ? symbol; such formulas cannot arise, so
the system is consistent.
Put this way, Hilbert’s proof theory is simple and attractive. It was deliberately
designed to have one particular virtue: it should enable mathematicians to reason
correctly about all manner of inﬁnite sets, and thus to stay in the paradise Cantor had
created for them. In Hilbert’s words: ‘‘No-one can drive us from the Paradise that
Cantor has created for us.’’8 As we shall see shortly, Hilbert was anxious to head off
the challenge of those in the next generation who sought to lead the way out of Eden.
Hilbert sought to do this by requiring that although there might be axioms that were
controversial when made about inﬁnite sets (such as the law of the excluded middle),
the arguments about these objects were expressed in a ﬁnite number of steps, each one
explicitly checkable. For this reason, Hilbert’s position is much more accurately
summed up by the term ‘‘ﬁnitism’’ than by ‘‘formalism.’’
Hilbert took the challenge posed by the problems of the inﬁnite very seriously,
writing in 1926 that the ﬁnal explanation of the essence of the inﬁnite (his italics)
reaches far beyond the domain of special scientiﬁc interests and rather ‘‘has become
necessary for the honour of human understanding.’’9 To legitimate his approach to
the inﬁnite, Hilbert made repeated use of an analogy with ideal elements in other
branches of mathematics. He mentioned speciﬁcally the ideals that Dedekind in-
troduced into algebraic number theory (for example, the ideal that divides both 2 and
1 þ H5) and the introduction of points at inﬁnity in projective geometry. In neither
case can one point to an object in a straightforward way: the ideal number and the
usual numbers are different, as are ordinary points and points at inﬁnity. But one can
work with them in an entirely rigorous way. Just so, the formulas one writes stand
for inﬁnitely many statements (for example, the axiom that asserts the commutativity
of the integers, a þ b ¼ b þ a), but we can work with them. Just so, one can write
down the axiom that asserts the validity of the law of the excluded middle and work
with it in ﬁnite, mechanically checkable arguments. In the 1920s, but not in his work
before the First World War, Hilbert also introduced a distinction that was to prove
lasting. He distinguished between the purely formal aspect, which he called ‘‘proper
mathematics,’’ from the contentual side, which he called ‘‘meta-mathematics.’’ Me-
tamathematics was to protect mathematics from unnecessary prohibitions and the
paradoxes and to provide consistency proofs. Here only ﬁnite arithmetical consid-
erations enter (such as the enumeration of the formulas in an argument), and these
8 Hilbert 1926, 274.
9 See Hilbert 1926, 164, reprinted in Hilbert 1930, 265.
412

CHAPTER 7

are entirely safe. These statements, insofar as they are mathematical at all, are self-
evidently sound and do not require a rigorous theory of arithmetic before they can be
used. So the accusation, leveled by Poincare´, among others, that the foundational
enterprise was vitiated by a vicious circle was refuted.
It remained to write down an axiom system that would generate set theory and
number theory, and that could be shown to be consistent. If such a system contained
the law of the excluded middle as an axiom, then use of the law would be secured,
and mathematicians could remain in paradise. As things were to turn out, the best
efforts of Hilbert and his assistants Bernays and Ackermann were to fail in this
regard, but only in ways that could bring no solace to Hilbert’s rivals, either.
A number of issues connected with Hilbert’s program are worth commenting on
even if it proved unsuccessful in its day.10 His ﬁnitism is based on the idea that the
mind has immediate access to a ﬁnite collection of marks on paper. But this cannot be
quite right (mathematics cannot be constrained by the size of a piece of paper, for
example), and rather what is surely meant is that these marks are accessible as
intuitions in something like a Kantian sense, as Mancosu has argued.11 For Hilbert
and Bernays, ﬁnitary intuitions are a new, hitherto unnoticed, source of a priori
knowledge. Unfortunately, it is hard to be precise about what Hilbert meant by
ﬁnitary and so to be sure what arguments are legitimate from that point of view. On
the face of it, statements such as ‘‘for all n, 1 þ n ¼ n þ 1’’ is not ﬁnitarily meaningful
because they cannot be checked on all numbers, so something must be meant that
gets around this trivial objection.
Another criticism is the one raised in the mid-1920s by Hermann Weyl: all that
ﬁnitism could do would be to show that mathematics is consistent. This does nothing
to establish that it is true (compare the situation in geometry). For that, some account
must be given of how mathematical statements are meaningful. One could, for ex-
ample, try to show that formal mathematics cannot prove the validity of any state-
ment known to be wrong to some highly reliable audience. Consistent mathematics
would then be about many familiar things and some new ones. Once you go down
this road, the only natural, highly reliable audience you come to is the scientiﬁc
community. Weyl’s much more ambitious idea was that mathematics as a whole was
in some way conﬁrmed by its profound uses in physics, a subject that was becoming
unthinkable without it.
But before Weyl could get to these positive contributions to Hilbert’s program, he
ﬁrst had to deny it outright.
7.1.3 Brouwer and Weyl
In the 1920s the opposition to Hilbert could not have come from sources more
painful to him than the ones it did: L.E.J. Brouwer and Hermann Weyl. Brouwer had
already established himself as the leading topologist, the dominant ﬁgure in this
central and growing branch of mathematics, a man of the highest standards of
10 This account follows Richard Zach, ‘‘Hilbert’s Program,’’ in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Phi-
losophy (Fall 2003 edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta, http:==plato.stanford.edu=archives=fall2003=entries=
hilbert-program=.
11 His argument for this shift in Hilbert’s thinking is given in Mancosu 1998.
AFTER THE WAR

413

mathematical rigor. Hilbert had made sure he was among the active editors of the
Mathematische Annalen, the cherished Go¨ttingen journal that saw itself as the
leading journal in the ﬁeld. Weyl was Hilbert’s most obvious successor, the gifted
mathematician who had passed through Go¨ttingen and stood out even among such
talent, who had been the ﬁrst to devise the right mathematics to capture Einstein’s
general theory of relativity and was shortly to do much the same for the new science
of quantum mechanics. It can only have caused Hilbert anguish to see that the two
men upon whom he placed so much hope for the future were willing to abandon so
much of the mathematics that had been recently created.
Their opposition was in some ways similar, in some ways different. Both drew it
from their considerable immersion in philosophy, and if Brouwer went further, and
seemed oblivious to the harm he was doing to the patient mathematics by the rigor of
his remedies that was because he, unlike Weyl, had no sympathy with applied
mathematics and physics. Brouwer was the ﬁrst to raise his criticisms, and Weyl
gravitated toward him, partly because he found Brouwer to be a ﬁne, principled man,
and Weyl set considerable store by such things. Husserl described him as a ‘‘com-
pletely original, radically honest, real and very modern man.’’12 Einstein, however,
saw something else in Brouwer, ﬁnding him ‘‘an involuntary advocate of Lombroso’s
theory of the close relationship between genius and madness.’’13
Brouwer, from his earliest days as a mathematician, had entertained the gravest
doubts about what the human mind can know about the inﬁnite. He also inclined to
solipsism, ﬁnding logic subordinate to mathematics and language to both. Whatever
his reasons for calling his philosophy of mathematics intuitionism, it was rooted in
the idea that mathematics is a languageless private activity of thought. All his distrust
can be usefully concentrated on one inference in mathematics: the nonconstructive
existence proof. Most mathematicians, and Hilbert above all, liked to argue that
given an inﬁnite set X and some property P that might apply to elements of X, then
there is an element x of X such that the property P does hold for x if it can be shown
that the claim that there is no such x leads to a contradiction. The argument is
entirely unproblematic when X is a ﬁnite set, because in principle one can check P
element by element. Brouwer denied that the argument was valid when X was an
inﬁnite set. He required that there be a construction that produces at least one such x.
For example, if X is an inﬁnite set of real numbers, one wants to know if there is a
least upper bound for the set, that is, a number u such that every x in X is less than u
and every other number u’ that is greater than every number in X is also greater than
u. Very often in mathematics one argues as follows: there is a number, v say, which is
greater than every number in X, and therefore there is a least upper bound u as
required. It may be difﬁcult, even impossible, to ﬁnd this least upper bound exactly.
Brouwer would have none of this, and only allowed that a least upper bound exists if
there is a procedure for ﬁnding it to any arbitrary degree of approximation. It should
be said that this forced him into some contortions, because some of the best of his
prewar theorems relied on such indirect reasoning.14 However, these contortions are
not actually fatal to his position.
12 Quoted in Hesseling 2003, 87.
13 Hesseling 2003, 87, n. 395.
14 To give one example, the famous Brouwer ﬁxed point theorem says that any map from the disk to
itself maps at least one point to itself, but the usual argument gives no way of ﬁnding such a point.
414

CHAPTER 7

Brouwer’s position can also be compared to the verdict of not proven in Scottish
law. This is intermediate between guilty and innocent and means that while the
accused may walk free, this is not so much because he or she is innocent as because
the prosecution has not proved its case. In Brouwer’s opinion, if you wanted cer-
tainty in mathematics you had to make a sharp distinction between what you could
exhibit to the mind and what you must otherwise ﬁnd meaningless. To say that
something exists in mathematics without a construction being given for it is as in-
comprehensible, because contradictory, as saying guilty but not proven. This was to
become a position that provoked as much dissent as the Scottish verdict does among
those with, one might say, a naive realist view of life.
But one should not think that Brouwer’s views were otherwise in agreement with
Hilbert’s, except over the law of the excluded middle. In fact, the implications of this
difference went deep. Brouwer had a different concept of a set, which derived from
his very precise idea of what it was to say some element belonged to a set. The set of
all such-and-suches did not make sense for Brouwer without some way of deter-
mining precisely if each candidate element did or did not belong to it. This was
another position he pushed to an extreme. Consider, for example, a rule that pur-
ports to deﬁne a decimal number, such as this: the nth decimal place is a 1 if and only
if the decimal expansion of p contains a run of n 9’s in succession, otherwise it is a 5.
Hilbert would have said that this rule deﬁnes a number, but we do not know what it
is. Brouwer would have denied that this rule deﬁned anything, because there is no
way of determining the number with arbitrary precision, and indeed in one of his
papers he argued that not every real number has a decimal expansion. It was likewise
impossible for Brouwer to accept very large sets, because they could only be ‘‘de-
ﬁned’’ by rules that ﬂouted his criteria for being clear to the mind.
Brouwer shared with Hilbert a deep identiﬁcation with the modernist view that it
is the responsibility of the mathematician, and the mathematician alone, to ground
mathematics with certainty, and that this can be done only by a profound analysis of
mathematics itself. Thereafter, they disagreed. For Hilbert, the way forward was into
a reformulation of mathematics and logic, and he was open to both syntactical and
semantic linguistic analyses. He was a free spirit, optimistic that every problem can
be solved, he saw no limitations on the human mind when it came to mathematics, he
saw axiomatic mathematics playing a steadily greater role in the physical sciences,
and, of course, he saw no real problems in applying the law of the excluded middle.
Brouwer, whose intuitionism derived from the mystical position he had adopted as a
young man, saw only limitations on the human mind, rejected logic and language in
favor of inner and supposedly veridical insight, did not care for the connections
between mathematics and science, and had abandoned the law of the excluded
middle.
It is possible, as we shall see below, to separate the mathematical and philo-
sophical parts of Brouwer’s position, but in holding them so ﬁrmly together Brouwer
deliberately departed from the modernist orthodoxy that had emerged over the
previous few decades. Equally obviously, it was not a return to the simple-minded
ways of the past. It was a response to the evident failure to ground mathematics in
naive abstractionism, but it turned to the integrity of immediate mental experience.
Mystical and solipsistic it might be, but it was a response to the anxiety apparent in
the contemporary mathematical world. It can best be seen as akin to Heidegger’s
later sense of ‘‘being in the world,’’ and in that sense the ensuing debate between the
AFTER THE WAR

415

supporters of Hilbert and the supporters of Brouwer can be seen as the mathematical
equivalent of the parting of the ways between Kantian and existentialist philosophers
that happened at about the same time.
In 1921 Weyl changed his position of the foundations of mathematics and came
close to agreeing with Brouwer. Indeed, he thought he was in complete agreement,
but Brouwer felt that Weyl still had quite some way to go. The topic that provoked
Weyl’s change of mind was the continuum, or set of all real numbers, upon which he
had written a celebrated little booklet called Das Kontinuum in 1918. It is worth
digressing to look at this little book.15
Weyl was once again concerned about the paradoxes of set theory; this time,
Grelling’s paradox (see §4.7.3). He argued that part of the way to avoid them was to
consider only meaningful sentences, and not the larger class of grammatically correct
ones; here we see further tentative explorations of the semantic-syntactic distinction.
This forced Weyl to explain what a meaningful statement is, and here he started by
admitting some primitive intuitive concepts, such as a point in space or a number and
the elementary relations between them. This put him nearer to Pasch than Hilbert on
the topic of geometry, and, more importantly, very close to Poincare´ on the topic of
arithmetic because, like Poincare´, he took the natural numbers as given and not as
objects to be constructed out of logic or set theory. Complete mathematical induction
was, for Weyl, grounded in intuition. To describe the mathematical relations he
needed to get to mathematical analysis, Weyl returned to his approach in 1910 but
was now much more explicit that he was dealing with a formal language.
Weyl could now construct sets in a meaningful way. He adhered to a predicativist
position, again much as Poincare´ had advocated, started with primitive objects, and
then used his system of relations to build more elaborate objects. These objects
naturally have levels that reﬂect the way they have been constructed, and Weyl used
these levels much as Russell used types to avoid the paradoxes. The risk then is that
other mathematical arguments, such as the existence of a least upper bound, are
imperiled because objects have the wrong levels, but Weyl dismissed Russell’s axiom
of reducibility (which offers a way of forgetting about the levels) as artiﬁcial and
unworkable. Weyl clearly hoped to get away with just working at ground level, but
here he got into trouble, because Richard’s paradox can still be posed within Weyl’s
framework, and his prediliction for ground level cannot be made into a prescription
for it.
Mathematical analysis requires a theory of real numbers, or something like it.
Weyl could construct the rational numbers out of the natural numbers, and the real
numbers out of the rational numbers via the theory of Dedekind cuts. But what he
could prove about the real numbers was limited by his apparatus. He noted, cor-
rectly, that the least upper bound axiom for sets is false in his theory, essentially
because the deﬁnition of the least upper bound is impredicative. But he also noted
that the least upper bound axiom for sequences is valid in his system. These axioms
are not equivalent: the one for sets implies the one for sequences (because from a
sequence one can extract a set), but the converse requires the axiom of choice, and
Weyl was never comfortable with the axiom of choice. Weyl therefore explored what
one can do on the sequence approach, and convinced himself that one could con-
15 Here our guides are Feferman 1998 and Feferman 2000.
416

CHAPTER 7

struct a large part of the theory functions and so recover enough mathematics to do
the exact sciences.
Weyl’s analysis was elegant and profound. There was and is no need to start
mathematics with set theory. It is entirely reasonable to accept as primitive intuitions
ideas like number and point that everyone else works with quite happily. The idea of
avoiding impredicative deﬁnitions in order to keep out the logical antinomies was
well supported at the time. There were imperfections in the account (Richard’s
paradox still lurked), but further boldness might yet carry the day.16 However, Weyl
abandoned the attempt, and it was not taken up again until the 1950s. What irked
him was that he had analyzed the continuum as if it were made up of isolated points.
In 1921, after reading Brouwer’s papers, he came to prefer to see the continuum not
as already made up but as something endlessly coming into being. For this, Brouwer’s
view of a real number as a sequence of intervals was much more congenial.
As early as his inaugural address at the University of Amsterdam in 1912, Brouwer
had argued that the ‘‘basal intuition of mathematics’’17 was that of the falling apart
of moments of life into qualitatively different parts later reunited while remaining
separated by time, and he referred to it as ‘‘the intuition of the bare two-oneness’’
(p. 85). So the intuitionist regarded Kant’s apriority of space as a lost cause, but
adhered, said Brouwer, to the apriority of time. From this intuition of two-oneness
the intuitionist creates the ﬁnite ordinal numbers and the smallest inﬁnite number,
but there one must stop.
Weyl was attracted to this heady mixture of mathematics and philosophy and
wrote:
So I now abandon my own attempt and join Brouwer. I tried to ﬁnd solid ground in the
impending dissolution of the State of analysis (which is in preparation, even though it
is still only recognised by few) without forsaking the order upon which it was founded,
by carrying out its fundamental principle purely and honestly. And I believe I was
successful—as far as this is possible. For this order is in itself untenable, as I have now
convinced myself, and Brouwer—that is the revolution! (Weyl, 1921, 98–99).
The year 1921 was a difﬁcult one in German history. After the Russian Revolution
of 1917, there had been an attempt at a socialist revolution in Germany in 1918,
which had been quite brutally put down. The German Communist Party was es-
tablished as a mass party in 1920, and the Comintern was urging world revolution.
The harsh implications of defeat and the terms of the Versailles Treaty left most
middle-class Germans in difﬁcult ﬁnancial straits, the old certainties of Germany’s
position in the world were broken. Though the allegedly inevitable dissolution of the
state and the coming revolution might have struck some readers as attractive, it
certainly struck others as a most unpleasant prospect, Hilbert among them. He
disparaged Weyl’s ‘‘revolution’’ as a repressive dictatorship, seeking to throw over-
board everything that made its authors uneasy, and as only a repetition of an attempt
at a coup that had been tried before by Kronecker and failed. All it did was threaten
to dismember and mutilate mathematics. All the more interesting, then, that Hil-
bert’s and Weyl’s actual political views were not that far apart: Weyl had republican
16 As Feferman 1998 has shown.
17 See Brouwer 1912, 85, in Dresden’s translation.
AFTER THE WAR

417

sympathies and Hilbert was attracted to Leonard Nelson’s non-Marxist left-wing
breakaway from the German Socialist Party.18
The deliberate political undertones to these contributions to the debate on intu-
itionism hint at the passions it was to generate. They were fueled by a real sense that
grave mathematical mistakes would be made if the nature of mathematics was
misunderstood. Here, Brouwer and Weyl agreed for different reasons. For Brouwer,
the primary activity was mathematical thought. If this process was unable to deal
with certain kinds of inﬁnite sets, as he felt it to be, then there was nothing more to be
done. It was like picking up heavy weights: with practice and ingenuity, one might
ﬁnd ways of doing some things that had seemed impossible, but other activities were
simply beyond human reach. In this limited sense, his philosophy is Kantian, in-
asmuch as Kant had imposed an unalterable structure on the human mind so that
knowledge becomes possible at all. Weyl, however, was much more philosophically
driven, much more inclined to locate ultimate questions in a continuing philosophical
discourse. In these years he was inclined to the views of Fichte and had some sympathy
with the increasingly phenomenological views of Husserl. So he believed that the basic
elements of experience are the experiences of consciousness as each person has them.
His more overtly idealistic philosophy, and the weight he attached to such consider-
ations, brought him into close agreement with Brouwer’s more subjective and private
view, in particular when it came to the topic of human limitations.
Slowly after 1921, more rapidly after 1924, intuitionism moved to a position of
importance in debates about mathematics. It became the major current in the so-
called foundational crisis that dominated German mathematical life in the 1920s.19
Exacerbated by the dire situation Germans found themselves in after the war, the
foundational crisis was an exercise in self-doubt and heart searching that held in
question many of the major advances of modern mathematics. What were mathe-
maticians talking about when they said something existed? What evidence should
they produce in support of their claims? How does the content of the mathematics
relate to the formalism in which it is expressed? What are the abstract, inﬁnite sets
mathematicians reason about? And, when they do so, what logical principles apply,
for example, the law of the excluded middle?
The crisis was given its name, and its salience, by Weyl’s paper of 1921 in which
he converted to the Brouwerian revolution. When Hilbert replied to it he did so in a
series of ﬁve public lectures at the University of Copenhagen and then at the newly
founded and mathematically strong University of Hamburg. The Copenhagen lec-
tures were the occasion for Hilbert to receive an honorary degree, while the Ham-
burg lectures produced a very lively debate.20 Perhaps for that reason, Hilbert chose
the new journal of the Hamburg Mathematics Seminar to publish his paper, the
‘‘New Grounding’’ that was described above. In the published paper, his reaction to
the intuitionism of Brouwer and Weyl was ﬁerce. He argued that all mathematical
statements should be either true or false, there was no room for half-truths; but that in
pursuit of this goal, Brouwer and Weyl had chosen a false path. Indeed, he said, the
alleged inconsistency of real analysis was nowhere to be seen. Few subjects had been
as thoroughly studied as real analysis,
18 I thank Colin McLarty for this information.
19 It is a major focus of Mehrtens 1990. See also Volkert 1986.
20 Information from Hesseling 2003, 136.
418

CHAPTER 7

and not even the shadow of an inconsistency has appeared. If Weyl here sees an ‘‘inner
instability of the foundations on which the empire is constructed,’’ and if he worries
about ‘‘the impending dissolution of the commonwealth of analysis,’’ then he is seeing
ghosts. . . .
To sum up, I should like to say: if one speaks of a mathematical crisis, in any case
one may not speak, as Weyl does, of a new crisis. He has artiﬁcially imported the vicious
circle into analysis.
Hilbert’s observations about the recent history of mathematics are usually rather
shallow and intended to serve a purpose, and these are no different, but they are not
off the mark. It was indeed true that talk of a crisis in mathematics was not new but
went back at least as far as work on the foundations of set theory, which had been
publicly questioned by Poincare´, Perron, and others and had surfaced in 1905 in the
debates about Zermelo’s axiomatization of set theory. The shifting nature of the
celebrated paradoxes of set theory also testiﬁes to an ongoing disquiet worthy of
being called a crisis. But it is also true that there was not a single genuine contra-
diction in the body of mathematics. None of the bizarre results discovered before the
war were antinomies, they were not in contradiction with other results. Whatever
one thought of the foundations of set theory, some strange principle or invisible hand
seemed to keep problems in the foundations of mathematics from generating fatal
problems in the higher reaches of the subject. Of perplexity there was plenty, but that
was the very nature of mathematics, and there was no reason to suppose that new
ideas would not be found to keep the subject moving forward.
What was new was the suggestion that there was a vicious circle in the founda-
tions and that mathematicians were deceiving themselves if they thought otherwise.
There was a famous exchange between the distinguished Hungarian analyst Polya
and Weyl after Weyl had given three lectures in Lausanne in 1919 that sheds an
interesting light on this.21 The lectures formed the basis of Weyl’s paper of 1921, and
Polya, a colleague of Weyl’s at the ETH in Zurich, asked him what he meant by the
requirement that mathematical statements be not only true but meaningful. Weyl
replied that this was a matter of honesty, to which Polya replied that it was a mistake
to mix philosophy and science. Weyl replied: ‘‘What Polya calls sentiment and
rhetoric, I call insight and truth; what he calls science I call letter pedantry. Polya’s
defence of set theory . . . is mysticism. Separating mathematics as formal from
spiritual life kills it, turns it into a shell.’’
We are in the presence of the true believer who, in the intensity of his feelings, does
not see disagreement as a technical matter but as arising from a terrible moral
failing—a fatal separation of mathematics from spiritual life—and leading to the
replacement of truth with rhetoric and science with letter pedantry. Mere pragma-
tism usually has no effect on such people, at least in the short term. In the absence of
a self-contradiction in analysis, the most Weyl could produce was a series of claims
that the foundations were incoherent.22 In the 1921 paper, Weyl referred to math-
21 Information from Hesseling 2003, 128–129.
22 Weyl had had an earlier run-in with Polya in 1918, before he converted to intuitionism. There he
had bet, among other things, that within twenty years mathematicians would come to see that there could
be inﬁnite sets that do not have a countably inﬁnite subset, a bet he eventually admitted some years after it
had expired that he had lost, ‘‘by 49 to 51 per cent.’’ This prompts the observations that ﬁgures in straw
polls carry a health warning: these numbers may reﬂect the choice of the electorate.
AFTER THE WAR

419

ematics as a monstrous paper economy, devoid of real value (which resides, in this
analogy, in the singulars, such as food). This was published just as the extraordinary
inﬂation of the German mark was beginning.
In 1924 reactions to the issue of intuitionism and the foundations of mathematics
started to accumulate, and almost immediately there was a rapprochement between
the two sides. Thus Abraham Fraenkel, whose work on axiomatic set theory will be
considered in the next section, indicated in his book that he saw no reason to suppose
intuitionism was a challenge to logic.23 More importantly, in 1924 and again in 1925,
Hermann Weyl moved to the center ground to suggest that mathematics could be done
either as intuitionism suggested, or classically. He may already have begun to worry
that mathematics a` la Brouwer could not provide the necessary tools for physics, and in
particular for quantum mechanics. Weyl suggested that the disagreements between
Hilbert and Brouwer may be smaller than had been recognized. Both men, he sug-
gested, saw the same limitations on intuitive thought and recognized that transﬁnite
methods in mathematics provide no justiﬁcation for saying that the transﬁnite ex-
pressions in mathematics are contentual truths.24 Hilbert went on to give a purely
formal account of what he saw as lying beyond the contentual; Brouwer refused. As
Weyl put it in 1925: ‘‘With Brouwer, mathematics gains the highest intuitive clarity;
his doctrine is idealism in mathematics thought through to the end. But, full of pain,
the mathematician sees the greatest part of his towering theories dissolve in fog.’’25 The
difference between Brouwer and Hilbert, as Weyl now saw it, was that one was
prepared to offer formal account that explained the consistency of mathematics, while
the other was concerned with the much smaller part that could be said to be true.
Weyl’s concern that Brouwerian mathematics might be wholly inadequate for the
study of quantum mechanics was not merely a pragmatic criticism. Weyl was also
shifting his views about what the successful practice of science entailed for the
philosophy of mathematics.26 Furthermore, as Epple has valuably pointed out,27
Brouwer’s own position was losing adherents as he spelled out its implications for
mathematical analysis. His philosophy of set theory retained its attractions, and
several spoke in its favor, but, signiﬁcantly, his attempts to work out a truly con-
structive analysis did not win support.
Brouwer’s constructive reinterpretation of the nonconstructive existence argu-
ments in analysis hinge on what is sometimes called his ‘‘Fan theorem.’’ Fortunately,
we need not understand what this is to follow Epple’s argument. He notes that these
ideas of Brouwer were ﬁrst published in 1924, by which time Weyl was already
turning away. Neither Skolem nor Fraenkel, who were sympathetic to intuitionism,
included these ideas in their later accounts of Brouwer’s work. Only Menger, it
seems, came close to the Fan theorem, and even he fell short. So Epple concludes that
this was because these distinguished mathematicians and logicians found it difﬁcult.
They were, moreover, right to do so, Epple argues, because much later the logician
23 See Fraenkel 1923. Fraenkel had become a professor at Marburg in 1922, where he remained until
1928. He then he moved to Kiel, and in 1929 he emigrated and taught at the University of Jerusalem until
1959. He died in Jerusalem in 1965.
24 Weyl 1924, 448.
25 See Mancosu 1998, 136.
26 See Scholz 2006 and the references there.
27 Epple 2000.
420

CHAPTER 7

Kleene showed that Brouwer, without clearly realizing it himself, was postulating a
new formulation of intuitionistic mathematics and the introduction of a new proof
scheme when he discussed the Fan theorem.28 Promoting a new proof scheme in
mathematics without realizing it was not a consequence of existing positions is sel-
dom likely to succeed.
What prevents us from dismissing Hilbert’s formalist account as a mere game, no
more interesting than chess, and allows mathematics to remain a serious cultural
concern, is the possibility of attaching some sense to Hilbert’s game with formulas.
Here, Weyl saw only one possibility: physics. The new theoretical physics offered a
completely different kind of knowledge from the usual knowledge that expresses
what is given in intuition. It is the theory as a whole that confronts experience and
permits one to represent the transcendent, or so Weyl put it. By this he may be taken
to have meant that the whole apparatus of theoretical physics permits us to speak of
novel and elusive processes (in a language of extraordinary mathematics that would
otherwise be a prime candidate for neglect) and yet plausibly claim that our de-
scriptions make good sense. The process of symbolic construction, the construction,
so to say, of theory by the manipulation of symbols, does not yield the kind of
knowledge that we get from immediate experience, but it is not wholly arbitrary,
either. The ﬁrst task of mathematics is to make sure that this process of symbolic
construction is self-consistent. Weyl suggested the kind of knowledge this process
produces might be called belief, akin to ‘‘the belief in the reality of the own I and that
of others, or belief in the reality of the external world, or belief in the reality of God.’’
Its organ is not the eye but creativity, and it is ‘‘undeniable that there is a theoretical
need . . . with a creative urge directed upon the symbolic representation of the
transcendent, which demands to be satisﬁed.’’29
In 1927 Abraham Fraenkel gave a series of ten lectures to the Kant Society, an
important gathering of German philosophers.30 One of these lectures was on intui-
tionism, and there he gave as its central feature the sharp distinction between con-
structions and pure existence statements. But despite his own measured assessment of
intuitionist and ﬁnitistic mathematics, he held out little hope of a reconciliation
between the two schools because their opposition was essentially dogmatic. In this,
he was both prescient and well informed, for in a paper of 1925 Hilbert had, if
anything, moved toward an even stronger emphasis on mathematics as the activity
that produces formulas according to rules. In 1927 Hilbert returned to Hamburg
with a further defense of his position, anchored now in some increasingly sophisti-
cated new mathematics. Weyl was in the audience, and his conciliatory remarks are
interesting, for by now he was back in a harmonious relation with Hilbert, driven
there by his growing feeling that Brouwer’s mathematics would not give mathema-
ticians and physicists what they need.
Weyl noted that there had been quite some sympathy for Brouwer’s ideas, despite
what Hilbert saw as their destructive implications, and this was because Brouwer
talked about mathematics the way mathematicians always had until recently:
mathematical statements were meaningful. It was Hilbert who had changed the
nature of the enterprise, for his proof theory sought to save classical mathematics by
28 For the details, see Epple 2000, 165, and Kleene 1956.
29 Weyl 1925–27, quoted in Mancosu 1998, 140.
30 Later published as Fraenkel 1927.
AFTER THE WAR

421

turning mathematics into bodies of consistent statements. For himself, Weyl found
no epistemological gap between Brouwer and Hilbert. He even went so far as to
claim that an intuitionist would accept proofs using ideal elements (Brouwer never
agreed), and that if, as he said now seemed likely, Hilbert’s views overcame intui-
tionism, it would be a decisive defeat for pure phenomenology.
It is sometimes claimed, usually by those strongly drawn to intuitionism, that
Hilbert’s ﬁnitism is a large concession to intuitionism in that it agrees that new,
special rules must be used when reasoning about inﬁnite sets. And it is surely likely
that Hilbert intended it as something of a compromise designed to bring waverers
over to his side (did he hope to lure Weyl in this way?). But it is also true that Hilbert
knew very well that something had to be done to ensure that conclusions about
inﬁnite sets were always properly drawn, and he never contemplated restricting the
scope of mathematics, as Brouwer always did. He never wavered in his belief that
consistency was all that was needed to guarantee mathematical existence, and, if
anything, ﬁnitism is a sharpening of that position, because all questions of meanings
behind the signs are now excluded or consigned to meta-mathematics.
There are many other interesting aspects of the intuitionist debate in the 1920s
that cannot be explored here but must be brieﬂy noted. One concerns how the claim
of constructibility can be made precise: Is there a useful distinction between con-
structible and constructed? Another concerns the intuitionist idea of negation. If
there is a third category, distinct from the true and the false, is it to be thought of as
the unproved, or the absurd, or in yet some other way? These and other aspects can
be pursued in Hesseling’s book Gnomes in the Fog; here we may proceed to the ﬁnal
confrontation between Hilbert and Brouwer in 1928.
In 1928 Brouwer gave two lectures in Vienna at Menger’s invitation. They are
well remembered today, perhaps because Wittgenstein and Go¨del were in the au-
dience, but they seem to have been a popular success. Also in 1928, the International
Congress of Mathematicians in Bologna was the ﬁrst since the First World War to
invite German mathematicians. This had taken quite some negotiations behind the
scenes, but Brouwer, a Dutchman, found the terms insulting and tried to organize a
boycott. He had some success, bringing on board Bieberbach, who later tried to
make his career as a Nazi mathematician. This was the last straw for Hilbert. He was
recovering from his pernicious anemia, which might well have killed him in 1925 had
it not been for the timely discovery of a cure, and he was more aware than ever that
the issue of the future editors of Mathematische Annalen still had to be settled.
Hilbert, whose motto always had been that there is no ‘‘ignorabimus’’ (we shall not
know) in mathematics, whose greatest of many claims to fame was as a solver of deep
problems, could not endure the idea that the journal (his journal) would pass to his
opponent, the radical exponent of the idea that there are many things even in
mathematics that we cannot know. He cast around for a way to dismiss Brouwer as
an editor, and eventually wrote to the board, Brouwer included, to say that he was
dismissed because of the fundamental incompatibility of their views.
Hilbert did not have the power to take such a decision on his own, and he had to
seek the agreement of the other editors. Einstein found the whole business rather
ridiculous, a ‘‘frog and mouse’’ battle, he called it.31 Carathe´odory also did not agree.
31 The allusion is to a Homeric fable.
422

CHAPTER 7

But Brouwer made the mistake of offering to accept only if Hilbert’s doctor would
sign a letter saying that Hilbert was of unsound mind. What someone once so ad-
mired by Weyl could have hoped to gain by such an insulting suggestion is not clear,
but it cost him the support of the fourth and ﬁnal editor, Blumenthal. This whole
situation had to be resolved, and it was done so by formally dissolving and recon-
stituting the editorial board. Carathe´odory and Einstein refused to join it.
Brouwer was devastated, and retired from public intellectual life. He was not the
ﬁrst or the last pure ﬁgure of relentless will to crumble at the dirtiness and hurly-burly
of the world, but his departure took the drama and the philosophical knife out of the
debate. What remained was for the various protagonists to ﬁnd that there had been
nothing much to disagree about after all, and that is what they did. The new spirit of
consensus was most visible at the second Conference on the Epistemology of the
Exact Sciences, held in Ko¨nigsberg in September 1930, partly organized by sup-
porters of the Vienna circle. The conference papers and the discussion that followed
were then published in the circle’s journal Erkenntnis, edited by Hans Reichenbach
and Rudolf Carnap. The organizers had deliberately sought out younger speakers to
present papers: von Neumann spoke on formalism, Carnap on logicism, and Arend
Heyting (a former student of Brouwer’s) on intuitionism. All three agreed that their
form of mathematics was constructive: Hilbertian formalism because its proofs are
ﬁnite, logicism because it constructs the real numbers out of logical ideas, intui-
tionism because a proof is a construction (or it is not a proof at all). As for the
existence of mathematical objects, Heyting was indifferent. The only properties of an
object that we could speak about were those we could claim to know, and tran-
scendental claims to knowledge were, for him, inadmissible. Nor, however, were
they asserted by ﬁnitism, either. Von Neumann spoke of the old arguments now
resulting in more and more unambiguous problems for investigation that were not
matters of taste.32
This amicable, and arguably productive, disagreement was partly possible because
Heyting, the leading intuitionist after Brouwer’s retirement, had made it possible to
see formal ways of resolving the issue by turning it from a contentious question of
philosophy to a simple matter of logic. In 1928 he had won a competition of the
Dutch Mathematical Society with an essay on the theme of formalizing Brouwer’s set
theory. News of it spread before it was published, Bernays, for example, heard of it at
the Bologna conference that year, but it brieﬂy fell foul of the frog and mouse battle
when Brouwer, with Heyting’s consent, withdrew it from the Mathematische An-
nalen. It was ﬁnally published in a Berlin journal.33
Heyting opened the paper with a piece of Brouwerian orthodoxy: a defense of
mathematics as an activity of thought to which language was secondary. He then
spelled out in formal terms the rules of reasoning used in intuitionism. This was not
the ﬁrst time it had been done. The brilliant young Russian mathematician Kolmo-
gorov had given one such treatment in 1925, but it did not cover all the logical rules.
But this time, and for whatever reason, most of Heyting’s readers engaged much less
with the rhetoric than the symbolism. What they took away from the paper was clear
statements of the rules of deduction that apply to both classical and intuitionistic
logic, of the rules that apply only in intuitionistic logic, and of the classically valid
32 For a review of the three ‘‘isms’’ and later developments, see Detlefsen 1997 and Mehlberg 2002.
33 Heyting 1930.
AFTER THE WAR

423

deductions that cannot be made in the intuitionistic setting. His account was en-
dorsed by Kolmogorov when he passed through Go¨ttingen early in 1931. The im-
mediate and palpable consequence of Heyting’s work was that it was now possible to
behave as an impeccable Hilbertian ﬁnitist while honoring Brouwer by using the
intuitionists’ rules. This seems to have been what happened, somewhat to Heyting’s
chagrin, as he later observed, remarking of his papers that they had ‘‘diverted at-
tention from the underlying ideas to the formal system itself.’’34
7.1.4 Axiomatic Set Theory
The axiomatization of set theory proposed by Zermelo in 1908 was inadequate in
two distinct ways. One was that it relied on an imprecise concept, that of a set being
‘‘deﬁnite’’ (see above, §4.7.6), which Poincare´ was not the only one to ﬁnd fault with.
At best it pointed the way to making set theory rigorous while keeping out the
paradoxes, but it could not stand close examination. The other objection was more
technical. In his urge to keep out candidates for sets that were somehow too large,
Zermelo had excluded objects that ought to be sets. For example, if given a set X we
write P(X) for the set of all subsets of X, then starting with N, the set of natural
numbers, the collection fN‚P(N)‚P(P(N))‚ . . .g is not a set.
It fell to Abraham Fraenkel to revise Zermelo’s axiomatization in ways that later
generations found acceptable. Hermann Weyl had already taken up the problem of
the indeﬁnite nature of the ‘‘deﬁnite’’ concept. His ﬁnal idea, in 1917, was to for-
mulate the insight that a property was ‘‘deﬁnite’’ if it could be deduced from expres-
sions of the form x [ y or x ¼ y by ﬁnitely many uses of the logical rules for negation,
conjunction, disjunction, existential quantiﬁcation, and substitution of a constant for
a variable. The problem was that he wanted to say what ‘‘ﬁnitely many’’ meant
without previously deﬁning the natural numbers—after all, the natural numbers are
to be constructed out of sets, so the rules for set theory surely have to be speciﬁed
ﬁrst—and this made his theory very complicated. So much so that he decided to
reverse the order and construct set theory out of the natural numbers, a policy that
soon pushed him toward intuitionism.
Fraenkel was not inﬂuenced by Weyl. He took to set theory on the simple grounds
that he believed it would form the foundations of mathematics and yet not many
people knew it, so it was easy to become a specialist. In 1921 he wrote to Zermelo
with a question about the object fN‚P(N)‚P(P(N))‚ . . .g, pointing out that it does not
seem to follow from Zermelo’s axioms that it is a set, but if it is not then one could
not prove that the ordinal Qo exists (because it is not provably a set). Fraenkel had a
poor opinion of logic and preferred to revise the axioms for sets, proposing in 1922
what he called an ‘‘axiom of replacement’’ that allowed a collection to be a set if it is
cooked up from the empty set—any set X on Zermelo’s deﬁnition—and the natural
numbers by ﬁnitely many uses of set-theoretic union, taking power sets, and forming
unordered pairs. This rag-bag deﬁnition, however, not only failed to allow
fN‚P(N)‚P(P(N))‚ . . .g to be a set, but von Neumann showed in 1928 that in fact this
formulation of replacement was a theorem in Zermelo’s set theory. Von Neumann,
34 Heyting 1978, 15.
424

CHAPTER 7

therefore, called for, and provided, a stronger axiom of replacement. This paper also
gave a clear criterion for when a collection of objects is too large to be a set.35
The work of Fraenkel and von Neumann, welcomed by Hilbert (1929, 228) ‘‘as an
awakening, as a luminous aurora,’’ brought Zermelo back to the subject. In 1929 he
gave an axiomatization of the contentious ‘‘deﬁnite’’ property that avoided the no-
tion of natural number, and in 1930 he shifted his position only slightly to give a
system of seven axioms for set theory. Three were taken almost verbatim from his
original presentation of 1908, one derived from a paper of Fraenkel’s, one from his
own paper of 1929, one ruled out inﬁnite descending sequences of elements
(X1 ] X2 ] X3 ] . . .), and one was a modiﬁed form of Fraenkel’s axiom of replace-
ment. He dropped the axiom of inﬁnity on the grounds that it did not belong to the
general theory of sets, and he dropped the axiom of choice.
With these proposals, all the crucial ingredients for one of the standard versions of
modern mathematics were in place except one, but that one was among the most
important, and the most radical for the modernization of mathematics. For one
might say that Zermelo’s improved axiomatization was just that—an improvement.
The decisive intervention came from elsewhere.
For most of the 1920s the Norwegian mathematician Thoralf Skolem had been
thinking about logic. The question that most detained him was quantiﬁers, the very
topic that had inspired the move away from commonsense logic and into its study by
Boole, Schro¨der, and others. His attention was caught by a result of the Polish
logician Leopold Lo¨wenheim from 1915, which he reworked in 1920. Lo¨wenheim’s
result is almost paradoxical. It says that if a theory allows quantiﬁcation only over
individuals but not over sets, then any sentence that is true over every ﬁnite domain
but not over some inﬁnite domain is in fact false over some denumerable domain.
Skolem turned this argument into the theorem that such a sentence (or even count-
ably many such sentences taken together) that has a model has a countable model.36
All this may seem technical, as indeed the proofs are, but Skolem was quick to
draw a highly nontrivial conclusion: although Zermelo’s theory created uncountably
inﬁnite sets, it could be satisﬁed by a countable set. Thus the idea that a given set was
countable or uncountable depended on what model of set theory one was using—a
disturbing suggestion known ever since as Skolem’s paradox.
Skolem was the ﬁrst to be clear that when talking about what one can logically do,
one had to say if quantiﬁcation took place only over individuals, or if quantifying
over sets of individuals was allowed. The ﬁrst case is today called ﬁrst-order logic, the
second case second-order logic.37 First-order logic meets all the requirements one
naturally asks of logic.38 Second-order logic can strike one as rather artiﬁcial, and a
35 There is an unresolved puzzle about the publication of von Neumann’s essay as late as 1928, because
it was preceded by a more elementary exposition of its themes in 1925. This was written at the suggestion of
Fraenkel, who had gotten to know von Neumann in 1922 or 1923 when he was sent a paper of von
Neumann’s to review. The paper eventually became von Neumann’s doctoral dissertation and the 1928
paper. Fraenkel records that perhaps he did not understand everything, ‘‘but enough to see that it was an
outstanding work and to recognize ex ungue leonem [the lion by his paw].’’ Quoted in Moore 1982, 264.
36 May the experts forgive me for my imprecision—it would serve no purpose here to put it right—
and follow the accounts in Ferreiro´s 2001 and Moore 1982, upon which this account is based.
37 There are higher-order logics, too, allowing one to quantify over sets of sets of . . . .
38 For a historical account of how ﬁrst-order logic became a core system of modern logic, and some
philosophical criticisms of this outcome, see Ferreiro´s 2001.
AFTER THE WAR

425

source of mischief. But: theories constructed just using ﬁrst-order logic turn out to be
highly counterintuitive, as Skolem’s paradox shows, and models of these theories are
far from being unique as a result, so the theories are not categorical. They do not
deﬁne their objects. Theories constructed with second-order logic are typically (but
not always) categorical; they deﬁne their objects (up to some harmless concept of
isomorphism). If you think you have produced a clean, tidy set theory using second-
order logic, your work is open to the objection that perhaps second-order logic is too
hospitable and the real difﬁculties you thought you were resolving in mathematics,
and in particular in set theory, have simply relocated to your system of logic.
Skolem naturally pushed for the default logic used to construct any version of set
theory to be ﬁrst-order logic. This meant that such a set theory could not be cate-
gorical, a conclusion that Zermelo opposed. His formulation of set theory was es-
sentially second-order, for that reason, and the exclusion of inﬁnite descending se-
quences was made to make it even more likely that the resulting set theory was
categorical. In the end, even this was seen to fail, and to this day logicians and set
theorists study different set theories (they can be told apart by various assumptions
involving very large cardinals) and worry which one ought to be true if mathematics
is meaningfully about sets. What most mathematics, and most of the mathematics
used in science, requires is the axioms Zermelo proposed in 1930, together with the
axiom of choice and an honest recognition that the underlying logic is second-order.
Perhaps rather selectively, this theory is known to all mathematicians as Zermelo-
Fraenkel with Choice (ZFC) in honor of the contributions of both men.39 Of all the
fruits of modernism in mathematics, it is probably fair to say that the least known
one, even to mathematicians, who naturally incline to Zermelo-Fraenkel, is Skolem’s
fundamental distinction between levels of logic.
Skolem drew a further consequence from the axiomatization of set theory, which
marks a further unexpected consummation of the modernist thrust, its successes and
failures. As he put it in his address of 1922: ‘‘When founded in such an axiomatic
way, set theory cannot remain a privileged logical theory; it is then placed on the
same level as other axiomatic theories.’’40 As Ferreiro´s comments: ‘‘The basic rela-
tionship of membership ceases to have a ﬁxed meaning, it can be interpreted at will in
models of axiomatic set theory.’’41 Axiomatization may solve certain problems, but it
cannot privilege certain interpretations (models, or meanings) over others, even those
that led to Skolem’s paradox showing that even set theory is relative.
Skolem’s paradox has a possibly unexpected bearing on the mathematical deﬁ-
nition of the natural numbers. These were most conveniently presented, following
Dedekind, in the form of Peano’s ﬁve axioms (see above, §3.4.4). It might seem that
nothing more need be said, that these axioms capture exactly what we believe and
expect of the natural numbers. But this is not the case. For a start, they are not good
enough to permit mathematicians to formalize statements about numbers so pre-
cisely that arguments about them can be followed mechanically. As the mathema-
tician and logician Paul Cohen observed lucidly in 1966:
39 There is an apple to this pc, the theory due to Bernays, Go¨del, and von Neumann, which cannot be
discussed here.
40 Skolem 1922 in van Heijenoort 1967a.
41 Ferreiro´s 1999, 362.
426

CHAPTER 7

If we examine Peano’s axioms for the integers, we ﬁnd that they are not capable of being
transcribed in a form acceptable to a computing machine. This is because the crucial
axiom of induction speaks about ‘‘sets’’ of integers but the axioms do not give rules for
forming sets nor other basic properties of sets. . . . When we do construct a formal
system corresponding to Peano’s axioms we shall ﬁnd that the result cannot quite live up
to all our expectations. This difﬁculty is associated with any attempt at formalization.42
Cohen then showed that the vague notion of a set could be replaced in a variety of
ways with a precise, if inﬁnite, list of axioms for the integers. Indeed, one could do so
in several ways that captured almost the same idea. The resulting system is called
Peano arithmetic, and it is a ﬁrst-order theory. As Cohen noted, it follows from
Go¨del’s famous incompleteness theorem that these formalizations could not be shown
to form a consistent system except by methods more powerful than the system itself.
Nor do the Peano axioms capture all that we can mean by the term ‘‘natural num-
ber.’’ The problem is the same as described by Cohen: the nonstandard or unexpected
models of set theory. The structure of the natural numbers cannot be characterized
uniquely in a ﬁrst-order theory. Indeed, even the notion of ﬁniteness turns out to be
relative in Skolem’s sense. However, if one retreats to the comfort of a second-order
theory such as ZF, it is true that the ﬁnite cardinals do play the role of the natural
numbers. Certainly, one can prove that for every natural number n there is a corre-
sponding cardinal. But is every ﬁnite cardinal of the form of a natural number? ZF must
remain silent, because the concept of natural number is prior to the concepts of ZF and
cannot be interpreted within it. More food for the philosophers (compare §7.3.1).
7.1.5 Go¨del
It remains for us to return to Ko¨nigsberg in 1930 and the remarkable denouement of
all the struggles to show that the conclusions of mathematics are true. In 1930 Kurt
Go¨del was a twenty-four-year old Austrian logician. The mathematician Hans Hahn
had introduced him to the Vienna circle philosophers around Moritz Schlick, who
were developing the philosophy of logical positivism, which was hostile to most forms
of metaphysics and sought to make philosophy a science. This was not to Go¨del’s taste,
but Carnap was a prominent member of the circle, and he may have encouraged Go¨del
to study logic. In 1929 Go¨del took the propositional calculus as presented by Russell
and Whitehead—and more or less as presented by Hilbert and Ackermann in their
book of 1928—and showed that if a sentence in this calculus is such that its negation
cannot be interpreted as a true statement, then the sentence can be proved.
This may sound rather technical, but it becomes much more interesting if it is
teased apart. The claim is that a certain theory makes statements, and you are to take
any one of these statements and consider if its negation can be said to be true. What
does this mean? For a statement to be true, there is an interpretation of the axioms of
the theory and the terms in the statement which simply makes the statement true. It
might be that the axioms deﬁning the theory can always be interpreted as laying
down the rules for plane geometry, and the statement can be interpreted to say that
two distinct points determine a line. Let us agree that there is no geometry in which
42 Cohen 1966, 3– 4.
AFTER THE WAR

427

the negation of this statement (which would say that two points do not determine a
line) is true. Then, says Go¨del’s theorem, the statement has a proof. That is to say, the
formal statement has a proof derived solely from the axioms of the theory according
to some agreed logical rules of deduction. Knowledge that the statement is always
true implies that there is a proof.
Now suppose instead that some other statement could be interpreted to mean that
two distinct lines determine a point. There is a geometry, indeed plane Euclidean
geometry, in which the negation of this statement is true: two lines do not determine
a point if they are parallel. So this formal statement does not have a proof.
Go¨del’s theorem said about the propositional calculus that there was an intimate
connection between being true on all interpretations and being provable. Being true
is a matter of interpretation, about the existence of models, about semantics. Being
provable is a matter of juggling with symbols, writing down deductions, in short
syntax. Go¨del’s theorem was one of the ﬁrst to clarify and explore the relationship
FIGURE 7.1. Kurt Go¨del. Courtesy of Princeton University Library
from the Kurt Go¨del Papers on deposit from the Institute
for Advanced Study.
428

CHAPTER 7

between the semantics and the syntax of a mathematical theory. It said that in this
case every statement that was true under every semantical interpretation was also
syntactically provable. The theory is therefore said to be complete.
Hilbert wanted every true statement in mathematics to be provable from some
agreed axiomatized starting point. On September 7, 1930, the day before Hilbert was
scheduled to speak at the Ko¨nigsberg conference and to be made an honorary citizen
of his native city, Go¨del gave a paper there in which he proved that no mathematical
theory rich enough to include arithmetic was complete.43 More precisely, Go¨del
showed that if Pk is any consistent axiom system containing an axiom system, P,
adequate to produce elementary arithmetic and perhaps some other axioms, then the
statement that expresses the consistency of Pk in the symbolism of P cannot be
proved in Pk.44 In the published version he then explicitly remarked that ‘‘I wish to
note expressly that [this theorem does] not contradict Hilbert’s formalistic view-
point. For this viewpoint presupposes only the existence of a consistency proof in
which nothing but ﬁnitary means of proof is used, and it is conceivable that there
exist ﬁnitary proofs that cannot be expressed in the formalism of P.45
Go¨del’s acute comment has not born fruit. No one has given Hilbert’s vision a
lease of life this way.46 Von Neumann grasped the implications very quickly, and for
this reason was reluctant to see the three-way discussion he had had with Carnap and
Heyting published, feeling that Go¨del’s incompleteness theorem made it all rather
irrelevant. Bernays, too, was soon convinced (Hilbert’s own reaction is much harder
to determine). Gradually, the feeling that there will always be true statements in
mathematics that are not provable has come to feel like a liberation for mathematics
from the iron claw of mechanical proof, but the existence of a gap between true and
provable in mathematics has been the end of almost every nineteenth-century phi-
losophy of mathematics.47
Perhaps the simplest messages to take away to any philosophical discussion to
which Go¨del’s work might apply are these.48
1. Go¨del’s ﬁrst incompleteness theorem proves that a large consistent system
can make statements that cannot be proved or disproved within that
system—but they may be trivially provable in a larger theory.
2. Go¨del’s second incompleteness theorem shows that large consistent systems
cannot be proved to be consistent within the system itself—but this says
43 The stipulation is necessary, for Mojz˙esz (Moses) Presburger had shown in 1928 that a formal
system capable of handling addition but not multiplication is provably consistent. To quote from Fe-
ferman 2006, 435, n. 1, ‘‘Presburger’s work was carried out as an ‘exercise’ in a seminar at the University
of Warsaw run by Alfred Tarski.’’ See Zygmunt 1991 for a short biography of Presburger, and Presburger
1991 for an English translation of his work.
44 See Go¨del, ‘‘On Formally Undecidable Propositions,’’ in Go¨del 1986.
45 See Go¨del 1986, 195.
46 The matter is subtle and unresolved, not least because Hilbert never precisely formulated what
‘‘ﬁnitary’’ means. For a recent survey of the issue, see Richard Zach, ‘‘Hilbert’s Program,’’ in The Stanford
Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2003 Edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta, http:==plato.stanford.edu=
archives=fall2003=entries=hilbert-program=.
47 Among the many good recent guides to Go¨del’s ideas are the essays by Davis, Floyd and Kanamori,
Sigmund, Feferman, Franze´n, Dawson, and Kennedy in the Notices of the American Mathematical So-
ciety 53.4 (April 2006) and Franze´n 2005.
48 I take these from Franze´n 2005 and the Raatikainen 2007 review.
AFTER THE WAR

429

nothing about their consistency as seen from another system and nothing at
all about absolute consistency independent of any system whatever.
3. Go¨del’s incompleteness theorems apply to consistent systems, they do not
apply to systems not known to be consistent.
4. The systems ZF and ZFC are large, indeed more than sufﬁcient to derive all
of ordinary mathematics. So there are arithmetical truths not provable
within ZF or ZFC, but curiously no ‘‘interesting’’ arithmetical truth has
been shown to be of such a kind, only artiﬁcial examples constructed for
the purpose of being unprovable.
5. So mathematics (for the moment deﬁned as the system ZF) cannot be
shown to be complete except by systems presumably even harder to accept
than ZF, so we cannot force anyone who doubts ZF to accept it—but we
also have no compelling reason to doubt it.
6. Finally, Go¨del’s theorems cannot tell us that our attempts to graft a formal
system onto our analysis of other philosophical questions, be they in
physics, brain behavior, or theology, will necessarily fail to be complete,
only that if the formal system is large then it is incomplete.
7.1.5.1 CODA
Even this account barely hints at the sophistication of logic by the 1930s. Im-
provements in Russell’s type theory, notably simple type theory, have been bypassed
altogether. It has not considered the remarkable work of the Polish school of logi-
cians, from Lukasiewicz’s three-valued logic to Tarski’s theory of truth in formal
languages. Nor is there space to describe Gerhard Gentzen’s proof that arithmetic is
consistent, which he published in 1935 and which does not contradict Go¨del’s the-
orem because it uses much stronger methods (a necessary minimum of transﬁnite
induction). Go¨del’s incompleteness theorem did not put an end to logical and phil-
osophical investigations into the foundations of mathematics. But it is enough for the
purposes of this book to note that the movement of mathematical modernism
transformed our ideas of logic out of all recognition. From organized commonsense,
logic became a many-layered thing; issues of syntax and semantics were clariﬁed and
novelties on both sides began to ﬂourish; rigor, truth, and meaning became more
precise as concepts. And it must be said that mathematical modernism made the
grounds for accepting mathematics contentious, but it provided no resting point.
None of the prominent schools that sprang up to explain mathematics succeeded; all
remain as noble fragments.
7.2 Mathematics and the Mechanization of Thought
7.2.1 Can Computers Think?
The idea of machines that can think has a long history. By the time Boole proposed
his Laws of Thought, with the implied promise that thought could be mechanized,
there was already a very detailed plan for a computer. This was Charles Babbage’s
430

CHAPTER 7

analytical engine, a vast and vastly ambitious machine that stretched precision en-
gineering to its limits, and about which Ada Lovelace rhapsodized in these terms:
‘‘There is no ﬁnite line of demarcation which limits the powers of the Analytical
Engine. These powers are co-extensive with our knowledge of the laws of analysis
itself,’’ although she did later note that ‘‘it is desirable to guard against the possibility
of exaggerated ideas that might arise as to the powers of the Analytical Engine.’’49
If the implication of her remarks was that the machine could think anything that
we can think, she was to be strikingly wrong, for notoriously the machine proved
impossible to make. But there is nonetheless something impressive about the re-
constructed piece of it now in the Science Museum, London, and had it succeeded it
would have done something valuable. It would have printed out tables of values of
functions deﬁned by speciﬁc rules, to a speciﬁed level of accuracy, with no mistakes
in the calculation and none in the printing, either. The more puzzling question is
whether this would or should count as thinking at all.
Consider just one of the questions this, or a similar machine, could answer: ﬁnd
sin (18). It is unlikely that anyone not trained in mathematics would know how to do
this, and many a mathematics student today would stumble their way toward the
answer. To be sure, that is partly because many branches of mathematics are not
concerned with this or similar questions, and all users of mathematics simply ask
their nearest computer for the answer without even wondering how the machine on
their desk actually ﬁnds it. But it would be a nontrivial job to teach the relevant
mathematics, and successful students might take a few minutes to ﬁnd the answer
under exam conditions, just as they would with any question requiring thought. On
the other hand, once the theory is worked out, the calculation is entirely routine. The
hard work of thinking goes into ﬁnding routines that are quick and work uniformly
for a large range of inputs. The actual computation is so little evidence of thought
that exactly this task was delegated by the mathematician de Prony during the French
Revolution to teams of unemployed hairdressers.50
This example illustrates what years of experience have demonstrated working
with computers: there is a difference between working very fast and accurately
according to a set of rules, and the way people think. At the start of the twenty-ﬁrst
century it seems that how humans think and how machines operate are very different
indeed. That said, we may indeed be years away from building machines that can
genuinely do philosophy, but if mathematics is, as Hilbert suggested, nothing more
than the production of formulas according to rules, are we far away from producing
machines that would do mathematics? One way in to this problem is to return to
Borel’s argument in his ‘‘La logique et l’intuition en mathe´matiques’ of 1907 (see
§4.2.1 above). There he observed that a machine set simply to produce provable
formulas might well grind out all the algebraic formulas it can, but it cannot focus
attention on the interesting ones. Indeed, not only might the formulas relevant to a
particular mathematical problem be generated as numbers 344, 1027, 90112, and so
on at random, but they may not come out in anything resembling the ‘‘right’’ order.
In which case, one could never be sure one had them all. Or it might be that the steps
needed to generate many interesting results were themselves so numerous that one
would have to wait many lifetimes for them to arrive. Once one looks for shortcuts,
49 Lovelace 1843.
50 Wig manufacture had gone out of fashion, for obvious reasons.
AFTER THE WAR

431

directed at producing all and only the worthwhile formulas, one has presumably left
this kind of mechanical work behind.
Boole’s Laws of Thought was aimed at a different kind of mental activity, one
more akin to human thinking. Fictional detectives excel at deductions of the kind: it
cannot be the butler because he is right-handed and the murderer was left-handed,
and if it was Jane then John would have not met her in London at 6 p.m. that evening,
and therefore. . . . If there was a complete list of all eventualities, then, as Sherlock
Holmes said, ‘‘When you have eliminated the impossible, whatever remains, however
improbable, must be the truth.’’51 Computer-aided statistical searches generate op-
portunities for sophisticated versions of this form of reasoning. Oddly enough, hu-
mans are not very good at it, and in order to speed the process up, Jevons invented a
mechanical contraption, sometimes called his logical piano. This did enable people to
tackle questions of this kind and those involving four terms faster than ever before,
but it was clumsy and disparaged by Venn, who invented the Venn diagrams to solve
the problem.52
More interesting for present purposes was the machine invented by Allan Mar-
quand, who was among the students Peirce had arranged to contribute to the Studies.
His father, Henry Gurdon Marquand, was a New York banker and one of the
founders and a chief benefactor of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, and Allan
Marquand was eventually to ﬁnd his metier as a professor of ﬁne arts at Princeton
University, where he taught for forty years. As a young man he had been both an
athlete and a scholar, with a degree from Princeton. He then studied theology for
three years at the Princeton Seminary and at the Union Seminary in New York,
before going to the University of Berlin for a year and then on to Johns Hopkins,
where he received his Ph.D. in philosophy.
Like Jevons, Marquand worked on logic diagrams, and like Jevons found them
cumbersome and set to work to automate logical deduction. While at Johns Hopkins,
Marquand (1883) published two essays in the Studies, one displaying his immersion
in classical scholarship, ‘‘The Logic of the Epicureans,’’ and the other the work that
interests us here: ‘‘A Machine for Producing Syllogistic Variations.’’ This generates
all eight forms in which a given syllogism can be written, provided it is put in the
correct form. It was followed by an essay entitled ‘‘A New Logical Machine’’ in 1885,
when Marquand was thirty-two, in which the sixteen possible combinations of four
terms could be analyzed.53 Peirce praised it in the ﬁrst volume of the American
Journal of Psychology in 1887 as ‘‘a vastly more clear-headed contrivance than that
of Mr Jevons’’ because it used Mitchell’s presentation of the syllogism throughout.54
This seems reasonable. Baldwin, in the article he wrote in the Dictionary of Philo-
sophy and Psychology on logic machines, observed that ‘‘for problems of ten terms
Venn would require a new diagram of complicated form, and 1,024 keys to operate
the instrument. Jevons for a ten-term machine would require 10,240 letters for his
combinations, and a key-board with forty-four keys. Marquand’s machine for ten
terms needs only 124 letters and twenty-two keys.’’
51 See Doyle 1891.
52 See Edwards 2004.
53 See Gardner 1983, chap. 6.
54 Quoted in Gardner 1983, 109.
432

CHAPTER 7

In his book Gardner tells us that his inquiries about this machine led to a search
for it in Princeton University and it was eventually discovered in the stacks of the
university library. Today it is preserved and on display in the Firestone Library.
Baldwin also wrote that ‘‘in 1882 Marquand constructed from an ordinary hotel
annunciator another machine in which all the combinations are visible at the outset,
and the inconsistent combinations are concealed from view as the premises are
impressed upon the keys. He also had designs made by means of which the same
operations could be accomplished by means of electro-magnets.’’ The logician
Alonzo Church found the circuit design for this machine in Marquand’s papers in
1953—the ﬁrst known design of this kind.55
7.2.2 Hilbert
In the 1920s, when Hilbert was developing his proof theory, he was not simply
concerned to show that mathematics was correct. He wanted other proof-theoretic
matters settled at the same time. In his ‘‘On the Inﬁnite’’ (Hilbert 1926), he called for
a proof that every problem can be solved. Not being a constructivist, he did not
consider that proof theory would provide a general method for solving every
mathematical problem; rather, he hoped that proof theory could show that the
assumption that every problem has a solution is consistent. In 1928 at the Inter-
national Congress in Bologna he spelled out three problems: Was mathematics
complete—can every properly formulated statement be proved or disproved? Is it
consistent—is it impossible to prove a false statement or derive a contradiction? And
is mathematics decidable? This initially meant: given a correctly formulated sen-
tence, can it be decided if the sentence is true?56 Once Go¨del’s theorem separated the
concepts of true and proved, this problem became: Given a correctly formulated
sentence, can it be decided if the sentence is provable? In this form it became known
as the ‘‘decision problem.’’
Go¨del’s incompleteness theorem showed that the known formalized systems of
mathematics are either inconsistent or incomplete, and clearly incompleteness is to
be preferred. The decision problem remained open until 1936, when it too was
shown to have a negative answer. The solution was the independent work of three
logicians: Alonzo Church, Alan Turing, and Emil Post (whose contribution cannot be
discussed here). Church’s approach is more abstract, but it will help to highlight
where exactly in Turing’s work the human comes in, and so to bring out the im-
plications for human thought, an ongoing interest of Turing’s. Indeed, it is worth
stressing that ideas about what is computable proceeded in this period from what an
idealized human being might do, given arbitrarily many pencils and sheets of paper
and an arbitrarily long life.57
Church introduced what he called the ‘‘lambda calculus’’ and the concept of a
lambda-deﬁnable function.58 Independently, Go¨del and the French logician Her-
55 Gardner 1983, 112, tells us that the design is reproduced in Science 118: 281.
56 Hilbert 1929.
57 And, let us hope, a lot of time off.
58 See Gandy 1995.
AFTER THE WAR

433

brand introduced the concept of a recursive function, and Church and Kleene
showed that these concepts pick out the same functions. To say that a function is
recursive is to say something entirely precise (what, more precisely, will be indicated
below). Church was asked by Go¨del what the relationship was between effectively
calculable and recursive functions, where ‘‘effectively calculable’’ is a vague term that
means something like ‘‘a function that can occur in mathematics.’’ Church’s answer
was that any function that is effectively calculable by a machine of ﬁnite size is
recursive. What is known as Church’s thesis is therefore the philosophical thesis that
the concept of ‘‘effectively calculable’’ is caught exactly by the mathematically precise
term recursive. Post regarded it as ‘‘a fundamental discovery in the limitations of the
mathematicizing power of Homo Sapiens.’’59
Alan Turing’s idea was much more down to earth. He imagined a machine ca-
pable of carrying out computations unaided. It would be fed an arbitrarily long tape
divided into squares. At each stage it would read the information on the square in
front of it. If the square was blank, the machine could write a symbol in the square; if
the square had a symbol, the machine could erase the symbol in that square. In either
case, the machine would then move one place (left or right) on the tape or else stay
put. What determined what the machine would do was called its conﬁguration, and
the machine could go from one conﬁguration to another, so a typical action of the
machine would be something like: ‘‘Write a 1 in this square, go one step to the left,
enter conﬁguration 6.’’ The conﬁgurations (of which there are a ﬁnite number) can be
thought of as its program or rule book. So there would be a machine for each task:
adding numbers, for example, or multiplying them, or looking up the result in a
table of already computed numbers. On the view that any mathematical activity can
be broken down into ﬁnitely many simple activities of this kind, there would be
a machine for every mathematical activity. So Hilbert’s question became: Given
a problem, is there a machine that solves it?
To prove that there was not, Turing focused on one particular task: computing
numbers, such as the decimal expansion of p. Certainly there is a machine that will
produce arbitrary many numbers in the sequence 1, 4, 1, 5, 9. . . . Turing considered
what he called the computable numbers, the set of all numbers, each of which has the
property that it can be written down to arbitrary levels of accuracy. It includes all
rational numbers because they have repeating decimals, and it includes all the
numbers speciﬁed by a suitable rule. For convenience, consider just those computable
numbers that lie between 0 and 1. Suppose these numbers form a countable set, and
enumerate them. Ask the machine that computes the ﬁrst computable number to
compute the ﬁrst decimal place of that number. Ask the machine that computes the
second computable number to compute the second decimal place of that number.
And so on: ask the machine that computes the nth computable number to compute
the nth decimal place of that number. Now read down the numbers thus generated
and change them according to a rule, such as: replace each number which is not a 5
by a 5 and replace 5 by a 3. This gives you a number that is not produced by any
machine—for if it were, it would have been produced by some machine, say the nth,
but it differs from the number produced by the nth machine in the nth decimal place.
Therefore, the computable numbers form an uncountable set.
59 Quoted in Gandy 1995, 77.
434

CHAPTER 7

But this is impossible, because the set of machines is countable. Each machine is
speciﬁed by a ﬁnite set of conﬁgurations it can have, and each conﬁguration is
speciﬁed by a ﬁnite set of instructions, each written in a ﬁnite set of words. Each
machine, therefore, is speciﬁed by a ﬁnite set of words. They can therefore be enu-
merated by writing down the rule book for each machine and assembling the rule
books in alphabetical order.60 So the set of machines is countable, and since each
machine computes a computable number, the set of computable numbers is count-
able.
So the idea of computable numbers led Turing to a contradiction, and either it
must in some way be incoherent or else the use of these machines to produce an
uncomputable number must be ﬂawed. The only way out, he realized, was that, for
some number n, the computation of the nth decimal place of the nth number might
fail. To be precise, the nth machine might take indeﬁnitely long to produce the nth
number from the one before. Imagine that each machine is to be checked before it
goes off to do its bit. It has to be checked mechanically, of course, if the aim is to
mechanize all mathematics, so what Turing saw was that there could be no checking
machine that could check that every machine intended to produce a computable
number in fact did so. So Turing had a mathematical problem that could not be
solved by a machine, and with it the negative answer to Hilbert’s decision problem.
The precise way a machine might fail gave a negative resolution to another of
Hilbert’s problems, the halting problem. This asks for certainty that a given Turing
machine with given input will eventually halt after an explicit number of steps (the
number will depend on the machine and the input). Turing showed that there could
be no such certainty.
To complete the story, what Turing also proved, when he heard of Church and
Kleene’s work, was that every recursive function can be expressed as a Turing ma-
chine and vice versa. Thus we have what has been called the Church-Turing thesis:
that every effectively calculable function can be computed by a Turing machine.
To sum up, the work of Go¨del, Church, and Turing shows that any large system of
mathematics (if consistent) is incomplete—there will always be true statements that
are unprovable within the system—and it is undecidable: there will always be
problems that cannot be shown to be solvable within the system.61 This would seem
to say that mathematics exceeds the limits that Hilbert presumed for it, it is not to be
identiﬁed with the range of mechanically produced formulas, and it is therefore, one
might say, creative. It also turns out that no one since the momentous years of the
1930s has produced a function that could be called effectively computable and which
falsiﬁes the Church-Turing thesis.
This does not, however, mean that every kind of computer is limited in the way
that Turing machines are, or that the human mind is so limited. Only if every kind of
‘‘computation,’’ however broadly deﬁned, were mechanizable would there be a
convincing a priori case for the human mind being modeled on a Turing machine.
Such a claim has yet to be established. As for the ﬁrst claim, it is simply false. There
60 Allowing for translations, this might produce: Every marriage . . . [ It is a truth universally . . . [
London, Michaelmas term . . . , and, deliberate parodies and revised editions aside, all books ever written
in English might be listed in this way with entries of perhaps no more than twenty letters.
61 Here large means, for example, capable of formalizing both addition and multiplication. There are
provably complete consistent systems, such as the propositional and predicate calculi.
AFTER THE WAR

435

are machines that are not Turing machines. Typically, they are inﬁnite in size (they
have inﬁnitely long rule books), and they can handle inﬁnite amounts of information
at once. Turing ruled them out because they offended his sense of the calculable. He
argued that the human eye, for example, can only take in a ﬁnite amount of infor-
mation at a time, which is how he argued his way down to squares each contain-
ing one piece of information. Inﬁnite machines are not enumerable, but one might
also argue that they cannot be built precisely because they are inﬁnite.62 But it is an
open question as to whether a ﬁnite machine obeying the laws of physics and con-
structible in ﬁnite time can be built that would not be a Turing machine, and
quantum computers might well be such machines.63 Nor can the seemingly un-
constructible quality of the non-Turing machines weigh too heavily on the general
problem, because even a Turing machine is implausible: it requires arbitrary amounts
of tape, arbitrary amounts of time to run, and is assumed never to break down. This
is quite a step from a human, in Turing’s words, ‘‘working in a disciplined but
unintelligent manner.’’
One class of computers that might not be Turing machines deserves brief mention:
analogue computers. Some experts think that there may well be reliable physical
processes that could yield computation methods that cannot be modeled by Turing
machines.
It is also worth noting that Turing himself wrote about non-Turing machines in
his 1936 paper. He called them oracles, or O-machines. One is, to oversimplify, a
Turing machine with input in the form of some noncomputable number, supplied,
naturally enough, by an oracle. Indeed, as Copeland shows, because a Turing ma-
chine accepts no input once it is working (everything must be supplied on the initial
input) a pair of Turing machines, one accepting input from the other, can be made
into a non-Turing machine.
7.2.3 Turing and the Turing Test
Turing, as already noted, was at least as interested in how humans think as in
machines, and after the Second World War he took up the theme explicitly in a paper
he published in Mind in 1950. The Turing test, as he stated it, is so different from
what it is often said to be that the opening of the paper is worth quoting in full.
I propose to consider the question, ‘‘Can machines think?’’ This should begin with
deﬁnitions of the meaning of the terms ‘‘machine’’ and ‘‘think.’’ The deﬁnitions might be
framed so as to reﬂect so far as possible the normal use of the words, but this attitude is
dangerous. If the meaning of the words ‘‘machine’’ and ‘‘think’’ are to be found by
62 Consider this simple example of a perpetual motion machine: take a line and ﬁx a unit of length. At
the points 1, 2, 3, . . . units away from the origin, put a small unit weight. When the system is released
from rest, it will travel down the line away from the origin, because every weight has more points beyond
it than behind it. Similar obstacles might affect the construction of non-Turing machines: the rule book
could never be written down completely, and so on.
63 See the discussion in B. Jack Copeland, ‘‘The Church-Turing Thesis,’’ in The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy (Fall 2002 Edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta, http:==plato.stanford.edu=archives=fall2002=
entries=church-turing=. For a survey, see the published version of B.J. Copeland and R. Sylvan. ‘‘Beyond
the Universal Turing Machine,’’ Australasian Journal of Philosophy 77 (1999): 46–66.
436

CHAPTER 7

examining how they are commonly used it is difﬁcult to escape the conclusion that the
meaning and the answer to the question, ‘‘Can machines think?’’ is to be sought in a
statistical survey such as a Gallup poll. But this is absurd. Instead of attempting such a
deﬁnition I shall replace the question by another, which is closely related to it and is
expressed in relatively unambiguous words. The new form of the problem can be de-
scribed in terms of a game which we call the ‘‘imitation game.’’ It is played with three
people, a man (A), a woman (B), and an interrogator (C) who may be of either sex. The
interrogator stays in a room apart from the other two. The object of the game for the
interrogator is to determine which of the other two is the man and which is the woman.
He knows them by labels X and Y, and at the end of the game he says either ‘‘X is A and
Y is B’’ or ‘‘X is B and Y is A.’’ The interrogator is allowed to put questions to A and B
thus: C: Will X please tell me the length of his or her hair? Now suppose X is actually A,
then A must answer. It is A’s object in the game to try and cause C to make the wrong
identiﬁcation. His answer might therefore be ‘‘My hair is shingled, and the longest
strands, are about nine inches long.’’ In order that tones of voice may not help the
interrogator the answers should be written, or better still, typewritten. The ideal ar-
rangement is to have a teleprinter communicating between the two rooms. Alternatively
the question and answers can be repeated by an intermediary. The object of the game for
the third player (B) is to help the interrogator. The best strategy for her is probably to
give truthful answers. She can add such things as ‘‘I am the woman, don’t listen to him!’’
to her answers, but it will avail nothing as the man can make similar remarks. We now
ask the question, ‘‘What will happen when a machine takes the part of A in this game?’’
Will the interrogator decide wrongly as often when the game is played like this as he
does when the game is played between a man and a woman? These questions replace our
original, ‘‘Can machines think?’’
So there are three participants, and the interrogator (recall that Turing had spent
the war decoding Enigma messages) must decide who of the other two is a man or a
woman. If the interrogator does no better when a machine takes the place of the man,
then Turing suggested that the machine should be considered intelligent. After a
lengthy discussion of what a machine can be taken to be, and a construction, which
excluded such ideas as calling a person a machine and inclined toward deﬁning a
machine as a digital computer, Turing ventured his own opinion on what might
happen: ‘‘I believe that in about ﬁfty years time it will be possible to programme
computers with a storage capacity of about 109 to make them play the imitation
game so well that an average interrogator will not have more than 70 per cent chance
of making the right identiﬁcation after ﬁve minutes of questioning.’’ In this, he seems
to have been wrong. It is harder than he thought to make a machine talk coherent
sense about complicated real world issues. Turing gave the example of the interro-
gator asking A to write a sonnet and A replying ‘‘Count me out on this one. I never
could write poetry.’’ Which is fair enough, but similar declarations of modesty on too
many issues would surely excite suspicion.
Turing dealt, in this paper, with various objections to the idea that the test was a
fair one. He characterized what he called the mathematical objection this way. It is
known (from the work of Church and Turing discussed above) that there are certain
things that a digital computer with an inﬁnite capacity cannot do. There will be some
questions to which it will either give a wrong answer or fail to give an answer at all
however much time is allowed for a reply. This mathematical result is said to show a
AFTER THE WAR

437

disability of machines to which the human intellect is not subject. Turing was not
impressed with this evidence of mechanical inadequacy:
We too often give wrong answers to questions ourselves to be justiﬁed in being very
pleased at such evidence of fallibility on the part of the machines. Further, our superi-
ority can only be felt on such an occasion in relation to the one machine over which we
have scored our petty triumph. There would be no question of triumphing simulta-
neously over all machines. In short, then, there might be men cleverer than any given
machine, but then again there might be other machines cleverer again, and so on.
Turing then brieﬂy considered the vexing and profound topic of consciousness,
which is once again at the forefront of research, and argued that it was distinct from
the question of thinking.
He then turned to one of Lady Lovelace’s opinions about the Analytical Engine:
that it was incapable of originality. ‘‘The Analytical Engine has no pretensions to
originate anything. It can do whatever we know how to order it to perform’’ (her
italics). To this, Turing noted that this did not rule out being able to construct
electronic equipment that would ‘‘think for itself,’’ as certain recent developments
had seemed to suggest. He gave reasons to believe that the information store of
Encyclopaedia Britannica would ﬁt well into a computer the size of a child’s brain,
and the rest of the creation of a thinking adult brain could be done by education. His
account of education says more than one might expect about the rigors of an English
childhood, but gave only the vaguest of accounts of how a computer capable of
original thought could be taught to do so. Most likely he did not know by then that
such ideas had already been animating the other powerful mathematician whose
mind had turned during the war to making computers: John von Neumann.
7.2.4 Von Neumann and Neural Networks
The Psalmist (Psalm 8, verse 4) asked: ‘‘What is man, that thou art mindful of him?
and the son of man, that thou visitest him?’’ The Quaker Warren Sturgis McCulloch
tells us in his autobiography that in 1917, while a student at Haverford College in
Pennsylvania and inspired by Russell’s deﬁnition of number, he hoped one day to
answer the questions, ‘‘What is a number, that a man may know it, and a man, that
he may know a number?’’64 He spent the 1930s studying monkey and chimpanzee
brains at the Yale University Medical School. At a seminar at Yale he was reminded
of the work of Russell and Whitehead and asked the speaker, F. B. Fitch, to work up
the symbolic formulation of the theory of neural nets. What had caught McCulloch’s
attention was that a logical proposition is either true or false, and a neuron either
ﬁres or it does not. Neurons are linked in the brain in what are called neural nets, the
ﬁring of some determines the ﬁring of others, much in the way that propositions are
linked and the truth of some depends on the truth of others.
In 1941 McCulloch moved to the University of Illinois Medical School. There he
befriended Walter Pitts, an eighteen-year-old runaway from Detroit who had studied
logic with Carnap—it seems that Bertrand Russell may have introduced them65—
64 On McCulloch and Pitts, see Abraham 2002 and Heims 1991 and the literature cited there in.
65 See Abraham 2002, 12–13, quoting McCorduck 1979, 73–74, n. 1.
438

CHAPTER 7

when only ﬁfteen and mathematical biology with Rashevsky. Together they outlined
a theory of how neural nets might model complex propositions. Their idealized
neuron has some excitatory and some inhibitory inputs, a threshold voltage, and
some branching output to other neurons, and to that extent it is a plausible simpli-
ﬁcation of real neurons. They showed that a large class of mental functions could be
carried out by such nets.
In 1942 Pitts went to MIT to work with Norbert Wiener, who regarded Pitts as
‘‘without question the strongest young scientist I have ever met.’’66 Wiener also met
frequently with McCulloch and was also in contact with John von Neumann. Von
Neumann quickly saw that the Pitts-McCulloch model of neural nets was a good way
to think about the design of general-purpose computers.
In their published paper of 1943 McCulloch and Pitts showed how to join up
neurons so that, for example, neuron C will ﬁre if and only if neurons A and B ﬁre, or
so that neuron C will ﬁre if and only if either neuron A or neuron B ﬁres, and so on
through the logical connectives.67 This enabled them to write wiring diagrams and to
describe in formulas nets of neurons that could carry out any logical operation. They
even claimed that they had ‘‘proved, in substance, the equivalence of all general
Turing machines—man-made or begotten’’—although mathematical logicians dis-
puted this claim and physiologists rightly found their model oversimpliﬁed—and
they happily noted (p. 121) that now the human mind no longer ‘‘goes more ghostly
than a ghost.’’ Von Neumann, however, seems to have been attracted by the unity of
the biological and man-made worlds they proposed, and took their work as the
crucial insight for constructing a programmable computer.68 As Aspray remarks of
von Neumann, ‘‘He made their theory of neural nets and Turing’s machines the two
pillars of his theory of automata.’’69
The biological and medical communities were for a long time much less enthu-
siastic about the work of McCulloch and Pitts than von Neumann was. Matters
began to change with the work of the Canadian neurophysiologist Donald Hebb.
Neurons in the brain occur in bunches, communicating by chemical signals across the
small gaps between them known as synaptic gaps. In his book The Organization of
Behavior: A Neuropsychological Theory, Hebb attempted to analyze human be-
havior directly in terms of the functioning of the brain and the nervous system. He
offered what he called a ‘‘general theory of behavior that attempts to bridge the gap
between neurophysiology and psychology.’’ He focused on the way neurons may
change as a way to explain learning and memory. In a much-quoted passage, he
wrote: ‘‘When an axon of cell A is near enough to excite B and repeatedly or per-
sistently takes part in ﬁring it, some growth process or metabolic change takes place
in one or both cells such that A’s efﬁciency, as one of the cells ﬁring B, is increased.’’70
He argued that these cell assemblies thus formed could constitute a memory or
66 Heims 1991, 40.
67 McCulloch and Pitts 1943.
68 See, for example, von Neumann 1951.
69 Aspray 1990, 181. Aspray’s book gives the reader a great deal of insight into the last few years of
von Neumann’s life and work. Gandy 1995, 87, points out that Turing also used the idea of McCulloch-
Pitts logic gates in designing computers.
70 Hebb 1949.
AFTER THE WAR

439

thought-process. Such behaviour of what became known as the Hebb synapse was
ﬁrst demonstrated in the 1970s.
It turn, Hebb’s observations became the basis of a great deal of research into
computers that could learn. The idea was that neural networks could be described
that would tackle a certain problem and could be told that they had succeeded or
failed, done well or badly. They would then modify themselves, strengthen or
weaken various connections, and try again, learning in this way by trial and error
until they were conﬁrmed in a successful conﬁguration. The ups, downs, and ups of
this idea are beyond this book to describe.
7.3 The Rise of Mathematical Platonism
To be a mathematician is to be an out-and-out Platonist
—David Mumford, in Parikh 1991, xvii
7.3.1 Working Platonists?
A widely quoted aphorism circulates among mathematicians and philosophers of
mathematics these days, to the effect that mathematicians are Platonists on working
days but formalists on Sundays. In other words, while they are doing mathematics
they believe in the existence of mind-independent mathematical objects whose
properties are responsible for the truth of their theorems, but if forced to defend
mathematics in philosophical terms they would resort, perhaps insincerely, to Hil-
bert-style formalism. Although the real situation is much more complicated, the
aphorism contains a certain amount of truth. Mathematicians do speak of their most
securely established theorems as true (not merely as proved). It is as true for them
that 3 is a prime number as that there are no solutions to the equation xn þ yn ¼ zn
when x, y, z, and n are integers greater than 2. Probably most mathematicians believe
that these truths derive from the properties of objects (manifolds, schemes, spaces of
functions, . . .) that their carefully constructed theories so accurately describe. Some
even suggest that it is real insight into these objects that allows the best of them to be
truly innovative and to discover deep properties previously unknown.
A ﬁne example of a mathematical Platonist is Alain Connes, a Fields medallist in
1982. His fascinating discussions with Jean-Pierre Changeux introduce a number of
important themes and contain this declaration of his faith: ‘‘There exists, indepen-
dently of the human mind, a raw and immutable mathematical reality.’’ Challenged,
he admits that this reality does not exist in space-time, and indeed is ‘‘far more stable
than physical reality for not being located in space-time.’’ The mathematician per-
ceives it via a special sense. Changeux disagrees. As a molecular neurobiologist, he
prefers a materialist viewpoint, in which mathematics is a matter of syntax and
semantics, of language, and of the workings of the human brain. Connes regards all
that as tools with which we deepen our understanding of mathematical reality. He
thinks of himself as a realist (a term he prefers to Platonist) about mathematical
objects—but then, we could note, Plato was a realist too. He urges that there is no
irreconcilable conﬂict between materialism and realism, to which Changeux objects
440

CHAPTER 7

that, on Connes’ scheme of things, it is very hard to see how mathematical knowl-
edge can be acquired at all.71
Mathematicians also set a high store by formal proofs, and not only on Sundays.
For example, at the start of the twentieth century, Edmund Landau would not accept
a theorem until the proof has been published and scrutinized. Others to this day are
more willing to trust the insights of selected colleagues, and even their own.
To a considerable extent, many, even most, mathematicians are Platonists, but
there is more to be said. Many mathematicians are untroubled by any reﬂections of
this kind. They are not philosophers, and they are largely unaware of any other
philosophy of mathematics, so their default Platonism is hardly well defended. Were
this kind of philosophizing to matter more to mathematicians, it might be that some
would espouse other philosophies, at least on weekdays.72 In fact, when mathema-
ticians do reﬂect on the nature of their subject—when, without being so labeled, they
become philosophers of mathematics—they have concerns that conventional phi-
losophy of mathematics has largely ignored since modernism succeeded. They ask
about the fruitfulness of their methods and for the ‘‘right’’ way to think about a
problem, and they are concerned about the purity of their methods and what counts
as an explanation.
Mathematicians resort to philosophy in part because the best and most widely
accepted formulation of mathematics leaves room for it. The axioms of set theory,
say the Zermelo-Fraenkel axioms (ZF) or Zermelo-Fraenkel with choice (ZFC), do
not resolve philosophical questions for several reasons: there is no proof that ZF is
consistent (not that anyone seriously doubts it); ZF gives a great deal more than
elementary mathematics and not everybody is comfortable with this superabun-
dance; there is room for discussion of the ontological question about the existence of
the sets constructed in ZF or ZFC; there is room for an epistemological discussion;
and ﬁnally there is also room for discussion about how, and how well, the concepts
generated in ZF match what they are meant to describe or capture. Much of the
conﬁdence in the de facto consistency of ZF resides in the overwhelming charm of
naive set theory. Ontological problems arise over the nature of models in axiomatic
mathematics: If the models are entirely mathematical, is there not a risk of a vicious
circle? If the vicious circle is avoided, where and what are the ultimate undeﬁned
terms? If nonmathematical models, whether physical or naive, are admitted, is the
truth claim of mathematics ultimately no better than the truth claims of these models
(contrary to most mathematicians’ cherished beliefs)? Epistemological issues arise,
for example, in the step from denumerable to nondenumerably inﬁnite sets, which
some (Baire, for example) found unacceptable (see §4.7.5 above).
7.3.2 Schlick’s Anti-Platonism
An interesting early perspective on mathematical Platonism and its errors was pro-
vided by Moritz Schlick (1918) in his Allgemeine Erkenntnistheorie. Early on in
this book (§5), Schlick addressed the question of what is knowledge of concepts.
A concept, he said, is completely precise, and here he gave the example of modern
71 Changeux and Connes 1995; the quotations are on pp. 26, 28.
72 An example is the nominalism discussed below.
AFTER THE WAR

441

mathematics. Mathematical deﬁnitions, he pointed out in §7, are implicit deﬁnitions.
Mathematicians had dispensed with appeals to any kind of intuition and had offered
instead speciﬁcations of exactly what could be said of a concept by saying that the
primitive concepts are deﬁned by the axioms they satisfy. Because, as Schlick put it, the
intellectual labor of science consists of inferring, a concept is nothing more than that
concerning which certain judgments can be expressed. The beginner chafes at the idea
that the concepts thus deﬁned are devoid of actual content, but any set of objects
satisfying the axioms is as good as any other. So axiomatic geometry is not truly a
science of space, because the concepts denoted ‘‘point’’ and ‘‘line’’ have no association
or connection with reality at all. Its merit is rather that it determines its concepts
completely and so enables us to attain strict precision of thought.
Because a concept is completely precise, it cannot be a mental image, or a real
mental structure of any sort. We operate with them through their deﬁning charac-
teristics, we ask ourselves if an object has the properties speciﬁed in a deﬁnition. So a
concept plays the role of a sign for those objects that satisfy the relevant deﬁnitions.
They are represented in thought by, for example, images, and insofar as they are
handled in a nonintuitive way such thinking consists of conscious acts. Stumpf,
Husserl, and Ku¨lpe, he said, deserve great credit for bringing out the role of acts in
psychology; one such ‘‘act’’ or function is thinking of a concept, being directed
toward it. It is thus the conceptual function that is real, not the concept itself.
Schlick had this to say about the nature of concepts:
Concepts are not real. They are neither real structures in the consciousness of the thinker
nor are they, as medieval ‘‘realism’’ held, some kind of actual thing within the real object
that is designated by means of them. Strictly speaking, concepts do not exist at all. What
does exist is a conceptual function. And this function, depending on the circumstances,
can be performed on the one hand by images or various mental acts and on the other by
names or written signs. . . .
The view adopted above—that concepts do not actually exist, that to talk of concepts
is simply to use a kind of shorthand, that in reality there are only conceptual functions—
has encountered widespread opposition. It has been argued that entire sciences exist,
such as mathematics and pure logic, whose subject matter consists exclusively of con-
cepts and their relationships. Thus it seems that we cannot deny existence to concepts
without being led to absurdities of the sort Lorenz Oken expressed so well when he said
‘‘Mathematics is based on Nothingness (Nichts) and hence arises from Nothingness.’’
For this reason, we generally prefer to say: concepts do exist, they have a kind of being
just as sense objects, for example, do; but it is an ideal being rather than a real one.
Granted that the concepts of triangle, of the number ﬁve, of the syllogism, and the like
have no real existence. Yet they are not just nothing, since we can make various valid
statements about them. Therefore we must ascribe to them a kind of being, and this we
call ideal being to distinguish it from real being. There is no objection to this form of
expression, of course, so long as the question is purely one of terminology. But such talk
of ideal objects leads all too easily to unclear and erroneous views, views that point in
the direction of the Platonic metaphysics on which these linguistic formulations lean.
Almost without noticing it, we come to counterpose to the real world another world
independent of it, a world of ideal being, a realm of ideas . . . in short, a timeless world
of concepts.
442

CHAPTER 7

Schlick now argued that from this seemingly innocent use of language spread
entanglements that only obscured what they were meant to clarify.
He returned to this theme (in §18) when he said that clarity about the distinction
between mental activities and logical relationships had only been achieved in the feud
against psychologism. There was still, however, a tendency to think of a domain of
ideas that ‘‘exists’’ independently of the real world. ‘‘But there is scarcely a Plato-
nizing philosopher . . . who has not been led by the doctrine to entertain views that
make it quite impossible to understand the true relationship of the two realms [the
conceptual and the real]. These views have the same consequence in this respect as
the Platonic myth, which enthrones the Ideas as real beings . . . eternally remote
from our world and inaccessible to any of our senses.’’ To get epistemic access to
these remote objects, Schlick said that ‘‘idealists of the Platonist tendency . . . resort
to the same expedient to which philosophers have not infrequently had recourse in
similar cases: if a proposition that is close to their hearts is not correct when words
are taken in their usual sense, they construct a new sense for these words. In this way,
of course, it is always possible to maintain the old proposition; but now it means
something different.’’
He quoted Husserl, who wrote about grasping, experiencing, being aware of, in
connection with this ideal being, but in an entirely different sense than in connection
with an empirical or individually separate being.73 The only sense Schlick could
make of this was that what actually exists are the conceptual functions, and we do
actually experience an intention toward concepts. But this, he said, was no help with
understanding the nature of knowledge, because we still needed to know how in-
tentional experience relates to ideal structures. Nor was Schlick impressed with the
new science of phenomenology, but we shall see that others were to be more sym-
pathetic.
Schlick’s way out was to observe that one can reason quite precisely about con-
cepts because we can distinguish among the deﬁnitions they are associated with.
Intuitive ideas are certainly vague, but they can be distinguished from one another
with absolute certainty in precisely the way that exact truths can be established by
inexact experiences, and so imprecise ideas can perform fully the task of concepts.74
We need not follow him here, but can appreciate his analysis of the Platonic temp-
tation.
7.3.3 Bernays’s Formulation
The aphorism suggests that mathematicians deal with philosophical questions about
mathematics uneasily, and this is further manifest in the ill-deﬁned term ‘‘Platonism’’
with its vague, unanalyzed connotations of Plato’s theory of forms. In fact, mathe-
matical Platonism, however it is deﬁned, is a twentieth-century phenomenon and
arose from the triumphs of mathematical modernism.
73 Schlick gave this reference: Husserl, Logische Untersuchungen, vol. I, p. 128.
74 Schlick gave the delightful example ‘‘it is not simply inaccurate but utterly nonsensical to say that a
person has 2.002 ears’’ (p. 146).
AFTER THE WAR

443

The term ‘‘mathematical Platonism’’ seems to have been coined by Bernays in
1935.75 There he deﬁned it as a tendency to see mathematical objects as ‘‘cut off from
all links with the reﬂecting subject.’’ He went on that the value of this philosophy was
that it furnishes ‘‘models of abstract imagination’’ and forms representations ‘‘which
extrapolate from certain regions of experience and intuition.’’ He illustrated what he
meant by a ladder of existence claims, starting from the set of the ﬁrst n integers and
maps from this set to itself, to the generalization that considers the set of all integers,
rising to the set of all subsets of the set of all integers, and then to the real numbers as
usually deﬁned, the axiom of choice, and ﬁnally the Cantorian hierarchy of sets. He
noted that talk of the existence of the ﬁrst of these objects (say, the set of the ﬁrst
twenty-seven integers) is entirely unproblematic, and that as and when it becomes
problematic the discussion is enriched with talk about how the objects can be
speciﬁed, culminating in rules for forming sets. This form of Platonism, he observed,
has proved itself very successful in algebra and topology, and he concluded that
‘‘platonism reigns today in mathematics’’ (p. 5).
Bernays then noted that this form of Platonism had been criticized. What he called
absolute Platonism—by which he meant the Platonism corresponding to naive set
theory—was ruled out by the famous antinomies of naive set theory, leaving what he
called a quasi-combinatorial form. Some mathematicians had, however, recoiled
completely from the whole endeavor, most notably Brouwer, and Bernays located
the force of Brouwer’s position in its insistence that the thinking subject be given a
central role in the philosophy of mathematics. A variety of modern philosophical
positions have adopted the latter position, which has a respectable antecedent in the
later work of Husserl, and it is surely a powerful alternative to the view that would
purge philosophy ruthlessly of any ‘‘psychological’’ component, but is fundamentally
different from any form of Platonism and will not be considered further here. Ber-
nays himself saw Brouwerian intuitionism as the polar opposite of mathematical
Platonism and spent the rest of his paper trying to outline middle ways between these
two extremes. He found one—naturally enough, given the course of his own work—
in the underlying ideas of Hilbert’s proof theory.
Bernays’s deﬁnition of mathematical Platonism locates it as being concerned with
mentally accessible but mind-independent objects. These objects exist, but it would
seem, although he does not say so, that they do not exist as physical objects in space-
time, to adopt a term from present-day philosophers of mathematics. It is the
properties of these objects that mathematicians describe when they produce theo-
rems and announce conjectures. Note that Bernays did not explicitly say that these
theorems are true because they are correct descriptions of the objects. He allowed
himself to say that some statements about mathematics are true, but in this essay he
did not say that the conclusions of mathematics were true—he noted only that
intuitionists lay claim to speak exclusively of truth. It would be a fair interpretation
of what he wrote, however, that he would have agreed that the number 3 is prime,
and he may well have allowed one to say that it is true that 3 is prime, but truth is a
complicated subject and we shall have to return to this point.
75 Platonism in Mathematics, Bernays Project, text no. 13, trans. C. D. Parsons.
444

CHAPTER 7

7.3.4 Platonism, Nominalism, and Fictionalism
Philosophy of mathematics conducted in the analytic tradition since Bernays wrote
has a lot to say about mathematical Platonism, and this helps to clarify the position
into which it is suggested many mathematicians have drifted.76 It begins by dis-
missing the alternatives—mentalism and psychologism—very simply. These posi-
tions imply that a mathematical object (such as the number 5 or a straight line) might
be a mental state, but my mental states cannot be yours, the argument goes, so not
only are we not talking about the same thing when we each speak of the number 5,
but mathematically incorrect statements may actually be true of mental states.
Plainly this is no way to conduct a philosophy of mathematics, so mentalism and
psychologism are dismissed. This seems entirely reasonable if the aim is to conduct
philosophy in a mind-independent way, and if we accept these arguments then
modern philosophy offers two intriguingly similar and intriguingly antithetical al-
ternatives: Platonism and nominalism.77
Nominalism is the view that there are no abstract objects. Nominalists agree
that there are occasions when one sees 3 balls, even 3 red balls, they agree that
this person is a good man, but they regard it as illegitimate to infer an abstract
concept behind these physical objects, such as an abstract 3, or threeness, red or
redness, good or goodness. An obvious problem for nominalists is that the state-
ment that ‘‘3 is prime’’ is false for them, because there is no such thing as 3 and
contemporary analytic philosophy agrees that statements about nonexistent objects
must be false. This makes it difﬁcult for nominalists to distinguish between the
correct claim that 3 is prime and the incorrect claim that 4 is prime, given that for
them both claims are false. To deal with this problem, a variant of nominalism called
ﬁctionalism has been developed that has afﬁnities with the later philosophy of
Carnap.
Mathematical Platonists and nominalists agree, however, that philosophy of
mathematics is concerned with abstract objects lying outside space-time, with what
they may be said to be and with how we may know them. Platonists have to show
that we can meaningfully say what they are and that we really can have access to
them. Nominalists have either to stop the Platonist project in its tracks by showing
that there are no suitable abstract objects, or else to show that there might be
philosophical sense in the idea of abstract objects but that we cannot know them.
76 This treatment follows Mark Balaguer, ‘‘Platonism in Metaphysics,’’ in The Stanford Encyclopedia
of Philosophy (Summer 2004 Edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta, http:==plato.stanford.edu=archives=
sum2004=entries=platonism=.
77 But not just two. Among other alternatives is Feferman’s revival of Weyl’s predicativist theory,
outlined in Das Kontinuum but then allowed to lapse until the 1950s. See, for example, Feferman 1998,
chapter 14. The aim of Feferman’s work is to give logical foundations for all of the mathematics needed in
physics, and in Feferman 2006 he claims to have ‘‘veriﬁed to a considerable extent that all of currently
scientiﬁcally applicable mathematics can be formalized in a system that is proof-theoretically no stronger
than PA.’’ PA, for Peano Arithmetic, is a formal system considerably weaker than ZF. My point here is
much simpler: mathematicians cannot claim that Platonism must be the right philosophy for them be-
cause there is no other philosophy of mathematics—plainly there are several, and nominalism is one that
is close to formalist thinking.
AFTER THE WAR

445

The strongest objection to nominalism is known as the Quine-Putnam indis-
pensability argument.78 They argued that if the best results of science are true, and
quarks exist in atoms in much the way that elephants exist in Africa, and if math-
ematics is indispensable to science, then it is grievously inconsistent to be a nomi-
nalist in mathematics but not in science. So, being realists about science, they sug-
gested that nominalism in mathematics was untenable.79
This argument cannot, however, establish Platonism by default, because Plato-
nism, too, has its problems. It was famously challenged by Benacerraf to meet the
challenge of contemporary epistemology, which only allowed one to have knowledge
of objects one can causally interact with those, in other words, which are in space-
time.80 Since it was widely supposed that Platonists did claim direct mental access to
objects outside space-time by a kind of perception and, since this ability was so little
shared as to seem mysterious, mathematical Platonism is often felt to be problematic
for that reason.81
Bernays’s ladder offers one way into the world of abstract objects, which might
also be called the tone of voice trick. The set of integers from 1 to 27 is something
about which even children can speak reliably and correctly. It contains just these
squares, for example: 1, 4, 9, 16, and 25. It seems downright odd to say that there is
no such set because there are no such integers. But if such talk about these 27 integers
is meaningful, say because they exist, then it doesn’t seem much of a stretch to speak
of a map from this set to itself, such as the map that associates to each number the
sum of its prime divisors (here include 1 but not the number itself, so to 5 we
associate 1 and to 6 we associate 6, for example). We could even list all these maps
(there are 27 choices for each number in the set, making a total of 2727 in all, which is
a number with 39 digits, but ﬁnite all the same). The set of all integers does not seem
at all unreasonable to most people, likewise the set of maps from this set to itself, and
if we have a set we surely have its subsets, and so the idea that 5 exists moves quietly
into the idea that all sorts of large sets exist. If the sweet reasonableness of this
argument, the commonsense tone of voice with which it is uttered, seduces you, then
the natural thing to do is to look for arguments that support its conclusions. Taking
that route leads some to Platonism, and some nominalists to ﬁctionalism.
First, the nominalist objects that we begged the essential question right at the start.
Just as we must know what red means before we agree that we see 3 red balls before
us, so we must know what 3 is, otherwise we could not distinguish this collection of 3
balls from that collection of 4. But explaining what ‘‘red’’ means comes down to
some statements in physics, some brute facts about nature. Similarly, the abstract
concept ‘‘3’’ will dissolve into other brute facts.
The Platonist replies that true statements about people carry the implication that
the people exist, so from the evident truth of the claim that ‘‘3 is prime’’ we can
legitimately deduce that ‘‘3’’ exists. The bold response of the ﬁctionalist nominalist is
78 See Colyvan, Mark, ‘‘Indispensability Arguments in the Philosophy of Mathematics,’’ in The
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2004 Edition), ed. Edward N. Zalta, http:==plato.stanford
.edu=archives=fall2004=entries=mathphil-indis=.
79 Many philosophers think that the obvious move, arguing that mathematics is not essential to
science, will not work. See Balaguer 1998.
80 Benacerraf 1973 in Hart 1996. As we have seen, Changeux raises this point, too.
81 See the comments in Tait 1986, reprinted in Hart 1996.
446

CHAPTER 7

to reply that the statement ‘‘3 is prime’’ is not true. It is not true, because there is no
such thing as ‘‘3,’’ just as the statement that ‘‘Sherlock Holmes is uncannily obser-
vant’’ is false because there is no such person as Sherlock Holmes. However, the
ﬁctionalist continues, just as we can distinguish usefully between the claim that
‘‘Sherlock Holmes is uncannily observant’’ and the claim that ‘‘Sherlock Holmes is a
woman’’ by saying that the former claim is true in the world of certain Conan Doyle
novels and the latter one is not, so we can say that ‘‘3 is prime’’ is true, and ‘‘4 is
prime’’ is false in the story of mathematics. What ‘‘3 is prime’’ means, for the ﬁc-
tionalist, is that ‘‘3 is prime’’ follows from the axioms of arithmetic.
7.3.5 Carnap’s Linguistic Frameworks
Carnap’s later philosophy invoked the idea of there being various linguistic frame-
works.82 A framework is constructed within which people speak about certain types
of entities (solid objects, quarks, numbers, . . .). A framework may be logical or
factual. There are rules for deciding on the existence of entities within a framework;
questions such as, ‘‘Is there an elephant in the room?’’ or ‘‘Is there a prime number
which is also a square?’’ can be answered in principle. Carnap called these ‘‘internal
questions,’’ and distinguished them sharply from external questions, which he said
only philosophers asked. These concern the existence or reality of the system of
entities as a whole. Such questions, he felt, had never been answered satisfactorily
because they had never been posed correctly. So within the linguistic framework that
governs talk about numbers, it is logically true that no prime number is a square. But
the external question, ‘‘Do numbers exist?’’ was, said Carnap, an improper pseudo-
question. One can talk about numbers without making any claim about their reality
(still less about ‘‘reality’’), and the criteria for doing so, and for accepting any lin-
guistic framework, were, for Carnap, a pragmatic matter, determined by such factors
as efﬁciency, fruitfulness, and simplicity. He drew the following conclusion:
Thus it is clear that the acceptance of a linguistic framework must not be regarded as
implying a metaphysical doctrine concerning the reality of the entities in question. It
seems to me due to a neglect of this important distinction that some contemporary
nominalists label the admission of variables of abstract types as ‘‘Platonism.’’ This is, to
say the least, an extremely misleading terminology. It leads to the absurd consequence,
that the position of everybody who accepts the language of physics with its real number
variables (as a language of communication, not merely as a calculus) would be called
Platonistic, even if he is a strict empiricist who rejects Platonic metaphysics.83
Carnap would have had us navigate between frameworks also on pragmatic
grounds. Here a new twist to an old observation of Enriques is relevant. He objected
to some purported deﬁnitions on the ground that they were not deﬁnitions at all. It
was impossible, in his view, to deﬁne objects in the physical world. They can only be
described. One could, however, deﬁne an abstract object (such as, in mathematics,
a group or a ring). Consider now how mathematics is drawn out of ordinary life.
When abstract mathematics is created and purports to offer deﬁnitions of already
82 Carnap 1950.
83 Carnap 1950, 27.
AFTER THE WAR

447

well-known objects, a process of matching must be carried out. This process checks
that the formally deﬁned object has enough of the properties of the (idealized) fa-
miliar object and no unwelcome properties, and when it is concluded we can say we
have mathematically formulated what the familiar object is. Enriques was wrong:
one can deﬁne, for example, a straight line, or a pair of parallel lines, but whoever does
so must still admit that the formally deﬁned object is different from the ‘‘real thing.’’
7.3.6 Challenges to Philosophy
Hilbert, in his controversy with Frege, argued that all it means for a mathematical
object to exist is that it is described (one might say implicitly deﬁned) by a consistent
set of axioms. It is the least possible retreat from what Bernays called ‘‘absolute
Platonism’’ and observed was refuted by the antinomies. Philosophers object to this
position because it is close to saying that mathematical objects exist in a special sense
of the word, incompatible with commonly accepted synonyms (you shouldn’t argue
for claims such as ‘‘There are ﬂying saucers, but they don’t exist’’). But if talk of
abstract objects were to turn out to be essential for science, and abstract objects, on
an appropriate deﬁnition, do not exist in space-time, one supposes that philosophers
might be willing on those grounds alone to agree that abstract objects exist.
As for the epistemological argument against Platonism, one Platonist response is
to accept it, and to say that we do not have direct knowledge of these objects, but we
do have indirect knowledge. That is, so much of mathematics has empirical inter-
pretations in science, and these interpretations are so thoroughly conﬁrmed, that we
should accept the mathematics as true. Go¨del, for example, argued against Carnap
that the situation in mathematics is exactly analogous to the situation in science:
existence assumptions can be vindicated when they lead to veriﬁable conclusions as
indubitable and immediate as ‘‘3 is prime.’’ Some controversy attends those parts of
mathematics that are not conﬁrmable in this way and to those parts that are not yet
conﬁrmed, say, because they have only recently been established. If emphasis is now
placed on the coherence of mathematics, then another argument suggests itself,
which is that vast swathes of mathematics are simply proved: starting from simple
and indisputable premises, the rest of the enterprise follows of necessity.
Alternatively, one might object to Benacerraf that his challenge is simply unfair:
Why should there not be at least two forms of knowledge, one appropriate to me-
dium-sized physical objects in space-time and another for the objects of mathe-
matics? As with the term ‘‘exists,’’ philosophers again object that the two uses of the
word ‘‘know’’ should be recognizably similar, and since the core case concerns what
it is to know facts about physical objects, it is the nature of our knowledge of abstract
objects that has to conform. But this position is not transparently justiﬁed. Our
knowledge of Fermat’s Last Theorem is a good deal better, more robust, more likely
to survive scientiﬁc advance than our knowledge of some comparably celebrated
results of science. Perhaps one should argue that a philosophy of knowledge that
cannot recognize mathematical knowledge as knowledge at all is a poor thing, while
acknowledging that a philosophy of mathematical knowledge that merely asserts a
kind of knowledge without giving any account of how it is acquired is also inade-
quate.
448

CHAPTER 7

7.3.7 Alternatives to Platonism . . .
It may be, however, that the whole philosophy of Platonism is misplaced. Mathe-
matical Platonism is primarily intended to guarantee the mind-independent nature of
mathematical results, and secondarily to respect the strong feeling of mathematicians
that they are dealing with objects, which is why their hands are forced.
Confronted with words from the vocabulary of mind-dependent philosophies, in
which reality is somehow constructed, or people have only signs and their (private)
meanings, or in which meaning is created, mathematicians insist passionately that
they have no choice in the matter. Could Sherlock Holmes be a woman, or Moriarty
in disguise? The answer is ‘‘yes’’ if you write well enough, or if Conan Doyle turns out
to have left such a story for posterity, or in a number of other ways. But Fermat’s Last
Theorem cannot turn out to be false, even if you are a veritable Shakespeare of
mathematics, and—mathematicians would say—that is because there is something
fundamentally wrong with any ﬁctionalist account of mathematics. This is for the
ﬁctionalists to rebut.
Mathematicians, in various ways and presumably to different extents, do report
that they are dealing with objects, which is why their hands are forced. The standard
answer is to say that this sense is purely psychological, and therefore none of the
business of a philosopher. It might, more interestingly, be in some way or another
loose talk with an important kernel. Mathematics (more precisely, pure mathe-
matics) involves axioms, rules of deduction, and concepts deﬁned by axioms. What is
involved in going from talk about concepts deﬁned through a system of axioms to
talk about some objects deﬁned or created by those axioms?
As was discussed in §7.1.2, in 1925 Hilbert answered that question with a phi-
losophy of mathematics that had preoccupied him for some time, and his answer is
close to ﬁctionalism. His ﬁnitary approach to mathematics is in part the founding
statement of what might be called the syntactic view, namely that in many of the
most advanced areas of mathematics mathematicians follow the rules of whatever
axiomatized system they are working with. If this is done correctly (let the system be
assumed to be consistent), then the conclusions reached after any ﬁnite number of
steps are proved, and that is all anyone can ask for. Of course, Hilbert did not say or
imply that this is all there is to mathematics: his presentation of mathematical ac-
tivity is deliberately contrived and partial, for he would have agreed that mathe-
maticians do many things, and only eventually do they come to sit down and write up
their discoveries in the form of proper proofs. But then, as far as establishing
mathematics knowledge is concerned, Hilbert said that only the line-by-line elabo-
ration of a rigorous argument counts as proving things. His focus was on the written
activity of proof. It isolated a feature of mathematicians’ work that is essential—the
establishing of claims—and suggested that from the standpoint of philosophy this is
all there is. It plainly isn’t. The whole way mathematics relates to science is ignored
here, a topic on which Hilbert elsewhere had strong, well-informed views. But it is a
view about mathematical epistemology and so, I suggest, its ontology.
The syntactic view sees mathematics as a rule-governed activity, and one can
argue that we come to know the meaning of mathematical objects and concepts
through our use of these rules. In his paper ‘‘On the Inﬁnite’’ (1925), Hilbert argued
that his rule-governed account of how to handle inﬁnite sets in mathematics was
AFTER THE WAR

449

acceptable because it had already been accepted in principle when mathematicians
accepted Weierstrass’s rule-governed explanation of mathematical analysis.
On this view, what it means for a strictly mathematical object, deﬁned and treated
within a system of axioms, to be said to exist and to have certain properties is nothing
more than that the axioms are consistent and that the axioms and the rules for
deduction permit a proof of the stated properties. This may well be what mathe-
maticians take such talk to mean—they may not all be the hard-line Platonists phi-
losophers sometimes take them to be. An analogy with furniture moving may be
helpful. Sometimes the only proof that a new piano will ﬁt in your living room is to
move it there, whereas for much smaller and much larger objects, proof by mea-
surement would have sufﬁced. By analogy, mathematical knowledge is often of
the piano-moving kind: the mathematician learns something about the objects by
carrying out a certain form of activity. Indeed, knowledge of mathematical objects
could be understood as a way of talking about mathematical objects that makes
the objects epistemologically accessible, because there is nothing to one’s knowledge
of a mathematical object or concept other than what can be done with it according
to the rules that deﬁne it or otherwise bring it to mind. It is only great facility with
the rules that allows mathematicians to rephrase talk about rules as talk about
objects with properties.
7.3.8 . . . and Go¨del’s Platonism
Some remarks of Go¨del, famous if not notorious for his Platonism, are helpful here
and also instructive about his actual beliefs.84 Go¨del objected to Hilbert’s ﬁnitary
philosophy of mathematics not on the grounds that his own incompleteness theorem
had shown it to be wrong, but in the hope that the certainty of mathematics could be
secured by cultivating or deepening our knowledge of the abstract concepts them-
selves and seeking to gain insights into the solvability, and the actual methods for the
solution, of all meaningful mathematical problems. This clariﬁcation of meaning, he
said, could not consist simply in giving deﬁnitions, and so he turned to the phe-
nomenology of Husserl. As he put it:
Now in fact, there exists today the beginning of a science which claims to possess a
systematic method for such a clariﬁcation of meaning, and that is the phenomenology
founded by Husserl. Here clariﬁcation of meaning consists in focusing more sharply on
the concepts concerned by directing our attention in a certain way, namely, onto our
own acts in the use of these concepts, onto our powers in carrying out our acts, etc. But
one must keep clearly in mind that this phenomenology is not a science in the same sense
as the other sciences. Rather it is [in any case should be] a procedure or technique that
should produce in us a new state of consciousness in which we describe in detail the basic
concepts we use in our thought, or grasp other basic concepts hitherto unknown to us.
I believe there is no reason at all to reject such a procedure at the outset as hopeless.
Empiricists, of course, have the least reason of all to do so, for that would mean that
their empiricism is, in truth, an apriorism with its sign reversed.85
84 See Tieszen 2000.
85 See Go¨del 1995, vol. 3, 383.
450

CHAPTER 7

This is not mathematical Platonism as one might have supposed it and as Connes
described it, the contemplation of an abstract object by a facility akin to sight,
although that is a comparison Go¨del also made. It is directly connected to acts, our
acts in the use of concepts, our ability to carry out those acts. We have the power
because the axioms permit it, and some mathematicians have the power to a greater
extent than others. Rather, in this passage at least, this is Platonism as an ontological
twist to a philosophy of mathematics that singles out the ﬁnite sequence of acts that
constitute giving a proof, each act being, on this interpretation, an application of
a rule of deduction to a system of axioms (or a concatenation of these in the form
of a lemma or theorem).
Go¨del’s target here was Carnap’s philosophy of mathematics, which he consid-
ered inadequate because of its single-minded insistence on the syntactic aspect of
mathematics. Go¨del observed that insofar as mathematical proofs are syntactical and
not about anything they cannot be adequately said to be true (because they are not
true of some particular things), and he found this incoherent. He noted (p. 359) that a
linguistic framework must be consistent to be any use, but argued that empirical
induction was a poor way to ensure consistency, and the better way was ‘‘an intuition
of the same power is needed as for discerning the truth of the mathematical axioms,
at least in some interpretation’’ (p. 357). So ‘‘the syntactical interpretation of
mathematics does not relieve one of the necessity to acknowledge certain, by no
means trivial, propositions of a mathematical character as true in a non-conventional
sense’’ (p. 358).
7.3.9 Hilbert’s Garden
Perhaps one conclusion of all this is that mathematicians’ Platonism, maybe quite
generally and at least in Go¨del’s form, is a reiﬁcation of abstract axiomatics, in which
the objects return and are made known through the rules that govern them and the
mental acts that constitute conjectures and proofs. There are several reasons why this
might have come about. One is the subjective sensation many mathematicians have
that they are dealing with objects, not rules. If this is not, or not only, an interesting
insight into the psychology of mathematicians, then it may be a piece of naive phi-
losophizing, or it may stem from the way mathematical intuition is rooted in fairly
concrete objects. In his preface to Geometry and the Imagination Hilbert spoke of
the tendency toward abstraction [which] seeks to crystallize the logical relations in-
herent in the maze of material that is being studied, and to correlate the material in a
systematic and orderly manner. On the other hand, the tendency toward intuitive un-
derstanding fosters a more immediate grasp of the objects one studies, a live rapport
with them, so to speak. . . . As to geometry, in particular, the abstract tendency has here
led to the magniﬁcent systematic theories of Algebraic Geometry, of Riemannian
Geometry, and of Topology [which] make extensive use of abstract reasoning and
symbolic calculation in the sense of algebra. Notwithstanding this, it is still as true today
as it ever was that intuitive understanding plays a major role in geometry.86
86 Anschauliche Geometrie (1932), given as lectures in Go¨ttingen in 1920–21 and published in
German in 1932 and in English in 1952.
AFTER THE WAR

451

And so, he concluded: ‘‘We want to take the reader on a leisurely walk, as it were, in
the big garden that is geometry, so that each may pick for himself a bouquet to his
liking.’’ Access to the abstract, Hilbert was saying, was through the concrete, speciﬁc
world of objects, and this surely contributed to the sense that the objects deﬁned by
a system of axioms shared in the same sort of existence that their intuitively deﬁned
forebears did.
Another motive may also have been at work. The more mathematics was deﬁned
as conceptual mathematics, the more it lost contact with ordinary quantity, the
more it lost its sense of reference. Restoring objects in mathematics may have of-
fered reassurance to mathematicians who felt themselves cut off from the classi-
cal subject they had studied in their youth. It can feel powerfully reassuring to
say that mathematics is about objects lying just beneath the surface of familiar
objects (as groups do), much less comforting to say that mathematics is about axiom
systems.
7.4 Did Modernism ‘‘Win’’?
This book has documented the rise of what can be called mathematical modernism.
Even if the arguments it contains were to be found fully convincing, we can still take
a step back and, looking at the whole practice of mathematics, ask if modernism
‘‘won.’’ Did all of mathematics change? How profound and how broad were the
successes of modernism, and what longer continuities were there?
The term ‘‘modernism’’ was borrowed from the artistic domains of literature,
poetry, music, painting, and architecture. In each one, to varying degrees, modernism
made it difﬁcult if not impossible to work as if it had not occurred, and to that extent
we can say that modernism ‘‘won.’’ But the qualiﬁcation ‘‘to varying degrees’’ must be
noted. One can claim that to the extent that nonmodernist artists, writers, and so on
resisted modernism, they were somehow reactionary or inferior, and this claim
makes some sense when applied to painting. But it makes much less sense when
applied to music, when it sounds more like a propaganda claim or an exhortation.
Writers on Schoenberg wrestle with the apparent problem that whatever the merits
of his new music, it remained resolutely unpopular; writers about Picasso do not
have that problem. Modernism in architecture and in the novel are intermediate
cases: modern architecture became an established style, modernist ﬁction was
written in several forms, and none of these replaced the traditional modes. Which of
these is closest to modernism in mathematics—where certainly there were modern-
ists and also traditionalists who successfully resisted the call?
The systematic phase in the development of modernist mathematics is most visible
in geometry, analysis (notably functional analysis and topology), algebra, and in the
logic and foundations of mathematics. Emmy Noether and her students turned al-
gebra into abstract structural algebra, more abstract and more general than anything
Dedekind had considered. Topology, although it can be given almost a kindergarten
feel at times, is actually a highly abstract subject in which the objects and methods
are often inaccessible without axioms. This might make it seem as if modernism
‘‘won,’’ in the sense that mathematics became entirely modern, axiomatic, structural,
452

CHAPTER 7

and entirely self-contained. However, this neat picture would be an oversimpliﬁca-
tion that has to be contested.
Mathematicians today generally believe that mathematics comes in two types,
with a considerable degree of overlap. The highly axiomatized type just described,
with its long structured chains of deﬁnitions and theorems to master, can seem a long
way from and indifferent to applications, and it radically rewrites mathematics it
retains from the past to adapt it to its purposes. This may be called the highly
structured type of mathematics. The second type is highly delicate and subtle, much
less axiomatized, much more oriented toward problems. It rewrites past mathematics
much less when it takes it over, and it is closer to and more comfortable with
applications. It may be called the densely structured type.
These two strands or types of mathematics go in and out of fashion. Highly
structured mathematics was in the ascendant from before the First World War until
quite some time after the Second, the reigns of the Go¨ttingen and Bourbaki dynasties.
In the last twenty years the fashion has swung the other way, and ad hoc theories
crafted to particular problems are now much more in vogue. Undoubtedly this has
something to do with the vagaries of funding, but there are substantial reasons why
such swings are possible, even necessary. Densely structured mathematics contains
the theories of ordinary and partial differential equations as well as dynamical sys-
tems—it cannot be marginalized. Indeed, we can ask if the modernization of
mathematics is not an artifact of a value judgment about the nature of mathematics
(rather than, say, an insight into it). Is the modernization of mathematics merely the
view of a group of people who did well out it? The answer to this question is ‘‘No’’
precisely to the extent that one is prepared to say densely structured mathematics has
come to coexist with the new, highly structured form.
A purely sociological view that this is just the view of the winners and their
hangers-on is untenable, for the simple reason that both styles of mathematics
can coexist in the same person at the same time. To give but two examples, the
same Riemann who introduced modern differential geometry and rewrote the
whole philosophy of geometry wrote the paper that contains what is commonly
regarded as the deepest unsolved problem in mathematics to this day: the Riemann
hypothesis.
*This has to do with the distribution of the prime numbers. To a ﬁrst approximation
(noted originally by Gauss), the number of prime numbers less than an integer n in-
creases with n like n=ln n. This is already hard to prove, and is known as the ‘‘prime
number theorem.’’ But the primes don’t arrive steadily; there are sometimes long gaps
between one and the next, sometimes prime numbers seem to come in a rush. The prime
number theorem is more like a statistical law, and so the challenge is to explain these
departures from strict regularity. That is the business of the Riemann hypothesis, which
(in a way we need not describe)87 is a conjectured explanation that relates the distri-
bution of the primes to the complex numbers where a function, called today the Rie-
mann zeta function, vanishes. In particular, the Riemann hypothesis is the claim that all
these points lie on a line, called the critical line, because they have the same real coor-
dinate: 1=2.
87 See two very readable books on this topic: du Sautoy 2003 and Derbyshire 2003.
AFTER THE WAR

453

Our second example is Hilbert, for, as already noted, although he was the author
of the most conspicuously modernist tract on geometry, his Grundlagen der Geo-
metrie, his main publications between 1900 and 1910 were in analysis, where he
vigorously developed the new ﬁeld of integral equations and applied it to the theory
of differential equations and the calculus of variations. Indeed, Hilbert was not
regarded by his most intimate colleagues as a theorist so much as a problem solver.
He is well remembered to this day for his so-called twenty-three problems (the actual
number is around thirty; the Riemann hypothesis is number eight), which he posed at
the International Congress of Mathematicians in Paris in 1900 and which succeeded,
slowly but then vividly, in capturing the imagination of the mathematical commu-
nity.
Continuities such as these can be documented indeﬁnitely, and they show that
modernism in mathematics is not a simple break. It is a matter of continuities and
reformulations as much as dramatic novelties. To delineate this more precisely, let us
consider some of the characteristic features of modernism.
The ﬁrst element of modernism is its supposedly arbitrary character. We have seen
it compared to chess; both are supposedly rule-governed activities. Cantor and De-
dekind spoke of ‘‘free’’ rather than pure mathematics, meaning that this kind of
mathematics was unconstrained. The return of the inﬁnitesimal in geometry is in-
structive here. Bettazzi, Veronese, Hilbert, Dehn, Ho¨lder, and others successfully
built up quite a theory of inﬁnitesimals, including a theory of non-Archimedean
geometry. Or, to take a related example but nearer to analysis, consider the system of
numbers called the p-adic numbers (discussed in §4.5) that was created around 1900
and shown to be a perfectly good way to ﬁll in the gaps between the rational numbers
(the p-adic numbers are also not Archimedean). It follows that there was nothing
inevitable about the passage from the rational numbers to the real numbers that
Dedekind, Cantor, and Heine had spent so much time describing and which was
generally taken to spell out just what had hitherto been taken for granted. And once
the real numbers are no longer inevitable, it can be asked if they are particularly
natural or right. It happens that the familiar real numbers are the only way to extend
the rational numbers that allows one to extend the ordering on the rational numbers.
That is, the way one decides that x < y when x and y are real numbers also says that
x < y when x and y are rational numbers. However, although one can compare the
norms of two p-adic numbers x and y, this comparison does not agree with the
ordinary comparison when x and y are rational numbers.
The modernist attitude is that these novelties exist, or are known to exist as soon
as they are rigorously described, and so there is nothing natural or inevitable about
the much more familiar real numbers (themselves only made rigorous in the 1870s).
The deeper question is aesthetic: Should one care? The p-adic numbers spectacularly
vindicated themselves with Hasse’s work in algebraic number theory, so the verdict
was that one should care. The more general concept of a geometric magnitude has
not done so well, but that helps make the point: the existence question has to be
formulated in a modernist way, but once it is settled there is a possible rapproche-
ment with mathematicians of a nonmodernist persuasion that will proceed on
pragmatic grounds.
Another aspect of modernism is its emphasis on the autonomy of the mathema-
tician, in particular the mathematician’s freedom to develop theories that have no
apparent use. The very possibility of doing so, as Riemann saw very clearly, forces
454

CHAPTER 7

the realization that the relationship of mathematics to physics is a complicated one.
Mathematicians offer a bunch of possible descriptions of whatever it might be, and
necessity attaches to none of them, only greater or lesser degrees of plausibility. So
there is no certainty that any particular one is correct, or indeed that among the
known possibilities even one is correct. The relationship of mathematics to physics is
as a result much more complicated and open. Should one say (and if so, how and
why) that this mathematics is true? Correct? Useful? Valuable but merely hypo-
thetical? Conversely, can any amount of success in physics vindicate at least some
piece of mathematics?88
To the extent that this arbitrariness and autonomy are recognizable features of the
mathematical world by, say, 1920, one could say that modernism ‘‘won.’’ To get a
measure of the more traditional side, one can look at the practice of mathematics in
Britain, which remained resolutely unmodernist. Only two names are signiﬁcant
among the modernists here: Bertrand Russell and A. N. Whitehead. Of these, Russell
was a philosopher of mathematics, not a mathematician. A. N. Whitehead was to
Cambridge eyes an applied mathematician because that is where he began. As noted
above, he then wrote a strange but original book called Universal Algebra, then
books on axiomatic geometry, then, with Russell, Principia Mathematica, and after
the First World War he too made his way to philosophy. This was at a time when
Hardy and Littlewood were emerging into the front rank of mathematical analysis in
Britain.
Hardy’s great love was mathematical analysis, especially its application in the
theory of numbers. His awakening came in 1897 when he read Camille Jordan’s
Traite´ d’analyse. He was a proliﬁc mathematician, and his textbook A Course of
Mathematical Analysis (1908) put modern analysis in the path of every mathematics
undergraduate in Britain. In 1911 he teamed up with J. E. Littlewood, a collabo-
ration that lasted thirty-ﬁve years and produced over hundred joint papers. In 1913
he answered a letter from an unknown clerk in Madras, and so discovered the
remarkable genius of Ramanujan, whom he brought to Cambridge. Ramanujan died
in 1920. Of the three, Ramanujan was the untutored genius with a staggering ability
to ﬁnd formulas describing recondite properties of numbers, Littlewood the deter-
mined, indeed ferocious, problem solver, and Hardy somewhat more of the theorist.
Among his most important results was showing in 1914 that an inﬁnitude of zeros of
the Riemann zeta function lie on the critical line. All three men were recognizably
pure mathematicians, almost the ﬁrst of international stature in Britain, and their
inﬂuence on the growth of British mathematics was profound.
Hardy was resolutely unimpressed by some aspects of the modernist credo. His
view was: ‘‘I believe mathematical reality lies outside us, that our function is to
discover to observe it, and that the theorems which we prove, and which we describe
grandiloquently as our ‘creations,’ are simply our notes of our observations.’’ (Hardy
1969, 123–124). In other words, and to take an example, the prime numbers are
distributed in whatever way they are; the mathematician has no inﬂuence in the
matter. For that matter, the zeros of the zeta function must lie where they do whether
on the critical line or off it. Again, the mathematician has no choice in the matter. But
Hardy would have made a distinction between the primes and the zeros, arguing that
88 And indeed in the 1990s, well after the period addressed in this book, some physicists have begun
to think of using the p-adic numbers in physics.
AFTER THE WAR

455

the whole approach to the distribution question via the zeta function is in a way
arbitrary. It is the approach most likely to succeed—there really was no alternative in
sight—but other approaches might be possible. However, once you have subscribed
to this approach, the distribution of the zeros is again not something the mathe-
matician can adjust.
Theorems in this subject were, for Hardy, deep and real, not mere artifacts of the
theory. The whole immense and often delicate arguments needed to prove anything
in this subject, Hardy insisted, came from a perfectly rigorous set of deﬁnitions and
theorems, the already by then classic chain of arguments that starts with the integers,
constructs the rational numbers, the real numbers, the complex numbers, and the
whole apparatus of real and complex function theory. Together they make, as it
were, the apparatus necessary for the observations.
There is little in Hardy’s view—from its uncompromising stance, its implication
that it is stating the obvious, and its lack of philosophical sophistication—that
separates it from the opinion of many a mathematician from Greek times to today.
Hardy and Littlewood even joked that the Greek mathematicians were not bright
scholarship candidates, they were mathematicians from another college. It is gen-
erally the view of even today’s pure mathematicians that they have choice about
methods, but not results. It is, equally plainly, not modernist.
This solid block on the road to modernism requires us to push the concept of
modernism. Chapter 5 discussed some of the ways in which interactions between
mathematics and other disciplines, notably physics, were changed by the arrival of
mathematical modernism. Here it will be more useful to see what we can do to
illuminate some more philosophical questions:
1. The nature of mathematical objects
2. Mathematical proofs
3. The philosophy of mathematics itself
7.4.1 Objects
Mathematical modernism permits deﬁnition by axiomatization (one must, of course,
check that the axioms make sense). It is hard to imagine groups, rings, and ﬁelds,
function spaces and topological spaces, being studied in any other way. While sets
became the paradigm object of study by philosophers, it is also worth noting that as
more elaborate objects (such as groups and rings) became fundamental in mathe-
matics, a point was reached where it was not so much the case that such-and-such
kind of a ring was important because the ring of integers are a paradigm example, as
that the integers were important because they were only one example of such-and-
such a kind of a ring. This inversion of priorities is tied to the importance of gen-
eralization in mathematics. The capacity to generalize is very important in mathe-
matics, because it opens the way to the discovery of new proofs, and because it can
bring a quality of understanding.89
89 For example, there are now numerous examples of zeta functions in various domains of mathe-
matics, and for many of them mathematicians have been able to formulate and prove a Riemann hy-
pothesis.
456

CHAPTER 7

7.4.2 Proofs
Mathematicians have a variety of ways in which they evaluate approaches, even
proofs. Outside of mathematics it can seem strange to hear a proof called the ‘‘wrong’
proof ’’ even though it delivers the required result, but there can be many things
wrong about a proof. It can be said that a proof does not explain, and the result still
seems mysterious—it does not seem to come from anywhere. Or, that it does not
generalize, perhaps because it relies on features that are not known to pertain in a
more general setting. Or, that it argues in a roundabout way, perhaps descending to a
special case. Or, that it is a long calculation that, although correct, seems unmoti-
vated and not intrinsically connected to the question at hand. Characteristically
modernist proofs appeal to the structural quality of an argument: these results are
true because the object studied is, say, a group, and the proof ought to follow from
the fact that it is a group (and not, let us say, the integers). In one respect, Hardy’s
opinions were not so different. He distinguished mathematics from chess on the
grounds that chess was trivial mathematics,90 and what made for substantial
mathematics in both theorems and proofs was ‘‘a high degree of unexpectedness,
combined with inevitability and economy.’’91 He disliked complications of detail and
enumeration of cases. But he made no appeal to a higher court of structuralism.
7.4.3 The Philosophy of Mathematics
The philosophy of mathematics changed completely with the arrival of mathematical
modernism, and not only with the evolution of the mathematical Platonism just
discussed. After Hilbert’s proof theory and the dramatic work of Go¨del, mathe-
matical philosophy hit a productive period in which mathematical logic developed
rapidly and many outstanding questions were resolved, and in which the philoso-
phy of mathematics was very productively taken to concern itself with issues in
set theory. The focus on foundations was intense and was only reinforced by the
debates around intuitionism. By the start of the twenty-ﬁrst century, there were
strong indications of a return among philosophers of mathematics to more aes-
thetic questions: rightness of proof, purity of method, fruitfulness of concepts, the
nature of explanation and understanding.92 These ideas are not exclusive to modern
mathematics—Newton used similar ideas in his polemics against Descartes—but
modern philosophers have noticed that these traditional philosophical questions
were in fact particularly acute during the advent of mathematical modernism. The
autonomy of the mathematician provoked it, of course, and the genuine arbitrariness
of mathematics did so, too, but as this book has been at pains to describe, mathe-
matics was undergoing a critical free-for-all in the years around 1900. Very few of
these questions would have been asked at all had mathematics not changed in these
ways, as the long separation of mathematics and philosophy throughout much of the
nineteenth century demonstrates so clearly.
90 Hardy 1949, pp. 88, 112.
91 Hardy 1949, 113; italics in original.
92 For one way in, see the essays in Ferreiro´s and Gray 2006.
AFTER THE WAR

457

It is worth insisting that it is the characteristically modernist features of the new
mathematics that prompted all the discussion. Once modernism was established and
the long reductionist arguments about mathematical objects were in place to reduce
everything to set theory and questions about the philosophy of set theory, mathe-
matical logic could take over, and Hilbert’s hopes that the philosophy of mathe-
matics would itself become mathematical were in large measure fulﬁlled. That,
paradoxically, many of Hilbert’s hopes for the subject were promptly dashed by
Go¨del and Turing may well have served to show how powerful the new methods
were. But in the years from 1880 to 1920 the old philosophical questions about
mathematics were debated as they had not been since Greek times.
To say that philosophy of mathematics was an arena where modernism triumphed
is to say that modernism changed the practice of mathematics, because mathema-
ticians were among the most eager participants in this debate. It was far from the case
that mathematicians got on with good honest work while philosophers peered at
them through the glass, each side holding the other in polite disdain. Mathematics
did not cease to be densely structured, but it became highly structured as well.
7.5 The Work Is Done
The arrival of mathematical modernism was, like so many modernisms, unstable.
Mathematicians and philosophers seeking to answer genuine and deep questions
about the nature of mathematics, the grounds on which its conclusions should be
accepted, and its relation to the sciences were drawn into difﬁcult areas. They es-
tablished remarkable results, but they never reached solid ground, and in the end
their attempts were fractured beyond repair. The modernism project became in many
ways the standard for good work, and in other ways had to be abandoned.
It should not be thought, therefore, that the stories told so brieﬂy in this chapter,
ending as they do in the 1930s and 1940s, represent a terminus. The various domains
of pure mathematics were undoubtedly reshaped along abstract, axiomatic—in
short, modernist—lines. They remain secure ﬁelds with their own standards and
agendas even as the pendulum swings, in the 1950s, ’60s, and ’70s toward pure
mathematics and since then toward applications. It is possible that we are entering
for the ﬁrst time an era in which the biological sciences will call forth substantial new
mathematics, as the novel technologies have already done. It also remains the case
that the professional division between mathematicians and scientists, even physicists,
is securely in place; it is not at all clear what rigorous mathematics is rigorously
employed in physics.
The work of Go¨del and the other logicians of the 1930s did more than take
Hilbert’s program apart. It created a sophisticated body of theory that could take
many somewhat philosophical questions, formulate them in terms of mathematical
logic, and answer them. A considerable number of such questions about formal
systems and their syntax and semantics have been answered in this way. This process
gave rise to a new industry in the philosophy of mathematics which took the view
that all mathematics was an outgrowth of set theory, and so the fundamental (read:
philosophical) problems in mathematics were those in set theory, and this view has
458

CHAPTER 7

also had its successes. But the transition from foundations of mathematics to
mathematical logic, and from the practice of mathematics to set theory, represents a
narrowing of focus. There have been losses as well as gains.
The fragmentation shows up in many ways. Theoretical computation is now an
autonomous discipline, but what it studies seems ever more distinct from the way
humans work. We, it seems, are elaborate parallel processors; delicate issues of
reliability and timing make computer scientists and their companies nervous about
going in that direction. The work of Turing, McCulloch, and Pitts has given rise to a
whole theory of automata. The work of Post (not discussed here) led in turn to the
theory of formal grammars, the original ﬁeld of work for Noam Chomsky before he
turned to natural languages. But it would be hard to claim that the investigation of
mathematics as a language has the resonance it once possessed. Tarski’s work de-
ﬁning truth for a suitably rich class of formal languages explicitly stopped short of
natural languages.
The most visible failing in the present situation concerns the question of what
mathematics actually is. Most mathematicians sensibly get on with doing it, even
innovating in remarkable ways. Developments originally begun in algebraic topol-
ogy and algebraic geometry have produced, in category theory, a wholly new for-
mulation of the foundations of mathematics that avoids, or subsumes, set theory. But
the working image of mathematics for mathematicians is in many ways closer to the
image they had of themselves in the nineteenth century, although with a twentieth-
century underpinning. The view from outside is, if anything, less exciting: mathe-
maticians have been left in the main to get on with it. It is not clear to this writer, at
least, that mathematics, with its unique claims to knowledge and truth, animates
philosophers interested in the nature of knowledge and truth.93 The reason for this
lack of curiosity about mathematics derives from the collapse of the Hilbert program
and the retreat to efﬁcient but highly technical providers of specialist results. There is
not a vision of mathematics as an enterprise to which a large audience can relate.
There is only a sense that mathematics is simultaneously very formal and somehow
not entirely formal.
There may be signs with the new century that matters are changing again, but it
seems best to conclude with three quotations cited below that date from the 1960s.
The ﬁrst is from Emil Post, writing in 1941 but not published until 1965. The ﬁnal
two come from an essay by Go¨del that was published posthumously but dates from
1961. The ﬁrst two represent a call for the return of meaning in mathematics as
opposed to work-day Platonism and Sunday formalism. The ﬁnal one, coming as it
does from the most celebrated Platonist of the twentieth century, returns us most
forcefully to the legacy of Kant. Reader, farewell!
But perhaps the greatest service the present account could render would stem from its
stressing of its ﬁnal conclusion that mathematical thinking is, and must be essentially
creative. It is to the writer’s continuing amazement that ten years after Go¨del’s re-
markable achievement current views on the nature of mathematics are thereby affected
only to the point of seeing the need of many formal systems, instead of a universal one.
Rather has it seemed to us inevitable that these developments will result in a reversal of
93 Although the exceptions to this sweeping judgment are among the best twentieth-century philos-
ophers.
AFTER THE WAR

459

the entire axiomatic trend of the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, with a
return to meaning and truth. Postulational thinking will remain as but one phase of
mathematical thinking.94
Obviously, this means that the certainty of mathematics is to be secured not by proving
certain properties by a projection onto material systems—namely, the manipulation of
physical symbol—but rather by cultivating (deepening) knowledge of the abstract
concepts themselves which lead to the setting up of these mechanical systems, and
further by seeking, according to the same procedures, to gain insights into the solv-
ability, and the actual methods for the solution, of all meaningful mathematical prob-
lems. [This] procedure must thus consist, at least to a large extent, in a clariﬁcation of
meaning that does not consist in giving deﬁnitions. Now in fact, there exists today the
beginning of a science which claims to possess a systematic method for such a clariﬁ-
cation of meaning, and that is the phenomenology founded by Husserl. Here clariﬁca-
tion of meaning consists in focusing more sharply on the concepts concerned by
directing our attention in a certain way, namely, onto our own acts in the use of these
concepts, onto our powers in carrying out our acts, etc. But one must keep clearly in
mind that this phenomenology is not a science in the same sense as the other sciences.
Rather it is [or in any case should be] a procedure or technique that should produce in us
a new state of consciousness in which we describe in detail the basic concepts we use in
our thought, or grasp other basic concepts hitherto unknown to us. I believe there is no
reason at all to reject such a procedure at the outset as hopeless.95
I would like to point out that this intuitive grasping of ever newer axioms that are
logically independent from the earlier ones, which is necessary for the solvability of all
problems even within a very limited domain, agrees in principle with the Kantian
conception of mathematics. The relevant utterances by Kant are, it is true, incorrect if
taken literally, since Kant asserts that in the derivation of geometrical theorems we
always need new geometrical intuitions, and that therefore a purely logical derivation
from a ﬁnite number of axioms is impossible. That is demonstrably false. However, if in
this proposition we replace the term ‘‘geometrical’’ by ‘‘mathematical’’ or ‘‘set-theoret-
ical’’ then it becomes a demonstrably true proposition. I believe it to be a general feature
of many of Kant’s assertions that literally understood they are false but in a broader
sense contain deep truths. In particular, the whole phenomenological method, as I
sketched it above, goes back in its [central] idea to Kant, and what Husserl did was
merely that he ﬁrst formulated it more precisely, made it fully conscious and actually
carried it out for particular domains. Indeed, just from the terminology used by Husserl,
one sees how positively he himself values his relation to Kant.
I believe that precisely because in the last analysis the Kantian philosophy rests on the
idea of phenomenology, albeit in a not entirely clear way, and has just thereby intro-
duced into our thought something completely new, and indeed characteristic of every
genuine philosophy—it is precisely on that, I believe, that the enormous inﬂuence which
Kant has exercised over the entire subsequent development of philosophy rests. Indeed,
there is hardly any later direction that is not somehow related to Kant’s ideas. On the
other hand, however, just because of the lack of clarity and the literal incorrectness of
many of Kant’s formulations, quite divergent directions have developed out of Kant’s
94 Post, unpublished; see Post 1994, 345, quoted in Gandy 1995, 93.
95 Go¨del 1961, in Go¨del 1995, 383.
460

CHAPTER 7

thought—none of which, however, really did justice to the core of Kant’s thought. This
requirement seems to me to be met for the ﬁrst time by phenomenology, which, entirely
as intended by Kant, avoids both the death-defying leaps of idealism into a new meta-
physics as well as the positivistic rejection of all metaphysics. But now, if the misunder-
stood Kant has already led to so much that is interesting in philosophy, and also indirectly
in science, how much more can we expect it from Kant understood correctly?96
96 Go¨del 1961, in Go¨del 1995, 385, 387.
AFTER THE WAR

461

This page intentionally left blank 

