9
Uniquely Human
• Uniquely human behavior includes extensive collaborative sequences,
language, and other sequential activities, such as music and dance.
• Thesesequencescanbeverylong,lastalongtime,andfulfillamultitude
of goals, sometimes remote from biological goals.
• Humans can store and process sequential and episodic information with
greater accuracy than other animals.
• Human sequential behavior is underpinned by a diversity of mental
skills that operate on sequential information. These skills are often time
consuming.
• Most uniquely human skills are of recent origin and not part of our
biological history.
• Uniquely human skills do not develop spontaneously. Specific experi-
ences, training, and social environments are necessary.
• Apes and other animals raised by humans do not acquire human-level
abilities.
9.1
Introduction
The human and chimpanzee lineages split 6–8 million years ago, yet the first
evidenceofuniquelyhumantraitsdatestothetimeofthelateAustralopithecus
and early Homo species, around 2.5 million years ago. Simple stone tools are
the earliest finds, but over time more sophisticated artifacts appeared, includ-
ing small statues, cave paintings, and evidence for burial rituals. These are the
first signs of the human evolutionary transition introduced in chapter 1. Since
then, humans have transformed the Earth to such an extent that it has been
deemed appropriate to introduce a new geological era, the Anthropocene
(Steffen et al. 2006, Barnosky et al. 2011). In terms of biomass, humans plus
their livestock and pets comprised 0.1% of all vertebrates just 10,000 years
ago, whereas today this figure has grown to 98% (MacCready, in Dennett
2009). These extreme circumstances have frequently led to the conclusion
124

uniquely human
125
thathumanshaveuniquementalabilities,butpinpointingwhattheseabilities
areandunderstandingtheirevolutionremainschallenging(Pennetal.2008).
The overarching theme of our book is that sequential abilities are a help-
ful focal point. Thus far, we have discussed how animals learn behavioral
sequences, and from here on we focus on humans. We begin in section 9.2
with a summary of human sequential abilities, both behavioral and men-
tal. Section 9.3 discusses when these abilities may have appeared, while
section 9.4 discusses how they develop during an individual’s lifetime.
Finally, section 9.5 summarizes the main hypotheses about human cognitive
evolution.
The remainder of the book presents our ideas about the human evolu-
tionary transition. In chapter 10, we present the hypotheses introduced in
chapter 2 in more detail; in the chapters that follow, we describe their most
important consequences in terms of intelligence and thinking (chapter 11),
acquisition and transmission of sequential information (chapter 12), trans-
mission of mental skills (chapter 13), and cooperation (chapter 14). We then
explore the role of cultural evolution in chapter 15. Finally, in chapter 16,
we discuss why the human evolutionary transition has not occurred in other
animals.
9.2
Uniquely Human Traits
9.2.1
Behavior
Humans use a staggering diversity of behavioral sequences to achieve a mul-
titude of goals, to an extent that is not observed in any other animal. The
sequential structure of human behavior has been discussed repeatedly (e.g.,
Lashley 1951, Heyes 2001, Terrace 2005). Even seemingly trivial daily activ-
ities, such as getting dressed, preparing and eating food, or driving a car,
have a complex sequential structure. Crafts like pottery, metallurgy, and tool
making require long sequences, lasting hours to weeks (figure 9.1), and pur-
suits like agriculture and obtaining a college degree require years. Many of
these sequences are executed in parallel and require accurate task switching to
completesuccessfully.Humansarealsomastersofcommunicativesequences,
through language, and of expressive sequences, such as in dance and music.
The goals that humans pursue through these sequences are as diverse as the
sequences themselves. For instance, humans mass-produce objects by the
millions, pursue hobbies like sports and gardening, engage in art shows and
musical performances, fulfill social functions through rituals and procedures
like weddings and court cases. While the biological function of almost all
animal activities is clear, many human activities are remote from the basic
biological needs of food, rest, safety, or reproduction.

126
chapter 9
Boulder core
Appropriately
shaped core
Oldowan stone
flake tool
Hammer-
stone strikes
Hammer-
stone strikes
Boulder core
Core with
regular edge
Thinner core
Acheulean
hand ax
Hammer-
stone strikes
Primary thinning/shaping
with hammerstone
Light flaking for
edge strength
Secondary thinning/shaping with
hammerstone or softer baton
figure 9.1. Coarse descriptions of behavioral sequences used in stone tool pro-
duction (Stout et al. 2008, Stout 2011). Top: Oldowan stone flake tools. Bottom:
Acheulean hand ax.
Amajorfactorcontributingtothediversityofhumanbehavioralsequences
is our motor flexibility, which is much greater than in most animals (chap-
ter 4). Practically all elements that make up skilled performance are learned,
such as phonemes and syllables, piano chords and arpeggios, basketball shots
and blocks. The tremendous motor flexibility of human hands is a classic
topic in anthropology (Musgrave 1971, Vauclair 1982, Niewoehner et al.
2003), but almost all human movements are highly trainable. Another factor
contributing to sequence complexity is cooperation (Carneiro 2003), which
we discuss in chapter 14. For example, people may come together to prepare
food or build a house, taking advantage of different skills through division of
labor. Human cooperative sequences can also involve long production chains
in which individuals or groups collaborate while being almost anonymous to
each other. For example, consider a blacksmith forging metal axes. Her raw
material comes from a long iron production chain that includes mining, pro-
cessing of iron ore, and transport. Her final product may be sold, for example,
to shipbuilders that make boats to sell to fishermen who ultimately produce
food. Within these cooperative sequences, language is used extensively for
planning and coordination of different parties.
9.2.2
Memory
In chapter 5, we noted that, in animals, there is little evidence for general-
purpose episodic memory, that working memory is of comparatively short
duration, and that the representation of serial order is inaccurate. Human
memory appears superior in all these respects. Human episodic memory
enables us to remember and use information from arbitrary events, such as

uniquely human
127
1.0
100
90
Content
Details
Humans
Birds
Other mammals
Nonhuman
primates
Time
80
70
60
50
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
10
20
Retention interval (days)
Average proportion
% correct
30
40
1
10
100
Learning trails (per trained sequence)
1,000
10,000
figure 9.2. Left: Retention of episodic information in humans, plotted as aver-
age proportion of items retained over time (Kristo et al. 2009). Substantial
variation exists in human memory: some events are never forgotten, while others
are lost even faster than in the figure. Right: Results from stimulus sequence dis-
crimination studies (Ghirlanda et al. 2017). Humans stand out as attaining better
performance with much less training than animals (section 5.4.2).
what happened yesterday at work or on our last birthday (Tulving 1972,
2001). Human semantic memory is also extraordinarily developed and
encompassesmemoryfordiversefactsandcompositions,likepoemsormusi-
cal scores (figure 9.2, left). We find it particularly significant that memory for
sequential information appears much more developed in humans than in ani-
mals, as sequential information is prominent in human skills, like language,
mathematics, and music (table 9.1). The right panel of figure 9.2 summarizes
studies in which animals and humans were trained to discriminate between
ordered sequences of stimuli. Human subjects performed better even with
stimulithatweremorefamiliartotheanimals,suchasstudiesinwhichfinches
and humans had to discriminate between sequences of birdsong syllables
(Seki et al. 2013, Chen et al. 2015). Additionally, the animals in these stud-
ies required 10 to 100 times longer training than the humans (see Ghirlanda
et al. 2017, for the methodological details behind making such comparisons).
Additionally, Read et al.(2022) conclude that chimpanzee working memory
can hold 2 ± 1 items, compared to estimates of 7 ± 2 items in humans (Miller
1956.)
Human memory is not perfect: we forget, misremember, and privilege
some information over other (Simons and Chabris 1999, Howes 2006,
Lieberman2011).Thesefactsnotwithstanding,itseemssafetoconcludethat
human general-purpose memory is longer term, higher capacity, and more
accurate than typical animal memory.
9.2.3
Mental Processes
Humans routinely recombine causal information from different experiences,
anabilitythatwelabeledasthinking(section2.5)andthatwefoundlackingin
animals (chapters 7 and 8). These mental processes may be time consuming

128
chapter 9
Table 9.1. Importance of sequential information in human abilities
Phenomenon
Role of sequential information
Example
Episodic memory
Enables ordering of events
I arrived first ̸= You arrived first
Causal learning
Enables attribution of
cause and effect
Noise causes prey to escape ̸=
Prey escaping causes noise
Planning
Plans are ordered
sequences of actions
Turn door handle, then push ̸=
Push door, then turn handle
Imitation
Order of actions must be
perceived and
remembered
Peel the banana, then eat it ̸=
Eat the banana, then peel it
Language
Contributes to meaning
Killer whale ̸= Whale killer
Social intelligence
(theory of
mind)
Enables attribution of
beliefs and knowledge to
individuals
You spoke to her before me ̸=
You spoke to me before her
Cooperation
Order of actions must be
agreed upon and
remembered
I count to three, then we lift ̸=
We lift, then I count to three
Music
Order determines aesthetic
qualities (e.g., melody)
CDEC ̸= CECD
Mathematics
Order of operations
influences results
3 × 5 −2 ̸= 3 × (5 −2)
Source: Ghirlanda et al. (2017).
and mixed with fast processes, such as associative learning (dual process the-
ory: Sun 2001, Kahneman 2011) For example, many human activities are
planned, and this typically occurs through the mental rehearsal of alternative
sequences of actions (Gilbert and Wilson 2007). For instance, we regularly
plan our daily activities to fulfill one or several short-term goals, like a plan for
picking up the children from school, fetching a parcel from the post office, or
buying groceries on the way home from work (Miller et al. 1960). The rea-
son why these activities can be labeled as “routine” is that humans are good
enough at planning that plans for familiar settings can be devised on the fly
almost effortlessly. In reality, routines—in the sense of perfectly repeating
activities—are almost nonexistent.
Longer-term examples of planning include stocking up for the winter and
planning for an education, a career, or retirement. As a principle for structur-
ingbehavior,planningisverydifferentfromthegeneticallyguidedassociative
learning that is prevalent in animals. Planning relies on a mental model of
the environment, which is explored mentally to find productive sequences of
actions. Guided associative learning, on the other hand, selects one behavior
at a time based on genetic information and the estimated values of actions

uniquely human
129
(chapter 8). Indeed, part of human mental activity is directed toward learning
mental models (understanding how the world works); for example, using
logical inference, imagined scenarios (“what would happen if ...”), and com-
munication with others either in person or through various media. That
humans can plan, however, does not mean that all our behaviors are well
thought through. Rather, human behavior is best described as a combination
of planning and simpler decision-making strategies that are similar to those of
other species (Kahneman 2011).
Remarkably, human mental life includes many activities that are only
weakly related to behavior, such as mental arithmetic, sudoku solutions,
recalling memories, and imagining possibilities. For some, mental activity is
the main form of activity—for example, writers, chess players, and mathe-
maticians. These activities are so diverse that it is difficult to summarize them
effectively, yet we can highlight some common features. First, human men-
tal processes deal extensively with sequential information, as highlighted in
section 9.2.2 and especially in table 9.1. Second, human mental processes
are incredibly flexible. Consider, for example, the kinds of transformations
that can occur between sequences of information in the domain of language.
Producing spoken language requires translation of an internal representation
of meaning into a sequence of words, and understanding spoken language
requires the inverse translation. Humans can master many such translations,
as demonstrated by polyglots who can speak dozens of languages (Erard
2012). In addition, humans can translate to and from internal language codes
through a variety of methods that are of very recent invention, such as writ-
ing systems, sign systems, Braille, and even systems of whistles (Busnel and
Classe 2013). A third feature of human mental processing is that it is often
time consuming (Kahneman 2011; see also section 7.7.2). We are all famil-
iar with the time and effort it takes to make a well-reasoned decision. The
extraordinary capacity of human mental processing is well exemplified by the
feats of blind mathematicians who carry on lengthy computations with very
little external support (Jackson 2002), by musicians who can mentally com-
poselengthy,multipartscores,andbychessgrandmasterswhocanplaymany
simultaneous games blindfolded.
9.2.4
Mental Flexibility
Uniquely human traits probably evolved to deal with such common tasks as
foraging, competition, and cooperation (see section 16.3). Once established,
however, these traits gave rise to a mental revolution that is in every respect
as impressive and pervasive as its behavioral and material counterparts. In
addition to gathering knowledge about the physical world, humans have cre-
ated elaboratemental worlds,madepossiblebecausewecan freely recombine

130
chapter 9
mental information without regard to whether the outcomes are meaningful
in the physical world or not. This fact is perhaps most familiar in language,
which can refer equally well to real and imagined events. Detailing the multi-
tudeofmentalworldscreatedbyhumanswouldrequireanenormousamount
of space. Here we would just like to mention a few kinds of mental worlds to
give a sense of the mental flexibility that is necessary to produce them, and
that appear to have no parallel in other species.
By a “mental world,” we mean any set of ideas or concepts that can be
reasoned about according to given rules. Mental worlds range from those
thatstrivetoadheretophysicalreality,suchasscientifictheories,tothosethat
make no reference to it, such as abstract mathematical constructions. Most
mental worlds, however, consist of mixtures of imagined elements and ele-
ments closer to physical reality. Fascinating examples of such mixtures are
found in myths, legends, and religions, but even secular belief systems can
combine factual information with elements that have little connection to
physical reality, such as rules of courtesy, systems of laws, and social insti-
tutions. Mental worlds tend to be internally consistent (otherwise, it would
be impossible to reason about them) as well as consistent with aspects of
reality—although they are typically not wholly consistent in either respect.
The construction of detailed mental worlds is a prominent aspect of fic-
tion. Authors of fiction make no claims that their stories are true, although
they typically aim at achieving a goal such as entertainment, education, or
persuasion. Some fiction is created to be realistic, but often unrealistic ele-
ments are introduced, particularly in the genres of fantasy and science fiction.
Authors in these genres are often praised for the care they dedicate to creating
their imaginary worlds. To mention just one example, Lord of the Rings author
J.R.R. Tolkien drew detailed maps of his imagined Middle Earth and even
documented in detail the writing system, grammar, and vocabulary of several
fictional languages spoken there (Shippey 2014, Fimi and Higgins 2016).
Gamessuchaschess,Go,orsudokualsodefineimaginaryworldswiththeir
ownrulesandgoals.Althoughsomeelementsofgamesareinspiredfromreal-
ity (such as military jargon in chess), the rules of the game are arbitrary and
have the sole goal of making the game interesting. Music and dance are also
rooted in the physical reality of sound and movement, but have greatly elabo-
rated upon these foundations by creating many distinct forms and styles—in
this case turning combinatorics to their advantage, as the combinations of
even small sets of musical notes and dance moves are practically endless.
Insummary,theexistenceofmyriadmentalworlds,withdetailedrulesand
rich structure, demonstrates the remarkable mental flexibility of humans as
well as the centrality of sequential processing to human mental life. Games,
mathematics, music, dance, stories, and so on are all examples of domains in

uniquely human
131
which sequential information processing is indispensable. Although mental
flexibility and sequential information processing arose in human prehistory
through genetic evolution, they opened up unprecedented opportunities for
cultural evolution. The result is an almost complete transformation of human
mental life, which depends on culturally acquired information to a unique
extent. Regardless of whether we inhabit a lush African forest, an arid Aus-
tralian desert, or the frozen Arctic, we have created rich mental worlds that
change and grow through cultural evolution.
9.3
Much of Human Behavior Is Evolutionarily Recent
On an evolutionary timescale, much of contemporary human activity is of
very recent invention. For example, written language and agriculture are
10,000 years old or less. We do not know when humans started to count,
but even mathematics deemed basic enough to be taught in middle school,
such as coordinate systems and elements of set theory, is just a few hun-
dred years old. Most advanced mathematics was invented in the last 300
years, and the same is true of modern physics, everyday technology like
computers and cellular phones, and the vast majority of medical knowledge
and treatments. Humans are unique among all species in that our behav-
ior has changed extensively without intervening genetic change (Chiappe
and MacDonald 2005). Since the invention of writing, detailed historical
records of human culture have revealed prolonged periods of exponentially
fast change (Lehman 1947, Enquist et al. 2008), with new phenomena build-
ing upon existing ones. Perhaps this is most clear for crafts and technology,
but even in music and art we see clear historical trends, and expressive forms
can be seen changing significantly over just a few decades. The historical
development of a field often mirrors how that field is learned, such as mas-
tering figurative art before abstract art or tonal music before atonal music
(Gombrich 1977).
9.4
Uniquely Human Skills Are Learned
Detailed studies within developmental psychology and related fields have
focused on the acquisition of human skills, including spoken and written lan-
guage, imitation, memory, logical reasoning, cooperative skills, and motor
skills in music and sports (Anderson 1982, Bandura 1986, Gibson 1999,
Newell and Rosenbloom 1981, VanLehn 1996). From this wealth of informa-
tion we have identified three observations that can help us understand human
evolution and human uniqueness: dependence upon experience, extensive
social learning, and specificity.

132
chapter 9
9.4.1
Human Skills Do Not Emerge Spontaneously
Human skills invariably require extensive training, which implies that they
depend on experience rather than just on internal maturation processes. This
conclusionissupportedbydevelopmentalpsychology(Berk2013,Bjorklund
and Causey 2017) and education science (King and Kitchener 1994, Wood
1997), as well as the study of expertise acquisition (Ericsson et al. 1993),
cognitive skill acquisition (Newell and Rosenbloom 1981, Anderson 1982,
VanLehn 1996), imitation (Oostenbroek et al. 2016, Heyes 2016; but see
Meltzoffetal.2018),andlanguagedevelopment(EllisandLarge1988,Mead-
ows 1993, Hart and Risley 1999). Even the human skill that conceivably has
the most genetic support, language, requires a remarkable amount of training
(Curtiss 1977, Tomasello 2003, Bjorklund and Causey 2017). Attaining flu-
ency in one’s native language requires hearing about four million sentences
(Morgan 1989) and practicing for many years. Reading and writing have
a similarly slow course of acquisition (Stanovich 1986). The typical devel-
opmental trajectory of spoken and written language skills is summarized in
table 9.2. It is characterized by strong cumulative effects, with each step build-
ing on previous steps. For example, a child must learn words before putting
themtogetherintosentences(SaffranandEstes2006)andmustrecognizelet-
ters before she can read words (Bryant and Bradley 1985, Bryant et al. 1990).
Mathematicalskillsalsodevelopfollowingasimilarpattern:achildfirstlearns
numbers and the number sequence and later learns to manipulate numbers
according to rules (Sarnecka and Gelman 2004, Sarnecka et al. 2007).
Thisstepwise,cumulativedevelopmentistypicalofmosthumanskillsand
is the main reason why skill learning is slow and gradual: the more elements
a skill consists of, the longer it takes to master (Bruner 1975, Anderson 1982,
VanLehn 1996). Data also show that performance typically correlates with
amountofpractice,althoughthisisnotthesoledeterminant(Ericsson2006).
For tournament-level chess players and musicians, practice explains about
40%ofthevarianceinperformance(Ericssonetal.1993,Charnessetal.2005,
Gobet and Campitelli 2007, Hambrick et al. 2014).
9.4.2
Human Skills Are Learned Socially
Thesecondobservationisthatmuchoftheinformationnecessaryforhumans
to develop skills is acquired socially (Vygotsky 1962, Bruner 1966, Rogoff
1990, Tomasello 1999). Dependence upon social information is evident
in the case of a skill like mathematics, which is impossible to learn on
one’s own. The invention of even basic features, like a positional number
system and negative numbers, have required tremendous intellectual effort

uniquely human
133
Table 9.2. Examples of changes during development of spoken English
and reading
Age (months or years)
Spoken language
Reading language
0–3 m
Vocal play
6–10 m
Babbling
Discrimination between letter
shapes
8–18 m
First words
13–15 m
Expressive jargon
13–19 m
10-word vocabulary
14–24 m
50-word vocabulary
13–27 m
Two- and three-word
sentences
23–26 m
Irregular and regular
grammatical tenses
>500-word vocabulary
5 y
Basic skills almost fully
developed
Knowledge of alphabet
Verbal short-term memory
Recognition of written word
6 y
Basic skills almost fully
developed
Sounds associated with letters
Spelling
Note: Ages are approximate, as individual development varies.
Sources: Ellis and Large (1988), Meadows (1993), Hart and Risley (1999).
over hundreds of years of painstaking conceptual development (Ifrah 1998).
Similarly, language skills remain poor in the absence of an appropriate envi-
ronment (Curtiss 1977), and chess learners who play in groups and receive
explicit coaching perform better than players who practice alone (Gobet
and Campitelli 2007). With the invention of writing and other technology
for recording information, much skill acquisition is supported by artifacts
like books and computer programs. The size of a chess player’s library, for
example, correlates with the player’s skill (Gobet and Campitelli 2007). The
ultimate source of this knowledge is other people, hence learning through
these artifacts is also social.
9.4.3
Most Human Skills Are Domain-Speciﬁc,
but Some Are General
Extensive training enables humans to become exceptionally proficient in the
trained skill, but this typically has limited effect on other skills (see reviews
by Anderson 1982, Ericsson et al. 1993, VanLehn 1996, Ericsson 2006, Chi
2006, Chi et al. 2014). For example, training in chess, music, or working

134
chapter 9
memory does not improve mathematical and literacy skills (Sala and Gobet
2017).Extensiveresearchaboutchess(GobetandCharness2006)highlights
that skill training has multiple facets, including perception, memory, and
decision making, all of which exhibit specificity of performance. For example,
experts have a better memory for chess positions than novice players, not
because their memory is better in general but because they have learned effi-
cient encoding of chess positions (Chase and Simon 1973, Gobet and Simon
1996b). Further reliance on chess-specific strategies of memory encoding
is apparent from studies demonstrating that chess experts remember actual
game positions better than random positions that would not arise in play
(Chase and Simon 1973, Gobet and Simon 1996a). When it comes to deci-
sion making, chess experts can resume play from thousands of positions they
have previously studied or encountered, and are able to discard unproduc-
tivemovesmorequicklythanbeginners(GobetandCharness2006);butthis
does not necessarily improve their decision-making skills in other domains.
Transfer of performance across skills can, nevertheless, be observed
between skills that share mental or motor elements (Singley and Anderson
1989, Taatgen 2013). For example, learning English is easier for Swedish than
for Finnish speakers, because Swedish overlaps more with English in gram-
mar and vocabulary (Ringbom 2007, 41). Remarkably, it is also possible to
learn general skills that are helpful to solve many problems (Salomon and
Perkins 1987, Perkins and Salomon 1989). These skills range from elemen-
taryinformation-processingoperationstogeneralproblem-solvingstrategies.
Examples of the former are list-processing operations, such as appending an
item or reversing the whole list, which can be applied to any list, or counting,
which can be applied to any kind of object. As examples of general problem-
solving strategies, Polya’s classic book, How to Solve It, first published in 1945,
contains advice such as making sure to use all available data, looking for a
related problem that is either simpler or already known, and so on (Polya
2004). Perkins and Salomon (1989) review evidence that these and similar
strategies help experts in many fields solve unfamiliar problems. They also
provide a detailed analysis of transfer of expertise and examples of both suc-
cessful and unsuccessful transfer. We consider how human mental skills are
learned in chapter 13.
9.5
Explaining Human Uniqueness
A successful theory of human evolution must explain how humans have
gained extensive behavioral and mental flexibility, given that the behavioral
and mental skills of other species are much more constrained genetically.
In turn, this requires explaining how humans have been able to circumvent

uniquely human
135
Table 9.3. Characteristics of hypotheses about human evolution
Solutions
to new
problems
Extensive
behavioral
change on
a historic
timescale
Extensive
cultural
evolution
of mental
skills
Skill
learning is
slow and
gradual
Skills may
generalize
across
domains
Skill
learning
depends
on social
information
Evolutionary
psychology
No
No
No
?
No
?
Inborn general
intelligence
Yes
?
No
?
Yes
?
Cultural
evolution
Yes
Yes
?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Note:Aquestionmarkindicatesthatthehypothesisisnotspelledoutinsufficientdetailtoderiveaclearprediction.
the exponentially high learning costs of behavioral and mental flexibility
(chapters 4, 8, and 11).
Perhaps the most difficult question is, Why only humans? What has pre-
vented the evolution of humanlike abilities in other species? We consider this
question in chapter 16. In this section, we summarize the pros and cons of
some major theories of human evolution, with a focus on the three charac-
teristics of human behavioral and mental abilities reviewed in section 9.4.
Table 9.3 summarizes some characteristics of these hypotheses. We can con-
fidently reject and exclude from further discussion two extreme hypotheses.
First, human uniqueness cannot be entirely a product of genetic evolution,
because much of what makes humans unique requires extensive social input
and is of recent invention (section 9.2). Second, human uniqueness cannot
be entirely a product of cultural evolution, because, for example, apes raised
in human environments do not become cognitively human (Kellogg and Kel-
logg 1933, Terrace et al. 1979). A key task of a theory of human evolution is
to determine the roles of genetic and cultural evolution, as well as of physical
and ecological factors.
9.5.1
Evolutionary Psychology
The core idea behind evolutionary psychology is that the human mind has
evolved to contain many specialized mental modules, each of which is hard-
wired to solve specific problems (Tooby and Cosmides 1989, 1992, Cos-
mides and Tooby 1992, Pinker 1994, Buss 2005, Rozin 1976; for critique,
see Buller 2006). Human behaviors that have been attributed to such spe-
cific modules include child care (Daly and Wilson 1998), jealousy (Daly and

136
chapter 9
Wilson 1988), mate choice (Buss 2000), and social intelligence or theory of
mind (Whiten and Byrne 1988, Whiten 1997, Cosmides and Tooby 1994,
Cosmides et al. 2010). Similar views are shared by other nativist theories of
human faculties. Some linguists, for example, think of grammatical abilities as
an “instinct” similar to other complex genetically programmed traits, such as
web weaving in spiders and dam building in beavers (Chomsky 1980, Pinker
1994). Likewise, some neuroscientists have argued for an innate imitation
ability (Rizzolatti and Craighero 2004, Iacoboni and Dapretto 2006).
According to evolutionary psychology, human mental modules have
evolved through natural selection in order to deal with problems that were
common in our evolutionary past (Cosmides et al. 1992, Cosmides and
Tooby1994).Themodularorganizationofthemindwouldbecommontoall
animals, but humans would possess a much larger number of mental modules
(Cosmides and Tooby 1994, Buller 2006, Burkart et al. 2017). Thus many
evolutionary psychologists reject the idea that culture can shape human cog-
nition, and hold instead that culture is simply a manifestation of the operation
of innate mental modules (Tooby and Cosmides 1989).
The view of the mind as a collection of inborn mental modules has
appeal. For example, it provides a conceptual framework for how genetic
evolution influences human behavior (by creating mental modules), and it
identifies both what unites animal and human minds (the modular archi-
tecture) and what separates them (the number of modules). Indeed, much
research in evolutionary psychology has dealt with classic topics of evolu-
tionary biology rather than with uniquely human phenomena. An additional
rationale for a modular mind is of prime importance to our book. Both evo-
lutionary psychologists and nativist linguists recognize that combinatorial
dilemmas are a major obstacle to learning and development. For example,
Tooby and Cosmides (1992, 101) write: “Designs that produce ‘plasticity’
can be retained by selection only if they have features that guide behavior
intotheinfinitesimallysmallregionsofrelativelysuccessfulperformancewith
sufficient frequency.” This argument also implicitly recognizes that differ-
ent problems have different solutions; otherwise, just a few mental modules
would suffice. Similarly, the “poverty of the stimulus” argument in linguis-
tics recognizes the problem of learning a language from environmental input
(Chomsky 1980). A modular mind seems a straightforward solution to these
problems: if important mental skills are innate, learning just needs to fill in
the details (Fodor 1983, Tooby and Cosmides 1992, Gelman and Williams
1998, Chiappe and MacDonald 2005).
Despiteitsappealingfeatures,evolutionarypsychologyishardtoreconcile
with the fact that characteristically human traits require extensive and specific
training in order to develop (section 9.4), and with the fact that many of these
traits are too recent to have a specific genetic basis (section 9.3). For example,

uniquely human
137
how could we have innate modules for driving cars, programming computers,
composing a symphony, or playing chess? While it is possible to consider a
modulefordomain-generallearningandplanning,oramoduleforcombining
the abilities of other modules (discussed next), such modules would end up
being responsible for the vast majority of uniquely human behaviors, which
would undermine the premise that human uniqueness derives from a host of
specialized modules. It seems to us that the facts summarized in sections 9.2–
9.4 point to a much larger role of acquired information than can fit under the
umbrella of evolutionary psychology.
It has also been suggested that the foundation of human cognition lies in
a few inborn modules, called core knowledge systems. For example, Spelke and
Kinzler (2007) consider five modules: objects, actions, numbers, space, and
social partners. Similarly, Carey (2009) considers core systems for agents,
numbers, and objects, the latter including also causal and spatial relations.
Core knowledge systems are assumed to be inborn (similar to other notions
of cognitive modules), but also to serve as the foundation for learning further
mental skills. This view is similar to ours, although we focus on even more
basic abilities related to sequential information processing and we consider in
more detail how culture can contribute to mental skills.
9.5.2
Inborn General Intelligence
Thathumanshaveaninbornabilitytotacklepracticallyanyproblemhasbeen
suggested in many disciplines, such as archaeology, anthropology, behavioral
ecology, neuroscience, and philosophy (Fodor 1983, Donald 1991, Klein
1995, Mithen 1996, Klein 2002, Chiappe and MacDonald 2005, Gärdenfors
2006, Sol 2009, Barrett 2015). Some of these theories assume a partly mod-
ular cognitive architecture, but, in contrast with evolutionary psychology,
they focus on general intelligence rather than on domain-specific adapta-
tions(Guilford1967,Fodor1983,Sternbergetal.2002,Baum2004,Gardner
2011). Many authors, for example, have proposed that humans solve prob-
lems through mental simulations of possible scenarios, in order to predict
future events and compute a course of action (Craik 1943, Tulving 2002,
Hesslow 2002, Suddendorf and Corballis 2007).
The hypothesis that humans have an advanced mechanism for gen-
eral problem solving provides an intuitive account of human uniqueness
that is compatible with the flexibility and proficiency of human cognition
(section 9.2). This hypothesis, however, leaves two important questions
open. The first is the origin of the information upon which the general
problem-solvingmechanismwouldoperate.Forexample,eventhebestroute-
finding algorithm cannot bring you to your destination without knowledge
of the specific transportation infrastructure in your area. As it is unrealistic

138
chapter 9
to assume that each individual independently develops all the knowledge
underlying uniquely human skills, a general intelligence hypothesis seems
viable only if complemented with extensive amounts of individual and social
learning (see chapter 11). Reliance on learning could explain both gradual
skill development and specificity of performance, and would therefore be
compatible with the basic facts of human intelligence.
The second open question is whether the general problem-solving mech-
anism can evolve by natural selection. Sometimes intelligence is treated as a
one-dimensional quantity, such as body mass or height, that natural selec-
tion can increase or decrease (Deary et al. 2010, Nisbett et al. 2012), but
intelligence depends upon a variety of abilities, like working memory, pro-
cessing speed, logical reasoning, and imagery (Mackintosh 2011, Ritchie
2015, Ramus 2017). Without a detailed model of how such abilities oper-
ate together, it is difficult to study the evolution of intelligence. Some insight,
however,comesfromthefieldofartificialintelligence(AI),whichhistorically
had placed general intelligence among its main goals (Nilsson 2009, Ohls-
son 2012). For example, the General Problem Solver created by Newell et al.
(1959) attempted to solve problems by looking for a sequence of operations
that would transform an initial state into a final state with desired properties.
In this system, proving a mathematical theorem would begin with a set of
axioms (initial state) and admissible rules of inference (operations), with the
goal of finding a sequence of inferences arriving at the theorem (final state).
Because complex problems require long sequences of operations, it was soon
realized that general problem solving encounters the same combinatorial dif-
ficulties as animals attempting to learn long behavioral sequences. That is,
solving times increase exponentially with problem complexity. AI was thus
redirected toward finding efficient solutions in restricted problem domains,
using “expert systems” endowed with as much domain-specific knowledge as
possible(Newelletal.1972,Feigenbaum1977,Hayes-Roth1977).Forexam-
ple, the general theorem-proving program might be replaced by a Euclidean
geometry program that could access a library of already proven statements
and employ known theorem-proving strategies. Such a program would fare
better than the General Problem Solver in the domain of Euclidean geome-
try, but would be unable to work outside this domain. We come back to this
argument in chapter 11.
Although AI has progressed tremendously from its early days, the basic
insightstillholdsthateventhemostefficientalgorithmsarepowerlesswithout
domain-specific information. Indeed, this was the main reason why evolu-
tionary psychologists deemed the evolution of general intelligence unlikely,
and instead sought to partition intelligence into domain-specific modules
(section 9.5.1). Our argument about animal intelligence has a similar starting

uniquely human
139
point—combinatorial difficulties—but a somewhat different conclusion.
We argue that the main mechanism of animal intelligence (i.e., the chain-
ing algorithm) is domain-general, but also that combinatorial difficulties are
circumvented by focusing on relatively simple problems (short sequences)
andbyencodingdomain-specificknowledgeingeneticpredispositions(chap-
ter 4). Regarding human intelligence, it seems to us that neither evolutionary
psychologynorinborngeneralintelligencearewhollysatisfactoryhypotheses.
9.5.3
Cultural Evolution
That human uniqueness arises from cultural processes is the classic view
within the social sciences and humanities. Many theories of human culture
and how it changes have been formulated and have yielded important insights
(e.g., Kuhn 1996, Munro 1963, Berger and Luckman 1967, Steward 1972,
Geertz 1973, Harris 1999, Carneiro 2003). In the 1970s, the traditional
conceptual approach to culture was complemented by a research program
emerging from evolutionary biology, which sought to develop a mathemat-
ical theory of cultural evolution (Cavalli Sforza and Feldman 1981, Lumsden
andWilson1981,BoydandRicherson1985,LalandandBrown2011).These
efforts have produced a rich body of theory describing how low-level pro-
cesses, such as transmission, retention, and innovation, can create cultural
phenomena over time (Acerbi et al. 2014, Henrich 2015, Mesoudi 2016,
Creanza et al. 2017).
Focusing on culture as the determinant of human uniqueness easily fits
the basic facts highlighted above: that many human skills have a recent ori-
gin, that they require extensive training, that they are learned socially, and
that they are very diverse both over time and in different societies. It is more
challenging to articulate a comprehensive theory of how cultural evolution
interacts with genetic evolution to create human intelligence. We cannot
explain human uniqueness just with cultural evolution, as there must be
some inborn mechanism—absent in other species—that allowed humans to
become cultural beings. Understanding these inborn factors is of paramount
importance to understanding human uniqueness, the scope and power of cul-
tural evolution, and the origin of human culture. Indeed, theories of cultural
evolution often explain human uniqueness by assuming that crucial elements
of human psychology are innate. For example, Boyd and Richerson (1985)
proposed that inborn psychological biases, such as preferential learning from
successful individuals or from the majority, are crucial for culture to accumu-
late productive behaviors, despite the fact that unproductive behaviors could
be transmitted equally easily (see also Richerson and Boyd 2005, Eriksson
et al. 2007, Henrich 2015).

140
chapter 9
Recently, theorists have suggested that cultural evolution may have a
broader reach than has often been assumed, allowing humans to learn and
transmit not only behaviors and material culture but also mental abilities
(Gabora 1997, 1998, Richerson and Boyd 2005, Tomasello 2014, Henrich
2015, Heyes 2018). This broadening of the role of cultural evolution offers
new and powerful explanations of human uniqueness, and brings theorizing
from biology and psychology closer to traditional views in the social sciences
and the humanities. We briefly survey some of these ideas.
Tomasello and coworkers have suggested that thinking already exists in
primates, where it is mainly used in social competition. However, they posit
that humans haveuniqueinborn abilities and motivations to engagein collab-
orative endeavors, such as attending jointly to the same stimuli and behaviors,
understandingothers’intentions,andformulatingcollectivegoals(Tomasello
1999, Tomasello et al. 2005, Herrmann et al. 2007, Tomasello 2014; see also
Frith and Frith 2010, 2012, MacLean 2016). In this view, these factors are the
basisofhumancooperationandculturaltransmission,includingtransmission
of mental abilities, such as language. In this view, the role of cumulative cul-
ture is so important that, without an appropriate social environment, humans
would be very similar to apes (Tomasello and Rakoczy 2003).
Gabora (1997, 1998) has proposed a concrete mechanism for the transi-
tion from a world poor in culture to one in which culture is a major force,
which is similar to the ideas we present in chapter 16. In this scenario, the
human mind is very open but initially devoid of complex mental content.
Innovation proceeds by creating and recombining cultural elements, but this
process is slow until the cultural system reaches a critical threshold in com-
plexity and size. Past this threshold, the generation of new mental content
increases dramatically due to the availability of both raw mental material and
mental mechanisms that can recombine this material into new forms. Gabora
and Steel (2017, 2020) have studied this process using mathematical models
developed in theoretical biology to study the emergence of complex chemical
networks early in the evolution of life.
Finally, Heyes’s (2018) view of the role of culture in human cognition is
very similar to ours. Based on an eye-opening review of empirical data, she
concludes that social interactions are crucial for the development of abilities
that traditionally have been considered largely innate, such as grammatical
competence, imitation, and theory of mind. Further, she suggests that these
abilities are themselves largely the product of cultural evolution, and that they
can be learned effectively without strong genetic support based on domain-
general learning processes of sequential learning and associative learning. In
the following, we reach a similar conclusion based on theoretical arguments
and a complementary review of the literature.

