Logic Without Borders

Ontos Mathematical Logic
Edited by 
Wolfram Pohlers, Thomas Scanlon,  
Ernest Schimmerling, Ralf Schindler,  
Helmut Schwichtenberg
Volume 5

Logic Without 
Borders
Edited by 
Åsa Hirvonen, Juha Kontinen, Roman Kossak 
and Andrés Villaveces

ISBN 978-1-61451-772-6
e-ISBN (PDF) 978-1-61451-687-3
e-ISBN (EPUB) 978-1-61451-932-4
ISSN 2198-2341
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A CIP catalog record for this book has been applied for at the Library of Congress.
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie; 
detailed bibliographic data are available on the Internet at http://dnb.dnb.de.
© 2015 Walter de Gruyter Inc., Berlin/Boston/Munich
Printing: CPI books GmbH, Leck 
♾ Printed on acid-free paper
Printed in Germany
www.degruyter.com

|
To our friend and colleague Jouko


From the editors
The list of invited speakers at the meeting in honor of Jouko Väänänen’s Sixti-
eth birthday at the University of Helsinki in September of 2010 can be seen as a
perfect illustration of the present state of aﬀairs in mathematical logic. Twenty
ﬁve speakers gave talks on the history and philosophy of mathematics, set theory,
model theory, and theoretical computer science, and topics within each of these
disciplines varied greatly. Despite all that diversity, there was a unifying theme, a
ground common to all the talks given. They all were on various aspects of Mathe-
matical Logic. Another important uniting factor was personal: all speakers found
natural ways to connect their talks to the diverse body of work of Väänänen. Many
speakers were his former students, and many were his co-authors. Overall, it was
an impressive display of logic without borders.
This volume is dedicated to Väänänen, and presents a collection of articles,
both stemming from lectures given during the conference, and at the same time
brightly displaying the diversity and depth of contemporary mathematical logic;
in the intention of the editors, it also invites readers to a discussion on the state of
the discipline. The contributions are all by authors who are important members of
the “avant-garde” of contemporary mathematical logic, and the subjects of their
writings constitute an impressive “state of the art” of a good part of the discipline
as a whole.
Åsa Hirvonen
Juha Kontinen
Roman Kossak
Andrés Villaveces


Preface – Unity and Diversity of Logic
This short essay serves as an informal introduction to the volume and an invitation
to the discussion on the state of the discipline. Mathematical logic has a distinc-
tive place between mathematics its foundations and its philosophy. In the last four
decades, several branches of logic have evolved into highly specialized technical dis-
ciplines. There are strong arguments for autonomy and separation of some areas,
but there are also strong arguments for unity of all those diversiﬁed developments.
We comment brieﬂy on some historical aspects and some recent developments.
Logic today: Is there unity? What is its role within
mathematics?
What is mathematical logic today? How does it connect with its historical roots?
How does it continue to serve as foundations of mathematics, and how does it im-
pact mathematics in general? Does it continue to serve as the foundations of mathe-
matics at all? What distinguishes advanced areas of mathematical logic from other
branches of mathematics? What parts of mathematical logic should be considered
philosophy, and what parts evolved into independent subdisciplines of algebra,
analysis or computer science? The article by Juliette Kennedy in this volume ad-
dresses some of these issues directly, as does Jouko Väänänen’s personal account
of the development of his interests in mathematical logic. Other articles in the
volume might be construed as providing partial responses to these questions, of
course not necessarily in a direct way, but through the connections and links they
explore, both internally within logic and externally between logic and other dis-
ciplines.
There is no question that mathematical logic is diverse. The current press-
ing subject of discussion is its unity. Now, the problem of unity of mathematical
logic cannot be separated from the similar problem for mathematics in general:
as mathematics grows and its subdisciplines become highly specialized, so do
many areas of set theory, model theory, proof theory, and computability theory.
The “unifying glue” in the past was the foundational character of the problems
motivating research. This, of course, to some extent is still true today, but the
philosophical motivation, the driving force behind the early developments, has
to large extent been demoted from the center of concerns of the mathematical
community at large.
The issue of unity of mathematical logic has become ever more pressing in
recent years: even the question of the existence of unity of mathematical logic

X
|
Preface – Unity and Diversity of Logic
has been raised by mathematical logicians themselves across the wide spectrum
of subareas: from some prominent model theorists who intend to regard their
own subﬁeld as a sort of extension of algebraic geometry and no longer a part
of “Logic”1. While some model theorists have pulled towards generalized forms
of algebraic geometry, some set theorists have taken a similar step toward topo-
logical dynamics, Ramsey theory applied to Banach space theory or even the clas-
siﬁcation of operator algebras, 퐶∗-algebras, von Neumann algebras, etc. Others,
notably some recursion (or computability) theorists have made strides towards
both computer science and recursive model theory2. Also, proof theorists are do-
ing proof-mining and have been formalizing proofs in ways that add seriously to
this variety and diversity of perspectives. Add to all this pull in diﬀerent directions
the sharp splinter of unity brought about by the emergence during the past three
or four decades of a category theory-grounded logic, far away from set heory, and
now successful by some measures3.
The odd case of model theory
The speciﬁc case of model theory and its relationship with Logic in general pro-
vides an interesting case study4. In earlier days, and especially before 1970, model
theory’s main problems were very set-theoretic in nature: several important ques-
tions of the time (two-cardinal theorems, end extension methods, generalized
omitting types) were dependent on the speciﬁc model of set theory where the
model theorist is working. Extremely rich interplay between the two subdisci-
plines created such oﬀspring as Ehrenfeucht-Mostowski models, Jensen’s cov-
ering lemma, Morley’s categoricity theorem and its enormous oﬀ-spring reach-
ing now the domains of mathematical physics through quasi-minimal excellent
classes, Chang’s and Vaught’s conjectures, etc. However, this sort of logical in-
terplay was not necessary under stability assumptions: Shelah’s work of the
1970s provided model theorists with a “paradise” with rich dividing lines, rich
1 An “independence from the rest of logic” - and in particular from set heory - granted in the ﬁrst
order case by spectacular results in stability theory, itself deeply connected to set theory in wider
contexts, creating a paradox of set theory independence in logic.
2 The name “recursion theory” is now falling out of favor among many of its practitioners - the
more fashionable “computability theory”, a name that is both a description of new emphasis and
a declaration of intent, has now been the oﬃcial name of the subarea for more than two decades.
3 Homotopy type theoretic foundations for parts of mathematics is by far the largest subﬁeld in
2014 in terms of grants in the United States!
4 See the papers by Baldwin and Kennedy in this volume for more on this subject.

Preface – Unity and Diversity of Logic
|
XI
structural properties, and where many of the questions that in general would
have needed set-theoretical assumptions did not need them. Stability theory for
ﬁrst order logic opened a large playground for applications of model theory to
branches of mathematics diﬀerent from logic, and for wonderful and deep in-
ternal connections between deﬁnability issues, combinatorial characterizations
and independence notions. This playground has increased in size, covering areas
outside stable theories, with enormous success accumulating over more than
four decades. One side result of this story of success, for stability theory is that
large groups of model theorists do not feel the need for more interaction with set
theory. In an interesting shift of events, the ultimate expansion of stability theory
to abstract elementary classes and to connections with second order logic, via
new interplay with large cardinals and forcing and its connections with analytic
structures, in the work started by Zilber around the turn of the century, is again
pushing model theory to areas where understanding of its connections with set
theory is central.
The dynamics of grounding
When Andrzej Mostowski outlined mathematical logic in “Thirty Years of Foun-
dational Studies,” an impressively comprehensive summary of the history of the
subject from 1930 to 1964, he saw it as a continuation of eﬀorts of the three major
schools in philosophy of mathematics: “the intuitionism of Brouwer, the logicism
of Frege and Russell and the formalism of Hilbert.” In the introduction, Mostowski
acknowledged failures of each program, but stressed that the “ [...] activity of these
schools brought about a great number of important new insights and discoveries
that have deepened our knowledge of mathematics and its relation to logic. As
it often happens, these by-products have turned out to be more important than
the original aims of the founders of the three schools.” Mostowski’s statement
is still applicable today: we are proud every time a development in an advanced
area of mathematical logic ﬁnds an important application in mainstream mathe-
matics or in computer science. Still, much work in the discipline itself concerns
directly foundational issues, that may be not, and quite often are not, well un-
derstood by outsiders. What makes us unique in the mathematical community, is
our understanding of the role of formal languages and their interpretations. It is
the Hilbert-Russell-Gödel-Gentzen-Tarski legacy, that gives us a clear separation
of syntax and semantics, and shows how investigation of one informs the other. At
a risk of oversimpliﬁcation, one could say that while modern mathematical logic
branched into a vast landscape of diverse subﬁelds, what keeps us together, what
constitutes our unity, is exactly this understanding of the syntax/semantic sepa-

XII
|
Preface – Unity and Diversity of Logic
ration line, and understanding of the importance of foundational questions that
this separation motivates.
Grounding and Set Theory.
Another signiﬁcant, and perhaps overlooked by some nowadays, aspect for the
unity of mathematical logic is the grounding of mathematics in set theoretic for-
malism. Set theory grew out of the need to provide a formal system for mathemat-
ical arguments involving actual inﬁnity. It started with early eﬀorts of Bolzano,
Cantor and Dedekind, and then followed a remarkable path of success. Let us just
mention in passing the Zermelo and Fraenkel axiom system, Gödel’s proof of rel-
ative consistency of the axiom of choice and the continuum hypothesis, Cohen’s
invention of forcing with all further advances in the understanding of the inde-
pendence phenomena in set theory, the role of large cardinal axioms, applications
of descriptive set theory to classiﬁcation problems in classical mathematics, She-
lah’s classiﬁcation program in model theory; the list could go on an on. All those
developments necessarily result in specialization. Still, there is little doubt that all
those successes depend strongly on the solid unity and strength of mathematical
logic.
In their normal practice, most (almost all) mathematicians who are not logi-
cians tend to completely ignore most of these issues. It is a very strong measure
of the success of the foundational program (in spite of all the limitations it may -
and does - have) that algebraists, analysts, algebraic topologists, algebraic geome-
ters, mathematical physicists, number theorists may do their work without hav-
ing to pause and ponder about foundational issues underlying their disciplines,
the nature of real numbers being a prime example of this phenomenon. This phe-
nomenon of robust and healthy ignorance, due to - and witness of - the very success
of the program, produces the odd eﬀect of many mathematicians outside of logic
wondering what on earth logicians do. Setting aside this negative consequence
of the success, we have a weird witness to the uncanny power of set theory as
grounding of a large part of mathematics.
Growth and Evolution.
Of course, mathematics has evolved at a very fast pace, both inside and outside
logic, in the past few decades. And the (perhaps) “healthy and robust” ignorance
of logic could well turn upon its own head. Shifting the focus from foundational
issues to other kinds of interaction between logic and the rest of mathematics,

Preface – Unity and Diversity of Logic
|
XIII
there are interesting developments. In recent decades, whole areas that initially
seemed remote from logic have started interaction, at deep levels, including some
important conjectures in number theory, or Galois theory of diﬀerential equa-
tions, or algebraic dynamics, to mention a few of these areas, with developments
grown inside mathematical logic, model theory, of set theory. What is striking
is that those more recent developments, originally grown “inside the garden” of
logic, and independently from considerations from those other disciplines, in-
clude ideas and tools seriously sophisticated, among them geometric stability
theory, ideas around one-basedness5, combinatorial properties such as “depen-
dence”, etc.. It is at that advanced level that those applications have been appear-
ing. The connections with mathematical physics drawn from Zilber’s work, itself
oddly partially grounded in Shelah’s work in the model theory of non-elementary
classes - or the success of motivic integration through model theory again, or the
recent interactions with the combinatorics of approximate subgroups, through
stable groups, all bear witness of this new wave of interaction. The list is longer
and should probably include whole chunks of category theory in odd interactions
with, at the same time, algebraic topology and large cardinals, with forcing and
universally Baire sets or generic absoluteness or... this is grounding of a kind dif-
ferent from the original foundational program.
These interactions seemingly pulling logic in many diﬀerent directions, and
perhaps creating a new phase of “grounding”, witnesses enormous vitality and
apparent challenges to unity. However, mathematical logic has some internal
themes that appear in many faces throughout the more sophisticated, advanced
developments. One of them is deﬁnability. Another is categoricity6. Yet another
is stability7.
Jouko Väänänen has described deﬁnability as a wormhole that somehow
travels through all of mathematical logic. This beautiful metaphor on the ubiq-
uity of deﬁnability in logic (its appearances in disguised form sometimes, linking
ﬁrst order, second and higher order logic, linking model theory, proof theory, set
theory and computability theory, appearing in theorems both classic and cutting
5 See the article by Chatzidakis in this volume for more on these applications.
6 Since Łoś and Morley categoricity has been central; categoricity transfer is at the heart of She-
lah’s development of stability theory - in some cases it interacts in interesting ways with set the-
ory - yet more recently Zilber’s new focus on categoricity in connection with pseudo-analytic
structures and constructions coming from mathematical physics has provided new avenues of
interaction.
7 Stability as a concept seems central to model theory, yet it has serious antecedents in the work
of Grothendieck, Krivine and others in Banach space theory.

XIV
|
Preface – Unity and Diversity of Logic
edge) is an important reminder of what unites logic, beyond and together with the
shifting dynamics of its internal movements and external interactions.
Roman Kossak
Andrés Villaveces

Contents
From the editors | VII
Preface – Unity and Diversity of Logic | IX
Juliette Kennedy
On the “Logic without Borders” Point of View | 1
Samson Abramsky
Arrow’s Theorem by Arrow Theory | 15
John T. Baldwin
How Big Should the Monster Model Be? | 31
John P. Burgess
Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality | 51
Xavier Caicedo
Lindström’s Theorem for Positive Logics,
a Topological View | 73
Zoé Chatzidakis
Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey | 91
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
Some Aspects of the Ramsey Theory of Real Numbers | 115
Mirna Džamonja
The Singular World of Singular Cardinals | 139
Curtis Franks
Logical Nihilism | 147
Pietro Galliani
The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics | 167
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
The Size of a Formula as a Measure of Complexity | 193

XVI
|
Contents
Wilfrid Hodges
Notes on the History of Scope | 215
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms | 241
Tapani Hyttinen
Counting Measure and Forking in Finite Models | 265
Richard Kaye and Tin Lok Wong
The Model Theory of Generic Cuts | 281
Juha Kontinen
On Natural Deduction in Dependence Logic | 297
Steven Lindell, Henry Towsner, and Scott Weinstein
Inﬁnitary Methods in Finite Model Theory | 305
Maryanthe Malliaris and Saharon Shelah
Saturating the Random Graph with an Independent Family of Small
Range | 319
Ilkka Niiniluoto
Constructive Realism in Mathematics | 339
JeﬀB. Paris and Alena Vencovská
The Twin Continua of Inductive Methods | 355
Saharon Shelah
A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models | 367
Jouko Väänänen
Pursuing Logic without Borders | 403
A   Radio  Interview  with  Jouko  Väänänen          417

Juliette Kennedy
On the “Logic without Borders” Point of
View
||
Juliette Kennedy: Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Helsinki, Finland
...as the Bhagavad-Gita teaches, one
achieves knowledge and indiﬀerence at
the same time.—Andre Weil.
Deﬁnability is like a wormhole from one
ﬁeld of logic to another.—Jouko Väänä-
nen.
1 Introduction
Finitism, intuitionism, constructivism, formalism, predicativism, structuralism,
objectivism, platonism; foundationalism, anti-foundationalism, ﬁrst orderism;
constructive type theory, Cantorian set theory, proof theory; top down principles
or building up from below—framework commitments, that is, ideology, perme-
ates the logician’s mathematical life. Such commitments set in early and are—
usually—ﬁnal: lines are drawn in the sand, and a working life is mapped out.
Of course, not all logicians are attracted to dogma. Some are fascinated by the
space between theories, by points of data downplayed by this or that theoretical
stance, or left out altogether. Their approach is pantheistic and ecumenical, and,
with respect to foundations in particular, opportunistic and localized. Their atti-
tude is critical, not toward any particular logical method, but toward the idea of
omniscience. Neutrality is not a goal in itself; border-crossing logicians are will-
ing to take ideology seriously where they ﬁnd it eﬀective—it is just that they rarely
ﬁnd it so.
* This paper is based on a series of conversations with Jouko Väänänen.

2
|
Juliette Kennedy
We might call such a perspective the “Logic without Borders” point of view.
In the below we will recount some episodes in border-crossing, pieces of math-
ematics chosen almost arbitrarily from the work, career and conversation of the
dedicatee of this volume, Jouko Väänänen.
We will see that a key concept turns out to be deﬁnability—and indeed, what
is more important than the question of what we can say? As Väänänen puts it in
his “Pursuing Logic without Borders”:1
We were persuaded by the idea that model theory, set theory and recursion theory are just
diﬀerent approaches to the same goal, understanding deﬁnability.
2 First Episode: Model Theory
Should model theory have borders? Countability, or more precisely, the border be-
tween the “genuinely” uncountable as opposed to the “only apparently” uncount-
able, separates pure model theory, i.e. that part of the subject which is relatively
free of entanglement with set theory, from the rest. Logicians on one side ask the
question: why resort to set theory for studying the apparently marginal, the outly-
ing cases, when there is so much work to do in the cases where set-theoretic meth-
ods are (in general) not needed, i.e. in the area of (suﬃciently) stable and also in
the area of o-minimal models? While the border-crossing logician will take a dif-
ferent view of the term “marginal”, at least insofar as it is used as a synonym for
“entangled with set theory”.
In Shelah’s classiﬁcation theory, for example, uncountable models of a suf-
ﬁciently stable ﬁrst order theory2 can be analyzed in terms of dimension-like in-
variants, somewhat reminiscent of analyzing a vector space in terms of the size
of its basis. Since countable ﬁrst order theories with inﬁnite models have models
in all uncountable cardinalities, just as there are vector spaces and algebraically
closed ﬁelds of any dimension, the (only apparently) uncountable cardinalities of
such models must arise from their dimensions, in a kind of stretching from the
countable case. This places constraints on how complicated such models can be.
On the other hand, countable complete ﬁrst order theories which fail to be suﬃ-
ciently stable3 have, in every suﬃciently large cardinality, models which are non-
isomorphic, but they are so close to each other that one cannot imagine analyzing
1 in this volume
2 i.e. superstable, NDOP, NOTOP
3 i.e. they are unstable, or stable but unsuperstable, or superstable with DOP or OTOP

On the “Logic without Borders” Point of View
|
3
the models in terms of dimension-like invariants. What “so close to each other”
means can be expressed in exact terms in several ways. Originally Shelah showed
that such models of size 휅can be 퐿∞휅-equivalent.4 Using the method of transﬁ-
nite Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé games and their approximations by trees5 the original
result of Shelah has been greatly improved. In recent work by Kangas-Hyttinen-
Väänänen such models are constructed in suitable cardinalities which are even
퐿2
휅휔-equivalent.6 This is the best possible result in the sense that for the classiﬁ-
able case each model of cardinality 휅(for suitable 휅) can be characterized in 퐿2
휅휔
up to isomorphism.
The phrase “problematic set-theoretical content” occurs in the literature
in connection with debates about the foundational role of second order logic;7
but it also seems to have been found useful in connection with the question,
which structures should one study? Following standard mathematical practice,
for model theorists avoiding pathological cases—however this may be deﬁned in
a particular context—has become the rule.
Important oppositions, such as those between tame and nontame, classiﬁ-
able and nonclassiﬁable, o-minimal or not, admitting geometric invariants or not,
decidable and undecidable, or sometimes simply countable and uncountable,
emerge and become harmonized with the oppositions between “nonpathologi-
cal” and “set-theoretical”, or, ﬁnally, “interesting” and “too general”. But this
is precisely where ideological borders emerge. As to undecidability, the border-
crossing logician sees undecidability as a richness, a welcome elaboration of the
basic picture. As for “interesting” and “too general”, for the border-crossing logi-
cian “too general” is never a term of criticism, if all that is meant by “too general”
is that one’s reply to the question, what structures should one study? is simply
“all of them”.
2.1 A Remark of Sacks
Sacks expressed the conundrum thus in 1972:
B. Dreben...once asked...“Does model theory have anything to do with logic?” It is true
that model theory bears a disheartening resemblence to set theory, a fascinating branch
of mathematics with little to say about fundamental logical questions, and in particular to
4 See [14].
5 a method developed by the Helsinki Logic Group in cooperation with Saharon Shelah
6 See [4].
7 See below.

4
|
Juliette Kennedy
the arithmetic of cardinals and ordinals. But the resemblance is more of manners than of
ideas, because the central notions of model theory are absolute, and absoluteness, unlike
cardinality, is a logical concept.8
Among other things Sacks is referring to the fact that when one analyzes countable
models in terms of ﬁnite partial isomorphisms, one uses countable ordinals as
invariants and the set-theoretic aspect is submerged, because the concept of an
ordinal is absolute.9 In detail, consider the Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game of length
휔between non-isomorphic countable models A and B. Clearly player I10 has a
winning strategy because he can enumerate the models in 휔moves and then he
must win because no isomorphism exists. Consider now the restriction to games
of ﬁnite length, not to any ﬁxed ﬁnite length, but modifying the game by adding
the clause that player I has to count down an ordinal 훼while he plays. This ordinal
is like a clock which ticks down from the ordinal 훼and stops when it hits zero. He
can count down only ﬁnitely many steps so the game is ﬁnite, but it is potentially
inﬁnite in the sense that there is no bound on the length of the game.11 In general,
for “small” 훼player I will not have a winning strategy. So how big must 훼be in
order that I wins this harder game? A simple argument shows that if player II12
has a winning strategy for all countable 훼, then II has a winning strategy in the
original Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game of length 휔, and the models are isomorphic.
As the models are not isomorphic, there must be a countable 훼such that player II
does not have a winning strategy, and then by the Gale-Stewart theorem, which
implies that these games are determined, player I does have a winning strategy.
The smallest such 훼measures the distance of the models A and B from being
isomorphic. The bigger 훼is the closer they are to being isomorphic. This gives a
hierarchy in terms of countable ordinals. On each level 훼of the hierarchy there are
the pairs of countable models where 훼is the “watershed”, the boundary where
the advantage in the Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game slides from player II to player I.
With all clocks less than 훼player II, the “isomorphism player”, is able to survive
without losing, but once the clock is started from 훼(or bigger), player I is able to
ﬁnd the diﬀerence in the models and manifest the non-isomorphism by winning
the game. All elements of this game are quite absolute.
8 [11]
9 See Scott, [12].
10 the anti-isomorphism player, sometimes called the “spoiler”
11 The idea of thinking of ordinals as measures of potential inﬁnity and of trees as measures of
potential countability, is presented ﬁrst in [6]; see also [18].
12 the isomorphism player, sometimes called the “duplicator”

On the “Logic without Borders” Point of View
|
5
The point is that this fails in uncountable models. When one uses countable
partial isomorphisms to investigate uncountable models, one needs trees (an ana-
logue of ordinals) which have non-trivial set theoretic properties. So set theory
becomes entangled here with model theory.
To see this, consider the Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game of length 휔1 between non-
isomorphic models A and B of cardinality ℵ1. Clearly player I has a winning strat-
egy, as before, because he can list the models in 휔1 moves and then he must win
because no isomorphism exists. In analogy to the countable case we again mod-
ify the game by adding the clause that player I has to go up a tree, which has no
uncountable branches, while he plays. This tree is like a clock which ticks up the
tree and stops when the branch ends. He can go up only countably many steps
so the game is countable, but it is potentially uncountable in the sense that there
is no bound on the countable length of the game. As before, in general, for small
trees player I will not have a winning strategy. How big must the tree be in or-
der that I wins this harder game? It can be shown that for any non-isomorphic A
and B there are trees such that player I wins, and of course there are trees S such
that II wins (because one can start with small trees). Clearly we are thinking of
trees here as analogues of ordinals. How far this analogy reaches is an interesting
set-theoretical question. The structure of the class of trees with no uncountable
branches is much more complicated than the structure of the class of all ordinals
but as before, there is a hierarchy in terms of such trees and one can use proper-
ties of such trees to chart the area where the advantage in the Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé
game (with a tree as a clock) moves from II to I. Interestingly, there is a gray area
where neither player has a winning strategy because the Gale-Stewart theorem (or
Borel Determinacy) does not give determinacy for these games.
Here is an example of a non-trivial and novel set-theoretical analysis which
was and is needed to work out the properties of such trees, and this has immedi-
ate implications for the model theory of uncountable structures. For example, as
the work of Hyttinen, Shelah, Tuuri and others has shown, the extent to which the
non-isomorphism of uncountable elementarily equivalent models can measured
by trees is closely related to the stability theoretic properties of the ﬁrst order the-
ory of the models.13
13 See [5].

6
|
Juliette Kennedy
3 Second Episode: The Symbiosis between Model
Theory and Set Theory
Symbiosis is the relationship between model theory and set theory in which one
on the one hand exploits set-theoretical results to prove theorems in model theory,
and on the other hand, one uses model-theoretic considerations to force interest-
ing concepts and problems in set theory out into the open. Symbiosis was devel-
oped by Väänänen in order to, as he puts it, “expose the nature of the logic”; to
“uncover the set-theoretical commitments of the logic, its content, its strength,
even its reference”. Symbiosis signiﬁes co-dependence—in the benign sense of
the term—and is a form of entanglement. Recent debates about the foundational
virtues of second order logic vs. set theory, for example, decry the entanglement of
set theory with second order logic, insofar as it is admitted to exist at all.14 In fact,
as Väänänen shows, not only is there nothing pernicious here, second order logic
(denoted 푆푂퐿) is actually symbiotic with set theory, even in the technical sense of
the term deﬁned below—a predicament, possibly, for those who feel compelled,
on foundational grounds, to make a choice between the two formalisms.15
The technical deﬁnition of symbiosis is as follows. First some notation. By
a “predicate” we mean a formula of set theory, typically “푥is a cardinal” or “푥
is the power-set of 푦”. If a predicate 푃is added to the language of set theory
as a (deﬁnable) new symbol, then a 훴1(푃)-predicate means a 훴1-formula in the
vocabulary {∈, 푃}. A 훥1(푃)-predicate is a 훴1(푃)-predicate 푄(푥1, . . . , 푥푛) for which
there is another 훴1(푃)-predicate 푄耠(푥1, . . . , 푥푛) such that ∀푥1 . . . 푥푛(푄(푥1, . . . , 푥푛) ↔
푄耠(푥1, . . . , 푥푛)) is true (in 푉). If 휙is a sentence of a logic 퐿∗and 퐿耠is a subset of the
(many-sorted) vocabulary of 휙, then the projection of 휙to 퐿耠is the class of reducts
of models of 휙to 퐿耠. A model class is said to be 훥-deﬁnable in 퐿∗if it is a projection
of a sentence of 퐿∗and also its complement is. Now the deﬁnition:
Deﬁnition 3.1. A logic 퐿∗is symbiotic with a predicate P of set theory if the pred-
icate “휙∈퐿∗” and the predicate “푀　㨐퐿∗휙” are 훴1(푃) and 훥1(푃) respectively, and
in addition, a model class 퐾푃describing 푃(see below) is 훥-deﬁnable in 퐿∗.
What symbiosis tells us about a logic 퐿∗is that its truth predicate is “recursive” in
the predicate 푃, in the generalized sense of being 훥1(푃). The class 퐾푃is deﬁned
as follows:
14 See for example [13].
15 See below for the proof that 푆푂퐿is symbiotic with set theory. See also [15].

On the “Logic without Borders” Point of View
|
7
Deﬁnition 3.2. Suppose 푃is n-ary. The model class 퐾푃consists of models
(푀, 퐸, 푎1, ..., 푎푛)
isomorphic to some (푀耠, ∈, 푎耠
1, ..., 푎耠
푛) such that 푀耠is a transitive set and
푃(푎耠
1, ..., 푎耠
푛)
holds.
Barwise’s concept of an absolute logic is related to symbiosis but is not the same.16
An absolute logic as deﬁned by Barwise requires the satisfaction predicate to be
훥1, but without extra predicates. In the generalization of the concept introduced
by Väänänen one adds the predicate 푃as a kind of “oracle”.
For example, there is a symbiosis between the Härtig-quantiﬁer and the pred-
icate 푥= 퐶푑(푦) (“the cardinality of 푦is 푥”). First of all, as Lindström showed in [9],
the class of well-ordered models is a relativized reduct (i.e. a reduct in the sense of
many-sorted logic) of a model class deﬁnable by means of the Härtig-quantiﬁer,
for a linear order (퐴, <) is a well-order if and only if there are sets 푋푎, 푎∈퐴, such
that for all 푎, 푏∈퐴: 푎< 푏↔|푋푎| < |푋푏|. The satisfaction predicate “the assign-
ment 푠satisﬁes the formula 휙in the model 푀” for the extension of ﬁrst order logic
by the Härtig-quantiﬁer can be deﬁned in set theory by a 훴1(퐶푑)-formula. On the
other hand, the class of models (up to isomorphism) of the form (푀, ∈, 푎, 푏), where
푀is transitive and 푎= |푏|, is 훥-deﬁnable in the extension of ﬁrst order logic by the
Härtig-quantiﬁer. We get hold of transitive models (푀, ∈) because we can charac-
terise well-foundedness. We can make sure that 푎= |푏| because we can use the
Härtig-quantiﬁer.
Let us take an example of an application of set theory in model theory via sym-
biosis. One of the cornerstones of set theory is the Levy Reﬂection Principle, which
states that the hereditarily countable sets (denoted 퐻퐶) form a 훴1 elementary sub-
model of 푉. One can now observe that if a logic 퐿∗is symbiotic with set theory per
se (i.e. without any added predicate), then it has the Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem
down to ℵ0. To see this, note that if 휙∈퐿∗∩퐻퐶has a model, then the statement “휙
has a model” is a true 훴1-sentence of set theory, hence it is true in 퐻퐶. Hence 휙has
a countable model. In general, if symbiosis exists with a predicate, then we have
a Löwenheim-Skolem Theorem down to 휅as soon as 퐻(휅)17 has enough reﬂection.
For example, we noted that there is a symbiosis between the Härtig-quantiﬁer and
the predicate 푥= 퐶푑(푦) (“the cardinality of y is x”). Thus as soon as 퐻(휅), which
16 See [2].
17 퐻(휅) denotes the set of sets of hereditary cardinality less than 휅. Thus 퐻퐶is 퐻(ℵ1).

8
|
Juliette Kennedy
is always a 훴1 submodel of 푉, is also a 훴1(Cd)-elementary submodel of 푉, we have
a Downward Löwenheim-Skolem theorem for the Härtig quantiﬁer: If 휙∈퐿(퐻)
has a model, then 휙has a model of cardinality < 휅.
Let us consider an example in the other direction, from model theory to set
theory. The compactness of the inﬁnitary language 퐿휅휅is a well-known case. This
logic is symbiotic with the predicate “푥is the set of sequences of length < 휅of
elements of 푦”. There are two diﬀerent versions of compactness for this logic. The
ﬁrst says that any theory 푇of size 휅all subsets of smaller cardinality of which have
a model, has itself a model. The other drops the cardinality assumption that 푇has
size 휅. The ﬁrst concept leads to the concept of a weakly compact cardinal, the sec-
ond leads to the concept of strongly compact cardinal. Both concepts have become
important in set theory, independently of the relation to inﬁnitary languages.
A kind of ultimate symbiosis is the symbiosis of second order logic with the
power-set operation “푥is the power set of 푦”, as was mentioned, and as is proved
below.
Once one begins to look for symbiosis, one ﬁnds it everywhere! For example,
as Väänänen points out, symbiosis is not limited to inﬁnite models, but happens
in the area of ﬁnite models too. To see this, recall that a class of ﬁnite models is
recursive iﬀit is 훥-deﬁnable in the above sense in ﬁrst order logic (denoted 퐹푂) in
the context where all models considered are ﬁnite.
So here a computational deﬁnability concept, namely “recursive”, coincides
with a model-theoretic deﬁnability concept. Moreover, due to a result of Fagin, a
class of ﬁnite models is existential second order deﬁnable iﬀit is NP.18 Finally, a
class of ﬁnite ordered models is deﬁnable in Fixpoint logic iﬀit is PTIME.19
A beautiful case of symbiosis for a logic which is strictly between ﬁrst or-
der logic and second order logic is the extension of ﬁrst order logic by the well-
ordering quantiﬁer
푊푥푦퐴(푥, 푦) ↔{(푎, 푏) : 퐴(푎, 푏)}is a well-ordering
denoted 퐹푂(푊). This logic is symbiotic with set theory per se, i.e. with the pred-
icate 푥= 푥. This is because a model class is 훥1 if and only if it is 훥-deﬁnable in
퐹푂(푊). The well-ordering quantiﬁer is simple and yet it hits exactly the 훥1 level
in set theory.
Symbiosis often goes deeper than just the level of model classes. In many ex-
amples model-theoretic invariants, such as Löwenheim number, Hanf number,
decision problems and so on have natural set theoretic characterizations. For ex-
18 See Fagin, [3].
19 See N. Immerman [7] and M. Vardi [20] and [8].

On the “Logic without Borders” Point of View
|
9
ample, the Löwenheim number of second order logic is the supremum of all 훱2-
deﬁnable ordinals, and similar results hold for the Hanf number and the decision
problem of second order logic. Conversely, in many cases set-theoretic invariants
such as cardinals where one has reﬂection, have natural model theoretic applica-
tions. For example, by a result of Magidor, the ﬁrst supercompact cardinal is the
ﬁrst cardinal where second order logic has a strong form of a Löwenheim-Skolem
Theorem.20 The symbiosis here is informal, but what is also interesting is that in
each case one can look at the symbiosis more carefully and sharpen the results
about Löwenheim-Skolem Theorems, Hanf numbers and so on to be able to prove
symbiosis in the technical sense also.
4 Third Episode: The Entanglement of Second
Order Logic with Set Theory
That second order logic is entangled with set theory, is, under this perspective,
of no concern. Väänänen’s precisiﬁcation of the notion of entanglement is the
above-mentioned concept symbiosis. The concept was isolated in his 1978 [16],
in which the following is proved: Second order logic is symbiotic with the predi-
cate “푦= 푃(푥)” (the powerset operation). This means that a model class (closed
under isomorphism) is deﬁnable in set theory by a 훥1 formula in the vocabulary
which includes the binary predicate “푦= 푃(푥)” in addition to ∈, if and only if the
model class is 훥-deﬁnable in second order logic.
Why is second order logic symbiotic with the power-set operation? We repro-
duce here Väänänen’s reply to this question,21 together with some of his thoughts
on the ﬁrst order case:
First of all, since second order logic is closed under negation, it is enough to show that the
satisfaction predicate is 훴1 with respect to the power-set operation. This is entirely stan-
dard. The power-set operation is needed for the semantics of the second order quantiﬁers.
Conversely, we have to show that the class of transitive sets equipped with the power-set
operation is deﬁnable in second order logic with extra predicates. The ﬁrst observation is
that well-foundedness, and hence transitivity, can be deﬁned (up to isomorphism) in sec-
ond order logic. After this is it easy to use a second order quantiﬁer to say that that power-set
operation on the transitive set is really the full power-set operation.
20 See Magidor, [10].
21 personal communication

10
|
Juliette Kennedy
In the ﬁrst order case the symbiosis of 퐹푂with set theory takes place on the level of Kripke-
Platek set theory with urelements, denoted KPU−, without the axiom of inﬁnity.22 So a
model class is deﬁnable in ﬁrst order logic (when we think the universe of each model con-
sisting of urelements) iﬀit is 훥1 in KPU−. The moral of the story is that ﬁrst order logic is
so weak that its symbiosis with set theory takes place on the level of the weak set theory
KPU−.
Another way of presenting the entanglement of second order logic with set theory
is laid out by Väänänen in his 2001 and 2012 papers [17], and [19]. Here set theory
and second order logic are presented as analogs, or reﬂections of each other—
avatars, to use Michael Harris’s terminology23—kindred logical productions crys-
tallized by the intention of the logician as he inclines toward this or that precisi-
ﬁcation of the mathematician’s natural language discourse. As Väänänen puts it
in that paper:
We study two metatheories of mathematics: ﬁrst order set theory and second order logic. It is
often said (e.g. in [13]), that second order logic is better than ﬁrst order set theory because it
can in its full semantics axiomatize categorically N and R, while ﬁrst order axiomatization of
set theory admits non-standard, e.g. countable models. We show below that this diﬀerence
is illusory. If second order logic is construed as our primitive logic, one cannot say whether it
has full semantics or Henkin semantics, nor can we say whether it axiomatizes categorically
N and R.24 So there is no diﬀerence between the two logics: ﬁrst order set theory is merely
the result of extending second order logic to transﬁnitely high types.
The border-crossing logician does not pronounce, he proves. Which is to say, this
is just the starting point of the analysis. For example, Väänänen asks, how do we
22 See J. Akkanen, [1].
23 and Grothedieck’s, Deligne’s and others. Apparently the word has become a term of art in the
ﬁeld. Harris quotes Grothedieck on avatars:
Inspired by certain ideas of Serre, and also by the wish to ﬁnd a certain common “princi-
ple” or “motif” for the various purely algebraic “avatars” that were known, or expected, for
the classical Betti cohomology of a complex algebraic variety, I had introduced towards the
beginning of the 60s the notion of “motif”.
and Weil (translated from the French by Harris):
...those obscure analogies ...disturbing reﬂections of one theory in another.
Though as Harris notes, the reference to avatars is only implicit in the Weil quote. See Harris’s
forthcoming “Not Merely Good, True, and Beautiful,” Princeton University Press.
24 Of course as Väänänen notes in [19], one can prove internal categoricity in these cases. See
below.

On the “Logic without Borders” Point of View
|
11
recognize second order characterizable structures? Which structures are second
order characterizable in the ﬁrst place?25 What does it really mean to say that a
theory fails to be categorical?26
We brieﬂy consider the last two questions. Recall that a theory is 휅-categorical
if all models of the theory of size 휅are isomorphic. A key observation in [19] is this:
the question whether arithmetic in its second order construal is categorical is, as
it stands, ill-deﬁned. The well-deﬁned question is whether two Henkin models (of
second order arithmetic) which have a common expansion to a model of the Com-
prehension Axiom are isomorphic. If such an extension exists, then the two mod-
els are easily proved to be isomorphic in that common extension, that is, without
any set-theoretical metatheory in the background.27 If no such expansion exists,
that is if the language in question is so impoverished that it cannot describe both
structures, e.g. by lacking certain predicates, then the question whether the two
structures are isomorphic makes no sense. Put another way, if we cannot even say
what the two structures are, then how can we ask whether the one is isomorphic
to the other?
Which structures are second order characterizable? Answer: almost all of the
structures the mathematician encounters in his or her working life are second or-
der characterizable. It is consistent that some are not, e.g. it is consistent that the
reals with a Hamel basis, when the reals are considered as a vector space over
the rationals, is not second order characterizable.28 Second order characterizable
structures actually form a hierarchy. If a structure of cardinality 휅is second order
characterizable, then so is 휅(as a structure of the empty vocabulary), and all sec-
ond order characterizable structures of the same cardinality are Turing equivalent
in the sense given in [19]. In fact the following are proved in that paper:
Proposition 4.1. The ﬁrst inaccessible (Mahlo, weakly compact, Ramsey) cardinal
is second order characterizable. If 휅is the ﬁrst measurable cardinal, then 2휅is sec-
ond order characterizable. All second order characterizable cardinals are below the
ﬁrst strong cardinal.29
25 A structure 푀is said to be second order characterizable if there is a second order sentence 휃
such that 푀is, up to isomorphism, the only model of 휃, that is, 휃categorically characterizes 푀.
26 p. 97, [19].
27 This is called “internal categoricity” in [19].
28 The result uses Cohen forcing. See [4] for details.
29 The result concerning inaccessible cardinals is due to Zermelo, and the result on measurable
cardinals is due to D. Scott. The result concerning strong cardinals is due to Magidor. The large
cardinal sequence begins above 휔. See [10].

12
|
Juliette Kennedy
Proposition 4.2. If 휅is second order characterizable, then so are 휅+, 2휅, ℵ휅and ℶ휅.
More generally, if 휅and 휆are second order characterizable, then so is 휅휆.
Thus, as Väänänen observes, the ﬁrst non-second order characterizable cardinal
is a singular strong limit cardinal.
The analysis goes deeper. One can ask, of the predicate “휙is a second order
characterization of a structure”, what is its complexity? It is shown in [19] that
the predicate is the conjunction of a 훴2-complete and a 훱2-complete property of
휙. As such, it is not itself 훴2 or 훱2, a fact which has very important foundational
consequences:
So recognizing whether a candidate second order sentence is a second order characteriza-
tion of some structure is so complex a problem that it cannot (by the Proposition above) be
reduced to truth [of the form] 퐴　㨐휙∗in any particular second order characterizable struc-
ture 퐴. It encodes a solution to propositions of the type
̸　㨐휙∗. So in complexity it is above all
the particular truths 퐴　㨐휙∗and on a par with, but not equivalent to 　㨐휙∗. The whole frame-
work of the second order view takes the concept of a second order characterizable structure
as its starting point. In the case of familiar classical structures we can easily write the second
order characterizations. But if we write down an arbitrary attempt at a second order charac-
terization, the problem of deciding whether we were successful is in principle harder than
the problem of ﬁnding what is true in the structure, if the sentence indeed characterizes
some structure.
This actually supports, because it emphasizes the individuality of particular struc-
tures, forms of structuralism which specialize to the second order view as laid out
in [19]—a view which is built on the idea that second order validity is not reducible
to truth in any one second order characterizable structure. At the same time a
weakness of the view becomes visible: does the number theorist who is looking
for integer solutions to Diophantine equations really work with a completely dif-
ferent structure than the analyst who works with complex numbers? Are not the
integers rather a substructure of the complex numbers? It seems counterintuitive
that, e.g. Dedekind’s embedding of the natural numbers into the integers, and of
these into the rationals, and of these into the reals, and ﬁnally of these into the
complex numbers, is a wrong picture.
5 Conclusion
We began with Weil’s recommendation of a passage from the Bhagavad-Gita. We
want to say that here too one achieves knowledge and indiﬀerence at the same
time—or perhaps it would be more correct to say that for the border-crossing lo-
gician, his indiﬀerence is actually the source of his knowledge. For this is what

Bibliography
|
13
makes his logical life worth living: the ﬁne-structural, set-theoretical focus both
on logic, and on logics; the development of logical frameworks which are not so
much groundings as systems of avatars; and ﬁnally the attempt to expose matters
of reference and of content, while all the while remaining unmoved by ideological
pressures.
Bibliography
[1]
Jyrki Akkanen. Absolute logics. Ann. Acad. Sci. Fenn. Ser. A I Math. Dissertationes,
(100):83, 1995.
[2]
K. Jon Barwise. Absolute logics and 퐿∞휔. Ann. Math. Logic, 4:309–340, 1972.
[3]
Ronald Fagin. Generalized ﬁrst-order spectra and polynomial-time recognizable sets. In
Complexity of computation (Proc. SIAM-AMS Sympos. Appl. Math., New York, 1973), pages
43–73. SIAM–AMS Proc., Vol. VII. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, R.I., 1974.
[4]
Tapani Hyttinen, Kaisa Kangas, and Jouko Väänänen. On second-order characterizability.
Log. J. IGPL, 21(5):767–787, 2013.
[5]
Tapani Hyttinen and Heikki Tuuri. Constructing strongly equivalent nonisomorphic models
for unstable theories. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 52(3):203–248, 1991.
[6]
Tapani Hyttinen and Jouko Väänänen. On Scott and Karp trees of uncountable models. J.
Symbolic Logic, 55(3):897–908, 1990.
[7]
Neil Immerman. Upper and lower bounds for ﬁrst order expressibility. J. Comput. Syst.
Sci., 25(1):76–98, 1982.
[8]
Harry R. Lewis, Barbara B. Simons, Walter A. Burkhard, and Lawrence H. Landweber, edi-
tors. Proceedings of the 14th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, May 5-7,
1982, San Francisco, California, USA. ACM, 1982.
[9]
Per Lindström. First order predicate logic with generalized quantiﬁers. Theoria, 32:186–
195, 1966.
[10] M. Magidor. On the role of supercompact and extendible cardinals in logic. Israel J. Math.,
10:147–157, 1971.
[11] Gerald E. Sacks. Saturated model theory. World Scientiﬁc Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., Hack-
ensack, NJ, second edition, 2010.
[12] Dana Scott. Logic with denumerably long formulas and ﬁnite strings of quantiﬁers. In
Theory of Models (Proc. 1963 Internat. Sympos. Berkeley), pages 329–341. North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1965.
[13] Stewart Shapiro. Foundations without foundationalism, volume 17 of Oxford Logic Guides.
The Clarendon Press Oxford University Press, New York, 1991. A case for second-order
logic, Oxford Science Publications.
[14] Saharon Shelah. Existence of many 퐿∞,휆-equivalent, nonisomorphic models of 푇of power
휆. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 34(3):291–310, 1987. Stability in model theory (Trento, 1984).
[15] Jouko Väänänen. Abstract logic and set theory. I. Deﬁnability. In Logic Colloquium ’78
(Mons, 1978), volume 97 of Stud. Logic Foundations Math., pages 391–421. North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1979.
[16] Jouko Väänänen. Abstract logic and set theory. I. Deﬁnability. In Logic Colloquium ’78
(Mons, 1978), volume 97 of Stud. Logic Foundations Math., pages 391–421. North-Holland,
On the “Logic without Borders” Point of View

14
|
Juliette Kennedy
Amsterdam, 1979.
[17] Jouko Väänänen. Second-order logic and foundations of mathematics. Bull. Symbolic
Logic, 7(4):504–520, 2001.
[18] Jouko Väänänen. Models and games, volume 132 of Cambridge Studies in Advanced
Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2011.
[19] Jouko Väänänen. Second-order logic or set theory? Bull. Symbolic Logic, 18(1):91–121,
2012.
[20] Moshe Y. Vardi. The complexity of relational query languages (extended abstract). [8],
pages 137–146.

Samson Abramsky
Arrow’s Theorem by Arrow Theory
Abstract: We give a categorical account of Arrow’s theorem, a seminal result in
social choice theory.
Keywords: mathematics of social choice, Arrow’s theorem, category theory
MSC: 91-XX, 03, 18
||
Samson Abramsky: Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford
1 Introduction
Arrow’s theorem [2, 3] is a seminal result from 1950 which founded the mod-
ern ﬁeld of social choice theory. It is a no-go theorem for combining individual
preferences: under two very plausible assumptions, the only possible ‘social
welfare function’ is a dictatorship! Closely allied results, notably the Gibbard-
Satterthwaite theorem [6, 10], relate to voting systems: when there are at least
three alternatives, the only non-manipulable voting systems are dictatorships.
Our aim in this note is to cast this result at a more abstract, categorical level,
to expose common structure with no-go theorems in other ﬁelds, such as the
foundations of quantum mechanics. This is motivated by our recent work with
Adam Brandeburger on a sheaf-theoretic approach to quantum non-locality and
contextuality [1], and also by the work of Jouko Väänänen and others on Depen-
dence/Independence Logic [13, 7].
We shall assume only the most basic notions of category theory: categories,
functors, and natural transformations. Moreover, these will be used in a simple,
concrete setting. Thus the categorical language should not be an impediment to
readers interested in a structural account of Arrow’s theorem.
1.1 What Arrow’s Theorem Says
Let 퐴be a set of alternatives, and I a set of individuals.
P(퐴) is the set of preference relations on 퐴. These are usually taken to be weak
orders (transitive and connected relations), sometimes linear orders (transitive,
connected and irreﬂexive).

16
|
Samson Abramsky
P(퐴)I is the set of proﬁles or ballots, which assign a preference relation on the
alternatives to each individual — a “vote”.
A social welfare function is a map
휎: P(퐴)I 㨀→P(퐴).
Such a map produces a single ranking on alternatives — a social choice — from a
proﬁle.
Two conditions are standardly considered on such functions:
–
Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA). The social decision on the
relative preference between two alternatives 푎, 푏depends only on the individ-
ual preferences between these alternatives. It is independent of their rankings
with respect to other alternatives.
–
The Pareto or Uniformity Principle (P). If every individual prefers 푎to 푏,
then so should the social welfare function.
We can now state Arrow’s Theorem more formally as follows.
Theorem 1.1 (Arrow’s Theorem). If |퐴| > 2 and I is ﬁnite, then any social welfare
function satisfying IIA and P is a dictatorship: i.e. for some individual 푖∈I, for all
proﬁles 푝∈P(퐴)I and alternatives 푎, 푏∈퐴:
푎휎(푝) 푏⇐⇒푎푝푖푏.
Thus the social choice function, under these very plausible assumptions, simply
copies the choices of one ﬁxed individual — the dictator.
An extraordinary number of diﬀerent proofs, as well as innumerable varia-
tions, have appeared in the (huge) literature. For a small selection, see [3, 5, 9, 12].
A closely related result is the Gibbard-Satterthwaite theorem [6, 10] on voting
systems:
Theorem 1.2. If |퐴| > 2 and I is ﬁnite, then any voting system
푣: P(퐴)I 㨀→퐴
which is non-manipulable is a dictatorship.
The following quotation from the recent text [12] nicely captures the signiﬁcance
of the result:
For an area of study to become a recognized ﬁeld, or even a recognized subﬁeld, two things
are required: It must be seen to have coherence, and it must be seen to have depth. The
former often comes gradually, but the latter can arise in a single ﬂash of brilliance. ...With
social choice theory, there is little doubt as to the seminal result that made it a recognized
ﬁeld of study: Arrow’s impossibility theorem.

Arrow’s Theorem by Arrow Theory
|
17
The further contents of the paper are as follows. In Section 2, we shall present a
fairly standard account of Arrow’s theorem which will ﬁx notation and serve as a
reference point. In Section 3, we will reformulate Arrow’s Theorem in categorical
terms, and in Section 4, we shall give a development of the proof which uses the
categorical formulation to emphasize the structural aspects. Section 5 concludes.
2 A ‘standard’ account of Arrow’s theorem
The aim of this section is to give a clear, explicit presentation of a fairly standard
account of Arrow’s theorem and some related notions.
The arguments in Section 2.1 follow [3], with some clariﬁcations and reﬁne-
ments due to [5]. In Section 2.2, we follow [9].
2.1 Preference Relations
We consider a number of properties of binary relations 푅⊆퐴2 on a set 퐴. These
are all universally quantiﬁed over elements 푎, 푏, 푐∈퐴:
Reﬂexivity 푎푅푎
Irreﬂexivity ¬푎푅푎
Symmetry 푎푅푏⇒푏푅푎
Antisymmetry 푎푅푏∧푏푅푎⇒푎= 푏
Transitivity 푎푅푏∧푏푅푐⇒푎푅푐
Connectedness 푎푅푏∨푏푅푎.
A weak preference relation is a transitive connected relation. We write P(퐴) for the
set of all weak preference relations on 퐴. Given a weak preference relation 푅, we
can deﬁne two other relations:
Strict Preference 푎푃푏:= 푎푅푏∧¬푏푅푎.
Indiﬀerence 푥퐼푦:= 푎푅푏∧푏푅푎.
Then 푃is a strict ordering (transitive and irreﬂexive), while 퐼is an equivalence
relation (reﬂexive, symmetric and transitive). These relations satisfy the following
properties:
Trichotomy 푎푃푏∨푏푃푎∨푎퐼푏.
Absorption 푎퐼푏∧푏푃푐∧푐퐼푑⇒푎푃푑.

18
|
Samson Abramsky
A weak preference relation is linear if it additionally satisﬁes antisymmetry. We
write L(퐴) for the set of linear preference relations on 퐴. If 푅is linear, then the
associated indiﬀerence relation 퐼is just the identity relation, while 푃is a strict
linear order.
Given 퐴⊆퐵, we can deﬁne a restriction map P(퐵) →P(퐴) :: 푅㨃→푅|퐴, where
푅|퐴:= 푅∩퐴2. Note that the truth of any property of 푅expressed by a univer-
sal sentence is preserved under restriction, so this is well-deﬁned; moreover, the
same operation also deﬁnes a map L(퐵) →L(퐴).
2.2 Social choice situations
We shall deﬁne a class of structures which provide the setting for Arrow’s theorem.
A social choice situation is a structure (퐴, I, D, 휎) where:
–
퐴is a set of alternatives.
–
I is a set of individuals or agents.
–
D ⊆P(퐴)I is the set of allowed ballots or proﬁles of individual preferences.
–
휎: D →P(퐴) is the social choice function.
We write 푝푖for the weak preference relation of the individual 푖in a proﬁle 푝. We
write 푝>
푖for the strict preference relation associated with 푝푖. Similarly, we write
휎(푝)> for the strict preference relation associated with 휎(푝). We extend restriction
to proﬁles pointwise: (푝|퐴)푖:= 푝푖|퐴.
We shall now deﬁne a number of properties of social choice situations.
UD Unrestricted domain:
∀푎, 푏, 푐∈퐴. ∀푝∈P({푎, 푏, 푐})I. ∃푞∈D. 푞|{푎, 푏, 푐} = 푝.
P Pareto:
∀푎, 푏∈퐴. ∀푝∈퐷. (∀푖∈I. 푎푝>
푖푏) ⇒푎휎(푝)>푏.
WP Weak Pareto:
∀푎, 푏∈퐴. ∀푝∈퐷. (∀푖∈I. 푎푝>
푖푏) ⇒푎휎(푝)푏.
IIA Independence of irrelevant alternatives:
∀푎, 푏∈퐴. ∀푝, 푞∈D. 푝|{푎, 푏} = 푞|{푎, 푏} ⇒휎(푝)|{푎, 푏} = 휎(푞)|{푎, 푏}.
D Dictator:
∃푖∈I. ∀푎, 푏∈퐴. ∀푝∈D. 푎푝>
푖푏⇒푎휎(푝)>푏.
We can now state Arrow’s theorem.

Arrow’s Theorem by Arrow Theory
|
19
Theorem 2.1 (Arrow). Let (퐴, I, D, 휎) be a social choice situation with |퐴| ≥3, sat-
isfying UD, IIA and P. Then if I is ﬁnite it also satisﬁes D, i.e. there is a dictator.
2.3 Proof of Arrow’s Theorem
In this section we shall ﬁx a social choice situation (퐴, I, D, 휎) satisfying the fol-
lowing conditions: |퐴| ≥3, UD, and IIA.
2.3.1 Decisiveness, Neutrality and Monotonicity
In this subsection, we shall assume that our social choice situation satisﬁes the
weak Pareto principle WP.
Given 푈⊆I and 푝∈D, we introduce the notation 푎푝>
푈푏:= ∀푖∈푈. 푎푝>
푖푏. Given
a set 푈⊆I and distinct elements 푎, 푏∈퐴, we deﬁne
푈푎푏:= {푝∈D | 푎푝>
푈푏∧푏푝>
푈푐푎}.
We deﬁne a relation 퐷푈on 퐴by
푎퐷푈푏:= 푎
̸= 푏∧∀푝∈푈푎푏. 푎휎(푝)>푏.
We read 푎퐷푈푏as “푈is decisive for 푎over 푏”.
Proposition 2.2. For all 푎, 푏, 푐∈퐴:
1.
If 푐
̸= 푎, then 푎퐷푈푏⇒푎퐷푈푐.
2.
If 푐
̸= 푏, then 푎퐷푈푏⇒푐퐷푈푏.
Proof. For (1), if 푏= 푐there is nothing to prove. If 푏
̸= 푐, we consider a proﬁle
푝∈D such that for all 푖∈푈, 푝푖restricts to the strict chain 푎푏푐, and for all 푖∈푈c,
푝푖restricts to the strict chain 푏푐푎. Such a proﬁle exists by UD. Note that 푝∈푈푎푏∩
푈푎푐∩I푏푐. Since 푎퐷푈푏, 푎휎(푝)>푏, while by WP, 푏휎(푝)푐. By transitivity if 푏휎(푝)>푐, or
by absorption otherwise, 푎휎(푝)>푐. Now consider any proﬁle 푞such that 푞∈푈푎푐.
Then 푞|{푎, 푐} = 푝|{푎, 푐}, and by IIA, 푎휎(푝)>푐⇒푎휎(푞)>푐; thus 푎퐷푈푐. The argument
for (2) is similar.
As pointed out in [5], the following purely relational argument allows us to con-
clude Neutrality from the previous proposition.
Proposition 2.3. Let 푅be an irreﬂexive relation on a set 푋with at least three ele-
ments, such that, for all 푎, 푏, 푥∈푋:
1.
If 푥
̸= 푎, then 푎푅푏⇒푎푅푥.

20
|
Samson Abramsky
2.
If 푥
̸= 푏, then 푎푅푏⇒푥푅푏.
If 푥, 푦are any pair of distinct elements of 푋, then 푎푅푏⇒푥푅푦.
Proof. If 푦
̸= 푎, then 푎푅푏⇒푎푅푦⇒푥푅푦. If 푥
̸= 푏, then 푎푅푏⇒푥푅푏⇒푥푅푦.
Otherwise, 푥= 푏and 푦= 푎, and we must prove 푎푅푏⇒푏푅푎. In this case, since 푋
has at least three elements, we can ﬁnd 푐∈푋with 푎
̸= 푐
̸= 푏. Then:
푎푅푏⇒푎푅푐⇒푏푅푐⇒푏푅푎.
As an immediate consequence of Propositions 2.2 and 2.3, we obtain
Theorem 2.4 (Local Neutrality). For all 푎, 푏, 푥, 푦∈퐴with 푥
̸= 푦:
푎퐷푈푏⇒푥퐷푈푦.
We now deﬁne a relation 퐸푈on 퐴by:
푎퐸푈푏:= ∀푝∈D. 푎푝>
푈푏⇒푎휎(푝)>푏.
Thus we ask only that the individuals in 푈strictly prefer 푎to 푏; there is no con-
straint on those outside 푈. Clearly, 푎퐸푈푏⇒푎퐷푈푏. The converse is an important
property known as monotonicity.
Proposition 2.5 (Monotonicity). For all 푎, 푏∈퐴, 푎퐷푈푏⇐⇒푎퐸푈푏.
Proof. We shall prove 푎퐷푈푏⇒푎퐸푈푏. Suppose we are given a proﬁle 푝such that
푎푝>
푈푏. We can ﬁnd an element 푐∈퐴with 푎
̸= 푐
̸= 푏. We consider a proﬁle 푞∈D
such that for all 푖∈푈, 푞푖restricts to the strict chain 푎푐푏, and for all 푖∈푈c, 푐is
strictly preferred to both 푎and 푏in 푞푖, while 푞푖|{푎, 푏} = 푝푖|{푎, 푏}. Such a proﬁle exists
by UD. Note that 푞∈푈푎푐∩I푐푏, and 푞|{푎, 푏} = 푝|{푎, 푏}. Since 푎퐷푈푏, by Proposition 2.2
푎퐷푈푐, and so 푎휎(푞)>푐. By WP, 푐휎(푞)푏. By transitivity if 푐휎(푞)>푏, or by absorption
otherwise, 푎휎(푞)>푏. Since 푝|{푎, 푏} = 푞|{푎, 푏}, by IIA we conclude that 푎휎(푝)>푏, and
hence 푎퐸푈푏as required.
2.3.2 The Ultraﬁlter of Decisive Sets
In this subsection, we assume the strong Pareto principle P, which serves as a
basic existence principle for decisive sets. Note indeed that P is equivalent to the
statement that I is a decisive set.
We deﬁne
U := {푈⊆I | ∃푎, 푏∈퐴. 푎퐷푈푏}.

Arrow’s Theorem by Arrow Theory
|
21
Theorem 2.6 (The Ultraﬁlter Theorem). U is an ultraﬁlter.
Proof. (F1) As we have already noted, P implies that I ∈U.
(F2) Now suppose that 푈∈U and 푈⊆푉. By Proposition 2.5, we can conclude
that 푉∈U, since clearly 푈⊆푉implies that 퐸푈⊆퐸푉.
(F3) Now suppose for a contradiction that 푈and 푉are both in U, where 푈∩푉=
∅. Consider a proﬁle 푝∈D such that 푎푝>
푈푏and 푏푝>
푉푎. By Proposition 2.5, we have
both 푎휎(푝)>푏and 푏휎(푝)>푎, yielding a contradiction.
(F4) Finally suppose that 푈∈U can be written as a disjoint union 푈= 푉⊔푊.
We shall show that either 푉∈U or 푊∈U. Consider a proﬁle 푝∈D such that
for each 푖∈푉, 푝푖restricts to the strict chain 푏푐푎, for each 푖∈푊, 푝푖restricts to the
strict chain 푐푎푏, while for each 푖∈푈푐, 푝푖restricts to the strict chain 푎푏푐. Such a
proﬁle exists by UD. Note that 푝∈푈푐푎∩푉푏푎∩푊푐푏. We argue by cases:
–
If 푐휎(푝)>푏, then by IIA, for all 푞∈푊푐푏, 푐휎(푞)>푏, and hence 푐퐷푊푏, and 푊∈U.
–
Otherwise, we must have 푏휎(푝)푐. Since 푝∈푈푐푎and 푈∈U, using the Neutral-
ity Theorem 2.4, we must have 푐휎(푝)>푎. By absorption, 푏휎(푝)>푎. By IIA, for all
푞∈푉푏푎, 푏휎(푞)>푎, and hence 푏퐷푉푎, and 푉∈U.
The conditions (F1)–(F4) are easily seen to be equivalent to the standard deﬁnition
of an ultraﬁlter, given as (F1) and (F2) together with:
(F5) ∅
̸∈U.
(F6) 푈, 푉∈U ⇒푈∩푉∈U.
(F7) ∀푈⊆I. 푈∈U ∨푈푐∈U.
We deﬁne the set of ballots which are linear on the alternatives 푎, 푏:
L푎푏:= {푝∈D | 푝|{푎, 푏} ∈L({푎, 푏})} = {푝∈D | ∃푈⊆I. 푝∈푈푎푏}.
We now show that U completely determines 휎on linear ballots.
Proposition 2.7. For all 푎, 푏∈퐴, 푝∈L푎푏:
푎휎(푝)>푏⇐⇒{푖∈I | 푎푝>
푖푏} ∈U.
Proof. The right-to-left implication is immediate, since if 푈= {푖∈I | 푎푝>
푖푏}, 푝∈
L푎푏implies that 푝∈푈푎푏. For the converse, we use property (F7) from Theorem 2.6.
We also show that social choice functions map linear ballots to strict preferences.
Proposition 2.8. For all distinct alternatives 푎, 푏∈퐴:
∀푝∈L푎푏. 푎휎(푝)>푏∨푏휎(푝)>푎.
Proof. Immediate from the previous proposition and property (F7) from Theo-
rem 2.6.

22
|
Samson Abramsky
2.4 Arrow’s Theorem
Theorem 2.9 (Arrow). Let (퐴, I, D, 휎) be a social choice situation with |퐴| ≥3, sat-
isfying UD, IIA and P. Then if I is ﬁnite it also satisﬁes D, i.e. there is a dictator.
Proof. By the Ultraﬁlter Theorem 2.6, U is an ultraﬁlter. Since I is ﬁnite, U must
be principal, consisting of all supersets of {푖} for some 푖∈I. Then 퐷{푖} is decisive,
or equivalently by Proposition 2.5, 푖is a dictator.
3 Categorical Formulation of Arrow’s Theorem
Given a universe A of possible alternatives, where the cardinality of A is ≥3, we
consider the category C whose objects are subsets of A, and whose morphism are
injective maps; and its posetal sub-category Cinc with morphisms the inclusions.
We shall use C(푘) and C(푘)
inc to denote the full sub-categories of C and Cinc respec-
tively determined by the sets 퐴of cardinality ≤푘, for 푘≥0. We write Cop for the
opposite category of C.
For any notion of binary preference relation axiomatized by universal sen-
tences (universal closures of quantiﬁer-free formulas), we get a functor
P : Cop 㨀→Set.
P(푋) is the set of preference relations on 푋, and if 푓: 푋ↇↇ푌and 푝∈P(푌),
then we deﬁne
푥(P(푓)(푝)) 푥耠⇐⇒푓(푥) 푝푓(푥耠).
Note that injectivity ensures that (푋, P(푓)(푝)) is isomorphic to a sub-structure of
(푌, 푝), and hence the truth of universal sentences is preserved [8].
Also note that P cuts down to a functor Pinc : Cop
inc 㨀→Set.
We shall use P to denote the functor induced by the notion of weak preference
relation introduced in the previous section, and L for the subfunctor of linear pref-
erence relations.
3.1 Categorical formulation of UD
The functor PI
inc is deﬁned as the product of I copies of Pinc; thus for each 퐴,
PI
inc(퐴) := Pinc(퐴)I. This gives the set of all possible proﬁles over a set of alter-
natives 퐴for the agents in I. We shall assume we are given a subfunctor D of PI.
Thus D : Cop 㨀→Set is a functor, with a natural transformation D
.- PI whose
components are inclusion maps. D restricts to a functor Dinc : Cop
inc 㨀→Set.

Arrow’s Theorem by Arrow Theory
|
23
The axiom UD can be stated in these terms as follows:
(CUD)
(i)
For 퐴∈C(3), Dinc(퐴) = PI
inc(퐴).
(ii)
Dinc preserves epis.
The requirement that Dinc preserves epis means that inclusions 휄: 퐴⊂- 퐵are
mapped to surjections Dinc(휄) : Dinc(퐵) 㨀→Dinc(퐴).
3.2 Categorical formulation of IIA
Next, we make the observation that IIA is equivalent to the following statement:
(CIIA)
The social welfare function is a natural transformation 휎: Dinc
.- Pinc.
Explicitly, this says that for each set of alternatives 퐴we have a map
휎퐴: Dinc(퐴) 㨀→Pinc(퐴)
such that, for all inclusions 퐴⊆퐵and proﬁles 푝∈Dinc(퐴):
휎퐴(푝|퐴) = 휎퐵(푝)|퐴
More precisely, we have the following result.
Proposition 3.1. We assume that Dinc is a subfunctor of PI
inc satisfying CUD.
1.
If 휎A : Dinc(A) 㨀→Pinc(A) is a function satisfying IIA, then it extends to a
natural transformation 휎: Dinc
.- Pinc.
2.
If 휎: Dinc
.- Pinc is a natural transformation, then for every 퐴∈C, 휎퐴
satisﬁes IIA.
Proof. 1. Firstly, note that (A, I, Dinc(A), 휎A) is a social choice situation in the sense
of the previous section. We are assuming that this structure satisﬁes IIA.
We note that IIA implies the following, more general statement: for all 퐴⊆A,
and 푝, 푞∈Dinc(A),
푝|퐴= 푞|퐴⇒휎A(푝)|퐴= 휎A(푞)|퐴.
This holds because any binary relation on a set 푋is determined by its restrictions
to the subsets of 푋of cardinality ≤2.

24
|
Samson Abramsky
Given 퐴⊆A and 푝∈Dinc(퐴), by CUD there is 푞∈Dinc(A) such that 푞|퐴= 푝.
We deﬁne 휎퐴(푝) := 휎A(푞)|퐴. By our previous remark, this is independent of the
choice of 푞. For naturality, if 휄: 퐴⊂- 퐵and 푝∈Dinc(퐵), then for any 푞∈Dinc(A)
such that 푞|퐵= 푝, 푞|퐴= Dinc(휄)(푞|퐵), and hence
휎퐴∘Dinc(휄)(푝) = 휎A(푞)|퐴= (휎A(푞)|퐵)|퐴= Pinc(휄) ∘휎퐵(푝).
2. For the converse, if 휎: Dinc
.- Pinc is a natural transformation, 퐴⊆
A, and 휄: {푎, 푏} ⊂- 퐴, then 푝, 푞∈Dinc(퐴) with 푝|{푎, 푏} = 푞|{푎, 푏} means that
Dinc(휄)(푝) = Dinc(휄)(푞). Using naturality, we have
휎퐴(푝)|{푎, 푏} = Pinc(휄) ∘휎퐴(푝) = 휎{푎,푏} ∘Dinc(휄)(푝) = 휎{푎,푏} ∘Dinc(휄)(푞)
= 휎퐴(푞)|{푎, 푏}.
3.3 Categorical formulation of P
Consider the standard diagonal map 훥퐼: 푋㨀→푋I. An arrow 푓: 푋I →푋is
diagonal-preserving if 푓∘훥퐼= id푋. The Pareto condition is essentially a form of
diagonal preservation.
Firstly, note that given a functor 퐹: Cop
inc 㨀→Set, we can deﬁne the re-
striction 퐹(2)
:
(C(2)
inc)op
㨀→
Set. Now 훥퐼induces a natural transformation
L(2)
inc
.- (PI
inc)(2). Using part (i) of CUD, this factors through the inclusion
D(2)
inc
⊂- (PI
inc)(2). Thus we obtain a natural transformation 훥퐼: L(2)
inc
.- D(2)
inc.
Also, L(2)
inc is a sub-functor of P(2)
inc, with inclusion 푒: L(2)
inc
.- P(2)
inc. The categori-
cal formulation of the Pareto condition is now as follows:
(CP)
휎∘훥퐼= 푒.
Diagrammatically, this is
Linc({푎, 푏})
훥퐼- Dinc({푎, 푏})
Pinc({푎, 푏})
휎{푎,푏}
?
⊂
-

Arrow’s Theorem by Arrow Theory
|
25
Proposition 3.2. Let Dinc be a subfunctor of PI
inc satisfying CUD, and
휎: Dinc
.- Pinc
a natural transformation. Then 휎satisﬁes CP if and only if for every 퐴⊆A,
(퐴, I, Dinc(퐴), 휎퐴) satisﬁes P.
3.4 Categorical Formulation of Arrow’s Theorem
A categorical social choice situation is given by a set A determining a category
C, a set I of individuals, a subfunctor Dinc of PI
inc satisfying CUD, and a natural
transformation 휎: Dinc
.- Pinc.
Theorem 3.3 (Arrow’s Theorem: Categorical Statement). Let (A, I, D, 휎) be a cat-
egorical social choice situation where |A| ≥3, I is ﬁnite, and 휎satisﬁes CP. Then
휎= 휋푖for some ﬁxed 푖∈I, where (휋푖)퐴: 푝㨃→푝푖.
More colloquially, this can be stated as:
The only diagonal-preserving natural transformations 휎: Dinc
.- Pinc are the projections.
3.5 An Analogous Result in Type Theory
We remark that when Arrow’s theorem is formulated in this way, it displays an
evident kinship with a well-studied genre of results in functional programming
and type theory [14, 4]. These results use (di)naturality constraints to show that
the behaviour of polymorphic terms are essentially determined by their types.
We illustrate these ideas with an example.
3.5.0.1 Question
What natural transformations
푡푋: 푋2
.- 푋
can there be in the functor category [Set, Set]?
3.5.0.2 Answer
The only such natural transformations are the projections.

26
|
Samson Abramsky
3.5.0.3 Sketch
Use naturality to show this ﬁrst for two-element sets, then to lift it. E.g.
{푎, 푏}2
휋1- {푎, 푏}
푋2
?
푡푋
- 푋
?
(푎, 푏)
휋1 - 푎
(푥, 푦)
?
푡푋
- 푥
?
3.5.0.4 Exercise
Show that the same result holds for natural transformations 푋I
.- 푋.
4 Categorical perspective on the proof of Arrow’s
Theorem
We shall now revisit the proof of Arrow’s theorem from the categorical perspective.
We shall assume throughout this section that we are given a categorical so-
cial choice situation (A, I, D, 휎) satisfying CP. Note ﬁrstly that, for each 퐴⊆A,
(퐴, I, D(퐴), 휎퐴) is a standard social choice situation satisfying UD, IIA and P. We
shall use results from Section 2 freely.
4.1 Neutrality as Naturality
The property of Neutrality, which in the concrete setting was stated in a ‘local’
form in Theorem 2.4, becomes a form of naturality. To state this properly, we need
to consider the subfunctor D퐿of D, where D퐿(퐴) = D(퐴) ∩L(퐴)I. Thus D퐿(퐴) is
the set of admissible linear ballots. By Proposition 2.8, 휎cuts down to a natural
transformation 휎퐿: D퐿
inc
.- Linc.
The key neutrality property becomes the following:
Proposition 4.1 (Neutrality: categorical version). The social choice map 휎퐿ex-
tends to a natural transformation 휎퐿: D퐿
.- L.
The assertion of this proposition is that a social welfare function is natural with
respect, not just to inclusions, but to injective maps. Note that the family of maps
{휎퐿
퐴} is the same: we are claiming that additional naturality squares commute.

Arrow’s Theorem by Arrow Theory
|
27
Proof. Let 훼: 퐴ↇↇ퐵be an injective map. We must show that 푓= 푔, where
푓:= 휎퐿
퐴∘D퐿(훼),
푔:= L(훼) ∘휎퐿
퐵.
Note that, for 푟∈L(퐵) and 푎, 푎耠∈퐴,
푎(L(훼)(푟)) 푎耠⇐⇒훼(푎) 푟훼(푎耠),
and for 푝∈D퐿(퐵),
(D퐿(훼)(푝))푖= L(훼)(푝푖).
For 푝∈D퐿(퐵), and distinct 푎, 푎耠∈퐴, by Proposition 2.7:
푎푓(푝) 푎耠
⇐⇒
{푖∈I | 푎(D퐿(훼)(푝))푖푎耠} ∈U
⇐⇒
{푖∈I | 훼(푎) 푝푖훼(푎耠)} ∈U
⇐⇒
훼(푎) 휎퐿
퐵(푝) 훼(푎耠)
⇐⇒
푎푔(푝) 푎耠.
4.2 The Factorization Theorem
We now recast the Ultraﬁlter Theorem into an arrow-theoretic form. Firstly, we
recall some standard notions from boolean algebra [11].
Proposition 4.2. Given a set I, there is a bijection by characteristic functions be-
tween families U of subsets of I, and functions ℎ: 2I 㨀→2, where 2 := {0, 1}. A
family U is a ultraﬁlter if and only if the corresponding function ℎis a boolean alge-
bra homomorphism. If I is ﬁnite, the only such homomorphisms are the projections.
We can deﬁne maps
휙: L(퐴) 㨀→2퐴2 :: 휙(푟)(푎, 푎耠) = 1 ⇐⇒푎푟> 푎耠
and
휓: D퐿(푆) 㨀→(2I)퐴2 :: 휓(푝)(푎, 푎耠)푖= 1 ⇐⇒푎푝>
푖푎耠.
The following is a restatement in arrow-theoretic terms of the Ultraﬁlter Theorem.
Theorem 4.3 (Factorization Theorem). For any social choice function
휎: D퐿
.- L,
there is a boolean algebra homomorphism
ℎ: 2I 㨀→2

28
|
Samson Abramsky
such that the following diagram commutes:
D퐿(퐴)
휎퐴
- L(퐴)
(2I)퐴2
휓
?
ℎ퐴2
- 2퐴2
휙
?
The content of this result is that all the information needed to compute the social
welfare function 휎is contained in the boolean algebra homomomorphism ℎ.
The categorical form of Arrow’s theorem, Theorem 3.3, follows immediately
from the Factorization Theorem and the last remark in Proposition 4.2.
5 Discussion
One of our motivations in undertaking this study of Arrow’s theorem was to see if
common structure could be identiﬁed with notions such as no-signalling, param-
eter independence etc. which play a key rôle in quantum foundations. Arrow’s
theorem is a no-go theorem of a similar ﬂavour to results such as Bell’s theorem.
A central assumption is IIA, which is analogous to the various forms of indepen-
dence which appear as hypotheses of the results in quantum foundations. In par-
ticular, the functorial treatment we have developed in the present paper has com-
mon features with the rôle of presheaves in the sheaf-theoretic account of quan-
tum non-locality and contextuality given in [1].
It must be said that, although some degree of commonality has been exposed
by the present account, the arguments are substantially diﬀerent. Nevertheless,
the use of the categorical language to put results from such diﬀerent settings in
a common framework is suggestive, and may prove fruitful in exploring the rôle
of various forms of independence. It will also be interesting to relate this to the
logics of dependence and independence being developed by Jouko Väänänen and
his colleagues.
Altogether, although modest in its scope, we hope the present paper may help
to suggest some further possibilities for elucidating the general structure of no-go
results, and of the notions of independence which play a pervasive part in these
results.

Bibliography
|
29
Bibliography
[1]
S. Abramsky and A. Brandenburger. The sheaf-theoretic structure of non-locality and
contextuality. New Journal of Physics, 13(11):113036, 2011.
[2]
K.J. Arrow. A diﬃculty in the concept of social welfare. The Journal of Political Economy,
58(4):328–346, 1950.
[3]
K.J. Arrow. Social choice and individual values. Yale University Press, 1963. Second
edition.
[4]
E.S. Bainbridge, P.J. Freyd, A. Scedrov, and P.J. Scott. Functorial polymorphism. Theoreti-
cal Computer Science, 70(1):35–64, 1990.
[5]
J.H. Blau. A direct proof of Arrow’s theorem. Econometrica, 40:61–67, 1972.
[6]
A. Gibbard. Manipulation of voting schemes: a general result. Econometrica: Journal of
the Econometric Society, pages 587–601, 1973.
[7]
E. Grädel and J. Väänänen. Dependence, Independence, and Incomplete Information. In
Proceedings of 15th International Conference on Database Theory, ICDT 2012. ACM, 2012.
[8]
W. Hodges. A shorter model theory. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
[9]
A.P. Kirman and D. Sondermann. Arrow’s theorem, many agents, and invisible dictators.
Journal of Economic Theory, 5(2):267–277, 1972.
[10] M.A. Satterthwaite. Strategy-proofness and Arrow’s conditions: Existence and correspon-
dence theorems for voting procedures and social welfare functions. Journal of economic
theory, 10(2):187–217, 1975.
[11] R. Sikorski. Boolean algebras. Springer, 1969.
[12] A.D. Taylor. Social choice and the mathematics of manipulation, volume 6. Cambridge
University Press, 2005.
[13] J. Väänänen. Dependence logic: a new approach to independence friendly logic, vol-
ume 70. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[14] P. Wadler. Theorems for free! In Proceedings of the fourth international conference on
Functional programming languages and computer architecture, pages 347–359. ACM,
1989.
Arrow’s Theorem by Arrow Theory


John T. Baldwin
How Big Should the Monster Model Be?
To Jouko Väänänen on his 60th birthday
Abstract: We compare the role of set theory in formulating notions of ‘monster
model’ or ‘universe’ in the work of Shelah and Grothendieck.
Keywords: monster model, Grothendieck universe, simple theory, bounded orbit,
saturation and omission
MSC: 03C45, 14A99
||
John T. Baldwin: Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, University
University of Illinois at Chicago, e-mail:jbaldwin@uic.edu
The 1970’s witnessed two attempts to organize large areas of mathematics by in-
troducing a structure in which all of that mathematics took place. Both of these
programs explicitly invoke large cardinal hypotheses; advocates of both programs
deny that these hypotheses are necessary. There were a few years ago no extant
metatheorems justifying these conclusions (but see McLarty [24]). By a metathe-
orem, I mean a way to tell by looking at a particular proposition whether the pur-
ported use of large cardinals is necessary. The natural expectation is that these
criteria would be syntactic. But the possibility of geometric criteria arise in [21]
and the general model theoretic development suggests other ‘contentual criteria’
(Section 4.) We have been unable to develop any reasonable such theorem in the
model theoretic case. This paper just explores the territory.
As we will see, in both cases, the role of replacement as an intermediary be-
tween Zermelo Set Theory and large cardinals arises in the analysis. This work was
stimulated by some questions raised by Newelski in [27] concerning the ‘absolute-
ness’ of the existence of a bounded orbit and the discussions at about the same
time concerning the possible use of large cardinals in Wiles’ proof of Fermat’s last
theorem.
On the one hand Grothendieck wanted to provide a framework in which to
organize large areas of algebraic geometry. For this he invented the notion of a
universe, a large enough set to be closed under the usual algebraic operations. He

32
|
John T. Baldwin
explicitly developed cohomology theory using the existence of (a proper class of)
universes1.
At about the same time, Shelah introduced his version of a ‘universal domain’,
later dubbed a monster model: C is a saturated model of 푇with cardinality 휅a
strongly inaccessible cardinal. He writes in [30], ‘The assumption on 휅does not,
in fact, add any axiom of set theory as a hypothesis to our theorems.’ This is a
rather unclearly stated metatheorem. ‘Which theorems?’ An acceptable answer in
the short run is, ‘the theorems in this book’. And, apparently, the statement is true
in that sense. We seek here to clarify what theorems are intended and which are
not.
We give a brief comparison of the algebraic geometry side (in Section 1.2) re-
lying heavily on [23, 24, 21] and the model theoretic issues (in Subsection1.3). Sec-
tion 2 provides the connection between monster models and Hanf numbers. In
Section 3 we examine the model theoretic question more carefully in three exam-
ples and pose some speciﬁc problems. We conclude with speculations about the
ways one might sort out the properties which do not depend on a long universe in
Section 4
In addition to correspondence with McLarty, we want to thank Maryanthe
Mariallis and Enrique Casanovas for helpful discussions.
1 The two programs
1.1 Set Theoretic Background
We discuss four diﬀerent set theories. The standard background theory for model
theory is ZFC. While there has been some work lately on the necessary uses of set
theory in model theory [33, 15, 3] they have focused on the role of the axiom of
choice2 or on principles near the GCH3 and mostly on inﬁnitary model theory. Our
subject here is ﬁrst order model theory and the role of axioms having to do with
the length of the universe.
1 Theissue we addresshere ofthe sizeof theuniverse isdistinct fromthe organizationvia sheaves
addressed in [20].
2 See Shelah’s proof in [33] that for countable theories Morley’s categoricity theorem is provable
in ZF.
3 In particular many results in inﬁnitary logic apparently require 2휅< 2휅+, at least for 휅< ℵ휔.
See [2] for background and more references.

How Big Should the Monster Model Be?
|
33
We consider in Subsection 3.1 whether even relatively small cardinals such as
ℶ휔1 are necessary in model theory. In the section on foundations of cohomology
we discuss ZC (Zermelo Set Theory), i.e. ZFC without either replacement or foun-
dation, but with the full axiom of separation. Maclane set theory (i.e. bounded
Zermelo or MC in McLarty) weakens ZC still more by postulating only separation
for 훥0-formulas (bounded quantiﬁcation).
In the other direction, we consider whether certain uses of inaccessible car-
dinals are as transparently unnecessary as is usually claimed by model theorists.
For this it is useful to extend from ZFC to NBG, (Von Neumann, Bernays, Gödel)
set theory. This is a conservative extension of ZFC, which distinguishes between
classes and sets. See [23] for a more detailed account.
1.2 Grothendieck Universes and Wiles proof
In formulating the general theory of cohomology Grothendieck developed the
concept of a universe – a collection of sets large enough to be closed under any
operation that arose. Grothendieck proved that the existence of a single universe
is equivalent over ZFC to the existence of a strongly inaccessible cardinal [16,
Vol. I, p. 196]. More precisely, 푈is the set 푉훼of all sets with rank below 훼for some
uncountable strongly inaccessible cardinal.
McLarty summarised the general situation in [23]:
Large cardinals as such were neither interesting nor problematic to Grothendieck and this
paper shares his view. For him they were merely legitimate means to something else. He
wanted to organize explicit calculational arithmetic into a geometric conceptual order. He
found ways to do this in cohomology and used them to produce calculations which had
eluded a decade of top mathematicians pursuing the Weil conjectures [29]. He thereby pro-
duced the basis of most current algebraic geometry and not only the parts bearing on arith-
metic. His cohomology rests on universes but weaker foundations also suﬃce at the loss of
some of the desired conceptual order.
As written the great applications of cohomology theory (e.g. Wiles and Faltings)
implicitly rely on universes. Most number theorists regard the applications as re-
quiring much less than their ‘on their face’ strength and in particular believe the
large cardinal appeals are ‘easily eliminable’. An animated discussion on Math
Overﬂow [37] and earlier on FOM4 emphasizes this belief. This discussion is per-
haps best summed up by the amusing remark of Pete Clark, ‘If a mathematician
4 Search ‘universes’ or Wiles on the Fom archive.

34
|
John T. Baldwin
of the caliber of Y.I. Manin made a point of asking in public whether the proof of
the Weil conjectures depends in some essential way on inaccessible cardinals, is
this not a sign that “Of course not; don’t be stupid” may not be the most helpful
reply?’
There are in fact two issues. McLarty[23] writes: ‘Wiles’s proof uses hard arithmetic
some of which is on its face one or two orders above PA, and it uses functorial
organizing tools some of which are on their face stronger than ZFC.’
There are two current programs for verifying in detail the intuition that the
formal requirements for Wiles proof of Fermat’s last theorem can be substantially
reduced. On the one hand, McLarty’s current work ([24, 25]) aims to reduce the ‘on
their face’ strength of the results in cohomology from large cardinal hypotheses
to ﬁnite order Peano. On the other hand Macintyre aims to reduce the ‘on their
face’ strength of results in hard arithmetic[21] to Peano. These programs may be
complementary or a full implementation of Macintyre’s might avoid the ﬁrst.
McLarty ([24]) reduces
1.
‘ all of SGA5’ to Bounded Zermelo plus a Universe.
2.
“‘the currently existing applications” to Bounded Zermelo itself, thus the con-
sistency strength of simple type theory.’
The Grothendieck duality theorem and others like it become theorem schema.
The essential insight of the McLarty’s papers on cohomology is the role of replace-
ment in giving strength to the universe hypothesis. In [24], a 푍퐶-universe is de-
ﬁned to be a transitive set U modeling 푍퐶such that every subset of an element of
푈is itself an element of 푈. He remarks that any 푉훼for 훼a limit ordinal is provable
in 푍퐹퐶to be a 푍퐶-universe. McLarty then asserts the essential use of replacement
in the original Grothendieck formulation is to prove: For an arbitrary ring 푅every
module over 푅embeds in an injective 푅-module and thus injective resolutions
exist for all 푅-modules. But he gives a proof in a system with the proof theoretic
strength of ﬁnite order arithmetic6 that every sheaf of modules on any small site
has an inﬁnite resolution. (Section 3.6 of [24].)
Macintyre [21] dismisses with little comment the worries about the use of
‘large-structure’ tools in Wiles proof. He begins his appendix [21], ‘At present, all
roads to a proof of Fermat’s Last Theorem (henceforward FLT) pass through some
version of a Modularity Theorem (generically MT) about elliptic curves deﬁned
over Q ...A casual look at the literature may suggest that in the formulation of MT
5 SGA refers to a sequence of Grothendiecks works.
6 In [25], McLarty reduces the strength to second order arithmetic for certain cohomology theo-
ries.

How Big Should the Monster Model Be?
|
35
(or in some of the arguments proving whatever version of MT is required) there
is essential appeal to higher-order quantiﬁcation, over one of the following’. He
then lists such objects as C, modular forms, Galois representations ...and sum-
marises that a superﬁcial formulation of MT would be 훱1
푚for some small 푚. But
he continues, ‘I hope nevertheless that the present account will convince all ex-
cept professional sceptics that MT is really 훱0
1.’ There then follows a 13 page highly
technical sketch of an argument for the proposition that MT can be expressed by
a sentence in 훱0
1 along with a less-detailed strategy for proving MT in PA.
Macintyre’s complexity analysis is in traditional proof theoretic terms. But
his remark that ‘genus’ is more a useful geometric classiﬁcation of curves than
the syntactic notion of degree suggests that other criteria may be relevant.
From the standpoint of this paper the McLarty’s approach is not really a
metatheorem but a statement that there was only one essential use of replacement
and it can be eliminated. In contrast, Macintyre argues that ‘apparent second or-
der quantiﬁcation’ can be replaced by ﬁrst order quantiﬁcation. But the argument
requires deep understanding of the number theory for each replacement in a large
number of situations. Again, there is no general theorem that this type of result is
provable in PA. A battery of techniques is displayed for translating the statements
to 훱0
1 and reducing the proof theoretic strength of the axioms.
1.3 Monster models in Model theory
Many model theory papers begin ‘We work in a big saturated model’ or slightly
more formally, ‘We are working in a saturated model of cardinality 휅for suﬃ-
ciently large 휅(a monster model).’
What does suﬃciently mean? In every case I know such a declaration is not in-
tended to convey a reliance on the existence of large cardinals. Rather, in Marker’s
phrase, it is a declaration of laziness, ‘If the stakes were high enough I could write
down a ZFC proof’. As we note below, in standard cases the author isn’t being very
lazy; but the route to formalizing a metatheorem expressing this intuition does not
seem clear.
This was not a problem for the early history of classiﬁcation theory. Work fo-
cussed on stable theories. And a stable theory has a saturated model in every 휆
with 휆휅(푇) = 휆, where 휅(푇) is an invariant that is less than |푇|+. Thus, there is a
plentiful supply of monster models. But recently model theory has moved to the
investigation of unstable theories and these issues become more acute, as we dis-
cuss in Subsection 3.2. We will see that the diﬃculty is not just the lack of saturated
models but lack of the control of structure provided by stability theory.

36
|
John T. Baldwin
The fundamental unit of study is a particular ﬁrst order theory. The need is for
a monster model of the theory 푇. If 푀is a 휅-saturated model of 푇, then every model
푁of 푇with cardinality at most 휅is elementarily embedded in 푀and every type
over a set of size < 휅is realized in 푀. So every conﬁguration of size less than 휅that
could occur in any model of 푇occurs in 푀. Then general theorems are asserted to
hold for each theory.
In fact, the requirement that the monster model be saturated in its own car-
dinality is excessive. A more reﬁned version of the ‘monster model hypothesis’
asserts: Any ﬁrst order model theoretic properties of sets of size less than kappa
can be proved in a 휅-saturated strongly 휅-homogenous model M (any two iso-
morphic submodels of card less than 휅are conjugate by an automorphism of M).
Such a model exists (provably in ZFC) in some 휅耠not too much bigger than 휅. See
Hodges [18] or my monograph on categoricity [2] for the reﬁned version. (Hodges’
big model condition is ostensibly stronger and slightly more complicated to state;
but existence is also provable in ZFC.) Buechler [7], Shelah [30], and Marker [22]
expound the harmless nature of the fully saturated version. Ziegler [38] adopts a
class approach that could be formulated in Gödel Bernays set theory. And we will
follow that approach below.
In order to clarify the problem, we will address several speciﬁc problems
where some issues arise in calculating the size of the necessary ‘monster’.
2 Hanf Numbers and Monster models
In this section we expand a bit on the arguments for the eliminability of large
cardinal hypotheses in uses of the monster model. Then we connect the properties
of a class monster model with the calculability of certain Hanf functions.
Buechler7 argues that the apparent reliance can be removed by a sequence of
applications of the same proof. To prove model theoretic statements about struc-
tures of size at most 휅, use a 휅-monster. If 휅increases, choose a larger monster.
Note that the size of the monster was not used in the argument.
So, for example, to compute the spectrum function of a ﬁrst order theory via
the strategy of classiﬁcation theory, theories are divided into categories by prop-
erties (stability class, DOP, OTOP, depth) which have no dependence on the size of
the model. Then for each class 푃a function 푓푃is deﬁned such that for 휅< 휌which
is the size of a given choice of monster model 푓푃(휅) is (or is at least an upper bound
7 I paraphrase an argument that Buechler says holds ‘with few exceptions’ on page 70 of [7].

How Big Should the Monster Model Be?
|
37
for) the number of models in 휅. This function works for all 휅by just redoing the
argument for a larger 휌as 휅grows.
We work in Von Neumann, Bernays, Gödel set theory NBG, a conservative ex-
tension of ZFC, which admits classes as objects.
Deﬁnition 2.1. A monster model is a class modelM which is a union of 휅-saturated
models for arbitrarily large 휅.
This deﬁnition (from [38]) is quite diﬀerent from the usual usage in model theory.
We connect it with more standard usage by deﬁning the notion of a 휅-monster
which formalizes monster set models as certain kinds of special models [18, 9, 34].
Deﬁnition 2.2. 1.
A structure 푀of inﬁnite cardinality 휅is special if 푀is the
union of an elementary chain ⟨푀휆: 휆< 휅, 휆a cardinal ⟩, where each 푀휆is
휆+-saturated.
2.
A structure 푀is strongly 휅-homogeneous if for every 퐴contained in 푀with
|퐴| < 휅, every elementary embedding of 퐴into 푀can be extended to an au-
tomorphism of 푀.
3.
A 휅-monster model C휅is a special model of cardinality 휇= ℶ휅+(휅).
Fact 2.3. A 휅-monster is unique up to isomorphism, 휇+-universal and strongly 휅+-
homogenous.
Now the natural conjecture is:
Conjecture 2.4. For any property 푃, the class monster M satisﬁes 푃if and only if
all suﬃciently large 휅-monsters C휅satisfy 푃.
The main problem is to specify what is meant by a property. A too generous deﬁ-
nition is ‘a class in NBG’. But the issue is to reﬁne this notion. And all we actually
give here are some speciﬁc examples that should be considered in making a deﬁ-
nition.
This conjecture would follow if ‘all suﬃciently large 휅-monsters C휅satisfy
푃.’ were replaced by a ‘uniform proof’ that ‘for all suﬃciently large 휅-monsters
that C휅satisﬁes 푃.’ This is the strategy that works successfully for the spectrum
problem. But I don’t see how to get this claim in general; we examine a speciﬁc
problem where a uniform argument is not apparent in Subsection 3.2.
Finding such a uniform argument seems related to Hanf numbers. Hanf [17]
introduced the following extremely general and soft argument. 푃(퐾, 휆) ranges
over such properties as: 퐾has a model in cardinality 휆, 퐾is categorical in 휆, or
the type 푞is omitted in some model of 퐾of cardinality 휆. We will see some more
novel examples below.

38
|
John T. Baldwin
Theorem 2.5 (Hanf). Fix a set of classes 퐾of a given kind (e.g. the classes of models
deﬁned by sentences of 퐿휇,휈for some ﬁxed 휇, 휈of a given similarity type). For any
property 푃(퐾, 휆) there is a cardinal 휅such that if 푃(퐾, 휆) holds for some 휆> 휅then
푃(퐾, 휆) holds for arbitrarily large 휆.
Proof. Let
휇퐾= sup{휆:푃(퐾, 휆) holds }
where 휇퐾= ∞if there is no bound on the cardinality of models of 퐾satisfying 푃.
Then
휅= sup{휇퐾:휇퐾< ∞}.
22.5
Deﬁnition 2.6. 푃is downward closed if there is a 휅0 such that if 푃(퐾, 휆) holds with
휆> 휅0, then 푃(퐾, 휇) holds if 휅0 < 휇≤휆.
The following is obvious.
Theorem 2.7. If a property 푃is downward closed then for any 휅there is a cardinal
휇such that for any class of models 퐾with vocabulary8 of size 휅, if some model in
퐾with property 푃has cardinality greater than 휇, then there is a model in 퐾with
property 푃in all cardinals greater than 휇.
That is, if each of a collection of classes is downward closed for a property 푃there
is a Hanf Number for 푃in the following stronger sense.
Deﬁnition 2.8 (Hanf Numbers). The Hanf number for 푃, among classes 퐾with vo-
cabulary of cardinal 휅, is 휇if: if there is a model in 퐾with cardinality > 휇that has
property 푃, then there is a model with property 푃in all cardinals greater than 휇.
In this situation 휇is the Hanf number of 푃(for classes with vocabulary of cardinal
휅).
Deﬁnition 2.9. 1.
A function 푓(a class-function from cardinals to cardinals) is
strongly calculable if 푓can (provably in ZFC) be deﬁned in terms of cardinal
addition, multiplication, exponentiation, and iteration of the ℶfunction.
2.
A function 푓is calculable if it is (provably in ZFC) eventually dominated by a
strongly calculable function. If not, it is incalculable.
Here are several examples of properties of ﬁrst order 푇where Hanf numbers may
or may not be calculable.
1.
푇has a model in 휅.
8 This gets a bit more technical; see page 32 of [2].

How Big Should the Monster Model Be?
|
39
2.
푇has a saturated (or special) model in 휅.
3.
푇has a model that is a group with a bounded orbit in the sense of Subsec-
tion 3.2.
4.
The Hanf number for omission and saturation (Subsection 3.3).
For 1), the Hanf number is the cardinality of the vocabulary, so it is calculable.
For 2) the Hanf number is the ﬁrst stability cardinal for stable theories and again
this is calculable. But for unstable theories there is considerable not yet determi-
native research on the existence of saturated models so the Hanf number has not
been calculated. See, e.g., [31, 13]. Note that 2) is not downward closed. We explore
some cases of 3) where the Hanf number is calculated and some where it remains
an open question in Subsection 3.2. And we note in Subsection 3.3 that the Hanf
number for case 4) is incalculable in general but it is for superstable 푇.
If Conjecture 2.4 holds, the natural size for a monster model for studying a
property 푃is the Hanf number of 푃. Unfortunately, as our discussion in Subsec-
tion 3.2 shows, the equivalence in Conjecture 2.4 is not obvious.
Most examples in the literature of Hanf numbers are variants on the Morley’s
omitting types theorem and the Hanf number9 is ℶ휔1. There are more complicated
examples in [32, 2].
3 Three Examples
3.1 Is replacement needed?
One of the fundamental tools of model theory constructs indiscernibles realizing
types from a prescribed set.
Theorem 3.1. Let 푀be a big saturated model. For every large enough set 퐼⊂푀,
there exists an inﬁnite sequence of order indiscernibles 퐽⊂푀such that for every
ﬁnite b ∈퐽there is an 푎∈퐼with tp(b/0) = tp(푎/0).
The crux here is the requirement that the complete types of the sequences in 퐽are
types realized in 퐼. With no requirement on the types appearing in 퐽, only Ram-
sey’s theorem and compactness is needed in the standard Ehrenfeucht-Mostowski
proof.
9 This is for countable vocabularies; for a vocabulary with cardinality 휅, the relevant Hanf num-
ber ℶ(2휅)+.

40
|
John T. Baldwin
We can guarantee this result only if |푀| ≥ℶ휔1. This example makes the ques-
tion, ‘What set theory is used in model theory?’ a little sharper. Friedman proved
[14] that Borel determinacy required the existence of ℶ휔1. Are there such examples
of necessary uses of replacement in ﬁrst order model theory? Morley [26] showed
both that ℶ휔1 suﬃced for the cardinality of 퐼and that it was necessary. But this
necessity argument itself uses replacement.
In some sense Theorem 3.1 and Hanf numbers for omitting types require the
existence of ℶ휔1 even to be stated. Those notions are about size or about ‘logics’.
But here is a theorem clearly stated in ZC, but for which known proofs use replace-
ment. Byunghan Kim[19] proved:
Theorem 3.2 (Kim). For a simple ﬁrst order theory non-forking is equivalent to non-
dividing.
The usual easily applicable descriptions of simple theories involve uncountable
objects. But deﬁnitions of simple, non-forking, and non-dividing are equivalent in
ZC to statements about countable sets of formulas. Indeed we quote below such
formulations which were given as the deﬁnitions in Casanovas’ recent exposition
[8]. Nevertheless, the argument for Kim’s theorem employs Morley’s technique for
omitting types; that is: The standard argument uses the Erdos-Rado theorem on
cardinals less than ℶ휔1.
Our goal here is simply to state this proposition clearly enough to show that it
is properly formulated without any use of replacement. For this, we simply repeat
the basic deﬁnitions from [8] where the exact result we are after is given a short
complete proof. We work in a complete ﬁrst order theory in a countable vocabu-
lary.
Deﬁnition 3.3. Let 푎푖be a sequence of ﬁnite tuples in a model of a ﬁrst order the-
ory 푇. A set of formulas 푋= {휙(x, 푎푖) : 푖< 휔} is 푘-inconsistent if every 푘element
subset of 푋is inconsistent.
With this notion in hand we can deﬁne forking and dividing.
Deﬁnition 3.4. Let 퐴∪{푎} ∪{푎푗:푗< 푛} be a subset of a model of 푇.
1.
The formula 휙(x, 푎) 푘-divides over 퐴if there is an inﬁnite set 퐼= {푎푖: 푖< 휔}
such that {휙(x, 푎푖) : 푖< 휔} is 푘-inconsistent and all the 푎푖realize tp(푎/퐴). 휙
divides if it 푘-divides for some 푘.
2.
The formula 휋(x, 푎) forks over 퐴if for some ﬁnite set of formulas 휓푗(x, 푎푗) with
푗< 푛, 휋(x, 푎) ⊢⋁푗<푛휓푗(x, 푎푗) and each 휓푗(x, 푎푗) divides over 퐴.
Deﬁnition 3.5. The formula 휙(x, y) has the tree property with respect to 푘< 휔if
there is a tree (푎푠: 푠∈휔<휔) (in some model of 푇) such that for all 휂∈휔휔, the

How Big Should the Monster Model Be?
|
41
branch {휙(x, 푎휂↾푛) : 푛< 휔} is consistent and for all 푠∈휔<휔, the family of siblings
{휙(x, 푎푠̂푖):푖< 휔} is 푘-inconsistent.
Deﬁnition 3.6. 푇is simple if there is no formula 휙(x, y) which has the tree property
in 푇.
There is a direct proof of the following result in [8].
Theorem 3.7. Let 푇be a simple theory. A partial type 휋(x, 푎) divides over 퐴if and
only it forks over 퐴.
None of the arguments given in [8] directly invoke replacement. But Lemma 1.1 of
that paper, which is applied at a crucial point, is a variant of the standard:
Theorem 3.8. [Morley omitting types theorem] Let 푇be a 휏-theory, 훤a set of partial
휏-types (in ﬁnitely many variables) over 0 and 휇= (2|휏|)+, Suppose 푀훼for 훼< 휇are
a sequence of 휏-structures, each omitting all types in 훤and satisfying 푇such that
|푀훼| > ℶ훼.
Then, in a model 푀of 푇omitting all types in 훤, there is a countable sequence 퐼
of order indiscernibles such that for every ﬁnite sequence 푎∈퐼, tp(푎/0) is realized
in each 푀훼.
The crucial message of Morley’s theorem as opposed to the standard Ehrenfeucht
Mostowski argument which takes place in ZC is the requirement that the ﬁnite
types that will be realized in 퐽are speciﬁed in advance to come from the 푀훼. I
know of no proof of Theorem 3.7 that does not rely on replacement to invoke Erdos-
Rado via Morley’s omitting types theorem.
Question 3.9. Is Theorem 3.7 provable in ZC?
Remark 3.10. As we’ll see later in other examples, restricting to stable theories
often reduces the set theoretic strength needed for a result. In particular, Shelah
proved the equivalence of forking and dividing for stable theories without any
reliance on replacement. The strength of stationarity in stable theories allows the
construction of the required indiscernibles using only Ramsey’s theorem (as in
Ehrenfreucht-Mostowski). See Section V.3, in particular Theorem V.3.9 of [4].
Recently, Chernikov and Kaplan [10] proved a slight weakening of the theorem
for a much broader class of theories. They prove that for types over models10 in
10 Examples of unstable theories where types over sets can fork without dividing are well known.

42
|
John T. Baldwin
NTP2 theories; these11 include all simple and all NIP theories. But they still rely
on ‘Kim’s Lemma’ which uses replacement.
Building on work of Adler [1], Vasey [35] has proved Theorem 3.7 is provable in ZC.
3.2 Bounded orbits of types
Newelski in [27] raised questions about how to calculate whether the action of
a monster model of a ﬁrst order theory of groups on its Stone space admitted a
bounded orbit. Also in [27], he reduced the problem to the calculation of the Hanf
number for saturation and omission, which makes general model theoretic sense.
In Section 3.3, we recall that this Hanf number is not calculable. In this section,
we work only with the Hanf number for bounded orbits in an attempt to see if it
might be calculable (for arbitrary theories of groups).
Assumption 3.11. 푇is a ﬁrst order theory extending the theory of groups with
countable vocabulary 휏. Each model of 푇acts on itself and therefore on its Stone
space by left translation. For 푝∈푆(푀), 푝㨃→푔푝= {휙(푔−1푥, 푎):휙(푥, 푎) ∈푝}.
Notation 3.12. Consider 푀≺푀耠, which are groups. Let 푝∈푆(푀耠), and let the
푀耠-orbits of 푝be represented by 푝훼(훼< 휇). Consider the restrictions 푞훼= 푝훼↾푀
and let 푃1, 푃2 denote the following conditions.
P1: Each 푞훼extends uniquely to some type over 푀耠in the orbit of 푝.
P2: Every 푝훼restricts to some 푞훼.
The following deﬁnition is adapted from [27].
Deﬁnition 3.13. Let C be a 휅-monster, 푀≺C, 푞∈푆(푀), O = 푀푞. That is, O is the
orbit of 푞under left translation by 푀.
1.
O is C-bounded if there is 푝∈푆(C) with P1 and P2 and 푞= 푝↾푀.
2.
O is ∞-bounded if it is C耠-bounded for all 휅-monsters C耠≻푀(for any 휅> |푀|).
3.
푇has an ∞-bounded orbit if for some 푀　㨐푇, there is some ∞-bounded orbit
in 푆(푀).
4.
For a ﬁxed countable theory 푇, let 휇푇be the least cardinality of an ∞-bounded
orbit (for some 휅-monster modeling 푇) if such a model exists.
5.
Let 휇bd = sup{휇푇: 푇has a model with an ∞-bounded orbit }.
11 푇has TP2 if for some formula 휙(x, y) and some 푘< 휔there is an array {푎푗
푖: 푖, 푗< 휔} such that
each row 휙(푥, 푎푗
푖) is 푘-inconsistent and for every 휂: 휔→휔, each type 휙(x, 푎휂
푖(푖)) is consistent.

How Big Should the Monster Model Be?
|
43
Now Newelski[27] asked12.
If we consider the existence of a bounded orbit in 푆(C) as a property of 푇, then this property
should not depend on the choice of C휅provided 휅is large enough. In particular, if a type
푝∈푆(C) has bounded orbit and C耠= C耠
휅≻C휅耠is a larger monster model (for some 휅耠> 휅,
then there should exist a type 푝耠∈푆(C耠) extending 푝with the 퐺C耠orbit of the same size
as that of the 퐺C耠-orbit of 푝. It is unclear to me, how large 휅should be for C to have this
property.
In this section we give several other formulations of this question.
Question 3.14. 1.
Find a bound on 휇bd in terms of ℶ-numbers.
2.
Find an example where there is an ∞-bounded orbit of size > 22ℵ0 in a count-
able theory.
3.
Is there a bound on the size of an ∞-bounded orbit in a countable theory of a
group.
By Remark 1.12 of [27] the Hanf number for 휇bd is no more than 퐻(푁휆), (i.e. 퐻(푃휆
푁) )
as discussed in Section 3.3. But we showed in [6] that this number is incalculable.
However it is only an upper bound for the Hanf number for 휇bd.
We can’t answer any of these questions; we try to place them in a broader
context and address related questions. To begin with, instead of trying to bound
the size of the bounded orbit, one could bound the size of models which have
a bounded orbit. If there was no such bound, one would like to think that the
monster model had a bounded orbit in the sense of Deﬁnition 3.17.
Pillay and Conversano [11, 12] for o-minimal and even NIP theories and Newel-
ski [28] for more general classes deﬁned in terms of the action of groups have cal-
culated the Hanf number. But our question here is:
Question 3.15. Is there a calculation of the Hanf number for bounded orbits that
works for every ﬁrst order theory of groups? Or are some kind of stability condi-
tions necessary to get a bound.
Note that the key aspect of ∞-bounded is the property of extending a 휅-monster
to a 휅耠-monster preserving the size of a small orbit. It was implicit in [27] that such
an extension theorem holds in stable theories. For context, we include a proof.
Fact 3.16. If 푇is stable andC is a 휅-monster of 푇with a type 푝∈푆(C) with bounded
orbit of cardinality 휆< 휇(with 휇as in Deﬁnition 2.2.3), then in any 휅耠-monster C耠≻
C, there is a type with orbit of cardinality 휆.
12 Newelski’s 휅-monsters were not unique, complicating the issue even further.

44
|
John T. Baldwin
Proof. Let 푝耠∈푆(C耠) be a nonforking extension of 푝= 푝0 ∈푆(C). Fix 푀0 ≺C
that is 휅(푇)+-saturated and ⟨푞훼∈푆(푀0):훼< 휆⟩which are the conjugates of 푝↾푀0.
Each 푞훼is a nonforking extension of a stationary type over some 푋훼⊂푀0 with
|푋훼| < 휅(푇). If every C耠-conjugate of 푝耠is a nonforking extension of some 푞훼, we
are ﬁnished. Now suppose some 푚∈C耠conjugates 푝耠so that 푚푝耠↾푀0
̸= 푞훼for all
훼< 휇. Then 푚푋0 is not contained in 푀0. But there exists a subset 푌of 푀0 with
|푌| = 휅(푇) such that 푟= tp(푚푋0/푀0) is based on 푌. Now by |푀0|-saturation of C,
construct in C a nonforking sequence 푚훽푌훽for 훽< |푀0| of realizations of 푟. Each
푌훽is the base of a conjugate of 푝耠↾푀0 contrary to hypothesis.
23.16
Newelski’s formulation focuses on whether a particular orbit remains
bounded as the ambient monster changes. To connect with the true monster we
consider a variant– which monsters have bounded (i.e. small) orbits?
Deﬁnition 3.17 (A model has a Bounded orbit). 1.
Let M be the monster model
of 푇. We say M has a bounded orbit if there is a 푝∈푆(M) such that
M푝= {푎푝: 푎∈M} is a set.
2.
Let C = C휅be a 휅-monster model of 푇. We say C휅has a bounded orbit if there
is a 푝∈푆(C) such that, with C푝denoting {푎푝: 푎∈C}, |C푝| < |C|.
Question 3.18. When does M have a bounded orbit? That is, can we deﬁne a car-
dinal 휅and a property of set models such that M has a bounded orbit if and only
if the set monster C휅has the property.
This is the formulation of Conjecture 2.4 in this context. We will see it is problem-
atic.
Notation 3.19. We will write
̂푀for a model which may be either a 휅-monster C휅
or the true monster M. The saturation hypothesis may not always be used.
For the next few paragraphs we analyze the relation between the orbits of a type
and its restrictions. Note that for any set or class model 푀and 푝∈푆(푀), the car-
dinality of the orbit of 푝is the index of stb푀(푝) in 푀. (The stabilizer of 푝, stb푀(푝),
is the subgroup of 푎∈푀such that 푎푝= 푝.)
Claim 3.20. Let 푀≺푁≺
̂푀and
̂푝∈푆( ̂푀).
1.
If 푎∈stb ̂푀( ̂푝) and 푎∈푀then 푎∈stb푀( ̂푝↾푁). In particular, for any 푀≺
̂푀,
(stb ̂푀( ̂푝) ∩푀) ⊆stb푀( ̂푝↾푀).
2.
So if 푀contains representatives of all cosets of stb ̂푀( ̂푝),
| ̂푀/stb ̂푀( ̂푝))| = |푀/stb ̂푀( ̂푝) ∩푀| ≥|푀/stb푀( ̂푝↾푀)|.
Proof. For any 휙(푥, c) ∈
̂푝↾푁, 휙(푥, 푎−1c) ∈stb ̂푀( ̂푝) and 푎−1c ∈푁so 휙(푥, 푎−1c) ∈
stb푁( ̂푝↾푁). For the equality in the second assertion, note that for any 푏∈푀there
is an 푎푖in the set of representatives such that 푏−1푎푖∈stb ̂푀( ̂푏) but also in 푀. 23.20

How Big Should the Monster Model Be?
|
45
We establish downward monotonicity for having a bounded orbit.
Claim 3.21. Let 푀≺푁≺
̂푀and ̂푝∈
̂푀. If
̂푀has a bounded orbit of size 휇then for
every 휅with 휇< 휅< | ̂푀| and every model 푀of size 휅, there is a model 푀耠of size 휅
with 푀≺푀耠such that 푀耠has an orbit of size ≤휇.
Proof. Fix a model 푀of size 휅. Let
̂푝∈푆( ̂푀) have a bounded orbit of cardinality
휇, i.e. stb ̂푀( ̂푝) has 휇cosets with representatives ⟨푎푖: 푖< 휇⟩. Let 푁be a submodel
containing the 푎푖. Choose 푀耠as an elementary extension of 푁and 푀of cardinality
휅. By Claim 3.20, the orbit of
̂푝↾푀耠has size at most 휇.
23.21
We show every model is contained in a model of the same cardinality where
the containment in Claim 3.20.1 becomes equality.
Claim 3.22. Fix
̂푝∈푆( ̂푀). For any 푀, there is an 푀耠with 푀≺푀耠and |푀| = |푀耠|
such that
stb ̂푀( ̂푝) ∩푀耠= stb푀耠( ̂푝↾푀耠).
Proof. By Claim 3.20 stb ̂푀( ̂푝) ∩푀耠⊆stb푀( ̂푝↾푀). Now let 푀1 = 푀∗be a model
of size |푀| such that for every 푎∈stb푀( ̂푝↾푀) −stb ̂푀( ̂푝) ∩푀, there is c ∈푀∗
with 휙(푥, c) ∈
̂푝, 휙(푎−1푥, c)
̸∈
̂푝. Thus, every such 푎is not in stb푀∗( ̂푝↾푀∗). Now if
푀푖+1 = 푀∗
푖, then 푀耠= ⋃푖<휔푀푖satisﬁes the desired condition, as by Claim 3.20
stb ̂푀( ̂푝) ∩푀耠⊆stb푀耠( ̂푝↾푀耠).
23.22
With these technical lemmas we can relate the size of the orbit a ﬁxed type
over the (class or set) monster to the size of the orbits of its restrictions.
Lemma 3.23. Fix a type
̂푝∈푆(M). The following are equivalent.
1.
The orbit of
̂푝is bounded.
2.
Let 휇= |M ̂푝|. For every 푀with |푀| ≥휇, there exists an 푀耠containing 푀with
|푀耠| = |푀| such that
̂푝↾푀耠has cardinality 휇.
3.
Let 휇= |M ̂푝|. For every 푀with |푀| ≥휇, there is a 휅-monster C휅with 푀≺C휅
and the restriction of ̂푝to the 휅-monster C휅has an orbit of cardinality less than
휅.
Proof. 1) implies 2) is Claim 3.21 with
̂푀taken as M. For 2) implies 1), we prove the
converse. If
̂푝∈푆(M) is unbounded then for every 휅, we can choose 푀of cardi-
nality 휅so that 휅elements of 푀are in distinct cosets of stbM( ̂푝). By Lemma 3.22,
we can extend 푀to 푀耠with stbM( ̂푝) ∩푀耠= stb푀耠( ̂푝↾푀耠) and the index of this
subgroup is at least 휅.
3) To prove 3) from 1) make the same construction as in proving 3) but continue
for 휅+ steps with the 훼+ 1’st structure saturated over its predecessor.
3) implies 1). Build a chain C휅for arbitrarily large 휅satisfying the condition
in iii). Since
̂푝is ﬁxed for the entire construction
̂푝is unbounded.
23.23

46
|
John T. Baldwin
Remark 3.24. Note that condition 3) of Lemma 3.23 depends on the particular em-
bedding of 푀휅in the monster. That is, if we take a diﬀerent copy of 푀휅, there will
be a conjugate of
̂푝under the automorphism group of M whose restriction to this
푀휅has a bounded orbit.
Thus 3) implies:
4) For arbitrarily large 휅, there is a
̂푝耠∈푆(M) whose restriction to the 휅-
monster 푀휅has an orbit of cardinality less than 휅.
But 4) is ostensibly weaker; the extension keeps changing.
Question 3.25. Is it possible that there is a type 푝∈푆(푀) that is bounded, say
with orbit size 휇and for arbitrarily large 휅there are extensions 푝휅over set models
푀휅which all have orbit size 휇. But there is no increasing chain of such types?
We can rephrase this analysis with the following implication.
Corollary 3.26. From Lemma 3.23 and Remark 3.24, we know 1) implies 2):
1.
M has a bounded orbit.
2.
For arbitrarily large 휅, the 휅-monster 푀휅has an orbit of cardinality less than 휅.
Question 3.27. But does the converse hold?
If the converse held, then we would know that the true monster does not have a
bounded orbit, exactly if there is an upper bound on the cardinalities of set mon-
sters with bounded orbits. And then we could reduce the existence of a true mon-
ster with bounded orbits to the following ZFC question.
Question 3.28. Find an explicit description of a function 푓: On →On such that
if 푇has cardinality 휎and the 푓(휎)-monster has a bounded orbit then M has a
bounded orbit. More precisely, is there such an 푓which is calculable?
3.3 Saturation and omission
In this section, we state what seems to be a natural model theoretic property. It
arose from Newelski’s consideration of the issues in Section 3.2. But the Hanf num-
ber for the property is not calculable.
Newelski reduced the existence of bounded orbits to the question. When is a
there a triple of a theory in vocabulary 휏, a sub-vocabulary 휏1 and a 휏-type 푝such
that there is a model 푀with 푀↾휏1-saturated but 푀omits 푝.
Let us state the property more formally.

How Big Should the Monster Model Be?
|
47
Deﬁnition 3.29. We say 푀1 　㨐푡where 푡= (푇, 푇1, 푝) is a triple of two theories and a
type. The theories are in vocabularies 휏⊂휏1 with |휏1| ≤휆, 푇⊆푇1 and 푝is a 휏1-type
over the empty set if 푀1 is a model of 푇1 which omits 푝, but 푀1↾휏is saturated.
Let 푁휆denote13 the set of 푡with 휏1 = 휆and 푁푠푠
휆the subset of those where the
theory 푇is superstable. Then 퐻(푁휆) denotes the Hanf number of 푁휆, 퐻(푁휆) is
least so that if some 푡∈푁휆has a model of cardinality 퐻(푁휆) it has arbitrarily
large models.
To avoid diﬃculties about ﬁnding saturated models, we assume in this subsec-
tion:
Assumption 3.30. Assume the collection of 휆with 휆<휆= 휆is a proper class.
This assumption follows from the generalized continuum hypothesis or from
‘There are a proper class of strongly inaccessible cardinals’.
Under the mild set theoretic hypotheses of 3.30, we showed in [6] that 퐻(푁휆)
equals the Löwenheim number of second order logic, which is incalculable[36].
In [5] we restrict the question by requiring that the theory 푇satisfy stability condi-
tions. The distinction between superstable and stable is immense. For the super-
stable case the number is easily calculable in terms of Beth numbers.
Theorem 3.31. Let |휏| = 휆.
1.
If 푇is superstable
퐻(푁푠푠
휆) < 퐻(퐿(2휆)+,휔) ≤ℶ(2(2휆)+
)
+ .
2.
In general,
퐻(푁휆) ≥ℓ2(퐿퐼퐼)
where ℓ2(퐿퐼퐼) denotes the Löwenheim number of second order logic. Thus
퐻(푁휆) is a large cardinal if such exist.
For the superstable case, we have stated a calculable bound. For stable theories,
work in progress (with Shelah) purports to show the upper bound 퐻(퐿(2휔)+,휔1),
which still depends on the choice of set theory, although it is lower than the gen-
eral case.
13 Thus, ‘there is an 푀∈푁휆with cardinality 휅’ replaces the more cumbersome notation in [6],
‘푃휆
푁(퐾푡, 휅) holds’.

48
|
John T. Baldwin
4 What kind of conditions imply only weak set
theory is needed to prove a proposition?
The usual answers to this question are in terms of syntactic properties of the prop-
erties under consideration. Properties of inﬁnitary logic are inherently more com-
plicated that properties of ﬁrst order logic. Or as Macintyre phrased it, various
properties are phrased with second order quantiﬁcation.
None of the three examples in Section 3 seem a priori to have any real con-
nection with stability. Even in the ﬁrst case, forking and dividing can be deﬁned
for arbitrary theories and one can ask, ‘does forking equal dividing’. But we have
three propositions where there is apparent (in the ﬁrst case), deﬁnite (in the third)
and (open in the second) dependence on set theory to obtain the proposition for
an arbitrary theory14. But in each case a stability hypothesis gives a positive so-
lution to the problem. In stable theories forking is the same as dividing. In stable
theories, there are bounded orbits. In superstable theories, the Hanf number of
푁휆is calculable.
Note that in these examples the dependence of the result on the length of the
set theoretic universe varies depending on the stability of the underlying theory.
In contrast, calculating the spectrum function of a ﬁrst order theory has no such
dependence (although the proof uses the stability hierarchy).
Can we ﬁnd a way to characterize such conditions as stability or o-minimality
or the geometric conditions such as genus mentioned by Macintyre so as to ac-
count for lesser set theoretic strength necessary to study ‘tame’ mathematics? We
see here that the cardinalities of the objects studied are not the deﬁning charac-
teristic of tame.
Acknowledgement: I thank the John Templeton Foundation for its support
through Project #13152, Myriad Aspects of Inﬁnity, hosted during 2009-2011 at the
Centre de Recerca Matematica, Bellaterra, Spain. I thank Rutgers University for
support of visits where some of this work was done.
14 Strictly speaking to apply this comment to the case of NTP2 theories we should only consider
types over models, since we know there are non-simple theories for which forking (over arbitrary
(countable) sets) does not equal dividing.

Bibliography
|
49
Bibliography
[1]
H. Adler. Thorn-forking as local forking. Journal of Mathematical Logic, pages 21–38,
2009. preprint.
[2]
John T. Baldwin. Categoricity. Number 51 in University Lecture Notes. American Mathemat-
ical Society, Providence, USA, 2009. www.math.uic.edu/˜ jbaldwin.
[3]
John T. Baldwin. Amalgamation, absoluteness, and categoricity. In Arai, Feng, Kim, Wu,
and Yang, editors, Proceedings of the 11th Asian Logic Conference, 2009, pages 22–50.
World Sci. Publ., Hackensack, NJ, 2012.
[4]
J.T. Baldwin. Fundamentals of Stability Theory. Springer-Verlag, 1988.
[5]
J.T. Baldwin and S. Shelah. A Hanf number for saturation and omission II. to appear
Fundamenta Mathematica, preprint:http://www.math.uic.edu/~jbaldwin/pub/shnew22.
[6]
J.T. Baldwin and S. Shelah. A Hanf number for saturation and omission. Fund. Math.,
213:255–270, 2011. preprint:http://www.math.uic.edu/~jbaldwin/pub/shnew22.
[7]
Steven Buechler. Essential Stability Theory. Springer-Verlag, 1991.
[8]
Enrique Casanovas. The number of types in simple theories. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 98:69–86, 1999.
[9]
C.C. Chang and H.J Keisler. Model theory. North-Holland, 1973. 3rd edition 1990.
[10] A. Chernikov and I. Kaplan. Forking and dividing in ntp2 theories. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 77:1–20, 2012.
[11] A. Conversano and A. Pillay. Connected components of deﬁnable groups and o-minimality
i. preprint.
[12] A. Conversano and A. Pillay. Connected components of deﬁnable groups and o-minimality
II. preprint.
[13] Džamonja+Shelah. On <∗-maximality. Annals Pure and Applied Logic, 125:119–158, 2004.
item 692 in Shelah archive.
[14] Harvey Friedman. Higher set theory and mathematical practice. Ann. Math.Log., pages
325–357, 1971.
[15] Sy-David Friedman and Martin Koerwien. On absoluteness of categoricity in aecs.
preprint, 200x.
[16] A Grothendieck. Elements de géometrie algébriques (rédigés avec la collaboration de J.
Dieudonné), IV Etudes Locale des Schémas et des Morphismes de Schémas. Publ Math
I.H.E.S., 28:5–255, 1966.
[17] William Hanf. Models of languages with inﬁnitely long expressions. In Abstracts of Con-
tributed papers from the First Logic, Methodology and Philosopy of Science Congress,
Vol.1, page 24. Stanford University, 1960.
[18] W. Hodges. Model Theory. Cambridge University Press, 1993.
[19] Byunghan Kim. Forking in simple theories. Journal of the London Mathematical Society,
57:257–267, 1998.
[20] Angus J. Macintyre. Model theory: Geometrical and set-theoretic aspects and prospects.
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 9:197 – 212, 2003.
[21] Angus J. Macintyre. The impact of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems on mathematics.
In Baaz et al, editor, Kurt Gödel and the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 3–26. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2011.
[22] D. Marker. Model Theory: An introduction. Springer-Verlag, 2002.
How Big Should the Monster Model Be?

50
|
John T. Baldwin
[23] C. Mclarty. What does it take to prove Fermat’s last theorem? Grothendieck and the logic
of number theory. Bulletin of Symbolic Logic, 16:359–377, 2010.
[24] C. McLarty. A ﬁnite order arithmetic foundation for cohomology. preprint:http://arxiv.org/
pdf/1102.1773v3.pdf, 2012.
[25] C. McLarty. Zariski cohomology in second order arithmetic. preprint:http://arxiv.org/pdf/
1207.0276v2.pdf, 2012.
[26] M. Morley. Omitting classes of elements. In Addison, Henkin, and Tarski, editors, The
Theory of Models, pages 265–273. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1965.
[27] Ludomir Newelski. Bounded orbits and measures on a group. Israel Journal of Mathemat-
ics, 187:209–229, 2012.
[28] Ludomir Newelski. Bounded orbits and strongly generic sets. preprint, 2012.
[29] B. Osserman. The weil conjectures. In T. Gowers, editor, The Princeton Companion to
Mathematics, pages 729–732. Princeton University Press, 2008.
[30] S. Shelah. Classiﬁcation Theory and the Number of Nonisomorphic Models. North-
Holland, 1978.
[31] S. Shelah. Simple unstable theories. Annals of Mathematical Logic, 19:177–203, 1980.
[32] S. Shelah. Categoricity for abstract classes with amalgamation. Annals of Pure and Ap-
plied Logic, 98:261–294, 1999. paper 394. Consult Shelah for post-publication revisions.
[33] S. Shelah. Model theory without choice: categoricity. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 74:361–
401, 2009. paper 840.
[34] Katrin Tent and Martin Ziegler. A course in Model Theory. Lecture Notes in Logic. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2012.
[35] Sebastien Vasey. Indiscernible extraction and Morley sequences. preprint.
[36] Jouko Väänänen. Abstract logic and set theory II: Large cardinals. Journal of Symbolic
Logic, 47:335–346, 1982.
[37] various contributors.
Inaccessible cardinals and Andrew Wiles’s proof.
mathoverflow:http://mathoverflow.net/questions/35746/inaccessible-cardinals-and-
andrew-wiless-proof, 2012.
[38] M. Ziegler. Introduction to stability theory and Morley rank. In E. Bouscaren, editor,
Model Theory and Algebraic Geometry : An Introduction to E. Hrushovski’s Proof of the
Geometric Mordell-Lang Conjecture, pages 19–44. Springer-Verlag, 1999.

John P. Burgess
Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality
for Jouko Väänänen
Abstract: One reason is explained why the pursuit of modal logic’s original aim of
evaluating the formal validity of arguments turning on necessity and possibility
in a ‘metaphysical’ sense must cross borders and draw the logician into ‘metaphi-
losophy’.
||
John P. Burgess: Department of Philosophy, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544-1006,
USA, e-mail: jburgess@princeton.edu
1 Modal Logic & Border-Crossing
Originally ‘geometry’ named an enterprise aiming to describe the forms of physi-
cal space. Today geometry is the study of a vast range of mathematical structures,
closely enough related to structures once thought to model physical space that
they can usefully be studied by the same methods or adaptations thereof. Some
of these structures have important applications, as with the use of phase space in
statistical mechanics; but as this example shows, the applications may have little
to do with the original aims of the subject. The part of geometry devoted to the
original aim is now but a small corner of a large ﬁeld, and it is the more marginal
because it involves a crossing of disciplinary borders. It does so because it is no
longer tenable to view geometry as determining in advance the form of the arena
in which physical forces act, before electromagnetic and gravitational theory, say,
get to work describing those forces. On the contrary, the pursuit of what were the
original aims of geometry is now inseparable from electromagnetic and gravita-
tional theory themselves (which to begin with have taught us that we must not
speak of physical space, but rather of physical spacetime).
Originally ‘logic’ named an enterprise aiming to prescribe the norms of deduc-
tive argumentation in philosophy and elsewhere. Today logic is the study of a vast
range of formal systems, closely enough related to systems once thought to model
deductive argumentation that they can usefully be studied by the same methods
or adaptations thereof. Some of theses systems have important applications, as
with the use of boolean logic in circuit design; but as this example shows, the ap-
plications may have little to do with the original aims of the subject. The part of

52
|
John P. Burgess
logic devoted to the original aim is now but a small corner of a large ﬁeld, and
it is the more marginal because it involves a crossing of disciplinary borders. It
must do so because it is no longer uncontroversial to assume that logic can serve
as an organon, determining in advance the norms according to which substantive
philosophical or other issues should be debated, before philosophers or others
get to work debating. On the contrary, the pursuit of what were the original aims
of logic is now for many inseparable from philosophy generally, and philosophy
of language especially.
As it is with logic in general, so it is with modal logic in particular. But what
is meant by ‘modal’ here? Mood-and-modality is the linguistic category pertain-
ing to the expression of irreality of one kind or another, insofar as this is done
grammatically rather than lexically, which is to say, insofar as it is expressed by
inﬂections of the verb, or by use of special modal auxiliary verbs. Linguists dis-
tinguish deontic, epistemic, and dynamic modality. All are of interest in philoso-
phy, but most of all the third, which more or less amounts to what philosophers
call ‘metaphysical’ modality. Its key notions are expressible in various ways, but
chieﬂy by use of the modal auxiliaries ‘could’ and ‘would’ and ‘might’. For those
key notions are the necessary in the sense of what is and would have been (could
not have failed to be) no matter what, and the possible in the sense of what is or
isn’t but potentially might (or could) have been. Henceforth ‘necessary’ and ‘possi-
ble’, and with them ‘modality’, when used without distinguishing epithet, should
be understood as pertaining to this kind rather than any other. It will here be our
default sense of modality. Something very like this sense – or anyhow, something
much more like it than like any other sense in play today – seems to have been as-
sumed in the ﬁrst work on modal logic, Aristotle’s modal syllogistic. And therefore
without much exaggeration or distortion we can say that to articulate the logic of
this notion of modality was modal logic’s original aim.
Modal logic today is an enormously broader enterprise than it was in Aristo-
tle’s time. Much of modal logic seems to have been developed for its purely math-
ematical interest, since the number of formal systems far exceeds the number of
conceivable intuitive interpretations. But there are some signiﬁcant external ap-
plications, as with the use of dynamic logic in theoretical computer science. The
model-theoretic machinery developed to bring order out of the chaos of compet-
ing systems is indeed found invoked today in many areas of logic and across the
border from pure logic in theoretical computer science and linguistics. Very lit-
tle of modal logic is devoted to the attempt to determine what are the valid forms
of argument involving necessity and possibility in any sense, and vanishingly lit-
tle is devoted to the original aim of modal logic, that of dealing with the logic of
modality in our default sense.

Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality
|
53
In fact, apart from some scolding by critics of modern modal logic about the
dangers of ‘Aristotelian essentialism’ – which were met by ﬁrm denials from modal
logicians that their logic harbored any ‘essentialist commitments’ – until 1970 the
very topic of modality in our default sense was lost sight of, not only in logic, but in
philosophy as well. Today what were the original aims of modal logic have begun
to be pursued again, though the pursuit may not as yet have gotten very far. As
with geometry and with logic in general, pursuit of the original aims will require
crossing borders into another domain.
In the remarks that follow I will indicate how, in particular, one must enter
into the realm of metaphysics, and beyond that into the realm of ‘metaphiloso-
phy’, where the issues are about what the issues are about when debating meta-
physics. One must confront a notorious ‘modal paradox’, and consider not only
various views about how to deal with the paradox, but also various meta-views
about what ‘dealing with’ a paradox can mean.
2 Modality Lost
But how did the neglect, until a few decades ago, of modality, in what I have
claimed is the default sense of the term, come about? Well, not all at once, but
in stages. The ‘metaphysical’ notion of what would have been no matter what (the
necessary) was conﬂated with the epistemological notion of what independently
of sense-experience can be known to be (the a priori), which in turn was identi-
ﬁed with the semantical notion of what is true by virtue of meaning (the analytic),
which in turn was reduced to a mere product of human convention. And what mo-
tivated these reductions? Mainly, I would suggest, eﬀorts at ‘demystiﬁcation’. Let
me outline the story.
The mystery of modality, for early modern philosophers, was how we can have
any knowledge of it. Here is how the question arises. We think that when things
are some way, in some cases they could have been otherwise, and in other cases
they couldn’t. That is the modal distinction between the contingent and the neces-
sary. And we not only think that there is such a distinction, we also think that we
know some examples. For instance, though there has been no female U. S. pres-
ident, there could have been, whereas the number 29 not only has no nontrivial
divisors but couldn’t have had any. Thus we may speculate counterfactually about
‘What if Hilary Clinton had been president in September, 2001?’ but won’t specu-
late counterfactually about ‘What if 5 had been a divisor of 29?’ And what is called
the question of modal epistemology is just this: How do we know that the exam-
ples in question are examples of that of which they are supposed to be examples?

54
|
John P. Burgess
And why should this question be considered a diﬃcult problem, a kind of mys-
tery? Well, that is because, on the one hand, when we ask about most other items
of purported knowledge how it is we can know them, sense-experience seems to
be the source, or anyhow the chief source of our knowledge, but, on the other
hand, sense-experience seems able only to provide knowledge about what is or
isn’t, not what could have been or couldn’t have been. How do we bridge the gap
between ‘is’ and ‘could’? The classic statement of the problem was given by Im-
manuel Kant, early (p.3) in the introduction to the second or B edition of his ﬁrst
critique, The Critique of Pure Reason: ‘Experience teaches us that a thing is so, but
not that it cannot be otherwise.’
Note that this formulation allows that experience can teach us that a neces-
sary truth is true; what it is not supposed to be able to teach is that it is necessary.
For example, experience with what they call ‘manipulatives’ in pre-school, try-
ing to arrange 29 blocks in various patterns, may convince one that 29 is a prime
number, one that has no nontrivial factorization; but granted that it doesn’t ac-
tually have one, how do we know that it couldn’t possibly have had one, and is
necessarily a prime number? How can experience teach us that extra fact?
The problem becomes more vivid if one adopts the language that was once
used by G. W. Leibniz, and much later repopularized by Saul Kripke in his famous
work on model theory for formal modal systems, the usage according to which the
necessary is that which is ‘true in all possible worlds’. In these terms the problem
is that the senses only show us this world, the world we live in, the actual world
as it is called, whereas when we claim to know about what could or couldn’t have
been, we are claiming knowledge of what is going on in some or all other worlds.
For that kind of knowledge, it seems, we would need a kind of sixth sense, or
extrasensory perception, or nonperceptual mode of apprehension, to see beyond
the world in which we live to these various other worlds.
That is the problem. Let me now rapidly review some of the highlights of the
history of attempted solution, beginning with Kant himself. Kant concludes, in the
very next sentence after the one I quoted earlier, that our knowledge of necessity
must be what he calls a priori knowledge or knowledge that is ‘prior to’ or before
or independent of experience, rather than what he calls a posteriori knowledge
or knowledge that is ‘posterior to’ or after or dependant on experience. And so the
problem of the origin of our knowledge of necessity becomes for Kant the problem
of the origin of our a priori knowledge.
Well, that is not quite the right way to describe Kant’s position, since there is
one special class of cases where Kant thinks it isn’t really so hard to understand
how we can have a priori knowledge. He doesn’t think all of our a priori knowl-
edge is mysterious, but only most of it. He distinguishes what he calls analytic
from what he calls synthetic judgments, and holds that a priori knowledge of the

Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality
|
55
former is unproblematic, since it is not really knowledge of external objects, but
only knowledge of the content of our own concepts, a form of self-knowledge.
We can generate any number of examples of analytic truths by the following
three-step process. First, take a simple logical truth of the form ‘Anything that is
both an A and a B is a B’, for instance, ‘Anyone who is both a man and unmarried is
unmarried’. Second, ﬁnd a synonym C for the phrase ‘thing that is both an A and
a B’, for instance, ‘bachelor’ for ‘one who is both a man and unmarried’. Third,
substitute the shorter synonym for the longer phrase in the original logical truth to
get the truth ‘Any C is a B’, or in our example, the truth ‘Any bachelor is unmarried’.
Our knowledge of such a truth seems unproblematic because it seems to reduce
to our knowledge of the meanings of our own words.
So the problem for Kant is not exactly how knowledge a priori is possible, but
more precisely how synthetic knowledge a priori is possible. Kant thought we do
have examples of such knowledge, and indeed the example I have been using,
that 29 is a prime number, is one of them. Arithmetic, according to Kant, was sup-
posed to be synthetic a priori, and geometry, too – all of pure mathematics. In
his Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, Kant listed ‘How is pure mathemat-
ics possible?’ as the ﬁrst question for metaphysics, for the branch of philosophy
concerned with space, time, substance, cause, and other grand general concepts
– including modality.
Kant oﬀered an elaborate explanation of how synthetic a priori knowledge is
supposed to be possible, an explanation reducing it to a form of self-knowledge,
but later philosophers questioned whether there really were any examples of the
synthetic a priori. Geometry, so far as it is about the physical space in which we
live and move – and that was the original conception, and the one still prevailing
in Kant’s day – came to be seen as, not synthetic a priori, but rather a posteriori.
(This development was one of the main causes of the extended usage, alluded to
earlier, of ‘geometry’ to cover a vast range of mathematical investigations.) The
great mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauß had already come to suspect that geom-
etry is a posteriori, like the rest of physics, by some time in the ﬁrst half of the
nineteenth century. Since the time of Albert Einstein in the early twentieth cen-
tury the a posteriori character of physical geometry has been the received view
(whence the need for border-crossing from mathematics into physics if one is to
pursue the original aim of geometry).
As for arithmetic, the great logician Gottlob Frege in the late nineteenth cen-
tury claimed that it was not synthetic a priori, but analytic – of the same sta-
tus as ‘Any bachelor is unmarried’, except that to obtain something like ‘29 is a
prime number’ one needs to substitute synonyms in a logical truth of a form much
more complicated than ‘Anything that is both an A and a B is a B’. This view was
subsequently adopted by many philosophers in the analytic tradition of which

56
|
John P. Burgess
Frege was a forerunner, whether or not they immersed themselves in the details
of Frege’s program for the reduction of arithmetic to logic.
Once Kant’s synthetic a priori has been rejected, the question of how we have
knowledge of necessity reduces to the question of how we have knowledge of an-
alyticity, which in turn resolves into a pair of questions: On the one hand, how
do we have knowledge of synonymy, which is to say, how do we have knowledge
of meaning? On the other hand how do we have knowledge of logical truths? As
to the ﬁrst question, presumably we acquire knowledge, explicit or implicit, con-
scious or unconscious, of meaning as we learn to speak, by the time we are able to
ask the question whether this is a synonym of that, we have the answer. But what
about knowledge of logic? That question didn’t loom large in Kant’s day, when
only a very rudimentary logic existed, but after Frege vastly expanded the realm
of logic – only by doing so could he ﬁnd any prospect of reducing arithmetic to
logic – the question loomed larger.
Many philosophers, however, convinced themselves that knowledge of logic
also reduces to knowledge of meaning, namely, of the meanings of logical parti-
cles, words like ‘not’ and ‘and’ and ‘or’ and ‘all’ and ‘some’. To be sure, there are
inﬁnitely many logical truths, in Frege’s expanded logic. But they all follow from
or are generated by a ﬁnite list of logical rules, and philosophers were tempted to
identify knowledge of the meanings of logical particles with knowledge of rules
for using them: Knowing the meaning of ‘or’, for instance, would be knowing that
‘A or B’ follows from A and follows from B, and that anything that follows both
from A and from B follows from ‘A or B’. So in the end, knowledge of necessity
reduces to conscious or unconscious knowledge of explicit or implicit semantical
rules or linguistics conventions or whatever.
On this picture we know that ﬁve isn’t a divisor of 29 in any possible world, not
because we have some kind of ESP that permits us to engage in telepathic remote
viewing of other possible worlds while remaining in this one, but rather because,
just as we have implicitly or unconsciously learned conventions or rules that tell
us no one who is married may properly be described as a ‘bachelor’, so also we
have implicitly or unconsciously learned conventions or rules that tell us, or from
which it follows, that one may not describe any world as a world in which 5 is a
‘divisor’ of 29.
For instance, a world in which whenever one lays out ﬁve rows of six blocks
and then counts the total, one ﬁnds 29, is not properly described as a world in
which ﬁve times six is 29. Rather it is a world where, by some curious physical
principle, whenever 30 blocks are brought together in ﬁve rows of six, one of them
disappears; or where, by some curious psychological principle, whenever we try
to count 30 blocks arranged in ﬁve rows of six, we always miss one; or something
of the sort.

Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality
|
57
Such is the sort of picture that had become the received wisdom in philosophy
departments in the English speaking world by the middle decades of the last cen-
tury. For instance, A. J. Ayer, the notorious logical positivist, and P. F. Strawson,
the notorious ordinary-language philosopher, disagreed with each other across
a whole range of issues, and for many mid-century analytic philosophers such
disagreements were considered the main issues in philosophy (though some ob-
servers would speak of the ‘narcissism of small diﬀerences’ here). But both sides
put forward a picture quite like the one I have just drawn, Ayer in his Language
Truth and Logic (Golancz) of 1936 and Strawson in his Introduction to Logical The-
ory (Methuen) of 1952.
And people like Ayer and Strawson in the 1920s through 1960s would some-
times go on to speak as if linguistic convention were the source not only of our
knowledge of modality, but of modality itself, and go on further to speak of the
source of language lying in ourselves. Individually, as children growing up in a
linguistic community, or foreigners seeking to enter one, we must consciously or
unconsciously learn the explicit or implicit rules of the communal language as
something with a source outside us to which we must conform. But by contrast,
collectively, as a speech community, we do not so much learn as create the lan-
guage with its rules. And so if the origin of modality, of necessity and its distinc-
tion from contingency, lies in language, it therefore lies in a creation of ours, and
so in us. ‘We, the makers and users of language’ are the ground and source and
origin of necessity. Well, this is not a literal quotation from any one philosophical
writer of the last century, but a pastiche of paraphrases of several.
3 Modality Regained
Such was the climate of opinion before January, 1970, when Kripke delivered his
Princeton lectures on ‘Naming and Necessity’. Since then it has become clear that
there are several things wrong with the conclusion that we, the makers and users
of language, are the originators of necessity, and the line of thought from Kant
onwards that led to this sort of conclusion, and that incidentally led to necessity,
as something distinct from aprioriness or analyticity, being submerged and lost
sight of. I won’t try to say in advance just how many main things are wrong with
the line of thought I will be criticizing, lest I end up like Cardinal Ximenes in the
Monty Python sketch about the Spanish Inquisition, and ﬁnd myself repeatedly
having to revise my estimate upwards. I’ll just mention – following Kripke, though
not very closely or strictly – several diﬃculties one by one; we can count them up
afterwards if we wish.

58
|
John P. Burgess
For one thing, there is a diﬃculty to be found right at the beginning of the
whole line of argument, with Kant, and indeed at the very ﬁrst step, Kant’s infer-
ence from the premise that experience does not teach us that a thing cannot be
otherwise to the conclusion that our knowledge of necessity is a priori. Strawson
was less dismissive of Kant than was Ayer, but he famously described one argu-
ment of Kant’s as a ‘non sequitur of numbing grossness’. I don’t know whether
the argument to which this phrase was ﬁrst applied really deserved words so
harsh, but Kant’s argument from ‘experience isn’t suﬃcient to teach us that a thing
couldn’t have been otherwise’ to ‘experience isn’t needed to learn that a thing
couldn’t have been otherwise’ does seem to call for a pretty severe rebuke. It’s
like arguing from ‘sunshine isn’t suﬃcient to grow corn (rainfall is also needed)’
to ‘sunshine isn’t needed to grow corn (rainfall is suﬃcient)’. It really is a non se-
quitur of numbing grossness.
Kripke’s achievement was not just to point out this logical lapse on the part of
a famous philosopher – ﬁnding logical lapses in the works of famous philosophers
is something it is all too easy to do, I’m afraid, and one doesn’t become famous
just for doing that – but rather, his achievement was to oﬀer plausible counterex-
amples to Kant’s claim, plausible cases of a posteriori knowledge of necessity. One
famous example, perhaps the most celebrated, is that the Queen – or to call her
by name rather than title, Elizabeth Windsor – could not have been the daughter
of Harry Truman. Suppose a tabloid publishes a story according to which she is
the daughter of Harry Truman, smuggled into the royal family as an infant. The
story could be disproved by a chain of documents and testimony leading back to
persons who moved in royal circles in the 1920s. Or it could be directly disproved
by DNA testing. But all of these methods of disproof require sense-experience. The
tabloid’s sensational conspiracy theory can’t be disproved by so-called ‘armchair
methods’, just sitting and thinking. The story is false, but its falsehood is an item
of a posteriori, not a priori knowledge.
Nonetheless, according to Kripke, the fact that Elizabeth Windsor is not the
daughter of Harry Truman is a necessary fact. She not only actually isn’t but
couldn’t possibly have been the daughter of anyone other than her actual father
George Windsor, and in particular, not of Harry Truman. A ‘possible world’ or
counterfactual situation in which a daughter of Harry Truman was smuggled into
the royal family as an infant and later became Queen, would be a situation in
which a person other than Elizabeth Windsor became Queen (and presumably
along the way came to be called ‘Elizabeth Windsor’). It is not a situation in which
Elizabeth Windsor (the person we actually call ‘Elizabeth Windsor’) had a diﬀer-
ent father.
Such examples of a posteriori necessities show that what philosophers of the
period of Ayer and Strawson tended to claim about our knowledge of necessary

Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality
|
59
truths is wrong: it does not just reduce to knowledge of linguistic rules. In fact,
one must keep carefully distinct the age-old notion of necessity from the modern
notions of aprioriness and analyticity.
4 Necessity and Convention Reconsidered
The purely negative conclusion that the primæval notion necessity is not to be
equated with eighteenth-through-twenty-ﬁrst-century notions of aprioriness or
analyticity is what Kripke left us with at the end of his 1970 Princeton lectures. By
two years later, however, when the transcript of the audiotape of those lectures
was being published, he had something a bit more positive to say, and he said it
in some addenda to the lectures proper. There he suggests that in the background,
behind each of his examples of a posteriori necessity, there is some a priori prin-
ciple according to which whatever is so about certain matters is so of necessity.
On this picture, we know a priori that whatever the facts are about whether
one number divides another, they couldn’t have been otherwise. Experience with
manipulatives may teach us that ﬁve doesn’t divide 29, and combining what expe-
rience thus teaches us with our background a priori knowledge, we can conclude
that ﬁve couldn’t have divided 29. Similarly, we know a priori that, whoever a given
person’s parents were, someone with diﬀerent parents wouldn’t count as that per-
son. We know a posteriori that the Queen isn’t a daughter of Harry Truman, and
combining this a posteriori knowledge with our a priori knowledge, we can con-
clude that the Queen couldn’t have been a daughter of Harry Truman.
Kripke describes this a priori knowledge in the background as ‘discoverable
by philosophical analysis’, which is near enough for present purposes to calling
it ‘analytic’. Thus the view appears to be that our knowledge of necessity reduces
to something like a combination of a posteriori knowledge gained through sense-
experience with analytic knowledge of semantic rules or linguistic conventions
or whatever. In that case, the formulation that our knowledge of necessity derives
from our knowledge of linguistic rules would be defensible after all, provided it
is understood as meaning only this, that though our knowledge of the truth of a
necessary truth may depend on sense-experience, our knowledge of the neces-
sity of that truth, given that it is true, derives from knowledge of linguistic rules.
The main point is that the epistemology of modality is still demystiﬁed: there is
no need for ESP. And perhaps that is what the logical positivists and ordinary lan-
guage philosophers really cared about. (Unfortunately for them, Kripke has found
another problem with the line of thought leading to the conclusion that our knowl-
edge of necessity reduces to knowledge of linguistic rules, a ‘skeptical paradox’

60
|
John P. Burgess
about the notion of ‘rule’ itself; but this is a topic I must leave aside here for lack
of space among other reasons.)
The point we have reached is this: We have learned that we must be very care-
ful about how we understand such a formulation as ‘Our knowledge of necessity
derives from knowledge of linguistic rules’; but it has not really been shown that
such formulations are wholly oﬀthe mark. There remains, however, to be evalu-
ated the step from the intermediate conclusion ‘knowledge of modal distinctions
derives knowledge of linguistic rules’ – presumably rules about using modal aux-
iliary verbs, such as ‘would’ and ‘might’ – to the further conclusion that modal
distinctions themselves derive from linguistic rules, and the ﬁnal conclusion that
the origin of necessity lies in us, the makers and users of language.
One immediate diﬃculty with these further steps is that the conclusion just
enunciated, along with all talk about the ‘origin’ of necessity, is simply nonsense:
that the problem of the ‘origin’ of necessity is not a mystery but a muddle. For if
one takes the word ‘origin’ at all literally, then to speak of the origin of necessity
is to speak of a time when necessity came into being, and before which there was
none. And that certainly seems to be nonsense. The number 29 not only is today
but always has been necessarily prime. Even if we substitute ‘ground’ for ‘origin’,
to get rid of the temporal connotations, in asking after the ground of something
we still seem to be asking what is it without which that thing would not have been,
whereas the necessary as opposed to the contingent is precisely that which would
have been no matter what as opposed to that which might not have been if only. So
we seem to be asking, ‘What is it, without which that which could not have failed
to be would have failed to be?’ And surely such a question is nonsensical.
As for our role in the matter, as makers and users of language, certainly any
suggestion that if only we had acted diﬀerently, if only we had adopted diﬀerent
semantical rules or linguistic conventions, diﬀerent things would have been nec-
essary, involves a kind of confusion. Suppose, for instance, we had adopted the
conventions of a base-thirteen numeration system rather than our actual decimal
or base-ten system. Then the number that we wrote as a two followed by a nine,
and perhaps even pronounced ‘twenty-nine’, would indeed have been a number
divisible by ﬁve, since it would have been two times thirteen plus nine or 35 that
we would have been calling ‘twenty-nine’, and that number is ﬁve times seven.
But our adopting a diﬀerent numeration system would not have changed any facts
about the number 29, except the fact that we call it ‘twenty-nine’ and not ‘twenty-
three’ as we might if we used base thirteen.
So in speaking of ourselves as the originators of modality, the philosophers of
the mid-twentieth-century will have been speaking nonsense if they were speak-
ing literally. But surely they, or the best of them, had the wit to see this, and so we
must take them to be speaking ﬁguratively, even if they make no particularly stren-

Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality
|
61
uous eﬀorts to warn against literalism or to spell out in terms that can be taken
literally what they express ﬁguratively by speaking of ourselves, the makers and
users of language, as being the creators of necessity. Let us grant this, and let us
allow ourselves to go on speaking ﬁguratively for a bit. Even so, the formulation
according to which we are the creators of necessity is open to at least one further
challenge.
Even granting that what is needed to get from the kind of knowledge sense-
experience can give us to knowledge of the necessity of necessary truths is knowl-
edge of linguistic rules, and even granting also (despite ‘skeptical paradoxes’
about ‘rules’) that we do have the requisite kind of knowledge of linguistic rules,
still it is premature to conclude, even speaking ﬁguratively, that necessity itself
derives from linguistic rules. Another interpretation of the situation remains pos-
sible, and logical positivists and ordinary language philosophers have given no
real argument against this rival interpretation, but merely assumed that the rival
view is too ‘metaphysical’, in a pejorative sense, to be taken seriously by analytic
philosophers. The real problem or mystery of the so-called ‘origin of necessity’ lies
in the clash between these two interpretations.
5 Realism and Pragmatism about Modality
Let me now try to describe what the two conﬂicting views about the nature of
modality amount to, before turning to consider the bearing of their conﬂict on
other issues concerning modality, and ultimately on modal logic. I will give ﬁrst
the view that people like Ayer and Strawson want to reject, and then the view they
want to accept.
Here is the ﬁrst view. Though the fact is not mentioned in Genesis, the ﬁrst
thing God said on the ﬁrst day of creation was ‘Let there be necessity’. And there
was necessity. And God saw necessity, that it was good. And God divided neces-
sity from contingency. And only then did He say ‘Let there be light’. Several days
later, Adam and Eve were introducing names for the animals into their language,
and during a break between the ﬁsh and the birds, introduced also into their lan-
guage modal auxiliary verbs, or devices that would be translated into English us-
ing modal auxiliary verbs, and rules for their use, rules according to which it can
be said of some things that they ‘could’ have been otherwise, and of other things
that they ‘could not’. In so doing they were merely putting labels on a distinction
that was no more their creation than were the ﬁshes of the sea or the beasts of the
ﬁeld or the birds of the air.

62
|
John P. Burgess
And here is the rival view. The failure of Genesis to mention any command ‘Let
there be necessity’ is to be explained simply by the fact that no such command was
issued. We have no reason to suppose that the language in which God speaks to
the angels contains modal auxiliary verbs or any equivalent device. (I am speak-
ing of ‘metaphysical’ modality here as always, not of deontic modality of the kind
involved in ‘Thou shalt not...’) Sometime after the Tower of Babel some tribes
found that their purposes would be better served by introducing into their lan-
guage certain modal auxiliary verbs, and ﬁxing certain rules for their use. When
we say that this is necessary while that is contingent, we are applying such rules,
rules that are products of human, not divine intelligence.
I have been allowing myself here to use theological language in describing the
distinction I want to draw. That would have been the natural way for seventeenth
or eighteenth century philosophers, who nearly all were or professed to be theists
or deists, to discuss the matter. For many today, such language cannot be literally
accepted, and if it is only taken metaphorically, then I have not really done better
than those who speak ﬁguratively and frame the question as that of whether the
‘origin’ of necessity lies outside us or within us. So let me drop the theological
language, and try again, without it, to describe the division between two views
that I have in mind.
Well, here the ﬁrst view: Ultimately reality as it is in itself, independently of
our attempts to conceptualize and comprehend it, contains both facts about what
is, and superfacts about what not only is but had to have been. Our modal usages,
for instance, the distinction between the simple indicative ‘is’ and the construc-
tion ‘had to have been’, simply reﬂect this fundamental distinction in the world,
a distinction that is and from the beginning always was there, independently of
us and our concerns.
And here is the second view: We have reasons, connected with our various
purposes in life, to use certain words, including ‘would’ and ‘might’, in certain
ways, and thereby to make certain distinctions. The distinction between those
things in the world that would have been no matter what and those that might
have failed to be if only is a projection of the distinctions made in our language.
Our saying there were necessities there before us is a retroactive application to the
pre-human world of a way of speaking invented and created by human beings in
order to solve human problems.
Well, that’s my second try. With it I have gotten rid of theology, but unfortu-
nately I have not gotten rid of all metaphors. The key remaining metaphor is the
optical one: reﬂection vs projection. Perhaps I should give up the attempt to get
rid of all metaphors, and admit that the two views I am discussing are not so much
philosophical theses or doctrines as ‘metaphilosophical’ attitudes or orientations:
a stance that ﬁnds the ‘reﬂection’ metaphor congenial, and the stance that ﬁnds

Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality
|
63
the ‘projection’ metaphor congenial. But let me try a third time to describe the
distinction between the two outlooks in literal terms, avoiding optics as well as
theology.
To begin with, both sides grant that there is a correspondence or parallelism
between two items. On the one hand, there are facts about the contrast between
what is necessary and what is contingent, for instance, between 29 being a prime
number and 29 being the number of years it takes for Saturn to orbit the sun. On
the other hand, there are facts about our usage of modal auxiliary verbs such as
‘would’ and ‘might’, and these include, for instance, the fact that we have no use
for questions of the form ‘Would 29 still have been a prime number if such-and-
such?’ but may have use for questions of the form ‘Would 29 still have been the
number of years it takes for Saturn to orbit the sun if such-and-such?’ The dif-
ference between the two sides concerns the order of explanation of the relation
between the two parallel ranges of facts.
And what do I mean by that? Well, both sides grant that ‘29 is necessarily
prime’, for instance, is a proper thing to say, but they diﬀer in the explanation
why it is a proper thing to say. Asked why, the ﬁrst side will say that ultimately it
is simply because 29 is necessarily prime. That makes the proposition that 29 is
necessarily prime true, and since the sentence ‘29 is necessarily prime’ expresses
that proposition, it is true also, and a proper thing to say. The second side will say
instead that ‘29 is necessarily prime’ is a proper thing to say because there is a rule
of our language according to which it is a proper thing to say. This formulation of
the diﬀerence between the two sides gets rid of metaphor, though it does put an
awful lot of weight on the perhaps fragile ‘why’ and ‘because’.
Note that the adherents of the second view need not deny that 29 is necessarily
prime. On the contrary, having said that the sentence ‘29 is necessarily prime’ is,
per rules of our language, a proper thing to say, they will go on to say it. Nor need
the adherents of the ﬁrst view deny that recognition of the propriety of saying ‘29
is necessarily prime’ is enshrined in a rule of our language. The adherents of the
ﬁrst view need not even deny that proximately, as individuals, we learn that ‘29 is
necessarily prime’ is a proper thing to say by picking up the pertinent rule in the
course of learning our language. But the adherents of the ﬁrst view will maintain
that the rule itself is only proper because collectively, as the creators of the lan-
guage, we or our remote answers have, in setting up the rule, managed to achieve
correspondence with a pre-existing fact, or rather, a pre-existing superfact, the
superfact that 29 is necessarily prime. The diﬀerence between the two views is, as
I said, in the order of explanation.
I will want labels for the two sides, or ‘metaphilosophical’ stances, and rather
than invent new ones, I will simply take two of the most overworked terms in the
philosophical lexicon and give them one more job to do. I will call the reﬂection

64
|
John P. Burgess
view ‘realism’ about modality, and the projection view ‘pragmatism’. That at least
will be easy to remember, since ‘realism’ and ‘reﬂection’ begin with the same ﬁrst
two letters, as do ‘pragmatism’ and ‘projection’. The realist/pragmatist distinction
has bearing across a range of issues and problems, and above all it has bearing on
the meta-issue of which issues are signiﬁcant. For the two sides will, or ought to,
recognize quite diﬀerent questions as the central unsolved problems in the theory
of modality.
For those on the realist side, the old problem of the ultimate source of our
knowledge of modality remains, even if it is granted that the proximate source lies
in knowledge of linguistic conventions. For knowledge of linguistic conventions
constitutes knowledge of a reality independent of us only insofar as our linguis-
tic conventions reﬂect, at least to some degree, such an ultimate reality. So for
the realist the problem remains of explaining how such degree of correspondence
as there is between distinctions in language and distinctions in the world comes
about. If the distinction in the world is something primary and independent, and
not a mere projection of the distinction in language, then how the distinction in
language comes to be even imperfectly aligned with the distinction in the world
remains to be explained. For it cannot be said that we have faculties responsive to
modal facts independent of us – not in any sense of ‘responsive’ implying that if
the facts had been diﬀerent, then our language would have been diﬀerent, since
modal facts couldn’t have been diﬀerent. What then is the explanation? This is the
problem of the epistemology of modality as it confronts the realist, and addressing
it is or ought to be at the top of the realist agenda.
As for the pragmatist side, a chief argument of thinkers from Kant to Ayer
and Strawson and beyond for their anti-realist stance has been precisely that if
the distinction we perceive in reality is taken to be merely a projection of a dis-
tinction created by ourselves, then the epistemological problem dissolves. That
seems more like a reason for hoping the Kantian or Ayerite or Strawsonian view
is the right one, than for believing that it is; but in any case, even supposing the
pragmatist view is the right one, and the problems of the epistemology of modal-
ity are dissolved, still the pragmatist side has an important unanswered question
of its own to address. The pragmatist account, as I formulated it earlier, begins by
saying that we have certain reasons, connected with our various purposes in life,
to use certain words, including ‘would’ and ‘might’, in certain ways, and thereby
to make certain distinctions. What the pragmatist owes us is an account of what
these purposes are, and how the rules of our language help us to achieve them.
Addressing that issue is or ought to be at the top of the pragmatists’ to-do list.
While the positivist Ayer dismisses all metaphysics, the ordinary-language
philosopher Strawson distinguishes good metaphysics, which he calls ‘descrip-
tive’, from bad metaphysics, which he calls ‘revisionary’, but which I will call

Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality
|
65
‘transcendental’ (without intending any speciﬁcally Kantian connotations). De-
scriptive metaphysics aims to provide an explicit account of our ‘conceptual
scheme’, of the most general categories of commonsense thought, as embodied
in ordinary language. Transcendental metaphysics aims to get beyond or behind
all merely human conceptual schemes and representations to ultimate reality as
it is in itself, an aim that Ayer and Strawson agree is infeasible and probably un-
intelligible. The descriptive/transcendental divide in metaphysics is a paradig-
matically ‘metaphilosophical’ issue, one about what philosophy is about. Real-
ists about modality are paradigmatic transcendental metaphysicians. Pragmatists
must in the ﬁrst instance be descriptive metaphysicians, since we must to begin
with understand much better than we currently do how our modal distinctions
work and what work they do for us, before proposing any revisions or reforms.
And so the diﬀerence between realists and pragmatists goes beyond the question
of what issue should come ﬁrst on the philosopher’s agenda, being as it is an issue
about what philosophical agendas are about.
6 The Varied Sorrows of Modal Logic
So much for generalities about the realist/pragmatist distinction. Before taking
up the issue of the bearing of the division on modal logic, I must return to my
earlier historical sketch, and consider what was going on, in the period of Ayer and
Strawson and Carnap, and more generally in the pre-1970 period, in the domain
of modal logic.
The subject began, as I have already had occasion to mention, with logic’s
founder, Aristotle. It was actively pursued through antiquity and the middle ages
and in a more desultory fashion on into the early modern period as far as the nine-
teenth century. But Frege, the founder of truly modern logic, swept away such
fragments of modal logic as had still been left in Kant and still remained in his
own day. As he explains early (§4) in his Begriﬀsschrift, the founding work of
truly modern logic, his concept-writing is to contain no symbols for modalities,
on the grounds that modal distinctions only indicate something about how an as-
serted statement is known and contribute nothing to the content of the statement
asserted.
Apparently Frege is here falling in with the tendency to identify necessity and
aprioriness, which we have seen to be a mistake. A better reason for his leaving
modal distinctions aside would have been that the task of developing a logic capa-
ble, as the traditional syllogsistic was not, of analyzing mathematical arguments
was enough to keep him fully occupied. Distinctions of mood, like those of tense,

66
|
John P. Burgess
play no role in mathematics, which deals with facts that are necessary, as well as
timeless. Developing a logic for such notions, which do ﬁgure in philosophical as
opposed to mathematical argumentation, could well be left for the future, after
mathematical reasoning has been taken care of.
Modality continued to be ignored by Frege’s heirs: Russell, for one, and cer-
tainly Hilbert and his school. Eventually the eminent twentieth-century logicians
Kurt Gödel and Alfred Tarski were to take an interest in modal systems, but in both
cases involvement with modal logic was a sideline in a career devoted mainly to
other matters, and the systems considered were ones that had already been de-
veloped by other, lesser twentieth-century ﬁgures, above all C. I. Lewis.
As is well-known, Lewis’s main aim was to develop in the object language of
a formal system a theory of matters that orthodox logicians express only in the
metalanguage. His primary focus was on what he called ‘strict implication’. Close
reading shows that by this he did not mean formal logical deducibility or con-
sequence in the strictest sense, but something more like analytic deducibility or
consequence. (Thus ‘Jones is unmarried’ would be for Lewis ‘strictly implied’ not
only by ‘Jones is a man and Jones is unmarried’, but also by ‘Jones is a bachelor’.)
It is perhaps not going too far to suggest that Lewis’s enterprise, for which the
label ‘endometalogic’ might be appropriate, came to be called ‘modal’ logic only
because the modal notion of necessity had by Lewis’s day become conﬂated and
confounded with the notion of analyticity.
Now the chief diﬀerence between treating implication or entailment in the
metalanguage and representing it by an operator in the object language is that
such operators can be iterated and nested and embedded, whereas, if ‘implies’
or ‘entails’ appear only in metalinguistic formulations and only in application to
object-language formulas, then there can be no question or such iteration or nest-
ing or embedding. Lewis thought he had ‘intuitions’ directly about ‘strict implica-
tion’, and in devising a formal system he would consult these to decide which ax-
ioms involving iteration and nesting and embedding were acceptable and which
not.
Sometimes he changed his mind. Does p’s strictly implying q strictly imply
that q’s strictly implying r strictly implies p’s strictly implying r? Or can we only
say that p’s strictly implying q and q’s strictly implying r together strictly imply
p’s strictly implying r? Lewis leaned ﬁrst towards the ﬁrst position, then towards
the second, and so were born the systems known as S3 and S2. These were soon
joined by others, even before the mathematically-minded, who claimed no intu-
itions about strict implication, took over and produced dozens and scores of vari-
ants.
Lewis rather belatedly introduced the diamond symbol for possibility, and
allowed that ‘p strictly implies q’ could be analyzed as ‘it is not the case that it is

Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality
|
67
possible that p and not q’. But he never used the box symbol for necessity, and
never took the step of analyzing ‘possibly’ as ‘not necessarily not’ or ‘p strictly
implies q’ as ‘necessarily, if p then q’ (with the ‘material’ sense of ‘if’: it is not
the case that p and not q). Formal systems with necessity as primitive derive from
Gödel rather than Lewis.
When bringing in ‘possibly’, Lewis insists that it must be understood as what
he calls ‘logical’ possibility, as not involving a contradiction (really meaning by
this analytical possibility or not involving a contradiction-in-terms). Had he con-
sidered ‘necessarily’, he inevitably would have insisted on a ‘logical’, which is to
say analytical, interpretation of it as well. His position was fully in accord with the
tendency in his day to identify the necessary and the analytic.
Carnap, a pioneer of quantiﬁed modal logic, and one of the few modal logi-
cians after Lewis to say much about the meaning of modal formulas, explicitly
presented his key notion as an explication alike of ‘Leibniz’ notion of necessity
and Kant’s notion of analyticity’. And this provoked objections from W. V. Quine,
who saw that quantiﬁcation into the context ‘the statement “----------” is analytic’
is nonsense. Protesting against defenders of modal logic, who in his view were
not answering his objections but changing the subject, he insisted that he was
concerned about the status of quantiﬁcation into modal contexts ‘in the quan-
tiﬁcational sense of quantiﬁcation and the modal sense of modality’; and by the
latter he meant reading the box symbol in formal systems as ‘it is analytic that’.
For that is what the box was supposed to mean according to the writers Quine
was most concerned to criticize, above all Carnap. But for us the ‘modal sense of
modality’ should rather mean our default ‘metaphysical’ sense.
If Quine failed to convince, it was perhaps because many of his opponents,
though oﬃcially committed to explaining necessity as analyticity, were uncon-
sciously inﬂuenced by thoughts about necessity in the original, default, ‘meta-
physical’ sense. The general pre-1970 failure to recognize both notions explicitly
and to distinguish between them naturally made it impossible to appreciate that
diﬀerent logics may be appropriate to the diﬀerent notions. That is part of what I
meant by saying that the original aim of modal logic, to deal with ‘metaphysical’
modality, became submerged and lost sight of.
As for the dispute between Quine and the defenders of quantiﬁed modal logic,
by hindsight, belatedly distinguishing notions formerly conﬂated, Quine seems to
be right about the meaninglessness of ‘There is someone x such that the statement
“x did not defeat Nixon and win the 1968 U. S. presidential election” is not ana-
lytic’, while of course it makes sense to say that there is someone such it might
have happened that he defeated Nixon and won the 1968 U. S. presidential elec-
tion. Indeed this not only makes sense to say, but is true: For Hubert Humphrey is

68
|
John P. Burgess
someone such that it might have happened that he defeated Nixon and won the
1968 U. S. presidential election.
But we had to wait for Kripke (from whose 1970 lectures the foregoing exam-
ple derives) before it was made plain that reading the box as ‘it is analytic that...’
(the oﬃcial Ludovician explanation, to the extent that there was one) and read-
ing the box as ‘it could not have failed to be the case that...’ (a reading which
doubtless inﬂuenced the ‘intuitions’ of some) are two diﬀerent and incompatible
readings. Before then there was much arguing at cross-purposes, and much con-
fused groping guided now by one reading of the box and now by another, without
recognizing the switch.
It is said that when Cauchy lectured at the Académie des Sciences on the dis-
tinction between convergent and divergent series, Laplace rushed home to check
the series in his Mécanique Céleste. But when Kripke lectured in Princeton on the
distinction between ‘logical’ and ‘metaphysical’ necessity – or in his preferred
terminology, simply between analyticity and necessity tout court et sans phrase –
modal logicians did not rush home to check which formal system was the right
one for which notion of necessity. For by 1970 the idea that there might be a ‘right’
modal logic – which had been a serious issue between Aristotle and his student
Theophrastus, and a serious issue for Lewis as he compared S2 and S3 – had come
to seem quaint, so far had the subject drifted from its origins.
7 Realism, Pragmatism, and the Modal Paradox
To this day the literature on the question which is the right modal logic for ‘meta-
physical’ modality remains thin. The candidate systems most often considered
have been S5 and S4, though I have seen (as referee) a soon-to-be-published (I
hope) paper making an ingenious case for McKinsey’s S4.1. And there is a well-
known argument, developed by Nathan Salmon and others, for the system T, or
rather against the axiom that distinguishes S4 from T: the putative law that if p
is necessary, it is necessarily necessary (and dually, if p is possibly possible, it is
possible).
The objection goes by various names, but is perhaps most often called simply
‘the modal paradox’. To illustrate how issues of modal logic, in the original or old-
fashioned sense of the search for the right system of logic for modality properly so
called, are inseparable from issues of philosophy and even ‘metaphilosophy’, of
metaphysics and even ‘metametaphysics’, I would like to describe the example,
and indicate how the realist/pragmatist division bears on it.

Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality
|
69
The paradox goes back to some of the discussion of a posteriori necessities
in ‘Naming and Necessity’, and in particular to some examples pertaining to the
necessity of origins. I have in mind here under that head now not the necessity,
spoken of earlier, of the genealogy of human beings, whether of royal or noble or
commoner rank. Rather, the issue I wish to consider is over the original composi-
tion of inanimate artifacts.
In a much-discussed passage in his third ‘Naming and Necessity’ lecture and
attendant footnotes, Kripke suggests that the wooden table before him could not
have originally been made of wholly diﬀerent pieces of wood – really one should
say wood and hardware, I suppose. In so saying he is apparently tacitly granting
that the table could have been made of slightly diﬀerent pieces. Perhaps a diﬀerent
screw could have been used at a certain joint, for instance.
The same principle would seem to apply to, say, a ship made of a thousand
planks. There is an intuition X to the eﬀect that the same ship could have been
made of 999 of the same planks, arranged the same way, plus a replacement for
plank #473; but at the same time there is an intuition Y to the eﬀect that a ship
made of a thousand diﬀerent planks would have been a diﬀerent ship. The puzzle
is that these two intuitions, X and Y, seem to conﬂict. Let me describe the conﬂict
in Leibniziano-Kripkean ‘possible worlds’ language.
Here in the actual world A we have a ship, let us name it the good ship The-
seus, made of 1000 planks. Our ﬁrst intuition X is that the same ship could have
been made of 999 of these planks plus a replacement for plank #473. In possible-
worlds terms that means there is another world B where the same good ship The-
seus exists with all but one plank the same as in our world A, and only plank
#473 diﬀerent. But then in world B one has a good ship Theseus made of 1000
planks, and by the same sort of intuition, there must another world C where the
same good ship Theseus exists with all but one plank the same as in the world B,
but with plank #692 diﬀerent. That means for us back in world A there is another
world C where the good ship Theseus exists with all but two planks the same as
in our world A, but with planks #473 and #692 diﬀerent, so one could have two
planks diﬀerent and still have the same ship. The same sort of considerations can
then be used to argue that one could have three planks diﬀerent, or four, or ﬁve,
or all 1000. But that is contrary to our other intuition Y.
The modal paradox resembles well-known paradoxes of vagueness, such as
the heap and the bald one, for which proposed solutions are a dime a dozen –
except that here what seems to be vague is the relation of identity. And the idea
that ‘is the very same thing as’ could be vague is for many a far more troubling
idea than the idea that ‘heap’ or ‘bald’ is vague. Indeed, according to many, it
is an outright incoherent idea. Salmon has suggested that the solution here, the
way to avoid treating identity as vague, is to recognize that though world B is a

70
|
John P. Burgess
possibility for us in world A, and world C is a possibility for those in world B, still
C is not a possibility for us in world A, but only a ‘possible possibility’.
There are reasons, however, to doubt the cogency of this suggestion. For the
modal puzzle seems entirely parallel to the famous temporal puzzle discussed by
Plutarch and Thomas Hobbes. According to this puzzle, in the year A, the hero
Theseus returned to Athens after slaying the Minotaur, and his ship was left as a
monument in the harbor at Piraeus. In the year B, one plank, beginning to rot,
was replaced, and in the year C another plank, and so on, until in the end none of
the original planks were left. The puzzle is that we have an intuition that changing
one plank will leave us with the same ship but that if we change them all we have
only a replica, and not the original ship.
No one thinks the solution to this classical puzzle is to maintain that though
time B may be later than time A, and time C later than time B, still time C is not later
than year A, that it is at time A a time that ‘is going to be going to come’ but not a
time that ‘is going to come’. Parity of reasoning suggests that if we are suspicious
of the idea of a future future that is not a present future, we should be equally
suspicious of the idea of a possible possibility that is not an actual possibility.
The two puzzles or paradoxes can be developed in a way that makes the paral-
lelism between the modal and temporal cases more strikingly apparent. We have
a thousand planks laid out in a warehouse, and instructions for assembling them
into a ship, indicating which plank is to go where, and the following standing in-
struction. Each day we are to look out for a signal at noon, and if it comes, we are
to assemble the ship. If the signal does not come, we are to inspect the planks,
remove whichever one seems least sound and burn it, replacing it with the top
plank in a reserve pile stored in a secure place. Once the signal does come and
a ship is assembled, we are to inspect it each day, and replace whichever plank
seems least sound, in the same manner.
In both versions of the puzzle, the signal comes the ﬁrst day, and the ship
is assembled. In the temporal version, we compare the ship constructed on the
ﬁrst day with the ship in the harbor on the second day, the ship in the harbor on
the third day, and so on through a thousand daily changes of a plank, until the
last day. In the modal version we consider ship constructed on the ﬁrst day with
the ship that would have been constructed if the signal had not arrived until the
second day, with the ship that would have been constructed if the signal had not
arrived until the third day, and so on. I leave it to the reader to think through the
details.
The parallelism between the temporal and modal cases, and the clear unten-
ability in the temporal case of the suggestion that ‘later than’ is not transitive, to
me make Salmon’s solution to the modal paradox is uninviting. Now Salmon’s is
not the only purported solution on oﬀer, but I don’t think any of the others on

Modal Logic in the Modal Sense of Modality
|
71
oﬀer is any better, nor have I a better one of my own to suggest. My reason for
mentioning this problem about the necessity of origins is not to showcase some
new purported solution, but rather to underscore the signiﬁcance of the diﬀerence
between the realist and pragmatist views, thus indicating how that division may
ultimately be relevant to the choice of the right modal logic, and speciﬁcally to the
decision whether it includes the law that possibly possible implies possible. The
diﬀerence between the realist and pragmatist views is not over which solution to
the modal paradox is best, but over how conﬁdent one can be that there is any
solution, and ultimately over how signiﬁcant the puzzle is.
From a the standpoint of a genuine realist, presumably there just has to be
some solution, even if it is one requiring us to adopt a radically revisionist meta-
physics. Since the problem is that the vagueness of identity seems to be intolera-
ble, in a way other kinds of vagueness generally are not, the most obvious solu-
tion would be to get rid of the object, the ship, whose identity seems to be vague.
This might be done by adopting a revisionist metaphysics in which such extended,
composite objects as ships don’t really exist at all, but only atoms in the void, or in
more modern terms, leptons and quarks, or strings or something, some of which
sometimes swarm in ship-like formation.
For the pragmatist, however, it is all only a matter of whether a certain object
in a certain contemplated counterfactual situation would count as the same object
as a certain other object in a certain other contemplated counterfactual situation.
And that, in turn, is only really a question of whether the two ought to count as
one according to some rules ultimately created by us, as makers and users of lan-
guage. I produced early on a famous quotation from Kant. Let me now produce an
even more famous one, from his ‘Idea for a Universal History’: ‘Out of the crooked
timber of humanity no straight thing was ever made.’ Given the imperfection, the
‘crookedness’ of every creation of ourselves, it may well be that our rules and con-
ventions yield in certain cases conﬂicting answers, or no answers; and in such a
case the puzzle can have no solution. On the pragmatist view it is always well to
be aware our imperfections, and the puzzle of the origin of necessity is of signif-
icance insofar as it helps highlight one of those imperfections – but not because
the puzzle demands a solution. For the pragmatist, until we are shown that some
practical decision of genuine importance would hinge crucially on how we an-
swer the question ‘Would it be the same ship or not?’ we may be content to leave
the question unanswered. Moreover, if the question ever did prove to be, in some
speciﬁc case, of practical importance, then according to the pragmatist view we
could then settle it by ﬁat, making a new rule for ourselves, since it is rules we
have made to which the answers to all questions about modality are ultimately to
be traced.

72
|
John P. Burgess
In sum, for those who take a realist attitude towards the question of the origin
of modality, there will be a real problem of principle about the necessity of origin.
By contrast, to those who take a pragmatist attitude there will only be the potential
for a practical problem, a potential that is thus far apparently unrealized, and that
if it ever were realized could always be solved by ﬁat. On the realist view it seems
that the question of which modal logic is the right one must remain in suspense
until the right solution to the modal paradox has been found. On the pragmatist
view, there simply may be no answer to the question of which modal logic is right,
since there may be none to the question of which solution to the paradox is right.
Clearly, then, pursuit the right modal logic for ‘metaphysical’ modality, which was
arguably modal logic’s original aim, will take the logician deep into philosophy
and beyond it into ‘metametaphysics’.
Note
Portions of this paper derive from the second annual Kripke Lecture, which I pre-
sented at the CUNY graduate center in fall, 2012, and reprised a week later at a
conference on modality at Princeton hosted by Boris Kment, and at the Univer-
sity of Connecticut in spring, 2013, using the title ‘The Origin of Necessity and the
Necessity of Origin’ for the ﬁrst two presentations, and ‘Realism and Pragmatism
about Modality’ for the third, somewhat revised version. I am grateful to com-
ments from the audience on all three occasions, which have led to revisions that
I hope are improvements. The lecture material in turn was partly a summary, but
partly an elaboration going beyond, my recent book Saul Kripke: Puzzles and Mys-
teries (Polity Press, 2013). In particular, I refer the reader to that book (especially
the ﬁrst sections of the Introduction and of chapter 2) for fuller treatment of the
material in §§ 3, 4, and 6 above (and for discussion in chapter 5 of the ‘skeptical
paradox’ about ‘rules’, which I have barely alluded to here), and especially for
bibliographical references connected with this material. Portions of §6 trace back
to an old unpublished paper of mine, ‘The Varied Sorrows of Modality’ (whose
title is a phrase of Quine’s), and I remain grateful to my colleagues Gilbert Har-
man and the late David Lewis for comments on that draft. Finally, I am indebted
to Teresa Robertson for discussions of ‘the modal paradox’, and refer the reader
to her Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry ‘Essential vs. Accidental Proper-
ties’ and its linked supplement ‘Arguments for Origin Essentialism’ for references
to and discussion of the work of Salmon mentioned in §7 above, and the large
body of related work I have not had space to discuss.

Xavier Caicedo
Lindström’s Theorem for Positive Logics,
a Topological View
Abstract: The topology induced on classes of ﬁrst order structures by the ele-
mentary classes is characterized among ﬁner topologies by intrinsic non-boolean
properties. This yields a topological version of Lindström’s ﬁrst theorem which
applies to certain extensions of ﬁrst order logic lacking classical negation. In this
setting, we examine the possibility of extending the equilibrium game semantics
of imperfect information logic on ﬁnite models to inﬁnite models.
Keywords: abstract model theory, negationless logics, elementary topology, im-
perfect information logic, game semantics
MSC: 03C95, 03C52, 91A05, 91A40
||
Xavier Caicedo: Departamento de Matemáticas, Universidad de los Andes, AA 4976, Bogotá,
Colombia
1 Introduction
Closure under classical negation is an essential feature in the usual proofs of the
celebrated Lindström’s theorems characterizing ﬁrst order logic [21] and many
other results in abstract model theory. We provide in this paper an intrinsic char-
acterization of the elementary topology, actually a topological version of Lind-
ström’s ﬁrst theorem, from which negationless forms of this result follow. It is
well known that for each ﬁrst-order vocabulary 휏the class of ﬁrst-order struc-
tures of type 휏becomes a topological space by taking as a basis the elementary
classes 푀표푑(휑), 휑a ﬁrst-order sentence, so that model theoretic properties as
compactness correspond to genuine topological properties. We show that among
ﬁner topologies this is the unique regular compact topology for which the class
of countable structures is dense, and the forgetful and renaming functors relating
distinct vocabularies are continuous. Since any model theoretic logic gives rise
similarly to a natural topology, we obtain versions of Lindström’s theorem which
apply to certain extensions of ﬁrst-order logic lacking classical negation.
One of the most interesting such extensions is imperfect information logic
in its various versions (cf. [23], [30]). In this context, we discuss the problem of
extending to inﬁnite models the [0,1]-valued equilibrium semantics of these logics

74
|
Xavier Caicedo
for ﬁnite models introduced in [28], [15]. We show that under natural conditions
this is only possible for essentially ﬁrst order fragments of imperfect information
logic.
Model theoretic logics without negation have been considered by García-
Matos in [17]. Topological ideas have been present in classical model theory from
its beginnings, mainly via the study of Polish spaces of enumerated countable
models [11] or spaces of types [24], [25]. Working directly with spaces of models
appears ﬁrst in Fraïssé’s beautiful proof of countable compactness of ﬁrst order
logic [13]. This approach has been exploited in the context of model theoretic log-
ics by Mundici in [26] and the author in [5], [6], [7].
We refer the reader to [10], [2], [32] for unexplained concepts in model theory,
abstract model theory or topology, respectively.
2 The elementary topology
Given a ﬁrst-order vocabulary 휏, 퐿휔휔(휏) is the set of ﬁrst-order sentences of type 휏.
The elementary topology on the class 푆푡휏of ﬁrst-order structures type 휏is obtained
by taking the family of elementary classes
푀표푑(휑) = {푀: 푀　㨐휑},
휑∈퐿휔휔(휏)
as an open basis. Due to the presence of classical negation, this family is also a
closed basis and thus the closed classes of 푆푡휏are the ﬁrst-order axiomatizable
classes 푀표푑(푇), 푇⊆퐿휔휔(휏). Possible foundational problems due to the fact that
the topology is a class of classes may be settled observing that it is indexed by a
set, namely the set of theories of type 휏.
The main facts of model theory are reﬂected by the topological properties
of these spaces. Thus, the downward Löwenheim-Skolem theorem for sentences
amounts to topological density of the subclass of countable structures. Łoś theo-
rem on ultraproducts grants that U-limits exist for any ultraﬁlter 푈, condition well
known to be equivalent to topological compactness, and to model theoretic com-
pactness in this case.
These spaces are not Hausdorﬀor T1, but having a clopen basis they are reg-
ular; that is, closed classes and exterior points may be separated by disjoint open
classes. All properties or regular compact spaces are then available: normality,
complete regularity, uniformizability, the Baire property, etc.
Many model theoretic properties are related to the continuity of natural oper-
ations between classes of structures. The following operations are readily seen to
be continuous and play an important role in abstract model theory:

Lindström’s Theorem for Positive Logics, a Topological View
|
75
- Reducts, 휋휎휏: 푆푡휎→푆푡휏, 휋휎휏(푀) = 푀↾휏, which forgets the interpretation
of the symbols in 휎∖휏when 휏⊆휎.
- Renamings,
̂훼: 푆푡휎→푆푡휏that change the names of the interpretations ac-
cording to a bijection of vocabularies 훼: 휎→휏respecting kind and arity of the
symbols. More precisely, (훼푅) ̂훼(푀) = 푅푀for any 푅∈휎.
Not only these, but a host of operations are continuous for the elementary
topology: ﬁrst-order interpretations, cartesian products (as operations on several
arguments), any operation with 훴1
1 graph (cf. [6]), any operation enjoying the uni-
form reduction property in the sense of Feferman and Vaught [12]. Consider, for
example:
- Restrictions, 푟휏푃: 푆푡휏→푆푡휏, where 푃∈휏is a monadic predicate symbol,
sending 푀to the substructure 푀↾푃푀with universe 푃푀, when this set is a sub-
universe of 푀. If 휏has function symbols, this is a partial operation with closed
domain. It is continuous because 푟−1
푃(푀표푑휏(휑)) = 푀표푑휏(휑푃) where 휑푃results of
relativizing the quantiﬁers of 휑to 푃.
- Disjoint sums, which assign to a family of structures (푀푖)푖∈퐼∈훱푖푆푡휏푖the struc-
ture of type ⊕푖휏푖:= ∪푖{푃푖} ∪휏푖:
훴푖∈퐼푀푖= (∪푖퐴푖, 푀푖)푖∈퐼,
where the 푀푖are mutually disjoint renamings of the 푀푖with disjoint vocabu-
laries 휏푖and universes 퐴푖which interpret the predicates 푃푖. The resulting map
푆: 훱푖푆푡휏푖→푆푡⊕푖휏푖is continuous due to Feferman-Vaught theorem [12] which grants
for each sentence 휑∈퐿휔휔(⊕푖휏푖) sentences 휓푗∈퐿휔휔(휏푖푗), 푗= 1, ..., 푘, and a boolean
condition 퐵(푝1, ..., 푝푘) such that 훴푖∈퐼푀푖　㨐휑if and only if 퐵(푀푖1 　㨐휓1, ..., 푀푖푘　㨐휓푘)
holds. Taking a disjunctive normal form of 퐵, this is seen to mean that (푀푖)푖∈퐼
belongs to a union of basic classes of the product topology on 훱푖푆푡휏푖. Hence,
푆−1(푀표푑(휑)) is open.
3 Topological regularity
As noticed before, a topological space is regular if closed sets and exterior points
may be separated by open sets. It is normal if disjoint closed sets may be separated
by disjoint open sets. We do not include the Hausdorﬀproperty in our deﬁnitions.
Thus, normality does not imply regularity here. However, a regular compact space
is normal. Actually, a regular Lindelöf space is already normal (cf. [32], exc. 32.4).
Consider the following equivalence relation in a space 푋:
푥≡푦⇔푐푙{푥} = 푐푙{푦}

76
|
Xavier Caicedo
where 푐푙denotes topological adherence. Clearly, 푥≡푦if and only if 푥and 푦belong
to the same closed (open) subsets (of a given basis). Let 푋/≡be the quotient space
and 휂: 푋→푋/≡the natural projection. Then 푋/≡is T0 by construction but not
necessarily Hausdorﬀ. The following claims are easily veriﬁed:
a) 휂: 푋→푋/≡induces an isomorphism between the respective lattices of Borel
subsets of 푋and 푋/≡. In particular, it is open and closed, preserves disjointedness,
preserves and reﬂects compactness and normality.
b) The assignment 푋㨃㨀→푋/≡is functorial, because ≡is preserved by contin-
uous functions and thus any continuous map 푓: 푋→푌induces a continuous
assignment 푓/≡: 푋/≡→푌/≡which commutes with composition.
c) 푋㨃㨀→푋/≡preserves products; that is, (훱푖푋푖)/≡is canonically homeomor-
phic to 훱푖(푋푖/≡) with the product topology (monomorphisms are not preserved).
d) If 푋is regular, the equivalence class of 푥is 푐푙{푥} (this may fail in the non
regular case).
e) If 푋is regular, 푋/≡is Hausdorﬀ: if 푥
̸≡푦then 푥∉푐푙{푦} by (d); thus there
are disjoint open sets 푈, 푉in 푋such that 푥∈푈, 푐푙{푦} ⊆푉, and their images under
휂provide an open separation of 휂푥and 휂푦in 푋/≡by (a).
f) If 퐾1 and 퐾2 are disjoint compact subsets of a regular topological space 푋
that can not be separated by open sets there exist 푥푖∈퐾푖, 푖= 1, 2, such that 푥1 ≡푥2.
Indeed, 휂퐾1 and 휂퐾2 are compact in 푋/≡by continuity and thus closed because
푋/≡is Hausdorﬀby (e) above. They can not be disjoint; otherwise, they would
be separated by open sets whose inverse images would separate 퐾1 and 퐾2. Pick
휂푥= 휂푦∈휂퐾1 ∩휂퐾2 with 푥∈퐾1, 푦∈퐾2.
Clearly, for the elementary topology on 푆푡휏, the relation ≡coincides with ele-
mentary equivalence of structures and 푆푡휏/≡is homeomorphic to the Stone space
of complete theories.
As noticed before, the spaces 푆푡휏with the elementary topology are uniformiz-
able. It is easy to check that the family of relations ≡푛,휏0 (휏0-elementary equivalence
of structures up to quantiﬁer rank 푛), with 푛∈휔and ﬁnite 휏0 ⊆휏, forms a unifor-
mity basis.
4 An intrinsic characterization of the elementary
topology
In this section, 푥, 푦, ... will denote ﬁrst-order structures in 푆푡휏, 푥≈푦will denote
isomorphism.

Lindström’s Theorem for Positive Logics, a Topological View
|
77
푥∼푛,휏푦means that there is a sequence 0
̸= 퐼0 ⊆.... ⊆퐼푛of sets of 휏-partial
isomorphism of ﬁnite domain so that, for 푖< 푗≤푛, 푓∈퐼푖and 푎∈푥(respectively,
푏∈푦), there is 푔∈퐼푗such that 푔⊇푓and 푎∈퐷표푚(푔) (respectively, 푏∈Im(푔)).
The later is called the extension property.
푥∼휏푦means the above holds for an inﬁnite chain 0
̸= 퐼0 ⊆.... ⊆퐼푛⊆...
Fraïssé’s characterization of elementary equivalence [13] says that for ﬁnite
relational vocabularies: 푥≡푛,휏푦if and only if 푥∼푛,휏푦. To have it available for
vocabularies containing function symbols add the complexity of terms in atomic
formulas to the quantiﬁer rank.
It is well known that for countable 푥, 푦: 푥∼휏푦implies 푥≈푦.
Given a vocabulary 휏let 휏∗be a disjoint renaming of 휏. If 푥, 푦∈푆푡휏have the
same power, let 푦∗be an isomorphic copy of 푦sharing the universe with 푥and
renamed to be of type 휏∗. In this context, (푥, 푦∗) will denote the 휏∪휏∗-structure
that results of expanding 푥with the relations of 푦∗.
Lemma 4.1. There is a vocabulary 휏+ ⊇휏∪휏∗such that for each ﬁnite vocabulary
휏0 ⊆휏there is a sequence of elementary classes 훥1 ⊇훥2 ⊇훥3 ⊇.... in 푆푡휏+ such that
if 휋= 휋휏+,휏∪휏∗then (1) 휋(훥푛) = {(푥, 푦∗) : |푥| = |푦| ≥휔, 푥≡푛,휏0 푦}, (2) 휋(⋂푛훥푛) =
{(푥, 푦∗) : |푥| = |푦| ≥휔, 푥∼휏0 푦}. Moreover, ⋂푛훥푛is the reduct of an elementary
class.
Proof. Let 훥be the class of structures (푥, 푦∗, <, 푎, 퐼) where < is a discrete linear
order with minimum but no maximum and 퐼codes for each 푐≤푎a family 퐼푐=
{퐼(푐, 푖, −, −)}푖∈푥of partial 휏0-휏∗
0 –isomorphisms from 푥into 푦∗, such that for 푐< 푐耠≤
푎: 퐼푐⊆퐼푐耠and the extension property holds. Describe this by a ﬁrst-order sentence
휃훥of type 휏+ ⊇휏0 ∪휏∗
0 and set 훥푛= 푀표푑퐿(휃훥∧∃≥푛푥(푥≤푎)}. Then condition (1)
in the Lemma is granted by Fraïssé’s characterization and the fact that 푥being
inﬁnite has room to code all partial isomorphisms of ﬁnite domain, and condition
(2) is granted because (푥, 푦∗, <, 푎, 퐼) ∈⋂푛훥푛if and only if < contains an inﬁnite
increasing 휔-chain below 푎, a 훴1
1condition. □
A topology on 푆푡휏is invariant if its open (closed) classes are closed under iso-
morphic structures. In the following we will always assume this property of the
topologies considered. Of course, it is superﬂuous if we identify isomorphic struc-
tures.
Theorem 4.2. Let 훤휏be a regular compact topology ﬁner than the elementary topol-
ogy on each class St휏such that the countable structures are dense in 푆푡휏and reducts
and renamings are continuous for these topologies. Then 훤휏is the elementary topol-
ogy for all 휏.

78
|
Xavier Caicedo
Proof. We ﬁrst show that any pair of disjoint closed classes 퐶1, 퐶2 of 훤휏may be
separated by an elementary class. Assume this is not the case. Since the 퐶푖are
compact in the topology 훤휏then they are compact for the elementary topology
and, by regularity of the latter, there exist 푥푖∈퐶푖such that 푥1 ≡푥2 in 퐿휔휔(휏) by
claim (f) in the previous section. The 푥푖must be inﬁnite, otherwise they would
be isomorphic contradicting the disjointedness of the 퐶푖. By normality of 훤휏, there
are towers 푈푖⊆퐶耠
푖⊆푈耠
푖⊆퐶耠耠
푖, 푖= 1, 2, separating the 퐶푖with 푈푖, 푈耠
푖open and
퐶耠
푖, 퐶耠耠
푖closed in 훤휏and disjoint. Let 퐼be a ﬁrst-order sentence of type 휏耠⊇휏such
that (푧, ..) 　㨐퐼⇔푧is inﬁnite, and let 휋be the corresponding reduct operation. For
ﬁxed 푛∈휔and ﬁnite 휏0 ⊆휏let 푡be a ﬁrst-order sentence describing the common
≡푛,휏0-equivalence class of 푥1, 푥2. As
(푥푖, ..) ∈푀표푑휏耠(퐼) ∩휋−1푀표푑(푡) ∩휋−1푈푖, 푖= 1, 2
and this class is open in 훤휏耠by continuity of 휋, then by the density hypothesis
there are countable 푥푖∈푈푖, 푖= 1, 2, such that 푥1 ≡푛,휏0 푥2. Thus for some expansion
of (푥1, 푥∗
2),
(푥1, 푥∗
2, ..) ∈훥푛,휏0 ∩휋−1
1 (퐶耠
1) ∩(휌휋2)−1(퐶耠
2),
(1)
where 훥푛,휏0 is the class of Lemma 4.1, 휋1, 휋2 are reducts, and 휌is a renaming:
휋1(푥1, 푥∗
2, ...) = 푥1
휋1 : 푆푡휏+ →푆푡휏∪휏∗→푆푡휏
휋2(푥1, 푥∗
2, ...) = 푥∗
2
휋2 : 푆푡휏+ →푆푡휏∪휏∗→푆푡휏∗
휌(푥∗
2) = 푥2
휌: 푆푡휏∗→푆푡휏.
Since the classes (1) are closed by continuity of the above functors then ⋂푛훥푛,휏0 ∩
휋−1
1 (퐶耠
1)∩(휌휋2)−1(퐶耠
2) is non-emtpy by compactness of 훤휏+. But ⋂푛훥푛,휏0 = 휋(푉) with
푉elementary of type 휏++ ⊇휏+. Then
푉∩휋−1휋−1
1 (푈耠
1) ∩휋−1(휌휋2)−1(푈耠
2)
̸= 0
is open of 훤퐿++ and by the density condition it must contain a countable structure
(푥1, 푥∗
2, .., ...). Thus (푥1, 푥∗
2, ..) ∈⋂푛훥푛,휏0, with 푥푖∈푈耠
푖⊆퐶耠耠
푖. It follows that 푥1 ∼휏0 푥2
and thus 푥1 ↾휏0 ≈푥2 ↾휏0. Let 훿휏0 be a ﬁrst-order sentence of type 휏∪휏∗∪{ℎ} such
that: (푥, 푦∗, ℎ) 　㨐훿휏0 ⇔ℎ: 푥↾휏0 ≈푦↾휏0. By compactness,
( ⋂
휏0⊆푓푖푛휏
푀표푑휏∪휏∗∪{푓}(훿휏0)) ∩휋−1
1 (퐶耠耠
1 ) ∩(휌휋2)−1(퐶耠耠
2 )
̸= 0
and we have ℎ: 푥1 ≈푥2, 푥푖∈퐶耠耠
푖, contradicting the disjointedness of the 퐶耠耠
푖.
Finally, if 퐶is a closed class of 훤휏and 푥∉퐶, 푐푙훤휏{푥} is disjoint from 퐶by regular-
ity of 훤휏. Then 푐푙훤휏{푥} and 퐶may be separated by open classes of the elementary
topology, which implies 퐶is closed in this topology. □

Lindström’s Theorem for Positive Logics, a Topological View
|
79
If we ask continuity of further operations, we may trade the compactness hy-
pothesis in Theorem 4.2 for normality or the Lindelöf property, due to the follow-
ing topological version of Th. 15 in [5].
Theorem 4.3. Let 훤휏be a regular normal (or Lindelöf) topology on each 푆푡휏such
that reducts, renamings, restrictions, and disjoint sums are continuous. Then 훤휏is
compact.
Proof. By hypothesis, the disjoint sum embedding 푆: 훱푖푆푡휏푖→푆푡⊕푖휏푖is continuous
for the Tychonoﬀproduct of the topologies 훤휏푖in the domain and the topology 훤⊕푖휏푖
in the co-domain. On the other hand, the map 퐷: 푆푡⊕푖휏푖→훱푖푆푡휏푖:
푀㨃㨀→(푟푒푛푎푚휏푖,휏푖(푀↾푃푀
푖
↾휏푖))푖
decomposing a structure into a family of restricted renamed reducts is also con-
tinuous for these topologies since each projection 푆푡⊕푖휏푖→푆푡휏푖is continuous by
hypothesis. Clearly, 퐷∘푆is the identity on 훱푖푆푡휏푖(module isomorphism) and by
the functorial properties of 푋㨃㨀→푋/≡, 퐷/≡∘푆/≡is the identity in (훱푖푆푡휏푖)/≡. There-
fore, 푆/≡is injective and its image 퐶in 푆푡⊕푖휏푖/≡is a retract of this space. Since the
latter space is Hausdorﬀby regularity of 훤⊕푖휏푖and retracts of Hausdorﬀspaces are
closed, then 퐶is closed. As 푆푡⊕푖휏is normal by hypothesis, so is 푆푡⊕푖휏푖/≡and thus 퐶
is normal also. Therefore, 훱푖(푆푡휏푖/≡) ≈(훱푖푆푡휏푖)/≡≈퐶is normal. In particular, all
powers (푆푡휏/≡)퐼are normal. By Noble’s theorem stating that a Hausdorﬀspace 푋
is compact if and only if the power space 푋휅is normal for all 휅([27], Corollary 2.2),
we conclude that 푆푡휏/≡and thus 푆푡휏is compact for 훤휏. Finally, recall that regular
Lindelöf spaces are normal. □
5 Lindström’s theorem revisited
A model theoretic logic is a pair (퐿, 　㨐) where 퐿is an assignment 휏㨃㨀→퐿휏from
ﬁrst-order vocabularies to classes of “sentences”, and 　㨐is a relation in ∪휏푆휏× 퐿휏
satisfying Lindström’s axioms (cf. [2], II. Deﬁnition1.1.1):
- Isomorphism: If 푀≈푁then 푀　㨐휑iﬀ푁　㨐휑.
- Reduct: If 휎⊆휏then 퐿휎⊆퐿휏and for any 휑∈퐿휎, 푀∈푆푡휏: 푀↾휎　㨐휑iﬀ푀　㨐휑.
- Renaming: A bijection 훼: 휎→휏respecting kind and arity induces a map 푡:
퐿휎→퐿휏, so that 푀　㨐휑iﬀ
̂훼푀　㨐푡휑, where ̂훼: 푆푡휎→푆푡휏renames the structures
according to 훼.
Our results will hold under relaxed versions of the reduct and renaming ax-
ioms where the inclusion 퐿휎⊆퐿휏and the substitution map 푡: 퐿휎→퐿휏are
replaced with maps 퐿휎→푃(퐿휏) from symbols to theories.

80
|
Xavier Caicedo
Deﬁne 퐿≤푤퐿耠(퐿耠is a weak extension of 퐿) if each sentence of 퐿휏is equivalent
to a theory of 퐿耠
휏. Then, 퐿is equivalent in theories to 퐿耠if 퐿≤푤퐿耠and 퐿耠≤푤퐿.
Closure of 퐿under boolean connectives ¬, ∨, ∧, or relativization is deﬁned as
usual. The same for compactness. As noticed in [17], the downward Löwenheim-
Skolem theorem splits for negationless logics in several non equivalent versions:
∙LSk1: If any sentence has a model it has a countable model (the familiar version).
∙LSk2: Any sentence true in all countable models is true in all models.
∙LSk3: Two sentence equivalent in all countable models are equivalent (this prop-
erty implies the other two).
훴1
1 (Second order existential logic) satisﬁes the ﬁrst but not the second version,
and the opposite is true of 훱1
1 (second order universal logic) because {R} is 훱1
1-
deﬁnable. The fragment 퐿휔휔(푄+
0) of 퐿휔휔(푄0) obtained by closing 퐿휔휔under the
quantiﬁer 푄0 (there are inﬁnitely many...) and ∧, ∨, ∃, ∀, but not ¬, satisﬁes all three
versions.
Deﬁnition. For any model-theoretic logic 퐿let 훤휏(퐿) the topology on 푆푡휏obtained
by taking the classes 푀표푑(휃), 휃∈퐿휏, as a sub-basis of closed classes.
This topology is invariant, and reducts and renamings become automatically
continuous due to the (relaxed) Lindström’s axioms. Model theoretic compact-
ness of 퐿is equivalent to topological compactness of 훤휏(퐿) by Alexander sub-basis
lemma (cf [32]). Closure under connectives refers to properties of the sub-basis; for
example, closure under disjunctions grants it is a closed basis. LSk2 corresponds
in the later case to topological density of the countable structures. LSk1, instead, is
basis dependent if the logic is not closed under negations. Finally, 퐿≤푤퐿耠means
that 훤휏(퐿耠) is ﬁner that 훤휏(퐿).
Call a logic regular if the topology it induces is regular1. In a regular com-
pact logic closed under disjunctions and conjunctions, LSk1 implies LSk2: if 푀∉
푀표푑(푇), then by regularity 푀belongs to a closed class 퐶contained in 푀표푑(푇)푐.
By compactness there are ﬁnitely many closed basics 퐶푖such that 퐶⊆∩푖퐶푖⊆
푀표푑(휑)푐. By the closure conditions ∩푖퐶푖contains a countable model if LSk1 holds.
Thus, 푀표푑(휑)푐has a countable model and LSk2 holds.
The next version of Lindström’s theorem follows immediately from Theorem
4.2 and the previous observations.
Theorem 5.1. (Positive Lindström’s theorem) Any regular compact logic 퐿extend-
ing weakly 퐿휔휔, closed under disjunctions and satisfying LSk2, is equivalent in the-
ories to 퐿휔휔. If 퐿is also closed under conjunctions, the results holds under LSk1.
1 No to be confused with the notion of regular logic in [2].

Lindström’s Theorem for Positive Logics, a Topological View
|
81
Trivial examples of logics satisfying the hypothesis of the ﬁrst part of this theorem
are 푡ℎ휅
휔휔,휏= {푇: 푇is a ﬁrst-order theory of type 휏, |푇| ≤휅}. From these, only 푡ℎ휔
휔휔,휏
satisﬁes LSk1. This shows that regularity and compactness do not grant ﬁnite de-
pendence nor any bound on the dependence number.
Regularity can not be dropped from the hypothesis of Theorem 5.1. For exam-
ple, 퐿휔휔(푄+
0) satisfy LSk2 and LSk1, and it is compact by an ultraproduct argument
(see next section), but the class 푀표푑(∃푥푄0푦(푦< 푥)) is not ﬁrst-order axiomatiz-
able because its complement is not closed under ultrapowers. We conclude that
this logic can not be regular.
Similarly, 훴1
1 can not be regular because it satisﬁes the other hypothesis of
Theorem 5.1 (with LSk1) but its sentences are not all reducible to ﬁrst-order theo-
ries. However, its topology is normal due to Robinson’s consistency lemma. This
shows that we can not replace regularity with normality in any of our previous
results.
Topological regularity of 훤휏(퐿) does not have a simple model theoretic descrip-
tion, but in compact logics closed under ∨and ∧, it implies the following weak
form of negation: for any 휑∈퐿휏there is {휃푖}푖∈퐼⊆퐿휏such that 푀
̸　㨐휑if and only
if 푀　㨐∨푖휃푖. The second claim of Theorem 5.1, but not the ﬁrst, may be shown
utilizing this hypothesis instead of regularity.
Lindström’s original theorem (for a wider notion of extension) is an immedi-
ate corollary of Theorem 5.1.
Theorem 5.2. A compact weak extension of ﬁrst-order logic closed under boolean
connectives and satisfying LSk1 is equivalent (in sentences) to 퐿휔휔.
Proof. Closure of 퐿under boolean connectives means that the closed sub-basis
of 훤휏(퐿) is actually a clopen basis and thus the space is regular. By Theorem 5.1,
for any 휃∈퐿휏the complementary classes 푀표푑(휃) and 푀표푑(¬휃) are equivalent to
ﬁrst-order theories, hence they are elementary. □
Versions of Theorems 5.1 and 5.2 in terms of [휔1, ∞]-compactness instead of
compactness may be obtained from Theorem 4.3 if we add closure under rela-
tivizations and the uniform reduction property for disjoint sums.
6 Compactness and ultraproducts
The relation between compactness and ultraproducts survives in negationless log-
ics because it is a purely topological convergence phenomenon. Recall that given
an ultraﬁlter 푈over 퐼, a family {푎푖}푖∈퐼푈-converges to an element 푥in a space 푋, in

82
|
Xavier Caicedo
symbols {푎푖}푖∈퐼→푈푥, if and only if {푖∈퐼: 푎푖∈푉} ∈푈for any open (sub-basic)
neighborhood 푉of 푥. It is well known that a space is compact iﬀany 퐼-family of
푋has an 푈-limit.
Given a logic 퐿, convergence of structures, say {푀푖}푖∈퐼→푈푀, expressed in
terms of open sub-basics of 훤휏(퐿) means: 푀
̸　㨐휑⇒{푖∈퐼: 푀푖
̸　㨐휑} ∈푈; that is
for all 휑∈퐿휏: {푖∈퐼: 푀푖　㨐휑} ∈푈⇒푀　㨐휑.
(1)
Therefore, a logic is compact if and only if for any family of structures {푀푖}푖∈퐼of
the same type and ultraﬁlter 푈over 퐼there exists 푀such that (1) holds. Thus, any
logic 퐿satisfying the following one-way ultraproduct property must be compact:
{푖∈푃: 푀푖　㨐휑} ∈푈⇒훱푖푀푖/푈　㨐휑.
(2)
Example. Let K be a family of Lindström quantiﬁers closed under ultraproducts
(cardinality quantiﬁers 푄훼, Magidor-Malitz quantiﬁers, the Hartig quantiﬁer, etc.),
then the logic 퐿휔휔(K+) obtained by closing 퐿휔휔under the quantiﬁers in K and
∧, ∨, ∃, ∀may be shown to satisfy (2) by a simple induction.
Reciprocally, compactness of 퐿implies that for any family {푀푖}푖∈퐼of structures
and any ultraﬁlter 푈over I there is an extension 푀≥훱푖푀푖/푈such that for any
휑∈퐿휏∪{푐,푑,..}, 푓, 푔, .. ∈훱푖푀푖
{푖∈푃: 푀푖　㨐휑[푓(푖), 푔(푖), ..]} ∈푈⇒푀　㨐휑[푓/푈, 푔/푈, ..],
(3)
because the family of expansions 푀+
푖= (푀푖, 푓(푖))푓∈훱푖푀푖, where 푓(푖) interprets 푐푓,
must have a 푈-limit (푀, 푎푓)푓∈훱푖푀푖, and applying (3) to atomic sentences yields an
embedding 푓/푈㨃→푎푓: 훱푖푀푖/푈≤푀.
In this vein, the topological proof given in [7] of Shelah’s characterization of
[휆, 휅]-compact boolean closed logics in terms of ultraproducts, [22], may be readily
adapted to negationless logics. Regularity of the logic is not required.
Recall that a logic 퐿is [휆, 휅]-compact if, for any family of theories {푇훼}훼<휅in 퐿휏,
if ∪푗∈푆푇훼푗is satisﬁable for all 푆⊆휅of power less than 휆then ∪훼<휅푇훼is satisﬁable.
An ultraﬁlter 푈is (휆, 휅)-regular if there is 퐹⊆푈of power 휅such that ∩퐽= ∅for
any 퐽⊆퐹of power 휆.
Theorem 6.1. (Positive abstract compactness theorem) Let 퐿be a logic 퐿closed
under disjunctions. If there is a (휆, 휅)-regular ultraﬁlter 푈over 휅<휆such that for any
family {푀푖}푖∈퐼of structures there is an extension 푀≥훱푖푀푖/푈such that for any
휑∈퐿휏∪{푐,푑,..} and 푓, 푔, .. ∈훱푖푀푖(3) holds, then 퐿is [휆, 휅]-compact. If 퐿is closed
under relativizations the reciprocal holds.

Lindström’s Theorem for Positive Logics, a Topological View
|
83
7 Imperfect information logic as [0,1]-valued logic
One of the most interesting logics lacking classical negation is imperfect informa-
tion logic in its various versions. These derive from independence friendly logic 퐼퐹,
introduced originally by Hintikka as a “friendly” way of expressing Henkin quan-
tiﬁers [19]. Its syntax extends that of 퐿휔휔allowing for each ﬁnite set of variables 푌
and formulas 휑, 휓, expressions ∃푥/푌휑, ∀푥/푌휑, 휑∨/푌휓, 휑∧/푌휓, where the decora-
tion /푌expresses independence with respect to the variables in 푌, as in the usual
deﬁnition of uniform continuity of a function:
∀푥∀휀> 0 ∃훿/푥∀푦(|푥−푦| < 훿→|푓푥−푓푦| < 휀)
|
“there is 훿not depending on 푥”
The meaning of ∀푥/푌휑, 휑∨/푌휓, 휑∧/푌휓is more clearly explained by the game
semantics governing this logic [23]. To each sentence of 휑and structure 푀of the
same type is associated a two-players game 퐺(휑, 푀) which is played from the root
down along a branch of the syntactical tree of 휑. Calling 퐸and 퐴the two players,
they make their moves at each node depending on its label as follows:
∨/푌: 퐸chooses the left or right descendant (subformula)
∧/푌: 퐴chooses the left or right descendant
∃푥/푌: 퐸assigns a value 푎∈푀to the variable 푥
∀푥/푌: 퐴assigns a value 푎∈푀to the variable 푥
¬ : interchange roles and proceed to next node
Each move is made in ignorance of the value previously assigned to the variables
in 푌. When a terminal node is reached, 퐸wins if the atomic formula labeling
the node is true for the valuation of variables constructed by the players along
the way; otherwise 퐴wins (if the roles have been reversed by the last negation
reached, it is the opposite).
A sentence 휑is said to be true if 퐸has a winning strategy in this game, false
if 퐴has a winning strategy. We write, respectively, 푀　㨐+ 휑and 푀　㨐−휑(positive
and negative satisfaction).
For ﬁrst order sentences (where /∅is the only decoration) the game is deter-
mined and thus one of the players has a winning strategy according to the classical
truth value. This may be seen observing that the existence of a winning strategy
for 퐸(for 퐴) corresponds to the satisfaction of a particular (dual) Skolem normal
form of 휑. For the new sentences this is a game of imperfect information which
may be undetermined. It may happen that 푀
̸　㨐+ 휑and 푀
̸　㨐−휑and thus 휑does
not have a truth value in the model 푀.

84
|
Xavier Caicedo
Game semantics of 퐼퐹behaves so diﬀerently from ordinary semantics that it
raises several non-trivial issues. The valid formulas of the form ∀푥∃푦∀푧∃푤/푥휑(휑
ﬁrst-order) form already a non arithmetical set. Validity is not even 훴2 deﬁnable
in set theory (Väänänen [29]). A serious study was possible only after streamlin-
ing its syntax and Hodges discovery that it has a compositional semantics [18],
contradicting Hintikka’s previous claims. Väänänen has introduced an essentially
equivalent but conceptually diﬀerent dual version based on the notion of depen-
dence between variables, expressed at the atomic level [30]. Some strengthenings
have been considered also by Abramsky and Väänänen [1]. We will consider a vari-
ant 퐼퐹∗which eliminates all restrictions on the use of the quantiﬁer slashes and
where ∨, ∧are not slashed (cf. [8]), but our observations below are translatable to
dependence logic.
Since a winning strategy is a choice of appropriate Skolem functions making
true certain ﬁrst-order condition, the disjoint classes
푀표푑+(휑) = {푀: 푀　㨐+ 휑}, 푀표푑−(휑) = 푀표푑+(¬휑) = {푀: 푀　㨐−휑}
are 훴1
1. Therefore, 퐼퐹∗has the compactness property and the Löwenheim-Skolem
property with respect to 　㨐+. Moreover, in ﬁnite models it deﬁnes exactly the 푁푃
classes. Burgess [4] has observed that for any pair of disjoint 훴1
1-classes 퐾1, 퐾2 the
union of which contains all one element structures there is an 퐼퐹∗sentence 휑such
that 푀표푑+(휑) = 퐾1, 푀표푑−(휑) = 퐾2.
The semantics of 퐼퐹∗may be seen as a partial two-valued semantics taking
the truth value 1 in 푀표푑+(휑), 0 in 푀표푑−(휑), and no value out of these classes. It
is natural to ask if it is possible to interpolate in a sensible manner a [0,1]-valued
semantic assigning a value strictly between 0 and 1 to the structures where the
game is undetermined. An intriguing positive answer in the realm of ﬁnite models
is given by equilibrium semantics, suggested by M. Ajtai as explained in [3], and
studied by Sevenster and Sandu [28] for 퐼퐹and by Galliani [15] for Väänänen’s
dependence logic.
Given a particular run of 퐺(휑, 푀) in which the players use strategies 휎, 휏, the
payoﬀof the run for 퐸is 푢(휎, 휏) = 1 if she wins, 0 otherwise. For 퐴the payoﬀis
1 −푢(휎, 휏). Probabilistic distributions on sets of strategies are called mixed strate-
gies. Given a pair of mixed strategies 푝, 푞on the respective sets of strategies 푆1, 푆2
of each player, the expected value of the random variable 푢(휎, 휏), assuming the
players choose their strategies independently, is:
푢∗(푝, 푞) = 훴휎,휏푝(휎)푞(휏)푢(휎, 휏).
Since this is a constant sum game, the theory of games [31] grants that if 푀is ﬁnite
there exists an equilibrium pair of mixed strategies (푝0, 푞0) such that 푢∗(푝耠, 푞0) ≤

Lindström’s Theorem for Positive Logics, a Topological View
|
85
푢∗(푝0, 푞0) ≤푢∗(푝0, 푞耠) for all 푝耠, 푞耠so that the players will not improve their pay-
oﬀby changing them. Obviously all such pairs give the same value which (less
obviously) is identical to
푢∗(푝0, 푞0) = max
푝
min
푞
푢∗(푝, 푞) = min
푞
max
푝
푢∗(푝, 푞).
(1)
Equilibrium semantics takes this equilibrium value as the true value of 휑in
the model 푀. We will call it 휑푀. If 푀　㨐+ 휑and 휎is a winning strategy for 퐸then
any pair (휎, 휏) is an equilibrium pair and 휑푀= 1; similarly, 휑푀= 0 if 푀　㨐−휑.
For example, 휑푀= 1 −
1
|푀| for the sentence ∀푥∃푦/푥(푥
̸= 푦) (cf. [3]).
This semantics may be seen to satisfy on ﬁnite models:
C1. 휑푀= 1 if and only if 푀　㨐+ 휑, 휑푀= 0 if and only if 푀　㨐−휑
C2. ¬휑푀= 1 −휑푀
C3. (휑∨휓)푀, = max{휑푀, 휓푀}
C4. For any rationals 푟, 휀∈[0, 1], 휀< 1, and any sentence 휑∈퐼퐹∗there is 휑푟,휀∈퐼퐹∗
such that 휑푀≥푟iﬀ휑푀
푟,휀≥휀.
C2 is straightforward, C1 and C4 are shown in [28], and C3 may be proven by
game theoretic considerations. It is an open question whether C4 holds for 휀= 1;
that is, there is 휑푟such that
휑푀≥푟iﬀ휑푀
푟= 1.
(C4∗)
Equivalently, whether the complexity of the query 휑푀≥푟with respect to the size
of 푀is in 푁푃. Sevenster and Sandu [28] have shown that 훴1
2∩훱1
2 is an upper bound
for the complexity of these queries. Thus, a collapse of the polynomial hierarchy to
푁푃would make (C4∗) true. Finding a counterexample seems a though job because
it would separate 푁푃from 훴1
2 ∩훱1
2, solving an outstanding problem in algorithmic
complexity theory.
Our main question is whether it is possible to have a [0,1]-valued semantic of
퐼퐹∗in inﬁnite models satisfying C1 to C4 and preserving useful model theoretic
properties of 퐼퐹∗, as compactness and the downward Löwenheim-Skolem prop-
erty.
The ﬁrst candidate is equilibrium semantics itself. To extend equilibrium se-
mantics to inﬁnite models we must consider pairs of probabilistic measures 푝, 푞on
푆1, 푆2 for which 푢(휎, 휏) is measurable in the product measure, so that the expected
payoﬀ
푢∗(푝, 푞) =
∬
(휎,휏)∈푆1×푆2
푢(휎, 휏)푑푝푑푞

86
|
Xavier Caicedo
exists. If equilibrium pairs exist, the equilibrium value is given by the generaliza-
tion of (1): sup푝inf푞푢∗(푝, 푞) = inf푞sup푝푢∗(푝, 푞). However, the results may be wild.
The existence of equilibrium pairs may depend on the cardinality of the model
and the sup-inf identity may already fail for the humblest sentences of 퐼퐹∗:
∙∀푥∃푦/푥(푥
̸= 푦) does not have mixed equilibrium pairs in the set N, but
sup푝inf푞푢∗(푝, 푞) = inf푞sup푝푢∗(푝, 푞) = 1.
∙∀푥∃푦/푥(푥
̸= 푦) has mixed equilibrium pairs with value 1 in the set R; in fact, any
pair of atomless probabilistic measures is an equilibrium pair.
∙For ∀푥∃푦/푥(푥≤푦) in (N, ≤): sup푝inf푞푢∗(푝, 푞) < inf푞sup푝푢∗(푝, 푞).
Not withstanding this grim panorama, there are genuine 퐼퐹∗sentences hav-
ing mixed equilibrium pairs for all models.
Example. Consider the sentence 퐼푛푓: ∃푢∀푥∃푦/푢∃푧/푢푥(푧= 푥∧푦
̸= 푢) for which
푀표푑+(퐼푛푓) = {퐴: 퐴inﬁnite} and 푀표푑−(퐼푛푓) = {퐴: |퐴| = 1}. It has mixed equilib-
rium pairs with value 1 in all the inﬁnite models and a well deﬁned equilibrium
value 퐼푛푓푀< 1 in each ﬁnite model 푀.
Call an 퐼퐹∗sentence total if it has equilibrium pairs for all models. This family
of sentences has pleasant properties and is worth studying, but it has a serious
ﬂaw for our purposes. Notice that C1 is precisely the condition we would not like
to abandon if we wish to extend faithfully game semantics.
Fact 1. Equilibrium semantics on total sentences satisfy C2, C3, C4 in all models but
not necessarily C1.
Proof. C2 is straightforward, C3 may be proved by game theoretic considerations
and the proof in [28] of C4 may be seen to hold for inﬁnite structures. Now, there
is a sentence 푖푛푐푓∈퐼퐹∗such that 푀표푑+(푖푛푐푓) = {푀: 푀
̸≈(R,+, ⋅, 0, 1, <)} and
푀표푑−(푖푛푐푓) = ∅because being an incomplete ordered ﬁeld is a 훴1
1-condition. The
formula 푖푛푐푓∨∀푥∃푦/푥(푥
̸= 푦) has equilibrium value 1 in all models because in
structures non isomorphic to R there is a pure winning strategy for 퐸choosing
the left formula of the disjunction, and we have seen that the right formula has
equilibrium value 1 in R. However, R
̸　㨐+ 푖푛푐푓∨∀푥∃푦/푥(푥
̸= 푦), violating C1. □
We could restrict further the formulas of 퐼퐹∗or we could search for [0,1]-
valued semantics on inﬁnite models not necessarily related to equilibrium values.
An obvious possibility in the second course of action is three-valued semantics:
푀㨃㨀→휑푀=
{
{
{
{
{
1
if 푀　㨐+ 휑
0
if 푀　㨐−휑
1
2
otherwise

Lindström’s Theorem for Positive Logics, a Topological View
|
87
Indeed, it satisﬁes C1-C4∗in inﬁnite models. The straightforward proofs are left to
the reader. But this is not the end of our search because this semantics does no
satisfy compactness nor the Löwenheim-Skolem property. In fact, no [0,1]-valued
semantics 푀㨃→휑푀satisﬁes the later properties and C1 at the same time in all for-
mulas of 퐼퐹∗. To see this we must specify ﬁrst what we mean by these properties.
Deﬁne for any 푟∈[0, 1] ∩Q:
푀표푑≥푟(휑) = {푀: 휑푀≥푟}, 푀표푑≤푟(휑) = {푀: 휑푀≤푟}.
Compactness: If {푀표푑≥(≤)푟푖(휑푖)}푖∈퐼is ﬁnitely satisﬁable then it is satisﬁable.
Löwenheim-Skolem property: If 푀표푑≥(≤)푟(휑) is satisﬁable then it has a countable
model.
We will assume that any [0,1]-valued semantics satisﬁes the natural generalization
of Lindström’s axioms:
C0 (a) 휑푀= 휑푁if 푀≈푁; (b) 휑푀= 휑푀↾휏if 휏⊆휇; (c) 휑푀= 훼휑̂훼푀if 훼is a renaming.
Fact 2: There is no [0,1]-valued semantics on all formulas of IF∗satisfying simulta-
neously C1 and compactness or the Löwenheim-Skolem property.
Proof. Consider a semantics satisfying C0, C1. Then for the sentence 푖푛푐푓intro-
duced in the previous example we must have {(푀, 푎) : 푀≈R} = 푀표푑≤푟(푖푛푐푓) for
some rational 푟< 1 due to C1 and C0 (a),(b). But this class is a counterexample to
compactness and the Löwenheim-Skolem property. □
Thus, we are bound to consider proper fragments of IF∗. In this context, it
is worth noticing that the fragment of perfect recall sentences satisﬁes C1-C4 and
C4∗plus compactness and the Löwenheim-Skolem property for the three-valued
semantics. The next result shows the limitations if we wish more than that.
Theorem 7.1. Let 퐿be an extension of 퐿휔휔closed syntactically under ¬, ∨, with a
[0,1]-valued semantics extending the {0,1}-valued semantics of 퐿휔휔. Suppose 퐿satis-
ﬁes C2-C4, compactness, and the Löwenheim-Skolem property. Then for each 휑∈퐿
and rational (real) 푟∈[0, 1] there is a ﬁrst order theory 푇푟such that; 휑푀≥푟iﬀ
푀　㨐푇푟.
Proof. Consider the topology on 푆푡퐿having for a sub-basis of closed classes
푀표푑≥푟(휑), 휑∈퐿, 푟∈[0, 1] ∩Q. By C2 it includes the classes 푀표푑≤푟(휑) and due
to C3, C4, it is closed under unions: 푀표푑≥푟1(휑1) ∪푀표푑≥푟2(휑2) = 푀표푑≥휀(휑1푟1) ∪
푀표푑≥휀(휑2푟2) = 푀표푑≥휀(휑1푟1 ∨휑2푟2); hence, it is a closed basis. The topology is regular
because 푀
̸∈푀표푑≥푟(휑) implies 휑푀< 푠< 푟for some rational 푠and thus the open
classes 푀표푑≥푠(휑)푐and 푀표푑≤푠(휑)푐separate 푀and 푀표푑≥푟(휑). Countable structures
are dense because 휑푀< 푟implies 휑푀≤푠< 푟. Finally, C0 grants the continuity

88
|
Xavier Caicedo
of reducts and renamings. Therefore, this is the elementary topology by Theorem
4.2. □
Corollary. If 퐿is a fragment of IF∗with a [0,1]-valued semantics satisfying C1-C4,
compactness, and the Löwenheim-Skolem property, then 푀표푑+(휑) and 푀표푑−(휑) are
recursively ﬁrst-order axiomatizable for any 휑∈퐿.
Proof. 푀표푑+(휑) = 푀표푑≥1(휑) = 푀표푑(푇1) by 퐶1 and the previous theorem. More-
over, the ﬁrst-order consequences of 푇1 coincide with the consequences of a 훴1
1-
sentence. □
Assuming C4∗a simpler proof of the corollary may be obtained because
푀표푑+(휑) being 훴1
1 is closed under ultraproducts, and its complement 푀표푑+(휑)푐=
∪푟<1푀표푑≤푟(휑) = ∪푟<1푀표푑+((¬휑)푟) is closed under ultrapowers; hence, it is ﬁrst or-
der axiomatizable (cf. [10]). Moreover, under C4∗all the 푇푟of Theorem 7.1 result
recursively axiomatizable.
8 Final remarks
Further Lindström’s characterizations of ﬁrst order logic also hold for regular log-
ics, the proofs being essentially topological with minimal model theoretic con-
tents. Thus, any regular weak extension of 퐿휔휔satisfying compactness and the
(countable) Tarski’s chain property, or having relativizations and satisfying the
uncountable omitting types theorem, is equivalent in theories to 퐿휔휔. Many other
model theoretic results known for boolean logics are essentially topological and
may also be lifted to logics without classical negation.
The case of equilibrium semantics for 퐼퐹∗logic shows that [0,1]-valued se-
mantics makes perfect sense for classical structures, and topological regularity
appears naturally in this setting. Theorem 7.1 is actually a Lindström’s theorem
for [0,1]-valued logics on classical structures. This viewpoint may be translated to
the realm of [0,1]-valued structures to obtain Lindström’s theorems and other re-
sults mentioned in this paper for extensions of continuous logic and Lukasiewicz-
Pavelka logic. These results will appear elsewhere (cf. [9]).
Bibliography
[1]
S. Abramsky and J. Väänänen. From IF to BI: A tale of dependence and separation. Syn-
these, 167(2):207-230, 2008.
[2]
J. Barwise and S. Feferman (eds.), Model-Theoretic Logics. Springer Verlag, 1985.

Bibliography
|
89
[3]
A. Blass and Y. Gurevich. Henkin quantiﬁers and complete problems. Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic, 32(1):1-16, 1986.
[4]
J. P. Burgess. A remark on henkin sentences and their contraries. Notre Dame Journal of
Formal Logic, 44(3):185-188, 2003.
[5]
X. Caicedo. Compactness and normality in abstract logics. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 59:33-43, 1993.
[6]
X. Caicedo. Continuous operations on spaces of structures. In Quantiﬁers: models, logics
and computation, volume II, M. Krynicki, M. Mostowski, and L. W. Szczerba (eds.), pages
263-296, Kluwer Acad. Publ., 1995.
[7]
X. Caicedo. The abstract compactness theorem revisited. In Logic and Foundations of
Mathematics, Cantini, Casari, Minari (eds.), pages 131-141, Kluwer Acad. Publ., 1999.
[8]
X. Caicedo, F. Dechesne, and T. M. V. Janssen. Equivalence and quantier rules for logic
with imperfect information. Logic Journal of IGPL, 17(1):91-129, 2009.
[9]
X. Caicedo, J. Iovino, Omitting uncountable types, and the strength of [0,1]-valued logics.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 165:1169–1200, 2014.
[10] C.C. Chang and J. Keisler. Model theory, 2nd. ed. North Holland, 1973.
[11]
A. Ehrenfeucht and A. Mostowski. A topological space of models of ﬁrst-order theories.
Bull. de L’Academie Polonaise des Sciences. Série des sciences math., astr. et phys. IX:
369-373, 1961.
[12] S. Feferman and R.L. Vaught. The ﬁrst-order properties of products of algebraic systems.
Fundam. Math., 47:57–103, 1959.
[13] R. Fraïssé. Cours de logique mathematique, Tome 2, Theorie des modeles, 2푒edition.
Gauthier-Villars, Paris, 1972.
[14] R. Fagin. Generalized 1rst-order spectra and polynomial-time recognizable sets. In Com-
plexity of Computation, volume 7, R. M. Karp (ed.), pages 43-73, SIAM-AMS Proceedings,
1974.
[15]
P. Galliani. Game Values and Equilibria for Undetermined Sentences of Dependence Logic,
MSc thesis, ILLC Publications, MoL-2008-08, 2008.
[16] P. Galliani and A. L. Mann. Lottery Semantics: A Compositional Semantics for Probabilistic
First-Order Logic with Imperfect Information. Studia Logica, 101:293–322, 2013.
[17]
M. García-Matos. Abstract model theory without negation. Ph.D. Dissertation, University
of Helsinki, 2005.
[18] W. Hodges. Compositional semantics for a language of imperfect information. Logic Jour-
nal of the IGPL, 5(4):539–563, 1997.
[19] J. Hintikka and G- Sandu, G.. Game-theoretical semantics. In Handbook of Logic & Lan-
guage, J. van Benthem and A. ter Meulen (eds.), pages 361–410, Elsevier Science, 1997.
[20] J. Kontinen and J. Väänänen. On deﬁnability in dependence logic. Journal of Logic, Lan-
guage and Information, 18(3):317–332, 2009.
[21] P. Lindström. On extensions of elementary logic. Theoria, 35: 1-11, 1969.
[22] A. Makowski and S. Shelah. Positive results in abstract model theory. Ann. of Pure and
Applied Logic, 25(3):263-300, 1983.
[23] A. L. Mann, G. Sandu and M. Sevenster. Independence-Friendly Logic: A Game-Theoretic
Approach. London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, 2011.
[24] M. Morley. Categoricity in Power. Transactions of the A.M.S., 114:514-538, 1965.
[25] M. Morley. Applications of topology to 퐿휔1휔. Proceedings of the Tarski Symposium, A.M.S.
Proceed. Pure Math., 25:234-240, 1974.
Lindström’s Theorem for Positive Logics, a Topological View

90
|
Xavier Caicedo
[26] D. Mundici. Inverse topological systems and compactness in abstract model theory. Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic, 51:785-794, 1986.
[27] N. Noble. Products with closed projections, II. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 160:169-183, 1971.
[28] M. Sevenster & G. Sandu. Equilibrium semantics of languages of imperfect information.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 161:618-631, 2010.
[29] J. Väänänen. On the semantics of informational independence. Logic Journal of the IGPL
10(3):339-352, 2002.
[30] J. Väänänen. Dependence logic: A New Approach to Independence Friendly Logic. London
Mathematical Society Student Texts, Vol. 70. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[31] J. von Neumann and O. Morgenstern. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. Princeton
University Press, 1947.
[32] S. Willard. General Topology. Addisson-Wesley, 1970.

Zoé Chatzidakis
Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a
Survey
For Jouko, on the occasion of his 60th birthday
Abstract: This paper presents a survey of the model theory of ﬁelds with operators,
such as derivations, automorphisms, or the 휆-functions of separably closed ﬁelds.
Keywords: ﬁelds with operators
MSC: 03C60, 12L12, 12H99
||
Zoé Chatzidakis: CNRS (UMR 8553), Ecole Normale Supérieure
1 Introduction
The model theory of ﬁelds with operators has proven to be very useful in applica-
tions of model theory to problems outside logic. Diﬀerentially closed ﬁelds and
separably closed ﬁelds were instrumental in Hrushovski’s proof of the conjec-
ture of Mordell-Lang ([39]), and in work of Hrushovski and Pillay on counting the
number of transcendental points on certain varieties ([44]). Let me also mention
Ax’s work ([1]) on connections between transcendence theory and diﬀerential al-
gebra, which has been recently elaborated on by Bertrand and Pillay ([6]), and
by Kowalski ([51]) in positive characteristic. The model theory of diﬀerence ﬁelds
also provided various achievements: Hrushovski’s new proof of the conjecture of
Manin-Mumford ([40]), Scanlon’s approach to 푝-adic abc conjectures and prox-
imity questions ([89], [90], [91]), and his solution to Denis’ conjecture ([92]); more
recently, applications to algebraic dynamics by Hrushovski and the author ([21],
[22], [16]), and by Medvedev and Scanlon ([61]). Model theory also provides some
insight on the Galois theory of systems of diﬀerential (or diﬀerence) equations and
of Picard-Vessiot extensions, or of strongly normal extensions of Kolchin, see e.g.
[74].
The aim of this article is not to present these applications, but to give a survey
of what is known of the model theory of these enriched ﬁelds. We will discuss such
issues as existence of model companions and their various axiomatisations, elim-

92
|
Zoé Chatzidakis
ination of quantiﬁers and decidability; we will also investigate stability theoretic
properties and mention some open problems.
Another notable omission of this survey is that of exponential ﬁelds, which
have seen many extraordinary developments in the past twenty years: in the con-
text of the ﬁeld of real numbers, or in the context of the ﬁeld of complex numbers.
I do not consider myself an expert in this subject, parts of which are still in full
progress.
2 Basic results
2.1 Diﬀerential ﬁelds of characteristic 0
Recall that a diﬀerential ﬁeld is a ﬁeld 퐾endowed with a derivation 퐷, i.e., an
additive map 퐷: 퐾→퐾satisfying the Leibniz rule 퐷(푥푦) = 푥퐷(푦) + 퐷(푥)푦.
We study them in the language of rings augmented by a function symbol for the
derivation, {+, −. ⋅.0, 1, 퐷}.
The existence of a model completion (commonly called DCF0) of the theory of
diﬀerential ﬁelds of characteristic 0 was ﬁrst shown by Robinson ([84]); hence the
theory eliminates quantiﬁers and is complete ([83]). The models of DCF0 are called
diﬀerentially closed ﬁelds. Since every derivation of a ﬁeld extends to its algebraic
closure, a diﬀerentially closed ﬁeld is algebraically closed as a ﬁeld. Blum gave
a simple axiomatisation of DCF0 in her PhD thesis ([8], see also [9]), and showed
that DCF0 is 휔-stable. A consequence of this result is the existence and uniqueness
of the diﬀerential closure of a diﬀerential ﬁeld: any totally transcendental theory
has a unique prime model (Shelah). Poizat showed ([79]) that DCF0 eliminates
imaginaries.
2.2 Several derivations
These results were extended to several commuting derivations by McGrail ([59]):
the theory DCF0,푛of diﬀerentially closed ﬁelds of characteristic 0 with 푛commut-
ing derivations is complete, eliminates quantiﬁers (in the language of rings aug-
mented by 푛function symbols for the derivations), is 휔-stable of rank 휔푛and elim-
inates imaginaries.
The case of ﬁelds with non-commuting derivations but which have a ﬁnite
dimensional commutator Lie subalgebra was ﬁrst studied by Yaﬀe ([104]); Singer
([95]) then showed how to reduce the study of their existentially closed models to

Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey
|
93
the case of of models of DCF0,푛. The case of arbitrary non-commuting derivations
is a consequence of a result of Moosa and Scanlon, and will be discussed later.
2.3 Geometric axiomatisation
The axiomatisation given by Blum is very simple and uses diﬀerential polynomials
in one variable. If 퐹(푋) ∈퐾[푋], 푋= (푋0, . . . , 푋푛), involves non-trivially the vari-
able 푋푛, then the associated diﬀerential polynomial 푓(푋) = 퐹(푋, 퐷푋, . . . , 퐷푛푋) is
said to have order 푛. Besides the usual axioms for diﬀerential ﬁelds of character-
istic 0, Blum adds the scheme of axioms for algebraically closed ﬁelds, and the
following scheme of axioms: for every pair of diﬀerential polynomials 푓and 푔,
with the order of 푓strictly greater than the order of 푔, the axiom
∃푥푓(푥) = 0 ∧푔(푥)
̸= 0.
[Note that these axioms imply that the derivation is non-trivial: ∃푥퐷푥= 1.]
A diﬀerent kind of axiomatisation of DCF0 (so called geometric axiomatisation)
was given by Pierce and Pillay ([72]). Its formulation uses a very limited amount
of diﬀerential algebra, but nevertheless allows one to describe several variable
diﬀerential varieties. It contains the usual axioms for diﬀerential ﬁelds of charac-
teristic 0; for the remaining axioms we need ﬁrst a deﬁnition.
Let 푓1, . . . , 푓푚∈퐾[푋], 푋= (푋1, . . . , 푋푛). Suppose that they generate a prime
ideal of 퐾[푋] and let 푉⊂퐾푛be the irreducible aﬃne variety deﬁned by the equa-
tions 푓1(푥) = ⋅⋅⋅= 푓푚(푥) = 0. Deﬁne the twisted tangent bundle of 푉, 휏(푉), by the
following equations:
(푥, 푦) ∈휏(푉) ⇐⇒
푚
⋀
푖=1
푓푖(푥) = 0 ∧
푛
∑
푗=1
휕푓푖
휕푋푗
(푥)푦푗+ 푓퐷
푖(푥) = 0.
Here 푓퐷
푖
denotes the polynomial obtained by applying 퐷to the coeﬃcienst of
푓푖. Note that if 푎∈푉(퐾), then (푎, 퐷푎) ∈휏(푉), and for 푎∈푉, the algebraic set
휏(푉)(푎) = {푏| (푎, 푏) ∈휏(푉)} coincides with the algebraic set deﬁned by “푦−퐷(푎)
belongs to the tangent space of 푉at 푎”. There is a natural onto map 휋: 휏(푉) →푉.
The geometric axiomatisation of DCF0 is then obtained by adding to the theory of
algebraically closed diﬀerential ﬁelds the scheme of axioms:
For every irreducible varieties 푉⊂퐾푛and 푊⊂휏(푉) such that 휋(푊) is Zariski
dense in 푉, there is a point 푎such that (푎, 퐷(푎)) ∈푊.
[It is well-known that the polynomials 푓1, . . . , 푓푛generating a prime ideal is a ﬁrst-
order property of the coeﬃcients of the 푓푖’s.] Several attempts were made to ﬁnd

94
|
Zoé Chatzidakis
geometric axiomatisations for DCF0,푛, see [71], [86]; the problem is however much
harder than in the one derivation case, and the axiomatisations which were ob-
tained are in my opinion less elegant.
2.4 Other theories of diﬀerential ﬁelds of characteristic 0
All the ﬁelds discussed above are algebraically closed. One can however impose
conditions on the pure ﬁeld, and ask that it be existentially closed (as a diﬀerential
ﬁeld) with respect to those conditions. This was done by Singer ([94]) for ordered
diﬀerential ﬁelds (thus obtaining a notion of closed ordered diﬀerential ﬁeld),
and by Tressl for the class of diﬀerential ﬁelds which are large, and whose theory
in the language of rings is model-complete1. More work on closed ordered diﬀer-
ential ﬁelds was done by Brihaye, Michaux, Point, and Rivière ([64], [78], [80],
[81], [82]). The “uniform” axiomatisation of Tressl was generalised by Guzy in [34].
Itai and Hrushovski ([42]) showed the existence of many model-complete theo-
ries of diﬀerential ﬁelds of characteristic 0 which are superstable, and are not
DCF0. Chatzidakis and Hrushovski ([19]) studied the limit theory of the diﬀer-
ential ﬁelds (F푝(푡)푠, 푑/푑푡) as 푝goes to ∞, and showed that it interprets arithmetic2.
One can also consider valued ﬁelds with operators. Valued diﬀerential ﬁelds have
been studied extensively by Guzy, Michaux, Point and Rivière in [13], [30], [31],
[32], [33], [35], [36]. Valued diﬀerence ﬁelds were studied by Hrushovski ([41]), by
Durhan and Van den Dries ([2], [3]), by Bélair, Macintyre and Scanlon ([4]), by Pal
([70]), ...
2.5 More on DCF0
Shelah ([93]) showed that diﬀerential closures are not necessarily minimal: it is
possible to ﬁnd a diﬀerential ﬁeld 퐾, with diﬀerential closure
̂퐾containing a
strictly smaller 퐾-isomorphic copy of
̂퐾. (This result was also proved indepen-
dently by Rosenlicht and by Kolchin). In the same paper Shelah also showed that
there are 2휅non-isomorphic diﬀerentially closed ﬁelds of cardinality 휅when 휅
is uncountable. The question on the number of non-isomorphic countable dif-
1 A ﬁeld 퐾is large if it is existentially closed in the ﬁeld of power series 퐾((푡)).
2 F푝(푡)푠denotes the separable closure of F푝(푡).

Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey
|
95
ferentially closed ﬁelds stayed open for a long time, and was ﬁnally solved by
Hrushovski and Sokolovich, who showed there are 2ℵ0 many of them ([45], see
[57] for a published proof).
2.6 Diﬀerential ﬁelds of positive characteristic
Let 퐾be a diﬀerential ﬁeld of positive characteristic 푝, with derivation 퐷. The
Frobenius map 푥㨃→푥푝is then a ring embedding, and we denote the image of 퐾by
퐾푝. It is a subﬁeld of 퐾, and 퐷vanishes on 퐾푝. Thus, diﬀerential ﬁelds of positive
characteristic have very large subﬁelds of constants. We say that 퐾is diﬀerentially
perfect, or strict, if 퐾푝coincides with the constant subﬁeld, i.e.:
∀푥퐷푥= 0 →∃푦푦푝= 푥.
Existentially closed diﬀerential ﬁelds of characteristic 푝> 0 are called diﬀer-
entially closed. Their theory, denoted DCF푝, was axiomatised by Wood ([100]),
who showed that it is complete and model complete, and eliminates quantiﬁers
in the language of diﬀerential rings augmented by a function symbol 푟which is
interpreted as the inverse of the Frobenius map 푥㨃→푥푝: one adds the axiom
∀푥(퐷푥
̸= 0 ∧푟(푥) = 0) ∨푟(푥)푝= 푥. Note that this axiom implies that the ﬁeld is
diﬀerentially perfect, and thus DCF푝is the model completion of the theory of dif-
ferentially perfect diﬀerential ﬁelds of characteristic 푝. Wood and Shelah showed
that DCF푝is stable not superstable, and that every diﬀerential ﬁeld 퐾has a diﬀer-
ential closure (see [102], where Wood also gives Shelah’s proof that the diﬀerential
closure is unique). The underlying subﬁeld of a diﬀerentially closed ﬁeld of posi-
tive characteristic is of course separably closed, and of inﬁnite degree of imperfec-
tion. I think one does not know a natural language in which diﬀerentially closed
ﬁelds of positive characteristic eliminate imaginaries. See also the next section on
separably closed ﬁelds.
2.7 Separably closed ﬁelds of positive characteristic
Separably closed ﬁelds are ﬁelds 퐾with the following property: if 푓(푋) ∈퐾[푋] is
such that 푓耠(푋) is not identically 0 (such polynomials are called separable), then
푓(푋) has a zero in 퐾. If the characteristic of the ﬁeld is 0, then all polynomials are
separable. In positive characteristic 푝, non-separable polynomials are of the form
푓(푋) = 푔(푋푝), where 푔∈퐾[푋].
Let us ﬁx a ﬁeld 퐾of characteristic 푝> 0. Then 퐾푝is a subﬁeld of 퐾, and 퐾
is a 퐾푝-vector space. A 푝-basis of 퐾is a set 퐵⊂퐾such that 퐾= 퐾푝[퐵], and 퐵is

96
|
Zoé Chatzidakis
minimal such. The size of 퐵(an integer or ∞) is called the degree of imperfection
of 퐾(also called its Ershov invariant). If |퐵| = 푒∈N, then [퐾: 퐾푝] = 푝푒. For more
details on 푝-bases, see [10].
Ershov ([28]) showed that given a prime 푝and 푒∈N ∪{∞}, the theory SCF푝,푒
of separably closed ﬁelds of characteristic 푝and degree of imperfection 푒is com-
plete (and therefore decidable). He proved it through a model completion result:
expand the language by adding 푛-ary predicates 푄푛, 푛∈N, and add to the theory
of ﬁelds of characteristic 푝an axiom saying that 푄푛(푥1, . . . , 푥푛) holds if and only
if the elements 푥1, . . . , 푥푛are 푝-independent, i.e., if 푥푖∉퐾푝[푥1, . . . , ̂푥푖, . . . , 푥푛] for
every 1 ≤푖≤푛. Consider the theory 푇푒obtained from the theory of ﬁelds of char-
acteristic 푝by adding the deﬁning axioms for the predicates 푄푛and the axiom
∀푥1, . . . , 푥푒+1¬푄푒+1(푥1, . . . , 푥푒+1) [actually, only adding to the language 푄1, . . . , 푄푒+1
would suﬃce]. Then the model companion of 푇푒is precisely 푇푒∪SCF푝,푒.
Let 퐾be a ﬁeld of positive characteristic 푝> 0. For each positive integer 푛,
ﬁx an enumeration 푚푖( ̄푥), 푖< 푝푛, of the 푝-monomials in
̄푥= (푥1, . . . , 푥푛), i.e.,
of the monomials 푥푖1
1 푥푖2
2 . . . 푥푖푛푛with 0 ≤푖1, . . . , 푖푛< 푝. We then deﬁne 푛+ 1-ary
functions 휆푖( ̄푥, 푦) : 퐾푛+1 →퐾by 휆푖,푛( ̄푎, 푏) = 0 if either the elements of
̄푎are not
푝-independent in 퐾, or if 푏∉퐾푝[ ̄푎]; if 푏∈퐾푝[ ̄푎] and the elements of
̄푎are 푝-
independent, then the elements 휆푖,푛( ̄푎, 푏) (푖< 푝푛) of 퐾are uniquely determined by
the equation
푏= ∑
푖<푝푛
휆푖,푛( ̄푎, 푏)푝푚푖( ̄푎).
As far as I know, these functions ﬁrst appear in a paper of Srour which shows that
the theory of separably closed ﬁelds eliminates quantiﬁers in the expanded lan-
guage (Lemma 3, [96]). In this paper, he also studies prime models, and describes
independence. In case the degree of imperfection of the ﬁeld is 푒∈N, one can also
ﬁx a 푝-basis ̄푏= {푏1, . . . , 푏푒}, add to the language of rings 푒new constant symbols
(for the elements of ̄푏) and the functions 휆푖,푒( ̄푏, ) (푖< 푝푒); one then adds to the
theory of separably closeed ﬁelds an axiom saying that 푏1, . . . , 푏푒form a 푝-basis,
as well as the deﬁning axioms of the functions 휆푖,푒( ̄푏, ). Delon shows in [26] that
separably closed ﬁelds eliminate quantiﬁers and imaginaries in this extended lan-
guage.
No natural language in which separably closed ﬁelds of inﬁnite Ershov in-
variant eliminate imaginaries is known, this has been an open problem for a long
time. Note that in the ﬁnite invariant case, it was necessary to add to the language
new symbols of constants for the elements of a 푝-basis, but of course one cannot
do that in the inﬁnite invariant case.

Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey
|
97
2.8 Hasse-Schmidt derivations
We ﬁx a ﬁeld 퐾of characteristic 푝> 0. An iterative Hasse-Schmidt derivation on
퐾is a stack of operators 퐷푖: 퐾→퐾, 푖∈N, which are additive, and satisfy
–
퐷0(푥) = 푥,
–
퐷푛(푥푦) = ∑푖+푗=푛퐷푖(푥)퐷푗(푦),
–
퐷푛퐷푚(푥) = (푛+푚
푚)퐷푛+푚.
Note that 퐷0 is the identity map, that 퐷1 is just an ordinary derivation, that for
푖< 푝, 퐷푖is a rational multiple of 퐷(푖)
1 (the 푖-th iterate of 퐷1), and that 퐷(푝)
1
= 0. One
can also show that 퐷푝푛satisﬁes 퐷푝푛(푥푝푛) = 퐷1(푥)푝푛for 푛≥1, so that 퐷푝푛deﬁnes a
derivation on 퐾푝푛. The theory of ﬁelds with a Hasse-Schmidt derivation is axioma-
tisable (in the language {+, −, ⋅, 0, 1, 퐷푛(푛∈N)}), and has a model companion (see
Ziegler [105]) which is obtained from the original theory by adjoining to it SCF푝,1
together with the axiom expressing strictness (i.e., ker 퐷1 = 퐾푝). The resulting
theory SCH푝,1 eliminates imaginaries and quantiﬁers. Note that we did not have
to add constant symbols for the elements of a 푝-basis to eliminate imaginaries.
The results can be extended to arbitrary ﬁnite invariant 푒, by adding 푒
stacks of commuting operators to get the theory SCH푝,푒of 푒commuting iterative
Hasse-Schmidt derivations. Kowalski ([48]) shows that the theory of existentially
closed diﬀerential ﬁelds with 푒commuting derivations admits a geometric
axiomatisation.
Bi-interpretability with SCF푒.
Let 퐾be a separably closed ﬁeld of characteristic 푝and ﬁnite degree of imperfec-
tion 푒, ﬁx a 푝-basis 푏1, . . . , 푏푒of 퐾. One can then deﬁne 푒Hasse-Schmidt derivations
D푖, 푖= 1, . . . , 푒on 퐾by setting:
–
퐷푖
0 = 푖푑for all 푖;
–
퐷푖
1(푏푗) = 1 if 푗= 푖, 0 otherwise;
–
퐷푖
푝푛(푏푗) = 0 for 푛≥1 and all 푖, 푗.
These conditions, together with the axioms for commuting iterative Hasse-
Schmidt derivations, deﬁne uniquely the stacks D푖on 퐾for 푖= 1, . . . , 푒. Ziegler
([105]) shows that this expansion makes 퐾into a model of SCH푝,푒, and that the
above operators are deﬁnable in the language of rings augmented by constants
for the elements of the 푝-basis {푏1, . . . , 푏푒}.
Note also that there are many ways of expanding 퐾, but any one of them will make
퐾into a model of SCH푝,푒. The elimination of quantiﬁers in the language with the

98
|
Zoé Chatzidakis
Hasse-Schmidt derivations implies that the 휆-functions 휆푖(푥) over a given 푝-basis
푏are terms in (푥, 푏) (in the language of SCH푝,푒).
2.9 Derivations of the Frobenius
Let 퐾be a ﬁeld of characteristic 푝> 0, and 푞= 푝푛a power of 푝. A derivation of
the 푞-Frobenius on 퐾is an additive endomorphism of 퐾which satisﬁes a twisted
Leibnitz rule
훿(푎푏) = 푎푞훿(푏) + 푏푞훿(푎).
When 푞= 1, this is an ordinary derivation on 퐾. Kowalski shows in [49] that the
theory of ﬁelds endowed with a derivation of the 푞-Frobenius has a model com-
panion, which is complete, eliminates quantiﬁers in the language
{+, −, ⋅, 훿, 휆푖,푚푚∈N, 푖< 푝푚},
is stable not superstable. He gives a geometric axiomatisation of the theory, af-
ter introducing the appropriate version of the twisted tangent bundle. Strictness
of 퐾is deﬁned as with ordinary diﬀerential ﬁelds: 퐾is strict iﬀker 훿= 퐾푝. It is
unknown whether it suﬃces to add the inverse of the Frobenius map to the lan-
guage of diﬀerential rings to get quantiﬁer elimination. Kowalski’s paper leaves
open several other questions, some of them quite intriguing.
2.10 Diﬀerence ﬁelds
A diﬀerence ﬁeld is a ﬁeld 퐾with a distinguished endomorphism, usually
denoted by 휎. Macintyre showed that the theory of diﬀerence ﬁelds has a model
companion, ACFA ([56]). Its models are inversive diﬀerence ﬁelds, i.e., the
endomorphism 휎is onto. It admits a geometric axiomatisation: one says that 휎is
an automorphism of the algebraically closed diﬀerence ﬁeld 휎, and one takes the
following scheme of axioms:
For every irreducible varieties 푈and 푉, with 푉⊂푈× 푈휎, such that 푉projects
dominantly onto 푈and 푈휎, there is a tuple 푎such that (푎, 휎(푎)) ∈푉.
Here 푈휎denotes the variety image of 푈under 휎. We now list some properties
of ACFA: its completions are obtained by describing the behaviour of 휎on the
algebraic closure of the prime ﬁeld; ACFA is decidable; it does not eliminate
quantiﬁers in the language of diﬀerence ﬁelds, the reason being that an automor-

Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey
|
99
phism of a ﬁeld 퐸may have non-isomorphic extensions to the algebraic clo-
sure of 퐸. Macintyre gives in [56] a language in which ACFA eliminates quantiﬁers.
Chatzidakis and Hrushovski start an in-depth study of ACFA in [18]. Among
other things, they show that all completions of ACFA eliminate imaginaries, are
unstable, but are supersimple and of SU-rank 휔.
A ﬁeld which plays an important role is the ﬁxed ﬁeld, Fix(휎) = {푎∈퐾| 휎(푎) = 푎}.
In characteristic 푝> 0, if 푞= 푝푛for some 푛∈Z, we denote by Frob푞the map 푥㨃→
푥푞. Then the automorphisms 휏= 휎푛Frob푚are also deﬁnable (푛∈N, 푚∈Z), as are
their ﬁxed ﬁelds. These ﬁelds are pseudo-ﬁnite, and therefore unstable (they have
the independence property); but they are stably embedded, i.e., every 퐾-deﬁnable
subset of a cartesian power of Fix(휏) is deﬁnable with parameters from Fix(휏). One
can also show that if 퐾is a model of ACFA, then so is the diﬀerence ﬁeld (퐾, 휏).
2.11 Mixing operators: the commutative case
We already talked about several commuting derivations. The other examples all
involve an endomorphism or automorphism. The diﬃculty in all these cases is to
show that the class of existentially closed models is elementary. Once it is done,
results by Chatzidakis and Pillay ([25]) give much information on the behaviour
of the models, deﬁnable sets, algebraic closure, independence, etc. Usually, the
proofs done for ACFA generalise almost instantly. Below we will describe what is
known.
Separably closed ﬁelds
The ﬁrst new example is probably the theory of separably closed ﬁelds of ﬁxed de-
gree of imperfection (in the language with the 휆-functions) with a distinguished
endomorphism 휎. The model companion SCFA of this theory exists ([15]), is
simple but not supersimple nor stable, and eliminates imaginaries if the degree
of imperfection is ﬁnite. As is the case with ACFA, it does not eliminate quantiﬁers.
Diﬀerence diﬀerential ﬁelds
The next example was investigated by Bustamante-Medina in [14]. Consider
the theory of diﬀerential ﬁelds of characteristic 0 endowed with an endomor-
phisms 휎. It admits a model companion, denoted DCFA (this was ﬁrst proved
by Hrushovski in the late 90’s; for an axiomatisation, see [14]). The theory is
supersimple of SU-rank 휔2, eliminates imaginaries. There are three important
subﬁelds: the ﬁxed ﬁeld, the ﬁeld of constants, and their intersection. Recently,

100
|
Zoé Chatzidakis
the results of Bustamante-Medina were generalised by León Sánchez, to DCFA푛,
the theory of existentially closed models of the theory of ﬁelds of characteristic 0
with 푛commuting derivations and an endomorphism 휎of the diﬀerential ﬁeld. It
appears in [87], and uses the techniques of [86].
Commuting automorphisms
Hrushovski showed in the 90’s that the theory of ﬁelds with two commuting au-
tomorphisms does not have a model companion. The example appears in a paper
of Kikyo ([47]), I will give a slightly diﬀerent one here. We let K be the class of all
diﬀerence ﬁelds with commuting automorphisms 휎, 휏.
We let 퐾be an algebraically closed ﬁeld containing Q, on which 휏is the identity,
and let 휎be any automorphism of 퐾such that if 휔is a primitive cubic root of 1,
then 휎(휔) = 휔2, and such that 퐾has an element 푏푛with ⟨휎⟩-orbit of size exactly 푛
for each 푛> 2, and an element 푏with inﬁnite ⟨휎⟩-orbit.
Consider the following formula:
휑(푥, 푦, 푧) := 푦3 = 푥+ 푧∧휏(푦) = 휔푦∧휎(푥) = 휏(푥) = 푥.
Consider the ﬁeld 퐾(푡), 푡an indeterminate, and deﬁne 휎(푡) = 휏(푡) = 푡. Because
the elements 휎푖(푏), 푏∈Z, are all distinct, the algebraic extensions of 퐾obtained
by adjoining to 퐾(푡) a cubic root 훼푖of 푡+ 휎푖(푏) are linearly disjoint over 퐾(푡). So,
setting 퐿to be the algebraic extension of 퐾(푡) generated by the 훼푖’s, 푖∈Z, and
deﬁning 휎(훼푖) = 훼푖+1, and 휏(훼푖) = 휎푖(휔)훼푖for all 푖, the automorphisms 휎and 휏of 퐿
commute, and (푡, 훼0) is a solution of 휑(푥, 푦, 푏).
Assume now that 휑(푎, 훼, 푏푛) holds in some diﬀerence ﬁeld in K extending 퐾. Then
휎푛(훼) = 휔푗훼for some 푗. On the other hand, the fact that 휎and 휏commute implies
휏휎푛(훼) = 휏(휔)푗휏(훼) = 휔푗+1훼= 휎푛(휔훼) = 휔2푛+푗훼,
so that necessarily 2푛≡1 modulo 3, i.e., 푛is even. So, when 푛is odd, the formula
휑(푥, 푦, 푏푛) has no solution in any extension of 퐾in K. [Note that if 푛is even,
then the construction done for 푏can be easily adapted to yield a solution of the
formula 휑(푥, 푦, 푏푛).]
Take a non-principal ultrapower 푀of 퐾on the set 퐼of odd integers. If
푏∗= (푏푛)푛∈퐼/U, then the ⟨휎⟩-orbit of 푏∗is inﬁnite, so that the formula 휑(푥, 푦, 푏∗)
has a solution in some extension 푀耠∈K of 푀. However, any formula 휓(푧)
satisﬁed by 푏∗will be satisﬁed by inﬁnitely many 푏푖’s, for which we know that the
formula 휑(푥, 푦, 푏푖) has no solution. This shows that the model companion of the
theory of ﬁelds with two commuting automorphisms does not exist.

Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey
|
101
Action of Q on a ﬁeld. A contrario, Medvedev shows in [60] that the theory of ﬁelds
with an action of (Q, +) has a model companion (in the language of rings aug-
mented by function symbols 휎푞, 푞∈Q). She also generalises many of the results
true for ACFA to this context.
2.12 A remark
Note that the example showing that the theory of commuting automorphisms
does not have a model companion does not provide an answer to the following
two questions:
Let 푇be a theory which eliminates quantiﬁers in a language L, consider the
class K耠of models of 푇with a distinguished automorphism 휎. The questions are
whether the class of existentially closed elements of K耠is an elementary class,
when
(i) 푇is a complete theory extending ACFA, or
(ii) 푇is a complete theory of pseudo-ﬁnite ﬁeld.
The reason is that it is diﬃcult to show that a given system of diﬀerence equations
has a solution in a member of K耠, since the underlying ﬁeld of this extension must
be a model of ACFA or a pseudo-ﬁnite ﬁeld.
For instance, take the diﬀerence ﬁeld 퐾(푡) described above. We want to show that
the formula 휑(푥, 푦, 푏) has a solution in some extension of 퐾(푡) in K耠. Consider the
ﬁeld 퐿= 퐾(푡, 훼푖)푖∈Z.
In case (i), the satisfaction of 휑(푥, 푦, 푏) is equivalent to the fact that (퐿, 휎, 휏) em-
beds in a member of K耠; hence we need to extend 휎and 휏to the algebraic closure
퐿푎푙푔of 퐿, in such a fashion that 휎and 휏commute. This seems hard to achieve.
In case (ii), let 퐿0 be the subﬁeld of 퐿ﬁxed by 휏; then 휎restricts to an automor-
phism of 퐿0, and we consider the diﬀerence ﬁeld (퐿0, 휎), which we wish to extend
to a member of K耠. The theory of pseudo-ﬁnite ﬁelds reduces the problem to the
following: extend 휎0 and 휏to the algebraic closure 퐿푎푙푔of 퐿0 in such a fashion that
휎0 normalises ⟨휏⟩. Again, this seems hard to achieve.
2.13 A general framework for ﬁelds with operators
The following is a particular case of a setup introduced in [68] by Moosa and
Scanlon, and which permits to treat some of the above considered cases in a
uniform fashion. Consider a Q-algebra 퐷which is ﬁnite-dimensional over Q and

102
|
Zoé Chatzidakis
has basis {휀0, . . . , 휀ℓ−1} (as a Q-vector space). We assume that the projection 휋of
퐷onto the ﬁrst coordinate is a Q-algebra homomorphism. We call 휓the isomor-
phism 퐷→Qℓassociated to the basis. If 푅is a Q-algebra, one sets D(푅) = 퐷⊗Q 푅.
A D-ring is a Q-algebra 푅, together with a sequence 휕= (휕1, . . . , 휕ℓ−1) of operators
on 푅, such that the map
푒: 푅→D(푅),
푥㨃→푥휀0 + 휕1(푥)휀1 + ⋅⋅⋅+ 휕ℓ−1(푥)휀ℓ−1
is a homomorphism of Q-algebras.
The class of D-rings is axiomatisable in the language of rings augmented by
symbols for the operators. There is a unique D-ring structure on Q, obtained by
forcing 1 = 휀0 + 휕1(1)휀1 + ⋅⋅⋅+ 휕ℓ−1휀ℓ−1.
Some examples of D-rings:
1.
Diﬀerential rings: Let D(푅) = 푅[휂]/(휂2), with 푅-basis {1, 휂}.
2.
Rings with higher order derivations: let D
=
푅[휂]/(휂푛), with 푅-basis
{1, 휂, . . . , 휂푛−1}. This is a generalisation of ordinary diﬀerential rings, since no
iterativity condition is imposed.
3.
Diﬀerence rings: Let D(푅) = 푅× 푅, with 푅-basis {(1, 0), (0, 1)}.
4.
Rings with several (higher order) derivations and endomorphisms: take the
tensor product (over 푅) of various rings as above. The derivations do not com-
mute.
5.
퐷-rings: D(푅) = 푅2, with multiplication deﬁned by
(푥1, 푦1) ⋅(푥2, 푦2) = (푥1푥2, 푥1푦2 + 푥2푦1 + 푦1푦2푐).
If 푐= 0, this is just an ordinary derivation. If 푐
̸= 0, the map 휎(푥) = 푥+ 푐휕1(푥)
deﬁnes a ring endomorphism of 푅, and (because 푐∈Q) 휕1 is deﬁnable from
휎. These structures were considered by Scanlon in [88].
6.
Derivations of an endomorphism 휎: D(푅) = 푅× 푅[휂]/(휂2), with 푅-basis
{(1, 0), (0, 1), (1, 휂)}. Then the endomorphism 휎and the operator 훿satisfy
훿(푥푦) = 휎(푥)훿(푦) + 휎(푦)훿(푥).
7.
Taking ﬁbered products of ﬁnite dimensional Q-algebras.
The main result of [68] is that under certain conditions on the algebra D, the the-
ory of D-rings which are integral domains has a model companion, D-CF0. The
axiomatisation is geometric, once one has introduced the appropriate twisted tan-
gent bundle. They then describe completions of the theory, independence, types,
and show that they eliminate imaginaries. The theory is simple, and sometimes
supersimple, stable, or 휔-stable.

Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey
|
103
3 Stability theoretic notions
Basically the ﬁelds we study fall within four (= two times two) classes. The oper-
ators considered are variations of derivations or of automorphisms. If some auto-
morphism occurs, the theory of the enriched ﬁeld will be simple and unstable. If
only derivations occur, then it will be stable. One can then reﬁne this analysis. If
the underlying ﬁeld is algebraically closed then we actually get 휔-stability in the
case of commuting derivations, and supersimplicity when at most one automor-
phism is present. In the case of an endomorphism of an algebraically closed ﬁeld,
or of an automorphism of a separably closed ﬁeld, or of several non-commuting
automorphisms (of a ﬁeld or diﬀerential ﬁeld) we only obtain simplicity.
3.1 Algebraic closure, independence
In all cases where the underlying ﬁeld is algebraically closed or separably closed,
model-theoretic algebraic closure and independence are extremely easy to de-
scribe, once one knows algebraic closure and independence in ACF. Basically, to
get the model-theoretic algebraic closure, one closes under all obvious deﬁnable
functions, and then takes the (relative, ﬁeld-theoretic) algebraic closure. The inde-
pendence of algebraically closed sets is then the one induced by ACF (or possibly
in the case of inﬁnite degree of imperfection, SCF):
퐴|⌢퐶퐵if and only acl(퐴퐶) and acl(퐵퐶) are independent over acl(퐶).
3.2 Zilber’s conjecture – the trichotomy
Let 푇be a stable theory, 푀a model of 푇, and 퐷a strongly minimal deﬁnable
subset of 푀. Then acl deﬁnes a pregeometry on 퐷, i.e., it satisﬁes the Steinitz
exchange property: if the elements 푎, 푏of 퐷and the set 퐶⊂퐷are such that 푎∈
acl(퐶푏)\acl(퐶), then 푏∈acl(퐶푎). Quotienting 푆= 퐷\(acl(0)∩퐷) by the equivalence
relation 푎∼푏⇐⇒acl(푎) = acl(푏), one obtains a geometry cl on the set 푁:= 푆/∼,
which is of one of the following kinds:
–
degenerate or trivial: for any 퐴⊂푁, cl(퐴) = ⋃푎∈퐴cl({푎});
–
modular non-trivial: there are 푎1, . . . , 푎푛, 푏with 푏∈cl(푎1, . . . , 푎푛) \ ⋃푖cl({푎푖}); if
퐴, 퐵are closed and have non-empty intersection 퐶, then 퐴|⌢퐶퐵.
–
non-modular: there are closed sets 퐴and 퐵which have non-empty intersec-
tion 퐶and are not independent over 퐶.

104
|
Zoé Chatzidakis
Zilber’s conjecture stated that any geometry originating from a strongly minimal
set, coincides with the geometry of one of the following structures:
–
(Trivial) An inﬁnite set with no-structure.
–
(Modular non-trivial): A vector space (푉, +, −, 0, 훼)훼∈퐹over a ﬁxed division ring
퐹.
–
(Non-modular) An algebraically closed ﬁeld (퐹, +, ⋅, 푐)푐∈퐹0 with constants for a
subﬁeld 퐹0.
The conjecture was disproved by Hrushovski in [38] (see also [37]). Let us say that a
(stable) structure 푀satisﬁes the trichotomy if whenever 퐷is a strongly minimal set
deﬁnable in 푀, then the pregeometry associated to 퐷satisﬁes Zilber’s conjecture.
It turns out that many of the stable ﬁelds with operators do satisfy the trichotomy:
this was proved by Hrushovski and Sokolovich for DCF0 ([45]); to speak about the
other examples we ﬁrst need a discussion.
The concept of satisfying the trichotomy can be generalised in two fashions. First,
in the stable case, one can allow ∞-deﬁnable sets, as long as they are of U-rank 1,
i.e., as long as acl deﬁnes a pregeometry. Then the trichotomy is stated as above.
In the unstable case, some care needs to be taken, and the trichotomy becomes a
dichotomy between the ﬁrst two cases (modular case) on one hand, and the third
case (ﬁeld case) on the other. We still work with a deﬁnable (or ∞-deﬁnable) set
퐷, on which acl deﬁnes a pregeometry, but which is not necessarily strongly min-
imal. We also assume that there is a good independence notion - e.g., that the
theory is simple. We say that 퐷is modular iﬀwhenever 푎, 푏are tuples of elements
of 퐷, then they are independent over the intersection of their algebraic closures
in 퐷푒푞. The dichotomy then states:
If 퐷is not modular, then some type 푝of rank 1 which is realised in 퐷is non-
orthogonal to a ﬁeld.
Recall that a type 푝of rank 1 over a set 퐴of parameters is non-orthogonal to an
∞-deﬁnable set 푆iﬀthere is some 퐵containing 퐴, a tuple 푐in 푆such that 푐|⌢퐴퐵,
and acl(퐵푐) contains a realisation 푎of 푝which is not in acl(퐵).
3.3 Two generalisations of modularity
1 - The deﬁnition of modularity we gave generalises easily to types of arbitrary
rank, and in that case it is called one-basedness: a (∞-)퐴-deﬁnable set 푆is one-
based iﬀwhenever 퐵⊃퐴and 푎is a tuple of elements of 푆, then 푎and 퐵are inde-
pendent over the intersection of their algebraic closures in 푀푒푞.

Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey
|
105
Recall that a type 푝over 퐴is regular iﬀit is orthogonal to any of its forking ex-
tensions: if 퐶is a set, 푎and 푏are realisations of 푝, such that 푎|⌢퐴퐶and 푏|⌢/ 퐴퐶,
then 푎|⌢퐶푏. Forking makes it possible to deﬁne a pregeometry on the set of reali-
sations of 푝, i.e., one replaces acl by “forking”. A regular type is called modular
iﬀits associated geometry is modular; and non-modular otherwise.
3.4 Properties of one-basedness
The deﬁning property of one-basedness is, in my opinion, quite remarkable. It is
extremely desirable in case of a group structure, because of the following
Theorem (Hrushovski-Pillay, [43]) Let 퐺be a one-based L-structure, which is sta-
ble and of ﬁnite U-rank, and assume that it is a group (maybe with additional struc-
ture). Then for every 푛, every deﬁnable subset of 퐺푛is a ﬁnite Boolean combination
of cosets of deﬁnable subgroups of 퐺푛. Furthermore, these subgroups are deﬁned
over acl(0), and in particular there are at most |L| + ℵ0 many of them.
Note a consequence of this result: If 퐺satisﬁes the assumptions of the theorem,
then 퐺has a subgroup 퐺0 of ﬁnite index which is commutative. This comes from
looking at the graph of multiplication in 퐺3, or at the graph of the inverse map.
3.5 Some other structures which satisfy the dichotomy
Separably closed ﬁelds of ﬁnite degree of imperfection.
If 퐾is a saturated separably closed ﬁeld, then no deﬁnable subset of 퐾is ranked
by the U-rank. But there are many ∞-deﬁnable sets 퐷which have U-rank 1, for
instant the perfect core 푘= ⋂푛퐾푝푛of 퐾. Note that the ﬁeld 푘is algebraically
closed. Moreover, the induced structure on 푘is that of a pure ﬁeld: if 푆⊂퐾푛is
deﬁnable in 퐾, then 푆∩푘푛is deﬁnable in the pure ﬁeld 푘. Assume that the degree
of imperfection of 퐾is ﬁnite. Hrushovski showed in [39] that non-modular thin3
types of U-rank 1 are non-orthogonal to the ﬁeld 푘; this result was later extended
by Delon in [27] to all U-rank 1 non-modular types.
These results extend to ﬁelds with commuting iterative Hasse-Schmidt deriva-
tions. I do not know if they extend to any of the following characteristic 푝ﬁelds:
separably closed ﬁelds of inﬁnite degree of imperfection, diﬀerentially closed
3 i.e., those such that given a realisation 푎over a model 퐾, the ﬁeld dcl(퐾푎) has ﬁnite transcen-
dence degree over 퐾.

106
|
Zoé Chatzidakis
ﬁelds of positive characteristic, or to existentially closed ﬁelds with a derivation
of the 푞-Frobenius.
Diﬀerentially closed ﬁelds with several commuting derivations.
Moosa, Pillay and Scanlon study in [69] the modularity of regular types in DCF푛,0.
They show that a regular non-modular type is non-orthogonal to the generic of a
deﬁnable subgroup of G푎. This has for consequence the dichotomy for types of
rank 1: a type of rank 1 which is non-modular, is non-orthogonal to the generic
type of the ﬁeld of absolute constants, deﬁned by 퐷1푥= 퐷2푥= ⋅⋅⋅퐷푛푥= 0.
The hope is that the result extends to regular types of higher rank: that regular
non-modular types are non-orthogonal to a ﬁeld of constants, i.e., a subﬁeld
deﬁned by a conjunction of conditions of the form ∑푎푖퐷푖(푥) = 0. A partial result
in that direction was obtained by Süer ([97]).
Diﬀerence ﬁelds.
Chatzidakis and Hrushovski, later joined by Peterzil, show in [18], [24] that
models of ACFA satisfy the dichotomy: a type of SU-rank 1 which is not modular,
is non-orthogonal to a ﬁxed ﬁeld, i.e., to Fix(휎) if the characteristic is 0; or to some
Fix(휎푛Frob푚) if the characteristic is positive.
Because the theory ACFA is unstable, other issues connected to stability or
instability appear. Most types are not stationary. In characteristic 0, a type which
is foreign to Fix(휎) will be stable stably embedded. So, the unique source of
unstability is Fix(휎). In positive characteristic this is not the case: there are
modular subgroups of G푎which are unstable.
So, in characteristic 0, if 퐺is a deﬁnable group which is one-based, then the
result of Hrushovski-Pillay on stable one-based groups of ﬁnite U-rank will apply,
and give that any deﬁnable subset of 퐺푛is a Boolean combination of cosets of
deﬁnable subgroups. In characteristic 푝> 0, we cannot apply the result, however,
in case 퐺is a deﬁnable subgroup of an algebraic group 퐻(so that the group law
is quantiﬁer-free deﬁnable), then every quantiﬁer-free deﬁnable subset of 퐺푛is a
ﬁnite Boolean combination of cosets of quantiﬁer-free deﬁnable subgroups of 퐺푛.
This partial result suﬃces for most applications. If 퐻is a semi-abelian variety,
then 퐺is also stable stably embedded, and the full result holds, see [23].
D-ﬁelds.
Moosa and Scanlon show in [68] that the dichotomy theorem holds for ﬁnite-
dimensional types of SU-rank 1, i.e., types over a set 퐴of tuples 푎such that the

Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey
|
107
transcendence degree over acl(퐴) of acl(퐴푎) is ﬁnite. This brings me to another
remark.
3.6 Some words on proofs of the dichotomy
With the exception of ACFA in characteristic 0, the early results of the dichotomy
for theories of enriched ﬁelds4 used a very technical tool, Zariski geometries.
Zariski geometries were introduced by Hrushovski and Zilber in [46] and provide
a set of axioms for a geometry on a structure, which, if satisﬁed, imply that the
structure satisﬁes the trichotomy. The original setting is intended for strongly
minimal sets. In [39] a version for sets of realisations of minimal types appears,
see also [58] and [106]. This was unsatisfactory in many respects, as checking the
axioms usually is very long and involved.
A new way of showing the dichotomy: the CBP
Inspired by results of Fujiki and Campana on compact complex manifolds, Pillay
introduced in [75] a property of types of canonical bases of types of ﬁnite rank,
and which implies the dichotomy. Later, Pillay and Ziegler ([77]) somewhat gener-
alised this property to a wider context. This property is called the Canonical Base
Property, CBP for short. Pillay and Ziegler then proceed to show the CBP for certain
algebraic examples, in a very algebraic and elementary (and ingenious) fashion.
They show it for the following theories and families of types:
–
In characteristic 0, types of ﬁnite rank in the theories DCF0 and ACFA.
–
In separably closed ﬁelds of ﬁnite invariant, the very thin types5 have the CBP.
By the above mentioned result of Pillay, their result gives in particular a direct
proof of the dichotomy for DCF0 and ACFA0. Their proof can be (and was) adapted
to the so-called ﬁnite-dimensional types of DCFA and of DCF0,푛, D-CF0, DCFA푛,
see [14] and [68], [87]. In the case of DCF0,푛, and later of DCFA, the method of arc-
spaces introduced in [69] yields the full dichotomy. It is at the moment still open
for arbitrary rank 1 types in D-CF0.
Let me also mention that the dichotomy holds for types of transformally al-
gebraic elements in SCFA and in SCFE: one reduces the problem to the case of
4 that is: for DCF0 in [45], for minimal types in separably closed ﬁelds of ﬁnite degree of imper-
fection [27], for ACFA in positive characteristic [24].
5 i.e., those such that given a realisation 푎over a model 퐾, the structure 퐾⟨푎⟩obtained by closing
퐾(푎) under the 푝-th powers of the 휆-functions, has a ﬁnite separating transcendence basis over
퐾.

108
|
Zoé Chatzidakis
ACFA. Here SCFE denotes the model companion of the theory of diﬀerence ﬁelds
with 휎not surjective. It can also be described as the limit theory of the structures
(F푝(푡)푠, 푥㨃→푥푝푛) when 푝푛goes to ∞.
3.7 A few words on the CBP
The CBP has other interesting consequences, which can be found in [77], in [99],
in [65] and in [16]. It is still open for minimal types in SCF푒, and more generally
in most ﬁelds of positive characteristic (maybe with additional structure) which
are not algebraically closed. Chatzidakis shows in [16] that types of ﬁnite rank in
existentially closed diﬀerence ﬁelds of characteristic 푝> 0 have the CBP.
3.8 Deﬁnable groups
A classical result says that a group deﬁnable in an algebraically closed ﬁeld 퐾is
isomorphic to 퐺(퐾) for some algebraic group 퐺.
The intended generalisation to a ﬁeld with operators 퐾is:
(∗) If 퐻is deﬁnable in 퐾, then there is a group homomorphism 푓: 퐻耠→퐺(퐾), where
퐻耠is a deﬁnable subgroup of 퐻of ﬁnite index, 퐺is an algebraic group deﬁned over
퐾, and ker(푓) is ﬁnite.
This generalisation holds for most theories we described above (and maybe
all). They appear in papers by Messmer, and by Bouscaren and Delon on separa-
bly closed ﬁelds of ﬁnite invariant ([62], [11]), by Benoist [5] on ﬁelds with Hasse-
Schmidt derivations, by Pillay on diﬀerential groups ([73], [76]), by Kowalski and
Pillay ([52], [53], [54], [55]), by Bustamante-Medina [14], Freitag [29], ... (to name
a few).
In a recent paper [7], Blossier, Martin-Pizarro and Wagner introduce the no-
tion of a theory being one-based over another, and describe deﬁnable groups in
models of the ﬁrst one as almost embeddable in deﬁnable groups in the smaller
language of the second one. An application of their result gives then that (∗) holds
in all the theories we have so far considered, provided that
–
the theory eliminates imaginaries,
–
independence is given by ACF-independence of the algebraic closures in the
sense of the theory.
Thus it seems to me that among the theories I introduced above, the only theo-
ries which do not satisfy the hypotheses of the result of Blossier, Martin-Pizarro

Bibliography
|
109
and Wagner, are those of ﬁelds of positive characteristic and which have inﬁnite
degree of imperfection.
One should note that this is not quite the optimal result in case of diﬀerential
ﬁelds, since there (∗) can be strengthened to conclude that 푓is injective.
Acknowledgement: The author was partially supported by ANR-09-BLAN-0047.
Bibliography
[1]
James Ax, On Schanuel’s conjectures, Ann. of Math. (2) 93 (1971), 252 – 268.
[2]
Salih Azgin, Valued ﬁelds with contractive automorphism and Kaplansky ﬁelds, J. Alge-
bra 324 (2010), no. 10, 2757 – 2785.
[3]
Salih Azgin, Lou van den Dries, Elementary theory of valued ﬁelds with a valuation-
preserving automorphism. J. Inst. Math. Jussieu 10 (2011), no. 1, 1 – 35.
[4]
Luc Bélair, Angus Macintyre, Thomas Scanlon, Model theory of the Frobenius on the Witt
vectors, American Journal of Mathematics, Volume 129, Number 3, June 2007, 665 – 721.
[5]
Franck Benoist, Théorie des modèles des corps munis d’une dérivation de Hasse, Ph.D.
thesis, Université Denis Diderot - Paris VII, 2005.
[6]
Daniel Bertrand, Anand Pillay, A Lindemann-Weierstrass theorem for semi-abelian vari-
eties over function ﬁelds,J. Amer. Math. Soc. 23 (2010), no. 2, 491 – 533.
[7]
Thomas Blossier, Amador Martin Pizarro et Frank O. Wagner, Géométries relatives,
preprint 2010, hal-00514393.
[8]
Lenore Blum, Generalized Algebraic Structures: A Model Theoretical Approach, PhD
thesis, MIT, 1968.
[9]
Lenore Blum, Diﬀerentially closed ﬁelds: A model-theoretic tour, in Contributions to
Algebra (H. Bass, P. Cassidy, and J. Kovacic, Eds.), Academic Press, San Diego, 1977.
[10]
N. Bourbaki, XI, Algèbre Chapître 5, Corps commutatifs, Hermann, Paris 1959.
[11]
E. Bouscaren, F. Delon, Groups deﬁnable in separably closed ﬁelds, Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc. 354 (2002), no. 3, 945–966.
[12]
E. Bouscaren, F. Delon, Minimal groups in separably closed ﬁelds, J. Symbolic Logic 67
(2002), no. 1, 239–259.
[13]
Thomas Brihaye, Christian Michaux, Cédric Rivière, Cell decomposition and dimension
function in the theory of closed ordered diﬀerential ﬁelds, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 159
(2009), no. 1-2, 111 – 128.
[14]
Ronald F. Bustamante Medina, Model Theory of Differentially Closed
Fields with a Generic Automorphism, PhD thesis, Paris 2005. Available at
http://arxiv.org/abs/0907.3959.
[15]
Zoé Chatzidakis, Generic automorphisms of separably closed ﬁelds, Illinois J. Math. 45
(2001), no. 3, 693 – 733.
[16]
Zoé Chatzidakis, A note on canonical bases and one-based types in supersimple theo-
ries, Confluentes Math., 04 No 3, 1250004 (2012).
Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey

110
|
Zoé Chatzidakis
[17]
Z. Chatzidakis, G. Cherlin, S. Shelah, G. Srour and C. Wood, Orthogonality of types in
separably closed ﬁelds, in: Classiﬁcation theory, Proc. of the 1985 Chicago Conference,
Springer Lecture Notes 1292.
[18]
Zoé Chatzidakis, Ehud Hrushovski, Model theory of diﬀerence ﬁelds, Trans. Amer. Math.
Soc. 351 (1999), 2997 – 3071.
[19]
Zoé Chatzidakis, Ehud Hrushovski, Asymptotic theories of diﬀerential ﬁelds, Illinois J.
of Mathematics 47 Nr 3 (2003), 593 – 618.
[20]
Zoé Chatzidakis, Ehud Hrushovski, Model theory of endomorphisms of separably closed
ﬁelds, J. of Algebra 281 (2004), no. 2, 567 – 603.
[21]
Zoé Chatzidakis, Ehud Hrushovski, Diﬀerence ﬁelds and descent in algebraic dynamics,
I, Journal of the IMJ, 7 (2008) No 4, 653 – 686.
[22]
Zoé Chatzidakis, Ehud Hrushovski, Diﬀerence ﬁelds and descent in algebraic dynamics,
II, Journal of the IMJ, 7 (2008) No 4, 687 – 704.
[23]
Zoé Chatzidakis, Ehud Hrushovski, On subgroups of semi-abelian varieties deﬁned by
diﬀerence equations, preprint 2012. Available on arxiv 1112.0920.
[24]
Zoé Chatzidakis, Ehud Hrushovski, Yaacov Peterzil, The model theory of diﬀerence
ﬁelds, II: periodic ideals and the trichotomy in all characteristics, Proceedings of the
London Math. Society (3) 85 (2002), 257 – 311.
[25]
Z. Chatzidakis, A. Pillay, Generic structures and simple theories, Ann. Pure Applied Logic
95 (1998), 71 – 92.
[26]
Françoise Delon, Idéaux et types sur les corps séparablement clos, Supplément au Bull.
de la S.M.F, Mémoire 33, Tome 116, 1988.
[27]
Françoise Delon, Separably closed ﬁelds, in: Model Theory and Algebraic Geometry, E.
Bouscaren ed., Springer Verlag, Lecture Note 1696, Berlin 1998.
[28]
Ju. L. Ershov, Fields with a solvable theory (Eng. transl.), Sov. Math. Doklady 8 (1967),
575 – 576.
[29]
James Freitag, Indecomposability for diﬀerential algebraic groups, available on arxiv
1106.0695.
[30]
Nicolas Guzy, Note sur les corps diﬀérentiellement clos valués, C. R. Math. Acad. Sci.
Paris 341 (2005), no. 10, 593 – 596.
[31]
Nicolas Guzy, Quelques remarques sur les corps D-valués, C. R. Math. Acad. Sci. Paris
343 (2006), no. 11-12, 689 – 694.
[32]
Nicolas Guzy, Valued ﬁelds with K commuting derivations, Comm. Algebra 34 (2006),
no. 12, 4269 – 4289.
[33]
Nicolas Guzy, 0-D-valued ﬁelds, J. Symbolic Logic 71 (2006), no. 2, 639 – 660.
[34]
Nicolas Guzy, Some elements of Lie-diﬀerential algebra and a uniform companion for
large Lie-diﬀerential ﬁelds, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 150 (2007), no. 1-3, 66 – 78.
[35]
Nicolas Guzy, Françoise Point, Topological diﬀerential ﬁelds, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 161
(2010), no. 4, 570 – 598.
[36]
Nicolas Guzy, Cédric Rivière, Geometrical axiomatization for model complete theories of
diﬀerential topological ﬁelds, Notre Dame J. Formal Logic 47 (2006), no. 3, 331 – 341.
[37]
Ehud Hrushovski, Strongly minimal expansions of algebraically closed ﬁelds, Israel J.
Math, 79, 129 – 151 (1992).
[38]
Ehud Hrushovski, A new strongly minimal set, in Stability in model theory, III (Trento,
1991), Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 62 (1993), no. 2, 147 – 166.
[39]
Ehud Hrushovski, The Mordell-Lang conjecture for function ﬁelds, J. of the Amer. Math.
Soc. Vol 9 Nr 3 (1996), 667 – 690.

Bibliography
|
111
[40]
Ehud Hrushovski, The Manin-Mumford conjecture and the model theory of diﬀerence
ﬁelds, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 112 (2001), no. 1, 43 – 115.
[41]
Ehud Hrushovski, The elementary theory of the Frobenius automorphism, preprint
(1996, revised in 2004, ... 2013). Available at http://www.math.huji.ac.il/∼ehud/.
[42]
E. Hrushovski, M. Itai, On model complete diﬀerential ﬁelds, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
355 (2003), no. 11, 4267 – 4296.
[43]
U. Hrushovski, A. Pillay, Weakly normal groups, in: Logic Colloquium 85, North Holland
1987, 233 – 244.
[44]
Ehud Hrushovski, Anand Pillay, Eﬀective bounds for the number of transcendental
points on subvarieties of semi-abelian varieties, Amer. J. Math. 122 (2000), no. 3, 439
– 450.
[45]
Ehud Hrushovski, Željko Sokolović, Minimal subsets of diﬀerentially closed ﬁelds,
preprint 1994. Accepted by Trans. Amer. Math. Soc..
[46]
Ehud Hrushovski, Boris Zilber, Zariski geometries, J. of the Amer. Math. Soc. Vol 9 Nr 1
(1996), 1 – 56.
[47]
Hirotaka Kikyo, On generic predicates and automorphisms, Kokyuroku
of RIMS 1390 (2004), 1 – 8. Available at http://www.kurims.kyoto-
u.ac.jp/∼kyodo/kokyuroku/contents/1390.html.
[48]
Piotr Kowalski, Geometric axioms for existentially closed Hasse ﬁelds, Annals Pure Appl.
Logic 135 (2005), 286 – 302.
[49]
Piotr Kowalski, Derivations of the Frobenius map, J. Symbolic Logic 70 (1) (2005) 99 –
110.
[50]
Piotr Kowalski, Jet operators on ﬁelds, J. Algebra 289 (2005), no. 1, 312 – 319.
[51]
Piotr Kowalski, Schanuel property for additive power series, Israel J. Math. 190 (2012),
349 – 363.
[52]
Piotr Kowalski, Anand Pillay, Pro-algebraic and diﬀerential algebraic groups on aﬃne
spaces, American Journal of Math., 122, (2000), 213 – 222.
[53]
Piotr Kowalski, A. Pillay, A note on groups deﬁnable in diﬀerence ﬁelds, Proceedings
AMS, 130, (2001), 205-212.
[54]
Piotr Kowalski, Anand Pillay, Quantiﬁer elimination for algebraic D-groups, Trans. Amer.
Math. Soc. 358 (2006), no. 1, 167 – 181.
[55]
Piotr Kowalski, Anand Pillay, On algebraic 휎-groups, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 359 (2007),
no. 3, 1325–1337.
[56]
Angus Macintyre, Generic automorphisms of ﬁelds, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 88 Nr 2-3
(1997), 165 – 180.
[57]
David Marker, Model theory of diﬀerential ﬁelds, in Model Theory of ﬁelds (D. Marker, M.
Messmer, A. Pillay Eds.), Lecture Notes in Logic Nr 5, Springer Verlag 1996, 38 – 113.
[58]
David Marker, Zariski Geometries, in: Model Theory and Algebraic Geometry, E. Bous-
caren ed., Springer Verlag, Lecture Note 1696, Berlin 1998, 107 – 128.
[59]
Tracey McGrail, The model theory of diﬀerential ﬁelds with ﬁnitely many commuting
derivations, J. Symbolic Logic, vol. 65 (2000), no.2, 885 – 913.
[60]
Alice Medvedev, QACFA, preprint (2012).
[61]
Alice Medvedev, Thomas Scanlon, Invariant varieties for polynomial dynamical systems,
Annals of Mathematics (2) 179 (2014) no. 1, 81 – 177.
[62]
Margit Messmer, Groups and ﬁelds interpretable in separably closed ﬁelds, Trans.
Amer. Math. Soc. 344 (1994), 361 – 377.
Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey

112
|
Zoé Chatzidakis
[63]
Margit Messmer and Carol Wood, Separably closed ﬁelds with higher derivations, Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic 60 (1995), 898 – 910.
[64]
Christian Michaux, Cédric Rivière, Quelques remarques concernant la théorie des corps
ordonnés diﬀérentiellement clos, Bull. Belg. Math. Soc. Simon Stevin 12 (2005), no. 3,
341 – 348.
[65]
Rahim Moosa, Anand Pillay, On canonical bases and internality criteria, Illinois J. Math.
52 (2008), no. 3, 901 – 917.
[66]
Rahim Moosa and Thomas Scanlon, Jets and prolongations spaces, Journal of the Insti-
tute of Mathematics Jussieu 9 (2010), no. 2, 391 – 430.
[67]
Rahim Moosa and Thomas Scanlon, Generalized Hasse-Schmidt varieties and their jet
spaces, Proc. Lond. Math. Soc. (3) 103 (2011), no. 2, 197 – 234.
[68]
Rahim Moosa and Thomas Scanlon, Model theory of ﬁelds with free operators in charac-
teristic zero, preprint 2012, available on arXiv 1212.5838.
[69]
Rahim Moosa, Anand Pillay and Thomas Scanlon, Diﬀerential arcs and regular types in
diﬀerential ﬁelds, J. Reine Angew. Math. 620 (2008), 35 – 54.
[70]
Koushik Pal, Multiplicative valued diﬀerence ﬁelds, J. Symbolic Logic 77 (2012), no. 2,
545 – 579.
[71]
David Pierce, Fields with several commuting derivations, J. Symbolic Logic 79 (2014) no.
1, 1 – 19.
[72]
David Pierce, Anand Pillay, A note on the axioms for diﬀerentially closed ﬁelds of charac-
teristic zero, J. Algebra 204 (1998), no. 1, 108 – 115.
[73]
Anand Pillay, Some foundational questions concerning diﬀerential algebraic groups,
Paciﬁc J. 179 (1997), no 1, 179 – 200.
[74]
Anand Pillay, Diﬀerential Galois Theory I, Illinois Journal of Math. 42 (1998), 678 – 699.
[75]
Anand Pillay, Model-theoretic consequences of a theorem of Campana and Fujiki, Funda-
menta Mathematicae, 174 (2002), 187 – 192.
[76]
Anand Pillay, Algebraic D-groups and diﬀerential Galois theory, Paciﬁc J. Math. 216
(2004), no. 2, 343 – 360.
[77]
Anand Pillay, Martin Ziegler, Jet spaces of varieties over diﬀerential and diﬀerence
ﬁelds, Selecta Math. (N.S.) 9 (2003), no. 4, 579 – 599.
[78]
Françoise Point, Ensembles déﬁnissables dans les corps ordonnés diﬀérentiellement
clos, C. R. Math. Acad. Sci. Paris 349 (2011), no. 17-18, 929 – 933.
[79]
Bruno Poizat, Une théorie de Galois imaginaire, J. of Symb. Logic vol. 48 (1984) no. 4,
1151 – 1170.
[80]
Cédric Rivière, The model theory of m-ordered diﬀerential ﬁelds, Math. Log. Q. 52
(2006), no. 4, 331 – 339.
[81]
Cédric Rivière, The theory of closed ordered diﬀerential ﬁelds with m commuting deriva-
tions, C. R. Math. Acad. Sci. Paris 343 (2006), no. 3, 151 – 154.
[82]
Cédric Rivière, Further notes on cell decomposition in closed ordered diﬀerential ﬁelds,
Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 159 (2009), no. 1-2, 100 – 110.
[83]
Abraham Robinson, Relative model-completeness and the elimination of quantiﬁers,
Dialectica Volume 12, Issue 3-4 (1958), pages 394 – 407.
[84]
Abraham Robinson, On the concept of a diﬀerentially closed ﬁeld, Bulletin of the Re-
search Council of Israel, 1959, 113 – 128.
[85]
A. Robinson, Introduction to Model Theory and to the Metamathematics of Algebra,
North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1974.

Bibliography
|
113
[86]
Omar León Sánchez, Geometric Axioms for Diﬀerentially Closed Fields with Several
Commuting Derivations, Journal of Algebra, Vol. 362 (2012), 107 – 116.
[87]
Omar León Sánchez, PhD Thesis, U. of Waterloo, Canada, 2013.
[88]
Thomas Scanlon, A model complete theory of valued D-ﬁelds, Journal of Symbolic Logic,
65 , no. 4 (2000), 1758 - 1784.
[89]
Thomas Scanlon, The abc-theorem for commutative algebraic groups in characteristic p,
International Mathematics Research Notices 1997, no. 18, 881 – 898.
[90]
Thomas Scanlon, 푝-adic distance from torsion points of semi-abelian varieties, J. Reine
Angew. Math. 499 (1998), 225 – 236.
[91]
Thomas Scanlon, The conjecture of Tate and Voloch on 푝-adic proximity to torsion, Inter-
national Mathematics Research Notices, 1999, no. 17, 909 – 914.
[92]
Thomas Scanlon, Diophantine geometry of the torsion of a Drinfeld module, J. Number
Theory 97 (2002), no. 1, 10 – 25.
[93]
Saharon Shelah, Diﬀerentially closed ﬁelds, Israel J. of Math. 16 (1973), 314 – 328.
[94]
Michael F. Singer, The model theory of ordered diﬀerential ﬁelds. J. Symbolic Logic 43
(1978), no. 1, 82 – 91.
[95]
Michael F. Singer, Model theory of partial diﬀerential ﬁelds: from commuting to noncom-
muting derivations, Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 135 (2007), no. 6, 1929 – 1934.
[96]
G. Srour, The independence relation in separably closed ﬁelds, J. Symbolic Logic 51
(1986), no. 3, 715 – 725.
[97]
Sonat Süer, On subgroups of the additive group in diﬀerentially closed ﬁelds, J. Sym-
bolic Logic 77 (2012), no. 2, 369 – 391.
[98]
Marcus Tressl, The uniform companion for large diﬀerential ﬁelds of characteristic 0,
Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., vol.357 (2005), no.10, 3933 – 3951.
[99]
Frank O. Wagner, Some remarks on one-basedness, J. of Symb. Logic 69 Nr 1 (2004), 34
– 38.
[100] Carol Wood, The model theory of diﬀerential ﬁelds of characteristic 푝> 푂, Proc. Amer.
Math. Soc. 40 (1973), 577 – 584.
[101]
Carol Wood, Prime model extensions for diﬀerential ﬁelds of characteristic 푝
̸= 0, J.
Symbolic Logic 39 (1974), 469 – 477.
[102]
Carol Wood, The model theory of diﬀerential ﬁelds revisited, Israel Journal of Mathemat-
ics 25 (1976) 331 – 352.
[103]
Carol Wood, Notes on the stability of separably closed ﬁelds, J. Symbolic Logic 44
(1979), 412 – 416.
[104]
Yoav Yaﬀe, Model completion of Lie diﬀerential ﬁelds, Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, vol. 107
(2001), no.1-3, 49 – 86.
[105]
Martin Ziegler, Separably closed ﬁelds with Hasse derivations, Journal of Symbolic Logic
68 (2003), 311 – 318.
[106]
Boris Zilber, Zariski Geometries. Geometry from the logician’s point of view, London
Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series, 360. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge,
2010.
Model Theory of Fields With Operators – a Survey


Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
Some Aspects of the Ramsey Theory of Real
Numbers
Abstract: We examine several variations of the Ramsey property for collections
of inﬁnite sets or equences of natural numbers. Particular enphasis is put on
the existence of homogeneous inﬁnite products of ﬁnte sets of natural numbers.
Parametrizations of some of these partition properties are also considered, and
then used to obtain independence results.
Keywords: partition properties, partition calculus, Ramsey sets
MSC: 03E02, 03E05
||
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco: Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones cientíﬁcas, Caracas; Univer-
sidad de Los Andes, Bogotá, email: cdiprisc@ivic.gob.ve
1 Introduction
The theory of partitions as an area of combinatorial set theory originated in the
1930’s with F. P. Ramsey’s famous theorem [25]. Some earlier results of Schur and
Van der Waerden have some of the same combinatorial ﬂavor, but Ramsey’s theo-
rem became the initial point of a whole area of study (see [14]). In the 1950’s Erdös
and Rado gave shape to the theory and developed it in several diﬀerent directions
with their partition calculus [12].
Ramsey’s Theorem asserts that given positive integers 푛and 푘, for every par-
tition of N[푛] = {푎⊆N : |푎| = 푛} into 푘many pieces, there is an inﬁnite 퐻⊆N
such that 퐻[푛], the collection of all of its 푛-element subsets, is contained in one
piece. Such a set 퐻is said to be homogeneous for the partition. A ﬁnitary version
of Ramsey’s theorem is stated as follows, given positive integers 푛, 푘, 푚, there is a
positive integer 푁such that for every set 퐴of 푁elements and every partition of
퐴[푛] = {푎⊆퐴: |푎| = 푛} into 푘many pieces, there is a subset 퐻⊆퐴with |퐻| = 푚,
for which 퐻[푛] is contained in one of the pieces (i.e. 퐻is homogeneous for the
partition).
Ramsey proved his theorem as a technical tool to answer a question about de-
cidability of ﬁrst order logic [25]. Many diﬀerent applications of the theorem have
been found, and the multiple ways it has been generalized or adapted to other
contexts constitute a rich theory with applications in other areas of mathematics.

116
|
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
The books [14] and [23] provide a good sample of the degree of development of
Ramsey Theory. Several other developments in this area have started from meta-
mathematical considerations. In these other cases as well, the solution of a meta-
mathematical problem led to the development of concepts and theories of a purely
combinatorial character. The converse direction has also been fruitful, as some
natural questions about partitions have required a metamathematical analysis,
for example to establish consistency results.
The obvious inﬁnite dimensional generalization of Ramsey’s theorem to par-
titions of the set N[∞] of inﬁnite subsets of N, instead of the collection of subsets of
a speciﬁed ﬁnite size, is false. Nevertheless, partitions of N[∞] into a ﬁnite number
of “topologically simple” pieces always admit an inﬁnite homogeneous set, i.e. an
inﬁnite set 퐻⊆N such that 퐻[∞] = {퐴⊆퐻: 퐴inﬁnite} is contained in one of the
pieces.
Since we can identify subsets of N with their characteristic functions, the set
N[∞] corresponds to a subset of the Cantor space 2N, which, with the inherited
topology, is homeomorphic to the set of irrational numbers, and also to the Baire
space, the set N∞of all inﬁnite sequences of natural numbers endowed with the
product topology. In this sense, we are dealing with partitions of the set of real
numbers, considering these numbers represented by inﬁnite subsets of N, or inﬁ-
nite sequences of natural numbers.
Partition properties are frequently stated in terms of colorings. A 푘-coloring
of a set 푆is simply a function 푐: 푆→퐾where 퐾is a set of size 푘. Clearly, every
푘-coloring of 푆determines a partition of 푆into 푘pieces. For example, Ramsey’s
Theorem states that for every 푛, 푘∈N and every 푘-coloring of N[푛], there is 퐻∈
N[∞] such that 퐻[푛] is monochromatic.
We will consider partitions (or colorings) of N[∞] the set of inﬁnite subsets of
N, and partitions of inﬁnite products of various structures, ﬁnite or inﬁnite, and
the existence of diﬀerent types of monochromatic sets for them. Diﬀerent types
of monochromatic sets usually give rise to corresponding partition properties of
diﬀerent strengths. We will be interested in the interrelationship between them,
looking both into metamathematical and purely combinatorial aspects.
Some quite old questions of the theory remain open, like the question about
the necessity of inaccessible cardinals for the consistency of the Ramsey property
휔→(휔)휔, or if this partition property follows from 퐴퐷.
We use a very standard notation. N is the set of natural numbers, which is
identiﬁed with 휔, the ﬁrst inﬁnite ordinal. N∞is the set of inﬁnite sequences of
natural numbers; the topological space obtained giving it the product topology
(obtained by giving N the discrete topology) is called the Baire space. N<∞=
⋃∞
푛=0 N푛is the set of ﬁnite sequences of natural numbers. Given a set 퐴and 푛∈N,
퐴[푛] is the collection of those subsets of 퐴which have exactly 푛elements. The col-

Aspects of Ramsey theory
|
117
lection of ﬁnite subsets of N is denoted by N[<∞]. For every inﬁnite 퐴⊆N, we use
퐴[∞] to denote the collection of inﬁnite subsets of 퐴, accordingly, N[∞] is the set of
inﬁnite subsets of N. If 퐴∈N[∞] and 푎∈N[<∞], then 퐴/푎= {푛∈퐴: max 푎< 푛}.
If 푠∈N[<∞] and 푛∈N, we write 푛< 푠to express that 푛< min(푠).
We will use the letters 푛, 푚, 푘, 푙, . . . to denote natural numbers, and 퐴, 퐵, 퐶,
퐻, 푋, 푌, . . . to denote inﬁnite sets of natural numbers. The letters 푎, 푏, 푐, . . . will
be used to denote ﬁnite sets of natural numbers, and 푠, 푡, 푟, . . . to denote ﬁnite
sequences.
2 Ramsey’s Theorem
In this section we start presenting Ramsey’s theorem, which can be viewed as the
origin of the branch of combinatorics known today as Ramsey Theory. Then, we
consider some extensions or generalizations.
Theorem 2.1. (Ramsey [25]) For every 푛, 푘∈N, and every 푐: [N]푛→푘, there is
퐻∈[N]∞such that 푐is constant on [퐻]∞.
In the arrow notation of Erdös and Rado, this is expressed by
휔→(휔)푛
푘.
For a proof of Ramsey’s theorem the reader can consult [14] or [30].
It should be clear that the statement of Ramsey’s theorem for 푘= 휔is false,
just consider the function 푐: [N]푛→휔given by 푐(푎) = 푚푖푛(푎).
Other functions like 푐(푎) = {푚푖푛(푎), 푚푎푥(푎)}, give counterexamples. The fol-
lowing theorem of Erdös and Rado classiﬁes all the counterexamples.
Deﬁnition 2.2. Let 푎= {푥1, . . . , 푥푟} be a set of size 푟, and 푋⊆{1, . . . , 푟}. Then
푎↾푋= {푥푖: 푖∈푋}. A partition 푐: [퐵]푟→푂푟푑of the collection of 푟-element
subsets of 퐵is canonical on 퐵if there is a set 푋⊆{1, . . . , 푟} such that for every
푎, 푏∈[퐵]푟,
푐(푎) = 푐(푏) if and only if 푎↾푋= 푏↾푋.
The set 푋is unique if it exists.
Theorem 2.3. ([11]) For every positive integer 푟, and for every partition 푓: [N]푟→
푂푟푑, there is a set 퐵∈[N]∞, such that 푓is canonical on 퐵.
The sets of the form [N]푟with 푟a positive integer are the uniform families of ﬁnite
rank. A result of Pudlak and Rödl ([24]) generalizes Theorem 2.3 to the realm of all
uniform families.

118
|
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
For the convenience of the reader we include the following deﬁnition.
By induction on the countable ordinals we deﬁne what is an 훼-uniform family
of ﬁnite sets of natural numbers.
Deﬁnition 2.4. A family F ⊆[N]<휔is 훼-uniform on 퐴∈[N]∞if
1.
훼= 0 and F = {0},
2.
훼= 훽+ 1 and for every 푛∈휔, the collection
F(푛) = {푡∈N[<∞] : 푛< 푡, {푛} ∪푡∈F}
is 훽-uniform on 퐴/푛,
3.
훼is a limit ordinal and there exists a strictly increasing sequence {훼푛: 푛∈휔}
of ordinals with limit 훼and for every 푛∈휔,
F(푛) = {푡: 푛< 푡, {푛} ∪푡∈F}
is 훼푛-uniform on 퐴/푛.
We say that F is uniform on 퐴if it is 훼-uniform on 퐴for some 훼< 휔1.
Observe that {0} is the only 0-uniform family. And in general, for every 푘∈휔, N[푘]
is the only 푘-uniform family. The collection of all the sets of natural numbers of the
form {푛1, 푛2, . . . , 푛푘} such that 푛1 < 푛2 < ⋅⋅⋅< 푛푘y 푘= 푛1 + 1 is an 휔-uniform family
called the Schreier family. More generally, if {푚푖: 푖∈휔} is a strictly increasing
sequence of natural numbers, the collection {{푛1, 푛2, . . . , 푛푘} : 푘= 푚푛1} is an 휔-
uniform family.
And given {푚푖: 푖∈휔} a strictly increasing sequence of natural numbers, the
family {{푛1, . . . , 푛푘} : 푘> 푖, 푘= 푚푛푖} is 휔+ 푖-uniform
Recall that a family F of ﬁnite sets of natural numbers is a barrier on a set
푀∈N[∞] if for every 푠, 푡∈F, 푠
̸⊆푡if 푠
̸= 푡, and every inﬁnite subset of 푀has an
initial segment in F [22].
It is easy to show by induction on the countable ordinals that every uniform
family is a barrier. Also, every barrier is uniform on some inﬁnite set.
Deﬁnition 2.5. A function 휙: S →휔is a canonical partition of S on 푋if S is a
uniform family on 푋and there is a uniform family T and an application 푓: S →T
such that
(a) 푓(푠) ⊆푠for every 푠∈S,
(b) for every 푠, 푡∈S, 휙(푠) = 휙(푡) if and only if 푓(푠) = 푓(푡).
Clause (b) is equivalent to
(b’) there is a one-to-one function 휓: T →N such that for every 푠∈B, 휙(푠) =
휓(푓(푠)).
If F is a family of ﬁnite sets of natural numbers and 퐴∈N[∞], we write F ↾퐴to
denote the subfamily F ∩P(퐴).

Aspects of Ramsey theory
|
119
Theorem 2.6. [24] For every uniform barrier S on a set 푋∈[N]∞and every function
휙: S →N, there is 푌∈푋[∞] such that 휙↾(S ↾푌) is a canonical partition of S ↾푌
on 푌.
To end this section let us consider partitions of [N]∞. A straightforward general-
ization of Ramsey’s theorem to this kind of partition is prevented by the axiom of
choice. This is so since using this axiom one proves the existence of a partition of
[N]∞into two parts neither of them containing a subset of the form [퐴]∞. More-
over, an argument of [19] shows that the existence of a non principal ultraﬁlter on
N is enough to give a counterexample.
The topology induced on [N]∞by the product topology of 2N allows us to view
this in a diﬀerent form. Using the axiom of choice one can prove the existence of
a totally imperfect subset of [N]∞, that is, a subset of [N]∞that together with its
complement meets every perfect subset of [N]∞([1]). And since for every 퐴∈[N]∞
the set [퐴]∞is perfect, a totally imperfect set determines a partition as above.
Nevertheless, for partitions into deﬁnable portions there are homogeneous sets.
A subset A of [N]∞is Ramsey if there is 퐴∈[N]∞such that [퐴]∞⊆A or
[퐴]∞∩A = 0.
Theorem 2.7. (Galvin and Prikry, [13]) Every Borel subset of [N]∞is Ramsey.
Theorem 2.8. (Silver, [27]) Every analytic subset of [N]∞is Ramsey.
It is consistent with 푍퐹+ 퐷퐶that every subset of [N]∞is Ramsey, relative to the
consistency of 푍퐹퐶+∃inaccessible cardinal. In Solovay’s model [28], where every
set of real numbers is Lebesgue measurable, every subset of [N]∞is Ramsey [20].
Using the arrow notation, the statement “every subset of [N]∞is Ramsey” is
expressed by
휔→(휔)휔.
In the next sections we will examine several variants of this property.
3 Sublattices of P(N)
We consider now a partition property deﬁned using of a diﬀerent type of homo-
geneity for partitions of N[∞]. Instead of requiring for every coloring 푐: N[∞] →
{0, 1} the existence of an inﬁnite set 퐵with all of its inﬁnite subsets of the same
color, we only require that all subsets of 퐵containing a ﬁxed subset 퐴have the
same color.
The partition symbol
휔→((휔))휔

120
|
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
means that for every coloring 푐: N[∞] →{0, 1} there is a pair (퐴, 퐵) with 퐴⊆퐵∈
N[∞] and 퐵\ 퐴∈N[∞] such that
[퐴, 퐵] = {푋: 퐴⊆푋⊆퐵}
is monochromatic (we put no requirements on the size of 퐴). Such sets of the form
[퐴, 퐵] are called “doughnuts” in [7] and [6].
We write
휔→(perfect)휔
to express that for every coloring 푐: N[∞] →{0, 1} there is a perfect monochro-
matic set. Notice that this is equivalent to saying that there are no Bernstein sets.
A Bernstein set (or totally imperfect set) is a subset 푆of N[∞] such that 푆and its
complement meet every perfect set.
Since every “doughnut” [퐴, 퐵] is a perfect subset of N[∞], it follows immedi-
ately from the deﬁnitions that
휔→(휔)휔implies 휔→((휔))휔implies 휔→(perfect)휔.
Using the argument of [19] mentioned above, it can be shown that a non-
principal ultraﬁlter on N provides a counterexample for the property 휔→((휔))휔,
but the property 휔→(perfect)휔is consistent with the existence of such ultraﬁlters
(see [3]).
The consistency of (푍퐹+퐷퐶+휔→((휔))휔) follows just from the consistency of
푍퐹퐶, with no hypothesis involving inaccessible cardinals. This is so since 휔→퐵푎푖푟푒
((휔))휔holds (see [7]), and the consistency of “every subset of N∞has the Baire
property” has been established by Shelah assuming just the consistency of 푍퐹퐶
[26].
J. Brendle, L. Halbeisen and B. Lowe have studied the property 휔→((휔))휔
restricted to 훴1
2 sets, 훥1
2 sets, and projective sets in general (see, for example, [2],
and [15], where it is shown that 휔→훴1
2 ((휔))휔does not imply 휔→훴1
2 (휔)휔).
The exact relationship between the properties 휔→(휔)휔and 휔→((휔))휔
was revealed in [4]. In section 7 we will explain this and also the relation with a
partition property of polarized type.
4 Homogeneity in terms of products of ﬁnite sets
In this section we consider partitions of the Baire space N∞= N × N × . . . , the
set of inﬁnite sequences of natural numbers with the product topology obtained
when N is considered as a discrete space. We will also consider partitions of some

Aspects of Ramsey theory
|
121
subspaces of the Baire space given by inﬁnite products of ﬁnite sets. For such par-
titions we ask for the existence of homogeneous sets of a very particular form,
namely, products of ﬁnite sets.
Given
푐: N∞→{1, 2},
we want a monochromatic product ∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖, with 퐻푖⊆N of some speciﬁed size for
every 푖. ([5]).
We use the partition symbol
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
)
to express that for every coloring 푐: N∞→2, there is a monochromatic product
∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖with 퐻푖⊆N and |퐻푖| = 푚푖for every 푖.
Notice that here we do not require the sequence {퐻푖}∞
푖=0 to be increasing, but
as shown in [5] this is not essential.
It is easy to realize that we cannot require 퐻0 and 퐻1 to be both inﬁnite: let
푐: N∞→{0, 1} be deﬁned by 푐(푥) = 0 if and only if 푥(0) < 푥(1). Clearly, a product
∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖with 퐻푖⊆N and with 퐻0 and 퐻1 both inﬁnite cannot be monochromatic
for 푐. In the same fashion a counterexample can be given if we require inﬁnite sets
in any two speciﬁed (ﬁxed) coordinates. If no coordinates are speciﬁed, it is possi-
ble to get for every 푐: N∞→{0, 1} a monochromatic product ∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖with at least
two inﬁnite factors, the position of the inﬁnite factors depending on the partition.
This follows from results of G. Moran and D. Strauss [21]. They prove that for every
푘∈N and every partition of N∞into two pieces, there is a monochromatic prod-
uct ∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖with 푘factors that are inﬁnite (in fact, each of them is the whole set
N) and the rest of the factors are singletons. It is not known if we can also require
the ﬁnite factors to be non-trivial, having at least two elements each.
Question 4.1. Is the following statement consistent? (We mean consistent with
푍퐹, provided that 푍퐹is consistent). For every partition 푐: N∞→{1, 2}, there
is a homogeneous product ∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖such that for every 푖, |퐻푖| > 1 and there are
푚, 푛∈N, 푚
̸= 푛with |퐻푚| = |퐻푛| = ℵ0. (see [7]).
Henle proved in [16] that 휔→(휔)휔implies that every partition of N∞into two
pieces admits a homogeneous product ∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖such that for every 푖, |퐻푖| > 1 and
퐻0 is inﬁnite.

122
|
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
Identifying inﬁnite subsets of N with their increasing enumeration, it can be
easily veriﬁed that 휔→(휔)휔implies (
휔
휔
...
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
) for every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0
of positive integers.
The exact relationship between the partition properties 휔
→
(휔)휔and
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
) (for a given sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0 of positive integers) turned out to
be an interesting problem. The two partition properties are not equivalent since
polarized partition property is consistent with the existence of non principal ul-
traﬁlters on N (see [10]). To prove this, a theory of partitions of products of ﬁnite
sets and their parametrized versions was developed. This theory, of intrinsic com-
binatorial interest, is another example of a combinatorial development motivated
by a metamathematical question (see [8, 9, 29]).
We will deal now with partitions of subspaces of N∞of the form ∏∞
푖=0 푛푖, where
{푛푖}∞
푖=0 is a sequence of positive integers and, as usual, we identify each 푛with the
set {0, 1, . . . , 푛−1}. In other words, we will consider partitions of the set of inﬁnite
sequences of positive integers bounded by some sequence {푛푖}∞
푖=0.
Given a sequence {푛푖}∞
푖=0, invoking the axiom of choice we can deﬁne a col-
oring 푐: ∏∞
푖=0 푛푖→{0, 1} such that for no sequence {퐻푖}∞
푖=0 with 퐻푖⊆푛푖and
|퐻푖| = 2 for every 푖, the product ∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖is monochromatic. Restricting the class of
colorings to be considered, some positive results are obtained. For example, there
is a sequence {푛푖}∞
푖=0 such that every Borel coloring 푐: ∏∞
푖=0 푛푖→{0, 1} admits
a monochromatic product of pairs ([18, 8]). An interesting connection appeared
here between these partition relations restricted to deﬁnable classes of colorings
and the Grzegorczyk hierarchy of primitive recursive functions (see [8] and [30]).
In more general terms, for every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0 of positive integers, there
is a sequence {푛푖}∞
푖=0 of positive integers such that for every Souslin-measurable
coloring 푐: ∏∞
푖=0 푛푖→{0, 1} there is a monochromatic product ∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖where for
every 푖, 퐻푖⊆푛푖has size 푚푖.
Partitions of inﬁnite products of ﬁnite sets were considered in [5] and [17],
with particular interest in the question of the consistency of the existence some
sequence {푛푖}∞
푖=0 such that for every partition of ∏∞
푖=0 푛푖into two pieces there is a
monochromatic product of pairs.
We describe now, for each sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0, a class of products of ﬁnite sets
and a class of colorings which admit homogeneous products whose factors have
sizes determined by {푚푖}∞
푖=0. First we need some deﬁnitions. Given a sequence ⃗푛=
{푛푖}∞
푖=0 of natural numbers, a sequence
⃗퐻= {퐻푖}∞
푖=0 of ﬁnite sets of natural numbers

Aspects of Ramsey theory
|
123
is said to be of type ⃗푛, or a ⃗푛-sequence, if for every 푖, |퐻푖| = 푛푖. We also say in this
case that the product ∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖is an ⃗푛-product, or (푛푖)-product.
Whenever {퐻푖}∞
푖=0 and {퐽푖}∞
푖=0 are sequences of ﬁnite sets of natural numbers
we say that ∏∞
푖=0 퐽푖is a subproduct of ∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖if 퐽푖⊆퐻푖for every 푖. We write ⃗퐽≤푘
⃗퐻
if 퐽푖⊆퐻푖for every 푖∈N and 퐽푖= 퐻푖for 푖< 푘.
Given sequences of positive integers
⃗푚= {푚푖}∞
푖=0 and ⃗푛= {푛푖}∞
푖=0,
( ⃗푛) →( ⃗푚)
expresses that for every partition 푐: ∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖→{0, 1} such that |퐻푖| = 푛푖for all
푖, there is a sequence {퐽푖}∞
푖=0 with 퐽푖⊆퐻푖, and |퐽푖| = 푚푖for all 푖, such that 푐is
constant on ∏∞
푖=0 퐽푖. More concisely, for every 2-coloring of a product of type
⃗푛,
there is a monochromatic subproduct of type
⃗푚. As before, if we restrict ourselves
to colorings measurable with respect to a certain 휎-ﬁeld C of subsets of N[∞], we
use the notation
( ⃗푛) →C ( ⃗푚)
for the corresponding property.
Notice that for sequences
⃗푚={푚푖}∞
푖=0 and ⃗푛={푛푖}∞
푖=0 of positive integers, ( ⃗푛) →
( ⃗푚) does not follow from 휔→(휔)휔, as
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
)
does.
For partitions of ﬁnite products we use the notation
(
푛0
푛1
...
푛푘
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
푚푘
)
which means that for every partition 푐: ∏푘
푖=0 퐻푖→{0, 1} such that |퐻푖| = 푛푖for all
푖≤푘, there is a sequence {퐽푖}푘
푖=0 with 퐽푖⊆퐻푖, and |퐽푖| = 푚푖for all 푖≤푘, such that 푐
is constant on ∏푘
푖=0 퐽푖.
Deﬁnition 4.2. Let 푆: N<∞→N be deﬁned as follows
푆(푚0) = 2푚0 −1
푆(푚0, ..., 푚푖+1) = 2(푚푖+1 −1) [
푖
∏
푘=0
(
푚푘
푆(푚0, ..., 푚푘))] + 1.

124
|
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
The function 푆has the following property which can be veriﬁed by induction.
Lemma 4.3. Let (푚푖) ∈N∞and let 푛푖= 푆(푚0, ..., 푚푖) for all 푖. Then for every 푘
(
푛0
푛1
...
푛푘
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
푚푘
) .
It follows that we can get monochromatic subproducts of type
⃗푚for every con-
tinuous 2-coloring of ∏∞
푖=0 푆(푚표, . . . , 푚푖) (note that a continuous coloring gives a
partition into clopen pieces).
The existence of monochromatic
⃗푚-subproducts for semicontinuous 2-color-
ings, i.e. partitions into a closed set and its complement, also follows from the
Lemma (see [8]). To extend this result to a wider class of colorings, for example to
Borel-measurable colorings, iterates of the function 푆are deﬁned in order to carry
out certain diagonalization arguments.
The iterates of the function 푆are deﬁned recursively as follows.
푆(0)(푚0, ..., 푚푖) = 푆(푚0, ..., 푚푖),
푆(푝+1)(푚0, ..., 푚푖) =
푆(푆(푝)(푚0), 푆(푝)(푚0, 푚1), ..., 푆(푝)(푚0, ..., 푚푖)).
For 푀⊆N, deﬁne 푆푀: N<∞→N by
푆푀(푚0) = 푆(푚0),
푆푀(푚0, ..., 푚푖) = 푆(푝)(푚0, ..., 푚푖).
where
푝= | ⋃
푘∈푀∩푖
∞
∏
푗=0
푆푀(푚0, . . . , 푚푗)|.
For every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0 of positive integers, 푆푀((푚푖)) denotes the inﬁnite
sequence whose 푖-th term is 푆푀(푚0, . . . , 푚푖) (analogously for 푆(푝)((푚푖))).
We get the following lemma.
Lemma 4.4. Let {푚푖}∞
푖=0 be a sequence of positive integers, 푀⊆N, 푘∈푀, and
푁= 푀\ {푘}. For every 푆푀((푚푖))-product ∏푖퐻푖and every closed set X ⊆∏푖퐻푖,
there is an 푆푁((푚푖))-subproduct ∏푖퐽푖of ∏푖퐻푖such that for every 푥, 푦∈∏푖퐽푖, if
푥↾푘= 푦↾푘, then 푥∈X ↔푦∈X.

Aspects of Ramsey theory
|
125
When this happens we say that X ∩∏푖퐽푖depends only on coordinates < 푘.
Given 푛∈N, and two sequences (퐽푖) and (퐻푖) we use
(퐽푖) ≤푛(퐻푖)
to express that 퐽푖= 퐻푖for every 푖< 푛and 퐽푖⊆퐻푖for every 푖≥푛.
A pair (퐴, 퐵) of inﬁnite subsets of N is said to be regular if 퐴⊆퐵and 퐵\ 퐴is
inﬁnite. If (퐴, 퐵) and (퐶.퐷) are regular pairs,
(퐶, 퐷) ≤(퐴, 퐵)
if 퐴⊆퐶⊆퐷⊆퐵with both 퐶\ 퐴and 퐵\ 퐷inﬁnite. And for 푛∈N,
(퐶, 퐷) ≤푛(퐴, 퐵)
if (퐶, 퐷) ≤(퐴, 퐵) and also 퐴∩푛= 퐶∩푛and 퐷∩푛= 퐵∩푛.
Deﬁnition 4.5. We say that a set X ⊆N∞is (푚푖)-Ramsey if for every regular pair
(퐴, 퐵), every 푛∈퐵\퐴, and every 푆퐵-product ∏푖퐻푖, there is a regular pair (퐶, 퐷) ≤푛
(퐴, 퐵) and and an 푆퐷-product ∏푖퐽푖≤푛∏푖퐻푖such that X ∩∏푖퐽푖depends only on
coordinates < 푛.
X ⊆N∞is (푚푖)-Ramsey null if for every regular pair (퐴, 퐵), every 푛∈퐵\ 퐴,
and every 푆퐵-product ∏푖퐻푖, there is a regular pair (퐶, 퐷) ≤푛(퐴, 퐵) and and an
푆퐷-product ∏푖퐽푖≤푛∏푖퐻푖such that X ∩∏푖퐽푖= 0.
For every sequence (푚푖), the ideal of (푚푖)-Ramsey null sets is a 휎-ideal, and the
collection of (푚푖)-Ramsey sets is a 휎-ﬁeld of subsets of N∞.
Every closed subset of N∞is (푚푖)-Ramsey, and therefore all Borel subsets of
N∞are (푚푖)-Ramsey. Furthermore, all analytic subsets of N∞are (푚푖)-Ramsey
since the ﬁeld of (푚푖)-Ramsey sets if closed under the Souslin operation.
We obtain thus, the following.
Theorem 4.6. For every sequence
⃗푚= {푚푖}∞
푖=0, there is a sequence ⃗푛= {푛푖}∞
푖=0 such
that for any Souslin-measurable
푐:
∞
∏
푖=0
푛푖→{0, 1}
there exist 퐻푖⊆푁푖with |퐻푖| = 푚푖for all 푖, such that 푐is constant on ∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖.
These results were obtained in [8] and [10], and in this ﬁnal form in [29] and [30].
As it was mentioned before, 휔→(휔)휔implies the polarized partition relation
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
)

126
|
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
for every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0, but these two partition relations are not equivalent. To
show this, a parametrization of 휔→(휔)휔by inﬁnite products of ﬁnite sets was
developed in [9] and [10]. We give the basic facts about this parametrization in
the next section.
5 The Ramsey property parametrized by products
of ﬁnite sets.
The following lemma from [9] is a more uniform version of Lemma 4.3. Besides
being interesting in its own right, it is useful to parametrize the partition property
휔→(휔)휔with partition properties of the form ( ⃗푛) →( ⃗푚).
Lemma 5.1. There is 푅: N<∞→N such that for every inﬁnite sequence
⃗푚= {푚푖}∞
푖=0
of positive integers and every coloring
푐: ⋃
푘
∏
푖<푘
푅(푚0, . . . , 푚푖) →{0, 1},
there exist 퐻푖⊆푅(푚0, . . . , 푚푖), |퐻푖| = 푚푖for all 푖, and an inﬁnite 퐴⊆N, such that 푐
is constant on ⋃푘∈퐴∏푖<푘퐻푖.
We cannot hope to get even more uniformity, since it is easy to deﬁne a partition
for which there is no
⃗푚-sequence
⃗퐻such that for every 푘, the subproduct ∏푘
푖=0 퐻푖
monochromatic.
The original proof of lemma 5.1 given in [9] uses the hypothesis “all 훴1
2-sets are
Ramsey”. Todorcevic gave afterwards a proof which avoids this hypothesis using
the following Ramsey uniformization theorem (see [30]).
Theorem 5.2. Let X be a Polish space and 푅a coanalytic subset of the product
N[∞] × 푋with the property that for all 푀∈N[∞] there is 푥∈푋such that 푅(푀, 푥)
holds. Then there is an inﬁnite 푀∈N[∞] and a continuous function 퐹: [푀]∞→푋
such that 푅(푁, 퐹(푁)) holds for every 푁∈[푀]∞.
For our purposes below, it is convenient to take such an 푅as in 5.1 that majorizes
the function 푆of Lemma 4.3. We also can assume that 푅(푚0, . . . , 푚푖) majorizes each
of its arguments and is monotonically increasing in each of them.

Aspects of Ramsey theory
|
127
The iterates of the function 푅given by Lemma 5.1 are deﬁned as those for 푆in
the previous section.
푅(0)(푚0, ..., 푚푖) = 푅(푚0, ..., 푚푖),
푅(푝+1)(푚0, ..., 푚푖) =
푅(푅(푝)(푚0), 푅(푝)(푚0, 푚1), ..., 푅(푝)(푚0, ..., 푚푖)).
For 푀⊆N, deﬁne 푅푀: N<∞→N recursively by
푅푀(푚0) = 푅(푚0),
푅푀(푚0, ..., 푚푖) = 푅(푝)(푚0, ..., 푚푖).
where
푝= | ⋃
푘∈푀∩푖
∞
∏
푗=0
푅푀(푚0, . . . , 푚푗)|.
For every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0 of positive integers, 푆푀((푚푖)) denotes the inﬁnite
sequence whose 푖-th term is 푆푀(푚0, . . . , 푚푖) (analogously for 푆(푝)((푚푖))). And as be-
fore, for every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0 of positive integers, 푅푀((푚푖)) denotes the inﬁnite
sequence whose 푖-th term is 푅푀(푚0, . . . , 푚푖) (analogously for 푅(푝)((푚푖))).
A ﬁeld of subsets of N∞× N[∞] is deﬁned as follows:
Deﬁnition 5.3. A subset X ⊆N∞× N[∞] is (푚푖)-para-Ramsey if for every regular
pair (푁, 푀), every 푅푀((푚푖))-sequence
⃗퐻, every 푛∈푀\ 푁, every 퐴∈N[∞], and
every 푎∈N[<∞], there exist a regular pair (푄, 푃) ≤푛(푁, 푀) an 푅푃((푚푖))-sequence
⃗퐽such that ⃗퐽≤푛
⃗퐻, an integer 푘≥푛, and an inﬁnite 퐵⊆퐴such that ∀푠∈∏푖<푘퐽푖
[푠, ⃗퐽] × [푎, 퐵] ⊆X or [푠, ⃗퐽] × [푎, 퐵] ∩X = 0.
Here, [푠, ⃗퐽] is the collection of elements of ∏∞
푖=0 퐽푖which extend 푠.
A rather involved argument gives the following results (see [10] or [30]).
Lemma 5.4. Every open subset of the product space X ⊆N∞× N[∞] is (푚푖)-para-
Ramsey.
Theorem 5.5. ([10]) For every sequence
⃗푚, the ﬁeld of (푚푖)-para-Ramsey subsets of
X ⊆N∞× N[∞] is a 휎-ﬁeld of subsets of N∞× N[∞] containing the open sets and
closed under Souslin’s operation.
The proof of this theorem is much harder than the proof of the corresponding re-
sult for (푚푖)-Ramsey subsets of N∞. To show that open subsets of N∞× N[∞] are

128
|
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
in (푚푖)-para-Ramsey, the notion of barrier of Nash-Williams is used, and a combi-
natorial forcing is developed along the lines of [13].
As for the case of the ﬁeld of (푚푖)-Ramsey subsets of N∞, the argument of [10]
to show that for every (푚푖) the ﬁeld of (푚푖)-para-Ramsey subsets of X ⊆N∞×N[∞]
is closed under Souslin’s operation uses metamathematical tools. There is a more
recent combinatorial proof due to S. Todorcevic (see [30]).
Corollary 5.6. For every sequence (푚푖), every analytic subset of N∞× N[∞] is (푚푖)-
para-Ramsey.
It can be veriﬁed ([9] 5.2) that for every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0 there is a sequence {푛푖}∞
푖=0
such that given a set X ⊆∏∞
푖=0 푛푖× N[∞] which is (푚푖)-para-Ramsey, there is an
(푚푖)-sequence {퐻푖}∞
푖=0 and an inﬁnite set 퐻such that
∞
∏
푖=0
퐻푖× 퐻[∞] ⊆X or
∞
∏
푖=0
퐻푖× 퐻[∞] ∩X = 0.
Thus, we obtain the following.
Corollary 5.7. For every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0, there is a sequence {푛푖}∞
푖=0 such that for
every analytic X ⊆∏∞
푖=0 푛푖× N[∞], there is an (푚푖)-sequence {퐻푖}∞
푖=0 and an inﬁnite
set 퐻such that
∞
∏
푖=0
퐻푖× 퐻[∞] ⊆X or
∞
∏
푖=0
퐻푖× 퐻[∞] ∩X = 0.
6 Independence of the Ramsey property from the
polarized property.
We say that a model 푀is a Solovay model over a ground model 푉if 푀= 퐿(R), the
class of sets constructible from R, where R is the set of reals in a generic extension
of 푉obtained using the Levy order to collapse an inaccessible cardinal of 푉to
(휔1)푀.
The following theorem establishes that in a Solovay model, the ﬁelds of (푚푖)-
Ramsey sets and of (푚푖)-para-Ramsey sets deﬁned in the previous sections include
all subsets of the corresponding spaces. Since in a Solovay model all subsets of
N[∞] are Ramsey, Lemma 5.1 holds there.
Theorem 6.1. ([10]) In every Solovay model, for every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0 of positive
integers, every subset of N∞is (푚푖)-Ramsey, and every subset of N∞× N[∞] is (푚푖)-
para-Ramsey.

Aspects of Ramsey theory
|
129
The main ingredients of the proof are several well known properties of Solovay
models, in particular the fact that in a Solovay model every subset of N∞or of
N∞× N[∞] is the union of ℵ1 analytic sets.
It follows that in a Solovay model, for every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0, there is a se-
quence {푛푖}∞
푖=0 such that ( ⃗푛) →( ⃗푚). The parametrized version also holds.
Corollary 6.2. In every Solovay model, for every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0 there exists a se-
quence {푛푖}∞
푖=0 such that for every coloring
푐:
∞
∏
푖=0
푛푖× N[∞] →{0, 1}
there exist 퐻푖⊆푛푖, |퐻푖| = 푚푖for every 푖, and an inﬁnite 퐻⊆N such that (∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖) ×
퐻[∞] is monochromatic.
Notice that this implies that in every Solovay model, for every sequence {푚푖}∞
푖=0
and for every coloring
푐: N∞× N[∞] →{0, 1}
there exist 퐻푖⊆푛푖, |퐻푖| = 푚푖for every 푖, and an inﬁnite 퐻⊆N such that (∏∞
푖=0 퐻푖)×
퐻[∞] is monochromatic.
The consistency of this parametrized partition property can be used to show
that the property 휔→(휔)휔is not implied by the polarized partition property
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
) .
This is achieved starting from a Solovay model 퐿(R), and adding a generic
selective ultraﬁlter 푈to obtain the generic extension 퐿(R)[푈]. The parametrized
partition property in 퐿(R) is then used to show that this generic extension satisﬁes
the polarized partition property
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
) .
Since in the presence of non principal ultraﬁlters on N there are non Ramsey
subsets of N[∞], the property 휔→(휔)휔does not hold in the generic extension
퐿(R)[푈]. Therefore, the property
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
)

130
|
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
does not imply 휔→(휔)휔.
A natural question arises about the relationship between the polarized parti-
tion property
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
)
and the property 휔→(perfect)휔.
It is clear that 휔→(perfect)휔follows from
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
2
2
...
) ,
since every inﬁnite product of pairs is perfect. Are these two partition properties
equivalent?
We address this question in the next section.
7 Independence of the sublattice property from
the polarized property.
Let 퐿[{푎휉: 휉< 휔1}] be a generic extension of 퐿obtained by adding ℵ1-many Cohen
generic reals to 퐿, and let 푁1 = 퐿({푎휉: 휉< 휔1}) computed in the generic extension.
This is the inner model of the generic extension containing all the Cohen generic
reals as elements but not their collection.
We will see below that in the model 푁1 the property 휔→((휔))휔holds, but not
the polarized partition relation
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
2
2
...
) .
On the other hand, in [10] it is established that the polarized partition relation
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
2
2
...
)

Aspects of Ramsey theory
|
131
does not imply 휔→((휔))휔(see Section 6). So, none of these properties implies
the other.
For 푠, 푡∈2<휔, we write 푠⊑푡to express that 푠is an initial segment of 푡, and
푠< 푡when 푠is a proper initial segment of 푡. As usual, 푇⊆2<휔is a tree if 푡∈푇and
푠< 푡, implies 푠∈푇. Given a tree 푇⊆2<휔, we say 푇is uniform if for every 푠, 푡∈푇,
of the same length,
푠⌢0 ∈푇←→푡⌢0 ∈푇and 푠⌢1 ∈푇←→푡⌢1 ∈푇.
A branch of a tree 푇⊆2<휔is an inﬁnite sequence 푐∈2휔such that for every 푛,
푐↾푛∈푇. We denote by [푇] the set of branches of 푇. A tree 푇⊆2<휔is perfect if for
every 푡∈푇there is 푠∈푇such that 푡⊑푠for which 푠⌢0 ∈푇and 푠⌢1 ∈푇.
It is clear that every perfect uniform tree 푇⊆2<휔determines a sublattice
[퐴, 퐵]. Namely, 퐴= {푛∈휔: ∀푐∈[푇](푐(푛) = 1)} and 퐵= {푛∈휔: ∃푐∈[푇](푐(푛) = 1)}
We will show that 휔→((휔))휔holds in 푁1. For this we prove a more general
result.
Theorem 7.1. Let 푀be a transitive model of 푍퐹퐶, let 푀[{푎휉: 휉< 휔1}] be the generic
extension obtained using the forcing notion C휔1 which adds 휔1 Cohen reals, and let
푁= 퐿({푎휉: 휉< 휔1}) computed in the generic extension 푀[{푎휉: 휉< 휔1}]. In 푁the
property 휔→((휔))휔holds.
Proof. Notice that if 푦∈푀[{푎휉: 휉< 휔1}] is Cohen generic over 푀, then the forcing
C휔1 can be factored as C × C휔1, where C is Cohen forcing. So,
푀[{푎휉: 휉< 휔1}] = 푀[푦][퐺耠],
where 퐺耠is C휔1-generic over 푀[푦].
We will prove that if A ⊆N[∞] in 푁, there is a sublattice [퐾, 퐻] ∈푁such that
[퐾, 퐻] ⊆A or [퐾, 퐻] ∩A = 0.
Let A ⊆N[∞] be such that A ∈푁, and let 훼= 푟푎푛푘푁(A). There is a formula
훷(푧, 푎훿0, . . . , 푎훿푘−1) that deﬁnes A, and by the factoring mentioned at the begining
of the proof, we can assume that the parameters 푎훿푖(푖< 푘) of the formula are in
the base model 푀.
Let P be the forcing of ﬁnite uniform subtrees of 2<휔ordered by end extension,
thus, 푇2 ≤푇1 if and only if 푇1 ⊆푇2 and 푇2 ↾height(푇1) = 푇1, where height(푇1) is
the length of any branch of 푇1 (all branches of a ﬁnite uniform tree have the same
length).
Since P is countable and atomless, it is equivalent to Cohen forcing, therefore
there are P-generic ﬁlters over 푀in 푀[{푎휉: 휉< 휔1}]. A P-generic over 푀is a
perfect uniform tree, thus it is a sublattice [퐴, 퐵]. It can be shown by a standard
argument that every element of [퐴, 퐵] is Cohen generic over 푀.

132
|
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
We will see that for some [퐴耠, 퐵耠] ⊆[퐴, 퐵], [퐴耠, 퐵耠] ⊆A or [퐴耠, 퐵耠]∩A = 0. Take
푥∈[퐴, 퐵]. If 푀[{푎휉: 휉< 휔1}] ⊨푥∈A, then in 푀[푥], by the weak homogeneity of
the partial order C휔1, we have that
0 ⊩C휔1
̌푥∈A,
i.e., the empty condition forces ̌푥∈A, in the forcing C휔1, where ̌푥is the canonical
name for 푥as an element of the base model 푀[푥].
Therefore, since 푥is Cohen generic over 푀, in 푀there is a Cohen condition
푝such that
푝⊩“0 ⊩C휔1
̌훤∈A”,
where 훤is the canonical name for the C-generic, and where we admit a slight
abuse of notation to express
̌훤as the canonical name for the object named by 훤.
Consider [퐴, 퐵] ↾푝, i.e. the sublattice [퐴耠, 퐵耠] = {푦∈[퐴, 퐵] : 푝< 푦}. Notice
that 퐴耠diﬀers from 퐴just in a ﬁnite set, and the same for 퐵耠and 퐵. For every
푦∈[퐴耠, 퐵耠], since 푝⊩“0 ⊩C휔1
̌훤∈A”, we have
푀[푦] ⊨“0 ⊩C휔1
̌푦∈A”.
Since the forcing that extends 푀[푦] to the full extension 푀[{푎휉: 휉< 휔1}] is
(isomorphic to) C휔1, we have that
푀[{푎휉: 휉< 휔1}] = 푀[푦][퐺耠] ⊨푦∈A.
We proceed in the same fashion if 푀[{푎휉: 휉< 휔1}] ⊨푥∉A. In the ﬁrst case
we obtain that [퐴耠, 퐵耠] ⊆A, and in the second, we get [퐴耠, 퐵耠] ∩A = 0.
It remains to be shown that there is such a homogeneous sublattice [퐴, 퐵] in
the model 푁. We can code ﬁnite uniform subtrees of 2<휔by ﬁnite sequences of 0’s
and 1’s, i.e. by elements of 2<휔, in a canonical way. Dense subsets of the partial
order P will correspond to dense subsets of the Cohen partial order. This means
that any Cohen generic in the extension codes a generic sublattice. Therefore, we
will have generic sublattices in the model 푁.
Notice that from this proof it follows that in the model 푁, every A ⊆N[∞] is Silver
measurable, since we can reproduce this argument below any arbitrary [퐶, 퐷].
This argument is similar to the one used in [2] for projective partitions.
Corollary 7.2. In the model 푁= 퐿({푎휉: 휉< 휔1}) of the previous theorem, every
set A ⊆N[∞] contains or is disjoint from a perfect subset of N[∞], i.e., there are no
Bernstein sets in this model.
Deﬁnition 7.3. Let 푀be a transitive model of 푍퐹퐶, and 푀[퐺] a generic extension.
A real 푥∈N∞is eventually diﬀerent if for every 푦∈N∞∩푀there is 푘∈휔such
that for every 푖≥푘푥(푖)
̸= 푦(푖).

Aspects of Ramsey theory
|
133
Let us observe that if 푀is a transitive model of 푍퐹퐶, and 푀[푔] is a Cohen exten-
sion, then the Cohen generic real 푔is not eventually diﬀerent. This is so because
given 푦∈푀and 푘∈휔, the set 퐷푘= {푝: ∃푖≥푘(푝(푖) = 푦(푖))} is dense. Moreover, for
every 푦∈푀and 푘∈휔, the set 퐸푘= {푝: ∃푖≥푘(푝(푖) = 푦(푖) and 푝(푖+ 1) = 푦(푖+ 1))}
is also dense, and therefore, for every 푦∈푀, 푔(푖) = 푦(푖) and 푔(푖+ 1) = 푦(푖+ 1) for
inﬁnitely many 푖.
Thus, in a Cohen extension 푀[푔] no eventually diﬀerent reals are added. To
see this, let 푟∈휔휔such that 푟∈푀[푔] \ 푀, and let ̇푟be a C-name for 푟in 푀.
Enumerate the conditions of Cohen forcing C by 푝0, 푝1, 푝2, 푝3, . . . , 푝푛, . . .. Deﬁne
푥∈휔휔as follows:
푥(푛) := 푚푖푛{푘: ∃푞≤푝푛(푞⊩̇푟( ̌푛) = ̌푘)}.
Then, 푥∈푀, and we will see that {푖∈휔: 푟(푖) = 푥(푖)} is inﬁnite. Suppose not,
then ∃푛0 ∈휔[∀푛≥푛0(푟(푛)
̸= 푥(푛))]. By the Forcing Theorem there is 푝such that
푝⊩∀푛≥
̌푑( ̇푟(푛)
̸=
̌푥(푛)). Pick 푚> 푑such that 푝푚≤푝. If 푥(푚) = 푘, then (by
deﬁnition) there is 푞≤푝푚[푞⊩
̇푟( ̌푚) =
̌푘]. Therefore 푞⊩
̇푟( ̌푚) =
̌푥( ̌푚), which is a
contradiction.
Once we know that ∀푥∈푀[푔] ∃푦∈푀such that {푖∈휔: 푥(푖) = 푦(푖)} is inﬁnite,
it is easy to see that for all 푥∈푀[푔] there is 푦∈푀such that {푖∈휔: 푥(푖) = 푦(푖) ∧
푥(푖+1) = 푦(푖+1)} is inﬁnite: Let 푟1 ∈휔휔be such that 푟1 ∈푀[푔]\푀. Then consider
the real 푟2 which codiﬁes the consecutive pairs of 푟1. Apply to 푟2 the previous result
to ﬁnd in 푀a real 푟3 such that {푖∈휔: 푟2(푖) = 푟3(푖)} is inﬁnite. Decoding from 푟3 we
obtain a real 푟3
∗in 푀such that the set {푖∈휔: 푟1(푖) = 푟3
∗(푖) ∧푟1(푖+ 1) = 푟3
∗(푖+ 1)}
is inﬁnite.
Finally observe that if 푀[퐺] is obtained adding 휔1 many Cohen reals, then no
eventually diﬀerent reals are added.
An argument due to J. Brendle that we sketch below gives that the polarized
partition relation
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
2
2
...
)
fails in 푁1.
Remember that 푁1 is the model obtained adding 휔1 many Cohen reals to 퐿,
and then computing 퐿({푎휉: 휉< 휔1}) in the generic extension.
Since 퐿[퐺] does not contain eventually diﬀerent reals,
∀푥∈퐿[퐺]∃푦∈퐿{푖∈휔: 푥(푖) = 푦(푖)} is inﬁnite.
Moreover, for every 푥∈퐿[퐺], there is 푦∈퐿such that the set
{푖∈휔: 푥(푖) = 푦(푖) and 푥(푖+ 1) = 푦(푖+ 1)}

134
|
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
is inﬁnite, as we have observed in the paragraphs preceding the statement of the
theorem.
For every 푥, there is a ﬁrst 푦∈퐿, in the 훴1
2 ordering of the reals in 퐿, for which
{푖∈휔: 푥(푖) = 푦(푖) and 푥(푖+ 1) = 푦(푖+ 1)} is inﬁnite. We call it 푓(푥). Let 푖푥be the
ﬁrst 푖such that 푥(푖) = 푓(푥)(푖).
Deﬁne 푐: N∞→2 by 푐(푥) = 0 if and only if 푖푥is even.
We show that no product of pairs is monochromatic for 푐. In 퐿[퐺], let {퐻푖}푖∈휔be
a sequence of pairs of integers, and let 푥∈훱푖∈휔퐻푖. Notice that we can assume that
푥(푖푥) = 푓(푥)(푖푥) and 푥(푖푥+ 1) = 푓(푥)(푖푥+ 1), since we can modify a ﬁnite number
of values from 푥and obtain another member of the product with the same 푓(푥)
satisfying this requirement.
Now, modifying the 푖푥-th value of 푥we obtain 푥耠∈훱푖∈휔퐻푖such that 푐(푥)
̸=
푐(푥耠).
The coloring 푐is 훥1
2, since 푐−1{0} and 푐−1{1} are both 훱1
2. To see this, 푐(푥) = 0 if
and only if the ﬁrst 푖such that 푥(푖) = 푓(푥)(푖) is even; and the function 푓is deﬁned
by 훱1
2 formula: given 푥, 푧= 푓(푥) if and only if ∀푦(푦≤퐿푧⇒{푖: 푧(푖) = 푥(푖) and 푧(푖+
1) = 푥(푖+ 1)} is ﬁnite).
We have that 푀[퐺] satisﬁes that for every sequence {퐻푖}푖∈휔of pairs of natural
numbers, there are 푥, 푦∈훱푖∈휔퐻푖such that 푐(푥)
̸= 푐(푦).
Since 푐is deﬁnable, it is in 푁1 = 퐿({푎휉: 휉< 휔1}), and in this model the same
holds. Thus the polarized partition property does not hold in 푁1.
Summarizing, we state the next theorem.
Theorem 7.4. The Bernstein property 휔→(perfect)휔does not imply
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
2
2
...
) .
None of the properties 휔→((휔))휔and
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
2
2
...
)
implies the other.
Proof. The model 푁1 considered above satisﬁes 휔→((휔))휔(and therefore 휔→
(perfect)휔) and not the polarized partition property. In [10] it is shown that a selec-
tive ultraﬁlter can be added generically to a Solovay model 퐿(R) to obtain a model
퐿(R)[푈] in which the polarized partition property holds but not 휔→((휔))휔.

Bibliography
|
135
Clearly,
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
2
2
...
) implies 휔→(perfect)휔,
since a product of the form ∏푖∈휔퐻푖, with {푖∈휔: |퐻푖| ≥2} inﬁnite, is a perfect set.
But the previous results show that the reverse implication does not hold, consid-
ering that
휔→((휔))휔implies 휔→(perfect)휔,
since any [퐾, 퐻] is a perfect subset of N[∞].
We have then that the only implications that hold between these properties
are the ones shown in the following diagram.
휔→(휔)휔
휔→((휔))휔
(
휔
휔
...
) →(
푚0
푚1
...
)
휔→(perfect)휔.



@@
R
@@
R



Bibliography
[1]
Bernstein, F., Zur Theorie der Trigonometrischen Reiche. Berichte über die Ver-
handlungen der Königlich Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig
Mathematisch-Physiche Klasse 60 (1908) 325-338.
[2]
Brendle, J., L. Halbeisen and B. Löwe, Silver measurability and its relations to other
regularity properties. Math. Proc. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 138 (2005) 135-149.
[3]
Di Prisco, C. A., Partition properties and perfect sets. Notas de Lógica Matemática,
Universidad Nacional del Sur, Bahía Blanca, Argentina, 38 (1993)119-127.
[4]
Di Prisco, C. A. and F. Galindo, Perfect set properties in models of 푍퐹. Fundamenta
Mathematicae 208 (2010) 249-262.
[5]
Di Prisco, C. A. and J. Henle, Partitions of products. Journal of Symbolic Logic 58 (1993)
860-871.
[6]
Di Prisco, C. A. and J. Henle, Partitions of the reals and choice. In: Models, algebras
and proofs (X. Caicedo and C. H. Montenegro, Eds.) Marcel Dekker, Inc. 1999, 13-23.
Aspects of Ramsey theory

136
|
Carlos Augusto Di Prisco
[7]
Di Prisco, C. A. and J. Henle, Doughnuts, floating ordinals, square brackets, and ultra-
flitters. Journal of Symbolic Logic 65 (2000) 461-473.
[8]
Di Prisco, C. A., J. Llopis and S. Todorcevic, Borel partitions of products of ﬁnite sets
and the Ackermann function. Journal of Combinatorial Theory, Series A, 93 (2001) 333-
349.
[9]
Di Prisco, C. A., J. Llopis y S. Todorcevic, Parametrized partitions of products of ﬁnite
sets. Combinatorica (to appear).
[10]
Di Prisco, C.A. and S. Todorcevic, Souslin partitions of products of ﬁnite sets. Ad-
vances in Mathematics, 176 (2003) 145-173.
[11]
Erdös, P. and R. Rado, A combinatorial theorem. J. London Math. Soc. 25 (1950) 249-
255.
[12]
Erdös, P. and R. Rado, A partition calculus in set theory, Bulletin of the Amer. Math.
Soc. 62 (1956), 427-489. (Abstract 68T-368).
[13]
Galvin, F. and K. Prikry, Borel sets and Ramsey’s theorem, Journal of Symbolic Logic 38
(1973), 193-198.
[14]
Graham, R. L., B. L. Rotschild and J. H. Spencer, Ramsey Theory. John Wiley and sons,
1990.
[15]
Halbeisen, L., Making doughnuts of Cohen reals. Mathematical Logic Quarterly 49
(2003) 173–178.
[16]
Henle, J., The consistency of one ﬁxed omega, Journal of Symbolic Logic 60 (1995) 172-
177.
[17]
Llopis, J., A note in polarized partitions, Notas de Lógica Matemática, Universidad
Nacional del Sur, Bahía Blanca, Argentina, 39 (1994) 89-94.
[18]
Llopis, J. and S. Todorcevic, Borel partitions on products of ﬁnite sets, Acta Cientíﬁca
Venezolana 47 (1996) 85-88.
[19]
Mathias, A. R. D., A remark on rare ﬁlters, in: Inﬁnite and ﬁnite sets (A. Hajnal. R. Rado
and Vera Sós, Eds.). Colloquia Mathematica Societatis Janos Bolyai 10, , North Holland,
1975.
[20]
Mathias, A.R.D., Happy Families. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 12 (1977) 59-111.
[21]
Moran, G. and D. Strauss, Countable partitions of product spaces, Mathematika 27
(1980) 213-224.
[22]
Nash-Williams, C.St. J. A., On well quasi-ordering transﬁnite sequences. Proceedings
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 61 (1965) 33-39.
[23]
Nešetřil, J. and V. Rödl, Eds., Mathematics of Ramsey Theory. Springer Verlag, 1990.
[24]
Pudlák, P. V. Rödl, Partition theorems for systems of ﬁnte subsets of the integers. Dis-
crete Mathematics 39 (1982) 67-73.
[25]
Ramsey, F. P. , On a problem of formal logic. Proc. of the London Mathematical Society,
Ser. 2 30, Part 4 (1928) 338–384.
[26]
Shelah, S., Can you take Solovay’s inaccessible away? Israel Journal of mathematics
48 (1984) 1-47.
[27]
Silver, J., Every analytic set is Ramsey, Journal of Symbolic Logic 35 (1970), 60-64.
[28]
Solovay, R., A model of set theory where every set of reals is Lebesgue measurable.
Annals of Mathematics 92 (1970) 1-56.
[29]
Todorcevic, S., A new quantitative analysis of some basic principles in the theory of
functions of a real variable. Bull. de l’Acad. Serbe des Sci. vol. CXXII, No, 26 (2001)
133-144.

Bibliography
|
137
[30]
Todorcevic, S., Introduction to Ramsey Spaces. Annals of Mathematical Studies No.
174. Princeton University Press, 2010.
Aspects of Ramsey theory


Mirna Džamonja
The Singular World of Singular Cardinals
Abstract: The article uses two examples to explore the statement that, contrary to
the common wisdom, the properties of singular cardinals are actually more intu-
itive than those of the regular ones.
Keywords: singular cardinals, SCH, combinatorics
MSC: 03E05
||
Mirna Džamonja: School of Mathematics, University of East Anglia, Norwich, NR4 7TJ, UK,
email: h020@uea.ac.uk
1 Introduction
Inﬁnite cardinals can be regular or singular. Regular cardinals and especially suc-
cessors of regular cardinals, tend to lend themselves to easier and better under-
stood combinatorial methods and hence are often considered as being in some
sense easier. For example, Todd Eisworth in his Handbook of Set Theory article
[6] artfully exposes diﬃculties one has in dealing with the combinatorics of the
successors of singulars and explains on a number of examples why the methods
used at a successor of a regular most often cannot work when dealing with the
successor of a singular. Indeed, it is known that in many situations, dealing with
singular cardinals and their successors has to involve techniques beyond combi-
natorics and forcing, and it notably requires large cardinals. This is true even for
such seemingly elementary properties as the calculation of the size of the power
set of the cardinal 휅as a function of the size of the power sets of the cardinals
below, which is basically the content of the famous Singular Cardinal Hypothesis
and which has lead to some of the deepest results throughout set theory. In fact,
the common wisdom and the thesis of [6] are that if the universe is close to 퐿then
the singular cardinals and their successors are “manageable”, and the opposite
is true in the models obtained by using strong enough large cardinal hypothesis.
We shall explore the antithesis, which is that (a) in some situations singular
cardinals are more manageable than the regular ones and (b) in some models ob-
tained from large cardinals the successors of singulars actually behave quite close
to how they do in 퐿, even if we do our best to mess up 퐿by changing the cardinal

140
|
Mirna Džamonja
arithmetic drastically. Our exposition will involve two examples, one for each one
of (a) and (b), which we now explain.
2 Tree embeddings
In this part of the paper we discuss an issue that we investigated with Väänänen
in [5], inspired by work that he had initiated in a number of earlier papers, con-
centrating there on ℵ1 and other regular cardinals. In contrast, we worked with
휅a singular cardinal of countable coﬁnality and obtained a surprisingly diﬀerent
situation.
Consider rooted trees of height and cardinality 휅, which we call 휅-Trees 1. We
are interested in 휅-Trees which in addition do not have 휅-branches, which we call
bounded. We studied the natural notion of reduction, which is simply a strict-order
preserving function from one tree to another. The existence of a reduction from 푇
to 푇耠is denoted by 푇≤푇耠. Furthermore, we write 푇< 푇耠if both 푇≤푇耠and 푇耠
̸≤푇
hold. Considerations of tree reductions have arisen in the context of model theory
and descriptive set theory, as we now explain. Any undeﬁned or unreferenced no-
tion can be found in [5], where in particular we give ample references to EF games
and chain models.
A relational structure of size 휆can be considered as an element of 2휆. To
understand the classiﬁcation of such models up to isomorphism one uses the
Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé (EF) games, especially in the countable case. There is an
older method of classiﬁcation, using the fact that for two ﬁxed countable mod-
els the set of all isomorphisms between them is 퐹훿휎, and hence the set of pairs of
models that are non-isomorphic is co-analytic. In fact the set,
{(퐴, 퐵) : 퐴, 퐵countable models and ∃푓: 퐴≅퐵}
is the same set as the set of pairs (퐴, 퐵) of countable models for which II has a
winning strategy in the EF game. This analysis made it possible to attach to each
pair (퐴, 퐵) of non-isomorphic countable models a rank, called Scott watershed
푆(퐴, 퐵), which in this case is an ordinal 훼< 휔1.
The rank can be thought of as a clock of the EF game in the following sense:
during the EF game the Nonisomorphism player I has to go down this clock at
every stage, starting at 훼itself, and a condition of winning for I is that he has not
run out of time before the lack of an isomorphism has been exposed. This game
1 This is diﬀerent than the usual 휅-trees, which are also required to have levels of size < 휅.

The Singular World of Singular Cardinals
|
141
is called the dynamic 퐸퐹game of rank 훼+ 1 and denoted by 퐸퐹퐷훼+1. The fact that
푆(퐴, 퐵) = 훼+ 1 means that II wins 퐸퐹퐷훼(and hence 퐸퐹퐷훽for any 훽< 훼), while I
wins 퐸퐹퐷훼+1 (and hence 퐸퐹퐷훽for any 훽> 훼).
For uncountable models, say of size ℵ1, one can generalise the Ehrenfeucht-
Fraïssé Theorem by considering games of length 휔1. One is then tempted to ﬁnd
the corresponding notion of the Scott watershed. It turns out that it is no longer
enough to use the ordinals, as the game is transﬁnite. The right notion this time is
that of bounded ℵ1-Trees, the class of which we shall denote by Tℵ1. If 푇≤푇耠then
it is easier for II to win 퐸퐹퐷푇than 퐸퐹퐷푇耠. Respectively, if 푇≤푇耠then it is easier for
I to win 퐸퐹퐷푇耠than 퐸퐹퐷푇. Finally, if II wins 퐸퐹퐷푇and I wins 퐸퐹퐷푇耠, then one can
prove 푇< 푇耠. In [7] it was shown by Hyttinen and Väänänen that the analogue of
the Scott watershed exists also in the uncountable case. Naturally, the importance
of (Tℵ1, ≤) in this context led to a systematic study of its structural properties and
a development of the descriptive set theory of the space 2휔1 based on Tℵ1. The
theory of (T휆, ≤) for 휆successor of regular is also quite known, although it is not
completely parallel to that of (Tℵ1, ≤).
When moving to the singular cardinals in [5], the surprise was that new possi-
bilities opened up. Firstly, it is possible to make links between chain models and
the inﬁnitary logic 퐿휅휅. For 휅singular of countable coﬁnality, one can develop
model theory of 퐿휅휅based on the concept of a chain model, as was done by C.
Karp and her successors. A chain model is an ordinary model 퐴equipped with a
presentation of 퐴as a union of a chain 퐴0 ⊆퐴1 . . . ⊆퐴푛⊆. . . for 푛< 휔. The chain
is not assumed to be elementary. Let us denote such a system as (퐴푛). The point
of chain models is the following modiﬁcation of the truth deﬁnition of 퐿휅휅
(퐴푛) 　㨐∃̄푥휑( ̄푥) ⇐⇒there are 푛< 휔and ̄푎∈퐴푛with 퐴　㨐휑( ̄푎),
(1)
where ̄푥is a sequence of length < 휅. If we restrict to chain models, the model theory
of 퐿휅휅is very much like that of 퐿휔1휔. For example, one can prove the Completeness
Theorem using consistency properties, and one can also prove undeﬁnability of
well order, Craig Interpolation Theorem, Beth Deﬁnability Theorem, etc. (None of
these theorems is true for the classical 퐿휅휅logic). In [5] we extended Scott’s anal-
ysis of countable models to chain models of size 휅. In particular, we considered
versions of EF game for (chain) models of a singular cardinality 휅of countable co-
ﬁnality and discovered that the relevant clock trees of these games are bounded
휅-Trees.
In fact the main point of this is that 휅-Trees for 휅as above have properties that
make them rather similar to ordinals. The reason for this is that there is a natural
notion of rank. Using this notion we can for example show that the universality
number of bounded 휅-Trees under reduction is just 휅+, and that within each rank
in [1, 휅+) the universality number is just 휔. This is in sharp contrast with the situ-

142
|
Mirna Džamonja
ation of 휆-Trees where 휆is a regular cardinal. For example for 휆= ℵ1 Mekler and
Väänänen [10] have established that the universality number for bounded 휆-Trees
under reduction cannot be computed in ZFC, and the consistency of this number
being equal to 1 for 휆= ℵ1 is not known.
3 Universal graphs
In this section we shall discuss an embedding question which comes from an even
more familiar object than trees, namely graphs. Given a cardinal 휅, we are inter-
ested to know what is the smallest size of a family of graphs of size 휅which embeds
every graph of size 휅as an induced subgraph. This is known as the universality
number. For 휅= ℵ0 this number is 1, as the random graph is a universal count-
able graph. For uncountable 휅the situation becomes sensitive to the axioms of
set theory. Namely, by the classical results in model theory on the existence of
saturated and special models (see [1]), in the presence of GCH there is a universal
graph on every inﬁnite 휅, and in fact 휅= 2<휅suﬃces. On the other hand, a result
of Shelah mentioned in [11] and described in [8], is that adding ℵ2 Cohen reals to
a model of CH makes the universality number of graphs at ℵ1 equal to ℵ2. This
is an easy proof, in fact Shelah says in the abstract of [11] “The consistency of the
non-existence of a universal graph of power ℵ1 is trivial. Add ℵ2 generic Cohen
reals.”, and instead he concentrates on a much more complex proof of the consis-
tency of the existence of a universal graph at ℵ1 and the negation of CH (which in
fact was not right in [11]. Shelah corrected his proof in [12] and Mekler gave a dif-
ferent proof in [9]). Other successors of regulars behave in a similar way, although
neither Mekler’s nor Shelah’s proof seem to carry over from ℵ1 to larger successors
of regulars. Namely, in [4] Džamonja and Shelah obtained the consistency of the
universality number of graphs at 휅+ for an arbitrary large regular 휅being equal 휅++
while 2휅is as large as desired. The negative consistency results directly translate
to other successors of regulars and even to a class of them, and to let the reader
appreciate the way Cohen’s forcing is used, we give a rendition of that argument
here. (The proof of Theorem 3.1 presented in [8] is less formal.)
Theorem 3.1 (Shelah, see [8]). Suppose that 휅<휅= 휅and let P be the forcing to
add 휆many, with cf(휆) ≥휅++ and 휆≥2휅+, Cohen subsets to 휅. Then the universality
number for graphs on 휅+ in the extension by P is 휆.
Proof. First notice that in the extension we have that 2휅= 2휅+ = 휆, and hence the
total number of graphs on 휅+ is at most 휆, so the universality number for graphs on
휅+ is also ≤휆. Now we show that it is ≥휆. Suppose to the contrary, that {퐻훾: 훾<

The Singular World of Singular Cardinals
|
143
훾∗} for some 훾∗< 휆in the extension are graphs with universe 휅+ that are universal
for graphs on 휅+. By standard arguments about the factoring of the Cohen forcing
and using cf(휆) ≥휅++, we may assume that all graphs 퐻훾are from the ground
model. Let ⟨퐴푗
푖: 푖∈[휅, 휅+), 푗< 휅++⟩be a 1-1 enumeration of the ﬁrst 휅++ Cohen
subsets of 휅added by P, where the indexing is chosen for the convenience in the
argument to follow. For each 푗< 휅++ we deﬁne in the extension a graph 퐺푗on 휅+
by letting for 훼< 푖< 휅+ there be an edge between 훼and 푖iﬀ훼< 휅≤푖and 훼∈퐴푗
푖.
For each 푗let ℎ푗be an embedding of 퐺푗to some 퐻훾푗. Note that there is a club 퐶of
휅++ such that for all 푗∈퐶of coﬁnality 휅+, ℎ푗↾[휅+1) is in 푉[퐴푘
푖: 푖∈[휅, 휅+), 푘< 푘∗]
for some 푘∗< 푗. Then for any 푗∈퐶we have
퐴푗
휅= {훼< 휅: (훼, 휅) are an edge in 퐺푗} =
{훼< 휅: (ℎ푗↾[휅+ 1)(훼), ℎ푗↾[휅+ 1)(휅)) are an edge in 퐻훾푗},
which is an object in 푉[퐴푘
푖: 푖∈[휅, 휅+), 푘< 푘∗], a contradiction. ⋆3.1
Using a standard argument about Easton forcing we can see that it is equally easy
to get negative universality results for graphs at a class of regular cardinals:
Theorem 3.2. Suppose that the ground model 푉satisﬁes GCH and C is a class of
regular cardinals in 푉, while 퐹is a non-decreasing function on C satisfying that for
each 휅∈C we have cf(퐹(휅)) ≥휅++. Let P be Easton’s forcing to add 퐹(휅) Cohen
subsets to 휅for each 휅∈C. Then for each 휅∈C the universality number for graphs
on 휅+ in the extension by P is 퐹(휅).
Proof. Recall that the forcing notion P is constructed as follows: for each 휅∈C we
have the forcing 푃휅which adds 퐹(휅) Cohen subsets to 휅, using functions of size < 휅
from 휅×퐹(휅) to {0, 1} with the extension given by the extension of functions. Then
P is the Easton product of {푃휅: 휅∈C}, which means that each condition 푝∈P is
an element of 훱휅∈C푃휅with support spt(푝) satisfying |spt(푝)∩휃| < 휃for every regular
cardinal 휃. Denoting by 푝휅the projection of condition 푝on the coordinate 휅, each
condition in P can be viewed as a function on triples (휅, 훼, 훽) where 푝(휅, 훼, 훽) is
deﬁned as 푝휅(훼, 훽). Then standard arguments show that for every regular 휃the
forcing breaks into P≤휃× P>휃where P≤휃= {푝↾(휅, 훼, 훽) : 휅≤휃} and P>휃=
{푝↾(휅, 훼, 훽) : 휅> 휃}, and that P>휃is 휃-closed while P≤휃satisﬁes the 휃+-chain
condition.
Now let 휅∈C and suppose for a contradiction that in the extension by P we
have a universal family {퐻훾: 훾< 훾∗} of graphs on 휅+ for some 훾∗< 퐹(휅). Since
P>휅+ is 휅+-closed, it does not add any new subsets to 휅+, and hence the universal
family is added by P≤휅+. We shall once more use an argument about factoring, in

144
|
Mirna Džamonja
that for every 휃< 퐹(휅) we can consider P≤휅+ as the product
푄≤휃= {푝∈P≤휅+ : (휅, 훼, 훽) ∈dom(푝) 㨐⇒훽≤휃}
×
푄>휃= {푝∈P≤휅+ : (휅, 훼, 훽) ∈dom(푝) 㨐⇒훽> 휃}.
Since cf(퐹(휅)) ≥휅++, there is some 휃< 퐹(휅) such that all graphs 퐻훾are added by
푄≤휃. Now we can basically repeat the argument from the proof of Theorem 3.1: let
⟨퐴푗
푖: 푖∈[휅, 휅+), 푗< 퐹(휅)⟩be a 1-1 enumeration of the Cohen subsets of 휅added
by 푄>휃and for each 푗< 휅++ we deﬁne in the extension a graph 퐺푗on 휅+ by letting
for 훼< 푖< 휅+ there be an edge between 훼and 푖iﬀ훼< 휅≤푖and 훼∈퐴푗
푖. For each 푗
let ℎ푗be an embedding of 퐺푗to some 퐻훾푗. Note that there is a club 퐶of 퐹(휅) such
that for all 푗∈퐶of coﬁnality ≥휅+, ℎ푗↾[휅+ 1) is in 푉[퐴푘
푖: 푖∈[휅, 휅+), 푘< 푘∗] for
some 푘∗< 푗. Then for every 푗∈퐶
퐴푗
휅= {훼< 휅: (훼, 휅) are an edge in퐺푗} =
{훼< 휅: (ℎ푗↾[휅+ 1)(훼), ℎ푗↾[휅+ 1)(휅)) are an edge in 퐻훾푗},
which is an object in 푉푄≤휃[퐴푘
푖: 푖∈[휅, 휅+), 푘< 푘∗], a contradiction. ⋆3.2
Things change at the successor of a singular! Positive results analogous to the
Džamonja-Shelah [4] were obtained for 휅of countable coﬁnality by Džamonja and
Shelah in [3] and for arbitrary coﬁnality by Cummings, Džamonja, Magidor, Mor-
gan and Shelah in [2]. We quote that general result:
Theorem 3.3 (Cummings et al. [2]). If 휅is a supercompact cardinal, 휆< 휅is a reg-
ular cardinal and 훩is a cardinal with cf(훩) ≥휅++ and 휅+3 ≤훩there is a forcing
extension in which cf(휅) = 휆, 2휅= 2휅+ = 훩and there is a universal family of graphs
on 휅+ of size 휅++.
However, it is not known in Theorem 3.3 if the universality number is exactly 휅++.
For all we know, in that model there could be a universal graph on 휅+. Worse, we do
not know how to imitate the negative universality presented in Theorems 3.1 and
3.2 above. We do not know how to obtain a model in which the relevant instances
of GCH fail and the universality number of graphs is 2휆for 휆the successor of a
singular. We have given Shelah’s argument about the Cohen forcing in gory detail
to invite the reader to think if anything like this can be produced at a singular 휅.
Initial results by Cummings and Magidor (private communication) indicate that a
naive generalization might not be possible. Perhaps there is some sort of singular
cardinal hypothesis-like behaviour here. Perhaps we cannot just monkey around
with the universality number for graphs at the successor of singular even when
we are basically as far from 퐿as we can possibly be, at least as far as the power
set function is concerned?

Bibliography
|
145
4 Conclusion
We have discussed two problems where the intuition of the singular cardinal being
in a sense more diﬃcult than a regular one, seems to be completely false. In fact,
the truth seems to be that although the properties of the singular cardinals are
harder to discover, once we have done that diﬃcult discovery, these properties are
actually nicer than their analogues at the regular cardinals. Some other results but
the ones presented here can be viewed with this idea in mind, for example does
not the whole story of the Singular Cardinal Hypothesis including the celebrated
theorem of Shelah [(∀푛< 휔)2ℵ푛< ℵ휔] 㨐⇒2ℵ휔< ℵ휔4, does not this story say that
the singulars are infact more intuitive than the regulars? Erdös has said something
to the extent of the inﬁnite being the easy part, and the ﬁnite the diﬃcult one. If
the inﬁnite is the limit of the ﬁnite, a singular cardinal is a limit of the successors
of regulars, and maybe it is at such limits that the unruly universe of set theory
wishes to express its more tame behaviour. It seems possible that by investigating
ﬁner combinatorics than that expressed by the power set function we may ﬁnd
combinatorial versions of SCH which are just outright true.
Acknowledgement: The author thanks EPSRC for their grant EP/I00498.
Bibliography
[1]
Chen Chung Chang and H. Jeremy Keisler. Model Theory. North Holland, Amsterdam, third
edition, 1990.
[2]
James Cummings, Mirna Džamonja, Menachem Magidor, Charles Morgan, and Saharon
Shelah. A framework for forcing constructions at successors of singular cardinals. Sub-
mitted, 2013.
[3]
Mirna Džamonja and Saharon Shelah. Universal graphs at the successor of a singular
cardinal. J.Symbol. Logic, 68:366–387, 2003.
[4]
Mirna Džamonja and Saharon Shelah. On the existence of universal models. Arch. Math.
Logic, 43(7):901–936, 2004.
[5]
Mirna Džamonja and Jouko Väänänen. Chain models, trees of singular cardinality and
dynamic EF games. Journal of Mathematical Logic, 11(1):61–85, 2011.
[6]
Todd Eisworth. Successors of singular cardinals. In Matthew Foreman and Akihiro
Kanamori, editors, Handbook of Set Theory, volume 2, pages 1229–1350. Springer, Dor-
drecht, Heidelberg, London, New York, 2010.
[7]
Tapani Hyttinen and Jouko Väänänen. On Scott and Karp trees of uncountable models. J.
Symbolic Logic, 55(3):897–908, 1990.
[8]
Menachem Kojman and Saharon Shelah. Nonexistence of universal orders in many cardi-
nals. J. Symbolic Logic, 57(3):875–891, 1992.
The Singular World of Singular Cardinals 

146
|
Mirna Džamonja
[9]
A. Mekler. Universal structures in power ℵ1. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 55(2):466–477,
1990.
[10] A. Mekler and J. Väänänen. Trees and 훱1
1-subsets of 휔1휔1. The Journal of Symbolic Logic,
58(3):1052–1070, 1993.
[11] Saharon Shelah. On universal graphs without instances of CH. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic, 26(1):75 – 87, 1984.
[12] Saharon Shelah. Universal graphs without instances of CH: revisited. Israel Journal of
Mathematics, 70(1):69 – 81, 1990.

Curtis Franks
Logical Nihilism
Abstract: Traditional debates about the scope and nature of logic do not do justice
to the details of its maturation. In asking whether certain inferential practices are
properly logical or more aptly viewed as part of the special sciences, for example,
we ignore how logic has been shaped by developments in extra-logical culture. A
tour of some of logic’s modern contours showcases how the most interesting, and
most distinctively logical, features of the discipline emerge precisely when we let
go of our expectations of logical correctness. We are left wondering what role that
notion of correctness is supposed to serve and invited to question its coherence.
Keywords: admissibility, intuitionistic logic, philosophy, proof theory
MSC: 01, 03, 08
||
Curtis Franks: Department of Philosophy, University of Notre Dame, 100 Malloy Hall, Notre
Dame, IN 46556, e-mail: cfranks@nd.edu
Reproduced with permission from Curtis Franks, “Logical Nihilism”, in Penelope Rush (ed.),
The Metaphysics of Logic, (2015), © Cambridge University Press.
“This seems to abolish logic, but does not do so.”
—L. Wittgenstein, Philosophical Investigations §242
1 Introduction
The idea that there may be more than one correct logic has recently attracted con-
siderable interest. This cannot be explained by the mere fact that several distinct
logical systems have their scientiﬁc uses, for no one denies that the “logic” of clas-
sical mathematics diﬀers from the “logics” of rational decision, of resource con-
scious database theory, and of eﬀective problem solving. Those known as “logical
monists” maintain that the panoply of logical systems applicable in their vari-
ous domains says nothing against their basic tenet that a single relation of logical
consequence is either violated by or manifest in each such system. “Logical plu-
ralists” do not counter this by pointing again at the numerous logical systems,
for they agree that for all their interest many of these indeed fail to trace any rela-
tion of logical consequence. They claim, instead, that no one logical consequence
relation is privileged over all others, that several such relations abound.

148
|
Curtis Franks
Interesting as this debate may be, I intend to draw into question the point on
which monists and pluralists appear to agree and on which their entire discus-
sion pivots: the idea that one thing a logical investigation might do is adhere to
a relation of consequence that is “out there in the world,” legislating norms of
rational inference, or persisting some other wise independently of our logical in-
vestigations themselves. My opinion is that ﬁxing our sights on such a relation
saddles logic with a burden that it cannot comfortably bear, and that logic, in the
vigor and profundity that it displays nowadays, does and ought to command our
interest precisely because of its disregard for norms of correctness.
I shall not argue for the thesis that there are no correct logics. Although I do
ﬁnd attempts from our history to paint a convincing picture of a relation of logical
consequence that attains among propositions (or sentences, or whatever) dubi-
ous, I should not know how to cast general doubt on the very idea of such a rela-
tion. By “drawing this point into question” I mean only to invite reﬂection about
what work the notion of a correct logic is supposed to be doing, why the debate
about the number of logical consequence relations is supposed to matter to a logi-
cian, and whether the actual details of logic as it has developed might be diﬃcult
to appreciate if our attention is overburdened by questions about the correctness
of logical principles. Rather than issue any argumentative blows, I propose merely
to lead the reader around a bit until his or her taste for a correct logic sours.
2 The law of excluded middle
Surely the most notorious bone of contention in the discussion of logical correct-
ness is the law of excluded middle, 휙∨¬휙. Is this law logically valid, so that we
know that its instances, “Shakespeare either wrote all those plays or he didn’t,”
“Either the continuum hypothesis is true or it is not true,” “He’s either bald or he
isn’t,” etc., each are true in advance of any further information about the world?
One hardly needs to mention that hundreds of spirited disavowals and de-
fenses of lem have been issued in the last century. Many of these have even been
authored by expert logicians. But let us turn our backs to these ideological matters
and consider brieﬂy some of what we have learned about lem quite independently
of any question about its correctness.

Logical Nihilism
|
149
The simplest setting for this is the propositional calculus.1 The intuitionistic
propositional calculus (ipc) diﬀers from the classical propositional calculus (cpc)
precisely in its rejection of lem. For a concrete and standard formalization of ipc
one may take a typical Hilbert-style axiomatization of cpc and erase the single
axiom for double negation elimination, ⊢¬¬휙⊃휙, leaving the rules of inference
as before.
In fact, one of the ﬁrst things observed about lem is its equivalence with dne,
which is most easily seen in the setting of natural deduction. Standard natural
deduction presentations of cpc have a rule allowing one to infer any formula 휙
from the single premise ¬¬휙. It is easy to derive in such a system the formula 휙∨¬휙.
It is similarly easy to show that if we modify this calculus by disallowing dne but
now introduce a new rule that allows one to write down any instance of lem in any
context, 휙will be derivable in all contexts in which ¬¬휙is derivable.
In 1934–35, Gentzen observed to his own surprise2 that the sequent calcu-
lus presentation of cpc admits an even more elegant modiﬁcation into a presen-
tation of ipc than the one just described. One simply disallows multiple-clause
succedents and leaves the calculus otherwise unchanged. Thus lem and with it
the entire distinction between intuitionistic and classical logic is subsumed into
the background structure of the logical calculus. All the inference rules govern-
ing the logical particles (∧, ∨, ⊃, ¬) and all the explicit rules of structural reason-
ing (identity, cut, weakening, exchange, and contraction) are invariant under this
transformation. Thus it appears that a duly chosen logical calculus allows a pre-
cise analysis of what had been thought of as a radical disagreement about the
nature of logic. When classicists and intuitionists are seen to admit precisely the
same inference rules, their disagreement appears in some ways quite minor, if
more global than ﬁrst suspected.
1 I emphasize that this really is a matter of perspicuity. One should not think that the phenomena
described below are artifacts of peculiar features of propositional logic. They are nearly all conse-
quences of decisions about lem that are invariant across a wide spectrum of logics. Consider: the
structural subsumption of lem applies also to the predicate calculus; the admissible propositional
rules of Heyting Arithmetic (and of Heyting Arithmetic with Markov’s principle) are exactly those
of ipc (Visser 1999); the disjunction property holds for Heyting Arithmetic (Kleene 1945) and for
intuitionistic Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (Myhill 1973).
2 Gentzen described the fact that lem prescribes uses of logical particles other than those given
by their introduction and elimination rules as “troublesome.” The way that in the sequent cal-
culus the logical rules are quarantined from the distinction between classical and intuitionistic
logic he called “seemingly magical.” He wrote, “I myself was completely surprised by this prop-
erty ...when ﬁrst formulating that calculus” Gentzen 1938 (259).

150
|
Curtis Franks
Exactly how minor, on closer inspection, is the diﬀerence between these su-
perﬁcially similar calculi cpc and ipc? Not very. Even before Gentzen’s profound
analysis, Gödel (1932) observed that ipc satisﬁed the “disjunction property”: for-
mulas such as 휙∨휓are provable only if either 휙or 휓is as well. At ﬁrst sight this
might appear to be no more than a restatement ofthe intuitionist’s rejection oflem.
After all, that rejection was motivated by the idea that instances of lem are unwar-
ranted when neither of their disjuncts can be independently established. But, one
might think, if any disjunction is warranted in the absence of independent veri-
ﬁcation of one of its disjuncts, those like 휙∨¬휙are, so rejecting lem should lead
to something like the disjunction property. This reasoning strikes me as worthy
of further elaboration and attention, but it should be unconvincing as it stands.
For one thing, the formal rejection of lem only bars one from helping oneself to
its instances whenever one wishes. The gap between this modest restriction and
the inability ever to infer any disjunction of the form 휙∨¬휙at all, unless from
a record of that inference one could eﬀectively construct a proof either of 휙or of
¬휙, is a broad one. More, there are inﬁnitely many formulas 휙unprovable in ipc,
such that ipc+휙is consistent but insuﬃcient to prove lem. Examples like ¬푝∨¬¬푝
may well fuel suspicions that even in the shadow of global distrust of lem, some
disjunctions 휙∨휓are more plausible than any instance of lem even in the absence
of resources suﬃcient to derive 휙or 휓.
Thus the disjunction property is a non-trivial consequence of the invalidity of
lem. In fact, this situation exempliﬁes a recurring phenomenon in logic, wherein
from the assumption of a special case of some general hypothesis, that hypothe-
sis follows in its full generality. This often happens even when, as in the present
case, the general phenomenon does not appear, even in hindsight, to be a “logical
consequence” of its instance in any absolute sense. The disjunction property has
further consequences of its own, however, to which we can proﬁtably turn.
In the approach to semantics known as inferentialism, the meaning of a log-
ical particle should be identiﬁed with the conditions under which one is justiﬁed
in reasoning one’s way to a statement governed by that particle. From this point of
view, which is given expression already in some of Gentzen’s remarks, and owing
to the separation in sequent calculus of lem from the logical rules, the meanings
of the familiar logical particles might be said not to diﬀer in intuitionistic and
classical logic.
However, the disjunction property gives rise to an alternative interpretation
of the logical particles of ipc in which each theorem refers back to the notion of
provability in ipc itself. For if 휙∨휓is provable only if one of 휙and 휓is as well, then
a candidate and interesting reading of the sentence ⊢IPC 휙∨휓is “Either ⊢IPC 휙
or ⊢IPC 휓.” Expanding on this idea, one might suggest that the provability of a
conjunction “means” that each of its conjunctions is provable, that the provability

Logical Nihilism
|
151
of a conditional, 휙⊃휓, “means” that given a proof of 휙one can construct a proof
of 휓, and that the provability of ¬휙“means” that a contradiction can be proved in
the event that a proof of 휙is produced.
As we shall seeshortly, this so far informal interpretation of intuitionistic logic
is riddled with ambiguities. All the same, some reﬂection should bring home the
idea that some disambiguation of this reading is a possible way to understand the
theorems of ipc. When one compares the situation with cpc, where conditional
truth comes so cheap and the disjunction property fails badly, one can only con-
clude that the diﬀerence between these calculi is in some sense great after all,
greater even than the debate over the validity of lem alone ﬁrst suggests. When
one then recalls the earlier observation that these calculi can be presented so that
their formal diﬀerences are slight and their rules identical, the observation that
radical diﬀerences in meaning result from so subtle a change in form is striking.
If we are to take seriously the idea that theorems of ipc refer back to ipc prov-
ability, then some care must be taken in making this interpretation precise. For
if the provability of a conditional, 휙⊃휓, “means” that ⊢IPC 휓in the event that
⊢IPC 휙, then one should expect ⊢IPC 휙⊃휓in every situation in which the set of
theorems of ipc is closed under the rule “from 휙, infer 휓.” However, the disjunc-
tion property implies that these expectations will not be met.
To see this, consider the Kreisel–Putnam rule, “From ¬휙⊃(휓∨휒), infer (¬휙⊃
휓)∨(¬휙⊃휒).” The only derivations of ¬휙⊃(휓∨휒) in natural deduction are proofs
whose last inferences are instances of ⊃-elim (modus ponens), ∧-elim, dne, or ⊃-
intro. It is easy to see that a proof ending in ⊃-elim or ∧-elim cannot be the only way
to prove this formula, that in fact any such proof can be normalized into a proof of
the same formula whose last inference is an instance of one of the other two rules.
If, further, we consider the prospects of this formula being a theorem of ipc, then
dne is no longer a rule, and we may conclude that any proof necessarily contains
a subproof of 휓∨휒from the assumption ¬휙(to allow for ⊃-intro). What might this
subproof look like? Once more, dne is not an option, so again by insisting that the
proof is normalized (so that it doesn’t end needlessly and awkwardly with ⊃-elim
or ∧-elim) we ensure that its last step is an instance of ∨-elim. But this means that
an initial segment of this subproof is a derivation in ipc either of 휓or of 휒from the
assumption ¬휙(it is here that the disjunction property rears its head), and in each
case it is clear how to build a proof of (¬휙⊃휓)∨(¬휙⊃휒). Putting this all together,
we see that whenever ¬휙⊃(휓∨휒) is a theorem of ipc, so too is (¬휙⊃휓)∨(¬휙⊃휒).
When a logical system’s theorems are closed under a rule of inference, we say
that the rule is “admissible” for that logic. The above argument established that
the Kreisel–Putnam rule is admissible for ipc. One might expect that the rule is
also “derivable,” that ⊢IPC (¬휙⊃(휓∨휒)) ⊃((¬휙⊃휓)∨(¬휙⊃휒)). However, it is not
(Harrop 1960). This situation is dis-analogous to that of classical logic, where all

152
|
Curtis Franks
admissible rules are derivable so that the distinction between admissibility and
derivability vanishes. In the parlance, we say that cpc is “structurally complete”
but that ipc is not.
In fact much of the logical complexity of ipc can be understood as a residue
of its structural incompleteness. For the space of intuitionistically valid formulas
is far more easily navigated than the space of its admissible rules: although it is
decidable whether or not a rule is admissible in ipc, there is no ﬁnite basis of rules
that generates them all (Rybakov 1997).3
What ought one make of the structural incompleteness of ipc? One thing that
can deﬁnitely be said is that reading the expression 휙⊃휓as “There is a procedure
for transforming a proof of 휙into a proof of 휓” is problematic for both the classi-
cist and the intuitionist, but for diﬀerent reasons. This reading is wrong for the
classicist, because the idea of procedurality simply does not enter into the con-
ditions of classical validity. By contrast, procedures of proof transformation are
central for the intuitionist. However, we now know that there are procedures for
transforming a ipc-proof of 휙into a ipc-proof of 휓in cases where 휙⊃휓is not a
theorem of ipc. So at best one could say that ipc is incomplete with respect to this
semantics, and more plausibly one should say that this reading of ⊢IPC 휙⊃휓is
erroneous.
Thus we see a sense in which the phenomenon of structural completeness is
related to a sort of semantic completeness: a structurally incomplete logic will be
incomplete with respect to the most naive procedural reading of its connectives.
It also happens that structural completeness bears a precise relation to the phe-
nomenon of Post-completeness, the situation in which any addition made to the
set of theorems of some logic will trivialize the logic by making all formulas in its
signature provable. To state this relationship, we refer to a notion of “saturation.”
For a logical calculus 퐿whose formulas form the set 푆, let Sb(푋) be the set of sub-
stitution instances of formulas in 푋⊆푆and let Cn퐿(푋) be the set of formulas 휙
such that 푋⊢퐿휙. 퐿is saturated if for every 푋⊆푆Cn퐿(푋) = Cn퐿(Sb(푋)) for ev-
ery 푋⊆푆. By a 1973 theorem of Tokarz, a Post-complete calculus is structurally
complete if, and only if, it is saturated.
For these and perhaps other reasons many authors have felt that the presence
of non-derivable, admissible rules is a deﬁciency of systems like ipc. The very term
“structural incompleteness” suggests that something is missing from ipc because
3 Generally, the set of admissible rules has higher complexity than the set of derivable rules for
the same logic. In ipc admissibility is conexp-complete whereas derivability is pspace-complete.
A striking example from Chagrov 1992 is a decidbale modal logic for which admissibility is unde-
cidable.

Logical Nihilism
|
153
correct inferences about provability in this logic are not represented as theorems
in ipc. Rybakov (1997), for example, suggests that “there is a sense in which a
derivation inside a [structurally incomplete] logical system corresponds to con-
scious reasoning [and] a derivation using [its] admissible rules corresponds to
subconscious reasoning.” He faults such systems for having rules that are “valid
in reality” yet “invalid from the viewpoint of the deductive system itself” (10–11).
Structurally complete systems, by contrast, are “self contained” in the sense that
they have the “very desirable property” of being conscious of all the rules that
are reliable tools for discovering their own theorems (476). It seems to me that
this attitude derives from wanting to preserve the naive procedural understand-
ing of the logical connectives. The situation ought rather, I counter, lead one to
appreciate the subtlety of procedurality exhibited in intuitionism. For the logical
lesson to be learned is that in the absence of lem the context of inference takes on
a new role. Thus 휙⊃휓means that given any background of assumptions from
which 휙is provable, a proof of 휙can be transformed into a proof of 휓under those
same assumptions, and this understanding does not reduce, as it does with log-
ics insensitive to context, to the idea that any proof of 휙can be transformed into
a proof of 휓. This irreducibility strikes me as a “very desirable property” for many
purposes. I should like to know more about the conditions that lead to it.
From this point of view, it is natural to ask whether there are logics that, un-
like classical logic, admit a constructive interpretation but, like classical logic, are
not sensitive in this way to context. Perhaps the constructive nature of ipc derives
from its context-sensitivity. Surprisingly, Jankov’s logic, ipc+¬휙∨¬¬휙, appears
to undermine any hope of establishing a connection between these phenomena.
Consider the Medvedev lattice of degrees of solvability. The setting is Baire space
휔휔(the set of functions from 휔to 휔) and the problem of producing an element of
a given subset of this space. By convention, such subsets are called mass prob-
lems, and their elements are called solutions. One says that one mass problem
reduces to another if there is an eﬀective procedure for transforming solutions of
the second into solutions of the ﬁrst. If one deﬁnes the lattice M of degrees of re-
ducibility of mass problems, it happens that under a very natural valuation, the
set of identities of M corresponds to the set of theorems of Jankov’s logic, so that
the theory of mass problems provides a constructive interpretation of this logic.4
However, Jankov’s logic is structurally complete (Prucnal 1976). Thus one sees that
the so-called weak law of excluded middle preserves the context insensitivity of
cpc despite, standing in the place of full lem, allowing for a procedural semantics.
4 For the details of this interpretation, see Terwijn 2004.

154
|
Curtis Franks
In my graduate student years, several of my friends and I were thinking about
bounded arithmetic because of its connections with complexity theory and be-
cause the special diﬃculty of representing within these theories their own consis-
tency statements shed much light on the ﬁne details of arithmetization. We had a
running gag, which is that formal theories like pa are awfully weak, because with
them one can’t draw very many distinctions. The implicit punchline, of course, is
that the bulk of the distinctions one can draw in theories of bounded arithmetic
are among statements that are in fact equivalent. Lacking the resources to spot
these equivalences is no strength!
Something perfectly analogous happens in the case of substructural logics.
There are theorems of cpc that are unprovable in ipc, but not vice versa, so
the latter logic is strictly weaker. Moreover, cpc proves all sorts of implications
and equivalences that ipc misses. But if we stop believing for a moment, as the
discipline of logic demands we do, and ask about the ﬁne structure of inter-
dependencies among the formulas of propositional logic, ipc delivers vastly more
information. Consider just propositional functions of a single variable 푝. In cpc
there are exactly four equivalence classes of such formulas: those inter-derivable
with 푝, ¬푝, 푝∨¬푝, and 푝∧¬푝. In ipc the equivalence classes of these same for-
mulas exhibit a complicated pattern of implications, forming the inﬁnite Rieger-
Nishimura lattice.
One thought one may have is that ipc should be considered an expansion of
cpc: every classical tautology can be discovered with ipc via the negative trans-
lation of Gödel 1933 & Gentzen, so with ipc one gets all the classical tautologies
and a whole lot more. (Gödel at times suggested something like this attitude.) But,
of course, neither the negative translation nor the very idea of a classical tautol-
ogy arises within intuitionistic logic. The thought that I encourage instead is this:
The logician is loath to choose between classical and intuitionistic logic because
the phenomena of greatest interest are the relationships between these logical
systems. Who would have guessed that the rejection of a single logical principle
would generate so much complexity—an r.e. set of admissible rules with no ﬁnite
basis, an inﬁnite lattice of inter-derivability classes?
The intuitionist and the classicist have very ﬁne systems. Perhaps with them
one gains some purchase on the norms of right reasoning or the modal structure
of reality. The logician claims no such insight but observes that one can hold ﬁxed
the rules of the logical particles and, by merely tweaking the calculus between sin-
gle conclusion and multi conclusion, watch structural completeness come in and
out of view. The same switch, he or she knows, dresses the logical connectives up
in a constructive, context-sensitive interpretation in one position and divests them
of this interpretation in the other. These connections between sequent calculus,
constructive proof transformation, structural completeness, and lem are ﬁxtures

Logical Nihilism
|
155
from our logical knowledge store, but they cannot seriously be thought of as a
network of consequences in some allegedly correct logic.
3 Logic imposed and logic discovered
If I have conveyed my attitude successfully, then I will have inspired the following
objection:
You speak about an unwillingness to embrace any one or select few logical systems because
of an interest in understanding all such systems and how their various properties relate to
one another. But by making logical systems into objects of investigation, you inhabit an
ambient space in which you conduct this investigation. It is legitimate to ask which logic is
appropriate in this space. What is your “metalogic?”
I shall explain that this objection rests on various preconceptions that I do not
share. I hope the explanation functions to aid the reader in seeing these as mis-
conceptions. If it does, then logical nihilism will be understood.
If we agree that as logicians we are interested, not in factual truth, but in the rela-
tionships among phenomena and ideas, then the point of view we must hasten to
adopt should be the one that assists us in detecting and understanding these re-
lationships. Which relationships? Presumably, it has been suggested, those that
accurately pick out grounds and consequences, those that answer the question
“What rests on what?” But why stop here? What sort of purpose is served by si-
multaneously disregarding factual states of aﬀairs and pledging allegiance to fac-
tual relations of ground and consequence? I have an intuitive sense of what a fact
is; I have no such sense of ontological grounding. Nor have I seen any reason to
expect that the study of logic can foster such a sense in me.
More appropriate seems to be a disregard for privileged relationships similar
to our disregard for truth. Suppose that we are interested in detecting and un-
derstanding whatever relationships we can ﬁnd. Then we might wish not to be
wedded to any point of view. We might, instead, try on a few hats until some in-
teresting patterns appear where before there seemed to have been only disorder.
We might ﬁnd that one hat helps time and again, but we will be well-advised not
to forget that we are wearing it. For if we never take it oﬀ, then we risk forever
overlooking logical relationships of considerable interest. Worse, we risk coming
to think of the relationships we can detect as “in the world,” “preconditions of
thought,” or some such thing.

156
|
Curtis Franks
Allow me to illustrate this point with an example. At least since Aristotle it
was expected that great complexity could be uncovered by a proper analysis of
the quantiﬁers that occur in natural language. Notably, quantiﬁers allow us to
reason in succinct strokes about inﬁnite collections. About a century ago, David
Hilbert had the idea of analyzing quantiﬁers with consistency proofs, and he de-
vised an intricate calculus with “transﬁnite axioms” which allows proof ﬁgures
involving quantiﬁers to be transformed (in principle) into ﬁgures without them.
Hilbert’s idea was that reasoning about this transformation (which by its nature
requires being attentive to constructibility) would expose the quantiﬁers as in-
nocuous parts of our mathematical language and also make perspicuous their
complexity.5
Hilbert conducted this investigation in the shadow of a great ideological quar-
rel about the validity of various logical and mathematical principles. In one quar-
ter were dour skeptics who distrusted not only lem but other forms of inﬁnitary
reasoning. Chief among them was Kronecker, against whom Hilbert (1922, 199–
201) railed because he “despised ...everything that did not seem to him to be an
integer.” Less famously, but perhaps more importantly, he faulted Kronecker also
because “it was far from his practice to think further” about what he did accept,
“about the integer itself.” In a similar vein, Hilbert observed that Poincáre “was
from the start convinced of the impossibility of a proof of the axioms of arithmetic”
because of his belief that mathematical “induction is a property of the mind.”
Thus Hilbert viewed these ﬁgures as short-sighted, not only in their rejection of
mathematical techniques that he wished to defend, but also in their belief that
the manifest validity of a principle precludes any hope of our analyzing it. Both
attitudes, he cautioned, “block the path to analysis.”
After only a decade of partial successes, it was discovered that the sort of
consistency proofs Hilbert envisioned are not available. Speciﬁcally, Gödel (1931)
demonstrated that no proof of the consistency of a reasonably strong and consis-
tent mathematical system could be carried out within that same system. Typically
it is the recursion needed to verify that the proof transformation algorithm halts
that cannot be so represented. This situation raises the question whether proving
with such principles that a system is consistent is not obscurum per obscurius.
In 1936 Gentzen made these circumstances much more precise by providing
a perspicuous proof of the consistency of pa. Gentzen’s proof is carried out in the
relatively weak theory pra together with the relatively strong principle of transﬁ-
nite induction up to the ordinal
5 For details, see section 2 of Franks 2015.

Logical Nihilism
|
157
휖0 = sup
푛<∞
휔휔...휔푛
2
1
.
Together with Gödel’s result, this proof demonstrates that transﬁnite induction
through 휖0 is unprovable in pa. All of this is well known. Most people familiar with
the history of logic are aware that Gentzen proved also that transﬁnite induction
to any ordinal beneath 휖0, any ordinal 휔휔...휔푛
2
1
for 푛∈N, is in fact provable in pa.
But Gentzen pressed even further. One can consider fragments of pa deﬁned by re-
stricting the induction scheme to formulas with a maximum quantiﬁer complexity
(call these the theory’s class of inductive formulas). Gentzen showed in 1943 that
the height of the least ordinal suﬃcient for a proof of the consistency of such a
fragment corresponds with the quantiﬁer complexity of that theory’s class of in-
ductive formulas, and that transﬁnite induction to any smaller ordinal is provable
in the fragment. So the number of quantiﬁers over which mathematical induction
is permitted equals the number of exponentials needed to express the ordinal that
measures the theory’s consistency strength. One quantiﬁer equals one exponen-
tial. Thus the theory of constructive proof transformations has turned up a pre-
cise mathematical analysis of the complexity of natural language quantiﬁers, a
remarkable realization of Hilbert’s original ambition.
Why has so little attention been given to this result? The discussion of
Gentzen’s work has been dominated by debate about whether or not the proof
of pa’s consistency can really shore up our conﬁdence in this theory. To anyone
who has witnessed a talk about ordinal analysis sabotaged by this debate, the
scene will be familiar: someone reminds us that the proof uses a principle that
extends the resources of pa. Someone else defends the principle despite this fact
and points out that in every other way the proof is extremely elementary com-
pared to the full strength of pa. Because the two theories pa and pra+ti휖0
6 are in
this basic way incomparable, the jury is out as to the gains made by reducing the
consistency of one to that of the other. From the point of view of logic, however,
this is all a distraction from what Gentzen actually achieved: he showed that the
question of the consistency even of elementary theories can be formulated as a
precise problem, and he showed that the solution to this problem requires new
perspectives and techniques and carries with it unexpected insights about logical
complexity. If philosophers did not harbor skepticism about pa, then they would
likely not be interested in Gentzen’s result one way or the other. Their disinterest
in the analogous results about fragments of pa is just evidence that they harbor
6 The theory of primitive recursive arithmetic extended with a principle of transﬁnite induction
to 휖0.

158
|
Curtis Franks
no skepticism about these theories. We recognize Gentzen’s analysis of ﬁrst-order
quantiﬁers as one of the deepest results in the history of logic as soon as, and no
sooner than, we stop believing.
I now wish to respond more directly to the objection that opened this section. Of
course it is true that in the study of logical systems one must engage in reason-
ing of some sort or another. This reasoning can possibly be described by one or
a few select logical systems. But why should anyone assume that this amount of
reasoning is anything more than ways of thinking that have become habitual for
us because of their proven utility? Further, why should anyone assume that there
is any commonality among the principles of inference we deploy at this level over
and above the fact that we do so deploy them?
To expand on the ﬁrst of these points, it may be helpful to draw an analogy
between rudimentary logic and set theory. Often it is thought that decisions about
which principles should govern the mathematical theory of sets should be made
by appealing to our intuitions about the set concept and even about the cumu-
lative hierarchy of sets. Doubtless such appeals have ﬁgured centrally in the de-
velopment of set theory. But the history of the subject suggests that a complete
inversion of this dynamic has also been at play. Kanamori (2012, 1) explains:
[L]ike other ﬁelds of mathematics, [set theory’s] vitality and progress have depended on a
steadily growing core of mathematical proofs and methods, problems and results. ...from
the beginning set theory actually developed through a progression of mathematical moves,
whatever and sometimes in spite of what has been claimed on its behalf.
Whereas one can today ﬁnd endless phenomenological and metaphysical justiﬁ-
cations of, for example, the replacement axiom, Kanamori contends that set the-
ory in fact evolved primarily by absorption of successful techniques, like transﬁ-
nite induction, devised to answer mathematical questions. “It was von Neumann’s
formal incorporation of this method into set theory, as necessitated by his proofs,
that brought in Replacement” (33). In similar fashion, the power set existence as-
sumption, which originally had many detractors, was not ﬁnally embraced in the
wake of any argument or philosophical insight. It merely happened that “iter-
ated cardinal exponentiation ﬁgured prominently” in Kurepa’s proofs in inﬁni-
tary combinatorics, “so that shedding deeper concerns the power set operation
became further domesticated ...” (46). The upshot? “Set theory is a particular
case of a ﬁeld of mathematics in which seminal proofs and pivotal problems ac-
tually shaped the basic concepts and forged axiomatizations, these transmuting
the very notion of set” (1).
The point is not that we have no reliable intuitions about the set concept, nor
even that they should play no role in the development of formal set theory. The

Logical Nihilism
|
159
point is that those intuitions have evolved partly in response to our need to make
sense of routinely counter-intuitive scientiﬁc discoveries. If our intuitions have
been at least partially, perhaps largely, shaped by developments in logic, then the
fact that we appeal to them on occasion in order to reﬁne our deﬁnitions and tech-
niques or in order to choose new axioms seems to lose its signiﬁcance. Rather than
develop a theory of sets that unpacks the fundamental truths we intuit, we have
developed an intuition about sets that makes sense of mathematically interesting
relations we have discovered.
I need not argue that rudimentary logic has taken shape in a similar fashion
ﬁrst because others have been persuasive on this same point and second because
it does not really matter for my purposes whether, in the end, this is true. I am
content simply to reveal the picture that holds us captive when we begin to think
about logic. For the objection we solicited was that if our modern science of logic
thrives on an unprejudiced consideration of the full gamut of properties exhibited
by logical systems and the relations among them, so that issues of correctness do
not arise, then it has only smuggled those issues in through the back door, in the
metalogic that makes the science possible. But it is a preconception that science
is made possible by ahistorical norms of right reasoning. Once one considers the
possibility that logic may be studied with patterns of thought adapted to what
we learn along the way, it becomes hard to understand what special status the
rudimentary principles we ﬁnd ourselves reﬂexively appealing to are supposed to
have.
This brings us to the second of the points above, the idea that the principles that
have found their way into our basic toolkit must presumably have some features in
common that led them there. Even if these principles have been adopted over the
course of time, the idea goes, there must be some reason for their being adopted
instead of other principles. Perhaps this reason can be repackaged as an explana-
tion of their being the true logical principles.
In response to this suggestion, I wish only to expose the presupposition driv-
ing it. Whoever said that there must be some property of logical validity that some
principles of inference enjoy and others do not? If we knew in advance of all evi-
dence that some such property attains, then it might be reasonable to look for it in
whatever classes of inference rules we happen to ﬁnd collected together. But we
have no such foreknowledge and, in fact, the evidence suggests that the arrange-
ment of our toolkit is a highly contingent matter. Are we not better oﬀshedding
this vestigial belief that among all the intricate and interesting consequence re-
lations out there, some have a special normative status? Can we not get by with
the understanding that principles of inference with a rather wide range of appli-
cability diﬀer from those suited only to speciﬁc inference tasks only in having a

160
|
Curtis Franks
wider range of applicability? Had this been the understanding that our culture in-
herited, would anything we have learned from studying logic lead us to question
it?
At the end of Plato’s Phaedrus, Socrates explains that prior to investigating
the essence of a thing, it is important to devise an extensionally adequate deﬁni-
tion of that thing so that we will be in agreement about what we are investigating.
This attitude seems right to me, and it seems to me that the familiar debates about,
for example, where logic leaves oﬀand mathematics begins violate this principle
unabashedly. Suppose it were clear to everyone that some but not all patterns of
reasoning are inescapable and furthermore that it were easy to tell which these
are. Then we would have good reason to label this “logic” in distinction to pat-
terns of reasoning that we all recognize as the province of some special science
or particular application. It would be reasonable to wonder what accounts for the
privileged role that these principles play in our lives. As things stand, however,
many of us seem instead to assume that there simply must be patterns of reason-
ing that diﬀer in kind from others. Typically, our minds are already made up about
the psychological or metaphysical circumstances that underwrite this diﬀerence.
This is what Wittgenstein stressed with his observation that “the crystalline purity
of logic was not the result of an investigation,” that instead “it was a requirement”
(§107). Driven by this assumption, we thrash about looking for some extensional
deﬁnition that we can hang our ready-made distinction on. These deﬁnitions are
simply unconvincing on their own. They can satisfy only people who cannot tol-
erate the thought that there is no line to be drawn.
When Gentzen began his study of logic, he parted ways with his predeces-
sors7 by not ﬁrst deﬁning logical validity and then seeking out logical principles
that accord with that deﬁnition. He simply observed that some patterns of rea-
soning abound. Consider that to deﬁne “predicate logic” he said only that it “com-
prises the types of inference that are continually used in all parts of mathematics”
(1934–35, 68). This homely deﬁnition set Gentzen on a task of empirically tally-
ing the techniques used in mathematical proofs, ignoring those that are unique
to geometry, arithmetic, and other speciﬁc branches of mathematics.8 Of course
such a survey is by no means guaranteed to be exhaustively executable, and it was
Gentzen’s good fortune that his subject matter happens to exhibit few instances.
One should not, however, write oﬀhis success as purely a matter of luck.
Gentzen devised an ingenious argument to the eﬀect that his tally was in fact ex-
haustive. This involved constructing an innovative type of logical calculus that is
7 There are historical precedents for Gentzen’s attitude: Aristotle, Condillac, Mill.
8 This is explicit in Gentzen 1934–35 and even more vividly depicted in section 4 of Gentzen 1936.

Logical Nihilism
|
161
at once formal and patterned on the informal reasoning recorded in mathematical
proofs. This scheme enabled him to do more than construct a serial tally of proof
techniques, because the inference types identiﬁable with it are extremely few and
systematically arranged so that one can be sure that none have been overlooked.
After all, if there are any inference types that went unnoticed, then for that very
reason they fail to meet the criterion of ubiquity in mathematical practice that
Gentzen imposed.
This empirical “completeness proof” bears little semblance to familiar con-
ceptions of logical completeness and is interesting for this reason. I mention it
now only to draw attention to the fact that while Gentzen’s deﬁnition of predi-
cate logic does pick out a well-deﬁned body of inferences,9 he did not concoct the
deﬁnition in the service of a preconceived notion of logical validity. He did not,
for example, ﬁrst stipulate a semantic notion of logical consequence based on his
own intuitions and then ask whether his calculi adequately capture this notion.
Gentzen simply proposed that the intuitions guiding mathematicians in their re-
search would be worth isolating and studying, and he therefore modeled a logical
calculus on the inferences mathematicians actually make.10
Of course mathematicians also deploy proof techniques that are less univer-
sal, and the only observable diﬀerence between these and the ones that meet
Gentzen’s criterion of ubiquity is their relative infrequency. Mathematicians do
not report a feeling that arithmetical reasoning is less valid or valid in some other
way than general reasoning, and even if they did, we should be inclined to ig-
nore these reports if they did not reﬂect in mathematical practice. For these rea-
sons Gentzen could never bring himself to describe the distinction between in-
ference rules that appear in the predicate calculus and those that belong specif-
ically to arithmetic as a distinction between the logical and the non-logical. He
only thought that he had designated a logical system, one that by design encodes
some of the inferences he was bound to make when reasoning about it but whose
logical interest derives solely from what that reasoning brings to light.
Contrast this with one of the more famous attempts to demarcate the logi-
cal: Quine’s defense of ﬁrst-order quantiﬁcation theory. Second-order quantiﬁca-
tion, branching quantiﬁers, higher set-theory, and such can each be dissociated
from logic for failing to have sound and complete proof systems, for violating the
compactness and basic cardinality theorems, and other niceties. There is even a
1969 theorem, due to Lindström, to the eﬀect that any logic stronger than ﬁrst-
9 Actually Gentzen vacillated over the inclusion of the principle of mathematical induction, ul-
timately deciding against it.
10 For details of this conception of completeness, see section 3 of Franks 2010.

162
|
Curtis Franks
order quantiﬁcation theory will fail to exhibit either compactness or the down-
ward Löwenheim-Skolem theorem. Second-order logic, Quine concluded, is just
mathematics “in sheep’s clothing” because by using second order quantiﬁers one
is already committed to non-trivial cardinality claims (1986, 66).
How true will these remarks ring to someone who doesn’t know in advance
that they are expected to distinguish logical and mathematical reasoning? Quine’s
consolation is telling: “We can still condone the more extravagant reaches of set
theory,” he writes, “as a study merely of logical relations among hypotheses”
(1991, 243). I should have thought that this accolade, especially in light of the in-
tricate sorts of logical relations that set-theoretical principles bear to one another
and that set theory bears to other systems of hypotheses, would be used rather to
enshrine a discipline squarely within the province of logic. For if we never sus-
pected that among the plenitude of logical relations are a privileged few that cap-
ture the true inter-dependencies of propositions, what else would we mean by
“logic” than just the sort of study Quine described?
As to the properties that characterize ﬁrst-order quantiﬁcation theory, it
should now go without saying that from our perspective Lindström’s theorem, far
from declaring certain formal investigations extra-logical, exempliﬁes logic. So too
do results of Henkin (1949) and others to the eﬀect that second-order quantiﬁca-
tion theory and ﬁrst-order axiomatic set theory each are complete with respect
to validity over non-standard models. For a ﬁnal example, I can think of none
better than the recent result of Fan Yang that Väänänen’s system of dependence
logic (with branching quantiﬁers), extended with intuitionistic implication (the
context sensitive and constructive operator that results from the denial of lem), is
equivalent to full second-order quantiﬁcation theory (Yang 2013).
Wittgenstein (§108) expected his readers to recoil from the suggestion that we
shed our preconceived ideas by “turning our whole examination around.” Rather
than impose our intuitions about logic on our investigations by asking which prin-
ciples are truly logical, let us ﬁrst ask if a close look at the various inference prin-
ciples we are familiar with suggests that some stand apart from others. If some
do, then let us determine what it is that sets them apart. But the question he puts
in our mouths—“But in that case doesn’t logic altogether disappear?”—suggests
that we know deep down that our empirical investigation is bound to come up
empty. Various criteria will allow us to demarcate diﬀerent systems of inference
rules to study, but when none of these indicate more than a formal or happen-
stance association we will ﬁnd ourselves hard pressed to explain why any one of
them demarcates “the logical.”
I am more optimistic than Wittgenstein. The conclusion that I expect my
reader to draw from the absence of any clear demarcation of the logical is not
that there is no such thing as logic. Let us agree instead that no one part of what

Logical Nihilism
|
163
logicians study, contingent and evolving as this subject matter is, should be idol-
ized at the expense of everything else. Logic outstrips our preconceptions both in
its range and in its depth.
4 Conclusion
Traditional debates about the scope and nature of logic do not do justice to the
details of its maturation. In asking whether certain inferential practices are prop-
erly logical or more aptly viewed as part of the special sciences, for example, we
ignore how modern logic has been shaped by developments in extra-logical cul-
ture. Similarly, questions about whether logic principally traces the structure of
discursive thought or the structure of an impersonal world presuppose a logical
subject matter unaﬀected by shifts in human interest and knowledge.
I mean, by saying this, not just to suggest that the principles of rudimentary
logic are contingent, not diﬀerent in kind from principles that we use only some
of the time or very rarely and only for speciﬁc tasks. I do urge this attitude. But
the caution against mistaking our default, multi-purpose habits of reasoning for
something monumental is only preparation for a second, more valuable reaction.
One should warm up to the trend of identifying logic with the specialized scientiﬁc
study of the relationships among various systems and their properties. This is,
after all, how logicians use the word. Our preference to ignore questions about a
logic’s correctness stems not only from an interest in exploring the properties of
possible logical systems in full generality but also from an appreciation, fostered
by the study of logic, that no one such system can have all the properties that
might be useful and interesting.
In closing, let me re-emphasize that the idea of a true logic, one that traces the
actual inter-dependencies among propositions, is unscathed by all I have said.
Part of the diﬃculty in questioning that idea is that it is a moving target: argue
against it, you feel it again in that very argument; close the door, it will try the
window. But this very circumstance only underlines the fact that the idea is a pre-
supposition, nothing that emerges from any discovery made in the study of logic.
For the same reason that we can marshal no evidence against it, we see that if we
can manage to forget it our future discoveries will not reveal to us that we have
erred.
This realization, coupled with the observation that a ﬁxation on the true log-
ical relationships “out there” hinders the advancement of logic, certainly recom-
mends nihilism on practical grounds. The question that remains is whether we
are capable of sustaining a point of view with no direct argumentative support.

164
|
Curtis Franks
The proper antidote to our reﬂexive tendencies will surely extend an analysis
of modern logic and include a rehearsal of the subject’s history. I cannot oﬀer that
here.11 I can only mention that logic as a discipline has evolved often in deﬁance of
preconceived notions of what the true logical relations are. Logic has been repeat-
edly reconceived, not as a fallout from our better acquaintance with its allegedly
eternal nature, but in response to the changing social space in which we reason.
There is reason neither to expect nor to hope that logic will not be continually
reconceived. Such reconceptions have been and likely will again be fundamental,
so that what makes the moniker “logic” apt across these diverse conceptions is
not an invariable essence.
In these pages I have indicated instead logic’s modern contours, highlighting
the fact that the deepest observations logic has to oﬀer come with no ties to pre-
conceptions about its essence. The richness of logic comes into view only when
we stop looking for such an essence and focus instead on the accumulation of ap-
plications and conceptual changes that have made current logical investigations
possible. The study of logic might be the best practical antidote to the view of it
that we have inherited.
In his Logic of 1780, Condillac wrote: “People would like to have had philoso-
phers presiding over the formation of languages, believing that languages would
have been better made. It would, then, have required other philosophers than the
ones we know” (237–8). Our interest in a better made language is an interest in a
language that traces a pre-existing logical structure. Like Condillac, Wittgenstein
warned that presupposing such a structure fosters dismissive attitudes about the
languages we have: “When we believe that we must ﬁnd that order, must ﬁnd
the ideal, in our actual language, we become dissatisﬁed with what are ordinarily
called ‘propositions,’ ‘words,’ ‘signs’ ” (§105). When we stop believing for a mo-
ment, as the discipline of logic demands we do, the structures we ﬁnd immanent
in our several, actual languages command our interest more than anything we
could have devised in the service of our ideal.
Bibliography
[1]
Chagrov A. V. 1992. “A decidable modal logic with the undecidable admissibility problem
for inference rules.” Algebra and Logic 31: 53–55.
[2]
Condillac, E. 1780. La logique (Logic), translated by W. R. Albury. New York: Abaris. 1980.
11 For the details of the evolution of one central concept—that of logical completeness—in the
past two centuries, see Franks 2014.

Bibliography
|
165
[3]
Franks, C. 2010, “Cut as consequence,” History and Philosophy of Logic 31(4): 349–79.
[4]
Franks, C. 2014, “Logical completeness, form, and content: an archaeology.” Interpreting
Gödel: critical essays, J. Kennedy (ed.). New York: Cambridge.
[5]
Franks, C. 2015, “David Hilbert’s contributions to logical theory.” The History of Logic, A.
P. Malpass (ed.) New York: Continuum.
[6]
Gentzen, G. 1934–35, “Untersuchungen über das logische Schliessen.” Gentzen’s doc-
toral thesis at the University of Göttingen, translated as “Investigations into logical de-
duction” in Szabo 1969: 68–131.
[7]
Gentzen, G. 1936, “Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie,” Mathematische
Annalen 112. Translated as “The consistency of elementary number theory” in Szabo
1969: 132–213.
[8]
Gentzen, G. 1938, “Neue Fassung des Widerspruchefreiheitsbeweises für die reine
Zahlentheorie,” Forschungen zur logik und zur Grundlegung der exackten Wis-
senschaften, New Series 4. Translated as “New version of the consistency proof for el-
ementary number theory,” in Szabo 1969: 252–86.
[9]
Gentzen, G. 1943, “Beweisbarkeit und Unbeweisbarkeit von Anfangsfällen der trans-
ﬁniten Induktion in der reinen Zahlentheorie.” Gentzen’s Habilitationschrift at the Uni-
versity of Göttingen, translated as “Provability and nonprovability of restricted transﬁnite
induction in elementary number theory,” in Szabo 1969: 287–308.
[10] Gödel, K. 1931, “Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und ver-
wandter Systeme, I,” Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 38: 173–98.
[11]
Gödel, K. 1932, “Zum intuitionistischen Aussagenkalkül,” Anzeiger der Akademie der
Wissenschaftischen in Wien 69: 65–66.
[12] Gödel, K. 1933, “Zur intuitionistischen Arithmetik und Zahlentheorie,” Ergebnisse eines
mathematischen Kolloquiums 4: 34–38.
[13] Harrop R. 1960, “Concerning formulas of the types 퐴→퐵∨퐶, 퐴→(퐸푥)퐵(푥) in intuition-
istic formal systems,” Journal of Symbolic Logic 25: 27–32.
[14] Henkin, L. 1949, “The completeness of the ﬁrst-order functional calculus,” Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic 14: 159–166.
[15]
Hilbert, D. 1922, “Neubergründung der Mathematik. Erste Mitteilung,” translated by
William Ewald as “The new grounding of mathematics: ﬁrst report” in P. Mancosu (ed).
From Brouwer to Hilbert: the debate on the foundations of mathematics in the 1920s. New
York: Oxford, 1998: 198–214.
[16] Kanamori, A. 2012, “Set theory from Cantor to Cohen,” Handbook of the history of logic,
vol. 6: sets and extensions in the twentieth century. D. M. Gabbay, A. Kanamori, and J.
Woods (eds.). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[17]
Kleene, S. C. 1945, “On the interpretation of intuitionistic number theory,” Journal of
Symbolic Logic 10: 109–124.
[18] Lindström, P. 1969, “On extensions of elementary logic,” Theoria 35: 1–11.
[19] Myhill, J. 1973, “Some properties of Intuitionistic Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory,” Proceed-
ings of the 1971 Cambridge summer school in mathematical logic (Lecture Notes in Mathe-
matics 337): 206–231.
[20] Plato. “Phaedrus,” trans. by A. Nehamas and P. Woodruﬀ. Plato: Complete Works (1997),
ed. by J. M. Cooper, Indianapolis: Hackett.
[21] Prucnal, T. 1976, “Structural completeness of Medvedev’s propositional calculus,” Re-
ports on Mathematical Logic 6: 103–105.
[22] Quine, W. V. O. 1986. Philosophy of logic. Cambridge: Harvard.
Logical Nihilism

166
|
Curtis Franks
[23] Quine, W. V. O. 1991, “Immanence and validity,” Dialectica 45, reprinted with emenda-
tions in W. V. O. Quine, Selected logic papers. Cambridge: Harvard, 1995: 242–250.
[24] Rybakov, V. 1997. Admissibility of logical inference rules. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[25] Szabo, M. E. 1969. The collected papers of Gerhard Gentzen, London: North Holland.
[26] Terwijn, S. A. 2004, “Intuitionistic logic and computation,” Vriendenboek ofwel Liber Am-
icorum ter gelegenheid van het afscheid van Dick de Jongh, Institute for Logic, Language,
and Computation. Amsterdam.
[27] Tokarz, M. 1973, “Connections between some notions of completeness of structural
propositional calculi,” Studia Logica 32(1): 77–91.
[28] Visser, A. 1999, “Rules and arithmetics,” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 40: 116–140.
[29] Wittgenstein, L. 1953. Philosophical investigations, Second Edition, translated by G. E. M.
Anscombe. Oxford: Blackwell. 2001.
[30] Yang, F. 2013, “Expressing second-order sentences in intuitionistic dependence logic,”
Studia Logica 101(2): 323–342.

Pietro Galliani
The Doxastic Interpretation of Team
Semantics
Abstract: We advance a doxastic interpretation for many of the logical connectives
considered in Dependence Logic and in its extensions, and we argue that Team
Semantics is a natural framework for reasoning about beliefs and belief updates.
Keywords: team semantics, dependence logic, belief representation
MSC: 03B60, 03B80
||
Pietro Galliani: University of Helsinki, Finland, email: pgallian@gmail.com
1 Introduction
Dependence Logic [24] is an extension of First Order Logic which adds to its lan-
guage dependence atoms of the form =( ⃗푡1, ⃗푡2), where ⃗푡1 and ⃗푡2 are tuples of terms1,
with the intended interpretation of “the value of ⃗푡2 is a function of the value of ⃗푡1.”
It is a ﬁrst-order logic of imperfect information, like IF Logic [14, 13, 20] or Branch-
ing Quantiﬁer Logic [12]; but rather than adding new possible patterns of depen-
dence or independence between quantiﬁers, as these logics do, Dependence Logic
isolates the notion of dependence away from the one of quantiﬁcation and permits
the examination of patterns of dependence and independence between variables
or, more in general, between tuples of terms.
This diﬀerent outlook makes Dependence Logic a most suitable framework
for the formal study, in a ﬁrst-order setting, of functional dependence itself; and,
furthermore, this logic is readily adaptable to the analysis of other, non-functional
notions of dependence or independence [11, 6, 8].
Like other logics of imperfect information, Dependence Logic admits both a
Game Theoretic Semantics, an imperfect information variant of the one for First
Order Logic, and a Team Semantics, a compositional semantics which is a natural
adaptation of Hodges’ Trump Semantics [15]. One striking peculiarity of the cur-
rent state of the art of the research in Dependence Logic and its extensions is a
1 Sometimes only atoms of the form = ( ⃗푡, 푡耠) are taken as primitive, where 푡耠is a single term.
=( ⃗푡1, ⃗푡2) is then equivalent to ⋀푡耠∈⃗푡2 =( ⃗푡, 푡耠).

168
|
Pietro Galliani
willingness to take Team Semantics – and not Game Theoretic Semantics, as for
the case of much IF Logic research – as the fundamental semantic framework; and
this diﬀerent approach is at the root of many recent technical developments in the
ﬁeld, such as, for example, the characterizations of team class deﬁnability of [17],
[16] and [8], the hierarchy results of [4], and the study of notions of generalized
quantiﬁcation of [6] and [5].
This paper is a detailed account of a doxastic interpretation for Team Seman-
tics, according to which formulas are to be interpreted as assertions about beliefs
and belief updates. This is not a novel idea: as a matter of fact, it is already implicit
in the equivalence proof between Trump Semantics and Game Theoretic Seman-
tics of [15]. However, the consequences of this insight are far from fully explored:
until now, doxastic concerns have played very little role in the development of ex-
tensions of Dependence Logic, and the doxastic meanings of known connectives
have been left largely unexamined.2
In what follows, we will gradually develop a formal system – in essence, a
notational variant of Jouko Väänänen’s Team Logic [25] – and show that many
of the atoms, connectives and operators of Team Semantics arise naturally from
concerns about beliefs and belief updates. It is the hope of the author that by doing
this, we may succeed in drawing attention to this interesting avenue of research.
2 Belief Models
Let 푀be a ﬁrst order model with at least two elements in its domain, let 푉⊆Var
be a set of state variables, and let us consider the set of all ﬁrst-order assignments
over Dom(푀) with domain 푉.
With respect to Tarski’s semantics for ﬁrst order logic, such an assignment 푠
represents a possible state of things: in other words, once the model 푀is ﬁxed, the
truth value of a ﬁrst order formula in an assignment depends on the elements of
the model that the assignment associates to all the free variables of the formula,
and on nothing else.
Even disregarding First Order Logic, ﬁrst order assignments are very natu-
ral objects for representing states of things. For example, let us suppose that our
model’s domain contains all the participants to a given contest, and that our states
2 Even such important connectives as the Dependence Logic disjunction, which – after [25] – we
will write 휙⊗휓, or the intuitionistic implication 휙→휓of [1] do not have, to the knowledge of the
author, any known doxastic interpretation. Later in this work, we will provide such interpreta-
tions: as we will see, these connectives can be understood in terms of belief updates.

The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics
|
169
represent the possible outcomes of the contest – and, in particular, the players
who obtained the ﬁrst three positions in the ﬁnal ranking.
Such an outcome can be represented, in an obvious way, as an assignment 푠
over 푀with domain {푤1, 푤2, 푤3}: here, 푠(푤1) would be the identity of the winner,
and so on.
For this particular example, of course, we would need to add a constraint re-
quiring that no one can be placed in two diﬀerent positions in the ﬁnal ranking:
this can be represented easily enough as the ﬁrst order axiom
휙:= ¬∃푥((푤1 = 푥∧푤2 = 푥) ∨(푤2 = 푥∧푤3 = 푥) ∨(푤1 = 푥∧푤3 = 푥))
(1)
as a condition that must hold for all possible states of things 푠, in the sense that 푠
is an acceptable outcome if and only if 푀　㨐푠휙.
Once we have added this axiom, there is not much left to do: as long as the
domain of the model is the set of all participants to the contest, any assignment
which satisﬁes the above formula represents a possible contest outcome.
A special case of this which is of no small interest is when the domain of the
model 푀consists of only two elements 0 and 1, or “False” and “True”: then an
assignment is easily seen to be equivalent to a propositional truth valuation, or,
if one prefers, to the speciﬁcation to a possible world in the sense of Kripke’s Se-
mantics for Modal Logic.
Now, let us return to our example, and let us consider an agent 퐴who has
some – not necessarily true, nor complete – belief about who will reach the ﬁrst
three places of our tournament. How can we represent this belief?
There are many possible choices here: for example, we could consider a
probability distribution over states, or a possibility distribution [28], or even a
Dempster-Shafer distribution [23, 3].
But let us limit ourselves to a very simple idea, and consider the set 푋퐴⊆
(푉㨃→Dom(푀)) of all possible states of things (assignments) which our agent
believes to be possible. This idea of representing beliefs as “sets of possible states”
is fairly common in knowledge representation theory, and – even though other
approaches, such as the ones described above, are certainly more sophisticated –
it is a reasonable starting point.
Furthermore, this approach plays on the analogy between our framework and
modal logic: indeed, it is easy to see that, at least for the case of Boolean models,
such a belief set is exactly a set of possible worlds which an agent can see from the
“actual” world. An important diﬀerence between our framework and modal logic,
however, is that in our case the agents can reason only about outcomes, and not
about their beliefs or about the beliefs of other agents.
Now, what can we do with beliefs? To begin with, we can describe their prop-
erties in some suitable logical formalism; and, as Section 3. will show, many prim-

170
|
Pietro Galliani
itive formulas considered in logics of imperfect information have a very natural
interpretation in these terms.
But we can also update beliefs. In general, a (unary) update operation will be
a function 푂from belief sets, or, to use the terminology in common use for logics
of imperfect information, from teams, to sets of belief sets. We will not require
these updates to be deterministic; and we will write 푂(푋) 㨃→푌as a shorthand for
푌∈푂(푋), that is, for the statement that 푌is a possible outcome of updating 푋
according to the rule 푂.
Binary update operators are deﬁned analogously, as functions ⬦mapping
each pair of teams 푋and 푌to a set 푋⬦푌of possible resulting teams; and again,
we will write 푋⬦푌㨃→푍for 푍∈(푋⬦푌), that is, for stating that the belief set 푍is
a possible outcome of updating 푋with 푌according to the rule ⬦.
Ternary or 푛-ary operators can also be deﬁned in the same way, but we will
not need to consider any of them in the present work.
Once we have belief operators and a language for describing properties of be-
lief sets we can ask a number of new questions, such as
1.
Can a certain belief set be seen as the result of a certain update being applied
between belief sets satisfying certain properties?
2.
If we update a belief set under a certain rule, and the other belief sets used
for the update (if any) satisfy certain properties, can we guarantee that the
resulting belief set will satisfy certain other properties?
This kind of question is of clear practical importance in Artiﬁcial Intelligence: if
some intelligent system’s belief state respects a condition 휙and our system inter-
acts with some other system whose belief state respects another condition 휓, can
we guarantee that the resulting belief states will respect some further condition
휃?
The whole discipline of belief revision [10], for example, can be understood
as a special case of this, as its fundamental problem consists in the study and
comparison of the ways of updating a knowledge base 퐾when a new statement 휙
is learned which is contradictory to it.
Our framework, in itself, is vastly more general – and, of course, vastly more
computationally expensive – than any system of belief revision; but on the other
hand, the update operations that we will discuss here are all much simpler than
those considered in Belief Revision. What, in the opinion of the author, logics of
imperfect information can provide to that ﬁeld is a very general logical framework
for deﬁning update operations and reasoning about their properties.
But enough chatter. Beginning with the next section, we will deﬁne primitives
and operators for a very general logic of imperfect information, containing most of

The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics
|
171
the connectives which have been studied so far in the context of logics of imperfect
information, and we will discuss their doxastic interpretations.
3 Atoms and First Order Formulas
In this section, we will gradually develop a logical formalism – basically, a frag-
ment of Team Logic – and use it to state properties of belief sets.
Now, what can be said about the beliefs of an agent 퐴, or, to be more precise,
about his belief set 푋퐴?
To begin with, we can ask, given a ﬁrst order3 formula 휙, whether our agent
퐴believes that 휙holds. This justiﬁes the following semantic rule:
DI-bel If 휙is ﬁrst order, 푀　㨐푋퐵(휙) if and only if 푀　㨐푠휙for all 푠∈푋
where the expression 푀　㨐푠휙means that the assignment 푠satisﬁes 휙in 푀accord-
ing to the usual Tarski semantics.
As an example, let us consider again the scenario described in the previous
section and the formula 휙of Equation (1). Then “푀　㨐푋퐴퐵(휙)” is a sanity condition
for our agent, corresponding to the statement according to which he believes that
no player will get two distinct positions in the ﬁnal rankings.
As another, perhaps quite unnecessary, example, suppose that our agent 퐴
believes that the winner of the contest will be female; then, for all 푠∈푋퐴we will
have that 푀　㨐푠Female(푤1), and hence that 푀　㨐푋퐴퐵(Female(푤1)).
In most logics of imperfect information, one would just write 푀　㨐푋휙for what
we would write here as 푀　㨐푋퐵(휙). Furthermore, the above condition would be
given just for ﬁrst-order literals, and we would rely on the connectives of our logic
in order to build expressions equivalent to 퐵(휙) for complex ﬁrst-order formulas
휙: indeed, as mentioned in ([24], Proposition 3.30), if 휙is ﬁrst order then 푀　㨐푋휙
if and only if 푀　㨐푠휙for all 푠∈푋.
Here, however, we will write the 퐵operator explicitly, for three diﬀerent rea-
sons. First of all, our objective is emphatically not to develop a terse formalism in
which to express everything that can be expressed in a logic of imperfect informa-
tion: instead, we want to illustrate a possible interpretation of logics of imperfect
information, and hence it will be useful to examine many doxastically signiﬁcant
3 We could also use here any extension or variant of First Order Logic which admits a Tarski-
style semantics, such as Transitive Closure Logic or First Order Logic augmented with the Härtig
quantiﬁer.

172
|
Pietro Galliani
conditions and operators. Furthermore, it is vital for our purposes to distinguish
between the ﬁrst-order level of our language, which allows us to summarize the
properties of all the assignments of the team taken individually, the more sophis-
ticated kinds of atoms that we will describe later in this section, and the update
connectives that we will introduce in Sections 4-7. The fact that ﬁrst-order formu-
las can be decomposed in terms of ﬁrst-order literals and update operators will
then be, from this point of view, an interesting theorem, not something built in our
deﬁnitions. Finally, and perhaps more practically, we want to be able to express
another kind of “ﬁrst-order” assertion in our language, and we need to distinguish
it from belief statements as those just considered.
This new kind of ﬁrst-order assertion is a possibility assertion, which corre-
sponds to our agent believing some ﬁrst order condition to be possibly the case in
the “true” assignment. We can introduce this kind of assertion as follows:
DI-pos: If 휙is ﬁrst order, 푀　㨐푋푃(휙) if and only if 푀　㨐푠휙for some 푠∈푋
Dependence Logic and IF-Logic, the two most studied logics of imperfect informa-
tion, are downwards closed4 and hence incapable of expressing this sort of state-
ment. The most widely known formalism capable of that is Team Logic [25], where
푃(휙) corresponds to ∼¬휙, where ¬ is the dual negation and ∼is the contradictory
one.
From the point of view of the present work, possibility statements are very
natural: for example, using them we can express that our agent 퐴considers it
possible that the winner will be female, that is, that 푀　㨐푋퐴푃(Female(푤1)).
We could also give and justify along similar lines further “ﬁrst-order” condi-
tions over belief sets: for example, we could state that an expression of the form
Most(휙) holds in a team 푋if and only if most of the assignments in 푋satisfy 휙.
But let us now move to conditions which cannot be veriﬁed by examining the truth
value of a ﬁrst order formula in all assignments of our belief set.
In the example which we are considering, what else could our agent 퐴believe
that we cannot express already? Well, to begin with, our agent could believe that
he knows the identity of the winner.
It is easy enough to assert, using what we already have, that the agent believes
that the winner will be 푎0 for some 푎0 ∈Dom(푀): indeed, this is precisely the
condition corresponding to 푀　㨐푋퐴퐵(푤1 = 푎0). But what we are asking now is
diﬀerent: we want a formula that speciﬁes that the agent believes that someone
will certainly be the winner, but does not specify who this person is.
4 A logic of imperfect information is said to be downwards closed if for all models 푀, teams 푋
and 푌and expressions 휙, 푀　㨐푋휙and 푌⊆푋implies 푀　㨐푌휙.

The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics
|
173
An existential quantiﬁer will not do the trick: writing 푀　㨐푋퐴퐵(∃푥(푤1 = 푥))
corresponds only to asserting that our agent believes that someone will win the
contest, not that he believes this about someone in particular!5 For example, if
Tom, Bob and Jack are three participants to the tournament, it is easy to see that
the belief set
푋퐴=
푤1
푤2
푤3
푠0
Tom
Bob
Jack
푠1
Bob
Tom
Jack
corresponding to the belief state in which our agent 퐴knows that Jack will get
third place, but is unsure about who between Tom and Bob will get the second
place and who the ﬁrst one, satisﬁes the formula 퐵(∃푥(푤1 = 푥)) but it does not
respect the condition we are talking about.
In fact, no expression of the form 퐵(휙) or 푃(휙) will allow us to express our
intended condition: indeed, those of the former sort are ﬂat in the sense of [24],
and hence hold in a team if and only if they hold in all singleton subteams, and
those of the latter one are upwards closed, in the sense that if 푀　㨐푋푃(휙) and
푋⊆푌then 푀　㨐푌푃(휙).
What we seem to need is some way of saying that the value of 푤1 is the same for
all assignments in our team. This is precisely the semantics for constancy atoms
of Dependence Logic.6
DI-con: For all terms 푡, 푀　㨐푋=(푡) if and only if, for all 푠, 푠耠∈푋, 푡⟨푠⟩= 푡⟨푠耠⟩.
Given this deﬁnition, =(푤1) characterizes precisely the condition of our example;
and, more in general, it is easy to see that =(푡) is satisﬁed by a team 푋퐴if and only
if the corresponding agent 퐴believes that he knows the value of 푡.
What if our agent instead believes that he would be able to guess the name
of the winner from the name of the second placed participant? This corresponds
nicely to the dependence atom =(푤2, 푤1), where the rule for dependence atoms is
DI-dep: 푀　㨐푋=( ⃗푡1, ⃗푡2) if and only if any two 푠, 푠耠∈푋which assign the same value
to ⃗푡1 also assign the same value to ⃗푡2.
What else can we say about our agent 퐴’s beliefs? For example, he might think that
everybody who has a chance to make it to ﬁrst place has also a chance to make it
5 In brief, we are discussing here the de dicto/de re distinction.
6 Another reasonable approach could be to deﬁne an “external” existential quantiﬁer ∃, and
model the intended condition as ∃푥퐵(푥= 푤1). Later in this section, we will brieﬂy explore this
idea; but we can anticipate that this external existential quantiﬁer is precisely the ∃1 operator of
[17].

174
|
Pietro Galliani
to second place: then, for all 푠∈푋퐴there exists a 푠耠∈푋퐴such that 푠(푤1) = 푠耠(푤2).
This is represented by the inclusion atom 푤1 ⊆푤2 from [8], where
DI-inc: For all tuples of terms ⃗푡1 and ⃗푡2, of the same length, 푀　㨐푋
⃗푡1 ⊆⃗푡2 if and
only if for every 푠∈푋there exists a 푠耠∈푋such that ⃗푡1⟨푠⟩= ⃗푡2⟨푠耠⟩.
The meaning of the expression 푤1 ⊆푤2 is of course diﬀerent from that of 퐵(푤1 =
푤2), which would instead state that the agent believes that the ﬁrst and second
placed players will be the same.
As an aside, possibility operators can also be constructed in terms of inclusion
atoms: indeed, if the free variables of 휙are 푥1 . . . 푥푛then it is easy to see that 푃(휙)
can be written as ∃푤1 . . . 푤푛(휙[푤1 . . . 푤푛/푥1 . . . 푥푛] ∧(푤1 . . . 푤푛⊆푥1 . . . 푥푛)).
Again, what else? Well, our agent could also think that no one who has some
chance to take ﬁrst place has also some chance to take third place – only ﬁrst or
second. This is represented by the exclusion atom 푤1 | 푤3, also from [8], where
DI-exc: For all tuples of terms ⃗푡1 and ⃗푡2 of the same length, 푀　㨐푋
⃗푡1 | ⃗푡2 if and
only if for all 푠, 푠耠∈푋, ⃗푡1⟨푠⟩
̸= ⃗푡2⟨푠耠⟩.
Of course, this is diﬀerent, and stronger, than 퐵(푤1
̸= 푤3), which would only state
that the agent believes that the winner and the third placed player will not be the
same.
For the last pair of atoms that we will describe here, we need to modify slightly
our example. Let us suppose that 푤1, 푤2 and 푤3 represent the winners of three dif-
ferent tournaments in three successive years, so that the same player could con-
ceivably win more than one of them. Then a possible situation might be that, in
the opinion of the agent, learning the winner of the ﬁrst year would not tell him
anything about who the winner of the third year that he does not know already
– or, in other words, that the set of all possible third year winners is the same for
each ﬁxed ﬁrst year winner. This corresponds to the independence atoms 푤1 ⊥푤3,
where
DI-ind퐶: Let ⃗푡1 and ⃗푡2 be two tuples of terms, not necessarily of the same length.
Then 푀　㨐푋
⃗푡1 ⊥⃗푡2 if and only if for all 푠, 푠耠∈푋there exists a 푠耠耠∈푋with
⃗푡1⟨푠耠耠⟩= ⃗푡1⟨푠⟩and ⃗푡2⟨푠耠耠⟩= ⃗푡2⟨푠耠⟩.
As pointed out in [11], 푡⊥푡is logically equivalent to =(푡). The reason for this is
clear: in our interpretation, 푡⊥푡means that our agent thinks that he would not
learn anything new about 푡by being told the value of 푡, and this is possible only
if he believes that he knows it already.
Finally, our agent may think that, for the purpose of learning who will be the
winner in the third year, learning who won in the ﬁrst and second year and know-
ing who won in the second year alone makes no diﬀerence. Perhaps, according

The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics
|
175
to this agent, learning who won in the second year would give him valuable in-
formation, and so would learning who won in the ﬁrst year; but once he learned
who won in the second year, learning who won in the ﬁrst year too would be quite
irrelevant.
As an example of this situation, let us consider the following belief set:
푋퐴=
푤1
푤2
푤3
푠0
Bob
Tom
Tom
푠1
Tom
Bob
Bob
푠2
Tom
Bob
Jack
푠3
Jack
Bob
Bob
푠4
Jack
Bob
Jack
Here our agent believes that if Tom won the second year then he will win the third
year too, and that if Bob won the second year then either him or Jack will win
the third year. So, learning who won the second year would allow him to infer
something about who will win the third year. Also, he believes that if Tom won
the ﬁrst year then one of Bob or Jack will win the third year, that if Jack won the
ﬁrst year then one of Bob or Jack will win the third year and that if Bob won the ﬁrst
year then Tom will certainly win the third year. So, learning who won the ﬁrst year
would allow him to infer something about who will win the third year. However,
suppose that Tom is told who won the second year. Then learning who won in the
ﬁrst year too would tell him nothing new about who will win the third year: if the
winner of the second year is Tom, then he is also the winner of the third year, and
if the winner of the second year is Bob then, no matter who won the ﬁrst year, both
Bob and Jack are possible winners for the third year competition.
This is modeled by the following, more general independence atom, also from
[11]:
DI-ind: Let ⃗푡1, ⃗푡2 and ⃗푡3 be two tuples of terms, not necessarily of the same length.
Then 푀　㨐푋⃗푡2 ⊥⃗푡1 ⃗푡3 if and only if for all 푠, 푠耠∈푋with ⃗푡1⟨푠⟩= ⃗푡1⟨푠耠⟩there exists
a 푠耠耠∈푋with ⃗푡1 ⃗푡2⟨푠耠耠⟩= ⃗푡1 ⃗푡2⟨푠⟩and ⃗푡1 ⃗푡3⟨푠耠耠⟩= ⃗푡1 ⃗푡3⟨푠耠⟩.
In particular, it is not diﬃcult to see that the above team satisﬁes 푤1 ⊥푤2 푤3, as
required.7
It might be of course possible to consider other notions of dependence or in-
dependence, and justify them along similar lines. And indeed, in the opinion of
the author at least, one of the main future research directions in the ﬁeld of logics
7 As observed in [11], we then have that =(푥, 푦) is equivalent to 푦⊥푥푦, and so on. This can be
justiﬁed along the same lines in which it was justiﬁed that =(푥) is equivalent to 푥⊥푥.

176
|
Pietro Galliani
of imperfect information will be the search for new, doxastically signiﬁcant no-
tions of atom and the study of the relationships between the corresponding logics
of imperfect information.
However, we already have more than enough basic material for our purposes.
Let us now add the classical conjunction and disjunction to our language:
DI-or: 푀　㨐푋휓∨휃if and only if 푀　㨐푋휙or 푀　㨐푋휃.
DI-and: 푀　㨐푋휓∧휃if and only if 푀　㨐푋휓and 푀　㨐푋휃.
There is not much to say here about these two connectives, as they are simply a
way to join basic belief constraints into more complex ones.
Can we also add the classical quantiﬁers at this point? Nicely enough, this has
been already done by Kontinen and Väänänen in [17] by deﬁning the ∃1 and ∀1
quantiﬁers. These quantiﬁers have properties which are quite diﬀerent from the
ones of the “usual” existential and universal quantiﬁers for logics of imperfect
information, which will be interpreted in Section 7 in terms of update operations.
Here we will simply write ∃and ∀for the ∃1 and ∀1 of [17]. Their truth conditions
are
DI-exists: 푀　㨐푋∃푥휓(푥) if and only if there exists a 푚∈Dom(푀) such that
푀　㨐푋휓(푚);
DI-forall: 푀　㨐푋∀푥휓(푥) if and only if for all 푚∈Dom(푀), 푀　㨐푋휓(푚)
where 휓(푚) stands for the formula obtained by substituting 푚(or, to be more pre-
cise, a new constant whose interpretation is the element 푚) for 푥in 휓(푥).
These new connectives actually allow us to do without our many non ﬁrst-
order atoms: for example, it is not diﬃcult to see at this point that =(푥, 푦) is equiv-
alent to ∀푢∃푣퐵(푢
̸= 푥∨푣= 푦), 푥⊆푦is equivalent to ∀푢(퐵(푢
̸= 푥) ∨푃(푢= 푦)),
푥| 푦is equivalent to ∀푢(퐵(푢
̸= 푥) ∨퐵(푢
̸= 푦)) and 푦⊥푥푧is equivalent to
∀푢1푢2푢3(퐵(푢1
̸= 푥∧푢2
̸= 푦) ∨퐵(푢1
̸= 푥∧푢3
̸= 푧) ∨퐵(푢1 = 푥∧푢2 = 푦∧푢3 = 푧)).
Examining logics of imperfect information in terms of these quantiﬁers,
rather than in terms of some classes of non ﬁrst-order atom, may actually be a
promising – and, at the moment, largely unexplored – avenue of research; but in
this work, we thought it better to begin by describing the atoms that have been
studied so far, and only show their translations in term of basic quantiﬁers in a
second time.
Another connective that we are missing is a negation. We can certainly negate
a ﬁrst-order formula inside a belief or possibility statement; but can we also con-
sider an “external” negation, to go with our external quantiﬁers and our classical
conjunction and disjunctions?
It turns out that we can, of course, and that such an operator is precisely the
contradictory negation ∼휙of Team Semantics. Here we call it simply ¬휙, as there

The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics
|
177
is no “other” negation with which it may be confused. Its semantics is precisely
the one that we would expect:
DI-not: 푀　㨐푋¬휓if and only if 푀
̸　㨐푋휓.
Given such an operator, we can as usual rewrite 휙∧휓as ¬(¬휙∨¬휓) and ∀푥휓as
¬∃푥¬휓.
Furthermore, as in the case of the “diamond” and “box” operators of Modal
Logic, we can remove one of them from our list of primitives: for example, we
could keep only 푃(휙), and deﬁne 퐵(휙) as ¬푃(¬휙). Here, however, it must be noted
that the roles of the internal and external negations are quite diﬀerent: the former
states that something is not true with respect to the whole team, while the nega-
tion of ¬휙states that 휙is not true in one speciﬁc assignment. This is rather remi-
niscent, although not entirely identical, to the distinction between contradictory
negation and dual negation of Team Logic.8
Given such a theory 푇in the language developed so far and a suitable model
푀, one can consider the set Bel푀(푇) of all belief sets which satisfy 푇in 푀: for-
mally, we can deﬁne
Bel푀(푇) := {푋: 푀　㨐푋푇}.
Given two theories 푇1 and 푇2 and a suitable model 푀, we write 푇1 　㨐푀푇2 if
Bel푀(푇1) ⊆Bel푀(푇2), and 푇1 　㨐푇2 if 푇1 　㨐푀푇2 for all suitable models 푀.
The signiﬁcance of these expressions is clear: 푇1 　㨐푀푇2 means that whenever
our belief set over the model 푀satisﬁes all the conditions of 푇1, it also describes
all those described in 푇2, and 푇1 　㨐푇2 means that this is the case even if we do not
know the underlying model 푀.
4 Belief Updates
Consider again our agent 퐴with his belief set 푋퐴, and suppose that he interacts
with another agent 퐵with a diﬀerent belief set 푋퐵. Then, our ﬁrst agent could
update his beliefs in many diﬀerent ways, according to the degree up to which he
trusts his own beliefs, to the degree up to which he trust the other agent’s beliefs
and on a number of other possible factors.
This can be represented by deﬁning update operations 푋퐴⬦푋퐵from pairs of
teams to sets of teams; and, as stated in Section 2., we will write 푋퐴⬦푋퐵㨃→푌
8 In particular, the Team Logic expression ∼휙corresponds to our ¬퐵(휙), while the expression
¬휙corresponds to our 퐵(¬휙).

178
|
Pietro Galliani
for 푌∈(푋퐴⬦푋퐵), that is, for the assertion according to which 푌is a possible
outcome of a ⬦-interaction between two agents whose beliefs are represented by
푋퐴and 푋퐵respectively.
There are many possible choices of update operations of this sort. Here we will
consider four of them which seem, at least at ﬁrst sight, to be relatively reasonable
choices:
Conﬁdent update 푋퐴⊕푋퐵: 퐴trusts his beliefs concerning the true assignment
푠0, but learns and trusts in the same way the beliefs of 퐵too. Therefore, 푋퐴⊕
푋퐵㨃→푌if and only if 푌= 푋퐴∩푋퐵.
Credulous update 푋퐴⊗푋퐵: 퐴is willing to entertain the possibility that he is
wrong and the true state is one that 퐵believes possible and he does not. Or 퐵
may be wrong and he may be right, he does not know. Hence, 푋퐴⊗푋퐵㨃→푌
if and only if 푌= 푋퐴∪푋퐵.
Skeptical update 푋퐴⊖푋퐵: 퐴might trust 퐵’s beliefs, but only if 퐵appears to
know more than 퐴– that is, if 퐵does not consider possible anything that 퐴
considers impossible. Otherwise, 퐴refuses to perform the update. Therefore,
푋퐴⊖푋퐵㨃→푌if and only if 푋퐵⊆푋퐴and 푌= 푋퐵.
Openminded update 푋퐴⊙푋퐵: 퐴might trust 퐵’s beliefs, but only if 퐵appears to
know less than 퐴– that is, if he does not consider impossible anything that
퐴considers possible. Otherwise, 퐴refuses to perform the update. Therefore,
푋퐴⊙푋퐵㨃→푌if and only if 푋퐴⊆푋퐵and 푌= 푋퐵.
Note that the skeptical update and the openminded one can fail, that is, may not
lead to any possible outcome. This is a feature, not a bug: an update operation
does not need to be speciﬁed for all possible belief states, and does not need to be
deterministic either – none of the update operations considered here can lead to
more than one possible outcome, but nothing prevents in principle the deﬁnition
of such update operators.
Furthermore, these update operators satisfy the three following properties:
Idempotence: 푋⬦푋㨃→푌if and only if 푌= 푋;
Associativity: If 푋1 ⬦푋2 㨃→푌and 푌⬦푋3 㨃→푍, then there exists a 푊such that
푋2 ⬦푋3 㨃→푊and 푋1 ⬦푊㨃→푍;
Monotonicity: If 푋⬦푌㨃→푍and 푍⬦푊㨃→푋then 푋= 푍.
The interpretation of these properties, and the reason why they may be reasonable
properties to require for an update operator, should be clear. An update 푋⬦푌rep-
resents an interaction between two agents whose beliefs correspond to 푋and 푌:
therefore, idempotence states that whenever the two agents have the exact same
beliefs, the interaction does not modify these beliefs, associativity states that,
in group interactions, the order of the individual interactions is irrelevant, and

The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics
|
179
monotonicity means that an agent who changed idea cannot “return back” to his
previous beliefs through another interaction of the same kind.
Let us verify that the update operators that we deﬁned satisfy these properties.
For the conﬁdent and credulous updates, this is obvious; hence, we will verify the
case of the skeptical update, as the one of the openminded update is completely
analogous.
Idempotence: Since 푋⊆푋, it follows at once that 푋⊖푋㨃→푌if and only if
푋= 푌.
Associativity: Suppose that 푋1⊖푋2 㨃→푌and 푌⊖푋3 㨃→푍. Then, by the deﬁnition
of the skeptical update, we have that 푋1 ⊇푋2 = 푌⊇푋3 = 푍. But then we
have that 푋2 ⊖푋3 㨃→푋3, and that 푋1 ⊖푋3 㨃→푋3 = 푍, as required.
Monotonicity: If 푋⊖푌㨃→푍, then 푍= 푌⊆푋. Furthermore, if 푍⊖푊㨃→푋then
푋= 푊⊆푍. Hence, 푍⊆푋⊆푍, and therefore 푋= 푍.
Of course, these are only a possible selection of update properties: it may well be
the case that in the future interesting update operators which do not respect them
will be found, or that other, more important conditions will be explored.
After this parenthesis, let us reconsider the language of Section 3. As we saw,
this language is already capable of describing a number of properties of belief
states. But now we have something new, that is, some ways of updating beliefs.
This allows us to ask some very natural questions: for example, if 퐴’s belief state
푋퐴satisﬁes 휙, and if 퐵’s belief state 푋퐵satisﬁes 휓, what can we say about a belief
state corresponding to some update of 푋퐴and 푋퐵?
To answer this, we need to add some way of talking about updates to our lan-
guage. A possibility is to consider, for each update ⬦, a connective 휙⬦휓such that
푀　㨐푋휙⬦휓if and only if the belief set 푋can be seen as the result of a ⬦-update
between a belief set satisfying 휙and a belief set satisfying 휓.
In other words, the semantics of 휙⬦휓will be
DI-⬦: 푀　㨐푋휙⬦휓if and only if there exist teams 푌and 푍such that
푌⬦푍㨃→푋, 푀　㨐푌휙and 푀　㨐푍휓.
This gives us at once the following operations:
DI-⊕: 푀　㨐푋휙⊕휓if and only if 푋= 푌∩푍for some 푌and 푍such that 푀　㨐푌휙
and 푀　㨐푍휓;
DI-⊗: 푀　㨐푋휙⊗휓if and only if 푋= 푌∪푍for some 푌and 푍such that 푀　㨐푌휙
and 푀　㨐푍휓;
DI-⊖: 푀　㨐푋휙⊖휓if and only if 푀　㨐푋휓and there exists a 푌⊇푋such that
푀　㨐푌휙.
DI-⊙: 푀　㨐푋휙⊙휓if and only if 푀　㨐푋휓and there exists a 푌⊆푋such that
푀　㨐푋휙.

180
|
Pietro Galliani
The credulous update connective is exactly the tensor connective of Team Logic, or
the disjunction of Dependence Logic. The other ones, to the knowledge of the au-
thor, have not been studied in depth yet, but they do hold some interest; it is worth
noting, in particular, that for downwards closed logics (such as Dependence Logic
or Intuitionistic Dependence Logic) 휙⊕휓and 휙⊖휓are equivalent and correspond
to the classical conjunction 휙∧휓.
The intended interpretation of these connectives is better understood by con-
sidering expressions of the form 휙⬦휓　㨐휃. According to what we just discussed,
such an expression corresponds to the statement that
Any possible outcome of ⬦-update between two belief states satisfying 휙and 휓respectively
will satisfy 휃.
The signiﬁcance of such a statement, and its relevance for the kind of framework
that we are presenting, is then clear.
An expression of the form 휙　㨐휓⬦휃is perhaps a little more diﬃcult to read,
but its meaning is still intuitive enough: such an entailment holds if and only if
any belief state which satisﬁes 휙can be thought of as the result of a ⬦-update
between a belief state such that 휓and a belief state such that 휃.
This allows us to make sense of some properties of logics of imperfect informa-
tion. Here we will describe only three examples relative to the credulous update:
1.
It is easy to see that (휙⊗휓) ⊗휃　㨐휙⊗(휓⊗휃) for all 휙, 휓and 휃. This just means
that the credulous update is associative: if a belief state can be the result of an
agent, whose belief state satisﬁes 휙, performing a credulous update with some
agent whose belief set satisﬁes 휓and then with some other one whose belief
set satisﬁes 휃, then it can also be the result of an agent, whose belief state
satisﬁes 휙, performing a credulous update with some agent whose belief state
satisﬁed 휓before he performed a credulous update with some agent whose
belief state satisﬁed 휃.
2.
The credulous update is not idempotent: in general, 휙⊗휙
̸　㨐휙. This can be
veriﬁed easily by letting 휙be the constancy atom = (푥): if the value of the
variable 푥is constant in 푌and in 푍, indeed, it does not necessarily follow
that it is constant in 푌∪푍.
The reason for this is clear: if an agent who believes that he knows the value
of 푥performs a credulous update with another agent who also believes that
he knows the value of 푥, and the two agents disagree on this value, then our
ﬁrst agent will become unsure about who, between him and the other agent,
was in the right about 푥.
3.
If 휙, 휓and 휃are downwards closed formulas – for example, if they are ex-
pressible in Intuitionistic Dependence Logic or in Exclusion Logic – then the

The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics
|
181
following “distributivity property”, ﬁrst pointed out by Ville Nurmi, holds:
(휙⊗휓) ∧(휙⊗휃) 　㨐휙⊗휙⊗(휓∧휃).
According to what we just discussed, this entailment can be read as follows:
If a team 푋can be seen as the result of a credulous update between a team such that 휙
and one such that 휓, and also as the result of a credulous update between a team such
that 휙and one such that 휃, then it is can also be the result of a credulous update between
two teams such that 휙and one such that 휓and 휃.
This is a nontrivial – and, at least in the opinion of the author, rather interest-
ing – property concerning belief updates and their properties.
As an aside, the last property fails if we consider non-downwards closed formulas:
for example, consider the team
푋=
푥
푦
푧
푠0
0
1
1
푠1
1
0
0
in any model 푀with at least two elements. Then 푀　㨐푋푧= 1 ⊗푥⊆푦: indeed,
for 푌= 0 and 푍= 푋we have that 푀　㨐푌푥= 1, 푀　㨐푍푥⊆푦, and 푋= 푌∪푍.
Furthermore, 푀　㨐푋푧= 1 ⊗푧= 0, as can be easily veriﬁed by splitting 푋into the
two subteams {푠0} and {푠1}.
However, 푀
̸　㨐푋푧= 1 ⊗푧= 1 ⊗(푥⊆푦∧푧= 0): indeed, otherwise we could
split 푋into three subteams 푋1, 푋2 and 푋3 such that 푀　㨐푋1 푧= 1, 푀　㨐푋2 푧= 1
and 푀　㨐푋3 푥⊆푦∧푧= 0. Now, 푠1(푧) = 0
̸= 1, and therefore 푠1 would necessarily
be in 푋3; but then, since 푀　㨐푋3 푥⊆푦, there should be another assignment 푠∈푋3
with 푠(푦) = 푠1(푥) = 1. The only such assignment is 푠0; but 푠0(푧) = 1, and therefore
it would not be the case that 푀　㨐푋3 푧= 0. This contradicts our hypothesis.
As this example shows, diﬀerent fragments of our language may have diﬀer-
ent properties when it comes to the entailment relation. This may be worth explor-
ing further in the future.
5 Adjoints
In the previous section we considered a few update operators, and for each one of
them we deﬁned a connective expressing that a given team 푋can be seen as the
result of an update between some teams 푌and 푍satisfying certain properties. This
increased substantially the expressive power of our formalism, and, in fact, by
now our language contains the propositional fragment of most logics of imperfect
information.

182
|
Pietro Galliani
However, this is not all that we can do with these update operations. In par-
ticular, it may be useful to be able to make conjectures about what would happen
if we updated the team in a certain way. In particular, any update operator ⬦in-
duces a corresponding implication
⬦㨀→between sets of belief sets, deﬁned as
DI-
⬦㨀→: 푀　㨐푋휙
⬦㨀→휓if and only if for all 푌s.t. 푀　㨐푌휙and for all 푍such that
푋⬦푌㨃→푍, 푀　㨐푍휓.
The intended interpretation of these new connectives is clear: 휙
⬦㨀→휓corresponds
to the statement asserting that any ⬦-update between the beliefs 푋of our agent
and the beliefs 푌of any other agent such that 푀　㨐푌휙will always result in a belief
푍such that 휓.
This easily implies that
휙⬦휓　㨐푀휃⇔휙　㨐푀휓
⬦㨀→휃
for all 휙, 휓and 휃and for all models 푀. In other words, the operator
⬦㨀→is the right
adjoint of the operator ⬦.
This notion of adjointness is precisely the one studied in [1], in which it was
one of the motivations given for the deﬁnitions of the intuitionistic and linear im-
plications.
Hence, it should come to no surprise that now our framework will allow us to
recover both these implications, plus two new ones. Indeed, by instantiating our
deﬁnition of
⬦㨀→with the update operators of the previous section we obtain the
following connectives:
Conﬁdent implication: 푀　㨐푋휙
⊕㨀→휓if and only if for all 푌such that 푀　㨐푌휙it
holds that 푀　㨐푋∩푌휓;
Credulous implication: 푀　㨐푋휙
⊗㨀→휓if and only if for all 푌such that 푀　㨐푌휙it
holds that 푀　㨐푋∪푌휓;
Skeptical implication: 푀　㨐푋휙
⊖㨀→휓if and only if for all 푌⊆푋such that
푀　㨐푌휓it holds that 푀　㨐푌휃;
Openminded implication: 푀　㨐푋휙
⊙㨀→휓if and only if for all 푌⊇푋such that
푀　㨐푌휓it holds that 푀　㨐푌휃.
Skeptical implication and credulous implication are precisely the intuitionistic
and linear implications of [1]. Moreover, it is not diﬃcult to see that whenever the
antecedent satisﬁes the downwards closure property, the conﬁdent and the skep-
tical implications are equivalent (as would the credulous and the openminded
ones in the case of an upwards closed antecedent). This, in particular, implies
that for downwards closed logics (such as, for example, Intuitionistic Dependence
Logic) these two forms of implication are interchangeable.

The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics
|
183
However, in general the skeptical and the conﬁdent implications are not
equivalent. For example, consider the team
푋=
푥
푦
푠0
0
0
푠1
1
1
in a model 푀with two elements 0 and 1. Then 푀　㨐푋푥⊥푦
⊖㨀→=(푥): indeed, the
only subteams of 푋in which 푥is independent of 푦are {푠0} and {푠1}, and in these
subteams 푥is clearly constant.
But 푀
̸　㨐푋푥⊥푦
⊕㨀→=(푥): indeed, for
푌=
푥
푦
푠0
0
0
푠1
1
1
푠2
0
1
푠3
1
0
we have that 푀　㨐푌푥⊥푦, but that in 푋∩푌= 푋the value of 푥is not constant.
So now we have a new class of formulas which describe beliefs in terms of
how they would change if they interacted with other beliefs; and this is, of course,
of potential signiﬁcance for a number of practical applications. More in general,
it seems that the problem of deciding, given two formulas 휙and 휓of our language
(or of a fragment thereof) and a ﬁxed model 푀, whether 휙　㨐푀휓, is of no small
relevance for the ﬁeld of knowledge updating; and that the same may also be said
for the problem of whether 휙entails 휓in all models.
The interpretation just discussed also clariﬁes the fact, already pointed out
in [1], that = (푥, 푦) is logically equivalent to = (푥)
⊖㨀→= (푦) (or equivalently, since
constancy atoms are downwards closed, to =(푥)
⊕㨀→=(푦)), and that more in gen-
eral dependence atoms can be decomposed in terms of constancy atoms and in-
tuitionistic implication: indeed, a belief set 푋satisﬁes =(푥)
⊕㨀→=(푦) if and only if
the corresponding agent, by trusting the beliefs 푌of some agent who believes he
knows the value of 푥, will reach a new belief state 푋∩푌in which he believes to
know the value of 푦too. This corresponds precisely to the doxastic interpretation
of =(푥, 푦).
6 Minimal updates
Let ⬦be an update operator satisfying the idempotence, associativity and mono-
tonicity conditions described in Section 4. Then ⬦deﬁnes a partial order over be-

184
|
Pietro Galliani
lief sets as follows:
푋≤⬦푌⇔∃푋耠s.t. 푋⬦푋耠= 푌.
Indeed, by idempotence we have that 푋≤⬦푋; by the associativity of the operator,
we have that the ≤⬦relation is transitive; and by the monotonicity of the operator,
we have that if 푋≤⬦푌and 푌≤⬦푋then 푋= 푌.
The interpretation of the ≤⬦operator in our framework is the following: 푋≤⬦
푌if and only if an agent, whose belief set is 푋, may reach the belief state 푌through
a sequence of ⬦-updates.
Diﬀerent update operators, of course, may generate the same partial order. In
particular, for the operators that we considered we have that
푋≤⊕푌⇔푋≤⊖푌⇔푌⊆푋
and
푋≤⊗푌⇔푋≤⊙푌⇔푋⊆푌.
In other words, a belief state 푌can be reached from a state 푋through a conﬁdent
or a skeptical update if and only if 푌represents a stricter belief than 푋does, and
it can be reached through a credulous or an openminded statement if and only if
it represents a looser belief than 푋does.
By the way, this allows us to give an alternative deﬁnition of the skeptical and
openminded updates in terms of the conﬁdent and credulous ones as follows:
Skeptical update, v2: 푋⊖푌㨃→푍if and only if 푋≤⊕푌and 푋⊕푌㨃→푍;
Openminded update, v2: 푋⊙푌㨃→푍if and only if 푋≤⊗푌and 푋⊗푌㨃→푍.
This seems to be an instance of a more general phenomenon: given an update op-
eration ⬦satisfying our three conditions, we can always generate a new operation
⬦耠as
푋⬦耠푌㨃→푍⇔푋≤⬦푌and 푋⬦푌= 푍.
These new update operations ⬦耠, in other words, are deﬁned precisely as the older
operations ⬦, except that now our agent – who believes that 푋– is willing to per-
form an update with 푌if and only if 푌itself is a belief state that he could possibly
reach through a ⬦-update.
Now, let V be any family of belief sets, let 푋be a belief, and let us deﬁne 푋⬦V
as {푍: ∃푌∈V s.t. 푋⬦푌㨃→푍}. As usual, we will write 푋⬦V 㨃→푍for 푍∈(푋⬦V):
in other words, with 푋⬦V 㨃→푍we mean that 푍is a possible outcome of updating
푋with some 푌∈V.
Suppose now that our agent can choose which 푌∈V to pick to update his
beliefs, and also select the resulting 푍if more than one exists: which strategy
could he use?

The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics
|
185
A reasonable choice might be that our agent will attempt to make a ⬦-minimal
update, that is, one that does not commit him any more than necessary: in par-
ticular, if he can reach both 푍1 and 푍2, and he could reach 푍2 from 푍1 through
another ⬦-update, then he should pick 푍1 over 푍2. This can be deﬁned formally
as the notion of minimal update:
푋2 V 㨃→푍if and only if there is a 푌such that 푋⬦푌㨃→푍and 푍is ≤⬦-minimal
in 푋⬦V.
Here, stating that 푍is ≤⬦-minimal in 푋⬦V means simply that there exists no
푍耠∈푋⬦V with 푍耠<⬦푍.
Substituting ⬦with the four update operators considered so far, we get the
following updates:
Minimal conﬁdent update: 푋⊞V 㨃→푍if and only if there exists a 푌∈V such
that 푋∩푌= 푍, and if for all 푍耠⊋푍and all 푌耠∈V it holds that 푋∩푌耠
̸= 푍耠;
Minimal credulous update 푋⊠V 㨃→푍if and only if there exists a 푌∈V such
that 푋∪푌= 푍, and for all 푍耠⊊푍and all 푌耠∈V it holds that 푋∪푌耠
̸= 푍耠;
Minimal skeptical update: 푋⊟V 㨃→푍if and only 푍⊆푋, 푍∈V and for all 푍耠
with 푍⊊푍耠⊆푋it holds that 푍耠
̸∈V;
Minimal openminded update: 푋⊡V 㨃→푍if and only if 푋⊆푍, 푍∈V, and for
all 푍耠with 푋⊆푍耠⊊푍it holds that 푍耠
̸∈V.
As before, we can at this point deﬁne connectives 휙2 휓for describing that a team
푋is a possible result of a minimal update of this kind, and connectives 휙
2
㨀→휓
for describing that whenever we perform a minimal update between 푋and a the
family of teams satisfying 휙, the result will satisfy 휓.
The formal deﬁnitions would then be
DI-2: 푀　㨐푋
휙2 휓if and only if there exists a 푌such that 푀　㨐푌
휙and
푌2 Bel푀(휓) 㨃→푋;
DI-
2
㨀→: 푀　㨐푋휙
2
㨀→휓if and only if whenever 푋2 Bel푀(휙) 㨃→푍it holds that
푀　㨐푍휓.
Here, as usual, Bel푀(휓) represents the family of all teams which satisfy 휓in 푀.
Here we will not give the instantiations of these connectives for the four up-
dates described above, nor will we discuss their properties.
All that we will point out is that the minimal skeptical implication connective
휙
⊟
㨀→휓is precisely the maximal implication 휙㨅→휓mentioned in [16] and deﬁned
as
DI-maximp: 푀　㨐푋휙㨅→휓if and only if for all 푌⊆푋such that 푀　㨐푌휙and
푀
̸　㨐푍휙for all 푍with 푌⊊푍⊆푋, 푀　㨐푌휓;

186
|
Pietro Galliani
Thus, even this connective can be interpreted in this framework. This notion of
minimal update appears to be rather natural, and it probably deserves further
study; however, for the moment we will content ourselves with having deﬁned it
and shown how to recover the 㨅→implication through it.
As an aside, this implication allows us to decompose independence atoms:
for example, it is not diﬃcult to see that 푦⊥푥푧is equivalent to =(푥) 㨅→푦⊥푧.
7 Quantiﬁers
So far, our operators have treated assignments as if they were point-like possible
worlds. This is not the case, of course: for example, our agent may be conﬁdent
about the values of certain variables, but not about the ones of others. Further-
more, we have no way so far of adding or removing variables to the domains of
our teams. In this section, we will attempt to remedy this.
Let us begin with a forgetting operator 휌푥, where 푥is a variable, with has the
eﬀect of removing the variable 푥from the domain of our team: more precisely,
for all belief states 푋we deﬁne 휌푥(푋) as 푋\푥, that is, as the team containing the
restrictions of all assignments in 푋to Dom(푋)\{푥}. In the case that 푥is not in the
domain of 푋to begin with, this operator has no eﬀect.
The doxastic meaning of this operator is the one suggested by its value: after
performing the update (휌푥), our agents forgets everything about the value of the
variable 푥, and even the fact that this variable exists to begin with! This is not the
same as our agent simply professing ignorance about the value of 푥– this would
be another operator, that we will examine later – as here we are really erasing the
variable from our domain.
As in the case of the binary update operators considered in the previous sec-
tions, this forgetting operator corresponds to two distinct connectives, which can
be formally deﬁned as
DI-forgotten: 푀　㨐푋(휌푥)휙if and only if there exists a team 푋耠such that 푋=
(휌푥)푋耠= 푋耠
\푥and 푀　㨐푋耠휙.
DI-forgetting: 푀　㨐푋(휂푥)휙if and only if 푀　㨐푋耠휙, where 푋耠= (휌푥)푋= 푋\푥;
In other words, (휂푥)휙holds in a team 푋if, starting from 푋and forgetting the values
of the variable 푥, we obtain a belief state which satisﬁes 휙, and (휌푥)휙holds in a
team 푋if this team can be obtained by starting from a team 푋耠which satisﬁes 휙
and forgetting the value of 푥. As always, these two operators are adjoints, that is,
(휌푥)휙　㨐휓⇔휙　㨐(휂푥)휓.

The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics
|
187
A combination of these two operators which is of particular importance is the
disbelieving operator 퐷푥휙= (휂푥)(휌푥)휙. The intuition here is that 푀　㨐푋퐷푥휙if,
apart from the value of the variable 푥, the team 푋could correspond to a belief set
which satisﬁes 휙. This is evident by the corresponding semantic rule: indeed, by
combining the rules for the forgetting and remembering operators, one can see
that 푀　㨐푋퐷푥휙if and only if there exists a 푋耠such that 푋\푥= 푋耠
\푥and such that
푀　㨐푋耠휙.
The condition 푋\푥= 푋耠
\푥is easily seen to be equivalent to the existence of
a function 퐻: 푋→P(Dom(푋))\{0} such that 푋耠= 푋[퐻/푥] = {푠[푚/푥] : 푠∈
푋, 푚∈퐻(푠)}. Therefore, the 퐷푥휙operator corresponds precisely to the existential
quantiﬁer rule.9
Just like all connectives, 퐷푥휙can also be built directly from some belief up-
date operator. This is our ﬁrst true case of a non-deterministic belief update: more
precisely, we can deﬁne it as
(퐷푥)푋㨃→푌if and only if 푋\푥= 푌\푥.
The signiﬁcance of this operator in our framework should be easy to see: in brief,
we have that (퐷푥)푋㨃→푌if and only if an agent who starts from the belief 푋
and, disbelieving his previous opinions about the possible values of the variable
푥, changes them and nothing else, can possibly reach the belief state represented
by 푌.
The quantiﬁer (퐷푥)휙is then the unary equivalent of the 휙⬦휓connectives
considered in the previous sections: in brief, 푀　㨐푋(퐷푥)휙if and only if there
exists a team 푌with 푀　㨐푌휙and (퐷푥)푌㨃→푋.
Of course, we also get another quantiﬁer (푅푥)휙, which is satisﬁed by a belief
state 푋if and only if for all 푌such that (퐷푥)푋㨃→푌we have that 푀　㨐푌휙: in
other words, 푀　㨐푋(푅푥)휙corresponds that our agent, whose belief state is 푋, is
conﬁdent that 휙would hold even if his beliefs about the value of 푥were wrong.
Hence, we may perhaps call it the regardless quantiﬁer. Thus, we have obtained a
new pair of unary connectives:
DI-disbelief: 푀　㨐푋(퐷푥)휙if and only if there exists a 푌such that 푌\푥= 푋\푥and
푀　㨐푌휙;
DI-regardless: 푀　㨐푋(푅푥)휙if and only if for all teams 푌with 푌\푥= 푋\푥it holds
that 푀　㨐푌휙.
9 To be more precise, it corresponds to the lax variant of the existential quantiﬁer discussed in
[8], in which more than one possible value for 푥may be picked for each assignment.

188
|
Pietro Galliani
The “regardless” operator is a lax version of the universal quantiﬁer ∼∃푥∼. . . of
Team Semantics; and, as always, these two operators are adjoints, that is,
(퐷푥)휙　㨐휓⇔휙　㨐(푅푥)휓.
Finally, let us consider the following scenario: our agent’s belief is repre-
sented by the team 푋, which satisﬁes some property 휙, but now the agent decides
that he does not trust at all his own opinion about the value of some variable 푥.
Then the new belief state is given by
¡푥휙= 푋[푀/푥] = {푠[푚/푥] : 푠∈푋, 푚∈Dom(푀)}
that is, the new belief state of our agent is the same as the old one, except that
now our agent knows nothing at all about 푥. This, once again, represents a situ-
ation in which our agent doubts the validity of his beliefs about 푥; but where the
disbelief operator 퐷푥corresponds to the agent revising these beliefs in some arbi-
trary, nondeterministic way, this new operator ¡푥has the agent taking an agnostic
position about the possible values of 푥and moving to a belief state in which he
knows nothing about it.
As in all previous cases, this allows us to develop two new connectives, that
we will call the doubted and the doubting quantiﬁers:
DI-doubted: 푀　㨐푋(¡푥)휙if and only if 푋= 푌[푀/푥] for some 푌such that 푀　㨐푌휙.
DI-doubting: 푀　㨐푋(!푥)휙if and only if 푀　㨐푋[푀/푥] 휙;
The !푥connective is exactly the !푥operator in Team Logic, or the one written as
∀푥in Dependence Logic or in many other logics of imperfect information. The
other one is, to the knowledge of the author, new, but its interpretation is clear:
푀　㨐푋(¡푥)휙if the belief 푋can be seen as the result of taking a belief state 푌which
satisﬁes 휙, and doubting its guess about it. As always, we have that
¡푥휙　㨐휓⇔휙　㨐!푥휓.
8 Conclusion
As we saw, virtually all of the connectives and operators of Dependence Logic
and its extensions admit natural interpretations in terms of descriptions of beliefs
and/or belief update operations. This suggests that we can extend our formalism
along at least two diﬀerent lines, by adding more dependency notions for the spec-
iﬁcation of more properties of beliefs or by adding further forms of belief update.
It will be interesting to examine how these two aspects will interact.
We mention some possible avenues for further research:

The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics
|
189
1.
Modal Logics are, de facto, the standard logical formalisms for reasoning
about beliefs; and in particular, dynamic modal logics [2, 21, 27] add to the
basic modal framework the capability for reasoning about belief updates. It
is high time for a more formal examination of the relationship between these
approaches and Team Semantics, perhaps along the lines of a study of the
doxastic content of Modal Dependence Logic [26] and its extensions. The re-
sults promise to be greatly rewarding for both the Dependence Logic and the
Dynamic Modal Logic research communities.
2.
Likewise, Belief Revision concepts and methodologies can (and, in the opin-
ion of the author, should) be adapted to Team Semantics. We only dealt with
very simple notions of belief update so far; but there is in principle no reason
why the more complex ones which have been studied within the Belief Revi-
sion research area could not be introduced in Team Semantics. Our notion of
update minimality, in particular, appears to have some connections with the
distance semantics for belief revision of [18].
3.
If teams are to represent belief states as set of possible assignments, and if
team semantics can be thought of as a formalism for reasoning about these
states and their evolution, it follows that it should be possible to develop anal-
ogous logical formalisms for ﬁner-grained forms of belief representation. Just
to mention one possibility, it may be very worthwhile to consider probabilistic
distributions over assignments, that is, probabilistic teams in the sense of [7].
This might bring about interesting connections to the Equilibrium Semantics
of [22, 9], but from a radically diﬀerent perspective: rather than searching for
the values of the strategic equilibria of the semantic games corresponding to
sentences, as is the case for Equilibrium Semantics, we would associate for-
mulas to conditions over probability distributions over assignments.
As commented by a reviewer, many of the ideas and results of the work of this pa-
per does not seem to depend intrinsically from the deﬁnition of teams as sets of
assignments. A – potentially very fruitful – avenue of further research may consist
in abstracting from this deﬁnition and study belief representation through alge-
braizations of Team Semantics, based for example on Mann’s work on IF Logic
[19]: this would increase further the level of generality and abstraction of our
framework.
We leave a more in-depth analysis of these ideas to future works. Here we lim-
ited ourselves to a discussion of the doxastic interpretation of the current state of
the art in Team Semantics research; and it is the hope of the author that this pre-
sentation highlighted how this interpretation holds much promise for the further
development of this fascinating family of logics.

190
|
Pietro Galliani
Acknowledgement: We thank Samson Abramsky, Alexandru Baltag. Johan van
Benthem and Jouko Väänänen for many insightful comments. We also thank an
anonymous reviewer for their useful suggestions and corrections.
This work was supported by the European Science Foundation Eurocores pro-
gramme LogICCC [FP002 - Logic for Interaction (LINT)], by the Väisäla Foundation
and by grant 264917 of the Academy of Finland.
Bibliography
[1]
Samson Abramsky and Jouko Väänänen. From IF to BI. Synthese, 167:207–230, 2009.
10.1007/s11229-008-9415-6.
[2]
Alexandru Baltag, Lawrence S. Moss, and Slawomir Solecki. The logic of public announce-
ments, common knowledge, and private suspicions. In Proceedings of the 7th conference
on Theoretical aspects of rationality and knowledge, TARK ’98, pages 43–56, San Fran-
cisco, CA, USA, 1998. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc.
[3]
Arthur Dempster. Upper and lower probabilities induced by a multivalued mapping. In
Roland Yager and Liping Liu, editors, Classic Works of the Dempster-Shafer Theory of
Belief Functions, volume 219 of Studies in Fuzziness and Soft Computing, pages 57–72.
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2008.
[4]
Arnaud Durand and Juha Kontinen.
Hierarchies in dependence logic.
CoRR,
abs/1105.3324, 2011.
[5]
F. Engström and J. Kontinen. Characterizing quantiﬁer extensions of dependence logic.
arXiv:1202.5247, 2012.
[6]
Fredrik Engström. Generalized quantiﬁers in dependence logic. Journal of Logic, Lan-
guage and Information, 21(3):299–324, 2012.
[7]
Pietro Galliani. Game Values and Equilibria for Undetermined Sentences of Dependence
Logic. MSc Thesis. ILLC Publications, MoL–2008–08, 2008.
[8]
Pietro Galliani. Inclusion and exclusion dependencies in team semantics: On some logics
of imperfect information. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 163(1):68 – 84, 2012.
[9]
Pietro Galliani and Allen L. Mann. Lottery semantics. In Juha Kontinen and Jouko Väänä-
nen, editors, Proceedings of Dependence and Independence in Logic, pages 118–132.
ESSLLI 2010, 2010.
[10] Peter Gardenfors, editor. Belief Revision. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY, USA,
1992.
[11] Erich Grädel and Jouko Väänänen. Dependence and independence. Studia Logica,
101(2):399–410, 2013.
[12] Leon Henkin. Some Remarks on Inﬁnitely Long Formulas. In Inﬁnitistic Methods. Proc.
Symposium on Foundations of Mathematics, pages 167–183. Pergamon Press, 1961.
[13] Jaakko Hintikka. The Principles of Mathematics Revisited. Cambridge University Press,
1996.
[14] Jaakko Hintikka and Gabriel Sandu. Informational independence as a semantic phe-
nomenon. In J.E Fenstad, I.T Frolov, and R. Hilpinen, editors, Logic, methodology and
philosophy of science, pages 571–589. Elsevier, 1989.

Bibliography
|
191
[15] Wilfrid Hodges. Compositional Semantics for a Language of Imperfect Information. Jour-
nal of the Interest Group in Pure and Applied Logics, 5 (4):539–563, 1997.
[16] Juha Kontinen and Ville Nurmi. Team logic and second-order logic. In Hiroakira Ono,
Makoto Kanazawa, and Ruy de Queiroz, editors, Logic, Language, Information and Com-
putation, volume 5514 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 230–241. Springer
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2009.
[17] Juha Kontinen and Jouko Väänänen. On deﬁnability in dependence logic. Journal of Logic,
Language and Information, 3(18):317–332, 2009.
[18] Daniel Lehmann, Menachem Magidor, and Karl Schlechta. Distance semantics for belief
revision. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 66(1):pp. 295–317, 2001.
[19] Allen L Mann. Independence-friendly cylindric set algebras. Logic Journal of IGPL,
17(6):719–754, 2009.
[20] Allen L. Mann, Gabriel Sandu, and Merlijn Sevenster. Independence-Friendly Logic: A
Game-Theoretic Approach. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
[21] Jan Plaza.
Logics of public communications.
Synthese, 158:165–179, 2007.
10.1007/s11229-007-9168-7.
[22] Merlijn Sevenster and Gabriel Sandu. Equilibrium semantics of languages of imperfect
information. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 161(5):618–631, 2010. The Third workshop
on Games for Logic and Programming Languages (GaLoP), Galop 2008.
[23] Glenn Shafer. A Mathematical Theory of Evidence. Princeton University Press, 1976.
[24] Jouko Väänänen. Dependence Logic. Cambridge University Press, 2007.
[25] Jouko Väänänen. Team Logic. In J. van Benthem, D. Gabbay, and B. Löwe, editors, Interac-
tive Logic. Selected Papers from the 7th Augustus de Morgan Workshop, pages 281–302.
Amsterdam University Press, 2007.
[26] Jouko Väänänen. Modal Dependence Logic. In Krzysztof R. Apt and Robert van Rooij,
editors, New Perspectives on Games and Interaction. Amsterdam University Press, Ams-
terdam, 2008.
[27] Johan Van Benthem. Dynamic logic for belief revision. Journal of Applied NonClassical
Logics, 17(2):129–155, 2007.
[28] LotﬁA. Zadeh. Fuzzy sets as a basis for a theory of possibility. Fuzzy Sets and Systems,
1(1):3 – 28, 1978.
The Doxastic Interpretation of Team Semantics


Lauri Hella* and Jouko Väänänen
The Size of a Formula as a Measure of
Complexity
||
*Corresponding Author: Lauri Hella: School of Information Sciences, Mathematics, University
of Tampere
Jouko Väänänen: Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Helsinki and Insti-
tute for Logic, Language and Computation, University of Amsterdam
1 Introduction
We propose a reﬁnement of the usual Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game. The new game
will help us make ﬁner distinctions than the traditional one. In particular, it can
be used to measure not only quantiﬁer rank but also lengths of conjunctions and
disjunctions needed for expressing a given property. Our game is similar to the
game in [1] and in [5].
The most common measure of complexity of a ﬁrst order sentence is its quan-
tiﬁer rank, and the method of Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé games can be successfully used
to prove lower bound results for this measure of complexity. However, the number
of non-equivalent ﬁrst order formulas of quantiﬁer rank 푛is an exponential tower
of height 푛with a polynomial depending on the vocabulary on the top. Thus we
are not very close to knowing the formula if we merely know its quantiﬁer rank.
In this paper we measure complexity in terms of the number of symbols in the
formula. The advantage of our measure is that there are only 2푃(푛) non-equivalent
formulas with 푛symbols, where 푃(푥) is a polynomial depending on the vocabu-
lary.
Let us consider the question of the complexity of deciding whether a binary
string
푠1푠2 . . . 푠푛= 10110010...01
(1)
has a certain pattern. One approach to this is circuit complexity. For example, it
is proved in [3] that constant depth circuits cannot decide the parity of (1), i.e. the
question whether (1) has an even number of ones. Another approach is compu-
tational complexity, where the parity of (1) is easily decided in linear time. In so
called descriptive complexity the question is posed, what is the logical complex-
ity of the simplest formula in a given logic that expresses the property of (1) in
question, for example parity. Concerning this type of problems, it was proved in

194
|
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
[2] that the question whether a set 푅of 푛+ 1-sequences
(푎1, . . . , 푎푛+1)
(2)
from a ﬁnite set {1, . . . , 푚} has an even cardinality cannot be expressed in existen-
tial second order logic, where the second order variables range over ≤푛-ary re-
lations, that is, there is no sentence 휙of such existential second order logic with
the property that the structure ({1, . . . , 푚}, 푅) satisﬁes 휙if and only if 푅has even
cardinality.
Let us return to (1). A natural setup of using logic to study the question of com-
plexity of ﬁnding patterns in (1) is to use the propositional logic with propositional
symbols
푝1, 푝2, . . . , 푝푛
(3)
with the meaning
푝푖is true if and only if 푠푖= 1.
(4)
Propositional logic gives rise to a variety of complexity measures. We focus here on
the simplest of them, namely the number of occurrences of propositional symbols
in a formula. Up to a constant factor this is the same as the number of symbols,
that is, the length of the formula.
The parity of (1) is naturally expressed by the propositional formula
⋁{
푛
⋀
푖=1
푝퐴
푖: 퐴⊆{1, . . . , 푛}, |퐴| even},
(5)
where
푝퐴
푖=
{
{
{
푝푖
if 푖∈퐴
¬푝푖
if 푖∉퐴,
(6)
which gives the upper bound 1
2푛2푛to the size of the smallest formula expressing
parity. However, there is a shorter formula 휓deﬁned as follows: 휓= 휙1,푛, where
for 1 ≤푖< 푗≤푛and 푘= ⌊푖+푗
2 ⌋
휙푖,푗
=
(휙푖,푘∧휙푘+1,푗) ∨(¬휙푖,푘∧¬휙푘+1,푗)
and
휙푖,푖= ¬푝푖.
This gives (up to a constant factor) the upper bound 푛2 for the shortest proposi-
tional formula expressing parity1. Krapchenko (see [6, p 258]) has proved in 1971
1 More precisely, a straightforward induction shows that the size of 휓is at most (푛+ 1)2, and if 푛
is a power of 2, then the size of 휓is exactly 푛2.

The Size of a Formula as a Measure of Complexity
|
195
that this is optimal. We prove below the same result using our reﬁnement of the
Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game.
For a slightly diﬀerent complexity question, suppose we have 푛unary predi-
cates:
푃1(푥), . . . , 푃푛(푥).
(7)
We ask what is the length of the shortest formula in ﬁrst order logic with the
unary predicates (7) that expresses the property that every Boolean combination
of the predicates is non-empty. This property can be written as the existential sen-
tence:
⋀{∃푥
푛
⋀
푖=1
푃퐴
푖(푥) : 퐴⊆{1, . . . , 푛}},
(8)
where, as above in (6), 푃퐴
푖(푥) = 푃푖(푥) if 푖∈퐴, and 푃퐴
푖(푥) = ¬푃푖(푥) if 푖
̸∈퐴.
This gives the upper bound (푛+ 1)2푛to the size of the smallest sentence ex-
pressing the given property (we deﬁne the size of a formula to be the total number
of atomic subformulas and quantiﬁers occurring in it). In Section 5, we show that
this is optimal for existential sentences. If we give up existential sentences and
allow a quantiﬁer alternation, we have a smaller sentence 휙deﬁned as follows:
∀푥∃푦
푛
⋀
푖=1
(푃푖(푥) ↔푃푖+1(푦)) ∧
∀푥∃푦(
푛
⋀
푖=2
(푃푖(푥) ↔푃푖(푦)) ∧(푃1(푥) ↔¬푃1(푦))),
where addition 푖+ 1 is to be calculated modulo 푛. Since we use ¬, ∧and ∨as basic
connectives, and consider ↔only as an abbreviation, the size of 휙is 8푛+4. Thus, 휙
is really optimal (up to a constant factor) because we cannot have such a sentence
without mentioning each 푃푖at least once.
In our ﬁnal application, we consider the minimal size of a ﬁrst-order sentence
expressing that the length of a linear order is at least 푛. It is well known that this
can be expressed by a sentence with quantiﬁer rank ⌈log 푛⌉+ 1. Such a sentence
휙푛can be obtained as follows: deﬁne ﬁrst recursively formulas 휃푘(푥, 푦) by letting
휃2(푥, 푦) := 푥< 푦and 휃푘(푥, 푦) := ∃푧(휃푙(푥, 푧) ∧휃푚(푧, 푦)), where 푙= ⌊푘/2⌋+ 1 and
푚= ⌈푘/2⌉, for 푘> 2. Thus, 휃푘(푥, 푦) says that there are at least 푘elements in the
interval [푥, 푦]. Then 휙푛can be deﬁned as ∃푥∃푦휃푛(푥, 푦).
Clearly the size of 휙푛is linear in 푛. However, with a clever trick of recycling
quantiﬁed variables it is possible to deﬁne a variant 휙耠
푛of 휙푛that has size 푐⌈log 푛⌉,
where 푐is a small constant. Moreover, 휙耠
푛can be chosen to be in the 4-variable
logic FO4 (see [4], Section 5). On the other hand, Grohe and Schweikardt prove in
[4] that the minimal size of an equivalent sentence in FO3 is at least 1
2√푛. Their

196
|
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
proof is based on a method which is related to the game we study in this paper,
but it is not formulated in a game theoretic form.
2 A Game for Propositional Logic
We introduce now a game for measuring how long a propositional formula has to
be to express a given property of binary strings
푠= 푠1 . . . 푠푛,
(1)
where 푠푖∈{0, 1}. We denote strings by 푠, 푟, 푡etc. Let 푛be the ﬁxed length of the
strings considered. We shall discuss nonempty sets 푆of such strings and call them
string properties. For example, 푆could be the set of strings (1) where the cardinality
of the set {푖∈{1, . . . , 푛} : 푠푖= 1} is even. Another example is the set of strings
(1) with more ones than zeros. In an extreme case 푆can be a singleton, e.g. the
singleton constant one string {111 . . . 1}.
Propositional formulas are built up from propositional symbols (3) by means
of ¬, ∧and ∨. We use Greek letters 휙, 휓etc to denote propositional formulas. The
concept 푠　㨐휙of a string 푠satisfying a propositional formula 휙is deﬁned in the
usual way: 푠　㨐푝푖if 푠푖= 1; 푠　㨐¬휙if 푠
̸　㨐휙; 푠　㨐휙∧휓if 푠　㨐휙and 푠　㨐휓; 푠　㨐휙∨휓if
푠　㨐휙or 푠　㨐휓.
Deﬁnition 2.1. Suppose 휙is a propositional formula and 푆a string property. We
say that 휙deﬁnes 푆if for all strings 푠
푠∈푆⇐⇒푠　㨐휙.
We deﬁne the size w(휙) of the propositional formula 휙as follows:
w(푝푖)
=
1
w(¬휙)
=
w(휙)
w(휙∨휓)
=
w(휙) + w(휓)
w(휙∧휓)
=
w(휙) + w(휓).
Note that w(휙) is just the number of occurrences of propositional symbols in 휙. If
휙is in negation normal form2, then, up to a constant factor, this is the same as the
number of symbols in 휙.
2 A formula is in negation normal form, if all negations occurring in it are in front of proposition
symbols.

The Size of a Formula as a Measure of Complexity
|
197
Note that while there are, up to logical equivalence, 22푛propositional formu-
las over the propositional symbols 푝1, . . . , 푝푛altogether, there are for each 푚, up
to logical equivalence, only at most 2푚⋅(푛+ 2)2푚propositional formulas 휙with
w(휙) ≤푚.
A natural question now is:
Question: Given a string property 푆, what is the size of the smallest propositional formula
that deﬁnes 푆.
We shall deﬁne a game for the study of this question. In deﬁning the game
we follow mostly [1] and to a lesser degree [5]. This game resembles the usual
Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game for the ﬁrst order logic, but also the Ehrenfeucht-
Fraïssé game for the independence friendly logic, presented in [5].
In the usual Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game we have two structures A and B and
the game is about their similarity. Player II maintains that the structures are very
similar. Player I maintains that there is a diﬀerence. During the game player I picks
elements from either one of the models and player II tries to ﬁnd similar elements
in the other model.
In the new game we do not have just two models but instead two classes of
models. Player II maintains that whatever features the models in one class have
all in common, some member of the other class also has. The game to be deﬁned
is able to detect very minute diﬀerences in models and is in that sense ﬁner than
the usual Ehrenfeucht game. In particular, this game can detect diﬀerences in the
size of conjunctions and disjunctions needed for separating the classes of models.
Deﬁnition 2.2. Let 푆and 푅be string properties and 푤a positive integer. The
game EF푤(푆, 푅) has two players. The number 푤is called the rank of the game.
In the beginning the position is (푤, 푆, 푅). Suppose the position after 푚moves is
(푤푚, 푆푚, 푅푚). There are the following two possibilities for the continuation of the
game:
Left splitting move: Player I ﬁrst chooses numbers 푢and 푣such that 1 ≤푢, 푣<
푤and 푢+ 푣= 푤. Then player I represents 푆푚as a union 퐶∪퐷. Now the
game continues from the position (푢, 퐶, 푅푚) or from the position (푣, 퐷, 푅푚),
and player II can choose which.
Right splitting move: Player I ﬁrst chooses numbers 푢and 푣such that 1 ≤푢, 푣<
푤and 푢+ 푣= 푤. Then Player I represents 푅푚as a union 퐶∪퐷. Now the
game continues from the position (푢, 푆푚, 퐶) or from the position (푣, 푆푚, 퐷), and
player II can choose which.
The game ends in a position (푤푚, 푆푚, 푅푚) and player I wins if there is a proposi-
tional symbol 푝푖such that either 푠　㨐푝푖for all 푠∈푆푚and 푟
̸　㨐푝푖for all 푟∈푅푚, or

198
|
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
푠
̸　㨐푝푖for all 푠∈푆푚and 푟　㨐푝푖for all 푟∈푅푚. Player II wins the game if they reach a
position (푤푚, 푆푚, 푅푚) such that 푤푚= 1 and player I does not win in this position.
This is a game of perfect information and the concept of winning strategy is de-
ﬁned as usual. Since the rank 푤푚decreases in each move, the game always ends
in a ﬁnite number of moves. Hence, by the Gale-Stewart theorem, the game is de-
termined: exactly one of the players has a winning strategy in EF푤(푆, 푅).
Note that if the players have reached a position (푤푚, 푆푚, 푅푚) in the game
EF푤(푆, 푅), then the continuation of the game from that position onwards can be
seen as a play of the game EF푤푚(푆푚, 푅푚). Thus, player I (player II) has a winning
strategy in the game EF푤(푆, 푅) from position (푤푚, 푆푚, 푅푚) onwards if an only if
player I (player II, respectively) has a winning strategy in the game EF푤푚(푆푚, 푅푚).
We say that a propositional formula 휙separates string properties 푆and 푅, in
symbols (푆, 푅) 　㨐휙, if 푠　㨐휙for all 푠∈푆and 푟
̸　㨐휙for all 푟∈푅.
Theorem 2.3. Suppose (푆, 푅) is a pair of string properties, and let 푤be a positive
integer. Then the following conditions are equivalent:
(1)푤Player I has a winning strategy in the game EF푤(푆, 푅).
(2)푤There is a propositional formula 휙of size ≤푤such that (푆, 푅) 　㨐휙.
Proof.
We prove the equivalence of (1)푤and (2)푤by induction on 푤. Consider
ﬁrst the case 푤= 1. By Deﬁnition 2.2, there are no moves in the game EF1(푆, 푅),
and player I wins if and only if there is a proposition symbol 푝푖such that either
(푆, 푅) 　㨐푝푖, or (푆, 푅) 　㨐¬푝푖. Since w(푝푖) = w(¬푝푖) = 1, we have (1)1 㨐⇒(2)1. On the
other hand, if w(휙) ≤1, then 휙is, up to logical equivalence, either a proposition
symbol, or the negation of a proposition symbol. Thus, (2)1 implies (1)1.
Let us then consider the case 푤> 1, and assume (1)푣⇐⇒(2)푣for all 푣< 푤
as an induction hypothesis. To prove (1)푤
⇐⇒
(2)푤, assume ﬁrst that player
I has a winning strategy in the game EF푤(푆, 푅). We have the following two cases
according to the type of the ﬁrst move in the winning strategy of player I.
Case 1: Player I makes a left splitting move by choosing 푢, 푣, 퐶and 퐷such that
1 ≤푢, 푣< 푤, 푤= 푢+푣and 푆= 퐶∪퐷. Since this move is given by a winning strategy,
player I has a winning strategy in both of the games EF푢(퐶, 푅) and EF푣(퐷, 푅). By
induction hypothesis, there are formulas 휓and 휃such that w(휓) ≤푢, w(휃) ≤푣,
(퐶, 푅) 　㨐휓and (퐷, 푅) 　㨐휃. Thus, 푠　㨐휓for all 푠∈퐶and 푠　㨐휃for all 푠∈퐷, whence
푠　㨐휓∨휃for all 푠∈푆. On the other hand, for all 푟∈푅, 푟
̸　㨐휓and 푟
̸　㨐휃, whence
consequently 푟
̸　㨐휓∨휃. It follows that (푆, 푅) 　㨐휓∨휃. As w(휓∨휃) = w(휓) + w(휃) ≤
푢+ 푣= 푤, (2)푤is true.
Case 2: Player I makes a right splitting move by choosing 푢, 푣, 퐶and 퐷such that
1 ≤푢, 푣< 푤, 푤= 푢+푣and 푅= 퐶∪퐷. Since this move is given by a winning strategy,

The Size of a Formula as a Measure of Complexity
|
199
player I has a winning strategy in both of the games EF푢(푆, 퐶) and EF푣(푆, 퐷). By
induction hypothesis there are formulas 휓and 휃such that w(휓) ≤푢, w(휃) ≤푣,
(푆, 퐶) 　㨐휓and (푆, 퐷) 　㨐휃. Thus, for all 푠∈푆, 푠　㨐휓and 푠　㨐휃, whence 푠　㨐휓∧휃.
On the other hand, 푟
̸　㨐휓for all 푟∈퐶and 푟
̸　㨐휃for all 푟∈퐷, whence 푟
̸　㨐휓∧휃for
all 푟∈푅. It follows that (푆, 푅) 　㨐휓∧휃. As w(휓∧휃) = w(휓) + w(휃) ≤푢+ 푣= 푤, (2)푤
is true.
To prove the converse implication (2)푤㨐⇒(1)푤, assume that there is a formula 휙
of size ≤푤such that (푆, 푅) 　㨐휙. We show that then player I has a winning strategy
in the game EF푤(푆, 푅). We assume without loss of generality that 휙is in negation
normal form.3 The strategy depends on 휙as follows.
Case 1: 휙is a proposition symbol or the negation of a proposition symbol. Then
by the deﬁnition of the game EF푤, player I wins without making any moves.
Case 2: 휙is 휓∨휃. Let 퐶be the set of strings 푠∈푆such that 푠　㨐휓, and let 퐷be the
set of strings 푠∈푆such that 푠　㨐휃. Since 푠　㨐휙for every 푠∈푆, we have 푆= 퐶∪퐷.
Moreover, since 푟
̸　㨐휙for every 푟∈푅, we have (퐶, 푅) 　㨐휓and (퐷, 푅) 　㨐휃. Finally,
as w(휙) ≤푤, there are 푢and 푣such that 푤= 푢+ 푣, w(휓) ≤푢and w(휃) ≤푣. Note
that 푢, 푣< 푤, and so, by induction hypothesis, player I has a winning strategy in
the games EF푢(퐶, 푅) and EF푣(퐷, 푅). Thus, using 푤= 푢+ 푣, 푆= 퐶∪퐷as his ﬁrst
move and these winning strategies in the rest of the game, player I is guaranteed
to win the game EF푤(푆, 푅).
Case 3: 휙is 휓∧휃. Let 퐶be the set of strings 푟∈푅such that 푟
̸　㨐휓, and let 퐷be the
set of strings 푟∈푅such that 푠
̸　㨐휃. Since 푟
̸　㨐휙for every 푟∈푅, we have 푅= 퐶∪퐷.
Moreover, since 푠　㨐휙for every 푠∈푆, we have (푆, 퐶) 　㨐휓and (푆, 퐷) 　㨐휃. Finally, as
w(휙) ≤푤, there are 푢and 푣such that 푤= 푢+ 푣, w(휓) ≤푢and w(휃) ≤푣. Note that
푢, 푣< 푤, and so, by induction hypothesis, player I has a winning strategy in the
games EF푢(푆, 퐶) and EF푣(푆, 퐷). Thus, using 푤= 푢+ 푣, 푅= 퐶∪퐷in his ﬁrst move,
and these winning strategies in the rest of the game, player I is guaranteed to win
the game EF푤(푆, 푅).
Q.E.D.
Corollary 2.4. Suppose 퐾is a string property. Then the following conditions are
equivalent:
(1) 퐾is deﬁnable by a propositional formula 휙of size ≤푤.
(2) Player I has a winning strategy in the game EF푤(푆, 푅) for all 푆and 푅such that
푆⊆퐾and 푅∩퐾= 0.
3 A straightforward induction shows that for any formula 휙there is an equivalent formula 휙耠in
negation normal form such that w(휙耠) = w(휙).

200
|
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
Proof.
Suppose 퐾is deﬁned by 휙of size ≤푤. Let 푆and 푅be given so that 푆⊆퐾
and 푅∩퐾= 0. Thus every model in 푆satisﬁes 휙and no model in 푅does, whence
(푆, 푅) 　㨐휙. By Theorem 2.3, player I has a winning strategy in EF푤(푆, 푅). For the
converse, suppose player I has a winning strategy in EF푤(푆, 푅) for all (푆, 푅) with
푆⊆퐾and 푅∩퐾. This holds in particular if 푆is 퐾and 푅is the complement of 퐾.
Thus for this choice of 푆and 푅we have (푆, 푅) 　㨐휙for some 휙of size ≤푤. Thus 퐾
is deﬁned by 휙.
Q.E.D.
We get the following method for showing that a string property 퐾is not deﬁnable
by a propositional formula of size ≤푤: We ﬁnd classes 푆and 푅such that
1.
푆⊆퐾.
2.
푅∩퐾= 0.
3.
Player II has a winning strategy in EF푤(푆, 푅).
3 The Propositional Complexity of Parity
We shall now prove that the parity of a binary string of 푛bits cannot be expressed
with a propositional formula smaller than 푛2. The result has been proved in [6]
with a method which is very similar to ours, even if it does not explicitly use
games. We present the proof as an example of the use of our game.
Suppose 푆and 푅are disjoint sets of binary strings of length 푛. Let
퐸= {(푓, 푔) ∈푆× 푅: |{푖: 푓푖
̸= 푔푖}| = 1}.
The density of the pair (푆, 푅) is deﬁned to be the pair
퐷(푆, 푅) = (푠, 푟),
where
푠= |퐸|
|푆| , and 푟= |퐸|
|푅|.
Lemma 3.1. If 푠> 1 or 푟> 1, then there is no proposition symbol 푝푖such that (푆, 푅) 　㨐
푝푖or (푆, 푅) 　㨐¬푝푖.
Proof.
Suppose 푠> 1 and 푖∈{1, . . . , 푛}. Then there are 푓∈푆and 푔, ℎ∈푅
such that (푓, 푔), (푓, ℎ) ∈퐸. Clearly this means that 푓푖= 푔푖or 푓푖= ℎ푖, whence
푓　㨐푝푖⇐⇒푔　㨐푝푖or 푓　㨐푝푖⇐⇒ℎ　㨐푝푖. Thus, if all strings in 푆satisfy 푝푖(¬푝푖),
then there is a string in 푅satisfying 푝푖(¬푝푖, respectively). It follows that neither
푝푖, nor ¬푝푖separates the sets 푆and 푅.
In the case 푟> 1 there are 푓, 푔∈푆and ℎ∈푅such that (푓, ℎ), (푔, ℎ) ∈퐸. Then
we have ℎ푖= 푓푖or ℎ푖= 푔푖, whence ℎ　㨐푝푖⇐⇒푓　㨐푝푖or ℎ　㨐푝푖⇐⇒푔　㨐푝푖. As
above, we conclude that neither 푝푖, nor ¬푝푖separates the sets 푆and 푅.
Q.E.D.

The Size of a Formula as a Measure of Complexity
|
201
Lemma 3.2. (a) Suppose 퐷(푆, 푅) = (푠, 푟) and 푆= 푆0 ∪푆1, where 푆0 ∩푆1 = 0. Let
퐷(푆0, 푅) = (푠0, 푟0) and 퐷(푆1, 푅) = (푠1, 푟1). Then 푠0푟0 + 푠1푟1 ≥푠푟.
(b) Suppose 퐷(푆, 푅) = (푠, 푟) and 푅= 푅0 ∪푅1, where 푅0 ∩푅1 = 0. Let 퐷(푆, 푅0) =
(푠0, 푟0) and 퐷(푆, 푅1) = (푠1, 푟1). Then 푠0푟0 + 푠1푟1 ≥푠푟.
Proof.
We prove (a); the proof of (b) is similar. Clearly 푟0 + 푟1 = 푟and 푟0
푠0 + 푟1
푠1 = 푟
푠.
Since the harmonic mean is never greater than the arithmetic mean4, we have
푠0푟0 + 푠1푟1
푟
= 푠0푟0 + 푠1푟1
푟0 + 푟1
≥푟0 + 푟1
푟0
푠0 + 푟1
푠1
= 푟
푟
푠
= 푠,
and the claim follows.
Q.E.D.
Lemma 3.3. Suppose 퐷(푆, 푅) = (푠, 푟) and 푤< 푠푟. Then player II has a winning
strategy in EF푤(푆, 푅).
Proof.
The proof is by induction on 푤. In the case 푤= 1, the assumption 푤< 푠푟
implies that either 푠> 1 or 푟> 1. By Lemma 3.1, there is no proposition symbol
푝푖such that (푆, 푅) 　㨐푝푖or (푆, 푅) 　㨐¬푝푖. Since the game EF1(푆, 푅) ends in its initial
position (1, 푆, 푅), this means that player II automatically wins this game.
Assume then that 푤> 1. Using Lemma 3.1 again, we see that player I does not
win the game EF푤(푆, 푅) without making moves. Suppose then that player I makes
a left splitting move 푤= 푢+ 푣and 푆= 퐶∪퐷. Let 푆0 ⊆퐶and 푆1 ⊆퐷be sets such
that 푆= 푆0 ∪푆1 and 푆0 ∩푆1 = 0. Let 퐷(푆0, 푅) = (푠0, 푟0) and 퐷(푆1, 푅) = (푠1, 푟1). Then
by Lemma 3.2(a), 푠0푟0 + 푠1푟1 ≥푠푟. Thus 푠0푟0 > 푢or 푠1푟1 > 푣, for otherwise
푠푟≤푠0푟0 + 푠1푟1 ≤푢+ 푣= 푤,
contrary to the assumption. If 푠0푟0 > 푢, then by induction hypothesis, player II
has a winning strategy in the game EF푢(푆0, 푅), whence, a fortiori, he has a winning
strategy in EF푢(퐶, 푅). Otherwise, 푠1푟1 > 푣, and by the same argument, player II has
a winning strategy in the game EF푣(퐷, 푅). Thus, in any case, player II can make
his move in such a way that he is guaranteed to win.
The case of a right splitting move 푤= 푢+ 푣and 푅= 퐶∪퐷is proved in the
same way by using Lemma 3.2(b).
We are now ready to prove the promised lower bound for parity of binary
strings.
Corollary 3.4 ([6]). If 휙is a propositional formula expressing the parity of strings
푠∈{0, 1}푛, then the size of 휙is at least 푛2.
4 We are indebted to Kerkko Luosto for pointing this out.

202
|
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
Proof.
Let 푆be the set of all strings 푓∈{0, 1}푛such that |{푖: 푓푖= 1}| is even, and
let 푅be the complement of 푆. Thus, |푆| = |푅| = 2푛−1. Furthemore, for each string
푓∈푆, there are 푛diﬀerent strings 푔∈{0, 1}푛such that |{푖: 푓푖
̸= 푔푖}| = 1, and all
these strings are in 푅. Thus, we have |퐸| = 2푛−1푛, and consequently 퐷(푆, 푅) = (푛, 푛).
By Lemma 3.3, player II has a winning strategy in the game EF푤(푆, 푅) whenever
푤< 푛2, and we conclude that 푆is not deﬁnable by any formula of size less than
푛2.
As noted in the introduction, the parity of strings in {0, 1}푛can be expressed
by a formula of size at most (푛+1)2. Thus, the lower bound 푛2 cannot be essentially
improved.
4 A Game for Predicate Logic
We shall next deﬁne a game that can be used for measuring the size of a ﬁrst-order
sentence needed for expressing properties of models. For the sake of simplicity,
we will only consider models with relational vocabulary.
We need to ﬁx some notation ﬁrst. The universe of a model A is denoted by
퐴, of B by 퐵, etc. We use 푥푗, 푗∈N, to denote variables. A variable assignment
for a model A is a ﬁnite partial mapping 훼: N →퐴. The ﬁnite domain of 훼is
denoted by dom(훼). If 휙is a formula, then (A, 훼) 　㨐휙means that the assignment
훼satisﬁes the formula 휙in the model A. For this to be meaningful the domain of
the assignment 훼has to include all the 푗for which the variable 푥푗is free in 휙.
We shall discuss classes A of structures (A, 훼), where A is a model and 훼is an
assignment. We assume that whenever (A, 훼), (B, 훽) ∈A, then A and B have the
same vocabulary, and 훼and 훽have the same domain, which we denote by dom(A).
If 훼is an assignment on A, 푎∈퐴and 푗∈N, then 훼(푎/푗) is the assignment that
maps 푗to 푎and agrees with 훼otherwise. If 퐹is a choice function on A, that is, 퐹
is a function deﬁned on A such that 퐹((A, 훼)) ∈퐴for all (A, 훼) ∈A, then A(퐹/푗) is
deﬁned as {(A, 훼(퐹((A, 훼))/푗) : (A, 훼) ∈A}. Finally, A(⋆/푗) = {(A, 훼(푎/푗)) : (A, 훼) ∈
A, 푎∈퐴}.
Let A and B be classes of structures of a ﬁxed relational vocabulary. Assume
further that dom(A) = dom(B), and 휙is a formula such that 푗∈dom(A) for all
variables 푥푗which are free in 휙. As in the case of propositional logic, we say that
휙separates the classes A and B, (A, B) 　㨐휙, if (A, 훼) 　㨐휙for all (A, 훼) ∈A and
(B, 훽)
̸　㨐휙for all (B, 훽) ∈B.
Deﬁnition 4.1. Let A and B be classes of structures of the same relational vocab-
ulary with dom(A) = dom(B), and let 푤be a positive integer. The game EF푤(A, B)
has two players. The number 푤is called the rank of the game. In the beginning the

The Size of a Formula as a Measure of Complexity
|
203
position is (푤, A, B). Suppose the position after 푚moves is (푤푚, A푚, B푚), where
dom(A푚) = dom(B푚). There are the following four possibilities for the continua-
tion of the game:
Left splitting move: Player I ﬁrst chooses numbers 푢and 푣such that 1 ≤푢, 푣< 푤
and 푢+ 푣= 푤푚. Then Player I represents A푚as a union C ∪D. Now the
game continues from the position (푢, C, B푚) or from the position (푣, D, B푚),
and player II can choose which.
Right splitting move: Player I ﬁrst chooses numbers 푢and 푣such that 1 ≤푢, 푣<
푤and 푢+ 푣= 푤푚. Then Player I represents B푚as a union C ∪D. Now the
game continues from the position (푢, A푚, C) or from the position (푣, A푚, D),
and player II can choose which.
Left supplementing move: Player I chooses a natural number 푗and a choice
function 퐹for A푚. Then the game continues from the position
(푤푚−1, A푚(퐹/푗), B푚(⋆/푗)).
Right supplementing move: Player I chooses a natural number 푗and a choice
function 퐹for B푚. Then the game continues from the position
(푤푚−1, A푚(⋆/푗), B푚(퐹/푗)).
The game ends in a position (푤푚, A푚, B푚) and player I wins if there is an atomic
or a negated atomic formula 휙such that (A푚, B푚) 　㨐휙. Player II wins the game if
they reach a position (푤푚, 푆푚, 푅푚) such that 푤푚= 1 and player I does not win in
this position.
This is a game of perfect information and the concept of winning strategy is de-
ﬁned as usual. The game is determined by the Gale-Stewart theorem.
We deﬁne the size w(휙) of the formula 휙of predicate logic as follows:
w(휙)
=
1 for atomic 휙
w(¬휙)
=
w(휙)
w(휙∨휓)
=
w(휙) + w(휓)
w(휙∧휓)
=
w(휙) + w(휓)
w(∃푥푗휙)
=
w(휙) + 1
w(∀푥푗휙)
=
w(휙) + 1
Note that if 휏is a ﬁnite vocabulary, then there are for each 푤, up to logical
equivalence, only ﬁnitely many 휏-formulas of size ≤푤.
Theorem 4.2. Suppose (A, B) is a pair of classes of structures of the same vocabu-
lary, and let 푤be a positive integer. Then the following conditions are equivalent:

204
|
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
(1)푤Player I has a winning strategy in the game EF푤(A, B).
(2)푤There is a formula 휙of predicate logic of size ≤푤such that (A, B) 　㨐휙.
Proof.
We prove the equivalence of (1)푤and (2)푤by induction on 푤. Consider
ﬁrst the case 푤= 1. By Deﬁnition 4.1, there are no moves in the game EF1(A, B),
and player I wins if and only if there is an atomic formula 휙such that either
(A, B) 　㨐휙or (A, B) 　㨐¬휙. Since w(휙) = w(¬휙) = 1, we have (1)1 㨐⇒(2)1. On
the other hand, if w(휙) = 1, then 휙is, up to logical equivalence, either an atomic
formula, or the negation of an atomic formula. Thus, (2)1 implies (1)1.
Let us then consider the case 푤> 1, and assume (1)푣⇐⇒(2)푣for all 푣< 푤
as an induction hypothesis. To prove (1)푤
⇐⇒
(2)푤, assume ﬁrst that player I
has a winning strategy in the game EF푤(A, B). We have the following four cases
according to the type of the ﬁrst move in the winning strategy of player I.
Case 1: Player I makes a left splitting move by choosing 푢, 푣, C and D such that 1 ≤
푢, 푣< 푤, 푤= 푢+ 푣and A = C ∪D. Since this move is given by a winning strategy,
player I has a winning strategy in both of the games EF푢(C, B) and EF푣(D, B). By
induction hypothesis, there are formulas 휓and 휃such that w(휓) ≤푢, w(휃) ≤푣,
(C, B) 　㨐휓and (D, B) 　㨐휃. Thus, (A, 훼) 　㨐휓for all (A, 훼) ∈C and (A, 훼) 　㨐휃for
all (A, 훼) ∈D, whence (A, 훼) 　㨐휓∨휃for all (A, 훼) ∈A. On the other hand, for all
(B, 훽) ∈B, (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휓and (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휃, whence consequently (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휓∨휃. It
follows that (A, B) 　㨐휓∨휃. As w(휓∨휃) = w(휓) + w(휃) ≤푢+ 푣= 푤, (2)푤is true.
Case 2: Player I makes a right splitting move by choosing 푢, 푣, C and D such that
1 ≤푢, 푣< 푤, 푤= 푢+ 푣and B = C ∪D. Since this move is given by a winning strat-
egy, player I has a winning strategy in both of the games EF푢(A, C) and EF푣(A, D).
By induction hypothesis there are formulas 휓and 휃such that w(휓) ≤푢, w(휃) ≤푣,
(A, C) 　㨐휓and (A, D) 　㨐휃. Thus, for all (A, 훼) ∈A, (A, 훼) 　㨐휓and (A, 훼) 　㨐휃,
whence (A, 훼) 　㨐휓∧휃. On the other hand, (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휓for all (B, 훽) ∈C and
(B, 훽)
̸　㨐휃for all (B, 훽) ∈D, whence (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휓∧휃for all (B, 훽) ∈B. It follows
that (A, B) 　㨐휓∧휃. As w(휓∧휃) = w(휓) + w(휃) ≤푢+ 푣= 푤, (2)푤is true.
Case 3: Player I makes a left supplementing move by choosing a natural num-
ber 푗and a choice function 퐹for A. The next position in the game is then
(푤−1, A(퐹/푗), B(⋆/푗)). Since this move is given by a winning strategy, player I
has a winning strategy in the game EF푤−1(A(퐹/푗), B(⋆/푗)). By induction hypoth-
esis there is a formula 휓such that w(휓) ≤푤−1 and (A(퐹/푗), B(⋆/푗)) 　㨐휓. Let
휙be the formula ∃푥푗휓. Then w(휙) = w(휓) + 1 ≤푤, and it suﬃces to show that
(A, B) 　㨐휙. Note ﬁrst that for all (A, 훼) ∈A, (A, 훼(푎/푗)) 　㨐휓, where 푎= 퐹((A, 훼)).
Thus we have (A, 훼) 　㨐휙for all (A, 훼) ∈A. On the other hand, for all (B, 훽) ∈B
and all 푏∈퐵, we have (B, 훽(푏/푗))
̸　㨐휓, whence (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휙.

The Size of a Formula as a Measure of Complexity
|
205
Case 4: Player I makes a right supplementing move by choosing a natural num-
ber 푗and a choice function 퐹for B. The next position in the game is then
(푤−1, A(⋆/푗), B(퐹/푗)). Since this move is given by a winning strategy, player I
has a winning strategy in the game EF푤−1(A(⋆/푗), B(퐹/푗)). By induction hypoth-
esis there is a formula 휓such that w(휓) ≤푤−1 and (A(⋆/푗), B(퐹/푗)) 　㨐휓. Let
휙be the formula ∀푥푗휓. Then w(휙) = w(휓) + 1 ≤푤, and it suﬃces to show that
(A, B) 　㨐휙. Note ﬁrst that for all (A, 훼) ∈A and all 푎∈퐴, we have (A, 훼(푎/푗)) 　㨐휓.
Thus we have (A, 훼) 　㨐휙for all (A, 훼) ∈A. On the other hand, for all (B, 훽) ∈B,
(B, 훽(푏/푗))
̸　㨐휓, where 푏= 퐹((B, 훽)). Thus we have (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휙for all (B, 훽) ∈B.
To prove the converse implication (2)푤㨐⇒(1)푤, assume that there is a formula 휙
of size ≤푤such that (A, B) 　㨐휙. We show that then player I has a winning strat-
egy in the game EF푤(A, B). As in the case of propositional logic, we can assume
without loss of generality that 휙is in negation normal form. The strategy of player
I depends on 휙as follows.
Case 1: 휙is an atomic formula or the negation of an atomic formula. Then by
Deﬁnition 4.1, player I wins the game EF푤(A, B) without making any moves.
Case 2: 휙is 휓∨휃. Let C be the class of structures (A, 훼) ∈A such that (A, 훼) 　㨐휓,
and let D be the class of structures (A, 훼) ∈A such that (A, 훼) 　㨐휃. Since (A, 훼) 　㨐휙
for every (A, 훼) ∈A, we have A = C ∪D. Moreover, since (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휙for every
(B, 훽) ∈B, we have (C, B) 　㨐휓and (D, B) 　㨐휃. Finally, as w(휙) ≤푤, there are
푢and 푣such that 푤= 푢+ 푣, w(휓) ≤푢and w(휃) ≤푣. Note that 푢, 푣< 푤, and so,
by induction hypothesis, player I has a winning strategy in the games EF푢(C, B)
and EF푣(D, B). Thus, using 푤= 푢+ 푣, A = C ∪D as his ﬁrst move and these
winning strategies in the rest of the game, player I is guaranteed to win the game
EF푤(A, B).
Case 3: 휙is 휓∧휃. Let C be the class of structures (B, 훽) ∈B such that (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휓,
and let D be the class of structures (B, 훽) ∈B such that (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휃. Since (B, 훽)
̸　㨐
휙for every (B, 훽) ∈B, we have B = C ∪D. Moreover, since (A, 훼) 　㨐휙for every
(A, 훼) ∈A, we have (A, C) 　㨐휓and (A, D) 　㨐휃. Finally, as w(휙) ≤푤, there are
푢and 푣such that 푤= 푢+ 푣, w(휓) ≤푢and w(휃) ≤푣. Note that 푢, 푣< 푤, and so,
by induction hypothesis, player I has a winning strategy in the games EF푢(A, C)
and EF푣(A, D). Thus, using 푤= 푢+ 푣, A = C ∪D in his ﬁrst move, and these
winning strategies in the rest of the game, player I is guaranteed to win the game
EF푤(A, B).
Case 4: 휙is ∃푥푗휓. Since (A, 훼) 　㨐휙for every (A, 훼) ∈A, there is a choice function
퐹for A such that (A, 훼(퐹((A, 훼))/푗)) 　㨐휓for all (A, 훼) ∈A. Thus, (A, 훼∗) 　㨐휓for
every (A, 훼∗) ∈A(퐹/푗). On the other hand, for all (B, 훽) ∈B we have (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휙,
whence (B, 훽(푏/푗))
̸　㨐휓for all 푏∈퐵. In other words, (B, 훽∗)
̸　㨐휓for all (B, 훽∗) ∈

206
|
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
B(⋆/푗). Thus we conclude that (A(퐹/푗), B(⋆/푗)) 　㨐휓. Note that w(휓) = w(휙) −1 ≤
푤−1, and so, by induction hypothesis, player I has a winning strategy in the game
EF푤−1(A(퐹/푗), B(⋆/푗)). Thus, starting with the left supplementing move 푗and 퐹,
and using this winning strategy in the rest of the game, player I is guaranteed to
win the game EF푤(A, B).
Case 5: 휙is ∀푥푗휓. Since (B, 훽)
̸　㨐휙for every (B, 훽) ∈B, there is a choice function
퐹for B such that (B, 훽(퐹((B, 훽))/푗))
̸　㨐휓for all (B, 훽) ∈B. Thus, (B, 훽∗)
̸　㨐휓for
every (B, 훽∗) ∈B(퐹/푗). On the other hand, for all (A, 훼) ∈A we have (A, 훼) 　㨐휙,
whence (A, 훼(푎/푗)) 　㨐휓for all 푎∈퐴. In other words, (A, 훼∗) 　㨐휓for all (A, 훼∗) ∈
A(⋆/푗). Thus we conclude that (A(⋆/푗), B(퐹/푗)) 　㨐휓. Note that w(휓) = w(휙) −1 ≤
푤−1, and so, by induction hypothesis, player I has a winning strategy in the game
EF푤−1(A(⋆/푗), B(퐹/푗)). Thus, starting with the right supplementing move 푗and 퐹,
and using this winning strategy in the rest of the game, player I is guaranteed to
win the game EF푤(A, B).
Q.E.D.
Corollary 4.3. Suppose K is a class of models of the same vocabulary. Then the
following conditions are equivalent:
(1) K is the class of models of a ﬁrst order sentence 휙of size ≤푤.
(2) Player I has a winning strategy in the game EF푤(A, B) for all A and B such that
A ⊆K and B ∩K = 0.
Proof.
Suppose K is the class of models of 휙and w(휙) ≤푤. Let A and B be given
so that A ⊆K and B ∩K = 0. Thus every model in A satisﬁes 휙and no model
in B does, whence (A, B) 　㨐휙. By Theorem 4.2, player I has a winning strategy in
EF푤(A, B). For the converse, suppose player I has a winning strategy in EF푤(A, B)
for all (A, B) with A ⊆K and B ∩K. This holds in particular if A = K and B is the
complement of K. Thus for this choice of A and B we have (A, B) 　㨐휙for some 휙
of size ≤푤. Thus K is the class of all models of 휙.
Q.E.D.
We get the following method for showing that a model class K is not deﬁnable
by a ﬁrst order sentence of size ≤푤: We ﬁnd classes A and B such that
1.
A ⊆K.
2.
B ∩K = 0.
3.
Player II has a winning strategy in EF푤(A, B).

The Size of a Formula as a Measure of Complexity
|
207
A Game for Existential Formulas
The game EF푤can be used for solving questions of the type
Given a property P of models, what is the size of the smallest ﬁrst order formula that deﬁnes
P?
But in some applications we are interested in deﬁnability by some restricted type
of of formulas, rather than arbitrary ﬁrst order formulas. For example, if a property
P of models is known to be deﬁnable by an existential formula, it is natural to ask,
what is the size of the smallest existential formula deﬁning P. We will now deﬁne
a variant of the game EF푤that can be used in studying this question.
Here we say that a ﬁrst order formula is existential if it is in negation normal
form, and it does not contain any universal quantiﬁers. In other words, existen-
tial formulas are built from atomic formulas and negations of atomic formulas by
using the connectives ∨, ∧and the quantiﬁer ∃.
Intuitively, in the deﬁnition of the game EF푤, left and right splitting moves
correspond to the connectives ∨and ∧, while left and right supplementing moves
correspond to the quantiﬁers ∃and ∀. Thus, we obtain a game for existential for-
mulas simply by dropping right supplementing moves.
Deﬁnition 4.4. Let A and B be classes of structures of the same relational vocab-
ulary with dom(A) = dom(B), and let 푤be a positive integer. The existential game
EF∃
푤(A, B) has the same rules as EF푤(A, B), except that player I is not allowed to
make right supplementing moves.
Theorem 4.5. Suppose (A, B) is a pair of classes of structures of the same vocabu-
lary, and let 푤be a positive integer. Then the following conditions are equivalent:
(1)푤Player I has a winning strategy in the game EF∃
푤(A, B).
(2)푤There is an existential formula 휙of size ≤푤such that (A, B) 　㨐휙.
Proof.
The claim is proved by a straightforward adaptation of the proof of
Lemma 4.2. In the proof of (1)푤㨐⇒(2)푤it suﬃces to note that omitting Case 4,
the formula 휙separating the classes A and B will always be existential. Similarly,
in the proof of the opposite implication, Case 5 never occurs as the separating for-
mula 휙is existential, whence the winning strategy of player I does not use right
supplementing moves.
Q.E.D.
As in the case of the full ﬁrst order game EF푤, we get again a method for showing
that a model class K is not deﬁnable by an existential formula of size ≤푤: We ﬁnd
classes A and B such that
1.
A ⊆K.
2.
B ∩K = 0.

208
|
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
3.
Player II has a winning strategy in EF∃
푤(A, B).
5 The Existential Complexity of Non-Emptiness of
Boolean Combinations
We observed in the introduction that non-emptiness of all Boolean combinations
of 푛unary predicates can be deﬁned with a sentence of size 8푛+ 4 if a quanti-
ﬁer alternation is allowed. If only existential sentences are allowed, this can be
expressed with a sentence of size (푛+ 1)2푛. We use now our game for existential
formulas to show that (푛+ 1)2푛is the best possible value.
For each binary string 푠∈{0, 1}푛, let B푠be the {푃1, . . . , 푃푛}-structure such that
for each 푟∈{0, 1}푛, the Boolean combination of 푃B푠
1 , . . . , 푃B푠
푛
corresponding to 푟
contains exactly two elements, 푏푟and 푐푟, except that the combination correspond-
ing to 푠is empty. Furthermore, let A be the structure in which each Boolean com-
bination contains exactly one element; let 푎푟be the element in the Boolean com-
bination corresponding to 푟∈{0, 1}푛. Let A0 be the class {(A, 0)}, and let B0 be the
class {(B푠, 0) : 푠∈{0, 1}푛}. We will show that player II has a winning strategy in
the existential game EF∃
푤(A0, B0) for all 푤< (푛+ 1)2푛.
Since the game is existential, in any position (푢, A, B), the set A contains
only one structure (A, 훼), where 훼is the variable assignment that results from the
moves of player I. We say that a structure (B푠, 훽) is ﬂawless (with respect to 훼), if
dom(훽) = dom(훼), and for all 푗∈dom(훼) and all 푟∈{0, 1}푛, we have
훼(푗) = 푎푟⇐⇒훽(푗) = 푏푟.
(1)
Note that if 푎푠∈ran(훼), then there is no 훽such that (B푠, 훽) is ﬂawless. On the
other hand, if 푎푠
̸∈ran(훼), then there is a unique 훽such that (B푠, 훽) is ﬂawless; we
denote this 훽by 훽푠,훼.
Furthermore, we say that a structure (B푠, 훽) is good enough (with respect to
훼), if it is not ﬂawless, but dom(훽) = dom(훼), and (1) holds for all 푗∈dom(훼) and
all 푟
̸= 푠, and there is a string 푡∈{0, 1}푛with |{푖: 푠푖
̸= 푡푖}| = 1 such that
훼(푗) = 푎푠⇐⇒훽(푗) = 푐푡
(2)
for all 푗∈dom(훼). Thus, if 푎푠∈ran(훼), then for each 푡∈{0, 1}푛with |{푖: 푠푖
̸= 푡푖}| = 1
there is a unique 훽such that (B푠, 훽) is good enough; we denote this 훽by 훽푠,푡,훼.
For the rest of this section, B will always denote a set of structures of the form
(B푠, 훽), and A will denote a singleton set {(A, 훼)}. The measure of the set B is de-
ﬁned to be
푀(B) = (푛+ 1) ⋅푓(B) + 푔(B),

The Size of a Formula as a Measure of Complexity
|
209
where 푓(B) is the number of ﬂawless structures in B and 푔(B) is the number of
good enough structures in B.
Lemma 5.1. If 푀(B) > 1, then there is no atomic formula 휙such that (A, B) 　㨐휙or
(A, B) 　㨐¬휙.
Proof.
If 푀(B) > 1, then either there is a ﬂawless structure in B, or there are at
least two good enough structures in B. If (B푠, 훽) ∈B is ﬂawless, then by condition
(1), (A, 훼) and (B푠, 훽) satisfy the same atomic formulas, whence no atomic formula
separates A and B.
Assume then, that (B푠, 훽푠,푡,훼) and (B푠耠, 훽푠耠,푡耠,훼) are two distinct good enough
structures in B. Let 휙be an atomic formula. If 휙is an identity 푥푗= 푥푘(with 푗, 푘∈
dom(훼)), then it follows easily from (1) and (2) that (A, 훼) 　㨐휙⇐⇒(B푠, 훽푠,푡,훼) 　㨐휙.
Thus, 휙does not separate A and B.
Consider then the case 휙= 푃푙(푥푗), where 푗∈dom(훼). Let 훼(푗) = 푎푟. If 푟
̸= 푠,
then 훽푠,푡,훼(푗) = 푏푟, and we have
(A, 훼) 　㨐휙⇐⇒푟푙= 1 ⇐⇒(B푠, 훽푠,푡,훼) 　㨐휙.
Similarly, if 푟
̸= 푠耠, then (A, 훼) 　㨐휙
⇐⇒
(B푠耠, 훽푠耠,푡耠,훼) 　㨐휙. Assume ﬁnally,
that 푟= 푠= 푠耠. Since (B푠, 훽푠,푡,훼)
̸= (B푠耠, 훽푠耠,푡耠,훼), we have 푡
̸= 푡耠. Moreover, since
|{푖: 푟푖
̸= 푡푖}| = |{푖: 푟푖
̸= 푡耠
푖}| = 1, either 푟푙= 푡푙or 푟푙= 푡耠
푙. Thus, it is not possible
that 휙separates (A, 훼) from both (B푠, 훽푠,푡,훼) and (B푠耠, 훽푠耠,푡耠,훼). We conclude that in
all cases (A, B)
̸　㨐휙and (A, B)
̸　㨐¬휙.
Q.E.D.
Lemma 5.2. (a) If B = C ∪D, then 푀(C) + 푀(D) ≥푀(B).
(b) If A耠= A(퐹/푗) and B耠= B(⋆/푗), then 푀(B耠) ≥푀(B) −1.
Proof.
(a) If B = C ∪D, then obviously 푓(C) + 푓(D) ≥푓(B), and 푔(C) + 푔(D) ≥
푔(B). Hence we have 푀(C) + 푀(D) = (푛+ 1)(푓(C) + 푓(D)) + (푔(C) + 푔(D)) ≥푀(B).
(b) Let 퐹((A, 훼)) = 푎푟. Thus, A耠= {(A, 훼耠)}, where 훼耠= 훼(푎푟/푗). Observe ﬁrst
that if (B푠, 훽푠,훼) is a ﬂawless structure, and 푟
̸= 푠, then (B푠, 훽푠,훼(푏푟/푗)) = (B푠, 훽푠,훼耠)
is also ﬂawless, and clearly (B, 훽푠,훼) ∈B ⇐⇒(B, 훽푠,훼耠) ∈B耠.
Assume then that (B푠, 훽푠,푡,훼) is a good enough structure. If 푟
̸=
푠, then
(B푠, 훽푠,푡,훼(푏푟/푗)) = (B푠, 훽푠,푡,훼耠) is also good enough. On the other hand, if 푟= 푠, then
(B푠, 훽푠,푡,훼(푐푡/푗)) = (B푠, 훽푠,푡,훼耠) is good enough. In both cases, (B, 훽푠,푡,훼) ∈B
⇐⇒
(B, 훽푠,푡,훼耠) ∈B耠.
Thus, we see that if B does not contain a ﬂawless structure of the form
(B푟, 훽푟,훼), then 푓(B耠) = 푓(B) and 푔(B耠) = 푔(B), whence the claim is true.
Assume ﬁnally, that there is a ﬂawless structure (B푟, 훽푟,훼) in B. Since 훼耠(푗) =
푎푟, no structure (B푟, 훽) is ﬂawless with respect to 훼耠. On the other hand, for each 푡∈
{0, 1}푛with |{푖: 푟푖
̸= 푡푖}| = 1, there is a new good enough structure (B푟, 훽푟,훼(푐푡/푗)) =

210
|
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
(B푟, 훽푟,푡,훼耠) in B耠. Thus, in this case 푓(B耠) = 푓(B)−1 and 푔(B耠) = 푔(B)+푛, whence
푀(B耠) = (푛+ 1)(푓(B) −1) + 푔(B) + 푛= 푀(B) −1.
Q.E.D.
Lemma 5.3. If 푤< 푀(B), then player II has a winning strategy in EF∃
푤(A, B).
Proof.
We prove the claim by induction on 푤. Consider ﬁrst the case 푤= 1.
By the deﬁnition of the game EF∃
1(A, B), there are no moves, and player I wins
only if there is an atomic formula 휙such that (A, B) 　㨐휙or (A, B) 　㨐¬휙. Since
푀(B) > 푤= 1, by Lemma 5.1, there is no such 휙.
Assume then that 푤> 1, and the claim is true for all 푢< 푤. Since 푀(B) >
푤≥1, by Lemma 5.1 again, player I does not win the game without making moves.
Consider then the options of player I for his ﬁrst move. Making a left splitting move
A = C ∪D is not possible, since A is a singleton {(A, 훼)}. Suppose then that player
I makes a right splitting move 푤= 푢+ 푣and B = C ∪D. Then by Lemma 5.2(a),
푀(C) + 푀(D) ≥푀(B), and since 푤< 푀(B), either 푢< 푀(C), or 푣< 푀(D). If
푢< 푀(C), then by induction hypothesis, player II has a winning strategy in the
game EF∃
푢(A, C). Similarly, if 푣< 푀(D), then player II has a winning strategy in the
game EF∃
푣(A, D). Thus, by choosing the appropriate position (푢, A, C) or (푣, A, D),
player II is guaranteed to win the game EF∃
푤(A, B).
Suppose then that player I starts with a left supplementing move 푗and 퐹,
where 퐹is a choice function for A. The next position in the game is then (푤−
1, A耠, B耠), where A耠= A(퐹/푗) and B耠= B(⋆/푗)). By Lemma 5.2(b) and our as-
sumption 푤< 푀(B), we have 푤−1 < 푀(B) −1 ≤푀(B耠), whence by induc-
tion hypothesis, player II has a winning strategy in the continuation of the game
EF∃
푤(A, B) from position (푤−1, A耠, B耠) onwards.
Q.E.D.
Consider now the classes A0 and B0 deﬁned in the beginning of this section. Since
the variable assignment in the only structure in A0 is empty, all the 2푛structures
(B푠, 0) in B0 are ﬂawless. Thus, 푀(B0) = (푛+ 1)푓(B0) + 푔(B0) = (푛+ 1)2푛, and
by Lemma 5.3, player II has a winning strategy in the game EF∃
푤(A0, B0) whenever
푤< (푛+ 1)2푛. As all Boolean combinations of the predicates 푃1, . . . , 푃푛are non-
empty in A, but each structure in B0 has an empty Boolean combination, we get
the desired lower bound result:
Corollary 5.4. If 휙is an existential ﬁrst order sentence expressing the property that
all Boolean combinations of 푛unary predicates are non-empty, then the size of 휙is
at least (푛+ 1)2푛.
Q.E.D.

The Size of a Formula as a Measure of Complexity
|
211
6 The Existential Complexity of the Length of
Linear Order
As we noted in the introduction, for each 푛there is ﬁrst order sentence 휙푛of log-
arithmic size with respect to 푛which expresses the property that the length of a
linear order is at least 푛. However, the sentence 휙푛has an unbounded number of
quantiﬁer alternations. In this section we show that 2푛−1 is the minimum size of
an existential sentence expressing this property.
To prove the upper bound, deﬁne the following sequence of existential for-
mulas:
휓2 := ∃푥1∃푥2(푥1 < 푥2),
and
휓푛+1 := ∃푥푛+1(휓푛∧푥푛< 푥푛+1)
for all 푛≥2.
Clearly 휓푛is true in a linear order if and only if its length is at least 푛, and an easy
induction shows that w(휓푛) = 2푛−1.
To prove the lower bound, we will use again the existential game EF∃
푤. Let
A0 = {(A, 0)}, where A is a linear order of length 푛, and let B0 = {(B, 0)}, where
B is a linear order of length 푛−1. Our aim is to show that player II has a winning
strategy in the game EF∃
푤(A0, B0) for all 푤< 2푛−1.
Consider a position (푢, A, B) in the game EF∃
푤(A0, B0). Since the game is exis-
tential, A consists of a single structure (A, 훼). Let 푎1 <A ⋅⋅⋅<A 푎푙be the elements
in ran(훼), and let 푎0 and 푎푙+1 be the least and the largest element in A, respec-
tively. We say that a variable assignment 훽in B is acceptable (with respect to 훼) if
dom(훽) = dom(훼), there are elements 푏1 ≤B ⋅⋅⋅≤B 푏푙such that ran(훽) = {푏1, . . . , 푏푙}
and for all 푖∈{1, . . . , 푙} and all 푗∈dom(훼)
훼(푗) = 푎푖⇐⇒훽(푗) = 푏푖.
(1)
In other words, 훽is acceptable if and only if the mapping 훼(푗) 㨃→훽(푗), 푗∈dom(훼),
preserves the relation ≤.
Furthermore, we say that 훽is nice (with respect to 훼), if it is acceptable, and
in addition |{푖≤푙: 푑(푎푖, 푎푖+1)
̸= 푑(푏푖, 푏푖+1)}| = 1, where 푑(푥, 푦) is the distance
between 푥and 푦in the given linear order, and 푏0 and 푏푙+1 are the least and the
largest element in B, respectively. The distance from defect of 훽is deﬁned by
훿(훽) = 푑(푏푖, 푏푖+1), where 푖≤푙is the unique index such that 푑(푎푖, 푎푖+1)
̸= 푑(푏푖, 푏푖+1);
we denote this index by 푖(훽). Note that 푑(푏푖, 푏푖+1) = 푑(푎푖, 푎푖+1) −1 for 푖= 푖(훽). Note
also, that for each 푖≤푙there is exactly one nice 훽such that 푖(훽) = 푖.

212
|
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
For the rest of this section, we assume that A is a singleton set {(A, 훼)} and B
is a set of structures of the form (B, 훽). The niceness measure of B is deﬁned to be
푁(B) = ∑
훽∈N
(2훿(훽) + 1),
where N is the set of all nice variable assignments 훽such that (B, 훽) ∈B.
Lemma 6.1. If 푁(B) > 1, then there is no atomic formula 휙such that (A, B) 　㨐휙or
(A, B) 　㨐¬휙.
Proof.
If 푁(B) > 1, then either there is a nice assignment 훽∈N such that 훿(훽) ≥
1, or there are two distinct nice assignments 훽, 훽耠∈N. Assume ﬁrst that 훽is a nice
assignment in N, and 훿(훽) ≥1. Then there are elements 푎1, . . . , 푎푙, 푏1, . . . , 푏푙such
that ran(훼) = {푎1, . . . , 푎푙}, ran(훽) = {푏1, . . . , 푏푙}, 푎1 <A ⋅⋅⋅<A 푎푙and 푏1 ≤B ⋅⋅⋅≤B 푏푙.
Since 훽is nice, 푑(푏푖, 푏푖+1) = 훿(훽) ≥1 for 푖= 푖(훽), and 푑(푏푖, 푏푖+1) = 푑(푎푖, 푎푖+1) ≥1 for
all other 푖≤푙. Thus, we have 푏1 <B ⋅⋅⋅<B 푏푙. It follows easily from condition (1)
that (A, 훼) and (B, 훽) satisfy the same atomic formulas, whence no atomic formula
separates A and B.
Assume then that 훽, 훽耠∈N, and 훽
̸= 훽耠. As noted above, this means that 푖(훽)
̸=
푖(훽耠). Let 푎1, . . . , 푎푙be as above, and let ran(훽) = {푏1, . . . , 푏푙} and ran(훽耠) = {푏耠
1, . . . , 푏耠
푙}
with 푏1 ≤B ⋅⋅⋅≤B 푏푙and 푏耠
1 ≤B ⋅⋅⋅≤B 푏耠
푙. As above, we see that 푏푖<B 푏푖+1 for all
푖≤푙except 푖= 푖(훽), and similarly 푏耠
푖<B 푏耠
푖+1 for all 푖≤푙except 푖= 푖(훽耠). Moreover,
since 푖(훽)
̸= 푖(훽耠), for all 푖, 푗≤푙, we have either (푎푖<A 푎푗
⇐⇒
푏푖<B 푏푗) or
(푎푖<A 푎푗⇐⇒푏耠
푖<B 푏耠
푗). Using condition (1), it is now easy to see that no atomic
formula separates the sets A and B.
Q.E.D.
Lemma 6.2. (a) If B = C ∪D, then 푁(C) + 푁(D) ≥푁(B).
(b) If A耠= A(퐹/푗) and B耠= B(⋆/푗), then 푁(B耠) ≥푁(B) −1.
Proof.
(a) Assume that B = C ∪D. Let N be the set of nice assignments 훽such
that (B, 훽) ∈B. Furthermore, let O = {훽∈N : (B, 훽) ∈C} and P = {훽∈N :
(B, 훽) ∈D}. Then we have
푁(B)
=
∑
훽∈N
(2훿(훽) + 1)
≤
∑
훽∈O
(2훿(훽) + 1) + ∑
훽∈P
(2훿(훽) + 1) = 푁(C) + 푁(D).
(b) Let N (N耠) be the set of nice assignments 훽such that (B, 훽) ∈B ((B, 훽) ∈
B耠, respectively). Let ran(훼) = {푎1, . . . , 푎푙} with 푎1 <A ⋅⋅⋅<A 푎푙, where 훼is the
assignment such that A = {(A, 훼)}. As usual, we denote by 푎0 and 푎푙+1 the least
and the largest element in A, respectively. Furthermore, we denote 퐹((A, 훼)) by 푐.

The Size of a Formula as a Measure of Complexity
|
213
Assume ﬁrst that 푐= 훼(푘) for some 푘∈dom(훼). It is easy to see that for any
assignment 훽,
훽∈N ⇐⇒훽(푑/푗) ∈N耠,
where 푑= 훽(푘), and moreover 훿(훽(푑/푗)) = 훿(훽). Note also that if 훽
̸= 훽耠, then
훽(푑/푗)
̸= 훽耠(푑耠/푗). Thus, in this case we have 푁(B耠) = 푁(B).
Assume next that 푐= 푎0 or 푐= 푎푙+1. Then as above, we see that 훽∈N ⇐⇒
훽(푑/푗) ∈N耠, where 푑is the least or the largest element in B, respectively, and
훿(훽(푑/푗)) = 훿(훽). Thus, also in this case we conclude that 푁(B耠) = 푁(B).
Assume ﬁnally, that 푐
̸∈{푎0, . . . , 푎푙+1}. Then there is an index ℎ≤푙such that
푎ℎ<A 푐<A 푎ℎ+1. Let 훽be a nice assignment in N, and let ran(훽) = {푏1, . . . , 푏푙} with
푏1 ≤B ⋅⋅⋅≤B 푏푙. As noted earlier, there is exactly one nice assignment 훽ℎsuch that
푖(훽ℎ) = ℎ. If 훽
̸= 훽ℎ, then 푑(푏ℎ, 푏ℎ+1) = 푑(푎ℎ, 푎ℎ+1), whence there is an element 푑such
that 푑(푏ℎ, 푑) = 푑(푎ℎ, 푐) and 푑(푑, 푏ℎ+1) = 푑(푐, 푎ℎ+1). This means that 훿(훽(푑/푗)) = 훿(훽),
and clearly 훽(푑/푗) is in N耠.
On the other hand, if 훽= 훽ℎ, then 푑(푏ℎ, 푏ℎ+1) = 푑(푎ℎ, 푎ℎ+1) −1, and there are
elements 푑and 푒such that 푑(푏ℎ, 푑) = 푑(푎ℎ, 푐) −1, 푑(푑, 푏ℎ+1) = 푑(푐, 푎ℎ+1), 푑(푏ℎ, 푒) =
푑(푎ℎ, 푐) and 푑(푒, 푏ℎ+1) = 푑(푐, 푎ℎ+1) −1. Let 훽耠= 훽ℎ(푑/푗) and 훽耠耠= 훽ℎ(푒/푗). Then
훽耠, 훽耠耠∈N耠, and we have
훿(훽耠) + 훿(훽耠耠) = 푑(푏ℎ, 푑) + 푑(푒, 푏ℎ+1) = 푑(푎ℎ, 푎ℎ+1) −2 = 훿(훽ℎ) −1,
whence
(2훿(훽耠) + 1) + (2훿(훽耠耠) + 1) = 2(훿(훽ℎ) −1) + 2 = (2훿(훽ℎ) + 1) −1.
Thus, if 훽ℎis in N, we get
푁(B耠)
=
∑
훽耠∈N耠
(2훿(훽耠) + 1)
=
(
∑
훽∈N\{훽ℎ}
(2훿(훽) + 1)) + ((2훿(훽ℎ) + 1) −1) = 푁(B) −1.
On the other hand, if 훽ℎis not in N, we have 푁(B耠) = 푁(B).
Q.E.D.
Lemma 6.3. If 푤< 푁(B), then player II has a winning strategy in EF∃
푤(A, B).
Proof.
The proof is verbatim the same as for Lemma 5.3; just replace 푀(B) by
푁(B).
Q.E.D.
The proof of the lower bound result is also similar to that in the previous sec-
tion. Consider the sets A0 = {(A, 0)} and B0 = {(B, 0)}. Clearly 훿(0) = 푛−1, and so
푁(B0) = 2(푛−1)+1 = 2푛−1. Thus, by Lemma 6.3, player II has a winning strategy
in the game EF∃
푤(A0, B0) for all 푤< 2푛−1. Since the length of the linear order A
is 푛, while the length of B is less than 푛, we have proved

214
|
Lauri Hella and Jouko Väänänen
Corollary 6.4. If 휙is an existential ﬁrst order sentence expressing the property that
the length of a linear order is at least 푛, then the size of 휙is at least 2푛−1. Q.E.D.
Acknowledgement: The ﬁrst author was partially supported by the EUROCORES
LogICCC LINT programme, and the second author by grant 251557 of the Academy
of Finland and the EUROCORES LogICCC LINT programme.
Bibliography
[1] Micah Adler and Neil Immerman. An 푛! lower bound on formula size. ACM Trans. Comput.
Log., 4(3):296–314, 2003.
[2] M. Ajtai. 훴1
1-formulae on ﬁnite structures. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 24(1):1–48, 1983.
[3] Merrick Furst, James B. Saxe, and Michael Sipser. Parity, circuits, and the polynomial-time
hierarchy. Math. Systems Theory, 17(1):13–27, 1984.
[4] Martin Grohe and Nicole Schweikardt. The succinctness of ﬁrst-order logic on linear or-
ders. Log. Methods Comput. Sci., 1(1):1:6, 25, 2005.
[5] Jouko Väänänen. On the semantics of informational independence. Log. J. IGPL, 10(3):339–
352, 2002.
[6] Ingo Wegener. The complexity of Boolean functions. Wiley-Teubner Series in Computer
Science. John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester, 1987.

Wilfrid Hodges
Notes on the History of Scope
Abstract: Recent developments in logic and linguistics, not least Jouko Väänä-
nen’s Dependence Logic [39], have thrown our ideas of scope into the melting pot.
In this essay I oﬀer a historical perspective on where those ideas of scope came
from, and what people did before they had such a notion.
Keywords: scope, Frege, Hilbert, Skolem function, Avicenna
MSC: 01-02, 03B65, 01A30
||
Wilfrid Hodges: Herons Brook, Sticklepath, Okehampton, Devon EX20 2PY, England, e-mail:
wilfrid.hodges@btinternet.com
1 Early resolutions of scope ambiguities
Here is an early example of a scope problem. It comes from Plato’s dialogue Eu-
thydemus, in which two ham logicians, Euthydemus and Dionysodorus, ply their
trade by implicating their audience in amazing numbers of grotesque logical er-
rors. Euthydemus is proving that unless you know everything, you know nothing
at all:
If you don’t know something, you are not knowing [sc. something]. (Plato [32]
293c6.)
(1)
As often happens, the original text needs cosmetic surgery before we can analyse
it: in Plato’s Greek the ﬁrst ‘something’ is cliticised onto the ‘if’ and the second is
elided altogether. Probably the best approach is to restore the elided ‘something’
in the second clause:
You are not knowing something.
(2)
Euthydemus is relying on a structural ambiguity which makes the meaning of (2)
uncertain between ‘There is something that you don’t know’ and ‘You are not in-
formed about anything at all’.
Plato let the fallacy pass without comment. But Aristotle in his Sophistical
Refutations 4 (Aristotle [3] p. 280) proposed a way dealing with cases like this
one; we can call it the method of combination. It reappeared in the Scholastics
under the name of compositio et divisio. None of Aristotle’s examples own exam-

216
|
Wilfrid Hodges
ples work in English — or in Arabic, to judge by Ibn S¯ın¯a’s appreciative comment
(‘I can’t stand examples like these, that depend on misuse of language’ (Ibn S¯ın¯a
[25] 14.10)). But the English of Plato’s example (2) will serve to illustrate.
The method of combination is to observe that the sentence in question has
two readings, and in one of these but not the other, a certain group of words com-
bines to form a constituent phrase of the sentence. For example in (2) the words
‘not knowing’ are a constituent in the ﬁrst reading but not in the second. In this ex-
ample we could equally well say that ‘knowing something’ is a constituent in the
second reading but not in the ﬁrst. Some modern expositors make the distinction
with hyphens or parentheses:
not-knowing something; not (knowing something).
(3)
Without the beneﬁt of hyphens or parentheses, William of Sherwood in the thir-
teenth century developed a temporal metaphor for expressing the same thing. He
would say that in the ﬁrst reading in (3) the words ‘not’ and ‘knowing’ are put to-
gether ﬁrst, and then ‘something’ arrives later (posterius advenit); see [37] pp. 28,
37,102f and the editor’s footnotes on these pages. But more often the Scholastics
distinguished the two readings as the ‘combined’ reading and the ‘divided’ one,
apparently without any principled rule for deciding which name goes with which
reading.
The Latin Terminists of the thirteenth century developed a second method
for resolving scope ambiguities. It dealt speciﬁcally with quantiﬁers; it rested on
the idea that universal quantiﬁers can be expanded as logical products, and ex-
istential quantiﬁers as logical sums. See for example Buridan’s treatment of the
sentence ‘Some donkey every man sees’, [4] pp. 871, 874 (from his Sophismata iii).
I give the gist, using modern mathematical notation. Suppose we quantify univer-
sally over a set of two objects 푎1, 푎2 and existentially over a set of two objects 푏1, 푏2.
Then a sentence 휙(훱푖푎푖, 훴푗푏푗) is ambiguous between
(휙(푎1, 푏1) + 휙(푎1, 푏2)) × (휙(푎2, 푏1) + 휙(푎2, 푏2))
(4)
and
(휙(푎1, 푏1) × 휙(푎2, 푏1)) + (휙(푎1, 푏2) × 휙(푎2, 푏2)).
(5)
For a modern mathematician these are the expansions of 훱푖훴푗휙(푎푖, 푏푗) and
훴푗훱푖휙(푎푖, 푏푗) respectively, a view that appears in C. S. Peirce [31] and his successors
in the algebra of logic tradition. This view allows us to avoid the notion of quan-
tiﬁer scope and rely instead on standard mathematical conventions for writing
sums and products, provided that we are willing to reduce all formulas to prenex
normal form with the quantiﬁers listed at the front.

History of Scope
|
217
Peirce tells us how he came to think of universal and existential quantiﬁers as
like products and sums. An unpublished note [30] reveals what was going through
his mind as he was assembling his version of ﬁrst-order logic:
The ﬁrst system of relationship which logic studies is that of an indeﬁnite
collection of units. It may be represented by the schema
| | | | | | | | |
These constitute the universe of discourse. Various names or conventional
signs, for which letters may be used, are attached to these in various ways.
The study of this schema gives rise to the Boolian calculus. The logic of rela-
tives studies a collection of units arranged in an 푛-dimensional block, thus:
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
Distinguishing the diﬀerent dimensions by the letters 푖, 푗, 푘, etc. we may write
훱푖푎푖
for every 푖has the mark 푎.
훴푖푎푖
for some 푖has the mark 푎.
훱푖훱푗ℓ
Every 푖is in the relation ℓto every 푗.
훴푖훱푗ℓ
Some 푖is in the relation ℓto all 푗’s.
... The logic of relatives, so understood, coincides with Professor Mitchell’s
multidimensional logic ...
There is no reference here to the Terminists; perhaps Peirce wasn’t aware of the
parallel. Instead Peirce refers to work of his student Oscar Mitchell.
Mitchell [29] proposed an extension of Aristotle’s logic, to include what he
called ‘propositions of two dimensions’. These propositions say that things 푈have
properties 퐹at times 푉, so that they express a relation between certain things and
certain times. By speaking of ‘two dimensions’, Mitchell implies that the relation
is a subset of the cartesian product of the universe of things and the universe of
time, or in other words, a set of ordered pairs (푎,푏) where 푎is a thing and 푏is a
time. I don’t see this implication spelled out in Mitchell’s paper, but it’s clear from
the diagram in Peirce’s note above that Peirce understood Mitchell’s relations as
subsets of a cartesian product. The next step was to interpret quantiﬁers as sums
or products over the ﬁrst or second dimension in the product, as Peirce proceeds
to do in our quotation.

218
|
Wilfrid Hodges
The use of ordered pairs was a standard feature in Aristotelian logic long be-
fore Mitchell and Peirce. Already in the second century AD, Galen [13] xvi–xviii,
p. 49ﬀhad called attention to sentences in Euclid and elsewhere, which have
(in modern terminology) two or even three prenex universal quantiﬁers. Presum-
ably in response to Galen, Alexander of Aphrodisias [1] 344.9ﬀpointed out that
the string of quantiﬁers can be reduced to a single quantiﬁer by quantifying over
pairs or triples; I will refer to this below as ‘Alexander’s trick’. Alexander’s trick
passed into the common stock of Aristotelian logic, and we ﬁnd it used by both
Ibn S¯ın¯a and John Stuart Mill. Of course when both quantiﬁers are universal there
is no need to compare their scopes. The key new element in Mitchell’s theory was
that he allowed universal quantiﬁcation in one dimension and existential in the
other, and it seems to have been this that led to Peirce’s realisation that the quan-
tiﬁers can be manipulated like mathematical products and sums in diﬀerent di-
mensions. We will see in section 8 below that Alexander’s trick probably helped
Ibn S¯ın¯a in his understanding of multiple quantiﬁcation, which was diﬀerent from
Peirce’s.
2 Possible anticipations of scope
All the writers above were in some sense dealing with scope problems. But in an
important sense none of them had a notion of scope. Broadly speaking, scope is
a relation which holds between an element of a sentence and one or more con-
stituents of the sentence; the constituents are said to form the ‘scope’ of the ele-
ment, and a common metaphor is that the element has some kind of ‘command’
or ‘domination’ within its scope.
As far as I know, no ancient texts hint at any notion of scope in this sense.
Benson Mates [27] p. 30 thought he detected such a notion in a passage of Sextus
Empiricus:
“Indeﬁnite”, according to [the Stoics], are those [propositions] in which some
indeﬁnite part is dominant (kurieúei), as for example “Someone is sitting”.
([36] II.97, p. 286)
(1)
As Mates explains it, the word ‘Someone’ has a ‘scope’ and the sentence ‘lies in’
this scope. But the usage of the word kurieúei makes it more likely that for Sex-
tus Empiricus or his source the ‘dominating’ element meant the subject noun, or
perhaps the ﬁrst word in the sentence.
The Middle Ages provides a more plausible example. The fourteenth-century
logician Walter Burley in [5] p. 26f (trans. [6] p. 109) notes that from a sentence of

History of Scope
|
219
the form
휙(some 푋)
(2)
we can sometimes infer that either 휙(푎) or 휙(푏) or ..., where 푎, 푏, . . . list all 푋s. He
adds that we destroy this property if we add a negative word immediately before
‘some 푋’, but not if we add a negative word either after ‘some 푋’ or some distance
before it. He is telling us that the scope of a negation is the clause or phrase im-
mediately following it. In fact he seems to have a word dominium for scope:
negatio non habet dominium supra praecedens.
(3)
Sadly this word dominium seems to be a ﬂash in the pan; I’ve seen no evidence
that it appears anywhere else in this sense. Note two other features of Burley’s
account. First, he deﬁnes the scope of a negative element in terms of its place
in the linear ordering of the sentence. Second, his account of scope more or less
works in Latin, but it’s wildly wrong for some other languages, including his own
native language of Middle English, as illustrated in [18] p. 71.
The Middle Ages also witnessed the development of the syntactic notion of
government, called regimen in Latin and 푐amal in Arabic. To say that an element X
in a sentence ‘governs’ an element Y means, roughly speaking, that X determines
the inﬂection of Y. One can ask whether X has a ‘government scope’ in the sense
that if X governs Y then Y has to lie within a certain part of the sentence. Con-
temporary syntacticians certainly do ask this, but I don’t know of any medieval
thoughts along these lines.
3 Frege’s introduction of quantiﬁer scope
In 1879, in §11 of his Begriﬀsschrift, Gottlob Frege [10] presides over the birth and
baptism of the notion of the scope of a variable. He calls it Gebiet. Using German
letters for variables, he states that a universally quantiﬁed variable in a formula
needs to be introduced with a quantiﬁer symbol, so that the quantiﬁer symbol
delimits the scope that the generality indicated by the letter covers. The Ger-
man letter retains a ﬁxed meaning only within its own scope. (Frege’s italics.
... sie grenzt das Gebiet ab, auf welches sich die durch den Buchstaben beze-
ichnete Allgemeinheit bezieht. Nur innerhalb seines Gebietes hält der deutsche
Buchstabe seine Bedeutung fest; ...)
(1)

220
|
Wilfrid Hodges
He explains that when two universally quantiﬁed variables have overlapping
scopes within a formula, the quantiﬁer symbols are needed in order to determine
the scopes. (We ask — determine how?) He also introduces a convention that a
Latin letter can also be used as a universally quantiﬁed variable, but in this case
the scope is always
the content of the entire judgment. (Frege’s italics. ... den Inhalt des ganzes
Urtheils ...)
(2)
Frege certainly borrowed his use of Latin letters from common mathematical prac-
tice. Perhaps some mathematicians already used the word Gebiet in a sense that
suggested its use to Frege; I have no information about this. But even without com-
paring with earlier texts, Frege’s account in Begriﬀsschrift has the hallmarks of a
ﬁrst attempt. For example we are not told until (2) that the scope of a variable is a
content rather than a part of a formula. Frege’s explanations of content (more fully
‘conceptual content’, begriﬄiche Inhalt, [10] §3) are pretty minimal, and they cer-
tainly don’t extend to explaining what it is for a symbol to have a meaning within
a content. Nor has he told us what is the meaning (Bedeutung) of a variable letter;
he surely can’t mean what he calls Bedeutung in his later essays. Nor has he told
us how the quantiﬁer symbol delimits the scope. There is also a technical hitch:
in the course of a proof we might ﬁnd ourselves forming a compound from two
formulas which universally quantify the same German letter. This should cause
no problems of logic, because in the compound the scopes will be disjoint. But
Frege’s terminology will break down at this point, because he speaks of the scope
of the letter, and in this case the same letter will have two diﬀerent scopes asso-
ciated with diﬀerent quantiﬁer symbols. We want to say rather that the scope be-
longs to certain occurrences of the variable; but then the scope is needed precisely
in order to say which occurrences, so there is a threat of circularity!
In an essay that was written at most two years later than Begriﬀsschrift, but not
published in his lifetime, Frege repairs one of the faults above by spellling out how
the quantiﬁer delimits a scope. His explanation is speciﬁc to the language of Be-
griﬀsschrift, in which formulas are trees. It amounts to saying that an occurrence
of a quantiﬁer marks out a unique subformula, namely the subtree immediately
below it in the tree; the intended scope is then the content of this subformula ([11]
p. 21 bottom). At ﬁrst sight this was what he intended in Begriﬀsschrift; but there
is a discrepancy. In Begriﬀsschrift he said
Replacing a German letter everywhere in its scope by some other one is, of
course, permitted. ([10] §11)
(3)

History of Scope
|
221
That implies that the quantiﬁer itself (the quantiﬁer symbol plus the variable) lies
inside the scope of the variable; but the clariﬁcation in [11] stipulates that the
quantiﬁer is not in the scope of the variable. We will come back to this point.
In Grundgesetze der Arithmetik I (1893) §8, Frege revised his deﬁnition of scope
as follows:
Now we call what follows a concavity accompanying a German letter ... the
scope of the German letter which stands above the concavity. (Wir nennen
nun das auf eine Höhlung mit einem deutschen Buchstaben Folgende ... das
Gebiet des über der Höhlung stehenden deutschen Buchstaben.)
(4)
This makes one major improvement on Frege’s earlier deﬁnition: he now deﬁnes
the scope as the part of the formula which is delimited by the quantiﬁer, spelling
out what counts as delimiting. In the earlier deﬁnition he had deﬁned scope in
terms of its function; the relevant part of the formula appeared only in the ex-
planatory remarks. The new deﬁnition agrees with that in [11], and disagrees with
[10], by excluding the quantiﬁer itself from the scope. (The ‘...’ represents an extra
clause which spells out the meaning of universal quantiﬁcation. It is redundant
as a part of the deﬁnition, but it does conﬁrm that the scope is now a syntactic
object and that it excludes the quantiﬁer.)
With this new deﬁnition Frege clears up all the problems I mentioned with the
earlier deﬁnition, except that he still confuses the technicalities by assigning the
scope to the variable letter. It was Hilbert and Ackermann who corrected this by
making the scope belong to the quantiﬁer (occurrence) rather than to the variable
symbol:
Further, to each universal or existential quantiﬁer occurring in a formula,
there belongs a deﬁnite constituent part of the formula to which it relates.
We shall call this part the scope of the symbol in question. (... so gehört zu
jedem in einer Formel vorkommenden All- oder Existential-zeichen ein bes-
timmter Bestandteil der Formel, auf den es sich bereicht. Diesen wollen wir
den “Wirkungsbereich” des betreﬀenden Zeichens nennen. [16] p. 52)
(5)
(See page 145 of [15] for an earlier formulation in Hilbert’s 1917/18 lectures on ‘Prin-
cipien der Mathematik’.) Hilbert and Ackermann give examples to show how the
quantiﬁer scope is determined; these examples leave it unclear whether a quan-
tiﬁer lies within its own scope.
With hindsight it’s surprising how little impact the notion of scope made be-
fore Hilbert and Ackermann. The second edition of Principia Mathematica [40]
brieﬂy mentions Frege’s notion on page xxv (and includes the quantiﬁer itself in
the scope), but I’m not sure that the notion is ever used; Appendix ⋆8 on bound
variables manages to avoid it in the style of Peirce, by always reducing to prenex

222
|
Wilfrid Hodges
normal form. Even Hilbert and Ackermann introduce the notion of scope after
deﬁning free and bound variables, and as a result their deﬁnition of free and
bound variables is incoherent ([16] p. 52 top).
Russell’s introduction of the notion of the scope of a deﬁnite description on
page 70 of the ﬁrst edition of Principia in 1913 deserves note.
4 Grammars 1: Stemmata
Both Frege and Hilbert gave their deﬁnitions of scope for formal languages of their
own devising. If we go backwards in time from Frege, or forwards from Hilbert,
we ﬁnd logicians and linguists studying what we can broadly call scope phe-
nomena, but in natural languages. Probably any notion of scope needs to call on
some assumptions about grammatical structure, because it involves delimiting
constituents of sentences. To make sense of the literature, we should distinguish
between two kinds of grammar: dependency grammar and constituency gram-
mar.
In dependency grammar a sentence is analysed by displaying which word oc-
currences ‘depend on’ which. The dependences in a sentence are usually shown
as a tree branching downwards, where the nodes are identiﬁed with the occur-
rences of words in the sentence, and the successors of a word are the words that
depend on it. I write an arrow from a dependent word to the word that it depends
on. It’s probably more usual to write the arrows in the other direction; but writing
the arrows as I do suggests a picture that we meet in some writers. Namely, the
sentence is constructed by starting with the top node and successively attaching
successor nodes to the nodes that they depend on, so that the tree is built from
the top downwards. This need not be more than a metaphor.
The tree diagram showing the analysis of a sentence is called a ‘stemma’ (the
name is from Lucien Tesnière). We can almost read oﬀthe sentence from the
stemma, roughly speaking by reading the words from left to right. The succes-
sors of a node 푛will run from left to right, but the stemma also needs to show
the position of 푛among its successors. In more formal presentations of depen-
dency grammar, the grammatical sentences of a language are characterised by
the fact that they are exactly the strings that can be read oﬀfrom the stemmata
of the grammar. We won’t pursue this idea, but we will need the assumption that
each sentence of the language has a stemma, which is unique unless the sentence
is structurally ambiguous. Each node determines a phrase (in fact a constituent
of the sentence), which consists of that node and all nodes that can be reached

History of Scope
|
223
by going downwards from it. The node is called the ‘head’ of the phrase that it
determines.
The artiﬁcial languages of logic tend to have dependency grammars — count-
ing the formulas as sentences and the symbols as words. This includes both
Frege’s Begriﬀsschrift and Hilbert’s formal languages. For example a typical for-
mula of propositional logic, in Hilbert style, might be written
(¬(푏→¬푎) →푎)
(1)
A stemma for this formula might be written as follows (where for simplicity I ig-
nore the parentheses and the information about placing a node relative to its suc-
cessors):
→
Q
Q
Q
Q
k

3
@
@
@
I




6
푎
¬
푏
6
¬
푎
→
(2)
Here the lowest ¬ determines the phrase ¬푎, then the →immediately above it
determines the phrase (푏→¬푎), and so on upwards. The general pattern is that
an 푛-ary function symbol has 푛immediate successors, each of which determines
a subformula or term which is an argument of the symbol.
Here for comparison is Frege’s notation for the same formula in Begriﬀsschrift:
푎
푎
푏
(3)
The formula is in fact its own stemma, though the tree is written roughly NW/SE
rather than downwards. In Frege’s notation →becomes a branch point and ¬ be-
comes a short line protruding downwards.
Now in Begriﬀsschrift a universal quantiﬁer is a function symbol of arity 1, so
any occurrence of it in a stemma has a single successor node. Frege’s deﬁnition (4)
says that the scope of this occurrence is the subformula determined by this suc-
cessor node. This is the only reasonable general procedure for using symbols to

224
|
Wilfrid Hodges
determine phrases in a dependency grammar. Exactly the same formalism allows
us to talk of the ‘scope’ of any occurrence of a function symbol of arity 1; in partic-
ular each occurrence of the negation symbol has a scope which is a subformula.
I leave it to the reader to check how this notion of scope carries over to formulas
which are strings in the Hilbert style.
5 Grammars 2: Phrase markers
By contrast a constituency grammar analyses a sentence by showing which are the
grammatical constituents of the sentence, including the separate words. The anal-
ysis is written as a tree diagram branching downwards, but now the nodes (except
for the terminal nodes at the bottom ends of branches) are in 1–1 correspondence
not with the words but with the constituents; a line going up from a non-terminal
node 푚to a node 푛indicates that the constituent for 푚is a subconstituent of the
constituent for 푛. The convention is to label each non-terminal node with a symbol
for the grammatical category of the corresponding constituent. The bottom non-
terminal nodes are the categories of single words, and the words themselves are
added as terminal nodes below these non-terminal nodes. Tree diagrams of this
kind are called ‘phrase markers’.
The artiﬁcial languages of logic can be given constituency grammars, though
this is unusual in the logical literature. Then the phrase marker for the formula
(¬(푏→¬푎) →푎) will be the following diagram or some close variant of it. Here
the categories are F(ormula), U(nary truth-function) and B(inary truth-function),
and again we ignore parentheses:
F

Q
Q
Q
F
B
F

U
F
→
푎
@
@

¬
F
B
F
@
@
푏
→
U
F
¬
푎
(1)
There are seven F’s, corresponding to the seven subformulas of the formula.

History of Scope
|
225
In the mid 20th century stemmata fell almost entirely out of use in linguis-
tics, and to a great extent phrase markers took their place. Phrase markers tend
to be more elaborate than stemmata, but they beg fewer questions. For example
the only constituents of a sentence that can be read oﬀfrom the stemma of the
sentence are those with a head word. So dependency grammar has become a mi-
nority interest. I. A. Mel’čuk is one respected linguist who maintains ‘dependency
syntax’ [28]; I recommend his book for the light it throws on the mind set of earlier
logicians and linguists who used stemmata.
Linguists ﬁnd themselves examining various phenomena that involve one
word 푤in a sentence acting on some part 푐of the sentence. For example
–
푤is a noun and 푐is a clause within which 푤governs the inﬂections of any
verbs.
–
푤is a negative word and 푐is the part of the sentence where, because of 푤, we
can have negative polarity phrases like ‘at all’.
–
푤is a name and 푐is the part of the sentence within which every pronoun co-
referential with 푤has to be reﬂexive.
So we can reasonably ask for a way of delimiting the relevant kind of scope of 푤,
or
deﬁning the syntactic domain of a given node — roughly, the portion of the
tree consisting of those nodes which a given node bears the structural rela-
tion to.
(2)
as Tanya Reinhart [34] p. 13 puts it. Here we meet the problem that in phrase mark-
ers, unlike stemmata, there is no canonical way for a node to delimit a constituent.
So one has to search around; Reinhart goes on to describe and dismiss some early
attempts. Interesting for us is her view that as an empirical fact, left-right relations
in the tree ‘play no role in restricting the semantic interpretation of sentences’ ([34]
p. 18). (So much for Burley.)
Edward Klima [26] proposed an answer, for the special case of the scope of
negative words. He wanted a notion of ‘constituent X is in the scope of negation
Y’. With the terminology slightly adjusted, his deﬁnition reads:
A node is in construction with another node if the former is below the ﬁrst
branching node that is above the latter. ([26] p. 297)
(3)
I don’t know if Klima meant ‘another’ literally. Assuming not, the words that are
in construction with a node 푛are precisely those in the smallest constituent that
contains both 푛and at least one word not in 푛.
Reinhart [33] and Hodges [17] independently proposed Klima’s deﬁnition as a
general recipe for scope relations, Reinhart within linguistics and Hodges within

226
|
Wilfrid Hodges
logic. Reinhart reversed the direction of the relation and gave the result the name
‘c-command’, where ‘c’ is for constituent. In her formulation of [34] p. 18,
Node A c-commands node B iﬀthe branching node most immediately domi-
nating A also dominates B
(4)
(where ‘dominates’ means ‘is strictly above in the tree ordering’). The deﬁnition
in Hodges [17] p. 78 reads:
If S is some sentence with a phrase-marker supplied, and P is a part of S con-
sisting of one or more words, but not the whole of S, then we deﬁne the scope
of P to be the smallest constituent of S which contains both P and something
else besides.
(5)
Reinhart credits Klima. I regret that I didn’t; like Reinhart I had read [26], but I had
forgotten his deﬁnition until I read Reinhart more recently.
There are some diﬀerences between Reinhart’s version and mine. First, like
Klima she deﬁnes a relation between an element and a set of constituents; I deﬁne
a relation between an element and a single constituent. Reinhart’s constituents
are my constituent together with all its subconstituents; my constituent is the
maximal of her constituents. So her notion and mine are interdeﬁnable, and in
fact Chomsky spells out one direction in [7]. On page 60 he deﬁnes the ‘domain’ of
an element as ‘the minimal phrase containing it’; then on page 162 he stipulates
that an element c-commands the elements in its domain (adding a further condi-
tion that I discuss below). It’s not clear to me whether this diﬀerence between the
two deﬁnitions is more than a matter of style. One could write out reasons why
the ﬁrst deﬁnition is more helpful for linguistics and the second more helpful for
logic, but in cold print the reasons look thin.
A second diﬀerence is in extra conditions added. We saw that already in Frege
there is some equivocation about whether an element lies within its own scope. I
deliberately chose a deﬁnition that does put the element within its scope, partly
because I ﬁnd it helpful for deﬁning free and bound occurrences of variables, and
partly because general deﬁnitions should be simple. But there are applications
of scope where it seems natural to exclude the element from its scope: for exam-
ple the scope of a negation. I know less about the situation in linguistics, but it’s
clear that linguists have similar discussions about excluding certain items from
the scope. One common requirement — for example at [7] p. 162 — is that the c-
command of an element E excludes all elements contained in E.
In fact Reinhart [33] (according to Reinhart [34] p. 27 Note 1) added a condition
that A doesn’t c-command B if A and B are distinct elements of the same branch
(i.e. if one dominates the other). Reinhart states [34] p. 19 that Klima added the

History of Scope
|
227
same condition. There is no such condition in my copy of [26], but Klima or other
linguists could have added it in discussions of his paper.
6 Ibn S¯ın¯a opens up the ﬁeld of logic
There must certainly be many more things to say about the development of scope
in the twentieth century. But I turn back now to a previously unnoticed corner in
the history of scope. During the ﬁrst half of the 11th century the logician Ibn S¯ın¯a,
known in the West as Avicenna, was working in Persia and writing mainly in Ara-
bic. He made what as far as we know was the ﬁrst attempt to deal systematically
with sentences containing mixtures of universal and existential quantiﬁers. Deal-
ing with these, he ran into some problems that today we understand in terms of
scope. But he had no notion of scope. Also he knew that he was missing some-
thing, and he cast around for ways of ﬁlling the gap with the tools that he did
have.
Those tools came from Aristotelian Logic, though not all from Aristotle him-
self. Ibn S¯ın¯a was well informed — probably much better than we are today —
about the work of Roman Empire scholars such as Galen, Alexander of Aphro-
disias, Porphyry, Themistius, Philoponus. He could also take inspiration from the
writings of earlier Arabic logicians, chieﬂy Al-F¯ar¯ab¯ı. Today only historians are fa-
miliar with these names. But above all Ibn S¯ın¯a was an independent thinker who
took nothing for granted, even from Aristotle. So Ibn S¯ın¯a presents us with a rare
spectacle: a highly intelligent logician trying to make sense of scope problems
without using the notion of scope, and only partly succeeding.
Two lines of thought brought Ibn S¯ın¯a to consider sentences with more than
one quantiﬁer. The ﬁrst was something that he called the ‘three-way division’
(tat¯l¯ıt¯ ﬁl qisma, [23] 41.5); it consisted of three ways of reading a sentence ‘Every 퐵
is an 퐴’ as a modally necessary proposition. The ﬁrst reading — the equivalent of
today’s ‘true in all possible worlds’ — was that the sentence should be true at all
times. This would account for the truths of theology and mathematics; for exam-
ple we read a statement that God is alive as meaning
In all times and situations, God is alive.
(1)
By contrast the sentence
Everything that walks moves.
(2)

228
|
Wilfrid Hodges
can’t be true of all its subjects at all times, because people who walk stop walking,
and later they die. Accordingly the second reading is
Everything that walks moves for so long as it is walking.
(3)
Arabic logicians later than Ibn S¯ın¯a called this the ‘descriptional’ (was.f¯ı) reading
of the sentence. The third reading takes (2) as necessary in the sense that
Everything that walks moves for so long as it moves.
(4)
Ibn S¯ın¯a claims that this three-way division goes back to Aristotle himself.
In fact it seems likely that the division is Ibn S¯ın¯a’s own take on the three
meanings of ‘necessary’ discussed by Aristotle’s pupil Theophrastus in his lost
work Prior Analytics. The third reading agrees with Theophrastus’ third mean-
ing as reported by Alexander of Aphrodisias Pr. Anal. 32a19, [9] 100B. Elsewhere
Theophrastus is reported to have endorsed both the other two readings, the ﬁrst by
Philoponus Pr. Anal. 124.13, [9] 106D, and the second by Alexander Pr. Anal. 25a29,
[9] 100A. At Pr. Anal. 30b37, [9] 100D, Alexander seems to be claiming to ﬁnd antici-
pations of Theophrastus’ classiﬁcation of meanings of ‘necessary’ already in Aris-
totle’s De Interpretatione and Prior Analytics i. See [8] Chapter Two for Theophras-
tus’ views on necessity and their treatment by Alexander.
As far as we know (though the written record is sadly incomplete), before Ibn
S¯ın¯a the three readings were regarded as senses in which a sentence ‘Every 퐵is an
퐴’ can be counted as necessary. But Ibn S¯ın¯a took them as three sentence-forms
in their own right, with a subject quantiﬁer ‘Every’ and a second quantiﬁer which
is implicit and ranges over time. One of Ibn S¯ın¯a’s most characteristic teachings
was that we nearly always mean more than we say, and it falls to the logician to
make explicit the elements of meaning that we leave unspoken or unwritten. So for
Ibn S¯ın¯a, the three-way division describes three types of two-quantiﬁer sentence.
But in all three cases the two quantiﬁers are both universal, so there is not yet a
problem about comparing scopes.
The second line of thought that led Ibn S¯ın¯a to multiple-quantiﬁer sentences
was his conviction that if logic is the tool of the sciences, then logicians should
be prepared to look at what scientists actually say — not just the forms of the sen-
tences that they use, but how an intelligent and informed reader would under-
stand them. This led him to a much wider collection of sentence forms than he
found in the Aristotelian literature, even for sentences of the form ‘Every 퐵is an

History of Scope
|
229
퐴’:
It’s unhelpful that the deﬁnitions given [by Aristotle] always interpret the
content in [the style of (1) or (3)]. One ought to look for an account of all this
that covers the broad range. ([23] 41.11f)
(5)
When we start to look at that broad range, as Ibn S¯ın¯a himself does in [23] i.3, we
quickly ﬁnd that the time quantiﬁer is sometimes understood as existential:
Everybody who travels from Rayy to Baghdad reaches Kermanshah. ([23]
22.12)
(6)
The normal understanding of this sentence would be that for everyone travelling
from Rayy to Baghdad there is a time during the journey at which that person is in
Kermanshah. But that reading won’t work for
Everything that breathes in breathes out. ([23] 23.5)
(7)
(Ibn S¯ın¯a reads ‘breathes out’ as ‘breathes out sometimes’, an existential quan-
tiﬁcation. This may not be a very convincing reading, but it’s probably the best we
can do with just existential and universal quantiﬁers.) And so on and so on.
7 Negations and quantiﬁers
Aristotelian logic taught that for every proposition 휙there is a contradictory nega-
tion
̄휙which is true when 휙is false and false when 휙is true; also ̄̄휙= 휙. One of
the tasks of a logician is to ﬁnd, for every sentence form, an appropriate form for
its contradictory negation. So Ibn S¯ın¯a set to work in [23] i.5 to ﬁnd contradictory
negations for some of his new sentence forms. (There is a provisional commented
translation of [23] i.5 on my website at http://wilfridhodges.co.uk.)
It’s important that Ibn S¯ın¯a’s example sentences are all in Arabic, not in an ar-
tiﬁcial language and not even in a regimented logical fragment of Arabic. Ibn S¯ın¯a
was well aware that Aristotelian logicians had a tendency to adopt a language out
of line with normal scholarly usage, and he was very much against this tendency:
The eﬀect is that when we say a sentence 휙we don’t at all mean by 휙what 휙
ought to mean. Instead of that, when we say 휙, we say it meaning something
that the artiﬁcial convention says it should mean. And you learn that ‘this is
a stone’ and other drudgery. ([23] 45.9f)
(1)

230
|
Wilfrid Hodges
I think the point of the remark about stones is that any artiﬁcial language that we
adopt is likely to enshrine those features of language that we are already aware
of; so if we work with a monadic logic for classifying objects, we will adopt con-
ventions that tend to hide from us the relational complexities of real discourse. A
little earlier he has complained that the standard Aristotelian conventions make it
hard to handle some logical features of language ‘intuitively’ (푐al¯a bas.¯ıratin, [23]
41.15).
Ibn S¯ın¯a’s broader beliefs about scientiﬁc discovery feed through into his log-
ical practice. We learn by familiarising ourselves with many examples of the ma-
terial under discussion, and noting what we can see directly about them. With
familiarity we come to see the regularities, and these lead us to better deﬁnitions
of the nature of the things we are studying. Then knowing the deﬁnitions, we can
not only deduce the observable facts; we can also see why they are facts. Apply-
ing these ideas to the logic of contradictory negation, Ibn S¯ın¯a calls on intuition
to give us contradictory negations for sentences one at a time. Practice with these
should teach us the rules, ﬁrst for particular sentence forms, and then for sen-
tences in general. The general rules should reﬂect the reasons for the inference
relations, and these lie in the meanings of quantiﬁers among other words.
This view of the task governs the contents of Qiy¯as i.5, except that Ibn S¯ın¯a
reverses the order. Probably he does this to highlight the main points that he wants
to make. He begins with the meanings of quantiﬁers, and he explains why he has
diﬃculties in using these meanings to give general rules. Since he is unable to
resolve the diﬃculties, he ﬁnishes with what he can do, namely to give intuitive
solutions for a range of particular sentences.
Ibn S¯ın¯a’s procedure for ﬁnding the contradictory negation of a sentence is
to put the Arabic negative verb laysa in front of the sentence, and then work the
negation inwards. The following example summarises [23] 46.10–47.1. Take the
sentence
Every 퐵is an 퐴for a limited time.
(2)
We get a contradictory negation by adding laysa at the beginning, in eﬀect
It is not the case that every 퐵is an 퐴for a limited time.
(3)
Ibn S¯ın¯a invites us to think of situations in which (3) is true. For example it’s true
in both of the following situations:
Always, no 퐵is an 퐴.
(4)

History of Scope
|
231
Every 퐵is always an 퐴.
(5)
Do these and (2) exhaust all possibilities? Clearly not: it could be that
Some 퐵is never an 퐴.
(6)
But this reminds us that another situation where (3) is true is that
Some 퐵is permanently an 퐴.
(7)
Inspection shows that if (3) is true then at least one of (6) and (7) must be true.
(In fact Ibn S¯ın¯a overlooks the case where there are no 퐵s, which he elsewhere ex-
plains should make (3) true and (6), (7) false; but let this pass.) So a contradictory
negation for (2) can be written as
Either some 퐵is permanently an 퐴, or some 퐵is never an 퐴.
(8)
where the disjunction is inclusive.
We notice at once that Ibn S¯ın¯a’s procedure is highly informal. He seems to
be inviting us to ignore the syntactic form of the sentences and ask instead ‘What
kind of situations would I have in mind if I said this?’. In fact it seems almost
perverse that he doesn’t start by noting that in (2) the leading quantiﬁer is the
‘Every’ and not the temporal quantiﬁer. Noting that, one can reason at once that
‘Not every’ is equivalent to ‘Some not’, as Ibn S¯ın¯a had pointed out in his 푐Ib¯ara,
[22] 93.1f (with the rider that the two forms come apart when they quantify over an
empty set). Does Ibn S¯ın¯a simply not notice that the quantiﬁer ‘Every’ has wider
scope than the temporal quantiﬁer?
The situation is more confusing than one might think. The verb laysa can’t
always be read as ‘It is not the case that’. Ibn S¯ın¯a himself says, for example at
[22] 54.6f, that the Arabic laysa kull (literally ‘not every’) can be paraphrased by
laysa ba푐d. (literally ‘not some’). I am not sure what is happening here. There are
some cross-linguistic facts that may be relevant, for example that in English ‘Not
every swan is white’ is grammatically acceptable but ‘Not some swan is white’
is not. It may also be relevant that the verb laysa, which inﬂects with a personal
suﬃx, picks up this suﬃx from the subject of the sentence which it introduces ([2]
p. 114ﬀ). Arabic negations are fearsomely complicated, and Ibn S¯ın¯a doesn’t hide
the complications.

232
|
Wilfrid Hodges
8 The semantics of quantiﬁers
At least Ibn S¯ın¯a’s informal procedure gets him plausible candidates for contra-
dictory negations. But when he tries to reason them out in terms of the meanings
of the quantiﬁers, he runs into diﬃculties:
When we say ‘Every 퐵is an 퐴’ and we want to take into account the time in
the sentence ‘Not every 퐵is an 퐴’, since this is one of [the things that have
to satisfy] a condition in order to have a contradictory negation, this makes
diﬃculties for us. ([23] 386f.)
(1)
How so?
When Ibn S¯ın¯a intends to describe the meaning of a sentence 휙, sometimes
he gives necessary and suﬃcient conditions for the sentence to be true. But more
often he aims to explain, in the same language as 휙itself, what is in the mind of
someone who asserts 휙. In a long discussion at [22] 21.10–23.10 he compares two
sentences:
He is walking.
(2)
Someone is walking.
(3)
The states of the world in which someone could use either of these two sentences
to make a true statement are the same. Also the two sentences agree in not telling
the listener who it is that is walking. But the diﬀerence between the two, Ibn S¯ın¯a
explains, is that in (2) the speaker has to have some individual in mind for ‘he’
(otherwise there is no truth value), whereas this is not needed in (3). So the pri-
mary diﬀerence between (2) and (3) is that (2) demands more knowledge on the
part of the speaker. The extra knowledge required of the speaker in (2) is the same
knowledge that the speaker could have expressed by saying
Zayd is walking.
(4)
where Zayd is some individual. For Ibn S¯ın¯a the meaning of the name ‘Zayd’ is
an idea, a thinkable content, that identiﬁes Zayd; so it is the same idea that the
speaker of (2) needed to have in mind. Note that passing from (3) to (4) eliminates
the existential quantiﬁer.

History of Scope
|
233
In Qiy¯as i.5 Ibn S¯ın¯a approaches two-quantiﬁer sentences like ‘Every human
breathes’ and ‘Every horse sleeps’. As above, he reads these as short for
For every human there is a time at which he breathes.
(5)
and likewise with the horses. His instinct is to follow the same route that he took
with (3) above, and ask what kind of knowledge would enable a person who stated
one of these sentences to remove the implied existential quantiﬁer.
The question ties in closely with Ibn S¯ın¯a’s theory of science. For example
(and here I summarise a discussion in Burh¯an, [24] i.9) one typical piece of medical
knowledge is that
If a person takes a preparation of scammony, usually his bile is purged.
(6)
Here there are a universal quantiﬁcation over people and a ‘most’ quantiﬁcation
over times or circumstances. (As he remarks at [23] 161.13, medical knowledge
tends to be about what usually happens.) Medical research must aim, he says, to
remove the ‘usually’ by discovering the exact circumstances in which scammony
has this eﬀect. The result would be to replace (6) by some statement of the form
If any person takes scammony under such-and-such circumstances, then his
bile is purged.
(7)
Here we have only universal quantiﬁers. Another of his favourite examples is the
astronomical knowledge which allows us to spell out the circumstances in which
a satellite of a planet gets eclipsed.
Ibn S¯ın¯a notes at once that if the subject of the sentence is an individual, we
are back in the position he discussed in 푐Ib¯ara:
We should note that when there is a single [subject individual], the time of
the predication can be made speciﬁc. ([23] 39.8)
(8)
(Here and below, a ‘time’ for Ibn S¯ın¯a is a period of time, not an instant.) But
with a universally quantiﬁed subject we can’t hope to remove the existential time
quantiﬁer by naming a particular time, because ‘each individual has a diﬀerent
time’ ([23] 40.1f). Instead, we would have to look for an assignment of times to
individuals, or (in modern language that Ibn S¯ın¯a didn’t have) a function from
individuals to times. Thus a person who asserts ‘Every human breathes’ has in
mind that there is such an assignment.
We should compare Ibn S¯ın¯a’s position here with some other items in the log-
ical literature. First, the assignment of times to individuals can be thought of as
a subset of the two-dimensional universe of pairs (person, time). Since Ibn S¯ın¯a

234
|
Wilfrid Hodges
regularly calls on such ordered pairs, I would be amazed if this was not how he
pictured the assignment. The parallel with Alexander’s trick is striking: Alexan-
der handles two universal quantiﬁers by universally quantifying over the whole
array of ordered pairs; Ibn S¯ın¯a handles a universal and an existential quantiﬁer
by quantifying universally over a subset of the array. This comparison goes be-
yond what Ibn S¯ın¯a himself says, since in this context he doesn’t mention Alexan-
der’s trick. But given Ibn S¯ın¯a’s general approach, there is a clear pathway from
Alexander’s trick to Ibn S¯ın¯a’s function semantics. We saw earlier how there was a
natural, though diﬀerent, pathway from Alexander’s trick to Peirce’s dimensional
product and sum semantics for multiple quantiﬁers.
Second, Ibn S¯ın¯a is using a version of what today we call Skolem function
semantics for quantiﬁers. Logicians know this semantics from Leon Henkin’s use
of it for partially ordered quantiﬁers, [14] Section C. (That work of Henkin is at
least indirectly an ancestor of Jouko Väänänen’s Dependence Logic [39].) Similar
semantics for sentences like Ibn S¯ın¯a’s are now a familiar part of the landscape
in formal semantics of natural languages; Mark Steedman’s recent book Taking
Scope [38] develops this approach in detail.
Ibn S¯ın¯a evidently hopes that removing the existential quantiﬁer will make
his sentences easier to handle, and in particular it will make it easier to ﬁnd their
contradictory negations. With that hope he takes a sentence like (5), he skolemises
the sentence, and then he puts ‘It is not the case that’ in front of it. We know from
his procedure discussed in section 7 above that he hopes to push the negation
down into the sentence. But instead he grinds to a sudden halt, believing that
something has gone seriously wrong.
We land ourselves in the following diﬃculties when we introduce this point.
Suppose we say ‘Every 퐵is an 퐴’ and the times are diﬀerent because each
individual has a diﬀerent time. Then if we say ‘Not (laysa) every 퐵is an 퐴’,
it’s not possible for us to make this sentence point to the time which is speciﬁc
to each individual. ([23] 39.15–40.3)
(9)
He then spends several pages trying to ﬁnd a way out by using diﬀerent deﬁnable
functions from individuals to times.
The modern parallels show that Ibn S¯ın¯a hasn’t made any major error yet, so
there must be a way out of his impasse. In fact there are two. The ﬁrst is to note that
when an existential quantiﬁer is inside the scope of a negation, then pushing the
negation past it will turn it into a universal quantiﬁer, and vice versa. So if we put
‘It is not the case that’ in front of ‘Every 퐵is an 퐴’, we should aim to skolemise the
‘every 퐵’ rather than the ‘an 퐴’. Taking this route, Ibn S¯ın¯a would have to abandon
his strategy of skolemising before applying the negation. The second route, pre-
ferred by Steedman [38] p. 66f rule 2(a), is to note that putting a quantiﬁer ‘there is

History of Scope
|
235
a function ...’ inside the scope of a negation makes it behave like a quantiﬁer ‘for
every function ...’; so Ibn S¯ın¯a can stick with his assignment of times to individ-
uals, provided he makes it an indeterminate one (¯gayr mu푐ayyan) and quantiﬁes
universally over it — in modern terms he would need the notion of a universal
function quantiﬁer.
Either route would have tested Ibn S¯ın¯a’s logical abilities to the limit. But more
than that, either route would have required him to have some sense that adding
‘It is not the case that’ at the front of a sentence places the whole sentence into
the scope of the negation. It would have required some awareness of what a nega-
tion does to items within its scope, and in particular of how it switches positive
occurrences to negative and vice versa. For some years now I have been searching
through Ibn S¯ın¯a’s logical writings to ﬁnd any sign of recognition of the diﬀerence
between positive and negative occurrences, and so far I have drawn a complete
blank. The monotonicity arguments beloved of the Scholastics [35] are completely
missing in Ibn S¯ın¯a. He never mentions the dictum de omni et nullo as a principle
behind syllogisms. He has no notion of distributed and undistributed. The clos-
est that he comes is to recognise the diﬀerence between sentences that aﬃrm and
sentences that deny; but in [19] I assemble evidence that the notion he is working
with here is along the lines of the notion of sentence negation studied by some
modern syntacticians, and not a logical notion at all.
(Added in August 2014:) In Qiy¯as vi.3 Ibn S¯ın¯a [23] starts to develop an ex-
tension of syllogisms where we are not restricted to the traditional ‘Every’, ‘No’,
‘Some’, ‘Not all’ sentences, and within the new sentence frames we are allowed
to take negative terms ‘not-퐴’ etc. (He does this within the framework of propo-
sitional logic, but this is irrelevant for present purposes.) In particular he dis-
cusses which premise-pairs give rise to a syllogistic conclusion within this ex-
tended framework. As it happens, there is a very simple criterion that answers
this question: a premise-pair gives rise to a syllogistic conclusion if and only if the
middle term occurs positively in one premise and negatively in the other. We ﬁnd
that Ibn S¯ın¯a mistakenly claims that several premise-pairs don’t have syllogistic
conclusions when in fact they do. This includes some cases that he discusses at
length. It seems inconceivable that he could have made these mistakes if he had
known the simple criterion — and indeed he never mentions the criterion. It seems
odd too that he never noticed the criterion, until we place it alongside the other ev-
idence that he never developed any intuition of the diﬀerence between a positive
and a negative occurrence.

236
|
Wilfrid Hodges
9 Obstacles to scope
So we have to reckon that Ibn S¯ın¯a had no concept of the scope of a negation; in
fact I think he had no concept of any kind of scope. We are none of us good at
creating concepts ex nihilo. But I can point to one obstacle that Ibn S¯ın¯a would
have had to overcome if he had tried to adopt a notion of scope.
The obstacle is of Ibn S¯ın¯a’s own making, and it is the product of insight rather
than ignorance. He knows that the inference relations between sentences are de-
termined by the meanings of the sentences; translation respects entailment. But
also he is bilingual Arabic-Persian, and he knows that translation from one lan-
guage to another can make a radical diﬀerence to the form of a sentence. Trans-
lation can reverse the order of two words; it can split one word into two or more,
and it can contract a phrase into a single word. So the logician needs to be able to
look behind the sentences and detect the structure of their meanings.
Now for Ibn S¯ın¯a, compound meanings are constructed by attaching mean-
ings to other meanings. The result is a kind of dependency grammar of meanings.
Ibn S¯ın¯a is reasonably consistent about what attaches to what — though for a co-
herent account I have added to his picture the assumption that subject and predi-
cate terms attach to the copula. ‘The subject and the predicate don’t have to come
in one particular order by nature’ ([22] 31.3f), so they need to be distinguished by
their type of attachment, shown by the labels 푠and 푝. For example the meaning
structure of the sentence ‘Every horse breathes’ will be
EVERY
6
HORSE



푠
aﬃrmative
copula
@
@
I
푝
BREATHES
(1)
If we want to reﬁne this representation to show the intended meaning that every
horse breathes at some time, we ﬁrst have to add an indeterminate reference to
the time (Ibn S¯ın¯a calls this addition a ‘relation’, id. ¯afa), and then presumably we

History of Scope
|
237
need to quantify the indeterminate. Probably the picture should be
EVERY
6
HORSE



푠
aﬃrmative
copula
@
@
I
푝
BREATHES-AT-푡
SOME
6
(2)
Now consider the problem of deﬁning the scopes of the two quantiﬁers in terms
of this diagram. As we saw earlier, there is only one natural way in a stemma to
indicate that one element determines a phrase: namely where the phrase is at-
tached to the element. But here nothing is attached to either of the quantiﬁers.
Within this structure there is no way for the notion of comparing scopes to get oﬀ
the ground.
The moral is that even if Ibn S¯ın¯a had had a notion of quantiﬁer scope — and
there is no indication that he did have one — he wouldn’t have been able to in-
corporate it within his semantic theory. The position for scopes of negations is
similar, though the details are diﬀerent. For Ibn S¯ın¯a, a negation attaches to what
it negates. So (in an example that he takes from Aristotle, Qiy¯as 492.17f) we can at-
tach NOT to WHITE in the compound meaning WHITE STICK and get NOT-WHITE
STICK; but where should we attach NOT to get NOT A WHITE STICK? To quote
Mel’čuk [28] p. 28:
... there do exist some constructions which do not lend themselves to a sat-
isfactory description in terms of [dependency trees] alone. These are, for in-
stance, modiﬁcation structures in which an element (푋) modifying the head
of a phrase can contrast semantically with the same element modifying the
whole phrase ...
(3)
Ibn S¯ın¯a doesn’t say how he solves the problem. My guess is that he does think of
attaching NOT to the compound phrase as a whole, but he hasn’t thought through
the consequences of this departure from a strict dependency grammar.
One should add that even logicians who thought of propositions as linearly
ordered objects haven’t always called on the linear ordering to resolve scope am-
biguities. For example Mitchell [29] p. 87 distinguishes what we would write as

238
|
Wilfrid Hodges
∀푢∃푣퐹(푢, 푣) and ∃푣∀푢퐹(푢, 푣) as
Every part of 푈, during some part of 푉, is 퐹;
Every part of 푈, during the same part of 푉, is 퐹.
(4)
Ibn S¯ın¯a uses ‘same’ in a similar way to resolve the scope ambiguity ([23] 40.3).
(Added in August 2014:) Two papers written more recently articulate points
above in more detail. [20] gives further information on how Ibn S¯ın¯a structures
the meanings of sentences. It notes in particular that he sometimes gives his time
quantiﬁcation a wider scope than the other quantiﬁer by attaching the time quan-
tiﬁer to the other one. [21] discusses in more detail how Ibn S¯ın¯a handles sentences
with two quantiﬁers, and makes further points about the relationships to Galen
and Mitchell.
Bibliography
[1]
Alexander of Aphrodisias, In Aristotelis Analyticorum Priorum Librum I Commentarium,
ed. M. Wallies, Reimer, Berlin 1883.
[2]
Joseph E. Aoun, Elabbas Benmamoun and Lina Choueiri, The Syntax of Arabic, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge 2010.
[3]
Aristotle, The Complete Works of Aristotle, Volume One, ed. Jonathan Barnes, Princeton
University Press, Princeton NJ 1984.
[4]
John Buridan, Summulae de Dialectica, trans. Gyula Klima, Yale University Press, New
Haven 2001.
[5]
Walter Burleigh, De Puritate Artis Logicae Tractatus Longior, ed. P. Boehner, Franciscan
Institute, St Bonaventure NY 1955.
[6]
Walter Burley, On the Purity of the Art of Logic: The Shorter and the Longer Treatises,
trans. P. V. Spade, Yale University Press, New Haven CT 2000.
[7]
Noam Chomsky, Knowledge of Language: Its Nature, Origin, and Use, Praeger, New York
1986.
[8]
Kevin L. Flannery, Ways into the Logic of Alexander of Aphrodisias, Brill, Leiden 1995.
[9]
William W. Fortenbaugh et al., eds., Theophrastus of Eresus: Sources for his Life, Writings,
Thought and Influence Part One, Brill, Leiden 1992.
[10] Gottlob Frege, Begriﬀsschrift, Nebert, Halle 1879; trans. Stefan Bauer-Mengelberg in From
Frege to Gödel, ed. Jan van Heijenoort, Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA 1967, pp.
5–82.
[11]
Gottlob Frege, ‘Booles rechnende Logik und die Begriﬀsschrift’, in Nachgelassene
Schriften ed. H. Hermes et al., Meiner, Hamburg 1969, pp. 9–52.
[12] Gottlob Frege, Grundgesetze der Arithmetik I, H. Pohle, Jena 1893.
[13] Galen, Institutio Logica, ed. and trans. John Spangler Kieﬀer, Johns Hopkins Press, Balti-
more 1964.
[14] L. Henkin, ‘Some remarks on inﬁnitely long formulas’, Inﬁnitistic Methods, Pergamon
Press, Oxford and Pańswowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe, Warsaw 1961, pp. 167–183.

Bibliography
|
239
[15]
David Hilbert, David Hilbert’s Lectures on the Foundations of Arithmetic and Logic 1917–
1933, ed. W. Ewald et al., Springer, Berlin 2013.
[16] D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann, Grundzüge der Theoretischen Logik, Springer, Berlin 1928;
trans. of second edition (1937) by L. M. Hammond et al., Principles of Mathematical Logic,
Chelsea, New York 1950.
[17]
Wilfrid Hodges, Logic, Penguin, Harmondsworth 1977.
[18] Wilfrid Hodges, ‘Detecting the logical content: Burley’s “Purity of Logic” ’, in We Will Show
Them: Essays in Honour of Dov Gabbay II, ed. S. Artemov et al., College Publications,
London 2005, pp. 69–115.
[19] Wilfrid Hodges, ‘Aﬃrmative and negative in Ibn S¯ın¯a’, in Insolubles and Consequences:
Essays in honour of Stephen Read, ed. Catarina Dutilh Novaes and Ole Thomassen Hjort-
land, College Publications, London 2012, pp. 119-134.
[20] Wilfrid Hodges, ‘Ibn S¯ın¯a, Frege and the grammar of meanings’, Al-Mukhatabat 5 (2013)
29–60.
[21] Wilfrid Hodges, ‘The move from one to two quantiﬁers’, in The Road to Universal Logic, ed.
Arthur Buchsbaum and Arnold Koslow, Springer 2014.
[22] Ibn S¯ın¯a, Al-푐Ib¯ara, ed. M. El-Khodeiri et al., Cairo 1970.
[23] Ibn S¯ın¯a, Al-Qiy¯as, ed. S. Zayed et al., Cairo 1964.
[24] Ibn S¯ın¯a, Al-Burh¯an, ed. A. Af¯ıf¯ı et al., Cairo 1956.
[25] Ibn S¯ın¯a, Al-Safsat.a, ed. A. F. Ehwani et al., Cairo 1958.
[26] Edward Klima, ‘Negation in English’, in Jerry A. Fodor and Jerrold J. Katz eds., The Struc-
ture of Language, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliﬀs NJ 1964, 246–323.
[27] Benson Mates, Stoic Logic, University of California Press, Berkeley CA 1961.
[28] Igor A. Mel’čuk, Dependency Syntax: Theory and Practice, SUNY Press, Albany NY 1988.
[29] Oscar Mitchell, ‘On a new algebra of logic’, in C. S. Peirce et al., Studies in Logic, Little,
Brown and co., Boston MA 1883, pp. 72–106.
[30] C. S. Peirce, Untitled fragment on the Algebra of Logic 1884, in Writings of Charles
S. Peirce, Volume 5, 1884–1886, ed. C. J. W. Kloesel, Indiana University Press, Bloom-
ington IN 1993, pp. 109f.
[31] C. S. Peirce, ‘On the algebra of logic’, American Journal of Mathematics 7 (1885) 180–202.
[32] Plato, Euthydemus, in Platonis Opera III, ed. J. Burnet, Clarendon Press, Oxford 1903, pp.
i.271–307.
[33] Tanya Reinhart, The Syntactic Domain of Anaphora, PhD Dissertation, MIT, Cambridge MA
1976.
[34] Tanya Reinhart, Anaphora and Semantic Interpretation, University of Chicago Press,
Chicago IL 1983.
[35] Víctor Sánchez Valencia, ‘Monotonicity in medieval logic’, in Language and Cognition 4:
Yearbook (1994), ed. A. de Boer, H. de Hoop and H. de Swart, Rijksuniversiteit Groningen,
Groningen 1994, pp. 161–174.
[36] Sextus Empiricus, Against the Logicians, with trans. by R. G. Bury, Loeb, Heinemann,
Cambridge MA 1961.
[37] William of Sherwood, Treatise on Syncategorematic Words, trans. Norman Kretzmann,
University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis MN 1968.
[38] Mark Steedman, Taking Scope: The Natural Semantics of Quantiﬁers, MIT Press, Cam-
bridge MA 2012.
[39] Jouko Väänänen, Dependence Logic, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 2007.
History of Scope

240
|
Wilfrid Hodges
[40] Alfred North Whitehead and Bertrand Russell, Principia Mathematica I, Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, Cambridge, 1st ed. 1913, 2nd ed. 1927.

Jan Hubička* and Jaroslav Nešetřil
Universal Structures with Forbidden
Homomorphisms
Abstract: We relate the existence problem of universal objects to the properties of
corresponding enriched categories (lifts or expansions). In particular, extending
earlier results, we prove that for every (possibly inﬁnite) regular set F of ﬁnite con-
nected structures there exists a (countable) 휔-categorical universal structure U for
the class Forbh(F) (of all countable structures not containing any homomorphic
image of a member of F). We employ a technique known as homogenization: The
universal object U is the shadow (reduct) of an ultrahomogeneous structure U耠.
We also put the results of this paper in the context of homomorphism duali-
ties and constraint satisfaction problems. This leads to an alternative proof of the
characterization of ﬁnite dualities (given by Tardif and Nešetřil) as well as of the
characterization of inﬁnite-ﬁnite dualities for classes of relational trees given by
P. L. Erdős, Pálvölgyi, Tardif and Tardos.
The notion of regular families of structures is motivated by the recent charac-
terization of inﬁnite-ﬁnite dualities for classes of relational forests (itself related to
regular languages). We show how the notion of a regular family of relational trees
can be extended to regular families of relational structures. This gives a partial
characterization of the existence of a (countable) 휔-categorical universal object
for classes Forbh(F).
Keywords: amalgamation, Fraïssé, universality, homomorphism duality
MSC: 05C99
||
*Corresponding Author: Jan Hubička, Jaroslav Nešetřil: Computer Science Institute of
Charles University (IUUK), Charles University, 118 00 Praha 1, Czech Republic, e-mail: {hu-
bicka,nesetril}@iuuk.mﬀ.cuni.cz
1 Introduction
We review ﬁrst a few well known concepts and facts.
A relational structure (or simply structure) A is a pair (퐴, (푅푖
A : 푖∈퐼)), where
푅푖
A ⊆퐴훿푖(i.e., 푅푖
A is a 훿푖-ary relation on 퐴). The family (훿푖: 푖∈퐼) is called the type 훥.
The type is usually ﬁxed and understood from the context. We consider only ﬁnite
types. If the set 퐴is ﬁnite we call A a ﬁnite structure. We consider only countable or

242
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
ﬁnite structures. The class of all (countable) relational structures of type 훥will be
denoted by Rel(훥). The class Rel(훥), 훥= (훿푖; 푖∈퐼), is ﬁxed throughout this paper.
Unless otherwise stated all structures A, B, . . . belong to Rel(훥).
A homomorphism 푓: A →B = (퐵, (푅푖
B : 푖∈퐼)) is a mapping 푓: 퐴→퐵
such that (푥1, 푥2, . . . , 푥훿푖) ∈푅푖
A implies (푓(푥1), 푓(푥2), . . . , 푓(푥훿푖)) ∈푅푖
B, for each
푖∈퐼. For given structures A and B we will denote the existence of homomorphism
푓: A →B by A →B and the non-existence by A 䀀䀂䀠B. If 푓is one-to-one then 푓
is called a monomorphism. A monomorphism 푓such (푥1, 푥2, . . . , 푥훿푖) ∈푅푖
A if and
only if (푓(푥1), 푓(푥2), . . . , 푓(푥훿푖)) ∈푅푖
B for each 푖∈퐼is called an embedding.
Given a family of relational structures F, by Forbh(F) we denote the class of
all relational structures A for which there is no homomorphism F →A, for any
F ∈F. Formally,
Forbh(F) = {A; ∀F∈FF 䀀䀂䀠A}.
Given a class K of countable structures, an object U ∈K is called universal for K
if for every object A ∈K there exists an embedding A →U.
For a class K of countable relational structures, we denote by Age(K) the class
of all ﬁnite structures isomorphic to a substructure of some A ∈K and call it the
age of K. Similarly, for a relational structure A, the age of A, Age(A), is Age({A}).
A structure A is ultrahomogeneous (sometimes also simply called homoge-
neous) if every isomorphism between two induced ﬁnite substructures of A can
be extended to an automorphism of A. A structure G is generic for the class K if it
is universal for K and ultrahomogeneous.
The key property of the age of any ultrahomogeneous structure is described
by the following concept. Let A, B, C be relational structures, 훼an embedding of
C into A, and 훽an embedding of C into B. An amalgamation of (A, B, C, 훼, 훽) is a
triple (D, 훾, 훿), where D is a relational structure, 훾an embedding A →D and 훿an
embedding B →D such that 훾∘훼= 훿∘훽. Less formally, an amalgamation “glues
together” the structures A and B into a single substructure of D such that copies
of C coincide. See Figure 1.
Often the vertex sets of structures A, B and C can be chosen in such a way that
the embeddings 훼and 훽are identity mappings. In this case, for brevity, we shall
call an amalgamation of (A, B, C, 훼, 훽) simply an amalgamation of A and B over
C. Similarly, for an amalgamation (D, 훾, 훿) of a given (A, B, C, 훼, 훽) we are often
interested in the structure D alone. In this case we shall call the structure D an
amalgamation of (A, B, C, 훼, 훽) (omitting the embeddings 훾and 훿).
We say that an amalgamation is strong when
훾(퐴) ∩훿(퐵) = 훾(훼(퐶)) = 훿(훽(퐶)).
Less formally, a strong amalgamation glues together A and B with an overlap no
greater than the copy of C itself. A strong amalgamation is free if there are no

Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms
|
243
A
B
D
C
α
β
δ
γ
Fig. 1. Amalgamation of (A, B, C, 훼, 훽).
relations of D spanning both vertices of 훾(퐴) and 훿(퐵) that are not images of some
relations of structure A or B via the embedding 훾or 훿, respectively.
A class K of ﬁnite relational structures is called an amalgamation class if the
following conditions hold:
1.
(Hereditary property) For every A ∈K and induced substructure B of A we
have B ∈K.
2.
(Amalgamation property) For A, B, C ∈K and 훼an embedding of C into A, 훽an
embedding of C into B, there exists (D, 훾, 훿), D ∈K, that is an amalgamation
of (A, B, C, 훼, 훽).
3.
K is closed under isomorphism.
4.
K has only countably many mutually non-isomorphic structures. (This is al-
ways the case in our setting of ﬁnite types).
The following classical result establishes the correspondence between amalga-
mation classes and ultrahomogeneous structures.
Theorem 1.1 (Fraïssé [11, 13]). (a) A class K of ﬁnite structures is the age of a count-
able ultrahomogeneous structure G if and only if K is an amalgamation class.
(b) If the conditions of (a) are satisﬁed then the structure G is unique up to
isomorphism.
The ultrahomogeneous structure G such that Age(G) = K is called the Fraïssé limit
of K. We say that structure A is younger than structure B if Age(A) is a subset of
Age(B). Every ultrahomogeneous structure G has the property that it is universal
(and also generic) for the class K of all countable structures younger than G.

244
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
A countably inﬁnite structure is called 휔-categorical if all countable models
of its ﬁrst order theory are isomorphic. We use the following characterization of
휔-categorical structures given by Engeler [7], Ryll-Nardzewski [21] and Svenonius
[22].
Theorem 1.2. For a countable ﬁrst order structure A, the following conditions are
equivalent:
1.
A is 휔-categorical.
2.
The automorphism group of A has only ﬁnitely many orbits on 푛-tuples, for every
푛.
1.0.0.5 Lifts and shadows.
Let 훥耠= (훿耠
푖; 푖∈퐼耠) be a type containing type 훥. (By this we mean 퐼⊆퐼耠and
훿耠
푖= 훿푖for 푖∈퐼.) Then every structure X ∈Rel(훥耠) may be viewed as a structure
A = (퐴, (푅푖
A; 푖∈퐼)) ∈Rel(훥) together with some additional relations for 푖∈퐼耠\퐼. To
make this more explicit, these additional relations will be denoted by 푋푖
X, 푖∈퐼耠\퐼.
Thus a structure X ∈Rel(훥耠) will be written as
X = (퐴, (푅푖
A; 푖∈퐼), (푋푖
X; 푖∈퐼耠\ 퐼)),
and, abusing notation, more brieﬂy as
X = (A, 푋1
X, 푋2
X, . . . , 푋푁
X ).
We call X a lift of A and A is called the shadow of X. In this sense the class Rel(훥耠)
is the class of all lifts of Rel(훥). Conversely, Rel(훥) is the class of all shadows of
Rel(훥耠). If all extended relations are unary, the lift is called monadic. In the con-
text of monadic lifts, the color of vertex 푣is the set {푖; (푣) ∈푋푖
U}. Note that a lift is
also in the model-theoretic setting called an expansion (as we are expanding our
relational language) and a shadow a reduct (as we are reducing it). (Our terminol-
ogy is motivated by a computer science context; see [15].) Unless stated explicitely,
we shall use letters A, B, C, . . . for shadows (in Rel(훥)) and letters X, Y, Z for lifts
(in Rel(훥耠)).
For a lift X = (A, 푋1
X, . . . , 푋푁
X ) we denote by Sh(X) the relational structure A,
i.e. its shadow. (Sh is called a forgetful functor.) Similarly, for a class K耠of lifted
objects, we denote by Sh(K耠) the class of all shadows of structures in K耠.
1.0.0.6 Homogenization.
Many naturally deﬁned classes K of relational structures contain universal struc-
tures that are 휔-categorical. Because 휔-categoricity can be seen as a weaker no-

Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms
|
245
tion of ultrahomogeneity, it is natural to construct 휔-categorical universal struc-
tures as shadows of ultrahomogeneous structures. Such a construction is called
homogenization. Covington [6] provided a suﬃcient condition for the existence
of a universal structure for a given class K that is a shadow of an ultrahomoge-
neous structure by means of amalgamation failures. This concept in fact relaxes
the Fraïssé Theorem.
However, not all universal structures are constructed by means of homog-
enization. A necessary and suﬃcient condition for the existence of a universal
structure for the class deﬁned by forbidden monomorphisms from a ﬁnite family
F of connected graphs was given by Cherlin, Shelah and Shi [3]. Here the classes
are characterized by means of local ﬁniteness of the algebraic closure operator.
The techniques of [3] are motivated by proofs of the non-existence of a universal
structure for a given class. The universal structure is not constructed by an explicit
amalgamation argument.
1.0.0.7 Our motivation and results.
Our motivation stems from several sources. First, we seek a more streamlined
and combinatorial proof of the following corollary of the aforementioned result
of Cherlin, Shelah and Shi.
Theorem 1.3 ([3]). For every ﬁnite family F of ﬁnite connected graphs there is an
휔-categorical universal graph for the class Forbh(F).
We prove a stronger form of Theorem 1.3 by an explicit amalgamation argument. A
similar construction can be also be obtained by characterizing the amalgamation
failures and applying homogenization method. Our lifts are, however, diﬀerent
and more eﬀective.
We are interested in the structure of lifts constructed for a given (possibly in-
ﬁnite) family F. In special cases we relate lifts to the concept of homomorphism
dualities. Motivated by a recent characterization of inﬁnite-ﬁnite dualities by P.
L. Erdős, Pálvölgyi, Tardif, Tardos [8], we introduce a notion of regular families
of relational structures. These (possibly inﬁnite) families of structures general-
ize regular forests, used in [8] to characterize inﬁnite-ﬁnite dualities. In fact the
regular families of trees (and forests) corresponds to well established notion of
recognizable tree languages, see [5].
In Section 3 we strengthen Theorem 1.3 by proving the existence of a universal
structure for Forbh(F), where F is a regular family of ﬁnite connected structures.
In Section 4 we show the non-existence of an 휔-categorical universal structure
for Forbh(F) for certain non-regular families F, and give a partial characterization
of such families.

246
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
Finally, in Section 5 we relate our results to homomorphism dualities and con-
straint satisfaction problems. We show that for the classes F consisting of regular
relational trees the universal structure has a ﬁnite retract. This gives an alternative
construction of graph duals and also an alternative proof of the characterization
of homomorphism dualities.
2 Regular families of structures and F-lifts
Let F be a ﬁxed family of ﬁnite connected relational structures. For the construc-
tion of a universal structure of Forbh(F) we use special lifts, called F-lifts. The
deﬁnition of an F-lift is easy and resembles decomposition techniques standard
in graph theory, and thus we adopt a similar terminology. First we review some
elementary graph-theoretic notions, see [16, 2] for details.
For a structure A = (퐴, (푅푖
A, 푖∈퐼)), the Gaifman graph (in combinatorics often
called 2-section) is the graph 퐺A with vertices 퐴and all those edges which are a
subset of a tuple of a relation of A, i.e., 퐺= (퐴, 퐸), where 푥, 푦∈퐸if and only if
푥
̸= 푦and there exists a tuple ⃗푣∈푅푖
A, 푖∈퐼, such that 푥, 푦∈⃗푣.
We adopt the following standard graph-theoretic notions for relational struc-
tures. We call a structure A connected if its Gaifman graph 퐺A is connected. For a
structure A and subset of its vertices 퐵⊆퐴, we denote by 푁A(퐵) the neighborhood
of the set 퐵, that is all vertices of 퐴\ 퐵connected in the Gaifman graph 퐺A by an
edge to a vertex of 퐵. We denote by A \ 퐵the structure induced on 퐴\ 퐵by A.
Similarly we denote by 퐺A \ 퐵the graph created from the Gaifman graph 퐺A by
removing the vertices in 퐵.
A g-cut in A is a subset 퐶of 퐴such that the Gaifman graph 퐺A is disconnected
by removing the set 퐶. That is, there are vertices 푢, 푣∈퐴\퐶that belong to the same
connected component of 퐺A but to diﬀerent connected components of 퐺A \ 퐶. A
cut in A is subset 퐶of 퐴such that there are vertices 푢, 푣∈퐴\ 퐶that belong to the
same connected component of A but to diﬀerent connected components of A \ 퐶.
Observe that not every cut is a g-cut. With relations of arity greater than 2,
퐺A\퐶may be diﬀerent from 퐺A \ 퐶.
For a g-cut 퐶in the relational structure A, a structure A1 is a g-component of
A with g-cut 퐶if A1 is induced by A on some connected component of 퐺A \ 퐶.
We will make use of the following simple observation about the neighborhood
and g-components.
Observation 2.1. Let A1 be a g-component of A with g-cut 퐶. Then the neighbor-
hood 푁A(퐴1) is a subset of 퐶. Moreover 푁A(퐴1) is a g-cut and A1 is one of the
g-components of A with g-cut 푁A(퐴1).

Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms
|
247
A1
C
A′
1
A′′
1
A
A′
2
NA(A′
1)
C′
A2
Fig. 2. Construction of a minimal g-separating g-cut 퐶耠separating A1 and A2 in A.
Given a structure A with g-cut 퐶and two (induced) substructures A1 and A2, we
say that 퐶g-separates A1 and A2 if there are g-components A耠
1
̸= A耠
2 of A with g-cut
퐶such that 퐴1 ⊆퐴耠
1 and 퐴2 ⊆퐴耠
2.
Deﬁnition 2.2. Let 퐶be a g-cut in structure A. Let A1
̸= A2 be two g-components
of A with g-cut 퐶. We call 퐶minimal g-separating g-cut for A1 and A2 in A if 퐶=
푁A(퐴1) = 푁A(퐴2).
For brevity, we can omit one or both 푔-components when speaking about a min-
imal g-separating g-cut. Explicitly, we call a g-cut 퐶minimal g-separating for A1
in A if there exists another structure B such that 퐶is minimal g-separating for A1
and B in A. A g-cut 퐶is minimal g-separating in A if there exists structures B1 and
B2 such that 퐶is minimal g-separating for B1 and B2 in A.
The name of minimal g-separating g-cut is justiﬁed by the following (probably
folkloristic) proposition.
Proposition 2.3. Let A be a connected relational structure, 퐶a g-cut in A and A1
and A2 (induced) substructures of A g-separated by 퐶. Then there exists a minimal
g-separating g-cut 퐶耠⊆퐶that g-separates A1 and A2 in A. Moreover if 푁A(퐴1) ⊆퐶
(or, equivalently, A1 is a g-component of A with g-cut 퐶), then 퐶耠⊆푁A(퐴1).

248
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
Proof. We will construct a series of g-cuts and g-components as depicted in Fig-
ure 2.
Denote by A耠
1 the g-component of A with g-cut 퐶containing A1 (and thus not
containing A2). By Observation 2.1, 푁A(퐴耠
1) ⊆퐶is a g-cut that g-separates A耠
1 and
A2 (because A耠
1 is also g-component of A with cut 푁A(퐴耠
1) and A耠
1 does not contain
A2).
Now consider g-component A耠
2 of A with g-cut 푁A(퐴耠
1) containing A2. Put 퐶耠=
푁A(퐴耠
2). By Observation 2.1, 퐶耠⊆푁A(퐴耠
1) ⊆퐶is g-cut and A耠
2 (not containing A1)
is one of its g-components.
Denote by A耠耠
1 the g-component of A with cut 퐶耠containing A1. It follows that
퐶耠g-separates A耠耠
1 (that contains A1) and A耠
2 (that contains A2).
To see that 퐶耠is minimal g-separating for A耠耠
1 and A耠
2 it remains to show that
every vertex in 퐶耠= 푁A(퐴耠
2) is also in 푁A(퐴耠耠
1). This is true because every vertex of
퐶耠is in 푁A(퐴耠
1) and A耠
1 is substructure of A耠耠
1 .
Observe that every inclusion minimal g-cut is also minimal g-separating, but not
vice versa. Every minimal g-separating g-cut 퐶耠⊂퐶that g-separates A1 and A2 is
however also inclusion minimal g-cut that separates A1 and A2.
If 퐶is a set of vertices then 㨀
→퐶will denote a tuple (of length |퐶|) of all the ele-
ments of 퐶. Alternatively, 㨀
→퐶is an arbitrary linear ordering of 퐶. A rooted structure
P is a pair (P, 㨀
→푅) where P is a relational structure and 㨀
→푅is a tuple consisting of
distinct vertices of P. 㨀
→푅is called the root of P and the size of 㨀
→푅is the width of P.
We say that rooted structures P1 = (P1, 㨀
→푅1) and P2 = (P2, 㨀
→푅2) are isomorphic if
there is a function 푓: 푃1 →푃2 that is an isomorphism of structures P1 and P2
and 푓restricted to 㨀
→푅1 is a monotone bijection between 㨀
→푅1 and 㨀
→푅2 (we denote this
푓(㨀
→푅1) = 㨀
→푅2).
The following is the principal notion of this paper:
Deﬁnition 2.4. Let A be a connected relational structure and 푅a minimal g-
separating g-cut for g-component C in A. A piece of a relational structure A is
then a rooted structure P = (P, 㨀
→푅), where the tuple 㨀
→푅consists of the vertices of
the g-cut 푅in a (ﬁxed) linear order and P is a structure induced by A on 퐶∪푅.
Note that since P is the union of a g-component and its neighborhood it follows
that the pieces of a connected structure are always connected structures. As an
example, pieces of the Petersen graph are shown in Figure 3.
Given rooted structures (P, 㨀
→푅) and (P耠, 㨀
→푅耠) such that |푅| = |푅耠|, denote by
(P, 㨀
→푅) ⊕(P耠, 㨀
→푅耠) the (possibly rooted) structure created as a free amalgam of P
and P耠with corresponding roots being identiﬁed (in the order of 㨀
→푅and 㨀
→푅耠). Note

Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms
|
249
Fig. 3. Pieces of the Petersen graph up to isomorphism (and permutations of roots). G-cut of
size 4 splits the graph into 3 isomorphic pieces.
that (P, 㨀
→푅) ⊕(P耠, 㨀
→푅耠) is deﬁned only if the rooted structure induced by P on 㨀
→푅is
isomorphic to the rooted structure induced by P耠on 㨀
→푅耠.
Recall that F is a ﬁxed family of ﬁnite connected relational structures. A piece
P = (P, 㨀
→푅) is incompatible with a rooted structure A if P ⊕A is deﬁned and there
exists F ∈F that is isomorphic to P⊕A. (In other words, there exists F耠isomorphic
to some F耠耠∈F, such that P is a piece of F耠and A is the structure induced on
퐹耠\ (푃\ 푅) by F耠rooted by 㨀
→푅.)
Assign to each piece P a set IP containing all rooted structures that are in-
compatible with P. For two pieces P1 and P2 put P1 ∼P2 if and only if IP1 = IP2.
Observe that every equivalence class of ∼contains pieces of the same width 푛. We
also call 푛the width of the equivalence class of ∼.
Deﬁnition 2.5. A family of ﬁnite structures F is called regular if there are only
ﬁnitely many equivalence classes of ∼on the family of all pieces of structures in
family F.
The notion of regular family is a generalization of that of a regular family of forests,
introduced in [8]. The term used in [8] was motivated by the connection to regular
languages. This is explained in the following examples.
2.0.0.8 Example.
All ﬁnite families F of ﬁnite structures are regular. Examples of inﬁnite families F
include the following:
1.
The family Fodd consisting of all graph cycles of odd length. All pieces of
Fodd are paths rooted by initial vertex and terminal vertex. There are only

250
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
two equivalence classes of the pieces: paths of odd length and paths of even
length.
2.
The family Foriented consisting of those orientations of graph cycles where all
edges are oriented in the same direction. Pieces of Foriented are oriented paths
with all edges in a forward direction with roots on initial and terminal vertex.
Consequently there are only two equivalence classes of pieces: paths with ﬁrst
root on initial vertex and second root on terminal vertex, and paths with ﬁrst
root on terminal vertex and second root on initial vertex.
3.
Oriented paths can be described by words on alphabet {←, →}. It follows that
every language of words on this alphabet corresponds to a family of oriented
paths. It is not diﬃcult to show that all regular languages correspond to a reg-
ular family of paths. Consequently regular families may have a rich structure;
see [8].
Consider for example the family created by words of the form →→(→←→
)푛→→, 푛≥1, where (→←→)푛stands for 푛repetitions of →←→. All these
paths are cores and form an antichain. Several other examples of regular fam-
ilies of directed graphs are discussed in [9].
We continue our construction with the following:
Deﬁnition 2.6. We denote by 퐸1, . . . 퐸푁the equivalence classes of ∼correspond-
ing to pieces of structures in F. Put 퐼耠
= {1, 2, . . . , 푁}. A relational structure
X = (A, (푋푖
X : 푖∈퐼耠)) is called an F-lift of the relational structure A when the
arities of the relations 푋푖
X, 푖∈퐼耠, correspond to the width of 퐸푖.
For a relational structure A, we deﬁne the canonical lift
퐿(A) = (A, 푋1
퐿(A), 푋2
퐿(A), . . . , 푋푁
퐿(A))
by putting (푣1, 푣2, . . . , 푣푙) ∈푋푖
퐿(A) if and only if there is a piece P = (P, 㨀
→푅) ∈퐸푖such
that there is a homomorphism 푓: P →A with 푓(㨀
→푅) = (푣1, 푣2, . . . , 푣푙).
2.0.0.9 Example.
As an illustration we provide an explicit description of some canonical lifts of the
regular families discussed above.
1.
For the family Fodd there are two new binary relations. In a canonical lift 퐿(A)
there is (푢, 푣) ∈푋1
퐿(A) if and only if there is a walk of odd length between
vertices 푢and 푣and (푢, 푣) ∈푋2
퐿(A) if and only if there is a walk of even length
between 푢and 푣.

Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms
|
251
For A ∈Forbh(Fodd) there is no (푢, 푣) such that (푢, 푣) ∈푋1
퐿(A) and (푢, 푣) ∈푋2
퐿(A).
This means that odd cycles can be recognized by the existence of both a walk
of even length and a walk of odd length in between a given pair of vertices.
2.
For the family Foriented there are two new binary relations. In a canonical lift
퐿(A) there is (푢, 푣) ∈푋1
퐿(A) if and only if there is an oriented walk from 푢to 푣
and (푢, 푣) ∈푋2
퐿(A) if and only if there is an oriented walk from 푣to 푢.
For A ∈Forbh(Foriented) there is no (푢, 푣) such that both (푢, 푣) ∈푋1
퐿(A) and
(푣, 푢) ∈푋1
퐿(A). The same holds for 푋2
퐿(A) and in fact the second relation is fully
redundant in our construction and can be ignored.
3 Construction of universal structures
Theorem 3.1. Let F be a regular family of ﬁnite connected relational structures
(of a ﬁnite type). Then there exists an ultrahomogeneous lift U耠with only ﬁnitely
many new relations such that its shadow Sh(U耠) is a universal structure for the class
Forbh(F).
Moreover, the lift U耠can be constructed in the following way. Denote by L the
class of all induced substructures (sublifts) of canonical lifts 퐿(A), A ∈Forbh(F).
Then Age(L) is a amalgamation class (closed for strong amalgams whose shadows
are free amalgams) and U耠is the Fraïssé limit of Age(L).
Denote by 푛the maximal size of a minimal g-separating g-cut in a structure in F
(by regularity of F the size of g-cuts is bounded). Then the arity of extended relations
is bounded by 푛.
This theorem will be proved in the rest of this section. We take time for a simple
Lemma.
Given a piece P = (P, 㨀
→푅) of structure F, we call P耠= (P耠, 㨀
→푅耠) a subpiece of P
if P耠is a piece of F, 푃耠⊂푃. We show that a subpiece can be freely replaced by an
equivalent subpiece without changing the equivalence class of a given piece.
Lemma 3.2. Let P1 = (P1, 㨀
→푅1) be a piece of structure F1 ∈F, P耠
1 = (P耠
1, 㨀
→푅耠
1) be a
subpiece of P1 and P耠
2 = (P耠
2, 㨀
→푅耠
2) a piece such that P耠
1 ∼P耠
2.
Create P2 = (P2, 㨀
→푅2) as a copy of P1 with P耠
1 replaced by P耠
2 identifying 㨀
→푅耠
1 with
㨀
→푅耠
2. Then P2 is an isomorphic copy of a piece of some F2 ∈F, and moreover P1 ∼P2.

252
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
−→
R 1
−→
R
′
1
P′
1
P1
A
A′
P′
2
P2
F2
F1
Fig. 4. Replacing subpieces.
Proof. See Figure 4. Consider some A ∈IP1. By deﬁnition F1 = P1 ⊕A is isomor-
phic to some structure F. P耠
1 is also a piece of F1 and thus there exists a rooted
structure A耠such that P耠
1 ⊕A耠= F1. It follows that A耠∈IP耠
1. Because P耠
2 ∼P耠
1
and thus IP耠
2 = IP耠
1, we also know that F2 = P耠
2 ⊕A耠is isomorphic to some struc-
ture in F. P2 is a copy of P1 with P耠
1 replaced by P耠
2. By construction of A耠we have
P2 ⊕A = P耠
2 ⊕A耠= F2 and consequently A ∈IP2. We get IP1 ⊆IP2. By symmetry
we also have IP2 ⊆IP1.
For X ∈L we denote by 푊(X) one of the structures A ∈Forbh(F) such that the
structure X is induced on 푋by 퐿(A). 푊(X) is called a witness of the fact that X
belongs to L. Note that in this deﬁnition, the witness of a ﬁnite lift may be inﬁnite
structure, because Forbh(F) contains inﬁnite structures.
Proof of Theorem 3.1. Clearly it suﬃces to prove the second part of the theorem.
By deﬁnition the class Age(L) is hereditary, isomorphism-closed, and has the joint
embedding property. Assuming that Age(L) has the amalgamation property (with
restrictions described), the rest of the theorem follows from the Fraïssé Theorem
and the fact that L is the class of all lifts younger than the Fraïssé limit U耠of Age(L)
and thus U耠is generic for L.
We show the amalgamation property. Consider X, Y, Z ∈Age(L). Assume that
structure Z is a substructure induced by both X and Y on 푍and without loss of
generality assume that 푋∩푌= 푍.
Put
A = 푊(X),
B = 푊(Y),
C = Sh(Z).

Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms
|
253
X
Y
Z, C
A
B
−→
R
P
f −1(C)
f −1(A \ C)
f −1(B \ C)
f
Fig. 5. Construction of an amalgamation.
Because Age(L) is closed under isomorphism, we can assume that A and B
are vertex-disjoint with the exception of vertices of C.
Let D be the free amalgamation of A and B over vertices of C: the vertices of
D are 퐴∪퐵and there is ⃗푣∈푅푖
D if and only if ⃗푣∈푅푖
A or ⃗푣∈푅푖
B.
We claim that the structure
V = 퐿(D)
is a strong amalgamation of 퐿(A) and 퐿(B) over Z and thus also an amalgamation
of X, Y over Z. The situation is depicted in Figure 5.
First we show that the substructure induced by V on 퐴is 퐿(A) and that the
substructure induced by V on 퐵is 퐿(B). In the other words, no new tuples to 퐿(A)
or 퐿(B) (and thus none to X or Y either) have been introduced. Assume to the
contrary that there is a new tuple (푣1, . . . , 푣푡) ∈푋푘
V. By symmetry we can assume
that {푣1, . . . , 푣푡} ⊆퐴. Explicitly, we assume that there is a piece P = (P, 㨀
→푅) ∈퐸푘
and a homomorphism 푓from P to D such that 푓(㨀
→푅) = (푣1, 푣2, . . . , 푣푡) ∉푋푘
퐿(A).
The set of vertices of P mapped to 퐿(A), 푓−1(퐴), is nonempty, because it con-
tains all vertices of 㨀
→푅. The set 푓−1(퐵\ 퐶) is nonempty 푓is not homomorphism
from P to A (otherwise we would have (푣1, 푣2, . . . , 푣푡) ∈푋푘
퐿(A)). Because there are
no tuples spanning both vertices 퐴\ 퐶and vertices 퐵\ 퐶in D, and because pieces
are connected, we also have 푓−1(퐶) nonempty.
We will reason about the decomposition of P given by 푓−1(퐶) and create sub-
pieces containing vertices of 푓−1(퐵\ 퐶). This requires some careful analysis. The
process is depicted in Figure 6. Denote by F ∈F the structure such that P is a piece
of F. The vertices of 푓−1(퐶) form a g-cut in F g-separating any vertex in 푓−1(퐵\ 퐶)
from any vertex in 푓−1(퐴\ 퐶) (if such a vertex exists) as well as any vertex of F \ 푃.
We further strengthen our assumption on the choice of counter-example (con-
sisting of the choice of X, Y, A, B, the piece P and the homomorphism 푓):

254
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
P
−→
R
P′
1
P′
2
f −1(A \ C)
f −1(C)
f −1(B \ C)
F′
−→
R 1
−→
R 2
F
Fig. 6. The decomposition of piece P.
(푎) No subpiece P耠= (P耠, 㨀
→푅耠) of P is a counter-example with homomorphism 푓.
More precisely if 푓(푅耠) ⊆퐴, then 푓(
㨀→
푅耠) ∈푋푖
퐿(A) for 푖such that P耠∈퐸푖. Similarly
if 푓(푅耠) ⊆퐵, then 푓(
㨀→
푅耠) ∈푋푖
퐿(B) for 푖such that P耠∈퐸푖.
(푏) If there is some g-component P耠of F with g-cut 푓−1(퐶) contained in 푓−1(퐵\ 퐶)
such that 푅⊆푁P(푃耠), then there exists a g-component P耠耠of F with g-cut
푓−1(퐶) contained in 푓−1(퐴\ 퐶) such that 푅⊆푁P(푃耠耠).
It easily follows that the existence of counter-example implies the existence of
counter-example satisfying (푎) and (푏). (푎) can be made to hold by considering the
smallest subpiece of P that is still a counter-example. If (푏) fails we can exchange
A and B as well as exchange X and Y. This is possible because 푓−1(퐶) g-separates
any vertex in 푓−1(퐴\ 퐶) and any vertex in 푓−1(퐵\ 퐶) and thus the existence of P耠
implies 푅⊆푓−1(퐶).
Denote by F耠a substructure of F so that 푅is a minimal g-separating g-cut of
F耠and P \ 푅in F. Denote by P耠
1, P耠
2, . . . , P耠
푙the substructures induced on P by all
connected components of 퐺P \ 푓−1(퐴). We aim to ﬁnd, for every 푖= 1, 2, . . . 푙, a
minimal g-separating g-cut 푅푖⊆푓−1(퐶) of F that separates P耠
푖from F耠. Moreover,
we will choose 푅푖so that 푅푖
̸⊆푅. This implies the existence of P푖= (P푖, 㨀
→푅푖) that is
a subpiece of P containing P耠
푖.
We consider two cases:

Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms
|
255
1.
푅
̸⊆푁P(푃耠
푖): Construct 푅푖⊆푁P(푃耠
푖) as a minimal g-separating g-cut that
g-separates F耠and P耠
푖in F (given by Proposition 2 for structure F and g-cut
푓−1(퐶)).
Since pieces are connected and 푅is a minimal g-separating g-cut in F for P\푅
and F耠, we know that 㨀
→푅푖must contain some vertex 푣∉푅.
2.
푅⊆푁P(푃耠
푖): In this case consider structure P耠耠given by (푏). Construct 푅푖as a
minimal g-separating g-cut that g-separates P耠耠and P耠
푖in F.
We show that 푅푖⊃푅. Because every vertex 푣∈푅is connected in 퐺P to a vertex
in 푃푖and a vertex in 푃耠耠, we have 푅푖⊇푅. Moreover because pieces with roots
removed are g-components, 푅does not g-separate P耠耠and P耠
푖and thus 푅푖⊃푅.
Since 푅푖⊃푅, 푅푖g-separates P耠
푖and F耠in F.
We have constructed a family of subpieces P1, P2, . . . , P푙such that P耠
푖is contained
in P푖\ 㨀
→푅. It is possible that P푖is a subpiece of P푗for some 푖
̸= 푗. Without loss of
generality assume that P1, P2, . . . P푙耠is the maximal subset of pieces P1, P2, . . . , P푙
such that no piece is a subpiece of any other. Obviously 푃\ 푓−1(퐴) = ∪푖=1,2,...푙푃耠
푖is
a subset of ∪푖=1,2,...푙耠(푃푖\ 푅푖).
Let 푒푖be the index of the equivalence class of ∼such that P푖∈퐸푒푖. Now we
use assumption (푎). All the pieces P푖, 푖= 1, . . . , 푙耠are subpieces of P. Thus we have
that 푓(㨀
→푅푖) ∈푋푒푖
퐿(D) 㨐⇒푓(㨀
→푅푖) ∈푋푒푖
퐿(A). Thus there exists a piece P퐴
푖= (P퐴
푖, 㨀
→푅퐴
푖),
P퐴
푖
∼P푖, and a homomorphism 푓퐴
푖from P퐴
푖to A such that 푓퐴
푖(㨀
→푅퐴
푖) = 푓(㨀→
푅푖), for
every 푖= 1, 2, . . . , 푙耠.
In this situation we want to create P퐴= (P퐴, 㨀
→푅퐴) as a copy of P with P푖re-
placed by P퐴
푖for every 푖= 1, . . . 푙耠. By (repeated) application of Lemma 3.2 we will
then have P퐴∼P. To make this possible, we must show that no root vertex 푣of
P푖is contained in some P푗\ 푅푗for 1 ≤푖≤푙耠, 1 ≤푗≤푙耠. (Otherwise replacing P푗
by P퐴
푗may make it impossible to replace P푖by P퐴
푖.) Assume, to the contrary that
there is such a choice of P푖, P푗and 푣. Because P푖is not subpiece of P푗, nor vice
versa, there is a root 푣耠of P푖that is not contained in P푗. Because 푣is in P푗\ 푅푗
that is a g-component of F with cut 푅푗and 푣耠is not, we conclude that 푣and 푣耠are
g-separated by 푅푗in F. This leads to the fact that 푅푗∩푃푖is g-cut in P푖g-separating
푣and 푣耠. This is not possible because, by our construction, 푣, 푣耠∈푁P(푃耠
푖) and P耠
푖
is a g-component of P with g-cut 푓−1(퐶). Thus 푣and 푣耠are connected by a walk
in 퐺P푖containing only vertices of P耠
푖. It is not possible for vertex of P耠
푖to be in 푅푗,
because vertices of 푅푗are in 푓−1(퐶), while vertices of P耠
푖are in 푓−1(퐵\ 퐶).
Finally deﬁne 푓퐴: 푃퐴→퐴as follows:
1.
푓퐴(푥) = 푓퐴
푖(푥) when 푥∈푃퐴
푖for some 푖= 1, 2, . . . , 푙耠;
2.
푓퐴(푥) = 푓(푥) otherwise.

256
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
It is easy to see that 푓퐴is a homomorphism from P퐴to A such that 푓퐴(㨀
→푅퐴) =
(푣1, 푣2, . . . 푣푡). This is a contradiction with (푣1, 푣2, . . . 푣푡) ∉푋푘
퐿(A).
It remains to verify that D ∈Forbh(F). We proceed analogously. Assume that
푓is a homomorphism from some F ∈F to D and further assume that the counter-
example is chosen in a way so F \ 푓−1(퐴) has minimal number of vertices.
Because A, B ∈Forbh(F), 푓must use vertices of D \ 퐴and vertices of D \
퐵and, because F is connected, also vertices of C. Analogously to the previous
part, 푓−1(퐶) forms a g-cut in F. Denote by F퐴a g-component of F with g-cut 푓−1(퐶)
contained in F \ 푓−1(퐵) and by F퐵a g-component of F with g-cut 푓−1(퐶) contained
in F \ 푓−1(퐴). Denote by 푅a minimal g-separating g-cut in F contained in 푓−1(퐶)
that g-separate F퐴and F퐵(given by Proposition 2). Denote by P = (P, 㨀
→푅) a piece
of F containing F퐵. We have shown that 푓(㨀
→푅) ∈푋푖
퐿(A), for 푖such that P ∈퐸푖.
Consequently there is P耠= (P耠, 㨀
→푅耠), P ∼P耠, and a homomorphism 푓퐴: P耠→A
such that 푓퐴(㨀
→푅耠) = 푓(㨀
→푅). Now denote by F耠a structure created from F by replacing
piece P by piece P耠and identifying 㨀
→푅with 㨀
→푅耠. Because P ∼P耠, F耠is isomorphic
to some structure in F. Now consider the homomorphism 푓耠: F耠→D deﬁned as
follows:
1.
푓耠(푥) = 푓퐴(푥) for 푥∈푃耠,
2.
푓耠(푥) = 푓(푥) otherwise.
The size of F耠\푓耠−1(퐴) is strictly smaller than the size of F\푓−1(퐴), a contradiction
with the minimality of the counter-example.
This ﬁnishes the proof of the amalgamation property of Age(L): while V may
be inﬁnite (because witnesses may be inﬁnite), the lift V耠induced on vertices 푋∪푌
by V is the ﬁnite amalgamation of X, Y over Z and thus V耠∈Age(L).
4 Non-existence of universal structures for
classes Forbh(F).
In this section we show that there exists inﬁnite families F such that there is no
countable 휔-categorical universal structure for Forbh(F). This is in contrast with
the ﬁnite case, where the universal structures always exists.
Theorem 4.1. Let F be a family of ﬁnite connected relational structures (of ﬁnite
type). Assume that:
(푖)
The size of all minimal g-separating g-cuts of structures in F is bounded by 푛.

Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms
|
257
(푖푖) Let P = (P, 㨀
→푅) and P耠= (P耠, 㨀
→푅耠) be two pieces (of some structures in F). Denote
by A a rooted structure such that P ⊕A = F ∈F. If P耠⊕A is deﬁned and
P耠⊕A ∉Forbh(F), then there is F耠∈F isomorphic to P耠⊕A.
Then the following conditions are equivalent:
(푎) F is a regular family of connected structures.
(푏) There is an ultrahomogeneous lift U耠with only ﬁnitely many new relations such
that its shadow Sh(U耠) is a universal structure for the class Forbh(F).
(푐) There exists an countable 휔-categorical universal structure for Forbh(F).
Proof. (푎) 㨐⇒(푏) follows from Theorem 3.1 for the class F.
(푏) 㨐⇒(푐) is immediate. The shadow of every ultrahomogeneous structure
with ﬁnitely many relations is 휔-categorical.
To see that (푐) 㨐⇒(푎), assume to the contrary the existence of F satisfying (푖)
and (푖푖) which is not regular such that there is a universal structure U ∈Forbh(F)
which is 휔-categorical.
Because the sizes of minimal g-separating g-cuts are bounded by 푛, we know
that there is 푛耠≤푛with inﬁnitely many pieces P1, P2, . . . of width 푛耠such that the
corresponding sets IP1, IP2, . . . are all diﬀerent.
From Theorem 1.2 it follows that there are only ﬁnitely many orbits of 푛耠-
tuples. Denote by 푘the number of orbits of 푛耠tuples. Now assign every piece P푖the
set 푂푖of all orbits such that there exists a rooted embedding from P푖to U (that is a
rooted homomorphism that is also an embedding of P푖to U) sending the root of P푖
to the orbit. All the sets 푂푖are ﬁnite of size at most 푘. By the pigeonhole principle
there is 푖
̸= 푗such that 푂푖= 푂푗.
By our assumption (푖푖) we know that for two pieces P = (P, 㨀
→푅) and P耠=
(P耠, 㨀
→푅耠) such that P, P耠∉Forbh(F) we have IP = IP耠if and only if the rooted struc-
ture induced by P on 㨀
→푅is identical to the rooted structure induced by P耠on 㨀
→푅耠.
Consequently all those pieces belong to the same class of ∼and there are only
ﬁnitely many classes ∼containing piece P = (P, 㨀
→푅) such that P ∉Forbh(F). We
can thus assume that P푖, P푗∈Forbh(F) and thus there is an isomorphic copy of
both P푖and P푗in U (we where choosing 푖and 푗from inﬁnitely many equivalence
classes of ∼).
Now, because IP푖
̸= IP푗there is a rooted structure A that distinguishes IP푖
from IP푗. Without loss of generality assume that A ∈IP푖. By our assumption (푖푖),
A ⊕P푗∉F implies A ⊕P푗∈Forbh(F). Consequently there is an embedding from
A⊕P푗to U. This embedding must map the root of A⊕P푗to a tuple within an orbit
표∈푂푗. Since A ⊕P푖∉Forbh(F), we also have 표∉푂푖. This is in contradiction to
푂푖= 푂푗.

258
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
4.0.0.10 Example.
Consider relational structures with two binary relations (red and blue directed
edges). The family consist Frb−balanced of all red-blue balanced cycles, deﬁned as
follows. Take two paths 푃1 and 푃2 with initial and terminal vertex speciﬁed where
푃1 consists only of red edges, 푃2 consists only of blue edges, and 푃1, 푃2 have have
identical non-zero algebraic length. (The algebraic length of a path is the number
of forwarding edges minus number of backwarding edges on the way from the ini-
tial vertex to the terminal vertex.) A red-blue balanced cycle is created as a disjoint
union of 푃1 and 푃2 with the corresponding initial and terminal vertices identiﬁed.
The pieces of Frb−balanced consist of paths starting with a (possibly empty) blue
segment followed by a (possibly empty) red segment. The equivalence class of a
piece can be characterized by
1.
the existence of red segment and the existence of blue segment,
2.
whether the ﬁrst root is in red or blue segment,
3.
the algebraic length of red segment (if any) and the algebraic length of blue
segment (if any).
It is not diﬃcult to see that decision whether P⊕A is in Forbh(Frb−balanced) depends
precisely on the information above. There are inﬁnitely many diﬀerent algebraic
lengths and thus also equivalence classes of ∼. Consequently Frb−balanced is not a
regular family.
Finally we verify that Frb−balanced satisﬁes the assumptions of Theorem 4.1. Cy-
cles have minimal separating cuts of size 2 giving (푖). We now verify (푖푖). The only
rooted structures A such that P⊕A is isomorphic to some red-blue balanced cycle
are again pieces of red-blue balanced cycles. The algebraic lengths are preserved
in homomorphic images and because the algebraic lengths are non-zero, no red-
blue balanced cycle can be mapped to a path. Consequently for every piece of red-
blue balanced cycle P, P耠⊕A is a cycle and thus P耠⊕A ∉Forbh(Frb−balanced) imply
that P耠⊕A is a red-blue balanced cycle giving (푖푖). Consequently, by Theorem 4.1,
there is no 휔-categorical universal structure for Forbh(Frb−balanced).
There are non-regular families F where universal graph for Forbh(F) exists.
Consider relational structures with one binary relation. For simplicity, assume
that loops and bi-directional edges are forbidden so we consider oriented graphs.
Family Fbalanced of all balanced orientations of graph cycles (i.e., orientations hav-
ing the same number of forward and backward edges) is not a regular family. Here
all pieces are all oriented paths. The equivalence class of a piece depends on the
algebraic length of the path. On the other hand, however, homomorphic image of
balanced 4-cycle is an oriented edge. Consequently the countably inﬁnite graph
with no edges is the universal graph for Forbh(Fbalanced).

Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms
|
259
The family Fbalanced do not satisfy requirement of 푇ℎ푒표푟푒푚4.1, (푖푖). Let P be a
piece of balanced cycle and A an oriented path rooted in the endpoints. P ⊕A is
a oriented cycle and because it contains an edge we know that P ⊕A ∉Forbh(F).
Every oriented cycle can be constructed this way. The smallest family F耠contain-
ing Fbalanced that satisfy (푖푖) is thus the family of all oriented cycles. Such F耠is a
regular family.
Further applications of Theorem 4.1 are given in the following section.
5 Homomorphism dualities and constraint
satisfaction problems
A constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) is the following decision problem:
Instance: A ﬁnite structure A.
Question: Does there exist a homomorphism A →D?
We denote by CSP(D) the class of all ﬁnite structures A with A →D for some
D ∈D.
Recall that a homomorphism duality (for structures of given type) is any equa-
tion
Forbh(F) = CSP(D).
When both F and D are ﬁnite sets of ﬁnite structures, we call the pair (F, D) a
ﬁnite duality pair [17, 18, 12]. When F is an inﬁnite set of ﬁnite structures, and D
is a ﬁnite set of ﬁnite structures, we call it an inﬁnite-ﬁnite duality [8].
Dualities play a role not only in complexity problems but also in logic, model
theory, the theory of partial orders and category theory. In particular, it follows
from [1] and [20] that dualities coincide with those ﬁrst-order deﬁnable classes
which are homomorphism-closed.
For the sake of simplicity, in the following discussion we shall restrict our-
selves to the case where D consists of a single element D. D is called the dual
of F (it is easy to see that D is up to homomorphism-equivalence uniquely deter-
mined).
The notion of universal structures and duals is related. Given a class K of
countable structures, an object U ∈K is called hom-universal for K if for every
object A ∈K there exists a homomorphism A →U. The following is immediate
from the deﬁnitions:
Proposition 5.1. Let F be a family of relational structures. Structure D is the dual
of F if and only if D is hom-universal for Forbh(F).

260
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
In this section we shall show how to turn the universal structure constructed in
Section 3 into a ﬁnite dual. This is possible only in the special cases where a ﬁnite
dual exists. First we review some results characterizing dualities.
A (relational) tree can be deﬁned as follows (see [18]): The incidence graph
IG(A) of relational structure A is the bipartite graph with parts 퐴and Block(퐴),
where
Block(퐴) = {(푖, (푎1, . . . , 푎훿푖)) : 푖∈퐼, (푎1, . . . , 푎훿푖) ∈푅푖
A},
and edges [푎, (푖, (푎1, . . . , 푎훿푖))] such that 푎
∈
(푎1, . . . , 푎훿푖). (Here we write 푥
∈
(푥1, . . . , 푥푛) when there exists an index 푘such that 푥= 푥푘; Block(퐴) is a multi-
graph.) Relational structure A is called a (relational) tree when IG(A) is a graph
tree (see e.g. [16]). The deﬁnition of relational trees by the incidence graph IG(A)
allows us to use graph terminology for relational trees.
Theorem 5.2 ([18]). For every ﬁnite family F of ﬁnite relational trees there exists a
dual D. Up to homomorphism-equivalence there are no other ﬁnite dualities with
only one dual.
Various constructions of duals of a given F are known [19]. More recently, inﬁnite-
ﬁnite dualities have been characterized:
Theorem 5.3 ([8]). All regular families F of relational trees have a ﬁnite dual D.
Theorem 5.4 ([8]). The family F of relational trees has a ﬁnite dual if and only if its
upward closure UP(F) is regular.
Here the upward closure, UP(F), is the class of all relational trees T1 such that
there is T2 ∈F and T2 →T1.
We remark that all these characterizations extend naturally to duality pairs
(F, D) where structures in the class F are not necessarily connected (i.e., they are
relational forests). In this case however D generally consists of one or more struc-
tures. See [10, 8] for details.
The construction of Section 3 may be used to obtain an alternative way of con-
structing a dual in the proof of Theorems 5.2 and 5.3:
Corollary 5.5 (of Theorem 3.1). Let F be a regular set of ﬁnite relational trees. Then
there exists a class L of monadic lifts such that:
(푖)
Age(L) is an amalgamation class with free amalgamation;
(푖푖) The Fraïssé limit of Age(L) is an ultrahomogeneous structure U耠such that
Sh(U耠) = U is universal for Forbh(F);
(푖푖푖) U耠has a ﬁnite retract D耠and consequently Sh(D耠) = D is a dual of F.
Proof. Observe that the minimal g-separating g-cuts of a relational tree all have
size 1. Thus for a ﬁxed family F of ﬁnite relational trees Theorem 3.1 establishes

Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms
|
261
the existence of a class L and lift U耠satisfying (푖푖). Class Age(L) is closed under
strong amalgams that are free in the shadow. With only unary relations added to
the lift, we immediately get that Age(L) is closed under free amalgamation, too,
thereby obtaining (푖푖).
We show (푖푖푖). We ﬁnd ﬁnite D耠which is a retract of U耠, Sh(D耠) ∈Forbh(F), and
for which there is a homomorphism A →Sh(D耠) if and only if there is a homomor-
phism A →Sh(U耠) for every relational structure A.
Construct D耠from U耠by identifying all vertices of the same color (recall that
the color of vertex 푣is the set {푖; (푣) ∈푋푖
U}). Denote by 푟the homomorphism (re-
traction) U耠→D耠. Obviously, if 푓: Y →U耠is a homomorphism then 푓∘푟: Y →D耠
is also a homomorphism. Thus A →Sh(U耠) implies A →Sh(D耠).
It remains to show that Sh(D耠) ∈Forbh(F). Suppose, to the contrary, that there
is a tree F ∈F and a homomorphism 푓: F →Sh(D耠). Let X be a lift created
from F by adding an extended relation (푣) ∈푋푖
X if and only if (푓(푣)) ∈푋푖
D耠, for
every 푖= 1, 2, . . . 푁. Obviously 푓is also a homomorphism X →D耠. Consider lift Y
induced by X on elements of some tuple ⃗푣∈푅푗
X. Since F is a relational tree, the
shadow Sh(Y) has only one tuple. Because D耠is retract of U耠we know that the
homomorphic image of Y is a substructure of U耠and thus it is in L.
Because F is a relational tree, it is possible to construct a homomorphic copy
of X by starting with the homomorphic image of Y in L and using free amalgama-
tion (over a one-element set) to add lifts of homomorphic images of all other tuples
of F. It follows that the homomorphic image of X is in L, a contradiction.
5.0.0.11 Remark.
We stress the fact that families of trees are not the only regular families F of re-
lational structures where the universal structure for Forbh(F) can be described as
a shadow of an ultrahomogeneous monadic lift U耠. For example, consider rela-
tional structures created from a relational tree by replacing tuples by an arbitrary
irreducible structure (recall that a structure is irreducible if it has no vertex cuts).
Such structures have all minimal g-separating g-cuts of size 1. One can easily con-
struct continuum many such examples. There is however no ﬁnite retract of U耠
satisfying the statement of Corollary 5.5. (Such structures cannot be constructed
from individual tuples by the aid of free amalgamation.) Of course such structures
may have inﬁnite chromatic numbers.
Note that it is also possible to construct the dual D of F without using the
Fraïssé limit. Also this follows by our construction in Theorem 3.1. For every pos-
sible combination of new relations on a single vertex, create a single vertex of D
and then keep adding tuples as long as possible so that D is still in L (in a similar
way to the proof of Proposition 5.6).

262
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
We have shown that special cases of universal structures can be used to con-
struct duals. Now we show the opposite: every dual can be turned into a universal
structure by an especially simple monadic lift.
Proposition 5.6. For a family F of relational structures the following two state-
ments are equivalent:
(푖)
There is a ﬁnite dual D of F.
(푖푖) There exists a ﬁnite family F耠of monadic lifts X whose shadow Sh(X) has one
tuple with the following property:
Denote by L the class of all lifts Y such that
(a) Y ∈Forbh(퐹耠), and
(b) every vertex of Y is in precisely one extended relation 푋푖
Y.
There is a generic lift U耠for L and its shadow Sh(U耠) is an 휔-categorical univer-
sal structure for Forbh(F).
Loosely speaking, the class L is described by forbidden colors of vertices and for-
bidden colorings of edges.
Proof. (푖) 㨐⇒(푖푖): Fix a dual D with vertices {1, 2, . . . 푁} and consider lifts with
푁extended unary relations. Let F耠be the family of all structures X such that:
1.
the vertex set of X is 푋⊆{1, 2, . . . 푁};
2.
there is a tuple ⃗푣∈푅푗
X for some 푗∈퐼such that ⃗푣∉푅푗
D;
3.
for every 푖∈푋there is a tuple (푖) ∈푋푖
X;
4.
there are no other tuples in X and there are no vertices in 푋except ones in ⃗푣.
By deﬁnition, Age(L) is obviously an (free) amalgamation class (all forbidden sub-
structures are irreducible).
We show that the shadow of L is Forbh(F). For every A ∈Forbh(F) and homo-
morphism 푓: A →D construct a lift X by putting (푣) ∈푋푖
X if and only if 푓(푣) = 푖.
It is easy to see that X ∈L. On the other hand, for every structure A and lift X ∈L,
a homomorphism A →Sh(X) can be interpreted as an D-coloring of A and thus
A ∈Forbh(F).
The rest of statement follows by Fraïssé theorem analogously as Theorem 3.1.
In the opposite direction assume the existence of F耠, L and U耠satisfying the
statement of the proposition. Construct the retract D耠of U耠by unifying all vertices
of the same color. This gives a homomorphism (retraction) 푟: Sh(U耠) →D耠. Put
D = Sh(D耠). We show that D is the dual of F.
For every A ∈Forbh(F) there is an embedding 푒: A →Sh(U耠). It follows that
A ∈CSP({D}) because 푒∘푟is a homomorphism A →D. To see that D ∉Forbh(F),
assume for a contradiction that there is F ∈F and a homomorphism 푓: F →D.
Create lift X from F by adding a tuple (푣) to 푋푖
X if and only if (푓(푣)) ∈푋푖
D耠. Lift X

Bibliography
|
263
satisfy condition (푎) of the deﬁnition of L. For every F耠∈F a homomorphism F耠→
X implies a homomorphism F耠→U giving (b) and thus X ∈L. A contradiction
with U耠being generic for L and Sh(U耠) ∈Forbh(F).
Theorem 4.1 and Proposition 5.6 imply Theorem 5.4. It is easy to see that UP(F)
have the size of separating cuts o bounded by 1 and moreover it is closed for free
amalgams of trees.
To show both implications of Theorem 5.2 it is necessary to show the non-
existence of monadic lifts as described in Proposition 5.6 for families F not con-
sisting of relational trees. This is possible with a more systematic study of the min-
imal arities needed in the lift for a given family F, and by giving a more explicit
description of the lifts via forbidden substructures, as shown in [14].
Acknowledgement: We would like to thank to Manuel Bodirsky for informing us
about [6] and to Jan Foniok for pointing out the connection to the classiﬁcation of
inﬁnite-ﬁnite dualities in [8].
We are also grateful to Andrew Goodall for remarks and comments that led to
improvements in the quality of this paper.
Finally we would like to thank to the anonymous referee for correcting two
principal examples in the paper and number of useful remarks.
The Computer Science Institute of Charles University (IUUK) is supported by
grant ERC-CZ LL-1201 of the Czech Ministry of Education and CE-ITI P202/16/6061
of GAČR.
Bibliography
[1]
A. Atserias: On digraph coloring problems and tree with duality. In: LICS’05, IEEE (2005),
106–115.
[2]
B. Bolobás: Modern Graph Theory, Graduate Texts in Mathematics, vol. 184, Springer,
1998.
[3]
G. L. Cherlin, S. Shelah, N. Shi: Universal Graphs with Forbidden Subgraphs and Alge-
braic Closure, Advances in Applied Mathematics 22 (1999), 454–491.
[4]
G. L. Cherlin, N. Shi: Graphs omitting a ﬁnite set of cycles, J. Graph Theory 21 (1996), 351–
355.
[5]
H. Comon, M. Dauchet, R. Gilleron, C. Löding, F. Jacquemard, D. Lugiez, S. Tison, M. Tom-
mas: Tree Automata Techniques and Applications, Available on:
http://www.grappa.univ-lille3.fr/tata.
[6]
J. Covington: Homogenizable Relational Structures, Illinois J. Mathematics, 34(4) (1990),
731–743.
[7]
E. Engeler: Äquivalenz von 푛-Tupeln, Z. Math. Logik Grundl. Math. 5 (1959), 121–131.
Universal Structures with Forbidden Homomorphisms

264
|
Jan Hubička and Jaroslav Nešetřil
[8]
P. L. Erdős, D. Pálvölgyi, C. Tardif, G. Tardos: On inﬁnite-ﬁnite tree-duality pairs of rela-
tional structures, arXiv:1207.4402v1 (submitted) (2012).
[9]
P. L. Erdős, C. Tardif, G. Tardos: On inﬁnite-ﬁnite duality pairs of directed graphs,
arXiv:arXiv:1207.4402v1 (subitted) (2012).
[10] J. Foniok, J. Nešetřil, C. Tardif: Generalised dualities and maximal ﬁnite antichains in the
homomorphism order of relational structures. Eur. J. Comb. 29(4): 881-899 (2008)
[11]
R. Fraïssé: Théorie des relations, North Holland, 1986.
[12] P. Hell, J. Nešetřil: Graphs and homomorphisms, Oxford University Press (2004).
[13] W. Hodges: Model Theory, Cambridge University Press (1993).
[14] J. Hubička, J. Nešetřil: Homomorphism and embedding universal structures for restricted
classes of graphs, arXiv:0909.4939v1 (2009).
[15]
G. Kun, J. Nešetřil: NP by means of lifts and shadows, MFCS’07 LNCS 4708 (2007), 171–
181.
[16] J. Matoušek, J. Nešetřil: Invitation to discrete mathematics, Oxford Univ. Press (1998), 2nd
edition (2007).
[17]
J. Nešetřil, A. Pultr: On classes of relations and graphs determined by subobjects and
factorobjects, Discrete Math. 22 (1978), 287–300.
[18] J. Nešetřil, C. Tardif: Duality Theorems for Finite Structures (Characterizing Gaps and Good
Characterizations), J. Combin. Theory B, 80 (2000), 80–97.
[19] J. Nešetřil, C. Tardif: Short answers to exponentially long questions: Extremal aspects of
homomorphism duality, SIAM J. Discrete Math. 19, No. 4 (2005), 914–920.
[20] B. Rossman: Existential positive types and preservation under homomorphisms. J. ACM
55 (3) (2008), 1–53.
[21] C. Ryll-Nardzewski, One the categoricity in power ℵ0, Bull. Acad. Polon. Sci. Ser. Math. 7
(1959), 545–548.
[22] N. Svenonius: ℵ0-categoricity in ﬁrst-order predicate calculus, Theoria 25 (1955), 82–94.

Tapani Hyttinen
Counting Measure and Forking in Finite
Models
Abstract: Based on the recent work by E. Hrushovski, using the counting mea-
sure, we construct an independence notion to nice classes of ﬁnite structure and
study when the independence notion is the same notion that we get from the non-
forking in the ultraproduct of a representative collection of models from the class.
Keywords: forking, counting measure, ﬁnite structures
MSC2010: primary 03C45, secondary 03C13
||
Tapani Hyttinen: Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Helsinki, e-mail:
tapani.hyttinen@helsinki.ﬁ
In the paper [9], Jouko Väänänen argues that pseudo-ﬁnite models (i.e. ultraprod-
ucts of ﬁnite models) are a good framework for studying ﬁrst-order logic on ﬁnite
models and he demonstrates this in several ways, e.g. he describes how to use
pseudo-ﬁnite models to prove various non-deﬁnability results for ﬁnite models.
In the spirit of [9], in this paper we look at one way of deﬁning an independence
notion on a class of ﬁnite structures.
A lot of work has been done in which stability theory for ﬁnite structures is
developed, used or which study questions that can be looked at naturally also
from this point of view. E.g. the work [5] by C. Hill on eﬀective algorithms invert-
ing 퐿2-invariants, many papers by V. Koponen, see e.g. [2], my own contributions,
see e.g. [8], the study of asymptotic classes of ﬁnite structure (and smoothly ap-
proximated structures), see e.g. [4], and the recent work [7] by E. Hrushovski from
which we will use several ideas.
So let K be a collection of ﬁnite models in a countable language and for sim-
plicity let 훥be the set of quantiﬁer free formulas. If the class has the joint em-
bedding property, we can ﬁnd a subset {A푖| 푖< 휔} of K so that for all 푖< 휔, A푖
is a substructure of A푖+1 and every member of K embeds to some A푖, 푖< 휔, and
one can think of the sequence (A푖)푖<휔as a monster model for the class, especially
when one can choose the sequence (A푖)푖<휔well, see [8]. Now one can ask, how
to ﬁnd an independence notion to (A푖)푖<휔, something like 휙(푥, 푎) is free over 푏for
훥-formulas 휙(푥, 푦).

266
|
Tapani Hyttinen
If 푈is a non-principle ultraﬁlter on 휔, then the non-forking in
M = 훱푖<휔A푖/푈
gives one such notion when we think each A푖as a substructure of M in the natural
way. But what does this notion tell about the structures A푖, 푖< 휔?
Using ideas from [7], from the counting measure on the models A푖, 푖< 휔,
one gets another such notion. This notion is the main novelty of this paper. We
will study various properties of it, in particular we ask when it behaves nicely and
when the notion is the same as the one, we get from the non-forking in 훱푖<휔A푖/푈.
We will show that they are the same in nice classes.
Everything we do is very close to what is done in the theory of asymptotic
classes. The main diﬀerence in the starting points is that we do not require the
existence of the dimensions, instead we work directly with the counting measures
inside all (훥-)deﬁnable subsets of A푛
푖, not just those of the form A푛
푖, see Example
2.3 below. Also we ask slightly diﬀerent questions, in particular we are a lot less
ambitious.
There is also a close connection to the theory of NIP theories and to Keisler
measure. In particular, Proposition 4.7 in [6] is close to what we prove here. See
also [3] Lemma 8.41.
In the end of this paper, many examples are given. However we mention one of
them already here to make it easier for the reader to follow our deﬁnitions (which
are rather tedious sometimes). Choose the models A푖so that A푖= (A푖, 퐸푘)푘<휔,
where A푖consists of those functions 푓: 휔→푖+ 1 such that for all 푥> 푖, 푓(푥) = 0
and 푓퐸푘푔if 푓↾(푘+ 1) = 푔↾(푘+ 1). And let 훥be the set of all quantiﬁer free
formulas.
1 Counting measure and forking
We let 퐿be a countable vocabulary and we ﬁx a strictly increasing sequence (A푖)푖<휔
of ﬁnite 퐿-structures (i.e. 퐿-structures with ﬁnite universe) such that for all 푖< 휔,
A푖is a submodel of A푖+1. 훥is a collection of ﬁrst-order 퐿-formulas which contains
all atomic formulas and is closed under boolean combinations and replacing vari-
ables by other variables (and adding dummy variables). The main examples of 훥
we have in mind are the set of all quantiﬁer free formulas and the set of all ﬁrst-
order formulas. In some cases we could let 훥be also something other than a col-
lection of ﬁrst-order formulas, see the end of this section.
By 푎, 푏etc. we mean ﬁnite sequences of elements from some model and by
푥, 푦etc. we mean ﬁnite sequences of variables. 푎∈A푖means that 푎∈(A푖)푛for

Counting Measure and Forking in Finite Models
|
267
suitable 푛. By 푡훥(푎/퐴; B) we mean the complete 훥-type of 푎over 퐴in a model B i.e.
{휙(푥, 푏)| 휙∈훥, 푏∈퐴, B 　㨐휙(푎, 푏)}. By 푡(푎/퐴; B) we mean the usual complete ﬁrst-
order type. We let A = ∪푖<휔A푖. By formulas, deﬁnability, elementary etc. mean the
usual ﬁrst-order concepts (not with respect to 훥). So e.g. we say that 푋⊆A푛
푖is
deﬁnable if for some ﬁrst-order formula 휙(푥, 푦) and 푏∈A푖, 푋= 휙(A푖, 푏) = {푎∈
A푖| A푖　㨐휙(푎, 푏)}. The number 푛is called the arity of 푋and in this case we also say
that 푋is deﬁnable over 푏. We add 훥to the notion (e.g. 훥-deﬁnable) when we use
only formulas from 훥(i.e. 훥-formulas).
We ﬁx a non-principal ultraﬁlter 푈on 휔.
We write A 　㨐푈휙(푎) if {푖< 휔| 푎∈A푖, A푖　㨐휙(푎)} ∈푈and by 휙푈(A, 푎) we mean
the set {푏∈A| A 　㨐푈휙(푏, 푎)} and 휙푈(A푖, 푎) = 휙푈(A, 푎)∩A푖. Also we say that (A푖)푖<휔
is a 훥-sequence if for all 푖< 휔, 훥-formula 휙and 푎∈A푖, A푖　㨐휙(푎) iﬀA푖+1 　㨐휙(푎)
(i.e. A푖is a 훥-elementary submodel of A푖+1). Then if (A푖)푖<휔is a 훥-sequence, 휙(푥, 푦)
a 훥-formula and 푎, 푏∈A푖, 휙푈(A푖, 푏) = 휙(A푖, 푏) and A푖　㨐휙(푎, 푏) iﬀA 　㨐푈휙(푎, 푏).
Abusing the notation, we say that 푋= (푋푖)푖<휔is (훥-) deﬁnable if there are a
(훥-) formula 휙(푥, 푦) and 푎푖∈A푖such that for all 푖< 휔, 푋푖= 휙(A푖, 푎푖). If for all 푖< 휔,
we can choose 푎푖= 푎∈A (푋푖is e.g. 0 if 푎
̸∈A푖) we say that 푋is deﬁnable over 푎
and that its arity is 푙푒푛푔푡ℎ(푥). We write also A for the sequence (A푖)푖<휔of models
and A푛for (A푛
푖)푖<휔. It will be clear from the context, whether we mean (∪푖<휔A푖)
or (A푖)푖<휔. In fact, practically always, by A we mean the model ∪푖<휔A푖, but the
meaning of some notions is not revealed from the union alone, we also need to
know how the union was got (e.g. A 　㨐푈above). So one can think A as the union
which also carries the information on how it was got.
We let 휇푖be the counting measure on A푖i.e. for 퐴, 퐵⊆A푖, 휇푖(퐴/퐵) = |퐴∩퐵|/|퐵|
(say 휇푖(퐴/퐵) = 1 if 퐵= 0) and for all deﬁnable sequences 푋and 푌, we write
휇푖(푋/푌) = |푋푖∩푌푖|/|푌푖|. By 휇(푋/푌) we mean 푙푖푚푖→∞휇푖(푋/푌) if this limit exists. We
deﬁne 휇∗(푋/푌) to be the inﬁmum of those rationals 푞such that {푖< 휔| 휇푖(푋/푌) ≤
푞} ∈푈. Notice that for all 푌the map 푋㨃→휇∗(푋/푌) is some kind of measure on the
set of all deﬁnable sequences. Notice also that 휇(푋/푌) = 0 implies 휇∗(푋/푌) = 0
or more generally 휇(푋/푌) = 푟implies 휇∗(푋/푌) = 푟. So, at least in many cases,
휇∗(푋/푌) can be calculated without knowing 푈; see the examples in Section 2.
Deﬁnition 1.1. (i) We say that (휇푖)푖<휔is 푈-continuous if for every 훥-formula 휙(푥, 푦),
푎∈A and 휖> 0, there is a ﬁrst-order formula 휓(푦) such that A 　㨐푈휓(푎) and for all
푏∈A, if A 　㨐푈휓(푏), then
{푖< 휔| |1 −(|휙(A푖, 푎)|/|휙(A푖, 푏)|)| ≤휖} ∈푈,
where 0/0 = 1 and 푛/0 = 2 for 푛> 0.
(ii) We say that (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous if for every 훥-formula 휙(푥, 푦)
and 휖> 0, there are 푛< 휔and ﬁrst-order formulas 휓푗(푦), 푗≤푛, such that A 　㨐푈

268
|
Tapani Hyttinen
∀푦⋁푗≤푛휓푗(푦) and for all 푗≤푛
{푖< 휔| for all 푎, 푏∈휓푗(A푖), |1 −(|휙(A푖, 푎)|/|휙(A푖, 푏)|)| ≤휖} ∈푈,
where again 0/0 = 1 and 푛/0 = 2 for 푛> 0.
(iii) We say that (휇푖)푖<휔is 푈, 훥-continuous if (i) holds with the additional
requirement that the formula 휓can always be chosen from 훥. Uniformly 푈, 훥-
continuous is deﬁned similarly.
Notice that e.g. the following class is 푈-continuous but not uniformly 푈-continu-
ous: For each 푖< 휔, let A푖= (⋃푗≤푖{푗} × (푗+ 1), 퐸), where (푗, 푛)퐸(푗耠, 푛耠) if 푗= 푗耠and
let 훥be the set of all quantiﬁer free formulas. The class is not 푈, 훥-continuous.
Lemma 1.2. (i) Uniform 푈-continuity implies 푈-continuity.
(ii) Suppose (휇푖)푖<휔is 푈-continuous, 휖> 0 and that 푋= (휙(A푖, 푎))푖<휔and 푌=
(휓(A푖, 푎))푖<휔have the same arity and 휙and 휓are 훥-formulas. Then there is a ﬁrst-
order formula 휃(푦) such that A 　㨐푈휃(푎) and for all 푏, if A 　㨐푈휃(푏), then, letting
푋耠= (휙(A푖, 푏))푖<휔and 푌耠= (휓(A푖, 푏))푖<휔,
|휇∗(푋/푌) −휇∗(푋耠/푌耠)| ≤휖.
(iii) Suppose (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous, 휖> 0 and 휙and 휓are 훥-
formulas. Then there are ﬁrst-order formulas 휃푖(푦), 푖
≤
푛, such that A
　㨐푈
∀푦⋁푖≤푛휃푖(푦) and for all 푗≤푛and 푎푖, 푏푖∈A푖, 푖< 휔, if {푖< 휔| A푖　㨐휃푗(푎푖)∧휃푗(푏푖)} ∈푈,
then letting 푋= (휙(A푖, 푎푖))푖<휔, 푌= (휓(A푖, 푎푖))푖<휔, 푋耠= (휙(A푖, 푏푖))푖<휔and 푌耠=
(휓(A푖, 푏푖))푖<휔,
{푖< 휔| |휇푖(푋푖/푌푖) −휇푖(푋耠
푖/푌耠
푖)| ≤휖} ∈푈.
Proof. We prove (iii), (ii) is similar (notice that although the claims look diﬀerent,
the only diﬀerence is in the order of quantiﬁers) and (i) is clear. Let 휖> 0 and
훿= 푚푖푛{휖, 1/2}/4. By the assumption, it is enough to show that if |1−|푋푖|/|푋耠
푖|| ≤훿
and |1 −|푌푖|/|푌耠
푖|| ≤훿, then ||푋푖|/|푌푖| −|푋耠
푖|/|푌耠
푖|| ≤휖(assuming that 푋푖⊆푌푖and
푋耠
푖⊆푌耠
푖and so |푋푖|/|푌푖| ≤1 and |푋耠
푖|/|푌耠
푖| ≤1). Now
(|푋푖|/|푋耠
푖|)/(|푌푖|/|푌耠
푖|) ≤(1 + 훿)/(1 −훿)
and
(|푌푖|/|푌耠
푖|)/(|푋푖|/|푋耠
푖|) ≤(1 + 훿)/(1 −훿)
and so
||푋푖|/|푌푖| −|푋耠
푖|/|푌耠
푖|| ≤|1 −(1 + 훿)/(1 −훿)| ≤2훿/(1 −훿) ≤4훿≤휖.

Counting Measure and Forking in Finite Models
|
269
Before further studies of this measure from the point of view of independence, we
notice that there is a connection between the continuity properties deﬁned above
and the elimination of quantiﬁers. This is a side track, but we feel that it needs to
be addressed.
If (A푖)푖<휔is a 훥-sequence, then we say that A is 훥-atomic if for all 푎∈A
there is 휙(푥) ∈푡훥(푎/0; A) such that for all 푏∈A, A 　㨐휙(푏) implies 푡훥(푏/0; A) =
푡훥(푎/0; A). We say that A is strongly 훥-atomic if for all 푎∈훱푖<휔A푖/푈there is
휙(푥) ∈푡훥(푎/0; 훱푖<휔A푖/푈) such that for all 푏∈훱푖<휔A푖/푈, 훱푖<휔A푖/푈　㨐휙(푏) implies
푡훥(푏/0; 훱푖<휔A푖/푈) = 푡훥(푎/0; 훱푖<휔A푖/푈).
Notice that if 퐿is ﬁnite and relational and 훥is the set of all quantiﬁer free
formulas, then for all 푛< 휔, the number of 푡훥(푎/0; A), 푎∈A푛is ﬁnite and also it
is easy to see that the number of these types is ﬁnite iﬀA is strongly 훥-atomic (cf.
Ryll-Nardzewski). However, we will not use the direction from right to left of this
fact in the proof of the next lemma, since in some cases in which these measures
may work (e.g. continuous logic), the direction is not true.
Lemma 1.3. Assume that (A푖)푖<휔is a 훥-sequence and that 훥is closed under subfor-
mulas.
(i) Every A푖is a 훥-elementary submodel of A and A is a 훥-elementary submodel
of 훱푖<휔A푖/푈.
(ii) Assume that (휇푖)푖<휔is 푈, 훥-continuous and A is 훥-atomic. Then A is 훥-
homogeneous i.e. if 푎and 푏have the same 훥-type then there is an automorphism
푓of A such that 푓(푎) = 푏.
(iii) If (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈, 훥-continuous and A is strongly 훥-atomic, then A
is an elementary submodel of 훱푖<휔A푖/푈and 훱푖<휔A푖/푈has 훥-elimination of quan-
tiﬁers, i.e, in 훱푖<휔A푖/푈, every ﬁrst-order formula is equivalent with a 훥-formula.
Proof. (i) is immediate by the assumption on 훥(the same argument works that
shows that every member of an elementary chain is an elementary substructure
of the union of the chain).
(ii): It is clearly enough to show that if 푡훥(푎/0; A) = 푡훥(푏/0; A), then the second
player wins the Ehrenfeuch-Fraıssé-game of length 휔played between (A, 푎) and
(A, 푏). For this it is enough to show that for all 푐∈A then there is 푑∈A such that
푡훥(푎푐/0; A) = 푡훥(푏푑/0; A). By 훥-atomicity, let 휙(푥, 푦) be the 훥-formula that isolates
푡훥(푎푐/0; A). By 푈, 훥-uniformicity, there is a 훥-formula 휓(푥) such that A 　㨐휓(푎) and
if A 　㨐휓(푎耠), then 휙(푎耠, A) is not empty. Since 푡훥(푎/0; A) = 푡훥(푏/0; A), 푑can be
found.
(iii): For the ﬁrst claim of (iii), it is again enough to show that the second
player wins the Ehrenfeuch-Fraıssé-game of length 휔played between (A, 푒) and
(훱푖<휔A푖/푈, 푒), where 푒∈A (so we prove more than what we claimed). This is easy:
She plays so that the sequences of the elements played so far have the same 훥-

270
|
Tapani Hyttinen
type over 푒. We show ﬁrst how she makes her second move in the case 푒= 0 and
on the ﬁrst move 푎∈A and 푏∈훱푖<휔A푖/푈are chosen and on the second round the
ﬁrst player has chosen 푐from A and then we look at the case when the ﬁrst player
chooses from 훱푖<휔A푖/푈. Then the general case goes exactly the same way.
Let 휙(푥, 푦) be the 훥-formula that isolates
푡훥(푐푎/0; A) = 푡훥(푐푎/0; 훱푖<휔A푖/푈)
even in 훱푖<휔A푖/푈. Let 휓푗(푦) be as in the deﬁnition of uniform 푈, 훥-continuity for
휙(푥, 푦) and 휖= 1/2 be chosen so that A 　㨐휓푗(푎). Then 훱푖<휔A푖/푈　㨐휓푗(푏) and let
푋∈푈be such that for all 푖∈푋, A푖　㨐휓푗(푏푖) (where 푏= (푏푖)푖<휔/푈). By the choice of
휓푗, there is 푌∈푈such that 푌⊆푋and for all 푖∈푌, |1 −|휙(A푖, 푎)|/|휙(A푖, 푏푖)|| ≤1/2.
Clearly we may assume that 푌is chosen so that 푎, 푐∈A푖for all 푖∈푌. But then
for 푖∈푌, 휙(A푖, 푏푖) can not be empty and thus the second player can choose 푑=
(푑푖)푖<휔/푈∈훱푖<휔A푖/푈such that for all 푖∈푌, A푖　㨐휙(푑푖, 푏푖).
Suppose then that instead of choosing from A, the ﬁrst player has chosen 푐=
(푐푖)푖<휔/푈∈훱푖<휔A푖/푈. Let 휙(푥, 푦) be the 훥-formula that isolates 푡훥(푐푏, 0; 훱푖<휔A푖/푈)
and 휓(푦) be the 훥-formula that isolates 푡훥(푏, 0; 훱푖<휔A푖/푈). Let 푖< 휔be such that
A 　㨐휙(푐푖, 푏푖) ∧휓(푏푖). Now by (ii), the second player can ﬁnd the required element.
For the second claim of (iii), let 휙(푥) be an arbitrary ﬁrst-order formula. By
(ii) (i.e. if the sequences have the same 훥-type, they satisfy the same ﬁrst-order
formulas) there are 훥-formulas 휓푘푗, 푘∈퐼and 푗∈퐽푘, such that
A 　㨐∀푥(휙(푥) ↔⋁
푘∈퐼
⋀
푗∈퐽푘
휓푘푗).
By the proof above,
훱푖<휔A푖/푈　㨐∀푥(휙(푥) ↔⋁
푘∈퐼
⋀
푗∈퐽푘
휓푘푗).
Since 훱푖<휔A푖/푈is 휔1-saturated,
푇ℎ(훱푖<휔A푖/푈) 　㨐∀푥(휙(푥) ↔⋁
푘∈퐼
⋀
푗∈퐽푘
휓푘푗).
From this the claim follows by compactness.
We extend the vocabulary 퐿to a vocabulary 퐿∗by adding new predicates 퐼휙,휓for
all 훥-formulas 휙= 휙(푥, 푦) and 휓= 휓(푥, 푦). We interpret these in A and in each A푖
so that (푎, 푏) ∈퐼휙,휓if 휇∗((휙(A푖, 푎))푖<휔/(휓(A푖, 푏))푖<휔) = 0. We write A∗
푖for what we get
from A푖after adding the interpretations for the predicates 퐼휙,휓and A∗is deﬁned
similarly. We let M∗be 훱푖<휔A∗
푖/푈and the embedding 푎㨃→(푎푖)푖<휔/푈, 푎∈A, is
considered as the identity map, where 푎푖= 푎for all 푖< 휔.

Counting Measure and Forking in Finite Models
|
271
We let M be the reduct of M∗to the vocabulary 퐿and we recall that by Lemma
1.3 (iii), if (A푖)푖<휔is a 훥-sequence, A is strongly 훥-atomic and (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly
푈, 훥-continuous, then A is an elementary submodel of M.
Remark 1.4. For all 푎, 푏∈A, A∗　㨐퐼휙,휓(푎, 푏) iﬀM∗　㨐퐼휙,휓(푎, 푏).
Proof. Immediate by the deﬁnitions.
For the rest of this paper, we make the assumption below. This is done because
we are interested in the properties of the models A푖that are ﬁrst-order in the orig-
inal similarity type (at least ﬁrst-order in the sense of continuous logic). However,
many of the results below hold if instead of M we work in M∗and modify deﬁni-
tions and assumptions suitably, see Section 2 in [7].
Assumption 1.5. From now on, we assume that (휇푖)푖<휔is 푈-continuous.
Lemma 1.6. (i) For all 푎, 푏, 푐, 푑∈A, if 푡(푎푏/0; M) = 푡(푐푑/0; M), then (푎, 푏) ∈퐼휙,휓
iﬀ(푐, 푑) ∈퐼휙,휓. If in addition (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous, this holds for all
푎, 푏, 푐, 푑∈M.
(ii) If 휙(푥, 푦) and 휙耠(푥, 푦) are equivalent in M, i.e. {푖< 휔| A푖　㨐∀푥∀푦(휙↔휙耠)} ∈
푈, and similarly for 휓(푥, 푦) and 휓耠(푥, 푦), then the interpretations of 퐼휙,휓and 퐼휙耠,휓耠
are the same.
Proof. (i): Immediate by Lemma 1.2.
(ii): Immediate by the deﬁnitions.
Suppose 푌is a 훥-deﬁnable sequence over 푏. We write 푎∈퐼휙,푌
푏
if (푎, 푏) ∈퐼휙,휓, where
휓is any formula such that (휓(A푖, 푏))푖<휔= 푌.
Let 푋and 푌be deﬁnable subsets of M, say 푋= 휙(M, 푎) and 푌= 휓(M, 푏),
where 푎= (푎푖)푖<휔/푈and 푏= (푏푖)푖<휔/푈. We write 휇∗(푋/푌) for the inﬁmum of the
rationals 푞such that
{푖< 휔| 휇푖(휙(A푖, 푎푖)/휓(A푖, 푏푖)) ≤푞} ∈푈.
We also write 푋푖for 휙(A푖, 푎푖) (and so 휇∗(푋/푌) = 휇∗((푋푖)푖<휔/(푌푖)푖<휔)). Notice
that 푋푖may depend on the choice of 휙and 푎but not too much, only in a small set.
In fact:
Lemma 1.7. (i) The deﬁnition of 휇∗does not depend on the choice of 휙(푥, 푎) and
휓(푥, 푏) nor on the choice of the representatives (푎푖)푖<휔and (푏푖)푖<휔.
(ii) For all 푋and 푌훥-deﬁnable over 푎∈A by 휙0(푥, 푎) and 휙1(푥, 푎), respectively,
and 휖> 0, there is a ﬁrst-order formula 휓(푦) such that A 　㨐푈휓(푎) and for all 푏∈A
if A 　㨐푈휓(푏) and 푋耠= 휙0(M, 푏) and 푌耠= 휙1(M, 푏), then |휇∗(푋/푌) −휇∗(푋耠/푌耠)| ≤휖.

272
|
Tapani Hyttinen
(iii) For all 푋and 푌훥-deﬁnable over 푎∈M by 휙0(푥, 푎) and 휙1(푥, 푎), respectively,
and 휖> 0, there is a ﬁrst-order formula 휓(푦) such that M 　㨐휓(푎) and for all 푏∈M if
M 　㨐휓(푏) and 푋耠= 휙0(M, 푏) and 푌耠= 휙1(M, 푏), then |휇∗(푋/푌) −휇∗(푋耠/푌耠)| ≤휖.
Proof. (i): If M 　㨐∀푥(휙(푥, 푎) ↔휙耠(푥, 푎耠)), then
푊= {푖< 휔| A푖　㨐∀푥(휙(푥, 푎푖) ↔휙耠(푥, 푎耠
푖))} ∈푈.
Thus for all 푖∈푊and 푐∈A푖, 푐∈휙(A푖, 푎푖) iﬀ푐∈휙(A푖, 푎耠
푖) i.e. for all 푖∈푊,
|휙(A푖, 푎푖)| = |휙(A푖, 푎耠
푖)|. And so the claim is immediate by the deﬁnitions.
(ii) and (iii) are immediate by Lemma 1.2 and the deﬁnitions.
Notice that for all 훥-deﬁnable subsets 푌of M푛, 푋㨃→휇∗(푋/푌) is a kind of measure
on the 훥-deﬁnable subsets of M푛(the domain of 휇∗is not a 휎-algebra) and letting
퐼푌be the set of all 훥-deﬁnable subsets 푋of M of measure 0 (i.e. 휇∗(푋/푌) = 0),
then 퐼푌is an ideal. Notice also that if 푌is deﬁnable over 푏∈A, then for all 푎∈A,
휙(M, 푎) ∈퐼푌iﬀ푎∈퐼휙,푌耠
푏
where 푌耠= (푌푖)푖<휔.
When we speak about order indiscernible sequences, we mean that they are
order indiscernible in M (or in some elementary extension of M) and in the sense
of the ﬁrst-order logic.
Deﬁnition 1.8. (i) We say that 퐼푌is an S1-ideal if for all 훥-formulas 휙(푥, 푦), for all 푏
such that 푌is 훥-deﬁnable over 푏and order-indiscernible (푎푖)푖<휔over 푏, if for some
푛< 휔, ⋂푖≤푛휙(M, 푎푖) ∈퐼푌, then 휙(M, 푎0) ∈퐼푌.
(ii) We say that 퐼푌is an S1-ideal over (푏, A) if 푌is 훥-deﬁnable over 푏∈A and
the following holds: for all 훥-formulas 휙(푥, 푦) and order-indiscernible (푎푖)푖<휔over
푏, if for all 푖< 휔, 푎푖∈A and ⋂푖<2 휙(M, 푎푖) ∈퐼푌, then 휙(M, 푎0) ∈퐼푌.
Notice that assuming uniform 푈-continuity, the requirement in Deﬁnition 1.8 (i)
above does not depend on the choice of 푏: By Erdös-Rado and 휔1-saturation, for
any 푐and order-indiscernible (푎푖)푖<휔over 푏, there is an order-indiscernible se-
quence (푏푖)푖<휔over 푏푐such that 푡((푏푖)푖≤푛/푏; M) = 푡((푎푖)푖≤푛/푏; M) for any 푛< 휔.
For the switch from 푛in (i) to 2 in (ii), notice that if (푎푖)푖<휔is order-indiscernible
over 푏, then so is (푐푖)푖<휔, where 푐푖= (푎푗| 푚푖≤푗< 푚(푖+ 1)) for any 0 < 푚< 휔.
The following Lemma and its corollary are based on ideas from [7].
Lemma 1.9. (i) For all 푌⊆M 훥-deﬁnable over 푏∈A, 퐼푌is an S1-ideal over (푏, A).
(ii) If (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous, then for all 훥-deﬁnable 푌, 퐼푌is an S1-
ideal.
Proof. (i) Suppose not. Let (푎푖)푖<휔and 휙(푥, 푦) witness that the claim is not true.
Let 휖= 휇∗(휙(M, 푎0)/푌) > 0, 푚≥4/휖be a natural number and 훿= 휖/푚3. By 푈-
continuity (i.e. Lemma 1.7 (ii)) and the deﬁnition of 휇∗, we can ﬁnd 푖< 휔such

Counting Measure and Forking in Finite Models
|
273
that for all 푗< 푚, 휇푖(휙(A푖, 푎푗)/푌푖) > 3휖/4 and for all 푗< 푘< 푚, 휇푖((휙(A푖, 푎푗) ∩
휙(A푖, 푎푘))/푌푖) < 훿. But then we have a contradiction since 휇푖(⋃푘<푚휙(A푖, 푎푘)/푌푖) > 1:
Let 푋= ⋃푖<푚({푖} × |휙(A푖, 푎푗) ∩푌푖|) and let 푓: 푋→M푙푒푛푔푡ℎ(푥) be such that for
all 푖< 푚, 푓↾({푖} × |휙(A푖, 푎푗) ∩푌푖|) is onto 휙(A푖, 푎푗) ∩푌푖and one to one. Let 푍be
the set of those 푐∈푋such that for some 푑∈푋−{푐}, 푓(푑) = 푓(푐). By the choice
of 푖and 휖, |푋| ≥3|푌푖| and by the choice of 푍, |푋−푍| ≤| ⋃푘<푚(휙(A푖, 푎푘) ∩푌푖)|,
since 푓↾(푋−푍) is one to one. Thus it suﬃces to show that |푍| ≤|푌푖|, since then
| ⋃푘<푚(휙(A푖, 푎푘) ∩푌푖)| ≥|푋| −|푍| ≥3|푌푖| −|푌푖| = 2|푌푖|. But
|푍| ≤훴푘<푗<푚푚|휙(A푖, 푎푘) ∩휙(A푖, 푎푗) ∩푌푖|
and thus |푍| ≤푚2(푚(훿|푌푖|)) = 휖|푌푖| ≤|푌푖|.
(ii) As (i). Notice that the witness for the counter assumption that 퐼푌is not an
S1-ideal can always be chosen so that 푛= 2, see the discussion after Deﬁnition
1.8.
Notice that in the proof above we showed a bit more than what we claim: If 푌is
훥-deﬁnable over 푏∈A, 휙(푥, 푎), 푎∈A, is a 훥-formula and 휇∗(휙(M, 푎)/푌) = 휖> 0,
then for any natural number 푚> 4/휖, there are no 푎푖∈A, 푖< 푚, such that 푎0 = 푎,
휇∗(휙(M, 푎0) ∧휙(M, 푎1))/푌) = 0 and for all 푘< 푗< 푚, 푡(푎푘푎푗/푏; M) = 푡(푎0푎1/푏; M).
Recall that 휙(푥, 푎) divides over (countable) 퐵if there is a sequence (푎푖)푖<휔and
푛< 휔such that 푎0 = 푎, (푎푖)푖<휔is order-indiscernible over 퐵and
M 　㨐¬∃푥⋀
푖≤푛
휙(푥, 푎푖).
We say that 휙(푥, 푎) forks over 퐵if there are formulas 휙푖(푥, 푎푖), 푖< 푛, such that each
휙푖divides over 퐵and
M 　㨐∀푥(휙→∨푖<푛휙푖).
We write 푎↓퐶퐵, if no 휙(푥, 푏) ∈푡(푎/퐶퐵; M) forks over 퐶.
We say that 휙(푥, 푎), 푎∈A, splits strongly over 푏∈A inside A if there is a
sequence (푎푖)푖<휔⊆A order-indiscernible over 푏such that 푎0 = 푎and 휙(푥, 푎0) ∧
휙(푥, 푎1) is not realized in M.
Corollary 1.10. (i) If 푎∈A, the 훥-formula 휙(푥, 푎) splits strongly over 푏∈A inside A
and 푌⊆M푙푒푛푔푡ℎ(푥) is a non-empty set 훥-deﬁnable over 푏, then 휙(M, 푎) ∈퐼푌.
(ii) Suppose (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous. If the 훥-formula 휙(푥, 푎), 푎∈M,
divides over 푏∈A and 푌⊆M푙푒푛푔푡ℎ(푥) is a non-empty set 훥-deﬁnable over 푏, then
휙(M, 푎) ∈퐼푌.
(iii) Suppose (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous. If 훥-formulas 휓푖(푥, 푎푖), 푎푖∈M
and 푖≤푛, divide over 푏∈A and 푌⊆M푙푒푛푔푡ℎ(푥) is a non-empty set 훥-deﬁnable over
푏, then ∨푖≤푛휓푖(M, 푎푖) ∈퐼푌.

274
|
Tapani Hyttinen
Proof. The proof of (i) is similar to the proof of (ii). For (ii), let 푎푖, 푖< 휔, and 푛< 휔
witness that 휙(푥, 푎) divides over 푏. By 휔1-saturation of M, we may assume that
푎0 = 푎. Then 푋= ∩푖≤푛휙(M, 푎푖) = 0 and thus 푋∈퐼푌. By Lemma 1.9, 휙(M, 푎) =
휙(M, 푎0) ∈퐼푌.
(iii): So suppose each 휓푖(푥, 푎푖) divides over 푏. Then by (ii),
휇∗(∨푖≤푛휓푖(M, 푎푖)/푌) ≤훴푖≤푛휇∗(휓푖(M, 푎푖)/푌) = 0.
Deﬁnition 1.11. (i) We say that the 훥-formula 휙(푥, 푎) 휇∗-forks over 푏if for all non-
empty sets 푌of arity 푙푒푛푔푡ℎ(푥) 훥-deﬁnable over 푏in M, 휙(M, 푎) ∈퐼푌(which is the
same as saying that 휇∗(휙(M, 푎)/푌) = 0).
(ii) Let 푝be a 훥-type (i.e. for some 푥, 푝is a collection of 훥-formulas 휙(푥, 푎),
푎∈M). We say that 푝휇∗-forks over 푏if there are 푛∈휔and formulas 휙푖(푥, 푎푖) ∈푝,
푖≤푛, such that ∧푖≤푛휙푖(푥, 푎푖) 휇∗-forks over 푎.
(iii) For countable 퐶⊆M and ﬁnite 퐵⊆M, we write 푎↓∗
퐵퐶if the type
푡훥(푎/퐵퐶; M) does not 휇∗-fork over 퐵.
(iv) For countable 퐴, 퐶⊆M and ﬁnite 퐵⊆M, we write 퐴↓∗
퐵퐶if for all (ﬁnite
sequences) 푎∈퐴, 푡훥(푎/퐵퐶; M) does not 휇∗-fork over 퐵.
Above there is a slight misuse of notation: If 퐴= {푎0, ..., 푎푛} and 푎= (푎0, ..., 푎푛), then
it may happen that 푎↓∗
퐵퐶but 퐴
̸↓∗
퐵퐶i.e. unlike in the case of non-forking, now
the diﬀerence between the deﬁnition of independence for sequences and sets may
be signiﬁcant, see Example 2.4.
Lemma 1.12. Let 휙(푥, 푦) be a 훥-formula and 푝a countable 훥-type over M.
(i) If 휙(푥, 푎), 푎∈M, does not 휇∗-fork over 퐴and 퐴⊆퐵(both ﬁnite), then 휙(푥, 푎)
does not 휇∗-fork over 퐵.
(ii) If 푎, 푏, 푐, 푑∈A and 푡(푎푏/0; M) = 푡(푐푑/0; M), then 휙(푥, 푎) 휇∗-forks over 푏iﬀ
휙(푥, 푐) 휇∗-forks over 푑. If (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous, then this holds for all
푎, 푏, 푐, 푑∈M.
(iii) If 푎, 푏∈A and 휙(푥, 푎) does not 휇∗-fork over 푏, then there is 휓(푦, 푧) ∈
푡(푎푏/0; M) such that if 푐, 푑∈A and M 　㨐휓(푐, 푑), then 휙(푥, 푐) does not 휇∗-fork over 푑.
If (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous, then this holds for M in place of A.
(iv) If 푝⊢휙(푥, 푏) and 휙(푥, 푏) is a 훥-formula such that it 휇∗-forks over 푎, then 푝
휇∗-forks over 푎.
(v) If 푡훥(푎/푏; M) is algebraic, then 푎↓∗
푏푐for all 푐.
(vi) If 푡훥(푎/푏; M) is not algebraic but 푡훥(푎/푏푐; M) is, then 푎
̸↓∗
푏푐.
Proof. (i) follows from the fact that if 푌witnesses that 휙(푥, 푎) does not 휇∗-fork
over 퐴, then it is 훥-deﬁnable over 퐴and thus also over 퐵and thus it witnesses
that 휙(푥, 푎) does not 휇∗-fork over 퐵.

Counting Measure and Forking in Finite Models
|
275
(v) is clear since if 휙(M, 푏) contains 푛elements, then for all 훥-deﬁnable 푋
which contain 푎, 휇∗(푋/휙(푀, 푏)) ≥1/푛> 0.
(vi): Clearly we can ﬁnd algebraic 휙(푥, 푏푐) ∈푡훥(푎/푏푐: M) such that
휙(푥, 푏푐) ⊢푡훥(푎/푏푐; M).
But then if 푌is 훥-deﬁnable over 푏and 휙(M, 푏푐) ∩푌
̸= 0, 푌is not algebraic. Thus
휇∗(휙(M, 푏푐)/푌) = 0.
The rest are immediate by Lemma 1.7 and deﬁnitions.
We say that ↓∗is symmetric if for all 푎, 푏, 푐∈M, 푎↓∗
푏푐implies 푐↓∗
푏푎.
The proof of Lemma 1.13 (iii) below uses ideas from [7].
Lemma 1.13. Let 푎, 푏, 푐, 푑∈M, 휙(푥, 푦) be a 훥-formula and 푝a countable 훥-type over
M.
(i) If 휙(M, 푎)
̸= 0, then 휙(푥, 푎) does not 휇∗-fork over 푎.
(ii) 푎↓∗
푏푐푑implies 푎↓∗
푏푐푑and 푎↓∗
푏푐. In particular, if ↓∗is symmetric, 푎↓∗
푏푐
and 푑is a subsequence of 푎, then 푑↓∗
푏푐.
(iii) If 푝does not 휇∗-fork over 푏, then for all countable 퐴⊆M there is 푎∈M
such that 푎　㨐푝and 푎↓∗
푏퐴.
Proof. For (i), just let 푌in the deﬁnition of 휇∗-forking be 휙(M, 푎) and (ii) is imme-
diate by Lemma 1.12 (i). So we prove (iii): By compactness and the fact that M is
휔1-saturated, it is enough to show that
휃= ∧푖≤푛휙푖(푥, 푏푖) ∧∧푖≤푛¬휓푖(푥, 푐푖)
is consistent, where 휙푖(푥, 푏푖) ∈푝and 휓푖(푥, 푐푖) are such that they 휇∗-fork over 푏
and 푐푖∈퐴. Let 푌witness that ∧푖≤푛휙푖(푥, 푏푖) does not 휇∗-fork over 푏i.e. 푌is 훥-
deﬁnable over 푏and 휇∗(∧푖≤푛휙푖(M, 푏푖)/푌) ≥휖> 0. Now by the deﬁnition of 휇∗-
forking, one can see that 푋∈푈, when 푋is the set of all 푗< 휔such that for all
푖≤푛, 휇푗(휓푖(A푗, 푐푖
푗)/푌푗) < 휖/(2푛+ 2) and 휇푗(∧푘≤푛휙푘(A푗, 푏푖
푗)/푌푗) > 휖/2. Then we can
ﬁnd 푎= 푎/푈∈M such that for all 푗∈푋, 푎푗∈∩푖≤푛휙푖(A푖, 푏푖
푗) −∪푗≤푛휓푖(A푗, 푐푖
푗). Clearly
푎realizes 휃.
Corollary 1.14. Assume that ↓∗is symmetric. Suppose 퐵, 퐶⊆M, 퐵ﬁnite and 퐶
countable and 퐴⊆M is countable. If 퐴↓∗
퐵퐶, then for all countable 퐷⊆M, there is
퐴耠such that
푡훥(퐴耠/퐵퐶; M) = 푡훥(퐴/퐵퐶; M)
and 퐴↓∗
퐵퐷.
Proof. Write 퐴= (푎푖)푖<휔and by 푥, 푥푘etc. we mean ﬁnite sequences of variables
from the set {푣푖| 푖< 휔}. Let 휙(푥, 푏) ∈푡훥((푎푖)푖<휔/퐵퐶; M) and 휓푘(푥푘, 푑푘), 푘< 푛and

276
|
Tapani Hyttinen
푑푘∈퐷, be such that each 휓푘(푥푘, 푑푘) 휇∗-forks over 퐵. Again it is enough to show
that 휃= 휙(푥, 푏) ∧∧푘<푛¬휓(푥푘, 푎푘) is realized in M. Let 푚< 휔be such that if 푣푖
appears in 푥or in some 푥푘, then 푖< 푚. By Lemma 1.13 (iii), there is (푎耠
푖)푖<푚∈M
such that 푡훥((푎耠
푖)푖<푚/퐵퐶; M) = 푡훥((푎푖)푖<푚/퐵퐶) and (푎耠
푖)푖<푚↓∗
퐵퐷. By Lemma 1.13 (ii),
(푎耠
푖)푖<푚realizes 휃.
Let M∗∗be some large very saturated elementary extension of M.
Deﬁnition 1.15. Suppose (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous.
(i) For 푎, 푏∈M, we say that 푡(푎/푏; M) is good if for all countable 퐶⊆M there
is 푎耠such that 푡(푎耠/푏; M) = 푡(푎/푏; M), 푎耠↓∗
푏퐶and 푎耠
̸∈퐶.
(ii) For 푎, 푏, 푐∈M∗∗, we write 푎↓∗
푏푐if for all (some), 푎耠, 푏耠, 푐耠∈M with
푡(푎耠푏耠푐耠/0; M) = 푡(푎푏푐/0; M∗∗), 푎↓∗
푏푐
Notice also that if 푡(푎/푏; M) is not algebraic and 푡(푎/푏; M)
̸⊢∨푖≤푛휓푖(푥, 푏푖) for any
훥-formulas 휓푖(푥, 푏푖) which 휇∗-fork over 푏, then 푡(푎/푏; M) is good.
Lemma 1.16. Suppose (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous and M is stable. Then for
all 푎, 푏, 푐∈M, the following holds: if 푡(푐/푏; M) is good and 푎↓∗
푏푐, then either 푎
̸↓푏푐
or 푐↓∗
푏푎. In particular, if M has 훥-elimination of quantiﬁers, ↓∗is symmetric.
Proof. Suppose not i.e. 푎↓푏푐and 푐
̸↓∗
푏푎. Since 푡(푐/푏; M) is good and M is 휔1-
saturated by compactness as in the proof of Lemma 1.3 (iii), we can ﬁnd 푎푖, 푐푖∈
M∗∗, 푖< 휅= ℶ(2휔)+ so that for all 푖< 휅, 푡(푎푖푐푖/푏; M∗∗) = 푡(푎푐/푏; M) and 푎푖↓푏푐푖
∪푗<푖푎푗푐푗(and so 푎푖↓푏∪푗<푖푎푗푐푗), 푐푖
̸∈∪푗<푖푏푎푗푐푗and 푐푖↓∗
푏푑for all 푑∈∪푗<푖푎푗푏푗. By
Erdös-Rado, we may assume that (푎푖푐푖)푖<휔is an (inﬁnite) indiscernible sequence
over 푏and by 휔1-saturation of M that 푎푖푐푖∈M for all 푖< 휔and that 푎0 = 푎and
푐0 = 푐. By the choice of 푐푖, 푐푖↓∗
푏푎푗if 푖> 푗. If 푖< 푗, then 푠푡푝(푐푖/푏; M) = 푠푡푝(푐/푏; M)
and 푠푡푝(푎푗/푏; M) = 푠푡푝(푎/푏; M) and since both 푎↓푏푐and 푎푗↓푏푐푖, 푡(푎푐/푏; M) =
푡(푎푗푐푖/푏; M) and so 푐푖
̸↓∗
푏푎푗. By Lemma 1.12 (ii), this is a contradiction with the
stability of M (we have an inﬁnite deﬁnable ordering).
For the in particular part we assume that M has 훥-elimination of quantiﬁers
and that 푎↓∗
푏푐and show that 푐↓∗
푏푎. We observe ﬁrst that by Lemma 1.13 (i) and
(iii) and Lemma 1.12 (v), if 푡(푐/푏; M) is not algebraic, then it is good (Lemma 1.12 (v)
guarantees that the 휇∗-non-forking extension is not algebraic). But if 푡(푐/푏; M) is
algebraic, then by Lemma 1.12 (v), 푐↓∗
푏푎. So we may assume that 푡(푐/푏; M) is good.
By 훥-elimination of quantiﬁers, Corollary 1.10 (iii) and Lemma 1.12 (iv), 푎↓푏푐and
so by what we showed above 푐↓∗
푏푎.
Theorem 1.17. Suppose (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous, M is stable and has 훥-
elimination of quantiﬁers. Then for all 푎, 푏, 푐∈M, 푎↓푏푐iﬀ푎↓∗
푏푐.

Counting Measure and Forking in Finite Models
|
277
Proof. By 훥-elimination of quantiﬁers, we have already shown the implication
from right to left in Lemma 1.12 (iv) and Corollary 1.10 (iii). So we prove the other
direction. By Corollary 1.14 and Lemma 1.16 together with 훥-elimination of quan-
tiﬁers (i.e. symmetry), we can ﬁnd a countable elementary submodel B of M such
that 푏∈B and B ↓∗
푏푎푐. Then B ↓푏푎푐and so 푎↓푏B푐, in particular 푎↓B 푐.
Also by monotonicity and symmetry (i.e. Lemma 1.16), 푎↓∗
푏B. So by Corollary
1.14 and 훥-elimination of quantiﬁers, there is 푎耠such that 푡(푎耠/B; M) = 푡(푎/B; M)
and 푎耠↓∗
푏
B푐. Since the implication from right to left holds 푎耠↓B 푐. Thus
푡(푎/푏푐; M) = 푡(푎耠/푏푐; M). Since 푎耠↓∗
푏푐, Lemma 1.12 (ii) implies that 푎↓∗
푏푐.
Before the examples, we want to observe, that although we have assumed that 훥
consists of ﬁrst-order formulas, there are cases in which we may loosen this as-
sumption: Suppose that the vocabulary 퐿is ﬁnite and relational and let 푘∈휔
be greater than the arity of any relation in 퐿. By 퐿푘we mean the set of all 퐿휔1휔-
sentences such that at most 푘variables appear in them. We let 훥be the clo-
sure of 퐿푘under (ﬁnite) boolean combinations (so in 훥-formulas, any ﬁnite num-
ber of variables may appear). Finally suppose that (A푖)푖<휔is such that A푖is 퐿푘-
elementary submodel of A푖+1. Then each A푖is 훥-elementary submodel of M =
훱푖<휔A푖/푈and we may think of the formulas of 퐿푘as atomic formulas. When we
do this, (A푖)푖<휔is a 훥-sequence and A is strongly 훥-atomic, in fact, for each 푛the
number of 푡훥(푎/0; A), 푎∈A푛, is ﬁnite. Now it is easy to see that everything we
have done above goes through also in this situation.
Also one expects that what we have done above can also be done for contin-
uous logic (∼fuzzy logic).
Open question 1.18. If in Theorem 1.17 uniform 푈-continuity is replaced by just
푈-continuity, can one still prove that 푎↓푏푐iﬀ푎↓∗
푏푐, for all 푎, 푏, 푐∈A.
2 Examples
In this section we give examples. The ﬁrst three in a sense positive examples, at
least mostly, and the last two contain counterexamples.
Example 2.1. Let 퐹be a ﬁnite ﬁeld and for all 푖< 휔, let A푖be an 푖+ 1-dimensional
vector space over 퐹chosen so that A푖is a subspace of A푖+1. We let 훥be the set of
all quantiﬁer free formulas. Now (A푖)푖<휔is a 훥-sequence, the number of 푡훥(푎/0; A),
푎∈A푛, is ﬁnite for all 푛< 휔and (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈, 훥-continuous, in fact, for
훥-formulas 휙(푥, 푦) and 휓(푥, 푦) and 푎∈A such that A 　㨐∀푥(휙(푥, 푎) →휓(푥, 푎)),

278
|
Tapani Hyttinen
letting 푑푒푔be the Morley degree,
휇(휙(A, 푎)/휓(A, 푎)) = 휇∗(휙(A, 푎)/휓(A, 푎)) = 푑푒푔(휙(푥, 푎))/푑푒푔(휓(푥, 푎))
if the generic element in 휙(M, 푎) and the generic element in 휓(M, 푎) have the same
dimension i.e. the sets have the same Morley rank and otherwise
휇(휙(A, 푎)/휓(A, 푎)) = 휇∗(휙(A, 푎)/휓(A, 푎)) = 0.
Also this value is clearly deﬁnable (and not only approximately) with a 훥-formula
and since the number of possible 훥-types is ﬁnite, this can be done uniformly. Of
course, M is stable and has 훥-elimination of quantiﬁers.
Example 2.2. Let 푝be a prime and 푁푖= 훱푛≤푖푝푖
푛, where (푝푛)푛<휔is the usual enu-
meration of primes. Let A푖be a ﬁeld of size 푝푁푖chosen so that A푖is a subﬁeld of
A푖+1 and 훥be the set quantiﬁer free formulas. Then A is algebraically closed. Now
for this class, (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈-continuous. This can be seen essentially as
in Example 2.1 using (the proof of) Main Theorem in [1]: We write 푀푅(휙(푥, 푎)) for
the Morley rank of 휙(푥, 푎), 푎∈A푖⊆A, as calculated in the theory of A. By [1],
for every 훥-formula 휙(푥, 푦) there are 푛< 휔and for 푗< 푛, a formula 휓푗(푦) and a
rational number 휇푗, such that for all 푎∈A the following holds: For all 휖> 0 and
for all 푖< 휔large enough
|푞−|휙(A푖, 푎)|/|A푀푅(휙(푥,푎))
푖
|| < 휖
for some
푞∈{휇푗| 푗< 푛}
and for all 푞∈{휇푗| 푗< 푛} for all 휖> 0 small enough and 푖< 휔large enough,
|푞−|휙(A푖, 푎)|/|A푀푅(휙(푥,푎))
푖
|| < 휖
iﬀA푖　㨐⋁{휓푗(푦)| 휇푗= 푞}. Finally, for all 푗< 푛and 푖< 휔, A푖　㨐휓푗(푎) ∧휓푗(푏)
implies 푀푅(휙(푥, 푎)) = 푀푅(휙(푥, 푏)). From this the claim follows immediately. No-
tice also that M is not algebraically closed and thus A and M are not elementarily
equivalent. In particular, A is not strongly 훥-atomic (of course, the 훥-type of a
non-algebraic element is not isolated). For more on this example and variations,
see the theory of pseudo-ﬁnite ﬁelds.
Our next example is the one we already mentioned in the introduction.
Example 2.3. For all 푖< 휔, let A푖= (A푖, 퐸푘)푘<휔be such that A푖consist of functions
푓: 휔→푖+ 1 such that for all 푥> 푖, 푓(푥) = 0 and 푓퐸푘푔if 푓↾(푘+ 1) = 푔↾(푘+ 1).
Again, let 훥be the set of quantiﬁer free formulas. Then (휇푖)푖<휔is uniformly 푈, 훥-
continuous, M is stable and has 훥-elimination of quantiﬁers. Notice that this class
is not an 푁-dimensional asymptotic class for any 푁< 휔.

Bibliography
|
279
Example 2.4. For all 푖< 휔, let A푖= (A푖, 퐸) be such that A푖consists of pairs (푘, 푚) ∈
휔2 such that 푘≤푖and if 푘= 0, then 푚≤푖2 and otherwise 푚≤푖. (푘, 푚) 퐸(푘耠, 푚耠) if
푘= 푘耠. 훥is the set of quantiﬁer free formulas. Now the class is not 푈-continuous
(since for any 푘< 휔, for all large enough 푖, in A푖, all the elements have the same
type upto quantiﬁer rank 푘) and in M, 퐸(푥, (0, 0)) forks over 0 but it does not 휇∗-
fork over 0.
If instead of 푘≤푖we require that 푘< 2, we get a class which still is not 푈-
continuous and in which 퐸(푥, (1, 0)) does not fork over 0 but it 휇∗-forks over 0.
We also want to point out what happens in the latter example with the for-
mula 휙(푥) = ¬퐸(푦, 푧) in relation with Lemma 1.13. Now letting 푎= (0, 0) and
푏
=
(1, 1), 푡훥((푎, 푏)/{(1, 0)}; M) does not 휇∗-fork over 0 (휙(M) witnesses this)
while 푡훥((1.0)/{푎, 푏}; M) does 휇∗-fork over 0 and so symmetry fails. Of course also
푡훥(푏/{(1, 0)}; M) 휇∗-forks over 0 and thus also the conclusion of the in particular
part of Lemma 1.13 (ii) fails.
Example 2.5. For all 푖< 휔, deﬁne 푁푖so that 푁0 = 3 and 푁푖+1 = 2푁푖+ 1. Let
A푖= (A푖, <), where A푖is the set of all integers between −푁푖and 푁푖and < is the
natural ordering. By replacing A푖, 푖> 0, by isomorphic copies, we may assume
that the embeddings 푥㨃→2푥are identical maps. Let 훥be the set of quantiﬁer free
formulas. Then (휇푖)푖<휔is not 푈-continuous (and M is not stable) and −1 < 푥∧푥< 1
(−1, 1 ∈A0) divides over 0 but it does not 휇∗-fork over 0. Notice that here M is
elementarily equivalent with 휔+ Z × Q + 휔∗.
Acknowledgement: The author was partially supported by the Academy of Fin-
land, grant 1123110.
Bibliography
[1]
Z. Chatzidakis, L. van den Dries and A. Macintyre, Deﬁnable sets over ﬁnite ﬁelds, Journal
für die Reine und Angewandte Mathematik, vol. 427, 1992, 107-135.
[2]
M. Djordjevic, Finite variable logic, stability and ﬁnite models, Journal of Symbolic Logic,
vol. 66, 2001, 837-858.
[3]
G. Cherlin and E. Hrushovski, Finite Structures with Few Types, Annals of Mathematics
Studies, Number 152, Princeton University Press, Princeton, 2003.
[4]
R. Elwes, Asymptotic classes of ﬁnite structures, Journal of Symbolic Logic, vol. 72, 2007,
418-438.
[5]
C.D. Hill, Eﬃciently inverting the 퐿2-invariant through stability theory, extended abstract
in Logical Approaches to Barriers in Computing and Complexity, 2010.
[6]
E. Hrushovski and A. Pillay, On NIP and invariant measures, J. Eur. Math. Soc., vol. 13,
2011, 1005-1061.
Counting Measure and Forking in Finite Models

280
|
Tapani Hyttinen
[7]
E. Hrushovski, Stable group theory and approximate subgroups, J. Amer. Math. Soc., vol.
25, 2012, 189-243.
[8]
T. Hyttinen, On stability in ﬁnite models, Archive for Mathematical Logic, vol. 39, 2000,
89-102.
[9]
J. Väänänen, Pseudo-ﬁnite model theory, Matematica Contemporanea, vol. 24, 2003,
169-183.

Richard Kaye* and Tin Lok Wong
The Model Theory of Generic Cuts
Abstract: We survey some properties of the recently discovered notion of generic
cuts [6, 8], and discuss the model-theoretic context of these results for theories of
pairs (푀, 퐼) where 퐼is a generic cut of a model 푀of Peano arithmetic.
The main new results are that such pairs possess certain model completeness
properties (Section 4), and they are existentially closed in a suitable category (Sec-
tion 5).
Keywords: generic cuts, models of arithmetic
MSC: 03C62, 03H15, 03C10
||
*Corresponding Author: Richard Kaye: School of Mathematics, University of Birmingham,
United Kingdom
Tin Lok Wong: Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, Singapore
1 Preliminaries
For background in model theory, see Hodges [4]. Unless otherwise stated, we fol-
low the notation in the books by Kaye [5] and by Kossak–Schmerl [12]. We ﬁx some
notation and repeat a few more relevant deﬁnitions here.
The usual language for arithmetic {0, 1, +, ×, <} is denoted by LA. Let LSk de-
note the Skolemised language for arithmetic, i.e., LSk contains, in addition to the
symbols in LA, a function symbol 푓휃( ̄푥) for each formula 휃( ̄푥, 푦) ∈LA, intend-
ing to mean the least 푦satisfying 휃( ̄푥, 푦). By ‘deﬁnable’, we always mean ‘deﬁn-
able with parameters’. All our types can only contain ﬁnitely many parameters.
We write Q푥. . . for ‘there are coﬁnally many 푥such that ...’. Peano arithmetic is
abbreviated as PA.
A cut of a model of arithmetic is a nonempty proper initial segment 퐼that has
no maximum element. We write 퐼⊆e 푀for ‘퐼is a cut of 푀’. If 퐼is, in addition, an
elementary substructure of the model, then we say that 퐼is an elementary cut.
Let ̄푐∈푀　㨐PA. We denote by Aut(푀) the automorphism group of 푀, and
by Aut(푀, ̄푐) the pointwise stabiliser of ̄푐in Aut(푀). If 푋⊆푀and 푓is a function
with domain 푀, then 푋푓denotes the image of 푋under 푓, i.e.,
푋푓= {푓(푥) : 푥∈푋}.

282
|
Richard Kaye and Tin Lok Wong
Similarly, we sometimes write 푥푓for 푓(푥). Two cuts 퐼, 퐽⊆e 푀are conjugate over ̄푐
if there is 푔∈Aut(푀, ̄푐) such that 퐼푔= 퐽.
2 Generic cuts
Generic cuts were discovered by the ﬁrst author during an axiomatic study on indi-
cators. The motivation was to understand structures of the form (푀, 퐼), where 퐼is
a cut of a model of arithmetic 푀, in a model-theoretic context. We view a generic
cut as representing the majority of cuts in a model. This will be made more pre-
cise at the end of this section. For now, let us ﬁrst review some basic deﬁnitions
related to generic cuts.
Generic cuts are constructed using a notion of forcing, i.e. a Banach–Mazur
game in an appropriate topological space. The open sets are generated by certain
intervals in a model of arithmetic. If 퐼⊆e 푀　㨐PA and [푎, 푏] ⊆푀, then we write
퐼∈[푎, 푏] to mean 푎∈퐼< 푏. We will regard an interval both as a set of numbers
and as a set of cuts, which of these we are thinking of will be clear from context.
The consistency condition for our forcing comes from a neighbourhood system.
Deﬁnition 2.1. A nonempty set N of intervals of the form [푥, 푦] from 푀is a neigh-
bourhood system if the following properties hold.
(1) (Nontriviality.) For all 푥∈푀there is some [푥, 푦] ∈N .1
(2) For each 퐵∈푀, there exists a recursive 훴1-type 푝(푥, 푦) over 푀such that
∀푥, 푦<퐵([푥, 푦] ∈N ⇔푀　㨐⋀⋀푝(푥, 푦)).
(3) 푦> (푥+ 1)2 for all [푥, 푦] ∈N .
(4) If [푥, 푦] ∈N and 푧∈푀, then either [푥, 푧] ∈N or [푧, 푦] ∈N .
(5) If [푥, 푦] ∈N and [푥耠, 푦耠] ⊇[푥, 푦], then [푥耠, 푦耠] ∈N .
We will be particularly interested in neighbourhood systems that are invariant
under the action of the automorphism group of the model. An important example
of a neighbourhood system is the set Nelt of intervals [푎, 푏] for which there is an
elementary cut 퐼∈[푎, 푏]. This is automorphism-invariant and type-deﬁnable in a
model of PA; if the model is recursively saturated it is in fact locally type-deﬁnable
by a recursive 훴1-type in the sense of (2) above.
1 The nontriviality clause has been added to the deﬁnition given in our previous paper [8] though
it was not required for all the key results there. It implies that the corresponding set of cuts does
not have any isolated points.

The Model Theory of Generic Cuts
|
283
Neighbourhood systems arise naturally from indicators, as introduced by
Paris and Kirby [9, 10].
Deﬁnition 2.2. Let 푀　㨐PA be nonstandard. An indicator on 푀is a function
푌: 푀2 →푀that satisﬁes the following properties.
(1) (Nontriviality.) For all 푥∈푀, there exists 푦∈푀such that 푌(푥, 푦) > N.
(2) 푌is piecewise deﬁnable, i.e.,
{⟨푥, 푦, 푌(푥, 푦)⟩: 푥, 푦< 퐵}
is deﬁnable in 푀for every 퐵∈푀.
(3) 푦> (푥+ 1)2 for all 푥, 푦∈푀with 푌(푥, 푦) > N.
(4) 푀　㨐∀푥, 푦(푥⩾푦→푌(푥, 푦) = 0).
(5) 푀　㨐∀푥, 푦, 푥耠, 푦耠(푥⩽푥耠∧푦耠⩽푦→푌(푥耠, 푦耠) ⩽푌(푥, 푦)).
(6) If 푥, 푦∈푀such that 푌(푥, 푦) > N and 푧∈[푥, 푦], then either 푌(푥, 푧) > N or
푌(푧, 푥) > N.
(7) 푀　㨐∀푥, 푦, 푧(푌(푥, 푦) ⩾푧→∃푥耠, 푦耠(푌(푥耠, 푦) = 푧∧푌(푥, 푦耠) = 푧)).
We will often treat an indicator as if it were deﬁnable. Formally, one has to replace
the function with the code of some large enough initial part of it.
An indicator 푌clearly gives a neighbourhood system
N푌= {[푥, 푦] : 푌(푥, 푦) > N}.
Conversely, provided the model has countable set-theoretic coﬁnality, we can ob-
tain an indicator 푌from any neighbourhood system which is locally deﬁned by
recursive types of bounded complexity 푛∈N. The idea is that 푌(푎, 푏) counts the
number of formulas in 푝(푥, 푦) satisﬁed by the pair 푎, 푏, where 푝(푥, 푦) is as given
in clause (2) of the deﬁnition of neighbourhood systems. This can be expressed
within LA using a 훴푛-complete formula Sat훴푛. The countable coﬁnality assump-
tion comes in when one tries to combine a family of ‘partial indicators’ into a sin-
gle function — it is not hard to piece two ‘partial indicators’ together, but we do
not see how to deal with inﬁnitely many of them at one time.
Strictly speaking, the material in this paper concerns neighbourhood sys-
tems, in the sense that we are only interested in indicators up to the neighbour-
hood system they determine. However a single indicator function is often consid-
erably easier to work with than a neighbourhood system with its type-deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 2.3. Let 푀　㨐PA be nonstandard, and 푌be an indicator on 푀.
–
A 푌-interval is an interval [푎, 푏] ⊆푀such that 푌(푎, 푏) > N. Double square
brackets [[⋅, ⋅]] will be reserved for denoting 푌-intervals.
–
A 푌-cut is a cut 퐼⊆e 푀that satisﬁes 푌(푥, 푦) > N for all intervals [푥, 푦] con-
taining 퐼.

284
|
Richard Kaye and Tin Lok Wong
–
푌is invariant if its neighbourhood system N푌is Aut(푀)-invariant.
Suppose we have an indicator 푌on a nonstandard model 푀　㨐PA. We think of
푌-intervals as being ‘large’ enough to ‘catch’ at least one 푌-cut. It is straightfor-
ward to verify that the collection of 푌-intervals generates a topology on the class
of all 푌-cuts, and if 푀is countable, this topological space is homeomorphic to the
Cantor set 2휔(using the nontriviality clause in the deﬁnition). Instead of deﬁning
generic cuts in terms of forcing, we deﬁne them using this topology and the auto-
morphisms of 푀.
Deﬁnition 2.4. Let 푀　㨐PA be nonstandard and 푌be an indicator on 푀. A cut
퐼⊆e 푀is 푌-generic if it is contained in a class of 푌-cuts G that has the following
properties.
(a) G is closed under Aut(푀), i.e., 퐼푔∈G for all 퐼∈G and all 푔∈Aut(푀).
(b) G is dense in the space of 푌-cuts, i.e., every 푌-interval contains a cut in G .
(c) For each 퐼∈G and each ̄푐∈푀, there is an interval [푎, 푏] ⊆푀containing 퐼in
which all cuts in G are conjugate over ̄푐.
Theorem 2.5. Let 푀be a countable arithmetically saturated model of PA, and 푌be
an invariant indicator on 푀.
(1) There is a unique class G of 푌-cuts that satisﬁes (a)–(c) in the deﬁnition of 푌-
generic cuts.
(2) The class of 푌-generic cuts is the smallest comeagre set in the space of 푌-cuts.
The proof of this [8] goes via the combinatorial notion of pregeneric intervals,
which we do not want to delve into here. (Pregenericity will, nevertheless, make
a brief appearance in Theorem 3.11.) Actually, generic cuts were deﬁned in terms
of these intervals in our previous paper [8].
Notice part (1) of this theorem implies that around any generic cut, there is an
interval in which all generic cuts are conjugate. This is the key property of generic
cuts that we will use over and over again.
The name ‘generic cuts’ comes from part (2) of this theorem. It says that
generic cuts satisfy all the properties that are possessed by almost all cuts, when
‘almost all’ means ‘comeagre’.
The previous paper, the deﬁnition of generic cuts, and Theorem 2.5 concern
neighbourhood systems, indicators and generic cuts in a single model of PA. Some
neighbourhood systems, such as Nelt, and their corresponding indicators, make
sense across a range of models of PA. When they do we will be interested in their
model-theoretic properties, and this is the main focus of this paper. We will get to
this in the ﬁnal section.

The Model Theory of Generic Cuts
|
285
3 Saturation
We work with a ﬁxed countable arithmetically saturated model 푀　㨐PA and an
invariant indicator 푌on 푀throughout this section.
Before we show how saturated generic cuts are, we need to describe the lan-
guage involved more explicitly.
Deﬁnition 3.1. Deﬁne L cut
Sk
to be the language obtained from LSk by adding one
new unary predicate symbol I, which is intended to be interpreted as a cut. So with
some abuse of notation, we sometimes write 푡
̸∈I as 푡> I. PAcut is the L cut
Sk -theory
that consists of the axioms of PA in LSk, the deﬁnitions for the Skolem functions,
and an axiom saying I is a cut.
We divide the L cut
Sk -formulas into levels as in usual model theory.
Deﬁnition 3.2. The formula classes ∀푛and ∃푛in the language L cut
Sk
will be re-
ferred to as 훱cut
푛
and 훴cut
푛
respectively, for all 푛∈N.
For example, since LSk is Skolemised, all formulas in LSk are 훱cut
1 . The theory
PAcut contains both 훱cut
1 - and 훴cut
1 -formulas. So it is at most 훱cut
2 . This implies that
models of PAcut are closed under unions of chains. Using the preservation theo-
rems, it is a straightforward exercise to show that PAcut is neither 훱cut
1
nor 훴cut
1 .
Most of the other concepts we will see are either 훴cut
1
or 훱cut
1 . For instance,
if 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푧) is an LA-formula, then ‘there is an interval [푥, 푦] containing I that
satisﬁes 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푧)’ is 훴cut
1 . This is more than just a random example.
Lemma 3.3. Every 훴cut
1 -formula is equivalent over PAcut to a formula of the form
∃푥∈I ∃푦>I 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푧),
where 휒∈LA.
Proof. Note that every 훴cut
1 -formula is equivalent to a ﬁnite disjunction of formulas
of the form
∃̄푣(⋀⋀
푖<푚
푡푖( ̄푣, ̄푧) ∈I ∧⋀⋀
푗<푛
푠푗( ̄푣, ̄푧) > I ∧휂( ̄푣, ̄푧)),
where the 푡푖’s and 푠푗’s are Skolem functions and 휂is an LA-formula, and this dis-
played formula is equivalent over PAcut to
∃푥∈I ∃푦>I ∃̄푣(푥= max
푖<푚(푡푖( ̄푣, ̄푧)) ∧푦= min
푗<푛(푠푗( ̄푣, ̄푧)) ∧휂( ̄푣, ̄푧)).
Let us come back to the saturation properties of generic cuts. We start with a no-
tion deﬁned in Kirby’s thesis [9].

286
|
Richard Kaye and Tin Lok Wong
Deﬁnition 3.4. The 푌-index of a cut 퐼⊆e 푀is deﬁned to be
{푛∈푀: (푀, 퐼) 　㨐∀푥∈I ∀푦>I 푌(푥, 푦) > 푛}.
The index of a cut is clearly an initial segment of the model.
Proposition 3.5. If 퐼is a 푌-generic cut in 푀, then the 푌-index of 퐼is N.
Proof. Every natural number is in the 푌-index of 퐼because 퐼is a 푌-cut. Take any
nonstandard 휈∈푀. Recall that 푌is piecewise deﬁnable. Pick any 퐵∈푀\ 퐼,
and let
̂푌∈푀be the code of {⟨푥, 푦, 푌(푥, 푦)⟩: 푥, 푦< 퐵}. Using the genericity of 퐼,
let [푎, 푏] be an interval containing 퐼in which all 푌-generic cuts are conjugate over
⟨̂푌, 휈⟩. Choosing 푏= 퐵−1 if necessary, we may assume 푏< 퐵. Let [푢, 푣] ⊆[푎, 푏]
such that N < 푌(푢, 푣) < 휈, and 퐽be a 푌-generic cut in [푢, 푣]. By the choice of [푎, 푏],
we know that 퐼and 퐽are conjugate over ⟨̂푌, 휈⟩. Since
(푀, 퐽) 　㨐∃푥∈I ∃푦>I
̂푌(푥, 푦) ⩽휈,
the same formula is true in (푀, 퐼) too. So 휈is not in the 푌-index of 퐼.
Remark 3.6. There is a notion that is similar to the index, called the coﬁnality,
of a cut. It turns out that the coﬁnality of a generic cut depends on the indicator
chosen. See Theorem 4.13 in Kaye [6] for the details.
This proposition implies a non-saturation property of generic cuts. Recall the fol-
lowing deﬁnition: if L is a recursive language and 훤is a class of L -formulas,
then an L -structure M is 훤-recursively saturated if and only if all recursive types
that just consist of formulas in 훤are realised in M.
Corollary 3.7. If 퐼is a 푌-generic cut in 푀, then (푀, 퐼) is not 훱cut
1 -recursively satu-
rated.
Proof. Consider the type
푝(푣) = {푣> 푛: 푛∈N} ∪{∀푥∈I ∀푦>I
̂푌(푥, 푦) > 푣},
where
̂푌is a code for some suitable initial part of 푌.
This has consequences on the non-deﬁnability of generic cuts, in the sense that
no ﬁrst-order L cut
Sk -theory captures only generic cuts.
Corollary 3.8. Let 푇be a consistent L cut
Sk -theory extending PAcut. Then there is a
model (퐾, 퐽) 　㨐푇such that 퐽is not 푌-generic for all indicators 푌on 퐾.
Proof. Take (퐾, 퐽) 　㨐푇to be countable and recursively saturated.

The Model Theory of Generic Cuts
|
287
In particular no ﬁrst-order L cut
Sk -theory 푇captures the notion of ‘elementary
generic’, i.e. generic for Nelt.
We will show that the failure of 훱cut
1 -recursive saturation is best possible for
generic cuts. The proof uses a lemma that is worth stating on its own.
Lemma 3.9. Let [[푎, 푏]] be a 푌-interval and 푝(푣) be a recursive set of 훴cut
1 -formulas
that involves only ﬁnitely many parameters from 푀. Then the following are equiva-
lent.
(1) There exists a 푌-interval [[푟, 푠]] ⊆[[푎, 푏]] such that for all 푌-cuts 퐼in [[푟, 푠]] the set
푝(푣) is realised in (푀, 퐼).
(2) There is a 푌-cut 퐼∈[[푎, 푏]] such that 푝(푣) is realised in (푀, 퐼).
(3) There is a 푌-cut 퐼∈[[푎, 푏]] such that 푝(푣) is ﬁnitely satisﬁed in (푀, 퐼).
(4) For each ﬁnite 푝耠(푣) ⊆푝(푣), there is a 푌-cut 퐼∈[[푎, 푏]] such that (푀, 퐼) 　㨐
∃푣⋀⋀푝耠(푣).
Proof. It is clear that (푖) ⇒(푖+1) for 푖= 1, 2, and 3. So it suﬃces to show (4) ⇒(1).
By Lemma 3.3, we may assume
푝(푣) = {∃̄푥∈I ∃̄푦>I 휃푖(푣, ̄푥, ̄푦, ̄푐) : 푖∈N},
where ̄푐∈푀and 휃0, 휃1, . . . ∈LA. Consider the recursive set
푞(푣, 푟, 푠) = {푌(푟, 푠) > 푛: 푛∈N} ∪{푎⩽푟∧푠⩽푏}
∪{∃̄푥<푟∃̄푦>푠휃푖(푣, ̄푥, ̄푦, ̄푐) : 푖∈N}
of LA-formulas. If this is realised in 푀, then (1) is true. So by recursive saturation,
it suﬃces to show 푞(푣, 푟, 푠) is ﬁnitely satisﬁed in 푀. We can prove
푀　㨐∃푣∃[푟, 푠]⊆[[푎, 푏]] (푌(푟, 푠) > 푛∧⋀⋀
푖<푛
∃̄푥<푟∃̄푦>푠휃푖(푣, ̄푥, ̄푦, ̄푐))
for every 푛∈N from the hypothesis that (4) holds.
Proposition 3.10. If 퐼is a 푌-generic cut in 푀, then (푀, 퐼) is 훴cut
1 -recursively satu-
rated.
Proof. Let 푝(푣) be a 훴cut
1 -recursive type that is ﬁnitely satisﬁed in (푀, 퐼), and ̄푐∈푀
be the parameters that appear in 푝(푣). Using genericity, pick an interval [푎, 푏] ⊆
푀containing 퐼in which all 푌-generic cuts are conjugate over ̄푐. By the previous
lemma, we can ﬁnd a 푌-interval [[푟, 푠]] ⊆[[푎, 푏]] in which all 푌-cuts 퐽make 푝(푣)
realised in (푀, 퐽). Inside such an interval, there is a 푌-generic cut that is conjugate
to 퐼over ̄푐. So 푝(푣) is realised in (푀, 퐼) too.
Strangely, generic cuts seem to possess more than what 훴cut
1 -recursive saturation
can oﬀer. For example, the following apparently needs 훱cut
1 -recursive saturation.
The extra bit comes from the strength of N.

288
|
Richard Kaye and Tin Lok Wong
Theorem 3.11. Let 퐼be a 푌-generic cut in 푀. Then for every ̄푐∈푀, there exists an
interval [푎, 푏] containing 퐼such that for every LA-formula 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푧),
(푀, 퐼) 　㨐∃푥∈I ∃푦>I 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐) →∃푥<푎∃푦>푏휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐).
Proof. Let [푢, 푣] be an interval around 퐼in which all 푌-generic cuts are conjugate
over ̄푐. Using recursive saturation, ﬁnd 푓∈푀coding a function N →푀such that
푓(휒) = (max 푛)(∃[푟, 푠]⊆[푢, 푣] (푌(푟, 푠) ⩾푛∧∃푥<푟∃푦>푠휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐))),
for all LA-formulas 휒∈N. Let 푑∈푀\ N such that
푓(휒) > N ⇔푓(휒) > 푑,
for all 휒∈N. Such 푑exists because N is strong in 푀. We claim that for every 휒∈N,
we have 푓(휒) > 푑if and only if
(푀, 퐼) 　㨐∃푥∈I ∃푦>I 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐).
This suﬃces because we can then write our type as
푝(푎, 푏) = {푎∈I ∧I < 푏} ∪{푓(휒) > 푑→∃푥<푎∃푦>푏휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐) : 휒∈LA},
which is recursive and 훴cut
1 .
Let 휒∈N. If 푓(휒) ⩽푑, then 푓(휒) ∈N, and so
(푀, 퐼) 　㨐∀푥∈I ∀푦>I ¬휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐)
since 퐼is a 푌-cut. Conversely, suppose 푓(휒) > 푑. Let [푟, 푠] ⊆[푢, 푣] such that
푌(푟, 푠) = 푓(휒) > N and 푀　㨐∃푥<푟∃푦>푠휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐). By our choice of [푢, 푣], the cut 퐼
is conjugate over ̄푐to some 푌-generic cut 퐽∈[푟, 푠]. For any such 퐽, we have
(푀, 퐽) 　㨐∃푥∈I ∃푦>I 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐).
Therefore, this formula is also true in (푀, 퐼).
We present two applications of this theorem, the ﬁrst of which is easy.
Corollary 3.12. Let 퐼be a 푌-generic cut in 푀. Then for all ̄푐∈푀, there exists 푎∈퐼
such that for every LA-formula 휂(푣, ̄푧),
(푀, 퐼) 　㨐∃푥∈I ∀푣∈I (푣> 푥→휂(푣, ̄푐)) →∃푥<푎∀푣∈I (푣> 푥→휂(푣, ̄푐)).
Proof. Let 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐) be ∀푣∈[푥, 푦] 휂(푣, ̄푐).
The second one seems slightly more tricky. Recall ﬁrst the following.

The Model Theory of Generic Cuts
|
289
Deﬁnition 3.13. Let M be a structure in some ﬁrst-order language L , and ̄푐, 푟∈
M. The existential type of 푟over ̄푐, denoted by etpM(푟/ ̄푐), is deﬁned to be
{휙(푤, ̄푐) ∈∃1 : M 　㨐휙(푟, ̄푐)}.
As is commonly done in models of PA, we regard each element of 푀as an 푀-ﬁnite
set here. See our previous paper [7] for details. Our consequence of Theorem 3.11
now follows.
Corollary 3.14. Let 퐼be a 푌-generic cut in 푀. Then the existential type of any tuple
̄푐in (푀, 퐼) is coded, i.e., there exists 푡∈푀such that for all 휙( ̄푤) ∈훴cut
1 ,
(푀, 퐼) 　㨐⌜휙⌝∈푡↔휙( ̄푐).
Proof. By Lemma 3.3, it suﬃces to consider only 훴cut
1 -formulas of the form
∃푥∈I ∃푦>I 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푧),
where 휒∈LA. By Theorem 3.11, we can ﬁnd an interval [푎, 푏] containing 퐼such
that
(푀, 퐼) 　㨐∃푥∈I ∃푦>I 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐) ↔∃푥<푎∃푦>푏휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐),
for every LA-formula 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푧). So recursive saturation of 푀implies that
푝(푡) = {⌜∃푥∈I ∃푦>I 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푧)⌝∈푡↔∃푥∈I ∃푦>I 휒(푥, 푦, ̄푐) : 휒∈LA}
is realised in 푀.
4 Model completeness
Throughout this section, we work with a ﬁxed countable arithmetically saturated
model 푀　㨐PA, an invariant indicator 푌on 푀, and a 푌-generic cut 퐼in 푀.
In our previous paper [8], we established a weak quantiﬁer elimination result.
We reformulate this theorem here in more model-theoretic terms, and list some
consequences related to model completeness.
Theorem 4.1. Let ̄푐∈푀and 퐽be a 푌-generic cut in 푀. If etp(푀,퐼)( ̄푐) = etp(푀,퐽)( ̄푐),
then (푀, 퐼, ̄푐) ≅(푀, 퐽, ̄푐).
Proof sketch. Without loss, assume 퐼< 퐽. Using genericity, pick intervals [푎, 푏]
and [푢, 푣] containing 퐼and 퐽respectively in which all 푌-generic cuts are conjugate
over ̄푐. Let 푥∈퐼that is above 푎. We claim that there is ℎ∈Aut(푀, ̄푐) such that
푥ℎ∈[푢, 푣], which will give us what we want. By recursive saturation, it suﬃces

290
|
Richard Kaye and Tin Lok Wong
to show that the LA-type of 푥over ̄푐is ﬁnitely satisﬁed in [푢, 푣]. Let 휃(푥,
̄푤) ∈LA
such that 푀　㨐휃(푥, ̄푐). Then (푀, 퐼) 　㨐Q푦∈I 휃(푦, ̄푐) by (the proof of) Corollary 3.12.
Notice Q푦∈I 휃(푦,
̄푤) is 훱cut
1 , and ¬Q푦∈I 휃(푦,
̄푤)
̸∈etp(푀,퐼)( ̄푐). Thus ¬Q푦∈I 휃(푦,
̄푤)
̸∈
etp(푀,퐽)( ̄푐), which means (푀, 퐽) 　㨐Q푦∈I 휃(푦, ̄푐). In particular, there is 푦∈퐽above
푢such that 푀　㨐휃(푦, ̄푐).
Corollary 4.2. For any ̄푐, 푟, 푠∈푀, if etp(푀,퐼)(푟/ ̄푐) = etp(푀,퐼)(푠/ ̄푐), then (푀, 퐼, ̄푐, 푟) ≅
(푀, 퐼, ̄푐, 푠).
Proof. Suppose etp(푀,퐼)(푟/ ̄푐) = etp(푀,퐼)(푠/ ̄푐). Using recursive saturation, let 푔∈
Aut(푀, ̄푐) such that 푠푔= 푟. Setting 퐽= 퐼푔gives (푀, 퐼, ̄푐, 푠) ≅(푀, 퐽, ̄푐, 푟), and so
by hypothesis,
etp(푀,퐼)( ̄푐, 푟) = etp(푀,퐼)( ̄푐, 푠) = etp(푀,퐽)( ̄푐, 푟).
The previous theorem then does the rest.
Deﬁnable elements in models of PAcut were studied in Kossak–Bamber [11]. Corol-
lary 4.2 gives us more information about these deﬁnable elements in the case of
generic cuts.
Corollary 4.3. All L cut
Sk -deﬁnable elements of (푀, 퐼) are 훴cut
1
deﬁnable with the
same parameters.
Proof. Let 푎, ̄푐∈푀and 휃(푤, ̄푧) ∈L cut
Sk
such that 푎is the unique element 푤that
satisﬁes 휃(푤, ̄푐) in (푀, 퐼). Consider 푝(푤) = etp(푀,퐼)(푎/ ̄푐). If 푎耠∈푀that satisﬁes
all of 푝(푤) in (푀, 퐼), then (푀, 퐼, ̄푐, 푎) ≅(푀, 퐼, ̄푐, 푎耠) by Corollary 4.2, and so 푎= 푎耠
because they both satisfy 휃(푤, ̄푐). It follows that
푞(푤) = 푝(푤) ∪{푤
̸= 푎}
is not realised in (푀, 퐼). The set 푞(푤) can be rewritten as a recursive set of 훴cut
1 -
formulas using Corollary 3.14. So by 훴cut
1 -recursive saturation, this set is not ﬁnitely
satisﬁed in (푀, 퐼). Therefore, there is 휙(푤, ̄푐) ∈푝(푤) such that
(푀, 퐼) 　㨐∀푤(휙(푤, ̄푐) →푤= 푎),
as required.
Remark 4.4. Typical 훴cut
1 -deﬁnable elements are
(max 푤∈I)(휃(푤, ̄푐))
and
(min 푤> I)(휃(푤, ̄푐)),
where 휃(푤, ̄푐) is in LA.
Question 4.5. Can one make the map 휃(푤, ̄푧) 㨃→휙(푤, ̄푧), which is given by the
proof above, independent of ̄푐?

The Model Theory of Generic Cuts
|
291
Recall that a deﬁnition of model completeness says: a theory 푇is model complete
if and only if every ∀1-formula is equivalent modulo 푇to a ∃1-formula.
Corollary 4.6. For every 훱cut
1 -formula 휃(푤, ̄푧) and every ̄푐∈푀, there exists a set
훷(푤, ̄푧) of 훴cut
1 -formulas such that
(푀, 퐼) 　㨐∀푤(휃(푤, ̄푐) ↔⋁⋁훷(푤, ̄푐)).
Proof. Let 퐴= {푤∈푀: 푀　㨐휃(푤, ̄푐)}. For the moment, work with a ﬁxed 푎∈퐴.
Set 푝푎(푤) = etp(푀,퐼)(푎/ ̄푐). By Corollary 4.2,
(푀, 퐼) 　㨐∀푤(⋀⋀푝푎(푤) →휃(푤, ̄푐)).
Therefore, the set 푝푎(푤) ∪{¬휃(푤, ̄푐)} is not realised in (푀, 퐼). As in the previous
proof, we use 훴cut
1 -recursive saturation to pick 휙푎(푤, ̄푐) ∈푝푎(푤) such that
(푀, 퐼) 　㨐∀푤(휙푎(푤, ̄푐) →휃(푤, ̄푐)).
For every 푎∈퐴, we can ﬁnd such a formula 휙푎(푤, ̄푐). It can be veriﬁed that
훷(푤, ̄푧) = {휙푎(푤, ̄푧) : 푎∈퐴} does what we want.
Question 4.7. Is the corollary above true for all L cut
Sk -formulas 휃(푤, ̄푧)?
In Corollary 4.6 above, we cannot guarantee that the set 훷(푤, ̄푧) is ﬁnite. This
can be proved using Corollary 3.7 and Proposition 3.10. Therefore, Th(푀, 퐼) is not
model complete.
5 Existential closure
In this section, we show that generic cuts are existentially closed in a suitable
category. Existentially closed models of arithmetic were studied by Goldrei, Mac-
intyre, Simmons [2, 13], Hirschfeld, Wheeler [3], and others in the 1970s. A more
recent reference is Adamowicz–Bigorajska [1].
Recall that an existentially closed model of a theory 푇is a model M 　㨐푇such
that whenever K 　㨐푇that extends M, if 휎( ̄푧) ∈∃1 and ̄푐∈M, then K 　㨐휎( ̄푐)
implies M 　㨐휎( ̄푐). This property requires us to consider indicators across several
models.
Deﬁnition 5.1. Let K be a class of models of PA. An (invariant) indicator over K is
a sequence (푌(푥, 푦) = 푛)푛∈N of LA-formulas with a recursive deﬁnition that can
be extended to (푌(푥, 푦) = 푛)푛∈푀to obtain an (invariant) indicator on 푀for every
푀∈K. For simplicity, we will often write an indicator over K as 푌instead of

292
|
Richard Kaye and Tin Lok Wong
(푌(푥, 푦) = 푛)푛∈N. For an indicator 푌over some class of models of PA, deﬁne PAcut
푌=
PAcut ∪{∀푥∈I ∀푦>I 푌(푥, 푦) ⩾푛: 푛∈N}, where 푌(푥, 푦) ⩾푛means ⋀⋀푖<푛푌(푥, 푦)
̸= 푖.
Note that PAcut
푌is 훱cut
2 .
Almost all indicators that appeared in the literature are deﬁnable, and their
deﬁnitions make sense over all models of PA. This allows one to prove indepen-
dence results for PA using indicators. See Chapter 14 in Kaye [5] for an exposition
on this line.
There is a uniform way of deﬁning an indicator 푌elt for the neighbourhood
system Nelt in the sense above over the class of all recursively saturated models of
PA. For this 푌the theory PAcut
푌is the theory of models of PA with a distinguished
proper elementary cut.
We need one technical lemma before the theorem.
Lemma 5.2. Fix a countable arithmetically saturated model 푀　㨐PA, an invariant
indicator 푌on 푀, and a 푌-generic cut 퐼in 푀. If 훩is an LA-deﬁnable function under
which 퐼is closed, then there is 푛∈N such that for all suﬃciently large 푥∈퐼, we have
푌(푥, 훩(푥)) < 푛.
Proof. Find an interval [푎, 푏] around 퐼in which all 푌-generic cuts are conjugate
over the parameters ̄푐needed to deﬁne 훩. Suppose 퐼is closed under 훩, but for all
푛∈N, there are coﬁnally many 푥∈퐼such that 푌(푥, 훩(푥)) ⩾푛. Then
푀　㨐∃푥∈[푎, 푏] (훩(푥) ∈[푎, 푏] ∧푌(푥, 훩(푥)) ⩾푛),
for all 푛∈N. Using recursive saturation, ﬁnd nonstandard 휈∈푀and 푥∈[푎, 푏]
such that
푀　㨐훩(푥) ∈[푎, 푏] ∧푌(푥, 훩(푥)) ⩾휈.
Note [푥, 훩(푥)] is a 푌-interval. So it contains a 푌-generic cut, say 퐽. However 퐽is not
closed under 훩, and hence 퐼cannot be conjugate to 퐽over ̄푐. This contradicts our
choice of [푎, 푏].
Theorem 5.3. If 푀is a countable arithmetically saturated model of PA, and 퐼is a
푌-generic cut in 푀, then (푀, 퐼) is an existentially closed model of PAcut
푌.
Proof. Let (퐾, 퐽) be an extension of (푀, 퐼) that satisﬁes PAcut
푌. Notice we must have
푀≺퐾since LSk is Skolemised. Suppose (퐾, 퐽) 　㨐휎(푐), where 푐∈푀and 휎(푧) ∈
훴cut
1 . By Lemma 3.3, we may assume 푐> 퐼and 휎(푧) is of the form
∃푥∃푦(휃(푥, 푦, 푧) ∧푥∈I ∧푦
̸∈I),

The Model Theory of Generic Cuts
|
293
where 휃∈LA. Deﬁne
훩(푥) =
{
{
{
{
{
{
{
(max 푦)(휃(푥, 푦, 푐)),
if it exists;
푐,
if ∀푢∃푦>푢휃(푥, 푦, 푐);
0,
if ¬∃푦휃(푥, 푦, 푐).
The fact that (퐾, 퐽) 　㨐휎(푐) implies that 퐽is not closed under 훩.
Suppose ﬁrst that we have 푎∈퐼such that 훩(푥) > 퐽for some 푥< 푎in 퐽. Then
(퐾, 퐽) 　㨐(min 푏)(∀푥<푎(훩(푥) ⩽푏)) > I.
This transfers to (푀, 퐼), and so (푀, 퐼) 　㨐휎(푐).
Suppose next that such an 푎cannot be found. Then 퐼is closed under 훩. By
the previous lemma, there is 푛∈N such that for all suﬃciently large 푥∈퐼,
(푀, 퐼) 　㨐푌(푥, 훩(푥)) < 푛.
By overspill there is [푎, 푏] ⊆푀containing 퐼such that
푀　㨐∀푥∈[푎, 푏] 푌(푥, 훩(푥)) < 푛.
This transfers to (퐾, 퐽) as 푀≺퐾. However, such a statement cannot be true in
(퐾, 퐽) because 퐽is a 푌-cut under which 훩is not closed.
It follows immediately that if 퐼is a generic cut in a model 푀　㨐PA, then the exis-
tential type of any 푐∈(푀, 퐼) is maximal over PAcut
푌, i.e., for all 훴cut
1 -formulas 휎(푧),
either PAcut
푌+ etp(푀,퐼)(푐) ⊢휎(푐) or PAcut
푌+ etp(푀,퐼)(푐) ⊢¬휎(푐).
Question 5.4. If 퐼is a cut of a countable arithmetically saturated model 푀　㨐PA
such that for all ̄푐∈푀the existential type etp(푀,퐼)( ̄푐) is maximal over PAcut
푌, then
is the cut 퐼always 푌-generic for some indicator 푌on 푀?
A strengthening of existential closure is existential universality, which has been
around in the literature for some time [3]. Recall that an existentially universal
model of a theory 푇is a model M 　㨐푇such that whenever K 　㨐푇that extends M,
if 푝(푣, ̄푧) is a set of ∃1-formulas and ̄푐∈M, then K 　㨐∃푣⋀⋀푝(푣, ̄푐) implies M 　㨐
∃푣⋀⋀푝(푣, ̄푐). No countable nonstandard model 푀　㨐PA is existentially universal:
just consider
푝(푣) = {푖∈푣: 푖∈푆} ∪{푖
̸∈푣: 푖∈N \ 푆},
where 푆⊆N that is not in SSy(푀). For the same reason, no countable model of
PAcut is existentially universal. To avoid this, we relax the deﬁnition a bit.
Deﬁnition 5.5. Let 푇be a theory in a recursive language L . Then a recursively
existentially universal model of 푇is a model M 　㨐푇such that whenever K 　㨐푇

294
|
Richard Kaye and Tin Lok Wong
that extends M, if 푝(푣, ̄푧) is a recursive set of ∃1-formulas and ̄푐∈M, then K 　㨐
∃푣⋀⋀푝(푣, ̄푐) implies M 　㨐∃푣⋀⋀푝(푣, ̄푐).
Corollary 5.6. Fix an invariant indicator 푌over some class of models of PA. If 푀
is a countable arithmetically saturated model of PA, and 퐼is a 푌-generic cut in 푀,
then (푀, 퐼) is a recursively existentially universal model of PAcut
푌.
Proof. Take a tuple ̄푐∈푀and a recursive set of 훴cut
1 -formulas 푝(푣, ̄푧) that is re-
alised in some extension of (푀, 퐼) satisfying PAcut
푌. Then 푝(푣, ̄푐) is ﬁnitely satisﬁed
in (푀, 퐼) by existential closure. So 훴cut
1 -recursive saturation guarantees that 푝(푣, ̄푐)
is realised in (푀, 퐼).
It is standard model-theoretic fact that all embeddings between existentially
closed models are ∃2-elementary. This applies to generic cuts too. The previ-
ous corollary suggests that generic cuts may actually satisfy something stronger.
Recall that all embeddings between existentially universal models are elemen-
tary [2, 3]. We only have a partial result towards this.
Corollary 5.7. Let 푌be an invariant indicator over a class K of models of PA, and
let 퐼, 퐽be 푌-generic cuts in countable arithmetically saturated models 푀, 퐾∈K re-
spectively. If SSy(푀) = SSy(퐾), then every embedding (푀, 퐼) →(퐾, 퐽) is elementary.
Proof. Let ℎ: (푀, 퐼) →(퐾, 퐽) be an embedding, ̄푐∈푀and
̄푑= ̄푐ℎ. Suppose (퐾, 퐽) 　㨐
∃푤휃(푤,
̄푑) where 휃∈L cut
Sk , and take 푠∈퐾with (퐾, 퐽) 　㨐휃(푠,
̄푑). Then 푝(푤,
̄푑) =
etp(퐾,퐽)(푠/ ̄푑) is coded in 퐾by Corollary 3.14, and hence it is coded in 푀too. Also
etp(푀,퐼)( ̄푐) = etp(퐾,퐽)( ̄푑), since the inclusion ⊆is obvious and etp(푀,퐼)( ̄푐) is maximal
by Theorem 5.3. Thus 푝(푤, ̄푐) is ﬁnitely satisﬁed in (푀, 퐼) and by Proposition 3.10
is realised in (푀, 퐼), by some 푟∈푀say. Let 푠耠= 푟ℎ∈퐾. Then etp(퐾,퐽)(푠/ ̄푑) =
etp(퐾,퐽)(푠耠/ ̄푑) by maximality again and so tp(퐾,퐽)(푠/ ̄푑) = tp(퐾,퐽)(푠耠/ ̄푑) by Corollary 4.2.
Therefore (퐾, 퐽) 　㨐휃(푠耠,
̄푑) as required.
Question 5.8. Can the assumption SSy(푀) = SSy(퐾) in Corollary 5.7 be removed?
We also ask a related question that is speciﬁc to 푌elt-generic cuts.
Question 5.9. Let 퐼, 퐽be elementary generic cuts in countable arithmetically sat-
urated models 푀, 퐾　㨐PA respectively. Is it necessarily the case that if (푀, N) ≡
(퐾, N), then (푀, 퐼) ≡(퐾, 퐽)?
Acknowledgement: Part of this work is from the second author’s doctoral disser-
tation [14], written under the supervision of the ﬁrst author. While this paper was
being written, the second author was supported ﬁnancially by the Department of
Mathematics at the National University of Singapore. He would like to thank Pro-

Bibliography
|
295
fessor Chitat Chong for this. We also wish to thank the anonymous referee, whose
comments helped improve the quality of this paper.
Bibliography
[1]
Zoﬁa Adamowicz and Teresa Bigorajska. Existentially closed structures and Gödel’s
second incompleteness theorem. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 66(1):349–356, March
2001.
[2]
Derek C. Goldrei, Angus Macintyre, and Harold Simmons. The forcing companions of
number theories. Israel Journal of Mathematics, 14:317–337, 1973.
[3]
Joram Hirschfeld and William H. Wheeler. Forcing, Arithmetic, Division Rings, volume 454
of Lecture Notes in Mathematics. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1975.
[4]
Wilfrid Hodges. Building Models by Games. Dover Publications, Inc., Mineola, New
York, 2006. Unabridged republication of the work originally published as volume 2 in
the London Mathematical Society Student Texts series by Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, in 1985.
[5]
Richard Kaye. Models of Peano Arithmetic, volume 15 of Oxford Logic Guides. Clarendon
Press, Oxford, 1991.
[6]
Richard Kaye. Generic cuts in models of arithmetic. Mathematical Logic Quarterly,
54(2):129–144, 2008.
[7]
Richard Kaye and Tin Lok Wong. On interpretations of arithmetic and set theory. Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 48(4):497–510, October 2007.
[8]
Richard Kaye and Tin Lok Wong. Truth in generic cuts. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic,
161(8):987–1005, May 2010.
[9]
Laurence A.S. Kirby. Initial segments of models of arithmetic. PhD thesis, Manchester
University, July 1977.
[10] Laurence A.S. Kirby and JeﬀB. Paris. Initial segments of models of Peano’s axioms. In
Alistair Lachlan, Marian Srebrny, and Andrzej Zarach, editors, Set Theory and Hierar-
chy Theory V, volume 619 of Lecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 211–226, Berlin, 1977.
Springer-Verlag.
[11] Roman Kossak and Nicholas Bamber. On two questions concerning the automorphism
groups of countable recursively saturated models of PA. Archive for Mathematical Logic,
36(1):73–79, December 1996.
[12] Roman Kossak and James H. Schmerl. The Structure of Models of Peano Arithmetic, vol-
ume 50 of Oxford Logic Guides. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2006.
[13] Harold Simmons. Existentially closed models of basic number theory. In Robin O. Gandy
and J. Martin E. Hyland, editors, Logic Colloquium 76, volume 87 of Studies in Logic and
the Foundations of Mathematics, pages 325–369, Amsterdam, 1977. North-Holland Pub-
lishing Company.
[14] Tin Lok Wong. Initial segments and end-extensions of models of arithmetic. PhD thesis,
University of Birmingham, May 2010.
The Model Theory of Generic Cuts


Juha Kontinen
On Natural Deduction in Dependence Logic
Abstract: We study the natural deduction system of dependence logic introduced
in [6]. We introduce a single rule that allows us to generalize the completeness
theorem of [6] from sentences to open formulas. By using a variant of our rule for
independence logic, an analogous generalization of the corresponding complete-
ness theorem of [5] is also obtained.
Keywords: dependence logic, axiomatization, team
MSC: 03B60
||
Juha Kontinen: Department of Mathematics and Statistics,University of Helsinki,
e-mail:juha.kontinen@helsinki.ﬁ
1 Introduction
Dependence logic was introduced in [7]. It extends ﬁrst-order logic by new atomic
formulas
=(푥1, . . . , 푥푛, 푦)
with the meaning that the values of the variables 푥1, . . . , 푥푛functionally determine
the values of 푦. The set of valid formulas of dependence logic has the same com-
plexity as that of full second-order logic, and hence it is not possible to give a
complete axiomatization of dependence logic. One classical way to circumvent
this problem is to modify the semantics - this is the line adopted in Henkin’s Com-
pleteness Theorem for second-order logic. For dependence logic this direction has
been pursued in [3]. Another way to proceed is to restrict to a fragment of depen-
dence logic. This is the line of study pursued in [6], where a natural deduction in-
ference system was formulated for dependence logic. This deduction system was
shown to be strong enough to derive all ﬁrst-order consequences of dependence
logic sentences.
Independence logic [4] is a variant of dependence logic in which the depen-
dence atoms are replaced by independence atoms 푥⊥푧푦. In [5] the deduction
system, and the analogous completeness theorem, of [6] was formulated for inde-
pendence logic. For both dependence and independence logic, an open question
remained whether the completeness result hold for open formulas also. In this ar-

298
|
Juha Kontinen
ticle we introduce a single rule for both dependence and independence logic that
allows us to generalize both completeness theorems to open formulas.
2 Preliminaries
In this section we deﬁne Dependence Logic (D) and recall some basic results
about it.
Deﬁnition 2.1 ([7]). The syntax of D extends the syntax of FO, deﬁned in terms of
∨, ∧, ¬, ∃and ∀, by new atomic formulas (dependence atoms) of the form
=(푡1, . . . , 푡푛),
(1)
where 푡1, . . . , 푡푛are terms. For a vocabulary 휏, D[휏] denotes the set of 휏-formulas
of D.
The meaning of the dependence atom (1) is that the value of the term 푡푛is func-
tionally determined by the values of the terms 푡1, . . . , 푡푛−1. As singular cases we
have =() which we take to be universally true, and =(푡) meaning that the value of
푡is constant.
The set Fr(휙) of free variables of a formula 휙∈D is deﬁned as for ﬁrst-order
logic, except that we have the new case
Fr(=(푡1, . . . , 푡푛)) = Var(푡1) ∪⋅⋅⋅∪Var(푡푛),
where Var(푡푖) is the set of variables occurring in the term 푡푖. If Fr(휙) = 0, we call 휙
a sentence.
In order to deﬁne the semantics of D, we ﬁrst need to deﬁne the concept of a
team. Let A be a model with domain 퐴. Assignments of A are ﬁnite mappings from
variables into 퐴. The value of a term 푡in an assignment 푠is denoted by 푡A⟨푠⟩. If
푠is an assignment, 푥a variable, and 푎∈퐴, then 푠(푎/푥) denotes the assignment
(with domain Dom(푠) ∪{푥}) which agrees with 푠everywhere except that it maps 푥
to 푎.
Let 퐴be a set and {푥1, . . . , 푥푘} a ﬁnite (possibly empty) set of variables. A team
푋of 퐴with domain Dom(푋) = {푥1, . . . , 푥푘} is any set of assignments from the
variables {푥1, . . . , 푥푘} into the set 퐴. We denote by 푟푒푙(푋) the 푘-ary relation of 퐴
corresponding to 푋
푟푒푙(푋) = {(푠(푥1), . . . , 푠(푥푘)) : 푠∈푋}.
If 푋is a team of 퐴, and 퐹: 푋→퐴, we use 푋(퐹/푥푛) to denote the (supplemented)
team {푠(퐹(푠)/푥푛) : 푠∈푋} and 푋(퐴/푥푛) the (duplicated) team {푠(푎/푥푛) : 푠∈
푋and 푎∈퐴}.

Natural deduction in dependence logic
|
299
We call a formula of D ﬁrst-order if it does not contain any dependence atoms.
An is [6], we assume that the scope of negation is always a ﬁrst-order formula.
We are now ready to deﬁne the semantics of dependence logic. In this deﬁni-
tion A 　㨐푠휙refers to satisfaction in ﬁrst-order logic.
Deﬁnition 2.2 ([7]). Let A be a model and 푋a team of 퐴. The satisfaction relation
A 　㨐푋휙is deﬁned as follows:
1.
If 휙is ﬁrst-order, then A 　㨐푋휙iﬀfor all 푠∈푋, A 　㨐푠휙.
2.
A 　㨐푋=(푡1, . . . , 푡푛) iﬀfor all 푠, 푠耠∈푋such that
푡A
1 ⟨푠⟩= 푡A
1 ⟨푠耠⟩, . . . , 푡A
푛−1⟨푠⟩= 푡A
푛−1⟨푠耠⟩, we have 푡A
푛⟨푠⟩= 푡A
푛⟨푠耠⟩.
3.
A 　㨐푋휓∧휙iﬀA 　㨐푋휓and A 　㨐푋휙.
4.
A 　㨐푋휓∨휙iﬀ푋= 푌∪푍such that A 　㨐푌휓and A 　㨐푍휙.
5.
A 　㨐푋∃푥푛휓iﬀA 　㨐푋(퐹/푥푛) 휓for some 퐹: 푋→퐴.
6.
A 　㨐푋∀푥푛휓iﬀA 　㨐푋(퐴/푥푛) 휓.
Above, we assume that the domain of 푋contains the variables free in 휙. Finally,
a sentence 휙is true in a model A, A 　㨐휙, if A 　㨐{0} 휙.
Next we deﬁne the notions of logical consequence and equivalence for formulas
of dependence logic.
Deﬁnition 2.3. Let 푇be a set of formulas of dependence logic with only ﬁnitely
many free variables. The formula 휓is a logical consequence of 푇,
푇　㨐휓,
if for all models A and teams 푋, with Fr(휓) ∪⋃휙∈푇Fr(휙) ⊆Dom(푋), and A 　㨐푋푇
we have A 　㨐푋휓. The formulas 휙and 휓are logically equivalent,
휙≡휓,
if 휙　㨐휓and 휓　㨐휙.
The following basic properties of dependence logic will be used in this article. Let
푋be a team with domain {푥1, . . . , 푥푘} and 푉⊆{푥1, . . . , 푥푘}. Denote by 푋↾푉the
team {푠↾푉: 푠∈푋} with domain 푉. The following lemma shows that the truth of a
formula depends only on the interpretations of the variables occurring free in the
formula.
Proposition 2.4. Suppose 푉⊇Fr(휙). Then A 　㨐푋휙if and only if A 　㨐푋↾푉휙.
Note that by Proposition 2.4, we may use the notation 휓(푥) to mean that Fr(휓) is
contained in the variables of the tuple 푥without problems. The following fact is
also a very basic property of all formulas of dependence logic:
Proposition 2.5 (Downward closure). Let 휙be a formula of dependence logic, A a
model, and 푌⊆푋teams. Then A 　㨐푋휙implies A 　㨐푌휙.

300
|
Juha Kontinen
3 Sentences versus open formulas
It is well known that the relationship between open formulas and sentences of
dependence logic is more complicated than, e.g., in ﬁrst-order logic. In FO, an
open formula can be translated into a sentence (in an extended vocabulary) by
replacing the free variables of it by fresh constant symbols. In dependence logic,
this is not possible as exempliﬁed by the following example.
Example 3.1. Let A be a structure over 휏= {푃} such that 퐴= {0, 1} and 푃A = 0.
Consider the following team of 퐴with domain {푥0}:
푥0
푠0
0
푠1
1
(1)
It is straightforward to verify that A
̸　㨐푋푃(푥0) and A
̸　㨐푋¬푃(푥0). Suppose we
extend A by a new constant symbol 푐A. Now 푐A ∈{0, 1} and, in either case, it
holds that A 　㨐푃(푐) or A 　㨐¬푃(푐), and hence the behaviour of the formula 푃(푥0)
cannot be captured by 푃(푐).
The problem in Example 3.1 can be ﬁxed by representing the team 푋by a new
relation symbol. In [7] it was shown that any formula of dependence logic can be
translated to an equivalent sentence of ESO that has an extra predicate for the
team (i.e., 푋is represented by 푟푒푙(푋)). For our purposes the following variant of
this result will be useful.
Proposition 3.2 ([1]). Let 휏be a vocabulary and 휙a D[휏]-formula with free vari-
ables 푥1, . . . , 푥푠. Then for all 휏∪{푅}-structures A and 푋with Dom(푋) = {푥1, . . . , 푥푠},
A 　㨐푋휙⇐⇒(A, 푟푒푙(푋)) 　㨐∀푥1 . . . ∀푥푠(¬푅(푥1, . . . , 푥푠) ∨휙).
The proof of Proposition 3.2 uses the downwards closure of all formulas of depen-
dence logic and the ﬂatness property of formulas without dependence atoms (see
Clause 1 of Deﬁnition 2.2).
3.1 Generalizing completeness for open formulas
In this section we formulate an inference rule that allow us to extend the com-
pleteness theorem of [6] to cover also open formulas. Let us recall this result:
Theorem 3.3 ([6]). Let 푇be a set of sentences of dependence logic and 휙∈FO.
Then the following are equivalent:

Natural deduction in dependence logic
|
301
1.
푇　㨐휙,
2.
푇⊢D 휙.
In clause 2, the symbol ⊢D refers to derivability with respect to the natural deduc-
tion system of dependence logic in [6]. We will not discuss the details of this infer-
ence system in this article but refer to [6] for details. The open problem addressed
in this article is whether Theorem 3.3 holds if the set 푇is allowed to contain also
open formulas. One of the crucial steps in the proof of Theorem 3.3 is the approx-
imation of dependence logic sentences by an inﬁnite set of ﬁrst-order sentences.
It seems that some modiﬁcations would be needed in the approximations if our
dependence logic formulas are allowed to have free variables.
It turns out that, by adopting the following auxiliary inference rule to the de-
duction system ⊢D of [6], the generalization of Theorem 3.3 can be proved. Note
that Proposition 3.2 is applied in the formulation of this rule:
퐴(푥)
[∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨퐴(푥))]
....
∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨퐵(푥))
퐵(푥)
(2)
where the prerequisite for applying this rule is that 푅does not occur in 퐴or 퐵,
nor in any non-discharged assumption in the subderivation, except for ∀푥(¬푅(푥)∨
퐴(푥)). The soundness of Rule (2) can be shown using Proposition 3.2. We will write
푇⊢∗휓to mean that 휓can be derived from 푇using the rules of [6] and rule (2).
Lemma 3.4. Let 푇∪{휓} be a set of formulas of dependence logic. If 푇⊢∗휓, then
푇　㨐휓.
Proof. We will show how to extend the Soundness Theorem of [6] to cover also
rule (2). Assume that we have a natural deduction proof of a formula 퐵(푥) from
the assumptions
{퐴1, . . . , 퐴푘}
with the last rule (2) applied to 퐴(푥). Without loss of generality, we may assume
that 푥contains the variables that appear free in any of these formulas. By the
assumption, we have a shorter deduction of 퐴(푥) from the same assumptions, and
a deduction of
∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨퐵(푥))
using assumptions {퐴푖1, . . . , 퐴푖푙, ∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨퐴(푥))}, where 퐴푖푗∈{퐴1, . . . , 퐴푘} for
1 ≤푗≤푙.
Let A be of vocabulary 휏and 푋(with 푥as domain) be such that A 　㨐푋퐴푖, for
1 ≤푖≤푘. We need to show that A 　㨐푋퐵(푥). Denote by C the reduct of A to the
vocabulary 휏\ {푅}.

302
|
Juha Kontinen
By the induction assumption, we get that A 　㨐푋퐴(푥), and, since 푅does not
occur in 퐴(푥), C 　㨐푋퐴(푥). Therefore, by Proposition 3.2
(C, 푟푒푙(푋)) 　㨐∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨퐴(푥)).
(3)
Since 푅does not occur in 퐴푖푗, we also get that
(C, 푟푒푙(푋)) 　㨐퐴푖푗,
(4)
for 1 ≤푗≤푙. Now by (3), (4), and the induction assumption it follows that
(C, 푟푒푙(푋)) 　㨐∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨퐵(푥)).
Using Proposition 3.2 again, we get C 　㨐푋퐵(푥). Now, since 푅does not occur in
퐵(푥), A 　㨐푋퐵(푥) follows.
We are now ready to state the generalization of the completeness theorem of [6].
Recall that by assumption only ﬁnitely many distinct variables may appear free in
the formulas of 푇below. We write 푇(푥) to indicate that the free variables of 푇are
contained in 푥.
Theorem 3.5. Let 푇(푥) be a set of formulas of dependence logic and 휙(푥) ∈FO.
Then the following are equivalent:
1.
푇(푥) 　㨐휙(푥),
2.
푇(푥) ⊢∗휙(푥).
Proof. By Lemma 3.4 it suﬃces to show the implication from 1 to 2. Note ﬁrst that
there has to be a ﬁnite 푇耠⊆푇such that 푇耠(푥) 　㨐휙(푥). If no such ﬁnite 푇耠exists,
then by the compactness theorem of D [7] the following set of sentences (recall
Proposition 3.2)
{∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨휃푖(푥)) : 휃푖∈푇},
and the sentence
¬∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨휙(푥))
(5)
are consistent. This would imply (again using Proposition 3.2) that there is a struc-
ture A and a team 푋such that A 　㨐푋푇(푥) and A
̸　㨐푋휙(푥) contradicting assump-
tion 1. Note that, for this argument it is essential that 휙(푥), and hence also (5), is
ﬁrst-order. In particular, the following now holds:
훹　㨐∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨휙(푥)),
where 훹is the sentence
∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨⋀
휃푖∈푇耠
휃푖(푥)).

Natural deduction in dependence logic
|
303
By Theorem 3.3, we get that
훹⊢D ∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨휙(푥)).
(6)
Now by combining the derivation (6) with one application of the rule (2) we get
⋀
휃푖∈푇耠
휃푖(푥) ⊢∗휙(푥),
which by 푇耠⊆푇(and the conjunction introduction rule) concludes the proof.
3.2 The case of independence logic
In this section we prove the analogue of Theorem 3.5 for independence logic and
thereby generalize the completeness result of [5].
Independence logic I replaces the dependence atoms of D by independence
atoms of the form 푦⊥푥푧with the following semantics:
A 　㨐푋푦⊥푥푧iﬀfor all 푠, 푠耠∈푋: if 푠(푥) = 푠耠(푥), then there is 푠0∈푋such that 푠0(푥) =
푠(푥), 푠0(푦) = 푠(푦) and 푠0(푧) = 푠耠(푧).
Dependence atoms can be easily expressed using independence atoms imply-
ing that independence logic contains dependence logic as a sublogic. This con-
tainment is in fact proper, since, for example, the analogue of Proposition 2.5
(downwards closure) does not hold for independence logic. On the other hand,
for sentences, the expressive power of both D and I coincides with that of exis-
tential second-order logic.
It worth noting that adopting the semantics of Deﬁnition 2.2 for the existential
quantiﬁer makes independence logic non-local, i.e. Proposition 2.4 does not hold
for it. On the other hand, by the results of [2], locality can be restored if the co-
domain of 퐹: 푋→퐴(clause 5 of Deﬁnition 2.2) is changed to P(퐴) \ {0}. This
variant of the semantics (Lax-semantics) is also used in [5].
We will use the following proposition which is analogous to Proposition 3.2.
Proposition 3.6. Let 휏be a vocabulary and 휙a I[휏]-formula with free variables
푥1, . . . , 푥푠. Then for all 휏∪{푅}-structures A and 푋with Dom(푋) = {푥1, . . . , 푥푠},
A 　㨐푋휙⇐⇒(A, 푟푒푙(푋)) 　㨐∀푥(¬푅(푥1, . . . , 푥푠) ∨(푅(푥1, . . . , 푥푠) ∧휙)).
(7)
The author is grateful to Pietro Galliani for pointing out that, due to the lack of
downward closure, the conjunct 푅(푥1, . . . , 푥푠) is needed in the formula in (7) (com-
pare to Proposition 3.2).

304
|
Juha Kontinen
We can now formulate the new inference rule for independence logic:
퐴(푥)
[∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨(푅(푥) ∧퐴(푥)))]
....
∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨(푅(푥) ∧퐵(푥)))
퐵(푥)
(8)
where the prerequisite for applying this rule is that 푅does not occur in 퐴or 퐵, nor
in any non-discharged assumption in the subderivation, except for ∀푥(¬푅(푥) ∨
(푅(푥)∧퐴(푥))). The soundness of rule (8) can be proved analogously to Lemma 3.4.
We will write 푇⊢⋆휓to mean that 휓can be derived from 푇using the rules of [5]
and rule (8). The generalization of the completeness theorem of [5] can be now
stated.
Theorem 3.7. Let 푇(푥) be a set of formulas of independence logic and 휙(푥) ∈FO.
Then the following are equivalent:
1.
푇(푥) 　㨐휙(푥),
2.
푇(푥) ⊢⋆휙(푥).
Proof. The proof is analogous to the proof of Theorem 3.5. In particular, compact-
ness theorem, which was used in the proof of Theorem 3.5, also holds for sentences
of independence logic.
Acknowledgement: I would like to thank the anonymous referee for useful com-
ments. This work was supported by grant 264917 of the Academy of Finland.
Bibliography
[1] Arnaud Durand and Juha Kontinen. Hierarchies in dependence logic. ACM Transactions on
Computational Logic, 13(4):1–21, 2012.
[2] Pietro Galliani. Inclusion and exclusion dependencies in team semantics - on some logics
of imperfect information. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 163(1):68–84, 2012.
[3] Pietro Galliani. General models and entailment semantics for independence logic. Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic, 54(2):253–275, 2013.
[4] Erich Grädel and Jouko A. Väänänen. Dependence and independence. Studia Logica,
101(2):399–410, 2013.
[5] Miika Hannula. Axiomatizing ﬁrst order consequences in independence logic. Manuscript,
2012.
[6] Juha Kontinen and Jouko Väänänen. Axiomatizing ﬁrst-order consequences in dependence
logic. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic, 64(11):1101 – 1117, 2013.
[7] Jouko Väänänen. Dependence logic, volume 70 of London Mathematical Society Student
Texts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2007.

Steven Lindell*, Henry Towsner, and Scott Weinstein
Inﬁnitary Methods in Finite Model Theory
Abstract: We exhibit the usefulness of inﬁnitary methods in ﬁnite model theory.
||
*Corresponding Author: Steven Lindell: Haverford College
Henry Towsner, Scott Weinstein: University of Pennsylvania
1 Introduction
This paper explores applications of the inﬁnitary techniques of classical model
theory in the context of ﬁnite model theory, and thus elaborates on themes ex-
plored by [13]. We are grateful for the opportunity to celebrate Jouko’s inclusive
vision of logic in this way.
2 Preliminaries
We suppose the reader is familiar with the notion of a relational structure of sim-
ilarity type 휏. By a class of structures, we understand a collection of relational
structures of common similarity type which is closed under isomorphism. We use
FO to denote the collection of sentences of ﬁrst order logic.
Deﬁnition 2.1. Let 퐾be a class of structures of similarity type 휏and let 훤be a set
of ﬁrst-order sentences.
1.
Th(퐾) = {휑∈FO | (∀퐴∈퐾)퐴　㨐휑}.
2.
Mod(훤) = {퐴| 퐴　㨐훤}.
3.
Let 퐴be a structure of similarity type 휏. 퐴is a pseudo-퐾structure if and only
if 퐴∈(Mod(Th(퐾)) −퐾).
An alternative formulation of Deﬁnition 2.13 is: 퐴is a pseudo-퐾structure if and
only if 퐴
̸∈퐾but for every ﬁrst order sentence 휑, if 퐴　㨐휑, then for some 퐵∈퐾,
퐵　㨐휑. Intuitively, a structure 퐴is pseudo-퐾just in case it is indistinguishable
from structures in 퐾by ﬁrst order sentences.
Let 퐹휏be the class of ﬁnite structures of similarity type 휏. A structure 퐴of
similarity type 휏is pseudo-ﬁnite if and only if 퐴is pseudo-퐹휏. In general, if there
is no ﬁnite upper bound on the size of structures in 퐾⊆퐹휏, then a structure 퐴is

306
|
Steven Lindell, Henry Towsner, and Scott Weinstein
pseudo-퐾just in case 퐴satisﬁes the limit theory of 퐾(Th∞(퐾)) deﬁned as follows.
Th∞(퐾) = {휑∈FO | (∃푛∈휔)(∀퐵∈퐾)(|퐵| ≥푛→퐵　㨐휑)}.
Suppose 퐹is a class of structures, not necessarily ﬁnite, and 퐾⊆퐹. We say that
퐾is ﬁrst order deﬁnable over 퐹if and only if there is a ﬁrst order sentence 휑such
that for all 퐴∈퐹, 퐴　㨐휑if and only if 퐴∈퐾.
3 An easy inexpressibility result – connectivity
In this section, we give some examples which apply the notion of pseudo-퐾struc-
ture to inexpressibility results in ﬁnite model theory. The source of these results
is the following simple observation.
Proposition 3.1. Let 퐾⊆퐹휏. Suppose there is a structure 퐴of similarity type 휏which
is both pseudo-퐾and pseudo-(퐹휏−퐾). Then 퐾is not ﬁrst order deﬁnable over 퐹휏.
The ﬁrst example is due to [9].
Proposition 3.2. Connectivity is not deﬁnable in ﬁrst order logic over ﬁnite simple
graphs.
Proof: Let 퐾be the class of connected ﬁnite simple graphs and let 퐺be the class of
all ﬁnite simple graphs. By Proposition 3.1, it suﬃces to exhibit a structure 퐴which
is both pseudo-퐾and pseudo-(퐺−퐾). And for this, it suﬃces to show that there
is a structure 퐴which is both pseudo-퐶1 and pseudo-퐶2, where 퐶1 is the class of
simple cycles and 퐶2 is the class of pairs of disjoint simple cycles. We claim that
3.3. every 2-regular, acyclic simple graph is both pseudo-퐶1 and pseudo-퐶2.
Let 푇be the ﬁrst order theory which speciﬁes that a graph is 2-regular, acyclic and
simple. 푇can be axiomatized by the following inﬁnite set of ﬁrst order sentences.
1.
(∀푥)¬퐸푥푥∧(∀푥)(∀푦)(퐸푥푦→퐸푦푥)
2.
(∀푥)(∃푦)(∃푧)(푦
̸= 푧∧(∀푤)(퐸푥푤↔(푤= 푦∨푤= 푧))
3.
for each 푛≥3 the sentence
¬(∃푥1) . . . (∃푥푛)( ⋀
1≤푖<푗≤푛
푥푖
̸= 푥푗∧⋀
1≤푖<푛
퐸푥푖푥푖+1 ∧퐸푥푛푥1)
It is easy to see that every model of 푇consists of a disjoint union of bi-inﬁnite sim-
ple chains. It follows at once that for every 휅> ℵ0, 푇is 휅-categorical. Therefore,
by the Łos-Vaught Test, 푇is complete. Note that every ﬁnite sub-theory of 푇has
a model 퐶which consists of a single simple cycle and a model 퐷which consists

Inﬁnitary Methods in Finite Model Theory
|
307
of a disjoint pair of simple cycles. It follows at once, by the Compactness Theo-
rem, that the same holds for any sentence 휑which is a consequence of 푇; this
establishes 3.3, thereby concluding the proof.
2
In the next section, we give a “classical” proof that connectivity is not
monadic-훴1
1, as a corollary to the Hanf threshold-locality theorem.
Other investigators have noted the eﬀectiveness of classical model-theoretic
techniques in establishing limits on the expressive power of ﬁrst order logic over
ﬁnite structures. Antedating the classical proof of [9], [12] showed, using ultra-
products of 2-regular ﬁnite graphs, that connectivity is not ﬁrst-order deﬁnable
over ﬁnite simple graphs; extending this, [13] uses ultraproducts to show that
connectivity is not monadic-훴1
1 over ﬁnite graphs. [13] also uses ultraproducts to
show that even cardinality of ﬁnite structure is not ﬁrst order deﬁnable; [11] gives
a beautiful proof of this result using initial segments of “non-standard models” of
the ﬁrst order theory of ⟨휔, <⟩. Moreover, [6] used classical model theoretic tech-
niques to derive the 0-1 law for ﬁrst-order logic with respect to ﬁnite graphs with
constant edge probability, from which a raft of inexpressibility results follows.
Very recently, Philip Dittmann has applied ultraproducts to obtain a variety of re-
sults in ﬁnite model theory, as reported in [2].
4 Locality Theorems
Locality theorems characterize various senses in which properties of a relational
structure which are deﬁnable in a particular way depend on “local informa-
tion” about the structure, typically, isomorphism types of neighborhoods in the
Gaifman-graph of the structure. The next deﬁnition formulates some topological
notions requisite for describing locality precisely.
Deﬁnition 4.1. Let 퐺be a graph, 푎, 푏∈퐺and 푟≥0.
1.
We write 훿퐺(푎, 푏) for the distance between 푎and 푏in 퐺.
2.
B푟(퐺, 푎) = {푐∈퐺| 훿퐺(푎, 푐) ≤푟}, for 푟∈휔. B∞(퐺, 푎) = ⋃푟∈휔B푟(퐺, 푎).
3.
Let 퐴be a relational structure of similarity type 휏. The Gaifman-graph of 퐴
(denoted 퐺퐴) is the simple graph whose node set is 퐴and whose edge relation
holds between a pair of nodes 푎, 푏with 푎
̸= 푏if and only if for some 푅∈휏and
tuple 푐∈푅퐴there are 푖, 푗with 푐푖= 푎and 푐푗= 푏.
4.
We say a structure 퐴has bounded degree if and only if there is a 푑∈휔such
that for every 푎∈퐴the degree of 푎in 퐺퐴is at most 푑; we say 퐴has ﬁnite
degree if and only if for every 푎∈퐴, the degree of 푎in 퐺퐴is ﬁnite.

308
|
Steven Lindell, Henry Towsner, and Scott Weinstein
5.
Let 푟∈휔or 푟= ∞, and let 푎be an 푛-tuple of elements of 퐴.
퐴푟(푎) = ⟨(퐴↾⋃1≤푖≤푛B푟(퐺퐴, 푎푖)), 푎⟩.
The structure 퐴푟(푎) is often called the 푟-neighborhood of 푎in 퐴.
Note that for any ﬁnite relational signature 휏, there is a ﬁrst-order formula 훿푟
휏(푥, 푦)
such that for every 휏-structure 퐴and 푎, 푏∈퐴, 퐴　㨐훿푟
휏[푎, 푏] if and only if the dis-
tance between 푎and 푏in 퐺퐴is at most 푟. If 휑(푥1, . . . , 푥푘) is a formula, we write
휑푟(푥1, . . . , 푥푘) for the formula which results from 휑(푥1, . . . , 푥푘) by relativizing all its
quantiﬁers (푄푦) to the formula 훿푟
휏(푥1, 푦) ∨. . . ∨훿푟
휏(푥푘, 푦). We call such a formula
an 푟-local formula. If 푎is a 푘-tuple of elements of 퐴, the local type of 푎in 퐴is the
set of formulas 휑푟(푥), for all 푟∈휔, such that 퐴(푎) 　㨐휑푟(푎). An 푛-ary 휏-query is
an isomorphism invariant map 휑from 휏-structures 퐴to 푛-ary relations on 퐴; we
write 휑[퐴] for the 휑image of 퐴.
4.1 Gaifman locality
The next deﬁnition formulates a ﬁrst notion of locality.
Deﬁnition 4.2. Suppose 휑is an 푛-ary 휏-query, 푛> 0. We say that 휑is Gaifman
푟-local if and only if for every 휏-structure 퐴and 푛-tuples 푎, 푏of elements of 퐴, if
퐴푟(푎) ≅퐴푟(푏), then 푎∈휑[퐴] ⇐⇒푏∈휑[퐴]. A query is Gaifman local if and only
if it is Gaifman 푟-local for some 푟∈휔.
Theorem 4.3. Every ﬁrst order deﬁnable query is Gaifman local.
Proof: Suppose that 휑(푥) is a ﬁrst order formula deﬁning an 푛-ary query on 휏-
structures which is not Gaifman local.
4.4. Then for every 푟∈휔there is a 휏-structure 퐴and 푎, 푏∈퐴such that
1.
푎∈휑[퐴] and 푏
̸∈휑[퐴], and
2.
퐴푟(푎) ≅퐴푟(푏).
Expand the signature 휏with 2푛new constants 푎and 푏and a unary function symbol
푓. Choose, for each 푟∈휔, a ﬁrst order formula 휓푟in the expanded signature to
uniformly express the condition that 푓is an isomorphism from 퐴푟(푎) onto 퐴푟(푏).
Let 푇= {휑(푎), ¬휑(푏)} ∪{휓푟| 푟∈휔}. It follows at once from 4.41 and 2, via the
compactness theorem, that 푇is satisﬁable. Let 퐴耠　㨐푇and let 퐴be the reduct
of 퐴耠to 휏. It follows at once that there is an isomorphism 푔mapping 퐴∞(푎) onto
퐴∞(푏). We extend 푔to an automorphism ℎof 퐴thereby contradicting 퐴　㨐휑[푎]
and 퐴
̸　㨐휑[푏].

Inﬁnitary Methods in Finite Model Theory
|
309
For all 푎∈퐴, if 푎
̸∈퐴∞(푎)∪퐴∞(푏), we let ℎ(푎) = 푎. For all 푎∈(퐴∞(푏)−퐴∞(푎)),
there is a unique 푏∈퐴∞(푎) and 푚≤푛such that 푏
̸∈ran(푔) and 푔푚(푏) = 푎. We let
ℎ(푎) = 푏. It is easy to verify that ℎso deﬁned is an automorphism.
2
We make use of the following lemma in our proof of Theorem 4.7.
Lemma 4.5. Let 푎and 푏be non-empty tuples of the same local type in 휔-saturated
models 퐴and 퐵respectively. Then 퐴∞(푎) ≡퐵∞(푏).
Proof: We use the Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game to show that 퐴∞(푎) ≡퐵∞(푏). We pro-
ceed by induction on the number of moves. In particular, at the 푘-th round of the
game, we maintain the property that ⟨푎1, . . . , 푎푘, 푎⟩and ⟨푏1, . . . , 푏푘, 푏⟩have the same
local type.
Basis: For 푘= 0, ⟨푎⟩and ⟨푏⟩have the same local type in 퐴and 퐵by hypothesis.
Induction Step: By induction hypothesis, ⟨푎1, . . . , 푎푘−1, 푎⟩and ⟨푏1, . . . , 푏푘−1, 푏⟩
have the same local type 훬(푥1, . . . , 푥푘−1, 푥). We will show that the local type
훬耠(푥1, . . . , 푥푘, 푥) of every extension in 퐴∞(푎) is also realized in 퐵∞(푏), and vice
versa. Suppose without loss of generality we are given 푎푘in 퐴∞(푎) (resp. 푏푘in
퐵∞(푏)) such that 퐴∞(푎) 　㨐훬耠[푎1, . . . , 푎푘, 푎]. We want to ﬁnd 푏푘in 퐵∞(푏) (resp. 푎푘in
퐴∞(푎)) such that 퐵∞(푏) 　㨐훬耠[푏1, . . . , 푏푘, 푏]. Take any ﬁnite collection of local formu-
las 훷⊆훬耠. Their conjunction is equivalent to an 푟-local formula 휑푟(푥1, . . . , 푥푘, 푥) by
taking 푟to be the maximum of the radii in 훷. Let 푑be the distance from 푎푘to 푎and
observe that 휓(푥1, . . . , 푥푘−1, 푥) = (∃푥푘)[훿푑(푥, 푥푘)∧휑푟(푥1, . . . , 푥푘, 푥)] is (푑+푟)-local by
the triangle inequality. So 퐴푑+푟(푎1, . . . , 푎푘−1, 푎) ⊇퐴푟(푎1, . . . , 푎푘, 푎) 　㨐휑[푎1, . . . , 푎푘, 푎]
implies 퐴푑+푟(푎1, . . . , 푎푘−1, 푎) 　㨐휓[푎1, . . . , 푎푘−1, 푎], and hence 휓∈훬. This means
퐵∞(푏) 　㨐휓[푏1, . . . , 푏푘−1, 푏], and hence there is a 푏푘of distance 푑from 푏such that
퐵푟(푏1, . . . , 푏푘, 푏) 　㨐휑[푏1, . . . , 푏푘, 푏], and hence 퐵∞(푏) 　㨐휑푟[푏1, . . . , 푏푘, 푏], which makes
훬耠(푏1, . . . , 푏푘−1, 푥푘, 푏) ﬁnitely consistent in 퐵∞(푏). So by 휔-saturation, 훬耠is realized
by a single 푏푘such that 퐵∞(푏) 　㨐훬耠[푏1, . . . , 푏푘−1, 푏푘, 푏]. But notice that since the dis-
tance from 푏푘to 푏must be 푑, it is in fact in 퐵∞(푏). This completes the induction.
To ﬁnish the proof, notice that if ⟨푎1, . . . , 푎푘, 푎⟩and ⟨푏1, . . . , 푏푘, 푏⟩have the same
local type, then the radius 1 formulas in that type witness a partial isomorphism.
Therefore, 퐴∞(푎) ≡퐵∞(푏), since we have shown we can play the game between
them for any number of moves.
2
The following deﬁnition and theorem are due to [8].
Deﬁnition 4.6. A basic local sentence is one which says there are 푘disjoint neigh-
borhoods each satisfying the same local formula:
(∃푥1) . . . (∃푥푘) ⋀{푑(푥푖, 푥푗) > 2푟∧휑푟(푥푖) | 1 ≤푖< 푗≤푘}.
Theorem 4.7. Every ﬁrst-order sentence is equivalent to a Boolean combination of
basic local sentences.

310
|
Steven Lindell, Henry Towsner, and Scott Weinstein
Proof: By Corollary 1.0.7 of [4], it suﬃces to show that any two models 퐴and 퐵
which satisfy the same basic local sentences are elementarily equivalent. This is
obvious if one of the models is ﬁnite, because a basic local sentence can com-
pletely describe any ﬁnite model up to isomorphism. In case 퐴and 퐵are inﬁnite,
we may suppose, without loss of generality, that they are 휔-saturated, since every
structure has an 휔-saturated elementary extension. If 퐴has 푘distinct isomorphic
copies of some component 퐶, choose any element 푎in 퐶, and let 훴be the inﬁnite
set of formulas which says its 푘variables are inﬁnitely far apart and have the same
local type as 푎:
훴(푥1 . . . 푥푘) = {푑(푥푖, 푥푗) > 2푟∧휑푟(푥푖) | 1 ≤푖< 푗≤푘; 퐴푟(푎) 　㨐휑[푎]; 1 ≤푟< ∞}.
The existential closure of every ﬁnite subset of 훴is equivalent to a basic local sen-
tence true in 퐴, hence true in 퐵, by hypothesis. So 훴is ﬁnitely consistent over 퐵.
But since 퐵is saturated, 퐵satisﬁes 훴, and therefore has 푘elements of the same lo-
cal type that lie in separate components. By Lemma 4.5, these components in 퐵are
all elementarily equivalent to each other and to the corresponding components in
퐴. Repeating this argument the other way around, from 퐵to 퐴, we see that each
model must have either the same ﬁnite number of each component up to elemen-
tary equivalence, or an inﬁnite number. Therefore, we can play any ﬁnite number
of rounds of the Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game, and hence 퐴≡퐵.
2
4.2 Hanf locality
The next deﬁnition formulates a second notion of locality.
Deﬁnition 4.8. Suppose 휅, 휆, and 휇are cardinals, 퐴and 퐵are 휏-structures, and
퐾is a class of 휏-structures.
1.
휅∼휇휆if and only if 휅= 휆or 휅≥휇and 휆≥휇.
2.
Let 푟∈휔and 푡∈휔∪{휔}. 퐴is Hanf threshold 푟, 푡-equivalent to 퐵(written
퐴≈푟,푡퐵) if and only if for every pointed 휏-structure 퐶,
|{푎∈퐴| 퐴푟(푎) ≅퐶}| ∼푡|{푏∈퐵| 퐵푟(푏) ≅퐶}|.
3.
A class of 휏-structures 퐽is Hanf 푟, 푡-local on 퐾if and only if for all 퐴, 퐵∈퐾, if
퐴≈푟,푡퐵, then 퐴∈퐽⇐⇒퐵∈퐽.
4.
A class of 휏-structures 퐽is Hanf threshold-local on 퐾if and only if 퐽is Hanf
푟, 푡-local on 퐾for some 푟, 푡∈휔.
In the proof of the next theorem, we use the notion of a model pair, which is ex-
tensively used by [3] in similar spirit. Suppose 퐴and 퐵are 휏-structures and that

Inﬁnitary Methods in Finite Model Theory
|
311
퐴∩퐵= 0. The model pair ⟨퐴, 퐵⟩is the 휏∪{푃} structure with universe 퐴∪퐵, where
the extension of the unary predicate 푃is 퐴and the interpretation of all 휏vocabu-
lary is the union of its interpretation of 퐴and 퐵. Observe that for every ﬁrst order
휏sentence 휑, there are 휏∪{푃} sentences 휑퐴and 휑퐵such that
⟨퐴, 퐵⟩　㨐휑퐴⇐⇒퐴　㨐휑and ⟨퐴, 퐵⟩　㨐휑퐵⇐⇒퐵　㨐휑.
The following theorem is due to [7].
Theorem 4.9. If 퐽is ﬁrst order deﬁnable and 퐾is a class of structures of bounded
degree, then 퐽is Hanf threshold-local on 퐾.
Proof: Let 퐽be a class of 휏-structures deﬁned by a ﬁrst order sentence 휑, let 퐾
be a class of 휏-structures of degree bounded by 푑, and suppose that 퐽is not
Hanf threshold-local on 퐾. We formulate a theory 푇in the language of pairs of
휏-structures expanded with a new binary predicate 푅which describes this situa-
tion. Observe that since the structures in 퐾are of uniformly bounded degree, for
each 푟∈휔there is a ﬁrst order 휏∪{푃} formula 휓푟(푥, 푦) such that for all 푎∈퐴and
푏∈퐵,
⟨퐴, 퐵⟩　㨐휓푟[푎, 푏] ⇐⇒퐴푟(푎) ≅퐵푟(푏).
Let 푇be the following set of sentences.
1.
휑퐴∧¬휑퐵
2.
the degree of 퐴and of 퐵are bounded by 푑
3.
(∀푥)(∀푦)(푅(푥, 푦) →휓푟(푥, 푦)), for every 푟∈휔
4.
[(∀푥1 . . . 푥푡)(⋀푖푃(푥푖) →(∃푦1 . . . 푦푡)(⋀푖¬푃(푦푖) ∧⋀푖<푗(푥푖
̸= 푥푗→푦푖
̸= 푦푗) ∧
⋀푖푅(푥푖, 푦푖)))] ∧
[(∀푥1 . . . 푥푡)(⋀푖¬(푃푥푖) →(∃푦1 . . . 푦푡)(⋀푖푃(푦푖) ∧⋀푖<푗(푥푖
̸= 푥푗→푦푖
̸= 푦푗) ∧
⋀푖푅(푦푖, 푥푖)))], for every 푡∈휔
It follows at once from our hypotheses, via the compactness and Löwenheim-
Skolem theorems, that 푇is satisﬁable in a countable model pair ⟨퐴, 퐵⟩expanded
by an interpretation 퐹of 푅which is a bijection of 퐴onto 퐵with the property that
4.10. for all 푎∈퐴and for all 푟∈휔,
퐴푟(푎) ≅퐵푟(퐹(푎)).
Since 퐴is of bounded degree, for each 푟∈휔, 퐴푟(푎) is ﬁnite, hence there are only
ﬁnitely many isomorphisms from 퐴푟(푎) onto 퐵푟(퐹(푎)). Observe that the set of all
isomorphisms from 퐴푟(푎) onto 퐵푟(퐹(푎)) for all 푟∈휔forms a ﬁnitely branching
tree under inclusion, hence, by the König Inﬁnity Lemma, this tree has an inﬁnite
path which represents an isomorphism from 퐴∞(푎) onto 퐵∞(퐹(푎)). Thus, 퐹is an

312
|
Steven Lindell, Henry Towsner, and Scott Weinstein
isomorphism preserving bijection between the pointed components of 퐴and 퐵.
We say a component 퐶of 퐴has ﬁnite character if for some 푎∈퐶, there are only
ﬁnitely many 푏∈퐶such that 퐴∞(푎) ≅퐴∞(푏), and similarly for components of 퐵.
It is easy to see that 퐹induces a bijection between the components of 퐴and 퐵of
ﬁnite character. By compactness, we may take countable elementary extensions
퐴耠of 퐴and 퐵耠of 퐵such that every component of 퐴耠which is not of ﬁnite character
occurs inﬁnitely often in 퐴耠, up to isomorphism, and similarly for 퐵耠. It follows at
once that 퐴耠≅퐵耠, which contradicts 퐴耠　㨐휑and 퐵耠
̸　㨐휑.
2
As a corollary to Theorem 4.9, we show that connectivity is not mon-훴1
1 deﬁn-
able over the class of ﬁnite simple graphs, a result ﬁrst established by [5]; our proof
is an “inﬁnitary” version of an argument presented in [7]. (A formula of second or-
der logic is mon-훴1
1 if and only if it is of the form (∃푃)휑, where 푃is a sequence of
unary predicate variables and 휑is a ﬁrst order formula.)
Theorem 4.11. Connectivity is not mon-훴1
1 deﬁnable over the class of ﬁnite simple
graphs.
Proof: Suppose that
4.12. the mon-훴1
1 sentence (∃푃)휑(푃) deﬁnes connectivity over the class of ﬁnite sim-
ple graphs.
Let 퐾1 be the class of ﬁnite 푃-colored simple cycles which satisfy 휑(푃) and let
퐾2 be the class of pairs of all ﬁnite 푃-colored simple cycles (a 푃-colored simple
graph has, in addition to a loop-free undirected edge relation, interpretations of
the unary predicates in 푃– we shorten “푃-colored” to “colored” for the remain-
der). By Theorem 4.9, it follows from 4.12 that for some 푟0 and 푡0, if 퐷≈푟0,푡0 퐶for
some 퐶∈퐾1, then 퐷∈퐾1, for all ﬁnite colored simple graphs 퐷. It is easy to see
that
4.13. for every 푟, 푡, and 푑, there is a ﬁrst-order sentence characterizing graphs of
degree at most 푑up to ≈푟,푡.
Therefore, in order to derive a contradiction from 4.12, it suﬃces to show that
4.14. for every 퐴, if 퐴is pseudo-퐾1, then 퐴is pseudo-퐾2.
In order to verify 4.14, suppose that 퐴is pseudo-퐾1; by the Löwenheim-Skolem
Theorem, we may suppose, without loss of generality, that |퐴| > (2ℵ0)+. It is easy to
see that in this case 퐴consists of a collection of colored bi-inﬁnite simple chains.
Moreover, it follows from 4.13 and the fact that 퐴is pseudo-퐾1 that for every 푟, 푡,
there is a colored simple cycle 퐶푟,푡with 퐴≈푟,푡퐶푟,푡. To complete the veriﬁcation of
4.14, it therefore suﬃces to show that there is a colored simple cycle 퐷such that

Inﬁnitary Methods in Finite Model Theory
|
313
4.15. 퐶푟,푡⊕퐷≈푟,푡퐴.
Since |퐴| > (2ℵ0)+, it follows at once that there is a colored bi-inﬁnite chain 퐵⊆
퐴which occurs inﬁnitely often up to isomorphism in 퐴. It is easy to see, by the
pigeon-hole principle, that there is a 2푟+ 1-neighborhood 푁in 퐵which occurs
inﬁnitely often up to isomorphism. Let 푁1 and 푁2 be disjoint copies of 푁occurring
in 퐵. It follows at once that every 푟-neighborhood occurring between them in 퐵
occurs inﬁnitely often in 퐴up to isomorphism. Let 퐷be the colored cycle formed
by snipping 퐵at the midpoints of 푁1 and 푁2 and identifying the endpoints of the
of the resulting ﬁnite simple chain. It is easy to see that this choice of 퐷satisﬁes
4.15.
2
5 Ultraproducts and directed reachability
In this section we present Henry Towsner’s proof of the following result which was
established by Miklos Ajtai and Ronald Fagin (see [1]).
Theorem 5.1. Reachability is not mon-훴1
1 deﬁnable over the class of ﬁnite directed
graphs.
Proof: We are considering models of the language ⇒(a binary, asymmetric,
irreﬂexive relation), =, and two constant symbols 푠, 푡, possibly augmented by
ﬁnitely many unary predicate symbols. We write 푢⇔푣for (푢⇒푣) ∨(푣⇒푢).
Suppose that
5.2. the mon-훴1
1 sentence (∃푃1) . . . (∃푃푛)휑(푃1, . . . , 푃푛) deﬁnes 푠, 푡-connectivity over
the class of ﬁnite directed graphs.
We derive a contradiction to 5.2 via the following lemmas. The use of the ultra-
product construction obviates the need for any game argument. On a ﬁnite struc-
ture (푋푛, ⇒푛), there is a canonical choice of measure, the normalized counting
measure 휇푛(푆) =
|푆|
|푋푛|. On an ultraproduct of ﬁnite structures, as in Lemma 5.3, 휇
denotes the Loeb-measure, which canonically lifts the normalized counting mea-
sure on the ﬁnite structures X푛to a measure on the 휎-algebra generated by the
internal subsets of their ultraproduct X (see [10]).
Lemma 5.3. There exists a sequence of models X푖= (푋푖, ⇒푖) with |푋푖| →∞such
that 푠, 푡are connected in each X푖, and in any ultraproduct (by a nontrivial ultraﬁlter)
X,
–
for 휇-almost every 푢, the ⇔-connected component of 푢is a tree (i.e. has no
loops),

314
|
Steven Lindell, Henry Towsner, and Scott Weinstein
–
if 퐴⊆푋is internal with 휇(퐴) > 0 then for almost every 푢∈푋, there are inﬁnitely
many 푏∈퐴with 푢⇔푏.
Proof: The construction of the models (X푖, ⇒푖) is essentially the one in Proposition
8.3 of [1]. Suppose that, in X, the set 퐿of 푢such that the ⇔-connected component
of 푢contains a loop has measure 휖> 0. Observe that 퐿= ⋃푑퐿푑where 퐿푑is the
set of 푢such that there is a loop in the ball of radius 푑around 푢(where distance
is ⇔-distance). So if 휇(퐿) > 0 then there is some 푑with 휇(퐿푑) > 0. The set 퐿푑is
deﬁnable, so 퐿푑= ⟨퐿푑,푖⟩where 퐿푑,푖is the set of 푢∈푋푖such that there is a loop
in the ball of radius 푑around 푢. Therefore there are inﬁnitely many 푖such that
휇푖(퐿푑,푖) > 0.
Write #(퐴, 푢) = |{푏∈퐴| 푢⇔푏}| if this is ﬁnite and #(퐴, 푢) = ∞otherwise.
Let 퐴= ⟨퐴푖⟩be internal. Suppose that 휇(퐴) > 0 and the set of 푢with #(퐴, 푢) < ∞
has positive measure. Then for some 푑, the set of 푢with #(퐴, 푢) < 푑has positive
measure. Then there must be inﬁnitely many 푖where the set of 푢with #(퐴푖, 푢) < ∞
has positive measure.
So it suﬃces to arrange for the sequence of models X푖to have the following
properties:
–
for every 푑and every 휖> 0 there is an 푖such that for all 푗≥푖, 휇푗(퐿푑,푗) < 휖, and
–
for every 푑and every 휖> 0 there is an 푛such that for all 푗≥푖and every set
퐴⊆푋푗with 휇푗(퐴) ≥휖, the set of 푢with #(퐴, 푢) < 푑has 휇푗-measure < 휖.
The models (푋푖, ⇒푖) will have the following form: 푋푖= [1, 푖], 푠푋푖= 1, 푡푋푖= 푖, for
all 푎< 푖, 푎⇒푖푎+ 1, and in addition we select a small set of pairs 푎< 푏so that
푏⇒푖푎. The only discretion we have is in choosing the set of “backwards” arrows.
Consider the random process where for each pair 푎< 푏, we decide whether
푏⇒푖푎holds randomly with probability 푝(푖) = ln 푖/푖, with each pair determined in-
dependently. (As in [1], what really matters is that 푝(푖) grows faster than 푘/푖for all
푘and slower than 푖푠/푖for all 푠> 0.) We show that the properties we want hold with
high probability, and so certainly at least one model with the desired properties
exists.
We recall, for repeated use, the Chernoﬀbound. Suppose 푌is a Bernoulli ran-
dom variable—that is, 푌= ∑푖≤푚푌푖where each 푌푖∈{0, 1} is chosen randomly and
independently with the probability P[푌푖= 1] = 푝. Then the expected value of 푌is
휇= 푚푝and for any 훾≥0,
P[푌> (1 + 훾)휇] ≤푒−훾2휇/(2+훾), P[푌< (1 −훾)휇] ≤푒−훾2휇/(2+훾).
Let us write 퐵푟(푢) for the ball of radius 푟around 푢. Observe that |퐵1(푢)| = 푌+ 3 (or
푌+ 2 if 푢is an endpoint) where 푌is a Bernoulli random variable with mean ln 푛,
and so for a given 푢, the probability that |퐵1(푢)| ≥4 ln 푖= (1 + 3) ln 푖is bounded

Inﬁnitary Methods in Finite Model Theory
|
315
by 푒−9 ln 푖/5 = 푖−9/5. Therefore, the probability that some 푢has |퐵1(푢)| ≥4 ln 푖is
bounded by 푖−4/5, and in particular goes to 0 as 푖→∞. It follows that whenever
푟≪푖, with high probability for every 푢, |퐵푟(푢)| ≤ln푘푖for some constant 푘depend-
ing only on 푟.
We show that, with high probability, there are few cycles. Speciﬁcally, for ﬁxed
푟, 푑, 휖> 0, we show that as 푖goes to ∞, with high probability the set of 푣such that
퐵푟(푣) contains a loop of length ≤푑has density < 휖. Consider the following method
for generating ⇒푖. We ﬁrst deﬁne a relation ⇒耠
푖. We have 푎⇒耠
푖푎+ 1 for all 푎, and
we place the pairs 푎< 푏in an arbitrary order, and successively decide in this
order whether 푏⇒耠
푛푎will hold with probability 푝(푖), except that if 푏⇒耠
푖푎would
create a loop of length ≤푑, we do not include an edge. We then extend ⇒耠
푖to ⇒푖
by deciding, for each pair we skipped in the creation of ⇒耠
푖, whether ⇒푖should
hold between this pair. This is equivalent to the original method for generating
⇒푖(we are making the same choices with the same probability, and the choices
are independent; the only diﬀerence is the order in which we make the choices).
Further, ⇒푖has a loop of length ≤푑exactly if we add an edge in the second stage.
By taking 푖big enough, with high probability we have |퐵푑(푢)| ≤ln푘푖for all 푢.
Therefore, for each 푢, we consider at most ln푘푖possible edges, so there are 푖ln푘푖
possible edges added in the second stage, each with probability ln 푖/푖. The number
of edges added is a Bernoulli random variable, and by the Chernoﬀbound again,
when 푖is large, the probability is close to 1 that we add fewer than 4 ln푘+1 푖edges.
Every loop in the graph contains one of these edges; for each of these edges, taking
푢to be an arbitrary endpoint, |퐵푟(푢)| ≤ln푘耠푖. Since 퐵푟(푣) contains a loop of length
≤푑iﬀ푣∈퐵푟(푢) where 푢is one of the chosen endpoints, there are at most 4 ln푘耠(푘+1) 푖
vertices 푣such that 퐵푟(푣) contains a loop of length ≤푑.
Now suppose we ﬁx a set 퐴⊆푋푖with |퐴| ≥휖푖and ﬁx some 푢and then generate
⇒푖. Then #(퐴, 푢) is a binomial random variable with expected value 휖ln 푖, so letting
푖be large enough so that 휖ln 푖≥2푑,
P(#(퐴, 푢) ≤푑) ≤푒−3휖ln 푖/8.
Let 훿= 푒−3휖ln 푖/8; observe that 훿→0 as 푖→∞. For any ﬁxed set 퐵with |퐵| ≥휖푖, the
probability that for every 푢∈퐵, #(퐴, 푢) ≤푑is bounded by 훿|퐵| ≤훿휖푖. There are 2푖
choices for 퐴and 2푖possible choices for a set 퐵, so the probability that there is any
퐴and 퐵with both |퐴| ≥휖푖, |퐵| ≥휖푖, and for every 푢∈퐵, #(퐴, 푢) ≤푑, is bounded by
2푖2푖훿휖푖= 푒푛(ln 4+휖ln 훿). By taking 푖suﬃciently large, and so 훿suﬃciently small, we
may ensure that this probability approaches 0. Therefore, with high probability,
for every set 퐴with |퐴| ≥휖푖, |{푢| #(퐴, 푢)}| < 휖푖.
2
We may make the following simple observation:
Lemma 5.4. Every ⇔-connected component has measure 0.

316
|
Steven Lindell, Henry Towsner, and Scott Weinstein
Proof: Suppose some connected component 퐴has positive measure. Since almost
every point belongs to a component with no loops, 퐴must contain no loops. 퐴
itself is not internal, but it is a union of internal sets: pick any 푢∈퐴; then 퐴=
⋃푟퐵푟(푢). In particular, some 퐵푟(푢) must have positive measure; let 푟be least such
that 퐵푟(푢) has positive measure. Since 퐵푟(푢) \ 퐵푟−1(푢) is an internal set of positive
measure, almost every 푣satisﬁes #(퐵푟(푢) \ 퐵푟−1(푢), 푣) = ∞. In particular, we may
pick two points 푎0, 푎1 ∈퐵푟(푢) such that 푎푖⇔푣. Further, we may assume 푣
̸∈
퐵푟−1(푢). This means 푎0, 푎1 each have paths to 푢not including 푣or 푎1−푖, and therefore
combining these paths with 푣gives a loop in 퐴, which is the desired contradiction.
2
It follows from Lemma 5.2, 5.3, and Łoś’s Theorem that there are internal sets
퐴1, . . . , 퐴푛such that the expansion X = (푋, ⇒, 퐴1, . . . , 퐴푛) satisﬁes 휑(푃1, . . . , 푃푛).
Deﬁnition 5.5. If 휙is a formula with a single free variable, we write 휇(휙) for 휇({푎∈
푋| X ⊨휙(푎)}).
We say 푡푝(푥) is wide if whenever 휙∈푡푝(푥), 휇(휙) > 0. We say 푥is central if for
every 휙∈푡푝(푥), 휇({푎| 푎< 푥∧X ⊨휙(푎)}) > 0 and 휇({푎| 푥< 푎∧X ⊨휙(푎)}) > 0.
Clearly central elements have wide type.
Lemma 5.6. Almost every 푥is central.
Proof: We show that for every 휖, the non-central elements are contained in a set
of measure ≤휖. Let 휙1, . . . , 휙푛, . . . be an enumeration of the formulas with exactly
one free variable (and, ambiguously, the subsets of X they deﬁne). We will deﬁne
푈= ⋃푈푖where 휇(푈푖) ≤휖2−푖. If 휇(휙푖) = 0, set 푈푖= 휙푖. If 휇(휙푖) > 0, deﬁne
푈푖= {푥| 휇({푎| 푎< 푥∧X ⊨휙푖(푎)}) < 휖2−(푖+1)}
∪{푥| 휇({푎| 푥< 푎∧X ⊨휙푖(푎)}) < 휖2−(푖+1)}.
That is, 푈푖is the “bottom” and “top” 휖2−(푖+1) of the set deﬁned by 휙푖.
If 푥is not central then there is some 휙푖witnessing this, and by construction,
we have included 푥in 푈푖⊆푈.
2
Now we argue as follows. Consider those 푥such that 푥and 푥+ 1 are both
central, and such that the ⇔-connected component of 푥contains no loops; this is
a set of measure 1, so we may take some 푐with these properties.
Lemma 5.7. There are inﬁnitely many 푎with 푡푝(푎) = 푡푝(푐+ 1) and 푐⇒푎.
Proof: For any 휙∈푡푝(푐+ 1), since 푐+ 1 is central, 휇({푎| 푎< 푐+ 1 ∧X ⊨휙(푎)}) > 0.
Therefore, by choice of X, there are inﬁnitely many 푎such that X ⊨휙(푎), 푎< 푐,
and 푐⇔푎; but this implies 푐⇒푎. Since this holds for each 휙, saturation ensures
that there are actually inﬁnitely many 푎with 푡푝(푎) = 푡푝(푐+ 1) and 푐⇒푎.
2

Bibliography
|
317
Similarly,
Lemma 5.8. There are inﬁnitely many 푏with 푡푝(푏) = 푡푝(푐) and 푐+ 1 ⇒푏.
Lemma 5.9. There is a 푑with 푡푝(푑) = 푡푝(푐) not in the same ⇔-connected component
as 푐.
Proof: For every 푟, 휇(퐵푟(푐)) = 0, while for each 휙∈푡푝(푐), 휇(휙) > 0, so 휇(휙\퐵푟(푐)) > 0
as well. Since this holds for each 푟and each 휙∈푡푝(푐), saturation implies that there
is a 푑with 푡푝(푑) = 푡푝(푐) and 푑
̸∈⋃푟퐵푟(푐).
2
Let X耠be the model identical to X except that 푐
̸⇒푐+ 1. It is immediate that
X耠is an ultraproduct of structures X耠
푖almost all of which are not 푠, 푡-connected;
hence, X耠
̸　㨐휑(푃1, . . . , 푃푛). On the other hand, we claim X is isomorphic to X耠,
which completes the reductio.
We deﬁne 휋: X →X耠to be the identity outside the connected components of
푐and 푑.
We deﬁne 휋on the connected component of 푐so 휋(푐) = 푐but the image does
not include 푐+1: let 퐴= {푎| 푡푝(푎) = 푡푝(푐+1)∧푐⇒푎}, and we deﬁne 휋"퐴= 퐴\{푐+1},
which we can do since 퐴is inﬁnite. Since the connected component of 푐is a tree
and the type of a point determines the type of its neighbors, we can deﬁne 휋on
the rest of the ⇔-connected component of 푐.
On the connected component of 푑, we do the reverse: let 퐵= {푏| 푡푝(푏) =
푡푝(푐+ 1) ∧푑⇒푏}, and deﬁne 휋"퐵= 퐵∪{푐+ 1}.
2
Acknowledgement: Henry Towsner is partially supported by NSF grant DMS-
1340666. We are grateful to Roman Rabinovich and Marlene Gregorek for valuable
comments on an earlier draft of this paper.
Bibliography
[1]
Miklos Ajtai and Ronald Fagin. Reachability is harder for directed than for undirected
ﬁnite graphs. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 55:113–150, 1990.
[2]
P. Dittmann. Ultraproducts as a tool for ﬁrst-order inexpressibility in the ﬁnite and inﬁnite.
arXiv:1310.3137, 2013.
[3]
K. Doets. Uniform short proofs for classical theorems. Notre Dame Journal for Formal
Logic, 42:121–127, 2001.
[4]
Heinz-Dieter Ebbinghaus and Jörg Flum. Finite model theory. Springer, 1995.
[5]
R. Fagin. Monadic generalized spectra. Zeitschrift für Mathematische Logik und Grundla-
gen der Mathematik, 21:89–96, 1975.
[6]
R. Fagin. Probabilities on ﬁnite models. Journal of Symbolic Logic, 41:50–58, 1976.
Infinitary Methods in Finite Model Theory

318
|
Steven Lindell, Henry Towsner, and Scott Weinstein
[7]
R. Fagin, L. Stockmeyer, and M. Y. Vardi. On monadic NP vs. monadic co-NP. Information
and Computation, 120(1):78–92, 1995.
[8]
H. Gaifman. On local and nonlocal properties. In J. Stern, editor, Logic Colloquium ’81,
pages 105–135. North Holland, 1982.
[9]
H. Gaifman and M. Y. Vardi. A simple proof that connectivity is not ﬁrst-order deﬁnable.
Bulletin of the European Association for Theoretical Computer Science, 26:43–45, 1985.
[10] Peter A. Loeb. Conversion from nonstandard to standard measure spaces and applica-
tions in probability theory. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society, 211:113–
122, 1975.
[11] Martin Otto. Model theoretic methods for fragments of FO and special classes of (ﬁnite)
structures. In Javier Esparza, Christian Michaux, and Charles Steinhorn, editors, Finite
and Algorithmic Model Theory, pages 271–341. Cambridge University Press, 2011.
[12] G. Turan. On the deﬁnability properties of ﬁnite graphs. Discrete Mathematics, 49:291–
302, 1984.
[13] J. Väänänen. Pseudo-ﬁnite model theory. Matematica Contemporanea, 24:169–183, 2003.

Maryanthe Malliaris* and Saharon Shelah
Saturating the Random Graph with an
Independent Family of Small Range
Dedicated to Jouko Väänänen on the occasion of his 60th
birthday
Abstract: The ﬁrst part of this paper is an expository overview of the authors’
recent work on Keisler’s order, a far-reaching program of understanding basic
model-theoretic structure through the lens of regular ultrapowers. We motivate
the problem and explain how this work connects model theory and set theory,
leading to theorems on both sides. In the second part of the paper, we prove a
new theorem which shows that, in some sense, saturating ultrapowers of the ran-
dom graph is much less complex than it appeared. More precisely, we prove that
for a class of regular ﬁlters D on 퐼, |퐼| = 휆> ℵ0, the fact that P(퐼)/D has little
freedom (as measured by the fact that any maximal antichain is countable) does
not prevent extending D to an ultraﬁlter D1 on 퐼such that 푀퐼/D1 is 휆+-saturated
whenever 푀is a model of the theory of the random graph. This result has cat-
alyzed our subsequent work on ultrapowers of simple unstable theories, and we
brieﬂy discuss some future directions of this work.
Keywords: unstable model theory, saturation of ultrapowers, Keisler’s order
MSC: Primary: 03C20, 03C45, Secondary: 03E05
||
*Corresponding Author: Maryanthe Malliaris: Department of Mathematics, University of
Chicago, 5734 S. University Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637, USA and Einstein Institute of Mathe-
matics, Edmond J. Safra Campus, Givat Ram, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem,
91904, Israel, e-mail: mem@math.uchicago.edu
Saharon Shelah: Einstein Institute of Mathematics, Edmond J. Safra Campus, Givat Ram, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel, and Department of Mathematics, Hill
Center - Busch Campus, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey, 110 Frelinghuysen Road,
Piscataway, NJ 08854-8019 USA, e-mail: shelah@math.huji.ac.il
1 Introduction
Keisler’s order is a long-standing (and far-reaching) program for comparing the
complexity of unstable theories, proposed in Keisler 1967 [6]. The measure of com-

320
|
Maryanthe Malliaris, Saharon Shelah
plexity, roughly speaking, is the relative diﬃculty of producing saturated regular
ultrapowers. The order ⊴already has signiﬁcant connections to classiﬁcation the-
ory, and we believe the present investigations will shed further light on the struc-
ture of simple unstable theories.
The goal of the present paper is ﬁrst, to give an expository introduction to re-
cent progress on Keisler’s order, and second, to prove a surprising theorem which
has catalyzed our subsequent work on Keisler’s order for simple theories. The im-
portance of this theorem can be described as follows. Previously, in [17], we had
shown that the diﬀerence between saturation for random graphs and for linear
order was visible in an interval of the form (휇, 휆= 2휇). Theorem 3.2 shows it is vis-
ible in an interval of the form (ℵ0, 휆). Thus Theorem 3.2 improves [17] Theorem 11.1,
although the current paper does not supercede [17]: we rely here on the substan-
tial background technology built there, and moreover the property Qr1 developed
there appears useful for more general arguments. Still, this new opening leads
to a (long and hard) program of analyzing the fundamental structure of simple
theories which we sketch in §1.2.1 and which is currently work in progress.
The present section is primarily expository. In §1.1 below, we deﬁne Keisler’s
order and survey what was known. In §1.2 we present this paper’s main result,
Theorem 3.2, and explain the relevance for simple theories. In §1.3, we describe
the known points of contact between regular ultraﬁlters and theories. In §1.4, we
discuss several theorems of set theory which have come from this program. §2
contains deﬁnitions and other preliminaries. §3 contains the proof of the paper’s
main theorem.
1.1 Keisler’s order and model theory
This subsection, written primarily for model theorists, aims to explain Keisler’s
order and our recent work.
For transparency, all languages are countable and all theories are complete.
We say that the ultrapower 푀휆/D is regular when D is a regular ultraﬁlter on 휆,
Deﬁnition 2.1 below. A key property of regularity is that:
Fact 1.1. (Keisler [6] Corollary 2.1 p. 30; see also Shelah [20].VI.1) Let 푀≡푁in a
countable signature, 휆≥ℵ0, D a regular ultraﬁlter on 휆. Then 푀휆/D is 휆+-saturated
if and only if 푁휆/D is 휆+-saturated.

Saturating the Random Graph
|
321
1.1.1 What is Keisler’s order and why is it model-theoretically interesting?
Questions of saturation have long been central to model theory. Morley’s theorem
is a fundamental example. Suppose we anachronistically deﬁne the Łos order on
complete countable theories:
–
푇1 ⊴퐿
휆푇2 if
–
(for all 푀2 　㨐푇2, |푀2| = 휆, 푀2 is saturated) implies
–
(for all 푀1 　㨐푇1, |푀1| = 휆, 푀1 is saturated)
–
푇1 ⊴퐿푇2 if 푇1 ⊴퐿
휆푇2 for all 휆> ℵ0
Then Morley’s theorem shows that ⊴퐿has a minimum class, a maximum class,
and no other classes, i.e. either all uncountable models of some given countable
theory are saturated, or else the theory has some unsaturated model of every un-
countable size.
Keisler’s order may be thought of as generalizing this hypothetical “Łos or-
der” in the following powerful way: rather than considering all uncountable
models, we consider only regular ultrapowers (so “saturated” becomes “휆+-
saturated”). This reveals a richer ﬁeld of comparison: we compare not by cardinal-
ity, but by provenance. Each 푀휆
1 /D 　㨐푇1 is naturally compared to models 푀휆
2 /D
of 푇2, built using the same ultraﬁlter D on 휆. More precisely:
Deﬁnition 1.2. (Keisler [6]) Let 푇1, 푇2 be complete countable ﬁrst-order theories.
1.
Let D be a regular ultraﬁlter on 휆. Write 푇1 ⊴D 푇2 when (for all 푀2 　㨐푇2,
푀휆
2 /D is 휆+-saturated) implies (for all 푀1 　㨐푇1, 푀휆
1 /D is 휆+-saturated).
2.
Write 푇1 ⊴휆푇2 if for any regular ultraﬁlter D on 휆, 푇1 ⊴D 푇2.
3.
(Keisler’s order) Write 푇1 ⊴푇2 if for all inﬁnite 휆, 푇1 ⊴휆푇2.
By Fact 1.1, ⊴is a pre-order on theories, usually thought of as a partial order on the
equivalence classes. [Note that by 1.1, 푇1 ⊴D 푇2 is equivalent to “for all 푀1 　㨐푇1,
푀2 　㨐푇2, (푀휆
2 /D is 휆+-saturated) implies ( 푀휆
1 /D is 휆+-saturated).”]
Keisler proved that ⊴had at least a minimum and maximum class, and asked:
Question 1.3. (Keisler 1967) Determine the structure of Keisler’s order.
Surprising early work of Shelah established the model theoretic signiﬁcance of ⊴
(note the independent appearance of dividing lines from classiﬁcation theory).
Theorem A. (Shelah 1978 [19] Chapter VI)
T1 ⊲T2 ⊲⋅⋅⋅⋅⋅⋅? ⋅⋅⋅⋅⋅⋅⊴T푚푎푥
where T1 ∪T2 is precisely the class of countable stable theories, and:
1.
푇1, the minimum class, is the set of all 푇without the ﬁnite cover property.

322
|
Maryanthe Malliaris, Saharon Shelah
2.
푇2, the next largest class, is the set of all stable 푇with the f.c.p.
3.
There is a maximum class T푚푎푥, containing all linear orders (i.e. SOP, in fact
푆푂푃3 [21]), however, its model-theoretic identity is not known.
For many years there was little progress, and the unstable case appeared relatively
intractable despite the ﬂourishing of unstable model theory.
Very recently, work of Malliaris and Shelah has led to considerable advances
in our understandings of how ultraﬁlters and theories interact (Malliaris [9]-[12],
Malliaris and Shelah [14]-[17]). For an account of some main developments, see
the introductory sections of [14] as well as [17]. Most of the seismic shifts are un-
derground and not yet visible as divisions in the order. Still, one can update the
diagram:
T1 ⊲T2 ⊲T푥⋅⋅⋅? ⋅⋅⋅⊲⋅⋅⋅? ⋅⋅⋅T푛푙⊴⋅⋅⋅? ⋅⋅⋅⊴T푚푎푥
T푥denotes the minimum unstable class (not yet characterized, but contains the
random graph). T푛푙denotes the simple non low theories, which are not known to
be an equivalence class but are all strictly above (=more complex than) T푥. A more
ﬁnely drawn diagram would also show that there is a minimum 푇푃2 theory, and
that at limit 휆푆푂푃2 suﬃces for maximality, see §1.4. Note that it is not yet known
whether the order is ﬁnite, or linear.
1.2 Prolegomena to our main theorem
Earlier this year, building on our prior work described above, we had shown that
the question of saturation of ultrapowers could be substantially recast in terms
of a two-stage approach, involving a more set-theoretic stage [constructing a so-
called excellent ﬁlter D on 퐼admitting a surjective homomorphism j : P(퐼) →B
onto a speciﬁed Boolean algebra, with j−1({1B}) = D] followed by a more model-
theoretic stage [constructing a so-called moral ultraﬁlter on the Boolean algebra
B, a step deﬁned in terms of “possibility patterns” of formula incidence repre-
sented in the theory].
This advance allowed us to give the ﬁrst ZFC ⊴-dividing line among the unsta-
ble theories, and the ﬁrst dividing line since 1978: separating the Keisler-minimum
unstable theory, the random graph 푇rg, from all non-low or non-simple theories.
Theorem B. (Malliaris and Shelah [17]) Suppose 휆, 휇are given with 휇< 휆≤2휇.
Then there is a regular ultraﬁlter D on 휆which saturates ultrapowers of all countable
stable theories and of the random graph, but fails to saturate ultrapowers of any
non-low or non-simple theory.

Saturating the Random Graph
|
323
Convention 1.4. We say that a regular ultraﬁlter D1 on 휆“saturates ultrapowers
of 푇” to mean that whenever 푀　㨐푇, 푀휆/D is 휆+-saturated.
Naturally this result raised many further questions. Chief among them was the
role of 휇< 휆≤2휇, which appeared to have a strong model-theoretic motivation
by analogy to [18], and in terms of what might be called the “Engelking-Karłowicz
property of the random graph:” in the monster model of the random graph, if
|퐵| = 휆and 휇< 휆≤2휇then there is some set 퐴such that every nonalgebraic
푝∈푆(퐵) can be ﬁnitely realized in 퐴. The role of 휇in the proof of Theorem B was
as the size of a maximal antichain of a quotient Boolean algebra at the key transfer
point in the inductive ultraﬁlter construction, i.e., the point where the excellent
ﬁlter D has been built. When 휇< 휆, this “lack of freedom” at the transfer point
was suﬃcient to guarantee the non-saturation result for any ultraﬁlter D1 ⊇D,
and as indicated, when 휆≤2휇, model-theoretic considerations made it possible
to guarantee saturation of the random graph for some D1 ⊇D.
In this paper we show that, contrary to initial expectations, the situation here
is fundamentally diﬀerent and the second restriction on 휇is unnecessary. Rather
it is, within the regime of so-called excellent ﬁlters on some arbitrary but ﬁxed 휆,
always possible to extend to an ultraﬁlter which will saturate the random graph,
even when 휇= ℵ0 at the transfer point:
Main Theorem. Let ℵ0 ≤휇≤휆= |퐼|. Suppose that G∗and D satisfy:
1.
D is a regular, excellent ﬁlter on 퐼
2.
G∗⊆휆휇, |G∗| = 2휆
3.
G∗is a D-independent family of functions
4.
D is maximal subject to (3)
Then for some ultraﬁlter D1 ⊇D, and all 푀　㨐푇rg, 푀퐼/D1 is 휆+-saturated.
Moreover, the proof itself modiﬁes the usual inductive construction of an ultraﬁl-
ter by means of independent functions by introducing so-called approximations;
this has been signiﬁcant for our subsequent work.
Note that when (퐼, D, G) is (휆, ℵ0)-good it is always possible to extend D to
an ultraﬁlter D1 which saturates all stable theories. [It suﬃces to ensure that the
coinitiality of 휔in (휔, <)퐼/D1 is ≥휆+.] Our theorem here shows that if D is excel-
lent this is additionally always possible for the random graph. It complements our
construction in [15] of a ﬁlter D, necessarily not excellent, no extension of which
is able to saturate the random graph.

324
|
Maryanthe Malliaris, Saharon Shelah
1.2.1 What avenues of investigation does this suggest for simple theories?
The parameter 휇measuring the freedom available in the underlying Boolean al-
gebra during ultraﬁlter construction, i.e. 휇in Deﬁnition 2.9 below, appears signif-
icant for “outside deﬁnitions” of simple theories. Given Theorem 3.2, the natural
question is whether membership in the Keisler minimum unstable class is charac-
terized by: whenever D is regular and excellent and (퐼, D, G) a (휆, ℵ0)-good triple,
some ultraﬁlter D1 ⊇D saturates 푇. By our prior results, 휇< 휆blocks saturation of
non-simple or non-low theories (this can be circumvented by introducing a com-
plete ﬁlter on the quotient Boolean algebra). Thus, the current focus is simple low
theories.
By increasing the range of possible 휇, Theorem 3.2 opens the door to a strati-
ﬁcation of simple low theories. That is, we will want to try to distinguish between
classes of theories based on various cardinal invariants of the Boolean algebras
P(퐼)/D. Our previous result, Theorem B above, distinguished between the ran-
dom graph (suﬃces to have antichains of size 휇) and non-low theories (necessary
to have antichains of size 휆) when 휇< 휆≤2휇. So to see ﬁner divisions in the un-
stable low theories, one might need to assume failures of GCH. In light of Theorem
3.2 this is no longer necessary.
The property 휇= ℵ0 appears connected with a model-theoretic coloring prop-
erty introduced in work in progress of the authors.
1.3 Translations between set theory and model theory
A fundamental part of investigating Keisler’s order involves construction of ul-
traﬁlters, thus combinatorial set theory. Isolating “model-theoretically meaning-
ful properties” and determining implications and nonimplications between them
gives a useful perspective on ultraﬁlters. We now include two “translation” theo-
rems from [14]. (Some deﬁnitions are given in the Appendix.)
Theorem C. (Malliaris and Shelah [14] Theorem F) In the following table, for each
of the rows (1),(3),(5),(6) the regular ultraﬁlter D on 휆fails to have the property in
the left column if and only if it omits a type in every formula with the property in
the right column. For rows (2) and (4), D fails to have the property on the left then it
omits a type in every formula with the property on the right.

Saturating the Random Graph
|
325
Set theory:
Model theory:
properties of ﬁlters
properties of formulas
(1) 휇(D) ≥휆+
A. ﬁnite cover property
(2) lcf(ℵ0, D) ≥휆+
**
B. order property
(3) saturates 푇푟푔
C. independence property
(4) ﬂexible, i.e. 휆-ﬂexible
**
D. non-low
(5) good for equality
E. 푇푃2
(6) good, i.e. 휆+-good
F. strict order property
Proof. The characterization of the maximum class via good ultraﬁlters and the
deﬁnition of the f.c.p. are due to Keisler 1967 [6], see [14] for details. (1)-(2) Shelah
1978 [19] VI.5. (3) Straightforward by quantiﬁer elimination. (4) Malliaris 2009 [9].
(5) Malliaris 2010 [11]. (6) Shelah 1978 [19] VI.2.6.
Theorem D. (updated version of Malliaris and Shelah [14] Theorem 4.2) Assume
that D is a regular ultraﬁlter on 휆(note that not all of these properties imply regu-
larity). Then:
(1) ←(2) ←(3) ←(5) ←(6), with (1)
̸→(2), (2)
̸→(3), (3)
̸→(5), and
whether (5) implies (6) is open. Moreover (1) ←(4) ←(5) ←(6), where (3)
̸→(4)
thus (2)
̸→(4), (4)
̸→(3), consistently (4)
̸→(5), consistently (4)
̸→(6); and (4)
implies (2) is open.
“Consistently” throughout Theorem D means assuming a measurable cardinal.
One of the surprises of [14]-[15] was the relevance of measurable cardinals in con-
structing regular ultraﬁlters. This bridges a certain cultural gap between regular
ﬁlters, typically used in model theory, and complete ultraﬁlters, used primarily in
set theory. §1.4 gives some consequences.
1.4 Set-theoretic theorems and aspects of this program
We now discuss some set-theoretic results of our program, from [14] and [17].
First, “consistently (4)
̸→(6)” in Theorem D above addressed a question
raised in Dow 1985 [2] about whether OK ﬁlters (introduced by Kunen, Keisler) are
necessarily good. We proved that consistently the gap may be arbitrarily large:
Theorem E. (Malliaris and Shelah [14] Theorem 6.4) Assume 휅> ℵ0 is measurable
and 2휅≤휆= 휆휅. Then there exists a regular uniform ultraﬁlter D on 휆such that D
is 휆-ﬂexible, thus 휆-OK, but not (2휅)+-good.
Notably, the failure of goodness is “as strong as possible” given the construction:
D will fail to (2휅)+ saturate the random graph, thus any unstable theory. See [14]

326
|
Maryanthe Malliaris, Saharon Shelah
§1.2 for an account of this result. As explained there, this is a natural context in
which to study further weakenings of goodness. The two papers [14]-[15] contain
several ultraﬁlter existence theorems.
We now describe a program from our paper [16]. Because of the Keisler-
maximality of linear order, but also for set theoretic reasons (e.g. cardinal invari-
ants of the continuum), it is natural to study cuts by deﬁning:
Deﬁnition 1.5. ([16]) Let D be a regular ultraﬁlter on 퐼, |퐼| = 휆. Let C(D) be the set
of all (휅1, 휅2) such that 휅1, 휅2 ≤휆are regular and (N, <)퐼/D has a (휅1, 휅2)-cut.
Deﬁnition 1.6. ([16]) Say that a regular ultraﬁlter D on 휆has 휅-treetops if for any
tree (T, ⊴) and any inﬁnite regular cardinal 훾< 휅, in 푁= (T, ⊴)휆/D any strictly
⊴푁-increasing 훾-indexed sequence has a ⊴푁-upper bound.
Both model-theoretic and set-theoretic considerations pointed to the question of
whether 휆+-treetops implies 휆+-good.
We had shown that an ultraﬁlter D on 휆has 휆+-treetops if and only if C(D)
has no symmetric cuts, so the question was:
Question 1.7. Given 휅≤휆㨐⇒(휅, 휅) ∉C(D), what are the possible C(D)?
Theorem F. (Malliaris and Shelah [16]) Suppose that for all 휅≤휆, (휅, 휅) ∉C(D).
Then C(D) = 0, and D is good.
In fact, the setup in [16] is somewhat more general: we consider what we call “co-
ﬁnality spectrum problems,” which cover a variety of problems including coﬁnal-
ities of cuts in ultrapowers of linear order. In [16] we also prove two corollaries
of this theorem, one model theoretic, one about cardinal invariants of the contin-
uum. First, 푆푂푃2 is maximal in Keisler’s order. Second, p = t, where p, t are the
pseudointersection number and the tower number respectively.
This concludes the introduction. We now work towards Theorem 3.2.
2 Preliminaries
Here we deﬁne: regular ﬁlters, good ﬁlters, excellent ﬁlters, and good triples.
Deﬁnition 2.1. (Regular ﬁlters) Let D be a ﬁlter on an index set 퐼of cardinality 휆.
A 휇-regularizing family {푋푖: 푖< 휇} is a set such that:
–
for each 푖< 휇, 푋푖∈D, and
–
for any inﬁnite 휎⊂휇, we have ⋂푖∈휎푋푖= 0

Saturating the Random Graph
|
327
Equivalently, for any element 푡∈퐼, 푡belongs to only ﬁnitely many of the sets 푋푖.
A ﬁlter D on an index set 퐼of cardinality 휆is said to be 휇-regular if it contains a
휇-regularizing family. D is called regular if it is 휆-regular, i.e. |퐼|-regular.
Regular ﬁlters on 휆always exist, see [1] or [17] top of p. 7.
Deﬁnition 2.2. (Good ﬁlters, Keisler [5]) The ﬁlter D on 퐼is said to be 휇+-good if
every 푓: Pℵ0(휇) →D has a multiplicative reﬁnement, where this means that for
some 푓耠: Pℵ0(휇) →D, 푢∈Pℵ0(휇)
㨐⇒
푓耠(푢) ⊆푓(푢), and 푢, 푣∈Pℵ0(휇)
㨐⇒
푓耠(푢) ∩푓耠(푣) = 푓耠(푢∪푣).
Note that we may assume the functions 푓are monotonic.
D is said to be good if it is |퐼|+-good.
Remark 2.3. The importance of good ﬁlters here arises from Keisler’s observation
that when D is regular, 퐴⊆푁:= 푀휆/D, 푝∈푆(퐴), |퐴| ≤휆, 푝= {휑푖(푥; 푎푖) : 푖< 휆}
then 푝is realized in 푁iﬀthere is some multiplicative 푓: Pℵ0(휆) →D which
reﬁnes the “existential” map 휎㨃→{푡∈휆: 푀　㨐∃푥⋀푖∈휎휑푖(푥; 푎푖[푡])}.
The proof of Theorem 3.2 builds on a main innovation of Malliaris and Shelah
[17], so-called excellent ﬁlters: 2.6 below. For the purposes of the current proof,
the reader may take “excellent” to be a new characterization of “good” which is
most interesting in the case where D is a ﬁlter and not an ultraﬁlter, as is proved in
Theorem 12.3 of the appendix to [17]. (As noted there, however, it is not yet clear
whether various useful restrictions of these two deﬁnitions will generally coin-
cide.)
Suppose we are given a ﬁlter D, a Boolean algebra B and a surjective ho-
momorphism j : P(퐼) →B such that j−1({1B}) = D. Roughly speaking, if D is
excellent we may assume that j is “accurate” in the sense that if certain distin-
guished Boolean terms hold on elements b of B, the same terms will hold on some
j-preimage of b without the a priori necessary qualiﬁer “ mod D.” [For details and
history, see [17] §2.] The main example for us here is:
Fact 2.4. Let 휆≥ℵ0 and let D be an excellent, i.e. 휆+-excellent ﬁlter on 퐼, |퐼| = 휆.
Let
퐴= ⟨퐴푢: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩
be a sequence of elements of P(퐼) which is multiplicative
mod D, i.e. for each 푢, 푣∈
[휆]<ℵ0, 퐴푢∩퐴푣= 퐴푢∪푣mod D.
Then there exists 퐵= ⟨퐵푢: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩such that:
1.
푢∈[휆]<ℵ0 㨐⇒퐵푢⊆퐴푢
2.
푢∈[휆]<ℵ0 㨐⇒퐵푢= 퐴푢mod D
3.
푢, 푣∈[휆]<ℵ0 㨐⇒퐵푢∩퐵푣= 퐵푢∪푣
i.e. 퐵reﬁnes 퐴and is truly multiplicative.

328
|
Maryanthe Malliaris, Saharon Shelah
Proof. [17] Claim 4.9.
The eﬀect of excellence is to allow a so-called “separation of variables,” [17] Theo-
rem 5.11. That is, as sketched in 1.2, ultraﬁlter construction can now be done in two
stages. First, one builds an excellent ﬁlter with a speciﬁed quotient B. One can
then build ultraﬁlters directly on B which ensure that so-called possibility pat-
terns of a given theory (a measure of the complexity of incidence in 휑-types) have
multiplicative reﬁnements. An immediate advantage of this separation is that it
allows us to prove results like Theorem B above. Namely, a “bottleneck” is built
in to the construction by arranging for the c.c. of P(퐼)/D to be small by the time
D is excellent. This prevents future saturation of some theories, but not all, and
so gives a dividing line. This analysis also pushes one to understand how these
“possibility patterns” reﬂect model-theoretic complexity.
Though we include the full deﬁnition of excellence from [17], Theorem 3.2 will
only use Fact 2.4 above, which the reader may prefer to take as axiomatic.
Deﬁnition 2.5. Let B be a Boolean algebra and a = ⟨a푢: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩be a sequence
of elements of B. When 푢is a ﬁnite set, write 푥P(푢) = ⟨푥푣: 푣⊆푢⟩for a sequence
of variables indexed by subsets of 푢.
1.
Deﬁne
푁(푎↾P(푢)) ={⟨푎耠
푣: 푣⊆푢⟩: for some 푤⊆푢
we have 푎耠
푣= 푎푣if 푣⊆푤and 푎耠
푣= 0B otherwise}
2.
Deﬁne 훬B,푎to be the set
{휎(푥P(푢)) : 휎(푥P(푢)) is a Boolean term such that
B 　㨐“휎(푎耠) = 0” whenever 푎耠∈푁(푎) }
3.
If D is a ﬁlter on B then 훬B,D,푎= 훬B1,푎1 where B1 = B/D and 푎1 = ⟨푎푣/D :
푣⊆푢⟩.
4.
If D is a ﬁlter on a set 퐼, then D determines 퐼, so we write 훬D,푎for 훬P(퐼),D,푎.
Deﬁnition 2.6. (Excellent ﬁlters, Malliaris and Shelah [17] Deﬁnition 4.6) Let D be a
ﬁlter on the index set 퐼. We say that D is 휆+-excellent when: if 퐴= ⟨퐴푢: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩
with 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0 㨐⇒퐴푢⊆퐼, then we can ﬁnd 퐵= ⟨퐵푢: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩such that:
1.
for each 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0, 퐵푢⊆퐴푢
2.
for each 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0, 퐵푢= 퐴푢mod D
3.
if 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0 and 휎∈훬D,퐴|푢, so 휎(퐴|P(푢)) = 0 mod D,
then 휎(퐵|P(푢)) = 0
We say that D is 휉-excellent when it is 휆+-excellent for every 휆< 휉.

Saturating the Random Graph
|
329
Deﬁnition 2.7. Given a ﬁlter D on 휆, we say that a family F of functions from 휆
into 휆is independent
mod D if for every 푛< 휔, distinct 푓0, . . . 푓푛−1 from F and
choice of 푗ℓ∈Range(푓ℓ),
{휂< 휆: for every 푖< 푛, 푓푖(휂) = 푗푖}
̸= 0
mod D
Theorem G. (Engelking-Karłowicz [3] Theorem 3, see also Shelah [20] Theorem
A1.5 p. 656) For every 휆≥ℵ0 there exists a family F of size 2휆with each 푓∈F
from 휆onto 휆such that F is independent modulo the empty ﬁlter (alternately, by
the ﬁlter generated by {휆}).
In particular, such families can be naturally thought of as Boolean algebras, so
we introduce some notation:
Deﬁnition 2.8. Denote by B1
휒,휇the completion of the Boolean algebra generated
by {푥훼,휖: 훼< 휒, 휖< 휇} freely except for the conditions 훼< 휒∧휖< 휁< 휇
㨐⇒
푥훼,휖∩푥훼,휁= 0.
We follow the literature in using the term “good triple” for the following object,
despite the name’s ambiguity.
Deﬁnition 2.9. Good triples (cf. [20] Chapter VI) Let 휆≥휅≥ℵ0, |퐼| = 휆, D a
regular ﬁlter on 퐼, and G a family of functions from 퐼to 휅.
1.
Let FI(G) =
{ℎ: ℎ: [G]<ℵ0 →휅and 푔∈Dom(푔) 㨐⇒ℎ(푔) ∈Range(푔)}
2.
Let FI푠(G) = {퐴ℎ: ℎ∈FI(G)} where
퐴ℎ= {푡∈퐼: 푔∈Dom(푔) 㨐⇒푔(푡) = ℎ(푔)}
3.
We say that triple (퐼, D, G) is (휆, 휅)-pre-good when 퐼, D, G are as given, and for
every ℎ∈FI(G) we have that 퐴ℎ
̸= 0 mod D.
4.
We say that(퐼, D, G) is (휆, 휅)-good when D is maximal subject to this condition.
Fact 2.10. If (퐼, D, G) is a good triple, then FI푠(G) is dense in P(퐼) mod D.
Observation 2.11. Let D be a ﬁlter on 퐼, B = B1
휉,휇for some 휉≤2휆, 휇≤휆and
j : P(퐼) →B a surjective homomorphism such that j−1({1B}) = D. Let G = GB =
{푔훼: 훼< 2휆} ⊆휆휇be given by 푔훼(휖) = j−1(푥훼,휖). Then (퐼, D, G) is a (휆, 휇)-good triple.
We will use the following existence theorem from [17].
Theorem H. (Existence theorem for excellent ﬁlters, [17]) Let 휇≤휆, |퐼| = 휆and
let B be a 휇+-c.c. complete Boolean algebra of cardinality ≤2휆. Then there exists
a regular excellent ﬁlter D on 퐼and a surjective homomorphism j : P(퐼) →B such
that j−1({1B}) = D.

330
|
Maryanthe Malliaris, Saharon Shelah
Corollary 2.12. Let 퐼, |퐼| = 휆≥ℵ0, and 휇with ℵ0 ≤휇≤휆be given. Let D be an
excellent ﬁlter on 퐼given by Theorem H in the case where B = B1
2휆,휇. Let GB ⊆휆휇
be given by Observation 2.11. Then (퐼, D, GB) is a (휆, 휇)-good triple.
3 Main Theorem
We now prove that it is possible to saturate the theory 푇rg of the random graph
using only functions with range ℵ0. While the construction is a natural evolution
of our argument for (an ultrapower version of) the Engelking-Karłowicz property
in [17] Lemma 9.9, the result was a surprise. Here, notably, we modify the usual
“inductive construction via independent families” to allow a much ﬁner degree
of control. The calibrations are noted throughout the proof, beginning with 3.3.
Remark 3.1. Note that in Theorem 3.2, possibly 2휇<< 휆; indeed, possibly 휇= ℵ0
while 휆= |퐼| is arbitrary.
Theorem 3.2. Suppose that we are given:
1.
(퐼, D, G∗) is a (휆, 휇)-good triple
2.
ℵ0 ≤휇≤휆= |퐼|
3.
D is 휆-regular
4.
D is 휆+-excellent
Then there is an ultraﬁlter D1 ⊇D such that for any 푀　㨐푇rg, 푀퐼/D1 is 휆+-
saturated.
We shall ﬁx 퐼, D, G∗, 휇, 휆as in the statement of Theorem 3.2 for the remainder of
this section. Hypothesis (4), excellence, is used only at one point, in Step 13.
The infrastructure for the proof will be built via several intermediate claims
and deﬁnitions. Note: When 휑is a formula, we write 휑0 for ¬휑and 휑1 for 휑.
Remark 3.3. In contrast to the usual method, we will not complete the ﬁlter at
each inductive step to a “good” triple. This is a crucial diﬀerence. Rather, we build
a series of approximations to the ﬁnal ultraﬁlter. Note that condition (c) on the size
of the approximation is natural, though not needed.
Background Note. An account of why realizing types in ultrapowers amounts
to ﬁnding a multiplicative reﬁnement is given in [14] §1.2, or see 2.3 below.
1. Approximations For 훼≤2휆, let AP훼be the set of pairs a = (A, G) = (Aa, Ga) such
that:
(a) Ga ⊆G∗
(b) |Ga| ≤|훼| + 휆

Saturating the Random Graph
|
331
(c) |Aa| ≤|훼| + 휆
(d) Aa ⊆P(퐼)
(e) (∀퐴∈Aa)(퐴is supported by Ga modulo D)
(f) 0 ∉ﬁl⟨D ∪Aa⟩
The elements of each AP훼can be naturally partially ordered (by inclusion in both
coordinates).
Convention 3.4. For a ∈AP훼, denote by ﬁl⟨D ∪a⟩the ﬁlter on 퐼generated by
D ∪Aa.
2. Aim of the inductive step. Our aim in the key inductive step will be to prove the
following. Note that from a certain point of view, this is about the Boolean algebra
P(퐼)/D; however, it clariﬁes our presentation here to refer explicitly to 퐼and to the
given types as they are presented in the reduced product. By quantiﬁer elimina-
tion, a type here is a choice of 휆parameters and a function from 휆to 2.
Claim 3.5. If (퐴) then (퐵):
(퐴) (a) a ∈AP훼
(b) 푀　㨐푇rg
(c) ℎ푖∈퐼푀for 푖< 휆
(d) 휂∈휆2
(e) For 푖< 푗< 휆, if 휂(푖) = 휂(푗) then 퐴푖,푗= 퐼, and if 휂(푖)
̸= 휂(푗) let
퐴푖,푗= {푡∈퐼: ℎ푖(푡)
̸= ℎ푗(푡)} = 퐼
mod ﬁl⟨D ∪a⟩
(f) 푝= {(푥푅(ℎ푖/D1))[휂(푖)]
:
푖< 휆} is a type in 푀퐼/D1 for every ultraﬁlter
D1 ⊇ﬁl⟨D ∪a⟩
(퐵) There are b, 퐵such that:
(a) a ≤b ∈AP훼+1
(b) 퐵= ⟨퐵푖: 푖< 휆⟩
(c) 퐵푖∈ﬁl⟨D ∪b⟩
(d) 퐵푖∩퐵푗⊆퐴푖,푗mod D for 푖< 푗< 휆such that 휂(푖)
̸= 휂(푗)
The proof will follow from Steps 11-13 below, following some intermediate deﬁni-
tions. In Step 13, we verify that Claim 3.5(B) is suﬃcient to realize the type.
Deﬁnition 3.6. Given any sequence 퐵= ⟨퐵푖: 푖< 휆⟩from Claim 3.5(B), let the
sequence 퐵∗= ⟨퐵푢: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩be given by: 퐵{푖} = 퐵푖for 푖< 휆, and 퐵푢= ⋂{퐵{푖} :
푖∈푢} for 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0, |푢| ≥2.
Discussion. Condition (퐴) corresponds to the data of a random graph type over the
parameters {ℎ푖: 푖< 휆}. Deﬁne a sequence 퐴= ⟨퐴푢: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩by |푢| = 1 implies

332
|
Maryanthe Malliaris, Saharon Shelah
퐴푢= 퐼, 푢= {푖, 푗}, 푖
̸= 푗implies 퐴푢= 퐴푖,푗as deﬁned above, and |푢| ≥3 implies
퐴푢= ⋂{퐴푣: 푣⊆푢, |푣| = 2}. Then 퐴gives a distribution for this type.
Note that 푡∈퐴푖,푗implies {(푥푅(ℎ푖/D1))[휂(푖)], (푥푅(ℎ푗/D1))[휂(푗)]} is consistent.
Since random graph types have 2-compactness, and (∃푥)푥푅(ℎ푖/D1) is sent to 퐼by
the Łos map, item (퐵)(푑) implies that the corresponding sequence 퐵∗= ⟨퐵푢:
푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩from Deﬁnition 3.6 reﬁnes 퐴modulo D and is multiplicative
mod D.
This will be suﬃcient to realize the type given the background assumption of ex-
cellence, see Step 13 below.
Data for the key inductive step. Steps 3-10 below are in the context of Claim
3.5, meaning that we ﬁx the data of Claim 3.5(A) and deﬁne the following objects
based on it. Thus all objects deﬁned here are implicitly subscripted by 훼and a and
depend on the choice of sequence ⟨퐴푖: 푖< 휆⟩at this inductive step.
3. The set F1
푖= F1
훼,a,푖. For each 푖< 휆, deﬁne F1
푖to be the set of all 푓∈FI(Ga) such
that for some 푗≤푖:
1.
ℎ푗|퐴푓= ℎ푖|퐴푓
mod D
2.
훾< 푗㨐⇒ℎ훾|퐴푓
̸= ℎ푖|퐴푓
mod D
i.e., 훾< 푗㨐⇒
{푡∈퐴푓: ℎ푗(푡)
̸= ℎ푖(푡) or ℎ훾(푡) = ℎ푖(푡)} = 0
mod D
Note that ﬁxing 퐴푓there is a minimal 푗such that ℎ푗|퐴푓= ℎ푖|퐴푓
mod D. Since the
ordinals are well ordered, we can choose a least 푗for which there is such a witness
퐴푓.
4. The set F2
푖= F2
훼,a,푖. For each 푖< 휆, choose F2
푖so that:
1.
F2
푖⊆F1
푖
2.
푓耠
̸= 푓耠耠∈F2
푖
㨐⇒푓耠, 푓耠耠are incompatible functions
3.
F2
푖is maximal under these restrictions
5. Density. Notice that for ℓ= 1, 2 Fℓ
푖is pre-dense, i.e. for every 푓耠∈FI(Ga) for some
푓耠耠∈F1
푖the functions 푓耠, 푓耠耠are compatible.
The set F1
푖is dense, meaning that for each 푓耠∈FI(Fa) there is 푓耠耠∈F1
푖such
that 푓耠⊆푓耠耠. Moreover, it is open, meaning that if 푓耠耠∈F1
푖and 푓耠耠⊆푓耠耠耠then 푓耠耠耠∈
F1
푖. Here by “⊆” we mean that the domain of the smaller function is contained in
the domain of the larger function, and the two functions agree on their common
domain. [Note that 푓⊆푓耠㨐⇒퐴푓耠⊆퐴푓.]
6. The collision function. For each 푖< 휆deﬁne the function 휌푖: F2
푖→푖by:
휌푖(푓) = min{푗≤푖: ℎ푖|퐴푓= ℎ푗|퐴푓
mod D}

Saturating the Random Graph
|
333
Note that by the deﬁnition of F2
푖, this is the whole story in the sense that if
휌푖(푓) = 푗then for no 푓耠⊇푓does there exist 푗耠< 푗such that ℎ푖|퐴푓耠= ℎ푗耠|퐴푓耠
mod D.
7. The new support. By induction on 푖< 휆choose 푔푖∈G∗\Ga \{푔푗: 푗< 푖} (we make
no further requirements on the sequence, but note the functions will be distinct).
8. The partition. For each 푖< 휆, the sequence ⟨퐴푓: 푓∈F2
푖⟩is (by deﬁnition) a
sequence of pairwise disjoint sets.
9. The reﬁnement. Let 퐵= ⟨퐵푖: 푖< 휆⟩where for 푖< 휆
퐵푖= ⋃{퐴푓∩(푔−1
휌푖(푓)({0}))
[휂(푖)] : 푓∈F2
푖}
where recall that for 퐵⊆퐼, 퐵[1] = 퐵, 퐵[0] = 퐼\ 퐵.
10. Deﬁnition of b. Finally, we deﬁne
b = (Ga ∪{푔푖: 푖< 휆}, Aa ∪{퐵푖: 푖< 휆})
Note that in contrast to the “usual” construction, here we have addressed the
problem of realizing a type by using 휆functions of range ℵ0, rather than a sin-
gle function of range 휆. Moreover, we do not complete to a good triple at the end
of the inductive step.
11. Proof of Claim 3.5(B)(a). We need to check that b as deﬁned in Step 10 satisﬁes
clauses (a)-(e) of the deﬁnition of approximation from Step 1. The only non-trivial
part is proving that 0 ∉ﬁl⟨D ∪Ab⟩, recalling Convention 3.4.
Suppose we are given 퐶0, . . . 퐶푘−1 ∈Aa and 푖0, . . . 푖푛−1 < 휆. It will suﬃce to
prove that
⋂
푗<푛
퐵푖푗∩⋂
ℓ<푘
퐶ℓ
̸= 0
mod D
Informally speaking, we ﬁrst try to ﬁnd a D-nonzero set on which the correspond-
ing parameters ℎ푖푗are distinct. On such a set, the instructions for each 퐵푖푗are
clearly compatible, so we can then ﬁnd some 퐴푓∗∈FI푠(G∗), Deﬁnition 2.9, which
is contained in their intersection
mod D. We now give the details.
First, by (퐴)(푒) of the inductive step and the fact that ﬁl⟨D∪Aa⟩is a ﬁlter, there
is 퐴∈ﬁl⟨D∪a⟩, 퐴⊆⋂{퐶ℓ: ℓ< 푘} such that 푗< 푗耠< 푛∧휂(푗)
̸= 휂(푗耠) 㨐⇒퐴푗,푗耠⊇퐴.
Moreover, by the deﬁnition of approximation, any 퐴∈ﬁl⟨D ∪a⟩contains a set
which is supported by Ga. Let 푓∈FI(Ga) be such that 퐴푓⊆퐴mod D.
Second, recall that each F2
푖is pre-dense. So for each 푗< 푛, we may choose 푓푖푗∈
F2
푖푗which is compatible with 푓. As we can increase 푓, without loss of generality,
for 푗< 푛there is 푓푖푗∈F2
푖푗such that 푓푖푗⊆푓(choose these by induction on 푗< 푛).

334
|
Maryanthe Malliaris, Saharon Shelah
By choice of 푓, for no 푗< 푗耠< 푛is it the case that ℎ푖푗= ℎ푖푗耠on 퐴푓. In other words,
푗< 푗耠< 푛∧휂(푗)
̸= 휂(푗耠) 㨐⇒휌푖푗(푓푖푗)
̸= 휌푖푗耠(푓푖푗耠)
Thus (identifying functions with their graphs) the function 푓∗deﬁned by
푓∗= 푓∪⋃{푓푖푗: 푗< 푛} ∪{(푔푘푗, 푡푗) : 푘푗= 휌푖푗(푓푖푗), 푡푗= 휂(푖푗)}
is indeed a function, thus an element of FI(G∗). Clearly 퐴푓∗⊆퐵푖푗for each 푗<
푛, and 퐴푓∗
̸= 0 mod D by the hypothesis that (퐼, D, G∗) is a good triple. This
completes the proof of Step 11.
Now Claim 3.5(B)(b)-(c) obviously hold, so we are left with:
12. Proof of Claim 3.5(B)(d). We now show that if 푖
̸= 푗< 휆, 휂(푖)
̸= 휂(푗) then 퐵푖∩퐵푗⊆
퐴푖,푗mod D. Note that if 휂(푖) = 휂(푗) the inclusion holds trivially, which is why we
assume 휂(푖)
̸= 휂(푗) (so 푖
̸= 푗).
Assume for a contradiction that 퐴∗:= (퐵푖∩퐵푗)\퐴푖,푗
̸= 0 mod D. As 퐵푖, 퐵푗, 퐴푖,푗
are supported by Gb, there is 푓∗∈FI(Gb) such that 퐴푓∗⊆퐴∗
mod D.
As there is no problem increasing 푓∗, we may choose 푓푖∈F2
푖, 푓푗∈F2
푗such
that 푓푖⊆푓∗∧푓푗⊆푓∗. In other words, 퐴푓∗⊆퐴푓푖∩퐴푓푗. Recall that
퐴푖,푗= {푡∈퐼: ℎ푖(푡)
̸= ℎ푗(푡)}
By the deﬁnition of 퐴푖,푗, since 퐴푓∗∩퐴푖,푗= 0 mod D it must be that ℎ푖= ℎ푗on
퐴푓∗
mod D. Because we chose 푓푖and 푓푗from F2
푖and F2
푗, respectively, there must
be 푘푖≤푖and 푘푗≤푗so that ℎ푖= ℎ푘푖on 퐴푓푖, and ℎ푗= ℎ푘푗on 퐴푓푗. Since equality is
transitive, there is 푘≤min{푖, 푗} such that ℎ푖= ℎ푗= ℎ푘on 퐴푓∗. In the notation of
Step 6, 휌푖(푓푖) = 휌푗(푓푗) = 푘.
Now we look at the deﬁnition of 퐵푖, 퐵푗. Since 휂(푖) = t푖
̸= 휂(푗) = t푗, we have that
퐵푖∩퐴푓∗⊆(푔−1
푘(0))t푖whereas 퐵푗∩퐴푓∗⊆(푔−1
푘(0))t푗. Thus 퐵푖∩퐵푗∩퐴푓∗= 0, which
is the desired contradiction.
13. Finishing the key inductive step. Why is Claim 3.5 suﬃcient to realize the type?
Let us rephrase the problem as follows.
Corollary 3.7. Let D be the excellent background ﬁlter deﬁned at the beginning of
the proof. Let a, ⟨ℎ푖: 푖< 휆⟩, ⟨퐴푖,푗: 푖< 푗< 휆⟩, 휂, 푝be as given in Claim 3.5(퐵) at the
inductive stage 훼. Let ⟨퐵푖: 푖< 휆⟩, b be as given by Claim 3.5(퐴).
Then in any ultraﬁlter D1 extending ﬁl⟨D ∪b⟩, the type 푝is realized.
Proof. Let ⟨퐴푢: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩be the sequence deﬁned in the Discussion in Step
2, which corresponds to a distribution of the type 푝. Let 퐵∗= ⟨퐵푢: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩
be constructed from {퐵푖: 푖< 휆} as in Deﬁnition 3.6 above. By deﬁnition 퐵∗is
multiplicative. In step 12, it was shown that 퐵∗reﬁnes 퐴mod D.

Saturating the Random Graph
|
335
Deﬁne a third sequence 퐵
耠= ⟨퐵耠
푢: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩by 퐵耠
푢= 퐵푢∩퐴푢for 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0.
Then the sequence 퐵
耠truly reﬁnes 퐴, but is only multiplicative modulo D.
By the excellence of D [i.e. Fact 2.4 above] we may replace 퐵
耠by a sequence
⟨퐵∗∗
푢
: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩such that:
–
푢∈[휆]<ℵ0 implies 퐵∗∗
푢
⊆퐵耠
푢⊆퐴푢
–
푢∈[휆]<ℵ0 implies 퐵∗∗
푢
= 퐵耠
푢mod D, thus 퐵∗∗
푢
∈ﬁl⟨D ∪b⟩
–
⟨퐵∗∗
푢
: 푢∈[휆]<ℵ0⟩is multiplicative
Thus we may realize the type.
Step 14: Adding subsets of the index set.
Claim 3.8. Let 훼< 2휆, a ∈AP훼, 퐴⊆퐼be given. Then there is b ∈AP훼+1 such that
either 퐴∈ﬁl⟨D ∪b⟩or 퐼\ 퐴∈ﬁl⟨D ∪b⟩.
Proof. Let 푋= 퐴if 0 ∉ﬁl⟨D ∪a ∪{퐴}⟩, otherwise let 푋= 퐼\ 퐴. By the hypothesis
that (퐼, D, G∗) is (휆, 휇)-good, we may choose a partition ⟨퐴푓푖: 푖< 휇⟩of P(퐼)/D1
such that each 푓푖∈FI(G∗). Let Gb = Ga ∪⋃{dom(푓푖) : 푖< 휇}, and let Ab = Aa ∪{푋}.
This suﬃces.
Proof of Theorem 3.2. We now prove the theorem.
Proof. (of Theorem 3.2) Without loss of generality, |푀| ≤2휆.
Let ⟨퐶훼: 훼< 2휆⟩enumerate P(퐼). Let ⟨ℎ
훼, 휂훼: 훼< 2휆⟩enumerate all 휂∈휆2
and all ℎ= ⟨ℎ푖: 푖< 휆⟩with ℎ푖∈퐼푀, with each such pair appearing 2휆times in the
enumeration.
We build the ultraﬁlter by induction on 훼≤2휆. That is, we choose a훼∈AP훼
by induction on 훼< 2휆such that:
1.
훽< 훼㨐⇒a훽≤a훼
2.
if 훼= 2훽+ 1 then either 퐶훽∈ﬁl⟨D ∪a훼⟩or 퐼\ 퐶훽∈ﬁl⟨D ∪a훼⟩
3.
if 훼= 2훽+ 2 and (a2훽+1, ℎ
훽, 휂훽) satisﬁes Claim 3.5(퐴), then there is 퐵which,
along with a훼, satisﬁes Claim 3.5(퐵).
4.
if 훼is a limit ordinal then a훼is the least upper bound of {a훽: 훽< 훼} in the
natural partial order, i.e. given by taking the union in both coordinates.
The odd inductive steps are given by Claim 3.8 above, and clearly ensure that
ﬁl⟨D ∪a2휆⟩is an ultraﬁlter. The even inductive steps are given by Claim 3.5 above,
and Corollary 3.7 ensures saturation.
Thus letting D1 = ﬁl⟨D ∪a2휆⟩, we complete the proof.

336
|
Maryanthe Malliaris, Saharon Shelah
Appendix
We include some deﬁnitions used mainly in §1.3. For details, see [14] §1.
Deﬁnition 3.9. (Shelah [20] Deﬁnition III.3.5) Let D be an ultraﬁlter on 휆.
휇(D) := min { ∏
푡<휆
푛푡/D : 푛푡< ℵ0, ∏
푡<휆
푛푡/D ≥ℵ0}
be the minimum value of the product of an unbounded sequence of cardinals mod
D.
Deﬁnition 3.10. (Good for equality, Malliaris [12]) Let D be a regular ultraﬁlter.
Say that D is good for equality if for any set 푋⊆푁= 푀퐼/D, |푋| ≤|퐼|, there is a
distribution 푑: 푋→D such that 푡∈휆, 푡∈푑(푎) ∩푑(푏) implies that (푀　㨐푎[푡] =
푏[푡]) ⇐⇒(푁　㨐푎= 푏).
Deﬁnition 3.11. (Lower coﬁnality, lcf(휅, 퐷)) Let 퐷be an ultraﬁlter on 퐼and 휅a car-
dinal. Let 푁= (휅, <)퐼/D. Let 푋⊂푁be the set of elements above the diagonal
embedding of 휅. We deﬁne lcf(휅, 퐷) to be the coﬁnality of 푋considered with the
reverse order.
Acknowledgement: Malliaris was partially supported by NSF grant DMS-1001666
and by a Gödel fellowship. Shelah was partially supported by Israel Science Foun-
dation grant 1053/11. This is paper number 1009 in Shelah’s list of publications.
Thanks to the anonymous referee for useful comments which improved the
article’s presentation.
Bibliography
[1]
C. C. Chang and H. J. Keisler, Model Theory, North-Holland, 1973.
[2]
A. Dow, “Good and OK ultraﬁlters.” Trans. AMS, Vol. 290, No. 1 (July 1985), pp. 145-160.
[3]
R. Engelking and M. Karłowicz, “Some theorems of set theory and their topological conse-
quences.” Fund. Math. 57 (1965) 275–285.
[4]
R. Grossberg, J. Iovino, O. Lessmann, “A primer of simple theories.” Arch. Math. Logic 41
(2002), no. 6, 541–580.
[5]
H. J. Keisler, “Good ideals in ﬁelds of sets.” Annals of Math. (2) 79 (1964), 338–359.
[6]
H. J. Keisler, “Ultraproducts which are not saturated.” J. Symbolic Logic 32 (1967) 23–46.
[7]
S. Kochen, “Ultraproducts in the theory of models.” Annals of Math. (2) 74, No. 2 (1961),
pp. 221–261.
[8]
K. Kunen, “Ultraﬁlters and independent sets.” Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 172 (1972), 299–
306.

Bibliography
|
337
[9]
M. Malliaris, Ph. D. thesis, University of California, Berkeley (2009).
[10] M. Malliaris, “Realization of 휑-types and Keisler’s order.” Ann. Pure Appl. Logic 157
(2009), no. 2-3, 220–224.
[11]
M. Malliaris, “Hypergraph sequences as a tool for saturation of ultrapowers.” Journal of
Symbolic Logic, 77, 1 (2012) 195–223.
[12] M. Malliaris, “Independence, order and the interaction of ultraﬁlters and theories.” Ann
Pure Appl Logic, 163, 11 (2012) 1580–1595.
[13] M. Morley, “Categoricity in power.” Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. 114, No. 2, (1965), 514–538.
[14] M. Malliaris and S. Shelah, “Constructing regular ultraﬁlters from a model-theoretic point
of view.” To appear, Trans. Amer. Math. Soc.
[15] M. Malliaris and S. Shelah, “Model-theoretic properties of ultraﬁlters built by indepen-
dent families of functions.” To appear, J. Symbolic Logic.
[16] M. Malliaris and S. Shelah, “Coﬁnality spectrum theorems in model theory, set theory,
and general topology.” Submitted. http://arxiv.org/abs/1208.5424.
[17] M. Malliaris and S. Shelah, “A dividing line within simple unstable theories.” Advances in
Math 249 (2013) 250–288.
[18] S. Shelah, “Simple unstable theories.” Ann. Math. Logic, 19, 177–203 (1980).
[19] S. Shelah, Classiﬁcation Theory, North-Holland, 1978.
[20] S. Shelah, Classiﬁcation Theory and the number of non-isomorphic models, rev. ed.
North-Holland, 1990.
[21] S. Shelah, “Toward classifying unstable theories.” Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 80
(1996) 229–255.
Saturating the Random Graph


Ilkka Niiniluoto
Constructive Realism in Mathematics
||
Ilkka Niiniluoto: Department of Philosophy, History, Culture and Art Studies, University of
Helsinki, Finland, e-mail: ilkka.niiniluoto@helsinki.ﬁ
1 Introduction
Traditional classiﬁcations of the main schools in the philosophy of mathematics
are based upon two questionable presuppositions. First, it is assumed that a real-
ist, who wishes to defend objective truth values of mathematical statements, has
to be either a Platonist or a physicalist. Secondly, a constructivist, who regards
mathematical entities as human constructs rather than pre-existing objects, has
to be either a subjective mentalist or an objective idealist. In contrast to these al-
ternatives and their many variants, this paper argues that it is possible to be a
constructivist and a realist at the same time. Mathematical entities are public cre-
ations in the human-made domain of abstract artifacts; this domain Karl Popper
called World 3. They are not completely transparent to their makers, so that math-
ematical constructs are full of open problems for us to study. The applicability of
mathematics to physical, mental, and social reality can be explained by the The-
ory of Measurement, which also helps to show what is wrong and what is right
with the empiricist approaches to mathematical knowledge.
2 Philosophy of Mathematics: Three Main
Problems
The philosophy of mathematics is a rich specialty with its own experts and pub-
lications - comparable to ﬁelds like the philosophy of physics, the philosophy of
biology, the philosophy of medicine, the philosophy of technology, and the phi-
losophy of the social sciences. It draws signiﬁcant inspiration from the develop-
ments of mathematics and the often surprising results of mathematical logic (see
Hintikka, 1969). While metamathematics, or the application of logical and math-
ematical tools in the study of the foundations of mathematics, can be regarded
as a branch of mathematics (see Rasiowa and Sikorski, 1968), the philosophy of

340
|
Ilkka Niiniluoto
mathematics is a subdiscipline of philosophy. By using general concepts and ap-
proaches of philosophy, it investigates problems of existence, truth, and knowl-
edge in relation to mathematics. Thereby the philosophy of mathematics has tra-
ditionally concentrated on three main problems.
First, the ontological question concerns the existence of mathematical enti-
ties. Here the main issue is the pre-existence vs. construction of mathematical
entities. The former view claims that mathematical objects and structures exist
objectively, independent of human activities. Already Plato in his theory of forms
argued that mathematical objects are abstract, eternal, indestructible, and not
part of space and time. Stewart Shapiro (2005), p. 6, calls this realism in ontology,
but we shall see that the realists have proposed other kinds of objective existence
besides Platonism. The most popular alternative has been the naturalist reduc-
tion of the objects of mathematics to physical phenomena (see Maddy, 1997). The
constructivists suggest that mathematical entities exist only as creations of math-
ematical activities. Ontological anti-realists deny the existence of speciﬁc mathe-
matical objects altogether. One form of such anti-realism claims that mathemati-
cal entities are ﬁctions (see Leng, 2010).
Secondly, the semantical question concerns the nature of mathematical truth.
Here the main issue is the contrast between proof and truth. What Shapiro calls
realism in truth-value claims that mathematical statements have truth-values in-
dependently of the minds, languages, and conventions of the mathematician. This
view is typical to semantical and model-theoretical approaches to mathematical
theories. Various kinds of semantical anti-realists reduce the assessment of math-
ematical statements to syntactical considerations of their provability in some for-
mal system or their assertability conditions (see Dummett, 1977).
Thirdly, the epistemological question concerns the nature of mathematical
knowledge. Here the main issue is between a priori vs. empirical knowledge. The
former alternative was defended by Plato’s rationalist account of non-sensuous
intuition, but later it has been supported by doctrines of conceptual or analytic
truth, i.e. truths based on deﬁnitions and meanings. J. S. Mill’s 1843 thesis that
the truths of arithmetic and geometry are inductive generalizations from empirical
experience (see Mill, 1906) has recently been revived by some naturalist philoso-
phers (see Kitcher, 1983).
In this paper, I argue that the most popular positions in the philosophy of
mathematics ignore an important alternative that I call “constructive realism” (cf.
Niiniluoto, 1984, 1992). My inspiration comes from Karl Popper’s (1972) ontologi-
cal doctrine of World 3. Popper is not mentioned at all in the recently published
Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Mathematics and Logic (2005), whose editor
Stewart Shapiro promises “a clear picture of the state of the art”.

Constructive Realism in Mathematics
|
341
Before outlining my view in the next sections, let me give you a preliminary
hint of its direction by quoting Jouko Väänänen, the brilliant mathematical logi-
cian, model-theorist and set-theorist. In two papers in Finnish, he has expressed
a highly interesting idea of mathematical reality. In a paper on Georg Cantor’s
concept of inﬁnity, Väänänen notes that Cantor is usually interpreted as a Platon-
ist who assumes ﬁxed truth about an eternal and unchanging domain of math-
ematical objects, but instead Cantor in fact promotes mathematical practice as
free intellectual activity which creates ﬁrst an intrasubjective reality and then a
developing transsubjective reality (Väänänen, 1982). In a paper on mathematical
objects, Väänänen suggests that classical realism can be defended by assuming
that mathematical entities are constructed by a “superbeing” or a “superman”, ca-
pable of inﬁnite generalizations of ﬁnite human constructions (Väänänen, 1984).
As an example of an inﬁnite construction, suﬃcient for the purposes of classical
mathematics, he mentions the cumulative hierarchy of sets, obtained by succes-
sively applying to the empty set 0 iterations of the power set operation and unions
(cf. Väänänen, 2012).
3 Abstract Entities: Three Main Schools
When the philosophy of mathematics emerged as a specialty, largely inspired by
the crisis in the foundations of mathematics in the ﬁrst years of the Twentieth
century, the ﬁeld was divided by three main schools: Logicism, Formalism, and
Intuitionism. This division, as the “received view”, was well formulated in 1931
in an issue of Erkenntnis, the new journal of the logical empiricists, with papers
by Rudolf Carnap, Johann von Neumann, and Arend Heyting. It was reinforced in
1964 in the ﬁrst edition of the authoritative anthology Philosophy of Mathematics,
edited by Paul Benacerraf and Hilary Putnam, with classical papers by the logi-
cists Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell, the formalists David Hilbert and Haskell
B. Curry, and the intuitionist L. E. J. Brouwer.
Logicism reduces mathematics to logic and set theory. Logical truths are tau-
tologies without any factual content. They can be known a priori, as they are ana-
lytic truths, consequences of axioms and deﬁnitions. In contrast to axiomatic pure
mathematics, which is analytic and a priori, interpreted mathematical theories
(like applied geometry) are branches of natural science with synthetic a posteriori
truths (see Nagel, 1961). Logicism as such can be neutral with respect to ontologi-
cal questions, but some of its leading proponents (like Frege and Kurt Gödel) were
strongly inclined to Platonism.

342
|
Ilkka Niiniluoto
Formalism treats logic and mathematics as games of manipulating syntactical
signs. From signs one can form expressions, and from sequences of expressions
one can form proofs. Rigorous study of mathematical theories as formal deductive
systems, including theorems about their consistency, can be given in proof theory.
Intuitionism contends that mathematics studies mental or introspective con-
structions in the mind of the mathematician. Mathematical objects are mind-
dependent, and their existence presupposes a successful construction. Brouwer’s
philosophy had Kantian and phenomenological roots, but later intuitionists have
formulated non-classical systems of logic and mathematical reasoning. In intu-
itionistic mathematics, all inﬁnity is potential, and inﬁnite classes are replaced
with “laws” or processes generating “choice sequences”.
It is interesting to observe that these three schools are closely parallel to three
approaches in the great medieval controversy about universals (cf. Armstrong,
1978). The realists accepted universals (e.g., whiteness) as independently existing
entities. Some of them followed Plato in placing such universals in a transcendent
realm (ante rem), and others agreed with Aristotle in thinking that universals are
immanent forms of objects, always instantiated in things (in rebus). The nomi-
nalists, who accepted only the existence of particular things, treated universals
as mere words in a written or spoken language (ﬂatus voci). The conceptualists
claimed that universals have a mental existence as concepts (in intellectu).
4 Popper’s Three Worlds
A new way of classifying ontological or metaphysical positions can be based on
Karl Popper’s terminology of three worlds (see Popper, 1972, 1974). World 1 con-
sists of physical things, events, and processes in space and time, including lawlike
relations between such entities. This is the domain of inorganic and organic na-
ture, studied by physics and biology. World 2 includes subjective mental states and
events (e.g., beliefs, emotions, and volitions) in individual human minds. This is
the domain of human psyche, studied by psychology and cognitive science. World
3 contains the products of human social action, such as cultural objects, social in-
stitutions, and abstract entities like concepts, propositions, arguments, theories,
problems, and numbers. This domain is studied by cultural and social sciences,
logic and mathematics.
Three monistic metaphysical doctrines can now be identiﬁed (cf. Niiniluoto,
1999). Materialism in its radical eliminative form claims that everything real be-
longs to World 1. Reductive materialism states that reality is reducible to World
1 entities and their complexes. Eliminative and reductive materialism are forms

Constructive Realism in Mathematics
|
343
of physicalism. Emergent materialism takes World 1 as primary, but admits that
suﬃciently complex material systems may have “emergent” non-physical proper-
ties. Subjective idealism makes parallel claims about World 2. Its eliminative and
reductive forms constitute the doctrine of spiritualism, but emergent idealism is
also a possible view. Objective idealism in its classical versions has taken some
non-material and non-subjective ideas (such as Plato’s forms, thoughts of super-
natural gods, and Hegel’s objective spirit) as the ultimate source of all being, but
more mundane variations could replace them by some abstract World 3 entities.
Idealist views (e.g., phenomenalism, social constructivism) are ontologically anti-
realist, as they treat the material reality in World 1 as mind-dependent or human-
made.
Besides such monistic views, dualist ontologies may accept World 1 and World
2 as two independent (but possibly causally interacting) domains of reality. This
is the Cartesian tradition initiated by Descartes. Another kind of dualism could
accept World 1 and World 3. Trialist doctrines accept the reality of all three worlds.
When Popper introduced his theory of the third world in a paper with a teas-
ing title “On the Theory of the Objective Mind”, Mario Bunge was shocked that
in 1967 Popper had a sudden “conversion to objective idealism” (Bunge, 1981, p.
138). However, Popper’s position can be interpreted as a form of emergent mate-
rialism (see Niiniluoto, 1999): in his evolutionary account he sees Worlds 2 and 3
as historical products of World 1. Neither of them could exist without the material
World 1, but they have achieved a relatively independent status by being able to
inﬂuence material entities by a causal “feedback mechanism”.
Popper mentions Bernard Bolzano’s “sentences in themselves” (Sätze an sich)
and Frege’s “thoughts” (Gedanke) as anticipations of his World 3. Frege stated in
1918 that “thoughts are neither things in the external world nor ideas”, so that
“a third realm has to be recognized” (Frege, 1984). So for Popper propositions as
the “objective contents of thought” are paradigmatic examples of World 3 enti-
ties. Frege’s position about propositions is Platonist, however, and Popper wants
to dissociate his “man-made and changing” World 3 from Plato’s “divine and un-
changing third world”. World 3 entities emerge as by-products of human social
action, especially the creation of symbolic languages. Popper’s theory of World 3
is thus a kind of “poor man’s Platonism”: as no higher being or god has created
abstract objects for us, man must himself make them (see Niiniluoto, 1992).
Popper does not refer to Carnap’s Aufbau, which in 1928 gave a three-fold
classiﬁcation of objects into physical, psychological, and cultural (see Carnap,
1967, cf. Niiniluoto, 2006). Cultural objects include concrete artifacts (e.g., books,
paintings, coins) which have a material kernel in World 1, but also non-physical
relational properties (e.g., meaning, value, price) through their relations to hu-
man practices. Cultural objects include also abstract artifacts (e.g., poems, sym-

344
|
Ilkka Niiniluoto
phonies) which can be copied, recorded, and reproduced by their embodiments
that belong to Worlds 1 and 2. Using Carnap’s terms, a symphony can be docu-
mented in World 1 by notes on a score, acoustic waves, recording tapes, or compact
discs, and it can be manifested in World 2 as the composer’s idea or the listener’s
experience. A virtue of the theory of World 3 is that it allows us to say that there
is one and only one Beethoven’s Eroica Symphony: it would be quite arbitrary to
identify this masterpiece with any of its multiple documentations and interpreta-
tions in Worlds 1 and 2. We can also see that abstract cultural objects in World 3
exist in time but not in space: they are created at a certain moment of time, and
they could be destroyed if all of their documentations and memories disappeared
from Worlds 1 and 2.
Popper defends the reality of World 2 and 3 entities by their causal powers. For
example, mental states inﬂuence our bodily behavior by “downward causation”,
and coins function as money via existing social institutions. It is less evident that
purely abstract entities could have a causal impact on us. For such entities one can
apply Charles Peirce’s “medieval” deﬁnition of reality: real things have characters
that “are independent of what anybody may think them to be” (see Peirce 1931-
35, § 5.405). Popper’s own example is prime numbers: the largest prime number
known in 2013 is 257885161−1. Probably no one had ever thought about this number
or written down its 17,425,170 digits, but still it had (even before it was found by
The Great Internet Mersenne Prime Search on January 25, 2013) “objectively” the
property of being prime. In the same spirit, Haim Gaifman (2012) characterizes
the realist ontology of mathematics in terms of “factually meaningful questions”
which have determinate answers, “independent of our knowing it or our abilities
to ﬁnd it”.
Peirce’s criterion is not unproblematic in sophisticated branches of mathe-
matics like set theory. The deﬁnition of measurable cardinals was given Stanislaw
Ulam in 1930, and a great number of theorems about them have been proved. For
example, Ulam and Tarski showed that measurable cardinals are strongly inac-
cessible. Further, if 휅is measurable, then 휅is the 휅th weakly inaccessible cardi-
nal. Solovay proved in 1967 that ZF together with the axiom of determinacy AD
implies the measurability of the cardinal ℵ1. On the other hand, it is known that
the existence of measurable cardinals is independent of the axioms of ZFC. Scott
proved in 1961 that the axiom of constructibility V=L implies the non-existence
of measurable cardinals, but it is still unknown whether their existence is com-
patible with the axioms of ZFC. So in a sense, after 70 years of intensive studies,
we still don’t know whether these entities exist or not (see Kanamori, 2003). One
possible conclusion for a realist, compatible with Peirce’s criterion, is that math-
ematicians are able to rigorously investigate alternative universes of set theory –
Hamkins (2012) defends a Platonist version of this “set-theoretic multiverse”.

Constructive Realism in Mathematics
|
345
Peirce himself used his criterion to distinguish reality and ﬁction, and by the
same principle we can distinguish real public entities in World 3 and merely ﬁc-
tional objects (e.g., Santa Claus and Anna Karenina). Thus, World 3 diﬀers from
“Meinong’s jungle” of all possible conceivable objects (see Routley, 1980; cf. Nii-
niluoto, 2011).
5 Mathematics and World 3
The main schools in the philosophy of mathematics have their typical locations
for mathematical entities in diﬀerent categories of reality. This concerns not only
the old schools of Logicism, Intuitionism, and Formalism, but also the new ap-
proaches well described in Shapiro’s Handbook (2005).
The appeal of Platonism is still strong. In an inﬂuential article, Paul Benac-
erraf (1965) argued that arithmetic is not a science concerned with particular ob-
jects, the numbers, but instead studies the abstract structure that all progressions
of a certain kind have in common. This view is called “eliminative structuralism”
(see Parsons, 1990). Its weaker modal form, which asserts only the possibility of
such structures, is defended by Geoﬀrey Hellman (1989). But instead of getting
rid of mathematical entities, some realist structuralists have suggested that arith-
metic studies numbers as “positions” and ”patterns” (Resnik, 1997) or the natural
number structure as an ante rem universal (Shapiro, 2005, p. 22). Neither of them
has considered World 3 realism as an alternative to Platonism.
Intuitionists typically locate mathematical objects as mental constructions in
the subjective World 2. But Brouwer’s own account of mathematics as the tempo-
rally cumulating work of “the creative subject” (see Dummett, 1977) has a whiﬀ
of objective idealism. A limiting case of constructivism without ontological com-
mitments is given by Charles Chihara (1990), whose “constructibility quantiﬁers”
tell only what kinds of entities are possible to construct.
Formalism places numerals and other linguistic expressions as material signs
in World 1. New naturalist and empiricist approaches, often inﬂuenced by W. V. O.
Quine, have tried to analyze mathematics without abstract entities. The wish to
defend realism without Platonism has led to physicalist accounts which in some
sense reduce mathematical truth to scientiﬁc claims about World 1 (see Irvine,
1990; Maddy, 1997). Armstrong’s (1978) physicalism accepts Aristotelian univer-
sals, and nominalism is also criticized by Burgess and Rosen (1998).
Some physicalists have tried to get rid of mathematical ontology altogether.
Hartry Field’s (1980) ﬁctionalism argues that mathematical terms are dispensable
in scientiﬁc theories, so that ‘2 + 2 = 4’ can be taken to be true pretty much in the

346
|
Ilkka Niiniluoto
same sense as ‘Oliver Twist lived in London’. But Field (1989) advocates a “sub-
stantival” view of space-time regions and points in his physical ontology (even
though regions need not be conceived as sets of points), which makes it easy to
dispense with any additional special mathematical ontology of real numbers.
Another version of ﬁctionalism is defended by Mary Leng (2010). She starts
from Quine’s and Putnam’s argument that naturalism, conﬁrmational holism,
and the indispensability of mathematical entities in successful physical theories
leads to the conclusion that we ought to believe in the existence of mathematical
objects. Instead of rejecting indispensability like Field, Leng attacks the holistic
principle that “the conﬁrmation our theories receive extends to all their statement
equally”. She concludes that mathematical statements are less conﬁrmed than
physical claims, so that it is suﬃcient merely to “pretend” or “make-believe” that
there are mathematical objects satisfying the axioms of an empirically success-
ful physical theory. But Leng’s rejection of the egalitarian formulation of holism
does not capture Quine’s idea of a “web of belief” where logical and mathematical
truths belong to its “interior” which is less susceptible to rejection by empirical
evidence than observational statements in “the periphery” (see Quine and Ullian,
1970).
On the whole contemporary philosophy of mathematics seems to be based on
two tacit assumptions. First, it is assumed that a realist, who wishes to defend ob-
jective truth values of mathematical statements, has to be either a Platonist or a
physicalist. Secondly, a constructivist, who regards mathematical entities as hu-
man constructs rather than pre-existing objects, has to be either a subjective men-
talist or an objective idealist. These assumptions ignore the possibility that one
can be a realist and constructivist at the same time. This alternative is provided
by the interpretation of mathematical entities as public creations in the human-
made domain of abstract artifacts or the Popperian World 3 (see Niiniluoto, 1984,
1992).
Popper himself expressed explicitly his constructivism: “Pace Kronecker, I
agree with Brouwer that the sequence of natural numbers is a human construc-
tion” (Popper, 1972, p, 118). Still, the third world is real or “largely autonomous,
though created by us”. However, Popper does not assume with Brouwer that our
constructions are completely transparent to us. This is in sharp contrast to the
Cartesian assumption that the mind has privileged access to its own contents.
Kant expressed this tradition of “maker’s knowledge” by the principle that we can
“cognize in things a priori that which we ourselves place there” (cf. Niiniluoto,
1999, p. 88), For Brouwerian intuitionists and anti-realists the idea of unknown
truths is an anathema, but for Popperian realists World 3 “transcends its makers”,
since “it creates its own autonomous problems” (e.g, the existence and distribu-

Constructive Realism in Mathematics
|
347
tion of prime numbers), and these open problems are left for us as a challenge to
discover and study.
Popper does not explain in detail how such constructions are made, but we
know that inﬁnite mathematical structures (like N and R, Zermelo’s cumulative
hierarchy of sets V, Gödel’s constructible hierachy of sets L, and Barwise’s admis-
sible sets with urelements) as World 3 entities can be deﬁned by ﬁnite descriptions
(e.g., recursive deﬁnitions and set-theoretical constructions with transﬁnite itera-
tions). (See Barwise, 1975.) (This fact is not appreciated by the “ﬁnitist” arguments
of some followers of Ludwig Wittgenstein, as pointed out in Niiniluoto (1999), p.
266.) Such constructions can often be given in several alternative ways - for ex-
ample, the natural number 2 can be represented set-theoretically by {0, {0}} (Zer-
melo) or {{0}} (von Neumann) - but still in World 3 we have number 2 as a unique
entity with its relational properties, in the same way as there is only one Eroica
symphony in spite of its numerous documentations and interpretations. Similarly,
the same structure of real numbers can be introduced either by Dedekind cuts or
converging Cauchy sequences of rational numbers. These constructions and ab-
stractions guarantee realism in truth value: mathematical statements about such
World 3 structures have objective but possibly unknown truth values in the sense
of Tarskian model theory, and thus they satisfy the principles of classical logic.
Donald Gillies (1990, 2010) has given a sympathetic account of Popper’s phi-
losophy of mathematics. He calls it “constructive Platonism”, while I prefer to call
it “constructive realism”. The terminology of Gillies is based upon his own “con-
structive Aristotelianism”. This variant of realism claims that numbers are em-
bodied or instantiated in the material World 1 (and as well in Worlds 2 and 3).
For example, the set of moons of Mars is an embodiment of the number 2. Thus,
numbers are in rebus rather than ante rem. Popper instead insists that there are
“unembodied” numbers in World 3, “more than will ever be pronounced by men,
or used by computers”, “materialized in libraries” or “grasped or understood by
some people” (see Popper, 1974).
In my view, it is important to be cautious in talking about “unembodied”
entities in World 3, in order to avoid collapsing this account back to Platonism
(see Niiniluoto, 2006). Gillies may be right in saying against Popper that mathe-
matical problems come into existence only when they are formulated. Similarly,
World 3 should contain only actually composed symphonies, not all possible and
conceivable musical compositions. On the other hand, it makes sense to claim
that the class of natural numbers N as a well-deﬁned totality belongs to World 3,
and thereby the same is true about all of its known and still unknown members.
Against Gillies’ version of Aristotelianism, it seems clear that all members of the
inﬁnite set N will never be actually realized in World 1 (e.g., by paper and pencil,
or represented by a computer) or in World 2 (by calculations or thoughts in the

348
|
Ilkka Niiniluoto
human mind). In fact, if Gillies wished to be a true Aristotelian, he should agree,
as Aristotle himself in his Physics argued that inﬁnity exists only potentially and
never actually.
Note, however, that some physicalists, like Field (1989), would accept the
space-time continuum in their physical ontology, so that for them World 1 could
include counterparts of all natural and real numbers as well. Recall Galileo’s state-
ment that “the book of nature” is written in the language of mathematics. Against
this view, which is a kind of naturalized Platonism, I think it is more appropri-
ate to regard real numbers and functions as mathematical tools in World 3 that
can be used in idealized descriptions of physical phenomena (see the remarks on
measurement below). This agrees with Mill’s remark that geometrical objects like
“points without magnitude”, “lines without breadth” and “perfect squares” exist
“neither in nature nor in the human mind” (see Mill, 1906, p. 147-148).
Gillies (2010) also proposes to reduce the truth of mathematical statements to
the material relations of their embodiments in World 1. He notes the implication
that there are no truths about transﬁnite cardinals, even though some such correct
claims are theorems of set theory. However, it follows as well that there are many
simple arithmetical equations that fail to be true, since they concern numbers that
are larger than those embodied in World 1. Thus, the position of Gillies concern-
ing arithmetic is not suﬃcient to defend realism in truth value. The doctrine of
World 3 instead allows us say that all statements in arithmetic have a truth value
in the standard model N - and, by Gödel’s incompleteness theorem, any recursive
axiomatization of arithmetic fails to have all of these truths as its theorems.
6 Mathematical Knowledge
Our version of constructive realism helps to explain why mathematical knowl-
edge is a priori and analytic, independent of sense experience. While scientiﬁc
knowledge in most cases is based upon causal interaction between the subject
and object of cognition (see Niiniluoto, 1999, p. 94), this causal theory of knowl-
edge need not be applied in the case of abstract entities in mathematics (pace Be-
nacerraf, 1965). Popper’s suggestion that our grasping of a World 3 object means
its “making” or “re-creation” is not at all plausible with respect to most concrete
and abstract artifacts (e.g., painting, symphonies, social facts), but for mathemat-
ical entities it ﬁts quite well. When a mathematician wants to solve some problem
about a structure like N, this mathematical domain has to reconstructed to extent
that it can be studied. The principles of such constructions can be included among
the deﬁnitions and axioms which serve as premises of mathematical proofs. Such

Constructive Realism in Mathematics
|
349
proofs may concern singular statements about particular structures (e.g., 2 + 3 =
5), general statements about particular structures (e.g., 푚+ 푛= 푛+ 푚for all 푚,
푛in N), and generalizations over types of structures (e.g., every metric space is a
Hausdorﬀspace).
The ultimate basis of mathematical knowledge in deductive proofs, as empha-
sized both by the logicist and formalist traditions, is compatible with the fact that
sometimes non-demonstrative inferences (abduction and induction) may have a
role in the discovery and justiﬁcation of mathematical claims, just as George Polya
and Imre Lakatos have pointed out (see Niiniluoto, 1992). In such cases, we may
be able to prove some instances of a claim (e.g. Goldbach’s Conjecture, Riemann’s
Hypothesis) without a proof of the generalization. It is also possible that, under
certain conditions, empirical observations give support to purely mathematical
claims. To see why, we need an account of the problem of why mathematics is
applicable to reality.
In his otherwise illuminating paper on the applicability problem, Mark
Steiner (2005) does not mention at all the concept of measurement, which in my
view is the key to the relations between empirical relations in World 1 and math-
ematical facts in World 3 (see Niiniluoto, 1992, 2012). In fact, mathematics can be
applied to all the three worlds, but here I restrict my remarks to quantitative de-
scriptions of physical reality. The modern Theory of Measurement (or metrization)
gives representation theorems which justify a link from World 1 to World 3 , and
thereby justiﬁes the assignment of quantitative attributes to a class E of physical
objects (see Krantz et al., 1971). However, representation theorems assume that
the mathematical structures (such as N or R) are already available, so that they
don’t give arguments for the existence of mathematical entities.
For example, the axioms of extensive measurement give suﬃcient and neces-
sary conditions for a comparative relation ▶to be represented by a quantitative
real-valued function 푚: 퐸→R such that, for any two objects 푎and 푏in 퐸, 푎▶푏
iﬀ푚(푎) ≥푚(푏) and, for the combined object 푎∘푏, we have 푚(푎∘푏) = 푚(푎) + 푚(푏).
If 푎and 푏are physical objects, and 푎▶b means that 푎is at least as low as 푏in an
equal arm balance, then 푚is the quantitative mass function. This representation
theorem justiﬁes quantitative assertions like
2 kg + 3 kg = 5 kg.
(1)
The quantitative concept of length can be justiﬁed in the same way. The scale
of measurement determines what kinds of mathematical operations (such as ad-
dition and multiplication) with quantities are allowed. Such applications of the
quantitative method in natural science thus presuppose that certain factual as-
sumptions are correct.

350
|
Ilkka Niiniluoto
A similar justiﬁcation can be given to factual statements like
2 pebbles and 3 pebbles together are 5 pebbles.
(2)
This presupposes that the objects satisfy factual regularity assumptions: they do
not lose their identity, split or merge with other objects, when collected as an ag-
gregate. The class of such aggregates, together with the operation ∘of heaping
up, and the comparative relation “at least as many members as” (deﬁned inde-
pendently of counting with numbers) constitutes an extensive system. Then the
function 푚, whose existence is guaranteed by the representation theorem, is the
cardinality of the aggregate. The principle (2) is valid for pebbles, making em-
pirical “pebble arithmetic” a possibility (see Mill, 1906; Bigelow, 1988), but not
correct for water drops. Factual statements like (1) and (2) diﬀer from the genuine
arithmetical equation
2 + 3 = 5,
(3)
which is a provable claim about numbers in World 3 without any factual assump-
tions. Frege was thus right in arguing that Mill’s empiricist interpretation of math-
ematics confuses applications of arithmetic with the pure mathematical proposi-
tion itself (Frege, 1959, p. 13).
Empirical arithmetic may concern also the operations of physical devices,
such as pocket calculators and computers. Factual statements like
According to my calculator, 741 × 852 = 631 332
(4)
may give empirical conﬁrmation to a purely mathematical statement, if we have
good reasons for believing that the calculator functions without mistakes and dis-
turbances. Computers have also succeeded to verify important steps in mathemat-
ical proofs, as the case of the four-color theorem 4CT shows (see Tymoczko, 1986).
Similar remarks are valid on the relations of empirical and axiomatic geom-
etry. Measurement of lengths may give approximate conﬁrmation to Pythagoras’
Theorem, but in its exact form it can be proved by Euclid’s axioms.
7 Conclusion
Mathematics is not waiting us in the Platonist heaven or in physical reality, but
constructed in the human-made World 3. Genuine mathematical truths are a pri-
ori, but some of them can be interpreted and supported by factual and empiri-
cal results. This constructive realism allows a pluralist picture of mathematics,
as set theory may have alternative models or universes - besides the cumulative

Bibliography
|
351
hierarchy as its standard model. But the construction and reconstruction of pub-
lic mathematical entities, and the inquiry into the still unknown depths of such
structures, is a joint enterprise which does not happen in the mind of an individ-
ual scholar. So Jouko Väänänen’s vision of a superman can be understood as the
scientiﬁc community of mathematicians as a collective.
Bibliography
[1]
Armstrong, D. (1978), Universals and Scientiﬁc Realism, vols. 1-2, Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge.
[2]
Barwise, J. (1975), Admissible Sets and Structures: An Approach to Deﬁnability Theory,
Springer-Verlag, Berlin.
[3]
Benacerraf, P. (1965), “What Numbers Could not Be?”, Philosophical Review 74, 47-73.
Reprinted in Benacerraf & Putnam (1983), pp. 272-294.
[4]
Benacerraf, P. & Putnam, H. (eds.) (1964), Philosophy of Mathematics, Prentice-Hall, En-
glewood Cliﬀs, NJ. (2nd ed., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1983.)
[5]
Bigelow, J. (1988), The Reality of Numbers: A Physicalist’s Philosophy Mathematics, Ox-
ford University Press, Oxford.
[6]
Bunge, M. (1981), Scientiﬁc Materialism, D. Reidel, Dordrecht.
[7]
Burgess, J. & Rosen, G. (1998), A Subject with No Object, Oxford University Press, New
York.
[8]
Carnap, R. (1967), The Logical Structure of the World & Pseudoproblems in Philosophy,
University of California Press, Berkeley.
[9]
Chihara, Ch. (1990), Constructibility and Mathematical Existence, Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
[10] Dummett, M. (1977), Elements of Intuitionism, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
[11]
Field, H. (1980), Science without Numbers, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
[12] Field, H. (1989), Realism, Mathematics and Modality, Blackwell, Oxford.
[13] Frege, G. (1959), The Foundations of Arithmetic, 2nd ed., Northwestern University Press,
Evanston.
[14] Frege, G. (1984), “Logical Investigations. Part I: Thoughts”, in Collected Papers on Mathe-
matics, Logic, and Philosophy, ed. by B. McGuinness, Blackwell, Oxford.
[15]
Gaifman, H. (2012), “On Ontology and Realism in Mathematics”, The Review of Symbolic
Logic 5, 480-512.
[16] Gillies, D. (1990), “Intutionism vs. Platonism: A 20th Century Controversy Concerning the
Nature of Numbers”, in F. Gil (ed.), Scientiﬁc and Philosophical Controversies, Fragmen-
tos, Lisbon, pp. 299-314.
[17]
Gillies, D. (2010), “Informational Realism and World 3”, Knowledge, Technology & Policy
23: 1-2, 7-24.
[18] Hamkins, J. D. (2012), “The Set-Theoretic Multiverse”, The Review of Symbolic Logic 5,
416-449.
[19] Hellman, G. (1989), Mathematics without Numbers: Towards a Modal-Structural Interpre-
tation, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[20] Hintikka, J. (1969 (ed.), The Philosophy of Mathematics, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Constructive Realism in Mathematics

352
|
Ilkka Niiniluoto
[21] Irvine, A. D. (ed.) (1990), Physicalism in Mathematics, Kluwer, Dordrecht.
[22] Kanamori, A. (2003), The Higher Inﬁnite: Large Cardinals in Set Theory from Their Begin-
nings, Springer, Berlin.
[23] Kitcher, P. (1983), The Nature of Mathematical Knowledge, Oxford University Press, Ox-
ford.
[24] Krantz, D., Luce, R., Suppes, P. & Tversky, A. (1971), Foundations of Measurement, vol. 1,
Academic Press, New York.
[25] Leng, M. (2010), Mathematics and Reality, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[26] Maddy, P. (1997), Naturalism in Mathematics, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
[27] Mill, J. S. (1906), A System of Logic, 8th edition, Longmans, Green, and Co., London.
[28] Nagel, E. (1961), The Structure of Science: Problems in the Logic of Scientiﬁc Explanation,
Routledge & Kegan Paul, London.
[29] Niiniluoto, I. (1984), “Realism, Worldmaking, and the Social Sciences”, in Is Science Pro-
gressive?, D. Reidel, Dordrecht, pp. 211-225.
[30] Niiniluoto, I. (1992), “Reality, Truth, and Conﬁrmation in Mathematics - Reflections on the
Quasi-Empiricist Programme”, in J. Echeverria, A. Ibarra & T. Mormann (eds.), The Space
of Mathematics: Philosophical, Epistemological and Historical Explorations, Walter de
Gruyter, Berlin, pp. 60-78.
[31] Niiniluoto, I. (1999), Critical Scientiﬁc Realism, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[32] Niiniluoto, I. (2006), “World 3: A Critical Defence”, in I. Jarvie, K. Milford & D. Miller (eds.),
Karl Popper: A Centenary Assessment, vol. II: Metaphysics and Epistemology, Ashgate,
Aldershot, pp. 59-69.
[33] Niiniluoto, I. (2011), “Virtual Worlds, Fiction, and Reality”, Discusiones Filosoﬁcas 12,
13-28.
[34] Niiniluoto, I. (2012), “Quantities as Realistic Idealizations”, in D. Dieks, W. Gonzalez, S.
Hartmann, M. Stöltzner & M. Weber (eds.), Probabilities, Laws, and Structures, Springer,
Dordrecht, pp. 297-306.
[35] Parsons, Ch. (1990), “The Structuralist View of Mathematical Objects”, Synthese 84, 303-
346.
[36] Peirce, C. S. (1931-35), Collected Papers 1-6, ed. by C. Hartshorne & P. Weiss, Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
[37] Popper, K. R. (1972), Objective Knowledge, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[38] Popper, K. R. (1974), “Replies to my Critics”, in P. A. Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy of Karl
Popper, Open Court, La Salle, Ill., pp. 961-1197.
[39] Quine, W. V and Ullian, J. S. (1970), The Web of Belief, Random House, New York.
[40] Rasiowa, H. & Sikorski, R. (1968), The Mathematics of Metamathematics, 2nd edition,
Polish Scientiﬁc Publishers, Warsaw.
[41] Resnik, M.(1997), Mathematics as a Science of Patterns, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[42] Routley, R. (1980), Exploring Meinong’s Jungle and Beyond, Australian National Univer-
sity, Camberra.
[43] Shapiro, S. (ed.) (2005), The Oxford Handbook in the Philosophy of Mathematics and
Logic, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[44] Steiner, M. (2005), “Mathematics - Application and Applicability”, in Shapiro (2005), pp.
625-650.
[45] Tymoczko, T. (ed.) (1986), New Directions in the Philosophy of Mathematics, Birkhäuser,
Boston.

Bibliography
|
353
[46] Väänänen, J. (1982), “Äärettömyyden käsite Georg Cantorilla”, in J. Oikkonen (ed.), Kat-
sauksia matematiikan historiaan, Gaudeamus, Helsinki, pp. 88-101.
[47] Väänänen, J. (1984), “Matemaattiset oliot”, in L. Haaparanta (ed.), Olio, Reports of the
Department of Philosophy, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, pp. 142-146.
[48] Väänänen, J. (2012), “Second Order Logic or Set Theory?”, The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic
18, 91-121.
Constructive Realism in Mathematics


JeﬀB. Paris* and Alena Vencovská
The Twin Continua of Inductive Methods
Dedicated to our good friend Jouko
Abstract: After dominating the subject of Inductive Logic for over 50 years Car-
nap’s Continuum of Inductive Methods has in the past decade had its monopoly
challenged by a second continuum of inductive methods, the NP-Continuum,
which is also based on arguably rational principles. Does this mean there are (at
least) two distinct notions of rational or logical probability? We describe the bases
and key properties of both continua.
Keywords: uncertain reasoning, inductive logic, logical probability, Carnap’s con-
tinuum, NP-continuum
MSC: 03B42, 03B48, 03A10
||
*Corresponding Author: JeﬀB. Paris, Alena Vencovská: School of Mathematics, University of
Manchester, e-mail: jeﬀ.paris@manchester.ac.uk
1 Introduction
A good way to understand the underlying problem that Inductive Logic addresses
is as follows: Imagine an agent who inhabits a ﬁrst order structure 푀for a lan-
guage 퐿with relation symbols 푅1, 푅2, . . . , 푅푞and constants 푎1, 푎2, 푎3, . . . but no
function symbols nor equality. Everything in the universe of 푀is the interpre-
tation of at least one of the 푎푛so we may assume that the set of 푎푛actually is the
universe of 푀with each of the constants interpreted as itself. The agent knows
s/he is in such a structure for 퐿but that is the sum total of the agent’s knowledge.
The question now is: Given 휃∈푆퐿, where 푆퐿is the set of ﬁrst order sentences
of 퐿(and for future reference 푄퐹푆퐿is the set of quantiﬁer free sentences of 퐿),
what degree of belief, as subjective probability, should the agent give to 휃being
true in 푀? Or to take this a step further, what probability function 푤: 푆퐿→[0, 1]
should the agent adopt to reﬂect his/her beliefs, where by a probability function
on 퐿we mean here that 푤satisﬁes for 휃, 휙, ∃푥휓(푥) ∈푆퐿,
(P1) ⊨휃⇒푤(휃) = 1
(P2) 휃⊨¬휙⇒푤(휃∨휙) = 푤(휃) + 푤(휙)
(P3) 푤(∃푥휓(푥)) = lim푛→∞푤(⋁푛
푖=1 휓(푎푖))

356
|
JeﬀB. Paris, Alena Vencovská
Although we assume that the agent has no further knowledge of 푀we should
allow that the agent might further consider ‘What probability should I give to 휃
were I to learn that 휙was true in 푀?’ The standard convention in the subject is
that the agent should in that case take the resulting conditional probability of 휃
given 휙, to be
푤(휃| 휙) = 푤(휃∧휙)
푤(휙)
.
(A problem seems to arise here when 푤(휙) = 0 but we can satisfactorily side step
it by agreeing to the convention that an expression such as 푤(휃| 휙) = 푏is actually
short for 푤(휃∧휙) = 푏푤(휙), so since 푤(휙) = 0 implies 푤(휃∧휙) = 0, we can in the
case 푤(휙) = 0 assign 푤(휃| 휙) an arbitrary value, for the sake of argument say 1.)
Of course the agent is free to choose any probability function to quantify
his/her beliefs. However the name of the game here is that the agent should make
a choice which is logical or rational. What that means is that 푤should be required
to satisfy certain principles, principles which we feel it is logical or rational to
obey, or more pointedly perhaps which it would be irrational to ﬂout.
For example suppose that 휃(푎푘1, 푎푘2, . . . , 푎푘푛) ∈푆퐿, where the notation is in-
tended to indicate that all the constant symbols appearing in 휃are amongst the
(distinct) 푎푘1, 푎푘2, . . . , 푎푘푛, and we form 휃(푎푗1, 푎푗2, . . . , 푎푗푛) by the obvious simultane-
ous substitution. Then since the agent has no material reason for thinking that
휃(푎푘1, 푎푘2, . . . , 푎푘푛) is any more likely to be true in 푀than 휃(푎푗1, 푎푗2, . . . , 푎푗푛) s/he
should give them each equal probability.
This principle is, unsurprisingly, referred to as Constant Exchangeability, Ex,
and it is so widely assumed in this subject that from now on we will assume that
all the probability functions we consider satisfy it without further mention. One
simplifying consequence of this is that in stating principles we can take the ‘arbi-
trary’ 푎푘1, 푎푘2, . . . , 푎푘푛to be 푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛without any loss of generality.
A second principle that we shall assume from the start, both because of its
evident rationality and because its presence simpliﬁes the results we wish to state
later is:
Regularity, Reg
If 휃∈푄퐹푆퐿is consistent then 푤(휃) > 0.
The justiﬁcation here is that given our agent’s supposed lack of any speciﬁc knowl-
edge about the ambient structure 푀it would be irrational of him/her to assign

The Twin Continua of Inductive Methods
|
357
probability zero to any consistent quantiﬁer free sentence, in other words to as-
sert that as far as s/he was concerned it was impossible for that sentence to hold.1
Ex and Reg were principles that W.E.Johnson, [12], and R. Carnap, [1], [2], [3],
[4], [5], founders of the subject as a branch of mathematical logic, both employed,
Johnson in a period in the late 1920’s early 1930’s and Carnap, independently, a
decade or so later.
The principles Ex and Reg of course give no particular signiﬁcance to the arity
of the relation symbols 푅1, 푅2, . . . , 푅푞. However, both Johnson and Carnap concen-
trated almost exclusively on unary 퐿, that is when the 푅푖were all predicates or
unary relations. (Indeed it has only been in this millenium that signiﬁcant ad-
vances have been made in Polyadic Inductive Logic, see for example [13].) Like
these founding fathers we shall henceforth assume that the 푅푖are all unary.
2 Carnap’s Continuum of Inductive Methods
A third principle which both Johnson and Carnap proposed became in time known
as Johnson’s Suﬃcientness Postulate, JSP after a suggestion by I.J.Good (it started
life as Johnson’s Suﬃciency Postulate but that threatened being confused with
the notion of a ‘suﬃcient statistic’). In order to state this principle, and for future
use, we ﬁrst need to introduce a little notation.
Since all our relation symbols are now being taken as unary it follows that ev-
erything there is to know about a single constant 푎푖is given by the atom it satisﬁes,
where the atoms of 퐿are those 2푞formulae 훼1(푥), 훼2(푥), . . . , 훼2푞(푥) of the form
±푅1(푥) ∧±푅2(푥) ∧. . . ∧±푅푞(푥)
(±푅(푥) stands for 푅(푥) or ¬푅(푥)). In turn everything there is to know about
푎푘1, 푎푘2, . . . , 푎푘푛is determined by the state description
푛
⋀
푖=1
훼ℎ푖(푎푘푖)
that they satisfy.
1 The question of whether Regularity should also hold for quantiﬁed sentences, in particular con-
sistent sentences of the form ∀푥휃(푥) with 휃quantiﬁer free, has sparked a considerable literature,
as a lead in see [6, page 87], [10].

358
|
JeﬀB. Paris, Alena Vencovská
Johnson’s Suﬃcientness Postulate, JSP
푤(훼푗(푎푛+1) |
푛
⋀
푖=1
훼ℎ푖(푎푖))
should only depend on 푛and 푚푗= |{푖| ℎ푖= 푗}|, i.e. the number of times that 훼푗(푥) is
instantiated in the state description ⋀푛
푖=1 훼ℎ푖(푎푖).
One might ﬁnd an intuitive justiﬁcation for this postulate by imagining
that 푀was formed by repeated picking (with replacement) copies of atoms
훼ℎ1(푥), 훼ℎ2(푥), 훼ℎ3(푥), . . . from an urn and requiring that
푀　㨐훼ℎ1(푎1), 훼ℎ2(푎2), 훼ℎ3(푎3), . . .
With that picture it would seem reasonable that the probability that atom 훼푗(푥)
would be picked at the 푛+1’st stage would only depend on the number of previous
picks which had been made and the number of those which had yielded a copy of
훼푗(푥).
A reasonably straightforward consequence2 of JSP, which we mention be-
cause it will ﬁgure in what follows, is:
Atom Exchangeability, Ax
푤(
푛
⋀
푖=1
훼ℎ푖(푎푖))
depends only on the multiset {푚1, 푚2, . . . , 푚2푞} where 푚푗= |{푖| ℎ푖= 푗}| (as usual).
Equivalently, if 휎is a permutation of {1, 2, . . . , 2푞} then
푤(
푛
⋀
푖=1
훼ℎ푖(푎푖)) = 푤(
푛
⋀
푖=1
훼휎(ℎ푖)(푎푖)) .
Interestingly Ax would normally be seen as a principle based on, and indeed ratio-
nally justiﬁed by, considerations of symmetry whereas JSP is based on irrelevance.
What really makes JSP a major principle in the subject however is the follow-
ing result which was ﬁrst proved3 by Johnson in [12] and later by Kemeny [11].
Theorem 2.1. Provided 퐿has at least 2 relation symbols (i.e. 푞≥2) the only prob-
ability functions on 퐿satisfying JSP + Reg are the 푐퐿
휆for 0 < 휆≤∞, the so called
Carnap’s Continuum of Inductive Methods, given by:
푐퐿
휆(훼푗(푎푛+1)
儨儨儨儨儨儨儨儨儨儨
푛
⋀
푖=1
훼ℎ푖(푎푖)) =
푚푗+ 2−푞휆
푛+ 휆
(1)
2 For details of the proofs of the results stated in this paper collected together in one place see
[16] or the forthcoming [18].
3 See [23] for the history of this result and its more general versions.

The Twin Continua of Inductive Methods
|
359
As implied already by the statement of this theorem just the identities aﬀorded by
(1) are enough to determine 푐퐿
휆on the whole of 푆퐿(though the ﬁnal extension from
푄퐹푆퐿to 푆퐿requires a later result due to Gaifman, see [7], or [16, Theorem 7]). We
should mention here that if we drop the assumption of Regularity in this theorem
then a further solution4 appears, 푐퐿
0 , deﬁned by
푐퐿
0 (
푛
⋀
푖=1
훼ℎ푖(푎푖)) =
{
{
{
2−푞
if ℎ1 = ℎ2 = . . . = ℎ푛,
0
otherwise.
(2)
Going to the other extreme, when 휆= ∞, we have that
푐퐿
∞(
푛
⋀
푖=1
훼ℎ푖(푎푖)) = 2−푛푞,
so 푐퐿
∞treats all the 푅푗(푎푖) as stochastically independent, each with probability 1/2.
For 0 < 휆< ∞the right hand side of (1) looks like the proportion of 훼푗amongst the
훼ℎ푖moderated by ﬁxed terms in 휆whose inﬂuence tends to zero as 푛→∞. (For a
fuller discussion on this and related points see the account by Zabell in [23].)
Theorem 2.1 must be considered one of the most important results in the sub-
ject. For it seems to go very far along the road of justifying the idea that consider-
ations of rationality will determine a very tightly restricted choice of probability
functions for our agent, indeed a single choice if only 휆could be ﬁxed unequiv-
ocally. Although no generally persuasive argument for any particular value for 휆
has ever emerged, nevertheless we might rightly claim that the continuum of 푐퐿
휆
are logical on the grounds that any other rational being will be led inexorably as
Johnson and Carnap were to these same choices.
The inﬂuence of this position on the later developments of Inductive Logic
has been enormous. Most subsequent proposals for logical probability functions
to satisfy additional rationality principles not immediately satisﬁed by the 푐퐿
휆have
been based on taking combinations, or adaptations, of the 푐퐿
휆. And in justiﬁcation
of this position the 푐퐿
휆do have some attractive features in the context of rational
belief.
For example a property that the 푐퐿
휆for 0 < 휆< ∞satisfy (directly from (1)) is5:
Reichenbach’s Axiom, RA
If 훼ℎ1(푥), 훼ℎ2(푥), 훼ℎ3(푥), . . . is an inﬁnite sequence of atoms of 퐿and 푚푗(푛) is the
number of times that 훼푗(푥) appears amongst 훼ℎ1(푥), 훼ℎ2(푥), . . . , 훼ℎ푛(푥) then
lim
푛→∞(푤(훼푗(푎푛+1)
儨儨儨儨儨儨儨儨儨儨
푛
⋀
푖=1
훼ℎ푖(푎푖)) −
푚푗(푛)
푛
) = 0
4 Sometimes also included in Carnap’s Continuum, though not here in this note.
5 Attributed to H.Reichenbach after a suggestion by H.Putnam, see [4, p120].

360
|
JeﬀB. Paris, Alena Vencovská
In spirit then, as a recommendation, RA asserts that in the limit the subjective
probabilities should converge to frequency. In other words if 34% of the many
people I have ever met have had blue eyes then I should give probability close to
34/100 to the next new person I meet having blue eyes.
A second attractive property is that for ﬁxed 휆the 푐퐿
휆form a Language Invari-
ant family6, meaning that if 퐿⊆퐿耠(so 푆퐿⊆푆퐿耠) then the restriction of 푐퐿耠
휆to 푆퐿is
푐퐿
휆.
This seems clearly justiﬁed on the grounds that whilst at any one time our
agent might be inhabiting a structure for 퐿with relation symbols 푅1, 푅2, . . . , 푅푞
there is no reason to say that these are all the relation symbols there could ever
be, and if at a later time the language 퐿was expanded to 퐿耠then this should not
require the agent to revise his/her beliefs about the truth or otherwise of the sen-
tences of the original language 퐿.
A ﬁnal attractive property of the 푐퐿
휆which we mention7 is:
The Principle of Instantial Relevance, PIR
For an atom 훼푗(푥) and state description 훩(푎1, 푎2. . . . , 푎푛),
푤(훼푗(푎푛+2) | 훼푗(푎푛+1) ∧훩(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛)) ≥푤(훼푗(푎푛+1) | 훩(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛))
This principle reﬂects the very heart of what we understand in the real world
by ‘induction’: That the more times I have observed something in the past the more
times I should expect to observe it in the future. For example suppose I arrive in
a foreign country late at night and waking at 6.00 the next morning I ﬁnd that it
is raining. Shouldn’t this increase my belief, or at least not diminish it, that it will
also be raining at 6.00 tomorrow morning?
In fact as it turns out the 푐퐿
휆can hardly be said to be particularly distinguished
by satisfying PIR since by a result of Gaifman, [8]:
Theorem 2.2. For 휃(푎푛+1), 휓(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛) ∈푄퐹푆퐿and 푤satisfying Ex,
푤(휃(푎푛+2) | 휃(푎푛+1) ∧휓(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛)) ≥푤(휃(푎푛+1) | 휓(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛))
Whilst this does not particularly promote the primacy of the 푐퐿
휆as such it is an
important result because its discovery suggested that rational principles are not
only consistent with each other but even to some extent interderivable (and so
obliquely that the 푐퐿
휆are their embodiment).
6 This notion is usually employed in the polyadic context when we do not restrict our attention
to unary predicates so strictly speaking we should be talking here about Unary Language Invari-
ance.
7 This is a slight simpliﬁcation of a principle of the same name proposed by Carnap, [3].

The Twin Continua of Inductive Methods
|
361
Viewing the above results we might well be led to conclude that in Carnap’s
Continuum we had uncovered some universal truth about rationality. It all ﬁts
together simply and elegantly, isn’t that just what we expect of a true theory?
Furthermore another characteristic we associate with ‘fundamental truths’ is that
they reoccur as the result of seemingly diﬀerent approaches (take for example the
explication of ‘eﬀective process’). That is the case here, there are several principles
other than JSP which characterize the 푐퐿
휆, see for example [18].
3 Another Continuum
Given so many positive features it is scarcely surprising then that for many
decades Inductive Logic largely saw Carnap’s Continuum as the base camp from
which to explore further. In the early 2000’s however C. J. Nix and the ﬁrst author,
[14], made a somewhat unexpected discovery.
To explain the background recall the example we gave of observing rain at
6.00 to motivate PIR but now suppose instead that I oversleep and waking at 7.00
note that the streets are wet, though it is not actually raining. Shouldn’t that also
increase my belief, or at least not diminish it, that it will be raining at 6.00 tomor-
row morning? In other words observing a consequence of rain, if not actual rain
itself, should still be viewed as supporting evidence for rain tomorrow.
This sentiment might be captured in a principle generalizing Theorem 2.2:
The Generalized Principle of Instantial Relevance, GPIR
For 휃(푎푛+2), 휙(푎푛+1), 휓(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛) ∈푄퐹푆퐿, if 휃(푥) 　㨐휙(푥) then
푤(휃(푎푛+2) | 휙(푎푛+1) ∧휓(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛)) ≥푤(휃(푎푛+1) | 휓(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛))
(As an aside here we mention that this is the same principle if instead we
require 휃(푥) to be a consequence of 휙(푥) rather than the other way round.)
The following theorem, which will appear in [18], is simply a reformulation of
results in [14]:
Theorem 3.1. Provided 푞≥2 the only probability functions on 퐿satisfying GPIR +
Ax + Reg are the 푤훿
퐿for −(2푞−1)−1 < 훿< 1 given by:
푤훿
퐿(
푛
⋀
푖=1
훼ℎ푖(푎푘푖)) = 2−푞
2푞
∑
푗=1
훾푛−푚푗(훾+ 훿)푚푗
(1)
where 훾= 2−푞(1 −훿) and (as usual) 푚푗is the number of times that 훼푗(푥) is instanti-
ated in the state description ⋀푛
푖=1 훼ℎ푖(푎푘푖).

362
|
JeﬀB. Paris, Alena Vencovská
Interestingly the key power of GPIR here is in allowing additional information to
be present in the form of 휓(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛). Without this GPIR holds for all probabil-
ity functions satisfying Ax, see [18].
So here we have another ‘continuum of inductive methods’ sometimes re-
ferred to as the Nix-Paris (see [22]) or NP-Continuum. As with Carnap’s Continuum
it is based on rational principles, though the only member that both continua have
in common is 푐퐿
∞, 푤0
퐿.8
For a ﬁxed 훿the 푤훿
퐿do not form a Language Invariant family for −(2푞−1)−1 <
훿< 0, this is shown in [15], but they do for 0 ≤훿< 1 and for this reason it is now
common practice (which we henceforth follow) to take the NP-continuum to be
the 푤훿
퐿with 훿restricted to this range.
In addition to Language Invariance the 푤훿
퐿satisfy two other arguably attrac-
tive properties. Firstly they satisfy:
The Weak Irrelevance Principle, WIP
If 휃, 휙∈푄퐹푆퐿have no relation or constant symbols in common then
푤(휃| 휙) = 푤(휃).
The intended justiﬁcation for this principle seems clear: If 휃and 휙come from
diﬀerent languages whyever should knowing the truth of 휙inﬂuence one’s belief
in 휃?
This property does not provide a characterization of the 푤훿
퐿, there are other
probability functions satisfying Ax + Li which satisfy WIP though they are in a
sense all built from the 푤훿
퐿, see [17]. A property which does however characterize
the 푤훿
퐿is:
Recovery
A probability function 푤on 퐿satisﬁes Recovery, or is Recoverable, if when-
ever 훹(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛) is a state description then there is another state description
훷(푎푛+1, 푎푛+2, . . . , 푎ℎ) such that 푤(훷∧훹)
̸= 0 and for any quantiﬁer free sentence
휃(푎ℎ+1, 푎ℎ+2, . . . , 푎ℎ+푔),
푤(휃(푎ℎ+1, 푎ℎ+2, . . . , 푎ℎ+푔) | 훷∧훹) = 푤(휃(푎ℎ+1, 푎ℎ+2, . . . , 푎ℎ+푔)).
(2)
In other words 푤is Recoverable if given any ‘past history’ as a state description
훹there is a possible ‘future’ state description 훷which will take us right back to
where we started, at least as far as the quantiﬁer free properties of the currently
unobserved constants 푎ℎ+1, 푎ℎ+2, . . . are concerned.
8 In some accounts (1) is extended to the case 훿= 1, at which point 푤1
퐿= 푐퐿
0 , so meeting again
the ‘extended Carnap’s Continuum’ referred to earlier.

The Twin Continua of Inductive Methods
|
363
It is debateable whether Recoverability is an obviously desirable property of
a rational probability function, though if we think of it as a manifestation of sim-
plicity or at least ‘simpliﬁability’, of being able to wipe out the inﬂuence of the
past, then that could perhaps be argued for. The following result from [20] shows
that even a weak form of Recovery (in suitable company at least) actually charac-
terizes the NP-continuum:
Theorem 3.2. Suppose that the probability functions 푤퐿satisfy Reg + Ax and form a
Language Invariant family. Then 푤퐿has the property that for some state description
훷(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛) with 푛> 0, and for all 휃(푎푛+1, 푎푛+2, . . . , 푎푛+푔) ∈푄퐹푆퐿,
푤(휃(푎푛+1, 푎푛+2, . . . , 푎푛+푔) | 훷(푎1, 푎2, . . . , 푎푛)) = 푤(휃(푎푛+1, 푎푛+2, . . . , 푎푛+푔))
just if 푤퐿= 푤훿
퐿for some 0 ≤훿< 1.
4 Two Rationalities?
We have seen that we now have two continua, the very well established Carnap’s
Continuum and the much more recent NP-continuum. Both are ‘justiﬁed’ by satis-
fying several apparently desirable properties. Indeed it currently seems that most
rational properties that we might propose are satisﬁed by at least one of them.
Comparing these two continua9, they have in common that they both satisfy
Ax, Reg and Language Invariance. As for their diﬀerences the 푐퐿
휆satisfy Johnson’s
Suﬃcientness Postulate, which of course the 푤훿
퐿do not, and similarly the 푐퐿
휆do
not satisfy the Generalized Principle of Instantial Relevance except at 휆= ∞.
A further diﬀerence is that apart from the end point 푐퐿
∞where the two continua
meet the 푐퐿
휆do not satisfy the Weak Irrelevance Property, WIP. As a particular in-
stance of this latter failure one can check that for 0 < 휆< ∞,
푐퐿
휆(푅2(푎3) ∧푅2(푎4) | 푅1(푎1) ∧푅1(푎2)) > 푐퐿
휆(푅2(푎3) ∧푅2(푎4)).
(1)
So according to 푐퐿
휆, 푅1(푎1) ∧푅1(푎2) adds support to 푅2(푎3) ∧푅2(푎4) despite these
two sentences having no relation nor constant symbols in common. However one
might argue that this is actually a manifestation of induction which 푐퐿
휆recognizes.
Namely the information 푅1(푎1)∧푅1(푎2) suggests that the constants look alike, since
both 푎1 and 푎2 have been found to satisfy 푅1(푥), and this supports belief in 푎3, 푎4
also being alike and so both satisfying 푅2(푥). [Actually it turns out that we will
9 Further comparisons are given in [21].

364
|
JeﬀB. Paris, Alena Vencovská
always have ≥in (1) for any probability function that is a member of a Language
Invariant family of functions satisfying Ax, see [9], so from this point of view the
푤훿
퐿might be criticized for not picking up this version of relevance.]
Unlike the 푐퐿
휆(for 휆< ∞) the 푤훿
퐿do not satisfy Reichenbach’s Axiom, RA. To
give a speciﬁc example of this failure consider the sequence of atoms 훼ℎ푖(푥) where
ℎ푖= 1 if 푖= 0 mod 3 and ℎ푖= 2 otherwise. Then with 푗= 1 and the notation of the
statement of RA, 푚푗(푛)/푛→1/3 as 푛→∞. However
푤훿
퐿(훼1(푎3푛) |
3푛−1
⋀
푖=1
훼ℎ푖(푎푖)) = 훾(훾+ 훿)2푛+ 훾푛+1(훾+ 훿)푛+ (2푞−2)훾2푛+1
(훾+ 훿)2푛+ 훾푛+1(훾+ 훿)푛−1 + (2푞−2)훾2푛
which tends to 훾as 푛→∞, so RA fails. (Of course if 훾= 1/3 we can just change
the frequency of the 훼1(푥).) In defense of the 푤훿
퐿, there would seem to be no rea-
son per se for our agent to suppose that the 푚푗(푛)/푛would be a convergent se-
quence. Such a supposition would seem to be based on the rather unwarranted
assumption that there was some ﬁxed process, such as picking from an urn with
replacement, which was deciding whether or not 푎푛satisﬁed 훼1(푥). Without this
assumption there would seem to be little, or at least less, reason for the agent to
slavishly attempt to close in on the ‘limit’ of the 푚푗(푛)/푛.
Overall though the 푐퐿
휆seem to us to edge it in a straight contest with the 푤훿
퐿.
However that is not the main issue. The main issue is in explaining the alternate
concepts of ‘rationality’ which underpin them.
One might object here that if we accept as our rational probability function
the only member that the two continua have in common, i.e. 푐퐿
∞= 푤0
퐿, then we get
the best of both worlds and there needs be no dilemma. Unfortunately it is rather
that we seem get the worst of both worlds. In particular the failure of RA for the 푤0
퐿
is especially dramatic: 푤0
퐿does not respond at all to the evidence ⋀푛
푖=1 훼ℎ푖(푎푖) and
just gives 훼푗(푎푛+1) probability 2−푞regardless. In other words 푤0
퐿is entirely devoid
of induction and largely in consequence of this few in the area would nowadays
wish to promote it as ‘the rational choice’.10,11
Turning back then to the question of their underlying versions of rationality
one might hazard that the diﬀerence is this: The principles underlying the 푐퐿
휆re-
quire the agent to picture his/her ambient structure 푀as the result of some regular
statistical process. To repeat ourselves, the example of picking balls from an urn
10 But see [22] for a spirited counter argument.
11 Another possibility is to extend the continua to 푐퐿
0 , 푤1
퐿where they again agree and make this
choice. This has certainly been proposed in its time (and is even inevitable if one pushes symme-
try to the limit with purely unary languages, see [19]) but suﬀers the opposite defect from 푐퐿
∞of
being too much inﬂuenced by the evidence, as shown already in (2).

Bibliography
|
365
in the case of JSP. So the notion of rationality being taken here is of regularity, pre-
dictability, pattern. On the other hand the version of rationality being exploited,
and subsequently manifest, in the case of the 푤훿
퐿might be seen as simplicity or
economy. For example the consideration that information should be ignored, or
have the potential to be ignored, where possible leads to GPIR, WIP and Recover-
ability.
5 Conclusion
In this paper a number of rationality principles have been proposed each of which
is satisﬁed by, or even characterizes, the probability functions in one of two ‘Con-
tinua of Inductive Methods’, Carnap’s classical continuum and the recently ex-
plicated NP-continuum. We would suggest that what is signiﬁcant here is that it
implies that there are at least two separate notions of rationality at work and that
they are essentially incompatible, or at least their common ground does not pro-
vide acceptable rational or logical probability functions to most people’s way of
thinking.
Bibliography
[1]
Carnap, R., Logical Foundations of Probability, University of Chicago Press, Chicago, Rout-
ledge & Kegan Paul Ltd., 1950.
[2]
Carnap, R., The Continuum of Inductive Methods, University of Chicago Press, 1952.
[3]
Carnap, R. & Jeﬀrey, R.C. eds., Studies in Inductive Logic and Probability, Volume I, Uni-
versity of California Press, 1971.
[4]
Carnap, R., A Basic System of Inductive Logic, in Studies in Inductive Logic and Probability,
Volume II, ed. R. C. Jeﬀrey, University of California Press, 1980, pp7-155.
[5]
Carnap, R. & Stegmüller, W., Induktive Logik und Wahrscheinlichkeit, Springer Verlag,
Wien, 1959.
[6]
Earman, J., Bayes or Bust?, MIT Press, 1992.
[7]
Gaifman, H., Concerning Measures on First Order Calculi, Israel Journal of Mathematics,
1964, 2:1-18.
[8]
Gaifman, H., Applications of de Finetti’s Theorem to Inductive Logic, in Studies in Inductive
Logic and Probability, Volume I, eds. R.Carnap & R.C.Jeﬀrey, University of California Press,
Berkeley and Los Angeles, 1971, pp235-251.
[9]
Hill, A. & Paris, J.B., The Counterpart Principle of Analogical Support by Structural Similar-
ity, to appear in Erkenntnis.
[10] Hintikka, J. & Niiniluoto, I., An Axiomatic Foundation of the Logic of Inductive Generaliza-
tion, in Formal Methods in the Methodology of the Empirical Sciences, eds. M.Przelecki,
K.Szaniawski & R.Wójcicki, Synthese Library 103, Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1976, pp57-81.
The Twin Continua of Inductive Methods

366
|
JeﬀB. Paris, Alena Vencovská
[11]
Kemeny, J.G., Carnap’s theory of probability and induction, in The Philosophy of Rudolf
Carnap, ed. P.A.Schilpp, La Salle, Illinois, Open Court (1963), pp 711-738.
[12] Johnson, W.E., Probability: The deductive and inductive problems, Mind, 1932,
41(164):409-423.
[13] Landes, J., Paris, J.B. & Vencovská, A survey of some recent results on Spectrum Ex-
changeability in Polyadic Inductive Logic, Synthese, 2011, 181(Supplement 1), pp19-47.
[14] Nix, C.J. & Paris, J.B., A Continuum of Inductive Methods arising from a Generalized Princi-
ple of Instantial Relevance, Journal of Philosophical Logic, 2006, 35(1): 83-115.
[15]
Nix, C.J., Nix, C.J., Probabilistic Induction in the Predicate Calculus Doctoral Thesis, Manch-
ester University, Manchester, UK, 2005.
See http://www.maths.manchester.ac.uk/~jeff/
[16] Paris, J.B., Guangzhou Winter School course on Pure Inductive Logic, 2010, available at
http://www.maths.manchester.ac.uk/~jeff/lecture-notes/Guangzhou.pdf
[17]
Paris, J.B. & Vencovská, A., A Note on Irrelevance in Inductive Logic, Journal of Philosophi-
cal Logic, 2011, 40(3): 357-370
[18] Paris, J.B. & Vencovská, A., Pure Inductive Logic, to appear in the ASL series Perspectives
in Mathematical Logic, Cambridge University Press, 2014.
[19] Paris, J.B. & Vencovská, Symmetry’s End?, Erkenntnis, 2011, 74(1): 53-67.
[20] Paris, J.B. & Waterhouse, P., Atom Exchangeability and Instantial Relevance, Journal of
Philosophical Logic, 2009, 38(3):313-332.
[21] Williamson, J., Inductive Influence, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science, 2007,
58:689-708.
[22] Williamson, J., An Objective Baysian Account of Conﬁrmation, in Explanation, Prediction,
and Conﬁrmation. New Trends and Old Ones Reconsidered, Eds. D.Dieks, W.J.Gonzalez,
S.Hartmann, T.Uebel & M.Weber. Volume 2 in the series The Philosophy of Science in a
European Perspective, Springer, 2011, pp53-81.
[23] Zabell, S. L., Carnap and the Logic of Induction, in: Handbook of the History and Philoso-
phy of Logic, Volume 10, eds. D.Gabbay, S.Hartmann & J.Woods, Elsevier, 2011.

Saharon Shelah
A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
Dedicated to Jouko Väänänen honouring his 60th birthday
Abstract: Consider an a.e.c. (abstract elementary class), that is, a class 퐾of mod-
els with a partial order reﬁning ⊆(submodel) which satisfy the most basic prop-
erties of an elementary class. Our test question is trying to show that the function
̇퐼(휆, 퐾), counting the number of models in 퐾of cardinality 휆up to isomorphism,
is “nice”, not chaotic, even without assuming it is sometimes 1, i.e. categorical in
some 휆’s. We prove here that for some closed unbounded class C of cardinals we
have (a),(b) or (c) where
(푎) for every 휆∈C of coﬁnality ℵ0, ̇퐼(휆, 퐾) ≥휆
(푏) for every 휆∈C of coﬁnality ℵ0 and 푀∈퐾휆, for every cardinal 휅≥휆there is
푁휅of cardinality 휅extending 푀(in the sense of our a.e.c.)
(푐) k is bounded; that is, ̇퐼(휆, 퐾) = 0 for every 휆large enough (equivalently 휆≥ℶ훿∗
where 훿∗= (2LST(k))+).
Recall that an important diﬀerence of non-elementary classes from the elemen-
tary case is the possibility of having models in 퐾, even of large cardinality, which
are maximal, or just failing clause (b).
Keywords: model theory, classiﬁcation theory, a.e.c. (abstract elementary
classes), categoricity, number of non-isomorphic models
MSC: Primary: 03C45, 03C48; Secondary: 03C55, 03C75
||
Saharon Shelah: Einstein Institute of Mathematics, Edmond J. Safra Campus, Givat Ram, The
Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Jerusalem, 91904, Israel, and , Department of Mathematics,
Hill Center - Busch Campus , Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey , 110 Frelinghuysen
Road , Piscataway, NJ 08854-8019 USA, e-mail: shelah@math.huji.ac.il
Annotated Content
1
Introduction to the subject, pg.368
2
Introduction to the paper, pg.371
2.1 Content, pg.371
2.2 Discussion, pg.373
2.3 What is done, pg.374
2.4 Recalling Deﬁnitions and Notation, pg.375

368
|
Saharon Shelah
[Deﬁning 훶or
휅[k], 훶sor.]
3
More on Templates, pg.379
On k휇, 훶sor
휅[k], the ideal ER, being standard; the ideal ER, [MMSh:318]; iso-
morphic of vocabularies, 3.7 - 3.9; partial orders on 훶or
휅[k], 3.9, 3.12, basic
properties of ≤3
휅, ≤4
4, see 3.14. On 훶sor
휅[푘푀]
̸= 0, 3.15; amalgamating ≤⊕
휅, ≤4
휅.
Lastly, we deﬁne pit(T , I), 3.17 and have the relevant partition theorem,
3.18.
4
Approximations to EM models, pg.391
We deﬁne direct/pre-witnesses, (4.2, 4.3), prove existence, 4.6. Deal with
indirect witnesses (used in the main proof (see 4.7, 4.11) and prove the
main result.
5
Concluding Remarks, pg.400
1 Introduction to the subject
We would like to have classiﬁcation theory for non-elementary classes 퐾and more
speciﬁcally to generalize stability. Naturally we use the function ̇퐼(휆, 퐾) = number
of models up to isomorphism, as a major test problem. Now “non-elementary” has
more than one interpretation, we shall start with the inﬁnitary logics L휆,휅.
There are other directions; mostly where compactness in some form holds
(e.g. a.e.c. with amalgmation, see about those in [Sh:E53], and on a try to blend
with descriptive set theory see [Sh:849]). We had held that for 휅> ℵ0 the above
cannot be developed as, e.g. if V = L or just V 　㨐“0# does not exist”, then there
is 휓∈Lℵ1,ℵ1 such that if cf(휇) = ℵ0 ∧(∀훼< 휇)(|훼|ℵ0 < 휇) then 푀　㨐휓, ‖푀‖ = 휇
iﬀ푀≅(L휇, ∈). However, lately [Sh:1019] gives evidence that for 휃a compact car-
dinal, we can generalize to L휃,휃some theorems of [Sh:c, Ch.VI] on saturation of
ultra-powers and Keisler’s order. This shows that stability theory for 푇⊆L휃,휃ex-
ists, but it is still not clear how far we can go including 퐴= |푁|, 푁≺푀and
∪{푀푢: 푢⊂푛} when ⟨푀푢: 푢⊂푛⟩is a so called stable P−(푛)-system.
Anyhow (for the purposes of this history, and the present paper) we now con-
centrate on Mod휓, 휓∈L휆+,ℵ0 so 휅= ℵ0. Here we have both downward LST the-
orems, even using ≤휆ﬁnitary Skolem functions. Also we have the upward LST
theorem, using EM models.
Naturally all works started with assuming categoricity in some cardinal, ex-
cept some dealing with the ℵ푛’s for 휓∈Lℵ1,ℵ0. In this case we may many times
deal with 휓∈Lℵ1,ℵ0(푄). Some works apeared in the eighties (see the books
[Bal09], and [Sh:h], [Sh:i]).

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
369
Deﬁnition 1.1. Let
̇퐼(휆, 퐾) be the cardinality of {푀/ ≅: 푀∈퐾of cardinality 휆}
where 퐾is a class of 휏(퐾)-models (e.g. 퐾= 퐾k where k = (퐾k, ≤k)).
First, in ZFC, answering a question of Baldwin, it was proved that 휓cannot be
categorical, moreover if
̇퐼(ℵ1, 휓) = 1 then
̇퐼(ℵ2, 휓) ≥1. Also if
̇퐼(ℵ1, 휓) < 2ℵ1,
then for some countable ﬁrst order 푇with an atomic model 퐾푇= {푀: 푀an
atomic model of 푇} is ⊆Mod휓, but 1 ≤
̇퐼(ℵ1, 퐾푇). Fix 푇for awhile, now if 2ℵ푛<
ℵ푛+1, ̇퐼(ℵ푛, 푇) < 휇wd(ℵ푛+1, 2ℵ푛) for1 every 푛then 퐾푇is excellent which means it is
quite similar to the class of models of an ℵ0-stable countable complete ﬁrst order
theory. For this we consider S푚(퐴, 푀) for 퐴⊆푀∈퐾푇, only for some “nice” 퐴. On
the other hand for any 푛for some such 푇푛, 퐾푇푛is categorical in every 휆≤ℵ푛but
̇퐼(휆, 푇) = 2휆for 휆large enough. However, we do not know:
Conjecture 1.2. (Baldwin) If 퐾푇is categorical in ℵ1, then 퐾푇is ℵ0-stable, equiv-
alently is absolutely categorical.
Related is the:
Conjecture 1.3. If 퐾푇is categorical in ℵ1 but not ℵ0-stable then
̇퐼(2ℵ0, 퐾푇) = ℶ2.
See work in preparation Baldwin-Laskowski-Shelah ([BaLaSh:1037]) on such
퐾푇’s; it certainly says there is a positive theory for such classes (e.g. pseudo min-
imal types exist). We recently have changed our mind and now think:
Conjecture 1.4. If 퐾푇is categorical in every ℵ푛then 퐾푇is excellent.
This means that the present counter-examples are best possible. As this seems
very far we may consider a weaker conjecture.
Conjecture 1.5. Assume P is a c.c.c. forcing notion of cardinality 휆such that ⊩P
“MA + 2ℵ0 = 휆” and 휆= 휆<휆> ℶ휔1. If 퐾푇is categorical in every 휆< 2ℵ0 then 퐾푇is
excellent.
There is more to be said, see [Sh:F1273].
∗∗∗
In another direction, the investigation of models of cardinality ℵ1 does not point
to a canonical choice of logic for which the theorems on ̇퐼(휓, ℵ1) = 1 holds. This
had motivated the deﬁnition of a.e.c. k = (퐾k, ≤k) which has the “bottom” property
of elementary class 퐾= (Mod푇, ≺), 푇a complete ﬁrst order theory (i.e. 퐾k, a class
of 휏k-models, ≤k a partial order on it, both closed under isomorphism, union under
≤k-directed systems of member of 퐾k belong to 퐾k, moreover is a ≤k-lub (= union
1 note that 휇wd(휆+, 2휆) is essentially 2휆+.

370
|
Saharon Shelah
of a directed system of ≤k-submodels of 푁is a ≤k-submodel of 푁), existence of a
LST number and 푀1 ⊆푀2 ∧푀1 ≤k 푁∧푀2 ≤k 푁⇒푀1 ≤k 푀2).
Thesis 1.6. 1.
The framework of a.e.c. k is wider and not too far and better than
the family of (Mod휓, ≺sub(휓)) where 휓∈L휆+,ℵ0.
2.
The right generalization of types in this context is orbital types.
Why? The “wider” in 1.6(1) is obvious. The “not too far” is by the representa-
tion theorem which says that for some vocabulary 휏1 ⊇휏(k) of cardinality ≤휆, 휆
the LST-number +|휏(k)| and set 훤of quantiﬁer free 1-types, 퐾k = PC(0, 훤) = {푀↾
휏k : 푀a 휏1-model omitting every 푝(푥) ∈훤}; similarly ≤k. We can deduce the up-
ward LST, and so existence of suitable 훷∈훶lin[k] so we have EM-models. For
k with LSTk = ℵ0 it is natural to restrict ourselves to the case “훤is countable”
above for both 퐾k and ≤k, then we say k is ℵ0-presentable. So we may wonder for
such k if 푛< 휔⇒2ℵ푛+
̇퐼(ℵ푛+1, 퐾k) < 휇wd(ℵ푛+1, 2ℵ푛) implies k satisﬁes the par-
allel of being excellent? The answer is yes by [Sh:h], [Sh:i], but the way is long.
Also, we may replace ℵ0 by any 휆provided that 퐼(휆, 퐾k) = 1 = 퐼(휆+, 퐾k) and
1 ≤
̇퐼(휆++, 퐾k) < 휇wd(휆++, 2휆+), see more in [Sh:E53].
A central notion there is “s is a good 휆-frame”, ks = k, LSTk ≤휆, this is “bare
bones superstable”.
This is enough for proving
(∗) if (k is an a.e.c.), LSTk ≤휆, 2휆+푛< 2휆+푛+
and ̇퐼(휆+푛, 퐾k) = 1 for every 푛and 퐾k
has models of cardinality ≥ℶ(2LST(k))+, then 퐾k is categorical in every 휇≥휆.
However
Conjecture 1.7. If k is an a.e.c., 퐾k is categorical in some 휆large enough than LSTk,
then 퐾k is categorical in every 휇≥휆.
Note that [Sh:734] is a step ahead: in the context of 1.7, for many 휇= ℶ휇∈
[LSTk, 휆), there is a good 휇-frame s휇such that ks = 퐾k
휇. If we have this for 휔suc-
cessive 휇’s we shall be done by [Sh:600], but in [Sh:734] the family of such 휇’s is
scattered; a beginning is [Sh:842].
A much harder conjecture is:
Conjecture 1.8. 1.
The main gap theorem holds for a.e.c. 퐾k for 휆large enough.
2.
The class sup −limk = {휆: there is a super-limit 푀∈퐾k
휆} is “nice”, e.g. contains
every large enough 휆or contains no large enough 휆.
We are continuing this work in [Sh:F1302].
∗∗∗

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
371
We may wonder
Question 1.9. 1.
Maybe there is a natural logic which is the natural framework
for categoricity spectrum.
2.
Also for the super-limit spectrum.
We expect such logic to be stronger than L휆+,ℵ0 but weaker than L휆,휆. This may
remind us of [Sh:797]. The logic discovered there is L1
<휆for 휆= ℶ휆, it is between
L−1
<휆= ∪{L휇+,ℵ0 : 휇< 휆} and 퐿0
<휆,휇= ∪{L휇+,휇+ : 휇< 휆}, in a strong way well ordering
is not well deﬁned and it can be characterized (as Lindström theorem characterize
ﬁrst order logic) and has interpolation. In addition, for 휆a compact cardinal L1
<휆-
equivalence of 푀1, 푀2 is equivalent to having isomorphism 휔-limit ultra-powers
by 휆-complete ultraﬁlters, see [Sh:1019].
However, probably the characterization in [Sh:797] was by “the maximal logic
such that ...”. So maybe we should restrict the logic further such that “EM model
can be constructed”.
We conjecture there is a logic characterized by being maximal under this
stronger demand, and in it we can say at least something on the function ̇퐼(휆, 휓),
and maybe much. This is interesting also from the point of view of soft model
theory: we conjecture that there are many such intermediate logics with charac-
terization (and the related interpolation theorem).
2 Introduction to the paper
In this section, we begin by motivating our line of investigation. See notation in
§(1D) below (and more self contained introduction in §(1B), §(1C)).
2.1 Motivation/Content
We knew of old (see: [Sh:c, Ch.XIII,4.15]):
Theorem 2.1. For a countable complete ﬁrst order theory 푇, one of the following
holds:
(푎) 푇is categorical in every 휆> ℵ0
(푏)
̇퐼(휆, 푇) = ℶ2 for every cardinal 휆≥2ℵ0
(푐)
̇퐼(ℵ훼, 푇) ≥1 + |훼| for every ordinal 훼.
For a.e.c. we have something when k is categorical in some 휆’s ([Sh:734], [Sh:600])
and something about ̇퐼(ℵ1, k), ([Sh:88r], about when 1 ≤
̇퐼(ℵ1, k) < 2ℵ1, particu-

372
|
Saharon Shelah
larly when 2ℵ0 < 2ℵ1 and then on higher cardinals) but nothing for general a.e.c. k.
The current paper is motivated by hopes of ﬁnding something like 2.1 for a.e.c.’s.
Recall the history.
Our approach here assumes/relies on:
Thesis 2.2. Reasonable to concentrate on cardinals from Cfp = {휆: 휆= ℶ휆},
where fp stands for “ﬁxed points”.
Why? If 휆∈Cfp, 휆> LST(k) and 푀∈퐾k
휆then for every 휃∈[LST(k), 휆) and
푁≤k 푀, ‖푁‖ = 휃there is 훷∈훶k,휃so |휏(훷)| = 휃such that for any linear order 퐼,
e.g. 퐼= 휆we have 푁≤k EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷). So in 퐾k
휆we have many models of the form
EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷), 훷∈훶k,<휆. If ̇퐼(휆, k) < 휆, many of them will be isomorphic. Hence for
many 휃1 < 휃2 < 휆, 휃1 ≥LST(k), every 푁≤k 푀of cardinality 휃2 can be ≤k-embedded
into some EM휏(k)(휆, 훷), 훷∈훶or
휅[k].
Informally, the point is it allows us to use EM models. The key point is ﬁnding
a suitable template, set 훷of quantiﬁer free types, which requires ﬁnding enough
indiscernible sequences. When 퐾k is an a.e.c. (as opposed to an elementary or
pseudo elementary class) we must go through the Presentation Theorem to ﬁnd
an indiscernible sequence, i.e. we require suﬃciently large models omitting the
types in 훤.
To further motivate our approach, consider a not so strong conjecture, still
enough to exemplify “the function 휆㨃→̇퐼(휆, k) cannot be too wild”.
Conjecture 2.3. 1.
Letting Cfp
ℵ0 = {휆: 휆= ℶ휆and cf(휆) = ℵ0} and ﬁxing an a.e.c.
k, not both of the following classes are stationary (or restrict yourself to some
strongly inaccessible 휇and “stationary” means below it):
(푎) S1 = {휆∈Cfp
ℵ0 :
̇퐼(휆, k) < 휆}
(푏) S2 = {휆∈Cfp
ℵ0 :
̇퐼(휆, k) ≥휆}.
2.
A weaker conjecture (presented in the abstract) is replacing clause (b) by
(푏)耠S3 = {휆∈Cfp
ℵ0: for every 푀∈퐾k
휆has ≤k-extensions 푁of any cardinality
> 휆}.
Why “cf(휆) = ℵ0”? First, trying to prove 휆∈S3, we can approximate 푁by 훷∈
훶or
휆푛[k], 휆푛< 휆as we can approximate 푀by 푁耠≤k 푀, ‖푁耠‖ = 휆푛where 휆푛< 휆푛+1 <
휆= 훴{휆푚: 푚}. Second, for 휆∈Cfp
ℵ0 it is enough to show that {푀/ ≡L∞,휆: 푀∈퐾k
휆}
is small because it is well known that if cf(휆) = ℵ0 and 푀1, 푀2 are of cardinality
휆and L∞,휆-equivalent then they are isomorphic; on such logics see, e.g. [Dic85].
Thesis 2.4. There are, for a.e.c. k, meaningful dichotomy theorems for
̇퐼(휆, 퐾k)
when 퐾is a class of 휏(k)-models, 퐾= 퐾k and k = (퐾k, ≤k).
This is a more concrete thesis than “considering a.e.c.’s is a good frame for
model theory”; even more concrete is the “main gap conjecture”. It had been
proved that if 퐾k is the class of models of a complete countable ﬁrst order the-

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
373
ory then it satisﬁes the “main gap”, i.e. either
̇퐼(휆, 퐾) is large, even = 2휆for all
uncountable 휆or ̇퐼(ℵ훼, 퐾) is small, even < ℶ휔1(|훼|) for all 훼> 0; see [Sh:c, Ch.XII],
“The book’s main theorem”. In general for a class 퐾of 휏-models the “main gap”
will say that either ̇퐼(휆, 퐾) is large (i.e. 2휆or ≥휆+) for every 휆large enough or it is
small for every 휆large enough say ̇퐼(ℵ훼, 퐾) is ≤ℶ1,푛(|훼|) for some 푛= 푛(퐾) < 휔.
We are far away from this, still, until now for the a.e.c. the categoricity case
was almost alone, i.e. we start assuming ̇퐼(휆, 퐾) = 1 in some 휆, see below, but we
try here to look “higher”.
The contribution of the present paper is to show that in the much more gen-
eral context of a.e.c.’s for some ℵ0-closed unbounded class C of cardinals, we have
휆∈C ⇒
̇퐼(휆, 퐾k) ≥휆, a non-structure result, or 휆∈C ∧푀∈퐾k
휆⇒푀has ar-
bitrary large ≤k-extensions. Note that the latter property is now taken for granted
for elementary classes but is a real gain for a.e.c.
As noted in §1, in [Sh:734] and [Sh:600] we obtained results on
̇퐼(휆, 퐾) for
a.e.c.’s assuming categoricity in some 휆’s. However, nothing was known for gen-
eral a.e.c.’s under weaker few models assumption.
On abstract elementary classes, see [Sh:88r], [Bal09] and [Sh:E53]. We will
make essential use of the Presentation Theorem, which says that every a.e.c. can
be represented as a PC class, say PC(푇, 훤), see [Sh:88r, §1].
We thank the audience in the lecture in the Hebrew University seminar 2/2005
for their comments on an earlier version of this paper and Maryanthe Malliaris for
helping much in improving §2 and some corrections in fall 2011 - winter 2012 and
Will Boney for some further corrections (fall 2013).
2.2 Discussion
We give some further details regarding §(2.1).
In Thesis 2.2 the result on EM models needed is: [Sh:394, Claim 0.6], [Sh:394,
Claim 8.6], the “a.e.c. omitting types theorem” and [Sh:394, Lemma 8.7,p.46].
Fact 2.5. Let k be an a.e.c. If 휆∈Cfp, 휆> LSTk and 푀∈퐾k
휆then for every 휃∈
[LSTk, 휆) and 푁≤k 푀of cardinality 휃there is 훷∈훶[k] such that:
(푎) |휏(훷)| = 휃
(푏) for any linear order 퐼, in particular 퐼= 휆, without loss of generality 푁≤k
EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷) where this denotes the reduct of the EM model to the vocabulary of
k.
Comment:

374
|
Saharon Shelah
Let us repeat, the two points when cf(휆) = ℵ0 may be as required:
(푎) downward large depth in §4,
(푏) if we like to ﬁnd large 푁≤k-extending 푀for a given 푀∈퐾k
휆, if cf(휆) = ℵ0 we
can get it as an 휔-limit of 푀耠<k 푀, ‖푀耠‖ < 휆.
Such considerations further lead us to
Question 2.6. Let 훷∈훶휃[k] and 휅be a cardinal.
Sort out the functions
(푎) 휆㨃→|{EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷)/ ≅: 퐼a linear order of cardinality 휆}|
(푏) 휆㨃→
̇퐼휏(k)(휆, 휅, 훷) := |{EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷)/ ≡L∞,휅: 퐼a linear order of cardinality 휆}.
Recall, by [Sh:11] restricting ourselves to cardinals 휆= 휆<휅, that the function
in clause (b) of 2.6 is “nice”, more speciﬁcally: if 휃≤휆1 = 휆<휅
1
< 휆2 then
̇퐼휏(k)(휆1, 휅, k) ≥min{휆+
1, ̇퐼(휆2, 휅, k)}.
What occurs if 휆1 < 휆<휅
1 ? The case 휆1 = ℶ훿, cf(훿) = ℵ0 is more approachable
than the general case, see 5.2.
Our hope is to get “bare bones superstability”, i.e. good 휆-frames inside k, (as
in [Sh:600],[Sh:734]).
Another point concerning the function ̇퐼(휆, 휅, k) is: for a model 푀, cardinal 휃
and logic L we can deﬁne the depth of 푀for (L , 휃) as min{훼: if ̄푎, ̄푏∈휀푀, 휀< 휃
and
̄푎, ̄푏realizes the same formulas of L∞,휃(or L∞,휃[k]) of depth < 훼then they
realize the same L∞,휃-formulas}; of course, only formulas in 퐿‖푀‖<휃,휃are relevant.
This is a good way to “slice” the equivalence and it is easier for LST considerations.
2.3 What is Done
A phenomena making the investigation of general a.e.c. hard is having ≤k-
maximal models of large cardinality. As with amalgamation, we may consider the
property
(∗)1
휆if 푀∈퐾k
휆then 푀is not ≤k-maximal.
In investigations like [Sh:E46] and [Sh:576], which look at ∪{퐾k
휆+ℓ: ℓ< 4} this is
relevant. But in investigations as in [Sh:734], looking at ∪{퐾k
휆: 휆= ℶ휆}, it is more
natural to consider
(∗)2
휆if 푀∈퐾k
휆then for any 휇> 휆there is 푁∈퐾k
휇which ≤k-extends 푁.
In §4 we consider a 휆= ℶ휆of coﬁnality ℵ0 which is more than strong limit and
try to prove non-structure from ¬(∗)2
휆. Given 푁∈퐾k
휆we try to build an EM model
(that is construct the 훷) ≤k-extending 푁by an increasing chain of approximations:

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
375
given 휆푛→휆, 푀푛→푁, 푀푛∈퐾k
휆푛. The 푛-th approximation 훷푛to 훷has to have
“훷푛in a suitable sense is represented in 푁say of size 휆푛+1”.
Being stuck should be a reason for non-structure. For simplicity we consider
only cardinals 휇= ℶ휇, the gain without this restriction seems minor.
Concerning the results of §4 it would be nicer to make one more step concern-
ing 4.15, 4.14 and deal also with 휆= ℶ휆instead of 휆= ℶ1,휆, but a more central
question is to get the non-structure result for every 휆耠> 휆. It is natural to try given
훷∈훶sor
휅[k푀] and 푀≤k 푁, to deﬁne a “depth” for approximation of the existence
of a ≤k-embedding of standard EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷) into 푁(see Deﬁnition 3.2(2)), so that
depth inﬁnity give existence. But this does not work for us, so Deﬁnition 4.2 is a
substitute, moreover we need “indirect evidence”, see Deﬁnition 4.7.
Our main theorem is
Theorem 2.7. For any a.e.c. for some closed unbounded class of cardinals C, if
(∃휆∈C)[cf(휆) = ℵ0 ∧̇퐼(휆, 퐾k) < 휆] and 푀∈퐾k of cardinality 휇∈C of coﬁnality ℵ0,
then 푀has a proper <k-extension, and even ones of arbitrarily large cardinality.
The natural next steps are
Conjecture 2.8. 1.
In Theorem 4.16, i.e. what is promised in the abstract we can
choose C as an end segment of {휇: 휇= ℶ1,휇} or just choose C as {휇: 휇= ℶ2,휇>
LSTk}.
2.
For every a.e.c. k for some closed unbounded class C of cardinals, we have
푀∈퐾k
휆∧휆∈C ∧cf(휆) = ℵ0 ⇒훶or
휆[k푀]
̸= 0 or 휆∈C ∧cf(휆) = ℵ0 ⇒̇퐼(휆, 퐾k) ≥
2휆or at least ≥휆+.
We intend to deal with part (1) in a continuation.
2.4 Recalling Deﬁnitions and Notation
Notation 2.9. Let Card be the class of inﬁnite cardinals.
Deﬁnition 2.10. 1.
Let ℶ0,훼(휆) = ℶ훼(휆) := 휆+ 훴{2ℶ훽(휆) : 훽< 훼}. Let ℶ휀,훼(휆) be
deﬁned by induction on 휀> 0 and for each 휀by induction on 훼: ℶ휀,0(휆) = 휆,
for limit 훽we let ℶ휀,훽= ∑
훾<훽
ℶ휀,훾and for 휀= 휁+1 let ℶ휁+1,훽+1(휆) = ℶ휁,휇(휆) where2
2 why not, e.g. 휇= ℶ1,훽(휆)+? Not a serious diﬀerence as for limit 훼we shall get the same value
and in 2.14(1) this simpliﬁes the notation.

376
|
Saharon Shelah
휇= (2ℶ휁,훽(휆))+, lastly for limit 휀let ⟨ℶ휀,훼: 훼∈Ord⟩list in increasing order the
closed unbounded class ⋂
휁<휀
{ℶ휁,훼: 훼∈Ord}.
2.
Let 휆≫휅mean (∀훼< 휆)(|훼|휅< 휆).
Convention 2.11. 1.
k = (퐾k, ≤k) is an a.e.c., with vocabulary 휏k = 휏(k) and
LST(k) = LSTk its Löwenheim-Skolem-Tarski number, see [Sh:88r, §1]. If not
said otherwise, we assume |휏k| ≤LSTk.
2.
퐾k
휆= 퐾k,휆= {푀∈퐾k : ‖푀‖ = 휆}.
3.
If 퐾= 퐾k we may write k instead of 퐾; also we may write 퐾or 퐾휆omitting k
when (as usually here) k is clear from the context.
Deﬁnition 2.12. For a class 퐾of 휏-models:
(푎) for a cardinal 휆, let ̇퐼(휆, 퐾) be the cardinality of {푀/ ≅: 푀∈퐾has cardinality
휆}
(푏) for a cardinal 휆and a logic L , let ̇퐼(휆, L , 퐾) = {푀/ ≡L (휏): 푀∈퐾has cardi-
nality 휆}.
Deﬁnition 2.13. 1.
훷is a template proper for linear orders when :
(푎) for some vocabulary 휏= 휏훷= 휏(훷), 훷is an 휔-sequence, with the 푛-th
element a complete quantiﬁer free 푛-type in the vocabulary 휏,
(푏) for every linear order 퐼there is a 휏-model 푀denoted by EM(퐼, 훷), gen-
erated by {푎푡: 푡∈퐼} such that 푠
̸= 푡⇒푎푠
̸= 푎푡for 푠, 푡∈퐼and
⟨푎푡0, . . . , 푎푡푛−1⟩realizes the quantiﬁer free 푛-type from clause (a) whenever
푛< 휔and 푡0 <퐼. . . <퐼푡푛−1. We call (푀, ⟨푎푡: 푡∈퐼⟩) a 훷−EM-pair
or EM-pair for 훷; so really 푀and even (푀, ⟨푎푡: 푡∈퐼⟩) are determined
only up to isomorphism but abusing notation we may ignore this and use
퐼1 ⊆퐽1 ⇒EM(퐼1, 훷) ⊆EM(퐼2, 훷). We call ⟨푎푡: 푡∈퐼⟩“the” skeleton of
푀; of course again “the” is an abuse of notation as it is not necessarily
unique.
1A. If 휏⊆휏(훷) then we let EM휏(퐼, 훷) be the 휏-reduct of EM(퐼, 훷).
2.
훶or
휅[k] is the class of templates 훷proper for linear orders satisfying clauses
(푎)(훼), (푏), (푐) of Claim 2.14(1) below and |휏(훷)\휏k| ≤휅; normally we assume
휅≥|휏k| + LSTk but using k푀we do not assume 휅≥‖푀‖, see 3.1. The default
value of 휅is LSTk and then we may write 훶or
k or 훶or[k] and for simplicity if not
said otherwise 휅≥LSTk (and so 휅≥|휏k|). We may omit k and or omit “or”
when clear from the context.
3.
For a class 퐾of so called index models, we deﬁne “훷proper for 퐾” similarly
when in clause (b) of part (1) we demand 퐼∈퐾, so 퐾is a class of 휏퐾-models,
i.e.
(푎) 훷is a function, giving for any complete quantiﬁer free 푛-type in 휏퐾real-
ized in some 푀∈퐾, a quantiﬁer free 푛-type in 휏훷

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
377
(푏)耠in clause (b) of part (1), the quantiﬁer free type which ⟨푎푡0, . . . , 푎푡푛−1⟩real-
izes in 푀is 훷(tpqf(⟨푡0, . . . , 푡푛−1⟩, 0, 퐼)) for 푛< 휔, 푡0, . . . , 푡푛−1 ∈퐼.
Fact 2.14. 1.
Let k be an a.e.c. and 푀∈퐾k be of cardinality ≥휆= ℶ1,1(LSTk)
recalling we may assume |휏k| ≤LSTk as usual.
Then there is a 훷such that 훷is proper for linear orders and:
(푎) (훼) 휏k ⊆휏훷,
(훽) |휏훷| = LSTk + |휏k|
(푏) for any linear order 퐼the model EM(퐼, 훷) has cardinality |휏(훷)|+|퐼| and we
have EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷) ∈퐾k
(푐) for any linear orders 퐼⊆퐽we have EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷) ≤k EM휏(k)(퐽, 훷); moreover,
if 푀⊆EM(퐽, 훷) then (푀↾휏k) ≤k EM휏(k)(퐽, 훷)
(푑) for every ﬁnite linear order 퐼, the model EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷) can be ≤k-embedded
into 푀.
1A. Moreover, assume in (1) also 휆= ℶ1,1(휅), 휅≥LSTk + |휏k| so not necessarily
assuming LSTk ≥|휏k|, 푀+ is an expansion of 푀with 휏(푀+) of cardinality ≤휅
and 푏훼∈푀for 훼< 휆are pairwise distinct. Then there is 훷proper for linear
orders such that:
(푎) (훼) 휏(푀+) ⊆휏훷hence 휏(k) ⊆휏훷
(훽) 휏훷has cardinality 휅
(푏), (푐)has in part (1)
(푑) if 퐼is a ﬁnite linear order and 푡0 <퐼. . . <퐼푡푛−1 list its elements and 푀퐼=
EM(퐼, 훷) with skeleton ⟨푎푡푖: 푡∈퐼⟩, then for some ordinals 훼0 < . . . < 훼푛−1 <
휆there is an embedding of 푀퐼into 푀+ mapping 푎푡ℓto 푏훼ℓfor ℓ< 푛.
2.
If LSTk < |휏k| and there is 푀∈퐾k of cardinality ≥ℶ1,1(2LSTk), then there is
훷∈훶or
LST(k)+|휏(훷)|[k] such that EM(퐼, 훷) has cardinality ≤LSTk for 퐼ﬁnite and
휏훷\휏(푀) has cardinality LSTk. Note that E has ≤2LSTk equivalence classes
where E = {(푃1, 푃2) : 푃1, 푃2 ∈휏훷and 푃EM(퐼,훷)
1
= 푃EM(퐼,훷)
2
for every linear or-
der 퐼} hence above “≥ℶ1,1(2LST(k))” suﬃce.
3.
We can combine parts (1A) and (2). Also in both cases having a model of car-
dinality ≥ℶ훼for every 훼< (2LST(k)+|휏(k)|)+ suﬃce in parts (1),(1A) and for every
훼< ℶ2(LSTk)+ suﬃce in part (2).
We add
Claim 2.15. For every cardinal 휇and strong limit 휒≤휇there is a dense 휅-saturated
linear order 퐼= 퐼휇of cardinality 휇such that:
(∗) if 휃< cf(휕) = 휕< 휇, 2휃≤휒then
(∗)퐼,휒,휕,휃we have 2휃≤휒and 휃< 휕= cf(휕) and (퐴) ⇒(퐵) where:
(퐴) (푎) 퐼0 ⊆퐼
(푏) 퐼0 has cardinality ≤휃

378
|
Saharon Shelah
(푐) 퐼1 is a linear order extending 퐼0
(푑) 푢푛⊆푢푛+1 ⊆휃= ⋃
푛푢푛
(푒)
̄푡1
훼∈휃(퐼1) for 훼< 휕and ⟨̄푡1
훼: 훼< 휕⟩is an indiscernible sequence in 퐼1
over 퐼0 (for quantiﬁer free formulas)
(푓) for every 푛, 퐼1,푛= 퐼1 ↾({푡1
훼,푖: 푖∈푢푛, 훼< 휕} ∪퐼0) is embeddable into 퐼
over 퐼0
(퐵) there is ⟨̄푡훼: 훼< 휇⟩such that
(푎)
̄푡훼∈휃퐼
(푏) ⟨̄푡훼: 훼< 휇⟩is an indiscernible sequence over 퐼0 into 퐼(for quantiﬁer
free formulas)
(푐) the quantiﬁer free type of ̄푡0^ . . . ^ ̄푡푛over 퐼0 in 퐼is equal to the quantiﬁer
free type of
̄푡1
0^ . . . ^ ̄푡1
푛over 퐼0 in 퐼1 for every 푛
(퐵)+moreover we can replace ⟨̄푡훼: 훼< 휇⟩by ⟨̄푡푠: 푠∈퐼⟩.
Remark 2.16. 1.
We may consider replacing (A)(e) by
(푒)耠훼= ℶ2(휃)+, 푢푛⊆푢푛+1 ⊆휃= ⋃
푛푢푛and 퐼1,푛= {푡1
훼,휀: 훼< 휕, 휀∈푢푛} and
there is
̄푓= ⟨푓휂: 휂∈훬⟩such that 푓휂embeds 퐼1,ℓ푔(휂) into 퐼1 over 퐼0 and
휈⊲휂⇒푓휈⊆푓휂where 훬= {휂: 휂is a decreasing sequence of ordinals
< 훼}.
2.
Clauses (A)(d),(e) can be weakened to:
⊕
if 푖, 푗< 휃then 퐼1 ↾({푡1
훼,푖훼= 0, 1 and 푖< 휃} ∪퐼0) can be embedded into 퐼
over 퐼0.
But the present form ﬁts our application.
Proof.. First we give a suﬃcient condition for (∗)퐼,휒,휕,휃
⊞
the linear order 퐼satisﬁes (∗)퐼,휒,휕,휃when: 휒> 휕= cf(휕) > 휃and
(푎) 퐼is a linear order of cardinality 휇
(푏) if 퐼0 ⊆퐼, |퐼0| ≤휃then the set 퐼+
0 = {푡∈퐼: 푡∉퐼0 and there is no 푡耠∈퐼\퐼0\{푡}
realizing the same cut of 퐼0 in 퐼} has cardinality < 휕, so if 휕= (2휃)+ this
holds
(푐) if 푎<퐼푏then 퐼is embeddable into (푎, 푏)퐼
(푑) every linear order of cardinality ≤휃is embeddable into 퐼
(푒) in 퐼there is a decreasing sequence of length 휇and an increasing sequence
of length 휇
(푓) to get (퐵)+ we need: if 퐽is a linear order of cardinality ≤휃then we can
embed 퐼× 퐽(ordered lexicographically into 퐼).
It is obvious that there is such linear order. It is also easy to see that if 퐼satisﬁes
(a)-(d) then (∗)퐼,휕,휃.
□2.15

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
379
3 More on Templates
Why do we need 훶sor
휅[푀, k]? Remember that such 훷’s are witnesses to 푀having
≤k-extensions in every 휇> LSTk +‖푀‖ so proving existence is a major theme here.
First, why do we need below 훶sor
휅? Because “훶sor
휅[푀, k]
̸= 0” is equivalent to 푀
being not ≤k-maximal; moreover has ≤k-extensions of arbitrarily large cardinality
so proving this for every 푀∈퐾k
휆indicates “k is nice, at least in 휆”. Second, why
do we need various partial orders on 훶sor
휅[푀, k]’s?
In a major proof here to build 훷∈훶sor
휅[푀, k] we use ≤k-increasing 푀푛with
union 푀and try to choose 훷푛∈훶sor
휅[푀푛, k] increasing with 푛. For this we assume
‖푀푛‖ = 휆푛, 휆푛≪휆푛+1 and we use an induction hypothesis that 훷푛has a say 휆푛+5-
witness in 푀.
Of course, it is nice if EM휏(k)(휆푛+5, 훷푛) is ≤k-embeddable into 푀over 푀푛but
for this we do not have strong enough existence theorem. To ﬁne tune this and
having a limit (훷∈훶sor
휅[푀, k]) we need some orders.
Deﬁnition 3.1. For k an a.e.c. and 푀∈퐾k let k푀= k[푀] be the following a.e.c.:
(푎) vocabulary 휏k∪{푐푎: 푎∈푀} where the 푐푎’s are pairwise distinct new individual
constants
(푏) 푁∈퐾k푀iﬀ푁↾휏k ∈퐾k and 푎㨃→푐푁
푎is a ≤k-embedding of 푀into 푁↾휏k;
(푐) 푁1 ≤k푀푁2 iﬀ
(훼) 푁1, 푁2 are 휏k푀-models from 퐾k휇
(훽) 푁1 ⊆푁2
(훾) (푁1 ↾휏k) ≤k (푁2 ↾휏k).
Deﬁnition 3.2. 1.
We call 푁∈퐾k푀standard when 푀≤k 푁↾휏k and 푎∈푀⇒
푐푁
푎= 푎.
2.
If 푁1 ∈퐾k푀is standard and 푁0 = 푁1 ↾휏k then we write 푁1 = 푁0
[푀].
3.
We call 훷∈훶or
k standard when 푀= EM휏(k)(0, 훷) implies 푁≤k 푀↾휏k when
푁is the submodel3 of 푀↾휏k with universe {푐푀: 푐∈휏(훷) an individual
constant}. We call 훷fully standard when above 푁= 푀↾휏k.
4.
Let 훶sor
휅[k] be the class of standard 훷∈훶or
휅[k].
5.
For 푀∈퐾k let 훶sor
휅[k푀] be the class of 휅-standard 훷∈훶or
휅[k푀] which4 means:
(푎) letting 휅1 = 휅+ ‖푀‖, we have 훷∈훶sor
휅1 [k]
3 Note that we have not said “훷∈훶or
k[푁]” but by renaming this follows.
4 So though such 훷belongs to 훶or
휅[k], being standard for 훶sor
휅[k푀] is a diﬀerent demand than
being standard for 훶or
휅[k] as for the latter possibly {푐푎: 푎∈푀} ⫋{푐∈휏훷: 푐an individual
constant}.

380
|
Saharon Shelah
(푏) {푐푎: 푎∈푀} = {푐∈휏(훷) : 푐an individual constant}.
(푐) 푁= EM(0, 훷) ⇒|푁| = {푐푁: 푐∈휏훷}
(푑) 휏耠
훷:= 휏k\{푐∈휏훷is an individual constant} has cardinality ≤휅
(푒) if 푁= EM(퐼, 훷) and 푁1 is a submodel of 푁↾휏耠
훷then 푁1 ↾휏k ≤k 푁↾휏k.
5A. We may omit 휅in part (5) when 휅= LSTk+|휏k|. We may write 훶sor
휅[푀, k] instead
of 훶sor
휅[k푀], useful when k is not clear from the context.
Observation 3.3. 1.
If 훷∈훶sor
휅[k, 푀] then 훷∈훶or
휅+‖푀‖[k] but not necessarily the
inverse.
2.
If 훷∈훶sor
휅[k, 푀] then 훷is a fully standard member of 훶or
휅[k푀].
Claim 3.4. Assume k is an a.e.c. and 푀∈퐾k and k1 = k푀then :
(푎) k1 is an a.e.c.
(푏) LSTk1 = LSTk + ‖푀‖
(푐) applying 2.14 to k1, we can add “훷∈훶sor
휅[k푀]”.
Proof.. Straightforward.
□3.4
Deﬁnition 3.5. Assume 퐽is a linear order of cardinality 휆and 휆→(휇)푛
휃. We deﬁne
the ideal I = ER푛
퐽,휇,휃on the set [퐽]휇by:
∙
S ⊆[퐽]휇belongs to I iﬀfor some c : [퐽]≤푛→휃there is no 푠∈S such that
c ↾[푠]푛is constant.
Observation 3.6. 1.
If |퐽| = 휆and 휆→(휇)푛
휃then ER푛
퐽,휇,휃is indeed an ideal, i.e.
퐽∉ER푛
퐽,휇,휃.
2.
If 휃= 휃<휅then this ideal is 휅-complete.
Deﬁnition 3.7. 1.
For vocabularies 휏1, 휏2 we say that h is an isomorphism from
휏1 onto 휏2 when h is a one-to-one function from the non-logical symbols of 휏1
(= the predicates and function symbols) onto those of 휏2 such that:
(푎) if 푃∈휏1 is a predicate then h(푃) is a predicate of 휏2 and arity휏1(푃) =
arity휏2(h(푃))
(푏) if 퐹∈휏1 is a function symbol5 then h(퐹) is a function symbol of 휏2 and
arity휏1(퐹) = arity휏2(h(퐹)).
2.
If h is an isomorphism from the vocabulary 휏1 onto the vocabulary 휏1 and 푀1
is a 휏1-model then 푀[h]
1
is the unique 푀2 such that:
(푎) 푀2 is a 휏2-model
(푏) |푀2| = |푀1|
(푐) 푃푀2
2
= 푃푀1
1
when 푃1 ∈휏1 is a predicate and 푃2 = h(푃1)
(푑) 퐹푀2
2
= 퐹푀1
1
when 퐹1 ∈휏1 is a function symbol and 퐹2 = h(퐹1).
5 this includes individual constants

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
381
3.
We say h is an isomorphism from 휏1 onto 휏2 over 휏when 휏⊆휏1 ∩휏2, h is an
isomorphism from 휏1 onto 휏2 and h ↾휏is the identity.
4.
If 훷1 ∈훶or
휅and h is an isomorphism from the vocabulary 휏1 := 휏(훷) onto the
vocabulary 휏2 then 훷[h] is the unique 훷2 ∈훶or
휅such that: if 퐼is a linear order,
푀1 = EM(퐼, 훷1) with skeleton ⟨푎푡: 푡∈퐼⟩then 푀[h]
1
is the model (EM(퐼, 훷2))[h]
with the same skeleton.
Observation 3.8. 1.
In 3.7(2), 푀2 = 푀[h]
1
is indeed a 휏2-model. If in addition h is
over 휏(i.e. 휏⊆휏1 ∩휏2 and h ↾휏= id휏) then 푀1 ↾휏= 푀2 ↾휏.
2.
In 3.7(4), indeed 훷2 ∈훶or
휅.
3.
If h is an isomorphism from 휏1 onto 휏2 over 휏k so 휏k ⊆휏1∩휏2 and 훷1 ∈훶or
휅[k], 휏1 =
휏(훷1) then 훷2 = 훷[h]
1
belongs to 훶or
휅[k].
4.
In part (3) if in addition 푀∈퐾k and 훷1 ∈훶sor
휅[푀, k] and 푎∈푀⇒h(푐푎) = 푐푎
then 훷2 = 훷[h]
1
belongs to 훶sor
휅[푀, k].
Proof.. Straightforward.
□3.8
Next we recall the partial orders ≤1
휅, ≤2
휅and deﬁne an equivalence relation and
some quasi-orders on 훶or
휅[k].
Deﬁnition 3.9. Fixing k, we deﬁne partial orders ≤⊕
휅=≤1
휅=≤1
k,휅and ≤⊗
휅=≤2
휅=≤2
k,휅on
훶or
휅[k] (for 휅≥LSTk):
1.
훹1 ≤⊕
휅훹2 if 휏(훹1) ⊆휏(훹2) and EM휏(k)(퐼, 훹1) ≤k EM휏(k)(퐼, 훹2) and EM(퐼, 훹1) =
EM휏(훹1)(퐼, 훹1) ⊆EM휏(훹1)(퐼, 훹2) for any linear order 퐼(so, of course, same 푎푡’s,
etc.).
Again for 휅= LSTk + |휏k| we may drop the 휅.
2.
For 훷1, 훷2 ∈훶or
휅, we say 훷2 is an inessential extension of 훷1 and write 훷1 ≤ie
휅훷2
if 훷1 ≤⊕
휅훷2 and for every linear order 퐼, we have
EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷1) = EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷2).
(note: there may be more function symbols in 휏(훷2)!)
2A. We deﬁne the two-place relation Eæ on 훶or
k as follows 훷1Eæ훷2 iﬀ휏(훷1) = 휏(훷2)
and for some unary function symbol 퐹∈휏(훷1) or 퐹is just a (ﬁnite) compo-
sition6 of such function symbols, if 푀= EM(퐼, 훷1) with skeleton ⟨푎1
푡: 푡∈퐼⟩
and we let 푎2
푡= 퐹푀(푎1
2) for 푡∈퐼then:
–
퐹푀(푎2
푡) = 푎1
푡
–
푀is EM(퐼, 훷2) with skeleton ⟨푎2
푡: 푡∈퐼⟩;
6 but abusing our notation we may still write 퐹∈휏훷

382
|
Saharon Shelah
“æ” stands for almost equal.
2B. Above we say 훷2Eæ훷2 is witnessed by 퐹.
2C. We deﬁne the two-place relation Eie
휅on 훶or
k by: 훷1Eie
휅훷2 iﬀfor some 훷3, 훷1 ≤ie
휅
훷3 and 훷2 ≤ie
퐾훷3.
2D. We deﬁne a two-place relation Eai
휅on 훶or
휅[k] by 훷1Eai
휅훷3 iﬀfor some 훷2 ∈훶ai
휅[k]
we have 훷1Eæ
휅훷2 and 훷2Eie
퐾훷3.
3.
Let 훶lin
휅be the class of 훹proper for linear order and producing linear orders,
that is, such that:
(푎) 휏(훹) has cardinality ≤휅,
(푏) EM{<}(퐼, 훹) is a linear order which is an extension of 퐼which means 푠<퐼
푡⇒EM(퐼, 훹) 　㨐“푎푠< 푎푡”; in fact we can have
[푡∈퐼⇒푎푡= 푡].
4.
훷1 ≤⊗
휅훷2 iﬀthere is 훹such that:
(푎) 훹∈훶lin
휅
(푏) 훷ℓ∈훶or
휅for ℓ= 1, 2
(푐) 훷耠
2 ≤ie
휅훷2 where 훷耠
2 = 훹∘훷1, i.e.
EM휏(훷1)(퐼, 훷耠
2) = EM(EM{<}(퐼, 훹), 훷1).
(So we allow further expansion by functions deﬁnable from earlier ones (compo-
sition or even deﬁnition by cases), as long as the number is ≤휅).
It is not a real loss to restrict ourselves to standard 훷because
Claim 3.10. 1.
For every 훷1 ∈훶or
휅[k] there is a standard 훷2 ∈훶or
휅[k] such that
훷1 ≤ie
휅훷2; moreover 푀= EM(0, 훷2) ⇒|푀| = {푐푀: 푐∈휏(훷2) an individual
constant}, that is 훷2 is fully standard.
2.
Assume 훷1 ∈훶or
휅[k], 퐹∈휏(훷) is a unary function symbol such that 푀=
EM(퐼, 훷1) ∧푡∈퐼⇒퐹푀(퐹푀(푎푡)) = 푎푡. Then for a unique 훷2, 훷1Eæ훷2 as wit-
nessed by 퐹and 훷1 ∈훶sor
휅[k푀] ⇔훷2 ∈훶sor
휅[k푀].
3.
Ex
휅is an equivalence relation on 훶or
퐾[k] for x ∈{æ, ie, ai} all reﬁning Eai
휅.
Proof.. Obvious.
□3.10
Observation 3.11. Let ℓ= 1, 2.
1.
The relation ≤ℓ
휅is a partial order on 훶or
휅[k].
2.
If ⟨훷훼: 훼< 훿⟩is ≤ℓ
휅-increasing with 훿a limit ordinal < 휅+ then ⋃
훼<훿
훷훼naturally
deﬁned is a ≤ℓ
휅-lub.
3.
Eæ is an equivalence relation on 훶or.
4.
If 훶or
휅1 [k] ⊆훶or
휅2 [k] then 휅1 ≤휅2. If 휅1 ≤휅2 and 휄∈{1, 2} and 훷, 훹∈훶or
휅1 then
[훷≤휄
휅1 훹⇔훷≤휄
휅2 훹).
5.
Similarly for 훶sor
휅[k푀] deﬁned in 3.2(5).

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
383
Deﬁnition 3.12. 1.
For 휅≥LSTk + |휏k|, we deﬁne ≤⊙
휅=≤3
휅, in full ≤3
k,휅, a two-place
relation on 훶sor
휅[k], recalling Deﬁnition 3.2(5) as follows:
Let 훷1 ≤3
휅훷2 mean that: for every linear order 퐼1 there are a linear order 퐼2
and ≤k-embedding ℎof EM휏(k)(퐼1, 훷1) into EM휏(k)(퐼2, 훷2), moreover every indi-
vidual constant 푐of 휏(훷1) is an individual constant of 휏(훷2) and ℎ(푐EM(퐼1,훷1)) =
푐EM(퐼2,훷2).
2.
We deﬁne ≤4
휅=≤4
k,휅; a two-place relation on 훶sor
휅[k] as follows.
Let 훷1 ≤4
휅훷2 mean that: for some 퐹we have:
(푎) 훷1, 훷2 ∈훶sor
휅[k]
(푏) –
휏(훷1) ⊆휏(훷2)
–
퐹∈휏(훷2) is a unary function symbol or as in 3.9(2A)
(푐) if 퐼is a linear order and 푀2 = EM(퐼, 훷2) with skeleton ⟨푎2
푠: 푠∈퐼⟩then
there is 푀1 = EM(퐼, 훷1) with skeleton ⟨푎1
푠: 푠∈퐼⟩such that
–
푎1
푠= 퐹푀2(푎2
푠) for 푠∈퐼
–
푎2
푠= 퐹푀2(푎1
푠) for 푠∈퐼
–
푀1 ⊆푀2 ↾휏훷1 so 휏(훷1) ⊆휏(훷2)
–
(푀1 ↾휏k) ≤k (푀2 ↾휏k)
–
푐푀1 = 푐푀2 when 푐∈휏(훷1) is an individual constant.
Remark 3.13. So ≤4
휅is like ≤1
휅but we demand less as 푎1
푠= 푎2
푠is weakened by using
the function symbol 퐹.
Claim 3.14. 1.
≤3
휅is a partial order on 훶sor
휅[k] as well as ≤4
휅; also for 훷1, 훷2 ∈훶sor
휅[k]
and ℓ= 1, 2, 4 we have 훷1 ≤2 훷2 ⇒훷1 ≤1 훷2 ⇒훷1 ≤4 훷2 ⇒훷1 ≤3 훷3.
2.
Assume 훷1, 훷2 ∈훶sor
휅[k] have the same individual constants. Then 훷1 ≤3
휅훷2
iﬀas in 3.12(1) restricting ourselves to 퐼= ℶ1,1(휅) iﬀ훷1, 훷2 ∈훶sor
휅[k] and for
some 퐹and 훷耠
1, 훷耠
2 ∈훶sor
휅[k] and we have 훷1 ≤4
휅훷耠
1 witnessed by 퐹and 훷耠
1Eæ훷耠
2
witnessed by 퐹and for some 휏∗, h we have 휏(k) ⊆휏∗⊆휏(훷耠
1), h is an isomor-
phism from 휏(훷2) onto 휏∗over 휏(k) ∪{푐: 푐∈휏(훷1)} and 훷[h]
2
≤ie
휅훷耠
2 iﬀfor some
훷耠∈훶sor
휅[k] we have 훷1 ≤3 훷耠and 훷耠Eai
휅훷, see 3.9(2).
3.
If 훷푛∈훶sor
휅[k] and 훷푛≤3
휅훷푛+1 then there is 훷휔∈훶휅[k] such that 푛< 휔⇒
훷푛≤3
휅훷; moreover, EM휏(k)(0, 훷) is the union of the ≤k-increasing sequence
⟨EM휏(k)(0, 훷푛) : 푛< 휔⟩.
4.
Similarly for ≤4
휅.
Proof.. 1.
Obvious.
2.
First clause implies second clause
Holds trivially.
Second clause implies the third clause
Let 퐼1 = (휆, <), 휆large enough, e.g. 휆= ℶ1,1(휅). Let 푀1 = EM(퐼1, 훷1) be
with skeleton ⟨푎1
푡
: 푡∈퐼1⟩. As 훷1 ≤3
휅훷2, there is a linear order 퐼2 and

384
|
Saharon Shelah
푀2 = EM(퐼2, 훷2) with skeleton ⟨푎2
푡
: 푡∈퐼2⟩and ≤k-embedding 푓from
푀1 ↾휏(k) into 푀2 ↾휏(k) such that 푐∈휏(훷1) ⇒푐∈휏(훷2) ∧푓(푐푀1) = 푐푀2;
so by renaming without loss of generality 푓↾Sk(0, 푀1) is the identity and
|퐼2| > 휆. As ‖푀2‖ > ‖푀1‖ ≥휆> 휅≥|휏(푀2)|, clearly we can ﬁnd pairwise
distinct 푡훼∈퐼2 for 훼< 휆such that {푎2
푡훼: 훼< 휆} ∩{푓(푎1
훼) : 훼< 휆} = 0.
Let 휏1 = 휏(훷1) and7 let the pair (h, 휏3) be such that: h is an isomorphism from
the vocabulary 휏2 = 휏(훷2) onto 휏3 over 휏(k) ∪{푐: 푐∈휏(훷1)} such that 휏1 ∩
휏3 = 휏(k) ∪{푐: 푐∈휏(훷2)} and let 푀3 = 푀[h]
2 , so 휏(푀3) = 휏3, 훷3 = 훷[h]
2
so
휏(푀3) = 휏3 = 휏(훷3) and 푀3 is an EM(퐼2, 훷3) model with skeleton ⟨푎2
푡: 푡∈퐼2⟩.
Let 휏4 = 휏3 ∪휏1 ∪{퐹, 푃푙: 푙= 1, 2, 3, 4} with 퐹a one place function symbol and
푃ℓ, 퐹∉휏3∪휏1 and 푃ℓone place predicates for ℓ= 1, 2, 3, 4. We deﬁne a 휏4-model
푀4:
∙1
it has universe |푀3|
∙2
퐹푀4(푎2
푡훼) = 푓(푎1
훼) and 퐹푀4(푓(푎1
훼)) = 푎2
푡훼
∙3
푃푀4
1
= {푎1
푡: 푡∈퐼1}, 푃푀4
2
= {푎2
푡: 푡∈퐼2}, 푃푀4
3
= {푓(푎1
푡) : 푡∈퐼1}, 푃푀4
4
=
Rang(푓)
∙4
푀4 ↾휏3 = 푀3
∙5
푓embeds 푀1 into 푀4 ↾휏1.
Clearly there is no problem to do this and we apply 2.14(1A) with 푀4
↾
휏(k), 푀4, ⟨푎2
푡훼: 훼< 휆⟩, here standing for 푀, 푀+, ⟨푏훼: 훼< 휆⟩there and get
훷4 standing for 훷there. Now by inspection (see Deﬁnition 3.12(2)):
(∗)1 훷1 ≤4
휅훷4
(∗)2 훷3 ≤⊗
휅훷4; moreover 훷3 ≤ie 훷4.
We derive 훷5 from 훷4 by 3.10(2) using our 퐹so 훷4Eæ훷5. To show that the third
clause of part (2) indeed holds, we just note that 훷耠
1, 훷耠
2, h, 휏∗, there can stand
for 훷4, 훷5, h, 휏3 here, so we are done.
The third clause implies the ﬁrst clause:
So we are given 퐹and 훷1, 훷2 ∈훶sor
휅[k], 훷耠
1, 훷耠
2 ∈훶sor
휅[k], 휏∗⊆휏(훷耠
2) including
휏(k) and an isomorphism h from 휏(훷2) onto 휏∗over 휏k ∪{푐: 푐∈휏(훷1)} such
that 훷1 ≤4
휅훷耠
2 witness by 퐹, 훷耠
1Eæ훷耠
2 witness by 퐹and 훷[h]
2
≤⊗
휅훷耠
2.
Let 훹∈훶lin
휅witness 훷[h]
2
≤⊗
휅훷耠
2; and for uniformity of notation we let 훷3 := 훷耠
2.
We have to prove 훷1 ≤3
휅훷2 so let 퐼1 be a linear order.
Let 푀∗
1 = EM(퐼1, 훷1) be with skeleton ⟨푎1
푡: 푡∈퐼1⟩, let 퐼2 = EM{<}(훹, 퐼1) so
with skeleton ⟨푡: 푡∈퐼1⟩. Let 푀1 ⊆푀2 be deﬁned by 푀ℓ= EM(퐼ℓ, 훷2) with
7 The reason is that there may be a symbol in 휏(훷2) ∩휏(훷푐) but not from 휏(k1) ∪{푐: 푐∈휏(훷1)}.
We eliminate this “accidental equality”. Only now 휏3 ∪휏1 “makes sense”.

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
385
skeleton ̄푎ℓ= {푎2
푡: 푡∈퐼ℓ} for ℓ= 1, 2 and let 푀3 = EM(퐼1, 훷耠
1) be with skeleton
{푎3
푡: 푡∈퐼1}.
By the choice of 훹and of 퐼2 without loss of generality 푀[h]
2
= 푀3 ↾휏∗.
Lastly, there is a unique embedding 푓of 푀∗
1 into 푀3 ↾휏(훷1) mapping 푎1
푡to
퐹푀3(푎2
푡) for 푡∈퐼1. Easily 푓is a ≤k-embedding of 푀1 ↾휏(k) into 푀3 ↾휏(k)
mapping 푐푀1 to 푐푀2 for 푐∈휏(훷1) and 푀3 ↾휏(k) = 푀2 ↾휏(k) and 푐∈휏(훷1) ⇒
푐∈휏(훷2) ∧푓(푐푀∗
1 ) = 푐푀2.
We leave the fourth clause to the reader.
3.
By parts (2) and (4) or directly using 2.14(1) and the deﬁnition of ≤3
휅.
4.
So assume that 푛< 휔⇒훷푛
≤4
휅
훷푛+1 as witnessed by 퐹푛
∈휏(훷푛+1).
For any inﬁnite linear order 퐼we can choose 푀푛= EM(퐼푛, 훷푛) with skele-
ton ⟨푎푛
푡
: 푡∈퐼⟩. Let 휏휔= ∪{휏(훷푛) : 푛< 휔}. Without loss of generality
푀푛⊆푀푛+1 ↾휏(훷푛), 퐹푀푛+1
푛
(푎푛+1
푡
) = 푎푛
푡and 퐹푀푛+1
푛
(푎푛
푡) = 푎푛+1
푡
. For each 푛we
deﬁne 푀휔,푛= ∪{푀푛+푘↾휏푛: 푘∈[푛, 휔)}, so 푛1 < 푛2 ⇒푀휔,푛1 = 푀휔,푛2 ↾
휏(훷푛1). Hence letting 휏휔= ∪{휏(훷푛) : 푛< 휔} there is a 휏휔-model 푀휔with
universe |푀휔,0| such that 푀휔↾휏푛= 푀휔,푛for 푛< 휔. Now deﬁne 훷by
훷(푛) = tpqf(⟨푎0
푡0, . . . , 푎0
푡푛−1⟩, 0, 푀휔) whenever 푡0 <퐼. . . <퐼푡푛.
Clearly 푀휔= EM(퐼, 훷) with skeleton ⟨푎0
푡: 푡∈퐼⟩and 퐹푛−1 ∘. . . ∘퐹1 ∘퐹0 witness
훷푛≤4
휅훷휔, here we need composition of unary functions.
□3.14
Claim 3.15. For 푀∈퐾k of cardinality 휅≥LSTk + |휏k| the following conditions are
equivalent:
(푎) 훶or
휅[k푀]
̸= 0
(푏) for every 휆≥휅there is 푁such that 푀≤k 푁∈퐾k
휆
(푐) for every 훼< (2휅)+ there is 푁∈퐾k
≥ℶ훼which ≤k-extend 푀
(푑) there is 훷∈훶or
휅[k푀] such that if 푁= EM(퐼, 훷) and 푁↾휏k푀is standard then
푀= (푁↾휏k) ↾{푐푁: 푐∈휏훷an individual constant}
(푒) 훶sor
휅[k푀] is non-empty.
Proof.. For (d) note that we can replace an individual constant by a unary func-
tion which is interpreted as being a constant function. More generally an 푛-place
function 퐹푁by functions 퐹1, 퐹2 where
–
퐹1 is a (푛+ 1)-place function
–
if ̄푎= ⟨푎ℓ: ℓ≤푛⟩∈푛+1푁\푛+1푀then 퐹2( ̄푎) = 퐹푁( ̄푎↾푛)
–
if ̄푎∈푛+1푀then 퐹1( ̄푎) = 푎0
□3.15
Claim 3.16. If (A) then (B) when:
(퐴) (푎) 푀1 ≤k 푀2

386
|
Saharon Shelah
(푏) 훷1, 훹1 are from 훶sor
휅[k푀1] so are 휅-standard
(푐) 훹2 ∈훶sor
휅[k푀2]
(푑) 훷1 ≤4
휅훹1
(푒) 훹1 ≤1
휅훹2
(푓) {푐푎: 푎∈푀2} ∩휏(훹1) = {푐푎: 푎∈푀1}
(퐵) there is 훷2 such that
(푎) 훷2 ∈훶sor
휅[k푀2]
(푏) 훷1 ≤1
휅훷2
(푐) 훷2 ≤4
휅훹2.
Proof.. Straightforward: let 퐼be an inﬁnite linear order, 푀2 = EM(퐼, 훹2) be with
skeleton ⟨푎2
푡
: 푡∈퐼⟩. Let the unary function symbol 퐹witness 훷1 ≤4
휅훹1 so
퐹∈휏(훹1) ⊆휏(훹2) and let 푎1
푡= 퐹푀2(푎2
푡). Clearly ⟨푎1
푡: 푡∈퐼⟩is indiscernible
for quantiﬁer formulas in 푀2 and generate it hence for some 훷2 ∈훶or
휅we have
푀2 = EM(퐼, 훷2) with skeleton ⟨푎1
푡: 푡∈퐼⟩. Clearly 훷2 ∈훶sor
휅[k]. Also 훷2Eæ훷2 hence
훷2 ≤4
휅훹2 and 훷1 ≤⊕
휅훷2 as required.
□3.16
∗∗∗
The following will be used when applied to a tree of approximations to embedding
of EM-models to a model. In fact, we use only 3.18 for the case S = T \ max(T ),
see background in 3.19.
Deﬁnition 3.17. 1.
We say i = (T , ̄I) = (Ti, ̄Ii) is pit (partially idealized tree)
when :
(푎) T is a tree with ≤휔levels and
–
for transparency it is a set of ﬁnite sequences ordred by ⊲, closed un-
der initial segments
–
let lev(휂, T ) = levT (휂) be the level of 휂∈T in T , that is |{휈∈T :
휈⊲휂}|
–
let rtT be the root
–
the 푛-level of T is the set {휂: levT (푛) = 푛} so we have
–
levT (휂) = ℓ푔(휂) and rtT = ⟨⟩
(푏) I = ⟨I휂: 휂∈S ⟩where S ⊆T \ max(T ), we may write Si = S
(푐) I휂is an ideal on sucT (휂) := {휌: 휈∈T , 휂<T 휌and there is no 휈∈T
satisfying 휂<T 휈<T 휌} or just an ideal on a set which ⊇sucT (푛) such
that sucT (휂) ∉I휂; we may write Ii,휂.
1A. If I휂= {{푠: 휂^⟨푠⟩∈푋} : 푋∈I耠
휂} for some ideal I耠
휂on some set then abusing
notation we may write I耠
휂instead of I휂.
2.
Let (T1, ̄I1) ≤(T2, ̄I2) when (each is a pit and):

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
387
(푎) T1 ⊆tr T2 which means:
(훼) 휂∈T2 ⇒휂1 ∈T1 ∧lev(휂, T2) = lev(휂, T1) ∧suc(휂, T2) ⊆suc(휂, T1)
(훽) ≤T1=<T2↾T1
(푏)
̄I2 = ̄I1 ↾T2, i.e. ̄I1 ↾{휂∈T1 : 휂∈Dom(I1) and 휂∈I2}
(푐) if 휂∈T2\Si2 then suc(휂, T2) = suc(휂, T1).
2A. Let (T1, ̄I1) ≤pr (T2, ̄I2) when (each is a pit and)
(푎), (푏), (푐) as above
(푑) if 휂∈Dom( ̄I2) then sucT1(휂)\sucT2(휂) ∈I1,휂.
3.
We say (T , ̄I) is 휅-complete when every ideal I휂is.
4.
For i = (T , ̄I) we deﬁne Dpi = DpT , ̄I : T →Ord∪{∞} by (stipulate ∞+1 = ∞)
deﬁning when DpT , ̄I(휂) ≥훼by induction on 훼as follows:
(푎) if 휂∈max(T ) then 퐷T ,I(휂) ≥훼iﬀ훼= 0
(푏) if 휂∈T \ max(T ) and 휂∈Si = Dom( ̄I) then DpT ,I(휂) ≥훼iﬀ(∀훽<
훼)(∃푋⊆sucT (휂))[푋∈I+
휂∧(∀휈∈푋)(Dp(T , ̄I)(휈) ≥훽)]
(푐) if 휂∈T \ max(T )\Si then Dpi(휂) ≥훼iﬀ(∀휈)(휈∈sucT (휂) ⇒Dpi(휈) ≥
훼).
6.
If i = (T , ̄I) is a pit and 휂∈T let proj(휂, i) = proji(휂) is the sequence 휈of
length ℓ푔(휂) such that:
–
ℓ< ℓ푔(휂) ∧휂↾ℓ∈Dom( ̄I) ⇒휈(ℓ) = −1
–
ℓ< ℓ푔(휂) ∧휂↾ℓ∉Dom( ̄I) ⇒휈(ℓ) = 휂(ℓ).
7.
For i = (T , ̄I) a pit let proj(푛, i) = proji(푛) = {proji(휂) : 휂∈T has length 푛} and
proji = proj(i) is ∪{proji(휂) : 휂∈T }.
8.
If iℓis a pit for ℓ< 푛then
(푎)
∗
∏
ℓ<n
Tiℓis { ̄휂:
̄휂= ⟨휂ℓ: ℓ< n⟩is such that ℓ< n ⇒휂ℓ∈Tiℓand moreover
for some 푛called lev( ̄휂) we have (∀ℓ< n)(levTi(ℓ)(휂ℓ) = 푛)}.
Theorem 3.18. There are a pit i2 and ⟨푐휂: 휂∈proj(i1)⟩such that: i1 ≤i2, Dpi2(rti2) ≥
훾2 and 휂∈Ti2 ⇒c(휂) = cproj(휂,i1) when :
(푎) i1 = (T1, ̄I1) is a pit
(푏) i1 is 휆-complete pit
(푐) 2휅휃< 휆where 휃= |proji1|, 휅+ 휃is inﬁnite for transparency8
(푑) c is a colouring of T1 by ≤휅colours
(푒) 훾1 = 훾2 = (2(휅휃))+ or just
(훼) 훾1 ≤Dpi1(rti1), 훾1 is a regular cardinal,
(훽) 훾2 has coﬁnality > 휅휃and 훾< 훾2 ⇒|훾|휅휃< 훾1.
8 If 휅and 휃are ﬁnite, the computations are somewhat diﬀerent. Note that 휅= 0 is impossible
and if 휅= 1 then i2 = i1 will do so, without loss of generality 휅≥2.

388
|
Saharon Shelah
Remark 3.19. 1.
This relates on the one hand to the partition theorem of [Sh:f,
Ch.XI] continuing Rubin-Shelah [RuSh:117], Shelah [Sh:f, Ch.XI] and on the
other hand to Komjath-Shelah [KoSh:796]; the latter is continued in Gruenhut-
Shelah [GhSh:909] but presently this is not used.
2.
Now 3.18 is what we use but we can get a somewhat more general result - see
3.21.
3.
In 3.18 the case 훾1 = 훾2 > |T1| is equivalent to 훾1 = 훾2 = ∞.
Proof.. Let C = { ̄푐:
̄푐= ⟨푐∈ܚ :ܚproji1⟩, 푐<> = c(rt(T1)) and where 푐∈ܚRang(c)
or just (∃휂∈T1)(=ܚproji2(휂) ∧푐=ܚc(휂))}. For transparency without loss of
generality we assume Rang(c ↾max(Ti1)), Rang(c ↾(Ti1\ max(Ti1)) are disjoint.
Clearly |C | ≤휅|proj(i1)| = 휅휃< 휆.
Fix for a while ̄푐∈C , ﬁrst let T ̄푐= {휂∈T1: if 휈⊴휂then c(휈) = cproj(휈,i1)} so a
subtree of T1, i.e. a downward closed subset noting that rtT1 ∈T ̄푐.
Second, for 휂∈T1, let 푋1
̄푐,휂be sucT ̄푐(휂) if 휂∈T ̄푐∩Dom( ̄I1) and this set is ∈I1,휂
and be 0 otherwise. Let T 耠
̄푐
= {휂∈T ̄푐: if ℓ< ℓ푔(휂) and 휂↾ℓ∈Dom(I1) then
휂↾(ℓ+ 1) ∉푋1
̄푐,휂, i.e. sucT ̄푐(휂↾ℓ) := {휈∈sucT1(휂) : 휈∈T ̄푐}
̸= 0 mod I1,휂}, again
T 耠
̄푐is a subtree of T ̄푐, moreover i2, ̄푐= (T 耠
̄푐, ̄I ↾T 耠
̄푐) is a pit.
Third, for 휂∈T 耠
̄푐, Dpi1(휂) ∈Ord ∪{∞} is well deﬁned and, now for 휂∈T1,
let 푋2
̄푐,휂be {휈∈sucT 耠
̄푐(휂) : Dpi2, ̄푐(휈) ≥Dpi2, ̄푐(휂)} = 0 mod I1,휂} if 휂∈T 耠
̄푐∩
Dom( ̄I1), Dpi2, ̄푐(휂) < ∞and be 0 otherwise.
If for some
̄푐∈C , Dpi2, ̄푐(rtT 耠
̄푐) ≥훾2 easily we are done, so toward a con-
tradiction assume this is not the case, so recalling cf(훾2) > |C | clearly 훾∗=
sup{Dpi2, ̄푐(rtT 耠
̄푐) + 1 : ̄푐∈C } < 훾2. Now for each 휂∈Dom( ̄I1) clearly all 푋1
̄푐,휂, 푋2
̄푐,휂are
from I1,휂and their number is ≤2|C | < 휆hence 푋휂:= ∪{푋1
̄푐,휂∪푋2
̄푐,휂: ̄푐∈C } belong
to I1,휂.
Hence i3 is an pit and i1 ≤i3 where i3 = i(3) := i1 ↾{휂∈T1: if ℓ< ℓ푔(휂) and
휂↾ℓ∈Dom( ̄I1) then 휂↾(ℓ+ 1) ∉푋휂}; moreover by the deﬁnition of Dpi3 and the
choice of i3, clearly
(∗)1 (푎) i3 is a pit; moreover i1 ≤pr i3 hence
(푏) 휂∈Ti3 ⇒Dpi3(휂) = Dpi1(휂).
Deﬁne ℎby
(∗)2 ℎis a function from Ti1 × C deﬁned by
–
ℎ(휂, ̄푐) is −1 if 휂∈Ti1\T 耠
̄푐
–
ℎ(휂, ̄푐) is Dpi2, ̄푐(휂) if 휂∈T 耠
̄푐and Dpi2, ̄푐(휂) < 훾∗
–
Dp(휂, ̄푐) = 훾∗if none of the above.
We now choose (c푛, ℎ푛, X푛,
̄Y푛, S푛) by induction on 푛such that:
⊞
(푎) (훼) X푛is a subset of ∪{proji1(푚) : 푚≤푛}

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
389
(훽) if 푛= 푘+ 1 then X푘= X푛∩(∪{proji1(푚) : 푚≤푘})
(훾) S푛⊆X푛
(푏) (훼) ℎ푛is a function with domain X푛× C to 훾∗+ 1
(훽) c푛is a function from X푛to Rang(c)
(푐)
̄Y푛= ⟨Y푛,훾: 훾< 훾1⟩
(푑) (훼) Y푛,훾is a subset of Ti3, downward closed of cardinality ≤휃
(훽) if 휂∈Y푛,훾then ℓ푔(휂) ≤푛
(훾) if 휂∈Y푛,훾then Dpi3(휂) = Dpi1(휂) ≥훾
(훿) if 휂∈Y푛,훾and ℓ푔(휂) < 푛and 휂∉Dom( ̄I1) then sucTi3 (휂) = sucTi1 (휂) is
⊆Y푛,훾
(휀) if 휂∈Y푛,훾and ℓ푔(휂) < 푛and 휂∈Dom( ̄I1) then sucTi3 (휂) is a singleton
(휁) if 훾< 훾2 then X푛= {proji1(휂) : 휂∈Y푛,훾}
(휂) if 휂∈Y푛,훾and 휈= proji3(휂) then :
∙1
c(휂) = c푛(휈)
∙2
ℎ푛(휈, ̄푐) = ℎ(휂, ̄푐) for every ̄푐∈C
∙3
휂∈Dom( ̄I1) iﬀ휈∈S푛.
(휃) follows: the function 휂㨃→proji3(휂) on Y푛,훾is one to one.
Why this is possible:
For 푛= 0 this is trivial.
For 푛= 푚+ 1 for every 훾< 훾1, choose ̄ܚ푛,훾∈훱{sucTi3 (휂) : 휂∈Y푚,훾+1, ℓ푔(휂) =
푚, 휂∈Dom( ̄I1)} such that if 휂∈Dom( ̄ܚ푛,훾) then dpi1(휂) ≥훾, possible as 휂∈
Dom( ̄ܚ푛,훾) ⇒dpi1(휂) ≥훾+ 1. Let Y 耠
푛,훾= Y푚,훾+1 ∪{휈: for some 휂∈Y푛,훾+1 we
have ℓ푔(휂) = 푚and we have 휂∉Dom( ̄I1) ⇒휈=ܚ푛,훾(휂) and 휂∉Dom( ̄I1) ⇒휈∈
sucTi3 (휂)} ∪Rang( ̄ܚ푛,훾).
Let X 耠
푛,훾= {proji1(휂) : 휂∈Y 耠
푛,훾} and let the function c耠
푛,훾: X 耠
푛,훾→Rang(c)
be deﬁned by 휂∈Y 耠
푛,훾⇒c耠
푛,훾(proji3(휂))) = c(휂), well deﬁned as in ⊞(푑)(휂) and let
S푛,훾= {proji1(휂) : 휂∈Y 耠
푛,훾and 휂∈Dom( ̄I1)}. Let ℎ푛,훾: X 耠
푛,훾→훾∗+ 1 be deﬁned by
: if ̄푐∈C , 휈= proji2, ̄푐(휂) and 휂∈Y푛,훾then 휂∉T 耠
̄푐⇒ℎ푛,훾(휈) = 훾, 휂∈T 耠
̄푐⇒ℎ푛,훾(푣) =
Dpi2, ̄푐(휂).
Now X 耠
푛,훾is a subset of proji1, a set of cardinality ≤휃and c耠
푛,훾is a funtion
from X 耠
푛,훾into Rang(c), a set of cardinality ≤휅and ℎ푛,훾is a function from X 耠
푛,훾⊆
proji1 into 훾∗. But 훾∗< 훾2, 훾∗+ 휅< 훾1, 훾1 is a regular cardinal (recalling clause
(e) of the theorem) and (|훾∗| + 휅)휃< cf(훾1) = 훾1 hence for every 훾< 훾1 we have
|{(푋耠
푛,훾, c푛,훾, ℎ푛,훾) : 훾< 훾1}| ≤2휃⋅휅휃⋅|훾∗|휃< cf(훾1) = 훾1 hence for some c푛, ℎ푛, X푛the
set 푆푛:= {훾< 훾1 : c耠
푛,훾= c푛and ℎ푛,훾= ℎ푛, X 耠
푛,훾= X푛and S푛,훾= S푛} is unbounded
in 훾1.
Lastly, let Y푛,훾= Y 耠
푛,min(푆푛\훾), clearly c푛+1, ℎ푛+1, ⟨Y푛,훾: 훾< 훾2⟩are as required;
so we can carry the induction.

390
|
Saharon Shelah
Why this is enough:
Let X = ∪{X푛: 푛< 휔} ⊆proj(i1) and S = ∪{S푛: 푛< 휔} and c = ∪{c푛: 푛< 휔}
and h = ∪{ℎ푛: 푛< 휔} so by ⊞(푑)(휂) clearly there is ̄푐∗∈C such that 푐∗
=ܚc()ܚ
when the latter is deﬁned, so:
⊙1
if 푛< 휔, 훾< 훾1, 휂∈Y푛,훾and 휈= proj(i1) ∈X then
(푎) c(휂) = c푛(proji1(휂))
(푏) Dpi2, ̄푐(휂) = ℎ(휂, ̄푐) = ℎ푛(휈, ̄푐)
(푐) Dpi1(휂) ≥훾
Also
⊙2
X ⊆proji1 is a set of ﬁnite sequences, closed under initial segments with no
⊲-maximal member.
[Why? Straight, e.g. if 휈∈푋choose 푛= ℓ푔(휈) + 2 let 훾< 훾1 and choose 휂∈Y푛,훾+1
such that proji1(휂) = 휈, now by clause (c) of ⊙1 we know that Dpi1(휂) ≥훾+1, hence
there is 휂1 ∈sucTi1 (휂) in Y푛,훾+1 hence 휈1 = proji1(휂1) is in sucX (휈), i.e. successor of
휂in X푛+1 hence in X .]
⊙3
if 휈∈X then h(휈, ̄푐)
̸= −1.
[Why? Let 푛> ℓ푔(휈), let 훾< 훾2. Now by ⊞(푑)(휁) there is 휂∈Y푛,훾such that proji1(휂) =
휈.
Next by (∗)2 we have ℎ(휂, ̄푐) is -1 iﬀ휂∉T 耠
̄푐. However, 휂∈T ̄푐by the deﬁnition
of T ̄푐and the choice of ̄푐and ⊞(푑)(휂); moreover 휂∈T 耠
̄푐by the deﬁnition of T 耠
̄푐
and of i3 and clause ⊞(푑)(훼).
By the last two sentences ℎ(휂, ̄푐)
̸= −1 hence by the choice of 휂, i.e. as proji1(휂) =
휈, clause ⊞(푑)(휂) tells us h(휈, ̄푐) = ℎ(휂, ̄푐) so together h(휈, ̄푐)
̸= −1 as promised.]
⊙4
0 ≤Dpi2, ̄푐(⟨⟩) < 훾∗hence h(<>, ̄푐) < 훾∗.
[Why? Similarly using ⊞(푑)(휂)∙3.]
⊙5
if 휈∈X \S and 0 ≤h(휈, ̄푐) < 훾∗then for some 휌∈sucX (휈) we have 0 ≤
h(휌, ̄푐) < h(휈, ̄푐) < 훾∗.
[Why? Similarly using ⊞(푑)(훿).]
⊙6
if 휈∈S (⊆X ) and 0 ≤h(휈, ̄푐) < 훾∗then for the unique 휌∈sucX (휈) we have
0 ≤h(휌, ̄푐) < h(휈, ̄푐) < 훾∗.
[Why? Similarly using ⊞(푑)(휀).]
By ⊙4, ⊙5, ⊙6 together we get a contradiction.
□3.18
We may prefer the following variant of 3.18.

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
391
Deﬁnition 3.20. For a pit i = (T , ̄I) and partition
̄S = (S0, S1) of Si (or just
̄S = (S0, S1) such that S0 ∩S1 = 0 and Si ⊆S0 ∪S1) we deﬁne Dpi,S : T →
Ord ∪{∞}, stipulating ∞+ 1 = ∞by deﬁning when Dpi,휆(휂) ≥훼by induction on
the ordinal 훼(compare with 3.17(4)):
(푎) if 휂∈max(T ) then Dpi,휆(휂) ≥훼iﬀ훼= 0
(푏)0 if 휂∈S0 hence 휂∈S , 휂∉max(T ) then Dpi,
̄
S (휂) ≥훼iﬀfor every 훽< 훼the
set {휈∈sucT (휂) : Dpi,
̄
S (휈) ≥훽} belong to I+
휂
(푏)1 if 휂∈S1 then Dpi,
̄
S (휂) ≥훼iﬀ{휈∈sucT (휂) : Dpi,
̄
S (휈) ≥훼} belongs to I+
휂
(푐) if 휂∈T \S \ max(T ) then Dpi,
̄
S (휂) ≥훼iﬀfor every 휈∈sucT (휂) we have
Dpi,
̄
S (휂).
Theorem 3.21. There are a pit i2 and
̄푐= ⟨푐휂: 휂∈proj(i1)⟩such that i1 ≤
i2, Dpi2,
̄
S (rti2) ≥훾2 and 휂∈Ti2 ⇒c(휂) = cproj(휂,i1) when :
(푎) −(푒) as in 3.18 replacing Dpi2 by Dpi2,
̄
S in (푒)(훼)
(푓)
̄S = (S0, S1) is a partition of Si.
Proof.. Similarly.
□3.21
4 Approximation to EM models
In the game below the protagonist tries to exemplify in a weak form that the stan-
dard EM휏(k)(휆, 훷) is ≤k-embeddable into 푁over 푀. We may consider games in
which the protagonist tries to exemplify a weak form of isomorphism, this is con-
nected to logics which have EM models, continuing [Sh:797], but not for now.
Here we do not try to get the best cardinal bounds; just enough for the result
promised in the abstract.
Deﬁnition 4.1. Assume 휆> 휅≥LSTk + |휏k| and 푀∈퐾k
휅and 푀≤k 푁and 훾is an
ordinal.
1.
We say 훷is an (푀, 휆, 휅, 훾)-solution of 푁or is an (푁, 푀, 휆, 휅, 훾)-solution when
훷∈훶sor
휅(k푀) and in the game ⅁1
푁,푀,휆,훷,훾the protagonist has a winning strategy.
2.
Assume 훷∈훶휅(k푀) recalling Deﬁnition 3.1 ﬁxing 푀휆= EM(휆, 훷) and 푀퐼=
EM(퐼, 훷) for 퐼⊆휆and without loss of generality every 푀퐼(equivalently some
푀퐼) is standard, hence in particular 푀≤k 푀퐼↾휏(k). We deﬁne the game
⅁1
푁,푀,휆,훷,훾, a play last < 휔moves, in the 푛-th move 휆푛, 퐽푛, ̄ℎ푛, 훾푛are chosen such
that:
⊞푛(푎) 휆0 = 휆
(푏) if 푛= 푚+ 1 then 휅< 휆푛< 휆푚moreover 휆푚→(휆푛)푛
2휅
(푐) 퐽0 = 휆, and if 푛= 푚+ 1 then 퐽푛⊆퐽푚
(푑) |퐽푛| = 휆푛

392
|
Saharon Shelah
(푒)
̄ℎ푛= ⟨ℎ푢: 푢∈[퐽푛]푛⟩
(푓) if 푢∈[퐽푛]푛then ℎ푢is a ≤k-embedding of 푀푢into 푁extending ℎ푣
whenever 푣⊆푢
[Explanation: note if 푣⊂푢, |푣| = 푚then 푣∈[퐽푛]푚⊆[퐽푚]푛hence ℎ푣was deﬁned; this says
then for 푢1, 푢2 ∈[퐽푛]푛, ℎ푢2, ℎ푢2 are compatible functions]
(푔) 훾0 = 훾and 훾푛+1 is an ordinal < 훾푛.
In the 푛-th move:
(퐴) if 푛= 0 the antagonist chooses 휆0 = 휆, 퐽0 = 휆, 훾0 = 훾and the protagonist
chooses ̄ℎ0
(퐵) if 푛= 푚+ 1 then
(푎) the antagonist chooses an ordinal 훾푛< 훾푚and 휆푛> 휅such that 휆푚→
(휆푛)푛
ℶ2(휅)
(푏) the protagonist chooses
̄ℎ耠
푛
=
⟨ℎ푢
:
푢
∈
[퐽푚]푛⟩and S푛
∈
(ER푛
퐽푚,휆푛,ℶ2(휅))+, i.e. S푛⊆[휆푚]휆푛and S푛is not from this ideal, see
Deﬁnition 3.5
(푐) the antagonist chooses 퐽푛∈S푛⊆[퐽푚]휆푛and we let ̄ℎ푛= ̄ℎ耠
푛↾[퐽푛]푛.
(퐶) the play ends when a player has no legal move and then this player loses.
Another presentation:
Deﬁnition 4.2. Assume 푀≤k 푁and LSTk + |휏k| ≤휃, ‖푀‖ + 휃≤휅< 휆and 훷∈
훶or
휃[푀, k].
1.
Below we omit 훾if (a) or (b), where:
(푎) 훾= cf(휆), 휆strong limit and 훼< cf(휆) ⇒|훼|2휅+‖푀‖ < cf(휆)
(푏) not (a) but 훾is maximal such that 훾= 휔훾is inﬁnite and ℶ훾(휅+ ‖푀‖) ≤휆
and 휆is strong limit of coﬁnality > ℶ2(휅)
(similarly in all such deﬁnitions).
2.
We say that x is a direct witness for (푁, 푀, 휆, 휅, 훾, 훷) when x consists of:
(푎) 푁, 푀, 훷, 휆, 휅and 훾
(푏) T is a non-empty set of ﬁnite sequences closed under initial segments
(푐) if 휂∈T then :
(훼) 휂(2푛) is a cardinal when 2푛< ℓ푔(휂)
(훽) 휂(2푛+ 1) is a subset of 휆of cardinality 휂(2푛) when 2푛+ 1 < ℓ푔(휂)
(훾) 휂(2푛+ 1) ⊇휂(2푛+ 3) when 2푛+ 3 < ℓ푔(휂)
(훿) 휂(2푛) ≥휂(2푛+2), moreover 휂(2푛) →(휂(2푛+2))2푛+1
ℶ2(휅) when 2푛+2 < ℓ푔(휂)
(푑) 퐼휂, 휆휂for 휂∈T are deﬁned by:
(훼) if ℓ푔(휂) = 0 then 퐼휂= 휆, 휆휂= 휆
(훽) if ℓ푔(휂) = 2푛+ 1 then 퐼휂= 퐼휂↾(2푛), see (훼) or (훾) and 휆휂= 휂(2푛)
(훾) if ℓ푔(휂) = 2푛+ 2 then 퐼휂= 휂(2푛+ 1), 휆휂= 휂(2푛) = 휆휂↾(2푛+1), see (훼) or
(훽)

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
393
(푒) if 휂∈T \ max(T ) has length 2푛+1 then: the set S휂= {퐼휈: 휈∈sucT (휂)} ⊆
[퐼휂]휆휂is not from the ideal ER⌊ℓ푔(휂)/2⌋
퐼휂,휆휂,ℶ2(휅)
(푓) if 휂∈T then:
(훼)
̄ℎ휂= ⟨ℎ휂,푢: 푢∈[퐼휂]≤⌊ℓ푔(휂)/2⌋⟩
(훽) ℎ휂,푢is a ≤k-embedding of EM휏(k)(푢, 훷) into 푁for 푢∈[퐼휂]≤⌊ℓ푔(휂)/2⌋
(훾) 푢1 ⊆푢2 ∈[퐼휂]≤⌊ℓ푔(휂)/2⌋⇒ℎ휂,푢1 ⊆ℎ휂,푢2
(훿) if 푢∈[퐼휂]≤⌊ℓ푔(휂)/2⌋and 휈⊲휂and ℓ푔(휈) ≥2|푢|, then ℎ휂,푢= ℎ휈,푢
(휀) if ℓ푔(휂) = 2푛+ 2 and 푢∈[퐼휂]≤푛then ℎ휂,푢= ℎ휂↾(2푛+1),푢
(휁) there is ̄푎=
̄푎x = ⟨푎훼: 훼< 휆⟩∈휆푁such that 훼∈푢∈[퐼휂]≤⌊ℓ푔(휂)⌋/2 +
ℎ휂,푢(훼) = 푎훼and ̄푎is with no repetitions
(푔) Dpx(<>) ≥훾where Dpx(휂) is deﬁned as Dpi(x)(휂), see Deﬁnition 3.17, where
i = i(x) = ix is deﬁned by:
–
Ti = T
–
Si = {휂∈T : 휂is not ⊲-maximal in T and ℓ푔(휂) is odd}
–
if 휂∈Si and ℓ푔(휂) is odd then Ii,휂= ER⌊ℓ푔(휂)⌋
퐼휂,휆휂,ℶ2(휅) recalling 3.17(1A)
–
if 휂∈Si and ℓ푔(휂) is even then Ii,휂= {0}.
Deﬁnition 4.3. 1.
We say x is a pre-k-witness of (푁, 푀, 휆, 휅, 훿) when it as in 4.2
omitting ̄ℎ, i.e. clause (f), so 푁, 푀are irrelevant.
2.
We say x is a semi-k-witness of (푁+, 푀, 휆, 휅, 훿) when : it consists of:
(푎) 푁+ expands a model from 퐾k, 푀≤k (푁+ ↾휏(k)), 휆≥휅≥(휏(푁+))
(푏) −(푒) as in 4.2(2)
(푓)
̄푎= ⟨푎훼: 훼< 휆⟩
(푔) as in 4.2(2).
Claim 4.4. 1.
The deﬁnitions 4.1, 4.2 are equivalent.
2.
In Deﬁnition 4.2, ix is indeed a pit.
3.
If 훷1Eai
휅훷2, 훷ℓ∈훶sor
휅[푀, k] for ℓ= 1, 2 and 훷1 has a (푁, 푀, 휆, 휅)-witness then 훷2
has a (푁, 푀, 휆, 휅)-witness.
Proof.. Straightforward.
□4.2
Claim 4.5. If 훷ℓ∈훶sor
휅[k푀], 휅≥휏(k) + ‖푀‖ and 푀ℓ= EM휏(k)(휆, 훷ℓ) for ℓ= 1, 2
and 휆is strong limit of coﬁnality 휇where 휇= (ℶ2(휅))+ or 휇is regular such that
(∀훼< 휇)(|훼|2휅< 휇) and the protagonist wins in the game ⅁1
푀2,푀,휆,훷1,휇(equivalently
some x is a witness for (푀2, 푀, 휆, 휅, 훷1)) then 훷1 ≤3
휅훷2, see Deﬁnition 3.12.
Proof.. Straightforward by 3.18 and the deﬁnitions of the ideal ER in 3.5. See de-
tails in a similar case in the proof of 4.6(1) below.
□4.5
Claim 4.6. Assume 푀≤k 푁, 휅≥‖푀‖+휃, 휃≥LSTk +|휏k| and ‖푁‖ ≥휆, 휆strong limit
of coﬁnality 휇and 휇= (ℶ2(휅))+ or 휇is regular such that (∀훼< 휇)(|훼|2휅< 휇).

394
|
Saharon Shelah
1.
There are x, 훷such that:
(푎) 훷∈훶sor
휃(k푀)
(푏) x is a direct witness of (푁, 푀, 휆, 휅, 훷).
2.
If 푀1 = 푀, 훷1 ∈훶sor
휃[k푀1] and x1 a direct witness for (푁, 푀1, 휆, 휅, 훷1) and 푀1 ≤k
푀2 ≤k 푁and ‖푀2‖ ≤휅then there are 훷2, x2 such that:
(푎) 훷2 ∈훶sor
휃[푀2]
(푏) 훷1 ≤1
휅훷2 and 훷1 ≤4
휅훷2
(푐) x2 is a direct witness (푁, 푀2, 휆, 휅, 훷2).
3.
If in part (1) we change the assumption on 휆to 휆= ℶ휔⋅훾(휅) then there are 훷, x
such that:
(푎) 훷∈훶sor
휅[푀, k]
(푏) x is a direct witness of (푁, 푀, 훷, 휆, 휅, 훾, 훷).
4.
Also part (2) has a version with (훾1, 훾2) as in 3.18.
Proof.. 1) Let ⟨푎훼: 훼< 휆⟩be a sequence of pairwise distinct members of 푁.
Now
(∗)1 let T be the set of ﬁnite sequences 휂satisfying clauses (b),(c) of Deﬁnition 4.2
(∗)2 let ̄I = ⟨I휂: 휂∈S ⟩where
–
S = {휂∈T : 휂is not ⊲-maximal in T }
–
if 휂∈S , ℓ푔(휂) = 2푛+ 1 then I휂= ER푛
퐼휂,휆휂,ℶ2(휅)
–
if 휂∈S and ℓ푔(휂) = 2푛then I휂= {0}, the trivial ideal
(∗)3 i1 = i(1) = (T , ̄I) is a pit and is (2휅)+-complete and Dpi1(<>) ≥(ℶ2(휅))+.
[Why? Just read Deﬁnition 3.17(3) and the ideal ER is from Deﬁnition 3.5 and it is
(2휅)+-complete by 3.6 and as for the depth recall 휇= (ℶ2(휅))+.]
(∗)4 Let 푀+ be such that:
(푎) 푀+ is an expansion of 푁
(푏) |휏(푀+)| ≤휅and 휏耠:= 휏(푀+)\{푐푎: 푎∈푀} has cardinality ≤휃
(푐) if 푀+
1 ↾휏耠⊆푀+ ↾휏耠then 푀+
1 ↾휏(k) ≤푀+ ↾휏(k)
(푑) |푀| = {푐푀+ : 푐∈휏(푀+)}.
[Why 푀+ exists? By the representation theorem, [Sh:88r, §1] except clause (d)
which as before is easy.]
We like to apply Theorem 3.18 but before this we need
(∗)5 there is a pit i2 = i(2) such that i(1) ≤pr i(2) (see 3.17(2A)) so Dpi(2)(휂) =
Dpi(1)(휂) for 휂∈Ti(2) and:
∙
if 휂∈Ti(2), ℓ푔(휂) = 2푛+1 and 휈∈sucTi(2)(휂) then ⟨푎훼: 훼∈휈(2푛+1)⟩is an 푛-
indiscernible sequence in 푀+ for quantiﬁer free formulas, may add: and
푁↾{휎휀(푎훼0, . . . , 푎훼푛−1) : 휀< 휁} ≤k 푁where 휁< 휅+ and 휎휀is a 휏(푀+)-term.

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
395
[Why such i(2) exists? By the deﬁnition of the ideal I휂, see (∗)2 above and by Deﬁ-
nition 2.14. That is, for 휂∈Dom(Ii1) of length 2푛+ 1 let 푋휂= {휈: 휈∈sucT (휂), ⟨푎훼:
훼∈휈(2푛+ 1)⟩is 푛-indiscernible in 푀+ for quantiﬁer free formulas}, recalling
Dom(Ii1,휂) = {푢⊆퐼휂: |푢| = 휂(2푛)}. By 3.5 clearly 푋휂= [휆휂]휂(2푛) mod ERn
휆휂,휂(2),ℶ2(휅),
see Deﬁnition 3.17(1A).
Now let T 耠= {휂∈T : if 2푛+ 1 < ℓ푔(휂) then 휂↾(2푛+ 2) ∈푋휂} and i2 = i1 ↾T 耠,
so clearly i1 ≤pr i2, see Deﬁnition 3.17(2A).]
Next
(∗)6 deﬁne a function c with domain Ti2 as follows:
–
if 휂∈T , ℓ푔(휂) = 2푛+2, then c(휂) is the quantiﬁer type in 푀+ of ⟨푎ℓ: ℓ< 푛⟩
for any 훼0 < 훼1 < . . . < 훼푛−1 from 휂(2푛+ 1)
–
if 휂∈T , ℓ푔(휂) = 2푛+ 1 or ℓ푔(휂) = 0, then c(휂) = 0.
Clearly
(∗)7 Rang(c) has cardinality ≤2휅= 2휅.
So by 3.18 (with a degenerate projection; so 휅, 휃there stands for 2휅, ℵ0 here):
(∗)8 there are i(3) = i3 ≥i2 and ⟨푐푛: 푛< 휔⟩such that:
(푎) 휂∈Ti3 ⇒c(휂) = 푐ℓ푔(휂)
(푏) Dpi3(<>) ≥ℶ2(휅).
The rest should be clear.
2) Similar proof, this time in 푀+ we have individual constants for every member
of 푀2 and we start with the witness x1 so 푋휂have fewer elements still positive
modulo the ideal.
3),4) Similarly.
□4.6
Deﬁnition 4.7. We say x is an indirect witness for (푁, 푀, 휆, 휅, 훾, 훷), recalling 4.2(1),
when for some 훹:
(푎) 푀, 푁, 휆, 휅, 훾, 훷are as in Deﬁnition 4.2
(푏) 훹∈훶sor
휅[k푀] and 훷≤4
휅훹, see Deﬁnition 3.12
(푐) x is a direct witness of (푁, 푀, 휆, 휅, 훾, 훹).
Remark 4.8. Why do we need the indirect witnesses? As if we use direct witness
only in the proof of 4.14 it is not clear how to get many non-isomorphic models.
Claim 4.9. Assume 퐼= 퐼휒is as in 2.15.
If (A) then (B) where:
(퐴) (푎) LSTk + |휏k| ≤휅< 휒1 < 휒2 < 휒3 ≤휒and for ℓ= 1, 2, 휒ℓ+1 is strong limit of
coﬁnality > ℶ2(휒ℓ)
(푏) 푁= EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷1) where 훷1 ∈훶sor
휅[푀1, k], ‖푀1‖ ≤휒1

396
|
Saharon Shelah
(푐) 푀2 ≤k 푁and ‖푀2‖ ≤휒1
(푑) 훷2 ∈훶sor
휅[푀, k]
(푒) 훷2 has a witness for (푁, 푀2, 휒2, 휅)
(퐵) (푎) 훷2 has a witness for (푁, 푀2, 휒3, 휅)
(푏) if in addition 푀2 ≤k 푀1 then 훷2 ≤3
휅훷1
(푐) we can ≤k-embed EM휏(k)(퐼휒, 훷2) into 푁.
Proof.. As in the proof of 4.6 recalling the choice of 퐼in 2.15; for (B)(c) we use
Clause (퐵)+ of 4.6.
□4.9
Remark 4.10. In fact, in 4.9, 휒2 = ℶ1,1(휒1) and 휒3 = ℶ휔훾(휒1) suﬃces so, of course,
in (B)(a) we use (푁, 푀1, 휒3, 휅, 훾).
Claim 4.11. If (A) then (B) where:
(퐴) (푎) 푀1 ≤k 푀2 ≤k 푁
(푏) (훼) 푀ℓhas cardinality 휅ℓ
(훽) ‖푁‖ ≥휆
(훾) 휅ℓ≥휅≥LSTk + |휏k|
(푐) 훷1 ∈훶sor
휅(푀1, k)
(푑) 휆is strong limit and cf(휆) = (ℶ2(휅2))+ or just (∀훼< cf(휆))(|훼|2휅< cf(휆))
(푒) x1 is an indirect witness for (푁, 푀1, 휆, 휅, 훷1)
(퐵) there are 훷2, x2 such that:
(푎) 훷2 ∈훶sor
휅(k푀2)
(푏) 훷1 ≤1
휅2 훷2
(푐) x2 is an indirect witness for (푁, 푀2, 휆, 휅2, 훷2).
Proof.. By clause (퐴)(푒) of the assumption and the deﬁnition of indirect witness
in 4.7 there is 훹1 such that:
(∗)1 (푎) 훹1 ∈훶or
휅1 [k푀1] which is standard
(푏) x1 is a direct witness of (푁, 푀1, 휆, 휅1, 훹1)
(푐) 훷1 ≤4
휅1 훹1.
By claim 4.6(2) there are x2, 훹2 such that
(∗)2 (푎) 훹2 ∈훶sor
휅2 [k푀2]
(푏) 훹1 ≤1
휅2 훹2
(푐) x2 is a direct witness of (푁, 푀2, 휆, 휅2, 훹2).
Lastly, by 3.16 applied to our 훷1, 훹1, 훹2 and get 훷2 such that
(∗)3 (푎) 훷1 ∈훶sor
휅[k푀2]
(푏) 훷1 ≤1
휅훷2
(푐) 훷2 ≤4
휅훹2.

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
397
So we have gotten Clause (B) as promised.
□4.11
Claim 4.12. If (A) + (B) then (C) where:
(퐴) (푎) 휆푛≥LSTk is strong limit, cf(휆푛) = (ℶ2(LSTk + 휆푚))+ if 푛= 푚+ 1
(푏) 휆= ∑
푛휆푛and 휆푛< 휆푛+1
(푐) 푁∈퐾k
휆
(푑) 푀푛≤k 푀푛+1 <k 푁and ‖푀푛‖ = 휆푛
(푒) 푁= ∪{푀푛: 푛< 휔}
(퐵) there is no 훷∈훶sor
휆[k푁], see 3.15
(퐶) for some 푛and 훷
(푎) 훷∈훶sor
휆푛[k푀푛]
(푏) there is an indirect witness9 for (푁, 푀푛, 휆푛+4, 휆푛, 훷푛)
(푐) there is no indirect witness for (푁, 푀푛, 휆푛+5, 휆푛, 훷푛).
Remark 4.13. 1.
Later we shall weaken (퐴)(푎).
2.
We may use 훶sor
휅[k푀푛] where 휆0 ≥휅≥LSTk + |휏k| in 4.11 and in 4.12, also in
4.14.
Proof.. We assume (퐴) + ¬(퐶) and shall prove ¬(퐵), this suﬃces. We try to choose
(훷푛, x푛) by induction on 푛such that:
⊗
(푎) 훷푛∈훶sor
휆푛[k푀푛]
(푏) {푐푎: 푎∈푁} ∩휏(훷푛) = {푐푎: 푎∈푀푛}
(푐) x푛is an indirect witness for (푁, 푀푛, 휆푛+4, 휆푛, 훷푛)
(푑) if 푛= 푚+ 1 then 훷푚≤1
휆푛훷푛.
Now
(∗)1 if we succeed to carry the induction then there is 훷∈훶sor
휆[k푁].
[Why? Note that 훷푛∈훶sor
휆푛[k푀푛] ⊆훶sor
휆푛[k] and as 휆푛≤휆clearly 훷푛∈훶sor
휆푛[k] ⊆훶sor
휆[k]
and so by 3.11(2) there is 훷∈훶휆[k] such that 푛< 휔⇒훷푛≤1
휆훷. Easily 푁is ≤k-
embeddable into every EM휏(k)(퐼, 훷), in fact, 훷∈훶휆[k푁], contradiction to clause
(B) of the assumption.]
(∗)2 we can choose (x푛, 훷푛) for 푛= 0.
[Why? By 4.6(1).]
(∗)3 if 푛= 푚+ 1 and we have chosen (x푚, 훷푚) then we can choose (x푛, 훷푛).
9 hence also a direct one; similarly in ⊗(푑) in the proof

398
|
Saharon Shelah
[Why? If there is no indirect witness y푚for (푁, 푀푚, 휆푚+5, 휆푚, 훷푚) we have got-
ten clause (C), so without loss of generality y푚exists. Now apply 4.11 with
(y푛, 푀푚, 푀푛, 휆푛+5, 휆푛) here standing for (x1, 푀1, 푀2, 휆, 휅, 훷1) there, so we get x푛, 훷푛
here stand for x2, 훷2 there.]
□4.12
Claim 4.14. We have ̇퐼(휇, 퐾k) ≥휒when :
⊕
(푎) LSTk + |휏k| ≤휅≤휒1 < 휒2 < 휒3 ≤min{휆, 휇}
(푏) 푀≤k 푁
(푐) ‖푀‖ ≤휅and ‖푁‖ ≥휆
(푑) 훷∈훶sor
휅[k푀]
(푒) x is an indirect witness for (푁, 푀, 휒2, 휒1, 훷)
(푓) there is no indirect witness for (푁, 푀, 휒3, 휒1, 훷)
(푔) 휒3 is strong limit of coﬁnality (ℶ2(휒2))+
(ℎ) 휒= |{휃: 휃= ℶ휃and 휃∈[휒1, 휒2]}|
Proof.. Let 훾∗be maximal such that ℶ휔⋅훾∗(휒1) ≤휒2. Let 훹∈훶sor
휅[k푀] be such that
훷≤4
휅훹and 훹has a direct witness for (푁, 푀, 휒2, 휒1, 훹) and choose such a witness
x.
Let 푀2 be such that 푀≤k 푀2 ≤k 푁and ‖푀2‖ = ℶ휔⋅훾∗(휒1) ≤휒2 and x is a direct
witness for (푀2, 푀, ℶ휔⋅훾(휒1), 휒1, 훾∗, 훹).
As 휒3 is strong limit of coﬁnality > ℶ2(휒2) there are 훷3 ∈훶sor
휅[k푀2] and y which
is a direct witness for (푁, 푀2, 휒3, 휒2, 훷3) and so 휏耠
훷3 = 휏(훷3)\{푐푎: 푎∈푀2} has
cardinality 휅. For each 훾< 훾∗there are 푀2,훾, x훾such that:
(∗)1 (푎) 푀2,훾≤k 푀2
(푏) ‖푀2,훾‖ is ≥ℶ휔⋅훾(휒1) but < ℶ휔⋅훾+휔(휒1); can get even ‖푀2,훾‖ = ℶ휔⋅훾(휒1)
(푐) x훾is a direct witness for (푀2,훾, 푀, ℶ휔⋅훾(휒1), 휒1, 훾, 훹).
[Why? Try by induction on 푘to choose 휂푘∈Tx such that ℓ푔(휂푘) = 2푘+ 1, 휂푘(2푘) ≥
ℶ휔⋅훾(휒1) and ℓ< 푘⇒휂ℓ⊲휂푘. For 푘= 0, clearly 휂푘= ⟨⟩is O.K., and as 휂ℓ(2ℓ) >
휂ℓ+1(2ℓ+ 2), necessarily for some 푘we have 휂푘but cannot choose 휂푘+1; let 퐴훾=
∪{Rang(ℎx
휂,푢) : 휂푘⊴휂∈Tx and 푢∈[퐼x
휂]⌊ℓ푔(휂)/2⌋} so 퐴훾⊆푀has cardinality 휂푘(2푘) ∈
[ℶ휔⋅훾(휒1), ℶ휔⋅훾+휔(휒1). Without loss of generality if 푁∗= EM(0, 훷3) is standard (i.e.
푀= 푁∗↾휏푀2) then 퐴훾is closed under the functions of 푁∗↾휏耠
훷3. Let 푀2,훾= 푀2 ↾
퐴훾; it is ≤k 푀and it satisﬁes clauses (a),(b) and include 퐴훾. Then we can easily
ﬁnd x훾as required in clause (c).]
Next we can ﬁnd y훾, 훷3,훾such that
(∗)2 (푎) y훾is a direct witness of (푁, 푀2,훾, 휒3, ‖푀2,훾‖, 훷3,훾)
(푏) 훷3,훾∈훶sor
휅[푀2,훾, k].

A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models
|
399
[Why? Recall 휏(훷3)\{푐푎: 푎∈푀2} has cardinality 휅. Let 휏2,훾= 휏(훷3)\{푐푎: 푎∈
푀2\푀2,훾} so has cardinality ‖푀2,훾‖, let 훷3,훾= 훷3 ↾휏2,훾, is as required in (∗)2(푘). As
for y훾we derived it form y.]
Now let 퐼= 퐼휇be a linear order of cardinality 휇as required in 2.15.
Lastly, let 푁훾= EM휏(k)(휇, 훷3,훾) be standard hence 푀2,훾≤k 푁훾∈퐾k
휇.
We choose 휕푖by induction on 푖such that: if 푖= 0 then 휕푖= 휒1, if 푖is limit then
휕푖= ∪{휕푗: 푗< 푖} and if 푖= 푗+ 1 then 휕푖= ℶℶ2(휕푗)+ when it is ≤휒2 and undeﬁned
otherwise. Let 휕푖be deﬁned iﬀ푖< 푖(∗) and let 훩= {휕푖+1 : 푖+ 1 < 푖(∗)}. Now |훩| ≥휒
so it suﬃces to prove that ⟨푁휃: 휃∈훩⟩are pairwise non-isomorphic.
So toward contradiction assume
(∗)3 휃1 < 휃2 are from 훩and 휋is an isomorphism from 푁휃2 onto 푁휃1.
We can ﬁnd 푀∗≤k 푁휃1 such that ‖푀∗‖ = 휃2 and 푀∪푀2,휃1 ∪휋(푀2,휃2) ⊆푀∗and
without loss of generality we can ﬁnd 퐼∗⊆휇of cardinality 휃2 such that 푀∗=
EM휏(k)(퐼∗, 훷3,휃1).
Let 퐼∗
1 ⊆퐼∗be of cardinality 휃1 such that
푀2,휃1 ∪휋(푀) ⊆푁耠
휃1 := EM휏(k)(퐼∗
1 , 훷3,휃1)
and let 푁耠
휃2 = 휋−1(푁耠
휃1). By 4.6(2) we can ﬁnd 훹耠∈훶sor
휅(푁耠
휃2, k) and x휃2 a witness for
(푀2,휃2, 푁耠
휃2, 휃2, 휅, 훹耠) such that 훹≤4
휅훹耠and x휃2 ≤x耠
휃2 where 휃2 = ℶ휔⋅훾2(휒1).
Now clearly 푁耠
휃1, 훹, 휋(훹耠), 휋(x耠
휃2) satisﬁes the parallel statements in 푁휃1. By
4.9(B)(a) and the choice of 퐼휇there is a witness for (푁휃1, 푁耠
휃1, 휒3, 휅, 휋(훹耠)), hence
applying 휋−1 there is a witness x耠耠
휃2 for (푁휃1, 푁耠
휃1, 휒3, 휅, 훹耠).
Hence by 4.9(B)(b), 훹耠≤3
휅훷3,휃2 but together 훷≤4
휅훹≤4
휅훹耠≤3
휅훷3,휃2 hence
훷≤3
휃2 훷3,휃2 by 3.14(1) so by 3.14(2), the last clause, there is 훷耠
3,휃2 ∈훷3,휃2/Eai
휃2 such
that 훷≤4
휃2 훷耠
3,휃2. But as 훷3,휃2 has a (푁, 푀2,휃2, 휒3, 휃2) witness by 4.4(3) also 훷耠
3,휃2 has
hence 훷has an indirect witness for (푁, 푀, 휒3, 휅), contradiction.
□4.14
Conclusion 4.15. Assume cf(휆) = ℵ0 and 휆= ℶ1,휆.
1.
If 휆>
̇퐼(휆, 퐾k) then 푀∈퐾k
휆⇒훶sor
휆[k푀]
̸= 0.
2.
If 휇≥휆>
̇퐼(휇, 퐾k) then 푀∈퐾k
휆⇒훶sor
휆[k푀]
̸= 0.
Moreover, at least one of the following holds:
(푎) for some 휒1 < 휆if 휒1 < 휒2 = ℶ2,훿≤min{휆, 휇} then |훿| ≤̇퐼(휇, 퐾k)
(푏) 훶sor
휆[k푀]
̸= 0 for every 푀∈퐾k
휆.
Theorem 4.16. The result from the abstract holds, that is, for every a.e.c. k for some
closed unbounded class C of cardinals we have (a) or (b) where
(푎) for every 휆∈C of coﬁnality ℵ0, ̇퐼(휆, 퐾) ≥휆
(푏) for every 휆∈C of coﬁnality ℵ0 and 푀∈퐾휆, for every cardinal 휅≥휆there is
푁휅of cardinality 휅extending 푀(in the sense of our a.e.c.).

400
|
Saharon Shelah
Proof.. Let 훩= {휇: 휇= ℶ2,훿and |훿| > ̇퐼(휇, 퐾k) for some limit ordinal 훿}.
Case 1: 훩is an unbounded class of cardinals.
So C = {휇: 휇= sup(휇∩훩)} is a closed unbounded class of cardinals. Easily
휇∈C ⇒휇= ℶ1,휇and by 4.15 + 3.15 for every 휇∈C, clause (b) of 4.16 holds.
Case 2: 훩is a bounded class of cardinals.
So by the deﬁnition of 훩, C = {휇: 휇> sup(훩), 휇= ℶ2,휇} is as required.
□4.16
Also
Theorem 4.17. For every aec k one of the following holds:
(푎) for some 휒we have 휒< 휇= ℶ2,휇⇒
̇퐼(휇, 퐾k) ≥휇and 휒< 휇= ℶ1,휔⋅훾⇒
̇퐼(휇, 퐾k) ≥|훾|
(푏) for some closed unbounded class C of cardinals we have cf(휆) = ℵ0 ∧휆∈
C ∧푀∈퐾k
휆⇒훶sor[푀, k]
̸= 0.
Proof.. Similarly to 4.16, using Fodor lemma for classes of cardinals.
□4.17
5 Concluding Remarks
Deﬁnition 5.1. For an ordinal 훾, 휏-models 푀1, 푀2 and cardinal 휆we deﬁne a game
⅁= ⅁휃,훾(푀1, 푀2). A play lasts less than 휔models is deﬁned as in [Sh:797, 2.1].
Claim 5.2. 1.
Assume cf(휆) = ℵ0 and 푀1, 푀2 are 휏-models of cardinality 휆. If the
isomorphism player wins in ⅁휆,훾(푀1, 푀2) for every 훾or just 훾< (2<휆)+ then
푀1, 푀2 are isomorphic.
1A. If above 휆is strong limit then “(2<휆)+ = 휆+”.
2.
Assume 휆is strong limit of coﬁnality 퐾= 퐾k and |휏k| + LSTk ≤휆and 퐾= {푀↾
휏: 푀　㨐휓} for some 휓∈L휆+,ℵ0.
If ̇퐼(휆, 퐾) ≤휆then for every 푀1 ∈퐾there is 푀2 ∈퐾≤휆such that the isomor-
phism player wins in ⅁휆,훾(푀1, 푀2) for every 훾.
Conjecture 5.3. For every a.e.c. k letting 휅= LSTk+|휏k|, at least one of the following
occurs:
(푎) if 휆= ℶ1,휆> 휅and cf(휆) = ℵ0, then 훶sor
휅[푀, k]
̸= 0
(푏) if 휆= ℶ1,휆> 휅and cf(휆) = ℵ0, then
̇퐼(휆, 퐾k) = 2휆.
Acknowledgement: The author would like to thank the Israel Science Foundation
for partial support of this research (Grant No. 242/03). Publication 893.
The author thanks Alice Leonhardt for the beautiful typing.

Bibliography
|
401
Bibliography
[Bal09] John Baldwin, Categoricity, University Lecture Series, vol. 50, American Mathematical
Society, Providence, RI, 2009.
[Dic85] M. A. Dickman, Larger inﬁnitary languages, Model Theoretic Logics (J. Barwise and
S. Feferman, eds.), Perspectives in Mathematical Logic, Springer-Verlag, New York Berlin
Heidelberg Tokyo, 1985, pp. 317–364.
[Sh:c] Saharon Shelah, Classiﬁcation theory and the number of nonisomorphic models, Stud-
ies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 92, North-Holland Publishing Co.,
Amsterdam, xxxiv+705 pp, 1990.
[Sh:f] Saharon Shelah, Proper and improper forcing, Perspectives in Mathematical Logic,
Springer, 1998.
[Sh:h] Saharon Shelah, Classiﬁcation Theory for Abstract Elementary Classes, Studies in
Logic: Mathematical logic and foundations, vol. 18, College Publications, 2009.
[Sh:i] Saharon Shelah, Classiﬁcation Theory for Abstract Elementary Classes 2, Studies in
Logic: Mathematical logic and foundations, vol. 20, College Publications, 2009.
[Sh:11] Saharon Shelah, On the number of non-almost isomorphic models of 푇in a power,
Paciﬁc Journal of Mathematics 36 (1971), 811–818.
[Sh:E46] Saharon Shelah, Categoricity of an abstract elementary class in two successive cardi-
nals, revisited, Chapter V of [Sh:i].
[Sh:E53] Saharon Shelah, Introduction and Annotated Contents, Chapter N of [Sh:h],
0903.3428.
[Sh:88r] Saharon Shelah, Abstract elementary classes near ℵ1, Chapter I of [Sh:h]. 0705.4137.
0705.4137.
[RuSh:117] Matatyahu Rubin and Saharon Shelah, Combinatorial problems on trees: parti-
tions, 훥-systems and large free subtrees, Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 33 (1987), 43–81.
[MMSh:318] Dugald Macpherson, Alan H. Mekler and Saharon Shelah, The number of inﬁnite
substructures, Math Proc Cambridge Philosophical Soc 109 (1991), 193–209.
[Sh:394] Saharon Shelah, Categoricity for abstract classes with amalgamation, Annals of Pure
and Applied Logic 98 (1999), 261–294, math.LO/9809197.
[Sh:576] Saharon Shelah, Categoricity of an abstract elementary class in two successive cardi-
nals, Israel Journal of Mathematics 126 (2001), 29–128, math.LO/9805146.
[Sh:600] Saharon Shelah, Categoricity in abstract elementary classes: going up inductively,
Chapter II of [Sh:h], math.LO/0011215.
[Sh:734] Saharon Shelah, Categoricity and solvability of A.E.C., quite highly, Chapter IV of
[Sh:h], 0808.3023.
[KoSh:796] Peter Komjath and Saharon Shelah, A partition theorem for scattered order types,
Combinatorics Probability and Computing 12 (2003, no.5-6), 621–626, Special issue on
Ramsey theory. math.LO/0212022.
[Sh:797] Saharon Shelah, Nice inﬁnitary logics, Journal of the American Mathematical Society
25 (2012), 395–427, 1005.2806.
[Sh:842] Saharon Shelah, Solvability and Categoricity spectrum of a.e.c. with amalgamation,
Preprint.
[Sh:849] Saharon Shelah, Beginning of stability theory for Polish Spaces, to be published in
Israel Journal of Mathematics.
A.E.C. with Not Too Many Models

402
|
Saharon Shelah
[GhSh:909] Esther Gruenhut and Saharon Shelah, Uniforming 푛-place functions on well
founded trees, Set Theory and Its Applications, Contemporary Mathematics (CONM), vol.
533, Amer. Math. Soc., 2011, 0906.3055, pp. 267–280.
[BaLaSh:1037] John Baldwin, Chris Laskowski and Saharon Shelah.
[Sh:1019] Saharon Shelah, Model theory for 휃-complete ultra-powers, Israel Journal of Mathe-
matics, submitted.
[Sh:F1273] Saharon Shelah, Categoricity spectrum for the atomic model of a countable 푇:
thoughts.
[Sh:F1302] Saharon Shelah, AEC with many models, in preparation.

Jouko Väänänen
Pursuing Logic without Borders
||
Jouko Väänänen: Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Helsinki, Finland,
and Institute for Logic, Language and Computation, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
1 Introduction
I am too young to have followed Mostowski’s inﬂuential lectures “Thirty Years of
Foundational Studies” at the Vaasa Summer University in 1964. However, when I
was a student I bought the book [22] from the Societas Philosophica Fennica oﬃce
in the House of the Estates, an imposing Neo-Renaissance building in the centre
of Helsinki. Like many in my generation, I was greatly impressed by the book.
Mostowski covers classical and non-classical logic, model theory and set theory,
recursion theory and proof theory, as if they really were all more or less equal areas
of logic. Now, 40 years later, I worry about logic having become too fragmented,
young researchers of each subﬁeld becoming so immersed in the internal ques-
tions of their ﬁeld that the connection to neighboring subﬁelds is eroded. This
may be necessary from a narrow perspective of solving ever more diﬃcult and
speciﬁc technical problems but it does not serve well the interdisciplinary goal
of logic. Logic should not have borders between its subﬁelds, but should rather
promote active movement and interaction across its diﬀerent parts.
In the early 1970s we had an improvised study group of logic in the Mathe-
matics Department of the University of Helsinki. One of the papers we read was
an early manuscript of [3], which we got because one of us, Seppo Miettinen, spent
a fall semester in Oslo, where Barwise was visiting. Seppo, who was my ﬁrst logic
teacher, got us all interested in extensions of ﬁrst order logic. We were persuaded
by the idea that model theory, set theory and recursion theory are just diﬀerent
approaches to the same goal, understanding deﬁnability. Indeed, in the times of
my student years there was a popular such approach, namely the theory of admis-
sible sets, which uniﬁed (inﬁnitary) model theory, (Kripke-Platek) set theory and
(generalized) recursion theory. A whole group of us went to Oslo to hear Ronald
Jensen’s lectures on admissible sets and forcing.
I found generalized quantiﬁers, inﬁnitary logics, and abstract model theory
very intriguing, and most of my research ever since has been on these topics. The
questions I studied led me more and more into set theory and I became identiﬁed

404
|
Jouko Väänänen
as a set theorist, although I consider myself also a model theorist, perhaps a “set-
theoretical model theorist”.
2 Generalized quantiﬁers
Early on I started to investigate the overall structure of generalized quantiﬁers.
One might say that quite arbitrary generalized quantiﬁers are not interesting be-
cause they do not occur “naturally”. But both the quantiﬁers that arise in com-
puter science, especially as database queries, and the quantiﬁers of natural lan-
guage can be so complex that the requirement of occurring “naturally” becomes
too restrictive. My ﬁrst paper on the structure of generalized quantiﬁers [27] was an
attempt to understand the diﬀerence between unary and binary generalized quan-
tiﬁers. Examples of unary quantiﬁers (of type (1)) are 푄1푥휙(푥), “there are uncount-
ably many 푥such that 휙(푥)”, and the (type (1,1)) Härtig-quantiﬁer 퐼푥푦휙(푥)휓(푦),
“There are as many 푥such that 휙(푥) as there are 푦such that 휓(푦)”. An example
of a binary quantiﬁer is 푄퐸
1 푥푦휙(푥, 푦), “휙(푥, 푦) deﬁnes an equivalence relation with
uncountably many classes”. I showed that the binary quantiﬁer 푄퐸
1 could not be
deﬁned in terms of unary quantiﬁers. At the same time Xavier Caicedo [5] devel-
oped back-and-forth techniques to get the same and better results. Later Xavier
became a close associate and brought me in touch with the Bogotá logic group
with which my own logic group has developed a fruitful interaction.
I struggled for a long time to ﬁnd a ternary quantiﬁer that cannot be deﬁned
in terms of binary ones. This may sound like a scholarly question of little prac-
tical importance, but attempts to solve this question forced us to sharpen our
tools and invent a method (the method of bijective games) which became much
more important than the original problem. The problem of binary versus ternary
quantiﬁers was eventually solved in co-operation with Michał Kynicki and Alis-
tair Lachlan [18]. The ternary quantiﬁer that we considered was able to compute
the dimension of a vector space and we showed that it cannot be accomplished
with binary quantiﬁers. Krynicki was my fellow student in Warsaw and became
a good friend and colleague. His early passing in 2011 was a great loss. Further
discussions with Lachlan helped me to develop a general method for proving
non-expressibility results for 푛-ary generalized quantiﬁers for any ﬁxed 푛. This
approach was perfected by my then student Lauri Hella [6] with his concept of
a bijective Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game. The fundamental idea is that of a bijection
between structures with 푛-predicates, which—without being an isomorphism—
preserves all deﬁnable predicates of fewer than 푛variables. Hella developed a
version of the Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game where some moves were such bijections.

Pursuing Logic without Borders
|
405
This became a trademark game of the Helsinki Logic Group with many applica-
tions, most notably the result of Hella that there is no logic for PTIME based on
generalized quantiﬁers of bounded arity type [7].
The corresponding question of the existence of unary quantiﬁers of unary
type (1, . . . , 1) not deﬁnable by unary quantiﬁers of smaller type needed com-
pletely diﬀerent methods and was solved in [23] by means of combinatorics. A
new Ramsey-type theorem was needed and was kindly provided by Noga Alon.
Ramsey theory is useful in Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé games because the diﬀerent types
of a player’s moves can be interpreted as a colouring of a structure, and knowing
that there is a large homogeneous set helps to decide what move to make. A player
can move so that whatever the opponent moves, she has still a large enough set of
good moves left. In ﬁnite models this is an intrinsically combinatorial question.
The completely general hierarchy result for generalized quantiﬁers of any
type was proved with a counting argument in [8], following a suggestion of Per
Lindström via Dag Westerståhl. Lindström’s idea was to count how many diﬀer-
ent quantiﬁers of a given type there are in a ﬁxed ﬁnite domain and then show
that they cannot all, for cardinality reasons, be deﬁnable in terms of quantiﬁers
of a given smaller type. There is a vague resemblance to the priority method and
the hierarchy of degrees of unsolvability. It seems possible to take this analogy
further and construct quantiﬁers with special relationships, such as minimality,
maximality, comparability, incomparability, etc, to other quantiﬁers. We are used
to thinking that generalized quantiﬁers should be familiar, such as “for all but
ﬁve” or the quantiﬁer in “most boys in my class and most girls in your class know
each other”, and quantiﬁers constructed by a priority-type argument ﬁt poorly
into this picture. But if we understand the general landscape of quantiﬁers, we
can try to position the familiar ones in this picture and thereby reveal their true
nature.
In 1981/1982 I was invited to two informal meetings for preparing the volume
[4], one in Freiburg and another in Stanford, both of them incredibly important
for me personally as I got to know and work with people I knew only by name,
such as Jon Barwise, Dana Scott, Sol Feferman, John Baldwin, Phokion Kolaitis
and many others. Around 1989 Kolaitis sent me an e-mail, probably one of the
ﬁrst e-mails I ever received, asking me about Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé games for gen-
eralized quantiﬁers, were they known and would they work on ﬁnite models. I got
very excited because the answer was very deﬁnitely positive and I had not come
to think of that possibility at all. Phokion then visited me in Finland in 1990 and
taught me and some other Finns, e.g. Hella, what ﬁnite model theory is really all
about. As it happens, the back-and-forth method, i.e. Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game,
extensively studied at that time in Helsinki, works perfectly well in ﬁnite models,
unlike most other methods of inﬁnite model theory. Moreover, the concept of gen-

406
|
Jouko Väänänen
eralized quantiﬁers and inﬁnitary logics were equally, if not more, relevant in the
ﬁnite context, than in the inﬁnite context.
I ended up writing the paper [16] with Kolaitis on generalized quantiﬁers. We
established the basic results on back-and-forth techniques, especially the pebble
game, in ﬁnite models in the presence of generalized quantiﬁers. We were led to
consider applications of Ramsey theory in ﬁnite model theory, a precursor to the
later applications of Ramsey theory to generalized quantiﬁers. Finite model the-
ory became one of my lasting interests. There is a curious similarity in the diﬃcul-
ties one faces when dealing with ﬁnite models on the one hand and uncountable
models on the other hand. In both cases one constructs models, not step by step
from smaller models, but by taking a vast collection of models of the desired size
and throwing out the ones that are unﬁt, hoping that something is left.
In 1993 Dag Westerståhl came to Helsinki for a month and gave us inspiring
lectures on generalized quantiﬁers in natural language. I had known Dag since
our student days when he was a student of Lindström in Gothenburg. These lec-
tures opened the world of mathematical linguistics to me. Our experience with
Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé games on models in Helsinki led to the papers [9] and [38] in
which several deﬁnability and hierarchy questions concerning generalized quan-
tiﬁers, motivated by natural language examples, were solved. I started to appre-
ciate the complexity of natural language, and would still like to contribute to the
mathematical modelling of it. Perhaps team semantics, the topic of Section 6, can
lead to some new ideas in this direction.
3 Härtig quantiﬁer
In my student days I stumbled on the Härtig quantiﬁer “there are as many 푥with
휙(푥) as there are 푦with 휓(푦)” and did not suspect at that time, if indeed anybody
did, how complicated it is. It turned out to be even more complicated, although
not more powerful, than full second order logic.
Second order logic is entangled with set theory in a precise way. For any ordi-
nal that second order logic can characterise, and such ordinals can be quite large,
e.g. bigger than measurable cardinals, second order logic is able to characterise
the cumulative hierarchy up to that level.
The entanglement of the Härtig quantiﬁer with set theory is much more subtle
in that it depends on set theory itself: in some models of set theory the Härtig
quantiﬁer is able to capture the cumulative hierarchy, in some models not. My ﬁrst
observation in this direction, following a hint from my supervisor Peter Aczel, was
that if 푉= 퐿then 퐿(퐼) is more or less the same as second order logic in that it can

Pursuing Logic without Borders
|
407
characterise the cumulative hierarchy 푉훼for very large ordinals 훼. Thus if 푉= 퐿,
and this is true of many other inner models as well, for example 퐿휇, the logic 퐿(퐼)
is totally (up to the level 훴2 in the Levy-hierarchy) entangled with set theory. The
technique I used was not new, it was essentially the argument behind Gödel’s
proof of GCH in 퐿, that is, Mostowski’s Collapsing Lemma and Levy’s Reﬂection
Principle.
My second observation, which took some time to mature, was that it is con-
sistent with ZFC that 퐿(퐼) is so far from second order logic that every consistent
퐿(퐼)-sentence has a model of smaller size than the continuum. In this case the cu-
mulative hierarchy 푉훼can be characterised in 퐿(퐼) only in the trivial case 훼≤휔.
Thus in my new models of set theory the logic 퐿(퐼) was free from symbiosis with
set theory and could have such model theoretic properties as small Löwenheim
number1, small (relatively speaking) Hanf number2, decision problem3 of as low
complexity as 훥1
3, etc. Thus in this case 퐿(퐼) was just an “iota” more complex than
the well-ordering quantiﬁer
푊푥푦휙(푥, 푦) ⇐⇒휙(⋅, ⋅) well-orders the universe.
My technique for obtaining these methods was to develop iterated forcing in or-
der to make the set-theoretical universe in a precise sense generically maximal
(see discussion below in Section 4). In such maximal universes, in a sense “fat”
universes, there are so many sets that being able to distinguish between cardinals
does not give much of a clue as to what the other sets are like. In Gödel’s 퐿subsets
of any ordinal are deﬁnable from ordinals of the same cardinality in an absolute
sense, so 퐿(퐼) knows in the end all sets.
My method of maximal universes left one problem unsolved: can the Löwen-
heim number of 퐿(퐼) be below the ﬁrst weakly inaccessible cardinal? I had shown
already in my doctoral thesis that if that was the case, then 0♯(and much more)
must exit. So one had to force over models with large cardinals. This however is
not the problem. The problem is that one has to collapse cardinals and at the same
time control the behaviour of 퐿(퐼). Thus one cannot use the preservation of 퐿(퐼)-
truth in the forcing in order to control the behaviour of 퐿(퐼). The diﬃculty of this
problem bewildered me for 30 years until Menachem Magidor came to visit me
in Helsinki and we attacked this problem. He came up with a method to collapse
1 The smallest cardinal 휅such that every sentence which has a model has a model of cardinality
≤휅.
2 The smallest cardinal 휅such that every sentence which has a model of cardinality ≥휅has
arbitrarily large models.
3 The set of Gödel numbers of valid sentences.

408
|
Jouko Väänänen
cardinals and at the same time leave gaps where cardinals are not collapsed. In
those gaps we could use preservation of 퐿(퐼)-truth. On the other hand, if we start
with a supercompact cardinal, we can stretch the gaps to any lengths we needed.
So the old problem was solved and we wrote the paper [19].
Upon learning little by little how entangled the Härtig quantiﬁer was with set
theory, I started to study a general theory of relationships between abstract logics
and set theory [29, 30, 31]. I developed the concept of “symbiosis” between an
abstract logic and a predicate of set theory. This enabled me to establish a perfect
equivalence between deﬁnability in set theory and deﬁnability in abstract logics.
The only diﬀerence that remains is that model theoretic deﬁnability is always up
to isomorphism while set theoretic deﬁnability is up to identity. An abstract logic
퐿∗is said to be “symbiotic” with a predicate 푃of set theory when (essentially) the
truth predicate of 퐿∗is 훥1(푃), and on the other hand a class of models canonically
derived from 푃is implicitly deﬁnable in 퐿∗.
4 Set theory
While I worked on my doctoral thesis in Manchester in the late 70s, I realised, as I
have related above, that I needed forcing to show that certain questions about the
Härtig quantiﬁer are undecidable on the basis of ZFC alone. My supervisor Peter
Aczel suggested to me to think in terms of Boolean valued extensions, rather than
forcing extensions. It was an eye-opener, although there is very little diﬀerence
between the forcing approach and the Boolean valued approach. Using Boolean
valued models I developed a method to construct forcing extensions with maxi-
mality properties, which would nowadays be called generic absoluteness proper-
ties. I worked entirely in the context of generalized quantiﬁers, but I had already
proved that an equivalent approach would be to work in set theory, as I wrote at
the end of Chapter 3, since powerful generalized quantiﬁers are in perfect sym-
biosis with predicates of set theory.
I met Jonathan Stavi in the Wrocław Logic Colloquium in August 1977. I had
given a talk on the result of my forth-coming doctoral dissertation, explaining my
construction of a forcing extension which satisﬁes in a maximal way properties
of the Härtig quantiﬁer preserved under 퐶퐶퐶-extensions. In particular this gave
a model of set theory in which the Löwenheim number of the Härtig-quantiﬁer is
below the continuum, rendering the continuum very large. The idea is that con-
tinuum is so large that it is closed under any “arithmetic” operations on cardinals
below it. Stavi had had similar ideas, not in model theory like myself, but directly
in set theory proper. We had extensive discussions, ﬁrst in Wrocław and then by

Pursuing Logic without Borders
|
409
correspondence during 1977/1978. This lead to the paper [24]. Although this paper
was written in the early 1980s, and the results were announced in [31] and [10],
also I lectured about the results during a tour of the US in the late 80s, the paper
circulated only in unpublished form for over twenty years. The reason was that it
was impossible to contact my co-author, who had meanwhile, as I later learnt, left
academia, and I did not want to publish the paper without the permission of my
co-author.
The generic maximality principle 푀퐴푋(퐶퐶퐶) we devised with Stavi says that
every predicate of set theory, with parameters of hereditary cardinality < 2휔, prov-
ably persistent under 퐶퐶퐶-forcing, which is true in some 퐶퐶퐶-extension, is actu-
ally true. Restricted to 훴1-predicates this means that for all 퐶퐶퐶Boolean algebras
B we have:
(퐻(2휔), ∈)푉≺(퐻(2휔), ∈)푉B,
which is equivalent to MA, a result that was subsequently but independently
proved by Joan Bagaria [2]. My recent work with Magidor [19] can be seen as
a continuation of [24], although we do not formulate our results in terms of
generic absoluteness. A particularly interesting result in [24] is that 푀퐴푋(퐶퐶퐶)
and 푀퐴푋(퐶), maximality of the universe with respect to Cohen algebras, are in
contradiction with each other. Although generic maximality has since caught en-
couragingly the attention of other researchers, the ﬁeld is far from exhausted.
5 Trees, games and models
In many ways 퐿휔1휔is the only inﬁnitary language with a nice model theory. Both
퐿휔2휔and 퐿휔1휔1 lead to the necessity to understand models of size ℵ1, which are
obviously much more complicated than countable models. My senior colleagues
and good friends Jaakko Hintikka and Veikko Rantala had suggested in [12] so
called “inﬁnitely deep languages” for the systematic study of uncountable mod-
els. I tried to understand how this would work and ended up using transﬁnite
Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé games rather than “inﬁnitely deep languages”. Obviously the
Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé game of length 휔1, let us denote it by EF휔1, characterises any
model of size ℵ1. But what is this game like? Very little was known about games
of length 휔1. My idea was to use the class T1 of trees of height 휔1 and with no
uncountable branches as analogues of ordinals. It was clear what the natural or-
dering of T1 should be: it is the existence of a strict order preserving mapping
(which need not be one to one). But it seemed that nobody had studied T1 under
this ordering. It later turned out that Kurepa had studied it and introduced the so
called 휎-operation 푇㨃→휎(푇) which then turned out to be the right notion. As my

410
|
Jouko Väänänen
then student Tapani Hyttinen realised, it is not enough, as in the case of count-
able models, to investigate trees of countable plays of EF휔1, but one should also
focus on trees of countable sequences of strategies of the second player in EF휔1.
Once this became clear a general inﬁnitary Scott sentence4-type analysis of un-
countable models started to emerge. The ﬁrst results were published in a paper
with Tapani Hyttinen [15].
I met Saharon Shelah for the ﬁrst time in the Clermont-Ferrand Logic Collo-
quium in July 1975, where Shelah gave lectures on stable theories. I had proved
some results about the compactness and Beth properties in abstract logics and
told them to Shelah, who to my disappointment already knew them, or ﬁgured
out the proofs on the spot. I have later over the years worked extensively with him
and learnt that one does not tell Saharon new results but rather new open prob-
lems. I share with Saharon an interest in abstract logic, generalized quantiﬁers,
inﬁnitary languages, and also transﬁnite Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé games, which She-
lah had come to consider independently of me.
I had visited Lachlan in Vancouver in the mid 80s and met Alan Mekler, who
became a close friend until his early passing in 1993. He saw immediately the
power of EF휔1 and the analogy between ordinals and T1. For several years we had
wondered whether EF휔1 could be non-determined in some models of cardinality
휔2 and Mekler solved this problem almost on the spot: If 푉= 퐿, then such models
exist among almost free abelian groups, a topic close to Alan’s heart. Then She-
lah got involved and proved that one can force a model over a measurable cardinal
and get the consistency of the determinacy of EF휔1 in all models of size ℵ2 [20].
On the other hand, I came to think that there are some basic principles in
uncountable models which have an almost topological ﬂavour, and I considered
the generalized Baire space 휔휔1
1 as an analogue of the classical Baire space 휔휔. I
proved a kind of Cantor-Bendixson theorem [32] and, with Alan Mekler, other ba-
sic results in this type of generalised descriptive set theory [21]. While the classical
descriptive set theory arises from the foundations of classical analysis, the new
generalized descriptive set theory of the non-separable generalized Baire spaces
2휔1 and 휔휔1
1
is motivated by model theory. It isolates purely set theoretical and
topological properties of uncountable models arising from the analysis of games
like EF휔1. Now, after 20 years, there is a delightful surge of interest in generalized
Baire spaces.
The natural ordering of the class of trees with no uncountable branches
turned out to be quite problematic and is still far from settled. I have written sev-
4 The Scott sentence of a countable model is an 퐿휔1휔-sentence which characterises the model
up to isomorphism.

Pursuing Logic without Borders
|
411
eral papers, e.g. [26] with Todorcevic, on the topic and continue to think about
it. A natural assumption in the study of T1 is CH, because then T1 is closed under
the 휎-operation. However, Todorcevic [25] used PFA to get strong structural results
about “Lipschitz” trees is T1. There is a strong connection between properties of
trees in T1, properties of models of cardinality ℵ1, and Shelah’s Main Gap theorem
in stability theory [14].
I wrote a monograph [36] on the topic of games and models, emphasising
what I call the Strategic Balance of Logic, by which I mean the fact that the
three games of logic, the Semantic Game governing truth, the Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé
Game governing equivalence of models, and the Model Existence Game govern-
ing consistency, are really three versions of one and the same game. I hope the
monograph raises interest in the game theoretic approach to logic. The book has
of course a chapter on transﬁnite Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé games and the related gen-
eralized descriptive set theory, based on T1.
6 Dependence logic
It took me some time to understand what Hintikka’s Independence Friendly Logic
(also called the IF logic) [11] is about. In the 1999 Logic, Methodology and Philos-
ophy of Science Conference in Cracow I had heard a talk on IF logic by Krynicki.
His approach, joint work with Caicedo, was based entirely on the seminal work
of Wilfrid Hodges [13] on a compositional semantics for IF logic. I realised the im-
portance of Hodges’ semantics and wrote very quickly [34] in which I showed, that
just as Hodges proved that the semantics of Independence Friendly Logic can be
made compositional, the game theoretic semantics can be made determined by
modifying the game.
During several hot summers after the turn of the century I was given, with
the help of John Burgess, a quiet oﬃce in the Philosophy Department of Princeton
University, where I laid down the foundations of a logic based on the semantics
Hodges had introduced, and called the new logic Dependence Logic [35]. The rea-
son for introducing my own logic was that Hintikka’s logic, though equivalent to
mine on the level of sentences, had aspects that I could not make sense of in a sat-
isfactory way. I focused on “dependence” rather than on “independence” of vari-
ables, being convinced that it is then easier to keep the logic under control without
losing anything essential. Moreover I separated “dependence” from quantiﬁers
into a new kind of atomic formula
=(푥1, . . . , 푥푛) :
“푥푛depends only on 푥1, . . . 푥푛−1”.
(1)

412
|
Jouko Väänänen
Such an atomic formula can be given meaning in sets 푋of assignments, following
Hodges: A set 푋satisﬁes (1) if
∀푠, 푠耠∈푋((
푛−1
⋀
푖=1
푠(푥푖) = 푠耠(푥푖)) →푠(푥푛) = 푠耠(푥푛)).
(2)
Note that (2) would be always true if 푋consisted of a single assignment, as in clas-
sical ﬁrst order logic, so it is indeed essential to base the semantics of (1) on sets
of assignments. The fact that dependence logic is based on compositional seman-
tics, which I started to call team semantics, means that formulas have a natural
semantics, not only sentences. This is signiﬁcant because the dependence and in-
dependence atoms, which I later introduced with Erich Grädel, actually occur in
database theory, experimental science, social choice theory, etc. So it made sense
to bring them to the forefront.
Dependence logic has become a promising research area and I think it has po-
tential in a variety of application areas of logic. With Juha Kontinen I proved that
dependence logic captures exactly the downward closed existential second order
properties of teams [17]. My then student Pietro Galliani proved that all existential
second order properties of teams, downward closed or not, are deﬁnable in inde-
pendence logic. My paper [1] with Samson Abramsky brought new proof-theoretic
ideas into dependence logic, in particular it meant the emergence of intuitionis-
tic implication in dependence logic. In her doctoral thesis my student Fan Yang
proves the surprising result that the extension of dependence logic with intuition-
istic implication has full second order power [39].
Similarly as condition (2) gives meaning to (1) in teams, we can give meaning
to all kinds of new atomic formulas of the type (1). Examples of what has been
considered so far are independence atoms, exclusion atoms and inclusion atoms.
In a recent very interesting result of Hella and Galliani inclusion logic is shown to
be equivalent in ﬁnite models to the ﬁxpoint logic that Kolaitis got me interested
in over 20 years ago. Thus the 푃= 푁푃question translates in team semantics to
the question whether inclusion logic is equivalent in ﬁnite ordered models to in-
dependence logic.
7 Second order logic
I have been interested in second order logic ever since my very early paper [28]. Be-
fore I got deeper into this powerful logic I had thought about the Härtig-quantiﬁer,
as I have related above, and shown that its properties depended on set theory in
the sense that in some models of set theory the quantiﬁer was quite weak and in

Pursuing Logic without Borders
|
413
others quite strong. It was clear that the properties of second order logic are more
“absolute” in the sense that it is quite strong in all models of set theory. It is ab-
surd to call second order logic “absolute” in any sense, as it contains a vast num-
ber of notoriously non-absolute logics. However, second order logic attains some
absoluteness in a roundabout way, simply by way of being so incredibly strong.
Namely, second order logic is able to ﬁx the universe into a 푉훼with very large or-
dinals 훼, and then absoluteness follows from the uniqueness of such models.
Let us ponder this phenomenon more closely. Usually absoluteness of a con-
cept means that the concept remains the same even if the universe of set theory
is changed, within the room that the axioms allow. The ﬁrst order axioms of set
theory allow a lot of variation for the model, as testiﬁed by inner models and forc-
ing extensions. So, for example, ﬁniteness is absolute between transitive mod-
els of ZFC, as is well-foundedness and all 훱1
2-properties (by Shoenﬁeld’s Abso-
luteness Lemma). Numerous second order properties, like uncountability, equi-
cardinality, Souslinity, etc, are not absolute between transitive models of ZFC.
However, if we use a second order axiomatization 푍퐹퐶2 of ZFC, models are (up
to isomorphism) of the form 푉휅, 휅strongly inaccessible. It goes without saying
that all the concepts mentioned above are absolute between models of the form
푉휅, 휅strongly inaccessible.
I have developed a view that second order logic is for all practical purposes
a fragment of set theory, and defended this view in [33]. As a clear indication of
this circumstance I showed that the decision problem of second order logic is the
complete 훱2-deﬁnable set of natural numbers. Similarly the Löwenheim number,
the Hanf number and the decision problem of second order logic have a character-
isation in terms of 훱2-formulas of set theory. In [37] I developed further my claim
of the close relationship between second order logic and set theory. In a sense,
set theory is a very high order logic and therefore contains second order logic as
a proper part. First order set theory permits quantiﬁcation over sets, which intu-
itively means quantiﬁcation over subsets, sets of subsets, sets of sets of subsets,
etc of smaller sets.
Much confusion exists in the literature of philosophy of mathematics about
whether second order logic is “better” than ﬁrst order set theory. In truth they are
very close to each other. Both have axioms and a Completeness Theorem with re-
spect to non-standard models. Both are able to characterise the common struc-
tures of classical mathematics: second order logic characterises up to isomor-
phism, set theory up to identity. Both have a clear concept of a standard model: in
second order logic it is the full second order logic, which quantiﬁes over all sub-
sets and relations, in set theory it is the cumulative hierarchy, which builds on
the assumption that in successor stages we take all subsets of the previous level.
In both cases the word “all” is explained by giving comprehension-type axioms.

414
|
Jouko Väänänen
Second order logic cannot be better than set theory, for the reason that it is more
expressive, as is often claimed, but perhaps rather because it is less expressive.
Defenders of second order logic as the best foundation of mathematics may be
“doing the right thing, but for a wrong reason”.
8 Friends
I have described above a couple of scientiﬁc programs that I have tried to push for-
ward. I would not have made much progress if I did not have such great friends.
My logic friends have spent time all over the world thinking about questions that
one of us would propose, bringing me into contact with areas of logic and meth-
ods of mathematics that I would otherwise perhaps never have come to think and
learn. It has been a great privilege and pleasure to work with my friends and I
hope to have this good life in the future, too. A special joy has been and continues
to be talking about mathematics, philosophy, logic, and everything else with my
wife Juliette.
Bibliography
[1]
Samson Abramsky and Jouko Väänänen. From IF to BI: a tale of dependence and separa-
tion. Synthese, 167(2, Knowledge, Rationality & Action):207–230, 2009.
[2]
Joan Bagaria. A characterization of Martin’s axiom in terms of absoluteness. J. Symbolic
Logic, 62(2):366–372, 1997.
[3]
Jon Barwise. Axioms for abstract model theory. Ann. Math. Logic, 7:221–265, 1974.
[4]
Jon Barwise and Solomon Feferman, editors. Model-theoretic logics. Perspectives in
Mathematical Logic. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1985.
[5]
Xavier Caicedo. Back-and-forth systems for arbitrary quantiﬁers. In Mathematical logic
in Latin America (Proc. IV Latin Amer. Sympos. Math. Logic, Santiago, 1978), volume 99 of
Stud. Logic Foundations Math., pages 83–102. North-Holland, Amsterdam, 1980.
[6]
Lauri Hella. Deﬁnability hierarchies of generalized quantiﬁers. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic,
43(3):235–271, 1989.
[7]
Lauri Hella. Logical hierarchies in PTIME. Inform. and Comput., 129(1):1–19, 1996.
[8]
Lauri Hella, Kerkko Luosto, and Jouko Väänänen. The hierarchy theorem for generalized
quantiﬁers. J. Symbolic Logic, 61(3):802–817, 1996.
[9]
Lauri Hella, Jouko Väänänen, and Dag Westerståhl. Deﬁnability of polyadic lifts of general-
ized quantiﬁers. J. Logic Lang. Inform., 6(3):305–335, 1997.
[10] Heinrich Herre, Michał Krynicki, Alexandr Pinus, and Jouko Väänänen. The Härtig quanti-
ﬁer: a survey. J. Symbolic Logic, 56(4):1153–1183, 1991.
[11] Jaakko Hintikka. The principles of mathematics revisited. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, 1996. Appendix by Gabriel Sandu.

Bibliography
|
415
[12] Jaakko Hintikka and Veikko Rantala. A new approach to inﬁnitary languages. Ann. Math.
Logic, 10(1):95–115, 1976.
[13] Wilfrid Hodges. Compositional semantics for a language of imperfect information. Log. J.
IGPL, 5(4):539–563 (electronic), 1997.
[14] Tapani Hyttinen and Heikki Tuuri. Constructing strongly equivalent nonisomorphic models
for unstable theories. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 52(3):203–248, 1991.
[15] Tapani Hyttinen and Jouko Väänänen. On Scott and Karp trees of uncountable models. J.
Symbolic Logic, 55(3):897–908, 1990.
[16] Phokion G. Kolaitis and Jouko A. Väänänen. Generalized quantiﬁers and pebble games on
ﬁnite structures. Ann. Pure Appl. Logic, 74(1):23–75, 1995.
[17] Juha Kontinen and Jouko Väänänen. On deﬁnability in dependence logic. J. Log. Lang. Inf.,
18(3):317–332, 2009.
[18] Michał Krynicki, Alistair Lachlan, and Jouko Väänänen. Vector spaces and binary quanti-
ﬁers. Notre Dame J. Formal Logic, 25(1):72–78, 1984.
[19] Menachem Magidor and Jouko Väänänen. On Löwenheim-Skolem-Tarski numbers for
extensions of ﬁrst order logic. J. Math. Log., 11(1):87–113, 2011.
[20] Alan Mekler, Saharon Shelah, and Jouko Väänänen. The Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé-game of
length 휔1. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc., 339(2):567–580, 1993.
[21] Alan Mekler and Jouko Väänänen. Trees and 훱1
1-subsets of 휔1휔1. J. Symbolic Logic,
58(3):1052–1070, 1993.
[22] Andrezj Mostowski. Thirty years of foundational studies. Lectures on the development of
mathematical logic and the study of the foundations of mathematics in 1930–1964. Acta
Philos. Fenn. Fasc., 17:1–180, 1965.
[23] Jaroslav Nešetřil and Jouko A. Väänänen. Combinatorics and quantiﬁers. Comment. Math.
Univ. Carolin., 37(3):433–443, 1996.
[24] Jonathan Stavi and Jouko Väänänen. Reflection principles for the continuum. In Logic and
algebra, volume 302 of Contemp. Math., pages 59–84. Amer. Math. Soc., Providence, RI,
2002.
[25] Stevo Todorcevic. Lipschitz maps on trees. J. Inst. Math. Jussieu, 6(3):527–556, 2007.
[26] Stevo Todorčević and Jouko Väänänen. Trees and Ehrenfeucht-Fraïssé games. Ann. Pure
Appl. Logic, 100(1-3):69–97, 1999.
[27] Jouko Väänänen. Remarks on generalized quantiﬁers and second order logics. Prace
Nauk. Inst. Mat. Politech. Wrocław., (14 Ser. Konfer. No. 1):117–123, 1977.
[28] Jouko Väänänen. Two axioms of set theory with applications to logic. Ann. Acad. Sci.
Fenn. Ser. A I Math. Dissertationes, (20):19, 1978.
[29] Jouko Väänänen. Abstract logic and set theory. I. Deﬁnability. In Logic Colloquium ’78
(Mons, 1978), volume 97 of Stud. Logic Foundations Math., pages 391–421. North-Holland,
Amsterdam, 1979.
[30] Jouko Väänänen. Abstract logic and set theory. II. Large cardinals. J. Symbolic Logic,
47(2):335–346, 1982.
[31] Jouko Väänänen. Set-theoretic deﬁnability of logics. In Model-theoretic logics, Perspect.
Math. Logic, pages 599–643. Springer, New York, 1985.
[32] Jouko Väänänen. A Cantor-Bendixson theorem for the space 휔휔1
1 . Fund. Math., 137(3):187–
199, 1991.
[33] Jouko Väänänen. Second-order logic and foundations of mathematics. Bull. Symbolic
Logic, 7(4):504–520, 2001.
Pursuing Logic without Borders

416
|
Jouko Väänänen
[34] Jouko Väänänen. On the semantics of informational independence. Log. J. IGPL,
10(3):339–352, 2002.
[35] Jouko Väänänen. Dependence logic, volume 70 of London Mathematical Society Student
Texts. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2007. A new approach to independence
friendly logic.
[36] Jouko Väänänen. Models and games, volume 132 of Cambridge Studies in Advanced
Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2011.
[37] Jouko Väänänen. Second order logic or set theory? Bull. Symbolic Logic, 18(1):91–121,
2012.
[38] Jouko Väänänen and Dag Westerståhl. On the expressive power of monotone natural
language quantiﬁers over ﬁnite models. J. Philos. Logic, 31(4):327–358, 2002.
[39] Fan Yang. Expressing second-order sentences in intuitionistic dependence logic. Studia
Logica, 101(2):323–342, 2013.

A Radio Interview with Jouko Väänänen
Interview in Finnish Radio of Jouko Väänänen 24.8.2009 on the occasion of a new
edition of a collection of paciﬁst texts edited by Väänänen. Translation by Juliette
Kennedy and Jouko Väänänen.
Fig. A.1. Jouko Väänänen. Photo by Burton
Randol.
Interviewer: Welcome, Jouko Väänä-
nen!
JV: Thank you!
Interviewer: Today we talk about
paciﬁsm and the peace movement
and about the arguments in favor of
paciﬁsm. Jouko Väänänen, for a start
would you tell us a little bit about
your own background. You graduated
from high school in the legendary year
1968. What was your road to the peace
movement?
JV: I read Bertrand Russell, the British
philosopher, peace activist and writer, quite famous, who even got the Nobel
Prize, and whose article is in this book. Undoubtedly he inﬂuenced me. Then I
participated in the anti-Vietnam war demonstrations. I considered the Vietnam
War really wrong, and still do. I was appalled by the bombing of a country only
because it had a communist government. But my real activity in the peace move-
ment started when I objected to the military service and was ordered to the so-
called alternative service in the Järvenpää Social Hospital. From there I joined the
Union of Conscientious Objectors and I was elected chair of the union. That was
the beginning of my activities in peace organizations. On the intellectual level, my
job being that of a logician, Bertrand Russell was a kind of role model for me, be-
cause he was both a logician and a peace activist, and he also put himself at risk,
participated in demonstrations and did things that took him to prison. In this way
he inﬂuenced me by his example.
Interviewer: So, the intellectual aspect of the peace movement was important to
you in addition to having experienced the Vietnam War, how it spread...
JV: And I am sure I was inﬂuenced by the times, what you referred to as Peace,
Love and Rock ’n Roll, kind of a time of liberation. I suppose every generation has
such a moment and time of liberation, but in the sixties it was combined with rock

418
|
A Radio Interview with Jouko Väänänen
music, which united people, the opposition to the Vietnam War, which united peo-
ple in the peace movement, and then also the sexual revolution. Nothing brings
people together as powerfully as an idea, a radical idea that people feel is right.
Then it gets joined with everything, music, love and then also peace movement.
Of course I am also a product of this.
Interviewer: Child of the sixties?
JV: Yes, child of the sixties.
Interviewer: You have edited a book called “Rauhaa - Peace”. This new edition
that I have here in my hand is completely fresh: Classics of Paciﬁsm. You have in
your hand a diﬀerent looking book from the 1980s. Now a new edition has been
made of this book. Let us talk a little about paciﬁsm as an ideology. Jouko Väänä-
nen, is paciﬁsm understood correctly, what in fact is paciﬁsm?
JV: Usually it is thought that paciﬁsm is conscientious objection, objection to take
part in a war. This is how it manifests itself and this is the correct view. In reality
it makes, of course, more sense to ﬁght the causes of war rather than object to
the war at the last moment when a war has already broken out. In fact all notable
thinkers in paciﬁsm have tried to approach the question how to prevent wars. It
is true, many paciﬁsts have a religious background. Almost all religions are in
principle paciﬁst. It is rather remarkable that as long as we have had books at
all, they have expressed paciﬁst ideas. It does not seem at all that paciﬁsm is the
product of the sixties, it goes back 3000 years.
Interviewer: Yes, I was in fact going to ask you why the back cover of this book
says “Paciﬁsm for 2500 years”? Where does this 2500 years come from? Is there
some particular writing which marks the beginning?
JV: One cannot say that some writing marked the beginning but in the beginning
of this book we have Tao-te-king, Motse and Dhammapada and they are from 500
b.c., so about 2500 years ago. Tao-te-king, Motse and Dahmmapada all have the
basic idea that one cannot overcome hatred by another hatred, that hatred only
breeds new hatred, and some other solution has to be invented. In its most prim-
itive form paciﬁsm refuses to take part in this vicious cycle of hitting back when
you are being hit. But the next step is what for example Gandhi strongly advo-
cated, that when one refuses to take part, then one actually has a positive impact
and inﬂuences the so-called enemy. The bible says that one should turn the other
cheek but this does not mean that one should resign. This is very important. Of-
ten people think that paciﬁsm is “passivism”. It is not passivism although we have
there a similarity of words. It is not passivity, accepting exploitation or violence.
By turning the other cheek one turns the focus of interaction to a diﬀerent level. If

A Radio Interview with Jouko Väänänen
|
419
I take a modern example, I would say that in the 9/11 incident in which terrorists
hit buildings and thousands of people died, the US had a remarkable opportunity
to take the step that instead of saying that we will strike back and you can be safe
because we strike back, to say instead that those people who attacked the US were
driven by a wrong picture; we are not enemies of Muslims; we do not hate Mus-
lims; we are not going to attack; we are not going to punish; we are on a diﬀerent
level; we are on the level where these matters are solved by international agree-
ments and police actions. At that moment there was powerful sympathy for the
US all around the world, also in the Muslim world, because the US was the victim.
They could have turned this sympathy into a historical moment in the history of
mankind. Instead they hit back and are now up to their neck in trouble both here
and there.
Interviewer: History took a diﬀerent route.
JV: Yes.
Interviewer: How can you, having followed the world, if we count from the year
1968, it is quite a few decades, how do you have strength to believe in this paciﬁsm,
despite the fact that so many times hate has been answered with hate and war with
war.
JV: Well, in fact it is not so diﬃcult, for paciﬁsm has strongly inﬂuenced the history
of mankind throughout time. For example, think about the cold war. After the Sec-
ond World War the cold war kept us at the brink of nuclear war. Total destruction
was with us as a frightening possibility because these two nuclear powers were
armed against each other. How did this end? A group of people decided to try to
walk across a border. A border guard decided not to shoot them. And this started
a collapse, and in the end people walked over the Berlin Wall, and these East Ger-
man soldiers, who were thought to be shooting-robots, lowered their guns, and
the cold war disappeared.
Interviewer: Yes, who would have believed?
JV: Yes, the cold war did not end in one ﬁnally attacking the other and destroying
it. Instead people took control of the situation. Of course there are many factors
involved, Gorbachev, Reagan, etc. But in the end it was the civil disobedience of
people that overwhelmed the wall of the cold war. This civil disobedience is the
method that paciﬁsm oﬀers as an alternative to what the armies try to do. If we
think that armies are there to defend a country, then the alternative way to de-
fend a country is to train people not to be provoked, as President Mauno Koivisto
said, to train people to act independently, the way Solidarity acted, if occupied; to
train to build a parallel nonviolent society within a society, one that is morally on a

420
|
A Radio Interview with Jouko Väänänen
high level. Then this moral strength, what Gandhi emphasized in India, that when
we do not attack the British, we are on a higher level, is something that millions
and millions of people understand. And when millions of people suddenly under-
stand what tremendous power lies in refusing to engage in violence, then nothing
can stop them. Let us look at the civil rights movement in the US. Rosa Parks in
the ﬁfties refused to go to the back of the bus where African-American passengers
were supposed to sit. This initiated an avalanche that now took Obama to the pres-
idency. Martin Luther King emphasized that we have to proceed non-violently in
order not to be on the same level as those who attack us.
Interviewer: Now, Jouko Väänänen, you have given some names, and this book
indeed has writings from a period of 2500 years. Which ones would you pick out
as such as have been classics of paciﬁsm for you yourself, kind of classics of the
classics. Which are the important ones?
JV: Here is a text by Russell. Although Russell is not in my opinion the deepest
thinker in this book, he is so bitingly powerful a writer, and Tolstoi is another
who is, although he was a Christian paciﬁst, what I am not, being myself more of
a rational paciﬁst, but he is so good a writer, that these texts are undoubtedly my
favorites. But I would also like to pick out William Penn’s “An address to the Native
Americans”. It is only one page long. William Penn founded in the 17th century
the State of Pennsylvania in the US. There is still a strong community of Quakers
in the US. The address to the Native Americans is just one paragraph long and
I shall read now the last lines: “I consider you the same ﬂesh and blood as the
Christians and the same as if the body of one person had been divided into two.”
So Penn brings up in this talk the notion of equality. Equality is very important in
paciﬁsm. Each person is equally precious, this is the starting point. Many people
understand this idea; you think about it for a moment and realize that - indeed -
a Russian is equally precious and the same kind of a human being as myself, he
has a family, I have a family, he has sorrow, I have sorrow.
Interviewer: Same pain.
JV: Yes, same pain.
Interviewer: Same agony.
JV: Yes same agony. When one understands this, it is like, it just sweeps over you.
Interviewer: How would you answer the question which a paciﬁst surely is often
asked, that would you defend yourself and your own country.
JV: Yes, that is the point, the goal of civil disobedience and non-violent action
is that we should give up armies in the future. So then countries would defend

A Radio Interview with Jouko Väänänen
|
421
themselves by civil disobedience. But as you point out, it is often asked whether
I would remain passive if someone attacked me, what then. The answer is that I
would probably defend myself, but it does not follow from this that I would sup-
port training for years to kill other people. Having said that, I emphasize that on a
personal level it is part of paciﬁsm that one tries to develop oneself so as not to be
provoked by aggression. It is very important not to take every insult to the emo-
tional level. This is what Vonnegut’s text says in this book: sometimes one has to
give up one’s pride. Often one hears that the pride of a nation is wounded and it is
necessary to retaliate or else the honor is not maintained or something like that.
It is all nonsense to me. This talk that if I am attacked then my honor requires that
I defend myself, this is a wrong idea.
Interviewer: Yes, Vonnegut...
JV: Of course I would like to say that if someone attacks me then I will not hit back.
I would like to say that but I would probably be lying.
Interviewer: Yes, Vonnegut ends his colorful essay with the words: “Nothing lost
but honor”.
JV: Yes, yes.
Interviewer: We have a couple of minutes left to talk about how paciﬁsm appeals
to people today, Jouko Väänänen, does it have a market.
JV: It is not in fashion at the moment. I believe that movements like the peace
movement come in waves, they obey a certain harmonic movement. It was more
popular in the past, it is not so popular now, but it will come back. But if one just
observes the world and contemplates the world from the paciﬁst point of view,
and hopefully this book helps in that, one sees that paciﬁsm is very relevant also
today. But another question is what appeals to young people today. I am not the
best person to talk about that, but undoubtedly the internet era changes all these
questions. In fact, in the future it is possible that wars can be kind of internet wars,
cyber wars, and I am not sure what will come out of it, but it will not change paci-
ﬁsm in any way. The fundamental idea remains: one does not overcome hatred by
another hatred, whether cyber hatred or ordinary hatred.
Interviewer: Thank you, Jouko Väänänen. I end with the words: “Peace, man!”
JV: The same to you!


