Robert Spillane and Jean-Etienne Joullié
Overcoming Managerialism


Robert Spillane and Jean-Etienne Joullié
Overcoming 
Managerialism
Power, Authority and Rhetoric at Work

ISBN 978-3-11-075816-0
e-ISBN (PDF): 978-3-11-075828-3
e-ISBN (EPUB): 978-3-11-075833-7
Library of Congress Control Number: 2022931478
Bibliographic information published by the Deutsche Nationalbibliothek
The Deutsche Nationalbibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;  
detailed bibliographic data are available on the Internet at http://dnb.dnb.de.
© 2022 Walter de Gruyter GmbH, Berlin/Boston
Cover image: Rafael Pol / unsplash.com
Printing and binding: CPI books GmbH, Leck
www.degruyter.com

Acknowledgements
The authors are indebted to the late John Martin whose ideas inform Chapters 3 and 9.
Chapters 1 and 10 draw on material published by Spillane, R. & Joullié, J-E.
(2021) The decline of authority and the rise of managerialism. Organization
(doi:10.1177/13505084211061242).
The last part of Chapter 2 is taken from Spillane, R. & Joullié, J.-E. (2022)
Authority, conformity and obedience: Applying Friedrich’s theory of authority to
the classics. British Journal of Social Psychology, 1-15.
Parts of Chapter 5 are taken from Joullié, J-E. & Gould, A. (2021) Theory, expla-
nation, and understanding in management research. Business Research Quarterly
(https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/23409444211012414). Grateful thanks
are extended to SAGE Publishing for reproduction permission.
Chapter 6 is indedebted to Joullié, J.-E., Gould, A., Spillane, R. & Luc, S. (2021)
The language of authority and power in leadership. Leadership Quarterly, 32(4): 1-12.
Chapter 9 draws from a manuscript titled ‘Justifying ethical values: A purposive
ethics for managers’ which is, at the time of writing, under revision with Business
Ethics, the Environment & Responsibility.
Robert Spillane
Honorary Professor of Management
Macquarie University
Sydney, Australia
Jean-Etienne Joullié
Professor of Management
École de Management Léonard de Vinci
Paris La Défense, France
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-001


Contents
Introduction
1
Overview of the Book
4
Chapter 1:
Authority in the Golden Age
7
Etymology
8
Max Weber on Legitimate Rulership
9
Managerial Authority as Concession
18
Converging Perspectives
20
The Disappearance of Authority
22
Authority as Reasoned Elaboration
23
Chapter 2:
Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience
30
The Authoritarian Personality
32
Autocrats and Democrats
36
Conformity and Obedience in the Laboratory
38
Chapter 3:
A Theory of Managerial Power
49
Managerial Power: A Selective Critical Review
49
The Generative View of Power
56
A New Theory of Managerial Power
57
The Organisational Zero-Sum Game
59
Power Vehicles and the Rate of Centralisation
62
Expansion of the Power Base
63
Factors Impeding Power Centralisation
64
Authority: Psychological and Legal Impediments to Centralisation
65
Authority: Indirect Effects Resulting in a Centrifugal Power Flow
66
The Utility of the Theory
68
Chapter 4:
Authority and Argumentation in the Boardroom
70
Empirical Studies of Authority
72
Chairmen and Technical Experts
75
Chapter 5:
A Critique of Management Education
82
Law, Theory, Explanation
85
Theory and Explanation in Management
87

Challenges to Theory and Scientific Explanation
88
Explaining Management Laws
89
Alternatives to Scientific Explanation
91
Implications for Management Education
95
Chapter 6:
The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority
100
Karl Popper on Argumentation
103
Expressing: The Language of Feelings
104
Signalling: The Language of Efficiency
106
Describing: The Language of Truth
106
Arguing: The Language of Autonomy
108
Advising: The Language of Authority
109
Weeding the Managerialist Garden
112
Chapter 7:
The Misuse of Psychology
121
Psychoanalysis
122
The Cult of Personality Testing
130
Skinner’s ‘Behaviorism’
134
Third Force Psychology
136
The Myth of Mental Illness
141
Chapter 8:
Machiavellian Ingenuity or Moral Intelligence?
145
Princes and Power
147
Fortuna and Virtù
148
Lions and Foxes
149
From Cognitive to Multiple Intelligences
151
The Machiavellian ‘Personality’
153
Machiavellian Executives
156
Ingenuity of Intelligence?
159
Machiavelli’s Legacy
161
Chapter 9:
Purposive Ethics for Managers
163
Justifying Ethical Values in Management
164
Ethics and Reason
166
Purpose, Choice and Responsibility
168
The Nature of Ethical Justification
170
Purposive Ethics for Managers
172
Applying Purposive Ethics
173
Relevance for Managers
174
VIII
Contents

Chapter 10:
From Managerialism to Heroic Management
177
The Rise of Managerialism
177
Drucker on Management
182
Drucker’s Heroic Managers
189
Existentialism and Management
192
Authoritarian and Authoritative Managers
195
Summary: Ten Contentions
199
The Status of Contentions
199
Bibliography
206
Index
223
Contents
IX


Introduction
The central thesis of this book is that the rise of managerialism as a practice is
profitably analysed as manifestations of the decline of authority and the rise of
managerial power. This decline has remained largely unnoticed by scholars because
of the widespread conflation of power and authority in the management literature. It
follows from this thesis that resisting and overcoming managerialism requires two
undertakings. First, it necessitates the re-establishing of the conceptual distinction
between power and authority. Second, it requires the rehabilitating of authoritative
management as a protection against authoritarian practices. In other words,
authoritative management is a defence against authoritarian managerialism because
authority, properly conceived, redirects power to technical experts and professionals
and thereby limits managerial power.
As an abstract noun, ‘management’ is a relational word and refers to an irre-
ducible element in the interaction of managers and the resources they manage: the
anchor points between which the concept has its meaning. For example, the rela-
tionship between managers and their colleagues cannot be analysed in terms of
component relationships. Management is not the sum of managers’ actions, let alone
their putative personalities. While management overlaps with other relationships
between parties, such as influence, persuasion, conformity and obedience, these
may be present and management absent. These relational concepts demand atten-
tion and have been studied extensively by social psychologists. The challenge for
management theorists has been to agree on foundational components which, if
correctly identified, provide substance for empirical inquiry. In the relevant liter-
ature, two popular research themes have been power and authority.
Unlike managerial power, which is concerned with the ability to make things
happen, managerial authority is concerned with rights and duties. Further, the
exercise of power is bound to affect others who will assess its consequences and
evaluate their acceptability. This observation establishes the inseparability, both
theoretical and practical, of power and authority and their centrality in the
management relationship. However, this inseparability does not imply that the two
constructs should not, or cannot, be distinguished.
The authority of managers involves the right to direct power for productive
purposes and this involves them in the search for people who possess reliable
knowledge. When managers use knowledge for the benefit of others, researchers are
justified in calling their actions rational. And when colleagues grant managers the
right to use such knowledge, such assent is likewise rational since it replaces the
ineffective applications of knowledge with effective ones. As managers cannot grant
authority to themselves, their power is therefore dependent on their abilities to
mobilise the activities of others, and this mobilisation is dependent on the extent to
which authority is conceded to them. As such, managerial power is conditional on
and is circumscribed by such concessions.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-002

In the second half of the twentieth century management mutated into manage-
rialism. ‘While management can be defined as getting things done in organisations
through people, managerialism means that in businesses, managers have come to
view themselves as a professional caste.’¹ The distinction between management
and managerialism enables scholars to criticise managerialism while acknowledging
the importance of management. Arguably, the most famous proponent of manage-
ment and a critic of managerialism was Peter Drucker who wrote: ‘Ignorance of
the function of management is one of the most serious weaknesses of an industrial
society’, and ‘Any serious attempt to make management “scientific” or a “profession”
is deleterious.’²
Managerialism has been described as ‘over-management’ or ‘hyper-manage-
ment’, ‘a distortion of the study of management’ which has had a doleful impact
on society. It arises when management, as a practice, becomes a self-serving entity.
Managerialism deprives employees of decision-making powers and justifies the
authoritarian application of managerial techniques on the grounds of specialised
training and the exclusive possession of managerial ‘knowledge’.³
Manifestations of managerialism abound. Within universities, managerialist
bureaucrats with little or no experience in higher education have ousted academics
from decision-making bodies and now increasingly see themselves as ‘the univer-
sity’. Managerialism in higher education has created a greater separation of
academic and management activity, increased control and regulation of academic
work by managers, and a shift in power from academics to managers with a conse-
quent weakening of the professional status of academics.⁴ Consequently, faculty
members have been relegated to the periphery, considered as expendable resources
whose job is to deliver grades to students and publish journal articles to improve
their managers’ key performance indicators. Decisions about such issues as class
size, face-to-face teaching or enrolment standards are based on economic rather
than pedagogic criteria. The significant decline in academic and educational stand-
ards and the transformation of universities as educational institutions into training
colleges is well documented and widely acknowledged.
Similar phenomena have been observed in corporations, hospitals, police
departments, fire-fighter services, defence forces, utilities distribution, infrastructure
maintenance and elsewhere. In each of these sectors, self-serving managerial consid-
erations have taken priority over the objectives which led to the creation of these
organisations. Consequences include lack of innovation and risk-taking in firms,
declining service levels in administrations and a general decrease in the ability to
achieve important goals. If management as a group benefits, society suffers.
Quoted in Locke & Spender (2011: x).
Quoted in Tarrant (1980: 258).
Barberis (2013: 327); Clegg (2014: 566); Klikauer (2013: 23); Locke & Spender (2011: xi).
Gordon & Witchurch (2010).
2
Introduction

Although managerialism, as an ‘ism’, is generally treated as an ideology, it can
be analysed according to its practical manifestations in terms of authority and
power. Like management, managerialism is based on a theory of authority which
is rarely discussed, or even acknowledged, by managerialists and researchers.
In proportion as managerialism gained prominence and studies of managerial
power flourished, the scholarly analysis of authority declined. As Herbst observes,
‘On the nature of authority – what it actually is – we are fairly silent these days, typi-
cally unwilling to open what we suspect is a rather densely packed can of slippery
worms.’⁵ It is unarguable, she concludes, that the study of authority in various
academic disciplines has become ‘oddly unfashionable’. This neglect is due, in
part, to the conflation of authority and power and the identification of authority
with authoritarianism. For example, a review by the authors of more than a dozen
of the leading journals in management and organisational behaviour found no arti-
cles in which the phrase ‘managerial authority’ appears or studies which treat
‘authority’ as the main topic of investigation.⁶ This curious neglect is also a feature
of the voluminous literature on leadership. In an extensive survey of leadership
research generated since the turn of the century, researchers conducted a qualitative
review of leadership theory across 10 top-tier journals.⁷ Of the twenty-three thematic
categories of leadership which emerged from the 752 articles studied, none addressed
the issue of authority. Likewise, recent books on managerialism discuss power but do
not list ‘authority’ in their indexes.⁸
That managerialism is underpinned by authoritarian practices is a widely
accepted thesis.⁹ But what of authoritative management which is based on critical
discussion between experts and managers? It is difficult to see how managerialists
can practice, or indeed tolerate, authoritative management. If they do, they rely on
a distorted view of managerial authority.
The present authors have argued elsewhere (a point returned to in Chapter 3)
that when the basis of authority changes from authoritative to authoritarian forms,
managerial power centralises.¹⁰ That power has been progressively concentrated in
a cadre of professional managers in recent years is well documented, as has the
Herbst (2006: 285).
Journals checked include Business Ethics Quarterly, The Journal of Business Ethics, Organizational
Behavior and Human Decision Processes, Academy of Management Annals, Human Resource Manage-
ment Journal, International Labour Review, Journal of Management, Journal of Management Studies,
Journal of Management Behaviour, Journal of Organizational Behavior, California Management Review
and Harvard Business Review. The British Journal of Industrial Relations, the Academy of Management
Review and the Academy of Management Journal combined have offered only a handful of contribu-
tions (all but two dating from the 1960s) in which the expression appears.
Dinh et al. (2014).
Considine & Painter (1997); Enteman (1993); Klikauer (2013, 2015); Locke & Spender (2011); Parker
(2002); Rees & Rodley (1995).
Klikauer (2019); Locke & Spender (2011); Shepherd (2018).
Spillane & Joullié (2015: 216–220).
Introduction
3

fact that as senior managers have enjoyed more power and income, middle manage-
ment has been in decline for several decades.¹¹ Similarly, the authority of profes-
sional non-managers has been eroded.¹² In short, managerialism has transformed
authoritative management into authoritarian forms of control. This transformation
has gone hand in hand with significant, some would say obscene, increases in exec-
utive salaries and benefits.
Although early analysts of management, including Follett, Barnard and Bendix
considered authority in some detail, authors of recent books on managerialism treat
authority as a form of power and the secondary element in the managerial relation-
ship. Authoritative management, however, treats authority as a source of power and
the primary element in the relationship. In other words, authority, correctly under-
stood, directs power to managers and redirects power to professional colleagues.
In so doing, authority sets rational limits to managerial power. This is recognised
in authoritative management which stands opposed to the forms of authoritarian
control promoted and practiced by managerialists.
One of the central arguments of this book is that the confusion surrounding the
use of authority in management can be avoided by drawing on Carl J. Friedrich’s
analysis of authority as reasoned elaboration. As the vehicle for reasoned elabora-
tion is argumentation, a clear distinction can be drawn between those (authoritarian)
managerialists who reject argumentation and those (authoritative) managers who
actively promote and engage in it. Karl Popper’s theory of language functions
supports this view since it emphasises the crucial role of argumentation in personal
and social development. Friedrich’s and Popper’s views are consistent with the
theory of management advanced by Peter Drucker. In summary, study of the viability
of authoritative management in the age of authoritarian managerialism is timely and
deserves critical attention.
Overview of the Book
Chapter 1 revisits the golden age of research into managerial authority. After a brief
discussion of the pioneering work of Max Weber and Chester Barnard, it revisits the
classical studies of authority which dominated theoretical and empirical research
between 1950 and 1975. The diverse views offered by scholars in this era have led
to confusion about the relationship between authority, power and legitimacy.
Chapter 2 discusses authoritarianism and offers a theory of the authoritarian
personality. Also examined are two classical laboratory studies of conformity, obedi-
ence and authority, an examination which confirms both the conceptual confusion
Abbott (2015); Barberis (2013); Clegg (2014); Ehrenreich (2006); Grey (2013); Heckscher (1995);
Thomas & Dunkerley (1999); Wheatley (1992).
Deem (1998); Lynch (2014); Shepherd (2018); Smith & Hussey (2010); Vincent (2011); Ward (2011).
4
Introduction

and the possibilities for a clearer understanding of conformity and obedience in
terms of rational responses to authority figures.
Chapter 3 advances a new theory which captures the extensive character of
managerial power as the production of unintended effects. The central hypothesis
is that managerial power has centripetal and centrifugal tendencies which are
subject to dynamic changes. Authoritative rules, inventions and human resource
policies set limits to and re-distribute managerial power. Insofar as it qualifies the
centrifugal effects of power, this perspective is capable of revolutionising manage-
ment theory.
Chapter 4 argues that when corporate governance is defined as ‘authoritative
direction’, authority is a source of power in the boardroom. In addition to the wide-
spread conflation of authority with legitimate power, a second common misunder-
standing concerns the alleged tensions that result when board chairmen and tech-
nical experts engage in argument, where the latter are assumed to weaken the
authority of the former. To dispel this latter confusion, this chapter applies the
ideas of Friedrich and Popper to boardroom behaviour. Its conclusion is that the
authority of chairmen is enhanced by the presence and argumentative contribution
of technical experts.
Chapter 5 argues that the production of scientific theory has been a central focus
of management education. Indeed, it has allowed researchers to don the prestigious
mantle of science and has done much to legitimise management education and, ulti-
mately, managerialism. This argument is relatively uncontroversial. Less widely
acknowledged is that in management studies scientific theory smuggles in a
strawman view of human existence which cannot accommodate freedom and
responsibility. This limitation of scientific theory has dubious moral implications
for management education and limits its practical utility. If management is not a
science, however, it should not be researched and taught like one.
Chapter 6 develops and applies Popper’s hierarchy of language functions and
values to managerial authority. Specifically, authoritative management is grounded
on efficient signalling, true descriptions, valid arguing and reasoned advice. If
managers aspire to authoritative status, they need to eschew meaningless jargon
and obfuscating language. The philosophy known as empiricism has much to offer
here because it provides managers with tools by which nonsense can be identified
and eradicated.
Chapter 7 discusses the ways in which psychology has been misused by mana-
gerialists and how management by personality has compromised management by
objective performance. This misuse of psychology has produced a personality cult
which has taken various forms: psychoanalysis (Freud and Jung), personality theo-
ries and testing and motivational theories (Maslow). Also discussed is the issue of
mental health which has consequential implications for managers since it re-directs
attention to such matters as the medicalisation of moral behaviour and the related
topic of personal responsibility.
Overview of the Book
5

In Chapter 8, Machiavellian ingenuity is contrasted with the notion of moral
intelligence whose promoters have claimed that managerialists who endorse and
promote compassion and forgiveness are of high moral intelligence. Machiavellian
managers, therefore, are of low moral intelligence. This chapter argues instead
that: (a) agreement with any moral perspective is not indicative of intelligence; (b)
Machiavellian ingenuity cannot be reduced to a disposition without contradiction;
(c) there is no logical or empirical justification for deeming moral intelligence supe-
rior to Machiavellian ingenuity in management; (d) the moral intelligence movement
represents the tender-minded alternative to Machiavellian tough-minded manage-
ment, which (e) accounts for, rather than rejects, the tender-minded qualities of
management relationships.
Chapter 9 addresses the question of how managers can justify ethical values.
Managerialism is dominated by emotivism and ethical relativism and a widespread
scepticism about the possibility of basing ethics on reasoning. There are, however,
alternative strategies for ethical justification in which ethical conclusions are derived
deductively from purposive propositions. The chapter concludes with a discussion of
the implications for managers of a purposive ethics.
The final chapter discusses how managerialism is grounded on a theory of
authority which has been neglected in the literature because authority has been
treated as a form, rather than a source, of power. It is argued that managerialism
draws on authoritarian ideas and practices, whereas management as conceived by
Drucker involved a heroic element based on authoritativeness. To promote heroic,
authoritative management, is therefore, to resist managerialism since authority redi-
rects power to technical experts and thereby limits managerial power.
The book concludes with ten contentions which summarise the main theses in
the ten chapters. Taken together, they represent a theory of the foundation of
management in which authority, power and rhetoric are central concepts.
6
Introduction

Chapter 1:
Authority in the Golden Age
It is conventional when writing a book on management to commence with a review of
the empirical research conducted by previous investigators. From this review one can
derive a map of the territory as it has been covered to date and settle upon questions
of importance which have not yet been studied. One then proceeds to submit these to
empirical tests designed to produce further knowledge.
The present authors have departed from this procedure to the extent of incorpo-
rating, prior to the customary research review, an extended conceptual analysis. This
course was adopted partly because one of the central topics chosen – authority – is a
highly abstract concept and it would be rather presumptuous to assume what needs
to be shown if it were claimed at the outset that this concept can adequately be repre-
sented by any specified set of behaviours. Indeed, the approach to the definition of
the term can be from several directions.
One object of any conceptual analysis is to establish criteria for making reliable
distinctions of the concept at hand. The most sustained attempts at conceptual clar-
ification occurred during what can be called a ‘golden age’ of research into authority
from 1950 to 1975. With minor exceptions, there have been no further theoretical
advances in the study of authority.
A lack of progress in the development of a theory of authority has impaired the
empirical study of the concept. Specifically, it has prevented scholars from reaching
agreement about the nature of those behaviours they seek to describe as falling
within the sphere of authority. As such, the territory to which the term refers cannot
be mapped. Such a situation does not preclude, however, seeking out some behav-
iour in appropriate settings (including management) which epitomises the way the
concept is currently applied, nor of studying these isolated cases by empirical
methods.
The present chapter is in the main an extended conceptual analysis because the
decline of management and the rise of managerialism is best understood as a change
in the nature of the authority relationship which underpins both forms of workplace
behaviour. Authority is a pervasive factor in social relationships generally unless
many distinguished scholars have been totally mistaken. For instance, Jouvenel
remarks with engaging confidence: ‘The phenomenon called “authority” is at once
more ancient and more fundamental than the phenomenon called “state”; the
natural ascendancy of some men over others is the principle of all human organisa-
tions and all human advances.’¹ In this statement Jouvenel equates authority with
any form of ascendancy. His example has been followed by many scholars in the
Jouvenel (1957: 13).
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-003

social sciences and management who fail to distinguish authority from related terms
yet agree that it is an important social phenomenon.
Etymology
Authority derives from the Greek concept arché. This term has a variety of meanings
and is used to represent the notions of ‘initiative’, ‘cause’ (in relation to its effects)
and ‘beginning’. These meanings are very close to the early Roman usage of auctor
(originator, promoter, author).
In Homer arché signifies ‘initiative’ which ‘gets things done’ and is manifested
especially as ‘a cause of activity in others.’ Aristotle goes further and speaks of an
office possessing the ‘double power’ of introducing matters and bringing them to
completion. The ability to conclude matters depended on the possession of sufficient
power and the cooperation of those involved. To concentrate on the first category
(introducing matters into a debate) is to risk ignoring the desirability of gaining
voluntary cooperation in implementing tasks and failing to acknowledge that one
has the right as well as the ability to implement them.
The Aristotelian tendency to refer to those in positions of power by the term
arché and to focus on the implementation of action has helped to confuse authority
with power. For instance, in ancient Greek literature arché is frequently used to desig-
nate ‘rule’ as the term archon refers to ruler.
The translation of arché into Latin confirmed the conceptual link with initiative
but was ambivalent about representing authority as power. This ambiguity set the
pattern for authority to be regarded as a special form of power. However, the Latin
translators of arché emphasised initiative rather than power; the term they retained
derives from auctor and auctoritas, which refers to producing, inventing or inno-
vating in the public arena.²
Following Roman practice, from the early fourteenth century authority was asso-
ciated with individuals who were recognised as possessing specialised knowledge,
especially of a religious kind. This use gave rise to the notion of an ‘authoritative
viewpoint’. By the nineteenth century, this meaning was linked to that of ‘expert’,
a person who is regarded as an authority in a certain field. However, scholars
have noted that if authority weakened in relation to knowledge, it strengthened in
relation to power.³ Whatever the case, from the sixteenth century onwards, authority
became and has remained to the present day a key political term. For example, the
Oxford English Dictionary defines it as power or right to give orders, make decisions
and enforce obedience.
Benn & Peters (1959: 18); Myers (1968).
Ginsberg (2016: 92).
8
Chapter 1: Authority in the Golden Age

The change of emphasis from authority as ‘special knowledge’ to authority as
‘the ability to give orders’ set the scene for enduring ambiguity about the two
faces of authority. The first is known as formal authority (of office) and carries certain
powers which can be employed for or against subordinates; the second is known as
informal authority (of knowledge) and is an acknowledgement that certain individ-
uals demonstrate knowledge or skills which provide the basis for conceding certain
rights to them.
The dual perspective of authority has a long history in social philosophy. Gener-
ally, those who view authority as the capacity to issue orders have emphasised the
control-from-the-top aspects of the concept. This perspective is often referred to as
the ‘conventional approach’, a label which acknowledges the impact this form of
analysis has had. In earlier days, it was referred to by political philosophers (such
as Jouvenel) as the theory of sovereignty. When authority is treated as a property
of office it is scarcely distinguishable from the power which accompanies it. Yet, it
would appear desirable in the light of the current use of language to separate
power (which is a matter of capacity) and authority (which is a matter of right).
Scholars have argued that liberal society was formed by ridding authority, to a
great extent, of its personal elements. The institutionalisation of authority based
on a Lockean contract and ensuing laws has acted as an effective check to the vaga-
ries of personality-based and tradition-based authority. The check is effective
because individuals are authorised to act on behalf of the community only in specific
tasks and in line with demonstrated expertise. Thus, we find the power of the sover-
eign replaced by the power of the legislature-cum-executive. It is this association
with power which has encouraged many theorists in political science and sociology
to analyse authority in terms of legitimate power.
A prime exponent of the argument that authority is represented by the notion of
legitimacy is Max Weber. Specifically, Weber’s theories of legitimacy and legitimate
rulership are characterised by a combination of historical and sociological emphases
through which he integrates earlier perspectives. As such, his theories warrant
detailed exposition.
Max Weber on Legitimate Rulership
In Economy and Society Weber is particularly concerned to understand the funda-
mentals of social conflict. He represents conflict as an action within a social relation-
ship orientated towards carrying out the actor’s will against the resistance of another
party or parties. Defined in this way, conflict (Kampf) is very close to Weber’s defini-
tion of power (Macht). For example, he defines power as the probability that one
person within a social relationship will be able to carry out his will despite resis-
tance, regardless of the basis on which the probability rests.
Weber argues that in its general sense power is an aspect of most social relation-
ships and used in this way has little scientific utility, since all conceivable qualities of
Max Weber on Legitimate Rulership
9

individuals and all combinations of circumstances can put them in a position to
impose their will in a specific situation. Weber prefers the more precise sociological
concept of Herrschaft which he defines as the probability that certain commands will
be obeyed by a given group of persons.
If the widespread view that authority is a form of power is a legacy of Weber’s
analysis of Herrschaft, it is noteworthy that he does not analyse ‘authority’ and
does not employ the German words (Authorität and Behörde). Rather, he prefers
‘domination’ or ‘rule’ and his analysis of ‘authority’ is derived from it. As Herr
means Mister or Master, Herrschaft connotes a superior figure issuing commands
to subordinates. In Fischoff’s rendering of Economy and Society Herrschaft is trans-
lated as ‘domination (“authority”)’ but this parenthetical emphasis is farther from
Weber’s thinking than is domination, which emphasises the power of command
whether consent is present or not. Further, power (Macht) does not imply the right
to command and the duty to obey, whereas Herrschaft implies a probability of
obtaining willing obedience. It should also be emphasised that translators of
Weber have disagreed on the English equivalent of Herrschaft and this has led to
considerable confusion. Specifically, most authors translate Herrschaft directly into
‘authority’ which creates the misleading impression that to have a position of formal
power is, ipso facto, to have authority.
In Weber’s scheme, a social order is maintained through a system of command
and obedience of which there are three aspects. First, coercive power may provide
the prime motive for obedience to the ruler and hence to the social order itself.
Second, the existence of a constellation of mutual interests may lead citizens to
accept associations of command and obedience as useful. The third factor is the
sense of legitimacy: the belief that the commands of a ruler are rightful, and that
obedience is obligatory quite apart from questions of coercion or utility.
Legitimacy is ascribed to a social order by tradition, by emotions, or by a rational
belief in its absolute value and by its legality. This last category shows that ‘legiti-
macy’ is not synonymous with ‘legality’ in Weber’s framework. It must be admitted,
however, that under certain circumstances the distinction between legitimacy and
legality is difficult to draw. The legality of a rule is generally the result of its being
in accordance with the stated law. Conversely, in those situations where rulers
break the law, the question of their legitimacy in doing so is distinct from that of
legality. For example, their actions will be found to be perfectly legitimate if they
are believed to be in accordance with some generally held social value.
For Weber, the most usual basis of legitimacy is the belief in legality, the read-
iness to conform to and obey rules. Legality is treated as legitimate because of a
voluntary agreement between interested parties or it is imposed by a dominating
figure. Thus, submission to a social order is determined by a variety of motives
and interests and by a mixture of adherence to tradition and belief in legality.
Legitimate rulership in work organisations refers to a relationship between
managers and subordinates where the key factor is the meaning the parties attach
to the relationship. Managers claim the right to issue orders and the obedience of
10
Chapter 1: Authority in the Golden Age

subordinates is guided by their judgement that managers have the right to control
them within specified limits. In such relationships, the beliefs that sustain manage-
ment positions are concerned with the perception of those positions as being legiti-
mate rather than coercive or utilitarian. Thus, the distinction between power and
legitimacy is phenomenological.
Weber applied his four bases of legitimacy to interpersonal relationships
involving legitimate rulership. These he condensed into three categories: traditional,
charismatic and legal-rational grounds for the legitimation of command positions.
These constitute his ideal types of authority.
In traditional authority, the right to rule is based on tradition in the sense that it
is in accord with longstanding customs and values. It rests on the established belief
in the sanctity of traditions. Such rights are usually conveyed by birth and by general
social belief, such as the divine right of kings. Obedience is owed to the person who
occupies the traditionally sanctioned position.
The basis of authority termed charismatic refers to an extraordinary devotion to
individuals who can convince others that they possess exceptional skills and abili-
ties. Charismatically qualified individuals are obeyed by virtue of personal trust in
them and their exemplary qualities. They are perceived to be endowed with superna-
tural or at least exceptional personal powers which are not accessible to the ordinary
person. Individuals who demonstrate these exemplary qualities are generally treated
as leaders.
Weber’s explanation of the charismatic ideal type is confusing for he combines
two distinct analytic orientations. On the one hand, he implies that charisma is
based on affective sentiment which emanates from subordinates’ beliefs in the extra-
ordinary powers of the leader. On the other hand, he suggests that charismatics must
produce evidence that they can guide group members to specific shared goals.
Should they not be successful in this endeavour they lose their right to lead.
These requirements for charismatic leadership have created a tendency among
scholars to conclude that the foundations of charisma are anchored in subordinates’
self-interests. As such, charismatics obtain support largely from the issues with
which they are associated, the grievances they seek to right, and the manner and
time in which they propose to make these issues the passionate concern of their
potential followers.⁴
Weber makes rationality a basis for role authority only and considers all
personal authority to be based on non-rational criteria. Further, he insists that
there is a fundamental difference between a claim to authority based on technical
competence and one based on personal qualities. He argues that charismatics derive
their influence from exceptional personal characteristics of a non-rational nature
(one can think of the Reverend Jim Jones and his suicide cult to illustrate Weber’s
point).Yet it is apparent that some managers secure a sizeable following not because
Ratnam (1964: 345).
Max Weber on Legitimate Rulership
11

of charismatic qualities but because they propose to solve problems with which
others are grappling. In other words, Weber’s analysis does not easily account for
managers who are followed because of their superior ability to address challenging
problems. He is thus oblivious to the fact that there is nothing so rational as
following individuals because they can resolve dilemmas. To follow the advice of
such people does not automatically impose charismatic status upon them but indi-
cates that they are authorities in relevant matters.
Clearly, there are many cases of personal authority which fall short of the
demands of the charismatic category. This observation implies that charismatic lead-
ership emerges from demonstrations of technical expertise on the one hand, or from
specific and exceptional personal characteristics of a non-rational nature on the
other. Ambiguity about the two possible sources arises because the emotional
element is aroused in people when they have a crucial unresolved problem which
the ‘leader’ appears to be able to solve. Also left open is the possibility that authority
is not a group phenomenon springing from sentiments of solidarity but may stem
from rational judgements concerning an individual’s expertise.
Weber’s legal-rational ideal type is embedded in the impersonal social order and
extends to individuals only insofar as they occupy legitimised roles, such as an
organisational office, where their powers are limited to a ‘sphere of competence’.
For managers, this sphere of competence involves an obligation to perform tasks
which are part of a systematic division of labour, the provision of necessary authority
to carry out these tasks and clearly defined powers which are subject to definite
conditions. There is thus a separation of the sphere of office and that of private
affairs.
Weber hyphenates ‘legal-rational’ as both qualifiers are, for him, perfectly corre-
lated in the impersonal order. His analysis holds that in the legal-rational structure
authority is vested in the formally established position initially on rational grounds
and is then secured legally. These developments are fundamental to the existence of
organisations which have continuity beyond the terms of the active participation of
any one person. They have a degree of immutability which overcomes the disadvan-
tages of organisations dependent on the knowledge of allegedly irreplaceable
managers.
According to Weber, changes in the rationale of an organisation can be accom-
plished only by a charismatic reformer whose revolutionary character lies in setting
up personal authority against the established order. Thus, those who follow charis-
matics act irrationally because they reject the accepted rationale on emotional
grounds. Later scholars contested this view, arguing that the foundations of charisma
are anchored in subordinates’ self-interests and their ‘following’ is eminently
rational. Shils even argued that the social order itself has charismatic qualities.
History tells us that leadership often precedes the occupation of a formal office.
Special individuals appear on a scene dominated by major problems which the local
population cannot solve. Like religious cult leaders, they emerge from the pack, so to
speak, and convince large numbers of people that they can solve their problems and
12
Chapter 1: Authority in the Golden Age

proceed to demonstrate their organisational abilities which appear to go well beyond
the normal range. Such individuals also give the impression that they hold the key to
understanding the important problems of human existence. History provides many
examples of individuals of strong will who, in extreme situations, emerge from the
ranks, or from nowhere of importance, as the bearers of extraordinary gifts. Such
individuals can produce in people feelings of awe, respect and wonder which are
not related to the recognition of specific technical skills, however important these
may be. As the existence of serious, unsolved problems usually means that people
in positions of power are compromised, leaders often find their initial supporters
among the socially advantaged.
Historically, leaders differ from rulers by their different views and uses of power
and authority. Rulers draw their following from those who agree that power is the
necessary means for the solution of important problems. Leaders try to avoid the
use of coercive power and work through authority. Some of the great religious leaders
rejected coercive power when it was offered in favour of basing their leadership on
personal authority unencumbered by punishments. Their goal was to demonstrate to
their followers that authority is superior to power. If leaders use power against those
who challenge them, they demonstrate by their actions that the claim of authority,
and thus leadership, is shallow.
Similarly, leaders are usually opposed to the rules and roles of bureaucratic
organisation with its emphasis on formal power. After all, it is because the managers
of bureaucracies cannot solve recalcitrant problems that leaders evolve and develop
their extraordinary abilities. As they lack institutional support, leadership of this
type is inherently unstable. The status of leaders is established by the recognition
of their personal mission and special abilities. When that mission is no longer rele-
vant, or plausible, and when such leaders stop solving important problems, their
authority evaporates. That is, having established themselves as miracle workers,
leaders need continually to perform miraculous deeds without which they fade
into oblivion or death.
Leadership is not necessarily grounded on the irrational behaviour of followers.
It is reasonable to follow individuals who claim to have special problem-solving
skills to the point where they are allowed to demonstrate them and are judged on
the results. It is unreasonable to continue to follow such individuals when they
cease to solve difficult problems. Superior problem-solving is thus the fundamental
characteristic of the emergence and survival of leadership. To argue, as Weber does,
that it is irrational to follow special individuals who set themselves against the status
quo is to give prominence to the stability of the formal system of social power.
Part of the problem with Weber’s analysis is due to his use of ‘rational’, in his
legal-rational ideal type. His general thesis is that the great social change set in
motion by the Reformation, notably Calvinism, was the decline of leadership and
the rise of legal-rational rulership. The Renaissance witnessed many impressive dis-
plays of leadership which were usually brutish and short-lived. As personal authority
gave way to the formal authority of the state, monarchs and governments became the
Max Weber on Legitimate Rulership
13

new leaders. In the place of the old personal leaders arose the legal-rational ruler-
ship of the new capitalism and its associated bureaucracy.
Weber insists that bureaucracy is a machine in which people are merely func-
tionaries and that its impersonal character enables anyone who knows how to
control it to prosper. The form of authority which operates in bureaucracies differs
from earlier types because it is attached to a position, not a person. This setting effec-
tively eliminates the possibility of leaders rising from the ranks to control the system.
Insofar as leadership in previous eras was attached to a person, not a position,
bureaucratic rulership depersonalises relationships and much of the uncertainty
that goes with it and concentrates on the completion of tasks rather than the solving
of transcendental problems. Technical experts and their ability to complete allocated
tasks are thus sacralised.
Committed to his thesis of the progressive rationalisation of action, Weber
employs an outdated faculty psychology which makes a distinction between
(rational) thinking and (irrational) feeling. By burying individuals in ‘rationalised’
structures, Weber is left with the problem of the truculent individuals who refuse
to bend their knees to bureaucratic systems. In defence of Weber, it is true that, in
most cases, such individuals find work elsewhere, often as academics, entrepreneurs
or artists. In a very few cases, they become leaders.
Beyond the case of ‘rebels’, what is left unresolved in Weber’s analysis is the
question of technical experts effecting changes in the rationale of the organisation.
Since technical authority does not appear as a category in Weber’s analysis, he does
not consider the influence which experts have on legal-rational organisational struc-
tures. This is surprising given his interest in efficient legal-rational organisations
which should be engaged in selecting the most effective means to achieve relevant
goals. Thus, if effective means are suggested by a technical expert, they should be
readily accepted. This issue is pursued in Chapter 4 with respect to boardroom behav-
iour.
For Weber, then, rulership may be based on legitimate or non-legitimate claims.
Where it is based on legitimate grounds (traditional, legal-rational, charismatic),
scholars talk of authority. (Whether Weber would accept this use of terms is another
matter.) Authority, therefore, is defined as legitimate rulership. Those whose claim to
rule is based on non-legitimate grounds (coercion or utility) are not authority figures.
Thus, in Weber’s framework, it is inappropriate to use the adjective ‘legitimate’
before the noun ‘authority’; the former is always implied by the latter.
Applied to management, Weber’s view implies that managers who convince
others that they are competent to set them on a rational path which leads to goals
appropriate to the group’s power acquire authority. Accordingly, they are directed
to exercise the group’s power on future occasions. Organisational members are
usually aware that to generate power involves some sacrifice of individual freedom.
The subordination of all members in the interest of the organisation, however, typi-
cally creates a situation where there is no direction over the expression of power. As
this situation is highly unstable, members are usually willing to disengage several of
14
Chapter 1: Authority in the Golden Age

their number from the task of generating power to have them direct its expression.
Their task is to focus the power generated by the group on chosen goals. Ideally,
this harnesses the power of the group to rational ends and renders the organisation’s
expression of power predictable. This neo-Weberian line of reasoning has similarities
with traditional consent theory in politics where individuals grant to a ruler the right
to direct the use of power in rational ways. It was notably defended by O’Donnell
whose definition of authority includes the power to coerce subordinates to achieve
organisational goals. His thesis is that humans have natural rights derived from
the legal system and for them to coexist peacefully the state is empowered to develop
and enforce laws. The system requires a social contract to be entered into which
includes a right to command and a duty to obey. Authority, then, rests in the nature
of the social contract. When this Hobbesian thesis is applied to modern organisa-
tional life without modification, it raises the problems of the difference between
political and organisational authority.
An obvious difficulty with O’Donnell’s argument is in the type of consent theory
it involves. Consent theory is an attempt to define the conditions under which there is
a moral duty to obey orders without surrendering personal judgement. Accordingly,
consent theory attempts to harmonise the notions of a right to act according to one’s
own judgement and a duty to do so. While consent, as so theorised, is a necessary
and sufficient condition for social survival in the wider sense, it is doubtful whether
it is applicable without modification to work organisations where individuals have,
in principle, a wide range of choices and actions available to them. It would be so
insofar as individuals can move relatively freely from one organisation to another,
restructure existing organisations without necessarily altering the social system
generally or alter the basis of seniority and legitimacy within organisations. These
actions are of course possible at the societal level although there are greater struc-
tural barriers which place significant limits on individual actions of this nature.
Peters argues that whatever its weaknesses, consent theory holds that a moral
theory of authority can never be a theory of absolute authority.⁵ Recognising that
legitimate rulership is essential to social survival, rational individuals would
concede that they cannot insist on a right or a duty to disregard commands whenever
they disagreed with them and to act instead on their own judgement. Nevertheless,
they need surrender only their right to act, not to judge the commands they receive.
Peters’ emphasis on the phenomenological aspects of authority and consent
poses a dilemma for those theorists who equate authority with hierarchical positions
and who believe that the exercise of legitimate rulership is impartial and impersonal.
To ensure impartial administration authority is vested in the office and not in the
office holder. Authority of office entails a body of knowledge of a non-technical char-
acter and is generally called administrative knowledge, which includes information
about rules, roles and policy decisions. This form of authority is often associated with
Peters (1967: 217).
Max Weber on Legitimate Rulership
15

the ‘bureaucrat’ or unqualified official in, say, a hospital who has little knowledge of
the technical side of medicine or nursing.
Although several theorists have pointed out that the basis of authority lies with
personal as well as social values, the argument that authority is always a matter of
individual perception runs counter to ordinary forms of discourse.⁶ For example,
Homans holds that this argument points to the need to separate the institutional
and personal aspects of authority and to investigate why authority is generally so
stable resting as it does on such an apparently weak foundation as individual choice.
Another example is Bierstedt who defines authority as institutionalised power and
argues that power is transformed into authority when social action and interaction
proceed in accordance with the norms of a formal organisation. The right to use
force is then attached to specific statuses within the association and this right is
what is ordinarily meant by authority. However, he also recognises that authority
is used in a way which implies superior knowledge or expertise. In this sense, he
sees authority as related to influence rather than to power.
De Grazia views authority as power over people but based on the esteem or
respect of those people. Holders of authority are bound by common goals and by
their desires and abilities to move toward them. Benn and Peters see authority as
deriving from the fact that people can be seen as doing ‘right’ and ‘wrong’ things.
Together with these notions develops the establishment of rules and procedures to
determine norms and standards of action. Implicit in this idea is the need for organ-
isations and umpires to establish, modify and maintain these standards. It is in this
context that authority has developed. These authors criticise those who define
authority in terms of power for they believe that those in authority can get their
way by means other than those of force, propaganda and other modes of exercising
power. Like many others, Benn and Peters are prepared to state that the ability to
wield power may be a necessary condition for the exercise of authority in certain
situations. ‘Behind power, there lies authority and behind authority some conception
of legitimacy or right.’⁷
Day sees power as depending on force whereas authority depends on voluntary
obedience. A person who has power relative to another can cause certain effects
which the other cannot effectively resist. Power is also used in a way which specifies
the use of certain methods, such as force. This is power in the coercive sense in
contrast to power in the causative sense where the methods of change are not speci-
fied. Authority, Day argues, cannot be any form of coercive power as it depends on
subordinate obedience which is voluntary. Yet he also maintains that authority is a
kind of causative power. He argues that anyone who exercises political authority
can command obedience to laws and therefore has power in the causative sense.
‘It makes sense to talk of authority as power if it is clearly understood to be causative,
Duncan-Jones (1958); Homans (1951).
Benn & Peters (1959: 261).
16
Chapter 1: Authority in the Golden Age

not coercive.’⁸ Day acknowledges that those in authority sometimes successfully
utilise coercive power. This does not imply, however, that political authority is coer-
cive power. The idea of voluntary assessment of the situation and ensuing obedience
or disobedience is central to this analysis. For example, those who voluntarily obey a
government are accepting its authority; those who disobey or who obey through fear
are responding to its coercive power, not its authority. The confusion surrounding
power and authority is partly due to social institutions having both power and
authority at the same time and Day points to occasions in politics where a person
is perceived as having authority but no power. For example, police officers who
are beaten by a gang they are trying to arrest have no immediate power, but they
do retain legal authority. However, they are not able to exercise de facto authority
because they lack sufficient causative power.
Peters recognises de facto and de jure uses of the concept. When it is claimed
that authority refers to a right to do something according to a certain set of rules
and where this right is distinguished from the power to do things, then Peters argues,
this is authority in a de jure sense. This use of authority is to be contrasted with the
de facto use favoured by Jouvenel and others. Peters says that authority refers to the
ability of individuals to get their proposals accepted, a definition which implies that
power and authority are virtually synonymous. ‘To have de facto authority is to stand
in such a relation to other people that one can, as a matter of fact, induce them to do
[…] what one tells them, because, for whatever reason, they are convinced that they
ought to do so.’⁹
Winch opposes the view that authority, or Peters’ de facto authority, entails a
direct causal relationship between people in authority and subordinates subject to
their commands. Winch does not see authority as a form of influence but rather as
an internal relation ‘because of its connection with the ideas embodied in the
form of activity within which it is exercised.’¹⁰ Further, he holds that the concept
is connected conceptually with the notion of there being a right and wrong way of
doing things. However, the crucial point concerns the idea of voluntary submission,
and here Winch is close to Jouvenel who argues that authority is the faculty of
inducing assent. To follow an authority is a voluntary act. ‘Authority ends where
voluntary assent ends.’¹¹ Rather than view authority as a curtailment of freedom of
social choices, Winch sees authority as a precondition of this freedom.
Duncan-Jones has sympathy with Winch’s emphasis on voluntary acceptance of
commands and directions inherent in the concept. However, he argues that in
general usage authority has led to ‘authoritarian’ which connotes the idea of some
group imposing itself on others against their will. Winch believes this applies to
power or force rather than to authority. Day develops this point arguing that obedi-
Day (1963: 260).
Peters (1959: 216).
Winch (1958: 230).
Jouvenel (1957: 33).
Max Weber on Legitimate Rulership
17

ence to government is not necessarily voluntary. That is, when people obey through
fear of being punished for disobedience, such action is involuntary. But insofar as
people obey government through fear of punishment, they are not acting because
they accept the authority of the government. Individuals who keep within the law
solely to avoid punishment are not acknowledging the authority of the government
but its power.¹²
In summary, the foregoing discussion shows that those who define authority in
terms of power treat power in the causative sense referred to by Day. It is difficult to
dispute this argument for when power is defined so inclusively any act of influence
falls in the category. The coercive act of the dictator and the influence of the philos-
opher are equally represented by the notion of power. While technically correct, this
usage is not in line with popular parlance. Furthermore, a term defined so inclusively
has limited scientific utility, a conclusion reached by Weber regarding the notion of
power.
Managerial Authority as Concession
Mary Parker Follett was one of the first modern management writers to challenge the
idea of an ultimate or final authority in organisations. Expressions such as ‘ultimate
authority’, ‘final determination’ and ‘supreme control’ she believes to be anachron-
istic. She argues that the most fundamental idea in organisational life is that of
‘function’. People in an organisation perform a function and they should have
commensurate responsibility and authority according to their function. Accordingly,
function, responsibility and authority should be the three inseparables in work
organisations. Follett argues that people talk of the limit of authority when it
would be preferable to speak of the definition of the task.
Rather than relate authority to a hierarchical position, Follett argues that it
should go with knowledge and experience and that obedience should go where it
is due, whether it be up or down the hierarchy. This conception of authority and
responsibility runs contrary to the almost universally held belief that senior
managers delegate authority and responsibility. Further, the phrase ‘delegating
authority’ assumes that managers have the right to authority. This right, however,
should be commensurate with their function. Managers cannot delegate authority
except when they are ill or on vacation. But then they have not delegated authority;
someone else is doing their work and they have the authority which goes with that
work. Authority belongs with the job and stays with the job.¹³
In Follett’s case the concept of authority refers to the job function and the
emphasis is still on the position rather than the person. Accordingly, her approach
Day (1963: 259).
Follett (1926: 149).
18
Chapter 1: Authority in the Golden Age

is an extension of the formal, Weberian model with its emphasis on organisational
positions in the impersonal order. In fact, it is difficult to escape the influence of
Weber’s thesis in the management literature.
By the 1930s theorists were emboldened to combine aspects of the formal model
with a consideration of the personal, subjective aspects of authority. This can be seen
in the work of Chester Barnard who defines authority as a quality of a communica-
tion by virtue of which it is accepted by employees. However, he allows for the
formalised aspect in the ‘quality’ of the communication. Disobeying a communica-
tion, therefore, represents a denial of its authority. This is closer to Follett’s position
than to Weber’s: the decision on authority lies with the persons to whom communi-
cation is addressed and not with the initiator of the communication. Managers are
neither possessors of authority nor do they have authority.
For Barnard, assent is a necessary and sufficient condition for a management
relationship to be classed as one of authority. This position, however, is untenable.
A more accurate analysis reveals that if assent is indeed a necessary condition for the
management relationship to be classed as one of authority (which, for Barnard,
implies willingness), it is not a sufficient condition. For example, if a manager (A)
threatens a colleague (B) with dismissal if B does not behave illegally as instructed,
B may assent to A’s demands, but it cannot be claimed that A is exercising authority.
The denial rests on the argument that B’s situation was created by A’s use of a form
of power which runs counter to authority.
As a practicing manager, Barnard was struck by the frequency with which mana-
gerial directives are disobeyed. This observation led him to ask how it is possible for
managers to secure consistent cooperation if the acceptance of authority rests with
subordinate colleagues. His answer is that those who gain advantages from the
organisation’s rewards actively support the maintenance of authority therein. That
is, the informal shared view of the work community makes individuals reluctant to
question authority that is within their ‘zone of indifference.’ In this zone, employees
uncritically accept orders because such missives are deemed to be consistent with
the tasks implicitly accepted when they became employees. The formal instantiation
of this principle is the commonly accepted, but nonetheless mistaken, view that
authority comes from above. Conversely, disobedience of an instruction by an
employee to whom it is addressed is an effective denial of its authority and amounts
to challenging the organisation’s structure, processes and objectives.
Barnard differentiates the ‘authority of position’ and the ‘authority of leadership’.
The former is to a considerable extent independent of personal expertise. Authority
of leadership derives from the fact that people impute authority to those who are
judged to have superior knowledge and abilities regardless of their organisational
function. When the authority of leadership is combined with the authority of posi-
tion, organisational members will accept orders far outside the zone of indifference.
Authority, then, is another name for the willingness of individuals to submit to the
necessities of organisational power.
Managerial Authority as Concession
19

Weber acknowledged that authority emanates from subordinates in the sense
that, even when it is based on coercion, it is still generally accepted. What Weber
saw as a limiting case Barnard saw as the fundamental nature of authority, leading
him to the conclusion that the army is the ‘greatest of all democracies’ because
soldiers decide ‘on their own’ to accept orders. Barnard combined this position
with his view of the ‘fiction of superior authority’ and thus rejected traditional
models of authority based on (legitimate) power. This conclusion, surely, is a pyrrhic
victory for Barnard. The fiction of the superior authority is hardly a fiction when
soldiers can be shot for disobedience.
Although there are many similarities between Weber’s and Barnard’s theories,
scholars have generally seen them as champions of two different conceptual perspec-
tives. One is derived from Weber where authority is a power structure legitimated by
rational values, controlled by trained experts and defined by the principle of hier-
archy. In the other, developed by Barnard, authority is based on communication
processes which apprise managers of relevant matters of fact and inform them of
their responsibilities. In this latter case, neither legitimacy nor hierarchy plays a
central role; individual self-interests rather than shared moral commitments provide
the main motivation.¹⁴
Converging Perspectives
Disagreements between the proponents of these two perspectives resulted in
attempts at a synthesis to reconcile them. Like many of his predecessors, Hartmann
in Authority and Organisation in German Management acknowledges the two general
types of authority which he labels ultimate and functional. In the case of ultimate
authority managers claim the obedience of their subordinates because both parties
take this for granted. In German organisations, the most significant basis of ultimate
authority is management’s commitment to three systems of values: private property,
community service orientation and a belief in the maintenance of a hierarchical
society. Ultimate authority is independent of technical knowledge and job expertise.
Based on such ‘ultimate’ values, formal authority is difficult to acquire and destroy. It
includes an emphasis on value-orientation, the development of ideological attitude
patterns, non-rational evaluation of performance and a generalised claim to obedi-
ence.
Functional authority derives from specialist knowledge and expertise. Hartmann
refers to it as the problem-orientated type of authority and distinguishes it by a pecu-
liar form of relativity dependent on the actual quality of performance. That is, while
technical success creates a right to authority, malfunctioning destroys it. Functional
authority, then, is relatively easy to acquire and lose. It is also situational and conse-
Hopkins (1961: 82–83).
20
Chapter 1: Authority in the Golden Age

quently is not of a kind to produce stability. Although the functional basis of
authority should not be ignored, its very instability makes objective analysis difficult
and ever-changing.
Another prominent example of an attempt at synthesis is Simon. In Administra-
tive Behavior, Simon argues that authority should be defined in strictly behaviouristic
terms since it is only when the behavioural interaction between a superior and
subordinates occurs that authority exists. The behaviour of managers involves a
command and the expectation that the command will be obeyed. Subordinates, in
choosing to obey the command, are prepared to hold in abeyance their own critical
faculties for evaluating it. They are said to accept authority whenever they permit
their behaviour to be guided by the decision of a manager without independently
examining the merits of the decision.
While Simon can be charged with begging the question in his definition
concerning the motivation behind the suspension of critical judgement, he claims
to avoid the charge because of the recognition of the value of the organisation itself
and its achievable goals. Authority, for Simon, is one of several forms of influence. Its
distinguishing characteristic is that it does not necessarily seek to convince subordi-
nates, but to gain their acquiescence. When decisions and commands are ques-
tioned, it is the ‘authority figure’ who has the final word in the disagreement.
Simon’s definition is incomplete on several counts. First, it does not allow
distinctions to be made between authority, power and influence which would appear
desirable in the light of the current use of these terms. This policy is scarcely in tune
with the scientific requirement that categories be distinct, their population specifi-
able and their use consistent. Second, Simon’s definition fails to account for degrees
of acceptance.What he wishes to exclude from his notion of authority is the situation
where an individual examines and evaluates the merits of a manager’s proposals and
becomes convinced that the proposals should be carried out. The difficulties of this
argument are readily apparent. Some subordinates routinely give independent
examination to their manager’s orders and accept them whether they agree with
them or not. Therefore, those cases where they agree with the orders are not
instances of authority, even though they would carry them out anyway.
Situations where obedience arises from consent formed the basis of Peters’
point. The basis of authority rests with those subject to commands: authority is
conceded after examination of qualifications, expertise, official status and goal
attainment, always according to the ability of the examiner to appreciate the
rationale or to gain access to the premises on which it is claimed to rest.
A third problem with Simon’s definition of authority is the extent to which it is
‘purely objective and behaviouristic’. Simon’s use of such terms as ‘independent
examination’, ‘judgement’, ‘critical review’ or ‘expectation’ is inconsistent with his
stated conceptual objectives. For example, if the verbal behaviour of managers is
merely observed, it is impossible to know whether they are in a relationship of
authority since the subjective states of managers and subordinates cannot be
observed, or reliably inferred from observed behaviour.
Converging Perspectives
21

Simon appears to have been aware of these problems for in later chapters he
argues that authority is present where obedience anticipates and follows command.
The observed behaviour, therefore, is not sufficient to demonstrate an authority rela-
tionship. Consequently, Simon adopts at least five definitions of authority.¹⁵ In the
end, readers discover that the subjective reactions of subordinates have been intro-
duced into the category, a trend which was already well established in Barnard, but
which compromises a behaviourist account of authority.
As Simon’s example shows, attempts to define authority in purely objective
terms inevitably lead to an overgeneralisation of the concept and confound a host
of distinctions which make for important differences in human behaviour. Further,
the association of authority and power remains unexamined as can be seen in
Simon’s discussion of the motivational bases underlying the acceptance of authority.
That is, Simon follows Weber and Barnard in identifying confidence (technical skill)
and legitimisation and adds social approval together with sanctions and rewards.
The latter motivational base again confuses authority with power: a tendency
which social psychologists have followed.
The Disappearance of Authority
In a notable essay ‘What was Authority?’, Hannah Arendt discusses not what
authority is but what it was. Twentieth-century Western society, she argues, is in
the middle of a crisis triggered by the disappearance of authority, which is the conse-
quence of the decline, almost to the point of extinction, of authority’s two historical
sources: religion (which has been secularised) and tradition (which is seen as
outdated). Manifestations of these phenomena include people losing their sense of
life purpose and the pervasive impression that society is bereft of order and stability.
Contrasting authority with power, Arendt notes that authority precludes the use
of external means of coercion; where force is used, authority itself has failed. For
example, if violence makes people obey, then violence is authority. Authority,
then, implies an obedience in which individuals retain their freedom. However,
authority is incompatible with persuasion which presupposes equality and works
through a process of argumentation. Where arguments are used, she asserts,
authority is left in abeyance. This dual incompatibility (with power and reason) of
authority allows Arendt to argue against a return to the views of Plato and Aristotle.
For Plato, Arendt explains, authority cannot come from persuasion and argu-
ment. If persuasion and argument could establish authority, Socrates’ trial would
have returned a different verdict. Rather, Platonic authority, in Arendt’s reading of
The Republic, comes from truth because the self-evident nature of truth compels
the mind in ways that are stronger than persuasion and argument. However, only
Simon (1957: 11, 22, 125, 128, 151).
22
Chapter 1: Authority in the Golden Age

the philosopher-kings can know and be subject to the authority of the truth; the
multitude, which is easily swayed by myths, cannot be trusted to do the same. Ulti-
mately, the establishment of Platonic authority requires violence; as is the case with
Plato’s later attempt to ground authority on laws, which will have to be enforced.
Aristotle’s solution to the problem of authority fares no better than Plato’s in
Arendt’s analysis. Aristotelian authority assumes a division between rulers and the
ruled, with educators (and by extension, experts and scientists) playing the role of
the philosopher-kings by imposing knowledge on their students.
The violence inherent in Greek authority, Arendt argues, is best understood when
viewed against the Roman conception. Specifically, Roman authority did not require
coercion because it was conceived of as flowing from the city’s sacralised ancestors
to its citizens by way of the Senate. Rome was thought as not having been simply
built but authored and this glorious foundation infused Roman life with a collective
spirit which guided its development. Roman authority thus united past and future
generations through the acceptance of, and commitment to, a mythical vision.
In summary, for Arendt, authority has permanently died out. Neither truth nor
persuasion, neither argument nor science will assist Western society in overcoming
the existential crisis that the loss of authority triggered. Similarly, religion and tradi-
tion will not remedy the malaise since they are no longer authoritative. To alleviate
the disappearance of authority, Arendt places her hopes in modern revolutions. The
American Revolution with its ideals of freedom and justice enshrined in the Decla-
ration of Independence and the Constitution, exemplifies the sort of political event
which can provide the foundations for society’s rejuvenation. Her conclusion
shows that her ‘authority’ only tangentially connects with ‘authority’ as understood
by Weber and Simon. In her effort to distinguish authority from power, Arendt
divorces the two concepts entirely, arguing that authority is part foundational
myth and part political vision. Besides, she does not identify reason or persuasion
as a basis for ensuring its acceptance. Her conception embeds ideals that bring citi-
zens together and create social cohesion, but she does not explain why people
should embrace them.
Authority as Reasoned Elaboration
The present authors believe that there is a plausible answer to the vexed question of
authority in Carl Friedrich’s theory, overlooked by management writers, but revived
by several scholars who argue that it has the potential to resolve the many concep-
tual confusions and problems associated with the empirical study of managerial
authority.¹⁶ Like Arendt, Friedrich bases his analysis of authority on the crucial
difference between power and authority and the need to see it as related to commu-
Herbst (2006); Plant (2011); Spillane & Joullié (2015).
Authority as Reasoned Elaboration
23

nications. However, he arrives at very different conclusions. Indeed, the differences
between Arendt and Friedrich on authority, given their similar intellectual back-
ground and cultural heritage, are striking.
Friedrich was one of the earliest critics of the conflation of power and authority.
Teaching full time at Harvard from 1926, then alternatively at Harvard and the Univer-
sity of Heidelberg from 1956 until his retirement in 1971, Friedrich wrote on public
administration, political theory and totalitarianism. Noted for his knowledge of
German constitutional history, he advised the US occupying forces during de-Nazifi-
cation and participated in the drafting of West Germany’s post-war constitution. Frie-
drich’s lifelong concerns included the reconciliation of bureaucracy with personal
and professional responsibility, the respective roles (and scope for decision-making)
of policymakers and administrators and the possibility for administrators to engage
in public argument and debate. Uniting these concerns is his theory of authority.
Friedrich begins his famous essay, Authority, with a statement of the problem
confronting researchers. ‘Ever since the eighteenth-century revolt against the estab-
lished authorities in church and state, there has been a marked tendency among
freedom-loving intellectuals to view “authority” with a jaundiced eye, if not to
denounce it.’¹⁷
Friedrich is particularly critical of those scholars who conflate authority and
authoritarianism. Authority, he claims, has been juxtaposed to freedom, to force
and to reason. ‘It has been praised and condemned in all these contexts, and as a
result, the word has been incorporated in a pejorative adjective, ‘authoritarian’,
and linked as a general characteristic to ‘personality’ as an objectionable and eradi-
cable trait.’¹⁸
Friedrich disagrees with Weber’s proposition that authority should be defined in
terms of power, legitimate or otherwise, since authority may be held without power.
He notes that authority derives from auctoritas which is related to the notion of
augmentation: auctoritas supplements an act of will by adding reasons to it. It is
advice which cannot properly be disregarded, such as a doctor gives to a patient.
It is a matter of adding wisdom to will, reason to interests. The role of reasoning
in authority relationships is, for Friedrich, the central issue. For when good reasons
exist for believing and doing something, such action or thought acquires a quality
which is ‘authoritative’. Etymologically, there is also a link to ‘author’: a person
who creates and disseminates communications.
Authority, then, is the quality of a communication rather than of a person.
Specifically, it is the quality of a communication which is capable of reasoned elab-
oration. The capacity for reasoned elaboration is consistent with the values, beliefs,
interests and needs of the community within which the authority operates. In mana-
gerial authority, the communication requesting obedience is recognised as being
Friedrich (1958: 28).
Friedrich (1958: 29).
24
Chapter 1: Authority in the Golden Age

supported by reasons why the action is the desirable one. In this sense, authority is a
source of power, not a form of power. This distinction also applies to the power
wielder. However, one significant difference is that the power wielder may gain
obedience without recourse to reasoned elaboration. For Friedrich, power is that
relation among people which manifests itself in the behaviour of following. Although
conceptually independent, power and authority are thus closely related. For
example, much managerial authority can be maintained without managers needing
to elaborate their directions.
Friedrich’s analysis allows him to talk of both power and authority in terms of
obedience and yet be able to draw a distinguishing line between them. This delinea-
tion is possible because of his emphasis on reasoned elaboration without which indi-
viduals lack or lose authority. ‘Losing one’s authority’ is a way of saying that
managers have lost power when the authority of their communications has disinte-
grated because of community changes and consequently their capacity for
communal reasoning has declined.
Friedrich is also critical of those scholars who equate authority and legitimacy.
These authors miss the key aspect of authority, namely its relation to reason. Legiti-
macy implies ‘reasoning upon the title to rule’ and authority can create legitimacy
wherever it provides good reasons for the title to rule. Authority helps to legitimise
power by the fact that the capacity to issue communications, with an appropriate
convincing rationale, embraces the right to rule. Authority thus buttresses legitimacy.
Authority is not ‘legitimate power’ for legitimate power exists in its many forms
without a capacity for reasoned elaboration. What is required in organisations is a
rationale for following managers: a demonstration or a conviction that managers
can provide guidance and successfully direct colleagues to group goals.
Friedrich also criticises Barnard for extending a theory of informal organisation
to remedy the defects of his theory of formal organisation. For example, Barnard
broadened the concept of cooperation to cover all work relationships, including
those that involve coercion and thereby failed to make a distinction between ‘coop-
erative’ and ‘directive’ styles of managing. In the cooperative (or authoritative) organ-
isation, the contributions of all relevant colleagues are elicited and voluntarily made;
in the directive (or authoritarian) organisation, they are ordered and enforced. More-
over, there is no role in Barnard’s organisation for criticism or argumentation: disrup-
tive factors are either endorsed or minimised.
Friedrich argues that the true nature of authority (as authoritativeness) has been
obscured by the pejorative term ‘authoritarian’ which refers to managers who pretend
to act authoritatively while rejecting reasoned elaboration and critical argumentation
in favour of directives and commandments. When considered in Friedrich’s sense,
authority is quite distinct from the use of power and coercion that is ordinarily
implied in the notion of ‘authoritarian’. An authoritarian manager is one who orders
rather than argues, directs rather than advises, commands rather than suggests.
Friedrich’s analysis broadens the notion of authority since he sees it as a quality
of knowledge. Authority thus approaches the notion of ‘correctness’ communicated
Authority as Reasoned Elaboration
25

to others. Used in this sense, authority can be of two kinds: scientific and moral. In
seeking out the ‘authorities’ on a scientific matter one is searching for the most reli-
able and effective knowledge for bringing about some specifiable aim. To seek out
the ‘authorities’ on moral questions is thus to search for the best form of knowledge
on which to discriminate between acceptable and unacceptable aims or means. This
analysis explains the difficulties encountered in analysing authority, for if the cate-
gory is to include the range of values which influence human behaviour, then
authority becomes so amorphous a concept as to be empirically inaccessible.
Organisational members who engage in reasoned elaboration will frequently
find that their reasons are challenged by their colleagues who offer alternative
reasons for various policies and practices. Thus, a process of argumentation is
entered into as both parties exchange and offer reasons to support their contrasting
views. Friedrich stops short of considering the consequences of allowing those
people subject to reasoned elaboration a voice in the proceedings. Yet, his analysis
is consistent with the view that once reasoned elaboration is enacted, the probability
exists that disagreements and countervailing reasons will enter, if not dominate, the
exchange. If argument is forbidden at the outset, it is difficult to conceive of
authority as anything more than rationalised, rather than rational, communication.
Karl Popper goes further, claiming that argument, and hence rationality, is the basis
for social and personal development generally.
Understandably, Friedrich criticises those scholars, such as Fromm, who talk of
‘irrational authority’, which he (Friedrich) regards as false authority. While there are
greater or lesser degrees of reasoning involved in authority relationships, the author-
itative communication is capable of reasoned elaboration. Thus, attempts to identify
authority with the irrational miss the fundamental point that authority is, by defini-
tion, related to reason. In authority relationships the communication requesting
acceptance is recognised as being supported by reasons why the action is the desir-
able one. Authority is a quality of individuals that enhances their power, but it is not
itself power.
Situations where individuals successfully pretend to have authority give rise to
false authority which occurs when managers issue communications which are
believed to allow for reasoned elaboration when in fact they do not. That is, collea-
gues sometimes believe that communications could be reasonably elaborated and
are therefore worthy of acceptance when no such potentiality exists. Only when
what is communicated can be reasoned upon and defended is authority secure.
The view that there are degrees of reasoned elaboration involved in authority is
persuasive. For instance, to be authoritative, a proposed course of action, even if
advanced by a senior manager, must be supported by convincing reasons. This obser-
vation amounts to saying that authoritative communications depend on the interests,
beliefs and values of those to whom the communications are directed. Managers who
have little authority have lost power because the authority of their communications
has disintegrated, either because they have ceased to engage in reasoned elaboration
or because the values of the other organisational members have changed.
26
Chapter 1: Authority in the Golden Age

The fact that managers’ commands and other communications can be reinforced
by reasoned elaboration relating them to established values and beliefs lends their
acts that ‘authority’ which limits arbitrary abuse of power. Authoritative managers,
therefore, recognise their responsibility for discretionary acts as an obligation to
retain their regard for the importance of reasoned elaboration. ‘Once this regard is
lost – and it may be lost by [managers] at large no longer accepting reason as a
guide – the night of meaningless violence is upon us.’¹⁹
As managerial authority is reflected in cooperative exchanges between managers
and technical experts, management requires a language that emphasises valid
reasoning culminating in authoritative advice. However, the ability to engage in crit-
ical debate needs to be supplemented with the ability to persuade others of the right
course of action. What makes a specific course of action authoritative is that
convincing reasons may be meta-rational in the sense that they refer to transcen-
dental beliefs. As it is unreasonable to deny such beliefs evidential value, authorita-
tive reasoning and persuasive skills constitute the field of authority rather than the
more limited field of logic. As opposed to logic, persuasion is not a formal technique
because it is linked to accepted ideas and probable opinion. Persuasive skills provide
managers with strategies to protect them (and their authority) in debate since they
deal with accepted ideas and probable opinions rather than logical proofs. When
logical proof cannot be offered, reasoning needs to be supported by persuasion.
Power, legitimate or otherwise, is thus an insufficient basis for managerial effec-
tiveness. Indeed, to be effective, managers need to supplement their legitimate power
with authority which is vested in rational communications that are persuasively
disseminated. Managerial authority, therefore, is grounded on technical and persua-
sive skills. Authority is not an alternative to argument: it is grounded in it.
As to leadership, Friedrich argues that leaders hold power, but they also create
and spend power. He argues for three primary roles of leadership: innovation (e.g.,
entrepreneurs), authoritativeness (problem-solvers) and protecting (e.g., lawgivers),
to which correspond characteristic behaviours: imitating, obeying and acclaiming.
All three forms of leadership elicit consent and thus provide a foundation for consen-
sual power. His theory applies to charismatics and their followers, although Friedrich
disagrees with Weber’s notion of institutionalised charisma (e.g., a church), since
institutionalisation and charisma are contradictory terms. Charismatic leadership,
for him, is of minor importance to theorists because the faith in transcendent beings
is today not strong enough to provide an adequate basis for legitimising leadership.
By extending his definition of authority into the social psychological field Frie-
drich overcomes the problems of both the formal and informal models and empha-
sises the existential aspects of the relationship. His insistence on the psychological
aspects of authority, when brought to bear on Weber’s sociological analysis, raises
the question of whether authority (in Friedrich’s sense) can penetrate the resistance
Friedrich (1958: 48).
Authority as Reasoned Elaboration
27

of large organisations with their formally ensconced managerialists.Whatever effects
technical experts and others have on managerial power therefore will differ in degree
according to the question at issue.
Finally, Friedrich’s theory predicts that managerial authority is enriched through
the contribution of technical experts. Existing anomalies concerning the rational
qualities of the social order provide an empirical challenge of considerable impor-
tance for it links the two sides of the authority relationship: the concession of
authority on the one hand and the consequences of compliance on the other. This
latter aspect has been widely studied and has yielded much valuable information.
However, the other side of the relationship is still submerged in conceptual
ambiguity and theoretical confusion. This state-of-affairs has serious implications
should a researcher investigating any one of these concepts attempt to describe
one in terms of another. Consequently, the analysis of managerial authority has
yielded results at a level of generality which does not permit researchers to be
able to make reliable and subtle distinctions in human behaviour. Authority is one
of those concepts most in need of subtle analysis since it has a claim to be the foun-
dation of organisational behaviour.
The conceptual review in this chapter highlights the difficulties facing those who
aim to objectify abstract concepts, such as authority. Authority is a relationship
which provides information about the nature of both superordinate and subordinate
parties. It yields information which can lead to inferences about the phenomenolog-
ical world of the representatives of both parties. This, in turn, provides the founda-
tion for the establishment of law-like propositions of the degree to which authority
has become institutionalised.
The function of the empirical investigation of authority is to set up situations in
which this relationship appears and to note the conditions which define the situation
where the appropriate consistencies appear between the two end points in which the
relationship is anchored. One technique by which this is accomplished is to create
empirical analogues of the Weberian ideal types for experimental manipulation.
While there are certain problems with this technique, the applicability of such
analogues to real-life settings is lent the appearance of some validity by the theoret-
ical bridge inherent in the conceptual scheme.
It is clear from the studies quoted in this chapter that the criteria adopted by
researchers in arriving at a conceptual framework for authority betray diverse
assumptions. Authority is indeed a protean concept.
Regrettably, a common stance adopted in the literature is to think of occasions
on which people change their behaviour as cases in which a single type of factor
is operating and to conclude that it is of little importance whether this factor is called
power, influence, authority, obedience, conformity or social pressure. There has been
empirical progress in some fields, however. For example, the early studies of
conformity and obedience have attracted widespread critical comment from both
experimental and ethical perspectives.
28
Chapter 1: Authority in the Golden Age

While the possibilities discussed above assist in clarifying the conceptual ambi-
guities and empirical contradictions involved in the study of managerial authority,
there is today little agreement among scholars about the nature and source of
authority. Research after the golden age of research has failed to resolve conceptual
confusions.
Authority as Reasoned Elaboration
29

Chapter 2:
Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience
Much of the discussion in the preceding chapter concentrated on the essentially
rational nature of authority. This perspective is to be contrasted with the psychoana-
lytic view that the basis of authority is irrational. That authority has an irrational (or
non-rational) quality is familiar to political scientists and sociologists. Weber, for
instance, emphasised this aspect in his analysis of charismatic leadership.
In Freudian theory the family is the prototype of authority relationships.
Authority figures represent idealised father images which stand for superego func-
tioning. The functions of the superego are the same as the function of parents and
teachers and others who insist on appropriate social norms aiming at proper
conduct. However, there are, as Freud recognised, two aspects of proper conduct:
that induced by the fear of punishment and that resulting from the effective opera-
tion of the superego, or conscience.
According to Freud, authority relationships involve two qualitatively different
identifications. On the one hand, such relationships are authoritarian as they involve
a command figure who applies sanctions and curbs natural inclinations. On the
other hand, the authoritative person offers guidance and counsel and, in the form
of the father, dominates personality development. Yet, there is an ambivalence
underlying all authority relationships which is reflected in the person who is
perceived to be both authoritarian and authoritative. Understandably, Freud traces
this ambivalence to childhood where early authority figures bear considerably on
later authority identifications.
In An Outline of Psychoanalysis, Freud wrote that the parents’ influence includes
not merely the personalities of the parents themselves but also the national and
family traditions handed on through them, together with contributions from later
successors and parental substitutes, such as teachers and respected figures in public
life. Further, in Freudian theory, the historical bond between father and child is
crucial for later identifications for ego interests are validated by the notions of
right and wrong developed through early authority relationships. However, superego
identifications are not always personal because institutions assume the guise of
either a paternal or maternal presence. For example, churches, hospitals and univer-
sities, whose role is to protect and guide people, are considered maternal as opposed
to aggressive masculine institutions, such as armies or business corporations. While
an institution generally has a maternal identification, its management often has a
parental identification. In the words of a Freudian scholar, ‘What we are asserting,
on the basis of Freudian theory, is that the psychological source of the intense
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-004

emotions of loyalty and rebelliousness which institutions are able to evoke from their
members is to be found within their original family relations.’¹
In his analysis of group formation, Freud studied the bonds which developed
between group members and the leader and the bonds among the members them-
selves. He argued that the bond which united the members in a group was founded
on a shared identification with a central figure, object or concept. His ideas were
followed up by Redl who identified several types of group leader, or central person,
around whom the group process take place. The difference between the type of
leader lies in their various roles. Patriarchal Sovereigns attract group members in a
way that leads to identification and invites their approval. Leaders appeal to the
love emotions and represent an ideal for others to model. Organisers render an
important service to group members by providing the means for the satisfaction of
common, and often undesirable, drives and thus prevents guilt feelings, conflicts
and frustrations which otherwise are generally involved in the group. Tyrants gain
their influence through the fears of their subordinates. Heroes initiate group activi-
ties, saving group members from anxieties and conflicts associated with a lack of
goal clarity and direction. Good Examples render a service to group members by
virtue of the infectiousness of the unconflicted personality upon the conflicted
ones and thus save them from the necessity of facing their own anxieties.
Fromm, a social psychoanalyst, argues that a separation of authority into
rational and irrational components clarifies the problem of ambivalence which both-
ered Freud. Rational authority has its source in competence but requires constant
scrutiny and criticism. The source of irrational authority is always power over people
where criticism is forbidden. Rational authority is based on the equality of both
authority and subject, which differs only with respect to the degree of knowledge
or skill in a specific field. Irrational authority is by its very nature based on
inequality, implying difference in value. In Fromm’s analysis obedience to directives
is a possible outcome of either form of authority: rational authority is seen in the
teacher-pupil relationship and irrational authority in the master-slave relationship.
The essential difference is the meaning which is attached to the relationship and
the basis on which it rests.
According to Fromm, authoritarian ethics can be distinguished from humanistic
ethics. Authoritarian ethics denies the human capacity to know what is good or bad
since the moralist is a power figure who claims transcendent knowledge. Such a
system is based not on reason but on awe of the power figure and on the subjects’
feelings of impotence and dependence. Authoritarian ethics, which is really a
moralism, answers the question of what is good or bad in terms of the interests of
the power figure: it is basically exploitative. The power figure ordains obedience to
be the main virtue and disobedience to be the main sin. ‘The unforgiveable sin in
authoritarian ethics is rebellion, the questioning of the authority’s right to establish
McIntosh (1970: 908).
Chapter 2: Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience
31

norms and of its axiom that the norms established by the authority are in the best
interests of the subjects.’²
Humanistic ethics, in contrast, is based on the principle that only individuals
can determine the criterion for virtue and sin. It is based on the principle that the
criteria of ethical values are human purposes and welfare. These matters are
discussed further in Chapter 9 in relation to a purposive ethics for managers.
If Fromm’s analysis is accepted, that is, if it is agreed that legitimacy is a pre-
requisite of authority, authority-related concepts reveal the emphases of the under-
lying components of the dichotomy between authoritarian and humanistic ethics.
For example, rational authority points to notions of influence, persuasion, respect,
recognition, prestige and expertise. Theorists who emphasise irrational authority
employ terms in accordance with Fromm’s definition, such as power, domination,
coercion, control, inequality, force and obedience. This tendency appears in the
extensive work on the authoritarian personality.
The Authoritarian Personality
In the years after the Second World War, the American Jewish Committee subsidised
a research team from the University of Berkeley to study the psychology of anti-Semi-
tism. The team, led by Adorno, included Jewish authors who were escapees from
Nazism. In 1950 they published The Authoritarian Personality, a work which
continues to attract the interest of scholars.³
The team began by constructing an Anti-Semitism (AS) scale which included
items describing Jews as offensive, threatening, seclusive or clannish. A second
scale was developed to see whether a negative view of Jews was associated with
negative views of minority groups generally. Scores on this ethnocentrism scale (E)
scale correlated positively with scores on the AS scale. A third scale (PEC) was devel-
oped to assess conservative political and economic attitudes, since fascism was
generally regarded as a political movement of the extreme right. Scores on the
PEC scale correlated positively with the AS and E scales. This result was interpreted
to mean that conservatives are more ethnocentric and anti-Semitic than those from
the radical left.
As the three ideological scales correlated with each other, the research team
argued that a central personality factor explained a potentiality for fascism. Accord-
ingly, a fourth scale was constructed to assess this hypothetical personality factor. As
the scale, known as the F-Scale or Authoritarianism, correlated positively with the
Fromm (1967: 22).
Adorno et al. (1950); Altemeyer (1996); Christie & Geis (1970); Christie & Jahoda (1954); Stone,
Lederer & Christie (1993).
32
Chapter 2: Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience

three original scales, the Adorno team concluded that it is a valid measure of the
authoritarian personality.
Adorno and his researchers found that authoritarian subjects thought well of
themselves but lacked accurate interpersonal perception. Importantly, they were
able to hold contradictory ideas without undue concern or even awareness.
Buttressed by the Freudian view that ambivalence towards parents is inevitable,
the team concluded that the authoritarian subjects’ use of the Freudian defence
mechanism of denial was a consequence of a repressive upbringing. Also, in the
Freudian vein, they believed that authoritarians re-direct their feelings of hate
from their parents to minority groups.
Publication of the F-scale was followed by an avalanche of research studies. It
was quickly established that scores on the F-scale correlated negatively with scores
on IQ tests, measures of socio-economic status and with length of education.
Spillane and Martin argue that the independent variable common to these relation-
ships is intelligence.⁴
The items of the F-scale are proverb-like clichés expressing a rigid adherence to
middle-class values, a submissive attitude to idealised moral authorities, denigration
of tender-minded individuals, dogmatic thinking, a pre-occupation with dominance
and leadership, identification with power wielders and exaggeration of the impor-
tance of toughness, a denigration of human nature, topped with an exaggerated
concern with danger and with sexual activities.
High scorers on the F-scale demonstrate a strong tendency to endorse items that
have opposite meanings. For example, authoritarians agree that Jews are clannish
and obtrusive, an obvious contradiction. As the scale items are statements of general
rules, the tendency to endorse them leads relatively unintelligent people into this
kind of contradiction. The persistent tendency of authoritarians to endorse general
rules and contradict themselves and the relationship with IQ indicates that what
lies at the basis of authoritarianism is a specific intellectual factor. Spillane and
Martin identify it with the perception of patterns.
People feel comfortable in social interactions when they can predict the actions
of others with a reasonable degree of reliability. This is achieved generally by
observing patterns in the actions of others and referring these to purposes, beliefs
and emotions. There are, of course, significant differences in people’s ability to
perceive such patterns, especially where individuals are acting relatively freely. If,
however, a large proportion of the actions of others is governed by rules, prediction
becomes easier for all concerned.
For those who are poor at detecting patterns in social life, the environment
appears as a dangerous place where people act in unpredictable ways for mysterious
reasons. The obvious way to cope with this tension is to insist on strict obedience to
rules, roles and authorities so that the social world is rendered more predictable.
Spillane & Martin (2005: 79–87; 2018: 76–83).
The Authoritarian Personality
33

Moreover, in a predictable social world one can gain or regain a sense of personal
power, whereas an unpredictable world renders them relatively impotent. Social
life is, as Machiavelli and Nietzsche insisted, a world of power and one needs a
strong will to power to survive and overcome adversaries. Those individuals who
are good at detecting patterns in social life are thereby empowered and are likely
to feel less anxious and more secure in their social relationships than those in
which this ability is less developed. Further, good pattern perceivers are likely to
be unimpressed by rules and fixed roles and more idiosyncratic in what they do.
This thesis makes authoritarianism a relative matter.
To support their thesis, Spillane and Martin argue that the conditions in pre-Nazi
Germany increased unpredictability to the extent that many people were unable to
tolerate it and, consequently, became alarmed. As a result of the decrease in predict-
ability they experienced, society’s regulation of its citizens’ behaviour slackened.
This situation generated a desire for more effective regulation and encouraged
people to endorse authoritarian attitudes and practices which in turn created a
demand for authoritarian leadership. Even in less dramatic times, there are inevi-
tably people who do not enjoy a comfortable level of predictive power. These people
are susceptible to the emphasis given by conservative politicians to law and order.
This observation assists in accounting for the persistent support for conservative
politicians among members of the working class, whose interests are not otherwise
served by conservative parties.
Minority groups, including migrants, frequently encounter prejudice and rejec-
tion from those people who are easily threatened by customs and behaviour which
appear to be incompatible with the traditional ways and thus are relatively unpre-
dictable. These minority groups are invariably criticised by those most disturbed
by the change in patterns of social life who engage in strategies by which they
endeavour to regain personal power in the social structure. Such strategies include
extreme demands for social conformity, insistence that minority groups are punished
for perceived transgressions and the establishment of a new set of standards by
which the offenders are to be judged. The intensity of these prescriptions varies
according to the degree to which the minority groups abide by the new, sometimes
draconian, rules. The presence of clans and ghettoes, especially of a religious kind,
exacerbates the problem and inflames the emotions which drive the authoritarians to
permanent prejudice. In this sense, authoritarianism has universal significance
which is resistant to learning and which compromises rational behaviour. Whether
it is a personality trait is another question.
Spillane and Martin argue that the assumption of a personality trait should
include the following considerations. First, consistency of behaviour over situations
is not a sufficient condition for the inference of personality traits because role-
playing and habitual behaviour are relatively consistent rational means of achieving
goals. Second, where people are ignorant of effective behaviour, their ineffective
behaviour is not a sufficient condition for the inference of personality traits. Third,
an explanation in terms of personality traits demands that the behaviour must be
34
Chapter 2: Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience

consistent over situations in some or all of which it is effective, and the instances in
which the behaviour is ineffective must not be the result of personal ignorance,
which means that people had the opportunity to adapt their behaviour to the circum-
stances. As personality traits are assumed to be stable, it follows that behaviour
which is explained in terms of personality traits is only that which implies a lack
of adaptability.
Spillane and Martin conclude that if their hypothesis about authoritarianism is
correct, it qualifies for the status of a personality trait as they define the concept
since it is, by definition, a deficiency in a specific aspect of intelligence, so that its
possessor acts in a consistent but often ineffective or non-rational way. Whatever
the case, there has been no shortage of studies of the correlation of scores on author-
itarian scales and other personality traits. This line of research is not worth pursuing
further since correlating psychological scales reveals more about item selection than
about authoritarianism per se.
Stimulated by the problem of academic anti-intellectualism in the 1960s, Rudin
argues that although the study of attitudes to irrational authority has attracted
considerable attention, this has been at the expense of the study of rational authority
and its products. Rudin argues that the acceptance of the authority of people judged
to have greater competence than oneself in specific areas is different from the indis-
criminate acceptance of authority. Similarly, Martin and Ray point to the fact that:
‘Authority is a many-faceted element in experience, and it is not conceptually satis-
fying to regard acceptance of any and every form of authority (without distinction as
to time, place or situation) as indicative of incipient fascism and necessary preju-
dice.’⁵ They point out that the Adorno research reports carried strong evaluative
suggestions concerning those people with high scores on the F-Scale. In the final
chapter of The Authoritarian Personality, Adorno et al. even assert that authoritari-
anism is ‘a disease to be cured’. Subsequent research in this field has generally rein-
forced such value judgements and perpetuated the identification of authoritarianism
with potentiality for fascism.⁶
Rudin published a scale which claimed to be a measure of ‘rational authoritari-
anism’ as defined by Fromm. He assumed the F-Scale to be a measure of ‘irrational
authoritarianism’, since the description by Adorno’s team of the authoritarian’s
personality conforms closely to what would be expected of a participant in a
master-slave relationship. However, the Rudin scale has failed to generate much
interest within psychology. Martin and Ray argue that this neglect reflects the Zeit-
geist of the post-war decades which has viewed permissiveness versus authoritari-
anism as the dominating factor in socialisation. In this worldview, special approval
is reserved for anti-authoritarianism since it is an important element of liberalism.
Martin & Ray (1972: 17).
Christie & Jahoda (1954); Shils (1954).
The Authoritarian Personality
35

Using Rudin’s scale, Martin and Ray found that agreement with anti-rational
authority statements was positively related to measures of emotional instability
and negatively related to socio-economic status and intelligence. Agreement with
pro-authoritarian items, on the other hand, was independent of these measures.
Martin and Ray conclude that the concept of authoritarianism has been overgeneral-
ised and that a more relevant question is whether the authority to which one defers
has claims to rational support or not. They argue that rejecting rational authority and
accepting irrational authority are equally indicative of personal inadequacy. In this
regard, the relationships with intelligence are illuminating. Agreement with pro-
authoritarian (F-Scale items) and agreement with anti-rational authoritarian items
(Rudin) are both negatively related to intelligence. People of low intelligence are
likely to accept irrational authority and reject rational authority. In short, they fail
to discriminate between what is rational and what is not.
Autocrats and Democrats
In the 1930s there was considerable interest in the differences between autocratic
and democratic political regimes. In the US, this research was taken up by psychol-
ogists and applied to managerial behaviour. The classic study in this field is that
reported by a team led by Kurt Lewin who categorised supervisory styles as auto-
cratic, democratic and laissez-faire.⁷ As Lewin’s study was reported in 1939, countless
subsequent studies have extolled the virtues of democratic supervision and indicted
autocratic supervision. The study has since become a classic in this field.
Lewin was a refugee from Nazi Germany who arrived in America determined to
promote the ideals of democracy in its various forms. His aim was to demonstrate
empirically the social, economic and psychological benefits of democratic leader-
ship. He drew a sharp distinction between autocratic and democratic styles of super-
vision and sought evidence for the superiority of the latter.
According to Lewin and his colleagues in the autocratic style: policies are deter-
mined solely by group supervisors; techniques and activity steps are dictated by
supervisors one at a time so that future steps are always uncertain; supervisors
dictate work tasks and work companions; supervisors are personal in their praise
and criticism of group members; supervisors remain aloof from active group partic-
ipation except when demonstrating tasks. By contrast, in the democratic style: poli-
cies are a matter for group discussion and decision, encouraged and assisted by
supervisors; general steps to achieving goals are sketched by supervisors and
when technical advice is needed they suggest alternatives; members are free to
work with whomever they choose and division of tasks is a group decision; supervi-
sors are objective in their praise and criticism of group members; supervisors try to
Lewin, Lippitt & White (1939).
36
Chapter 2: Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience

be regular group members in spirit without taking over the work of others. It is
widely reported and believed that the study found that the democratic supervisors
developed higher levels of ‘morale’ in their groups than did the autocrats. Further,
it is generally accepted that the democratic groups achieved higher levels of output.
There have been few major criticisms of Lewin’s influential study. An exception
is Carey who showed that the results point to the conclusion that the autocratic
groups produced less aggression (sometimes interpreted as a higher level of morale)
and higher levels of output than did the democratic groups. Carey concludes:
It is a considerable tribute to the experimenters’ attachment to the word ‘democracy’ (both in its
political connotations and in the sense in which a human relations supervisory style in industry
is called democratic) that they are able to interpret this evidence in a way favourable to democ-
racy and conclude that it was more efficient and produced less frustration, less aggression or
both […] After a while it was widely reported, in textbooks and articles, that output was highest
in the democratically-led groups.⁸
Lewin’s study can be criticised on other, technical grounds. For instance, goal clarity
is a necessary condition of effective supervision. Lewin made it a condition of the
autocratic condition that the supervisors reveal to group members the steps to the
group goal one at a time, whereas in the democratic condition the path to the
group goal was a matter of group discussion and decision. It is simply not the
case, however, that lack of a group goal is fundamental to autocracy. It is a key
feature of totalitarian regimes that their leaders make the goals of their countries
explicit whereas in democracies national goals are frequently confused and unclear.
For example, Hitler and Mussolini were very clear about their plans for domination
while the Kennedy regime in America was not. It is therefore instructive to note that
two Australian psychologists reported results which support the hypothesis that
when goal perspective is equally clear to both autocratic and democratic groups,
there is no difference in morale between the groups.⁹ Autocratic groups, however,
were found to be significantly more effective in performance, as measured by quan-
titative output. These results offer convincing evidence that clarity of group goal
perspective rather than supervisory style was the major variable accountable for
the findings of the Lewin study.
To this day, the debate about autocratic and democratic management styles
misses the crucial point that what is at stake is the utilisation of managerial
power, not merely differences in communication styles. Autocratic managers are
judged unfavourably because it is claimed that they wield power ruthlessly in the
pursuit of their goals. Democratic managers are judged favourably because it is
claimed that they are subjected, or subject themselves, to a variety of checks and
balances to their power. However, it is when managers direct the power of a group
Carey (1976: 238).
Lansbury & Spillane (1983: 95).
Autocrats and Democrats
37

successfully that they are accorded the right to direct group members in certain tasks
beyond their level of expertise. Management style is influenced by several variables
including the power inherent in their position, the structure of the task itself and the
expectations and power of group members. Some jobs require that power be exer-
cised to a greater degree than others. Prescriptions that managers and supervisors
ought to be democratic (supportive, participative, friendly) in all work environments
remain unsupported.
Conformity and Obedience in the Laboratory
Social psychologists working in the field known as group dynamics attempted to
bridge personality and society by investigating relational concepts, including
conformity, obedience and authority, in the experimental laboratory. The early
experiments on groups emphasised that people find meaning in carrying out
plans to achieve relevant goals. In later work, the emphasis was more on techniques
for manipulating and deceiving subjects. Importantly, psychologists brought to bear
on their results deterministic explanations which led them to employ such problem-
atic constructs as ‘group pressure’ and ‘malevolent authority’. This differed from
earlier research which had concluded that human behaviour depends largely on
how individuals perceive patterns in their environment, monitor their actions and
direct them to specific goals.
Conformity, or yielding in laboratory settings, is rarely discussed in terms of
authority. This omission is surprising because at least one interpretation of yielding
directly involves the concept. This interpretation is that proposed in a classic study in
social psychology.
In the 1950s, Asch conducted a laboratory study in which subjects yielded to a
majority judgement even when that judgement was wrong in fact and in appearance.
Subjects’ choice was, therefore, to answer accurately and become a deviant or to
yield to the majority. The impact of this study is due to subjects yielding to a
group opinion which is contrary to the direct evidence of their senses. This situation
is not one in which people are expected to change their judgements. Yet, when
confronted with the difference between their own and their peers’ judgements, the
subjects tended to err in the direction of the group consensus. Only about one quarter
of subjects remained independent. Conformity, such as that which Asch produced in
his experiments, is widely regarded as a change in behaviour towards a group due to
‘group pressure.’
A general theme in conformity studies is the belief that the response which indi-
cates the effect of social influence implies a suspension of rational processes. One of
its influential advocates was Moscovici who wrote: ‘The Asch studies are one of the
most dramatic illustrations of conformity, of blindly going along with the group, even
38
Chapter 2: Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience

when the individual realises that by doing so, he turns his back on reality and
truth.’¹⁰ Notwithstanding Moscovici’s enthusiasm, whether the conformity observed
in the Asch-type experiments can be explained by yielding to group pressure or by
authoritative direction remains an unsettled question.
Early sociologists Tarde and Le Bon were among the first to argue that group
influence occurs independently of reason. Drawing on analyses of common social
phenomena, they pointed to the blind and irrational effects of group influences.
Their position reflected the Darwinian emphasis, typical of their period, on unknown
mechanistic factors controlling behaviour. Other researchers of this persuasion have
argued that wherever individuals respond to social influence their actions are uncrit-
ical or unreasoned. This approach has been carried into the laboratory studies in
small groups where conformity is thought to be the result of irrational and blind
conformity.
This general policy has been questioned, however. For example, it has been
argued that individuals are influenced by ‘prestige suggestion’, a notion not inconsis-
tent with authoritative guidance which is explicable without evoking notions of irra-
tional forces. When combined with a mechanistic view, conformity in the laboratory
becomes conformity to the group, occurring non-cognitively as the result of ‘norma-
tive social influence’ or reflects individuals’ (cognitive) agreement with the group
based on what has been called ‘informational social influence’.
A significant feature of the normative social influence process is that it leads
individuals to agree with a group judgement in public, while they remain privately
unconvinced. Normative social influence arises from various sources: from wishing
to remain in a group to instances where individuals seek a ‘reality’ upon which to
base their opinions. A group with similar opinions can provide them with a ‘social
reality’. The ‘pressures’ arising in a group in this way lead to informational social
influence. This sort of influence focuses on the content of the influence and not
the social effects of accepting it and thus resembles the notion of authoritative influ-
ence where individuals accept the guidance of a person or persons regarded as likely
to think correctly on a subject. As such, relatively less conformity in situations is
expected where subjects had cause to doubt the authoritativeness of group members.
For example, researchers have found that where subjects had reason to believe that
they were more competent than the group they conformed less. Others have shown
that as the number of errors made by group members increases, so individuals’ confi-
dence in the group decreases and they conform less. Conversely, the more competent
the group (as perceived by subjects), the more conformity occurs. It has also been
argued that subjects attribute some level of ability to themselves and some level to
others and whether they hold to their own judgement or yield to that of others
depends on the relative levels of ability they attribute to each party. Finally, several
experimenters investigated self-confidence as a predictor of conformity. The findings
Moscovici (1985: 349).
Conformity and Obedience in the Laboratory
39

are as expected: the more confident subjects who believe themselves to be authori-
tative yield less.¹¹
A central question is whether all the conformity in the Asch-type experiments
can be explained by the notion of authoritative direction. The distinction between
normative and informational social influence points to a negative answer. Yet,
there is considerable confusion in the identification of these two categories. The pres-
ence of normative social influence is an inference deriving from the procedures
which encouraged ‘cooperation’ in the group. These findings are open to alternative
interpretation: subjects complied with the wishes of experimenters. This represents
conformity to experimenters, not to the group. It is also possible that the two influ-
ences (normative and informational social) operate side-by-side and for this reason
the methods adopted to study the processes have not been successful in distin-
guishing them in practice. Consequently, their meaning remains unclear.
It should be emphasised that Asch’s experimental programme was based on
Gestalt field principles which were given their most explicit formulation by Lewin.
In Lewin’s theory, the dynamic elements are forces which move individuals about.
It is thus unsurprising that Asch’s commentators have generally interpreted his
results in terms of yielding to social pressure, a form of expression that not only indi-
cates a causative explanation but happens to accord with a metaphorical usage of
these terms in everyday language.
The mainstream causative interpretation of Asch’s studies has been recently
questioned on two accounts. First, against Le Bon, it has been argued that groups
regularly display more rationality and less bias than individuals do.¹² As such,
going with the group in perplexing situations is rational behaviour, whereas ignoring
it would be irrational (a point made by Asch). Second, it has been noted that if Asch’s
research reports provide apparent evidence for irrationality on the part of the
subjects, they also contain abundant evidence for their rationality.¹³ For example,
when asked why they conformed, subjects reported that they did not want to appear
foolish or isolated. Others thought that the first person to speak had a visual impair-
ment and assumed that those who spoke after him did not want to come across as
impolite: thus, they decided to follow suit. Further, if most of Asch’s subjects
conformed at least once, about a quarter never did. If there is evidence for
conformity, there is also clear evidence for deliberate resistance.
In standard conformity experiments the subjects’ perception of the task is delib-
erately restricted by experimenters. Crucial features are concealed from the subjects
so that it is almost impossible for them to make correct inferences about the true
state-of-affairs. That is, the subjects’ perceptions are carefully structured by experi-
menters. If the subjects knew that others (including the experimenter) were
Rock (1990).
Spears (2010).
Cialdini & Goldstein (2004); Jetten & Hornsey (2011; 2017); Mori & Arai (2010).
40
Chapter 2: Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience

conspiring against them, it is doubtful whether a language of ‘forces,’ ‘social pres-
sure’ or ‘blind conformity’ could be justified to account for their behaviour. In
other words, it is the deception applied to the subjects which constitutes the baseline
for interpretation of the results in terms of ‘forces’ or ‘pressures,’ and which allows
experimenters to ignore the possibility that subjects are acting on their own evalua-
tion of the situation. The necessity for deception renders the ‘scientific’ explanation
in mechanistic terms very contrived.
It should be emphasised that Asch was himself cautious in his explanations.
Although he relied on such expressions as ‘pull’, ‘group pressure’ and ‘social pres-
sure’ in his accounts, he did not claim that his results were explained adequately
by these constructs. His restraint was presumably based on the finding that
increasing the majority size does not increase the yielding effect monotonically.
Asch found that beyond four, further increases in the majority have no effect on
the responses. This finding is not what one expects if pressure is to be measured
by the number of contrary opinions encountered. Yet, the mechanical model of
conformity has prevailed throughout much of the literature. It pictures individuals
as a system of needs and regards social interaction as directed towards satisfying
those needs. This model is very limited since it is unable to explain psychological
phenomena of any complexity. By failing to consider the ways in which individuals
apprehend the situation in the Asch-type experiment, explanations have been
reduced to terms like ‘social pressure’ and a ‘need to conform’.
An alternative explanation is to be found among researchers who argue that the
Asch-type studies are not concerned with social pressure but with a cognitive oper-
ation. Accordingly, subjects conform because they believe others (posing as subjects
like themselves) are competent. However, if social pressure is operating here, it
requires qualification. Specifically, there is little doubt that subjects are directly influ-
enced by the group in that they believe the group to be correct and conform with it.
Conformity, however, can also occur because of indirect influence. That is, subjects
respond to a psychological process and conform because they focus on the effect of
their responses, rather than on their content. This focus on the effect of action can be
used to account for the lower level of yielding in the experiment conducted where
subjects were partitioned from each other (in contrast with Asch’s early studies).
In summary, social psychologists would do well to move towards a theory of the
person as a rational, role-playing agent to account for conformity. To modify one’s
judgement in response to people who are equally authoritative on a topic is a reason-
able form of activity.
Since the mid-1970s and the start of what has been called the ‘dark age’ of obedi-
ence research, salient questions about the subject have still to receive convincing
answers. While authors have explained the decline of obedience studies by calling
on ethical concerns, a brief survey of textbooks in social psychology reveals that
authors generally associate authority either with the authoritarian personality or
link it to Milgram’s obedience studies. In the latter case, authors typically define
Conformity and Obedience in the Laboratory
41

authority as legitimate authority or legitimate power. Interpretations of the obedi-
ence studies remain problematic, however.
Studies have shown that occupancy of office lends legitimacy to occupants
which enables them to extend their powers. Poignant examples come from research
on experimental demand where the power of formal authority, represented by the
experimenters (usually older and of higher status than their subjects), has been
graphically demonstrated. As legitimate figures, they can and often do extend
their powers. Further, by entering the experimental environment group members
expect experimenters’ directives and accept them as legitimate. Consequently, exper-
imental subjects generally follow the directives of experimenters without complaint
or resistance.¹⁴ An early example is Landis who, during a study of emotional reac-
tions, told subjects to behead a live rat. Fifteen of the 21 subjects obliged, after
what was described as ‘more or less urging’.
Landis’s experiment is a precursor of studies in which participants are requested
to perform ethically debatable tasks, including the doing of harm. More generally,
researchers have consistently found that when students agreed to be subjects in
an experiment, they typically gave such power to experimenters that they could
not get subjects to resist their efforts to have them perform disagreeable tasks.
Many social psychological studies support this finding. Examples are to be found
in the studies of demand characteristics of the experiment, experimenter bias effects,
and from diverse examples of compliant behaviour in experimental settings and
studies which stress the unreasonableness, tediousness or even apparent danger
of the experimental task.¹⁵
A telling example of compliant behaviour is provided by Orne. Presenting
subjects with approximately 2000 pages of random numbers and instructing them
to sum adjacent numbers and continue until his return, Orne found almost no
subject was willing to relinquish the absurd task, even after five hours. Extending
the unreasonableness of the task by asking subjects to tear up completed pages
and to dispose of them in a waste-paper basket had little effect on subjects’ persis-
tence. When asked by the experimenter why they persevered with such an obviously
meaningless task, subjects said they believed the experiment to be a test of their
persistence.
In the studies referred to above, subjects invariably gave as the rationale for their
actions the statement that they were an integral part of a ‘scientific investigation’ and
were determined to fulfil their commitment to the study despite having to incur some
discomfort.¹⁶ Some subjects provided several reasons for continuation, including
trust in experimenters and their institution. When conducted in the name of a
noble cause with which they identify, the cooperation of subjects with an experi-
Frank (1944); Hodges & Geyer (2006); Hollander & Turowetz (2017).
Orne (1962a & b); Orne & Evans (1965); Rosenthal (1963); Verba (1966).
Haslam, Reicher & Birney (2014); Hollander & Turowetz (2017); Smith & Haslam (2017).
42
Chapter 2: Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience

menter (such as demonstrated in Milgram’s studies) has been recently analysed as
one of ‘engaged followership’.¹⁷ Though they reported feeling rather uncertain
about the tasks and reported strong emotional reactions to the repugnant activities,
the subjects reported that they were quite convinced they would not be harmed
because the experiment was being conducted by responsible experimenters.
Findings such as Orne’s point to the degree of overt behavioural control which
experimenters can exercise in the laboratory. Such control is well demonstrated in
the obedience studies conducted by Milgram. However, Orne’s experimental findings
demand caution in the interpretation of Milgram’s studies. A common view is to see
Milgram’s experiments as epitomising not only an ill-considered and dangerous
subservience to formal authority but also man’s inhumanity to man. Milgram, for
example, wrote:
The kind of character produced in American society cannot be counted on to insulate its citizens
from brutality and inhumane treatment at the direction of malevolent authority. A substantial
proportion of people do what they are told to do, irrespective of the content of the act and
without limitations of conscience, so long as they perceive that the command comes from a legit-
imate authority.¹⁸
These interpretations are somewhat tenuous given the findings that experimental
subjects will comply with the experimenters’ requests to inflict possible injury to
themselves.
Milgram’s experiments attracted much attention, if not notoriety, because of the
apparent willingness to obey the experimenter’s instructions to deliver potentially
lethal shocks to loudly suffering victims. Milgram was surprised at the results and
concluded that a dictator would find it easy to persuade Americans to electrocute
their fellow citizens. A close inspection of his experimental procedure, however,
reveals that considerable persuasion was brought to bear on the subjects. The experi-
menter repeatedly instructs them to continue raising the shock level. There is also the
explicit statement of the experimenter that no ‘permanent tissue damage’ would
result from the shocks which were ‘not dangerous.’ As no person has been reported
as being killed in a psychological experiment, Milgram’s results can be regarded as a
measure of the subjects’ trust in the experimenter’s competence and responsibility.
Researchers in universities are responsible for the outcome of their experiments
and, accordingly, there is every reason to believe that they would be held account-
able for serious mistakes. It bears noting that, despite these checks and balances,
many subjects displayed signs of indecision, agitation and stress.
The results of Milgram’s experiments seemingly offer convincing evidence for the
existence of a human tendency to submit to the control of others and to abdicate
one’s claim to rationality and responsibility at the first excuse. This line was taken
Haslam, Reicher & Millard (2015); Haslam & Reicher (2017; 2018).
Milgram (1965a: 75).
Conformity and Obedience in the Laboratory
43

by Milgram, who argued that his results imply a general personality which is overly
compliant to malevolent authority.
Two related questions need to be asked. First, did Milgram’s subjects view the
experimenters as a malevolent authority? Second, is their obedience owed to the
fact that what the studies’ protocols require subjects to do permit expression of
their covert aggression? A careful examination of the situation of subjects in the
experiment reveals that the answer to the first question is negative. Indeed, the
experimenter clearly and repeatedly states that ‘no tissue damage will result from
the shocks,’ which are ‘not dangerous.’ Combined with the legitimate status of scien-
tific investigators, this constitutes a strong claim for the experimenter to be regarded
as a non-malevolent authority and the subsequent administration of shocks to serve
the cause of ‘learning’ is consistent with this claim. The status of Milgram’s subjects
is thus better compared to that of nurses who, under instruction, engage in activities
that hurt patients, but which do not imply malevolent intent. The conclusion that
Milgram’s results can be generalised to cover cases of people obeying authority
viewed as malevolent appears vacuous.
An early challenge to Milgram’s interpretation was mounted by Mixon who found
that subjects were faced with cues and definitions of the situation which favoured
the conclusion that the ‘victims’ were not likely to be harmed. To support his anal-
ysis, Mixon conducted a mock-up version of the Milgram experiment in which
subjects were told that the shocks were not real but agreed to pretend that they
were. Subjects’ emotional reactions and rates of obedience matched well with
Milgram’s results. Mixon concluded that experimental subjects construe their situa-
tion as governed by rules compatible with the rational (non-malevolent) authority
code of the day.
Another challenge to Milgram’s interpretation is a study by Martin et al. who
designed a similar experiment to Milgram’s, except that the only possible sufferers
from the subjects’ readiness to obey the experimenter were the subjects themselves.
The study was designed to create a set of conditions in which subjects were asked to
run a considerable risk of lasting personal injury (hearing damage in this instance;
obviously no such risk existed). A feature of this experiment was that the voluntary
nature of participating was stressed several times. Unlike the Milgram procedure,
there was no prompting by the experimenter to continue the experiment when
subjects showed signs of faltering. Also, the condition of the experiment precluded
the introduction of the cries of pain and pleas to desist on the part of the victim
which were so dramatic a feature of Milgram’s procedure.
The Martin study produced similar results to the Milgram study. Responses to the
post-test questionnaire showed that the subjects felt under no obligation to risk
personal injury but experienced a strong element of curiosity about the study. Very
few admitted to any doubts about the genuineness of the experimenter’s explana-
tions and a substantial number expressed trust in his authority. One conclusion of
the study was that: ‘the post-test questionnaire suggests a combination of curiosity
and trust in formal authority, while the close similarity between our results and
44
Chapter 2: Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience

those obtained in the Milgram situation suggests that there is no necessity to postu-
late any explanation involving aggression towards the helpless victim in the latter.’¹⁹
Commenting on the argument raised apropos Milgram’s results that the subjects
enjoyed the situation in which they were placed because it allowed them to express
covert aggression, Martin et al. argued that if this is the true explanation, the subjects
should see authority as by nature malevolent since it legitimises the expression of
their own malevolence. It would then be expected that the subjects should not
only support the commands of the experimenter as an authority figure but should
show signs of tension release. The evidence provides no support for this view. Rather,
the opposite seems to have been the case since manifest signs of increasing tension
were observed among Milgram’s subjects. The Martin team noted that their results
carry the objections to this interpretation even further, since to explain them in
similar terms would necessitate postulating aggression against the self at the behest
of an authority figure, which is absurd.
The Martin study has attracted little comment. An exception is Miller who, in The
Obedience Experiments, dismisses it as a critique of Milgram’s studies on the grounds
that Milgram measured obedience while Martin assessed compliance. However,
Miller does not think it necessary to explicate the difference between compliance
and obedience. Further, Miller comments that the pressure, or what he calls the
agonising conflict between an authority’s commands and the subject’s personal
desires, seems missing from the Martin study. This comment begs the question at
issue: did Milgram’s subjects respond to ‘pressure’ and did they experience agonising
conflict? The standard textbook presentation of the Milgram studies answers in the
positive.²⁰ Other scholars have answered in the negative.²¹ The present authors
concur with the latter view. The reasons for this conclusion are worth exposing
since they hinge on conceptual distinctions between power, authority and legiti-
macy, distinctions that neither Milgram nor Miller made.
For Milgram, authority means the person who is perceived to be in a position of
social control within a given situation. This definition, apart from being phenomeno-
logical, conflates authority with control and power. To operationalise authority,
Milgram added verbal prods which are delivered as (allegedly) malevolent
commands. The ensuing ‘obedience to authority’ enabled Milgram to talk of ‘forces’
which impinge upon individuals and change their behaviour in undesirable direc-
tions. For example, Milgram states that an authority system consists of a minimum
of two persons sharing the expectation that one of them has the right to prescribe
behaviour for the other. He argues that there is general agreement that experimenters
can influence behaviour and that they ought to be able to do so. One of these ‘forces’
is an illegitimate or malevolent ‘authority.’ Moving from ‘influence’ to ‘power,’
Martin et al. (1976: 353).
Griggs (2017).
Darroch & Steiner (1970); Elms (2009); Gibson (2014); Greenberg (1967); Haslam, Reicher & Birney
(2014); Hodges & Geyer (2006); Hollander & Turowetz (2017); Passini & Morselli (2009).
Conformity and Obedience in the Laboratory
45

Milgram concludes that experimenters’ power is based on the consent of subjects. He
refers to this power as legitimate authority with the consequence that he can talk of
illegitimate (or malevolent) authority as the second ‘force’ operating on amenable
subjects.
Commentators on Milgram’s work almost invariably follow his tendency to
confuse authority and legitimacy. Such confusion is visible in the implication that
at the beginning of the proceedings, experimenters’ communications are perceived
by subjects as authoritative but as the experiment developed, they came to seen
as authoritarian.²² In that case, however, the question as to how exactly the experi-
menters are perceived is unclear to say the least.
Miller acknowledges that the Martin study challenges Milgram’s assertion that
his experiment exposed subjects to ‘malevolent authority.’ However, Miller argues
that, unlike Martin, Milgram deliberately used such verbal prods as ‘you must go
on’ to fit with his view of authority. The prods were supposed to turn authority
into a malevolent form. Yet, the experimenters in the obedience studies did engage
in reasoning to establish the bona fides of the experiment.²³ Miller’s assertion that
the prods both operationalise (malevolent) authority and prove the existence of
obedience to orders (rather than voluntary compliance to rules and norms) is thus
circular.
That power and authority are conflated in the obedience studies is evidenced by
Miller’s statement that Milgram was influenced by the ‘impressive’ analysis of social
power by French and Raven. The confusion could hardly be clearer: authority is to be
represented by different forms of power. Milgram’s conceptual analysis leads to the
conclusion that coercive power is consistent with authorisation. People under torture
are obviously reacting to coercion but it cannot seriously be maintained that they are
authorising it.
In more recent times, researchers have analysed exchanges between the experi-
menter and subjects in Milgram’s studies and argue that the experiments are not
demonstrations of obedience to authority but an exercise in persuasion and rhetor-
ical skill.²⁴ An analysis of the Milgram tapes held in the archive at Yale University
shows that the subjects often argued with the experimenter and, in several cases,
won the argument. Defiant subjects were able to mobilise arguments and draw the
experimental session to a close. In these cases, ‘the participants are not so much
disobeying as engaging the experimenter in rational debate.’²⁵ That some subjects
mobilised arguments for ending the session well before the experimenter resorted
to directives demonstrates that the Milgram studies were not about obedience to
authoritarian commands or to orders as conventionally understood.²⁶ Rather than
Kaposi (2017: 393).
Gibson (2014; 2019).
Gibson (2013; 2014; 2019); Gibson et al. (2018).
Gibson (2014: 434).
Burger et al. (2011); Burger, Girgis & Manning (2011).
46
Chapter 2: Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience

studies in obedience, the experiments look more like tests of experimenters’ rhetor-
ical skill.
Miller described the Milgram’s verbal prods as one of the most important
features of the obedience paradigm because they allegedly operationalise authority.
But do they? It has been argued that if Milgram’s verbal prods operationalise
anything, it is persuasion.²⁷ It is a conspicuous feature of the interactions that
subjects were prepared to argue with experimenters about their verbal prods and
the general logic associated thereto. This well documented fact all but annihilates
the conventional view that subjects surrendered their powers of reasoning to a
malevolent figure in a white coat and performed inhumane acts, as Milgram argues,
and as generations of textbook writers have accepted. Researchers who have recently
studied
experimenter-subject
interactions
through
post-experiment
interviews
concluded that it is unlikely that Milgram’s results can be explained by a single
psychological process, such as ‘obedience to authority’, ‘agentic state’ (Milgram),
or ‘engaged followership’.²⁸
Understandably, much of the attention in the Asch and Milgram studies is
directed at the subjects’ behaviour: judgements in the Asch studies and action in
Milgram’s. These behaviours are then embedded in relationships of conformity and
obedience, respectively. However, (rational) authority is a more suitable embedding
of the behaviour exhibited in Asch’s and Milgram’s studies.
The role and behaviour of experimenters is of crucial importance to the outcome
of laboratory studies. Asch described the role of experimenters as that of ‘impartial
chairmen’ who open the meeting with brief comments about the purpose of the
experiment and make it clear that it is a test of the subject’s ability. Milgram’s experi-
menters gave a longer introduction which emphasised the importance of psycholo-
gists and their theories of learning. In the Milgram case, the experimenters needed
to communicate and demonstrate potentially distressing information subsequently
to downplay it with assurances that no permanent damage will result from the
actions of the subjects.
In their mainstream interpretation, the Asch and Milgram studies demonstrate
that most people permit a group or experimenters to impose upon them a definition
of reality which is different from their own. However, this orthodox account offers no
rational explanation for such phenomenon. It has encouraged researchers to employ
a language of forces, social pressure, conformity and obedience to (malevolent or
illegitimate) ‘authority,’ or what has been called ‘irrational’ authority. This tendency
is explicit in Milgram’s studies.
Subjects in the Milgram studies were not always convinced by the experimenters’
reasoning. The subjects’ interests, beliefs and values could hardly be expected to
Gibson (2019).
Haslam & Reicher (2017; 2018); Hollander (2015); Hollander & Maynard (2016); Hollander & Turo-
wetz (2017); Reicher & Haslam (2017).
Conformity and Obedience in the Laboratory
47

coincide with the task Milgram set for his subjects. In fact, such a misalignment (and
the subjects’ response to it) was the very point of the study. Further, the study mobi-
lised the community’s view of an admired university (Yale), research for humani-
tarian purposes (learning) and the exemplary role of experimenters as agents of
both.
The experimenters in the Asch study had an easier task since the experiment was
presented as a test of ability. If it is accepted that subjects in laboratory experiments,
when under observation, approach their task as a test of their abilities, most of the
problems in the interpretation of the experimental results disappear. Indeed, in the
Asch and Milgram studies, the situations are deliberately contrived to obscure clues
about what ability is being tested by allowing two conflicting criteria for performance
to be equally prominent. The subjects who want to perform well are presented with
alternative judgements (Asch) or actions (Milgram). It is reasonable to assume that
they wonder what is expected of them and this assumption is supported by their
questioning of and seeking further advice from the experimenter. Since they believe
some ability is being tested, any feedback they receive will be crucial to further per-
formance. Consequently, the feedback must be either nil or conflicting if the in-built
ambiguity of the experiment is to be preserved. It is unsurprising, therefore, that
subjects select from those alternatives available that which satisfies the experimenter
and themselves. This situation would not arise if experimenters informed their
subjects about the specific ability to be tested. This move, however, would convert
all experiments into tests, so that the information gained would be about what
subjects can do and not what they will do.
It is a function of authority to give reasons to support actions where the steps to a
goal entail a cost. Experience shows that individuals will act in accord with this view
of authority provided they accept that they are furthering the desirable purpose
claimed by the authority. The experimental literature on conformity and obedience
has shown that subjects can readily be deceived by misleading statements
concerning the purpose of the experiment, or by false claims that certain steps are
necessary for its fulfilment. In the case of Milgram’s study, there is no evidence to
show that authority would be conceded if either the experimenters’ declared goals
were judged to be malevolent, or the claim that the specified steps are necessary
for their achievement were shown to be false.
The results of the Milgram and Martin studies indicate that subjects respond to
the edicts of formal authority in the laboratory as they do elsewhere. Subjects arrive
in the laboratory with a cultural perspective with which they interpret the demands
of the situation.²⁹ Consequently, an explanation of action in terms of a cultural
perspective of authority is more feasible than approaching the problem the other
way around and regarding experimental results as explaining action in ‘real-life’.
Tajfel (1972).
48
Chapter 2: Authoritarianism, Conformity and Obedience

Chapter 3:
A Theory of Managerial Power
In Economy and Society, Weber, under the influence of Marx and Nietzsche, argued
that power must be the starting point for the analysis of all social relationships.
Many later scholars followed Weber in pursuing questions of how and by whom
power is exercised over people. Consequently, the topic of power has come to be
viewed as one entailing the production of intended effects, notably domination
and submission. However,Weber also argued that social scientists should investigate
the production of unintended events because if an event occurs as the result of a
person’s intentions, that person knows what causes it. By contrast, if an event is
not intended by anyone, it can be assumed that its causes are not known, and a
scientific enquiry is justified to discover them. In other words, science, according
to Weber, aims at extending the power obtained through knowledge and social
organisation aims at extending power over material conditions.
Bertrand Russell went further than Weber. He argued that power is the funda-
mental concept in the social sciences, as energy is the fundamental concept in
physics. ‘The laws of social dynamics are laws which can only be stated in terms
of power, not in terms of this or that form of power.’¹ However, Russell defined
power as ‘the production of intended effects’ and made no attempt to consider the
‘laws of social dynamics’ as such. Like Weber, he treated power as domination
which is only one form of power. The notion that to qualify as an exercise of
power a person’s actions must be intentional is refuted by the fact that the exercise
of power often has effects beyond that intended.
In Philosophy of Leadership, the present authors made a start in the direction
indicated by Weber and Russell.² Specifically, they defended the thesis that manage-
rial power has both centripetal and centrifugal tendencies. This theory draws a
crucial distinction between power and authority and argues that the latter sets limits
to the former. However, the theory remains underdeveloped and calls for elaboration.
It is the aim of this chapter to revisit the foundation of their theory, offer supporting
arguments, relevant examples and develop implications for management and organ-
isation studies.
Managerial Power: A Selective Critical Review
The literature on managerial and organisational power is too extensive to review in
detail. It is also, in the opinion of more than a few commentators, confused and
Russell (1938: 9–10).
Spillane & Joullié (2015:203–222).
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-005

confusing.³ Anderson and Brion, Fleming and Spicer, and Sturm and Antonakis
provide extensive reviews with a total of 673 references. The overlap of referenced
authors is only eight between Fleming/Spicer and Anderson/Brion, and six between
Fleming/Spicer and Sturm/Antonakis. The overlaps include the works of Weber and
an influential article by French and Raven. These authorial teams have eliminated
the need to fill the pages of this book with references. Another of their merits is to
highlight tensions between three influential perspectives: behaviourist, phenomeno-
logical and generative.
The behaviourist view, notably promoted by Simon in Administrative Behavior,
holds that power is equivalent to cause, because specific actions by managers
cause specified actions on the part of colleagues. Another example is Dahl who
argues that power is anything that emanates from managers and affects the behav-
iour of colleagues. Kelvin puts these two assumptions together to prosecute the case
for power as the central concept in organisational relationships (so much so that his
index does not contain a reference to legitimacy or authority).
Kelvin assumes that any case in which the behaviour of subordinates is affected
by managers is an instance of the power of managers over subordinates. This
assumption leads him to view organisational relationships in terms of the power
of managerial over subordinate positions. He then admits that for such power to
exist it needs to be accepted by subordinates, an admission which acknowledges
the existence of personal powers. The quandary then arises that if subordinates
fail to accept the norm legitimating the power of managers, then managers become
the object of the exercise of power of their subordinates.
Kelvin’s analysis implies that there is no difference in situations where individ-
uals behave in accordance with the wishes of others out of the belief that such
behaviour is right, and those cases in which individuals act under duress. The stan-
dard defence, which is usually brought forward in justification when the conceptual
confusion is pointed out, is that empirical and experimental evidence does not
permit the distinction to be made. Experiments such as those on conformity and
obedience, for example, do not permit researchers to say whether the subjects follow
the group or experimenters’ instructions because of beliefs that they are correct or
because of fears of what might happen to them if they remain independent. A
quasi-behaviourist approach to the evidence is then adopted which maintains that
the group and/or experimenter cause the change in behaviour. The question of
perception and volition on the part of the subjects is thereby avoided. Further, Kelvin
sidesteps issues about whether the behaviour of managers who are supposed to be
exercising power was intended to produce the specified behaviour by colleagues, or
whether the specific effect was produced unintentionally or accidentally. Kelvin
Clegg & Haugaard (2009); Greve & Mitsuhashi (2007); Haugaard (2012); Laslo-Roth (2017); Joullié &
Spillane (2021); Scott (1994; 2001); Tjosvold & Wisse (2009); Wrong (1968; 2002); Zhu & Westphal
(2021).
50
Chapter 3: A Theory of Managerial Power

thereby ignores questions about whether the effect was planned and so promotes a
behaviourist account.
Despite Simon’s, Dahl’s and Kelvin’s analyses, power is not equivalent to cause
since managers often cause an event unintentionally, or accidently. In these cases,
they are unable to repeat the event because they are unaware of the relevant causal
relations. Such occurrences provide evidence that to be the cause of something is not
the same as having the power to bring it about. Power depends on the knowledge of
causes and of how these are exploited to produce intended effects.
An alternative approach to the behaviourist account is the phenomenological
perspective. It is represented by Lukes who argues that behaviouristic accounts of
power are inadequate and proposes a ‘three-dimensional view’ of power-over-people.
His approach includes those cases in which managers affect subordinates by influ-
encing their needs. He argues that where there is no conflict of interest, influence
is not power. Conversely, the terms are synonymous where there is a conflict of
interest. However, where there is a conflict of interest involving coercion, power
and influence are different. Lukes considers authority to be a sub-classification of
influence to be called power if conflict of interests exists, or not power if there is
consensus.
Lukes offers a possible criticism of his analysis when he asks whether power can
be exercised by person A over B in B’s interest. This question presupposes that B’s
view of his interests is incorrect and that A’s view is the correct one. Lukes provides
two answers to his question. First, if B acknowledges his interests the power relation
ceases. But as Lukes notes, this answer opens the door to paternalism. A second
answer is that all forms of control by A over B where B resists represent violations
of B’s autonomy. Therefore, such exercises of power cannot be in B’s interests.
Lukes considers this answer to open the door to an anarchist defence against pater-
nalism.
Lukes is in deeper trouble than he realises. Specifically, since he defined cases in
which A acts in a way which is not in conflict with B’s interest as not being an exer-
cise of power, the question whether power can be exercised by A over B in B’s
interest cannot be raised.⁴ That is, the dilemma Lukes posed depends on A and B
having different perceptions of what is in B’s interests and that situation is only
one step removed from declaring that A and B have different perceptions of what
constitutes an exercise of power over B.
Lukes’ ‘radical’ theory of power is thus phenomenological since it depends on
how the situation is perceived, especially by subordinates. His analysis leads directly
to the theories of such social psychologists as Cartwright, French and Raven, which
all in their own ways reveals the consequences that follow from adopting the
phenomenological perspective.
Spillane & Joullié (2015: 205).
Managerial Power: A Selective Critical Review
51

Among social psychologists, discussions of power, influence and authority
provide evidence of conceptual ambiguity and widespread disagreement. This is
the result, in part, of the tendency of most psychologists to commence their analyses
with the inclusive concept of power and attempt to derive the concept of authority
from it. This approach has its own dangers, for at the psychological level, power
is more amorphous a concept than it is at the sociological level.⁵
Cartwright explained this situation: ‘While there are theorists that would still
maintain that power always involves some form of coerciveness, the general trend
toward defining it to include many forms of social influence ought to reduce substan-
tially the social psychologists’ reluctance to employ it in describing social interac-
tion.’⁶ This statement helps to explain the inability of the discipline to arrive at an
adequate conceptual analysis. His view also confirms the apparent arbitrary basis
on which power theorists chose their terminology.
As an example, Adams and Romney’s formulation applies operant conditioning
principles where authority is identified with control over the behaviour of others.
Adams and Romney assume that authority is a relation between persons in which
A commands or otherwise specifies some behaviour of B, and B complies with or
carries out the commands of A. Adams and Romney further assume that: authority
relations are asymmetrical in that one of the parties has greater power over the other
than the other holds over him; authority relations are stable in the sense that the
asymmetry of power between the two persons holds over a range of situations; func-
tional authority relations arise in many situations without necessarily being legiti-
mised by society at large.
The example given by Adams and Romney is as follows: A is under the control of
deprivation or aversive stimulation (say she is thirsty). A then emits a response to this
stimulus which specifies what is required to reduce her discomfort. She says to B:
‘Give me water.’ B ‘emits a response’ to this communication by giving water to A.
B’s behaviour serves as reinforcement to A, and as a stimulus for her to emit a verbal
reinforcement for B, for example ‘Thank you’. In this relationship, A is supposed to
be in authority over B because A’s initial response specifies its own reinforcement.
The remainder of Adams and Romney’s theory is cast in similar Skinnerian
operant conditioning terms and depends on the familiar behaviourist definitions
of such constructs as ‘reinforcement’, ‘stimulus’ and ‘response’. The central concept
to which the whole system defers, however, is control which is wholly in terms of the
power to dispense rewards presumed to be sufficient to seduce or coerce each party
into a reciprocal behavioural sequence. One may question whether authority is
involved here at all.
The cogency of this question was illustrated by Mulder et al. who defined social
power as the control of reinforcers. The experiments they conducted on this basis
Schopler (1965).
Cartwright (1959: 184).
52
Chapter 3: A Theory of Managerial Power

produced results consistent with the Adams and Romney theory. It is therefore inter-
esting to note that, faced with an apparent conceptual contradiction, two psycholo-
gists could write: ‘Since their definition of power is the same as Adams and
Romney’s definition of authority, the results from this study may be taken as support
for their [Adams and Romney’s] theory.’⁷
The conflation of power and authority is also visible in the well-known catego-
risation of social power undertaken by French and Raven, which has become some-
thing of a classic in management textbooks where it is treated uncritically.
French and Raven’s approach to power and authority stems from Lewin who
defined the power of person A over person B as the quotient of the maximum
force which A can bring to bear on B and the maximum resistance which B can
muster. Cartwright offered a modified version of this: the power of A over B with
respect to a change from X to Y at a specified time, is equal to the maximum strength
of the resultant force which A can set up in that direction at that time.
Cartwright’s definition is elaborated by an attempt to reduce the meaning of
force to seven ‘primitive’ terms, one of which is ‘act of agent’ (influence attempts).
For Cartwright, A’s power over B is the maximum difference between the force
induced by A and the resistance offered by B, where this resistance is also induced
by A’s act. The formulation permits a distinction between power and control, but one
which is vacuous. If A asks B to do something, B may experience a tendency to
comply, but may not do so; or again he may do so. In either case, A is said to
have power over B; but only in the latter case, where B’s behaviour is changed in
the direction intended by A, is A said to control B. Intention is left undefined
although it is said to be essential in discussion of the effectiveness of any influence
attempt.
French attempted to quantify the influence each member of a group has over the
opinions of others in terms of forces induced (in the Lewinian manner). The defini-
tion of power in terms of these forces is identical with that of Cartwright and is appa-
rently synonymous with influence.
French and Raven argue that social power has five distinct bases: referent (or
attraction) power which arises from liking or identification; reward power based
on the ability of one party to administer or procure rewards for the other; coercive
power based on one party’s ability to punish or harm the other; legitimate power
based on one party’s belief that the other has the right to prescribe behaviour; expert
power based on one party’s belief that the other has more effective knowledge within
a given area.
French and Raven’s division of power is not satisfactory. To start with, the five
categories are not independent as evidenced in the relationship between referent,
expert and legitimate power. Reward and coercive power differ from the other
three in that they do not depend on the consent of subordinates. Legitimate, expert
Shaw & Costanzo (1970: 113).
Managerial Power: A Selective Critical Review
53

and referent power cannot operate without the active concurrence of subordinates.
The five bases of social power therefore reduce to two categories, namely ‘power’
(coercive and reward) and ‘authority’ (referent, expert and legitimate).
Furthermore, French and Raven’s use of the term ‘legitimate’ is confusing. Legit-
imate power, for them, arises because one group of people believes that another
party has a right to prescribe behaviour which implies a normative base (typically
moral) and thus allows for the term ‘right to be considered phenomenologically:
what is a ‘right’ prescription for one individual may not be so for another. However,
French and Raven’s definition also allows ‘right’ to be received in a narrower legal-
istic sense. Since French and Raven distinguish legitimate power from referent power
(which includes subjective elements), it is safe to conclude that they employ the term
‘legitimate’ in its more exclusive sense. Given such context, to avoid confusion a
better expression would have been ‘legal power’. French and Raven’s conceptual
imprecision has resulted in later theorists defining authority as legitimate power
and thus identifying authority with formal power. This identification in turn leads
to the view that referent and expert power are somehow of a different order to the
notion of authority, muddying further the conceptual waters.
The philosophical significance of this policy is important since it assumes that
the differences in behaviour arising from the impact of legal power as against
referent and expert power are objectively discernible. This is contrary to the use of
‘legitimate’ in the phenomenological sense. In these cases, the assumption is that
the criteria on which the division of the categories of social power rests are phenom-
enological.
French and Raven’s sources of power (except referent power) depend on
employees perceiving their managers as possessing power of a certain type. This
perception, therefore, is a necessary and sufficient condition for the occurrence of
the specified effects. As for referent power, it depends on managers being perceived
as worthy of emulation. None of French and Raven’s categories of power is such that
managers must be aware of exerting influence. Employees are free to regard anybody
as an exerciser of power. The perspective of managers supposedly exercising power is
in fact irrelevant.
As French and Raven’s taxonomy shows, once the perception of employees is
accepted as the primary element in the definition of power there is no limit to
what constitutes a possible exercise of power. This view presumably appeals to
psychologists, some of whom work therapeutically with people who believe that
real or imaginary powers are conspiring against them. That is, French and Raven’s
perspective permits psychologists to regard such ‘powers’ as real, but at the cost
of losing any basis for distinguishing between real and imaginary powers. Besides,
the theory obliges French and Raven to deny the existence of powers which many
people treat as real since it compels them to regard as powerful only those sources
that affect people psychologically. However, if power is manifested only psychologi-
cally, burning people alive at the stake for refusing to change their religious beliefs
would not be an exercise of power.
54
Chapter 3: A Theory of Managerial Power

A variant of the phenomenological approach is represented by the ‘potential’
theory of power. In this vein, Emerson asserts that power must be defined as poten-
tial influence and thereby conflates power and influence. Mott’s latency theory
claims that power is the ability to apply force, not its actual application. However,
shifting the focus from manifest to latent forms of power does not address the prob-
lems associated with the phenomenology of power. For example, the belief that a
management team has power is an insufficient ground for scientific enquiry. A
management team cannot be said to have power unless its activities yield objective
changes. When the team offers this evidence, it manifests its specific power. While
the view that a management team has actual and potential power is unproblematic,
the inference to the existence of latent power in the absence of evidence is not. In
other words, the latent or potential power perspective is thus overtly phenomenolog-
ical and does not require an empirical criterion. As such, it is no more likely to lead
in a fruitful direction than is the general phenomenological approach which it
embraces.
The 137 references in Sturm and Antonakis’s previously mentioned review are
dominated by writers who adopt the phenomenological view and, consequently,
conflate power, influence and authority. Sturm and Antonakis’ own analysis,
which continues the trend set by Lukes and French and Raven, offers an example
of this conflation. Indeed, Sturm and Antonakis conceive of (interpersonal) power
as ‘having the discretion and the means to asymmetrically enforce one’s will over
others.’⁸ They have therefore defined power in terms of power wielders and argue
that to have power managers must have the ability to act (intention) and the
means (position) to dominate others. Insofar as the power of an organisational posi-
tion is authorised by others, power and authority are thus conflated.
When authors define power phenomenologically as a form of domination or
influence, they create insuperable problems for social scientific enquiry because
they leave the definition of power dependent on people who claim to be influenced
or dominated. If power is to be the basis for the ‘laws of social dynamics’ (as Russell
maintained), a phenomenological view of power is inadequate because of the confla-
tion of power and influence and the failure to acknowledge that power and authority
refer to independent events taking place in different situations. Indeed, individuals
are influenced by many things about their managers, including these managers’
behaviour and reasoning, whether directed at influencing their colleagues or not.
This observation is not an admission that managers are exercising power over
anyone. Colleagues can be impressed that managers have special powers, but they
can be equally impressed when their belief about managers’ power is shown to be
false. Further, managers can try to influence colleagues psychologically and fail,
even when they exercise the power to fire them. Even then it can be said that subor-
Sturm & Antonakis (2015: 139).
Managerial Power: A Selective Critical Review
55

dinates are influenced by managers since, once fired, they do something different
and go home.
Coercion is a case of power which should not be called influence. Indeed,
managers typically exercise power by direct control of the workplace which can
result in indirect control over the conduct of colleagues. To reuse the previous
example, when managers fire people, they exercise power whether colleagues are
influenced psychologically by the change or not. That the sacked employees are
glad to be free, does not imply that power was not exercised by managers.
In summary, Lukes’, French and Raven’s and Sturm and Antonakis’s power
perspectives begin and end at a phenomenological, non-ecological position where
the notion of power falls short of contact with empirical reality. Weber’s concerns
about the protean nature of power are, therefore, vindicated.
The Generative View of Power
Most scholars offer some conceptual analysis in support of their definition of power.
A notable exception is Foucault who, drawing on the work of the late Nietzsche,
promoted the view that the world is a product of a mysterious, free-floating will to
power which is inexorably a will to more power. Nietzsche himself did not develop
this idea beyond a few jottings in his notebooks and there are reasons to believe
that he abandoned it because of its logical and empirical difficulties.⁹ Nevertheless,
Foucault claimed that power is everywhere, being neither a particular structure nor a
possession. Specifically, beginning with the view that life is a constant string of stra-
tegic conflicts and coercion, Foucault ended with the view that the institutionalisa-
tion of positions of power represents a constant use of force: power is co-extensive
with the social body and there are no spaces of liberty between the meshes of its
network. Eagleton concludes that power in Foucault’s writings is ‘self-grounding,
self-generative and self-delighting, without origin or end, an elusive blending of
governance and pleasure which is thus a kind of subject all in itself, however
subjectless it may otherwise be.’¹⁰ Despite (or thanks to) his excruciating, nebulous
prose and dubious historical sermons, Foucault continues to dazzle scholars of a
certain persuasion, notably within critical management studies.
Parsons went beyond the ‘power as domination’ perspective and treated power
as something generated by cooperation between people.¹¹ If the definition of
power is confined to power over people, theorists are committed to a view of
power, such as Foucault’s, where social life is nothing but domination and submis-
sion. Parsons calls this a ‘zero-sum perspective’, for he sees it as implying that when
Joullié (2013).
Eagleton (1990: 388).
Parsons (1937; 1967).
56
Chapter 3: A Theory of Managerial Power

a manager gains power colleagues are disadvantaged to at least an equivalent degree
because for every individual who has power there must exist people who are subject
to its exercise.
Parsons’ main point is that there is a discontinuity between power exercised by
individuals and power generated by the coordinated activity of several people.
Furthermore, the amount of power available for distribution in a work organisation
can be increased. Consequently, we should not confine the definition of power to the
‘power as domination’ perspective.
Power refers to a group’s ability to effect specific changes and accordingly
managers must apply a method to achieve the required results. To have such a
method implies knowledge of causes which can be manipulated to produce a fore-
seen result. In the case of a management team, such knowledge requires a practical
plan; for individual managers, it is an intention. Successful management is based on
the discovery of the cause of an event and is demonstrated when managers exploit
this cause to produce or prevent a desired event.
To appraise scientifically the existence of managerial power, the present authors
proposed elsewhere the following criteria: (a) an empirically recognisable effect (or
change) is produced; (b) the effect can be produced by managers recurrently and reli-
ably; (c) the production of the effect by individual managers and management teams
is intentional, rather than accidental; (d) criterion (c) means that managers can
cause the effect and that these causes can be manipulated by human action; (e)
the effect cannot be cancelled by the mere dissent of subordinates; (f) accidents,
unintentional or unplanned events are all rejected as cases of the exercise of
power. Also rejected are states of affairs which arise from the concatenation of
many powers exercised simultaneously but independently.¹²
A New Theory of Managerial Power
The authors accept Weber’s and Russell’s assumptions that organisations are power
fields, and that personal power involves the production of intended effects. These
interlocked assumptions are supported by the fact that managers produce intended
effects on organisations.
As opposed to personal power, however, a major form of managerial power is
produced by managers joining with each other and with others in directed
endeavour. As such, managerial power is produced collectively and is often alienated
from individual producers. However, because managerial power cannot be produced
individually, its effects are not necessarily intended by those individual managers
who contribute to them. Indeed, managerial power regularly yields results that
were not intended by anyone. The possible absence of an identified individual source
Spillane & Joullie (2015: 215).
A New Theory of Managerial Power
57

makes the question of deciding whether managerial power exists particularly diffi-
cult.
A scientific theory about the ways in which powers interact in organisations
brings intended and unintended events within the range of predictability for individ-
uals and organisational change within the scope of collective control. To be useful,
such a theory would: move the discourse about managerial power to a level of gener-
alisation of a scientific kind; assume that individuals are purposeful actors without
obstructing an approach to the unintended results of the independent actions of
many individuals; avoid the pitfalls inherent in accounts of individual action
which depend on ethical or subjective points of view.
The theory sought is an empirical generalisation. To be scientific, it must be falsi-
fiable. Further, it must assert an occurrence which is independent of conscious
control and of cognitive events. That is, the theory must preserve the insight that
the aspect of organisational affairs which is independent of conscious control results
from the unintended interplay of different forms of power.
The central thesis is: managerial power centralises.
This statement is falsifiable. Managerial power does not invariably centralise.
Further, the thesis is deterministic because it admits no place for human intention.
It is concerned with relations that pervade a vast range of human activities. It demar-
cates what is to be explained, including cases (like accidents) which do not accord
with it. It generates as many specific hypotheses as there are situations to which it
may be applied. It asserts something about the interplay of all the specific powers
operating in organisations and since it assumes no predetermined form for organisa-
tion, it is universally applicable. It offers a starting point for the explanation of
organisational change and therefore for a host of unintended events which otherwise
appear as organisational or personal problems. Although the statement is not the
only one about the interplay of managerial powers which fulfils all these conditions
and thus provides a starting point for causative explanation of organisational
phenomena, it is a starting point for a theory of managerial power.
The view that social power generally has centripetal and centrifugal tendencies
is not new. It was, for example, asserted but not developed by Gergen. The concern
here, however, is with managerial power and the theory proposed is an attempt to
capture some of its crucial features. The theory uses the notion of power, understood
as a statement that organisations accomplish things, as a basis for a scientific expla-
nation for unintended events. If the theory explains one such event it will have justi-
fied its existence and practical relevance.
Critics are welcome to challenge the theory by citing an event which, in their
view, it cannot explain. However, for their challenge to be effective, these critics
must show that this event falls within the scope of the theory. In particular, the
theory that is advanced here is deterministic in that it identifies the causes of unin-
tended events. A proposed counterexample which can be explained as the intended
result of an action falls outside the scope of the theory.
58
Chapter 3: A Theory of Managerial Power

The statement ‘managerial power centralises’ is considered here as a ‘First Law
of Managerial Dynamics’. It is not proposed as a definition of managerial power. It is
noteworthy, however, that the construct as considered here excludes the abilities and
potentialities of individuals, which are their personal powers. That is, managerial
power is the result of an organisation of individual powers and is characterised by
its alienation from its producers as individuals. Rather, the function of the First
Law is to set up a conceptual platform by asserting something which demarcates
what the theory is not proposed to explain. Accepting the First Law means, inter
alia, accepting that all empirical cases where managerial power centralises are
already covered and call for no further explanation. All other cases, however, do
call for explanation and it is the function of the remainder of this chapter to point
the way towards such explanations.
A starting point is with Parsons’ concern that power is a finite resource for which
people compete implying that in management power is a zero-sum game.
The Organisational Zero-Sum Game
A zero-sum game in organisations has the following characteristics. First, there
exists within organisations a given quantity of power which is incapable of increase
and accessible to all players in principle. Second, all players are in outright compe-
tition for this power. It follows that any one person’s gain is equalled by the losses
suffered by others. In this sense, the elimination of any player from the game is the
culmination of a process of de-organisation which has been in progress throughout
the play. Each time players are weakened they are bought closer to the point of elim-
ination and each such event constitutes a step towards de-organisation. When de-
organisation is complete (i.e., when all interaction under the existing rules ceases),
the game ends. As a social system, the zero-sum game is self-destroying.
The existence of the managerial zero-sum game implies that there are now two
laws to consider, namely:
(a) managerial power centralises;
(b) in a zero-sum system, de-organisation continues without limit.
Where these two laws apply the system will be in the process of disintegration. The
level of de-organisation at any point in time is a function of the extent to which
players lack equal power to resist elimination.
The first law envisages a process in which the power passes naturally from those
people with less to those with more. Although the zero-sum game is only a theoret-
ical model, it accords with the observation that individuals typically distribute power
unequally among themselves. Indeed, in ‘real’ social systems it is much more diffi-
cult to re-distribute power than often appears. For example, deliberate attempts at
The Organisational Zero-Sum Game
59

decentralisation in the public sector commonly fail.¹³ Some decentralisation occurs –
some degree of centrifugal seepage rather than centripetal flow – but such seepage is
typically offset by centralisation in other aspects. In any case, decentralisation, in the
rare cases where it does take place, constitutes an exception to the first law which, as
such, requires an explanation.
The built-in destructive tendencies of the zero-sum game are counteracted when
one or other of the characteristics which define it change. That is, if such a game is
saved it is no longer of the zero-sum type. There are two ways in which the possibility
of salvage can be conceived: external and internal changes in the dynamics of the
game.
An external change in the game occurs when those players whose loss of power
has reached a critical point are supplied with compensatory power drawn from
sources outside the game. Such a process requires that there exists some entity
outside the game with access to power whose origin does not depend on the play
and that this entity has an interest in keeping the game going. A mechanism of
rescue of this type implies the existence of a source of power which intervenes in
response to the pleas of the losers. An example is offered by trade union officials
who have a vested interest in maximising membership in, say, the public service.
To achieve their goal, they support managers with similar ideological commitments
and, in effect, prop up middle management where game losers abound.
Another way of dealing with the self-destructive tendencies of the zero-sum
game is to supply the players whose losses have reached a critical point with
power drawn from those who are ‘winning’, i.e., those in whose hands power is
concentrated. In this way, the game can be kept going indefinitely, since no player
need ever be eliminated. The accomplishment of this manoeuvre, however, demands
the creation of an entity which has the power to impose restrictions on the most
powerful players. Since this entity must be a creation of those within the game, it
cannot be insulated from the attentions of the powerful players whom it is proposed
to inhibit. Accordingly, they will treat it as another player and attempt to remove its
power. This entity will meet not just opposition from the most powerful players,
singly or in coalition, but active attempts to put it out of the game such as would
be directed at any other player. The outcomes of this power struggle then determines
the extent to which the zero-sum law operates.
Within a work organisation, an example of an entity able to restrict the power of
the strongest players is the human resource (HR) department. Indeed, if the HR
department is to stay in existence, it will preserve the system by taking from the
more powerful and giving to the less powerful players (who would otherwise be
expelled from the game) and will thus set a ceiling to the development of de-organ-
isation. In doing so, however, it reduces the incentive for competition among players,
because if the HR department is ready to relieve some players of a substantial part of
Pollitt, Birchall & Putman (2016).
60
Chapter 3: A Theory of Managerial Power

their gains, it is less rational for them to exert themselves unduly. The gap between
the winners and the losers is thus relatively smaller under the HR regime than it
would be if the zero-sum game operated unchecked.
Another possible way of preventing or stalling the development of de-organisa-
tion is through charity, for instance through devolvement of decision-making power.
That is, powerful players, observing that others are relatively powerless, can pass
some of their gains to the latter, thus making it possible for them to remain in the
game. Charity is unreliable because it depends on the powerful perceiving that
other players are reaching the critical stage where they are likely to be forced out
of the game. Furthermore, the probability that the powerful contact the powerless
is low. Even if such contact were universal, there are many circumstances in which
it is difficult for even the well-intentioned to know when the losses of other players
are such as to threaten the continuity of the game. For example, HR trainers are not
always able to give their trainees the kind of training which would equip them to
become adequate players. Even if such matters are detected, the fact remains that
the powerful are not primarily interested in raising up rivals. In general, the powerful
see the continuance of the game as secondary to the process of winning.
In some organisations charity is institutionalised, often through HR policies and
practices. Insofar as they operate, these policies and practices depress the rate of de-
organisation, but they seldom come into effect until their recipients are in severe
straits; in any case, there is a floor level above which they cease to function. Further,
those individuals wishing to see the system operate in something other than a zero-
sum fashion can subsidise less powerful players to the point where they become
rivals. Such behaviour does not break the zero-sum pattern, for if one promotes
the fortunes of another in this way, one merely shifts the point at which power
centralises from oneself to the other. The system operates as before except that it
is now oneself who is in danger of being ‘retired’ – or at least shifted to a more
peripheral position in the power structure. Individual sacrifice does not affect the
principle at work.
The two ways of salvaging the zero-sum game differ in effect. Those ways that
convert the system to a circular flow neglect the possibilities of increasing the
total power in the system, make no special provision for preserving what power is
already available in the system, and run counter to the spirit of competition which
is assumed in the zero-sum model. They simply prevent collapse by a partial –
even token – re-distribution of what power is available. Those ways which depend
on support from external sources envisage a system in which power is continually
growing and neglect the possibilities of collapse from within. All large work organ-
isations have drifted into the position where both forms of support are in use.
Even in simple organisations, players suffer some degree of alienation from the
result of their actions and from each other. Indeed, some provision must be made for
poor players if a system is to endure. Consequently, players allow their labour to go
under-rewarded leaving some surplus to be distributed to colleagues or stored
against times of scarcity. Insofar as an individual’s labour goes under-rewarded
The Organisational Zero-Sum Game
61

the system gains in power, even if this power is represented merely by an increase in
numbers. From this viewpoint – which can be consequential psychologically – all
productive workers are a source of external support feeding power into the system.
Thus, even when they gain their living through the system, the psychological posi-
tion of workers is always likely to be equivocal. They can, and sometimes do, see
themselves as exploited and set out to fight the organisation, especially if this organ-
isation is large and unionised.
In organisations where the distribution of power already exhibits a pronounced
gradient, labour is deployed by agents which command much greater power than
any individual. Consequently, power from this external source does not favour decen-
tralisation, but the reverse. The new power influx will be distributed in direct relation
to the pre-existing distribution. The powerful grow more powerful and the powerless
remain at best relatively powerless. Thus, even though the system is ‘open’ in the
sense that its producers are continually feeding new power into it through the labour
of employees, centralisation accelerates rather than decelerates unless exceptional
circumstances allow employees to retain the full value of their product. Similarly,
income from external sources is positively correlated with power held and supports
(or increases) the rate of centralisation and the level of de-organisation. The claim
that ‘real’ organisations are ‘open’ is thus true in the sense that it is possible to inject
more power into them continually, but it does not insulate them from the zero-sum
law.¹⁴ Indeed, the historical record offers ample evidence of organisations that have
collapsed after achieving great power, mostly from internal causes.
Power Vehicles and the Rate of Centralisation
Human beings are tool-using animals. Some of these tools are physical objects
(computers), some are controlled processes (fire), some are forms of social organisa-
tion (firms). All these, insofar as they have a tool-like property which allows them to
be used for human purposes, can be called power vehicles. The appearance of new
tools inevitably results in two effects: (a) an increase in the power of the organisation
which possesses them and the managers who control them, and (b) a sharpening of
the distinction between members of the organisation as human resources (whose
powers remain constant) and the power generating system per se. As an aside,
this distinction underlies the separation between sociology (including economics)
and psychology.
Managerial power is embodied in power vehicles, not persons. Power vehicles are
man-made objects and devices which are used to achieve purposes beyond their own
production. Human purposes are built into power vehicles which can be modified
without affecting the personal powers of the individuals who use them. However,
Scott & Davis (2015).
62
Chapter 3: A Theory of Managerial Power

once a power vehicle has been acquired, disposed of or modified, a new balance of
power is struck between members of the organisation. Besides, as physical objects,
processes or social entities, power vehicles are in a state of continual decay. If
ignored, they will sooner or later cease to function. If the advantage to those who
use them is to continue, the power vehicles must be maintained by human effort.
Such effort will come in the form of an exertion of organisational power and will
therefore have centripetal effects (as per the First Law).
The greater the effort required to maintain a power vehicle the greater will be the
rate of centralisation within the organisation that has it, with a corresponding
increase in the power of management. However, the maintenance effort required is
not in proportion to the total power available in the system. Some power vehicles
(say a concrete building) require little maintenance but offer great utility over a
long period; others, while being necessary tools for some purpose, require a
sustained maintenance effort or, like work organisations, a high investment in
administration.
The foregoing comments can be summarised in the following additions to the
theory:
(a) all power vehicles decay over time;
(b) the minimum rate of centripetal flow necessary to maintain the status quo
within an organisation depends on the amount of power required to prevent
deterioration of the power vehicles in use within that organisation.
The first of these statements is an empirical generalisation which admits of no excep-
tions. The second is a conditional statement. It derives from the first statement and
the centripetal law taken together. As it is a valid deduction and self-evidently true, it
leaves the premises from which it is drawn unfalsified.
Expansion of the Power Base
Besides the effort required to maintain the power vehicles, the rate of power central-
isation is affected by the rate at which the stock of power vehicles is expanded within
the organisation. At first glance, the reverse is more plausible. Indeed, the rate at
which the power base is expanded seems to be governed by the rate of centripetal
flow. In practice, however, means exist by which the power base is expanded now
on the expectation that the centripetal flow will be high enough in the future to
cover the investment. A typical means of expanding the power base in such a way
is monetary credit. Loans carry interest (which is one channel of centralisation)
and payment of interest requires that future labour continues to go under-rewarded
(as compared to capital) if the debt is to be amortised. The increase of the stock of
power vehicles (through monetary credit) thus precedes the increase in the rate of
centralisation.
Expansion of the Power Base
63

Loans, or reserves from which expansion of the power base are financed, are
accessible in direct proportion to the power already held. Consequently, the ability
to influence the future of centripetal flow, and thus the degree to which future labour
will go under-rewarded, is also possessed in direct proportion to the power held. In a
so-called free market economy, this necessary under-rewarding of future labour
occurs through a reduction in the amount paid as wages per item produced. This
reduction covers the requirements of the increased centripetal flow but leads to a
Keynesian bind, because the process of production often fails to distribute enough
money to ensure that its products can be purchased within the community. That com-
munity must then seek outside purchasers (international trade), and this provides an
influx of power to the entire community but contributes nothing to decentralisation.
In summary, the rate of centripetal flow of managerial power at any point in time
will therefore be related to the sum of:
(a) the amount of power devoted to maintenance of the assemblage of power vehi-
cles in use;
(b) the amount of power directly devoted to expansion of this assemblage;
(c) the amount of power contracted for but not directly supplied for expansion in
the past.
Factors Impeding Power Centralisation
Physical barriers, such as distance, oceans and impassable terrain, impede the
power centralisation process. It follows that the development of specific power vehi-
cles which facilitate transport and communication also facilitates the centralisation
process. However, certain geographical features create more favourable conditions
for the generation of managerial power than do the general run of locations
throughout an area. Indeed, locations where a combination of geographical charac-
teristics such as port, raw materials, water and other necessities of life are found
together tend to become locations at which managerial centralises geographically.
Such locations can be regarded as the soft points of the environment, where the
efforts of human beings have been found to be most readily combinable and most
efficient (they achieve their purposes for the lowest effort). Such locations typically
become the site of cities. The development of such a concentration of powers as
marks a city inhibits the growth of rival centres in the near vicinity unless these
rival centres are separated from the original by physical barriers. The effect of the
physical features of the environment upon the rate of power centralisation and the
loci at which it centralises is a topic for human geography theorists but falls outside
of the scope of the present chapter.
64
Chapter 3: A Theory of Managerial Power

Authority: Psychological and Legal Impediments to
Centralisation
Selective barriers to channels by which power could otherwise centralise operate
psychologically and legally. As these are closely connected, they can be grouped
under the rubric of authority.
The application of sanctions against illegal activities requires that power be
directed towards suppression of breaches of a given rule which is based on the
local authority code. For example, within work organisations, HR departments, as
legitimated power vehicles, require centripetal flows of power to operate. Paradoxi-
cally, power must be directed towards suppressing internal competition before the
cooperation which generates managerial power can develop. Hence, competition
must be moderated by cooperatively generated power, and insofar as this is done,
the assumption of outright competition contained in the zero-sum game is rendered
unrealistic and the operation of the zero-sum law tempered. Further, a group’s
suppression of internal competition is positively related to its potential for generating
managerial power. Therefore, ‘the psychological factors which make the working of
authority possible are logically prior to the creation of [managerial] power.’¹⁵
Societies have developed by small steps in cooperation which create advantages
and thus increase the value of trusting a transpersonal moral code. Although moral
codes are usually regarded as a-rational, they are rational insofar as they are the
product of profitable experiments in voluntary cooperation. An example of factors
blocking the centralisation of managerial power are rules preventing slave labour.
Slave labour involves human labour deployed at minimum cost, i.e., the short-
term subsistence of the slave labourer. Where unskilled labour is required, slave
labour produces the greatest surplus and the greatest centripetal flow of power
possible. Once the rule outlawing slave labour takes hold, however, the rate of
centralisation falls, and the system loses power unless substitute channels are
found.
The alternative to slave labour is paid labour. If the amount paid in wages does
not exceed the cost of maintaining slave-labourers, no reduction in the surplus avail-
able for centripetal flow occurs and no loss of power by the system eventuates. This
outcome shows that the concerned organisation was in fact not dependent on slave
labour. However, if the amount paid in wages exceeds the cost of employing slave
labourers, and the productivity of labour does not increase to take up the difference,
the rate of centralisation falls. If the fall is great enough to prevent the maintenance
of the assemblage of power vehicles in use, the system loses power or is threatened
with such a loss. In this case, three outcomes are possible: the organisation regresses
towards subsistence functioning; it is absorbed by more powerful competitors; or it
finds tools which make labour more productive.
Spillane & Joullié (2015: 218).
Authority: Psychological and Legal Impediments to Centralisation
65

The result of any change in the authority code which blocks or restricts channels
by which managerial power centralises leads to one of the three possible outcomes
(regression, absorption and discovery of new tools). Since the first two are normally
considered undesirable, fluctuations in the rate of power centralisation are moni-
tored. When signs of a fall are noted, extra effort is normally directed towards the
third outcome (the search for ways to make labour more productive). In the presence
of an adequate monitoring process, then, a reduction in the centripetal flow of power
leads to an increase of the potential value of any conceivable power vehicle which
could replace human labour or make it more productive.
Authoritative rules only enter the determination of the rate of power flow and the
consequent distribution of power insofar that they affect behaviour. A decree does
not affect the flow of power; it merely specifies authors’ thoughts about its legiti-
macy. Decrees are usually accepted when authors are already legitimated as their
source. They are typically supported by sanctions that apply where the prescribed
rules are not respected. However, sanctions do not ensure that decrees are respected,
as the fate of Prohibition in the United States illustrates.
The effective application of sanctions does not guarantee that decrees have the
effect envisaged by their authors since it is difficult to make rules to cover all cases.
Accordingly, when a law is made which removes power from individuals, they look
for and often find a self-advantageous loophole. For this reason, those who are
authorised to sit in judgement in legal disputes often seek to influence the effects
of authoritative decrees on the centralisation of power. An example is a judge who
asserts that the court only works on the letter of the law but cannot account for
the intentions of the government in framing it. (As an aside, the rule that a court
considers only the letter of the law was reversed by the English Law Lords providing
a further demonstration that the literal content of a decree or rule cannot be taken as
having a direct causative effect on the structure of power.)
Authority: Indirect Effects Resulting in a Centrifugal Power Flow
Obedience to authoritative rules explains why certain channels by which managerial
power centralises are unused. In these cases (and only in these special cases) of
effective prohibition does authority constitute a force equal and opposite to the
centralising tendency of managerial power. It follows that the kinds of power gener-
ated by managers depend on what channels are left open.
Activities which result in the production of useful commodities are often
regarded as legitimate channels for the centralisation of power. If a corporation
that creates highly valued products is somehow deprived of customers, its capacity
to secure profits and thereby centralise managerial power disappears. In a ‘free
market’ economy, no justification for continuing to make such products would
then be available, the corporation would go out of existence, and the labour and
materials would be deployed elsewhere. This hypothetical case shows that certain
66
Chapter 3: A Theory of Managerial Power

ways of generating managerial power operate only on condition that they inciden-
tally empower people by providing them with useful goods. It is as if an automatic
feedback mechanism exists to ensure that labour and materials are so managed as
to produce what is most useful to consumers. Such a putative mechanism supplies
the basis of the argument that some economists advance in favour of allowing
‘market forces’ to operate unchecked. In a ‘free market’ system, the capability of
making profit is accordingly taken as the index of whether the operation is distrib-
uting power to members of the community; any operation failing to do so is elimi-
nated, Darwinian style.
The ‘free market’ is, of course, a myth which economists employ for their own
purposes. Indeed, fully informed customers do not exist, and even if they did,
they would not be interested only in the tool-like qualities that the market offers.
That is, consumers do not think solely in terms of power but are influenced by a
host of other properties. This influence is easily seen when one considers the
profit-making capacity of the producers of illegal drugs. The ‘profit-motive’ has a
built-in tendency to direct production to cheap but attractive goods rather than
those which have a long useful life.
Another fallibility of profit-making capacity as an index of the extent to which
power is distributed to members of the community arises because products are
more useful to some individuals than others. To people who need a life-saving
drug, for example, the value of that drug in a free market is any amount lower
than the worth of the rest of their lives. Its first producers would therefore be able
to extract a very high margin of profit and use their increased financial power to
suppress possible competition. Variations on this theme are commonplace in busi-
ness practice. Profit-making is increased by restricting the distribution of a desirable
form of power beyond what is necessary.
Although certain forms in which managerial power is generated empower the
members of the population as a condition of their functioning, this empowerment
is neither automatic nor is it universal. Profit-making is, however, a reasonable
comprehensive index of the rate at which power is centralising in the profit-makers.
That is, at a general level, access to goods produced by an industrial complex is one
factor which explains why the members of an industrialised community have a
greater range of powers at their disposal than members of non-industrialised
communities.
The second part of the argument in the previous section held that: (a) when a
system contains an effective apparatus for monitoring the centripetal flow of
power, and (b) when a diminution in this flow is detected through this apparatus,
then (c) an increase occurs in the potential value of any conceivable power vehicle
which could replace human labour or make it more productive. It cannot be said
that this situation causes inventions, but it sets the scene in which they are most
likely to be accepted as potentially useful and experimented with. Recurring situa-
tions of this kind, coupled with the success of some inventions, creates a social
Authority: Indirect Effects Resulting in a Centrifugal Power Flow
67

climate in which invention is seen as a contribution to the generation of managerial
power.
Inventions can be regarded as falling into two classes. The first comprises those
inventions that are effective only within a massive power vehicle itself, like compu-
terised factory processes. They indirectly increase the flow of power down to the
consumer by decreasing the cost of the manufactured products. In the short run,
however, these inventions are apt merely to restore the centripetal flow to its
previous level, that which existed before the investment in the invention was
made. The second category of inventions consists of those which not only serve
the interests of the productive system by empowering individuals in their role within
that system but also, if incidentally, empower them in their capacity as independent
citizens. A large category of inventions has this effect. Indeed, such objects as mobile
telephones make people not only more productive, they also greatly extend the range
of things they can do personally wherever they have access to them. Inventions of the
second category (those which empower individuals as citizens) are not produced to
make organisational members independent of the system. That such inventions
sometimes do so is a by-product of the struggle to maintain the centripetal flow of
power when it is threatened by restriction of the channels through which it flows.
Innovations are thus not the direct result of ‘market forces’, but the indirect result
of a combination of circumstances which include the selective effects of authority
upon market operations and the human capacity for invention. Inventions, then,
represent another kind of factor (after rules) which set up a centrifugal flow and
serve to empower the person qua person.
In summary, the power structure of management reveals two factors at work: a
centralising tendency and a countervailing, centrifugal tendency. Changes in one
tendency are neither wholly dependent nor wholly independent of changes in the
other, and changes in both are neither wholly dependent on human decision-
making, nor wholly independent of it.
The Utility of the Theory
The thrust of the present theory of managerial power is towards an explanation of
‘unintended events’ – such as fluctuations in labour relations, employment, strikes,
theft, crime, retrenchments and other so-called social problems. Although such
phenomena have sociological and economic manifestations within and outside
work organisations, they result from the confluence of individual actions, be they
personal decisions or habits. Such a feature makes these phenomena relevant to
management and organisation theorists, sociologists and social psychologists.
The orientation of this chapter is close to that of Durkheim who concluded that
rates of suicide depend on the ‘social climate’. Like him, the present authors argue
that human decisions are affected by variations in social climate but, unlike him, we
propose that the principal dimension of social climate within organisations arises
68
Chapter 3: A Theory of Managerial Power

from the distribution of social power. Further, we accept as a premise that the effects
of managerial power are not entirely under human control.
The current theory endorses five propositions of interest to management theo-
rists. First, the theory starts from the premise that human behaviour is intentional,
i.e., performed on the basis of expected results so far as these can be foreseen by
the actor. Second, such behaviour cannot be controlled except by altering the pattern
of relationships in which a given result can be seen as likely to be achieved by a
specific plan of action. Third, the principal element in human relationships (both
with others and with the environment) is the distribution and dynamics of power,
in which managerial power plays a crucial role, and that this element explains the
widest range of organisational behaviour, but not all. Fourth, individuals differently
placed in a power structure act differently and by virtue of the power vehicles they
can activate. Fifth, the theory describes factors countervailing the centralisation of
power through constraints placed on the power of the parties to the organisational
relationship. These centrifugal factors take the form of authority, inventions, and
HR practices, among others.
Implicit in this theory is a host of questions for management theorists, not the
least of which concerns the origins of those forms of authority which either
encourage or outlaw the accumulation of power by certain specified means. On
the surface these factors seem to originate in a concern for others. Altruism, however,
has two levels. One level appears when individuals aid another by their own actions.
The other level is revealed when direction of managerial power is necessary for such
aid to be effective. In the latter case, the decision to be altruistic is not simply a
personal matter but is associated with some consensual position. If the required
power to do so is not available, altruism cannot be effective. Generation and direc-
tion of the required power are thus pre-conditions for the enactment of ethics.
That is, progress in ethical behaviour is dependent on progress in the scientific
and material spheres. It is hoped that this intriguing question will steer psychological
enquiry and management theory into ecological channels.
An explicit aspect of the theory is that it portrays managerialism as a natural and
spontaneous phenomenon within work organisations. Indeed, since managerial
power centralises, the collective power of managers who benefit from this centralisa-
tion increases. As a result, these people can be expected to use their growing power
to entrench themselves further in the structure, at the expense notably of experts,
front line workers and other professional colleagues. Fortunately, however, the
theory also indicates how resistance to managerial power is possible. As was argued,
authority is one of the processes which represents a barrier to centralisation and thus
to seemingly unstoppable managerialism. How that barrier is erected in practice is
the subject of the final chapter.
The Utility of the Theory
69

Chapter 4:
Authority and Argumentation in the Boardroom
Peter Drucker tells the story of Alfred Sloan, chairing a GM board meeting which had
before it a proposal for a major campaign.¹ Normally, a proposal of this kind would
generate considerable argumentative discussion. In this instance, however the
proposal was so well prepared that everybody supported it and believed Sloan
was also in its favour. When everyone thought that the proposal had been agreed
upon, Sloan said, ‘I take it all you gentlemen are in favour?’ ‘Yes, Mr Sloan,’ they
all replied. ‘Then I move that we defer action on this for a month to give ourselves
a chance to think.’ A month later, during the next board meeting, the proposal
was drastically revised. As they left the boardroom, Drucker asked Sloan whether
he was disappointed with the result. Sloan replied that he accepted the result
since the critical arguments raised about the proposal were valid.
Drucker’s vignette implies that the boardroom is a model of the human
encounter based on authority and argumentation. Elsewhere, Drucker maintains
that if managers perform, they earn the right to be argumentative, even annoying.
Managers, Drucker insisted, are not paid to share their feelings with each other:
they are paid to give reasons to support their views. In boardrooms, as elsewhere,
authority – in Friedrich’s sense as a quality of a reasoned communication – is
distinct from the use of power and coercion that is ordinarily implied in the notion
of ‘authoritarian.’ So, when corporate governance is defined as a system of ‘author-
itative direction,’ attention needs to be paid to the precise meaning of these words.²
Surprisingly, such scrutiny has not been exercised; although the definition has been
widely accepted, its dependence on a valid definition of authority has not been
discussed in the corporate governance literature.
Scholars have discussed the ways chairmen (the legally correct term in some
countries) direct their boards and offered recommendations to that effect.³ There
are times (during crises especially) when chairmen lose control of their board.
However, while the power of board members generally and of chairmen specifically
has been widely discussed, less attention has been paid to authority in the board-
room. For example, influential articles on boardroom behaviour make no mention
of authority and do not investigate the difference between authoritarian and author-
itative practices in the boardroom.⁴ Popular books on the topic fare hardly better and
typically do not list ‘authority’ in their indexes.⁵
Drucker (1979a: 287).
Colley et al. (2003: 3).
Bailey & Peck (2013); Bonn & Pettigrew (2009); Kakabadse & Kakabadse (2008); Kakabadse & van
den Berghe (2013); Roberts & Stiles (1999).
Finkelstein (1992); Letendre (2004); McNulty et al. (2011); McNulty & Pettigrew (1996); Nicholson &
Newton (2010); Pettigrew & McNulty (1995; 1998).
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-006

Although here have been studies of directors’ professional expertise, little is
known of how chairmen interact with professional experts during board meetings.⁶
Moodie argued that the challenge for chairmen of boards is to adopt a management
style which acknowledges a broad range of perspectives, draws on recognised profes-
sional expertise and encourages independent thinking while ensuring ‘authoritative
direction.’⁷ Yet, researchers have observed that most board meetings are formalistic
affairs, with meagre debate, few probing questions and little serious discussion.⁸
While scholars have argued that boards with diverse professional experts enhance
effective problem solving, others hold that the conflict between board members
that such diversity generates is prone to sabotage problem solving.⁹ In the same
vein, researchers have noted that boards often eschew critical discussion and
debate.¹⁰ Analysis of such phenomena is usually couched in terms of cognitive
conflict or refers to board members’ disinclination to appear incompetent.¹¹ For
example, after interviewing hundreds of Australian board members, Moodie
concluded that a common reason for board members’ refusal to ask relevant ques-
tions stems from a concern that their questions reveal a lack of knowledge or expe-
rience. Whatever the reasons for board members’ reluctance to speak, central ques-
tions remain: why do chairmen allow this reticence and, in their own case, avoid
critical discussion and argumentation? On these two points the relevant literature
is unhelpful. This chapter is dedicated to showing that Friedrich’s theory of authority
is relevant to boardroom behaviour insofar as it addresses most, if not all, of the
themes to which the two questions refer.
As per Friedrich, the vehicle for reasoned elaboration is argumentation. A clear
distinction can thus be drawn between those (authoritarian) chairmen who reject
argumentation and those (authoritative) chairmen who promote and engage in it.
Further, when chairmen reject argumentation for fear that it weakens their power,
they also reject the authority of professional experts on the board. In so doing,
they revert to authoritarian practices and present authority as a form of power, rather
than a source of power. There are reasons to believe, however, that the authority of
chairmen is enhanced by the presence and argumentative contributions of technical
experts on boards.
Insofar as boardroom meetings are bureaucratic processes, they are regulated by
conformity to legal and technical standards. Board members are functionaries in a
system in which power is exercised by people occupying specific positions. Power
is therefore attached to the position (or role) of board member rather than to specific
Clarke & Branson (2012); Johnson (2004); Leblanc & Gillies (2005).
Gray & Nowland (2017).
Moodie (2001).
Winkler (1987: 140).
Baranchuck & Dybvig (2009); Williams & O’Reilly (1998).
Forbes & Milliken (1999); McNulty, Florakis & Ormrod (2013).
Ranasinghe, Mather & Young (2020).
Chapter 4: Authority and Argumentation in the Boardroom
71

individuals and this setting allows the system to achieve a high degree of predicta-
bility and stability. Nevertheless,Weber’s model does not account for board members
who expand, ignore or rebel against the boundaries of their role.Weber concedes the
inevitability of such intrusions into bureaucratic groups of personal and non-rational
elements. Such behaviour is, for him, disruptive and threatens the cohesion of
bureaucracies; it can be tolerated only if disputes between group members are
based on and limited to legal or technical issues which should be subjected to
rational discussion and debate. This subjection presupposes a commitment to a
rational tradition which has its roots in Aristotle’s principles of argumentation.
Empirical Studies of Authority
As discussed in Chapter 1, Weber regards the two faces of authority – legal and
rational – as perfectly correlated because bureaucracies are based on offices
which are (allegedly) filled on merit. However, most scholars disagree and argue
that these two dimensions are independent. The distinction deserves attention
because of the possible conflict between the following four categories: (1) office
without knowledge; (2) knowledge without office; (3) office and knowledge; (4)
neither office nor knowledge.
Office without Knowledge
Occupation of organisational office encourages group members to retain authority
figures in such offices.¹² Authority figures, such as board chairmen, come to be
accepted as part of the status quo and this acceptance helps to explain the accrual,
and even extension, of powers that accompany such positions. Specifically, the
powers that accrue to office holders are related to the authority of the office
combined with subordinate endorsement of the office holder. One method of
increasing the authority attached to a position is thus to increase and utilise the
powers of office.¹³ As such, the authority of chairmen accrues from the perception
of their positional power; those chairmen whose positions carry high powers are
more favourably regarded by their colleagues.¹⁴
Research has shown that when asked to rate each other on degree of liking and
perceived power, group members with high power are better liked than those with
Blau (1963); Burke (1966); Cohen (1962); Cohen & Bennis (1961); Crozier (1964); Etzioni (1965);
Flament (1956); Hollander & Julian (1970); Julian, Hollander & Regula (1969); Pryer, Flint & Bass
(1962); Udy (1959).
Newman, Summer & Warren (1967).
Bennis et al. (1958); Pelz (1952).
72
Chapter 4: Authority and Argumentation in the Boardroom

low power.¹⁵ Subordinates seek to be liked by high power figures and employ subtle
ingratiation strategies to gain acceptance. Low status members who can increase
their status in the group tend to communicate in friendly, ingratiating ways designed
to enhance their relations with those controlling the mobility process.
The general conclusion of studies in these matters is that the very occupancy of a
formal position lends legitimacy to the occupant. Applied to the boardroom, direc-
tors tend to accept the position of chairmen and their power as legitimate within a
wide sphere of operation. However, if board members believe that chairmen have
the power to effect changes in their environment and do not utilise that power,
they judge them less favourably. That is, colleagues have high-level expectations
and ideas about how chairmen should behave in the performance of their duties
and conformance to these expectations determines how chairmen’s general perfor-
mance is assessed.
Knowledge without Office
The popular expression ‘informal authority’ refers to the use of technical knowledge
and skills in the allocation of means to the effective attainment of goals. Cases of
informal authority encompass situations in which the knowledge-holder possesses
professional competence, task and social expertise, social status and personal qual-
ities. Interestingly, research has found that demographic or biographical variables,
including age, level of education, levels of motivation and self-esteem are unrelated
to perception of technical authority.¹⁶
After reviewing factors associated with the emergence of authority in small
groups, Stogdill appealed to five classifications. High rate of participation without
negative affect increases personal authority. Dominance is related to personal
authority. Task expertise is one of the most influential variables in the perception
of personal authority. Attempts to influence group members increases authority. Exclu-
sive possession of information is related to acquiring and maintaining authority.
Specifically, it has been shown that a technical expert’s opinion is more influential
than the majority group opinion in determining group response to a judgemental
task.¹⁷
Applied to boards, the general conclusion of these studies is that the more direc-
tors are perceived to be technically competent by colleagues, the greater the proba-
bility of their success. Accordingly, their information skills and personal characteris-
tics are determining factors in the attribution and maintenance of their authority.
Research has also shown that where group rather than individual performance is
Baum (1961); Cohen (1958); Hurwitz, Zander & Hymovitch (1953); Jones & Jones (1964).
Student (1967).
Luchins & Luchins (1961).
Empirical Studies of Authority
73

rewarded, as in boards, competence to achieve the group’s goals is a crucial determi-
nant of selection for a senior position.¹⁸ Technical expertise, however, is not neces-
sarily sufficient to guarantee success, or even accommodation, within the formal
bureaucratic system.
Knowledge and Office
Peabody conducted a questionnaire study to investigate related perceptions of
different forms of authority. He found that managers viewed authority strictly in
terms of their relationships with employees. Subordinates, on the other hand, were
more likely to emphasise their relationships with clients when asked to elaborate
on the meaning of authority.
It is noteworthy that while Peabody predicted that knowledge-based authority
would serve to bolster formal authority, his results highlight a basic ambivalence,
if not an inherent conflict, between the different bases of authority. Specifically, in
work environments where technical competence is important for task execution,
the technical aspects of authority are significant, and the authority of the position
may act as a hindrance to the furtherance of this expertise.
In an influential study, researchers separated experimentally the legal and
rational components of Weber’s typology, varying technical knowledge while holding
authority of office constant.¹⁹ They found that differences in conformity across the
experimental conditions were accounted for, in part, by shifts to the belief that
people in formal positions have the right to occupy their offices. Almost all subjects,
regardless of experimental condition, felt obliged to obey the commands of their
superiors, albeit for different reasons. If people in formal positions are judged to
lack relevant technical knowledge, the attribution of authority shifts to a ‘bureau-
cratic’ base. The conclusion is that people occupying organisational offices require
personal authority to maximise their influence, although formal authority is paradox-
ically strengthened without it. This finding is supported by research which found that
faculty members’ satisfaction with their deans was higher when these deans enjoyed
a relatively high degree of influence and when this influence was based on expertise
in addition to positional authority. Expertise was found to be the most prominent
factor in the deans’ influence with positional authority second. Interestingly, an
earlier study reversed this finding when account executives were the subjects.²⁰
Applied to boardroom behaviour, a general theme of the empirical literature
stresses the need for positional authority to be combined with personal and technical
expertise on the part of the chairman if maximisation of power is desired. Board
Hollander (1964).
Evan & Zelditch (1961).
Bachman (1968); Bachman, Smith & Slesinger (1966).
74
Chapter 4: Authority and Argumentation in the Boardroom

members will be more satisfied with chairmen who combine both components of
authority.
Chairmen and Technical Experts
Following Friedrich, a board member is acknowledged as authoritative owing to
special knowledge or skills. Authoritativeness, however, does not necessarily involve
legitimacy (right to rule). A distinction is thereby made between the authoritative
communications of chairmen and those of board members with specific technical
expertise.
Boards of directors have a stewardship role. As such, they are meant to preserve
the correct ways of doing things in organisations and to achieve organisational objec-
tives. However, board members occasionally act as a source of innovation by
providing the board and the organisation with improved ways of achieving its
goals. Thus, the contribution of technical experts, provided it accords with organisa-
tional aims, should receive general approval. In this sense, any model of boardroom
behaviour which attempts to account for change in board effectiveness needs to
account for the way the benefits of technical experts are utilised.
In The Prince, Machiavelli acknowledged the role of technical experts, insisting
that rulers should surround themselves with competent, loyal people.
A prince should show his esteem for talent, actively encouraging able men, and paying honour
to eminent craftsmen […] The first opinion that is formed of a ruler’s intelligence is based on the
quality of the [people] he has around him.When they are competent and loyal he can always be
considered wise, because he has been able to recognise their competence and to keep them
loyal.²¹
Applied to boards, Machiavelli’s advice means that chairmen derive kudos from the
presence in the ranks of competent and loyal board members. While this implication
is perhaps obvious with respect to loyalty, it is less obvious that argumentative
experts enhance the authority of chairmen since they can be seen as competitors,
or even enemies.
The general argument for holding that position-based authority (chairmen)
conflicts with knowledge-based authority (technical experts) is that the development
of the latter within a boardroom is, in part, an outcome of task specialisation.
Restriction of attention to a relatively small number of problems increases experience
within these limited areas and improves the individual’s ability to deal with prob-
lems arising from within them. Such a practice, however, often results in over-
specialisation and unduly diversification of interests among board members.²² In
Machiavelli (1973: 123–124).
Tuggle, Schnatterly & Johnson (2010).
Chairmen and Technical Experts
75

this sense, diversification within the board increases the risk of conflict among board
members. This argument, however, is inconsistent with Machiavelli’s observation
that group leaders derive credit and trust from the presence in the group of technical
experts, even where vigorous debate occurs.
Machiavelli’s observation has found empirical support in two studies.²³ Tensions
between chairmen and technical experts are less likely to be acute when chairmen
have the same technical background as the experts because in such situations
they have similar approaches to problems, or at least use the same language to
describe them. Similarly, tensions between chairmen and experts will be less
pronounced when and if the experts act in accordance with the goals of the board
generally.
In a laboratory test of Machiavelli’s observation in small groups, Spillane
showed that a marked tendency exists for group leaders to be granted credit by
most of their colleagues for the contributions to goal achievement made by technical
experts when leaders and experts are promoting the same goal.²⁴ The offerings of
experts, when seen as rational, lead to an increase in their prestige and to an
increase in the prestige of the group leader. This finding implies that the crucial
element is the perceived rationality of the task-solution at which the group arrived.
This result is in accord with Weber’s theory that the bureaucratic system is funda-
mentally one in which control is dependent on the cumulation of knowledge and
this is in turn consistent with the view, promoted by Friedrich and of Roman origin,
that authority is concerned with growth through correct knowledge.
In a second unpublished study, Spillane found a positive relationship between
the perception of a technical expert and satisfaction with the group and with its
leader. Group members did not perceive the leaders and experts as antagonists.
Rather, many of the favourable satisfaction ratings were attributed to the experience
of participating in groups in which people were exposed to and preferred an ongoing
process of argument, in the form of a dialectic. Others stated that they gained the
strong impression they were being guided through the agenda in a competent
fashion. Hence, the ability of group leaders effectively to coordinate group activities,
including the contributions of experts, is a major factor in obtaining group support.
Spillane also found that the rate of verbal participation contributed to the iden-
tification of the informal authority figure. In such cases, it is unlikely that the group
leader dominated group members. In fact, according to self-reports, the presence of
experts encouraged formal authorities to assert themselves more frequently, but not
in an authoritarian fashion. Further, a reduction in the perceived power of the posi-
tion was reported by some group leaders when task experts were present. This
finding points to the differences between group leaders’ and members’ judgements
and feelings of satisfaction in groups where authority figures of both kinds are pre-
Bezemer et al. (2014); Van Oortmessen et al. (2014).
Spillane (1983).
76
Chapter 4: Authority and Argumentation in the Boardroom

sent. This disjunction helps to account for the divergent views which have character-
ised the sociological literature concerning the instrumental and emotional value of
informal authority figures. That is, rather than exert a divisive influence, informal
authorities bolster the formal authority of group leaders and their administration
from the subordinates’ perspective when the same goals are accepted by both
parties. In the last analysis, the debate turns on whether investigators study the
authority relationship from the superiors’ or from the subordinates’ perspective.
Interestingly, the more favourable attributions resulting from the presence of
informal and formal authorities in the same group came from subordinates. Formal
authorities experienced a relative loss of personal influence when a task expert was
present. Yet, the authority of the expert increased subordinates’ support for formal
authorities.
Applied to boards, Spillane’s psychosocial finding supports Friedrich’s explana-
tion of authority. The interaction between chairmen and technical experts sets up the
process of reasoned elaboration and, being open to monitoring by all members, has
the effect of enhancing the authority of chairmen. The implication for boardroom
behaviour is that the presence of technical experts acts to enhance the prestige of
chairmen even when the latter lack commensurate technical expertise. This result
points to the need to assess the impact of the behaviour of chairmen on group
morale, productivity and goal attainment, particularly when technical experts are
prepared to engage in reasoned elaboration with colleagues. Used in such a broad
sense, authority approaches the notion of ‘correctness.’
The notion of authority as a quality of knowledge gains support from the fore-
going discussion. In a boardroom, in seeking out ‘the authorities’ on a technical
matter, board members are searching for the most reliable and effective knowledge.
Boards in which both chairmen and technical experts are present are thus judged (by
members) to perform more effectively. Furthermore, part of this effectiveness is cred-
ited to chairmen. Indeed, while the expert is acknowledged as an informal authority,
chairmen are acknowledged as the successful coordinators of board decision-
making. The added weight of the authority of chairmen and the expectation that
they have the final responsibility for board performance acts to enhance their general
influence. As they control access to technical expertise, chairmen exercise power in
groups. Insofar as chairmen channel group power, including the knowledge of
experts, for the benefit of the group, they are effective to the degree that they direct
group power to achieve desired goals.
Experimental studies in small groups have generally found that group leaders
are granted credit by group members for the contribution to goal achievement
made by technical experts, provided that both parties are promoting the same
goal.²⁵ However, the theories reviewed in the early part of this book fail to predict
this result, nor do they offer an explanation. Machiavelli comes closest, although
Germain (2012).
Chairmen and Technical Experts
77

he takes the process for granted, as a matter of observation, since he nowhere argues
for it. One should therefore look further for an explanation or theoretical framework
in which the phenomenon can be set. There are several possible candidates in the
realm of theory which start with different assumptions from the theories previously
discussed.
Allport’s theory, which was put forward to explain a wide range of empirical
results in social psychology, holds that people who find themselves in groups
adopt a posture which will permit, or promote, the emergence of structure.²⁶
Although no reason or motive is adduced to explain this tendency, the form of the
theory implies that structure is valued, either for itself or for some (unstated)
purpose. The theory parallels several others found in social psychology which
hold that order itself is a necessary foundation for psychological functioning and
will therefore be sought out and retained.
Weber argued that the teachings of charismatics are ‘routinised’ by the followers,
thus making them compatible with a legal-rational order from which the aura of the
sacred has been stripped. Approaching the same question from a different departure
point, Shils argued that Weber’s discussion of the concept of charisma is incomplete
in that he does not acknowledge that the social order itself can be, and often is,
regarded with similar feelings of awe and potency as are directed at charismatic indi-
viduals. Shils’ counterargument is in the tradition of Durkheim, in that the latter’s
theory of religion ascribes an element of the sacred to the wider social order.
The concept of charisma has not been treated in this chapter. Indeed, the
concern has been primarily with Friedrich’s rational aspects of authority and its rela-
tionship with a presumed rational order represented by occupants of formal posi-
tions, specifically chairmen of boards. Furthermore, even though the term ‘charis-
matic’ has been widely (ab)used in modern parlance, it is absurd to ascribe it to
chairmen. Further research would thus be well directed to assessing board members’
predilection for maintaining order or for regarding it as having the cluster of qualities
implied by the term ‘charismatic.’ Until then, Allport’s and Shils’ theories remain
open possibilities.
Research has shown that the offerings of technical experts, when seen as
rational, lead to an increase in their prestige and to an increase in the prestige of
the group leader.²⁷ Such a finding opens a different set of possibilities from those
canvassed by Allport and Shils, since it implies that the crucial element is the
perceived rationality of the task-solution which has been decided by the group. A
possible implication is that charisma as an individual quality is also based on
perceived rationality and that the social structure is perceived as the preserver of
the rational solutions (correct means to goals) once these have been attained.
Among the more comprehensive theories reviewed in this book, Weber’s theory is
Allport (1962).
Selznick (1957).
78
Chapter 4: Authority and Argumentation in the Boardroom

that which best explains such findings. That the prestige of group leaders increases
in proportion to the perceived rationality of decisions supported by technical exper-
tise is consistent with Weber’s view that the bureaucratic system is fundamentally
one in which control is dependent on the cumulation of knowledge. This observa-
tion, in turn, is in line with Friedrich’s theory of authority as concerned with social
growth through correct knowledge. However, there remains room for further hypoth-
eses and future investigation could profitably be directed towards deciding between
other possibilities, which are now examined.
In the boardroom environment, authority is ascribed to individuals on personal
expertise or effectiveness as indicated by their ability and willingness to impart rele-
vant knowledge. Objective measures of that phenomenon are thus possible, at least
in principle. At first sight, the question of whether such individuals have authority
(i.e., correct knowledge) seems beyond doubt, but caution needs to be exercised.
For one thing, if technical experts have effective knowledge and communicate it to
others, then chairmen have their formal authority enhanced since they impart further
knowledge due to the interchange. For another, it is probable that empirical study
would reveal differing perceptions of directors’ expertise: while the authority of
chairmen is generally secure, the attribution of authority to other board members
is less certain. Nonetheless, at the individual level, the positive influence of experts
on the authority of chairmen remains a strong hypothesis worthy of further study.
Such research could be conducted along the following lines.
In board meetings, chairmen control access to technical experts and this repre-
sents a form of power in the group. There is considerable evidence in the literature of
the relationship between power and the attribution of authority. Task expertise repre-
sents personal power of a type. Chairmen are, in principle, able to channel group
power, including the expertise of directors, for the benefit of the group. Mulder’s
power distance theory is relevant here. Mulder argues that there is a tendency
towards reducing the psychological distance between oneself and more powerful
others provided that the distance is not too great. This hypothesis was put forward
as an alternative to ego-defence theory which claimed that individuals in groups
with a powerful person have feelings of uneasiness because the former depend on
the latter for rewards and the satisfaction of various needs. As a result, the less
powerful people try to reduce their uneasiness by deferential behaviour, directing
communication to the more powerful person. According to Mulder, this is not a
power theory but an insecurity theory. He argues that this explanation is not
adequate because the less powerful people do not adapt themselves with ego defen-
sive reactions but often strive to reduce power differentials by initiating behaviour,
modelling the behaviour of powerful people and by emotional reactions.
Mulder et al. developed different power conditions which produced behaviour
consistent with a power distance reduction hypothesis. They found that there were
stronger liking tendencies manifested when the power distance between subjects
and the more powerful were small. Further research in this direction could investi-
gate the perceptions of power in relation to authority figures on boards and the
Chairmen and Technical Experts
79

tendency of directors to reduce power distance in contrast to a defensive adaption to
the more powerful board members, especially chairmen.
As an explanation for the phenomenon under discussion, power equalisation
theory is, in some respects, antithetical to power distance theory. Indeed, the pres-
ence of a technical expert acts to balance the power of chairmen.²⁸ In the boardroom,
where experts actively involve themselves in group tasks, power equalisation has two
possible effects. First, it reduces the distance between board members and chairmen
by involving the former in the group tasks. Second, it conveys the impression that
chairmen are prepared to delegate responsibility (i.e., decisions) to board members.
These effects should increase feelings of satisfaction among board members, which
in turn can be expected to reflect on their judgement of chairmen.
More generally, according to power equalisation theory, one expects that boards
members’ satisfaction to be inversely related to the degree to which chairmen are
perceived to dominate the group in an authoritarian fashion. In such instances, tech-
nical experts balance the interaction by involving at least one of the members in the
information exchange. This exchange, in turn, reflects favourably on judgements of
the chairmen and of board meetings generally. Further research could involve
comparative studies of board meetings where degree of involvement of chairmen
and board members and the types of informational exchanges are assessed.
While research into the themes sounded in the previous paragraphs will clarify
boardroom behaviour, further theoretical and empirical analyses are required to
elucidate the process by which the authority of chairmen is enriched through the
contribution of technical experts. Existing anomalies concerning the rational quali-
ties of the social order provide a fascinating empirical challenge because it links the
two sides of the authority relationship, namely the concession of authority on the
one hand and the consequences of compliance, conformity and obedience on the
other. As noted in Chapter 2, this latter aspect has been widely studied and has
yielded much valuable information. However, the other side of the relationship is
still submerged in conceptual ambiguity and theoretical confusion.
In a context marked by a general scepticism about authority, it is unsurprising
that chairmen are losing control of their boards or see their role (and that of the
group they superintend) challenged.²⁹ The effectiveness of boardroom authority
depends on its acceptance and the minimum condition for this acceptance is that
chairmen’s reasoning is weighed by the board members. This evaluation implies
some form of open discussion that board members can follow and in which they
participate. When such discussion is rejected, chairmen typically use their power
to enforce ‘authority,’ leading to its decay as a source of consensual psychological
control. This is often followed by further attempts at coercive control and bullying
Leavitt (1958); Likert (1961); Strauss (1963).
Kakabadse & Kakabadse (2013).
80
Chapter 4: Authority and Argumentation in the Boardroom

of their colleagues.³⁰ A vicious circle is thereby established from which it is difficult
to emerge as an authoritative figure worthy of respect.
In board meetings it is relatively easy for directors to assess whether the actions
of experts are in accord with group goals. Hence, experts who can achieve group
goals more effectively than existing members are candidates for authoritative status.
If, however, both chairmen and experts are perceived to be working towards similar
goals, which are commensurate with the goals of board members generally, there is
little incentive to alter existing patterns of authority and power relationships. The
increased member satisfaction which obtains from the presence of experts is attrib-
utable to the perception of directors that the group is being expertly directed from
two distinct but concordant sources. The added weight of the power of office and
the expectation that chairmen have the final responsibility for board performance
enhances the general influence of managers, thus indirectly supporting Friedrich’s
theory.
Harvey et al. (2006).
Chairmen and Technical Experts
81

Chapter 5:
A Critique of Management Education
With Anthony M. Gould
One of the assumptions upon which managerialism, as a practice and ideology, rests
is the view that managers are equipped with the type of specialised knowledge that
enables them to devise and implement value-free and reliable means for achieving
their organisation’s objectives. The previous chapters have implicitly adopted the
position that this assumption is unwarranted because such knowledge does not
exist. The present chapter is dedicated to substantiating this position. Further, it is
argued that the sort of knowledge currently imparted in management schools is
particularly deficient in educating managers about the fundamentals of human rela-
tionships. A consequence of this thesis is that a radical overhaul of management
education is called for.
As is generally the case with applied disciplines taught at university, manage-
ment education hinges on the assumption that there exists a codified, teachable
body of knowledge without which the practice of management is impaired. Ever
since Taylor’s Principles of Scientific Management, the conceptual building block of
this corpus has been scientific management theory. This emphasis on theory
modelled on the natural sciences was explicitly manifested in Simon’s landmark
work at the Graduate School of Industrial Administration (GSIA), the successive
waves of behavioural science orientations throughout the middle decades of the
twentieth century, and the Ford Foundation 1959 report that took the GSIA’s
approach as exemplary.
Today, scientific theory is at the heart of management research and education.
For researchers, theory production is a career imperative because management jour-
nals require that their articles make a theoretical contribution. For example, the
formal mission of the Academy of Management Journal is ‘to publish empirical
research that tests, extends, or builds management theory’; other leading publica-
tions, such as Administrative Science Quarterly, Research in Organizational Behavior
and Organization Science, have similarly worded mission statements. For manage-
ment educators, theory is an equally pressing concern. While management gurus
tour the globe and attract large audiences keen to learn the latest wisdom, their
classroom counterparts are obliged to keep abreast of theoretical developments
and incorporate them in their courses lest they be criticised by their students for
not being ‘up to date.’
The production and promulgation of scientific management theory have had at
least two justifications. First, such theories professionalise researchers by creating a
shared embrace of a scientific framework and a commitment to disseminating find-
ings in a common language. Second, theoretical knowledge acquired within the
academy offsets the inexperience of novice managers and improves the practice of
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-007

more seasoned ones. Evidence-based management scholars, such as Rousseau,
Pfeffer and Sutton, are particularly resolute proponents of this offsetting and essen-
tially managerialist thesis. They insist that the best managers operate like medical
doctors do, not according to ideology, preconception or intuition, but constrained
by the principles of logic, a commitment to evidence-gathering and an allegiance
to the application of the fruits of science. In short, scientific theory legitimises
management research, education and practice as professional vocations and
management schools as places of learning.
However, and despite decades of effort, management researchers’ legitimation
quest has not been crowned with unmitigated success. On the one hand, since the
1960s, measured against student enrolments and academic status benchmarks, the
credibility and status of business schools are well established. Moreover, the
emphasis on analytical skills (quantitative analysis in particular) that the reforms
of the 1960s introduced has remained largely unchallenged. Business and manage-
ment schools now attract about one fifth of all US undergraduate enrolments and
their faculty command the second-highest salaries in tertiary education, just behind
those of academics in legal studies. On the other hand, management researchers face
a growing chorus of detractors. From Flexner in the 1930s to Mintzberg in the 2000s,
criticism has been unremitting. Three decades ago, perceptive scholars lamented the
lack of progress of management research and the ephemeral nature of the theories it
produces. It is unlikely that substantial progress has been accomplished since.
Indeed, in a noted editorial for the Academy of Management Journal, George observed
in 2014 that the more management studies proliferate, the more they resemble ‘black
cats in coal cellars.’ Notwithstanding its defenders, the debate about the value of
theory-driven management research continues and there is evidence that the sceptics
are winning it.
Critics of mainstream management education typically advance two lines of
attack. First, they argue that the output of management research is difficult to
apply to workplaces and to teach in classrooms. They lament that researchers prefer
abstract explanation over practical knowledge and that management research has
become inward looking, producing theory for theory’s sake to boost business
schools’ rankings and ensure their accreditation. The second line of attack against
theory-driven management education is on ethical grounds, with detractors charging
that contemporary scholarship has an unduly short-term and individualistic focus.
Business schools are accused of elevating materialistic and excessively ‘winner-
take-all’ values above those concerning societal betterment and equitable sharing
of prosperity. The recurrent corporate scandals of the 2000s (such as Enron, Tyco
and WorldCom) and the 2008 Financial Crisis have provided impetus for such criti-
cism.
Doubts about contemporary approaches to management education have reached
a point where the legitimacy of business schools is being questioned by credible
sources from outside and within the academy. An academic commentator has
gone so far as recently to accuse management researchers and educators of being
Chapter 5: A Critique of Management Education
83

‘genuine imposters,’ busying themselves with work they know is nonsensical.¹ Calls
for management schools to be shut down altogether have been heard, and while
some schools have indeed been closed, their faculty retrenched or absorbed within
business
and
economics
departments,
others
have
terminated
their
MBA
programmes. The malaise is such that a former Dean of Lee Kong Chian School of
Business at Singapore Management University admitted that the industry suffers
from ‘a bad case of existential angst.’²
This chapter is dedicated to arguing that the charges of practical irrelevance and
moral turpitude levelled at management education have a common source: the
desire to explain (and to share explanatory knowledge of) management phenomena
by exclusively proposing theories about them. Specifically, an obsession with scien-
tific theory blinds management academics to an insight long established in philos-
ophy of science but not well ensconced within the management literature: theory
explains in a narrow sense but does not deliver understanding. Concisely, a scientific
explanation is a deduction from the general to the particular, presented in terms of
necessary relationships embedded in a theory whereas understanding obtains
through reflection about reasons and values in a way that marginalises forced
outcomes. Such a nuanced distinction between scientific explanation and the
broader notion of understanding is a necessary first step in the quest to create alter-
natives to management education which, in fact, impart understanding of manage-
ment situations and cut to size the ‘know-it-all-better’ mindset typical of manageri-
alists.
Clarification of the concept of theory in management studies is obtained through
first analysing the generic meaning of explanation in science. It is noteworthy that
the definition and construct of theory to be presented applies within the scholarly
frame of reference, whether the origin is scientific, critical, quantitative or qualita-
tive, as opposed to the view embraced more broadly in everyday parlance to refer
to conjecture or unsupported speculation. The term ‘scientistic’ is used here to
emphasise the difference between science as a broadly based system of empirical
enquiry and logical inference, and scientism which is the belief that the human
sciences require no methods other than those of the natural sciences. As scientism
refers to practices that pretend to be, but are not, science, the term is used generally
by opponents. Consequently, the present use of ‘scientistic’ should not be interpreted
as a general attack on science, logical positivism or logical behaviourism. Second,
conceptual and technical problems associated with the pursuit of scientific explana-
tion in management research are presented. Third, the contribution of critical
management studies, sometimes seen as the alternative to orthodox (theory-driven)
management studies, is examined and criticised. Practical implications for manage-
Tourish (2020).
Thomas, Lorange & Sheth (2013); Thomas & Wilson (2011).
84
Chapter 5: A Critique of Management Education

ment education are then presented and contrasted with existing non-theory driven
pedagogies.
The matters dealt with in this chapter have attracted attention beyond manage-
ment studies and are relevant to social science education generally. Philosophers of
science, sociologists and psychologists, including Dilthey, Weber, Horkheimer and
Hempel have made notable contributions. Although educators in these scholars’
disciplines have been receptive to some of their arguments, their management coun-
terparts have, for reasons to be exposed, typically remained unreceptive. One of the
contributions of the present chapter is that it invokes disparate bodies of scholarship
to assess the state of management education. However, its central contribution is
practical in nature. Specifically, the present argument is that those who only espouse
the promulgation of management theory should not have an exclusive franchise on
management education. Although this case has already been prosecuted in the liter-
ature, the exercise is undertaken here by drawing on the often-overlooked constructs
of theory, explanation and understanding.
Law, Theory, Explanation
Philosophers have long debated the degree to which science explains and its mode of
so doing. A dominant perspective on this matter, the deductive-nomological model,
was formalised by Hempel whose conception is also called the ‘covering law theory’
or ‘received view’. Although Hempel’s model is no longer mainstream in philosophy
of science, its enduring influence justifies a short exposition.
According to Hempel, a scientific explanation is an account of a phenomenon
consisting of two components. The first is the explanandum, a structured description
of what is being explained. The second is the explanans, a series of statements which
specifies certain conditions and includes one or more laws from which the explan-
andum deductively follows as a conclusion. An example provided by Hempel is
the following: the level of the element mercury rises in a thermometer in proportion
to the temperature of the liquid in which the thermometer is immersed (explan-
andum). This is because mercury is contained in a glass tube (specific conditions,
first part of the explanans) and because bodies expand in proportion to their heat
and mercury’s coefficient of expansion is greater than that of glass (two laws, second
part of the explanans).
The deductive-nomological model of scientific explanation suffers from weak-
nesses the elucidation of which are beyond the scope of this chapter. Suffice to
say that philosophers of science have proposed alternatives. Two such substitutes
dominate contemporary literature: the so-called ‘causal’ and ‘unificationist’ modes
of explanation. For proponents of the causal model, to explain something in science
is to provide details about how that something was caused. In contrast, promoters of
the unificationist model base their analysis on what scientists do, which is to develop
explanatory schemes that can be applied as widely as possible. As such, unification-
Law, Theory, Explanation
85

ists hold that an explanation in science is an account which connects facts and rela-
tionships by reconciling them within a set of general patterns and principles. The
overall objective of unificationist science is to minimise the number of patterns
and principles which are established as fundamental.
To advance the present argument it is not necessary to attempt to reconcile the
causal and unificationist models of scientific explanation. Rather, two comments are
relevant. First, proponents of each perspective have conceded ground to the other.
Indeed, a causal process can be interpreted as the manifestation of a general prin-
ciple operating within material reality and a general principle, if it is to explain mate-
rial change, can be conceived of as causal in nature. The difference between the
causal and unificationist models thus seems more a matter of presentation than of
substance. Second, and more consequentially, both models use the same semantic
structure to formulate a scientific explanation, a structure that is indebted to
Hempel’s initial explanandum-explanans articulation. Namely, to explain something
in science is to propose an account which goes from the general to the particular.
Advanced on causal or unificationist logic, this shift rests on laws, either universal
(exception-less, i.e., causal) or statistical.
In science, a law is a generalisation which summarises observations made under
experimental, quasi-experimental or natural conditions. A scientific law only reports
what is observed. For example, it is a law that ice floats on water. The converse (water
floats on ice) is conceivable but has not been observed to be the case. In contrast, a
scientific theory is an explanation for a law that has been successfully tested using
accepted standards and protocols (an untested explanation for a law is hypothesis,
conjecture, speculation or proposition). For instance, Darwin’s theory of evolution by
means of natural selection is an explanation for the law of evolution evidenced by
the fossil record and other phenomena. Not all phenomena have been explained
with theories: no theory is available to explain how life originated on Earth, but
conjecture exists.
Scientific theories explain all pertinent laws as well as more specific theories.
For example, knowledge of fundamental physical theories affords scientists a
head-start when seeking to explain fluid dynamics. Like Russian dolls, scientific ex-
planations are inclined to be cascading in nature. In all cases, however, a theory
consists of statements about an aspect of the world (the laws subsumed by the
theory itself) from which logical consequences are derived. A scientific theory thus
codifies predictive knowledge. In so doing, it allows for a measure of control or, in
cases such as meteorology and astronomy, at least permits prediction of the
phenomena the law describes and the theory explains. Indeed, to resurrect Lewin’s
adage, it is because theory captures predictive knowledge about a feature of reality
that there is nothing so practical as a good theory. It is noteworthy that this predictive
feature, at least according to orthodoxy, characterises theories of both the social and
natural sciences.
The construct of theory exemplifies the bond of empirical discovery which unites
researchers irrespective of their epistemological and methodological orientation. This
86
Chapter 5: A Critique of Management Education

unity is perhaps easiest to appreciate when reflecting on quantitative research, but it
also applies to qualitative protocols. With quantitative research, the notion of a data-
set’s message is by convention often parsed as a binary set of propositions: analysts
establish a hypothesis (a theory) and seek to reject its null equivalent. This approach
makes quantitative research protocols replicable and is meant to yield stable results,
at least across multiple trials. With qualitative research, the production and presen-
tation of data are somewhat merged with interpretation of those data. However, as in
quantitative research, considerations of the presence of a finding, its effect size, and
its
generalisability
constrain
the
overall
message.
Specifically,
qualitative
researchers, rather than providing truncated conclusions, create a narrative about
these three elements. Besides, in qualitative studies the conception of measurement
is altered because data are not in numerical form and are rarely amenable to being
represented by so-called higher order measurement scales, such as interval or ratio-
based formulations. Moreover, qualitative researchers typically de-emphasise effect
size and are comparatively less conservative than their statistically orientated coun-
terparts in generalising a finding. Whatever the case, qualitative researchers, like
their quantitative compatriots, remain concerned with theory production.
Theory and Explanation in Management
The characteristic elements of scientific explanation were implicit in sociology and
psychology even before philosophers of science attempted to formalise them. For
example, Durkheim sought to explain how societies maintain internal cohesion by
calling on the presence of either of two possible forms of solidarity: mechanical
for primitive societies and organic for industrialised ones.³ The phenomenon that
is analysed (social order) is thus explained by proposing a theory. Management theo-
rists have made equivalent contributions. An example which adheres to Hempel’s
semantic structure of scientific explanation is as follows. ‘Sales representatives
performed well last month’ because working conditions are adequate and financial
incentives attractive and because, according to Herzberg’s two-factor theory,
employees go beyond compliance when both hygiene and motivating factors are in
play.
In the management literature, inquiries into the nature of theory and the foun-
dations of theory building began with Burrell and Morgan’s 1979 book, Sociological
Paradigms and Organisational Analysis. For the following two decades, protagonists
debated, at times in vigorous terms, the nature of organisational reality and how best
to study it. However, despite these controversies, a consensus exists amongst main-
stream researchers concerning a central issue: explanation in management studies
follows the causal model of scientific explanation. Specifically, these commentators
Durkheim (1969).
Theory and Explanation in Management
87

hold that causal chains are present in organisational reality and describing their
modus operandi constitutes management theory. Indeed, it is thanks to theory
that researchers and practitioners can formulate predictions about the behaviour
of firms.
In summary, for mainstream management researchers, management theories are
statements which disclose an aspect of organisational reality the knowledge of which
enables prediction and possible control of future work-related phenomena by
positing causal interactions, relationships, processes or structures. While some
authors have challenged Burrell and Morgan’s analysis of sociological research
and disagreed about which paradigm is best suited for management research, the
acceptance of the causal model of scientific explanation in mainstream management
studies has remained largely uncontested.
Challenges to Theory and Scientific Explanation
Scholarly interest in scientific explanation is understandable in the light of the
purported ability of scientists in the nineteenth and early twentieth century to
explain physical, social and psychological phenomena. Not everyone was so easily
convinced, however. For example, Dilthey held that science cannot explain all
human affairs. He argued that whereas nature is characterised by ‘objective neces-
sity’ and causal continuity, human beings find within their self-consciousness a
sovereignty of the will, a responsibility for actions, a capacity for subjecting every-
thing to reasoning and for resisting any encroachment on their personal freedom.
While all science is experiential, the facts of consciousness, such as willing, feeling
and thinking, are not knowable through the means of natural science. These
phenomena have a different epistemological status because they are accessible
only through reflective analysis, introspection and exegesis of the records of
human existence. In his late works, Dilthey clubbed together such methodological
orientations under the umbrella term ‘hermeneutics.’
The difficulty inherent in studying human inner life generally and consciousness
specifically by the same means that scientists use to study nature led Dilthey to
distinguish between Naturwissenschaften (the natural sciences) and Geisteswissen-
schaften (literally, the sciences of the mind or spirit), generally translated in English
as the human or social sciences. On Dilthey’s view, the task of the natural sciences is
to propose causal explanations of phenomena. Since the notion of causality renders
the notion of ‘free choice’ meaningless, such an explanation is acceptable within
natural sciences where researchers typically inquire into behaviour which is amoral
in nature and not associated with human agency. By contrast, the mission of the
human sciences is to understand lived experience. For Dilthey, this undertaking
entails identifying and articulating aspects of social and cultural life which highlight
intrinsic reasons and provide meaning for human action and relationships. In
Dilthey’s conceptualisation, understanding requires an analysis of the ideals, values
88
Chapter 5: A Critique of Management Education

and norms which manifest in human choice. Such an approach marginalises neces-
sary interactions and forced outcomes, i.e., scientistic theory.
It is noteworthy that Dilthey did not deny the existence of structures governing
human thought and socio-historical reality, constructs that he sometimes referred to
as ‘forces’ or ‘laws.’ For Dilthey, however, such structures do not determine human
behaviour. On his view, social scientists are less concerned with what people do indi-
vidually or collectively, and more with what they should do. If individuals exhibit
behavioural continuity, if they behave in regular and even predictable ways, it is
because they have ultimately chosen to do so. Hence, the structures uncovered by
social scientists govern human reality only insofar as they are normative. Behav-
ioural patterns emerge exclusively because humans, as an act of volition, conform
to precedents which they have established for themselves purposefully, for idiosyn-
cratic reasons or because they seek to comply with group norms. Human action,
therefore, cannot be reconciled with cause-and-effect reasoning because it is the
product of choices, mostly made in constrained circumstances.
Dilthey’s analysis of the natural and human sciences has been influential. For
example, his dichotomy between scientific explanation and understanding was
not lost on Weber, who tried to combine both approaches when developing interpre-
tive sociology. For Weber, the interpretive sociologist’s job is to reconstruct the
meaning of social events from the perspective of those who live them, rather than
exclusively through the detached and objective standpoint of natural scientists.
That is, Weberian sociologists are to account for the actions of other human beings
by attributing to them the feelings and thoughts which they would have if they
carried out the same actions, rather than as manifesting impersonal causal proc-
esses. However,Weber acknowledged the merit of scientific explanation where social
and historical phenomena have no known origin or when actions have unintended
consequences. In these circumstances, the interpretive understanding of social
action is to arrive at a causal explanation of its cause and effects.
Explaining Management Laws
The world of managers and the resources they superintend offers an abundance of
laws (in the descriptive sense of observed regularities). For instance, most employees
arrive to and leave a place of engagement at set times.When called to meetings, they
typically attend them. Beyond these kinds of basic regularities, some employees
consistently exceed compliance-related expectations. Managers are inclined to
reward such conscientious workers and discipline or otherwise admonish their
peers who are identified as underperforming. Customers satisfied with the offerings
provided by a firm tend to do repeat business with that entity and may recommend it
to others. Executives generally look for and discuss opportunities to increase return
on capital deployed under their stewardship. Behavioural laws of such kind are
pervasive and well known in the world of commerce and workplaces. Accordingly,
Explaining Management Laws
89

management and organisational researchers typically attempt to account for them by
way of theories.
The domination of theory production in management research has an illustrious
history which commenced (in the modern era) with the archetypal scientistic theo-
retician, Frederick Taylor. Indeed, in asserting (and providing formulaic rationale)
that there is ‘one best way’ to do each production-related task, the great man was
advancing a theory of management, in his case one of job design. However, despite
Taylor’s enduring influence, to date no management theory has been articulated that
can be implemented with the same reliability as those addressing the physical
world’s interrelationships. This shortcoming represents something of an elephant
in the room for the custodians of management studies.
Management researchers have often argued that the lack of progress in identi-
fying domain-specific theory which can be reliably implemented arises principally
because of validation difficulties. Such problems have been comprehensively docu-
mented. One is particularly noteworthy because, although it manifests as a technical
matter for those caught up in the process of quantitative analysis, it starkly exposes a
crucial conceptual distinction between social and natural science. The issue is this:
the constructs of interest to social science researchers, although in principle often
amenable to experimental control, cannot be investigated using the same laboratory
protocols that are associated with the natural sciences, mostly for practical and
ethical reasons. Furthermore, even in the case of field or natural experiments on
work-related phenomena, delineating experimental and control groups is not
straightforward.
Techniques exist in the social sciences that are intended to compensate for the
difficulties associated with the inability to conduct laboratory experiments. Most of
these techniques aim to offset problems arising from the lack of robust control
groups. These techniques include manipulations such as statistical control (random
sampling being the most widespread instantiation) and use of proto-control groups à
la field or natural experiments. However, as Andreski notes, unambiguous explana-
tions invoking cause-effect relationships are typically not realistic in such domains
as sociology and humanistic psychology.⁴ Owing to the compromise of the principle
of laboratory control within the social sciences, conclusions based on experimenta-
tion protocols are beset by the fact that competing explanations for changes to a
dependent variable exist simultaneously. A generic case in point concerns the
shifting intentions of individuals whose behaviour is under investigation. A manifes-
tation of this problem is the current ‘replication crisis’, wherein social science
researchers have had difficulty reproducing findings of published studies.
The malaise which currently besets management studies highlights a shared
feature of some of the arguments offered by Dilthey and Weber. Despite their differ-
ences, these authors share the view that accounting for observed regularities (laws)
Andreski (1969).
90
Chapter 5: A Critique of Management Education

by way of scientific explanation and theory is appropriate in natural science but of
questionable relevance in social science. As explained, scientific explanations
encapsulate predictive knowledge in the form of an objective, logical account.
Such an emphasis on prediction is particularly noticeable in mainstream manage-
ment studies where explanations advanced by researchers are decompositions of
the phenomena under analysis which rely on causal chains.
The existence of scientistic management theory implies the presence of causal
chains operating within and across workplaces and their broader milieu. In more
practical terms, if the scientistic management theoreticians are correct in their world-
view, organisational participants behave as theory specifies, that is, in accordance
with the causal chains postulated. Accordingly, within the domain of activities
explained by scientistic theory, participants do not behave purposefully, only invol-
untarily. This perspective takes no account of notions of morality, imagination,
choice and creativity. If valid, a vision of the human experience which can be repre-
sented exclusively through invoking theory applies as much to those doing research
as it does to the phenomena they examine. This has a disquieting consequence: the
quest to identify scientistic theory in management studies is tantamount to seeing
oneself (and one’s peers) as alive and ambulant but bereft of planning capacity, or
of agency generally. Most social scientists do not come across as aware that their
work has such implications. It is worth stressing that this comment does not apply
to theory, such as that expounded in Chapter 3, which explicates the unintended
effects of social action.
Alternatives to Scientific Explanation
In a widely quoted essay, Ghoshal argues that management researchers and educa-
tors do little else but convey liberalism dressed up as ‘pretence of knowledge.’⁵ For
Ghoshal, such pretence arises because researchers adopt the approach of natural
science when they study organisational reality. In so doing, they develop a sort of
physics in which ‘causal theories’ operate on employees (and others) who are inci-
dentally but unavoidably established as non-human input in the process of produc-
tive transformation. Such an impoverished view of organisational reality, Ghoshal
insists, is at its core ideological and socially harmful in that it tends to be self-
fulfilling. ‘Physics envy’ is perhaps a better way to describe how management
researchers undertake their mission.
To move from pretence to substance, Ghoshal urges management researchers to
accept that no single idea captures social complexity and that human beings do not
exclusively pursue personal gain, as alleged in much current management scholar-
ship. He further holds that management research requires a unifying framework
Ghoshal (2005).
Alternatives to Scientific Explanation
91

which can accommodate simultaneously different views of human nature. As a first
step on the journey towards developing such a framework, Ghoshal calls for the
acceptance of intellectual pluralism in the academy. Within such a pluralism,
multiple perspectives sit beside each other with equanimity and thus the currently
dominating research framework is downgraded. However (and despite his pluralistic
inclinations), Ghoshal does not give up on scientific theory. In fact, he encourages
management researchers to produce more of it, not realising that a single-minded
quest for scientific theory puts researchers on the path to scientistic theory and its
narrowly specific mode of explanation.
The research agenda of critical management scholars is potentially seductive for
researchers endorsing Ghoshal’s indictment of management academia. If one
believes that orthodox management research rests on and conveys a socially harmful
ideology, then it is tempting to abandon two of the most noteworthy pillars of scien-
tific research, namely objective observation and ensuing logical reasoning. However,
a closer inspection of the objectives and assumptions of critical management authors
reveals that the kind of research they advocate cannot in fact make good on its stated
promise. There are identifiable reasons for this, some pertaining to critical theory in
general, others to its more specific adaptation in the hands of critical management
advocates.
It is not necessary to debate here whether critical theory can deliver a more just
and humane society. Of greater relevance is the evaluation of critical theory to see
whether it fundamentally differs from the general construct of theory discussed
earlier. After all, critical theory is still theory. Further, if critical theory differs from
traditional theory for being historically contextualised and directed to a particular
social end, it shares with traditional theory its overall unificationist logic. As such,
critical theory’s objective is to provide explanatory knowledge through the applica-
tion of a deterministic semantic structure to the business of making predictions.
Critical theory follows unificationist logic because it rests on a general explana-
tory principle. This general principle is apparent in Horkheimer’s view that the
discrepancy between fact and theory must be overcome because behind them lies
a deeper unity, namely the general subjectivity upon which individual knowledge
depends. From this deeper unity or ultimate explanatory relationship derives
Horkheimer’s general contention that traditional theoretical knowledge cannot be
objective but must be historically and socially situated, and his more specific view
that traditional theory serves the interests of bourgeois society.
Horkheimer acknowledges that social science based on traditional theory
delivers knowledge of society and that such knowledge is useful in specific circum-
stances. For example, it can contribute to improving production processes by way of
division of labour. However, he insists that, failing to take account that reality is
itself the product of society’s work, knowledge arrived at from traditional theory
contributes to maintaining the status quo and exploitation of the masses by the capi-
talist elite. By contrast, the objective of social critical theory is to deliver knowledge
92
Chapter 5: A Critique of Management Education

that will drive societal change. Whatever the case, it is noteworthy that explanatory
knowledge of society is an objective pursued by critical and traditional theory.
According to Horkheimer, the traditional theoretician’s goal is the prediction of
future psychosocial phenomena based on the most suitable conceptual apparatus.
This is also true of the exemplary critical theorist, Horkheimer himself. Indeed, if
one is to believe him, applying critical theory when doing social science will improve
society by unmasking capitalist oppression. To this general prediction about critical
theory, one can add another, implicit in Horkheimer’s arguments. Specifically, on his
view, what sets critical theory apart from traditional theory is critical theorists’ self-
awareness of their social and historical contexts and their ambition to improve
society. Hence, a future theoretical contribution not advanced under such auspices
will not count as critical in nature.
In summary, as Horkheimer himself admits, if the works of the traditional and
critical theorists differ in their specific interests, they manifest the same logical
form. Indeed, from a purely unificationist, explanatory and predictive logic, they
are indistinguishable. In other words, management scholars looking for an alterna-
tive to traditional theory, its specific mode of scientific explanation, and its accom-
panying deterministic picture of human agency, will not find solace in Horkheimer’s
critical theory irrespective of the merit of the research programme it makes possible.
Similarly, the work of critical management scholars offers little to management
researchers who remain wary of the limitations of scientistic explanation. There
are two main reasons for such a letdown.
First, critical management scholars, like traditional ones, pursue and seek to
disseminate theory. Indeed, critical authors face the same legitimation challenge
as their traditional colleagues; in fact, they face it with greater intensity, since a
purely critical (negative) stance is bound to lead to the role of an irrelevant gadfly
rather than to that of a contributor. In this sense, critique has always been in tension
with a desire for recognition through practical influence. Thus, as leading propo-
nents of critical management studies have had to concede, critical authors pursue
legitimation by proposing theory which improves the practice of management, like
the traditional management authors which they otherwise criticise for adopting a
managerialist stance.⁶
Second, the research programme of critical management studies cannot deliver
definitive outcomes, even in the form of emancipation or theory. If social structures
are alienating, by definition, as the critical management community claims, then crit-
ical management studies are likewise alienating since this scholarship, with its dedi-
cated journals, conferences and institutional grants, has created for itself a social
structure. Besides, if rationality is misleading as critical authors propose, then
rational arguments (including a defence of the proposition that rationality is
Alvesson & Willmott (2003); Bowden (2018); Parker & Parker (2017).
Alternatives to Scientific Explanation
93

misleading) are also misleading. On these matters, critical management advocates
lack the reflexivity they trumpet as one of the strengths of their epistemology.
More generally, in the absence of knowledge of ultimate truth (or ways to obtain
it), definitive theoretical conclusions or practical courses of action cannot be
proposed. Critical management inquiry will reveal only that underneath every alien-
ating institution or managerial layer lies another which is equally estranging. Hence,
rather than emancipation, critical management research leads to a theoretical abyss
and practical paralysis. In the final analysis, critical management authors play the
role of their academic orthodoxy’s good conscience. They speak from self-claimed
high moral and epistemological grounds, but their epistemology denudes them of
the ability to influence mainstream management research and practice.
Management researchers and educators who seek a substitute for their theory-
driven orthodoxy but are wary of critical management studies can find refuge in at
least one alternative. Indeed, they need only return to Dilthey’s core arguments,
namely those that were subsequently defended by Weber. Specifically, rather than
seek scientific explanation for management laws, scholars can attempt to under-
stand such phenomena. That is, if researchers want to account for the regularities
they observe within workplaces, then scientistic theory production is not an optimal
strategy because the accounts it generates leave no room for the roles played by
reason, choice and values.
Since antiquity humans have developed pictures of themselves in which they
choose and consequently attract merit or blame for their actions. People have
expended energy in maintaining systems of thought, like religion, to guide them
in making sense of their existence and demonstrating such sense through their
choices. Modern justice systems also assume, as their most elementary character-
istic, that individuals are responsible for their actions, insofar as they understand
and can predict the consequences of those actions. It is also noteworthy that US
Federal Policy for the Protection of Human Subjects, which applies to social science
research, insists that human subjects should be dealt with by researchers as auton-
omous and responsible individuals.
Work settings are microcosms of human societies. For example, they typically
reproduce, in simplified form, the dilemmas that individuals confront in other
contexts. Hence, models of workplaces in which actors are characterised as bereft
of choice, self-selected purpose and other distinctively human forms of agency are
of dubious value. Scientistic management theory is one such model. Furthermore,
attempting to validate a management theory as part of a research project would
de facto contradict the basic ethical principles of the Common Rule, since it
would require the assumption that the individuals whose behaviour is being
compared with what the theory predicts are bereft of responsible autonomy and deci-
sion-making capacity. In this respect, teaching management theory as if it were valid
(because scientifically established) sets much of the stage for morally compromised
employer conduct and restricts the scope for creation of principles that are relevant
to management practice.
94
Chapter 5: A Critique of Management Education

Insofar as moral turpitude is concerned, problems arise because management
theory cannot be reconciled with a picture of humans as moral beings, responsible
before their communities for the way they use their freedom. The language invoked
by theory-driven management education is one of the key culprits here. This
parlance, for the most part, does not embrace moral language, or, to the extent
that it does, distorts and trivialises meaning associated with language’s customary
usage. Such corruption typically occurs with words such as ‘good,’ ‘wrong’ or
‘ethics’. In managerialist language, these words are generally intentionally deployed
in an equivocal way or used merely to refer to matters of compliance with arbitrary
rules which are put in place by and designed to suit the interests of one party. Insofar
as theory-driven management education’s lack of practical relevance is concerned,
pedagogies which entail a vision of human existence that contradicts how managers
and their subordinates understand themselves are likely to be ignored or, if applied,
typically yield disappointing results.
Implications for Management Education
Thirty years ago, commentators thought that management education was so deeply
entrenched in its ways that it was invulnerable to reform. Although evidence to date
mostly supports such a bleak prospect, criticism has continued to accumulate which
gives hope that management schools will change their curricula. Ideally, in the light
of the limitations of theory-driven education highlighted in this chapter, manage-
ment schools should jettison their current curricula and replace them with a few
business subjects (e.g., law, economics, marketing, accounting and finance) which
are offered as complements to an education grounded in the study of the humanities.
Such a shift in emphasis would bring programmes in line with the spirit of the
recommendations of the 2011 Carnegie Foundation Report on management education
which argues for the inclusion of liberal arts in the curricula of business schools.
Although programmes based on these principles exist (in the form of business
majors in arts degrees), their proliferation is unlikely to be endorsed by management
educators. It is hard to imagine a revolution led by those it relegates to peripheral
roles.
Realistic reformers will note that, although mainstream management education
has been theory-driven since the 1960s, other pedagogies have been available since
the academy’s inception. For example, in addition to internship electives, which have
in recent decades become available to management students, the most prominent of
the alternatives is the case-study method, pioneered at Harvard Business School and
historically one of this institution’s distinctive pedagogies. For its advocates in
management and business education, the case study method, insofar as its main
objective is not to illustrate theory application, notably dispels the illusion that
real-life problems can be entirely analysed and addressed by way of morally neutral
solutions, such as scientific theories. However, case studies have been criticised
Implications for Management Education
95

because, in presenting complex situations in a truncated (not to say simplistic) form,
they convey biases and discard nuances and necessary details. Despite such limita-
tions, for their advocates the incompleteness of cases is something of a virtue.
Indeed, summaries are susceptible to varying and often conflicting interpretations
concerning the ‘real’ problem, its antecedents and its possible remedies. The case
study method also reveals how and where work- and business-related phenomena
are unique. Thus, for some educators, the case study method offers a bridge between
rigorous quantitative analysis and artistic work (insofar as cases, being incomplete,
require analysts’ imagination) through which students hone their problem-solving
skills and enhance their critical and creative abilities.
Another alternative to theory-driven education, long used in military educational
institutions if yet to make inroads in management schools, is the so-called ‘staff
rides’ methodology. Grounded in experiential learning, staff rides are re-creations
of significant historical incidents, prior to and during which participants engage in
research, collective critical analysis and exchange of information. According to
their promoters in management education, staff rides combine long-term thinking,
improvisation and careful examination of protagonists’ motives for action. They
empower participants psychologically because they require contextual and time-
constrained decision-making. As such, staff rides are purported to be especially
effective for developing intellectual maturity and resistance to executive stress.
Other non-theory-based pedagogies which exist in management education
include critical incident methodology and problem-based learning. These have in
common with the case study and staff rides approaches (beyond their limited popu-
larity in business schools) an emphasis on psychological development. Each
requires that students analyse human behaviour, engage in situation-based deci-
sion-making and fine-tune their communication skills. That is, these alternative
methodologies aim at cultivating the psychological maturity of management
students by requiring them to evaluate critically complex situations on a case-by-
case basis and persuade others to create shared and well-defended solutions.
The stated learning outcomes of case studies, staff rides and critical incidents
can be enhanced through the parallel and more conventional study of a well-estab-
lished body of knowledge.Western thought offers a repertoire of unifying frameworks
each of which intended to enable individuals to make sense of their existence and
surroundings. Science is one of these initiatives, religion another, artistic endeavour
yet another. Philosophy is the discipline which analyses and attempts to reconcile
these perspectives. In this regard, it is noteworthy that from Plato until the middle
of the twentieth century, education for business and community leaders included
the formal study of philosophy.
For more than 2000 years, education for citizenship and community leadership
was based on the studia humanitatis, that is, on a critical engagement with the body
of knowledge through which people document and attempt to understand their exis-
tence. One famous example is Machiavelli who prepared himself for a senior admin-
istrative position by studying Latin, rhetoric, logic, diplomacy, history and philos-
96
Chapter 5: A Critique of Management Education

ophy. This type of education provides analytical and critical methods of inquiry
rooted in an appreciation of diverse human values, surely a requirement of manage-
ment today. A critical evaluation of assumptions (as entailed in the studia humani-
tatis) cultivates awareness of alternatives. Indeed, intellectual freedom, citizenship
engagement and leadership development stem from such an endeavour. Critical
analysis, however, is impossible in the darkness of an imprecise language, in the
absence of moral referents or in a senseless world divorced from its historical and
intellectual foundations. Mastery of language and an appreciation of philosophical
systems support the use of reason, encourage argument and produce mature individ-
uals. In other words, the unifying language allowing intellectual pluralism, the
embrace of which Ghoshal pleaded for, already exists. It is only waiting to be
included as part of management curricula, as a course of its own in management
programmes or to complement the alternatives to non-theory driven methodologies.
Gellner argued that, if science is characterised by its ability to generate consen-
sual, cumulative knowledge capable of improving human existence by way of predic-
tions, the so-called ‘social sciences’ are not scientific.⁷ Three decades earlier, Winch
contended that the social sciences (to which theory-driven management research
claims to belong) are in fact not science but a branch of philosophy.⁸ This is so
because explanations of human behaviour are not of the same order as, and are
not reducible to, the kind of explanations produced by natural scientists. As such,
the established central role for theory, as captured in the expression ‘physics
envy,’ must be reassessed. If management is not a science, then it should not be
taught like one. So long as researchers attempt to formulate answers to management
problems in the scientific, deterministic language of their academy’s current ortho-
doxy, they will fail to produce ethically defensible and practically relevant contribu-
tions to management.
The introduction, in the 1960s, of a programme to base management research
and education on the model of the natural sciences was doomed to failure. In its
place, philosophy should be returned to the management curriculum. While
psychology has enjoyed an enviable place in MBA degrees, philosophy has been
largely ignored.Yet, like the other social sciences, psychology is based on philosoph-
ical foundations. It is true that philosophers are rarely content with answers to recal-
citrant questions. It is also true that they are impatient with dogmatic answers or
appeals to practicalities. Philosophers insist that the real contribution of any
perspective is not what it explains, but the elucidation of what it assumes. It is to
philosophy that one turns for arguments about first principles, foundational assump-
tions and the validity of reasoning therefrom. Most managers are somewhat forgiv-
ably unreceptive to such questions but there is no excuse for management
Gellner (1986).
Winch (1990).
Implications for Management Education
97

researchers and educators to be frustrated by them. On these matters, Keynes is
worth quoting:
Practical men, who believe themselves to be quite exempt from any intellectual influences, are
usually the slaves of some defunct economist. Madmen in authority, who hear voices in the air,
are distilling their frenzy from some academic scribbler of a few years back. I am sure that the
power of vested interests is vastly exaggerated compared with the gradual encroachment of
ideas.⁹
Managers are reluctant to acknowledge that their ideas have come down to them
from ‘academic scribblers.’ They would do well, however, to remember that Plato
advised the King of Syracuse; Aristotle was tutor to Alexander the Great whose
favourite philosopher was Diogenes the Cynic; a philosophy professor, Martin Luther,
invented the Protestant religion; Locke provided the blueprint for the American
Constitution; Rousseau was the inspiration for the French revolutionaries; Schopen-
hauer’s ideas were appropriated by Freud and Jung; Hegel influenced Marx whose
ideas have changed the lives of more than a billion people; and Nietzsche was
Hitler’s house philosopher, even if it is unlikely that Hitler ever read him.
It should also be asked who is prepared to accept the challenge of ‘weeding the
management garden’ to criticise the proliferation and use of jargon and the attack on
facts, truth and logic which is a feature of managerialism. A specific philosophical
perspective (logical positivism) provides the tools by which hundreds of pages of
meaningless jargon can be reduced to a few pages of truth-bearing propositions.
Hobbes warned readers of the dangers of the misuse of language. ‘For words are
wise men’s counters, they do but reckon by them: but they are the money of
fools’.¹⁰ In Leviathan, Hobbes insists that people engage in the privilege of absurdity
in the ways they use and abuse language. Nature cannot err; but in human society
ignorance on a grand scale abounds. For Hobbes, the abuse of language is a form of
madness. People who are ill-educated are not mad, but many educated people who
abuse words are mad or seek to render others mad.Wittgenstein agreed and said that
philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of
language.¹¹ If so, managers should be dragged kicking and screaming to the study
of philosophy. It is, however, a sad historical fact that philosophy has not been
regarded as a suitable candidate for inclusion in MBA degrees, a neglect that has
contributed indirectly to the rise of managerialism.
Business and government workplaces, as well as management classrooms, are
infected with what Don Watson calls ‘weasel words’, contemporary clichés and
obfuscating jargon.¹² There seems to be some powerful force disposing managerial-
ists to inflict significant damage on the English language. This force is so undiscrimi-
Keynes (1949: 383).
Hobbes (1996: 28–29).
Wittgenstein (1953).
Watson (2004).
98
Chapter 5: A Critique of Management Education

nating that it takes seriously the tortured syntax, pleonasms, tautologies, metaphors,
oxymorons, and nonsensical propositions of today’s popular management writers.¹³
As thinking is talking to oneself (and others), reasoning is defective when one’s
internal dialogue is jargon-ridden. To communicate effectively, all parties to the
management relationship need to be sensitive to language. If managers want to
develop this sensitivity, philosophy is the subject of first choice. Attending to the
meaning of words, true descriptions and the validity of arguments is the primary
learning outcome of philosophy. That it is not a mandatory subject in MBA courses
raises several urgent questions which cannot be answered here.
If the pages of management books and journals are replete with content that is
difficult to implement and laden with questionable ethical consequences, then a case
exists for the academy to change course. If nothing is done, management schools are
likely to become the principal institutional causes of their own de-legitimation.When
the Titanic was taking water, the orchestra kept playing. The doomed were to remain
entertained. The failure to act makes the closure of management schools an ever
more credible threat.
Joullié & Spillane (2021).
Implications for Management Education
99

Chapter 6:
The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority
That those who master language have control of themselves and others is a view
embedded in Western thought. The ancient Greeks granted persuasive words a
central role in human existence and applied them to the solving of personal prob-
lems in living. For example, In Homer’s Iliad suggestive speeches empower warriors.
Later, the Sophists believed in the power of ‘therapeutic oratory’ based on language
and dialectic.¹ Plato noted that ‘physicians of the soul’ use language while physi-
cians of the body heal by physical means. Some words have the power to implant
the conviction of virtue, others that of vice. For Plato, language has the power to
strengthen will, re-organise values and replace ineffective beliefs with more effective
ones. A fundamental aspect of Plato’s thinking is the distinction between noble and
base rhetoric.²
Aristotle argued that suasory effectiveness has three intertwined elements: logic,
pathos and ethos. He insisted that persuasion demands style, analogies and meta-
phors which are more persuasive than literal expression. Later authors have not devi-
ated markedly from such recommendations, adjusting only their illustrious predeces-
sor’s analysis to modern circumstances. For instance, Atkinson’s study of the ways in
which politicians’ speeches arouse audiences is, on the author’s own admission, a
simplification and adaptation of Greek techniques. Similarly, Burke did not diverge
from Aristotelian guidelines when he argued that hearers should identify with
speakers if they want to persuade them. Despite their enduring merits and applica-
bility, however, these suasory techniques do not include linguistic analysis. Specifi-
cally, they gloss over the fact that language can be decomposed into functions which,
when employed, at least partly disclose information about the personal values of the
speaker.
Building on the distinction outlined by Plato and Aristotle, Weaver argues that
language is never value-free; it is sermonic because all speakers are preachers in
their public capacity. Further, Weaver notes that ‘there are but three ways for
language to affect us. It can move us toward what is good; it can move us toward
what is evil; or it can, in hypothetical third place, fail to move us at all.’³ The
noble speaker uses language to inspire individuals to speak clearly, think independ-
ently, challenge dogmatic pronouncements and choose autonomously. On the other
hand, the base or ignoble speaker attempts to deprive individuals of their personal
autonomy and dignity.
Edman (1956: 316–317).
Lain Entralgo (1970).
Weaver (1953: 6).
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-008

In the parlance of Plato and his disciples, noble speakers seek to strengthen the
willpower of and promote self-control in their listeners. Achieving these objectives
entails identifying and clarifying ambiguity, as well as replacing destructive beliefs
with constructive and self-promoting ones. Overall, noble speakers empower their
listeners by showing them better versions of themselves. In contrast to noble
language, base language undermines personal courage and erodes liberty and
dignity. Base speakers try to keep their listeners in a state of dependency by inhib-
iting the rational examination of alternatives. They achieve this control by exagger-
ating problems to elicit feelings of despair and by contextualising advice in a milieu
of hostile forces. Base speakers use words and phraseology that consolidate their
control over those who listen to them.
According to Weaver, nothing is more feared by the base speaker than argument
and debate. Indeed, whereas Weaver holds that noble language protects individuals
by showing them better versions of themselves and encourages critical thinking, he
sees base language as promoting heteronomy and blocking critical thinking. Such
features of base language are particularly evident when speakers attempt to identify
the origin of practical problems, because by discussing only one side of an issue, by
mentioning cause without consequence or consequence without cause, acts without
agents or agents without acts, the base speaker often successfully blocks cause-effect
reasoning. Managerialists employ such base techniques to increase their own power
and to create sycophantic followers. By contrast, managers use noble language to
wean colleagues away from their inclination to depend unthinkingly on their senior
managers and to teach them to strive for authoritative rather than authoritarian
status.
Weaver’s analysis of noble and base language is open to the objection that it is
biased toward the speaker. Such criticism would be mistaken, however, because the
characterisation as noble or base depends on the assessment of hearers. Further-
more, the noble speaker seeks to maximise authoritativeness for all and minimise
authoritarianism generally. For example, that Churchill and Hitler were accom-
plished rhetoricians can readily be admitted. That both men empowered their audi-
ences can also be admitted. It follows that the characterisation of rhetoric as noble or
base depends on whether certain rhetoricians are judged to influence others toward
what is good or what is bad, a judgement that will differ according to the values of
those who render it. That Churchill is remembered as a noble rhetorician and Hitler
as a base rhetorician is owed, in large part, to the perception that while both political
leaders empowered their respective audiences, the latter directed his listeners toward
authoritarian goals.
As planners and persuaders, managers have little choice but to be sensitive to
and have mastery of language’s effects on those to whom it is directed (a point gener-
ally overlooked in the management development literature). In this sense, they
operate at their best when they take advantage of its full repertoire. The same is
true for those who interact with them, because simply to highlight people’s perfor-
mance shortcomings and insist that they improve (as base speakers often do when
Chapter 6: The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority
101

they seek to dominate their listeners) is to hinder professional development. Indeed,
disproportionately emphasising performance deficits in feedback sessions under-
mines their worth because it breeds instinctive defensiveness and creates an unnec-
essarily adversarial dimension to a relationship. Furthermore, appraising and
passing judgement on someone’s performance assumes that the appraiser is techni-
cally or psychologically superior to the appraised. Such circumstances of psycholog-
ical inferiority are exacerbated when recommendations (or directions) that are
intended to improve performance follow an instance of appraisal: when improve-
ment recommendations are made, those to whom they are directed are implicitly
deemed incapable of identifying and proposing solutions of their own. Should
psychological dependence and inferiority become internalised by the concerned
manager, performance deficiencies will likely continue or worsen. Conversely, mana-
gerial effectiveness requires a degree of independence of judgement and a measure
of autonomy in decision-making; these constructs are precisely what noble language
seeks to promote.
If one accepts that managerial performance requires high-level judgement and
responsible autonomy in decision-making, noble language can be redefined as a
speech that inculcates and reinforces development in these areas and base language
as one that does not. This delineation is compatible with Weaver’s characterisation of
noble language as that which provides those to whom it is directed with better
versions of themselves: namely, versions in which managers appear as responsible,
competent and autonomous decision-makers. It is worth reiterating here that use of
language is fundamental to the discharge of managerial duties. Specifically,
compared with other organisational actors who have procedural-related tasks and
responsibilities, the management function is essentially declarative. It cannot
adequately be fulfilled without mastery of sophisticated language.
Persuasion is particularly salient for managers and their colleagues (including
union representatives) since they attempt to convince each other to improve their
status or reduce demands made upon them. At some point in the process, one
party delivers an assessment of the current state-of-affairs and advances propositions
to amend it, supported by some form of reasoning calling on evidence, moral justi-
fication and application of the principles of logic. To this assessment and proposal,
the other party responds and advances its own views. Arguments are thus weighed
against each other and normally result in agreements, formal or informal. These
agreements are typically not definitive, however, for situations keep evolving and
arrangements need to be revised at regular intervals by both parties to the manage-
ment relationship. In any case, the endeavour is less about closure (which remains
temporary) than it is about opening, response and counterproposal. Unsuccessful
arguments rarely disappear; they often return, in one form or another, in future
exchanges.
Rhetoric, then, is at the very heart of management. The persuasive element in the
language of management is what qualifies it as rhetorical. In existing research,
however, when not referring to the ability to speak in tongues, rhetoric is generally
102
Chapter 6: The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority

understood in an Orwellian sense. Specifically, for most management authors, rhet-
oric is synonymous with attempts to frame the context of discussions, manipulate
opinion and structure perception of reality. There is a sad irony in the negative
connotation currently attached to the term ‘rhetoric’ given the fact that for 2500
years Rhetoric was one of the most highly regarded disciplines. More than a subject
of study valued in and of itself, mastery of rhetoric was deemed essential to social
life, indeed to citizenship. Nowadays, it is difficult to find academics at universities
who teach rhetoric. Be that as it may, management researchers have, with few excep-
tions, studiously avoided the topic, preferring such anaemic concepts as ‘language’
and ‘discourse’.
Although Weaver’s analysis addressed dialogue, persuasion and moral conduct,
this broad emphasis did not allow him to formulate precise, unambiguous criteria
with which to delineate noble from base language in specific situations. In the
context of managerialism, a more detailed exposition is possible, beginning with
Popper’s theory of language functions.
Karl Popper on Argumentation
Building on the work of Bühler, Popper proposes the doctrine of the four functions of
language. He analyses the main purpose of language – communication – into the
following: the expressive function – i.e., the communication serves to express the
emotions and feelings of the speaker; the signalling or release function – i.e., the
communication serves to stimulate or release certain reactions in the hearer; the
descriptive function – i.e., the communication describes a certain state of affairs;
and the argumentative function – i.e., the communication serves to present and
compare arguments or explanations in connection with certain definite questions
or problems.⁴
Argument is, for Popper, the basis of rationality and of critical thinking. As
reasons offered by authoritative managers entail the probability that they will be
exposed to alternative ones to support or resist proposed changes, argument is the
vehicle for reasoned elaboration.
Popper’s four language functions constitute a logical hierarchy since signalling
entails expression and describing entails expression and signalling. An argument
serves as an expression as it voices the stance of a person about a given matter. It
is moreover a signal (or communication) because it aims to provoke a response in
another. Insofar as argument is about someone or something, it is descriptive.
Further, Popper argues that these functions of language correspond to human values
because each of them takes one of two possible antithetical values: self-expression is
Popper (1972: 120ff).
Karl Popper on Argumentation
103

either concealing or revealing; signalling is either ineffective or effective; descrip-
tions are either false of true; arguments are either invalid or valid.
Spillane added an advisory function to Popper’s model. Indeed, people often
resolve doubts about the truth of descriptions and the validity of arguments by an
appeal to authoritative advice.⁵ Insofar as authority entails advice, the advisory func-
tion crowns argumentation. Besides, since argument normally entails reasons to
confirm, refute, or seek new descriptions, the advisory function requires argumenta-
tion: in providing authoritative advice, managers argue. Table 6.1 summarises the
entire hierarchy.
Table 6.1: A hierarchy of language functions and values.
Level
Function
Noble Values
Base Values

Advisory
Authoritative
Authoritarian

Argumentative
Autonomy
Heteronomy

Descriptive
Truth
Falsity

Signalling
Efficiency
Inefficiency

Expressive
Revealing
Concealing
Expressing: The Language of Feelings
The expressive function is the lowest in the hierarchy because it is the most primitive
language, one that is shared with animals. An expressive statement is the utterance
of an inner state, such as emotions, feelings or moods. Expressive language is the
least regulated by linguistic conventions because it includes yells and grunts
which are revealing (sincere) or concealing (insincere) depending on their corre-
spondence to the inner state of the speaker, even though listeners (whose presence
is not required for expression to take place) cannot ascertain this status.
Managers who encourage and reinforce the expressive function are susceptible
to Popper’s criticism that fixation at this level means that the higher functions are
devalued. By viewing language merely as an expression of feelings, they degrade
descriptions and argument (reasoning). Popper has no time for such an approach.
Considering language as mere expression amounts to neglecting the fact that
through language people offer true and false descriptions and produce valid and
invalid reasoning.
From Socrates onwards, argument has been generally accepted as an effective
and cooperative method to stimulate critical thinking, draw out ideas and identify
underlying presuppositions. Since the advent of postmodernism, however, the
Spillane (1987).
104
Chapter 6: The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority

language of feelings has developed a positive connotation whereas argument has
gained a negative connotation. By qualifying statements with ‘I feel,’ ‘subjectively
speaking,’ ‘it seems to me’, ‘in my opinion’ and phrases of similar meaning,
managers immunise themselves against criticism because one cannot argue about
feelings. One can agree or disagree with expressive statements, but one cannot
argue with them or point out errors of reasoning related thereto. Furthermore,
when managers grant feelings unwarranted prominence, it is but a short step for
them to become embroiled in issues of political correctness. This risk is compounded
by the fact that statements about personal feelings are bound to upset the feelings of
others because expressive statements cannot be judged to be true or confected.
Managers are then forced into the impossible position of a referee who is called
upon to make judgements about the status of statements without reference to
truth or validity.
The subjective nature of expressive statements and the difficulty in deciding
whether they are sincere or insincere acquire special relevance when such commu-
nications are employed in bargaining discussions. For instance, because there is
no observable entity or force called ‘psychological stress’ managers and other parties
have no choice but to rely on communications (spontaneous or collected by way of
interviews and questionnaires) from employees to evaluate stressful work conditions.
Moreover, while stressors typically originate in the external environment, they cannot
be divorced from the concerned individuals’ perception of them. While noise is
stressful for most people (and is harmful at extreme levels), for some people it is
a source of pleasant stimulation (the rhythm of a busy shopfloor; modern ‘music’).
Managers can therefore reject expressive statements, like stress reports, as resulting
from
employees’
psychological
maladaptation
or
incompetence
rather
than
pertaining to work (or the workplace) itself. Similar comments apply to Repetitive
Strain Injury (RSI) and mental health claims.⁶ In the absence of identifiable physical
lesions, which are lacking in RSI and ruled out by definition in mental illness cases,
such claims are vulnerable to out of hand dismissal by the party against which they
are directed. More generally, when medical diagnoses cannot be based on physical
(i.e., objective) signs, they are based on reported (i.e., subjective) symptoms.
When they are expressed as statements of personal feeling (‘I feel depressed’, ‘I
feel stressed beyond belief’, ‘I have too much on my mind’), they cannot be said
to be true or false. Although such utterances possibly have rhetorical value, they
have no empirical value.
Spillane (2017).
Expressing: The Language of Feelings
105

Signalling: The Language of Efficiency
According to Popper, signalling or communicating takes place whenever an expres-
sive communication in one person operates upon another as a signal that releases a
response in the other person. Signalling is often voluntary but can also be involun-
tary. For example, the expression of fear tends to induce fear in other people. Not all
communication is of the ‘infectious’ type, however, because while expressions of fear
often encourage aggressors, symptoms of courage may tend to discourage them.
Since expression and signalling are necessarily present when the higher func-
tions are operating, it is always possible to analyse linguistic exchanges in terms
of the lower functions, i.e., as expressions of feelings or signals. Popper believes
this approach to be disastrous. Indeed, when communication fixates at the level of
signals (or stimuli), the higher functions of language are not activated, and thus
cannot be analysed. Consequently, critical evaluation and reasoning cannot take
place and psychological and social development become impossible. When speakers
do not go beyond signalling, they are bound to view the problems they are trying to
address in terms of ‘poor communication’, a universal (but superficial) pseudo-ex-
planation which does not require speakers to engage in the higher and distinctively
human aspects of linguistic interaction. Moreover, by failing to develop arguments,
speakers are likely to address so-called ‘communication problems’ by way of orders:
‘My way, or else.’ Such a language, which seeks only obedience, does not achieve
cooperation, and therefore does not belong to an integrative exchange, except
insofar as it forms the basis of more sophisticated language: descriptive, argumenta-
tive and advisory functions.
Several studies have shown that managers attribute their problems with other
people to ‘poor communication’.⁷ It is rarely clear which aspect of communication
they blame, but by falling back on the convenient, catch-all explanation of ‘poor
communication,’ managers fail to attend to the higher and distinctively human
aspects of interaction. This neglect is encouraged by most human resource manage-
ment textbooks which display their authors’ obsession with problems of communi-
cation and little concern with argumentation.
Describing: The Language of Truth
Descriptive language conveys true or false statement about the world. Descriptions
are required in management exchanges because parties need to agree about the
nature of the issues they seek to address. Further, the quality of a management rela-
tionship is, to a large extent, characterised by the degree to which parties describe to
each other the constraints under which they operate. Inevitably, disagreement about
Lansbury & Spillane (1983).
106
Chapter 6: The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority

descriptions arises when parties misrepresent facts. While a divergence of descrip-
tions strains management discussions, it also represents an opportunity to consoli-
date them provided that the parties agree on a method to resolve their differences.
When carried out successfully, these remedial measures dissolve misunderstandings,
clarify the issues at hand and build trust. Such exchanges require cooperation about
relevant points and since cooperation (as opposed to manipulative managerialist
control) cannot be achieved through lies, the bargaining parties’ preference for
truth or falsity determines whether the proceedings are integrative or adversarial.
In management discourse the issue of truth and falsity of descriptions is often
difficult to settle. This difficulty arises in part from the metaphorical nature of
human language generally and the language of management specifically. The ancient
Greeks understood that metaphorical statements possess more suasory power than
literal statements. As their intention is to control, managerialists use metaphors
liberally. Hence, Gordian knots need to be cut and kites flown, while cards that
are not kept close to one’s chest are at risk of being shot down by negotiators playing
hardball or taking the role of the Devil’s advocate.
Notwithstanding their suasory effectiveness, metaphorical statements are figures
of speech that are not literally true. They are, therefore, false. Consequently, when
metaphors multiply, discussions become confused because speakers no longer
mean what they say or say what they mean. Today, managers are interchangeably
called captains, coaches, motivators, generals, mentors, educators, trainers and facil-
itators: contemplating such a multiplication of metaphors one is left wondering what
management is, or is supposed to be, exactly.
The widespread presence of oxymorons, pleonasms, tautologies and metaphors
in current management speech is typically the result of jargon-mongering, careless-
ness or illiteracy. From a linguistic perspective, these are elements of base language
because their use creates ambiguity, confusion and unnecessary deviations from
clear thinking. In terms of the hierarchy of language discussed here, when
confronted with such ambiguity, managers and their colleagues either progress to
argument or regress to signalling and expressive language. In the current post-
modern era of ‘post-truth’, they are likely to regress. Ambiguous language and meta-
phorical statements have at least one merit, however: they point to the value and
necessity of arguing about descriptions. Cross-critical evaluation of descriptions
(the Socratic method) transforms acrimonious exchanges into more mature conversa-
tions in which speakers engage in constructive argument. At this stage of a discus-
sion, the higher levels of the linguistic hierarchy come into play.
This linguistic move is crucial in the management relationship because the
manager’s personal preference for noble or base language determines the future
nature of the relationship. Critical evaluations of descriptions transform exchanges
with colleagues into a mature relationship in which speakers are prepared to engage
in constructive argumentation or regress to more primitive language.
More generally, the truthfulness of descriptive statements are crucial dimensions
of a communication that seeks to establish authority. Although managers sometimes
Describing: The Language of Truth
107

misrepresent reality to their listeners, they do not normally accept communications
about specific situations unless they have empirical reference. In other words, there
cannot be authority without a degree of empirical credibility, even if some listeners
suspend disbelief longer than others do.
Arguing: The Language of Autonomy
Popper argues that if individuals are to develop psychologically, they need to pass
from a dogmatic to a critical phase of thinking. This transition involves them in
trial-and-error learning based on risk-taking (trials) and the willingness to modify
principles and behaviour when they are found to be inappropriate (error elimina-
tion). For Popper, heteronomy is synonymous with dogmatism, autonomy with crit-
ical thinking. Insofar as the aim of workplace interactions is to achieve a relationship
free of coercion, argument in its various forms acts as a bulwark against heteronomy.
Arguing, therefore, is likely to minimise the likelihood that employees will perceive
the relationship with their managers in terms of domination. Obviously, employees
can use argument for base ends, i.e., to obfuscate facts and confuse colleagues.
However, if argumentation is meant to help workers free themselves from coercion
and control, then it is the preferred vehicle to promote autonomy.
Popper is adamant that argumentation is the basis for personal and social devel-
opment. With the evolution of the argumentative function of language, criticism is
the main instrument of growth. Managerialists, however, ignore or reject the argu-
mentative function of language in their deliberations. This rejection typically takes
two forms. Authoritarians reject argument in favour of orders which are, essentially,
descriptions: ‘Do this, or else.’ More subtle managerialists fixate at the expressive
level of the language hierarchy, encouraging others to express their feelings.
Although venting pent-up emotions often has a cathartic effect, the workplace is
inimical to psychotherapy. While therapists are paid by their clients to help them
deal with personal difficulties or ‘psychological’ problems, managers are paid to
ensure that their subordinates address professional or practical work-related prob-
lems. Besides, a neglect of the higher functions of language indirectly amounts to
levelling speakers to the status of non-human animals.
Contrary to widespread postmodern belief, arguing is the language of coopera-
tion because arguments enable people to expose justifications. Critical arguments
clarify problems, expose misconceptions and reveal lies. They also unmask dogma-
tists and extremists and those people who try to present contentious situations as
one-sided
affairs.
Furthermore,
argument
supports
integrative
management
outcomes since it aims at enlarging the pool of value to be shared between parties.
Since the critical assessment of recommendations and assumptions reveals the exis-
tence of a range of alternatives, parties who seek integrative outcomes will find in the
critical review of propositions a common process from which new ideas can be
generated and mutually beneficial solutions appraised.
108
Chapter 6: The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority

Managers and their colleagues benefit from developing their argumentative
skills. On the one hand, valid argument enables speakers to convince others of the
strength of their case without having recourse to manipulation, misrepresentation
or coercion. On the other hand, those individuals skilled in argumentation can see
through attempts on the part of others to act in these ways. Unscrupulous managers
who set the terms of debate, frame reality or confuse their counterparts by way of
misleading statements, tangential or unrelated considerations and fallacious argu-
ments find in argumentative colleagues, resolute opposition.
To argue at management meetings is to adopt a specific ethical position and to
recommend it to others. As arguing rests on the implicit adoption of an ethical
perspective, arguing validly is valued because it is the vehicle of reasoned elabora-
tion and thus of authority.While such ethics are typically widely shared at work, they
can never be assumed to apply to all individuals therein. Argumentative managers
thus run the risk of being accused of manipulating their colleagues into adopting
their values via the language of argument. Strength of argument is confused with
intimidation and forcefulness in debates is identified with bullying. That is, even
when such outcomes are unintentional, the language of argument can be confused
with the language of power.
If might is not right, then right is not might. As such, argumentation enables
managers to engage in reasoning with colleagues and challenge authoritarians
who seek coercion and control. Argumentation enables speakers to evaluate and
choose among the ways in which they interact with others. In this sense, argumen-
tation is the basis for developing personal autonomy and encouraging it in others.
Within organisations, arguing involves employees in the giving of reasons to support
their recommendations. When managers eschew argumentation and give advice
without reasons to support it, they rely on power rather than authority. In these
cases, they are ‘authoritarians’ who obscure the nature of authority as reasoned elab-
oration.
Advising: The Language of Authority
Advising is the language of authority because asking for advice assumes that the
adviser possesses authoritative knowledge or skills that the advice-seeker lacks.
Authority is especially visible in cases where advice is accepted without decisive
evidence or conclusive reason. So-called ‘arguments from authority’ achieve only
so much, however, since recommendations normally require justification which
implies that, in the linguistic hierarchy, the advisory function of language is above
the argumentative function. Justification can be implicit or explicit, easily identified
or in need of sustained research. For instance, the reason for workers wearing hard-
hats on construction sites does not require much, if any, explanation. The reason for
workers wearing prescription glasses supplied with free corrective safety spectacles
Advising: The Language of Authority
109

does call for elaboration, which may (or may not) be effective. When advice is
accepted authority has been established.
To managerialists and Marxist-leaning scholars who believe that discussions
between managers and subordinates are best conducted as a power struggle, one
will retort that the language of authority does not dissolve the conflict (if conflict
there is) in the employment relationship. Rather, the view advanced here is that
such a conflict is temporarily and partially subsumable under agreement about a
specific policy or management decision. Such situations arise because, even in an
adversarial outline, there are cases where policies and decisions are found reason-
able (in the sense of rational, ethical, desirable and acceptable) by managers and
employees alike.
The language of advice, which includes such words as ‘should,’ ‘ought,’ ‘I
strongly recommend’ and other expressions of similar meaning is close to the
language of power with which it is frequently confused. While it is apparent to
most that the workplace does not permit coercion, some are nonetheless tempted
to assert control via the language of the technical expert. Conversely, employees
can be tempted to ask for advice to be relieved of their responsibilities. Confronted
by such colleagues who persistently claim to ‘need advice,’ managers either revert
to description to outline alternatives (i.e., sketch solutions to the practical problems
with which their colleagues are grappling) or argue about their perceived ‘need.’ In
either case, if they are noble speakers, they refrain from recommending any specific
course of action. This restraint illustrates the noble role of the authority figure who
avoids proscriptive communications, shares knowledge and appreciates the ethical
dimension of the relationship.
Managerial authority arises from cooperative exchanges between real or alleged
technical experts, that is, from the sharing of knowledge and justification. Authori-
tative managers shun coercion, share knowledge and justify their views. They recog-
nise that to give advice is de facto to adopt an ethical position and to recommend it,
if implicitly, to others, for it is a truism that human actions occur in a context of
values. Managerialists as base speakers, on the other hand, hide their ethical
perspective and use a language of power to manipulate their colleagues into
adopting it without them realising that they are doing so.
Managers need to be knowledgeable in the matters upon which they seek to base
their authority. Even when they are knowledgeable, however, their authority is
vulnerable from two related directions. First, the psychological factors that make
the working of authority possible (the assent of those to whom communication is
directed) are logically prior to its establishment. Managers have, therefore, to deal
with the tension between autonomy and dependency because for everyone who
concedes authority, the choice between submitting to authority and preserving indi-
vidual autonomy remains. Managers need to be sensitive to these tensions and that
choice.
Second, as advising rests on the implicit adoption of an ethical standpoint with
the expectation that others share or accept it, managers can be accused of manipu-
110
Chapter 6: The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority

lating their followers into adopting their values via a language of authority. Even
when manipulation is not their intention, managers’ language of advice can be
confused with the language of coercion. The possibility also exists that the values
underpinning the manager’s language become outdated within a changing moral
context. Such misalignment sometimes happens with older managers whose collea-
gues no longer share the values embedded in the arguments of the ‘old ones,’ or
when managers become victims of deliberate malicious gossiping meant to under-
mine their moral standing or the trust they previously secured from their colleagues.
In such situations, managerial language loses its effectiveness and the authority of
the speaker declines; power that used to be benign becomes coercive and compli-
ance replaces cooperation.
Popper’s philosophy of science is relevant to the study of managerialism because
it challenges the widespread belief that decisions should be based on past successes
which are accepted uncritically. As argued in a cleverly titled essay, ‘Doing it Right
Instead of Twice,’ managers should learn from their mistakes but also, through crit-
ical argument, attempt to learn before making mistakes by seeking to eradicate
errors of reasoning.⁸ If managerialists persist with their unwillingness to argue
with each other and rely on past successes, they participate in what Popper calls a
flight from reason and intellectual responsibility.
It is worth pointing out, in passing, that Popper has been called a ‘romantic
rationalist’ because he promotes an image of individuals imposing their hypotheses
on the world and assessing the result.⁹ Accordingly, Popper is ‘romantic’ in his insis-
tence on the fight to be waged between competing theories, the role of risk-taking
through the development of bold ideas and rigorous criticism, the willingness to
engage in imaginative trials in the search for error, and the preparedness to learn
from and eliminate errors.
While it is obvious to most people that truth is preferable to falsity, valid arguing
to invalid arguing, authoritativeness to authoritarianism, and cooperation to coer-
cion, such values are not universally or even widely accepted in workplaces (espe-
cially by managerialists). Indeed, belonging to the same organisation does not guar-
antee voluntary collaboration. In the name of effectiveness or personal power, some
people engage in half-truths, gossips, lies, manipulation, or other duplicitous behav-
iour to advance personal agendas or vested interests. Misaligned interests of parties
in business endeavours and the employment relationship are not new; they have
long received the sustained attention of industrial sociologists.
Building on the work of philosopher and psychologist George Herbert Mead,
Szasz contends that personal conduct is fundamentally rule-following, role-playing,
strategic and meaningful.¹⁰ In support of this analysis, Szasz advances a model of
Cowton & Zecha (2003); Loughlin (2004); Moss (2003); Shareef (2007); Thomas (2010).
Lieberson (1982).
Mead (1934); Szasz (2010).
Advising: The Language of Authority
111

human behaviour in which patterns of interpersonal relations are analysed as if they
are games. As such, personal conduct is regulated to varying degrees by explicit and
implicit rules. That is, games are often played within games. It is possible, for
instance, to play a game (exhibiting bad behaviour) within a game (of tennis).
In honest games, players freely choose their moves which are thereby difficult to
predict. Players enter games with the knowledge that they will encounter uncertain-
ties and risks which they must master if they want to succeed. The fewer rules, the
more open the range of possible moves and more uncertainty. Players who cannot
tolerate uncertainty will be tempted to act dishonestly to gain some measure of
control over other players and some will be tempted to lie and cheat. In the case
of honest game playing, the aim is successful mastery of a task; in playing dishon-
estly, the aim is coercion and manipulation of the other players.
When playing the game of management, managers have two options. Although
authoritarian and authoritative management can be equally effective in meeting
organisational objectives (especially short-term ones), managers who seek authority
speak noble language, a language that emphasises truth, sound reasoning and coop-
eration. They value knowledge and skills manifested in workmanship and perfor-
mance. By contrast, authoritarian managers employ base language, a language
conveying incomplete information, spurious reasoning and biased advising through
which they try to control and manipulate their colleagues. One way they can achieve
this is subtly to encourage inadequate task performance, as doing so places their
colleagues in a position of inferiority and dependence, in turn highlighting their
own performance and contribution to the organisation.
To the extent that the practice of management is a linguistic exercise, managers
do not escape the general role of language and its effects on those to whom it is
directed. Authoritarian managerialists use language to signal their intentions ambig-
uously, describe their situation incompletely or falsely, argue invalidly or not at all,
and issue commands or threats. As base speakers they use language to increase their
own power and to produce uncritical disciples. Opposing such practice, authoritative
managers try to convince their colleagues of the validity of their reasoning, describe
situations accurately, direct colleagues’ attention to relevant matters, seek coopera-
tion in solving problems and implementing solutions, look for remedial actions
through arguments, offer relevant and credible recommendations and advise accord-
ingly, while exposing their moral preconceptions. In short, managers reveal their
personal values in their use of language.
Weeding the Managerialist Garden
Managerialism comes with its own obfuscating jargon.
Managerialism, a name for various doctrines of business organizations, also comes with a
language of its own, and to such unlikely places as politics and education. Managerialism
112
Chapter 6: The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority

came to the universities as the German army came to Poland. Now they talk about achieved
learning outcomes, quality assurance mechanisms, and international benchmarking. They
throw triple bottom line, customer satisfaction and world class around with the best of them.¹¹
In Social Sciences as Sorcery, Andreski wondered why sociologists, whose writings
are supposed to explain ourselves to ourselves, write in inexplicable prose. His
hypothesis is that pretentious and pompous terms are often treated as evidence of
the writer’s profundity, whereas it is more likely to be indicative of a lack of origi-
nality. He argues that it is dismaying that not only do their writings reveal an excess
of pompous bluff and a paucity of new ideas, but that even the valuable insights
from illustrious ancestors are drowned in a torrent of meaningless verbiage. This
obfuscation is also visible in the pretentious and nebulous rhetoric known as
psychobabble which, according to Andreski, involves the interminable repetition
of platitudes and disguised propaganda about psychological matters. One can only
agree with Andreski ‘going forward, proactively and mindfully.’
Sociologists and psychologists are not alone in the abuse and misuse of
language. Managerialists happily participate in an orgy of linguistic manipulation
and deceit. Managementese, or managerialist jargon, has been compared with
Orwell’s ‘newspeak’ as the language of authoritarian manipulation. It has inspired
games, such as Wank Word Bingo, where brave managers count the number of
weasel words in a meeting and call the speaker’s bluff. A dangerous tactic, indeed,
since people in positions of power do not like to be told that they are naked
emperors, or that what they are saying is bullshit.
Tapping into the current Zeitgeist, Frankfurt penned a short essay, On Bullshit, in
which he argues that the contemporary proliferation of bullshit developed out of the
postmodern lunacy which denies facts and truth. Postmodernists are rarely bothered
by rational folk who point out that when they say ‘there are no facts and truths’, they
are stating that it is a fact that there are no facts, and it is true that there are no
truths. Some postmodernists will admit the contradiction and fall back to their feel-
ings. ‘I feel that there are no facts and truths’ is a proposition that is neither true nor
false and is, therefore, immune to criticism, which is, of course, the postmodernists’
strategy.
Bullshitters, notably postmodernists and the Twitterati, prefer expressive
language to argumentative language and avoid rational debate since they reject
the possibility of knowing how things truly are. By ignoring truth, they differ from
liars because it is impossible for people to lie unless they think they know the
truth. People who lie react to the truth. Bullshitters, according to Frankfurt, are
neither on the side of truth nor on the side of falsity. They do not care whether
their statements describe reality correctly; they merely make things up to suit their
purpose.
Grey (1996: 593).
Weeding the Managerialist Garden
113

As thinking is speaking to oneself and to others, it is tempting to conclude that
something has gone seriously wrong with managerialists’ thinking. The alternative is
that managerialists, as reasonably intelligent people, are base speakers. As rhetoric
is judged by its ability to persuade, there is little evidence that managerialist rhetoric
is effective. Rather, it is the cause of much hilarity on the one side and anger on the
other. To be required to use managerialist jargon in job interviews or management
meetings is, for some, merely an amusing game. For others, it gives rise to frustration
and anger because it convinces them that their superiors are indeed naked emperors.
The same arguments can be applied to the management literature and to manage-
ment educators. When confronted by the tortured syntax, pleonasms, oxymorons,
tautologies and dubious metaphors of management writers, one wonders whether
their thinking is seriously deficient or whether they are merely participating in a
cynical game of rhetorical obfuscation.¹²
The necessity of argumentation is revealed by the proliferation of pleonasms and
tautologies in the descriptive language of management. Pleonasms are two-word
phrases which contain a redundancy, such as ‘kindly compassion’, ‘reverting
back’, ‘future potential’. Pleonasms are necessarily true since they can be translated
as trivial hypotheticals: ‘If a product has potential, it has a future’. For example,
‘strategic management’ is pleonastic since ‘strategic’ means goal-directed, and
managing is impossible without goal-direction. The same applies to ‘strategic
marketing management’, ‘strategic human resource management’, and so on. The
addition of the word ‘strategic’ presumably has strategic value in the race for mana-
gerial power, but it remains an element of pretentious rhetoric.
Tautologies are extended pleonasms expressed in subject-predicate form. As
such, they are propositions which are necessarily true by virtue of the meaning of
words. For example, ‘Charismatics have special personal qualities’ is necessarily
true according to the definition of ‘charismatic’. Its negation, ‘Some charismatics
do not have special personal qualities’ is self-contradictory. Tautologies are redun-
dant, verbal truths and provide no information about the material world of facts.
For example, ‘Managers are paid professionals’ is necessarily true. As ‘professional’
entails ‘paid’ the latter term is redundant. That is, if managers are professionals, they
are paid. It should be noted that this proposition is true even if managers are not
professionals.
Readers may wonder why it is important to recognise tautologies. Bearing in
mind that they convey no information about the material world, tautologies have
only tautological consequences. In other words, it is impossible to deduce an empir-
ical proposition from a tautological one. It would be possible, therefore, to write a
book on management which includes only tautologies. While every proposition
contained therein would be (trivially) true, the book would tell readers nothing
about the facts of management, or of anything else, except the meaning of words.
Micklethwait & Wooldridge (1996); Rosen (1977); Watson (2004); Watson (2006).
114
Chapter 6: The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority

Managerialists and their teachers readily embrace tautologies. They say or write
such trivial sentences as, ‘Improving staff morale is an on-going process’, ‘An astute
manager makes shrewd decisions’, ‘Effective managers may eventually become
leaders’, ‘Only organisations that are adapted to their environment survive.’
Empirical propositions are matters of fact based on experience. They are, there-
fore, not true by definition and when true they are contingently true: they could be
false. Consequently, their negation does not lead to self-contradiction, ‘All managers
are aggressive’ is an empirical proposition because it is either true or false and its
negation is not self-contradictory. Empirical propositions describe the material
world and experience is their guarantee of truth and falsity. For example, ‘Manage-
ment author, Peter Drucker, wrote novels’, is an empirical proposition which happens
to be true. ‘Alfred Sloan was Chairman of General Motors between 1960 and 1980’ is
an empirical proposition which is false. It is widely assumed that management books
are based mainly on empirical propositions. Unfortunately, this assumption is not
warranted.
Nonsensical propositions are neither tautological nor empirical. Propositions of
value, such as, ‘Managers should be virtuous’ are nonsensical since they are expres-
sions of personal feelings about a particular issue. A distinction needs to be made
therefore between statements of fact and statements of value. Managerialists move
easily but incorrectly from statements about human behaviour to value judgements,
i.e., from ‘is’ to ‘ought’. Logically, however, one cannot deduce ‘ought’ from ‘is’. From
the factual statement, ‘Females are under-represented on boards of directors’, it does
not follow logically that there should be more females on boards. There may be (or
again there may not be) good reasons for appointing females to boards but relying
on value judgements (or nonsensical propositions) is not one of them.
The managerialist literature is dominated by nonsensical propositions, such as
‘Effective managers have outstanding flashes of vision’, ‘My manager has lower
moral standards than I’, ‘Jack Welch was the best CEO General Electric had’, ‘Every-
thing is relative’, ‘This organisation believes in excellence’, ‘My manager’s mind is
filled with facts’, ‘All sentences are metaphors’.
The current authors provided elsewhere examples of pretentious managerialist
rhetoric.¹³ One of them is Bolman and Deal’s popular book, Reframing Organisations,
which alerts readers to linguistic dangers from its cover on. ‘Organisation’ is an
abstract noun and cannot therefore be framed, let alone reframed. If by framing,
Bolman and Deal mean applying a perspective or theory to the study of organisa-
tions, their attempt to argue a case for the role of different perspectives and the
ways in which they lead to diverse consequences is a candidate for critical evalua-
tion. However, from the first page, readers are thrown into a world of tautologies
and nonsensical gibberish.
Joullie & Spillane (2021).
Weeding the Managerialist Garden
115

If an organization is overmanaged but underled, it eventually loses any sense of spirit or
purpose. A poorly managed organization with a strong, charismatic leader may soar briefly
only to crash shortly thereafter. Malpractice can be as damaging and unethical for managers
and leaders as for physicians. Myopic managers or overzealous leaders usually harm more
than just themselves.¹⁴
This passage should not be allowed to go without comment. First, Bolman and Deal
introduce in their first sentence notions of management and leadership as if the
distinction is clear to readers and the latter term unproblematic. Yet, they never
make clear what they mean by ‘overmanaged’ and ‘underled’. Do they mean that
there are too many managers? Or do they mean that managers are micromanaging?
Do they mean that there are few leaders (which Weber would say is a good thing)? Or
do they mean that the so-called leaders among the managers are not, in fact,
leading? If the latter, then they have somehow reverted to the status of mere
managers.
Second, what is meant by a sense of spirit or purpose’? Assuming that ‘spirit’
does not refer to alcohol, to what does it refer? As a metaphor, it is probably
taken from the sporting notion of ‘team spirit’ which is invoked when a team
wins. That is, the team has spirit because it won, and it won because of its team
spirit. Circular arguments of this type bedevil management textbooks. Furthermore,
abstract nouns, like ‘organisation’, cannot have purposes: people do.
Third, it is obvious that anything can happen eventually (if it has not happened
yet, it will happen, eventually, and that will be when it happens). The use of ‘even-
tually’ turns the sentence into a trivial tautology and conveys no empirical informa-
tion about managers and leaders. Since Reframing Organizations was written for
managers and management students, it is therefore surprising to find Bolman and
Deal implying that banks, insurance companies or government departments have
in their ranks ‘strong, charismatic leaders.’ Two pleonasms are at play here: charis-
matics are strong, and they are, by definition, leaders. To talk of a weak charismatic
or a charismatic who is not a leader is self-contradictory. It would have been suffi-
cient to write only of charismatics, but then one wonders whether Bolman and
Deal truly believe that a typical workplace has charismatics roaming the corridors
of power.
Fourth, any organisation may (or may not) soar, crash or turn itself into a flying
saucepan. Any sentence with the verbal auxiliary ‘may’ is, by definition, necessarily
true since it also implies the opposite of what it states. The liberal use of ‘may’ (or
‘can’) has become the bane of the management literature, including the most presti-
gious management journals whose editors appear to be oblivious to the pointless of
its use.
Bolman & Deal (2003: xvi).
116
Chapter 6: The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority

Fifth, malpractice is damaging, by definition, and myopic managers need spec-
tacles rather than admonishment. And overzealous leaders, if they are to be found,
might quibble about the inevitability of self-harm.
Sixth, when Bolman and Deal invoke oxymoronic expressions like ‘objective
perspective’ or ‘organised confusion’, catch-all phrases like ‘positive attitude’ or
empirically unverifiable value judgements and expressions of feelings, phrases like
‘flashes of vision’ (which do not refer to retinal disturbance), their use of metaphor
threatens to move beyond the boundaries of reasonable rhetoric and descends into
what Australian poet A. D. Hope called ‘pretentious, illiterate verbal sludge’. Or as
Wittgenstein liked to say, Bolman and Deal’s language has gone on holiday.
In an analysis of the language used by management authors of the implications
for practice of 198 articles published in 2015 in four prestigious management jour-
nals, Joullié and Gould found that among the propositions analysed 59% are tauto-
logical, 15% are empirical and 26% are nonsensical. ‘In summary, although resorting
to state-of-the-art statistical or semantic analysis, approximately seven eighth
(87.4%) of contributions published in 2015 in the four [prestigious] journals retained
for this study either fail to propose at least one explicit practical implication or, when
they do, formulate it in a way that makes it either [tautological] or nonsensical, in
either case empirically irrelevant.’¹⁵
Joullié and Gould note an obsessive use of the verb ‘suggest’ which appears in
nearly 22% of the 225 propositions extracted from the articles and is found in
such sentences as ‘Our results suggest that…’ Its frequent use by management
authors concerning their research introduces subjectivity in the interpretation of
data which allows for the possibility that other researchers, reviewing the same
results, might interpret them differently. This is a familiar strategy which is used
to protect authors from criticism. It also enables them to avoid charges of dogmatism
or selective interpretation.
Joullié and Gould also found that authors overuse tautologies involving the
modals ‘may’ or ‘might’, as in ‘Results show that rewarding helping may be benefi-
cial when an organisation is young.’ More than 38% of all statements analysed offer
advice to managers using similar wording together with use of the modal ‘can’
(‘could’, ‘enable’, ‘help’, ‘allow’). Propositions like ‘employees who realise their aspi-
rations can experience a sense of fit’ are trivially true and represents nearly 25% of
statements analysed. Other useless formulations include sentences which mention
‘potential advantages’ since any management practice has a ‘potential advantage’
since ‘potential’ refers to an unspecified point in the future.
Joullié and Gould also note the tendency to reify such abstract nouns as ‘compa-
nies’, ‘firms’, and ‘cultures’. The result is an anthropomorphising of abstractions and
the unwarranted inference that they ‘act’. Nearly 50% of the 25 empirical proposi-
tions identified in their study share this feature. The authors of journal articles
Joullie & Gould (in-press).
Weeding the Managerialist Garden
117

write of ‘companies’ and ‘organisations’ as if these abstractions had an autonomous
existence apart from the human beings who comprise them. Authors frequently talk
or ‘organisational purposes’ or ‘the management team believes …’, or ‘my company
expects’. Accounting for this misuse of language, which turns an empirical proposi-
tion into a nonsensical one, the 25 empirical propositions are reduced to 5.8% of 225
analysed.
The same authors point out that reifications are pervasive in the management
literature. The reason for such ubiquitous presence is intuitive: reifications point
to derivative phenomena to be analysed by examining the aggregate activities of indi-
viduals. The fact remains, however, that a judicious weeding of the managerialist
garden results in the dismissal of much of the corpus of organisational and manage-
ment scholarship which claims to be ‘scientific’. It behoves, therefore, to researchers
who claim to be operating within a scientific framework to clarify their use of
abstractions and discuss the entities which give rise to them. Without such clarifica-
tion, most organisational research is trivial.
Joullié and Gould conclude that managers are justified in being sceptical about
the research published in academic journals and the practical implications which
flow therefrom. That fewer than 6% of so-called ‘implications for practice’ are empir-
ical raises the question of why managers and their teachers want to read these arti-
cles. And management books are no better, dominated as they are by tautologies and
nonsensical propositions.
Stove concludes his book, The Plato Cult, with a chapter entitled ‘What is Wrong
with Our Thoughts?’ He provides examples of the ways in which human thinking has
gone wrong, not in some superficial way, but in some way which is beyond the possi-
bility of cure. An example of a writer of gibberish is Foucault and Stove wants to
know what is wrong with his thinking. Most of Foucault’s passages are simply
nonsensical but that does not mean they are meaningless since he has profoundly
influenced the intelligentsia in most of the Western world.
It is tempting to say, after Frankfurt, that Foucault’s books are mostly composed
of ‘bullshit’. But this conclusion is not helpful because what is wrong with Foucault’s
thinking is different from what is wrong with, say, Bolman and Deal’s thinking.
It is to their credit that the logical positivists attempted to answer Stove’s ques-
tion by means of Hume’s Fork, or what is known professionally as the analytic-
synthetic distinction. That is, the logical positivists acknowledged three ways in
which thinking can go wrong: contingent falsity, self-contradiction and meaningless-
ness. But they refused to accept that nonsensical propositions are meaningful for
many people. Had they, or their followers, been more explicit, they might have
said that although nonsensical propositions are not truth-bearing and thus not scien-
tifically meaningful, they are nonetheless meaningful (albeit in a different sense) for
many, indeed for most people. But this admission would have diverted them from
their overarching project, which was to secure language on a scientific footing.
As Western universities embraced diverse forms of irrationality, generally
imported from France by way of Foucault and his ilk, even the notions of contingent
118
Chapter 6: The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority

falsity and self-contradiction lost their power. As noted, postmodernists declared war
on facts, objectivity, rationality and truth and are not bothered with issues of contin-
gent, or even necessary, falsity. Similarly, authoritarians can seriously entertain
contradictory ideas without realising they are doing so, or not caring in any case.
It is generally accepted that logical positivism as a philosophical movement has
run its course. However, without their restraint on the proliferation of gibberish, the
field is open to writers, like Foucault, who push language to and beyond the pale. A
return to the glory days of logical positivism is unlikely since it consigned to the
dustbin statements that are illogical or unempirical, yet meaningful for large
numbers of people. As such, because people will give their lives for abstractions
or believe in everything from gods and ghosts to communism and spiritual intelli-
gence, it is almost impossible to avoid the conclusion that scientific facts are no
panacea for psychological problems. Spillane and Martin note:
On the larger canvas not the physical sciences, nor scientific training, nor the manipulations of
counsellors can reach the jungle of invalidated beliefs for which humans seem so bent on sacri-
ficing themselves, their families and species. Given the history of humankind, it is difficult to
maintain that sanity is the norm. Far from it. The truth is that sanity is some extremely rare
state (perhaps only notional) that we might not recognise if we were to encounter it. Human
reasoning is obviously flawed […] For any kind of nonsense believers can be found.¹⁶
Like Spillane and Martin, Stove concludes that from a positivist point of view most
human beings are mad since they have lunatic beliefs to which they attach great
importance. Though mostly sane in everyday activities, when they attempt any
depth of thought, they go mad almost infallibly, and fall into the worship of some
dangerous lunatic.
Insofar as logical positivism survives in the management literature, scholars are
faced with a dilemma. On the one hand, they are tempted, like any logical positivist,
to weed the management garden of noxious language and allow true statements and
valid reasoning to flourish. On the other hand, they find themselves restricted to
empirical statements and definitions which narrow their horizon dramatically and
demands of them scientific rigour in a field which does not lend itself to experiments
and the development of law-like propositions.
As for managerialists, they cannot be expected so to restrict their language as to
become impotent. Managerialism is an ideology as well as a practice, and an
ideology is based on the use of a non-scientific language in the service of power.
It is unsurprising, then, that managerialists favour the use of self-serving jargon
and are relatively unconcerned about matters of truth, unless it is to their advantage
to define and use it pragmatically to their own ends.
From a research perspective, Stove argues that it is still possible to carry out a
neo-positivist project in particular cases. Although an answer to the general ques-
Spillane & Martin (2005: 249).
Weeding the Managerialist Garden
119

tion, ‘What is wrong with human thinking?’ is elusive, an answer to the question,
‘What is wrong with Bolman and Deal’s thinking in a particular paragraph?’ admits
of a helpful answer.
The conceptual distinctions defended in this chapter open a fertile educational
agenda. Language as the object of analysis provides explicit data that are empirically
verifiable and thus actionable. By studying the way managers speak, one can assess
the degree to which they use active or passive voice, expressive or descriptive
language, first-person singular versus first-person plural pronouns and conditional
tense conjugations or present-tense verb conjugations. Similarly, there are ways to
qualify language as authoritarian (base) or authoritative (noble). The former entails
dogma, deception and manipulation, the latter flexibility, true descriptions, sound
reasoning and justified advising. Recommendations are therefore available to
those who want to be seen not as mere incumbents with the power to enforce obedi-
ence, but as authoritative managers.
As it emerges from the work of Friedrich and Popper, authoritative management
requires valid reasoning and critical argument. Such initial commitments culminate
in authoritative advice. This conclusion holds to the extent that there is a general
preference for truth over falsity, rationality over irrationality, authoritative advice
over authoritarian commands, and cooperation over coercion. In the age of post-
modern managerialism, based on forceful implementation of managerial techniques,
elimination of middle managers and silencing of technical expertise, such prefer-
ences cannot be taken for granted. It is, however, through the revival of these pref-
erences that the tide of managerialism can be reversed. If managers decided to
wage war against pretentious, obfuscating language, they will follow the advice of
Hume and commit to the flames books which are dominated by tautologies and
nonsensical language. Such an act would help to rid management of the sophistry
and illusion that dominates it in the age of managerialism.
120
Chapter 6: The Rhetoric of Managerial Authority

Chapter 7:
The Misuse of Psychology
In management, there are two competing approaches to psychology and its role in
the workplace. The first, popular approach asserts that psychology should be studied
by managers to enable them better to motivate and control employees. Psychology is
thus regarded as a tool to be used by managers to maximise employee performance.
The second approach, promoted by Drucker, argues that the main purpose of
psychology is to enable individuals to gain insight into and mastery of themselves.
Drucker criticised managers for engaging in the former, a sort of psychological
manipulation which plays on individual anxieties and personal needs. Using
psychology to control others, he argues, is self-destructive abuse of knowledge. It
is also a particularly repugnant form of tyranny.
There are echoes here of Follett who insisted that ‘personality studies’, which
were gaining momentum in her lifetime, ignore the law of the situation because
they focus management’s attention on the psychology of employees and away
from actual circumstances. While cooperative work relationships rest on mutual
respect and truth sharing, managers who inquire into their subordinates’ psycholog-
ical profiles disregard this ideal and compromise management by performance.
Claiming that they are acting unselfishly in the best interests of their colleagues,
such managers-turned-psychologists replace the task of doing their job competently
(and helping their colleagues to do the same) with the task of doing their job
‘compassionately.’ While it is possible that some people at work require psycholog-
ical advice, managers have neither the expertise nor the mandate to provide it. The
relationships between psychotherapist and client and manager and subordinate are
mutually exclusive and their goals diametrically opposed. While the integrity of
psychotherapists is subordination to the client’s welfare, the integrity of managers
is subordination to the requirements of the organisational task. In this sense,
managers who believe otherwise and act on the perceived psychological needs of
their subordinates rather than the objective needs of the task engage in base rhetoric
(in the sense advanced in Chapter 6) and destroy the integrity of the management
relationship. As Drucker saw, even compared with old-style autocratic management,
management as psychotherapy is a form of psychological despotism and a gross
misuse of psychology.
In psychotherapy, therapists try to make explicit the implicit rules by which
clients conduct themselves in everyday living. At work, managers try to clarify the
explicit rules by which they and their colleagues are expected to conduct themselves,
the roles they are supposed to embody and the goals they are to meet. Inevitably,
managers face behaviour that deviates from the rules and roles of their organisation.
While authoritarian managers turn to psychological testing in the hope of controlling
their colleagues, their authoritative counterparts eschew psychological testing in
management in favour of open discussion.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-009

Drucker maintained a sceptical attitude towards the human relations movement
(c1930 – c1950) with its emphasis on motivation, friendly supervision and people
orientation. Having flirted with psychologists, managerialists of the current HRM
era now readily embrace them. Psychologists returned the favour and set their sights
on the old guard, notably Drucker, who was roundly criticised by psychologists,
including Maslow, for failing to appreciate and account for individual differences,
especially personal needs. After all, Drucker had argued that there is only one
style of management: to make strength productive and weakness irrelevant. While
accepting the fact of different personalities and motives, management should be
based on objective tasks. Maslow disagreed and thought there should be different
management styles for different people. In Management, Drucker responded and
criticised industrial psychologists for their simplistic accounts of workplace behav-
iour and their habit of pretending that descriptions of everyday behaviour are
universal theories of human nature.
The personality and motivational psychologists who have impressed manageri-
alists treat persons as objects (as opposed to subjects) for investigation which it is
their task to discover, describe and manipulate. The thesis that people have person-
alities has been taken so far as to assume that work organisations are simply expres-
sions of the sum of the inward nature of those who work in them. Personality
psychologists, or personologists, believe that human beings ‘have’ personalities.
Personality, in its earliest English sense, was the quality not of a thing but a person:
the sum of one’s qualities as manifested in behaviour generally. This meaning is not
that used in present-day psychology where it is treated as a possession. Psycholo-
gists have transformed personality from a general to a specific human quality, a
move which allows them to talk of ‘split personality’, ‘personality disorder’ or
‘lack of a personality’. This transformation leads inexorably to the belief that person-
ality can be dissected, measured, interpreted, modified and treated.
The trend in scientific psychological circles has been away from the idea that the
concept of personality is fully explicative of human relationships. The possibility that
there may be no such independent entity called personality has not deterred mana-
gerialists and management consultants for whom personality and motivational traits
are central concepts. This conviction began with Freud.
Psychoanalysis
Freud’s general theory is based on the principle of unconscious psychological deter-
minism. The relative importance and strength of the various drives that determine
adult behaviour have been shaped by the experiences, especially sexual, in infancy
and childhood. Behaviour is caused by internal mental events which represent an
internalisation of conflicts between person and environment, past and present.
Freud’s second major assumption is that humans are dynamic beings constantly
pursuing goals. Failing to achieve a goal produces tension which increases psycho-
122
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

logical energy to the point where it seeks some form of egress. While people derive
pleasure from the release of tension, they also confront a social reality which actively
discourages excessive gratification. The conflict between the pleasure drive (repre-
sented in the psyche by id), the demands of reality (represented by ego), the
demands of morality (represented by superego) and the dictates of society, creates
further tension, especially in childhood.
Freud used the term ‘defence’ to refer to the processes by which people uncon-
sciously defend themselves against dangerous thoughts, feelings and impulses by
transforming them into desirable ones. So, whenever anxiety is aroused the response
of ego is to defend, primarily by repression of the offending material. The ability of
the unconscious part of ego to channel the unacceptable impulses of id demands the
existence of a censor or unconscious judge. Freud was unable to explain how this
oxymoronic expression does its job since its operation requires that the censor is
itself subject to unconscious judgemental forces.
Thus, the primary defence mechanism is repression, but this is only one of
several mechanisms that include reaction formation (opposite impulses adopted),
sublimation (dangerous impulses channelled to acceptable behaviour), projection
(dangerous impulses attributed to others), identification (similar impulses of others
adopted), displacement (dangerous impulses redirected), regression (to earlier life
periods), denial (unconscious forgetting) and rationalisation (sour grapes). These
defence mechanisms underpin Freud’s system and give it an air of credibility
because they are paralleled by patterns of behaviour familiar from our own experi-
ences and recognisable in the behaviour of others. At the same time, defence mech-
anisms are said to be the result of unconscious processes, and it is this claim that
makes them different from their recognisable parallels. Unconscious repression,
for example, is paralleled by conscious suppression, which is a process of elimi-
nating anxiety, but the two are not the same. Unconscious projection is paralleled
by telling a lie to or about another person, unconscious reaction formation is paral-
leled by conscious hypocrisy, diplomacy or sportsmanship, and so on, through all
the defence mechanisms.
The third principle of psychoanalysis concerns Freud’s insistence that adult
behaviour reflects, in modified form, childhood experiences. The first six years of
life are crucial in the development of a relatively fixed personality, because the
child’s three classes of drives (self-preservative, sexual and aggressive) need to be
harmonised with each other and with the tangible and moral demands of society
represented by parents, teachers, siblings and others. In Freudian terms, the healthy
personality is one which has successfully overcome the traumatic problems of child-
hood to achieve an effective balance between social demands, id impulses, ego and
superego.
Freudian theory stands or falls on the question of unconscious motivation. Freud
attributed behaviour to unconscious motives and refused to accept either free will or
the fact that people act on premises which appear to be unconscious but are merely
taken for granted. Much is learned in childhood that remains unquestioned.
Psychoanalysis
123

However, Freud ascribed abnormal behaviour to unconscious motives and rejected
the view that inappropriate behaviour is the result of operating on faulty premises
waiting to be corrected by valid reasoning. This possibility attributes to human
beings far more rationality than Freud is prepared to concede.
According to Freud, individuals are neither free nor responsible for their actions.
Although he does assume that the arrival of repressed material in consciousness is a
goal of therapy, he insists that when such material is surrendered to consciousness it
is anti-social, otherwise it would not have been repressed in the first place. The aim
of psychoanalysis, therefore, is to neutralise the offending material. Yet, such
neutralisation is an impossible task given Freud’s assumption that human beings
are systems of forces and hydraulic-like mechanisms that produce predictable behav-
iour. This assumption is incompatible with that of an unconscious judge that
‘chooses’ to repress dangerous material or allow less serious material into conscious-
ness. To appreciate this incompatibility is to destroy the coherence of the entire
system.
In the UK during the heyday of psychoanalysis – the 1950s and 1960s – Freud’s
ideas were adopted and modified by members of the Tavistock Institute of Human
Relations. When Tavistock consultants begin a relationship with a management
client, they assume that the practical problems presented to them for analysis are
merely surface problems since the ‘real’ psychological problems are unconscious.
What appears on the surface as a simple management problem is treated as the
manifestation of underlying deep-seated emotional conflicts which, when brought
to the surface, distress the concerned managers. The consultant is obliged, therefore,
to ‘interpret’ the observable (surface) behaviour to elicit its ‘unconscious message’.
Lest readers think this reading of the Tavistockian approach is an exaggeration,
Miller makes it clear that just like the psychoanalyst armed with coach, pad and
pen interprets surface behaviour, so the psychoanalytic management consultant
interprets managers’ communications to identify the real problems.¹ After having
their view of the substance of their problems so invalidated, managers face a variety
of bewildering ‘interpretations’. Indeed, when they are tempted to fall back on appa-
rently rational motives to support their actions, psychoanalytic consultants argue
that management rationality is a myth which needs to be examined in the light of
what they (the psychoanalysts) claim to know about the role of the unconscious
in human behaviour. Managerial decision-making is thereby assessed as the product
of deep-seated unconscious motives which it is the task of consultants to explore.
This unearthing is referred to as consciousness-raising: bringing under conscious
control material that was previously unconscious.
The members of the Tavistock Institute assume that the consultant-client rela-
tionship is dominated by the transference principle. This principle means that clients
re-enact feelings experienced in earlier stages of life and project undesirable aspects
Miller (1977: 43).
124
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

of themselves to others, and frequently to consultants. Tavistock consultants there-
fore need to be emotionally resilient (to use a currently fashionable term) when
dealing with the surface problems and latent problems directed at them by difficult,
and often truculent or egomaniacal clients. Rice (a Tavistock consultant) explains
that when he becomes anxious, embarrassed or hurt, he copes by asking himself
why he has these feelings and attempts to sort out what comes from within himself
and what comes from the consultant-client relationship. By stating how he is feeling
he believes he can provide a framework in which his clients can release for discus-
sion information that would otherwise be unavailable. ‘If the data are essential for
making adequate decisions, their release, however painful and embarrassing at
the time, can be reassuring.’²
One is compelled to assume that Tavistock consultants have undergone a lengthy
period of psychoanalytic therapy without which they would be unable to do the
‘sorting’. Moreover, it would be unsurprising to find that some clients conclude
that the consultants are multiplying problems rather than solving them. Indeed,
by engaging the unconsciously motivated consultant in an unconsciously motivated
game of interpretation, only part of which is recognised and even less understood, it
is a miracle that the original problem is not lost in the shuffle of metaphors.³ What-
ever the case, it must come as a surprise to managers to be told that their practical
problems are unconsciously motivated psychological problems which need to be
interpreted by psychoanalysts. Clients are thereby sentenced to the status of naïve
evaluators of human behaviour who need the skills of those who have been psycho-
analysed. Indeed, the Tavistock group see this dependency relationship as inevi-
table, at least during the life of the client-consultant relationship.
In general terms, a dependency relationship is a relationship of authority. Such
dependence develops naturally and unavoidably between client and consultant since
clients hire consultants to help them solve practical problems at the workplace.
Dependency, for psychoanalysts, has a different meaning because they start from
the assumption that their clients have unresolved anxieties. Accordingly, clients
who seek psychoanalytic assistance will, through regression, seek refuge in a
dependency relationship. When such regression happens, psychoanalysts conclude
that the real basis of the problem for which assistance is required is an unconscious
psychological problem rather than a conscious practical problem. In this way, mana-
gerial problems are re-defined as psychological problems which necessitate the serv-
ices of psychoanalysts. If clients argue against such re-definitions of their problems,
they are likely to be accused of unconscious psychological resistance, thus
confirming the analysts’ original hypotheses.
Psychoanalysis has been used in the field of executive coaching and leadership
development programmes. Some INSEAD academics use a psychoanalytic ‘clinical
Rice (1963: 6–7).
Lansbury & Spillane (1983: 33).
Psychoanalysis
125

paradigm’ based on four premises: all human behaviour can be rationally explained;
the unconscious mind plays a major role in determining human actions, thoughts,
fantasies, hopes and fears; human emotions contribute to identity and behaviour;
human development is an interpersonal and intrapersonal process.⁴ The assumption
about the unconscious mind is the untestable psychoanalytic proposition that the
mind robs managers of freedom and responsibility for their actions. Such a proposi-
tion qualifies as base rhetoric because it seeks to persuade managers that they are
victims of their unconscious mental processes, whatever these are.
The INSEAD authors acknowledge a 1995 article by the man to whom their book
is dedicated: ‘Abraham Zaleznick who showed the way.’ A professor at the Harvard
Business School for more than 40 years, Zaleznick was, in 1971, certified by the
American Psychoanalytic Association to practice psychoanalysis and in later years
extended his clinical practice to assisting managers with issues of organisational
conflict and succession planning. He was, with Levinson, one of the founders of
the movement which sought to apply psychoanalysis to organisational and manage-
ment studies.
Zaleznick begins his article with a warning: ‘I argue that, unlike clinical psycho-
analysis, more harm than good occurs when consultants attempt to interpret uncon-
scious material to clients in organizations.’⁵ The harm that comes from interpreting
unconscious conflicts and motives outside the very controlled psychoanalytic situa-
tion is, for him, twofold: first, these interpretations engender new defensive behav-
iour; and second, the subjects of these interpretations will not understand the
consultant’s’ language and consequently will become emotionally confused. The
result is a diminished capacity of the management client to function effectively,
which has serious consequences, notably for its employees and customers.
In his widely quoted article, Zaleznick discusses critically the activities of the
Tavistock group. He is concerned that when consultants convene a group and then
withdraw (hence creating a leaderless group) regression follows and anxiety levels
rise rapidly, activating defences. Given the inevitability of such problems, Zaleznick
favours the use of psychoanalytic ego psychology when working with managers. He
believes that ego psychology adds to the practice of consultation the ability to eval-
uate situations by understanding the forces at work and explaining the relationship
between these forces and the presenting problems. But how does a psychoanalytic
consultant move from observation and explanation to action, given Zaleznick’s argu-
ment that acting on the interpretation of unconscious material is ineffective, if not
harmful? Zaleznick’s salutary conclusion is that psychoanalytic consultants do not
know what unconscious forces are at work in complex organisational relationships.
Intuitions and guesses are insufficient and unjustifiable in professional relation-
ships. Even if consultants claim to know details of unconscious processes and
Kets De Vries & Korotov (2007).
Zaleznick (2007: 321–322).
126
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

their situational effects, communicating this knowledge runs the risk of triggering
regressive and other defences. Finally, clients will come to enhance their power at
the expense of their colleagues’.
Most of Freud’s followers found it difficult to accept all his ideas, especially his
theory of unconscious psychic determinism and his emphasis on childhood
sexuality. One was Swiss psychiatrist Carl Jung, who criticised Freud’s obsession
with sex, in which there is a certain irony since Jung’s libido was considerably
stronger than Freud’s. Parting from Freud, Jung concluded that psychoanalysis
was a religion and psychotherapy was a new name for the cure of souls. He then
proceeded to form his own religion and cure his own souls.
The personal unconscious, for Jung, contains only a small proportion of the total
amount of unconscious material because it is in the collective unconscious that
beliefs and myths of race are contained. He goes so far as to assert that the whole
of mythology can be taken as a projection of the collective unconscious. At the
deepest level of the collective unconscious lie the universal unconscious elements
common to all humanity. While the personal unconscious is made up essentially
of contents which have at one time been conscious, but which have disappeared
from consciousness through having been forgotten or repressed, the contents of
the collective unconscious have never been in consciousness and therefore have
never been individually acquired. Rather, they owe their existence exclusively to
heredity.
Whereas the personal unconscious consists of complexes, the collective uncon-
scious consists of archetypes: mythological images not unlike Platonic ideas which
direct attention from the particular to the general. Behind a physical mother, for
instance, lies an archetypal mother, behind an individual mind lies a group mind.
The most powerful ideas in history go back to the archetypes. While this assumption
of Jung’s is acceptable for religious ideas, he meant to include the central concepts of
science, philosophy, ethics and aesthetics. Archetypes are spiritual images and
include child/God (Christ), mother (Mary), magician (Yahweh), hero (Siegfried),
demon (Satan) and shadow (underground). Jung was convinced that the deposit of
humankind’s ancestral history of father, mother, child, husband and wife has exalted
these archetypes into the supreme regulating principles of religious and political life.
Jung called persona the part of the personality that is available for public inspec-
tion. One persona may be extraverted, the other introverted, and within these cate-
gories people are seen as thinkers, intuiters, feelers or sensualists. In every person
either extraversion or introversion dominates at the conscious level of existence,
but the reverse is the case at the unconscious level. For example, the person who
is a thinking extravert is unconsciously an emotional introvert. Corresponding to
the persona, but more primitive, is the anima or animus which in a male is feminine
and in a female masculine. A very masculine person is unconsciously strongly femi-
nine, the courageous man is unconsciously cowardly, and so on.
Jung believed that males repress their feminine traits (weakness, softness) and
because this repression leads to an increase in libido tension, males project these
Psychoanalysis
127

traits onto females, especially to a female partner. The opposite is the case for
females. Jung, however, upset feminists and bewildered many others by claiming
that the anima produces ‘moods’ in males, and the animus produces ‘opinions’ in
females.
In the 1970s, Jung eclipsed Freud in the popularity stakes. His blend of psycho-
analysis, Eastern mysticism, mythology and spiritualism appealed to those who
found Freud’s pseudo-scientific psychology too austere. Indeed, Jung makes Freud
look like a scientist. In The Jung Cult, Noll notes that following the wide dissemina-
tion of Jung’s writings in English translation by the 1960s, Jung’s obvious fascination
with mythology, parapsychology, the I Ching, astrology, alchemy and mystical expe-
riences made him a source of inspiration for the emerging neo-pagan religious move-
ments in Europe and North America. His mystical ideas are the basis of a personal
religion for thousands of people who are inspired by and united in a common belief
in a collective unconscious which is supposed to manifest itself through the indi-
vidual psyche and has redeeming powers.
Jung survives in management today, indirectly through the cult of personality
testing and directly through a popular personality test. After reading about a person-
ality test in a 1942 Reader’s Digest, Myers and Briggs decided to develop a test to
make people nicer. Inspired by a misreading of Jung’s psychology, they developed
the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) which has become one of the most widely
used personality test in the world. The MBTI measures the extent to which
individuals prefer specific behaviours and cognitive sets. Its four ‘preference’ scales
measure
extraversion-introversion,
sensing-intuiting,
thinking-feeling,
judging-
perceiving, in a forced-choice format. As scoring is based on (dubious) dichotomies,
the test’s psychometric qualities have been seriously questioned and its use in
management heavily criticised. Several studies have failed to replicate the MBTI’s
factor structure and have questioned factor naming as vague and tendentious. Critics
are adamant that the test should not be used for ‘typing’ individuals for specific jobs,
although it has been widely used for that purpose. The enthusiasm for the test
endures despite research showing that the sixteen types assessed by the MBTI
have no scientific basis whatever. Moreover, as many as three-quarters of testees
acquire a different personality when tested again after a relatively short period.
The technical deficiencies of the MBTI are also well publicised. To mention only
its most glaring ones, the test contradicts the original Jungian ideas on which it is
ostensibly based and several studies using the test have failed to confirm the theory
or validate the measure.⁶
As Paul notes in The Cult of Personality Testing, it is easy to understand the popu-
larity of the MBTI. Its positive tone and content avoid the dark side of personality and
blend seamlessly with the language of political correctness, such as that used by
psychologists, consultants and managers who emphasise ‘feeling and caring’. The
Spillane (2009: Ch. 4).
128
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

test’s popularity with female HR managers is well known and countless managers
have been marched off to training courses to be subjected to the MBTI. In some
cases, they are instructed to display their personality type on their shirts throughout
the course. It has even been asserted that scores on the MBTI predict managerial
leadership.
Hodkinson quipped that ‘the concept of leadership is an incantation for the
bewitchment of the led.’⁷ The fact is that throughout history, political rulers have
tried to convince citizens that they should be obeyed not because they have the
power to enforce obedience, but because they are ‘born leaders’. The myth of the
born leader was invented by Plato who exhorted potential rulers to become leaders
by lying about their claim to rulership. In The Republic, Plato calls the story of the
born leader the great lordly lie. ‘Could we perhaps fabricate one of those very
handy lies? With the help of one single lordly lie we may, if we are lucky, persuade
even the rulers themselves.’⁸ In this way rulers can become leaders and bewitch their
followers.
‘Leadership’ is one of the most popular topics on the managerialist agenda
where it has become something of a fetish. Like the personality cult, to which it is
intimately related, it has a long history in management. Arguably, managerialists’
fascination with leadership is grounded on an unstated desire to believe that their
authority derives from subordinates’ recognition of their exemplary personalities
rather than from their positional power.
In The Servants of Power, Baritz documents the ways in which the notion of lead-
ership has been used by psychologists and management consultants in American
industry and government. He argues that early formulations insisted that leadership
is an art, something vague and even mystical that could not be reduced to scientific
investigation or communicated to managers. According to this view, leaders are born
and not made, a view which is closely related to the popular idea that leadership is a
function of personality. Leaders are supposed to have strong characters, self-confi-
dence, sensitivity, integrity and imagination. For example, a decorated soldier and
governor-general of Australia, Sir William (later Lord) Slim, argued before manage-
ment audiences that leadership is a projection of personality based on will power,
courage, knowledge, judgement and ‘flexibility of mind’. Leadership, he argued, is
‘of the spirit, compounded of personality and vision, and its practice is an art.’
Management, on the other hand, is a matter of calculation of statistics, of methods,
timetables and routines, and its practice is a science.⁹
Baritz argues that the Platonic view of leadership contradicted research which
showed that about half of successful executives have volatile tempers and do not
know, like or care about their colleagues. It was not until after the Second World
Hodgkinson (1983: 228).
Plato (2013: 414).
Byrt (1978: 5–6).
Psychoanalysis
129

War that managers embraced the view that authoritarian leadership in management
is likely to fail since the consent of subordinates is essential to success. Subordinates
need to be persuaded rather than ordered to conduct themselves appropriately.
Persuasion should be used rather than the exercise of power.
According to Baritz, the concern with leadership became an obsession in the
1950s. Conferences, books and articles were dominated by an exhortation to trans-
form management into leadership. Out of the desire of managers to be respected
and rewarded as persons rather than powers, an industry grew and flourished. To
this day, leadership remains at the top of managerialists’ concerns, aided and
abetted by the cult of personality testing.
The Cult of Personality Testing
Baritz traces the beginnings of the psychological testing movement to the 1920s
when psychologists attempted to define a personality test. The general view was
that a sample of people’s behaviour (captured by way of questionnaire) indexes abil-
ities and other tendencies and permits the prediction of their future behaviour. Such
a formulation, although expressed a century ago, holds sway to this day. However, it
raises the vexed (and still unresolved) question of how many personality traits are
needed for reliable prediction. This uncertainty opened the door to quacks and char-
latans who, in the 1920s, showered management with their stereotypes and carica-
tures.
Given the widespread enthusiasm for personality tests, critics found it difficult to
be heard. An exception was Mary Gilson who worked in personnel and wrote that it
is ‘incredible that certain well-known men, holding important positions in business
and industry, shrewd in their competitive activities, could be so naïve in adopting
charlatanry in their attempts to judge human beings.’ She noted with concern that
‘businessmen were paying large fees to self-styled “psychologists” who advised
them, in all seriousness, concerning the choice of executives and workers on the
basis of such traits as “convex” or “concave” faces.’¹⁰
By the late 1920s managers began to realise that they were being seriously
misled. However, they did not (or could not) distinguish between frauds and bona
fide psychologists. One psychologist estimated that approximately ninety per cent
of the companies that used tests after the First World War concluded that they did
not predict workplace behaviour and abandoned them. Another psychologist,
reviewing the same period in 1947, found that personality tests had been ‘discredited
nearly everywhere.’¹¹
Baritz (1960: 70 –71).
Baritz (1960: 72).
130
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

Despite critics’ warnings, the personality testing business continued to boom in
the 1950s, as evidenced by the popularity of Cattell’s 16 Personality Factor Test and
the Humm-Wadsworth Temperament Scale (HWTS). Developed in the 1930s, the
HWTS was known as a ‘people-sorting instrument’ which was designed to meet
the needs of managers in large organisations, the assumption being that every job
had an ideal personality to ‘fit’ it, like a key to a lock. ‘People-sorters’ were popular
in the US in the 1920s when they were used to screen out political liberals and union
sympathisers. According to Baritz, the HWTS was used at Lockheed to identify and
remove potential troublemakers from job applicants. It allegedly detected such
diverse ‘temperaments’ as autistic, paranoid, epileptoid, depressive, manic, hyste-
roid, schizoid, cycloid. Another company used personally tests to discover whether
applicants’ wives dominated family decisions since it was believed that such men
would be easy to control.
Apart from the hundreds of definitions of personality to be found in psychology
textbooks, there are thousands of personality traits to be found in a dictionary.When
account is taken of synonyms, the number reduces to about a thousand traits which
psychologists have attempted to measure by questionnaire. The results are analysed
statistically by factor analysis which groups the results into clusters. Each cluster
represents several traits which are statistically related to each other, such as ‘aggres-
sive’ and ‘dominant’. Personality psychologists have readily embraced factor
analysts, which is surprising given how little rigour there is in interpreting its results.
Factors are taken as measuring what the factor analysts say they do, and it is rare to
find psychologists questioning their interpretation. Proof that a factor measures
anything at all is even rarer. Moreover, factor analysts cannot agree on the number
of factors to be extracted from a correlation matrix. Some personality psychologists
have staked their reputations on sixteen or more personality factors while others
prefer a more parsimonious solution. Hans Eysenck was the most parsimonious of
them all and for many years defended just two personality types: extraversion and
neuroticism.
It is widely believed in managerialist circles that personality predicts perfor-
mance in management. Accordingly, managerialists employ psychologists, trainers,
coaches and HR managers to delve into the personalities of their colleagues. This
is a harmless enough endeavour if colleagues are at liberty to refuse to participate
in testing and, if they do participate, are confident that their results are not available
to a third party, notably their boss. Where the personality scores are provided to a
third party, the exercise becomes one of management by personality rather than,
or as well as, management by performance. If it were the case that personality
test scores reliably predict management performance, there could be little objection.
However, after nearly a century of personality testing it is possible confidently to
assert that personality does not predict management performance.
Popper maintained that scientific hypotheses and theories are, in principle, falsi-
fiable by empirical testing. Where a theory or hypothesis has been consistently falsi-
fied over a considerable period, rational people will see it as part of a degenerate (or
The Cult of Personality Testing
131

degenerating) research programme. Beyond a certain point, further testing is point-
less. The hypothesis that personality test scores predict management performance
has been consistently falsified over a period of more than ninety years. This research
programme has, therefore, degenerated and from a scientific point of view is worth-
less. Consequently, it is a dispiriting experience for authors to have to rehearse
repeatedly the case against personality testing. Yet, this repeated rehearsing is essen-
tial because of the never-ending stream of propaganda and self-serving declarations
about new tests and their ability to overcome perennial problems.
Despite the empirical problems involved, some managerialists continue to
employ psychologists to measure the personality traits of their colleagues. There
appear to be three main reasons for this, only two of which are openly stated. A
popular reason for subjecting people to personality tests is the belief that they
predict work performance. A second reason is to do with what is called ‘organisa-
tional fit’. The third unstated reason is that the possession of colleagues’ personality
scores represents a form of managerial power since the scores can be used to
promote or demote, hire or fire. Although managerialists and HR managers roundly
deny that the scores are used in this manner, it would be exceedingly naïve to deny
that they can be, and indeed have been, used precisely in this manner.
It is easy to agree with Paul that the idea that an individual’s personality should
‘fit’ a specific job is an attempt to shift responsibility from performance to a lack of
harmony between employees and management. Management and employees are not
to be considered bad or good. Rather, when things go wrong, it is lack of ‘fit’ that is
the culprit. Personality functions as an escape valve which distracts managerialists
from such questions as whether work is effectively managed and adequately
rewarded. In this way, managerialists can (and do) claim that despite their best
efforts as leaders, if there is a lack of ‘fit’ with the organisation such employees
will fail to respond to their exemplary personalities. The argument, of course, is
circular.
In 1968, Mischel published Personality Assessment, a book which had a devas-
tating effect on the personality cult. In it, he argues that while ‘personality’ and
‘behaviour’ are often used interchangeably, behaviour is based on observable
patterns whereas personality is inferred from those patterns. Furthermore, the use
of the notion of personality ‘trait’ is inconsistent and confusing. For example,
‘trait’ is used to refer to the differences between the observed behaviour patterns
of two or more individuals. However, the same expression is also used to refer to
a theoretical construct invented for its convenient explanatory power, but which is
not meant to exist as a ‘thing’ or ‘process’ within a person. ‘Traits’ have also been
treated as causes of behaviour even though they are theoretical constructs which
cannot been shown to have any power. Personologists are rarely bothered by such
admissions and frequently retreat to the claim that because people respond differ-
ently to similar environments, personality traits, some of which are supposed to
be inherited, should be invoked as explanations. This argument has been consis-
132
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

tently prosecuted for decades in the face of countless research studies, too many to
catalogue, which invalidate the claim.
Mischel argues that the extraordinary attention to personality traits has been
accompanied by a massive neglect of environmental factors. Accordingly, he argues
that unless the environment changes dramatically, past behaviour rather than
personality test scores is the best predictor of future behaviour in similar situations.
The practice of inferring generalised behaviour patterns from self-reports and trying
to predict behaviour from the inferences would be an acceptable procedure if it could
be done reliably and provide predictive power. Mischel is adamant that five decades
of research studies (to the late 1960s) had shown conclusively that it cannot. He
concludes that personality traits are excessively crude concepts for a scientific
psychology to manage.
The personality testers fought back under the banner of ‘interactionism’. This
move was a relatively easy matter for them since they claimed that they have
never denied the impact of social forces (to do so would be silly). Their vigorous
defence was helped by a major shift in psychological thinking which began in the
1960s and saw environmentalism lose ground to the biological reductionists who
emerged victorious in the 1980s.
By the 1990s, the personality cult had recovered lost ground and gained even
more. This revival was the result of several factors, including the progressive medi-
calisation of moral behaviour, as can be seen in the psychiatric profession where
moral problems in living are redefined as medical conditions.¹² The popular belief
that personality traits are inherited and thereby place limits on human freedom
and personal responsibility also played its part in the return to grace of personality
testing.¹³
The cult of personality testing gained scores of new members with the widely
publicised success of the Big Five Personality Test which measures extraversion,
agreeableness, conscientiousness, openness to experience and emotional stability
(not included in the MBTI which, according to its inventors, assesses only ‘nice’ char-
acteristics). Mischel acknowledged how the revival of the Big Five generated fresh
enthusiasm for the personality trait model but noted its serious deficiencies. His
views have been largely ignored by management psychologists who point to the
‘impressive new research’ which (allegedly) establishes the long sought-after rela-
tionship between personality and work performance. Their enthusiasm is based on
several meta-analyses which studied the relationship between the five magic bullets
and work performance.¹⁴
Four meta-analyses of the relationship between work performance and the Big
Five yield low correlations. The ‘best’ and much-quoted result is between perfor-
Szasz (2007).
Eysenck (1976).
Barrick & Mount (1991); Spillane (2017).
The Cult of Personality Testing
133

mance and conscientiousness which accounts for only 4.4 per cent of the variance.
However, this result is not to be taken at face value since it is based on ‘soft’ perfor-
mance data. Subjective ratings by managers of their subordinates are soft data; mea-
sures of objective performance are hard data. When corrected for hard data, the
average correlation between the Big Five and work performance is barely above zero.
The extraordinary appeal of personality (and of inner causes of behaviour gener-
ally) together with the relative neglect of environmental forces cannot be the result of
illiteracy, illogic or irresponsibility alone. Skinner, no friend of personality theorists,
argues that the appeal of inner causes of behaviour has deep roots. It is the appeal of
an inexplicable power in a world which seems to lie beyond the reach of reason. ‘It is
the appeal still enjoyed by astrology, numerology, parapsychology and psychical
research.¹⁵
Skinner’s ‘Behaviorism’
Psychological determinism is the thesis that human behaviour is best understood as
caused by internal and external forces over which individuals have little, or no,
control. Freud’s theory is one such thesis, in that it explains the whole of human
behaviour through a mechanistic model. Freud, by committing to the dogma that
every human action is determined by physical and mental forces thus undermined
the view that humans are fundamentally purposive beings with the power to choose
their actions. The mechanical and the purposive represent different forms of
language that cannot be harmonised, since if one does something with purpose it
makes no sense to say that one’s behaviour was caused. The appeal of the idea
that one’s failure to achieve a particular purpose has been caused by circumstances
beyond one’s control is intuitive. More originally, Freud placed the interfering causes
inside the individual.
The second force in psychology is known as behaviourism, or ‘behaviorism’ as
Americans spell it. Its most vigorous proponent, B. F. Skinner, was voted by peers
as the most influential psychologist of the twentieth century. Skinner rejected
personal freedom and responsibility out of hand. In the early 1970s he appeared
on the cover of Time magazine following the publication of his book, Beyond
Freedom and Dignity.
Skinner was the ultimate determinist since he abandoned all psychological
concepts. ‘Response’ is linked to ‘stimulus’ by cause alone. Recognising that ‘reward’
is a psychological concept he substituted ‘reinforcement’, which he defined as
anything that follows a response and increases the probability that it will recur. In
advancing this definition, Skinner proved insensitive to circularity or argument.
How do he know what reinforces? Only when it reinforces.
Skinner (1993: 178).
134
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

A major objection to Skinner’s policy of universal determinism is that it ignores
the fact that (most) people perceive themselves as having choices (especially when
they succeed at a task for which they are rewarded), and this perception is self-
fulfilling because it leads them to regard themselves as responsible for the results
of their choices. This lends them some degree of self-control and entitles them to
respect and dignity.
Skinner’s reply was that such sentimental concepts, by persuading people that
they control themselves, simply obstruct the process of discovering precisely what
is controlling them. He argues that human behaviour is determined by a genetic
endowment traceable to the evolutionary history of the species and by the environ-
mental circumstances to which as individuals they have been exposed. Conse-
quently, as scientists learn more about the effects of the environment, they have
less reason to attribute any part of human behaviour to an autonomous agent.
Autonomous individuals are not easily changed but, says Skinner, the environment
can be changed, and behaviourists know how to change it for the better.
The explanation of behaviour in terms of social conditioning is extremely
popular, especially with educationalists, social workers and socialists. As behav-
iourism relieves people of responsibility for their errors and irrationalities, it will
appeal to those who find the notion of personal autonomy too challenging. But
there is also a subtle appeal in that conditioning implies a power relationship; the
conditioner has control over resources that the subject lacks. Talk of conditioning
is, therefore, a way of talking about asymmetrical power relationships. Young people
are, for instance, particularly disposed to blame society, parents, teachers, peer
groups and police for their misbehaviour. In addition, there is the general comfort-
able belief that ‘scientific’ psychologists will improve matters for the benefit of all.
Behaviourism leads to a view of society from which freedom, choice, responsi-
bility and dignity disappear. Should people accept the theory as reality, these matters
would be removed from their awareness: they simply do that for which they are
rewarded. Yet, it is difficult to imagine that people could be reduced to this level
of autism through behaviouristic training.
In Beyond Freedom and Dignity Skinner argues that if human freedom is
permitted to continue in an age when tools and techniques have placed immense
destructive power in the hands of humankind, it will destroy itself. Therefore, indi-
viduals should yield up the ideas of freedom of choice and personal responsibility
and submit themselves to operant conditioning which would make them incapable
of destroying each another. While this sounds like the programme adopted by total-
itarians, Skinner argues that totalitarians fail because they employ coercive methods
rather than positive reinforcement. In Skinner’s society people do what they want,
even though they do not know what they want. The problem of social control
remains, however. Skinner refuses to acknowledge that the libertarians he scorns
object to totalitarianism out of respect for freedom, responsibility and dignity.
The notion that behaviour is something to be totally controlled by external
means extends not only to self-appointed agents of control, like Skinnerian psychol-
Skinner’s ‘Behaviorism’
135

ogists, but also to those who would achieve it through social sanctions. This alterna-
tive brings other ‘professionals’ (sociologists, political scientists, social planners,
religionists) into the picture with the implied promise that a harmonious society
could be designed and implemented. Strangely enough, this notion has a good
deal of attraction for many people who suffer from the illusion that it requires
only the sufficient application of intelligence to call utopia into existence. The history
or past efforts to build societies should have a sobering effect, for modern attempts
at egalitarian democracy have proved to be direct movements towards bureaucracy,
from whence the next step is total regulation.
Third Force Psychology
Maslow, ever popular with managerialists and their teachers, presented himself as
one of the leaders of third force psychology offered as an alternative to the psycho-
logical determinism of Freud and the environmental determinism of Skinner. By
committing himself to a version of motivational theory, however, Maslow paradoxi-
cally supported psychological determinism. He wrote that Freud’s ‘great discoveries’
can be improved upon. ‘His one big mistake, which we are correcting now, is that he
thought of the unconscious merely as undesirably evil.’¹⁶ Maslow aimed to improve
on Freud by replacing the notion of motive force with that of ‘need’.
In everyday speech it is assumed that people select the ends to be achieved and
choose what is necessary for their accomplishment according to the circumstances.
Maslow converted this assumption to a fixed hierarchy and treats needs as mechan-
ical forces. At the bottom of Maslow’s hierarchy are the physiological needs which
support his theory of deprivation-motivation: people are forced to pursue something
(say, food) that is lacking (if they wish to continue to live). At the top end of the hier-
archy is the notion of self-actualisation which supports his theory of growth-motiva-
tion: people pursue desirable states. Maslow was thus unaware that self-actualisa-
tion is a concept which is admissible only in a model which incorporates notions
of choice, intention and purpose, whereas his biological need-system claims that
humans are driven towards it after subordinate goals have been achieved.
According to Maslow, individuals do not self-consciously choose to actualise
their potentialities since their decisions are based on what they need. Individuals
need self-actualisation, and they choose self-actualisation because they need to.
Self-actualisation shifts the meaning of need because its aim is unspecifiable.
These needs include the full use and exploitation of talents, capacities and potential-
ities. Self-actualisers submit to social regulation without losing their integrity or
personal independence, although they are constantly evaluating other possibilities.
Maslow (1973: 180).
136
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

Maslow claims that individuals who have had their lower-level needs satisfied
throughout their life will inevitably develop their higher potentialities. Consequently,
individuals raised in relative luxury should become more mature and creative and
individuals raised in disadvantageous conditions will become inferior products.
The empirical evidence does not support this contention. Furthermore, it is simply
untrue that people must attend to the lower needs before the higher ones. For
example, individuals are not compelled to attend to safety needs before pursuing
military glory.
Where motivational theories employ the notion of motive-force as the basis for a
mechanistic model, problems of circularity, intentionality and purposiveness make it
unlikely that they can explain anything at all. Because he uses self-actualisation as
an escape route which opens a window to freedom and responsibility, Maslow
believes he escapes the charge of determinism. In so doing, he equivocates on
motive-as-cause and motive-as-reason.
It is one thing to say that people have reasons to pursue specific goals and quite
another to say that they pursue goals because of an inner force. Motive-as-reason
implies choice and responsibility; motive-as-cause does not. Motive-as-reason refers
to that which justifies the choice of an intention to act and therefore narrows the
possible choices open to individuals. People also form the intention of acting
without there being any motive (reason) to warrant the choice since choice is free.
In Maslow’s motivational psychology, the use of motive-as-cause implies that people
are forced to do what they do. This is simply not true. People can choose to beg, or
they can choose to brag. The writings of motivational psychologists are often unclear
on this point, and one wonders whether they can tell the difference between motive-
as-cause and motive-as-reason.
The religious nature of Maslow’s model is explicitly stated in his theory of meta-
motivation, which is presented in the form of 28 ‘testable’ propositions.¹⁷ For
example, Proposition I: ‘Self-actualising individuals […] by definition, already suit-
ably gratified in their basic needs, are now motivated in other higher ways, to be
called “metamotivations”.’ Individuals are self-actualising because they are meta-
motivated; they are meta-motivated because they are self-actualising. The remaining
27 propositions follow from this circularity. Proposition II has a decidedly Calvinist
tone: ‘All such people are devoted to some task, call, vocation, beloved work
(‘outside themselves’).’ Proposition VI states: ‘Such vocation-loving individuals
tend to identify (introject, incorporate) with their “work” and to make it into a
defining characteristic of the self.’ Rarely was Calvin’s psycho-religious doctrine
more explicitly stated. Maslow claimed that his intrinsic (Calvinist) values are
‘instinctoid’ in nature and the illnesses resulting from deprivation of intrinsic values
(meta-needs) are called meta-pathologies. If readers feel excluded from Maslow’s
club of self-actualisers, they should remember that they are in good company;
Maslow (1967).
Third Force Psychology
137

most of humankind fails to meta-choose meta-needs and suffers from meta-pathol-
ogies, or meta-twaddle.
Why, then, is Maslow’s model so popular with managers and their teachers? One
explanation is that in management circles Maslow has been used as a convenient
justification for emphasising social relationships and communication skills, rather
than attending to employees’ demands for more control over their jobs. Indeed,
according to Maslow, if social needs are not satisfied (and the possibility that they
cannot be satisfied in work relationships is not to be ignored) there is no point in
encouraging employees to pursue personal power or self-esteem, let alone self-actu-
alisation. Similarly, defining management problems in terms of ‘poor communica-
tion,’ as they frequently are, sidelines the substantive content of the communica-
tions.
Most management textbooks emphasise the importance of social needs. It is
hard to quarrel with writers who profess care and concern for the social well-being
of working people. Further, it is unwise in management circles to suggest that a
sleight of hand is at work and that Maslow’s theory has been used as an effective
ploy to allow managers to direct resources to training in interpersonal skills and
personality assessment rather than actively engage in job enrichment.
The best support for Maslow’s theory comes from studies which show that if
managers decrease hierarchical control, they obtain self-actualising behaviour. As
Maslow’s theory was derived from observations of behaviour in social organisation,
studies which appear to support Maslow’s theory involve circularity of reasoning. His
studies are based on the observation of people in social organisations and the ways
in which they build social structures to provide for their needs. As hierarchical status
predicts satisfaction of needs, studies which confirm Maslow’s theory by correlating
satisfaction of needs with social status are engaged in the circular process of demon-
strating that a theory formulated on social observation is supported by observation
of the forms of social organisation. Maslow implies that he had discovered a hier-
archy of motive-forces which interacts with the social situation in which people
find themselves. Yet his hierarchy of needs, which purports to be based in biological
structures, is derived solely from a social context; the needs themselves are only
known from what other people are seen to do, so the explanation is circular.
Circularity is a feature of all motivational theories in which psychological needs
are treated as unseen mechanical forces that cause human behaviour. Indeed, if
motives are inferred from actions, they cannot, on the pain of circularity, be used
as explanations for these actions. Further, when psychologists treat motives as
reasons, they end up with as many motives as there are reasons. To have a motive
for every action raises an odd question. If we can describe specific actions, and
then add an inferred motive, we are faced with the problem of circularity of explana-
tion. Why, then, employ the motive construct at all?
Motivation remains a popular, if confused, topic in managerial psychology. Its
popularity is the product, in part, of the never-ending human quest to discover
the keys to the inner kingdom of the psyche. Its confusion derives from the ambiguity
138
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

of the term and the way it can be used to describe mechanical or purposive behav-
iour. Maslow shifts from one meaning to the other as it suits him.
As Maslow wanted to present himself to the psychological community as a ‘third-
force’, he had to abandon, or pretend to reject, psychological determinism. It is
unsurprising, therefore, that he flirted with existentialism, or that peculiar American
version of existentialism which turns a blind eye to the tragic side of human exis-
tence.
Although it was a popular philosophy in the middle of the twentieth century,
existentialism is rarely taught to students of psychology. As existentialists argue
that human existence cannot be studied scientifically, psychologists have been
wary of allowing existentialism into curricula. Be that as it may, existential philoso-
phers and psychologists have interesting things to say about human freedom and
personal responsibility. By today’s standards, their language is politically incorrect,
and they are for this reason worthy of close study.
In Existentialism and Humanism, Sartre criticises people who reject their
personal freedom and present themselves as victims of their biological and social
conditioning. Sartre calls this denial of freedom ‘bad faith’ of which there are two
representatives. Those who reject their freedom with deterministic excuses he calls
cowards (les lâches); those who deny their own freedom and that of others he
calls bastards (les salauds). Those psychologists who assume their own freedom
while denying it to others qualify as hypocrites or logically defective.
Sartre’s existentialism is expressed in terms that are today uncongenial to polit-
ically correct postmodernists. In the present culture of hurt feelings and compulsive
complaint it is unsurprising to find perpetually aggrieved moralists quick to wield
metaphorical machetes against existential individuals who treat others as free
human beings and hold them responsible for their actions, including criminal behav-
iour and manifestations of so-called mental illnesses.
Existentialism was never as popular in the US as it was in Continental Europe
during and after the Second World War. Sartre’s message was pronounced gloomy
and insufficiently optimistic for Americans. Maslow claimed that existentialism is
vague, tragic, too difficult to understand and unscientific. Such criticism betrays
Maslow’s ignorance of existentialism which rejects science as the method by
which psychologists understand human existence. Frankl is no better, in fact far
worse than Maslow in his sheer insensitivity to human existence. Presenting himself
as an existentialist, Frankl boasted of having authorised and performed lobotomies
on people against their will, justifying his torture on the grounds that what matters is
the ‘spirit’ with which the torture is administered.¹⁸
Maslow wrote in an oddly ill-informed way about European existentialists who
are too difficult to understand from a scientific point of view. He seems to be
unaware that existentialists replace the scientific with a phenomenological method
Frankl (1969: 56).
Third Force Psychology
139

which sets itself against the ‘natural attitude’ of scientific mechanical models.
Maslow thereby fails to appreciate the difference between scientific psychology
and existential phenomenology. However, what follows is, from a scholarly point
of view, simply embarrassing. After applauding existentialists for their studies of
authentic living, he strips existentialism of its tragic element. Existentialism, he
explains, helps to throw inauthenticity (living by illusions) into a clear light which
reveals it as sickness. However, he does not think that Americans, endowed with
the power of positive thinking, need take too seriously the pessimism of the Euro-
pean existentialists.
I don’t think we need to take too seriously the European existentialists’ exclusive harping on
dread, on anguish, on despair and the like, for which their only remedy seems to be to keep
a stiff upper lip […] Sartre and others speak of the ‘self as project’, which is wholly created
by the continued (and arbitrary) choices of the person himself, almost as if he could make
himself into anything he decided to be. Of course, in so extreme a form, this is almost certainly
an overstatement, which is directly contradicted by the facts of genetics and of constitutional
psychology. As a matter of fact, it is just plain silly.¹⁹
Maslow’s position was far removed from European existentialism because his notion
of freedom was severely compromised by motive forces. Furthermore, the claim that
Sartre and other existentialists believe that individuals can turn themselves into
anything they want to be is unwarranted. It is ‘just plain silly’ to summarise Euro-
pean existentialism in this way, ignoring everything that Sartre had to say about indi-
viduals’ facticity which limits their freedom to act in particular ways, even though it
does not remove their capacity to choose. Furthermore, Maslow’s assertion that
genetics and constitutional psychology somehow remove an individual’s capacity
to choose, and thereby inhibit one’s recognition of possibilities in their lives, is
misleading or mendacious, or both.
Maslow prefers the yea-saying ‘existentialists’ since the naysayers are too gloomy
and ‘just don’t experience joy’. If existentialism means anything, it means that while
they recognise human finitude as limited by birth, death, time, space and freedom,
yea-saying existentialists view the problem of existence as the problem of the possi-
bility of existence. Existence is thus structured by its possibilities. Maslow, however,
is concerned with actualities and potentialities, but is oblivious that since poten-
tiality signifies pre-determination of the actual, the potential excludes the possible.
Indeed, while it is true that not all potentialities will be realised, given that potential
means ‘is destined to occur’, potentiality makes no room for possibility. In the last
analysis, because he failed to embrace the modal concept of possibility Maslow
was, despite his concessions to human freedom, a (confused) determinist in disguise.
He wrote as if individuals are free to choose their actions but his ‘choices’ are
responses to biological needs. Compounding the confusion and demonstrating
Maslow (1968: 9–17).
140
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

once again his inability to grasp the meaning of basic psychological concepts, he
even insisted that if individuals do not choose to push themselves toward self-actu-
alisation, mental illness will overtake them.
The Myth of Mental Illness
Unlike Maslow, Szasz maintains that personal conduct is always rule-following,
purposive and meaningful. Accordingly, interpersonal relations are analysed as if
they are games where the behaviour of players is governed by explicit and tacit
game rules. In contrast to heteronomous games, autonomous ones can be played
only by relatively mature individuals who have learned that since games are socially
constructed, they can be deconstructed. This applies especially to the game of
psychiatry, which he defines as the ‘science of lies’.²⁰
Szasz has been associated with the antipsychiatry movement, created in the
1960s by Cooper and Laing who sought to replace conventional psychiatry with
their own brand. Szasz criticised antipsychiatrists as egregious self-promoters who
use their psychiatric authority to coerce their clients. Antipsychiatry is thus still a
form of psychiatry. Szasz’s therefore rejects psychiatry and antipsychiatry with
equal vigour. Antipsychiatry is, for him, quackery squared.²¹
Although it is widely accepted by the general population that mental illness is a
major topic of concern, there is little agreement among psychologists about the facts
of mental illness. Managers are routinely reminded by government officials of their
duty of care and responsibility for those working people ‘suffering from mental
illnesses’. Government websites inform citizens that one in four people in the devel-
oped countries suffer from a mental illness each year. Yet, mental illness remains a
contested issue since mental health professionals cannot validly distinguish the
mentally ill from the mentally healthy. For example, a recent attempt by the Amer-
ican Psychiatric Association (APA) to define mental illness was described by Allen
Frances, architect of the psychiatric bible known as the Diagnostic and Statistical
Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM), as bullshit.²²
Psychiatrists working on DSM-5 conceded that the clinically significant DSM
criteria for mental disorders generally are tautological and that ‘boundaries between
normal and pathological are contentious.’²³ Piling farce upon farce, a recent review
concluded that no biological sign has ever been discovered for any mental disorder.²⁴
The DSM-5 Task Force accepted this sober conclusion and admitted that psychiatrists
do not have a biological marker or genetic test that can validly be used for diagnostic
Szasz (2008).
Szasz (2009).
Cohen (2016).
Kirk et al. (2015: 66).
Burstow (2015).
The Myth of Mental Illness
141

purposes.²⁵ The Chairman of the DSM-5 Task Force, David Kupfer, stated that
psychiatrists’ hope to identify mental disorders using biological and genetic markers
remains disappointingly distant. ‘We’ve been telling patients for several decades that
we are waiting for biomarkers. We’re still waiting.’²⁶
Undaunted, the APA continues to assert that DSM is a medical classification of
disorders. According to Kirk et al. the assertion that irrational and banal human
behaviours are medical illnesses is a momentous scientific conceit which reflects
the DSM’s political success in medicalising everyday life. It is a conceit since it states
as fact that which has not been validated scientifically, namely that the behaviours
defined as symptoms of mental illnesses are caused by biological dysfunction. ‘The
justification that “the DSM at least provides a common vocabulary” ignores (or
exploits) the power of language to conquer rhetorically what cannot be validated
empirically’.²⁷
Szasz was even more emphatic, referring to DSM as a catalogue of misbehaviours
which are erroneously called mental disorders. ‘Modern psychiatry – with its Diag-
nostic and Statistical Manuals of non-existing diseases and their coercive cures –
is a monument to quackery on a scale undreamed of in the annals of medicine.’²⁸
Psychiatry has a long history of quackery. In the 1850s, a ‘mental illness’ – drap-
etomania – was invented to classify and punish slaves who ran away from their
masters. In the 1930s, masturbation was called ‘masturbatory insanity’, while
today internet gaming is a mental disorder. When the APA proposed ‘rapism’ as a
new mental illness, feminists opposed it since rapists might be treated more sympa-
thetically. Similarly, the APA abandoned the label ‘masochism’ when applied to
women who stay in abusive relationships.²⁹ Despite the obvious political nature of
these medical ‘diagnoses’, psychiatrists, psychologists and government bureaucrats
continue to publicise the myth that ‘mental illnesses are just like other illnesses.’
Szasz declared war on orthodox psychiatry in 1961 with The Myth of Mental
Illness which challenged the theory, language and practice of psychiatry and clinical
psychology. This subversive book, which nearly lost him his chair in psychiatry,
contains a disarmingly simple thesis.
As illness affects only the body (according to books of pathology), and as the
‘mind’ is not a bodily organ (either because it does not exist or it is non-material),
it follows logically that the ‘mind’ cannot be ill, except in a metaphorical sense.
Mental illness, therefore, is metaphorical illness (minds can be sick only in the
sense that jokes can be sick.). To those people who believe that the mind is really
the brain, it follows that mental illnesses are (undiagnosed) brain illnesses which
should be treated by neurologists, not psychiatrists. Furthermore, since brain
Whitaker & Cosgrove (2015).
Kupfer (2013).
Kirk et al. (2015: 65); Kirk & Kutchins (1992).
Szasz (2008: 18–19).
Szasz (1987: 79–80).
142
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

illnesses are diagnosed by medical signs (which are objective), and no mental illness
has ever been diagnosed by medical signs, mental illnesses are not legitimate
illnesses. Further, mental illnesses are diagnosed by symptoms (which are subjec-
tive); they are thus based on communications (often complaints) which frequently
refer to moral dilemmas. Yet, moral dilemmas are routinely re-defined by psychia-
trists as medical conditions, and most people accept and promote this re-definition.
Hence, mental illness is a social fact but not an empirical fact. It is therefore reason-
able to conclude that mental illness is a myth.
Brain illnesses are discovered; mental illnesses are invented. If there are no
mental illnesses, there can be no treatment or cure for them. Furthermore, the intro-
duction of psychiatric issues into the criminal law, notably the insanity plea and
verdict and diagnoses of mental incompetence to stand trial, corrupt the law and
victimise the persons on whose behalf they are employed. All considered, since
there is no medical, moral or legal justification for involuntary psychiatric interven-
tions they are, for Szasz, crimes against humanity.³⁰
When Szasz asserts that mental illness is a myth, he is not saying that personal
unhappiness and socially deviant behaviour do not exist. Rather, he is saying that
they are incorrectly categorised as illnesses. Consequently, ‘mental illness’ has
become a semantic strategy for medicalising economic, moral, personal, political
and social problems. Szasz has also been criticised on the grounds that a mentally
ill person is clearly ‘suffering’ from some disability and so the concept of mental
illness can be promoted because of that suffering. Szasz disagrees, arguing that
most people seen by psychiatrists do not suffer; they make others suffer. Further-
more, the only way to know that such people suffer is when they say so.
In The Meaning of Mind, Szasz argues that the mind is also a myth. ‘Brain’ is a
concrete noun; ‘mind’ is an abstract noun. Abstract nouns do not refer to entities and
should not be treated as if they do. The abstract noun ‘mind’ is a product of the verb
‘to mind’, which means to attend and adjust to one’s environment. Treated as a noun,
‘mind’ refers to the linguistic abilities that people require to talk with others and with
themselves about minding shops or steps. In this sense, ‘mind’ is the ability to talk
with oneself. Accordingly, mind(edness) is a moral and psychological concept and
not a thing to be studied by biologists, neuroscientists or psychiatrists. It is psycho-
logical because it is concerned with people talking with others and especially with
themselves about personal issues; it is moral because issues of right and wrong,
good and evil, are only expressible through a language which presupposes commu-
nity. One cannot be evil alone.
The problem people face, according to Szasz, is deciding when to attribute
‘mentality’ to individuals, treat their behaviour as an intentional act (say, winking),
and hold them responsible for it and when to attribute ‘materiality’ to them, treat
their behaviour as a manifestation of physical processes in their bodies (say,
Szasz (2010: 267–268).
The Myth of Mental Illness
143

blinking), and hold them not responsible for it. Speakers face the same dilemma:
when should they treat themselves as responsible agents, and when as non-respon-
sible victims (of mental illnesses or some other cause)? It is a delusion to hold that
this choice can be avoided.
The word ‘responsible’ comes from the Latin respondere, which means to
respond or answer. Responsibility is, therefore, not something people possess; it is
something they are said to be. Personal responsibility is an attribute of persons,
even though ‘mind’ is often used in lieu of ‘person’. The consequence of this misuse
of words is to attribute responsibility or its absence to ‘mind’.
In ethics and law, people are regarded as moral agents if they are answerable for
their conduct. Being responsible is, therefore, a type of ‘minding’ and assumes that
people can communicate to others and to themselves.When they are in a moral rela-
tionship with others, people talk of responsibility; when they are in a relationship
with themselves, they talk of conscience. Szasz thus sees conscience as a particular
kind of self-conversation, the person’s inner dialogue concerning the goodness or
badness of its own conduct. Since talking to others and to oneself is a voluntary
act, responsibility can be seen as the paradigmatic self-conversation.
If there is no such thing as a mind, it follows that there can be no illnesses of the
mind. If there is no mental illness, there is no mental health either. Although mental
health professionals and government publications criticise and hector people for
their confusion about the ‘facts’ of mental illness, Szasz argues that there are no
facts about mental illness except that it is a myth based on the myth of the mind.
Mindedness is thus not the substratum of a condition waiting to develop but an
achievement. The myth of mental illness allows people to avoid facing their prob-
lems, believing that mental health ensures the making of right choices in the conduct
of life. But the logic goes the other way: it is the making of wise choices in life that
people regard, retrospectively, as evidence of good mental health.
144
Chapter 7: The Misuse of Psychology

Chapter 8:
Machiavellian Ingenuity or Moral Intelligence?
Although Machiavelli wrote for politicians and princes in the sixteenth century, his
maxims have been applied liberally to the fields of psychology and management.¹
This application is possible because Machiavelli’s stark realism acts as an antidote
to authors who apply Christian principles to management under the name of
moral intelligence.
Shakespeare called him the ‘murderous Machiavel’ and his name is still associ-
ated with murder, machismo and mendacity in political affairs. He has been charac-
terised for posterity as a malicious, power-hungry cynic who encouraged tyrants to
murder and mayhem. A prince, as Machiavelli portrays him, is a pragmatist with
respect to means but an idealist with respect to ends. Machiavelli’s ideal is the
power and glory of the State, and his philosophy is one of power rather than of
authority. When authority is mentioned, it is merely regarded as a property of the
prince and his office.
Despite his infamous reputation, Machiavelli is not without defenders.² Russell
stated that Machiavelli wrote honestly about political dishonesty and so was
bound to offend those who engage in it. Accordingly, much of the negativity that
attaches to Machiavelli’s name stems from the indignation of hypocrites who hate
the frank discussion of evil doing. Consequently, his name is associated with shrewd,
expedient, evasive, deceitful and cunning behaviour, or in Burckhardt’s less moral-
istic terms, with ingenuity.
Entrepreneurship scholars who argue that the emergence of radical ideas
requires elements of the ‘dark triad’ implicitly endorse Burckhardt’s view of Machia-
vellianism as ingenuity. As it is an intentional concept, ingenuity involves goal-
directed action and has, therefore, normative implications. Intelligence, by contrast,
is generally characterised as a disposition which, unlike action and intention, lacks
normative force. That is, insofar as ‘normative’ means adopting an authoritative stan-
dard by which actions can be judged, intelligence (as a series of abilities) lacks a
normative dimension. Of course, intelligence takes on an apparent normative prop-
erty when it is subjected to moral judgement, an appearance which has led to the
development of the notion of moral intelligence.
In recent years, several scholars have applied the notion of moral intelligence to
management. This chapter relies on Moral Intelligence by Lennick and Kiel, a book
that reveals all too clearly its authors’ Christian assumptions about human behaviour
and ideals. Specifically, Lennick and Kiel argue that there is a kind of moral compass
Buskirk (1975); Butterey & Richter (2003); Demarck (2002); Flanagan (1972); Galie & Bopst (2006);
Grace & Jackson (2018); Griffin (1991); Jay (1968); McAlpine (1997); Scott (2018); Swain (2002); Tholen
(2016).
Russell (1946: 491); Skinner (2000); Viroli (1998; 2013); White (2004); Zuckert (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-010

at the heart of business success. They define moral intelligence as the mental
capacity to determine how universal moral principles should be applied to individ-
uals’ values, goals and actions. In other words, moral intelligence for these authors
is the ability to differentiate right from wrong as defined by universal principles,
conceived of as beliefs about human conduct common to all cultures, religions,
ethnicity and both sexes. As will be argued, such universalism is severely compro-
mised by Lennick and Kiel’s adherence to Christian ideals.
Lennick and Kiel assert that the best managers are neither charismatic nor heroic
types. Rather, the best managers are ‘quiet leaders’ who accomplish great things
modestly, all sharing a common trait: humility. That is, the best managers ‘are,
quite simply, good people who consistently tap into their inborn disposition to be
moral […] They believe in honesty, […] show compassion for their fellow humans
and know how to forgive others’.³ The authors go so far as asserting that there is
a ‘powerful correlation’ (which remains undisclosed in their book) between strong
moral principles and business success, which may be true, and that the moral prin-
ciples which ‘guarantee’ success are integrity, responsibility, compassion and forgive-
ness, which is not true. Indeed, the claim that integrity, compassion and forgiveness
guarantee business success is patently false. Further, Lennick and Kiel do not clarify
whether executives need to believe and act upon the moral principles they identify
or, in Machiavellian fashion, merely give the appearance to others that they believe
them when in fact they do not. In either case and since Machiavelli recommends
deceit when it is required, if Lennick and Kiel are right, Machiavellians have low
moral intelligence. Equally patent is that Lennick and Kiel’s position amounts to
confounding ability and value judgements.
This chapter pursues five related arguments. First, agreement with and commit-
ment to a moral perspective is not indicative of intelligence (moral or otherwise).
Second, Machiavellian ingenuity cannot be reduced to a disposition without contra-
diction. Third, there is no logical or empirical justification for deeming moral intelli-
gence superior to Machiavellian ingenuity in management. Fourth, the moral intelli-
gence
movement
represents
the
tender-minded
alternative
to
tough-minded
Machiavellian management. Fifth, Machiavelli’s tough-minded philosophy accounts
for the tender-minded qualities of human relationships while the moral intelligence
movement dismisses Machiavellian ingenuity as unworthy of respect. Before the case
for these arguments can be made, a contextual exposition of Machiavelli’s recom-
mendations for rulers is necessary.
Lennick & Kiel (2005: 19–20).
146
Chapter 8: Machiavellian Ingenuity or Moral Intelligence?

Princes and Power
Machiavelli’s reputation as the devil incarnate derives largely from his little book The
Prince which was published five years after his death in 1527. Banned by the Catholic
Church in 1557, it remained on the Papal Index of Forbidden Books until 1890. His
more scholarly book, The Discourses, contains a theory of the conditions for repub-
lican rule based on the Roman model. Machiavelli agreed with Aristotle that the
three forms of government, monarchy, aristocracy and democracy, have irresistible
tendencies to tyranny, oligarchy and anarchy, respectively. Prudent legislators, he
thinks, choose one that shares in them all. The best form of government, therefore,
is one that combines all three forms and so minimises the chances that rulers will
become demagogues in one form or another. However, in times of crisis republics
need a prince who aggressively confronts and challenges ‘necessity’ and ‘fortune’.
This necessity is the main theme of The Prince which is a practical manual for
those individuals who want to gain and retain power.
As all discussions of society involve assumptions about human nature, it is
necessary to appreciate Machiavelli’s attitude to human beings. He does not follow
Plato and Aristotle in referring to man as Homo sapiens: man is not primarily a
knower or truth-seeker. Rather, man is Homo homini lupus (man is a wolf to man).
Human beings are ungrateful, fickle, liars and deceivers who support others when
they are successful and turn against them when danger beckons. They have less hesi-
tation in injuring people who make themselves loved than those who makes them-
selves feared, because love is usually rejected for personal profit whereas fear is
held by a dread of punishment. Consequently, human beings must be protected
from themselves. But this is impossible in the ideal society of Plato’s philosopher-
kings or Aristotle’s noble men. Rather, the ideal society is one in which people are
safe and prosperous, governed by a state that is feared internally and externally.
Such a state is embodied by either a strong prince (The Prince) or a strong republic
(The Discourses).
Before Machiavelli, the conventional view of rulers was that they had to be
moderate, wise and just. Plato thought that the philosophers seeking truth should
be the rulers. Aristotle held that virtues are middle paths between opposing vices.
Cicero insisted that princes had to be trustworthy, generous and unpretentiousness,
and that force and fraud were unworthy of people. Seneca argued that princes should
cultivate clemency. To these humanistic virtues, Christians added compassion, love
and forgiveness and taught that one’s fate in heaven depends exclusively on one’s
intentions, not on their practical consequences.
Machiavelli has no patience with his predecessors’ views, which he finds senti-
mental but ill-founded. He combines a brutally realistic view of human nature with a
critical political view of Christianity which, on his reading, has glorified weak men
and set up as the greatest good humility and contempt for the material world. In
The Discourses, Machiavelli insists that Christianity has placed no value in strength
of body or in any of the pagan virtues and by imposing an other-worldly image of
Princes and Power
147

human excellence, it has not merely failed to promote civil glory but has helped to
bring about the decline and fall of great nations. He is one of the first writers to
attribute the fall of the Roman Empire to Constantine’s adoption, in 313, of Christi-
anity as the State religion. Christian virtues are, for Machiavelli, inconsistent with
the pagan virtues that secured for Rome its pre-eminent position in world affairs.
He thinks that the price the Romans paid for the traditional interpretations of Chris-
tianity, based on humility, compassion and brotherly love, was too great since it
made Rome weak. If political rulers insist on making it their business to be good
among so many who are not, they will not only fail to achieve great things but
will surely be destroyed. Nonetheless, Machiavelli is not opposed to religion as
such. Rather, he exhorts his compatriots to interpret Christianity in a more muscular
fashion.
Machiavelli never doubted that humans are by nature more prone to evil than to
good. They are ambitious, suspicious and unable to gauge the limits of their own
fortune. Greed blinds them to danger; they constantly desire what they cannot obtain
and are discontented with what they have obtained. In The Prince, Machiavelli insists
that it is prudent to assume the worst of people and act upon that assumption, even
in the face of apparent evidence to the contrary. Consequently, Machiavelli has been
vilified as an anti-Christian writer and a preacher of evil.
Fortuna and Virtù
Like the pagans, Machiavelli believes that the most important concept in political life
is power. According to the classical heritage that Machiavelli admired, power is a
combination of virtù (personal power) and fortuna (spiritual, natural and social
power). Fortuna derives from the Latin root ferre (to bring). The Greek equivalent is
tyche and is derived from a root meaning ‘to succeed’ or ‘to achieve’. The meaning
in both cases is not ‘chance’ or events which seem to occur randomly. Rather, the
connotation is that of unintended consequences which are brought about by a
power which works in inscrutable ways. Theologically, fortuna concerns deities
and divine will; naturalistically, it is described by Machiavelli anthropomorphically
as a destructive river which, when angry, floods the plain; socially, we might call it
social power: the production of unintended effects.
Fortuna, being unpredictable and incomprehensible sounds, for Machiavelli, like
a woman. Fortuna, then, is she who brings forth. As a goddess she is attracted to the
vir: true manliness and courage. Christianity rejected the idea of a goddess and made
fortune a blind power: fate. With the recovery of the classical values in the Renais-
sance, however, fortune was linked to social power and contrasted with fate
(which is beyond human control). When uncertainty reigns, virile individuals seize
the day.
There is a fundamental ambiguity in Machiavelli’s fortuna because he combines
naturalism with mythology. Specifically, Machiavelli employs fortuna to designate
148
Chapter 8: Machiavellian Ingenuity or Moral Intelligence?

the unexpected and unintended consequences of social power, but he also applies it
to mythical forces which superintend these consequences. It is possible, however, to
strip Machiavelli’s fortuna of its mythical elements and to view it as a rational refer-
ence to large-scale social causes and their unintended consequences. As argued in
Chapter 3, the social sciences should seek explanations for unintended effects.
Indeed, as far as intended effects are concerned, how to produce them is already
known and therefore does not call for scientific discovery. Unfortunately, Machia-
velli’s analysis of fortuna is weakened considerably by his metaphorical and semi-
mythical language. Machiavelli’s reluctance to provide definitions or theories is
also visible in his use of virtù of which he offers no coherent doctrine. The word
derives form vir which means manliness and is associated with strength of will or
personal power which is applicable to both males and females.
Today, the use of ‘manliness’ is problematic because sex and gender are
routinely conflated. Sex is reflected in the number of females in the workforce
which has risen significantly in the past fifty years. Gender is reflected in the degree
to which feminine behaviour and values have influenced workplace behaviour. By
ignoring the distinction between sex and gender, people have naively assumed
that feminine behaviour and values are necessarily embraced by females. Yet
everyone knows of females who are as masculine as any of their male counterparts,
and males have shown themselves capable of adopting feminine qualities when it
suits them. There is no inconsistency, then, in talking of masculine and feminine
males, masculine and feminine females. Hence, when people, notably feminists,
criticise Machiavelli for promoting an ethic exclusively for males, they miss Machia-
velli’s point: manliness refers to gender, not to sex. He did not confuse sex and
gender and considered the former a biological contingency and the latter adopted
behaviour. Gender equality is, therefore, a delusion: a rather bad joke. If Machiavelli
is right, effeminate males and females will find the going tough in organisations
where positions of power are few and candidates many. Virtù is what matters: femi-
nine females and feminine males will find it difficult to survive and thrive among
their masculine colleagues.
Lions and Foxes
Machiavelli explains that princes who acquire new principalities through their own
skill, rather than chance, retain them with relative ease. The challenges they face are
owed mainly to the difficulty in introducing and maintaining a new order in the face
of determined opposition from those who have done well under the old regime.
Besides, those who do well under the new regime are disinclined to offer full-
blooded defence because they fear adversaries who have the law on their side.
New princes, therefore, find themselves in a precarious position and face the
dilemma of acting alone or seeking the help of others. Machiavelli is convinced
that if a new prince depends on others and seeks help from them, he will surely
Lions and Foxes
149

fail. If, however, he relies on his own skill and can use force, then he will rarely be in
harm’s way. This is the reason why unarmed prophets come to grief.
A prince’s behaviour must be tempered by humanity and prudence so that over-
confidence does not result in being rash or paranoid. From this arises the question:
whether it is better to be loved than feared. Having negotiated with and studied
Cesare Borgia and Caterina Sforza, among others, Machiavelli is in no doubt that
it is safer for princes to be feared than loved, if they cannot be both. However, a
prince must make himself feared in such a way that, if he is not loved, at least he
avoids being hated. Men will walk across hot coals to settle accounts with people
they hate, and princes must therefore ensure that they, and their inner circle, are
not hated. Although princes are generally praised for keeping their promises, none-
theless, experience shows that the successful ones promise rarely and know how to
control people with trickery.
Machiavelli believes that human beings are sophisticated animals with all the
passions and desires that render rational living difficult. To that end, princes need
to know how to use the power and nature of animals to their advantage, especially
the qualities of the lion and the fox. Princes must emulate both the fox and the lion,
because lions cannot defy snares, while foxes cannot defy packs of wolves. Princes
must therefore be foxes to spot the snares and lions to overwhelm the wolves.
Those who rely on the lion alone are not perceptive. Rulers cannot keep their
word when to do so works against them and when the reasons that made them
promise are annulled. Never has a shrewd prince lacked good reasons to make
their promise-breaking appear honourable. Those who know best how to play the
fox come out best, but they must understand well how to become a great simulator
and dissimulator.
Ideally, princes should be compassionate, faithful to their word, kind and guile-
less. However, insists Machiavelli, their disposition should be such that, if they need
to be the opposite, they know how to adapt. Typically, Machiavelli adds that
although princes need not have all these admirable qualities, it is necessary for
them to appear to have them. Indeed, he believes that it does princes harm to
possess these good qualities and always observe them. Above all else, a prince
must be prepared to act contrary to truth, charity and religion when necessity
commands.
Burckhardt insists that readers take the Renaissance’s political context into
account when pondering Machiavelli’s writings. Specifically, he notes that Machia-
velli wrote in an age that encouraged individuality in men and women of vir.
These people needed to mobilise their intellectual resources, and especially their
ingenuity, to maximise their personal power in a life that was usually brutal and
brief. Burckhardt gives a superb example of Renaissance ingenuity and its brutality.⁴
The citizens of Siena were liberated from foreign attack by a military officer of
Burckhardt (1990: 31).
150
Chapter 8: Machiavellian Ingenuity or Moral Intelligence?

considerable bravery and intelligence. After lengthy deliberation, the citizens
concluded that no reward in their power was great enough for their saviour, except
to revere him as their city’s patron saint. However, to worship their saviour thus, he
had to be dead. So, they killed him and worshipped him as a saint.
If Burckhardt is correct and ingenuity is the key element in Machiavellian poli-
cies and practices, it is difficult to see how ‘Machiavellianism’ can be reduced to a
personality trait. Yet, a cursory inspection of the literature on Machiavellianism
shows that it is this aspect of the Florentine’s work that has captured the imagination
of psychologists and management writers. Furthermore, the problem of reducing
ingenuity to a personality trait is compounded by the problematic use of the notion
of ‘intelligence’ to describe adherence to specific moral values.
From Cognitive to Multiple Intelligences
In recent years, management scholars have shown interest in multiple intelligences,
a topic familiar to researchers in the fields of education and child psychology.⁵ For
example, Gardner offers a dispositional analysis of seven intelligences, including
interpersonal and intrapersonal forms. ‘An intelligence is the ability to solve prob-
lems, or create products, that are valued within one or more cultural settings’⁶ (italics
added). This extension of cognitive intelligence to interpersonal issues (including the
moral evaluation of their solution) conflates dispositions and intentions and renders
the notion of moral intelligence unintelligible. Unlike cognitive intelligence, which is
based on objective criteria of problem-solving ability, moral intelligence includes the
additional dimension of social evaluation. For example, Borba insists that moral
intelligence is the capacity to understand right from wrong, and to act in an honour-
able way. Adding to the confusion, it is widely assumed by psychologists that moral
intelligence can be measured as a personality trait with the following components:
empathy, conscience, self-control, respect, kindness, tolerance and fairness. These
value-laden traits, which are measured in countless personality inventories, can
scarcely be said to be based on the objective criteria of problem-solving.
Cognitive intelligence represents an ability, or series of abilities. Further, it is
associated with versatility and adaptability.⁷ Cognitive intelligence can be defined
and measured by tests which were intended to be quick measures of problem-solving
ability. The same cannot be said for moral intelligence which is not an ability but
agreement with specific values.
The concept of intelligence has had a controversial history in psychology. The
construction of the first IQ tests relied on the use of statistical techniques of correla-
Bradshaw (2009); Lennick & Kiel (2005).
Gardner (1983: xiv).
Spillane & Martin (2005).
From Cognitive to Multiple Intelligences
151

tion where different problems are selected for their power to assess a similar ability
and graduate them according to degree of difficulty. This resulted in the development
of separate tests, such as vocabulary, comprehension, numeracy, mechanical
reasoning, their scores added, and the total converted by standardising them against
age norms. Psychologists then discovered that scores on the separate scales always
correlated positively with one another. Although the correlations were not high, they
suggested that a general factor of cognitive intelligence existed. Intrigued by this
finding, Spearman used factor analysis for extracting what was common to these
separate tests. His analysis revealed a large common factor which he named g for
general intelligence and a smaller specific factor for each separate test. Spearman,
thereafter, defended a two-factor theory of intelligence, based on general intelligence
and a task-specific element (e.g., verbal intelligence).
However, when researchers, notably Thurstone, used a different form of factor
analysis they found five ‘primary mental abilities’ that represented cognitive ability.
In opposition to the English view, American psychologists argued vigorously for a
multi-factor definition of intelligence. They agreed, however, with the English view
that intelligence is based on abilities.
The conventional view that intelligence is a measure of cognitive abilities was
challenged by Gardner who, as noted, argued for seven separate ‘intelligences’,
including interpersonal and intrapersonal intelligences. This set has been expanded
to embrace ‘naturalistic’ and ‘existential’ intelligences. More generally, by the 1990s,
it was frequently argued that intelligence tests are incomplete measures of the ‘total
personality’ because they ignore emotional and moral skills. It was widely believed,
without empirical evidence, that Emotional Intelligence (EQ) is twice as important as
IQ. However, a critical evaluation of such claims resulted in researchers concluding
that EQ is little else than a set of familiar personality and motivational traits which
lacks theoretical sophistication and empirical support.⁸
Once the idea of multiple intelligences is accepted there is no limit to the number
of specific types that can be defined: cognitive, emotional, social, political, organisa-
tional, leadership, business, money-making, criminal, musical, spiritual and moral.
In this sense, the fashion in management circles of speaking of one’s moral asser-
tions and value judgements as evidence for ‘intelligence’ is another attempt by
psychologists and managerialists to enlarge the personality perspective by asserting
that moral intelligence is a personality trait. That this strategy has stimulated
psychologists and managerialists is illustrated and supported by moral competency
tests which purport to measure one’s ‘hard-wired moral compass’.
Ciarrochi, Forgas & Mayer (2001); Hedlund & Steinberg (2000); Olson (2006).
152
Chapter 8: Machiavellian Ingenuity or Moral Intelligence?

The Machiavellian ‘Personality’
As noted, Lennick and Kiel assert that morally intelligent individuals value integrity,
responsibility, compassion and forgiveness. In their words, ‘integrity is authenticity.
It is saying what you stand for and standing for what you say’. Further, ‘the hallmark
of personal responsibility is our willingness to accept that we are accountable for the
results of the choices we make’. Compassion means caring ‘about others’ goals as
much as they do.’ Accordingly, moral intelligence is knowing what to do and moral
competence is the skill of doing the right thing. To be morally intelligent thus
means: telling the truth, standing up for what is right, keeping promises, taking
responsibility for personal choices, admitting mistakes and failures, embracing
responsibility for serving others, actively caring about others, and forgiving one’s
own and others’ mistakes.⁹
Lennick and Kiel hold the requirement to forgive others’ mistakes to be espe-
cially relevant to leadership. They assert that effective leaders form a relationship
with followers with forgiveness at its core. Whether leader or follower, behaving in
agreement with these principles reveals one’s high moral intelligence. It follows
that those managers who apply Machiavelli’s maxims to their work are of low
moral intelligence. However, Lennick and Kiel do not discuss the difference between
publicly professing (Christian) values and appearing to do so. Indeed, while Machia-
vellians can pretend to profess Christian values, it is hard to see how Lennick and
Kiel’s managers can pretend to profess ruthless pagan values. The asymmetry
involved in this matter has encouraged scholars to treat moral (and emotional) intel-
ligence as a disposition which can be measured in the manner of Lennick and Kiel’s
test of moral compass. Similarly, they have reduced Machiavellian policies and prac-
tices to a personality trait which is relatively fixed, predictable, and not subject to the
vagaries of personal (ingenious) choice.
In the 1960s, psychologists began to think in terms of a Machiavellian ‘person-
ality’ and constructed questionnaires composed of maxims taken from The Prince
and The Discourses. There now exist several ‘Mach’ scales and although psycholo-
gists have raised doubts about the viability of reducing Machiavellian maxims to
the status of a personality trait, these scales have generated more than 2000 research
articles.¹⁰ In any case, it is one thing to say that certain individuals agree with
Machiavelli’s assessments of human nature and suggestions for political success,
but quite another matter to assume that there is a Machiavellian personality.
Psychologists are in general agreement that personality is known through the
observation of relatively consistent tendencies in people’s behaviour. These are
referred to internal forces which are conceived of as exerting control over their
conduct and thereby constituting an explanation of it. However, consistency in
Lennick & Kiel (2005: 80, 95, 106, 65, 227).
Grace & Jackson (2014; 2018); Jackson & Grace (2015).
The Machiavellian ‘Personality’
153

behaviour can be explained, in large part, by the adoption of roles and habit. When
people adopt roles or act habitually, personality is not invoked as an explanation
because what is observed in role and habitual behaviour is the application of learned
skills. Accordingly, role-playing and habit are not attributed to personality traits
because the behaviour is effective in achieving goals. However, if the behaviour is
ineffective, personality traits, such as anxiety, are often invoked to explain the failure
to display appropriate skills.
If role-playing and habit are not attributed to personality traits, it follows that
consistency of behaviour is not a sufficient condition for the inference of personality
traits.Where people are ignorant of the behaviour needed to achieve goals, say in an
unfamiliar culture, their ineffective behaviour is likewise not a sufficient condition
for the inference of personality traits. Personality traits are thus invoked when behav-
iour is consistent over situations in which it is ineffective but is not due to ignorance.
Consequently, the only behaviour that requires personality traits is that which
implies a lack of adaptability. This is in accord with the relatively fixed character
of personality traits. Personality traits, therefore, constitute whatever it is that
reduces flexibility of behaviour and makes people unable to act intelligently.¹¹ The
view that Machiavelli’s maxims can be used as the basis for a personality trait has
therefore to be rejected, since Machiavelli valued versatility, adaptability and,
above all else, ingenuity.
Despite Machiavelli’s insistence on flexibility and expediency, psychologists
have preferred to treat Machiavellianism as a fixed personality trait. For example,
researchers have identified three themes in Machiavelli’s books: manipulative behav-
iour (including the use of flattery and deceit), cynicism about human nature (viewing
others as weak, untrustworthy, dishonest and egoistic), and unconventional moral
views.¹² They then constructed scales to measure a Machiavellian disposition and
correlated scores with other personality scales. Later researchers have reviewed
more than two decades of this research and concluded that endorsement of Machia-
vellian maxims correlates with attitudinal measures of personal control, dominance,
cynicism and psychopathy.¹³ Machiavellians endorse manipulative tactics, are
persuasive, reveal little about themselves, are emotionally detached, and task- rather
than people-orientated.
Eysenck and Wilson created a ‘manipulation’ scale and found that high scorers
are detached, calculating, shrewd, worldly, expedient and self-interested in their
dealings with people. Low scorers are warm-hearted, trusting, empathetic, altruistic,
naive and gullible. Questionnaire items (with answers denoting Machiavellian traits
indicated in brackets) include: Do you think honesty is always the best policy? (N);
Does a sense of fair play restrict your business acumen? (N); Do you feel a great deal
Spillane & Martin (2005).
Christie & Geis (1970).
Fehr, Samson & Paulhus (1992).
154
Chapter 8: Machiavellian Ingenuity or Moral Intelligence?

of sympathy for the underdog? (N); Do you think that most people are basically good
and kind? (N); Do you occasionally have to hurt other people to get what you want?
(Y); Do you normally tell the truth even though you would be better off lying? (N); Do
you regard yourself as a skilled organiser and manipulator of other people (Y). On
such bases, the psychologists argue that the Machiavellian trait correlates positively
with aggressiveness, assertiveness, achievement motivation, sensation-seeking,
dogmatism and masculinity. With other authors, they have concluded that the
Machiavellian trait forms part of a personality type which they call tough-minded-
ness.¹⁴
More recently, psychologists have referred to Machiavellianism as a personality
trait which represents one third of a ‘dark triad’ with narcissism and psychopathy.
Machiavellians are characterised by their relative emotional detachment (alexi-
thymia), lack of compassion and forgiveness, and tough-mindedness. The correlation
with measures of psychopathy (or psychoticism) is well established although the
relationship with narcissism seems less straightforward.¹⁵
Despite their promoters’ confidence, the validity of the various Mach scales is
debatable. Jackson and Grace have shown that there is nothing in Machiavelli
which corresponds to such items as: ‘P. T. Barnum was wrong when he said that
there’s a sucker born every minute’ or ‘People suffering from incurable diseases
should have the choice of being put painlessly to death’. Jackson and Grace conclude
that fewer than half of the twenty items in the popular Mach IV scale have some
tenuous link to Machiavelli (the others are far removed from him although his
name is linked to all). Furthermore, there are passages in The Prince which reveal
a different, less negative, side to Machiavelli. For example: ‘To betray friends, to
be treacherous, pitiless, irreligious, these are not glory’; ‘It would be splendid to
have a reputation for generosity’. These maxims are not constituents of the Mach
scales and, if included, would pose numerous psychometric problems for psycholo-
gists. Such issues led Jackson and Grace to conclude that the distorted Machiavelli
depicted in psychology is but a shadow of the insightful Machiavelli of The Prince
and the Discourses. Consequently, the psychology of Machiavellianism and the innu-
merable psychometric studies of its properties present a distorted view of Machia-
velli’s entire corpus.
By way of contrast to the extensive literature on Machiavellianism, Lennick and
Kiel developed a Moral Competence Inventory based on ten skills which are meas-
ured as attitudes, rather than problem-solving ability. Unlike IQ, which seeks to
capture analytical ability, conceptualising moral intelligence as a personality trait
condemns it to suffer the same fate as other personality traits about which defini-
Allsopp, Eysenck & Eysenck (1991).
Furnham, Richards & Paulhus (2013); Grace & Jackson (2014); Jones (2016); Jones & Paulhus
(2009); Kajonius, Persson & Jonason (2015); McHoskey (1995); Mudrack & Mason (1995); Paulhus
(2014); Trahair et al. (2020); Wastell & Booth (2003).
The Machiavellian ‘Personality’
155

tional problems, issues of unreliability and invalidity abound.¹⁶ Items in Lennick and
Kiel’s scale include: ‘I own up to my own mistakes and failures’; ‘I am able to ‘forgive
and forget’, even when someone has made a serious mistake’; ‘If I knew my company
was engaging in unethical or illegal behaviour, I would report it, even if it could have
an adverse effect on my career’; ‘When someone asks me to keep a confidence, I do
so’; ‘Because I care about my co-workers, I actively support their efforts to accom-
plish important personal goals’; ‘Even when people make mistakes, I continue to
trust them’.¹⁷
Scores on Machiavellian and Moral Competency scales are interpretable as mea-
sures of positive or negative responses to some of Machiavelli’s maxims which have
been carefully selected to represent Shakespeare’s ‘evil Machiavel’ or specific Chris-
tian values, respectively. At face value, scores on these scales can be expected to be
strongly negatively correlated. However, the psychometric deficiencies of the Lennick
and Kiel scale, and the inadequate selection of items in the Machiavellian scales,
render this research otiose. Indeed, high scorers on Machiavellian scales cannot
be expected to admit to conventionally undesirable behaviour, such as manipu-
lating, cheating, lying and dominating others. Being manipulative entails rejecting
accusations that one is so. Machiavellians do not admit they are Machiavellian.
Lennick and Kiel argue for a form of moral intelligence that they consider oppo-
site and superior to Machiavellian ingenuity. However, intelligence as a disposition
has no normative force or aspect, since it entails problem-solving ability, versatility
and adaptability. To grant dispositional intelligence moral force it is necessary to add
moral judgements to the conventional notion of cognitive intelligence. Gardner was
an early contributor to this popular trend when he wrote: ‘a prerequisite for a theory
of multiple intelligences, as a whole, is that it captures a reasonably complete gamut
of the kinds of abilities valued by human cultures’ (italics added).¹⁸ One is left
wondering which abilities fail and which pass the test. Among failures, Gardner
includes those used by a scientist, a religious leader and a politician. His selection
reveals that an ability needs to be valued within cultures or societies to be accepted
as an intelligence. This assumption enables Lennick and Kiel to extol tender-minded
Christian values and indict tough-minded pagan values.
Machiavellian Executives
As noted, Weber argued that both management and leadership relationships are
based on authority: role-based in the case of the former, personality-based in the
case of the latter. ‘Natural’ (personality-based) leaders acquire a following because
Kaliska (2014); Martin & Austin (2010).
Lennick & Kiel (2005: 251–258).
Gardner (1983: 62).
156
Chapter 8: Machiavellian Ingenuity or Moral Intelligence?

of an extraordinary devotion of followers to the heroism, sacredness or exemplari-
ness of special individuals and the solutions to recalcitrant problems revealed by
them. In The Art of War, Machiavelli expresses his reservations about the emergence
of such leaders because they represent a threat to the power of a prince. To ensure
that leaders do not cause trouble, their authority and power over their people
must be restricted. Machiavelli says that such restriction is achieved either through
nature or circumstances. As to nature, princes must ensure that a leader who is
born in a particular place is not given power over the people enrolled there but
should be made a leader in places where he has no natural connections. As to
circumstances, Machiavelli recommends that each year the leaders are changed
from district to district, because continuous authority over the same people produces
among them such a close union that it easily can be changed into something
damaging to the prince.
Machiavelli saw that leadership works against effective organisation because
leadership is self-determined and sets its own limits. It is, therefore, naturally
unstable because the mere fact of recognising the personal mission and extraordi-
nary power of natural leaders establishes their status. They must offer convincing
solutions to difficult problems and should they cease to do so, their status and
power evaporate. According to this reasoning, effective managers would qualify as
leaders when they set themselves against the organisational status quo. But if
they do so, it is difficult to see how they could be regarded as effective since their
success depends on the respect and support of others. At this point, the notion of
‘leader’ becomes problematic in the context of the Weberian connotation of person-
ality-based followership. Indeed, if the words ‘leader’ and ‘executive’ are to be taken
as referring to relationships with followers and subordinates respectively, Weber’s
distinction between role-based and personality-based ‘followership’ is crucial.
Insofar as executives’ authority adheres to their role, if another word for an effective
senior manager is needed, ‘executive’ makes more sense logically, if not rhetorically,
than ‘leader’.
Machiavelli is adamant that executives should judge their managers on their
work performance, of which there are three types. First are those managers who
think for themselves; second are those who are competent, loyal and respond well
to instructions; third are those who are unable to think for themselves or compre-
hend instructions. The first type of performer is the best but Machiavelli cautions
that individuals who think mainly of themselves and purse their own profit cannot
be trusted. The challenge for executives, therefore, is to support and encourage the
strengths of independent thinkers while retaining a degree of control over them.
Machiavelli advises executives to be wise, just, courageous and shrewd. They
should create obligations, confer benefits gradually, and protect themselves from
those who are dangerously independent. They should never appear indecisive, irres-
olute, cowardly, frivolous or effeminate. With respect to their staff, they must insist
on competence and loyalty, get others to do unpleasant tasks, shun flatterers, seek
advice on their terms and adhere to their decisions forthrightly.
Machiavellian Executives
157

In forming an opinion about choosing managers, Machiavellian executives look
at those around them.When these managers are competent and loyal, executives can
be themselves considered prudent because they have been able to recognise those
who are competent and keep them loyal. To keep managers loyal, Machiavellian
executives remember to honour and reward them for their achievements, give
them challenging responsibilities and leave them with the impression that they
are indispensable. However, the same executives will be prudent enough to ensure
that such honours do not lead managers to desire even greater wealth, nor that
their new responsibilities make them fear change. Machiavelli concludes that if exec-
utives are of this kind, they can have confidence in one another. If they are not,
things will end badly for one or the other.
Machiavelli’s is a performance-orientated philosophy. While executive failure is
often attributed to irresolution, procrastination or lack of courage, much is forgiven
in retrospect to those who succeed. John Pierpont Morgan, Thomas Watson, Alfred
Sloan, Jack Welch and Steve Jobs are widely considered to be among the most
successful business executives of the last century. Yet, none of them is remembered
as a boss with whom it was easy to work.¹⁹ Conversely, it is difficult to find evidence
for Lennick and Kiel’s claim that the best executives are humble, compassionate,
caring and forgiving.
Machiavellian executives are pragmatists with respect to means but idealists
with respect to ends. Their ideal is the power and glory of the organisation. It is a
serious misreading of Machiavelli to interpret his ‘Machiavellians’ as psychopaths.
His political philosophy is based on personal and social power and the inevitable
tension between them. In management, this tension emerges as the conflict between
person and organisation. For every executive there is a choice between power (ability
to act) and authority (right and duty to act). Machiavelli does not have much to say
about authority since he considers it to be co-extensive with the power of office. Yet,
as a staunch republican, he insisted that to be at liberty individuals must not be
dependent on the will of others. To avoid tyranny, the rule of law must be accepted
and revered. Such acceptance requires of political rulers (and by extension execu-
tives) an ability to engage in Friedrich’s persuasive reasoned elaboration which is
dependent on the interests and values of those to whom it is directed.
If there is an argument for leadership in management, it cannot be based on the
naive idea that every second manager can become a leader. However, where compe-
tent executives develop a philosophy which they are prepared to articulate publicly,
where they present a view of business or government as positive achievements,
where they educate people rather than subordinate them to platitudes, they are
candidates for leadership.
Machiavelli endorsed the Greek’s and Romans’ emphasis on the power of rhet-
oric through which individuals earn the right to educate others. As such, he was
Joullié & Spillane (2021: 63).
158
Chapter 8: Machiavellian Ingenuity or Moral Intelligence?

not the founder of political science that he is often made to be, but the restorer of the
Roman conception of politics as civil wisdom. That is, he saw politics as a rhetorical
practice and wrote as a rhetorician to persuade his readers of the contribution of
long-forgotten ancient political principles.
Ingenuity of Intelligence?
Proponents of multiple intelligences define them in terms of abilities that are valued
by the community. If certain abilities are not valued, therefore, they are not intelli-
gences. Consequently, managers who have special abilities in interpersonal relation-
ships that are not valued in the community cannot be called morally intelligent. This
logic renders the notion of moral intelligence relative to alleged values both within
and between communities.When such moral value judgements are imposed on exec-
utives, moralising is in danger of becoming moralism.
Executives inevitably engage in moralising because they cannot avoid value
judgements in decision-taking. Further, there are executives who believe that they
know precisely how their colleagues should behave morally. Their belief in their
own ability to assess appropriate behaviour is strong enough that they direct others
to their version of right belief. Executive behaviour of this kind demonstrates
moralism, not intelligence.
The normative dimension of executive behaviour acquires a central role in
management theory because managers’ actions are subject to rules, regulations,
norms and laws. Managers possess competencies insofar as they combine authority
and accountability for effective performance for which they are rewarded. Psycholog-
ical dispositions, as causes of behaviour, are thus granted normative status. Yet, as
has been shown, Gardner and Lennick and Kiel attempt to combine notions of dispo-
sitional intelligence with normative standards and egregious value judgements. Such
attempts distort the meaning of intelligence which is a collection of abilities that
manifests itself in interactions between individuals and the environment.
Some management authors have asserted that to be intelligent, individuals need
to be knowledgeable of and versatile with respect to moral issues.²⁰ Such abilities
cannot include a dogmatic commitment, personally or collectively, to a specific
moral position. Indeed, the idea that there is, or should be, only one moral perspec-
tive for any society is not an example of versatility. Rather, it exemplifies authoritari-
anism or even totalitarianism. Besides, moral versatility cannot be compared to the
ability to solve arithmetical problems or comprehend a passage of philosophy. More-
over, if intelligence is synonymous with versatility, a serious logical error is
committed when moral versatility is treated as a fixed personality trait. Yet this iden-
tification is exactly the position promoted by the moral intelligence movement.
Cosans & Reina (2018); Harris (2010).
Ingenuity of Intelligence?
159

Machiavellian ingenuity cannot be reduced to a personality or motivational trait
without contradiction since the dispositional nature of traits reduces versatility and
thereby inhibits ingenuity. If moral intelligence is to be preferred to Machiavellian
ingenuity, the reasons are themselves moral, rather than logical or empirical. From
observations of individuals’ problem-solving behaviour inferences are made about
their ‘intelligence’, which is then used as an inner cause of the observed behaviour.
Invalid circular reasoning of this sort has dominated personality theories for decades
and condemned them to sterility.
Where Machiavellianism and moral intelligence are treated motivationally,
similar problems emerge since the term ‘motivation’ carries different meanings. In
managerial psychology, it refers to a motive force as in physics, whereas in popular
psychology it is used as a synonym for ambition or greed. Its function as a motive
force is problematic since it turns out to be either circular or a metaphor for intention
or purpose. If the latter, motivation cannot be a disposition. In summary, neither
moral intelligence nor Machiavellianism can be treated as a personality or motiva-
tional disposition without encountering serious logical problems, notably circularity.
As Machiavelli accepted that ethical debates are decided ethically, he described
what political rulers do, but also told them what they should do in the light of his
generalisations about human nature gleaned from personal political experiences
and his reading of the pagan literature. Machiavelli is thus not a philosopher in
the rationalistic tradition. Rather, he combines and applies to the study of politics,
observation, historical knowledge, rules of thumb, practical suggestions, broad-
based reflections, cool political realism and a realist psychology. That his social
psychology is today described as cynical reveals again the value judgements that
threaten empirical research on his maxims.
Applied to management, moral intelligence is the tender-minded alternative to
tough-minded Machiavellian ingenuity, where the terms tough- and tender-minded
are not intended to be normative expressions. Against objectives of individual and
collective work performance maximisation, however, a normative evaluation can
be offered. Specifically, as managers with high moral intelligence allegedly reject
and invert the values and practices espoused by Machiavelli, those with low moral
intelligence are those who do not support or sincerely promote compassion, forgive-
ness and brotherly love. That is, managers of high moral intelligence support the
Christian proverb ‘honesty is the best policy’ whereas managers of low moral intel-
ligence probably agree with the Hungarian proverb that ‘those who tell the truth get
their heads bashed in.’ By emphasising the importance of integrity, responsibility,
forgiveness and compassion, the advocates of moral intelligence set themselves
against the pagan values of personal and political power. As a philosopher of
power, Machiavelli earns the label ‘tough-minded’ and his followers would therefore
be expected to engage in the tough-minded behaviour revealed by empirical studies.
Machiavelli believed that religion, like the law, acts as an ethical cement and
thus reinforces social cohesion. If he opposed Christian virtue to pagan virtù, it
was to emphasise that the former seeks the psychological safety of salvation at
160
Chapter 8: Machiavellian Ingenuity or Moral Intelligence?

the risk of being crushed by people who are unconstrained by such idealistic
concerns. Further, strict adherence to Christian religious beliefs reduces personal
versatility and burdens people with heavy moral baggage. To rule a principality,
one needs to be willing and able to ‘enter into evil when necessity commands.’ To
this end, Machiavelli advocates a dual political ethic: a pagan ethic for rulers and
a Christian ethic for the rest.²¹
Machiavelli is committed to the view that a dual ethic is required for a strong
society. His reading of history convinced him that a society based on a dual ethic,
such as the Roman Republic, requires extraordinarily strong rulership to ameliorate
the tensions between the rulers and the ruled. Ironically, therefore, the man who is
widely regarded as the devil incarnate, was not an advocate of totalitarian rule. He
sincerely believed in the personal liberty that is possible for people in a strong,
republican society and was not bothered by the moral duality that underpins it.
He accepted the inevitability of tough-minded rulers and tender-minded followers
and the necessity of both. Any attempt, he argued, to enforce a monolithic morality
must end in totalitarianism and is doomed to failure. Despite his fearsome reputation
as a preacher of evil, Machiavelli aimed to revive the Roman conception of political
theory as a rhetorical practice in the service of liberty. Although this vision is not
necessarily a tender minded one, at least it sublimates the tough mindedness for
which Machiavelli is remembered.
Machiavelli’s Legacy
Machiavelli’s dialectic of power set the agenda for the political philosophies of
Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, Jean Jacques Rousseau and Edmund Burke, where
the intertwining of authority and power is well demonstrated.
The question of whether authority is imposed upon citizens or whether it is
conceded by them to a person or office needs to be carefully considered. Machia-
velli’s analysis, at least in The Prince, implies that authority is imposed as a fait
accompli by a combination of coercion, tradition, religion and law. An alternative
view is that authority should be defined as a relational term which emphasises its
concessional basis. The idea of a process of authorisation points to an evaluative
basis which is subject to periodic monitoring. This view is not necessarily incompat-
ible with Machiavelli’s since to be able to impose authority one must have had it
conceded by some group to whose views the persons on which it is imposed do
not subscribe. But this imposition is likely to be by way of the exercise of power.
Machiavelli’s method is eclectic and although he studied history intensively and
read ancient authors carefully, he uses them selectively and extracts from his sources
examples that support his general position. His method is not inductive in the sense
Berlin (1991).
Machiavelli’s Legacy
161

that his aim is merely to observe political relationships and describe how rulers
conduct their affairs. He constantly criticises the contemporary world and tells his
readers how politicians ‘ought’ to act. He is, in this sense, more rhetorician than
scientist.
Machiavelli’s ‘political science’ cannot be evaluated against the rigorous stand-
ards of the natural sciences. If one’s critical criterion for science is the generation of
falsifiable propositions, then Machiavelli’s political philosophy is not a science.
Further, if one means by ‘science’ the formulation of hypotheses based on detailed
observations and deductions therefrom, Machiavelli also fails as a scientist. To
take a typical example, after pointing out some of the mistakes of the French in
their invasion of Italy, Machiavelli concludes that from this anecdote may be
drawn a general rule which rarely fails: that the man who enables another to become
powerful brings upon himself his own ruin. But, of course, this rule does fail in many
cases.
Machiavelli’s dramatic generalisations about human nature, Christianity, polit-
ical tactics and society are not intended to be statements of empirical fact but
assumptions which wise princes would be well advised to act upon. He does not
claim rigorous empirical support for his view that human beings are without excep-
tion Homo homini lupus. Nonetheless, a wise prince acts on the assumption that this
is so.
Machiavelli believes that human beings are fundamentally good or fundamen-
tally evil. He never doubts that human beings are by nature more prone to evil
than to good: they are ambitious, suspicious, and unable to gauge the limits of
their own fortune, blinded by greed to danger, constantly desire what they cannot
obtain and are discontented with what they have obtained. It is prudent, therefore,
to assume the worst of human beings and act upon that assumption, even in the face
of apparent evidence to the contrary.
It is difficult to exaggerate the insightfulness of the great Florentine. We can do
no better than conclude this discussion with the following quotation from Meinecke:
Machiavelli’s theory was a sword which was plunged into the flank of the body politic of
Western humanity, causing it to shriek and rear up. This was bound to happen; for not only
had genuine moral feeling been seriously wounded, but death had also been threatened to
the Christian views of all churches and sects, and therefore to the strongest bond uniting
men and nations, the highest spiritual power that reigned over them.²²
Meinecke (1957: 49).
162
Chapter 8: Machiavellian Ingenuity or Moral Intelligence?

Chapter 9:
Purposive Ethics for Managers
The problem of how managers can justify ethical values is an aspect of more general
discussions of business ethics. As ‘business ethics’ is usually taken to refer to stand-
ards by which working people and other stakeholders regulate their behaviour by
distinguishing what is acceptable for their purposes from what is not, a fundamental
question is: how may any ethical value be justified? This problem is particularly
acute given the ethical relativism in postmodern workplaces and the general pessi-
mism in management circles about the possibility of being rational about ethics.¹
Ethical relativists believe that ethical obligation arises from the need to conform
to social prescriptions and proscriptions which vary according to time, place and
local power relationships. Consequently, managerial problems develop when stake-
holders can see no good reason why they should regulate their behaviour according
to what they see as arbitrary and variable rules. This difficulty is accentuated in
younger people who have been shown to be relatively more individualistic, narcis-
sistic and materialistic than their parents and grandparents.² There is also strong
evidence that many of the problems of apathy and aggression at the workplace
emerge because people no longer share the common understanding that is a neces-
sary basis for cooperative action.³
In recent years there has been considerable interest in revisiting the notion of
purpose in an endeavour to treat ethical statements objectively and thus provide
them with firm foundations. Purpose is associated with mission and vision and is
widely considered as that which underpins and unites these constructs. Purpose is
a relational concept; it is relevant to organisations and management and is the
underlying reason for their existence. Purpose also operates at the individual level
and provides a way of relating personal aspirations to organisational goals.⁴ More
generally, purpose is the basis of business ethics because without purposes there
can be no ethics. To say of an action that it is right is equivalent to saying that it coin-
cides with a purpose. The purpose behind a series of actions is typically the goal
toward which that action tends.
The aim of this chapter is to offer a theory of ethics for managers based on
common human purposes and free of metaphysical, religious or a priori foundations.
Such an undertaking, if it generates demonstrably useful guidelines, will achieve a
secular status capable of facilitating communication, even with ethical relativists
Abend (2014); Joullié & Spillane (2021)
Greenfield (2013).
Doran (2016); Ward (2011).
Birkinshaw, Foss & Lindenberg (2014); Bronk et al. (2009); Cardona & Rey (2008); Craig & Snook
(2014); Grant (2017); Hill & Turiano (2014); Hollensbe et al. (2014); Laloux (2014); Maclagan (2007);
Rey, Velasco & Almandoz (2019); Spillane & Martin (2005); White et al. (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-011

and fundamentalists. This outcome will be achieved only if the framework arrived at
offers a method by which managers increase their effectiveness in assisting stake-
holders to live in a more self-directed and effective manner.
Justifying Ethical Values in Management
The problem of how managers justify ethical values is particularly acute given the
ethical relativism in postmodern business and the general pessimism in manageri-
alist circles about the possibility of being rational about ethics. Nietzsche stands
at the head of this trend owing to his virulent criticisms of Christian ethics and
his prediction that nihilism, which entails ethical as well as other forms of relativism,
would dominate European consciousness in the twentieth century and beyond. In
Beyond Good and Evil, Nietzsche appears to deny status to all standards and institu-
tions. However, despite his protestations, Nietzsche is not in fact unethical since he
bases his criticism of Western ethics on premises which are of an ethical kind, even if
unconventional. For example, Nietzsche indicts reactive slave morality (based on
fear and resentment) and extols active master morality (based on vitality and aristo-
cratic self-assertion). He concludes that the way forward in ethics demands a radical
kind of thinking – a ‘re-evaluation of all values’ – that will not be justifiable in a
manner which is acceptable to adherents of the old Christian paradigm.
Managers typically seek to justify an ethical position by referring to some higher
value which is either held in common or is advanced as being self-evidently true. For
example, when asked why she refused to work in a nuclear power plant, a manager
said that she opposes nuclear power because it might annihilate humanity. When
pressed as to why she considered that the interests of humanity placed her under
an obligation to act, she replied that there is no need to justify the value of
human life: it is self-evident. While most people agree with her as to the value of
human life, how does one justify that view? The horror of human cruelty, mass
corruption and homicidal despotism is not confined to the past. What possible justi-
fication is there for a species that has caused so much damage and devastation to
itself and the planet? How can its survival be a fundamental ethical value?
Philosophers from Aristotle to Kant have argued that ethical propositions are
justified by an appeal to intuitive knowledge of right and wrong supported by empir-
ical facts. In both cases the philosophical arguments advanced purport to provide
some rational support for the ethical propositions in question. Typically, an ethical
position is expressed in injunctive form (thou shalt …) and viewed as implying an
obligation for people to behave in the manner it prescribes. Indeed, it is difficult
to conceive of an ethical system, religious, utilitarian, deontological or virtue,
which does not depend on the feeling of obligation. Christians, for example, regard
‘obligation’ as the essential element of ethics and so any value system which does
not create a cosmic onus or transcendental demand is deemed as non-ethical.
Descriptions of this ‘obligatory’ perspective are generally in terms of feelings of obli-
164
Chapter 9: Purposive Ethics for Managers

gation or habits of obedience. These feelings are projected into ethical reasoning in
the form of transcendental demands.
Kant’s famous attempt to justify ethics by means of deductive logic yielded an
analysis of obligation as the fabric of ethical reality and disclosed the nature of
the individual’s relationship to ethics to be that of ‘duty’. However, his deductive
logic is only as sound as its premises. To accept as real the existence of transcen-
dental ethical obligation, and thus duty, before arriving at a satisfactory justification
of transcendental ethical concepts is simply to beg the question.
Kant’s critical admirer, Schopenhauer, was not taken in by his predecessor’s
reasoning. In The Basis of Morality, he confidently concluded that he had succeeded
in establishing the basis of ethics, which he located in the cognitive process of
‘empathy’. In effect, Schopenhauer located the origin of ethics in human nature
and dispensed with the idea of obligation or duty altogether.
Yet, if the idea of transcendental obligation is merely a projection of a biologi-
cally based tendency to a feeling of obligation, there is no reason to believe that
any form of transcendental obligation exists. Does that mean that there is no
sense in which an ethical proposition has validity?
Even though a concept of transcendental obligation cannot be logically vali-
dated, it is possible to speak of an ethical proposition having objective validity.
The form that such objectivity takes will involve a factual proposition, logical
reasoning as to the implications of those facts, and a third element which will
mark the specifically ethical character of the proposition. If ethical debate is under-
taken in terms of propositions of that kind, ethics will be elevated from mere feelings
and brought into the realm of reason. In other words, if it is possible to reach an
understanding of the rationality of ethical justification, it will be possible for
managers to communicate on ethical issues in an effective and convincing manner.
It should then be possible to develop objective standards for applications in critical
enquiries and business debates. This outcome is achievable only if the under-
standing arrived at provides a method by which philosophy and the behavioural
sciences increase their effectiveness in assisting people to live in a more self-directed
manner.
One reason for thinking that there can be no objective ethics is the widespread
belief that evaluative judgements are merely expressions of personal feelings. This
objection to the possibility of a rational approach to ethics is based on the old-fash-
ioned ‘faculty’ view of consciousness which began with Plato and claims that there is
an irreducible difference between reason and emotion. Consequently, debates about
ethical systems have often turned on the traditional distinction between cognitive
and affective states of consciousness.
Cognitive states include perceiving and reasoning, both of which play an essen-
tial part in the processes of science. Reasoning plays a significant role in the integra-
tion of observation but is not the authoritative foundation of scientific knowledge.
Perceiving, especially of replicable causal sequences, is the foundation of science
and carries the final authority for the justification of any scientific claim. Reasoning
Justifying Ethical Values in Management
165

is the authoritative process in questions of logic, and it is not possible to impugn the
logic of a proposition on the strength of an empirical observation (and vice-versa: it
is not possible to dismiss a corroborated observation through logical reasoning).
Reasoning and perceiving cooperate to extend knowledge but, in the final analysis,
in any question of proof or justification each is restricted to a distinct and limited
field of competence.
The affective side of consciousness – the passions – embraces emoting, feeling
and willing. Most people believe that affective experience is essentially irrational.
This conviction springs from an ancient belief that passions are constantly at war
with reasoning: a reflection of the difficulty people find in conforming to their
own best judgement. Hume thought that the affective faculties had won the war:
he saw reason as a slave of the passions. The legacy of this now dated ‘faculty’
view of consciousness is the widespread belief that emotion and reason are funda-
mentally of a distinct nature and that the cognitive faculties govern reasoning.
This conception is especially dominant in debates about ethical responsibility.
There is a large body of practical understanding about the nature of ethical
responsibility because it is the yardstick by which guilt and liability are measured
in a legal sense. For example, there are situations in which people are found to
have a causal responsibility for an event without being regarded as having an ethical
responsibility. The distinction centres on the question of whether the event was a
true expression of the agent’s willing. If an accident outside an individual’s control
intervenes to change the outcome of a course of action, then this individual’s ethical
and legal responsibility is limited. Similarly, when sensibilities are clouded by drugs,
responsibility is usually said to be diminished. Anything one does which is under full
control is described by philosophers and lawyers as ‘one’s action’. Actions attract
ethical responsibility; reactive bodily movements do not.
Unlike reactive behaviour, every action has a purposive structure. The difference
between stealing and accidentally taking an object is the difference of purpose.
Accordingly, situations are perceived in such a way that certain of their features
become reasons for trying to create a new situation with which the original one is
contrasted. For example, organisations are said to have a purpose applied to them
by managers, whereas individual managers have intentions which support (or not)
the overriding purpose. Consequently, managerial situations requiring action can
be analysed so that their structure reproduces that of a practical syllogism in
which factual propositions are related to purposive propositions.
Ethics and Reason
The concepts ‘ethics’ and ‘reason’ are often used in two distinct contexts. ‘Ethics’
refers to rules, community judgements, a sense of ‘rightness’ and ‘wrongness’,
reward and punishment and the feelings of ‘guilt’ and ‘self-righteousness’. By way
166
Chapter 9: Purposive Ethics for Managers

of contrast, ‘reason’ is linked to ideas of reasonableness, relative costs and benefits
and success or failure.
Differences between ethics and reason are accountable in terms of an ‘obligatory’
view of ethics, and in terms of the appropriation to ethics of altruistic behaviour. The
dichotomy between reason and ethics has inclined people to view reason in terms of
self-interest with the result that altruistic actions are frequently viewed as unreason-
able. This view shows itself in a subtle way, for example, in the flashes of self-right-
eous indignation displayed by managerialists when their patience is tried by an argu-
mentative subordinate.
Ideally, individuals who ground ethics on reason would not experience the
tension that is engendered in ethicists who undertake altruism as a sacrifice to prin-
ciple, or a Kierkegaardian ‘leap of faith’. Indeed, the former would not act on altru-
istic principles unless they genuinely identified the altruistic purpose as their own.
They would only favour the interests of ‘the other’ if those interests were also
their own concern. In that case, they assess the risks, costs and benefits according
to their own genuine purposes and do not accrue the resentment that develops in
people for whom ethics is a handicap imposed upon them.
Conflicts in individuals between reason and ethics are a sign of the false
dichotomy of those concepts. The phenomenon is symptomatic of the ‘bad faith’ de-
scribed by Sartre. ‘Bad faith’ is a form of ethical cowardice displayed by individuals
who have been intimidated by the ‘obligatory’ conception of ethics and who act out a
role to which they are not committed.
The appropriation to ethics of altruistic behaviour leads to mistaken ascriptions
of motivation and to the denial of the possible reasonableness of altruism. For
example, in the face of extreme provocation from a rude colleague, a manager
keeps her feelings under control and explains to witnesses later what her feelings
really were. It is possible to see her behaviour as motivated by the ethical precept
that one should ‘turn the other cheek’ and it is probable that her colleagues will
see it that way. But this interpretation ignores the wealth of reasons which could
explain the behaviour. The manager may be determined to provide her colleagues
with a model of dignity, to instil in them the importance of politeness and to ensure
as far as possible for her own part, by affirmative action, that she works in the kind
of organisation in which people act courteously. These justifications point to
coherent, reasonable objectives. Insofar as it is reasonably conceived as serving
some identifiable purpose, any precept generally regarded as ethical is thus also
reasonable.
’Reasonableness’ is an ideal defined in the law of liberal democracies in terms of
what a competent, caring and self-disciplined person is expected to do.⁵ The concept
is also associated with standards of information and logic. As such, it is an expres-
sion of social interest as distinct from the self-interest of the individual. That is, if
Miller & Perry (2011).
Ethics and Reason
167

reasonableness means being competent, caring and self-disciplined, then it implies
some degree of social definition and denotes some quality of social interaction. Such
a quality could be justified by self-interest, but no such demonstration is necessary
to the legal concept of reasonableness. The law views reasonableness as a standard
or expectation the community imposes on its members regardless of their individual
concerns. There is, therefore, no need to regard reason as primarily a self-centred
ideal. In this case, genuinely altruistic purposes are reasonable, conceived from
the individual’s perspective, provided only that they are conceived by individuals
as springing from their own free purposes and choices (these being socially framed)
rather than from some external source with which they do not identify.
In sum, the intrication of reason within ethics is such that an ethical proposition
can only be justified through reasoning. Managers who expect a different justifica-
tion in what they perceive to be rational behaviour than they expect in what they
believe is ethical behaviour only exhibit the travails of the ‘obligatory’ view of ethics.
There is no reason why what has typically been regarded as an ethical kind of moti-
vation in management cannot now be regarded as a reasonable kind of behaviour
and vice versa. For example, managers can judge ethical behaviour according to
whether it takes reasonable account of the relevant information available which
has some bearing on whether their actions will fulfil their explicit purposes. They
should also take account of whether the logic used to explicate their purposes is
valid. Similarly, if they are judging an action in relation to business goals, they
should take account of whether the action was consistent with the kind of action
a reasonable person would take.
Purpose, Choice and Responsibility
In psychology, purposive behaviour is usually associated with the ‘behaviorism’ of
Tolman who claimed that behaviour is modified by learning, patterned and directed
towards producing some premeditated effect. Unlike other behaviourists who
eschewed cognitive concepts, Tolman postulated that humans develop ‘cognitive
maps’ that enable them to find their way in the world. However, he was not willing
to admit consciousness in his theory, which is rather strange for someone who does
admit purpose. Rather, he asserted that purposes are determined entities. Unsurpris-
ingly, Tolman was criticised for his teleological tendencies which conflict with the
determinism of orthodox behaviourist theories. His critics were concerned that his
‘teleology’ opened the door to free will and was therefore just another deficient
version of mind/body dualism. Tolman’s theory is rarely quoted nowadays, although
he has a distant and influential relative in Lewin who produced a quasi-purposive
theory which generated influential experiments in social psychology.
Purposive psychology was revived by Spillane and Martin who sought an alter-
native to the deterministic theories which dominate psychology. Their theory is based
on three axioms. First, people are spontaneous movers and are always in motion.
168
Chapter 9: Purposive Ethics for Managers

Consequently, there is no need to explain why people behave. Rather, the problem is
to show why activity takes the direction it does. Second, people are pattern-
perceivers and can perceive a total pattern when perceiving only part of it. When
the pattern (or some fragment of it) occurs over time, people can anticipate or predict
by reference to its recalled culmination. Furthermore, people are perceivers of cause
and effect (a particular kind of pattern); they use knowledge of causes to control
effects and to avoid being affected themselves if that is their wish. Third, people
perceive pleasure and pain and the difference between them, and they use this
perception as a basis of choice. This capacity results in the creation of a hierarchy
of values which is based on trial-and-error experiments which people conduct on
their physical and social environments.
Spillane and Martin’s theory invokes an array of hypothetical psychological
constructs such as purpose, choice and responsibility which indicate the special
types of pattern perception that are hypothesised under different conditions.
Although Spillane and Martin use the term ‘personality’, they reject the view, popular
in management, that the total personality is the sum of relatively stable traits or
motives, and that people are therefore moved into action by them. Rather, they
use the term ‘personality’ existentially to indicate that people are aware that they
are the authors of their actions and the owners of the strategies and values which
guide the choice of these actions. The same authors postulate that some degree of
coherence arises in this personality from the logic of action, the cultural tradition
in which it was formed and its hierarchy of values. But as the value hierarchy
lacks a final form, personality remains a quasi-pattern which is always subject to
modification while experience continues.
Scholars working in the field of management studies have frequently sought to
adopt the methods and language of science, which thereby commits them to deter-
minism in some form of another. However, they are confronted with the fact that
human beings have consistently demonstrated that they use determinism only
with reference to the causes that they themselves manipulate for their own purposes.
Wherever possible, people position themselves on the causal side of cause-effect
sequences to be the causer rather than the affected party. This fact suffices to assert
that determinism is a misguided policy to apply to the psychology of human beings.
In the field of ethics, the challenge is to refine ‘managerial consciousness’ to
make accessible as great a range of rational choice as possible to those who can
appreciate extensive vistas of the pattern taken by events. This endeavour implies
a magnification of the differences between managers in terms of their abilities in
perceiving and pursuing complex patterns. Such magnification has desirable aspects
in that it offers the prospect of the withering away of the necessity for external
controls and so advances civilised management. Such a perspective has notable
ethical implications since it rejects egalitarian values in favour of management
being led forward by its own creativity. It is also returns managers to fundamental
questions about the purpose of management, organisations and the intricate prob-
lems of their own purposive behaviour.
Purpose, Choice and Responsibility
169

The Nature of Ethical Justification
Ethics, then, is concerned with purposes. The matter is complicated by the fact that
the purpose is the goal that is desired by people who believe it is attainable by their
actions. If this belief is false, the purpose will not be fulfilled or, if it is, it will be
owing to good fortune. Offering a bribe to a manager, for example, may be the crucial
factor in losing one’s job even though the bribe was intended to impress him.
To hold that ethics is fundamentally concerned with purpose is to hold that an
ethical value is justified only by demonstrating that it is one which serves to advance
some purpose. Accordingly ethical conclusions are deductively derived because
reason is authoritative in all questions of deductive logic. Hence, all reasoned ethical
justifications comprise conclusions which are purposive propositions, and since a
reasoned conclusion cannot logically include an element which is not present in
or implied by the premises from which that conclusion is drawn, it follows that
the premises must contain or imply a purposive proposition.
The argument that ethical premises contain a purposive element implies that
purposive propositions are necessary premises in ethical justifications. Even if the
argument is valid, it may still be argued that a necessary premise need not be a suffi-
cient one, that an element other than a purposive proposition needs to be present
before recognising the conclusion as an ethical justification. Managers might, for
example, claim that the proposition ‘it is wrong to cheat people’ is a valid ethical
proposition which implies a universal obligation. They might also recognise that it
is not possible to justify anything like universal obligation by reference only to
purposive propositions. In reply, it can be said that it makes no sense to talk of a
universal ethical obligation except to describe a feeling a person has, such as a
sense of obligation. The conclusion that ethical justification is purposive stands.
A starting point for an example of ethical justification for managers is the widely
accepted contention that the ultimate test of management is the achievement of
actual results. Drucker, for example, insisted that the ultimate test of management
is objective performance without which organisational survival is not possible. Yet,
he also argued that business ethical values cannot be justified while quoting approv-
ingly Norris’s succinct ethical statement that the purpose of business is to do well by
doing good.⁶ As scholars have noted, Drucker believed that there should not be
suprapersonal ethical values which apply to business specifically.⁷ He argued that
performance and contribution are essential purposes for management, but this
requirement does not entail a suprapersonal, (or metaphysical) perspective.⁸ Drucker
acknowledged a long tradition in ethics, from Aristotle on, which asserts that ethics
originates with the individual: one ethics, one set of rules, one code, that of indi-
Drucker (1982).
Bardy & Rubens (2010); Malcolm & Hartley (2009).
Drucker (1981: 19).
170
Chapter 9: Purposive Ethics for Managers

vidual behaviour in which the same rules apply to everyone. Rather, the performance
requirement provides a foundation for a managerial purposive ethic based on the
ongoing survival and growth of business organisations. A manager who begins
with that purpose proceeds as follows:
(a) Purposive proposition: ‘In this company, our purpose is to manage by objective
work performance.’
(b) Empirical premise: ‘Personality test scores do not predict objective work perfor-
mance.’
(c) Logical conclusion: ‘In this company, our purpose is to manage by objective work
performance without the use of personality tests.⁹
This reasoning is valid in the sense that its conclusion is true in relation to the
explicit purpose on every occasion on which the empirical premise is true. There
may, of course, be managers or consultants with a vested interest in the use of
personality tests who claim that the empirical premise is not true. This doubt will
create confusion among managers when they discover that their ability to draw
ethical conclusions from the use of personality tests is thereby frustrated.
Statement (c) is a purposive proposition. But is it an assertion of ethical value?
To say that ‘our purpose is to manage in a certain way’ is to say that it is a preferred
way of managing for this company. An ethical position on this subject can therefore
be justified by demonstrating that it is a position which serves to satisfy some pref-
erence (e.g., achievement, effectiveness). In effect, any purpose is a candidate for
judgement from the perspective of any other relevant purpose. Purposes are relevant
to each other if the frustration or fulfilment of one has some consequences bearing
on the frustration of fulfilment of the other.
The idea that functionality is the sole dimension of ethical evaluation will
encounter objections. Functionality has frequently been abused as a justification
for oppression and outrage. Hitler, it might be objected, could easily have justified
extermination of the Jews on the sole ground that it was his preference that the
economic power of European Jews be broken. To these objections, the reply is that
any purpose may be judged for functionality from the perspective of any other rele-
vant purpose. What this rejoinder implies is that the most complete judgement of
functionality will attempt to take account of other relevant purposes. There is, there-
fore, no reason why managers cannot generate a continually expanding body of
propositions of the form of the one concerning personality tests and the importance
of objective work performance.
Spillane & Joullié (2015: 41).
The Nature of Ethical Justification
171

Purposive Ethics for Managers
A purposive view of ethics is necessarily relative rather than absolute, but it is not
thereby wholly idiosyncratic. The most common version of relativism in management
proposes that ethical justification arises from social expectations and that one’s duty
is to conform to the behavioural expectations of one’s organisation. The relativists
who rely on organisational (or community) expectations as an authoritative basis
for the assessment of ethical issues do so because they require some rules which
can sharpen the process of ethical discussion, giving it a degree of precision. This
requirement, they hope, eliminates the idiosyncratic tendencies of relativism.
There are more effective strategies for the refinement of ethical judgement than
the one offered by relativists. Indeed, a thorough judgement of one specific purpose
requires consideration of related purposes. To a fair extent, managers judge a
purpose according to their knowledge of a consensus of human purposes and busi-
ness purposes and quickly reach an appreciation of the significant issues involved.
In the final analysis, though, they each determine their overall response to the
purpose in question only by deciding which purposes are most significant.
Purposive ethics assumes that humans are free, responsible beings. This
assumption for the refinement of ethical justification is neither mainly conceptual
nor empirical. It is existential and agrees with those writers, like Sartre, who assume
that human beings are ontologically free. Its basis is described simply: individuals
choose. The act of choosing is an expression of purpose. It follows that if the
construct of choice is stressed in social action, that of purpose cannot be avoided.
There is no valid reason why the fact of deliberate choice in justification of an ethical
value cannot be advanced.
Critics will hold that ‘choice’ is not a satisfying foundation for ethical justifica-
tion. First, they will object that the statement (A) ‘I hold x value because I choose to’
is tautological and therefore trivial. Yet A is not empty because it conveys a psycho-
logical fact, my resolution. It is probable that the fact of my resolution is not without
history and that my choice is a crystallisation of a history of beliefs about the issue at
hand. Second, critics will press that choice is not a satisfactory kind of ethical justi-
fication on the grounds that it is an idiosyncratic event and, as such, encourages irre-
sponsible, indiscriminate egoism. While some such choices are indeed idiosyncratic,
there are instances in history where a resolution has been the impetus to a distin-
guished career. In these days of ‘moral leadership’, the potential power of a seminal
choice of value is hard to miss.¹⁰
Purposes are related insofar as the fulfilment or frustration of one purpose has
implications for the fulfilment of another purpose. Managers embrace multitudinous
and often conflicting purposes but the fact that one purpose impinges on another
provides a functional basis for assessing convergence or divergence of purposes.
Solinger, Jansen & Cornelissen (2020).
172
Chapter 9: Purposive Ethics for Managers

This type of comparison can be extended because it is usually the case that a specific
purpose relates directly (i.e., in a functional manner) to a prior purpose.When exam-
ining a specific purpose, managers will take account of the prior purposes that are
being served. Only in rare instances do they find that an action arises from some
unitary purpose, such as compelling hunger. In almost all cases they will find that
an action is undertaken to fulfil a harmonious range of different purposes. The
inter-relationship of purposes, both individual and social, makes an action reason-
able and justified on a multiplicity of different counts. The integration of purposes
in this manner is the hallmark of what is commonly called reasonable behaviour.
A convergence of purposes can never justify an action in an absolute sense, but it
provides additional ethical weight to it. Further, when an ethical justification is
offered, it implicitly carries the weight of social sanction. Besides, noting that
such purposes as physical comfort, safety and nourishment are universal does not
turn an inference into a universal ethical obligation. Drawing such a conclusion
would commit the error of arguing from the fact of their universality to the value
of obligation. Instead, managers take account of fundamental human purposes
when they assess whether those purposes are furthered or frustrated by another
purpose that they are evaluating. An ethical or reasonable justification based on
fundamental purposes will always be of the form followed by every other valid
ethical justification, namely:
(a) x purpose does/does not further/frustrate the satisfaction of a need.
(b) It is preferred that y need be/be not furthered/frustrated.
(c) Therefore, (and for the purpose of y need only) x purpose is/is not desirable.
Although such reasoning does not allow managers to justify a universal ethical obli-
gation, the fact that there are universal human purposes does allow them to advance
their understanding of what kinds of ethical justification will presumably be accept-
able to other people.
Applying Purposive Ethics
Maslow is relevant to the idea of fundamental purposes on the condition that his
influential theory of a hierarchy of needs is stripped of the notion of ‘motive-force’
and given a purposive interpretation. As noted, Maslow’s individuals make choices
according to what is satisfying to their bodies and sense of well-being. They do
not employ reason to choose to actualise their potentialities because their decisions
are based on what they need. In other words, by appealing to needs Maslow fell into
the ‘purposive’ trap. In everyday language a need is something that is necessary for a
specified goal, which is rarely made explicit because it is taken for granted. ‘I need x’
means ‘I need x in order to y’. In ordinary speech having a need is also to have a
purpose and so one cannot have a need for its own sake, even if certain needs
(food) are more persistent than others (tickets to a football match). From the fact
Applying Purposive Ethics
173

of this general persistence, it is tempting to conclude that a strict order of importance
operates for human beings, as Maslow claimed. This temptation should be resisted,
however, for things are necessary to the accomplishment of ends strictly in relation
to specific situations. For example, food is essential for the maintenance of life, but
sometimes antibiotic drugs (which are not food) are more important. Consequently,
no fixed hierarchy can be applied to necessity independent of the ends in view.
Maslow abandoned the view that a need implies a purpose and invested his
needs with the power of ‘motive-force’. If the notion of motive-force is rejected
and if it is assumed that individuals make choices on the grounds of reason, the
motive hierarchy becomes a set of priorities for personal and social action. For
example, reason indicates that political rulers should secure their citizens against
the necessities of food, shelter and competitors before securing procreation and
child-rearing. Rulers should then attempt to provide for the civilised amenities of
science, art and philosophy.
Similarly, Maslow’s hierarchy, stripped of the ‘motive-force’ component,
amounts to the general statement that work organisations should be directed
towards emancipating individuals from the primary levels of need, leaving them to
work towards higher levels of achievement. It is, therefore, unsurprising that the
notion of a hierarchy of needs seems familiar and useful. Received in this light,
Maslow’s theory supports the cause of purposive, rather than motive-force, ethics.
Maslow’s theory is popular because managers will continue to require some
systematisation of behavioural expectations to help in the decision-making process.
New managers, for example, need guidelines if they are to become competent and
managers generally need some means of expressing their common purposes. More
generally, if something as simple as ‘purpose’ is central to all ethical issues, it is
possible to re-examine the large body of traditional ethical wisdom in relation to
the concept of purpose and to restate it in a consistent manner.
Relevance for Managers
The traditional distinctions between ethical and non-ethical issues, which are arbi-
trary when they depended on arbitrarily promulgated ethical rules, dissolve in tradi-
tional ethics. For example, utilitarians defined the ultimate good in terms of ‘the
greatest good for the greatest number’. This definition implies that every question
which has a bearing on the happiness of the greatest number is necessarily an
ethical question and that no question which has no such bearing is an ethical ques-
tion. Purposive ethics sees no distinction of kind between ‘ethical rules’ and ‘poli-
cies’ or between ‘functional’ and ‘good’. It opens all fields of choice to some degree
of ethical enquiry.
The view of purposive ethics espoused here is relevant to all aspects of manage-
rial behaviour. Questions such as ‘Should I become a manager?’ ‘Should I promote
174
Chapter 9: Purposive Ethics for Managers

‘hard- or soft-skill’ management?’ ‘Should I tell the truth?’ are all candidates for anal-
ysis. For researchers, matters to be investigated include:
(a) Which purposes typify work experience? Which are most important to managers
specifically and working people generally?
(b) Which of those purposes can be attained and at what costs in relation to other
typical purposes?
(c) How can managers maximise individual effectiveness in fulfilling their
purposes?
Theories are formulated to explain and predict phenomena and to challenge and
extend human knowledge. Furthermore, a theoretical framework gives rise to
research programmes. In the social sciences most theories are deterministic (e.g.,
Marxism, behaviourism) and those that are not insist on the fact of human intentions
and meanings (e.g., Weberian sociology, existentialism). Scientific theory differs
from everyday knowledge because it is directed at discovering how to do things
that cannot be done at the time the theory is conceived. It is unnecessary to advance
a theory about what is commonly and reliably done. In this case, the relevant ques-
tion is why this specific method is chosen, i.e., what body of knowledge dictates the
choice of action. Only when no reliable method is known to do something is it appro-
priate to turn to theory. Discovering such a theory is dependent on discovering the
cause of the event the occurrence of which is not yet under control. Scientific theory
is thus deterministic by construction. Consequently, social scientists have thrown a
cloud of obfuscation around the question of purpose, understood as the conscious
planning of an act. In most cases, social scientists have even abolished the idea of
purpose by asserting a species of universal determinism which holds that all
human action is caused. But is determinism, in any form, an appropriate basis for
a theory of ethics?
The theory offered here agrees with the existentialists’ insistence on the impor-
tance of choice and purpose as a basis for human action. The difference is that exis-
tentialists show little or no interest in formal deductive logic and prefer to encourage
individuals to develop their own theories of personal existence. Existentialists have
an ambivalent attitude to authority which, for them, cannot be other than confidence
trick, but one they must accept (reluctantly) if they are to act with justification. There-
fore, the choice is between the very best confidence trick and a void.
Humanity’s privileged perspective on its own experience reveals that humans are
purposive beings. A study of relevant and effective purposes is therefore called for in
management studies. Such a study requires coming to grips with what managers
want and elucidating the conflicts of purposes that exist. It will indicate situations
where the convergence of purposes that exists challenge other purposes which
enjoy established privilege. To this extent, purposive management will necessarily
be revolutionary in the sense of imposing a regime of change. However, this obser-
vation does not imply that the most effective strategies for maximising the fulfilment
of purposes will be combative. Purposive managers are orientated towards concilia-
Relevance for Managers
175

tion and conflict resolution as tools to harness the synergistic properties of cooper-
ation. They will choose to study those purposes with which they sympathise in pref-
erence to those they oppose.
With the rise of managerialism, the problem of how ethical values in business
are justified is magnified since (as is argued in Chapter 10) management based on
rational argumentation has been transformed into managerialism based on author-
itarian practices. Consequently, new business problems have arisen under manage-
rialist regimes because many middle managers, professional non-managers and
other employees see no good reason why they should regulate their behaviour
according to what they see as arbitrary use of power.
In the extreme case, the problem of justification does not arise for authoritarian
managerialists because they enforce their decisions without justification. It does not
arise, either, when managers are concerned with the means required rationally to
achieve a desired goal. Rather, the problem of justification arises when managers
communicate such rationality in terms of the needs of the situation and encounter
conflicting ethical convictions. When transcendental obligations are forsaken, it is
tempting to retreat to an unrelieved relativistic view of ethics. There is, however,
an alternative strategy based on rationality. Adopting it widely will ameliorate the
excesses of authoritarian managerialism.
A purposive ethics differs from traditional ethics at the experiential level. The
traditional conception of ethics involves ideas of guilt, obligation, blind obedience,
punishment and self-righteousness. These ideas need not play any part whatsoever
in a purposive ethics. By contrast, the theory offered here is consistent with the
view that managerial authority is based on rational argumentation. When managers
move beyond first-person singular statements of ethical value to second and third-
person statements, they have power and authority at their disposal. Where they
rely on power, they inevitably fall back on the ‘obligatory’ approach to ethics
which they attempt to achieve through demands and commands. Authoritative
managers face the challenge of marshalling arguments for accepting purposive prop-
ositions, relevant facts and purposive conclusions. After all, if the absence of ration-
ality is what characterises faith, the opposite is also true. Where one has no faith in
anything, then there is only rationality left to answer to.¹¹
Kerr (1996: 357).
176
Chapter 9: Purposive Ethics for Managers

Chapter 10:
From Managerialism to Heroic Management
Books on the history of management generally acknowledge that, although there
have been ‘managers’ for thousands of years, management and its academic study
developed apace in the early years of the twentieth century. Authors are at one in
drawing up a list of notable contributors to the rise of management. It has even
been said that management is the most important innovation of the twentieth
century.
Rarely, if ever, has a new basic institution, a new leading group, a new central function, emerged
as fast as has management since the turn of the century. Rarely in human history has a new
institution proven indispensable so quickly. Even less often has a new institution arrived with
so little opposition, so little disturbance, so little controversy.¹
These words were written in the late 1960s by Peter Drucker, one of America’s fore-
most management writers and consultants. In the 1990s he admitted that the first
two sentences remain valid, but one can no longer claim that management encoun-
ters little opposition or causes little disturbance. Rather, management has become
highly controversial.
The Rise of Managerialism
In his study of the history of industrial relations and its socio-economic conse-
quences, Godard identifies five perspectives on management which he defines as
the stewardship of capital. On the left of the political spectrum, he places radical
Marxism, then liberal reformism, orthodox pluralism, managerialism and finally
neoliberalism on the right. What differentiates orthodox pluralists from manageri-
alist scholars, according to Godard, is the way they conceive of conflict in the
employment relationship. While orthodox pluralist scholars consider conflict to be
legitimate and requires governance mechanisms, their managerialist counterparts
hold it to be illegitimate. Specifically, managerialists regard overt manifestations
of conflict in the employment relationship as the result of misunderstanding on
the part of employees or other organisational dysfunctions, including suboptimal
management practices. According to Godard, the former position characterises the
ideology of industrial relations scholarship, the latter that of the human resources
management literature. The success of human resources management, as a body
of ideas and practices, and the progressive adoption by managers of the manageri-
Drucker (1980: 219).
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-012

alist perspective throughout the second half of the twentieth century is compatible
with Godard’s analysis.
Notwithstanding its prevalence, managerialism is rarely promoted as such. To
those who endorse it, managerialism is an effective and efficient approach for the
reform and running of workplaces based on the principle that firms pursue goals
defined by managers on behalf of all corporate stakeholders. Further, managers
are equipped with the sort of specialised knowledge that enables them to devise
and implement value-free means for achieving relevant objectives.
To critics, the self-referential aspect of a definition, according to which managers
know best how to achieve the goals they define, reveals managerialism as a self-
promoting ideology. To illustrate their criticism, scholars point to the way manageri-
alists have entrenched themselves in all corners of the power structure of firms,
museums, government bodies, universities, hospitals and other public administra-
tions. Further, commentators have noted that although managers are purportedly
working in a post-growth era (in a context of saturated markets, at least in developed
economies), they continue to add layers of technocracy to their organisations,
thereby consolidating managerialism.²
Beyond sprawling technocracy, one of the most notable manifestations of mana-
gerialism has been a progressive concentration of power in the hands of professional
managers who move between industry sectors. As executives have secured ever more
power and income, middle management has diminished in its relative size and
power base. Simultaneously, the authority of experts and non-management profes-
sionals has eroded.³
Although authority is a concept central to organisational life, the management
and organisational literature is uninformative. When authors purport to analyse
authority, they typically analyse power which has resulted in a paucity of empirical
studies of authority in the management literature. Kiechel concurs, commenting that
the question of the nature and source of authority, although typically present in the
background of management theory, has not received much attention from
researchers. Two exceptions to this statement are McMahon, whose work has received
little attention from management scholars, and the present authors who emphasise
‘the power of authority’ in their study of the philosophy of leadership.
As Chapter 1 argued, authority has two faces: a form of power (as in ‘the author-
ities have decided to close borders’) and a source of power (as in ‘I do as she says
because she is an authority in her field’). This dual nature of authority has remained
largely unrecognised in the literature, even in the works of noted authors who have
in their majority conceived authority as legitimate power.
Abbott (2015); Baddeley (2013); Barberis (2013); Blühdorn (2017); Fenton-O’Creevy (2001); Gordon
& Whitchurch (2010); Klikauer (2013; 2015; 2019); Locke & Spender (2011); Meyer (2020); Stolz (2017).
Ehrenreich (2006); Lynch (2014); Shepherd (2018); Smith & Hussey (2010); Thomas & Dunkerley
(1999); Vincent (2011); Ward (2011); Wheatley (1992).
178
Chapter 10: From Managerialism to Heroic Management

In workplaces, a consequence of treating authority exclusively as a form of
power is to confine its attribution to managers, as if only managers could have
authority. Further, the neglect of authority as a source of power leads to the view
that non-managerial technical experts are not authorities in their fields. However,
while managerial power is concerned with the ability to rule, the recognition of indi-
viduals as authoritative owing to their special knowledge or skill does not imply a
claim or ability to rule. A distinction needs to be made, therefore, between managers
as formal authorities and (non-managerial) employees, experts and other professio-
nals as informal authorities.
The basis of professional authority is technical knowledge and competence. As
such, authoritative professionals act as a source of innovation by providing
managers with effective ways of achieving organisational goals. As a matter of ortho-
doxy, managers are supposed to uphold the correct ways of doing things while also
(paradoxically) scanning the environment for better ways. In these circumstances,
the contributions of professionals, provided they accord with organisational aims,
should receive managerial support. Such context sets the scene for a delicate act
of managerial balancing. On the one hand, the expertise of professionals and the
way it contributes to organisational performance consolidates managerial power.
On the other hand, as an independent source of power professional authority
weakens managerial power. One way to eliminate such tension is to claim both
expertise and ability to rule, that is, to claim both authority and power through resort
to the notion of hierarchical position. Managerialism, the perspective of management
which is grounded on the principle that managers simultaneously have the ability
and right to rule owing to their role and superior knowledge, rests precisely on
such claims.
In the early 1980s, authors referred to that concern to resist challenges to mana-
gerial prerogatives and preserve the existing system of power relations as ‘manage-
rialism’.⁴ Managerialism, then, was regarded as a ‘view from the top’ which incorpo-
rates an ideology consistent with the maintenance and promotion of the legitimacy
of managers. Although it is drawn from diverse sources, several core concepts were
said to summarise the managerialist perspective. First, humans are primarily moti-
vated by economic goals. Second, organisations are mechanistic systems which
can be planned and controlled by managers. Third, the primary task of managers
is to increase efficiency through ‘correct’ organisational structure and close supervi-
sion of workers. Fourth, since the divorce of ownership from control of enterprises
occurred, managers have become largely non-propertied. Thus, the authority of
managerial control has been transferred from a traditional basis in property owner-
ship to a basis in technical expertise. Fifth, as the authority of management is based
on technical expertise, it is therefore legitimate. Managerialism, therefore, represents
Lansbury & Spillane (1983: 87).
The Rise of Managerialism
179

an ideology based on a particular theory of authority. However, the theory of
authority on which managerialists rely is seriously flawed.
Managerialists argue that managerial authority is concerned with the rights of
those elevated to offices and positions of ‘leadership’ to issue commands and control
others through demonstrations of personal and technical competence. Managerial
control is thus legitimised by the expertise of administrators and the legal system
itself. Consequently, it is widely believed that organisations are technical hierarchies
controlled by those most fitted in terms of natural and acquired abilities.
In After Virtue, MacIntyre argues that managerial authority based on technical
expertise is a fiction because, as opposed to engineering knowledge, there is no
genuine managerial knowledge. The widespread belief that managerial power and
authority are justified because managerialists possess the ability to put knowledge
to work effectively presupposes claims to knowledge which cannot be made good.
Managerialists justify themselves and their claims to authority, power and rewards
by invoking their own competence as managers of social change. This justification,
MacIntyre argues, is based on the appeal to their ability to deploy a body of social
scientific knowledge understood as comprising a set of universal law-like generalisa-
tions. But these law-like generalisations are myths. If true, organisations are
managed by a bureaucratic illusion and their employees are oppressed by ignorance
rather than expertise.
MacIntyre, notes that managerialists have a vested interest in concealing or
euphemising institutional conflict. Furthermore, they avoid rational argumentation
and debate because they are by nature unpredictable and unmanageable. As such,
debates can damage the carefully crafted image of the managerialist as an expert
in human affairs, technical expert in business, social scientist and ‘leader’. However,
managerialists do not possess the keys to an imaginary kingdom. They do not have
access to specialised knowledge and their attempts to present themselves as morally
neutral guardians of efficiency and effectiveness are jejune. Although managerialists
typically claim moral neutrality in their pursuit of ‘effectiveness’, this claim is
patently false since the effectiveness of decisions or policy is relative to specific
goals. Further, the emphasis on managerial effectiveness selects and promotes a
certain, and not necessarily desirable, form of human existence.
MacIntyre argues that whether managers are effective or not is a different ques-
tion from that of the morality of the ends which their effectiveness serves or fails to
serve. Nonetheless, he argues, there are solid grounds for rejecting the claim that
effectiveness is a morally neutral value. Indeed, the concept of effectiveness is insep-
arable from a mode of human existence in which the contrivance of means is in the
main the manipulation of human beings into compliant patterns of behaviour, and it
is by appeal to their effectiveness in this respect that managers claim the right to do
so. But what if effectiveness is a masquerade of social control rather than a reality?
What if effectiveness were a quality widely imputed to managers and bureaucrats
both by themselves and others, but in fact a quality which rarely exists apart from
this imputation? MacIntyre answers his own questions in the affirmative. The
180
Chapter 10: From Managerialism to Heroic Management

moral neutrality of managers is a moral fiction and their claim to special expertise
qua managers is an empirical fiction.
Several researchers have applied MacIntyre’s critique to managerialism in public
administration and universities.⁵ These authors offer trenchant criticisms of manage-
rialists’ abuse of power and the deleterious effect of their behaviour. In the case of
universities, they argue that they are (or should be) places of constrained disagree-
ment which can best be achieved through rational argumentation and a commitment
to truth. Instead, universities have succumbed to managerialism, academics have
been marginalised, bureaucratised and supervised by administrators and layers of
managers with job titles of breath-taking ambiguity. Academic autonomy has disap-
peared, replaced with accountability for unimportant bureaucratic tasks. This has
gone hand in hand with a dramatic change from academics’ role as educators to
trainers and associated demands from students that their material be practical
and ‘relevant’. Management academics, who in the 1970s, fought their way out of
large faculties and created semi-autonomous, profitable business schools, have
been unceremoniously returned to the womb. In several cases, these business
schools were rated as the best in their country, only to be re-absorbed into large
faculties and their profits appropriated and distributed elsewhere.
As often happens in business under managerialism, when decentralised units
are successful their profits are re-distributed to expand management, subsidise
cost centres and prop up underperforming profit centres. As this redistribution of
power and decline of authority proceeds, managerialists pay themselves exorbitant
salaries. Finally, the tradition of tenured employment has been sacrificed in the
name of profit maximisation so that academics have lost the job security which
acted as protection against managers and others who disagreed with their views.
Long-serving academics who have taught controversial topics find themselves
today under attack, not only from social media but also, and worryingly, from
other academics with support from their managers in the bureaucracy. That bureau-
crats have so much power and interfere daily in the working lives of respected and
high-performing academics is hard to believe unless one understands the rise of
managerialism and its authoritarian underpinning and consequences.
Scholars are generally agreed that the main features of the practice of manage-
rialism include an expansion in the number, power and remuneration of senior exec-
utives with a corresponding downgrading of the role and influence of skilled
workers. Furthermore, there has been a greater separation of professional work
and management activity and greater control over the decision-making powers of
professionals. As the power of professionals has decreased, the power of senior
managers has increased, and more and more work has been outsourced. Employees
have thereby been reduced to mere human resources, or human remains.
Overeem & Tholen (2011); Stolz (2017).
The Rise of Managerialism
181

In addition to overt, if unsophisticated, assertions of power, insidious avenues
exist for managerialists to control their colleagues. One such avenue obtains from
the growing emphasis on emotive language and the corresponding decline of argu-
mentation that have characterised the last decades. The opportunity therefore exists
for managerialists to conduct meetings which eschew decision-making in favour of
sharing one’s feelings, opinions and values with each other. However, since feelings
are private and inscrutable, managerialists who encourage their expression prevent
argument and debate in favour of what amounts to psychotherapy, in that emotional
catharsis coexists with and sometimes takes priority over more conventional deliber-
ation. However, emotion-venting meetings of such kind are condemned to sterility.
Rational decision-making, based on statements of feeling which are neither true
nor false, cannot be an effective challenge to managerialist power. Further, ‘expres-
sive’ meetings facilitate the pursuit of manipulative goals. Specifically, they are liable
to being interpreted as evidence of the caring attentions of managerialists, or a
sleight of hand in which employees are given the false impression that they are
being consulted on consequential issues. By way of contrast, authoritative managers
(in Friedrich’s and Popper’s sense) actively encourage and promote argument for
including employees’ perspectives on mission-relevant matters and rational deci-
sion-making related thereto.
To establish their authority, managerialists could be expected at least to engage
in reasoned elaboration and argumentation rather than seek to maximise their (coer-
cive) power. That is, they could be expected to strive to be authoritative managers
rather than authoritarian managerialists. However, reasoning and debating with
colleagues exposes them to criticism and runs the risk of undermining the view
that they are competent managers, or even leaders. To appreciate how remote mana-
gerialism is from traditional management and to outline a way to overcome manage-
rialism, a critical exposition of traditional philosophies of management, and partic-
ularly that promoted by Drucker, is necessary.
Drucker on Management
Most of the theories of management which developed alongside Taylor’s scientific
management in the early years of the twentieth century developed models of effi-
ciency based on a military model. Understandably so, military organisations manage
people efficiently and develop a discipline in the ranks which has a secure founda-
tion in legitimacy. Not only do military officers have considerable power they also
have the right to use it ruthlessly against truculent subordinates. These principles
were embraced by and remain popular with managers.
Fayol believed there are universal principles for management, as there are for
military organisations. These are: division of work; authority commensurate with
accountability; discipline; unity of command (orders from one superior only);
unity of direction; subordination of individual to general interest; fair remuneration
182
Chapter 10: From Managerialism to Heroic Management

of personnel; balance between centralisation and decentralisation; scalar chain of
authority and communication (from highest to lowest positions); order; equity;
stability of tenure; initiative; and esprit de corps.⁶
The next step was taken in the 1920s by Alfred Sloan at General Motors. Sloan
believed the major problem facing managers of large multi-purpose organisations
was decentralisation of authority. At GM, he created decentralised divisions on
Fayol’s principles, but he organised the corporation on the principle of federal
decentralisation. The five divisions of GM were established as semi-autonomous busi-
nesses, each with its own management and with full profit and loss accountability.
Atop the structure, a management team kept central control over policies and cash
flow. By the end of the 1940s, GM had become the managerial model for large organ-
isations around the world.
In the early 1940s, Drucker attempted to gain access to the workings of a large
corporation to learn about management from the inside. He had already published
The Future of Industrial Man in which he raised questions about the management
of large organisations, the role of big business in society and the foundations of
industrial order. He concluded that business enterprise had become the fundamental
institution of industrial society within which principles of governance were
embodied and the individual’s status and function realised. Management is, for
him, the crucial element in every business. As the two world wars had disabused
people of the view that politicians and military officers should be society’s leaders,
Drucker saw managers as filling the power vacuum. In this sense, Drucker’s
managers were to be the new cultural heroes.
As he admitted, Drucker had neither practical knowledge of management nor
exposure to managers at the workplace. Fortunately, General Motors came to his
aid and in 1943 he began working with GM’s top executives as a consultant and
researcher. He was immediately impressed by Sloan’s method of managing which
had received theoretical expression in a 1927 article by Donaldson Brown entitled
‘Decentralized Operations and Responsibilities with Coordinated Control’.
When Sloan took over control of GM in the early 1920s, he was faced with a large
organisation comprised of separate automobile companies competing against each
other in the marketplace. His solution was to centralise financial control and policy
development and decentralise operational authority. This ‘staff and line’ structure
resulted in a central marketing strategy including pricing, several semi-autonomous
operating divisions, and a central staff to provide advice and coordinate work. Sloan
argued that such ‘federalist’ system combined the initiative, responsibility, develop-
ment of personnel and flexibility of decentralisation with the advantages of central-
isation.
One of GM’s senior executives told Drucker that it was the Jeffersonian federal-
ists who provided the blueprint for big business with their emphasis on the need to
Fayol (1949).
Drucker on Management
183

foster citizenship and community. Drucker now had the outline of a management
model which attempted to address the issues of managerial power and authority
without mentioning those words. Working with Harold Smiddy, a GM vice-president,
Drucker argued that the best way to minimise the deleterious effects of managerial
power is to encourage workers to practice self-control and managers to exemplify
it. This ideal is best achieved if goals and standards are jointly defined and agreed
upon. What became known as ‘management by objectives and self-control’ (MBO)
became part of GM’s policy in 1952. Its purposes were to redirect managerial
authority away from ‘legitimate power’ to reasoned elaboration and debate, fulfil
personal aspirations of managers and employees and encourage entrepreneurship
within organisations (what was later to be called ‘intrapreneurship’). Managers
should, therefore, see their task as managing the behaviour which, when judged
against work objectives, is called performance.
Drucker maintained that to manage by performance is to aim to produce
personal responsibility for work by encouraging employees to develop objectives
and standards for themselves. To maximise their authority at work, managers control
their own performance, an endeavour which requires self-discipline. Even if manage-
ment by objectives is not necessary to give the organisation unity of direction, it is
necessary to realise management by self-control. If the element of self-control is
replaced with control by others, authoritative management gives way to authoritarian
practices.
According to Drucker, senior managers have three jobs: to make economic
resources productive (the entrepreneurial job); to make human resources productive
(the administrative job); to help make public resources productive (the political job).
To do these three jobs well, managers are to think through and define the specific
purpose of the organisation, to make work productive and the worker achieving,
and to manage social contacts and social responsibilities. The specific purpose of
business is economic performance: to create customers. Accordingly, managers
need to administer to the present and the future; they need to be entrepreneurs,
risk-takers and innovators.
According to Sloan and his executives at GM, the function of an organisation is
to make strength productive and weakness irrelevant. This principle was to guide
Drucker’s work for the rest of life. He was neither diverted from this principle by
human relations advocates who tried to impress upon him the importance of job
satisfaction, nor was he convinced by psychologists who claimed that one of the
major management problems is ineffective communication. He maintained a scep-
tical attitude towards the human relations advocates and their emphasis on friendly
supervision and people orientation, claiming that the human relations movement
grew out of attempts to subvert the growth of trade unions by pretending that
managers cared about the psychological needs of their employees. In 1950, he wrote:
The human relations policies which American management had been buying wholesale in the
past ten years have been a conspicuous waste and failure in my opinion […] Most of us in
184
Chapter 10: From Managerialism to Heroic Management

management […] have instituted them as a means of busting the unions. That has been the main
theme of these programs. They are based on the belief that if you have good employee relations
the union will wither on the vine.⁷
Drucker argued that there are three main forces of misdirection which create organ-
isational conflicts. These forces are the specialised work of managers, the existence
of hierarchy, and the differences in vision that exist in organisational life. MBO is a
way of overcoming these deficiencies by relating the task of each manager to the
overarching goals of the organisation. By this technique, management can become
a cohesive group activity rather than a loose-knit collection of individuals. The busi-
ness enterprise needs a principle of management that gives full scope to individual
strength and a common direction to effort which is achieved by MBO because it
substitutes ineffective external control for effective control from the inside. In
other words, MBO substitutes authoritarianism for authoritative management.
Drucker was forced to admit that the external control associated with manageri-
alism appears to have won the day. Managers have, as a rule, failed to take the initia-
tive, failed to take advantage of the strengths of people. In 1980 he wrote that
employees in most companies and public service institutions are mostly ‘underem-
ployed’. They are held accountable for diverse objectives set by managers but they
are not given the power and authority to achieve them. Drucker insisted instead
that employees are held responsible for the constant improvement of the entire oper-
ation, or what the Japanese call ‘continuous learning’.
This [employee responsibility] is not democracy, it is citizenship. It is not being permissive. It is
also not ‘participative management – which is often only a futile attempt to disguise the reality
of employee impotence through psychological manipulation. Actually imposing responsibility
on the employees – for plant community affairs, for their own goals and objectives; for contin-
uous improvement in the performance of their own work and job – immeasurably strengthens
management in the same way in which ‘decentralisation’ in the multinational company
strengthens management. It creates a better understanding of management decisions and mana-
gerial attitudes throughout the workforce.⁸
Often misunderstood as a proponent of managerialism, Drucker advanced views on
management which are compatible with those of Friedrich (exposed in Chapter 1).
For example, Drucker predicted that professional experts (or ‘knowledge workers’)
would become major contributors to organisational effectiveness and that managers
would need to recognise and reward their authority. Further, he warned against the
expanding power of cost centres relative to profit centres, the dangers of bureaucratic
management and the centralisation of managerial power. He also urged managers to
replace external control with internal control arguing that managers need to promote
freedom and personal responsibility at work. He agreed indirectly with Friedrich and
Drucker (1950: 7).
Drucker (1980: 188–189).
Drucker on Management
185

Popper that authoritative management requires a language that emphasises valid
reasoning and culminates in authoritative advice.
Drucker insisted that employees should be empowered according to their abili-
ties so that their freedom and responsibility are maximised. He was in tune with
the various work reform movements in Scandinavia which preceded the rise of mana-
gerialism and were eliminated by it. Towards the end of his long life, he expressed
disappointment at the failure of American managers to speak beyond the level of
self-interest and lamented the fact that managers, as managerialists, had become
a self-serving, paranoid minority who sought to increase their power at the expense
of other employees.
Drucker’s MBO has been widely criticised. By the 1970s it had become manage-
ment by objectives and the boss’s control and in the 1980s, with the growth of HR
departments, MBO became a bureaucratic nightmare. Moreover, Drucker’s promotion
of intrapreneurship, in which managers combined private profits with community
service, has become mere fashionable lip-service. ‘Rather, managers had become
ivory-tower number crunchers and bureaucratic parasites who preyed on producers
and the public and feasted on short-term profits.’⁹
Drucker tirelessly promoted corporate life and his deepest belief was that people
wanted to perform at work and see their organisations prosper. He passionately
defended management’s right to direct the collective power of others and to accept
responsibility for the achievement of actual results.When one of the present authors
asked his widow, Doris, why Peter did not write about power, she said that he did but
he called it responsibility. Regrettably, however, Drucker uses the word ‘responsi-
bility’ in two ways: to denote accountability to others and to acknowledge that
employees are the authors of their actions. It is not always clear to which he refers
when he says that managers and their colleagues must accept responsibility for their
actions. If he means accountability to others, then authority must enter the picture as
a correlative term. It is axiomatic in management, as elsewhere, that authority and
accountability are correlative concepts. Where accountability exceeds authority, as
is the case under managerialism, the result is tyranny.
Drucker never faced up to the issue of authority, viewing it as ‘legitimate power’
based not on ‘submission to force’ but on ‘the right of right over might.’ But, as he
acknowledged, legitimacy remained a problem for him. He even went so far as saying
that management was the second most illegitimate profession and the first one is fast
becoming legitimate. The problem for him was the tension between a managerial
elite that manages for organisational survival and profit and the needs of employees
for security, satisfaction and continuous learning. In short, he did not see how mana-
gerial authority can be based on anything more than employee acquiescence to
despotic bureaucracy. He sought, therefore, a form of work contract in which
Waring (1992: 228).
186
Chapter 10: From Managerialism to Heroic Management

employees accepted managers as their ‘governors’ but which also allowed a degree
of self-government.
Of all his work on management, Drucker regarded his arguments for self-
governing plant communities as the most original and important. He was frustrated
by the unwillingness of managerialists to empower working people beyond the bare
minimum. During the Second World War, he saw firsthand at GM the possibilities of
what would become the Scandinavian semi-autonomous work group movement in
the 1970s. In both cases, the hopes for worker empowerment of this sort have faded.
Drucker was one of management’s greatest supporters, but he was also prepared
to be its vehement critic when it attempted to centralise power to itself. Readers were
surprised to find him writing that management is making it difficult for people to
work. He noted wistfully that although job enrichment has been around for decades
and has been universally successful, managerialists are not interested.What they are
interested in, if not obsessed by, is leadership.
It is understandable that practicing managers become impatient with conceptual
analyses of management and leadership. It is equally understandable that managers
see leadership as a goal to which they should aspire. There is no doubt that leader-
ship has a positive connotation and, in an era when management as managerialism
has come under public attack because of its authoritarian proclivities, leadership is
clearly the topic de jour. But do managers, even effective ones, deserve to be called
leaders?
Drucker was ambivalent, if not downright sceptical, about management’s obses-
sion with leadership. Indeed, in Management, ‘leadership’ does not appear in his
glossary or index. Readers need to return to his 1954 book, The Practice of Manage-
ment, to see that he devoted two out of 466 pages to leadership. Having defined the
purpose of an organisation as making common people do uncommon things, he
points out that he has not written about turning common people into uncommon
people. That is, he has not written about leadership.
With an eye to management, Drucker claimed that leadership cannot be created
or promoted, taught or learned. He insisted that management cannot create leaders.
Rather, management can only create the conditions under which potential leadership
qualities become effective or can stifle those qualities. There is no need to follow him
in his discussion of the ‘spirit’ of an organisation and the ways in which leaders
allegedly create an appropriate spirit. In fact, Drucker soon dropped such spiritual
language and turned his attention to the obsession with charisma that HR managers
were demonstrating in the late 1980s. He was amused by one manager who asked
him to run a seminar on how to acquire charisma. He informed the naïve manager
that leaders think through, define and establish their organisation’s mission, set
goals, priorities and maintain standards. Leaders, he said, see leadership as respon-
sibility rather than as power and privilege. They strive to earn trust without which
there will be no followers. When Drucker concluded, the manager claimed that
what he said is no different from what has been known for years as effective manage-
Drucker on Management
187

ment. In short, there is no need to talk of leadership, except for rhetorical purposes.
And that was precisely Drucker’s conclusion.
According to managerialists, there are effective managers, ineffective managers
and leaders. Long lists of qualities can be found in management books which
purport to reveal the difference between managers and leaders. In all cases, the
words that are allegedly characteristic of leaders are more positive and virtuous
than those that characterise managers. Apart from the obvious fact that leaders
require followers and managers do not, there is no attempt made by these authors
to analyse the difference between effective managers and leaders. The qualities
attached to putative leaders in management can be, and should be, equally attached
to effective managers. It is thus difficult to resist the conclusion that the current rage
for leadership, as Drucker described it in 1988, is yet just another example of
management-speak and propaganda. There is no need to add another tendentious
and self-serving concept to a ‘profession’ over-burdened with jargon.
During the 1970s, one of the longest periods of growth in recent economic history
ended. In the 1980s an age of increasing turbulence began. According to Drucker, a
time of turbulence is a dangerous time because of the widespread temptation to deny
reality. Writing in the early 1980s, he argued that the new realties fit neither the
assumptions of the Right nor those of the Left. ‘The greatest and most dangerous
turbulence today results from the collision between the delusions of the decision-
makers, whether they be in governments, in the top managements of business, or
in union leadership, and the realties.’¹⁰ A time of turbulence is also one of great
opportunity for those who can understand and exploit the new realties.
The gurus of the 1960s and 1970s who achieved fame with motivational theories
offer few, if any, insights that had not been developed before the Great Depression of
the 1930s. Most of the advocates of worker participation of the mid-1970s merely
restated arguments that reach back to the early years of the twentieth century. For
example, the much-publicised achievements of the Volvo and Saab plants in Sweden
were, in large part, the result of ideas and practices adopted in General Motors and
other companies in the Second World War, when shortages of supervisors and engi-
neers forced radical changes to managerial assumptions about work design.
Drucker was convinced that post-1980 management gurus would have to address
a new set of problems and develop radically different approaches to management
and organisation. He also insisted that managers must learn how to manage without
dependence on gurus. The demands of well-educated people for challenging profes-
sional work increase pressures on managers to modify hierarchical structures and to
introduce labour-saving technology. Bureaucratic structures cannot operate effec-
tively when decisions about new technology need to be taken quickly and with
expert advice to support them. As such, decision-making power which is buried in
Drucker (1981: 10).
188
Chapter 10: From Managerialism to Heroic Management

over-burdened management hierarchies and committees is not constructive power.
Rather, it is a negative force which ruins many organisations.
Drucker admitted that management in the 1980s was suffering a crisis of legiti-
macy. Managers were blamed for poor productivity, for general incompetence, for
their conduct of industrial relations and their indifference to the plight of weaker
employees. Drucker wrestled long and hard with the notion of management legiti-
macy and criticised managers generally for their unwillingness or inability to
speak and act for the wider community. In particular, he held against them that
they retired behind the protection of managerial prerogatives, government protection
and bailouts to become another self-serving group without over-inflated salaries.
Drucker concluded that the managers of the twenty-first century will be effective
only if they cease to view themselves as representing a ‘special interest’. In a social
arena overcrowded by true believers in special causes, managers must establish
themselves as representatives of the common good. They can no longer depend on
politicians to be the integrating force but need to become integrators themselves.
That is, managers need to become educators and advocates. ‘The manager, in
other words, will have to learn to create the “issues” to identify both the social
concern and the solution to it, and to speak for the producer interest in society as
a whole rather than for the special interest of “business”’¹¹
However, the problem of preventing the rise of managerialism will persist under
the ‘new manager’. This problem will require continued vigilance by community
interest groups who seek to restrict the overweening power of business and govern-
ment. Management itself will need to be ‘de-bureaucratised’ so that employees
regain a degree of control over decisions which affect their working lives.
Drucker’s Heroic Managers
Although Drucker’s ideal of a society in which managers are the new cultural heroes
has not come to pass, there is in his philosophy a heroic element which stands apart
from his social idealism. This aspect of his thought is a result of his commitment to
the heroic maxim that ‘one is what one does’, a view that spans the centuries from
Homer to Sartre.
The present authors have argued elsewhere that Drucker’s philosophy of
management can be analysed, in part, through the lens of the oldest Western world-
view: ancient heroism. Unlike modern heroism which exaggerates and glorifies
everyday performances, ancient heroism was based on the highest standards of
warlike achievement. Ancient heroism is a philosophy of action in which people
are judged, not by intentions, but by performance based on successful endeavour.
In a nutshell, ancient heroism is a philosophy of power.
Drucker (1981: 199).
Drucker’s Heroic Managers
189

In heroic society, individuals are what they do. There are no hidden depths to use
as excuses for failure. Indeed, in Homer’s Iliad, there is no psychological language:
no unconscious motives, no personality traits, no motivational needs. Homer is inno-
cent of a language of mind. His heroes associated certain behaviours with bodily
changes, a habit which persists today, as when people say, ‘I have a job, but my
heart is not in it’, or ‘I lack the guts to resign.’ Homer had no words for inner psycho-
logical forces which allegedly interfere with and thus compromise action. In Homeric
society individuals and their actions are identical: there is no actor behind the
actions, just as there is no lightning behind the flash. Today’s speakers are inclined
to believe in an actor which pulls the strings of action. They have many words for this
actor: soul, psyche, mind, ego, self, character, personality. Not so in Homer whose
language is naturalistic. For example, ‘psyche’ for Homer means breath which leaves
the body at death and ‘soma’ means a corpse. ‘Psychosomatic’, therefore, means the
interaction of breath and corpse which is absurd. Today’s use of ‘psychosomatic’ to
refer to the interaction of mind and body is equally absurd, insofar as ‘mind’ is
conceived as a non-bodily entity.
If Homer’s characters have neither minds nor psychological language, one is
justified to wonder why they behave at all. The answer to that question is captured
in three Rs: roles, rules and rewards. Every individual has a given role in a well-
defined hierarchical system which is held together by rules and rewards. People
are defined by their role which tells them what they owe others and what others
owe them. Their role tells them how to act in the face of enemies and how to relate
to friends. To use the language of Follett and Drucker, all individuals have a function
which determines their status and duties. Consequently, they are judged according to
their performance in their roles. As MacIntyre noted: ‘By performing actions of a
particular kind in a particular situation a man is given warrant for judgement
upon his virtues and vices; for the virtues just are those qualities which sustain a
free man in his role and which manifest themselves in those actions which his
role requires.’¹²
If Homeric people know what they are to do, they also know how to evaluate the
actions of others. And since they judge performance and ignore intentions, they use
objective criteria expressed in factual statements. In heroic societies, moral behav-
iour is assessed empirically. Actual performances are either praised or blamed and
one cannot deflect one’s peers’ judgement by pointing to factors beyond one’s
control.
In summary, there is in ancient heroism no psychological language by which
objective performance can be compromised. Aspects of ancient heroism survive in
the exploits of successful military commanders, such as US General George S. Patton,
and in the sporting arena where, at least in principle, one is judged on objective per-
MacIntyre (1985: 122).
190
Chapter 10: From Managerialism to Heroic Management

formance and rewarded or penalised accordingly. In these examples, roles are clearly
defined, rules are in the main not negotiable and rewards go to achievers.
That psychologists are now part of professional sporting teams and manage-
ment, points to a watering down, or even a rejection, of the heroic view. Management
by performance based on objective criteria is in danger of giving way to management
by personality based on subjective criteria.
The relationship between ancient heroism and Drucker’s management philos-
ophy rests on the emphasis on task achievement and contribution to an organisation.
As he rejects the need for a managerial psychology, Drucker can emphasise without
contradiction the importance of responsibilities, by which he means that the
synthesis of personal responsibility and organisational accountability is achieved.
Those who perform to a high standard should be well rewarded. Homer’s heroes
were prepared to die in battle; Drucker’s managers are prepared to be fired in
their own battles. Homer’s warriors were supported by camp-followers who had
no power over them. Drucker was adamant that cost centres should not have
power over profit centres. These similarities illustrate how far postmodern corpora-
tions have deviated from a basic heroic principle since camp followers frequently
control warriors rather than provide a service for them.
Although the leading warriors of the Iliad frequently disagree vigorously with
each other’s views, they are generally able to resolve important issues. Drucker
encouraged disagreement and debate and believed that consensus and harmony
are dangerous ideals. Ancient heroes knew what they had to achieve and were not
distracted by irrelevant idealistic discussions. Drucker argued that the cascading
of clear objectives is management’s core activity in the absence of which organisa-
tional survival and success are impossible. Indeed, to the reader of Homer, the
managers who dominate The Practice of Management and its sequels remind one
of the characters that populate the Iliad. One could say that Drucker’s MBO is ancient
heroism transposed to management, or that ‘ancient heroism is the Ariadne’s thread
with which Drucker’s management writings are amenable to coherent analysis.’¹³
The relationship between ancient heroism and Drucker’s management philos-
ophy can be pushed only so far, however. Drucker was, after all, a Christian and a
devotee of Kierkegaard, an existential writer who emphasised the importance of
freedom, responsibility and the need to leap into some form of faith to achieve a
life beyond everyday pragmatism. Then again, Drucker’s Christian existentialism
(like other versions of existentialism) incorporates heroic elements, especially the
view that individuals are what they do and what they do betrays their values.¹⁴
Joullié & Spillane (2015: 104); Kanter (1985).
Drucker (1971).
Drucker’s Heroic Managers
191

Existentialism and Management
In recent years there has been sporadic interest in the application of existentialist
philosophy to management.¹⁵ This interest in existentialism follows the pioneering
work of Ordione, Rice and Richter but neither depends on nor develops their general
commentaries. Interestingly, Drucker is rarely, if ever, mentioned in this literature.
The early contributors saw existentialism as a philosophy for the management
outsider and an alternative to conventional management and the ‘organisation
man’ so well described by Whyte. In contrast to Homer, they emphasised hostility
to role-playing and encouraged managers to take a stand against institutional
conformity and its associated demand to act in bad faith by committing themselves
to practices in which they do not believe. For example, Rice argues that despite its
reputation as a clandestine wedding of Nordic melancholy and Parisian pornog-
raphy, existentialism assists managers in building a philosophy which does not
make them dependent on organisational roles and rules but offers them relative
freedom and a personal type of responsibility. Rice further observes that managers
are frequently placed in compromising situations in the name of organisational prog-
ress. Consequently, they excuse their actions by blaming those who order them to act
unethically. Existentialists, however, do not understand managers as role-players
who slavishly obey others. Rather, existentialists emphasise individual managers
and their reactions to their organisational roles and rules. Individuals who believe
that what they are doing is wrong are not excused by their situation because they
are contributors to, and responsible for, their actions.
Ordione applies existentialist theory to the ‘jungle warfare of management
theory’. Quantitative models, he argues, contribute obscure tautologies to a small
part of management and ignore what is human at the workplace. Behaviourists
adopt ponderous principles which, when generalised, trivialise human behaviour
while other forms of psychology reduce humans to the status of sub-humans. Instead
of psychology, Ordione turns to ontology to provide a realistic base from which to
develop existential managers. Such managers experience themselves as alone in
an economic world that is remote from theories about their personality and motiva-
tional traits, organisational roles and rules. Existential managers are self-conscious
choosers of actions in situations which are governed by power and authority rela-
tions which attempt to submerge them in authoritarian relationships.
Richter claims a pervasive relevance of existentialism for public administration.
For him, the key concepts for existential administrators are the freedom to choose,
intentionality and purposiveness, risk-taking and authenticity. He points out that
existentialism is neither a prescriptive philosophy nor a social doctrine. Existential-
Asham (2007); Asham & Lawler (2008); Jackson (2005); Joullié & Spillane (2021); Lawler (2005);
MacMillan, Yue & Mills (2012); Spillane & Martin (2005; 2018); Spillane & Joullié (2015); Waugh
(2004); West (2008).
192
Chapter 10: From Managerialism to Heroic Management

ists are not dedicated to conversion; they seek liberation for individuals by showing
them their essential freedom and eliminating moralism. For example, the concept of
the Moral Law is inimical to existentialism, for that way lies coercion and dictator-
ship. Richter also argues that if individuals are aware of their fundamental purpo-
siveness, they tend to stand against social conformity, which is a false mode of
self-esteem. Above all, existentialism is valuable for managers because it is a philos-
ophy of freedom and personal responsibility which is attentive to the freedom and
responsibility of others.
It is noteworthy that in Rice’s, Ordione’s and Richter’s early contributions the
emphasis is on standing against conformity in management, risk-taking, and an
unresolvable tension between personal autonomy on the one side and organisational
roles and rules on the other. However, the tension between autonomy and formal
authority is decided in favour of autonomy.
It is a truism to state that the 1950s’ and 1960s’ emphasis on existential freedom
and responsibility was a ‘sign of the times.’ Nonetheless, this emphasis bears
comparison with more recent attempts to apply and accommodate existentialism
to the managerialism of the past thirty years. There is no doubt that existentialism
fell out of favour with management writers between 1970 and 2000 and it is tempting
to see this oversight as a reaction to the potential incompatibility of existentialism’s
ideas with the growing authoritarianism of managerialism.
After two decades of relative neglect, existentialism was revived in the early
years of this century by several management scholars. Waugh outlined in broad
terms the philosophies of Heidegger, Sartre and Camus and applied their ideas to
public administration. Jackson emphasised authenticity as a key aspect of Sartre’s
philosophy and applied it to business ethics. Articles by Lawler and Asham returned
to prominence Sartre’s existentialism and its applicability to the study of managerial
‘leadership’. Asham’s critique and extension of Lawler’s interpretation of Sartre’s
existentialism ended in a happy association and joint declaration in their 2008
article. The two authors expanded their discussion of existentialism and introduced
readers to Jaspers and Buber’s dialogic existentialism and their relevance for leader-
follower communication. West also adopted a sanguine approach to the possibilities
of applying Sartrean existentialist ideas to ethical decision-making in business. In
these cases, the assumption is that existential executives can navigate the difficult
path between radical freedom, personal responsibility and the power and authority
relations that underpin management. In this sense, the outsider has become an
insider.
Spillane and Martin argue that existentialism is a collection of philosophies
based on the doctrine that humans, as conscious beings, have no essence: they
are paradoxically ‘essentially free’. In Sartre’s language, human beings are essen-
tially nothing, alone in the world with themselves to create. Authority, then, cannot
be other than a confidence trick, but one that cannot be dispensed with if human
society is to be possible. For existentialists, the choice is thus between the best confi-
dence trick available or chaos. ‘This fits in with a number of observed psychological
Existentialism and Management
193

phenomena: the fear of freedom, the relief at becoming a true believer, and the post-
modern belief in the destruction of selfhood as a necessary condition for deliverance
from the illusion of autonomy to the world of sliding discourse.¹⁶
The fact that many managers have authoritarian tendencies reflects, in part, the
fact that management would be impossible unless there were some readiness to
accept uncritically apparently arbitrary managerial decisions. Consequently, any
management philosophy can only be based on different forms of authority and arbi-
trary assumptions about what is to be taken as true. The study of management, then,
is a study of different ideologies, why they are adopted and with what consequences.
The view that existentialism is a philosophy for the outsider is difficult to rebuke.
Drucker’s heroic managers combine the qualities of Homer’s warriors and Kier-
kegaard’s ‘knight of faith’. In an article on Kierkegaard, initially buried in an obscure
journal, Drucker agrees with the Dane that the crucial question for managers is to
decide who they are before submitting themselves to organisational rules and
roles. The task of management is to integrate the personal and the social by recon-
ciling the interests of employees with those of employers. The profit motive must not
be allowed to dominate if society is to remain harmonious. As such, there is not, nor
can there be, business ethics: there is only existential ethics.
As noted, the argument that Drucker’s work is grounded on a form of heroism,
according to which managers are assessed against and accountable for the highest
standards of workmanship, is compatible with existentialism’s fundamental view
that individuals are what they do. Drucker qualifies this position, in the manner of
the Sartre of Existentialism and Humanism, by adding that managers’ actions are
commitments they make before and to their community. Received in this light,
Drucker’s work can be read as an extension of the ‘heroic individualist’ tradition
inaugurated by Nietzsche and continued by Sartre and Camus. This tradition
attempts to combine solidarity with freedom, society with individuals and heroism
of the group with individual heroism.
Contrary to the views of those management writers who accuse Drucker of being
a proto-managerialist, it should be emphasised that he was critical of authoritarian
managers because they strive for power over people. Drucker’s managers strive for
autonomy and responsibility. The language of these managers is authoritative: they
are the authors of their existence and readily disseminate their creative products
to their colleagues. The language of authoritarian leaders is based not on individual
authoring but on a rationalised power, even cruelty, which is created to protect and
preserve employees, in their own interest as it were. An ‘external tyranny of
authority’ leads to the adoption of roles which are grounded on externally imposed
values.
A return to Drucker’s heroic model would confront the layers of bureaucratic
managerialists who have effectively muted the power and influence of technical
Spillane & Martin (2005: 94; 2018 :88).
194
Chapter 10: From Managerialism to Heroic Management

experts and other non-managerial professionals. Moreover, the managerialist obses-
sion with the centralisation of managerial power to the disadvantage of line units
and technical experts has essentially destroyed the work reform movements of the
1970s with their emphasis on semi-autonomous work units. Consequently, over-
coming managerialism requires a management philosophy according to which the
layers of bureaucratic managerialists are either removed in favour of a return to
active line management or subjected to severe tests of competence. What is required
to overcome managerialism is a philosophy of management which can withstand the
power of entrenched managerial privilege. Meeting this challenge is no easy task
given the self-protective barriers which managerialists employ to insulate themselves
from direct engagement with actual and potential competitors.
It is too simplistic to argue that Drucker was a friend of management and an
enemy of managerialism. There are many examples in Drucker’s numerous books
of his belief that, after the horrors of two world wars and the ensuing distrust of poli-
ticians, managers would fill the power vacuum and speak for the commonweal. This
never happened as American managers withdrew into their self-serving enclaves and
rewarded themselves handsomely for their efforts. Drucker was horrified at the
explosion of executive salaries and bonuses and turned to Japan (a country still
marked by its heroic, Bushido-style past) as the exemplar of the type of managerial
restraint he admired. On balance, when the transformation of management, as
Drucker understood and promoted it, into managerialism is considered, Drucker
argued against managerialism’s salient features.
Authoritarian and Authoritative Managers
For every individual there is a choice between authoritarianism and authoritative-
ness. For those who value the latter, the authority of managers, when it is not
based on technical expertise, is problematic because it is either authoritarian or
ill-deserved. If it is ill-deserved, because the manager in question occupies a position
without power or personal expertise, the stage is set for setting subordinates against
the manager either through countervailing power or authoritative argumentation. If
subordinates are confronting authoritarian managerialism, they are not necessarily
disposed to reject all forms of management since they are not inclined to reject
authoritative communications as a matter of principle. Their fight is with authoritar-
ians who are disinclined to engage in constructive discussion and argue their case in
a relatively unprejudiced fashion.
The challenge, therefore, is to find ways to promote, rather than deny, the
tension between management and managerialism. This means that authoritative
managers need literally to fight the organisation. The fight, however, need not be
based on aggression for that is self-destructive. Fighting the organisation does not
have to be a belligerent of selfish act. Rather, the fight is waged through a process
of attacking arguments rather than people.
Authoritarian and Authoritative Managers
195

Managers face a simple choice between automatic adherence to the will of
others, or a rebellious willingness to run arguments rather than people into the
ground. Authoritarian managers say yes when they do not think for themselves,
and they say no to saying no openly: they say yes and no at the same time.¹⁷
Authoritative managers say no: but they say yes when they think for themselves.
Authoritarians are the quintessential pragmatists who fawningly acquiesce to
superiors and treat subordinates harshly. Authoritative managers, on the other
hand, argue about facts and values and insist that we cannot avoid arguing
because the very denial would itself be an argument. Authoritarians assert that
we should not argue.
The minimum condition for the effectiveness of managerial authority is that
issues of importance can be weighed by the individuals to whom they are directed.
Managerialists fail to see authority in this light. Rather, they believe that their
authority is final and leaves no room for debate. Consequently, authoritarians are
dangerous because they rely on coercion to enforce their ‘authority’.
Managerialism is oligarchical since the managerialist teams that dominate
organisational hierarches are not regarded as ‘the best’, which they are required
to be in aristocratic regimes. In our era, however, it is likely that an argument
for aristocratic management would be met with derision. And given discussions
of the problems of managerial legitimacy, it is unlikely that such a view will be
offered. Rather, the management literature is saturated with anodyne theories of
leadership which are weak attempts to make managerialism appear more accept-
able and worthwhile. Moreover, it is difficult even to begin to understand what
aristocratic management would look like. There are, to be sure, aristocratic polit-
ical theories (e.g., Nietzsche’s) but obstacles await those who attempt to extrapo-
late from the practice of democratic politics to the practice of management which
is in no way democratic.
Managerialism has transformed management into the very iron cage of bureauc-
racy that Weber feared, with the added problem of a personality cult which attempts
to transform mediocre managers into leaders. This has happened because theories of
leadership, cast within the safe assumptions of the human resources approach to
management, have been promoted by managerialists and their servants of power
and accepted by a gullible, submissive public.
Managerialism can be overcome by: (a) ameliorating its negative aspects with
anodyne theories of management and leadership in which the relationship between
authoritarian managers and their colleagues is muted and rendered benign; or (b)
overcoming authoritarian managerialism with authoritative management. The
previous chapters make it clear that the present authors favour the second solution.
A notable consequence of managerialism is that aspect of authoritarianism
which reveals itself as brutality toward subordinates and fawning acquiescence
Spillane & Joullié (2015: 201).
196
Chapter 10: From Managerialism to Heroic Management

to superiors. Consequently, subordinates find that their performance and person-
alities are under constant evaluation while managerialists manage to avoid such
scrutiny. After all, it is relatively easy to assess the performance of employees
working in profit centres and difficult to assess that of those sitting in the camp
of HR, training and development, market research, strategic planning and the
myriad other cost-centres. Similarly, it is difficult to assess the performance of
managerialist bureaucrats in the protected upper reaches of the ever-expanding
organisational hierarchies. Not that those who work in the many layers of mana-
gerialist jobs are safe from attack by their superiors. On the contrary, they are
easily disposed of when they fall out of favour with the authoritarians at the top
since there are few, if any, objective criteria by which they can be reliably assessed.
The matter is further complicated nowadays by the deft use of diversity and inclu-
sion criteria to side-step issues of objective performance. Such vindictive practices
are evident in recent retrenchments at universities where older, white, male
academics with strong performance records have been ‘let go’ after decades of
service.
An authoritative model of management would insist on legitimising manage-
ment by objective performance, self-control and personal responsibility, rather
than management by personality, self-identification and external control. The
rationale for that position is not that such managers would necessarily have higher
morality or display less selfishness than other groups. Rather, the rationale is that
authoritative managers oppose performance management to authoritarian rule.
An authoritative model would provide a structure to check the worst excesses of
managerialism which are occurring because great power has been accrued but little
or no framework for responsibility, above fiscal, is in place for its use. Similarly, the
power of managerialists needs to be sustained by technical and moral authority. In
this context, the managerial role involves more than ruling employees and balancing
the budget: managers must be creators within their own field of expertise. They will
need to be strong enough of character not to engage in petty tyranny, and capable
enough to build organisations that can provide support for their surrounding
communities.
This transformation of management will appeal to those who want to be judged
by their performance and contribution to the organisation. Indeed, an authoritative
model will quickly sort out those individuals who deserve to be in positions of real
power and those who should act as assistants to line managers. Drucker noted that
one of the most difficult jobs to fill is that of HR manager because its occupant needs
to be prepared to be an assistant to senior and line managers. That HR departments
have acquired considerable power, including the right to overrule line managers, is
testimony to the success and omnipresence of managerialism.
The defence of authoritative management offered here is not a naïve or thinly
disguised endorsement of a pro-management position, itself stemming from an
uncritical adherence to a unitarist perspective of the employment relationship.
Indeed, promoting authority does not imply, as managerialists have it, that managers
Authoritarian and Authoritative Managers
197

can be trusted to make decisions benefiting the entire workplace on the assumption
that no fundamental divergence of interests exists within it. Rather, establishing
authority as a bulwark against managerialism amounts to saying that whatever work-
place conflicts arise can be temporarily and partially overcome through argumenta-
tion and the finding of common ground.
198
Chapter 10: From Managerialism to Heroic Management

Summary: Ten Contentions
The principal arguments advanced in this book and their implications for manage-
ment can be expressed as ten contentions. While some scholars might prefer the
notion of hypothesis, ‘contention’ is used here to emphasise points advanced for
argument which do not entail the need or possibility of empirical testing. This
strategy violates academic manners, but it has the advantage of focusing attention
on the main theoretical issues rather than relying on dubious empirical support.
Taken as a whole, the ten contentions can be called a theory of the foundation of
management.
The Status of Contentions
Popper was struck by the ease with which confirmatory evidence is found for conten-
tions in the social sciences. He had in mind the diverse contentions of Freud and
Jung which allow human behaviour to be interpreted in terms of their theories, so
that anything can be taken as confirmatory evidence. In management, the same
can be said of all contentions about motivation, cognition and personality – in
fact any contention which depends on inductive inferences about mental events –
because no fixed relationships between mental events (or hypothetical constructs)
and human behaviour can be established. Such abundance of confirmatory evidence
leaves theorists free to combine their contentions in any way necessary to explain
anything at all. Popper therefore proposed that the essence of a contention that
aspires to scientific status lies in is testability, and notably, its quality of being falsi-
fiable in principle. That a contention can be confirmed or supported by evidence is
not good enough. Popper’s criterion for scientific status is today widely accepted. It
does, however, lead to a peculiar difficulty. Theoretical scientific contentions are
generalisations and there does not seem to be any generalisation which is exception-
less. All generalisations are, therefore, falsifiable in principle: what Popper is recom-
mending is a contention which, if testable and tested, will inevitably be falsified.
What, then, will be left to call a contention specifically or a scientific theory gener-
ally?
It is useful to consider what follows if it is assumed that a generalisation which is
falsified by the discovery of an exception must be superseded by a better one, as
Popper recommends. Accordingly, when a generalisation is falsified, the next step
is to seek one wide enough in scope to subsume both the import of the original
and allow for the exceptions which falsified it. If further exceptions are found, a
still broader generalisation must be sought so that the process ends in the unattain-
able exceptionless generalisation which explains everything, and thus nothing in
particular. Because Popper’s principle leads to this impossible position, discarding
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-013

generalisations that have been falsified by the discovery of exceptions must be recog-
nised as a mistaken policy.
The appropriate addition to what Popper has to say about scientific conjectures
is that the fundamental contention from which a science stems is a generalisation
which is in principle falsifiable, but which is not to be discarded on that account
alone. Asserting the universal occurrence of a specific event amounts to asserting
that any case on which this event occurs requires no further explanation, while
also asserting that all discoverable exceptions do require further explanation. This
principle thereby serves to limit the range of events which the science is obliged
to explain, thus relieving scientists of the obligation to explain everything. A funda-
mental contention is therefore one which is not to be discarded although it has been
refuted as a generalisation by the appearance of exceptions.
A case in point is Russell’s contention that the fundamental concept in the social
sciences is power, in the same sense that energy is the fundamental concept in
physics. The laws of social dynamics, he argued, can only be stated in terms of
power and it should be the business of the social sciences to study the ways
power passes from one form into another.
Russell’s contention is obviously falsifiable. The laws of social dynamics are laws
which can be stated in terms other than power. Nonetheless, it is a valuable conten-
tion since it demarcates what is to be explained, with what concepts and indicates
cases which do not accord with it. It generates innumerable contentions, including
those that assert something about the relationship between power and other
concepts, such as authority, influence, conformity and obedience. It also provides
a starting point for the explanation of managerial behaviour and values.
If Russell’s contention that power is the fundamental concept in the social
sciences (and in society) is accepted, it follows that power is the fundamental
concept in management, since management is a social relationship and can be
studied as a social science.
First contention: The foundation of the management relationship is the
distribution of social power.
Weber argued that power must be the starting point for the social sciences, but that
only. He regarded power as too protean a concept to be useful and turned his atten-
tion to more specific relationships, notably rulership. However, he agreed that
human life is carried out in a power field and that the social sciences should be
concerned with the unintended consequences of social power.
It follows from the first contention that management is carried on in a power
field. Personal power consists, as Russell maintained, in the production of intended
effects. Social power consists, as Weber maintained, in the production of unintended
effects. In the latter case, managers produce power by joining with themselves and
with others in directed effort. As it is collectively produced, managerial power is
200
Summary: Ten Contentions

often divorced from its producers as individual managers. Consequently, the first
contention assumes that managers are actors who individually produce intentional
results and collectively produce unintended results.
On one hand, if an event occurs because of a managers’ intentions, then they
know what causes it. On the other hand, if an event is not intended by any manager,
it is probable that its causes are not known, and it is appropriate to try to discover
them. Such a discovery will increase managers’ power to control events. As manage-
ment (and science) is directed at extending human powers through knowledge, this
contention adumbrates a scientific research programme as envisaged, but not
pursued, by Russell.
Weber’s argument, that power is too protean a concept to be useful in the social
sciences, can be rejected since science aims not to describe something about which
scientists are well informed, but to discover something new about phenomena which
are familiar, although not under human control. Unlike personal power, managerial
power need not be defined because a definition would be an admission that it is
already an object of knowledge. This absence of definition runs the risk of deceiving
researchers who perform investigations bounded by their pre-set definition and are
thus unable to discover anything at variance with it. Furthermore, the history of
science indicates that whatever ‘reasonable’ notions which are expressed in a defi-
nition are often discarded during scientific investigations.
Second contention: Managerial power centralises.
That managerial power moves centripetally is not an empirical generalisation but a
conceptual foundation which asserts something that demarcates what it is not
proposed to explain. Indeed, if any empirical case is found in which managerial
power centralises, then this case is already covered by this contention and calls
for no further explanation. Other cases do, however, call for explanation and it is
the purpose of the remaining contentions to point towards such explanations.
Managerial power excludes the abilities and potentialities of individual
managers which are their personal powers. All managerial power is generated
through an organisation of individual powers but is marked by its alienation from
its producers as individuals.
The second contention demarcates cases which do not accord with it and gener-
ates innumerable ancillary contentions arising from the myriad management situa-
tions to which it is applicable. It offers a foundation for the explanation of those
unintended events which are described by managers as ‘communication problems’,
‘personality clashes’ or ‘poor employee morale’.
The Status of Contentions
201

Third contention: Authority acts as a contrary force to the centralisation of
managerial power.
Managerial authority resists the centralisation of power because it directs power to
colleagues and other parties and therefore limits the power of managers. Authority
is associated with access to managerial power and the right to direct it which is
granted by stakeholders to managers acting as their agents.
Managers demonstrate their power through executive action without having the
authority to do so. Although they often believe in the desirability of the exercise of
their power, they cannot grant to themselves the authority to employ it because
authority introduces considerations of relevance of the use of power to others.
This observation highlights both the distinction between and the inseparability of
the notions of power and authority and their centrality in management.
As participants in a bureaucracy, managers are obliged to obey authoritative
rules. The formal authority to give orders required for the execution of their duties
includes rules for delimiting coercion. Formal managerial authority is attached to
a position, not a person. When managers exceed their positional authority, they
face the prospect of sanctions, or in extreme cases, mutiny: a challenge to those
managers who exceed their authorised power.
Fourth contention: The effectiveness of the authority that underpins management
is based on reasoned elaboration.
Unlike power, authority requires assent, and its effects are cancelled by dissent.
Authority contains a transpersonal, moral element whereas power is morally neutral,
although specific uses of power are judged morally as supported by or bereft of
authority. A use of power that is not authorised may induce assent, but assent
does not create authority.
The minimum condition for the acceptance of authority is reasoned elaboration
and critical argumentation so that reasons can be weighed and debated by relevant
colleagues. Friedrich notes that ‘authority’ derives from auctoritas which supple-
ments an act of will by adding reasons to it. Managerial authority, then, is based
on communications which are supported by reasons why proposed actions are desir-
able ones. In this sense, authority is a source of power, not a form of power. As Frie-
drich notes, managers who have ceased to engage in reasoned elaboration or whose
values are no longer shared by the concerned parties have ‘lost their authority’ and
thus some of their power.
202
Summary: Ten Contentions

Fifth contention: The vehicle for reasoned elaboration is argumentation.
Support for the fifth contention comes from Popper whose hierarchy of language
functions is crowned by argument. Argument is the basis for personal and social
development and Popper was understandably critical of people in positions of
power who reject the argumentative function of language. For example, managers
who reject argument and embrace the command function of language are justly
called authoritarians. Other managers who reject argument descend to the most
primitive level of language: the expression of feelings. These tactics are, for Popper,
disastrous because they neglect the fact that managers are in the business of
providing true descriptions and valid arguments. Expressions of feelings are neither
truth-bearing nor debatable.
Sixth contention: Managers who engage in reasoned elaboration and critical
argumentation will be granted credit by colleagues for their contribution to group
goals.
Managers are regarded as authoritative when they demonstrate special knowledge
and skills. Authoritative non-managers will, on occasions, act as a source of innova-
tion by providing managers with effective ways of achieving organisational goals. As
management is designed to invent better ways to achieve organisational goals, the
contribution of technical experts should receive managerial approval provided it
accords with organisational aims. Therefore, a theory of management effectiveness
needs to account for the way the potential benefits of technical experts are utilised.
The offerings of non-managerial technical experts, when viewed as consistent
with organisational goals, will normally lead to an increase in the prestige of
managers. The presence of experts enhances the authority of managers even when
the latter lack commensurate expertise. If true, the sixth contention involves the
assumption that managers are viewed as the preservers of the rational solutions of
important problems once these have been achieved. This conclusion is consistent
with Weber’s view that bureaucracies are structures in which control is dependent
on the accumulation of knowledge. It is also in line with Friedrich’s view that that
interaction between authority figures sets up the process of reasoned elaboration
and enhances managerial authority because it is monitored by all parties.
Seventh contention: The distaste for reasoned elaboration and the contempt for
critical argument are the marks of the authoritarian manager and managerialist.
The true nature of authority as authoritativeness has been obscured by the pejorative
term ‘authoritarian’ which refers to managers who pretend to act authoritatively
while rejecting reasoned elaboration in favour of command.
The Status of Contentions
203

Friedrich refers to this pretence as ‘false authority’ and it occurs when managers
issue communications which are believed to allow for reasoned elaboration and
argument but in fact do not. Fromm considered false authority to be irrational and
contrasts it with rational authority. Rational authority has its source in knowledge
and competence; irrational authority is always power over people where criticism
is forbidden. Fromm likens rational authority to the teacher-pupil relationship and
irrational authority to the master-slave relationship. The essential difference is the
meaning attached to the relationship and the basis on which it rests. If Fromm is
correct in holding (against Friedrich who asserts the fundamental rational nature
of all authority) that power is a manifestation of irrational authority, management
theorists who define authority as a form of power are likely to employ such terms
as domination, control, force and obedience, while those who insist that authority
is a source of power will use such terms as persuasion, recognition, respect, compe-
tence and expertise. Anecdotal evidence (i.e., unsystematic parsing of the manage-
ment literature) supports this prediction and confirms the widespread conflation
of authority and power.
Eighth contention: The persuasive element in the management relationship is
what qualifies it as rhetorical.
Since managerial authority is reflected in cooperative exchanges between managers
and technical experts, authoritative management requires a language that empha-
sises valid reasoning which culminates in authoritative advice. However, the ability
to engage in critical debate needs to be supplemented by the ability to persuade
others of the right course of action. Managers, therefore, need to study the art and
practice of rhetoric.
As rhetoric is the study of persuasive speech and writing, one would think it
would be one of the more important subjects in the management curriculum. For
centuries students who aspired to rulership, like Machiavelli, studied the work of
the ancient rhetoricians, beginning with Aristotle. A hundred years ago, rhetoric
was still regarded as the humanistic discipline. Today, it has but disappeared from
academic curricula. While managers are exposed to and taught nonsensical jargon,
they are not taught the basic principles of speaking to themselves and to others.
Weaver maintained that the twentieth century witnessed the decline of a number
of subjects that once enjoyed prestige, but no subject suffered more amazingly in
this respect than rhetoric.
204
Summary: Ten Contentions

Ninth contention: Since rhetoric can be used for noble or ignoble purposes,
managers are judged according to the quality of their rhetoric and the values
associated with it.
The ancient Greeks emphasised the difference between noble and base rhetoric.
When used by managers, noble rhetoric seeks to provide all employees with better
versions of themselves. To paraphrase Weaver, base rhetoric attempts to keep people
from the support which personal courage, noble associations and rational philos-
ophy provide them. Although Weaver’s examples of base rhetoricians are journalists
and political propagandists, his analysis applies equally to authoritarian managers.
Nothing is more feared by the base rhetorician than argument and debate.
Tenth contention: If there is a road back from managerialism to management and
from management to leadership, noble rhetoric is the vehicle to create the
necessary authority.
Noble rhetoric points people towards ideals which lie beyond the everyday pragmatic
world of management. It is that form of language that moves people toward what is
desirable in contrast to those forms of language that move people toward what is
undesirable or fail to move people at all.
Generally, managers are obeyed because of the role they occupy and the tech-
nical skills they possess. Employees follow managers because it is rational to do
so. However, when faced with emergencies, leadership is called forth. Those rare
individuals who come forward and are followed are rhetoricians who convince
their potential followers that they can solve recalcitrant problems with which the
group is bedevilled. This undertaking requires considerable persuasive skills.
Further, since management is fundamentally concerned with the solving of difficult
problems, an individual manager who claims an almost supernatural ability can be
expected to be treated with disdain. Yet, a few managers have been able to convince
their community that they do possess the special skills which elevate them above the
normal run of executives and qualify them for leadership. Executive leaders need to
persuade potential followers that it is in their interests to accept the former’s claim to
an extraordinary ability to solve important problems and improve the status of all
employees. Noble rhetoric will be the vehicle for the necessary authority without
which executive leadership is impossible.
The Status of Contentions
205

Bibliography
Abbott, K. (2015) The totalitarian dynamic behind HRM’s democratic façade. Asia Pacific Journal of
Human Resources, 53(2): 204–220.
Abend, G. (2014) The Moral Background: An Inquiry into the History of Business Ethics. Princeton
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Adams, J. S. & Romney, A. K. (1959) A functional analysis of authority. Psychological Review, 66:
234–251.
Adorno, T. W., Frenkel-Brunswick, E., Levinson, D. J. & Sanford, R. N. (1950) The Authoritarian
Personality. New York: Harper.
Allport, F. H. (1934) The J-curve hypothesis of conforming behaviour. Journal of Social Psychology,
5: 141–183.
Allport, F. H. (1962) A structuronomic conception of behaviour: Individual and collective. Journal of
Abnormal and Social Psychology, 64: 3–30.
Allsopp, J., Eysenck, H. J. & Eysenck, S. B. (1991) Machiavellianism as a component in
psychoticism and extraversion. Personality and Individual Differences, 12(1): 29–41.
Altemeyer, B. (1996) The Authoritarian Spectre. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Alvesson, M. & Willmott, H. (eds.) (2003) Studying Management Critically. London: Sage
Publications.
Anderson, C. & Brion, S. (2014) Perspectives on power in organizations. Annual Review of
Organizational Psychology and Organizational Behaviour, 1: 67–97.
Andreski, S. (1969) The Uses of Comparative Sociology. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Andreski, S. (1974) Social Sciences as Sorcery. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Andreski, S. (2010) Max Weber’s Insights and Errors. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Arendt, H. (1961) Between Past and Future: Six Exercises in Political Thought. New York: The Viking
Press.
Aristotle (2004) The Art of Rhetoric (Trans. H. Lawson-Tancred). Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Asch, S.E. (1951) The effects of group pressure upon the modification and distortion of
judgements. In Guetzkow, H. (ed.) Groups, Leadership and Men. Pittsburgh: Carnegie Press.
Asch, S.E. (1952) Social Psychology. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
Asch, S.E. (1955) Opinions and social pressure. Scientific American, 193(5): 31–35.
Asch, S.E. (1956) Studies of independence and conformity: A minority of one against a unanimous
majority. Psychological Monographs, 70(9): No. 416.
Asham, I. (2007) Existentialism and leadership: A reply to John Lawler with some further thoughts.
Leadership, 3(1): 91–106.
Asham, I. & Lawler, J. (2008) Existential communication and leadership. Leadership, 4(3):
253–269.
Atkinson, M. (1984) Our Masters’ Voice: The Language and Body Language of Politics. London:
Methuen.
Bachman, J. G. (1968) Faculty satisfaction and the Dean’s influence: An organisational study of
twelve Liberal Arts Colleges. Journal of Applied Psychology, 52: 55–61.
Bachman, J. G., Smith, C. G. & Slesinger, J. A. (1966) Control, performance and satisfaction: An
analysis of structural and individual effects. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 4:
127–136.
Baddeley, C. (2013) Managing the New Museology: The Changing Role, Purpose and Management
of Australian Museums since 1980. Chisinau: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Bailey, B. C. & Peck, S. I. (2013) Boardroom strategic decision-making style: Understanding the
antecedents. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 21(2): 131–146.
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-014

Baranchuk, N. & Dybvig, P. (2009) Consensus in diverse corporate boards. Review of Financial
Studies, 22: 715–747.
Barberis, P. (2013) The managerial imperative: Fifty years’ change in UK public administration.
Public Policy and Administration, 28(4): 327–345.
Bardy, R. & Rubens, A. (2010) Is there a transatlantic divide? Reviewing Peter F. Drucker’s
thoughts on ethics and leadership of US and European managers. Management Decision,
48(4): 528–540.
Baritz, L. (1960) The Servants of Power: A History of the Use of Social Science in American
Industry. New York: Wiley.
Barnard, C. I. (1938) The Functions of the Executive. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Barrick, M. R. & Mount, M. K. (1991) The Big Five personality dimensions and job performance: A
meta-analysis. Personnel Psychology, 44: 1–26.
Baum, B. H. (1961) Decentralisation of Authority in a Bureaucracy. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice-Hall.
Bendix, R. (1956) Work and Authority in Industry. New York: Wiley.
Benn, S. I. & Peters, R. S. (1959) Social Principles and the Democratic State. London: George Allen
& Unwin.
Bennis, W. G., Berkowitz, N., Affinito, M. & Malone, M. (1958) Authority, power and the ability to
influence. Human Relations, 11: 143–155.
Berlin, I. (1991) Against the Current: Essays in the History of Ideas. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Bezemer, P. J., Nicholson, G. & Pugliese, A. (2014) Inside the boardroom: Exploring board member
interactions. Qualitative Research in Accounting & Management, 11(3): 238–259.
Bierstedt, R. (1954) The problem of authority. In Berger, M., Abel, T. & Page, C. H. (eds.). Freedom
and Control in Modern Society. New York: Van Nostrand.
Birkinshaw, J., Foss, N. J. & Lindenberg, S. (2014) Combining purpose with profits. MIT Sloan
Management Review, 55(3): 49–56.
Blau, P. M. (1963) Critical remarks on Weber’s theory of authority. American Political Science
Review, 57: 305–316.
Blühdorn, I. (2017) Post-capitalism, post-growth, post-consumerism? Eco-political hopes beyond
sustainability. Global Discourse, 7(1): 42–61.
Bolman, L. G. & Deal, T. E. (2003) Reframing Organizations: Artistry, Choice and Leadership. 3rd
Edition. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Bonn, I. & Pettigrew, A. (2009) Towards a dynamic theory of boards: An organisational life cycle
approach. Journal of Management and Organisation, 15(1): 2–16.
Borba, M. (2001) Building Moral Intelligence: The Seven Essential Virtues that Teach Kids to do
the Right Thing. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Bowden, B. (2018) Work, Wealth, and Postmodernism: The Intellectual Conflict at the Heart of
Business Endeavour. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bradshaw, J. (2009) Reclaiming Virtue: How We can Develop the Moral Intelligence to do the Right
Thing at the Right Time for the Right Reason. New York: Bantam Dell.
Bronk, K. C., Hill, P. L., Lapsley, D. K., Taliba, T. L., Finch, H. & Cotton Bronk, K. (2009) Purpose,
hope, and life satisfaction in three age groups. Journal of Positive Psychology, 4: 500–510.
Burckhardt, J. (1990) [1860] The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy (Trans. S. G. Middlemore).
London: Penguin Classics.
Burger, J. M., Girgis, Z. M. & Manning, C. C. (2011) In their own words: Explaining obedience to
authority through an examination of participants’ comments. Social Psychological and
Personality Science, 2(5): 460–466.
Burke, K. (1969) A Grammar of Motive. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Burke, P. J. (1966) Authority relations and disruptive behaviour in small discussion groups.
Sociometry, 29: 237–250.
Bibliography
207

Burrell, G. & Morgan, G. (1979) Sociological Paradigms and Organisational Analysis. Aldershot:
Ashgate.
Burstow, B. (2015) Psychiatry and the Business of Madness: An Ethical and Epistemological
Accounting. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Buskirk, R. H. (1975) Modern Management and Machiavelli. London: Basic Books.
Buttery, E. & Richter, R. (2003) On Machiavellian management. Leadership and Organizational
Development, 24(8): 426–435.
Byrt, W. J. (1978) Leaders and Leadership. Melbourne: Sun Books.
Cardona, P. & Rey, C. (2008) Management by Missions. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Carey, A. (1976) Industrial Psychology and Sociology in Australia. In Boreham, P., Pemberton, A. &
Wilson, P. (eds.). The Professions in Australia. St. Lucia: University of Queensland Press.
Cartwright, D. (ed.) (1959) Studies in Social Power. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Institute for
Social Research.
Christie, R. & Geis, F. L. (1970) Studies in Machiavellianism. New York: Academic Press.
Christie, R. & Jahoda, M. (eds.) (1954) Studies in the Scope and Method of ‘The Authoritarian
Personality’. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.
Cialdini, R. B. & Goldstein, N. J. (2004) Social influence: Compliance and conformity. Annual
Review of Psychology, 55: 591–621.
Ciarrochi, J., Forgas, J. & Mayer, J. (eds.) (2001) Emotional Intelligence in Everyday Life: A Scientific
Inquiry. Philadelphia, Penn.: Psychology Press.
Clarke, T. & Branson, D. (2012) The Sage Book of Corporate Governance. London: Sage.
Clegg, S. (2014) Managerialism: Born in the USA. Academy of Management Review, 39(4):
566–585.
Clegg, S. & Haugaard, M. (eds.) (2009) The Sage Handbook of Power. London: Sage.
Cohen, A. M. (1962) Changing small group communication networks. Administrative Science
Quarterly, 6: 443–462.
Cohen, A. M. & Bennis, W. G. (1961) Continuity of leadership in communication networks. Human
Relations, 14: 351–367.
Cohen, A. R. (1958) Upward communication in experimentally created hierarchies. Human
Relations, 11: 41–53.
Cohen, B. M. (2016) Psychiatric Hegemony. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Colley, J. L., Doyle, J., Logan, G. W. & Stettinius, W. (2003) Corporate Governance: Business, Legal
and Ethical Challenges Faced by Boards of Directors. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Considine, M. & Painter, M. (eds.) (1997) Managerialism: The Great Debate. Melbourne:
Melbourne University Press.
Cosans, C. E. & Reina, C. S. (2018) The leadership ethics of Machiavelli’s Prince. Business Ethics
Quarterly, 28(3): 275–300.
Cowton, C. & Zecha, G. (2003) Doing it right instead of twice: A Popperian approach to
management decisions. Philosophy of Management, 3(2): 23–33.
Craig, N. & Snook, S. (2014) From purpose to impact. Harvard Business Review, 92(5): 104–111.
Crozier, M. (1964) The Bureaucratic Phenomenon. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press.
Dahl, R. A. (1957) The concept of power. Behavioural Science, 2: 201–215.
Dalton, G. W., Barnes, L. B. & Zaleznick, A. (1968) The Distribution of Authority in Formal
Organizations. Boston, Mass.: Harvard University Graduate School of Business
Administration.
Darroch, R. K. & Steiner, I. D. (1970) Role-playing: An alternative to laboratory research? Journal of
Personality, 38: 302–311.
Day, J. (1963) Authority. Political Studies, 11: 257–271.
208
Bibliography

Deem, R. (1998) New managerialism and higher education: The management of performance and
cultures in universities in the United Kingdom. International Studies in Sociology and
Education, 8(1): 47–70.
De Grazia, S. (1959) What authority is not. American Political Science Review, 53: 321–331.
Demarck, J. (2002) The Modern Machiavelli: The Principles of Power in Business. Sydney: Allen
and Unwin.
Dilthey, W. (1989) Introduction to the Human Sciences. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Dilthey, W. (1996) Hermeneutics and the Study of History. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University
Press.
Dinh, J., Lord, R., Gardner, W., Meuser, J., Liden, R. & Hu, J. (2014) Leadership theory and research
in the new millennium: Current theoretical trends and changing perspectives. Leadership
Quarterly, 25(1): 36–62.
Doran, C. (2016) Managerialism: An ideology and its evolution. International Journal of
Management, Knowledge and Learning, 5(1): 81–97.
Drucker, P.F. (1950) Have Employee Relations Policies Had the Desired Effect? American
Management Association, Personnel Series, 134: 7.
Drucker, P. F. (1954) The Practice of Management. New York: Harper.
Drucker, P. F. (1971) The unfashionable Kierkegaard. In The New Markets and Other Essays.
London: Heinemann.
Drucker, P. F. (1972) Concept of the Corporation (Revised ed.). New York: The John Day Company.
Drucker, P. F. (1979a) Adventures of a Bystander. London: William Heinemann.
Drucker, P. F. (1979b) Management. London: Pan Books.
Drucker, P. F. (1980) Managing in Turbulent Times. London: Pan Books.
Drucker, P. F. (1981) What is business ethics? The Public Interest, 63: 18–36.
Drucker, P. F. (1982) The Changing World of the Executive. New York: Harper & Row.
Duncan-Jones, A. E. (1958) Authority. In Peters, R., Winch, P. G. & Duncan-Jones, A. E. Proceedings
of the Aristotelian Society. Supplementary Vol. 32.
Durkheim, E. (1948) The Elementary Forms of Religious Life. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.
Durkheim, E. (1951) Suicide. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.
Durkheim, E. (1969) The Division of Labour in Society. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.
Eagleton, T. (1990) The Ideology of the Aesthetic. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Edman, I. (ed.) (1956) The Works of Plato: The Jowett Translation, New York: Modern Library.
Ehrenreich, B. (2006) Bait and Switch: The Futile Pursuit of the Corporate Dream. London: Granta.
Elms, A. C. (2009) Obedience lite. American Psychologist, 64: 32–36.
Emerson, R. M. (1962) Power-dependence relations. American Sociological Review, 27: 31–41.
Enteman, W. F. (1993) Managerialism: The Emergence of a New Ideology. Madison Wis: The
University of Wisconsin Press.
Etzioni, A. (1965) Dual leadership in complex organisations. American Sociological Review, 30:
688–698.
Evan, W. M. & Zelditch, M. (1961) A laboratory experiment in bureaucratic authority. American
Sociological Review, 26: 883–893.
Eysenck, H. J. (1976) The Measurement of Personality. Baltimore: University Park Press.
Eysenck, H. J. & Wilson, G. (1976) Know Your Own Personality. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Fayol, H. (1949) General and Industrial Management (Trans. C. Storrs). London: Pitman Publishing.
Fehr, B., Samson, D. & Paulhus, D. (1992) The construct of Machiavellianism: Twenty years later.
In Spielberger, C. D. & Butcher, J. (eds) Advances in Personality Assessment. Volume 9,
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Fenton-O’Creevy, M. (2001) Employee involvement and the middle manager: Saboteur or
scapegoat? Human Resource Management Journal, 11(1): 24–40.
Financial Reporting Council (2016) The UK Corporate Governance Code. London: FRC Ltd.
Bibliography
209

Finkelstein, S. (1992) Power in top management teams: Dimensions, measurement and validation.
Academy of Management Journal, 35: 505–538.
Flament, C. (1956) The influence of changes in the networks of communication upon the
performance of groups. Psychologie Francaise, 1: 12–13.
Flanagan, T. (1972) The Political Calculus: Essays on Machiavelli’s Philosophy. Toronto: University
of Toronto Press.
Fleming, P. & Spicer, A. (2014) Power in management and organization. Academy of Management
Annals, 8(1): 237–298.
Follett, M. P. (1924) Creative Experience. New York: Longmans.
Follett, M. P. (1926) The illusion of final authority. Bulletin of the Taylor Society, 11: 243–246.
Follett, M. P. (2013) Freedom and Coordination: Lectures in Business Organization. New
York: Routledge.
Forbes, D. P. & Milliken, F. J. (1999) Cognition and corporate governance: Understanding boards of
directors as strategic decision-making groups. Academy of Management Review, 24(3):
489–505.
Foucault, M. (1980) Power/Knowledge. New York: Pantheon Books.
Frank, J. D. (1944) Experimental study of personal pressures and resistance: Experimental
production of resistance. Journal of General Psychology, 30: 23–41.
Frankfurt, H. (2005) On Bullshit. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Frankl, V. E. (1969) Nothing but – On reductionism and nihilism. Encounter (London), 33, 51–56.
French, J. R. P. (1956) A formal theory of social power. Psychological Review, 63: 181–194.
French, J. R. P. & Raven, B. H. (1959) The bases of social power. In Cartwright, D. (ed.) Studies in
Social Power. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Institute for Social Research.
French, J. R. P. & Snyder, R. (1959) Leadership and interpersonal power. In Cartwright, D. (ed.).
Studies in Social Power. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan, Institute for Social Research.
Freud, S. (1953) The Standard Edition of the Complete Works of Sigmund Freud (Ed. J. Strachey).
London: Hogarth Press.
Freud, S. (1982) Introductory Lectures on Psychoanalysis (1916–1917) (Trans. J. Strachey).
Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Friedrich C. J. (ed.) (1958) Authority. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Friedrich, C. J. (1963) Man and His Government: An Empirical Theory of Politics. New York:
McGraw-Hill.
Friedrich, C. J. (1972) Tradition and Authority. London: Macmillan.
Fromm, E. (1967) [1947] Man for Himself. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Furnham, A., Richards, S. C. & Paulhus, D. L. (2013) The Dark Triad of personality: A 10-year
review. Social and Personality Psychological Compass, 7: 199–216.
Galie, P. & Bopst, C. (2006) Machiavelli and modern business: Realist thought in contemporary
corporate leadership manuals. Journal of Business Ethics, 65(9): 235–250.
Gardner, H. (1983) Frames of Mind. New York: Basic Books.
Gardner, H. (1999) Intelligence Reframed. New York: Basic Books.
Gellner, E. (1986) Relativism and the Social Sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gergen, K. J. (1995) Relational theory and the discourses of power. In Hosking, D-M., Dachler, H.
P. & Gergen, K. J. (eds.) Management and Organization: Relational Alternatives to
Individualism. Aldershot, UK: Avebury.
Germain, M. L. (2012) Traits and skills theories as the nexus between leadership and expertise:
Reality or fallacy? Performance Improvement, 51: 32–39.
Ghoshal, S. (2005) Bad management theories are destroying good management practices.
Academy of Management Learning & Education, 4(1): 75–91.
Gibson, S. (2013) Milgram’s obedience experiments: A rhetorical analysis. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 52: 290–309.
210
Bibliography

Gibson, S. (2014) Discourse, defiance and rationality: ‘Knowledge work’ in the Obedience Studies.
Journal of Social Issues, 70(3): 424–438.
Gibson, S. (2019). Obedience without orders: Expanding social psychology’s conception of
‘obedience.’ British Journal of Social Psychology, 58: 241–259.
Gibson, S., Blenkinsopp, G., Johnstone, E. & Marshall, A. (2018) Just following orders? The
rhetorical invocation of ‘obedience’ in Stanley Milgram’s post-experiment interviews.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 48(5): 585–599.
Ginsberg, M. (2016) Authority. Critical Quarterly, 58(3): 91–93.
Godard, J. (2011) Industrial Relations, the Economy, and Society. Concord: Captus Press.
Goleman, D. (1995) Emotional Intelligence. New York: Bantam Books.
Gordon, G. & Whitchurch, C. (2010) Academic and Professional Identities in Higher Education: The
Challenges of a Diversifying Workforce. Abingdon: Routledge.
Gould, A. & Joullié, J.-E. (2017) ’Parallel universe’ or ’proven future’? The language of dependent
means t-test interpretations. Journal of Modern Applied Statistical Methods, 16(2): 200–214.
Grace, D. & Jackson, M. (2014) Reflections on the misrepresentation of Machiavelli in
management: The mysterious case of the MACH IV personality construct. Philosophy of
Management, 13(3): 51–72.
Grace, D. & Jackson, M. (2018) Machiavelliana: The Living Machiavelli in Modern Mythologies.
Boston, Mass.: Brill Rodopi.
Grant, G. B. (2017) Exploring the possibility of peak individualism, humanity’s existential crisis,
and an emerging age of purpose. Frontiers of Psychology, 8: 1–11.
Gray, S. & Nowland, J. (2017) The diversity of expertise on corporate boards in Australia.
Accounting and Finance, 57, 429–463.
Greenberg, M. S. (1967) Role-playing: An alternative to deception. Journal of Personality and
Social Psychology, 7: 152–157.
Greenfield, P. M. (2013) The changing psychology of culture from 1800 through 2000.
Psychological Science, 24(9): 1722–1731.
Greve, H. R. & Mitsuhashi, H. (2007) Power and glory: Concentrated power in top management
teams. Organizational Studies, 28(8): 1197–1221.
Grey, C. (1996) Towards a critique of managerialism: The contribution of Simone Weil. Journal of
Management Studies, 36(5): 561–585.
Grey, C. (2013) A Very Short, Fairly Interesting and Reasonably Cheap Book about Studying
Organisations. London: Sage.
Griffin, G. R. (1991) Machiavelli on Management: Playing and Winning the Corporate Power Game.
New York: Praeger.
Griggs, R. A. (2017) Milgram’s obedience study: A contentious classic reinterpreted. Teaching of
Psychology, 44(1): 32–37.
Harris, P. (2010) Machiavelli and the global compass: Ends and means in ethics and leadership.
Journal of Business Ethics, 93: 131–138.
Hartmann, H. (1959) Authority and Organisation in German Management. Princeton, NJ: Princeton
University Press.
Harvey, M. G., Heames, J. T., Richey, R. G. & Leonard, N. (2006) Bullying: From the playground to
the boardroom. Journal of Leadership and Organisational Studies, 12(4): 1–11.
Haslam, S. A. & Reicher, S. D. (2017) 50 years of ‘Obedience to Authority’: From blind conformity
to engaged followership. Annual Review of Law and Social Science, 13: 59–78.
Haslam, S. A. & Reicher, S. D. (2018) A truth that does not always speak its name: How Hollander
and Turowetz’s findings confirm and extend the engaged followership analysis of harm-doing
in the Milgram paradigm. British Journal of Social Psychology, 57(2): 292–300.
Bibliography
211

Haslam, S. A., Reicher, S. D. & Birney, M.E. (2014) Nothing by mere authority: Evidence that in an
experimental analogue of the Milgram paradigm participants are motivated not by orders but
by appeals to science. Journal of Social Issues, 70: 473–488.
Haslam, S. A., Reicher, S. D. & Millard, K. (2015) ‘Happy to have been of service’: The Yale archive
as a window into the engaged followership of participants in Milgram’s ‘obedience’
experiments. British Journal of Social Psychology, 54: 55–83.
Haugaard, M. (2012) Rethinking the four dimensions of power: Domination and empowerment.
Journal of Political Power, 5: 33–54.
Heckscher, C. (1995) White Collar Blues. New York: Basic Books.
Hedlund, J. & Steinberg, R. (2000) Too many intelligences? Integrity, social, emotional and
practical intelligence. In Bar-On, R. & Parker, J. (eds.) The Handbook of Emotional
Intelligence. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Hempel, C. G. (1965) Aspects of Scientific Explanation and Other Essays in the Philosophy of
Science. New York: Free Press.
Herbst, S. (2006) Legitimate power in a mediated age: Revisiting Carl J. Friedrich’s “Authority,
Reason and Discretion”. Political Communication, 23: 285–290.
Hill, P. L. & Turiano, N. A. (2014) Purpose in life as a predictor of mortality across adulthood.
Psychological Science, 25: 1482–1486.
Hobbes, T. (1996) [1651] Leviathan (Ed. R. Tuck). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hodges, B. H. & Geyer, A. L. (2006) A nonconformist account of the Asch experiments: Values,
pragmatics and moral dilemmas. Personality and Social Psychology, 10(1): 2–19.
Hodgkinson, C. (1983) The Philosophy of Leadership. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Hollander, E. P. (1964) Leaders, Groups and Influence. New York: Oxford University Press.
Hollander, E. P & Julian, J. W. (1970) Studies in leader legitimacy, influence and innovation. In
Berkowitz, L. (ed.) Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, Vol. 5. New York: Academic
Press.
Hollander, M. M. (2015) The repertoire of resistance: Non-compliance with directives in Milgram’s
‘obedience’ experiments. Social Psychology Quarterly, 79(4): 355–375.
Hollander, M. M. & Maynard, D. W. (2016) Do unto others…? Methodological advance and
self-versus other-attentive resistance in Milgram’s ‘Obedience’ experiments. British Journal of
Social Psychology, 54: 425–444.
Hollander, M. M. & Turowetz, T. (2017) Normalising trust: Participants’ immediate post-hoc
explanations of behaviour in Milgram’s ‘obedience’ experiments. British Journal of Social
Psychology, 56: 655–674.
Hollensbe, E., Wookey, C., Hickey, L., George, G. & Nichols, C. V. (2014) Organizations with
purpose. Academy of Management Journal, 57(5): 1227–1234.
Homans, G. C. (1951) The Human Group. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Hopkins, T. K. (1961) Bureaucratic authority: The convergence of Weber and Barnard. In Etzioni, A.
(ed.) Complex Organisations. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Horkheimer, M. (2002) Critical Theory: Selected Essays. New York: Continuum.
Hume, D. (1978) [1739–40] A Treatise of Human Nature. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hume D (1975) [1748] Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles
of Morals. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hurwitz, J. I., Zander, A. F. & Hymovitch, B. (1953) Some effects of power on the relations among
group members. In Cartwright, D. & Zander, A. (eds.) Group Dynamics: Research and Theory.
Evanston, Ill.: Row Peterson.
Jackson, K. T. (2005) Towards authenticity: A Sartrean perspective on business ethics. Journal of
Business Ethics, 58(4): 307–325.
Jackson, M. & Grace, D. (2015) Machiavelli’s shadows in management, social psychology and
primatology. Theoria, 142 (62): 67–84.
212
Bibliography

Jay, A. (1968) Management and Machiavelli. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Jetten, J. & Hornsey, M. J. (2017) Conformity: Revisiting Asch’s line-judgement studies. In Smith, J.
R. & Haslam, S. A. (eds.). Social Psychology: Revisiting the Classic Studies. 2nd ed. London:
Sage Publications.
Jetten, J. & Hornsey, M. J. (eds.) (2011) Rebels in Groups: Dissent, Deviance, Difference and
Defiance. Chichester, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Johnson, P. (2004) Shared thinking and interaction in the family business boardroom. Corporate
Governance, 4(1), 39–51.
Jones, D. N. (2016) The nature of Machiavellianism: Distinct patterns of misbehaviour. In
Zeigler-Hill, V. & Marcus, D. K. (eds.) The Dark Side of Personality. Washington, DC: American
Psychological Association.
Jones, D. N. & Paulhus, D. L. (2009) Machiavellianism. In Leary, M. R. & Hoyle, R. (eds.) Handbook
of Individual Differences in Social Behaviour. New York: The Guilford Press.
Jones, R. E. & Jones, E. E. (1964) Optimum conformity as an ingratiation tactic. Journal of
Personality, 32: 436–458.
Joullié, J-E. (2013) Will to Power: Nietzsche’s Last Idol. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Joullié, J.-E. (2018) Management without theory for the twenty-first century. Journal of
Management History, 24(4): 377–395.
Joullié, J.-E. & Gould, A. M. (2021) Theory, explanation, and understanding in management
research. Business Research Quarterly, 1-14. doi.org/10.1177/23409444211012414
Joullié, J-E. & Gould, A. M. (in-press) Having nothing to say but saying it anyway: Language and
practical relevance in management research. Academy of Management Learning and
Education, https://journals.aom.org/doi/10.5465/amle.2017.0207
Joullié, J.-E., Gould, A. M., Spillane, R. & Luc, S. (2021) The language of authority and power in
leadership. Leadership Quarterly, 32(4): 101491.
Joullié, J-E. & Spillane, R. (2015) Heroic Drucker. Journal of Business Ethics, 128: 95–105.
Joullié, J.-E. & Spillane, R. (2021) The Philosophical Foundations of Management Thought (Revised
and expanded edition). New York: Lexington Books.
Jouvenel, B. de (1957) Sovereignty. Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press.
Julian, J. W., Hollander, E. P. & Regula, C. R. (1969) Endorsement of the group spokesman as a
function of his source of authority, competence and success Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 11: 42–49.
Jung, C. G. (1963) Memories, Dreams, Reflections (Ed. A. Jaffe, Trans. R. & C. Winston). London:
Collins & Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Jung, C. G. (1971) The structure of the psyche. In The Portable Jung (Trans. R. Hull). New York:
Viking Press.
Kajonius, P. J., Persson, B. N. & Jonason, P. K. (2015) Hedonism, achievement, and power:
Universal values that characterise the Dark Triad. Personality and Individual Differences, 77:
173–178.
Kakabadse, A. & Kakabadse, N. (2008) Leading the Board: The Six Disciplines of World Class
Chairmen. London: Palgrave.
Kakabadse, A. & Van den Berghe, L. (2013) How to Make Boards Work. London: Palgrave.
Kaliska, L. (2014) First results from verification of psychometric properties of D. Lennick’s and F.
Kiel’s Moral Competency Questionnaire for measuring moral intelligence in Slovak conditions.
The New Education Review, 37(3): 257–268.
Kant, I. (1981) [1785] Grounding of the Metaphysics of Morals. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Kanter, R. M. (1985) Drucker: The unsolved puzzle. New Management, 2(1): 10–13.
Kaposi, D. (2017) The resistance experiments: Morality, authority and obedience in Stanley
Milgram’s account. Journal of the Theory of Social Behaviour, 47: 382–401.
Bibliography
213

Kelvin, P. (1970) The Bases of Social Behaviour: An Approach through Order and Value. London:
Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Kerr, P. (1996) A Philosophical Investigation. London: Vintage.
Kets De Vries, M. & Korotov, K. (2007) The clinical paradigm: A primer for personal change. In
Kets De Vries, M., Korotov, K. & Florent-Treacy, E. Coach and Couch: The Psychology of
Making Better Leaders. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Keynes, J. M. (1949) The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money. London: Macmillan.
Kiechel, W. (2012) The management century. Harvard Business Review, 90(11): 62–75.
Kirk, S. A., Cohen, D. & Gomory, T. (2015) DSM-5: The delayed demise of descriptive diagnosis. In
Demazeux, S. & Singy, P. (eds.) The DSM-5 Perspective: Philosophical Reflections on the
Psychiatric Babel. Dordrecht, NL: Springer.
Kirk, S. A. & Kutchins, H. (1992) The Selling of DSM: The Rhetoric of Science in Psychiatry. New
York: Aldine De Gruyter.
Klikauer, T. (2013) Managerialism: A Critique of an Ideology. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Klikauer, T. (2015) What is managerialism? Critical Sociology, 41: 1103–1119.
Klikauer, T. (2019) A preliminary theory of managerialism as an ideology. Journal for the Theory of
Social Behaviour, 49: 421–442.
Kupfer, D. J. (2013) Chair of DSM-5 task force discusses future of mental health research. Public
statement released May 6.
Lain Entralgo, P. (1970) The Therapy of the Word in Classical Antiquity. New Haven, CT: Yale
University Press.
Laloux, F. (2014) Reinventing Organizations: A Guide to Creating Organizations Inspired by the
Next Stage of Human Consciousness. Brussels: Nelson Parker.
Landis, C. (1924) Studies of emotional reactions: General behaviour and facial expression. Journal
of Comparative Psychology, 4: 447–509.
Landry, J. T. (2005) Review. Harvard Business Review, 83(5): 30.
Lansbury R. D. & Spillane, R. (1983) Organisational Behaviour: The Australian Context. Melbourne:
Longman Cheshire
Laslo-Roth, R. (2017) The power of change and the need to change power: Changing perception of
power in the organisational setting. In Muhlbauer, V. & Harry, W. (eds.) Redefining
Management: Smart Power Perspectives. Cham: Springer.
Lawler, J. (2005) The essence of leadership? Existentialism and leadership. Leadership, 1(2):
215–231.
Leavitt, H. J. (1958) Management Psychology. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Leblanc, R. & Gillies, J. (2005) Inside the Boardroom: How Boards Really Work and the Coming
Revolution in Corporate Governance. Mississauga ON: John Wiley & Sons Canada.
Lennick, D. & Kiel, F. (2005) Moral Intelligence: Enhancing Business Performance and Leadership
Success. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing.
Letendre, L. (2004) The dynamics of the boardroom. Academy of Management Review, 18(1),
101–104.
Levinson, H. (1970) Executive Stress. New York: Harper & Row.
Lewin, K. (1951) Field Theory in Social Science. New York: Harper.
Lewin, K., Lippitt, R. & White, R. K. (1939) Patterns of aggressive behaviour in experimentally
created social climates. Journal of Social Psychology, 10: 271–301.
Lieberson, J. (1982) The romantic rationalist. The New York Review of Books, https://www.nybooks.
com/articles/1982/12/02/the-romantic-rationalist/ accessed on 15 March 2021.
Likert, R. (1961) New Patterns of Management. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Locke, J. (1970) [1690] Two Treatises of Civil Government. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Locke, R. R. & Spender, J-C. (2011) Confronting Managerialism. London: Zed Books.
214
Bibliography

London, P. & Lim, H. (1964) Yielding reason to social pressure: Task complexity and expectation in
conformity. Journal of Personality, 32: 75–89.
Loughlin, M. (2004) Management science and reality: A commentary on “Practically Useless? Why
management theory needs Popper. Philosophy of Management, 4(2), 35–44.
Luchins, A. S. & Luchins, E. H. (1961) On conformity with judgements of a majority or an authority.
Journal of Social Psychology, 53: 303–316.
Lukes, S. (2005) Power: A Radical View. London: Macmillan.
Lutz, W. (1989) How Government, Business, Advertisers, and Others use Language to Deceive You.
Harper & Row: New York.
Lynch, K. (2014) New managerialism: The impact on education. Concept, 5(3): 1–11.
McAlpine, A. (1997) The New Machiavelli. London: Aurum.
Machiavelli, N. (1965) The Chief Works and Others (Trans. A. Gilbert). Durham, NC: Duke University
Press.
McHoskey, J. (1995) Narcissism and Machiavellianism. Psychological Reports, 77: 755–759.
McIntosh, D. (1970) Weber and Freud : On the nature and sources of authority. American
Sociological Review, 35: 901–911.
MacIntyre, A. (1985) After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory. London: Duckworth.
Maclagan, P. (2007) Hierarchical control or individuals’ moral autonomy? Addressing a
fundamental tension in the management of business ethics. Business Ethics: A European
Review, 16(1): 48–61.
McMahon, C. (1989) Managerial authority. Ethics, 100(1): 33–53.
McMahon, C. (1994) Authority and Democracy: A General Theory of Government and Management.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
McMahon, C. (1995) The political theory of organizations and business ethics. Philosophy & Public
Affairs, 24(4): 292–313.
MacMillan, S., Yue, A. R. & Mills, A. J. (2012) Both how and why: Considering existentialism as a
philosophy of work and management. Philosophy of Management, 11(3): 27–46.
McNulty, T. & Pettigrew, A. (1996) The contribution, power and influence of part-time board
members. Corporate Governance, 4(3), 160–179.
McNulty, T., Pettigrew, A., Jobom, G. & Morris, C. (2011) The role, power and influence of company
chairs. Journal of Management and Governance, 15, 91–121.
McNulty, T., Florackis, C. & Ormrod P. (2013) Boards of directors and financial risk taking during
the credit crisis. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 21, 58–78.
Malcolm, S. B. & Hartley, N. T. (2009) Peter F. Drucker: Ethics scholar par excellence. Journal of
Management History, 15(4): 375–387.
Martin, D. E. & Austin, B. (2010) Validation of the Moral Competency Inventory measurement
instrument. Management Research Review, 33(5): 437–451.
Martin, J. & Ray, J. (1972) Anti-authoritarianism: An indicator of pathology. Australian Journal of
Psychology, 24: 13–18.
Martin, J., Lobb, B., Chapman, G. C. & Spillane, R. (1976) Obedience under conditions demanding
self-immolation. Human Relations, 29: 345–356.
Maslow, A. H. (1954) Motivation and Personality. Harper: New York.
Maslow, A. H. (1967) A theory of metamotivation: The biological rooting of the value-life. Journal
of Humanistic Psychology, 7: 93–127.
Maslow, A. H. (1968) Toward a Psychology of Being. New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold Company.
Maslow, A. H. (1973) The Farther Reaches of Human Nature. Harmondsworth: Pelican.
Mead, G. H. (1934) Mind, Self, and Society. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Mechanic, D. (1962) Sources of power of lower participants in complex organisations.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 7: 349–364.
Meinecke, F. (1957) Machiavellism, (Trans. D. Scott), London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Bibliography
215

Meyer, J. M. (2020) The politics of the ‘post-political’ contesting the diagnosis. Democratization,
27(3): 408–425.
Micklethwait, J. & Wooldridge, A. (1996) The Witch Doctors. New York: Random House.
Milgram, S. (1963) Behavioural study of obedience. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology,
67: 371–378.
Milgram, S. (1965a) Some conditions of obedience and disobedience to authority. Human
Relations, 18: 57–76.
Milgram, S. (1965b) Liberating effects of group pressure. Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, 2: 127–134.
Milgram, S. (1974) Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View. New York: Harper & Row.
Miller, A. D. & Perry, R. (2011) The reasonable person. New York University Law Review, 87:
323–392.
Miller, A. G. (1986) The Obedience Experiments: A Case Study of Controversy in Social Science.
New York: Praeger.
Miller, A. G. (2009) Reflections on ‘Replicating Milgram’. American Psychologist, 64: 20–27.
Miller, E. J. (1977) Organisational development and industrial democracy: A current case study. In
Cooper, C. L. (ed.) Organisation Development in the U.K. and U.S.A. London: Macmillan.
Mintzberg. H. (1983) Power In and Around Organisations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Mischel, W. (1968) Personality Assessment. New York: Wiley.
Mixon, D. (1972) Instead of deception. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, 2: 145–174.
Mixon, D. (1989) Obedience and Civilisation: Authorised Crime and the Normality of Evil. London:
Pluto Press.
Moodie, A.-M. (2001) The Twenty First Century Board: Selection, Performance and Succession.
Sydney: Australian Institute of Company Directors.
Mori, K. & Arai, M. (2010) No need to fake it: Reproduction of the Asch experiment without
confederates. International Journal of Psychology, 45(5): 390–397.
Moscovici, S. (1985) Social influence. In Lindzey, G. & Aronson, E. (eds.) Handbook of Social
Psychology Vol. 2. New York: Random House.
Moss, M.W. (2003) Practically useless? Why management theory needs Popper. Philosophy of
Management, 3(3): 31–42.
Mott, P. E. (1970) Power, authority, influence. In Aiken, M. & Mott, P. E., The Structure of
Community Power. New York: Random House.
Mudrack, P. E. & Mason, E. S. (1995) Extending the Machiavellianism construct: A brief measure
and some unexplored relationships. Journal of Social Behaviour and Personality, 10:
187–200.
Mulder, M. (1959) Power and satisfaction in task-oriented groups. Acta Psychologica,
16: 178–225.
Mulder, M. (1960) The power variable in communication experiments. Human Relations, 13:
241–257.
Mulder, M., Van Dijk, R. Soutendijk, S., Stelwagen, T. & Verhagen, J. (1964) Non-instrumental
liking tendencies toward powerful group members. Acta Psychologia, 22: 367–386.
Mulder, M. & Wilke, H. (1970) Participation and power equalisation. Organizational Behavior and
Human Performance, 5: 430–448.
Myers, J. L. (1968) The Political Ideas of the Greeks. New York: Greenwood Press.
Newman, W. H., Summer, C. E. & Warren, E. K. (1967) The Process of Management.
Englewood Cliffs: NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Nicholson, G. & Newton, C. J. (2010) The role of the board of directors: Perceptions of managerial
elites. Journal of Management and Organisation, 16(2): 201–218.
Nietzsche, F. (2008) [1886] Beyond Good and Evil (Trans. M. Faber). Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
216
Bibliography

Noll, R. (1996) The Jung Cult: The Origins of a Charismatic Movement. London: Fontana Press.
O’Donnell, C. (1964) The course of managerial authority. In Koontz, H. & O’Donnell, C. (eds.)
Management: A Book of Readings. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Olson, D. R. (2006) Becoming responsible for who we are: The trouble with traits. In Schaler, J. A.
(ed.) Howard Gardner Under Fire: The Rebel Psychologist Faces His Critics, Chicago & La
Salle, Ill.: Open Court.
Ordione, G. S. (1966) The management theory jungle and the existential manager. Academy of
Management, June: 109–116.
Orne, M. T. (1962a) On the social psychology of the psychological experiment: With particular
reference to demand characteristics and their implications. American Psychologist, 17:
776–783.
Orne, M. T. (1962b) Antisocial behaviour and hypnosis: Problems of control and validation in
empirical studies. In Estabrook, G. H. (ed.) Hypnosis: Current Problems. New York: Harper &
Row.
Orne, M. T. & Evans, F. J. (1965) Social control in the psychological experiment: Antisocial
behaviour and hypnosis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1: 189–200.
Overeem, P. & Tholen, B. (2011) After managerialism: MacIntyre’s lessons for the study of public
administration. Administration and Society, 43(7): 722–748.
Parker, M. (2002) Against Management: Organization in the Age of Managerialism. Cambridge:
Polity Press.
Parker, S. & Parker, M. (2017) Antagonism, accommodation and agonism in Critical Management
Studies: Alternative organizations as allies. Human Relations, 70(11): 1366–1387.
Parsons, T. (1937) The Structure of Social Action. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Parsons, T. (1967) Sociological Theory and Modern Society. New York: Free Press.
Passini, S. & Morselli, D. (2009) Authority relationships between obedience and disobedience.
New Ideas in Psychology, 27: 96–109.
Paul, A. M. (2004) The Cult of Personality Testing. New York: Free Press.
Paulhus, D. L. (2014) Toward a taxonomy of dark personalities. Current Directions in Psychological
Science, 23(6): 421–426.
Peabody, R. L. (1962) Perceptions of organisational authority: A comparative analysis.
Administrative Science Quarterly, 6: 463–482.
Peabody, R. L. (1964) Organizational Authority. New York: Atherton.
Pelz, D. C. (1952) Influence: A key to effective leadership in the first line supervisor. Personnel, 3:
3–11.
Peters, R. S. (1958) Authority. In Peters, R., Winch, P. G. & Duncan-Jones, A. E. Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Vol. 32.
Peters, R. S. (1959) Authority, Responsibility and Education. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Peters, R. S. (1967) Authority. In Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Vol 1. London: Collier-Macmillan.
Pettigrew, A. & McNulty, T. (1995) Power and influence in and around the boardroom. Human
Relations, 48(8): 845–873.
Pettigrew, A. & McNulty, T. (1998) Sources and uses of power in the boardroom.
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 7(2): 197–214.
Pfeffer, J. (2010) Power: Why Some People Have It and Others Don’t. New York: Harper Business.
Pfeffer, J. & Sutton R. (2007) Evidence-based management. Public Management, 89(8): 14–25.
Plant, J. F. (2011) Carl J. Friedrich on responsibility and authority. Public Administration Review,
May/June: 471–482.
Plato (2013) The Republic (Trans. C. Emlyn-Jones & W. Preddy). Cambridge, Mass: Harvard
University Press.
Pollitt, C., Birchall, J. & Putman, K. (2016) Decentralising Public Service Management. London:
Macmillan.
Bibliography
217

Popper, K. R. (1963) Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge. London:
Routledge.
Popper, K. R. (1972) Objective Knowledge: An Evolutionary Approach. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Popper, K. R. (1996) Knowledge and the Body-Mind Problem: In Defence of Interaction. London:
Routledge.
Popper, K. R. (2002) The Logic of Scientific Discovery. London: Routledge.
Pryer, M.W., Flint, A. W. & Bass, B. M. (1962) Group effectiveness and consistency of leadership.
Sociometry, 25: 391–397.
Ranasinghe, D., Mather, P. & Young, S. (2020) Board structure and earnings persistence: The
mediation effect of board processes. Australian Journal of Management, 45(2): 266–293.
Ratnam, K. (1964) Charisma and political leadership. Political Studies, 12: 341–354.
Raven, B. (1992) A power/interaction model of interpersonal influence: French and Raven thirty
years later. Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 7: 217–244.
Raven, B. H. & French, J. R. P. (1958a) Group support, legitimate power and social influence.
Journal of Personality, 26: 400–409.
Raven, B. H. & French, J. R. P. (1958b) Legitimate power, coercive power and social influence.
Sociometry, 21: 83–97.
Redl, F. (1955) Group emotion and leadership. In Hare, A. P., Borgatta, E. F. & Bales, R. F. (eds.)
Small Groups: Studies in Social Interaction. New York: Knopf.
Rees, S. & Rodley, G. (eds.) (1995) The Human Costs of Managerialism. Leichhardt: Pluto Press
Australia.
Reicher, S. D. & Haslam, S. A. (2017) Obedience: Revisiting Milgram’s shock experiments. In
Smith, J. R. & Haslam, S. A. (eds.) Social Psychology: Revisiting the Classic Studies.
London: Sage Publications.
Rey, C., Velasco, J. S. C. & Almandoz, J. (2019) The new logic of purpose within the organisation.
In Rey, C., Bastons, M. & Sotok, P. (eds.) Purpose-driven Organisations: Management Ideas
for a Better World. Cham: Springer International Publishing.
Rice, A. K. (1963) The Enterprise and its Environment. London: Tavistock.
Rice, J. H. (1960) Existentialism for businessmen. Harvard Business Review, 38(2): 135–143.
Richter, A. (1970) The existentialist executive. Public Administration Review, 30(4): 415–422.
Roberts, J. & Stiles, P. (1999) The relationship between chairmen and chief executives:
Competitive or complementary roles? Long Range Planning, 32(1): 36–48.
Rock, I. (ed.) (1990) The Legacy of Solomon Asch: Essays in Cognitive and Social Psychology.
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum Associates.
Rosen, R. (1977) Psychobabble: Fast Talk and Quick Cure in the Age of Feeling.
Wildwood House: London.
Rosenthal, R. (1963) On the social psychology of the psychological experiment: The
experimenter’s hypothesis as unintended determinant of experimental results. American
Scientist, 51: 268–289.
Rousseau, D. (2016) Evidence-based practice: The psychology of EBP implementation. Annual
Review of Psychology, 67(1): 667–692.
Rudin, S. A. (1961) The relationship between rational and irrational authoritarianism. Journal of
Psychology, 32: 179–183.
Russell, B. (1938) Power: A New Social Analysis. London: Unwin Books.
Russell, B. (1946) History of Western Philosophy. London: George Allen & Unwin.
Sartre, J-P. (1984) [1948] Existentialism and Humanism (Trans. P. Mairet). London: Methuen.
Sartre, J-P. (2003) [1943] Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology (Trans.
H. E. Barnes). London: Routledge Classics.
218
Bibliography

Schaler, J. A. (ed.) (2004) Szasz Under Fire: The Psychiatric Abolitionist Faces His Critics. Chicago
& La Salle: Open Court.
Schaler, J. A. (ed.) (2006) Howard Gardner Under Fire: The Rebel Psychologist Faces His Critics.
Chicago & La Salle, Ill.: Open Court.
Schopenhauer, A. (1965) [1841] The Basis of Morality. Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill.
Schopler, J. (1965) Social power. In Berkowitz, L. (ed.) Advances in Social Psychology. New York:
Academic Press.
Scott, J. (ed.) (1994) Power: Critical Concepts. London: Routledge.
Scott, J. (2001) Power. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Scott, J. T. (2018) The fortune of Machiavelli’s unarmed prophet. The Journal of Politics, 80(2):
615–629.
Scott, W. R. & Davis, G. F. (2015) Organizations and Organizing Rational, Natural and Open
Systems Perspectives. London: Routledge.
Selznick, P. (1957) Leadership in Administration: A Sociological Interpretation. Evanston, Ill.: Row,
Peterson.
Shareef, R. (2007) Want better business theories? Maybe Karl Popper has the answer. Academy of
Management Learning and Education, 6(2): 272–280.
Shaw, M.E. & Costanzo, P. R. (1970) Theories of Social Psychology. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Shepherd, S. (2018) Managerialism: An ideal type. Studies in Higher Education, 43(9):
1668–1678.
Shils, E. A. (1954) Authoritarianism ‘Right’ and ‘Left’. In Christie, R. & Jahoda M. (eds.) Studies in
the Method and Scope of ‘The Authoritarian Personality’. Glencoe, Ill.: Free Press.
Shils, E. A. (1965) Charisma, order and status. American Sociological Review, 30: 199–213.
Simon, H. A. (1957) Administrative Behavior: A Study of Decision-Making Processes in
Administrative Organization. New York: The Free Press.
Skinner, B. F. (1953) Science and Human Behavior. New York: The Free Press.
Skinner, B. F. (1993) About Behaviorism. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Skinner, Q. (2000) Machiavelli. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Smith, D. J. (2007) Managerial authority as political authority: A retrospective examination of
Christopher McMahon’s ‘Authority and Democracy. Journal of Business Ethics, 71: 335–338.
Smith, J. R. & Haslam, S. A. (eds.) (2017) Social Psychology: Revisiting the Classic Studies.
London: Sage.
Smith, P. & Hussey, T. (2010) The Trouble with Higher Education: A Critical Examination of our
Universities. Abingdon, UK: Routledge.
Solinger, O. N., Jansen, P. G. & Cornelissen, J. P. (2020) The emergence of moral leadership.
Academy of Management Review, 45(3): 504–527.
Spearman, C. (1927) The Abilities of Man. New York: Macmillan.
Spears, R. (2010) Group rationale, collective sense: Beyond intergroup bias. British Journal of
Social Psychology, 49(1): 1–20.
Spillane, R. (1983) Authority in small groups: A laboratory test of a Machiavellian observation.
British Journal of Social Psychology, 22: 51–59.
Spillane, R. (1987) Rhetoric as remedy: Some philosophical antecedents of psychotherapeutic
ethics. British Journal of Medical Psychology, 60: 217–224.
Spillane, R. (2009) Questionable Behaviour: Psychology’s Undermining of Personal Responsibility.
Melbourne: Michelle Anderson Publishing.
Spillane, R. (2010) Enlightened Eccentrics. Melbourne: Michelle Anderson Publishing.
Spillane, R. (2015) An Eye for an I: Philosophies of Personal Power. Sydney: GOKO Publishing.
Spillane, R. (2017) Psychomanagement: An Australian Affair. Sydney: GOKO Publishing.
Spillane, R. & Joullié, J-E. (2015) Philosophy of Leadership: The Power of Authority. Basingstoke,
UK: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bibliography
219

Spillane, R. & Martin, J. (2005) Personality and Performance: Foundations for Managerial
Psychology. Sydney: University of New South Wales Press.
Spillane, R. & Martin, J. (2018) What Went Wrong with Psychology? Myths, Metaphors and
Madness. Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.
Spillane, R. & Spillane, L. (1999) The two faces of authority: A critique. Journal of Australian and
New Zealand Academy of Management, 5(1): 1–11. Published on-line by Cambridge University
Press, 18 September 2015, pp. 1–11.
Stogdill, R. M. (1974) Handbook of Leadership: A Survey of Theory and Research. New York: Free
Press.
Stolz, S. A. (2017) MacIntyre, managerialism and universities. Educational Philosophy and Theory,
49(1): 38–46.
Stone, W., Lederer, G. and Christie, R. (eds.) (1993) Strength and Weakness: The Authoritarian
Personality Today. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Stove, D. (1991) The Plato Cult and Other Philosophical Follies. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Strauss, G. (1963) Some notes on power equalisation. In Leavitt, H. J. (ed.). The Social Science of
Organisation. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Student, K. R. (1967) Some organisational correlates of supervisory influence. Dissertation
Abstracts, 27: (10b): 3701.
Sturm, R. E. & Antonakis, J. (2015) Interpersonal power: A review, critique, and research agenda.
Journal of Management, 41(1): 136–163.
Swain, J. W. (2002) Machiavelli and modern management. Management Decision, 40(3): 281–287.
Szasz, T. (1979) The Myth of Psychotherapy: Mental Healing as Religion, Rhetoric and Repression.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Szasz, T. (1987) Insanity: The Idea and its Consequences. New York: Wiley.
Szasz, T. (1996) The Meaning of Mind: Language, Morality and Neuroscience. Westport, Conn:
Praeger.
Szasz. T. (2007) The Medicalization of Everyday Life: Selected Essays. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse
University Press.
Szasz. T. (2008) Psychiatry: The Science of Lies. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Szasz, T. (2009) Antipsychiatry: Quackery Squared. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.
Szasz, T. S. (2010) The Myth of Mental Illness: Foundations of a Theory of Personal Conduct. New
York: Harper Centennial.
Tajfel, H. (1972) Experiments in a social vacuum. In Israel, J. & Tajfel, H. (eds.) The Context of
Social Psychology. London: Academic Press.
Tarrant, J. J. (1980) Drucker: The Man Who Invented the Corporate Society. New York: Warner
Books.
Taylor, F. W. (1919) The Principles of Scientific Management. New York: Harper Brothers Publishers.
Taylor, J. R., & Van Every, E. J. (2014) When Organization Fails: Why Authority Matters. New York:
Routledge.
Tholen, B. (2016) Machiavelli’s lessons for public administration. Administrative Theory and
Praxis, 38: 101–114.
Thomas, H., Lorange, P. & Sheth, J. (2013) The Business School in the Twenty-first Century:
Emergent Challenges and New Business Models. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Thomas, H. & Wilson, A. D. (2011) ‘Physics envy’, cognitive legitimacy or practical relevance:
Dilemmas in the evolution of management research in the UK. British Journal of
Management, 22: 443–456.
Thomas, R. (2010) What is the relevance of Karl Popper’s critical rationalism to management
studies and practice? Philosophy of Management, 9(1): 5–38.
Thomas, R. & Dunkerley, D. (1999) Careering downwards? Middle management in the downsized
organization. British Journal of Management, 10(2): 157–169.
220
Bibliography

Thurstone, L. L. (1938) Primary Mental Abilities. Psychological Monograph No. 1, Chicago, Ill.:
University of Chicago Press.
Tjosvold, D. & Wisse, B. (2009) Power and Interdependence in Organisations. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Tolman, E. C. (1932) Purposive Behavior in Animals and Men. New York: Century.
Tolman, E. C. (1938) The determiners of behavior at a choice point. Psychological Review,
45(1): 1–41.
Tolman, E. C. (1951) Collected Papers in Psychology. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Tourish, D. (2020) The triumph of nonsense in management studies. Academy of Management
Learning & Education, 19(1): 99–109.
Trahair, C., Baran, L., Flakus, M., Kowalski, C. M, Rogoza, R. (2020) The structure of the Dark Triad
traits: A network analysis. Personality and Individual Differences, 167: 1–7.
Tuggle, C. S., Schnatterly, K. & Johnson, R. A. (2010) Attention patterns in the boardroom: How
board composition and processes affect discussion of entrepreneurial issues. Academy of
Management Journal, 53(3): 550–571.
Udy, S. H. (1959) ‘Bureaucracy’ and ‘rationality’ in Weber’s organization theory: An empirical
study. American Sociological Review, 24: 791–795.
Van Oortmerssen, L. A., van Woerkum, C. M., & Aarts, N. (2014) The visibility of trust. Public
Management Review, 16(5) : 666–685.
Verba, S. (1966) Leadership: Affective and instrumental. In Backman C. & Secord, P. F. (eds.)
Problems in Social Psychology. New York : McGraw-Hill.
Vincent, A. (2011) Ideology and the university. The Political Quarterly, 82(3): 332–340.
Viroli, M. (1998) Machiavelli. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Viroli, M. (2013) Redeeming ‘The Prince’: The Meaning of Machiavelli’s Masterpiece. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.
Ward, S. C. (2011) The machinations of managerialism: New public management and the
diminishing power of professionals. Journal of Cultural Economy, 4(2): 205–215.
Waring, S. P. (1992) Peter Drucker, MBO, and the corporatist critique of scientific management. In
Nelson, D. A Mental Revolution: Scientific Management Since Taylor. Ohio: The Ohio State
University Press.
Wastell, C. & Booth, A. (2003) Machiavellianism: An alexithymic perspective. Journal of Social and
Clinical Psychology, 22: 730–744.
Watson, D. (2004) Weasel Words: Contemporary Clichés, Cant and Management Jargon. Sydney:
Knopf.
Watson, R. (2006) On the language of bureaucracy: postmodernism, plain English and
Wittgenstein. In Lynch, T. & Cruise, P. (eds.) Handbook of Organization Theory
and Management: The Philosophical Approach. Boca Raton, FL: Taylor & Francis.
Waugh, W. L. (2004) The existentialist public administrator. International Journal of Organisation
Theory and Behaviour, 7(3): 432–451.
Weaver, R. M. (1953) The Ethics of Rhetoric. Chicago, Ill: Regnery.
Weaver, R. M. (1970) Language is Sermonic: Richard M. Weaver on the Nature of Rhetoric. (Eds. R.
L. Johannesen, R. Strickland & R. T. Eubanks). Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press.
Weber, M. (1968) Economy and Society (Trans. E. Fischoff et al.). New York: Bedminster Press.
Weber, M. (1969) The Theory of Social and Economic Organisation. (Trans. A. M. Henderson & T.
Parsons). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
West, A. (2008) Sartrean existentialism and ethical decision-making in business. Journal of
Business Ethics, 81: 15–25.
Wheatley, M. (1992) The Future of Management. Corby: British Institute of Management.
Whitaker, R. & Cosgrove, L. (2015) Psychiatry Under the Influence: Institutional Corruption, Social
Injury, and Prescriptions for Reform. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Bibliography
221

White, A., Yakis-Douglas, B., Helanummi-Cole, H. & Ventresca, M. (2017) Purpose-led organization:
‘Saint Anthony’ reflects on the idea of organizational purpose in principle and practice.
Journal of Management Inquiry, 26(1): 101–107.
White, M. (2004) Machiavelli: A Man Misunderstood. London: Little Brown.
Whyte, W. H. (1956) The Organization Man. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Williams, K. & O’Reilly, C. (1998) Demography and diversity in organizations: A review
of 40 years of research. Research in Organizational Behavior, 20: 77–140.
Winch, P. G. (1958) Authority. In Peters, R., Winch, P. G. & Duncan-Jones, A. E. Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Vol. 32.
Winch, P. G. (1990) [1956] The Idea of Social Science and Its Relation to Philosophy. London:
Routledge.
Winkler, J. (1987) The fly on the wall of the inner sanctum: Observing company directors at work.
In Moyser, G. & Wagstaffe, M. (eds.) Research Methods for Elite Studies. London: Allen and
Unwin.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953) Philosophical Investigations. Blackwell: Oxford.
Wrong, D. (2002) Power: Its Forms, Bases and Uses. London: Transaction.
Zaleznick, A. (2007) The case for not interpreting unconscious mental life in consulting to
organisations. In Kets De Vries, M., Korotov, K. & Florent-Treacy, E. Coach and Couch: The
Psychology of Making Better Leaders. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Zhu, D. H. & Westphal, J. D. (2021) Structural power, corporate strategy, and performance.
Strategic Management Journal, 42: 624–651.
Zuckert, C. (2014) Machiavelli and the end of nobility in politics. Social Research, 81(1): 85–106.
Zürn, M. (2018) A Theory of Global Governance: Authority, Legitimacy, and Contestation.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
222
Bibliography

Index
Adams, J.
52–53
Adorno, T.
32–33, 35
Alexander
98
Allport, F.
78
Anderson, C.
50
Andreski, S.
90, 113
Antonakis, J.
50, 55–56
Arendt, H.
22–24
Aristotle
8, 22–23, 72, 98, 100, 147, 164,
170, 204
Asch, S.
38–41, 47–48
Asham, I.
193
Atkinson, M.
100
Baritz, L.
129–131
Barnard, C.
4, 19–20, 22, 25
Bendix, R.
4
Benn, S.
16
Bierstedt, R.
16
Bolman, L.
115–118, 120
Borba, M.
151
Borgia, C.
150
Briggs, K.
128
Brion, S.
50
Brown, D.
183
Buber, M.
193
Bühler, K.
103
Burckhardt, J.
150–151
Burke, E.
161
Burke, K.
100
Burrell, G.
87–88
Calvin, J.
13, 137
Camus, A.
193–194
Carey, A.
37
Cartwright, D.
51–53
Churchill, W.
101
Cicero
147
Constantine
148
Cooper, D.
141
Dahl, R.
50–51
Darwin, C.
39, 67, 86
Day, J.
16–18
Deal, T.
115–118, 120
De Grazia, S.
16
Dilthey, W.
85, 88–90, 94
Diogenes
98
Drucker, D.
186
Drucker, P.
2, 4, 70, 115, 121–122, 170, 177,
182–192, 194–195, 197
Duncan-Jones, A.
17
Durkheim, E.
68, 78, 87
Eagleton, T.
56
Emerson, R.
55
Eysenck, H.
131, 154
Fayol, H.
182–183
Fleming, P.
50
Flexner, A.
83
Follett, M.
4, 18–19, 121, 190
Foucault, M.
56, 118–119
Frances, A.
141
Frankfurt, H.
113, 118
Frankl, V.
139
French, J.
46, 50–51, 53–56
Freud, S.
5, 30–33, 98, 122–124, 127–128,
134, 136, 199
Friedrich, C.
4–5, 23–28, 70–71, 75–79,
81, 120, 158, 182, 185, 202–204
Fromm, E.
31–32, 35, 204
Gardner, H.
151–152, 156, 159
Gellner, E.
97
George, G.
83
Gergen, K.
58
Ghoshal, S.
91–92, 97
Gilson, M.
130
Godard, J.
177–178
Gould, A.
82, 117–118
Grace, D.
155
Hartmann, H.
20–21
Hegel, G.
98
Heidegger, M.
193
Hempel, C.
85–87
Herbst, S.
3
Herzberg, F.
87
Hitler, A.
37, 98, 101, 171
Hobbes, T.
15, 98, 161
Hodgkinson, C.
129
Homans, G.
16
Homer
8, 100, 190–192
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110758283-015

Hope, A.
117
Horkheimer, M.
85, 92–93
Hume, D.
120, 166
Jackson, K.
193
Jackson, M.
155
Jaspers, K.
193
Jefferson, T.
183
Jobs, S.
158
Jones, J.
11
Joullié, J-E.
49, 117–118, 178
Jouvenel, B.
7, 17
Jung, C.
5, 98, 127–128, 199
Kant, I. 164–165
Kelvin, P.
50–51
Kennedy, J.
37
Keynes, J.
64, 98
Kiechel, W.
178
Kiel, F.
145–146, 153, 155–156, 158–159
Kierkegaard, S.
167, 191, 194
Kirk, S.
142
Kupfer, D.
142
Laing, R.
141
Landis, C.
42
Lawler, J.
193
Le Bon, G.
39–40
Lennick, D.
145–146, 153, 155–156, 158–159
Levinson, H.
126
Lewin, K.
36–37, 40, 53, 168
Locke, J.
98, 161
Lukes, S. 51, 55–56
Luther, M.
98
MacIntyre, A.
180–181, 190
McMahon, C.
178
Machiavelli, N.
34, 75–77, 96, 145–158,
160–162, 204
Martin, J.
33–36, 44–46, 48, 119, 168–169,
193
Marx, K.
49, 98, 110
Maslow, A.
5, 122, 136–141, 173–174
Mead, G.
111
Meinecke, F.
162
Milgram, S.
41, 43–48
Miller, A. 45–47
Miller, E.
124
Mintzberg, H.
83
Mischel, W.
132–133
Mixon, D.
44
Moodie, A-M.
71
Morgan, G.
87–88
Morgan, J.
158
Moscovici, S.
38–39
Mott, P.
55
Mulder, M.
52–53, 79
Mussolini, B.
37
Myers, l.
128
Nietzsche, F.
34, 49, 56, 98, 164, 194, 196
Noll, R.
128
Norris, W.
170
O’Donnell, C.
15
Ordione, G.
192–193
Orne, M.
42–43
Orwell, G.
103, 113
Parsons, T.
56–57, 59
Patton, G.
190
Paul, A.
128, 132
Peabody, R.
74
Peters, R.
15–16, 21
Pfeffer, J.
83
Plato
22–23, 96, 98, 100–101, 127, 129,
147, 165
Popper, K.
4–5, 26, 103–104, 106, 108, 111,
120, 131, 182, 186, 199–200, 203
Raven, B.
46, 50–51, 53–56
Ray, J.
35–36
Redl, F.
31
Rice, A.
125
Rice, J.
192–193
Richter, A.
192–193
Romney, A.
52–53
Rousseau, D.
83
Rousseau, J. 98, 161
Rudin, S.
35–36
Russell, B.
49, 55, 57, 145, 200
Sartre, J-P.
139–140, 167, 193–194
Schopenhauer, A.
98, 165
Seneca
147
Sforza, C.
150
Shakespeare, W.
145, 156
Shils, E.
12, 78
Simon, H.
21–23, 50–51, 82
Skinner, B.
52, 134–136
224
Index

Slim, W.
129
Sloan, A.
70, 115, 158, 183–184
Smiddy, H.
184
Socrates
22, 104
Spearman, C.
152
Spicer, A.
50
Spillane, R.
33–35, 49, 76–77, 104, 119,
168–169, 178, 193
Stogdill, R.
73
Stove, D.
118–119
Sturm, R.
50, 55–56
Sutton, R.
83
Szasz, T.
111, 141–144
Tarde G.
39
Taylor, F.
82, 90, 182
Thurstone, L.
152
Tolman, E.
168
Watson, D.
98
Watson, T.
158
Waugh, W.
193
Weaver, R.
100–103, 204–205
Weber, M.
4, 9–15, 18–20, 22–24, 27–29,
49–50, 56–57, 72, 74, 78–79, 85,
89–90, 94, 116, 156–157, 175, 196, 200–
201
Welch, J.
115, 158
West, A.
193
Whyte, W.
192
Wilson, G.
154
Winch, P.
17, 97
Wittgenstein, L.
117
Zaleznick, A.
126
Index
225


