Andrea Libero Carbone*
Aristotle’s Logic of Biological Diversity
https://doi.org/10.1515/apeiron-2022-0047
Published online May 4, 2023
Abstract: Aristotle’s biology is based on his method of division of animal kinds by
multiple diﬀerentiae. This results in complex clusters of non-subordinate terms,
between which Aristotle seeks to establish universal correlations. The form of these,
however, does not correspond to that prescribed by his theory of syllogism. Mer-
eological relations between terms are not linear and quantiﬁcation is far more
complex than the distinction between universal and particular propositions. Thus
the axiomatisation of Aristotle’s biology requires a tool designed for analysing such
complex universal correlations into valid syllogistic premises. Prosleptic-like pre-
mises turn out to be the solution outlined by Aristotle. They make it possible to
handle both the logic of consequence which translates from and into mereological
relations between term clusters, and the complex quantiﬁcation required by division
based on multiple diﬀerentiæ, through the instantiation of a variable ideally con-
sisting of indivisible groups of animals.
Keywords: Aristotle’s biology, Aristotle’s logic, Aristotle’s theory of division, Aris-
totle’s syllogism, prosleptic premises
One of the main and most remarkable aspects of Aristotle’s biology is his enquiry into
the diﬀerences between the distinctive features of living things, which stands out for
its focus on complexity and diversity. This is the main subject of his History of
Animals, which records the distinctive traits shared by several groups of living
things. His exploration there seems to be driven by the aim of establishing valid
universalisations in the form of universal correlations between terms, in line with
the project of an axiomatisation of biology within the framework set out in the
Posterior Analytics.1 While scholars agree on the fact that Aristotle’s biological
enquiry in his extant works represents a pre-demonstrative stage of his biology,
though, the degree of axiomatisation that they are prepared to recognize in the data
*Corresponding author: Andrea Libero Carbone, Independent Researcher, via Nunzio Morello 18,
Palermo, 90144, Italy, E-mail: andrealiberocarbone@gmail.com
1 On Aristotle’s interest for relevant combinations of diﬀerentiæ see Balme 1987. Gotthelf and
Lennox have thoroughly explored how Aristotle deals with “widest class generalizations”: see Got-
thelf 1988, Lennox 1987, and, for an overview of the question, Gotthelf 2012a.
apeiron 2023; aop

exposition as we actually ﬁnd it in the letter of Aristotle’s text widely ranges from
“axiomatic-like” to none at all.2 At any rate, how exactly universal correlations
between complex term clusters resulting from Aristotle’s method of division by
multiple diﬀerentiæ are to be analysed into valid syllogistic premises is a largely
unexamined question.
Beyond the undisputed fact that scientiﬁc syllogisms are completely absent from
Aristotle’s biological works, what seems to prevent us from regarding the way in
which Aristotle deals with multiple diﬀerentiæ as axiomatic-like, from a formal point
of view, is that universal correlations turn out to be very diﬃcult to establish, since
the distinguishing features of living things tend to overlap over diﬀerent groups, and
that a relevant number of exceptions and anomalies are found.3 Thus, one might
believe that Aristotle’s account of multiple diﬀerentiæ is merely discursive or
‘informal’, somewhat sketched out as draft notes, and that any emerging logical
patterns should be ascribed to the underlying logic of natural language, rather than
to a speciﬁcally designed method. But this would mean overlooking that in addition
to devising a new method of division on the grounds of his critique of Academic
dichotomy, Aristotle also developed, in his Prior Analytics, a detailed method for
recording and compiling terms for use in establishing syllogistic premises, and that
in the Topics he sets out a comprehensive methodology aimed precisely at shaping
‘informal’ propositions and reasoning, i.e. expressed in natural language. Aristotle’s
use of these methods in his biology remains almost unexplored in mainstream
scholarship, and it is to this exploration that I especially wish to contribute with this
paper.
2 According to Barnes 1993, xix, “the biological writings contain no explicit syllogism, and they do not
appear to exhibit any axiomatic structure […]. Since APst does not describe a scientiﬁc methodology,
it would be misconceived to complain that the methods which Aristotle follows and occasionally
describes in the scientiﬁc work do not ﬁt the prescriptions of APst. Again, insofar as the biological
writings do not purport to present a ﬁnished science, we should not expect them to exhibit the
organisation and structure that APst describes”. Starting from the Nineties, considerable eﬀort has
been devoted to understanding how scientiﬁc demonstrations may be obtained from Aristotle’s
exposition. According to the now mainstream reading of Aristotle’s practice of demonstration in his
biology, the information structure of Aristotle’s biological works is “pre-demonstrative” (Lennox) or
“axiomatic-like” (Gotthelf) and the rules of scientiﬁc demonstration prescribe that the exposition of
biological data has to be puttable into the appropriate scientiﬁc form, i.e. according to the rules of
scientiﬁc syllogisms, “not that it actually be so put” (see Gotthelf 2012b, 181).
3 I shall focus here on formal constraints. Other unresolved issues with respect to translating
biological data into APo-style demonstrations include the type of necessity involved in the premises
(necessity pertaining to living beings is necessity ‘from a hypothesis’ whereas scientiﬁc syllogism is
based on unqualiﬁed necessity), the possible reference to time, i.e. the logical-ontological priority
relations in generation (discussed in APo II 12), and the fact that demonstration needs to be adjusted
so that it can account for causes other than the formal one. On these issues, see Lennox 2001 6; 36 n. 37
and Lloyd 1996a.
2
A. L. Carbone

1 The Consequence of Division by Multiple
Diﬀerentiæ
A key theoretical and methodological aspect of Aristotle’s biology, division by mul-
tiple diﬀerentiæ is introduced in PA I 2–3 after rejecting dichotomic division as a
suitable procedure. Even if these chapters are quite laconic about the details of how
this method should be implemented, its aim and general outline are clear.
The ﬁrst step seems to consist in marking oﬀindividual animal groups – e.g.
man, dog or lion – through establishing the set of their speciﬁc and distinctive
features. In PA I 3, 643b 11 sq. Aristotle introduces the correct method of division by
stating that one should follow “the example of the majority” in identifying animal
kinds.4 According to his criticism, dichotomy is untenable because it is inconsistent
with the assumption of popularly deﬁned animal kinds, or, to put it another way,
because it contradicts endoxa about animal kinds.5
Failing to take into account endoxa with regard to animal kinds results in two
main drawbacks. On the one hand, when dichotomy disregards the rule of ‘diﬀerence
of diﬀerence’,6 i.e. the linearity of the division according to an unambiguous crite-
rion, animals belonging to the same kind are splitted into diﬀerent groups, e.g. some
species of birds among water animals and others among the volatiles.7 On the other
hand, even if the rule of unambiguousness is respected and the division proceeds in a
linear fashion, what is obtained is nothing more than an ultimate diﬀerence pointing
to a single deﬁning feature. This ultimate diﬀerence implies all the superordinate
groupings, but does not express the multiplicity of the animal’s distinctive features.
For example, in the case of man, one can indeed attain the ultimate diﬀerence
‘provided with multidivided feet’, which implies ‘provided with feet’ and ‘animal’.
Nonetheless, to deﬁne man as an ‘animal provided with multidivided feet’ is unde-
niably reductive.8 We will see in a moment what exactly it means that the ultimate
diﬀerence implies superordinate groupings and how this relates to Aristotle’s
methodology.
On the basis of this criticism, in PA I 3, 643b 10–13 Aristotle argues that
4 As Charles 1997, 40 points out, “the source of relevant authority for determining kind identity lies
with popularly held, well-entrenched views (or endoxa) about kinds”.
5 See Top. VI 10, 148b 20–22: “When it comes to terminology, one is bound to use the handed-down [τῇ
παραδεδομένῃ] and current usage, without making changes, even if in certain cases one should not
speak like the majority.”
6 See Metaph. Z 12, 1038a 25–26 and Kullman 1974, 69.
7 See PA I 2, 642b 10–14.
8 This deﬁnition is reminiscent of the notorious deﬁnition of man as a ‘featherless biped’, echoed in
Plato’s Statesman (266b–d) and mocked by Diogenes.
Aristotle’s Logic of Biological Diversity
3

One should try, rather, to take animals by kinds, following the example of the majority who
divide the kind of ‘bird’ and the kind of ‘ﬁsh’. Each of these is described by many diﬀerences, and
not by dichotomy.
Aristotle’s reference to the “example of the majority” shows that his method of
division by multiple diﬀerentiæ incorporates a dialectical approach, because it relies
beforehand on endoxa as reference standards for the identiﬁcation of kinds of living
things. The same approach is also recommended in APo II 14, 98a 13 ﬀ., where
Aristotle refers to the “common names that have been handed down”, such as ‘bird’
or ‘ﬁsh’. As Aristotle puts it in PA I 4, 644b 1 ﬀ., common names are reliable when
kinds have “both a single common nature and forms in them not too distant”.9 At the
highest relevant level of generality, kinds would correspond to groups sharing the
same “functions common to body and soul”.10 At the opposite end of the generality
scale are the ultimate forms, which have the highest level of substantiality, but whose
separate examination, as Aristotle points out in PA I 4, 644a 27 ﬀ., does not serve the
purpose of highlighting common features in kinds. To this extent, assuming kinds
corresponding to conventional usage like “bird” or “ﬁsh” achieves, so to speak, a
middle way along the generality scale.11
Aristotle’s recommendation in PA I 4, 644b 1 ﬀ. to refer to kinds that have “forms
in them not too distant” is echoed in the approach recommended in his Topics by the
third and by the fourth topical organa, i.e. the ‘discovery of diﬀerences’ (Top. I 16) and
the ‘examination of similarities’ (Top. I 17), where falling into groupings that are “not
too distant” is highlighted as a distinctive feature of what belongs to the same kind,12
vernacular animal kinds being a key example.13 Importantly, popular animal names
provide an endoxical reference of what the internal diversity of any grouping should
be,14 so that this method also allows for establishing unnamed groupings based on the
same criterion.15
9 The Greek has ἔχει τε μίαν φύσιν κοινὴν καὶεἴδη ἐν αὐτῷμὴπολὺδιεστῶτα.
10 As it is the case in the dichotomic tables quoted in PA I 3, 643a 35 ﬀ., that Aristotle considers
misconceived.
11 For a diﬀerent approach, see Lennox 2005.
12 “The diﬀerences between things are to be observed within the kinds themselves—for example,
how do justice and courage or wisdom and temperance diﬀer (all of which belong to the same kind)—
and between one kind and another, as long as they are not too far apart [μὴπολὺλίαν διεστηκότων]”
(Top. 107b 39–108a 4).
13 See Top. 108a 7 ﬀ. where Aristotle refers to “man”, “horse” and “dog” as “not very much too far
apart”.
14 See Ferejohn 1982, 389: “in addition to knowing (or supposing) that there is in fact a genus of things
to be divided, it would seem necessary, before diairesis can proceed, to possess some minimal
background informations about how the genus itself ﬁts into the wider scheme of things”.
15 See APo II 14, 98a 13–19; Top. VIII 2, 157a 21 ﬀ. and PA I 4, 644b 4–6.
4
A. L. Carbone

Once the initial kinds have been identiﬁed, however, how are multiple diﬀer-
ences dealt with? As we have said, in his methodological framework Aristotle is very
sparing with details on the subject, and one gets the distinct impression that these
procedures of identiﬁcation of kinds and division were so much a matter of an
ongoing debate that he did not need any particular clariﬁcation to make himself
understood by his audience. However, his reference to a term, in particular the
ultimate diﬀerence, implying superordinate groupings, is evidence that his method is
based on his logic of ‘consequence’ [ἀκολούθησις].16 This is to say, it consists in
selecting “those attributes which follow the common feature” [τὰἑπόμενα τοῖς ὑπὸτὸ
κοινόν] (APo II 14, 98a 8), for instance “if this is a bird, what things follow [ἕπεται] for
every bird and likewise ever closer” (98a 5–6). In other words, the attribution of each
kind entails a multiplicity of terms.
We ﬁnd a reference to this approach in Aristotle’s discussion of the second
topical organon, i.e. the examination of the meanings of a term, with the aim of
checking whether two kinds having the same name are subordinate or not:
If the two kinds are subordinate, the deﬁnitions are not necessarily diﬀerent. For instance, of
‘crow’ both ‘animal’ and ‘bird’ are kinds. When, therefore, we say that the raven is a ‘bird’, we
also say that it is a certain ‘animal’, so that both kinds are predicated of it. Likewise also when we
say that the raven is ‘animal, ﬂying, biped’, we say that it is a ‘bird’: in this way, then, both kinds
are predicated of the raven, and also their deﬁnition (Top. I 15, 107a 23–29).
Thus when a kind is attributed, or a set of features characterising a kind, this results
in implying a multiplicity of terms linked by relations of predication. If the thing to be
deﬁned is a certain animal, e.g. a bird of some sort, one proceeds ﬁrst by identifying
all the features that belong to the superordinate kind, i.e. to each animal. At each
subsequent step, the identiﬁed kinds imply a certain set of simultaneous charac-
teristics, which occur at the same level of generality.17 Subsequently, in order to get
16 On how the term ‘consequence’ eventually came to denote modus-ponens-type arguments in post-
Aristotelian logic, see Bobzien 2002.
17 According to current scholarship, Aristotle evolves three (as held by Lloyd 1961) or two (Balme 1987)
diﬀerent conceptions of division, and the method of dividing by multiple diﬀerences is a later devel-
opment after the Topics. Passages such as this one, however, suggest that already in the Topics he takes
into account divisions by simultaneous terms, i.e. identiﬁed at the same level of generality. Further, the
very idea of the simultaneity of multiple diﬀerentiæ is already outlined by Aristotle in Cat. 13, 14b 33 ﬀ:
“Also things that are opposed by the same kind, being divided in relation to one another are said to be
simultaneous by nature [τὰἐκ τοῦαὐτοῦγένους ἀντιδιῃρημένα ἀλλήλοις ἅμα τῇφύσει λέγεται]. Things
are said to be opposed by being divided in relation to one another when they belong to the same
division: for example,the volatile inrelationtothe terrestrial and the aquatic. These infact are opposed
by being divided in relation to one another, and belong to the same kind: animal, in fact, is divided into
these […] and none of these is before or after, but things of this kind are said to be simultaneous by
nature (and each of these can be further divided into species […])”.
Aristotle’s Logic of Biological Diversity
5

closer to the bird to be deﬁned, these common features will have to be further
diﬀerentiated. For example, since all animals possess parts that are suitable for
locomotion, it will be necessary to determine which of these parts are proper to birds
—namely, wings—and then which diﬀerences in these same parts will allow dis-
tinctions to be made between birds until the features that uniquely characterise the
bird to be deﬁned are identiﬁed.18 Aristotle expands on this method some paragraphs
later, in Top. II 5, 112a 16–21:
Moreover, whoever says one thing, in a certain way says many things, since each has many
necessary consequences. For example, whoever says that X is a ‘man’ also says that X is a ‘living
thing’, and that X is a ‘biped’, and that X is ‘capable of intelligence and knowledge’, so that by
eliminating one of these consequences the original term is also eliminated.
Aristotle claims here that each attribute can be dealt with in relation to its “necessary
consequences” [ἐξ ἀνάγκης ἀκόλουθα], so that whoever proves that the consequent is
not the case, will therefore have proved that the antecedent is not the case. The
mereological relations of predication between the kind and the forms of the kind in
fact verify the core rule of this logic, which regulates the convertibility and non-
convertibility of antecedent and consequent. Aristotle introduces this core rule in
Top. II 8, 113b15–26:
Look at the contradictory terms, if you can argue from the reversal of their consequence, both to
destroy and to establish a thesis, by asserting the rule by induction. For example, if man is an
animal, what is not an animal is not a man, and the same applies in any other case.
We ﬁnd evidence of how this logic works in SE 28, 181a 23–30, where we learn that
“the consequence of entailed terms [ἡτῶν ἑπομένων ἀκολούθησις]” may come from
the universal following on its particular, as ‘animal’ follows ‘man’. This means that
according to Aristotle mereological relations of predication translate from and into
chains of entailments. Aristotle further expands on this approach in APr I 27–31,
where he points out that the consequences of entailed terms ramify both upwards
and downwards along the generality scale. Thereby, one can ﬁnd which predicates
imply and are implied by a given term, and which ones are incompatible with it, in
order to construct syllogistic premises. As he claims in APr I 27, 43b 1–5,
18 As one proceeds towards the level of generality corresponding to the individual, the diﬀerences
become a matter of attributes that are increasingly accidental with respect to the generality level of
the ‘animal’, i.e. to the vital functions, but they are no less necessary for the deﬁnition of the ousia. As
Aristotle maintains in DA I, 1, 402 b 21 ﬀ., “Accidents contribute largely to the knowledge of the ‘what
is’. For when we are able to explain according to the phenomena with regard to accidents, whether all
or most of them, then we will also be able to speak in the best possible way about the ousia”.
6
A. L. Carbone

We must obtain the premises concerning each term by ﬁrst assuming the thing itself, its
deﬁnitions and everything that is proper to it; then after that everything that follows from the
thing [ὅσα ἕπεται]; everything to which it follows [οἷς τὸπρᾶγμα ἀκολουθεῖ]; and everything
that cannot belong to it.
We ﬁnd here the same logic governing the consequence of terms on which the
method introduced in APo II 14 is based, except that the procedure to be adopted is
described in full detail. Here “that which follows from the thing” means the set of
terms that can be universally predicated of something, whereas “that from which the
thing follows” means the set of terms of which some other term is universally
predicated.19 If we take the classic example of ‘biped’, we see that this term is
followed by ‘provided with feet’ and ‘animal’, meaning that it can be said that every
‘biped’ is ‘provided with feet’ and that every ‘biped’ is an ‘animal’, while it is implied
by ‘man’ and ‘bird’, because conversely it can be said that every ‘man’ is ‘biped’ and
likewise also that every ‘bird’ is ‘biped’, while the list of what cannot belong to this
living thing will include, for example, ‘provided with a hoof’. This results in three lists
for the potential predicate and three lists for the potential subject of a syllogistic
premise.
If the method set out in APr I 27–31 is applied in divisions carried out assuming
only one diﬀerentia at a time, this procedure goes smoothly and constructing syllo-
gistic premises is quite straightforward. By simply taking one term from the predi-
cate lists and one from the subject lists, and following a few simple rules to ‘bridge’
between the two set of lists, which Aristotle expounds in APr I 28, one can easily
obtain syllogistic premises in the various ﬁgures, since relations of implication
translate linearly from and into relations of predication.20 This translatability is in
fact guaranteed by the principle set out in Top. VI 1, 121b 12 sq. according to which
genos, eidos and diﬀerentia must be linked by a strict relation of inclusivity: the
extension of the genos must be greater than that of the eidos of which it is predicated
(or from which it follows) and in the same way the extension of the eidos must be
greater than that of the diﬀerentia of which it is predicated (or from which it follows).
Indeed, Aristotle’s discussion in Top. VI 6—which is illustrated by a number of
biological examples—also reveals that the relation of inclusion between genos,
diaphora and eidos can be non-unilinear. As shown by the example of the diﬀerentia
‘biped’ (Top. VI 6, 144b 12 ﬀ.), which is included in the canonical deﬁnition of man, the
19 On the consequence of terms see Striker 2009, 192–196.
20 This method was called pons asinorum (asses’ bridge) by mediaeval logicians. Both the pons
asinorum and the topical organa are “means which allow us to become well supplied with arguments
[εὐπορήσομεν … τῶν συλλογισμῶν]” (cfr. APr I 27, 43a 20, Top I 9, 103b 39 ﬀ. and I 13, 105a 22). As
Barnes 1975 points out, the same procedure is also applied to the attribution of kinds in APo II 14, 98a 1
ﬀ.
Aristotle’s Logic of Biological Diversity
7

same term can be predicated as a diﬀerentia of two distinct gene, namely walking and
ﬂying animals, which do not contain each other, provided that both these gene are
contained by a superordinate genos—as it is the case with bipeds, since both walking
bipeds and ﬂying bipeds are animals.21 In this case, though, the ﬁnal diﬀerentia does
not imply all the superordinate terms, but only the wider common genos and either
one or the other of the two intermediate-level gene which share the recurring
diﬀerentia.
When it comes to proceeding by multiple diﬀerentiæ taken simultaneously,
though, as required by the method of division set out in PA I 2–4, things become much
trickier, since the relationship between terms is in fact no longer one-to-one, but
between sets of related terms. Such relations do not translate into simple predicative
relations, but result in predications involving complex compound terms.22
This is what Aristotle calls the ‘interweaving of the kinds’ (GA II 1, 732b 15 ﬀ.),
i.e. the overlapping of divisions carried out along several axes corresponding to the
multiplicity of diﬀerences relevant to the identiﬁcation of animal kinds. Take for
instance a proposition like “all swimmers, volatiles and land-dwellers, whether live-
bearing or egg-layers, are generated similarly” (HA VII 7, 586a 24 ﬀ.). This universal
proposition combines two distinct sets of diﬀerentiæ. One pertains to the axis of
diﬀerentiation related to the living environment, embracing the three alternative
terms ‘swimmers’, ‘volatiles’ and ‘land-dwellers’, while the other refers to the axis of
diﬀerentiation related to the mode of reproduction, and comprises two alternatives,
namely ‘live-bearing’ and ‘egg-layers’. As it turns out, all combinations of the two sets
of features presented here are actually found among animals: cetaceans are
‘swimmers’ and ‘live-bearing’ (GA 718b 32), ﬁshes are ‘swimmers’ and ‘egg-layers’,
bats are ‘volatiles’ and ‘live-bearing’ (HA 511a 31), birds are ‘volatiles’ and ‘egg-layers’,
several kinds of animals, including man, are ‘land-dwellers’ and ‘live-bearing’, and
several kinds of animals including lizards and snakes are ‘land-dwellers’ and ‘egg-
layers’.
Accounting for combinations such as these, which can have a high degree of
complexity due to anomalies, exceptions and overlaps, in order to translate them into
generalisations, arguably requires a speciﬁc method which must involve what we
may call a “combinatorics of terms”.23 We can get an idea of the logical operations
21 On this rule concerning two gene which do not contain each other see Falcon 1996.
22 On Aristotle’s interest for relevant combinations of diﬀerentiæ see Balme 1987. Gotthelf and
Lennox have thoroughly explored how Aristotle deals with “widest class generalisations”: see Got-
thelf 1988, Lennox 1987, and, for an overview of the question, Gotthelf 2012a. As Lennox 2001, 50
points out, Aristotle’s method “requires the use of specialised descriptive phrases”.
23 As some of the examples mentioned earlier suggest, such a combinatorics of terms also provides a
framework for accounting for ‘dualizers’, i.e. animals characterised by features that are not bound by
linear entailment relationships. I owe this remark to an anonymous reviewer of this journal.
8
A. L. Carbone

involved in such a method by examining a proposition such as the following, a
particularly complex negative universal: “no animal being land-dweller and blooded
is an egg-layer unless it is four-footed or footless” (HA 502b 28–30). This example
shows how Aristotle is committed to ﬁnding universal correlations between as many
axes of diﬀerentiation as possible, here as many as four: living environment, pres-
ence of blood, mode of reproduction and mode of locomotion. What is also clear is
that his quest takes place through combinatorial operations, as shown by the pres-
ence of a disjunction which introduces a feature that can be combined with the
remaining ones. Formulating the proposition in this form makes it possible to convey
an overall picture of possible combinations. Further, it highlights that the other egg-
layers are neither land-dwellers (birds, ﬁshes) nor blooded animals (insects).24 The
main diﬀerence to the method set out in APr I 27–28 is that here the relations of
implication and incompatibility do not concern single terms but combinations of
terms. The term ‘egg-layer’ cannot be predicated of an animal of which the combi-
nation of terms ‘land-dweller’ and ‘blooded’ is predicated, unless a further term,
namely ‘four-footed’ or ‘footless’, is added to the combination. An implication rela-
tion would require a further addition, e.g. ‘provided with scales’.
A key consequence of adopting such a complex approach is that the focus of the
enquiry shifts to the logic preceding predication and syllogism, i.e. on the non-
syllogistic relations between correlated terms and their relations of implication.
Before attempting to establish a bridge between the predicate and the subject lists,
one needs to establish what are the relations within each set of lists. In fact, as in our
example, these relations are often in the foreground of Aristotle’s attempts at ﬁnding
generalisations about living things. A complex network of implications obeying his
logic of consequence, which binds together a series of related terms, stands out with
respect to predication, to which it is not straightforwardly reduced. How, then, is this
network of implications dealt with and how does it translate into assertoric
propositions?
2 Quantifying Complexity
Most passages where Aristotle deals with universal correlations actually appear to
contain functional elements which are quite inconsistent with an axiomatic or even
24 It is also remarkable that no aﬃrmative equivalent can be made out of the features in question.
For example, it is neither true that all the land-dweller, blooded, and four-footed animals are egg-
layers, nor that all the land-dweller, blooded, and footless animals are egg-layers. This is evidence
that all these diﬀerences are simultaneous—they identify the kinds of lizards and snakes,
respectively.
Aristotle’s Logic of Biological Diversity
9

axiomatic-like data exposition within the framework of the logic obeyed by cate-
gorical syllogisms. The most striking are disjunctions,25 which sometimes provide the
base for non-syllogistic inferences; partitive phrases restricting the range of quan-
tiﬁcation to a superordinate grouping; and a ﬁner-grained and more informative set of
quantiﬁers than those used in ordinary universal and particular propositions, which
include a number of set quantiﬁers like ‘alone’ and ‘all but’.
For what concerns disjunction, we ﬁnd evidence of a rather complex and
diversiﬁed use. Exclusive disjunction, which is normally expressed through the co-
ordinated antithesis of the particles μὲν and δὲ, refers to contrary features that
provide the ground for dividing a given kind. Another pattern to consider is one
where disjunction through coordinative particles such as ‘either A or B’ [ἢ(… ἢ)], and
‘whether A or B’ [εἴτε (… εἴτε)] is to be understood in a sense corresponding to ‘no
matter if A or B’. What is stressed in such cases is that diﬀerent animals possessing any
of the features at issue can be conjointly attributed some other predicate. A very
illustrative example is the following attempt at universalisation: “All animals that
swim or [καὶ] ﬂy or [καὶ] walk, whether [εἴτε] live-bearing or [ἢ] egg-layers, are
formed similarly” (HA VII 7, 586a 22). There are also examples of negative universal
propositions where disjunction is exclusive, as in “This is why none of the bloodless
animals has either [οὔτε] soft or [οὔτε] hard fat, as neither [οὐδ’] do they have blood”
(PA II 5, 651a 26), but we also ﬁnd negated inclusive disjunctions, which refer to
features that belong either conjointly or disjointly to other animals, as in “The hemys
has neither a bladder nor kidneys” (PA III 9, 671a 31). Remarkably, such a coordinative
correlation is also formulated through the use of the adjective οὐδέτερος (‘neither
of the two’), whose positive counterparts ἀμφότερος and ἄμφω are related to the
verb ἐπαμφοτερίζειν, which refers to animals that share some features of ‘both of
two’ contrary kinds without belonging to neither.26 An illustrative example is as
follows: “The seals and the bats, since, on the one hand, they tend towards both
[ἐπαμφοτερίζειν] water-animals and land-animals, and on the other hand towards
both ﬂying-animals and land-animals, for this reason they partake of both
[ἀμφοτέρων] and of neither [οὐδετέρων]” (PA 697b 4).27
When Aristotle deals with the correlation of multiple features which belong
universally to a certain group of animals, his use of conjunction is straightforward,
e.g. “Those which are four-footed and [καὶ] not winged are all blooded, though
some are live-bearing while others egg-layers” (HA I 6, 490 b 19) or in “as many as are
25 Disjunctive propositions were apparently the conventional formalisation of dichotomies taken as
premises according to the academic approach, as can be seen for instance in APr. I 31, 46b 5 ﬀ.
26 On Aristotle’s ‘dualizers’ see e.g. Lloyd 1996b.
27 See Balme 1991, 60–61 and Lennox 2001, 302. Cfr. the use of ἄμφω e.g. in HA 628b 15; 633b 4; PA 642b
33; GA 721b 8; Resp. 476a 14.
10
A. L. Carbone

four-footed and blooded and live-bearing, all have teeth” (HA II 1, 501a 10). Sometimes
‘at once’ [ἅμα] is added in order to stress that the conjunction indicates combination,
as in “Cloven feet and at once also a mane and two horns bent inwards towards each
other is what belongs to some animals” (HA II 1, 499b 31).
A further element to deal with is that, as we have already mentioned, these
combinations of terms are not always introduced by the conventional quantiﬁers
required by the theory of categorical syllogism, namely ‘all’ and ‘some’, but by a much
wider range of quantifying phrases. A few, but signiﬁcant, theoretical remarks
actually show that the set of valid quantiﬁers of which Aristotle is aware is wider
outside than within the domain of categorical syllogisms. For example, in SE 30, 181b
20 ﬀ. he highlights the ambiguity of the quantiﬁers ‘both’ and ‘all’, of which the ﬁrst
cannot be used in syllogisms.28 Earlier in SE 168a 7 ﬀ., he had already pointed out the
ambiguity of ‘all’ with reference to the phrase ‘of the things which’, this last being a
partitive quantiﬁer29 which is also not allowed in categorical syllogisms. To this we
may add the remarkable use of ‘most’ in a number of deﬁnitional passages of the
Organon.30 Proportional quantiﬁers such as ‘most’ [τὰπλεῖστα], ‘many’ [πολλὰ], and
‘few’ [ὀλίγα] are frequent in HA, where Aristotle often records the correlation be-
tween accidental attributes, and in GA, where he deals with complex overlapping
axes of diﬀerentiation. The phrase ‘for the most part’ [ὡς ἐπὶτὸπολὺ], which has been
given some attention in the literature on Aristotle’s conception of science, is also
quite abundant in his biological works.31 It might be tempting to explain away the
diversity of Aristotle’s use of quantifying phrases by reducing them to a set of
variations on this phrase. But, as we shall see in detail, this would be misleading.
Further, in Aristotle’s biology, ‘for the most part’ never refers to higher levels of
generality, but rather to the sub-speciﬁc level of inter- and intra-individual vari-
ability, i.e. not to the enquiry on diﬀerentiæ.
Moreover, despite this extensive use by Aristotle of a wide and diverse range of
quantifying phrases, a rather frequent situation is actually that of lacking quanti-
ﬁers. With very few exceptions, indivisible groupings are not quantiﬁed, as in the
28 The homonymity consists in that they can be understood either as “collective quantiﬁers” or as
“distributive quantiﬁers”, i.e. either “both/all together” or “each individually”. Both in Aristotle’s
biology and in his syllogistic, quantiﬁers have a distributive sense—“all animals have sensation”
means that each one taken individually has this faculty. In a well-known passage of Pol. 1261b 20 ﬀ,
though, Aristotle opts for the collective sense against an argument of Plato’s based on the distributive
sense. This issue was ﬁrst raised in the Hippias major, 302a ﬀ(see Grube 1929).
29 I borrow a tentative terminology here from contemporary cognitive linguistics (see e.g. Radden
and Dirven 2007, 115 sq.).
30 Especially in the Categories (2a 28; 7b 16; 8a 22; 10b 30; 14a 5), as well as in the very deﬁnition of
endoxa in Top. 100b 21 sq. and elsewhere (and even in APr 46 a 17).
31 See Mignucci 1981, Stricker 1985, Judson 1991.
Aristotle’s Logic of Biological Diversity
11

following sentence: “The two-winged ones have the sting in front, for example ﬂy,
horse-ﬂy, gadﬂy, gnat” (HA 490a 20). This simple example further illustrates how
quantiﬁers are also frequently omitted when dealing either with groupings that can
be designated by speciﬁc names or with wider kinds. Rough lists of non-quantiﬁed
terms designating indivisible species are often introduced by phrases like ‘for
example’ or ‘such as’ [οἷον, ὥσπερ, καθάπερ], either as an illustration or as a further
speciﬁcation. According to APr I 2, this kind of propositions should be strictly clas-
siﬁed as indeterminate. As such, they cannot be used as premises in a valid scientiﬁc
syllogism. In order to make sense of this practice from the point of view of standard
syllogistic, we might assume that in such cases quantiﬁcation is implicit, as these
terms are meant to indicate whole kinds of animals.32 Inﬂected names also play an
important role.33
Both the absence of quantiﬁers and the use of inﬂections are typical in the
Topics. True, in APo I 36 Aristotle seems to take for granted that arguments con-
taining inﬂected forms are fully translatable into syllogistic form.34 At a closer look,
however, the partitive genitives and locative datives that we ﬁnd in the biological
works perform a structural function that is signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from the role
played by common inﬂected terms in natural language. They allow Aristotle to
describe complex divisions by multiple diﬀerentiæ, i.e. to translate a division dia-
gram into a sentence without yet turning it into a well-formulated quantiﬁed syl-
logistic premise.
The same can be said of the relative adjective hosos and of the demonstrative
adjective toioutos, which respectively express quantity and quality, and which are
also used systematically in a variety of quantifying phrases. The neutral plural hosa
(‘those which’ or ‘as many as’), occurs with or without a quantiﬁer as a correlative35
32 On this point, see Galen, Institutio logica, 12.
33 See De int. 2, 16a 32 ﬀ. The partitive genitive occurs in complex quantifying phrases which involve
multiple axes of division, such as “among [τῶν…] the four-footed and live-bearing, all those which are
not provided with incisor-teeth in both jaws, among the horn-bearers, have four stomachs” (HA 507a
34). Locative datives are involved in very similar structures, e.g. “The nature of the lips is beneath the
nostrils in those which have teeth among the blooded ones” (PA 659b 20). They can also have a
peculiar “restrictive” sense with reference to the possession of the common feature on which the
generalisation is based, as in the recurrent phrase “in those which have one [τοῖς ἔχουσιν]” (e.g. “the
liver, in those which have one, etc.”, HA 507a 12), which refers to the same single feature at issue.
34 In reality, this is not always possible. See Striker 2009, 222.
35 According to Gotthelf and Lennox, the correlation between ὅσος and πᾶς (and other quantiﬁers)
shows a “redundant use of quantiﬁers” (Gotthelf 1988, 320) and a “syntactically redundant linguistic
pattern” (Lennox 2014). This correlation, though, is not peculiar to Aristotle’s biological corpus.
Rather, it depends on a frequent and well documented construction of ὅσος and other relative
adjectives, so that “very often the appropriate form of πᾶς precedes (or is implied) as antecedent” (see
e.g. Autenrieth 1895, s.v. ὅσος).
12
A. L. Carbone

e.g. “those which are bloodless are provided with membranous wings” (HA 490a 8);
“As many as have a bladder, they have also a bowel, but as many as have a bowel, not
all have a bladder” (HA 489a 6). The neutral plural toiauta (‘such as these’) plays a
similar role, as a grouping which has been previously speciﬁed is referred to as a
whole, in order to introduce a further quantiﬁed predication: “Those such as these
[τὰτοιαῦτα] are all also many-toed and cloven-footed” (HA 502b 34).
Closely related to these and widespread not only in HA but also in PA and in GA
are what may be called “open-ended generalisations”, namely those based on se-
lective quantiﬁers such as ‘and (all) those such as these’ [καὶτἆλλα τὰτοιαῦτα
(πάντα)] (e.g. HA 550b 2); ‘and as many as are such as these’ [καὶὅσα (ἄλλα) τοιαῦτα]
(e.g. HA 543b 8); ‘and those such as these, if any’ [καὶεἴτι ἄλλο τοιοῦτον] (e.g. HA 589a
32), where the extension of the referred group is left open.36 Aristotle deals with this
kind of generalisations in Top. VIII 2, 157a 21 ﬀ., where he claims that they are useful
when there is no agreed general term that can express all similarities. This is the
situation we encountered in APo II 14. In such cases, the phrase ‘likewise in all those
such as these’ [οὕτως ἐπὶπάντων τῶν τοιούτων] is used, but since this induces the
opponent to question the validity of the extension of this similarity, it is advisable,
Aristotle suggests, to coin a word that can cover all similar cases.37
One last type of quantiﬁcation worth noting is related to pointing out exceptions
through the set quantiﬁer ‘all but X’ [ἔξω, ἐκτὸς, πλὴν, ἐν μὲν οὖν τοῖς ἄλλοις … ἐν δὲ
τοῖς].38 We should highlight that this kind of quantiﬁcation is logically complemen-
tary to the predication of an idion, i.e. a speciﬁc feature, which in turn corresponds to
‘only X’ (Top. 102a 22 ﬀ.). As examples we may take “While others [Τὰμὲν οὖν ἄλλα]
have many breasts, the she-leopard instead [δὲ] has four on the belly, and the lioness
two” (HA 500a 27) or “In all but a few blooded animals [ἔξω ὀλίγων ἅπασι]” (GA 715a
20). Concessive participles are also used sometimes to imply a peculiar or unexpected
feature, as in “those which, while being [ὄντα] bloodless, have the ﬂeshy part outside”
(HA 523b 3). Once found, such peculiarities can be explained by pointing to speciﬁc
causes against the background of what characterises the wider kind to which the
anomalous animal belongs.39
36 Lennox points out that Aristotle’s universal correlations are generally open in character because
of the inductive strategy of the approach of HA (Lennox 2014). Yet he fails to notice the similarity
between the relative clauses where the adjective ὅσος has a correlative, and this kind of explicitly
indeﬁnite, open-ended generalisations.
37 This is a common practice in Aristotle’s biology on which see Lennox 1987, 31 sq.
38 According to Denniston 1966, 473, this use of μὲν οὖν is peculiar of Aristotle.
39 On this aspect of Aristotle’s method see Balme 1987b, 9. As Lennox points out, “such selectivity in
Aristotle’s treatment is to be expected if the majority of the features of such animals are in fact more
appropriately discussed as features of the wider kind of which they are one example” (Lennox 1991,
63).
Aristotle’s Logic of Biological Diversity
13

All these examples reveal the great wealth of linguistic and formal means that
Aristotle uses to translate into universal correlations the complex picture of over-
lapping features that results from following the method of division by multiple
diﬀerentiæ. Recurrent patterns are evidence of an aware and technical use of lan-
guage, in order to convey meanings that cannot be expressed through well-formed
quantiﬁed propositions, or at least not without a signiﬁcant loss of valuable scientiﬁc
information. As we have seen, in fact, non-predicative relations maintain a high
informative and explanatory value that is not reduced to that of predication, and
quantiﬁcation is much more reﬁned than allowed by the alternative between uni-
versal or particular propositions. While division by a single diﬀerentia immediately
results in universal predications that can be taken as syllogistic premises, the same
cannot be said when it comes to dividing by multiple diﬀerentiæ, since the form of the
universal correlations is not the one expected according to the conventional canons
of syllogistics.
Nonetheless, this does not mean that Aristotle renounces generalisation, since
this is the ﬁrst requirement of scientiﬁc discourse. And although non-syllogistic
inferences acquire a central importance in his approach, this in itself does not imply
that the project of an axiomatization of his enquiry into living things is ruled out by
the complexity of the data. What it does mean, however, is that Aristotle needs to
develop a more sophisticated method of working out syllogistic premises than that
set out in APr. I 27–31. He did not theorise this method and did not state the need for it
as clearly as he introduced the division by multiple diﬀerentiæ which makes it
indispensable. And yet, further examination of Aristotle’s practice of seeking uni-
versal correlations shows that he did develop this method, and can reveal how it
worked.
3 From Complex Generalisations to Syllogisms
In order to address the questions we have raised, we must ﬁrst establish what exactly
was the form of axiomatization Aristotle had in mind for biology. I shall argue that
ideally his focus was on individual animal species, as it is clearly apparent in PA I 4,
644a 29–33:
Since the ousia is that which is indivisiblein form, it would be best if one were able to investigate
separately each of the particular forms that are indivisible in form, for example ‘man’; not ‘bird’,
for this kind has several forms, but the various indivisible birds, for example ‘sparrow’, ‘crane’
and so on.
According to Aristotle, the biological enquiry should deal with the indivisibles
because they are ousia in a stronger sense than kinds. Interpreters who focus on a
14
A. L. Carbone

reading of Aristotle’s enquiry as axiomatic-like are quite uncomfortable with this
claim and tend to deﬂate its importance.40 Yet this is a very strong ontological claim
compared to the only reason Aristotle provides for preferring (when possible) a
survey of general attributes, i.e. avoidance of repetitions.41 The moral we may draw
is that his method is focused on the indivisibles, and that the whole exposition of
general attributes must be read in the light of the task of giving an account of ultimate
animal species. This particularly means that when biology shall be formalised as a
wholly axiomatised science, indivisible groupings of animals shall be the minor
terms of scientiﬁc demonstrations.
This emerges most clearly in APo II 14, where Aristotle gives a quite unique
example of a complete syllogism on a biological subject:
Let A be “Animal”, B what follows all animals, and C, D, E whatever animals. It is clear why B
belongs to D: because of A. Likewise for the others, and the same rule is still valid for the
subordinate ones (APo II 14, 98a 9–12).
If we apply this pattern to the example of birds recalled in PA I 4, we have something
like the following, where ‘bird’ is the middle term [A], ‘wings’ the major term [B] and
the individual form ‘crane’ is the minor term [C], as expected:
All birds have wings
Cranes are birds
Therefore, Cranes have wings
[AaB, CaA ⊢CaB]
A situation in which a set of related terms has to be taken into account is mentioned
in the next lines of APo II 14. Aristotle’s example points to all animals that share the
features of having horns, an incomplete set of teeth and a third stomach (98a 13–19).
Although more complex, since it involves a compound term, this case does not seem
to result in any signiﬁcant formal innovations over the previous syllogism. Hence, as
highlighted by Aristotle, ‘having horns’ is to be taken as the middle term (98a 19),
while the major term comes from the conjunction of the two other features, namely
having incomplete teeth and multiple stomachs. We can draw evidence of what a
complete syllogism involving these compound terms would look like from Aristotle’s
40 See for example Lennox 2001, 121 and more explicitly Balme 1992, 72.
41 The question of the level of generality to be adopted in biology raised in PA I 1, 639a 15 and left
unresolved is taken up here with a marked reference to the subject of ousia, which is ‘indivisible in
form’ (644a 29) on the basis of Metaph. Z 8: individuals such as Socrates or Callia, i.e. the ‘prime ousiai’
of Cat. 5, are ‘identical in form’, since their form (man) is indivisible (Metaph. Z 1034a 7–8). Dealing
with indivisible forms would therefore be the best option on a strictly ontological and gnoseological
level (Metaph. Z 1028a 36), but it would involve a great deal of repetition, since individual ousiai share
several features (on Aristotle’s point about repetitions see Balme 1992).
Aristotle’s Logic of Biological Diversity
15

discussion of this same subject in PA III 14, 674 b 6–30, where he gives a list of
indivisible forms exhibiting these traits, namely “sheep, ox, goat, deer and all ani-
mals such as these” (b 8–9), each of which may therefore qualify as a minor term.
However, a survey of Aristotle’s actual practice, especially in his HA, shows that
although it involves a compound term, the case under consideration here is far
simpler than those that actually emerge in the folds of his biological enquiry. Let us
take an example of such complexity: “All live-bearing animals among the four-footed
have kidneys and a bladder. As many as are egg-layers, none among the others has
them, that is neither bird nor ﬁsh, while among the four-footed the turtle alone” (HA
506b 25). Current scholarship agrees that a pattern can be identiﬁed in propositions
like those found in this passage, namely “As many as have X, all/some/none has Y”.42
This is believed to implement Aristotle’s solution for establishing “universal
correlations” between animal diﬀerentiæ, to be used as premises of scientiﬁc
demonstrations.
Nonetheless, such propositions seem to display a richer pattern, one that is not
only diﬀerent from, but also more complex than allowed by the expected form of a
regular syllogistic premise, because it involves the complex forms of quantiﬁcation
based on the quantifying phrases that we have listed in the previous section. As we
have highlighted, some recurring elements which are inconsistent with syllogistic
can be identiﬁed, the most striking being disjunctions, partitive phrases and a far
wider set of quantiﬁers than ‘all’ and ‘some’, which are the only two provided by the
theory of the categorical syllogism.
I therefore suggest that Aristotle’s complex propositions share a more reﬁned
basic sentence structure, which may be formulated as follows:
of Φx of which A, of Ψ of this B.
Here ‘x’ is an unspeciﬁed term, i.e. a variable, ‘A’ and ‘B’ can be either simple or
compound terms, while Φ and Ψ (if present) are quantifying phrases. The following
proposition is a relatively simple and clear example of how this works:
As many as [Ὅσα] are live-bearing and [καὶ] two-footed or [καὶ] four-footed, the uterus of all of
them [τούτων … πάντων] is below the midriﬀ, for instance [οἷον] in man, in dog, in pig, in horse,
in ox; and things are the same in all the horn-bearing (HA 510b 15 ﬀ.)
In this complex proposition we ﬁnd a compound term containing a conjunction and
an exclusive disjunction ([A] ‘live-bearing’ and [B] ‘two-footed’ or [C] ‘four-footed’),
42 As Lennox points out, Aristotle’s method “requires the use of specialized descriptive phrases” (see
Lennox 1991, 50. Allan Gotthelf and James G. Lennox, followed by David Charles, only focus on a
simpler structure such as “As many as have X, all/some/none has Y”. See e.g. Gotthelf 1988, 320 sq.;
Lennox 2014, 319 sq).
16
A. L. Carbone

quantiﬁed through the relative adjective [Φ] hosa, and whose correlative [Ψ] tauta is
universally attributed the feature [D] of ‘having the uterus below the midriﬀ’. This is
followed by another universal proposition aimed at highlighting that a group iden-
tiﬁed by a further overlapping feature (‘horn-bearing’) makes no exception. The
purpose of listing relevant indivisible species as examples clearly consists in
instantiating a variable [x]: these examples of indivisible animal groups verify the
given set of features. Hence the core proposition can be formalised as follows:
of all x of which [A and (B or C)], of all of this D.
Once this is posited as a premise, well-formed categorical syllogisms can be obtained
by instantiating the variable “x” and by selecting the relevant combination of
predicates:
[man is live-bearing and two-footed, therefore man has the uterus below the midriﬀ]
[dog is live-bearing and four-footed, therefore dog has the uterus below the midriﬀ]
etc.
What kind of premises are we dealing with? Traditionally, complex propositions
combining a relative clause and a correlative quantiﬁed proposition, which contain
two terms and an implicit third term introduced by the relative clause, are called
“prosleptic premisses”.43 Ancient sources credit Theophrastus with giving prosleptic
propositions their name, but also document their use in Aristotle’s Prior Analytics.44
Alexander provides us with evidence of a debate over the usefulness of syllogisms
constructed from such premises, that “diﬀer only in expression from categorical
ones, as Theophrastus has shown in his work On Assertion”. This hardly allows us to
think that Theophrastus invented them, as this testimony sees him engaged in a
debate aimed at downplaying their importance.45 In fact, what seems to have escaped
notice of both ancient commentators and modern scholars is that such propositions
are not only widespread, avant la lettre, in the Historia Animalium as well as quite
43 Such a framework clariﬁes the rationale for Aristotle’s otherwise puzzling use of indeﬁnite
propositions which, when embedded in prosleptic premises, are to be considered as equivalent to the
corresponding universal propositions. In categorical premises, indeﬁnite propositions are logically
equivalent to particular propositions (Top. 111a 20 ﬀ.). Yet, as we learn from ancient sources, ac-
cording to Theophrastus, when embedded in prosleptic premisses they are equivalent to universal
propositions (see Alexander In APr 378,18 ﬀand Σ 190a 1–4 Brandis; on this point Lejewski 1961, 168
and Malink 2009, 166).
44 See Lejewski 1961; Kneale and Kneale 1972, 206 and Malink 2009.
45 Alexander, In APr. 378,19. According to Galen, though, Peripatetics in general found prosleptic
syllogisms useful. For a discussion of this last puzzling reference see Kneale and Kneale 1972, 206. As
Lejewski points out, “It is, however, more than probable that the whole conception of the prosleptic
syllogism was derived by Theophrastus from the writings of his master” (Lejewski 1961, 164).
Aristotle’s Logic of Biological Diversity
17

frequent in Aristotle’s biological corpus, but that they are also found in several key
theoretical passages of Aristotle’s major works, with the aim of formalising an
argumentative rule or a theoretical framework.46
In the passage of APr I 41 commented by Alexander, Aristotle actually discusses
prosleptic-like propositions of the form “A belongs to all of that to which B belongs” [ᾧ
τὸΒ ὑπάρχει, τούτῳπαντὶτὸΑ ὑπάρχει] (APr 49 b 15) and “of as many as B is said, A is
said of all of them too” [καθ′ὅσων τὸΒ λέγεται, κατὰπάντων λέγεσθαι καὶτὸΑ] (APr
49 b 29–30). These are indeed abstract formalizations of the patterns of correlative
quantiﬁcation based on the use of the relative adjective hosos and of other formal
solutions that we have examined before. Prosleptic premises are designed to work as
a schema to be ﬁlled in.47 This means that they are a propaedeutic step towards
constructing well-formed categorical syllogisms, as those required by proper sci-
entiﬁc demonstrations. Insofar as they provide an argumentative pattern, they
can be said to perform a heuristic function akin to that of the method set out in APr I
27–31, but adequate for the complexity of the biological enquiry.
With this in mind, if we take a new look at the examples discussed so far, a new
perspective emerges. The instantiation of the implicit variable of prosleptic pre-
mises, which leads to the construction of a categorical syllogism, can be read
straightforwardly as the very last (and, as we have already pointed out, never
actually accomplished) step of a more complex procedure. An anonymous scholiast
commenting on APr II 6, 58a 25 ﬀ. points us to an interesting way to understand such
propositions:
This is the prosleptic [κατὰπρόσληψιν] premise. It is called prosleptic because when the
indeterminate term [ἀορίστου ὅρου] in the compound premise [τῇσυνθέτῳπροτάσει], that is
the middle term, is deﬁned and taken in addition [ὁρισθέντος τε καὶπροσληφθέντος], the
syllogism is completed and the conclusion is made known. Such a premise resembles the
complex hypothetical syllogism [ἔοικε δὲἡτοιαύτη πρότασις ὑποθετικῷσυλλογισμῷτῷ
συνημμένῳ].48
What is suggested here is that prosleptic propositions are designed to work like
conditional premises.49 This seems to be consistent with Aristotle’s focus on the logic
46 To cite but a few striking examples: Cat. 1b 11 ﬀ.; Top. 111a 20 ﬀ., 112a 24 ﬀ., 150a 15 ﬀ.; Metaph. Γ
1007b 14 ﬀ., Δ 1016b 36 ﬀ., Ζ 1035b 13 ﬀ. (with disjunction); EN 1148a 28 ﬀ. (with disjunction) etc.
47 “A prosleptic premiss can be regarded as a kind of recipe for constructing the whole argument by
ﬁnding the suitable substitute for x. The completed prosleptic syllogism can then easily be trans-
formed into the equivalent categorical syllogism” (Kneale and Kneale 1972, 206).
48 Σ 190a 30 ﬀ. Brandis. On the identiﬁcation of the indeterminate term of prosleptic premisses with
the middle term of a categorical syllogism see Kneale and Kneale 1972, 194.
49 See Lejewski 1961, 161. On syllogisms from a hypothesis in Aristotle see Striker 1979 and Crivelli
2011.
18
A. L. Carbone

of consequence among terms and with his use of complex quantifying phrases that
we have highlighted in the previous sections. Let us consider an example illustrating
such understanding of Aristotle’s way of dealing with universal correlations
resulting from division by multiple diﬀerentiæ, namely a generalisation by which he
tries to establish which animals besides man have kidneys and a bladder:
All [Z] live-bearing animals among the [T] four-footed have [N] kidneys and a [K] bladder. As
many as are [O] egg-layers, none among the others has them, that is neither bird nor ﬁsh, while
among the four-footed [H] the turtle alone (HA 506b 25).
Here Aristotle considers two axes of diﬀerentiation, one concerning the mode of
reproduction, the other the mode of locomotion and in particular the number of feet.
With respect to these simultaneous diﬀerences, the joint presence of certain features
is recorded. Since we are not dealing with a linear division, the method of APo I 27–31
is not directly applicable, so that these relations of implication do not immediately
translate into linear vertical relations of implications between universal and
particular. It cannot be said, for example, that ‘provided with kidneys’ implies ‘live-
bearing’, because there is also at least one kind of egg-layer animals provided with
kidneys. However, horizontal consequences of terms can be pointed out between
several sets of features, so that for instance the conjunction of ‘live-bearing’ and ‘four
footed’ does follow from ‘provided with kidneys’. Hence the consequence of terms
runs as follows:
x has ‘reins’ and ‘bladder’.
follows from
x is an ‘animal’ which is ‘four-footed’ and ‘live-bearing’, or ‘four-footed’ and ‘egg-layer’ and a
‘turtle’.
Once this premise is analysed, the ﬁrst side of the disjunction may straightforwardly
translate into an ordinary universal positive premise, since as we have already noted
‘having kidneys and a bladder’ actually follows from ‘being four-footed and live-
bearing’. Concerning the second side of the disjunction, though, what emerges is that
all the features follow from the one having the lowest level of generality, namely
‘turtle’ and no generalisation based on universal correlations of features turns out to
be possible. Prosleptic propositions oﬀer a very elegant and concise way to formalise
this state of aﬀairs, as follows:
of all x of which (Z and T), of all of this NK
of no x but H of which (O and T), of none of this NK
In other words, in the ﬁrst proposition the variable x can be instantiated by all the
animals that have the features Z and T (e.g. cow [C], dog [D] etc.), as follows:
Aristotle’s Logic of Biological Diversity
19

of all x of which (Z and T), of all of this NK
C is (Z and T); D is (Z and T); etc.
C is NK; D is NK; etc.
In the second proposition the variable x is instantiated by the turtle alone. In Aris-
totle’s practice of biological enquiry this means that it is an exception, which requires
it to be explained with reference to other features than those considered.
This reconstruction seems consistent with the complex scenario alluded to by
the anonymous scholiast commenting on APr II 6, 58a 25 ﬀ., and is in any case far
more complex than the customary syllogistic premises to which the method set out in
APr I 27–28 is expected to lead.
4 Concluding Remarks
In this paper, we have focused on the logical tools outlined by Aristotle in order to
deal with the complex clusters of non-subordinate terms which result from dividing
animal kinds by multiple diﬀerentiæ, as required by the method of division intro-
duced in PA I 2–4, when it comes to drawing up generalisations that can be used as
syllogistic premises. The complex relationships between terms that emerge from
this method of division present a formal constraint vis-à-vis the axiomatisation of
Aristotelian biology, as it is rather challenging, at least from the outset, to shape them
as valid syllogistic premises. Mereological relations are not linear and quantiﬁcation
is far more complex than the distinction between universal and particular
propositions.
As it turns out, an important implication of adopting such an approach to divi-
sion is that non-syllogistic relations between correlated terms come to play a key
role. Rather than syllogistics, the main logical framework seems to be the logic of
‘consequence’ that underlies the implication of a multiplicity of terms from the
attribution of a certain kind. This logic lays at the basis of the procedures for iden-
tifying kinds described both in APo II 14 and in the Topics, particularly in Top. II 5.
However, it also regulates the method for drawing syllogistic premises introduced in
APr I 27–31.
Aristotle also seems to adopt a combinatorial logic, with the aim of accommo-
dating correlations between terms that present anomalies, exceptions and overlaps,
and to oﬀer an informative overview of the animal kinds under investigation.
Further, he uses a ﬁner and more informative array of quantiﬁers than those
used in ordinary universal and particular propositions, an array that includes a
number of set quantiﬁers, disjunctions (which sometimes form the basis for non-
syllogistic inferences), and partitive clauses.
20
A. L. Carbone

All these components blend into the distinctive pattern for biological general-
isations outlined by Aristotle. Such complex prosleptic-like propositions make it
possible to handle both the logic of consequence which translates from and into
mereological relations and combinations of term clusters, and the complex quanti-
ﬁcation required by division based on multiple diﬀerentiæ. Based on this pattern,
analysis into syllogistic premises becomes possible through the instantiation of a
variable ideally consisting of indivisible groups of animals.
A more detailed picture of the logic adopted by Aristotle to account for the
diversity and complexity of living things should result from what we have outlined, a
logic that draws on tools set out not only in the Posterior Analytics but also in the
Prior Analytics and the Topics. Further, I hope to have shed new light not only on the
method adopted by Aristotle in the pre-axiomatic stage of his biological investigation,
but also to have oﬀered a more exact formal framing of the way he envisioned its
eventual axiomatisation.
References
Autenrieth, G. 1895. An Homeric Dictionary for Use in Schools and Colleges, translated and edited by R. P.
Keep. New York: Harper & Brothers.
Balme, D. M. 1987a. “Aristotle’s Use of Division and Diﬀerentiae.” In Philosophical Issues in Aristotle’s
Biology, edited by A. Gotthelf, and J. G. Lennox, 69–89. Cambridge/New York/New Rochelle (NY):
Cambridge University Press.
Balme D. M. 1987b. “The Place of Biology in Aristotle’s Philosophy.” In Philosophical Issues in Aristotle’s
Biology, edited by A. Gotthelf, and J. G. Lennox, 9–20. Cambridge/New York/New Rochelle (NY):
Cambridge University Press.
Balme, D. M. 1991. Aristotle. History of Animals. Books VII–X. Cambridge (MA): Harvard University Press.
Balme, D. M. 1992. Aristotle’s de Partibus Animalium I and de Generatione Animalium I (with passages from
book II. 1–3), Revised Edition. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Barnes, J. 1975. “Aristotle’s Theory of Demonstration.” In Articles on Aristotle. Vol. I: Science, edited by
J. Barnes, M. Schoﬁeld, and R. Sorabji, 65–87. London: Duckworth.
Barnes, J. 1993. Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, Translated With a Commentary, 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Bobzien, S. 2002. “The Development of Modus Ponens in Antiquity: From Aristotle to the 2nd Century AD.”
Phronesis 47 (4): 359–94.
Charles, D. 1997. “Aristotle and the Unity and Essence of Biological Kinds.” In Aristotelische Biologie, edited
by W. Kullmann, and S. Föllinger, 27–42. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner.
Crivelli, P. 2011. “Aristotle on Syllogisms from a Hypothesis.” In Argument from Hypothesis in Ancient
Philosophy, edited by A. Longo, 95–184. Napoli: Bibliopolis.
Denniston, J. D. 1966. The Greek Particles. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Falcon A. 1996. “Aristotle’s Rules of Division in The Topics: Remarks on the Relationship Between Genus and
Diﬀerentia in a Division.” Ancient Philosophy 16: 377–87.
Ferejohn, M. T. 1982. “Deﬁnition and the Two Stages of Aristotelian Demonstration.” Review of Metaphysics
36 (2): 375–95.
Aristotle’s Logic of Biological Diversity
21

Gotthelf, A. 1988. “Historiæ I: Plantarum et animalium.” In Teleology, First Principles, and Scientiﬁc Method in
Aristotle’s Biology, edited by A. Gotthelf, 307–42. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gotthelf, A. 2012a. “Data-Organization, Classiﬁcation, and Kinds: The Place of the History of Animals in
Aristotle’s Biological Enterprise.” In Teleology, First Principles, and Scientiﬁc Method in Aristotle’s
Biology, edited by A. Gotthelf, 61–292. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gotthelf, A. 2012b. “First Principles in Aristotle’s Parts of Animals.” In Teleology, First Principles, and Scientiﬁc
Method in Aristotle’s Biology, Vol. 181, edited by A. Gotthelf, 153–85. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Grube, G. M. A. 1929. “The Logic and Language of the Hippias Major.” Classical Philology 24: 369–75.
Judson, L. 1991. “Chance and ‘Always or for the Most Part’ in Aristotle.” In Aristotle’s Physics. A Collection of
Essays, edited by L. Judson, 73–100. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kneale, W., and M. Kneale. 1972. “Prosleptic Propositions and Arguments.” In Islamic Philosophy and the
Classical Tradition, edited by M. S. Stern, A. Hourani, and V. Brown, 189–207. London: Bruno Cassirer.
Kullmann, W. 1974. Wissenschaft und Methode: Interpretationen zur aristotelischen Theorie der
Naturwissenschaft. Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter.
Lejewski, Cz. 1961. “On Prosleptic Syllogisms.” Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 2: 158–76.
Lennox, J. G. 1987. “Divide and Explain: The Posterior Analytics in Practice.” In Aristotle’s Philosophy of
Biology, edited by J. G. Lennox, 7–38. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lennox, J. G. 1991. “Between Data and Demonstration. The Analytics and the Historia Animalium.” In
Aristotle’s Philosophy of Biology: Studies in the Origins of Life Science, edited by J. G. Lennox, 39–71.
Cambridge/New York/New Rochelle (NY): Cambridge University Press.
Lennox, J. G. 2001. Aristotle. On the Parts of Animals I–IV. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lennox, J. G. 2005. “Getting a Science Going: Aristotle on Entry Level Kinds.” In Homo Sapiens Und Homo
Faber, edited by G. Wolters, and M. Carrier, 87–100. Berlin: De Gruyter.
Lennox, J. G. 2014. “Aristotle’s Biology.” In The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, edited by E. Zalta. Also
available at http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2014/entries/aristotle-biology.
Lloyd, G. E. R. 1961. “The Development of Aristotle’s Theory of the Classiﬁcation of Animals.” Phronesis 6:
59–81.
Lloyd, G. E. R. 1996a. “The Theories and Practices of Demonstration.” In Aristotelian Explorations, 7–37.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lloyd, G. E. R. 1996b. “Fuzzy Natures?” In Aristotelian Explorations, 67–82. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Malink, M. 2009. “Indeterminate Propositions in Prior Analytics I.41.” In Focus: Ancient and Medieval
Philosophy/Schwerpunkt: Antike und Mittelalterliche Philosophie, 165–89. Leiden: Brill.
Mignucci M. 1981. “῾Ως ἐπὶτὸπολὺet Nécessaire dans la Conception Aristotélicienne de la Science.” In
Aristotle on Science. The Posterior Analytics, edited by E. Berti, 173–203. Padua: Antenore.
Radden, G., and R. Dirven. 2007. Cognitive English Grammar. Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Striker, G. 1979. “Aristoteles Über Syllogismen »Aufgrund Einer Hypothese«.” Hermes 107: 33–50.
Striker, G. 1985. “Notwendigkeit mit Lücken: Aristoteles über die Kontingenz der Naturvorgänge.” Neu
Hefte für Philosophie 24–25: 146–64.
Striker, G. 2009. Aristotle’s Prior Analytics Book I: Translated with an Introduction and Commentary. Oxford:
Clarendon Aristotle Series, Oxford University Press.
22
A. L. Carbone

