51
c h a p t e r   2
Joyful Frugality: Thoreau, Dickinson, 
and the Pleasures of Not Consuming
In his 1844 short story “Earth’s Holocaust,” Nathaniel Hawthorne imag-
ines a time— “ whether in the time past or time to come is a  matter of  little 
or no moment”— when “this wide world had become so over burdened with 
an accumulation of worn- out trumpery, that the inhabitants determined 
to rid themselves of it by a general bonfire.”1 As we might expect, given 
Hawthorne’s authorial proclivities, the “worn- out trumpery” includes so-
cial constructions and cultural institutions such as or ga nized religion and 
gender roles, but it also includes an awful lot of material stuff— books of 
all va ri e ties, “bundles of perfumed letters,” smoking pipes, “boxes of tea 
and bags of coffee,” barrels of liquor, regal robes and crowns, “blazonry of 
coat armor,” lace, ribbons, “last season’s bonnets,” guns and swords, guil-
lotines, and much, much more.2 So many of the objects burned in “Earth’s 
Holocaust” are consumer commodities, if not also literal consumables, that 
the story might almost be read as a parable of anticonsumerism. Twenty- 
first- century Americans are inundated with advice about how to remake 
ourselves and our relationship to “stuff” in order to live more happy and 
ethical lives. When Hawthorne’s story concludes with “Purify that inward 
sphere, and the many shapes of evil that haunt the outward, and which now 

52 
Joyful Frugality
seem almost our only realities,  will turn to shadowy phantoms and vanish 
of their own accord,”3 it might almost be a dictum from one of the dozens 
of bestselling con temporary guides to minimalism.
“Earth’s Holocaust” suggests that social and po liti cal change is inti-
mately bound up with personal change: We can burn our material and 
social “trumpery” in a revolutionary fervor, but it  won’t have a permanent 
effect  unless we remake ourselves first. It might be tempting to dismiss this 
as Hawthorne’s idiosyncratic conservatism or as transcendental naiveté, but 
the idea that when it comes to consumption, the personal is political— that 
what you privately consume (or refuse to consume) affects the public 
sphere— was surprisingly widespread in the nineteenth- century United 
States. It permeated popu lar domestic guidebooks and underpinned both 
establishment and reformist po liti cal rhe toric. The freedom of the indi-
vidual, theorized as central to classical theories of republicanism and de-
mocracy, was understood by many to be endangered by the expanding 
cap i tal ist marketplace, and resisting private consumerist appetites was 
 imagined to have po liti cal effects.
It can be hard to recover this mindset  today. In the twenty- first  century 
every thing from Marxist critiques to po liti cal cynicism has diminished our 
collective belief in the importance of the individual self to po liti cal action. 
Moreover, our sense of the inevitability of capitalism is so strong that, to 
quote Frederic Jameson, “it is easier to imagine the end of the world than 
to imagine the end of capitalism.” 4 And in fact, we do just that— hence the 
ever- increasing public appetite for apocalyptic film, fiction, and other me-
dia. Such apocalyptic fictions mark in part our increasingly desperate 
sense that capitalism and environmentalism are in deadly conflict. The cen-
tral tenet of capitalism is, as Marx put it in 1867, to “accumulate, accumu-
late! That is Moses and the prophets!”5 The logic of capitalism is unlimited 
growth and accumulation and endless desire.  There can never be enough. 
Yet our environmental crisis demands that the United States and other 
wealthy countries curb consumption. The supposed inevitability of con-
sumerism and economic expansionism makes solving our environmental 
crisis seem hopeless and apocalypse inevitable. To break this impasse, our 
sense of the inevitability of capitalism and its imperative to consume end-
lessly must be disrupted. Other ways of living must be made pos si ble. We 
must open up new lifeways if we are to imagine and then and bring into 
being new, more hopeful  futures.
Frugality seems, at first glance, an unlikely environmentalism to mid-
wife  these more hopeful  futures. In the first place, how can frugality sup-
port a genuinely effective, collective politics? As an environmental 

Joyful Frugality 
53
princi ple, it seems a tailor- made target for any critique of purity politics.6 
Just as importantly, for most  people with economic privilege, frugality 
seems unrealistic, if not also unpleasant. Other worlds have to be not just 
pos si ble but appealing, if they are to disrupt our sense of the inevitability 
of current (cap i tal ist) arrangements.
In this chapter, I seek to re orient our conception of frugality by recov-
ering a popu lar nineteenth- century US culture of frugality that understood 
itself as po liti cal and as connected to joy rather than deprivation. In the 
first part of the chapter, readings of Lydia Maria Child’s The Frugal Amer-
ican House wife and Sylvester Graham’s The Science of  Human Life explore 
how an antebellum culture of frugality conceived of itself as critical to de-
mocracy in the expanding United States. In the second part of the chap-
ter, I turn to Henry David Thoreau’s experiments in frugal living at Walden 
Pond. By restoring Thoreau’s connection to Grahamite vegetarianism and 
linking that with his demo cratic and artistic Walden proj ects, I demonstrate 
that Thoreau’s radical minimalism links reducing consumption and curb-
ing appetite with both po liti cal freedom and personal fulfillment. Writ-
ing against the “killjoy” Thoreau of popu lar US imagination, I show that 
Thoreau’s frugality promotes joy and even justice by challenging the con-
sumerist status quo.
The last section of the chapter explores the relationship between hap-
piness, desire, consumption, and possession in the poetry of Emily Dick-
inson. To the extent that Dickinson’s poetic interest in consumption has 
been attended to at all, it has been pathologized as “abnormal” or anorexic. 
Reading Dickinson back into her nineteenth- century context, a context 
that must include Child, Graham, Thoreau, Edward Hitchcock, and  others, 
can help us see past familiar gendered scripts about “the myth of Amherst.” 
In fact, Dickinson is a captivating theorist of consumer desire, and her em-
phasis on the pleasures of anticipation and the disappointments of con-
sumption have much to teach all of us living in the Capitalocene. Ultimately, 
I argue that Dickinson and Thoreau, by shifting the sites of plea sure away 
from consumption, might help us envision some of the other pos si ble and 
attractive lifeways we might embrace— individually and po liti cally, for our-
selves and for the planet.
A Frugal Republic: Lydia Maria Child, Sylvester  
Graham, and the Tyranny of Appetite
The politicization of private consumption has deep roots in Anglophone 
culture. During the eigh teenth  century, the rise of widespread consumerism 

54 
Joyful Frugality
in  England and Amer i ca was opposed by reformers who drew on the lan-
guage and values of classical republicanism, which opposed “luxury” to 
in de pen dence and thus civic virtue.7 Such tendencies intensified in the 
United States during the first third of the nineteenth  century, as the country 
underwent an uneven transition from a rural subsistence economy into an 
urban- focused cap i tal ist marketplace, a shift that was disturbing to a na-
tion that had been grounding its ideas of national virtue in in de pen dence 
from the marketplace since at least Thomas Jefferson.8 Jeffersonian 
agrarianism famously took a classical model of citizenship as its ideo-
logical template, making “the small- scale farmer the bastion of freedom 
and in de pen dence, the vanguard of American democracy,”  because such 
farmers “willfully sought to avoid commercial agriculture and preferred a 
‘moral economy’ in which they produced for subsistence purposes rather 
than the market and economic gain.”9 Like the Greek oikodespotes, “yeo-
man farmers”  were Jefferson’s ideal American citizens  because the eco-
nomic in de pen dence of their small farms made them fit for participation 
in civic and po liti cal life.10 Unlike a wage earner, the yeoman’s mind and 
ultimately his vote could not be controlled by an employer—or even com-
munity opinion— thanks to his aloofness from the market. Freed from ne-
cessity by his successful management of the oikos, Jefferson’s yeoman 
farmer was able to be po liti cally in de pen dent and was therefore worthy of 
the responsibilities of republican citizenship.
Agrarianism in American history turns out to be symbolic, “more fic-
tion than fact, a classic example of the intrusion of myth into history,” since 
even colonial farmers  were characterized by “commercial mentalité.”11 Yet 
the association between economic in de pen dence and republican virtue in 
the early United States was nevertheless power ful. By the antebellum pe-
riod, the citizenship model  behind Jeffersonian agrarianism was pervasive. 
In a nation where “freedom, democracy, and economic security”  were pop-
ularly  imagined to be “based on landowning small- scale subsistence farm-
ers,” the economic developments associated with industrialization  were 
deeply troubling.12  These changes occurred initially and most pervasively 
in the antebellum period in New  England and the mid- Atlantic seaboard 
but ultimately spread to nearly  every region but the South by the dawn of 
the Civil War. Although most Americans accepted the Market Revolution 
as inevitable— even Jefferson admitted “experience has taught me . . .  man-
ufactures are now as necessary to our in de pen dence as to our comfort” in 
1816— the tenets of civic humanism demanded that a replacement market- 
based haven for republican virtue be found.13

Joyful Frugality 
55
 Because the same economic developments that decreased subsistence 
farming si mul ta neously decreased and ultimately eliminated the home as 
a site of economic production for many middle-  and upper- class Ameri-
cans, the new seat of cultural virtue and the economic in de pen dence nec-
essary to maintain it  were increasingly located in the sentimentalized 
home.14 The idea of the market in de pen dence of the home, already in play 
in the eigh teenth  century, became even more plausible a fiction in light 
of the newly unproductive home at the heart of the antebellum period’s 
“cult of domesticity.”15 Building on the tradition of “republican moth-
erhood” popu lar during the early national period, which emphasized the 
impor tant role of  mothers in the education of  future republican citizens, 
the feminized home naturally became for many the new seat of republican 
virtue.16
A prophylactic distance between home and market may have been ideo-
logically desirable during the antebellum period, but it was difficult to 
achieve. One of the period’s most popu lar (and populist) guides to home-
making, Lydia Maria Child’s The American Frugal House wife, provides a 
useful case study for how domestic lit er a ture tied both individual and na-
tional happiness and virtue to eco nom ical practices designed to insulate 
the domestic sphere from capitalism. First published in 1829, Child’s book 
is “dedicated to  those who are not ashamed of economy” and offers two 
moralizing epigrams printed on both the cover and the title page. The first, 
by the flexitarian Founding  Father Benjamin Franklin, explic itly ties 
 house hold economy to individual virtue: “A fat kitchen maketh a lean  will.” 
Child’s guidebook follows the spirit of this epigram throughout, as rec-
ommendations for home economy are spiked with moralizing cautionary 
tales about the practical and moral dangers of “extravagance.” Child diag-
noses extravagance as “the prevailing evil of the pre sent day,” claiming that 
an extravagant lifestyle in anyone but the very rich is immoral  because 
 people of moderate fortune should be saving money with which to con-
front “any unforeseen calamity” of the sort that capitalism’s boom- and- 
bust cycle of “crash  after crash” had made not just pos si ble but increasingly 
likely.17 Home economy was a sound response to the uncertainties of an-
tebellum economic life; frugal practices enabled urban families to amass 
surplus wealth, and it was surplus wealth that allowed the home to seem 
insulated from the market.18
In The American Frugal House wife, surplus wealth is not merely the ba-
sis for economic security; for Child, it is also a foundation of moral be hav-
ior: “True economy is a careful trea surer in the ser vice of benevolence,” 

56 
Joyful Frugality
she writes. “The man who is eco nom ical, is laying up for himself the per-
manent power of being useful and generous.”19 Charity, one of the most 
impor tant Christian social values, is impossible without financial stability. 
More importantly, however, a refusal to save one’s money indicates partici-
pation in the extravagant, market- oriented society, where “a man’s cloth is 
of more consequence than his character.”20 In direct opposition to the civic 
humanist’s ideal republican, such citizens are utterly dominated by “Fashion,” 
and the excessive and unnecessary consumption fashion entails. Throughout 
much of her book, Child details how the form of consumption Thorsten 
Veblen would deem “con spic u ous” at the end of the nineteenth  century 
corrupts antebellum domestic life. For instance, the last third of Child’s 
The American Frugal House wife, entitled “Hints to Persons of Moderate 
Fortune,” contains  little more than a series of anecdotes designed to il-
lustrate how thoroughly and inevitably a neglect of frugality poisons the 
domestic happiness of such “Persons.” Child describes marriage  after mar-
riage ruined for lack of the “home education” that would have taught  women 
how to live within their means and still create a barrier between their 
 family and the insecurities of economic life in the form of “a few thousands 
in the bank.”21
This call for “economy” by Child and so many other authors of 
nineteenth- century domestic manuals remains linked etymologically to 
the Hellenic model of republican citizenship, since it comes from the Greek 
word oikonomia, meaning the proper management of the oikos or  house hold. 
In this sense, “economy” was always an essential part of republican citi-
zenship. Child emphasizes one of the meanings of “economy” that arose 
alongside market capitalism in the seventeenth  century, however— 
frugality.22 In her account, frugality is at the heart of proper  house hold 
management  because a refusal to economize makes the home vulnerable 
to the market forces that are always threatening its destruction. In keep-
ing with the emphasis civic humanism places on freedom from necessity 
and in de pen dence from the market, Child explic itly ties lavish consump-
tion and a concomitant rage for leisure travel and “public amusements” to 
a decline in republican virtue:
The good old home habits of our ancestors are breaking up—it  will be 
well if our virtue and our freedom do not follow them! It is easy to 
laugh at such prognostics,— and we are well aware that the virtue we 
preach is considered almost obsolete,— but let any reflecting mind 
inquire how decay has begun in all republics, and then let them calmly 
ask themselves  whether we are in no danger, in departing thus rapidly 

Joyful Frugality 
57
from the simplicity and industry of our forefathers. . . .  A republic 
without industry, economy, and integrity, is Samson shorn of his locks. 
A luxurious and idle republic! Look at the phrase!— The words  were 
never made to be married together;  every body sees it would be death 
to one of them.23
In other words,  after innumerable parables about marriages where luxury 
and idleness ruins the happiness and security of the relationship, we find 
out that another “marriage,” another  union, is also threatened by the lux-
ury Child is decrying— the nation. The antebellum fad of middle- class 
tourism is merely the par tic u lar development that crystallizes the more en-
demic prob lem of market capitalism: It pulls citizens of  every income level 
out of the sanctuary of the home and into the cash nexus, destabilizing the 
basis of republican virtue. Tellingly, Child ends her book with an anecdote 
that shows that even farmers, the ideal citizens of civic humanism, are be-
ing touched by the mania for excessive consumption. Influenced by the 
example of borders and friends, and feeling that they have “a right” as citi-
zens of the republic to enjoy what every one  else is enjoying, Child’s exem-
plary farmer and farmer’s wife set off on a trip for Quebec that catalyzes 
their near financial ruin. Child leaves her readers with this final admon-
ishment: “We make a  great deal of talk about being republicans; if we are 
so in real ity, we  shall stay at home, to mind our business, and educate our 
 children.”24 Child was a novelist and reformer who worked in the aboli-
tionist,  women’s rights, and Indian rights movements, and her domestic 
guidebook also becomes legible as po liti cal activism once “stay[ing] at home” 
is linked to the maintenance of a sound nation.
Child’s guidebook makes vis i ble the politicization of private, domestic 
consumption during the early part of the antebellum period. The space of 
the home was given a kind of po liti cal content that allowed Americans in-
creasingly to imagine that domestic arrangements could have real effects 
on civic life. Yet  there was a prob lem with making the home carry this 
heavy burden: Economic downturns— any “unforeseen calamity,” as Child 
puts it— could destabilize domestic life. Child advocates for home econ-
omy, but even she does not promise that this  will be enough; every one liv-
ing in her rapidly changing Amer i ca must be prepared for financial ruin. 
The last three pages of The American Frugal House wife, entitled “How to 
Endure Poverty,” suggest that riches of character must maintain one “when 
poverty comes (as it sometimes  will).” “A mind full of piety and knowledge 
is always rich,” Child promises. “It is a bank that never fails; it yields a per-
petual dividend of happiness.”25  Because the volatility of the market makes 

58 
Joyful Frugality
the home unstable, Child fi nally suggests that individual, internal resources 
must maintain one when financial resources fail.
The antebellum vegetarian reform movement, headed by Sylvester Gra-
ham, picks up where Child and other domestic- advice authors leave off. 
The most famous health reformer of the antebellum period, Sylvester Gra-
ham (1794–1851), is now only slightly remembered, if at all, as the name 
source of the graham cracker— a commercial product that bears merely an 
ironic resemblance to Graham’s anticommercial philosophy. Denigrated 
as “the prophet of sawdust” by antebellum newsmen and “the poet of bran 
bread and pumpkins” by Ralph Waldo Emerson,26 Graham lived an ob-
scure life  until the early 1830s, when he began his popular- lecture series. 
 These lectures evolved during the 1830s to encompass not only temper-
ance but a more general theory of health that included chastity and a col-
lection of dietary and hygienic recommendations that Graham referred to 
as “The Science of  Human Life.”
As Graham saw it, American bodies  were threatened by food that was 
increasingly mechanized and commercially produced, symbolized most 
acutely for Graham by animal products and the newly popu lar white bread 
being sold by urban bakeries. A key component of Graham’s vegetarian diet 
was therefore “Graham bread,” a bread made from unrefined flour and 
baked in the home by a loving wife or  mother; only such bread, according 
to Graham, was capable of providing proper physiological but also spiri-
tual nourishment. In 1839, Graham’s authority and popularity was con-
solidated with the publication of his magnum opus, Lectures on the Science 
of  Human Life, a collection of his physiological and lifestyle recommenda-
tions that ran more than 1,200 pages.27 Fully established as a leading re-
form movement of the antebellum period, at the height of their enthusiasm 
Graham’s followers established the nation’s first vegetarian society, set up 
Grahamite boarding  houses, opened the nation’s first health- food stores 
where products such as “Graham flour”28  were bought and sold, and even 
ran the student commons at Oberlin College on Grahamite princi ples. The 
Grahamites established their own journal, The Graham Journal of Health 
and Longevity, in 1837, and friendly articles  were printed about the health 
system in many other journals during the antebellum period, including 
Fowler and Wells’s popu lar Life Illustrated.29
Like Child, Graham responds to the challenge of an irrational econ-
omy with a call for frugality, but his economy comes in the form of a diet 
that tames an internal “vital economy” that Graham substitutes for the 
market economy. Graham’s “vital economy” demands similar management 
techniques to the market economy; runaway consumption is his culprit, 

Joyful Frugality 
59
and appetite control is his solution. “A stern simplicity of diet commenced 
in childhood and rigidly adhered to through life” is the only way to curb 
the depraved, voracious appetite that Graham believes dominates his con-
temporaries,30 and such a  simple diet is also calculated to avoid taxing the 
body’s “vital economy.”31 According to Graham, “ every  human being comes 
into existence with a determinate amount of constitutional stamina, an un-
replenishable fund of life. This fund . . .  can be profligately squandered in 
one- fourth or one- tenth part of the time which it might be made to last,” 
or it can be managed with thrifty care through the consumption of non-
stimulating vegetable foods.32 Graham rejects capitalism’s ideals of surplus 
and accumulation; all “stimulation” to Graham’s internal “vital economy” 
is harmful  because unlike the unlimited amount of capital and resources 
that characterize the external market economy, the internal “vital econ-
omy” has a precisely delimited fund of life that may be spent before it 
collapses.
Graham’s call for frugality, like Child’s, is so vehement  because it is the-
orized as the only means of attaining autonomy in the face of an irrational 
economy. By advocating for a dietetic “economy” that would help vege-
tarians achieve mastery over an out- of- control appetite, Graham’s vege-
tarian diet granted a more achievable form of economic self- sufficiency. 
The hunger of a “flesh- eater,” Graham insists to his readers again and 
again, is fundamentally “imperious,” “despotic, vehement, impatient . . . 
[and] craving.”33  Those who convert to vegetarianism, Graham promises, 
 will oust such controlling and immoral appetites through adherence to the 
“constitutional laws” of the “permanently established constitutional econ-
omy” and thereby preserve their health.34 Indeed, not merely the health 
of individual Americans but of the nation. Graham’s system, conceived in 
the language of republicanism and shot through with the prob lems of cap-
italism, actually aimed at the reform of what Graham calls “civic life.”35 
Explic itly connecting the care of the individual constitution with the care 
of social and po liti cal constitutions, antebellum vegetarianism offered Gra-
ham and many of his converts a way of thinking about individual  human 
“constitutions” and their proper form of “government” at the same mo-
ment that po liti cal crises caused  these questions to be debated at the na-
tional level in the United States.
As Michel Foucault observes in The Use of Plea sure, politicizing bodily 
appetites was a standard feature of classical republican po liti cal theory. Ap-
petite took on a po liti cal role  because private life was theorized as the 
training ground for civic participation; virtuous citizens constituted them-
selves as such precisely through the regulation of individual appetite.36 

60 
Joyful Frugality
Eileen Joy has argued that “for Foucault . . .  ethics is a practice (an ascet-
ics, or set of exercises) of freedom that revolves around the fundamental 
imperative: ‘Take care of yourself.’ ”37 Foucault’s emphasis on the impor-
tance of appetite regulation—in Hellenic citizenship theory and to radi-
cal forms of freedom— helps illuminate the po liti cal work Graham and 
his nineteenth- century vegetarian followers  imagined attention to regi-
men could achieve. According to Graham, “the dangers of the  table” are 
primarily that improper indulgence runs the risk of “multiplying and pam-
pering” “appetites”  until they threaten to make  people “perfect slaves” who 
are “led captives by their lusts to their destruction.”38 As Michael Warner 
has observed, nineteenth- century temperance movements more broadly 
conceived of desire as an external, controlling force and bodily discipline 
as the path to freedom.39 Graham’s vegetarian system explic itly politicizes 
 these assumptions, promoting civic virtue by exchanging the body politic 
for individual “po liti cal bodies” who could be liberated through a vegetar-
ian diet. In shifting the site of market insulation from the  family farm or 
domestic home to the  human body and then providing a regimen that wea-
ponized diet and appetite control against industrial capitalism, Graham-
ite vegetarianism politicized the  human body by giving it a role in the 
maintenance of a virtuous public sphere.
 Because it made diet an explic itly po liti cal prob lem, with ramifications 
for the safety and security of the nation, vegetarian politics denominated 
the  human body as a site of direct civic engagement. Graham can posit the 
 human constitution as a useful substitute for an irreparably flawed po liti-
cal constitution  because he theorized a  human body that had one more 
crucial characteristic: a universal constitution. Unlike the “compro-
mised” US Constitution described by Graham in his “Letter to the Hon. 
Daniel Webster” as unable to unite the American population,40 Graham’s 
Lectures on the Science of  Human Life paints a picture of a  human constitution 
so uniform as to demand the identical management of  every body. “We 
have been told,” he scoffs, “that . . .  what is best for one man, is not for 
another . . .  dif fer ent constitutions require dif fer ent treatment.” 41  These 
“erroneous dogmas,” he continues, are propagated primarily by  those “will-
ing to observe no other rules of life than the leadings of their appetites.” 42 
According to Graham, such slaves to appetite miss the “incontrovertible 
truth” that
the  human constitution is ONE, and  there are no constitutional 
differences in the  human race which  will not readily yield to a correct 
regimen . . .  and consequently,  there are no constitutional differences 

Joyful Frugality 
61
in the  human race which stand in the way of adapting one general 
regimen to the  whole  family of man; but, on the contrary . . .  what is 
best for one, is best for all; and therefore, all general reasonings 
concerning the  human constitution, are equally applicable to each and 
 every member of the  human  family, in all ages of the world, and in all 
conditions of the race, and in all the vari ous circumstances of 
individuals.43
Echoing the claims of self- evidence and universality that Lynn Hunt’s In-
venting  Human Rights has shown to characterize eighteenth- century 
 human rights theory,44 Graham posits a new, physiological basis for the 
Declaration of In de pen dence’s claim that “all men are created equal,” one 
that expands the implied subject of that phrase to include “each and  every 
member of the  human  family . . .  in all conditions of the race” and, pre-
sumably, “all conditions” of gender, since Graham’s regimen makes no dis-
tinction between the needs and constitutions of male and female bodies.
Of course, the universal  human constitution Graham posits could not 
literally deliver social or po liti cal equality to  free Blacks or enslaved per-
sons (or any other disenfranchised group). Yet theorizing a universal  human 
constitution was an impor tant step  toward such equality, since activists on 
both sides of the slavery question framed physiological homogeneity as one 
of the most significant gatekeepers on the path leading African Americans 
to freedom and equality. Proslavery scientists conducted unthinkably cruel 
medical experiments and ethnological research into supposed “African” 
and primate biological similitude in an effort to prove the incommensu-
rable physical difference of Black bodies from white, while abolitionist lit-
er a ture and lectures retorted with displays of suffering Black bodies 
designed to demonstrate that Blacks felt physical and emotional pain as 
keenly as whites.45 Physiological homogeneity was an active site of cul-
tural contestation during the antebellum period; in this cultural milieu, 
Graham’s argument for physiological universality, framed in the explicit 
context of the slavery question, offered a trenchant polemic aid to  those 
working  toward abolition and racial equality—an observation that per-
haps helps explain William Lloyd Garrison’s supportive interest in Gra-
ham’s work.46
Lydia Maria Child and Sylvester Graham share a conviction that con-
sumption has a public, po liti cal effect. Ultimately, each struck a nerve with 
many of their contemporaries  because both taught a form of frugality 
designed to subdue privately ruinous, publicly antisocial and antidemo-
cratic appetites. Rather than a  simple turn to the individual away from 

62 
Joyful Frugality
the collective, dietary and domestic frugality practices attempted to me-
diate a perceived conflict between individual, private desires and national, 
po liti cal goods. Amid rising consumer appetites and deeply unpredictable 
financial cycles, Child guided her readers to an anticonsumerist frugality 
that promised both private and public happiness and virtue. At a moment 
when internecine war seemed to be the increasingly inevitable outcome of 
a disunified body politic, Graham contributed a universal theory of diet 
and physiology that bound Americans together in the most intimate way 
pos si ble and tied physiological consumption to po liti cal virtue. In their 
dif fer ent ways, Child and Graham pop u lar ized the idea that personal 
and po liti cal freedom and happiness  were linked with frugal consump-
tion. As the rest of the chapter  will show, Henry David Thoreau and Em-
ily Dickinson’s rich literary engagements with the popu lar idealization of 
frugal consumption extends frugality into even more complex— and 
anticapitalist— territory.
Radical Minimalism: Walden in the Capitalocene
 There is a certain class of unbelievers who sometimes ask me 
such questions as, if I think that I can live on vegetable food alone; 
and to strike at the root of the  matter at once,— for the root is 
faith,— I am accustomed to answer such, that I can live on board nails. 
If they cannot understand that, they cannot understand much that  
I have to say.
Thoreau, Walden
Henry David Thoreau famously “began to occupy [his]  house” at Walden 
“on the 4th of July,” 1845, and the implications and effects of this declara-
tion of personal, po liti cal, and economic in de pen dence have been discussed 
and debated almost ever since.47 In his own time, Thoreau’s gesture was 
seen as every thing from a sincere attempt at utopian living, to the mis-
guided gesture of a harmless crank, to the hypocritical invention of a Bar-
numesque humbug.48 Among con temporary critics,  there is  little agreement 
as well. To some, Thoreau is a tongue- in- cheek parodist whose main aim 
is to provoke; to  others, he is a sincere lover of nature, working out one of 
the earliest- articulated ecological perspectives in the United States. Among 
 those critics inclined to engage the more po liti cal aspects of Thoreau’s 
thinking in Walden,  there is, if pos si ble, even less agreement. Although 
some critics have read Walden as a work of serious po liti cal import based 
on its confrontation of some of the most serious economic or po liti cal 
issues facing antebellum US society,49 many  others, including Michael 

Joyful Frugality 
63
Gilmore and Sacvan Bercovitch, have dismissed Walden’s ability to reform 
its society on the grounds that despite his vocal critique of the economic 
and po liti cal status quo, Thoreau merely replicated the conditions of his 
society while at Walden, rather than imagining a substantive alternative.50 
Despite recognizing Walden’s reformist ambitions, such critics read Tho-
reau’s text as a “defeated book,”51 one ultimately guilty of “a forsaking of 
civic aspirations for an exclusive concern with ‘the art of living well.’ ”52
Perhaps Thoreau’s Walden investigation of modes of living is difficult 
to recognize as po liti cal  because it is seldom read in the context of the eigh-
teenth-  and nineteenth- century British and American reformers who op-
posed “luxury” to in de pen dence and thus civic virtue.53 Yet such republican, 
anticonsumerist, reformist rhe toric was widespread; in fact, Joanna Co-
hen has recently argued that two distinct models of citizenship vied for 
primacy in the early United States, models distinguished from each other 
precisely through their opposed attitudes to consumerism. In Luxurious 
Citizens, Cohen demonstrates that a Revolutionary- era model of “patriot- 
consumers,” whose duty as citizens was “tied to self- sacrifice and withdrawal 
from the marketplace,” was gradually eclipsed by “citizen- consumers.” 
Once taxation power had been transferred to the federal government 
through Article 1, Section 8 of the Constitution, the “consumer’s duty as 
a citizen was now linked to making a purchase.” While  these two ways of 
relating to citizenship and consumerism coexisted (perhaps uncomfortably, 
even antagonistically) through the antebellum period, Cohen argues that 
the ascendency of the “citizen- consumer” over the “patriot- consumer” 
was so complete by the close of the Civil War that most Americans now 
have trou ble even recognizing the patriot- consumer model when they 
see it outside of the narrow context of the Revolutionary War and pre- 
Revolutionary boycotts.54
Certainly we have trou ble recognizing it in Walden. For instance, when 
in October 2015 the journalist Kathryn Schulz published a splashy Tho-
reau hit piece in the New Yorker entitled “Pond Scum: Henry David Tho-
reau’s Moral Myopia,” her screed centered on the charge that Thoreau’s 
account of his two- year “experiment in living” at Walden Pond is shot 
through with a repugnant, apo liti cal obsession with physiological purity 
and not consuming.55 “I cannot idolize anyone who opposes coffee (espe-
cially if the objection is that it erodes  great civilizations; had the man not 
heard of the Enlightenment?), but Thoreau never met an appetite too in-
nocuous to denounce,” Schulz writes.  After many paragraphs detailing 
Thoreau’s “adolescent” and “insufferable” views, Schulz concludes on a 
note of unsympathetic faux- pity:

64 
Joyful Frugality
Ultimately, it is impossible not to feel sorry for the author of 
“Walden,” who dedicated himself to establishing the bare necessities 
of life without ever realizing that the necessary is a low, dull bar; 
whose account of how to live reads less like an existential reckoning 
than like a poor man’s bud get, with its calculations of how much to eat 
and sleep crowding out questions of why we are  here and how we 
should treat one another.56
Schulz accuses Thoreau of playing at poverty for fun, apparently un-
aware that his time at Walden Pond was what we  today would call a writ-
er’s retreat;  after working a series of demanding jobs that left him  little 
time to write, his experiment in lowering his living expenses was a mostly 
self- funded, two- year writing fellowship. Lacking the wealth simply to 
bankroll his artistic aspirations (Schulz misrepresents Thoreau’s class po-
sition as elite), Thoreau reduced his expenses in order to become a full- 
time writer. In this and other re spects, “Pond Scum” is oversimplified and 
often misinformed, as  others have pointed out.57 Yet Schulz’s essay is only 
the latest in a long line of Walden denunciations decrying Thoreau’s sup-
posedly apo liti cal obsession with appetite and consumption.
The few critics who have addressed the topic of diet and consumption 
in Walden most often ignore or dismiss it as evidence of Thoreau’s unpleas-
ant, sanctimonious side58 and generally fail to contextualize his interest in 
appetite, consumption, and consumerism in its wider, popu lar antebellum 
context.59 Like many other careful observers of antebellum US culture, 
Thoreau expresses in Walden a keen awareness of the economic changes 
happening around him. When Thoreau begins Walden with advice about 
the frugal management of appetite and  house hold affairs, he places his book 
squarely in the tradition of popu lar domestic guidebooks and advice lit er-
a ture of the kind being produced by Catherine Beecher, Lydia Maria Child, 
William A. Alcott, and especially Sylvester Graham.60 Just as other ante-
bellum domestic guidebook authors do, Thoreau devotes a  great deal of 
space in Walden to decrying his neighbors and contemporaries’ marked lack 
of market in de pen dence, painting them as trapped by their consumerist 
desires. “Honestly think[ing]  there is no choice left,” 61 such men and  women 
spend their lives in mistaken pursuit of luxury62 and a lifestyle intended to 
impress their neighbors,63 losing their freedom in the pro cess. As Lance 
Newman has observed, when Thoreau “recommends a  simple life, he does 
so not  because bodily needs are low or trivial, but  because the way we ful-
fill them is deranged” by social conventions and pressure to consume 
conspicuously.64

Joyful Frugality 
65
As Walden makes clear from the outset, one of the primary obstacles 
to “improving” life is that the old model for a useful and virtuous life— 
farming—is no longer  viable. In an age of market capitalism, farming, 
which was for Jefferson the height of personal freedom, has become a kind 
of slavery; farmers, according to Thoreau, are “serfs of the soil.” 65 The vi-
sion of the mythically in de pen dent, subsistence- farming yeoman has been 
eradicated, and in its place is a modern farmer whose commercial men-
tality has produced farms where “nothing grows  free, whose fields bear 
no crops, whose meadows no flowers, whose trees no fruits, but dollars.” 66 
Moreover, Thoreau recasts prosperity as a burden repeatedly in “Econ-
omy,” envisioning the propertied man as a radically encumbered body 
dragged down by “all the trumpery which he saves and  will not burn.” 67 
Ultimately, “the more you have of such  things the poorer you are” 68 
 because they cost so much of a person’s  limited stock of “life” to maintain. 
Thoreau agrees with Graham that “life”— time—is the real capital to be 
hoarded.69
Thoreau’s philosophical alignment with Graham is signaled by the fact 
that he generally follows a Grahamite diet while living at Walden Pond. 
He takes frequent morning baths, as Graham was one of the earliest to rec-
ommend, avoids consuming most commercial food products, and eschews 
stimulating substances such as coffee, tea, alcohol, and, for the most part, 
animal products.70 Also similar to Graham, Thoreau claims that appetite 
and the inappropriate consumption patterns related to appetite indulgence 
are the ultimate source of personal and civic subjection. Thoreau endorses 
Graham’s central emphasis on the role of stimulation in disease and death 
when he offers his own theory of physiology near the beginning of Walden,71 
and in a passage that sounds quintessentially Grahamite, Thoreau adopts 
Graham’s framework that equates fast living with domestic and civic 
degeneration:
The nation itself, with all its so called internal improvements . . .  is 
[as] . . .  ruined by luxury and heedless expense, by want of calculation 
and a worthy aim, as the million  house holds in the land; and the only 
cure for it as for them is in a rigid economy, a stern and more than 
Spartan simplicity of life and elevation of purpose. It lives too fast.72
Even Thoreau’s famous formulation “the cost of a  thing is the amount of 
what I  will call life which is required to be exchanged for it, immediately 
or in the long run,” when reread in light of Graham’s vegetarian physiol-
ogy, can be seen as drawing on Graham’s theory of a  limited fund of life 
that individuals have to “spend” throughout their lives.73 Both Graham and 

66 
Joyful Frugality
Thoreau place “life” as the central value of their economic system, and it 
is the hoarding of “life” that represents “economic” success for both men. 
Thoreau purports to be “treating the subject [of food] rather from an eco-
nomic than a dietetic point of view,” but from the vantage point of ante-
bellum vegetarianism, the distinction is meaningless.74
Thoreau’s primary rationale for his vegetarian diet in Walden turns out 
to be that meat is just one more of the market luxuries that keep unimagi-
native citizens in the thrall of the market:
One farmer says to me, “You cannot live on vegetable food solely, for it 
furnishes nothing to make bones with;” and so he religiously devotes a 
part of his day to supplying his system with the raw material of bones; 
walking all the while he talks  behind his oxen, which, with vegetable- 
made bones, jerk him and his lumbering plough along in spite of  every 
obstacle. Some  things are  really necessaries of life in some circles, the 
most helpless and diseased, which in  others are luxuries merely, and in 
 others still are entirely unknown.75
In passages such as  these, Thoreau is building on the anticonsumerist, veg-
etarian abstemiousness of Sylvester Graham but broadening that philoso-
phy. Walden pre sents a picture of  simple living to all “circles” in order to 
teach even “helpless and diseased” citizens the difference between luxury 
and necessity— the precondition for real freedom, according to Thoreau.
For Thoreau, at issue in this management of appetite and consumption 
is nothing short of personal freedom and the meaning of the American 
dream. More than any other chapter in Walden, “Baker Farm”76 makes 
 these stakes clear. Immediately preceding “Higher Laws,” Thoreau’s more 
famous chapter about dietary  matters, “Baker Farm” is significant for be-
ing the only moment in Walden where we actually see Thoreau recommend 
his diet and lifestyle to any of his contemporaries. In this episode, Tho-
reau takes refuge from a rainstorm in what he believes to be an abandoned 
cabin near Baker Farm but finds it occupied by an extremely poor  family 
of Irish immigrants, the Fields. As they wait out the rainstorm together, 
Thoreau listens to the  family patriarch, John Field, give an account of his 
hard life, to which Thoreau responds by offering his own consumption pat-
terns as a pos si ble solution to the Field  family’s trou bles.
Comparatively  little has been written about “Baker Farm,” and the pur-
pose of the chapter is often misunderstood. For instance, one critic opines:
 There is perhaps no more unpleasant chapter in Walden than “Baker 
Farm.” . . .  The sight of the celibate Thoreau airily patronizing Field 
and his  family in the name of philosophy, urging him to drop his job, 

Joyful Frugality 
67
change their diet, and go a- huckleberrying, is as unsettling and 
vaguely repellent as it would be to see Socrates persuading Phaedo and 
com pany to commit suicide.77
 There is no doubt that Thoreau takes a patronizing tone  toward Field in 
this chapter, but to read Thoreau’s suggestions to the Field  family as be-
ing simply “in the name of philosophy” is to miss the point. Thoreau sees 
John Field’s tale of hardship as evidence of “a poor . . .  bargain,”78 and he 
“trie[s] to help him with [his] experience, telling him . . .  that [he] too, who 
came a- fishing  here, and looked like a loafer, was getting [his] living like 
himself,”79 with the difference
that I did not use tea, nor coffee, nor butter, nor milk, nor fresh meat, 
and so did not have to work to get them; . . .  and when he had worked 
hard he had to eat hard again to repair the waste of his system. . . .  He 
had rated it as a gain in coming to Amer i ca, that  here you could get 
tea, and coffee, and meat  every day. But the only true Amer i ca is that 
country where you are at liberty to pursue such a mode of life as may 
enable you to do without  these, and where the state does not endeavor 
to compel you to sustain the slavery and war and other superfluous 
expenses which directly or indirectly result from the use of such 
 things.80
The lesson that Thoreau is trying to teach Field  here is not some abstruse 
philosophical point but a  simple lesson in appetite management. When 
Thoreau says “I did not use tea, nor coffee, nor butter, nor milk, nor fresh 
meat, and so did not have to pay for them,” he is highlighting the econ-
omy of his Grahamite diet. Field may have “rated it a gain in coming to 
Amer i ca, that  here you could get tea, and coffee, and meat  every day,” but 
Thoreau points out that indulgence in  those commodities threatens the 
autonomy and liberty of the individual. Field’s fundamental prob lem, in 
Thoreau’s account, is that he  mistakes freedom with the consumption of 
market goods when true freedom in fact inheres in the appetite manage-
ment that allows one to “do without . . .  such  things.”
For Thoreau, frugal consumption is an act of re sis tance to capitalism. 
“He that does not eat need not work,” he writes in “Brute Neighbors,” cast-
ing food as the ur- commodity that keeps individuals tied to the unstable 
and compromising cap i tal ist system of exchange that, in the tradition of 
civic humanism, threatens the virtuous in de pen dence of republican citi-
zens.81 Thoreau devotes himself to the evaluation of man’s basic needs—
to finding out what are the “grossest groceries”— because such needs are 
the only necessary ties between an individual and a vampiric cap i tal ist 

68 
Joyful Frugality
marketplace. Thoreau recognizes that the marketplace threatens individ-
ual autonomy, and he sees that it is impossible for individuals to become 
in de pen dent  until they have learned to control their appetite. Such ap-
petite control  isn’t a part of Thoreau’s in de pen dence proj ect, then; it is the 
proj ect. As he puts it in “Economy,” “my greatest skill has been to want but 
 little.”82 Marx makes a similar point in volume 1 of Capital when he writes, 
“Individual consumption provides, on the one hand, the means for the 
workers’ maintenance and reproduction; on the other hand, by the con-
stant annihilation of the means of subsistence, it provides for their contin-
ued re- appearance on the labour- market.”83 Echoes between Thoreau and 
Marx are less a coincidence of their shared historical moment than they 
are evidence of Thoreau’s attentiveness to and participation in nineteenth- 
century anticapitalism; as scholars have demonstrated, in his Walden 
experiment Thoreau “saw himself as engaged in a vitally impor tant con-
versation with the utopian socialists” at Brook Farm, even if the social 
aspect of intentional communities remained unappealing to him.84
Fundamentally, Thoreau manages his body not in order to compete 
more effectively in the cap i tal ist marketplace but in order to withdraw ex-
perimentally from it as far as is practicable. Thoreau’s larger point in all of 
this is that the demands of capitalism are antithetical to both the demands 
of radical democracy and meaningful intellectual and personal in de pen-
dence; following the consumerist and acquisitive imperatives of capitalism 
means not only enslaving  others, in the literal sense that buying the market 
products of slavery helps perpetuate the slave system, but also oneself, 
since— following Graham—an inability to manage one’s appetite, one’s “in-
ternal economy,” means being controlled by the external market economy.
Thoreau’s proj ect in Walden is not, as it has sometimes been character-
ized, an attempt to develop a pattern book of a meaningful life that could 
be replicated by anyone hoping to escape a life of “quiet desperation.”85 We 
might think of Walden as something like con temporary experiments with 
limiting consumerism, where prac ti tion ers reduce their possessions to one 
hundred items or downsize their wardrobe to thirty- three items (or even 
a single dress) for three months or a year.86 The idea of  these experiments 
is not that prac ti tion ers would permanently embrace such extreme restric-
tions but that temporarily adopting them might remap their consumption 
habits, and perhaps even their personal and po liti cal imagination, in the 
ser vice of more ethical and ecological modes of living.87
Strangely, despite the obvious resonance of Thoreau’s Walden experi-
ment with anticonsumerism and with the currently very trendy philoso-

Joyful Frugality 
69
phy (or lifestyle, if you prefer) of radical minimalism, Thoreau and Walden 
are not cited as a precursor for the obsession du jour of unhappy privileged 
consumers in the United States, Japan, and elsewhere. Even when such works 
virtually parrot his system of economic reckoning in “Economy,” as does 
the cult classic Your Money or Your Life,88 the claim is that  these ideas are 
brand new, born of the despair of late capitalism. What would it mean to 
acknowledge that they are not new? To recognize a homegrown, minori-
tarian vein of anticonsumerism that has been  there all along, an integral 
part of US culture?
Private reform cannot substitute for po liti cal reform; Thoreau’s support 
of John Brown and his active participation in the Under ground Railroad, 
for example, illustrate that he understood the importance of collective ac-
tion. Yet democracy entails active, collective collaboration in the classical 
republican tradition; as far as Thoreau is concerned, his neighbors must 
learn to participate actively in their own lives first. Rather than eating, work-
ing, reading, thinking, and consuming mechanically,89 Thoreau wants his 
fellow Americans to “live deliberately,”90 as he does—to engage in delib-
eration, to think, choose, and act for themselves. This is a po liti cal aspira-
tion in a republican society  because a “true form of self- government cannot 
exist without a critical self: when  people act like machines, democracy 
ceases to be practiced on an everyday level.”91 Like its close con temporary 
The Communist Manifesto, Walden therefore frequently collapses its critique 
of the state and critique of the market  because from Thoreau’s perspec-
tive, both the “public” state and the “private” market are interfering with 
how one can manage the most significant “private” economy— the  human 
body.
Thoreau casts general social reform as a private ill in Walden, just one 
more consequence of an ill- governed appetite,92  because in most of his po-
liti cal writings he views society as an accretion of distinct individuals. If 
collectivities are mere accumulations of distinct, individualized bodies, and 
if  these bodies have been mechanized through immersion in a cap i tal ist 
marketplace, the revival of the robust in de pen dence of mind that self- 
government requires cannot result from more contact with the mecha-
nized “mass of men.”93 Instead, in “Re sis tance to Civil Government,” 
written while he was living at Walden Pond, Thoreau promotes the social 
utility of the well- governed individual using a bread meta phor: “It is not 
so impor tant that many should be as good as you, as that  there be some 
absolute goodness somewhere; for that  will leaven the  whole lump.”94  Later 
in this same essay, Thoreau famously calls for a “resting- place without 

70 
Joyful Frugality
[society],” from which he might move it.95 Walter Benn Michaels points 
out that this place cannot be mere “Nature,” for Thoreau repeatedly shows 
that when the individual gazes into nature, he merely sees himself reflected 
back.96 Michaels focuses on “the empty space [Thoreau] sometimes calls 
wilderness” as the solution,97 but in the context of Walden, Thoreau’s praxis 
suggests that if the individual cannot dis appear into nature, then the indi-
vidual’s body needs to become “the resting- place” outside of society. From 
this perspective, the reform of society depends upon the social and market 
autonomy of the individual that Thoreau’s vegetarian and domestic lifestyle 
are designed to promote.
Like Sylvester Graham, Thoreau believes that abolition and significant 
social reform are impossible so long as the “very Constitution is the evil,” 
as he writes in “Re sis tance to Civil Government,”98 and he shifts his at-
tention to the same  human constitution as Graham for the remedy. In fact, 
in “Slavery in Mas sa chu setts,” Thoreau, like Graham, advocates for the 
substitution of a perfect physiological constitution for a flawed po liti cal 
constitution when he writes:
The question is not  whether you or your grand father, seventy years 
ago, did not enter into an agreement to serve the devil, and that ser vice 
is not accordingly now due; but  whether you  will not now, for once and 
at last, serve God,—in spite of your own past recreancy, or that of your 
ancestor,—by obeying that eternal and only just CONSTITUTION, 
which He, and not any Jefferson or Adams, has written in your 
being.99
Even more than Graham, who takes refuge in an equal- opportunity em-
bodied constitution but who, like antislavery Constitutionalists such as 
Charles Sumner, attempts to imaginatively redeem the spirit of the US po-
liti cal constitution, Thoreau finds that the po liti cal constitution amounts 
to “an agreement to serve the devil”  because he feels that it incontrovert-
ibly supports slavery. The hopelessly flawed po liti cal constitution is fi nally 
irrelevant in the face of the “eternal and only just CONSTITUTION . . . 
written in your being,” a physiological constitution theorized as decidedly 
universal and radically egalitarian. Obeying the “eternal and only just 
CONSTITUTION . . .  written in your being” is clearly denominated as 
a po liti cal act in “Slavery in Mas sa chu setts.” If “the mass of men serve the 
State . . .  with their bodies” and if “the State never intentionally confronts 
a man’s sense, intellectual or moral, but only his body,” as Thoreau argues 
in “Re sis tance to Civil Government,” it makes sense to resist an unjust gov-
ernment with one’s body, as well.100

Joyful Frugality 
71
The value of Thoreau’s frugality is not that it bolsters a fantasy of self- 
sufficiency; the significance Thoreau gives consumption in fact reflects our 
interdependence with our environment and with one another. As Matthew 
Klingle has argued, the  human body is a space where vari ous scales, forms, 
and temporalities of consumption come together, and such consumption 
affects producers as well as consumers; it affects  here and  there, now and 
then (past as well as  future). In fact, “some of our deepest and most mean-
ingful connections to nature come through consumption,” making con-
sumption a continual reminder of our dependence on the earth.101 Rather, 
the value of Walden’s frugality is that it refuses the correlation of consump-
tion with freedom and happiness. In her work on Thoreau, Jane Bennett 
has asked, what is a “self capable of an act of conscientious dissent[?] What 
kind of being could be disobedient to civil authority?”102 By focusing on 
Thoreau’s dietary frugality, I am trying to ask: What is a self capable of 
resisting the lure of consumerism? What kinds of beings could be disobe-
dient to the cap i tal ist imperative to consume? The US economy and in-
deed American culture prize unlimited growth, accumulation, and the 
fostering of endless appetites and consumer desires. Walden’s cele bration 
of frugality suggests that we might challenge the most destructive aspects 
of capitalism without compromising our happiness— a critical precondi-
tion for motivating po liti cal responses to runaway consumption in the 
twenty- first  century.
Thoreau loved to renew worn- out words by  going back to their roots. 
At its root, “frugality” contains the Latin word for “fruit,” with all its 
sweetness, joy, and regeneration. Thoreau’s Walden experiment in extreme 
frugality is compelling insofar as it multiplies, not reduces, possibilities, 
 futures, and modes of living. “Nature and  human life are as vari ous as our 
several constitutions,” Walden assures us. “Who  shall say what prospect life 
offers to another?”103 When Thoreau leaves Walden it is  because “perhaps 
it seemed to me that I had several more lives to live.”104 The optimism of 
Thoreau’s “several more lives” has become difficult to maintain in the Cap-
italocene, as we confront the real ity that many of us, and Americans in 
par tic u lar, must drastically curb our consumption of every thing from plas-
tics to fossil fuels if we want to keep any but the most drastic  futures pos-
si ble for our planet. Walden might offer us a glimmer of hope insofar as it 
weds personal happiness and po liti cal possibility— the multiplication of op-
tions and  futures, creative and political—to reducing consumption and 
curbing appetite. Thoreau may seem or even be a killjoy for some readers, 
but his frugality promotes joy and fulfillment against the world- ending 
“quiet desperation” of empty, unending consumerism.

72 
Joyful Frugality
The “Banquet of Abstemiousness”: Dickinson’s Desire  
and the Plea sure of Limits
Enough is so vast a sweetness I suppose it never occurs— only pathetic 
counterfeits— Fabulous to me as the men of the Revelations who “ shall 
not hunger anymore.”
Emily Dickinson to T. W. Higginson, September 26, 1870
In Walden, Thoreau suggests that happiness depends upon appetite and de-
sire being managed, if not mastered. For Emily Dickinson, however, de-
sire is an integral part of the  human condition, inescapable and even to be 
embraced as a source of plea sure. Plea sure is not always the first  thing that 
we think of when we think of Dickinson. She has been diagnosed by crit-
ics as depressed, repressed, agoraphobic, and anorexic, to name just a few 
of the more common charges. Yet as often as she writes of death, madness, 
or misery, she writes of plea sure, of “maddest Joy.”105 According to Thomas 
Went worth Higginson, Dickinson told him, “I find ecstasy in living— the 
mere sense of living is joy enough,” and when Higginson questioned this 
“ecstasy in living” by asking  whether she “never felt want of employ-
ment, never  going off the place & never seeing any visitor,” Dickinson’s 
rebuttal to his intimation that her life might be somewhat empty, or at 
least lonely, could hardly have been more straightforward, or strident: “I 
never thought of conceiving that I could ever have the slightest approach 
to such a want in all  future time,” adding, “I feel that I have not expressed 
myself strongly enough.”106 A joyful self- sufficiency is not how Dickinson 
is typically understood, but her self- characterization might suggest that 
perhaps  there’s more than a  little paternalism in Higginson’s— and our 
own— characterizations of Dickinson’s life and literary perspective as “ab-
normal,” unhappy, and wanting.107
Dickinson’s expressions of happiness and her poetic explorations of joy 
are so easy to ignore  because  they’re often tied to hunger, lack, and desire. 
“Who never wanted— maddest Joy / Remains to him unknown— ,” she 
writes in an emblematic instance.108 Dickinson’s frequent conceptualiza-
tion of desire in relation to food and abstemious consumption— her many 
repre sen ta tions of food, hunger, starvation, and more general “consuming” 
in her poetry— stand alongside the sometimes exuberant relish with which 
she writes about food in her letters. For instance, an 1851 letter to Austin 
luxuriates in its vivid description of the  family’s ripening fruit: “The 
peaches are very large— one side a rosy cheek, and the other a golden, and 
that peculiar coat of velvet and of down, which makes a peach so beauti-
ful. The grapes too are fine, juicy, and such a purple— I fancy the robes of 

Joyful Frugality 
73
kings are not a tint more royal.”109 It is also relatively well known that Dick-
inson was an accomplished baker, with bread and dessert making being 
her “special province” within the  family.110 Suggestively, her par tic u lar spe-
cialty was  whole grain “Graham Bread,” as well as puddings and desserts. 
Yet, when Dickinson’s “poetics of food” is explored, critics such as Heather 
Kirk Thomas or Vivian Pollak have found her style and content to be 
“anorexic”111 or her food imagery to be “transgressive” and “Gothic,” as 
Elizabeth Andrews has it.112
Anorexia and pathology are not the only contexts though which we 
might read Dickinson’s ongoing interest in food, desire, and frugal con-
sumption.113 As this chapter has already demonstrated, antebellum domes-
ticity and dietary- reform lit er a ture frequently valorized extreme frugality 
and a refusal to consume market goods and even food in some contexts. 
We know that Dickinson was conversant in this feature of antebellum re-
form culture. David Reynolds has observed that “Dickinson, who was 
fully aware of antebellum popu lar culture in all its dimensions, seems to 
be intentionally playing on well- known temperance images” in many of 
her poems.114 In fact, Dickinson’s  father gifted her Child’s The American 
Frugal House wife in 1832, and the book’s worn pages testify to its status as 
a  house hold staple. Sylvester Graham lived one town over in the 1840s, in 
Northampton, making him Dickinson’s neighbor. We also know from her 
letters that Dickinson wrote about at least one temperance dinner,115 dis-
cussed baking Graham bread in her letters,116 and sometimes playfully par-
odied Grahamite language and princi ples, as she does in an 1851 letter to 
Austin.117
Even more familiar to Dickinson than Graham was Edward Hitchcock, 
president of Amherst College and an eminent naturalist whose botany book 
Dickinson quotes from in letters. Hitchcock takes up the popu lar subject 
of diet in his Dyspepsy Forestalled and Resisted, or, Lectures on Diet, Regimen, 
and Employment: Delivered to the Students of Amherst College, Spring Term, 
1830. Like Graham and other self- styled diet and regimen experts, Hitch-
cock devotes a  great deal of time to the question “How much  shall we eat?” 
The answer, as it turns out, is not much. Hitchcock’s “first rule” is “that 
the quantity of food at any one meal  shall be very moderate.”118 In illus-
trating this rule, he writes approvingly of “the eastern Christians” who “al-
lowed themselves but twelve ounces of bread per day, as their only solid 
food, and  water alone for drink: yet they lived long and happy.” He even 
lauds a man who ultimately “reduced his food so much, that it is said he 
lived several days upon the yolk of a single egg.”119 In the context of Hitch-
cock, Graham, Child, and a broad popu lar temperance and reformist 

74 
Joyful Frugality
culture that routinely valorized limiting food intake and managing appe-
tite, the reoccurring imagery of starvation and lack in Dickinson’s poetry 
hardly seems especially notable, let alone pathological.
Locating the recurring images of consumption and self- denial in Dick-
inson’s poetry in their broader cultural context means including dietary 
reformers, but we might also place them alongside nineteenth- century cri-
tiques of capitalism such as  those levied by Thoreau in Walden (or, for that 
 matter, Marx). Elizabeth Hewett, Betsy Erkkila, Peter Stoneley, and  others 
have established that Dickinson frequently uses economic language in her 
poetry and letters and that this language is not simply meta phorical.120 “In-
stead, Dickinson’s frequent employment of economic vocabulary signifies 
her abiding concern with, and study of,  human need and  human com-
merce.”121 This po liti cal and economic context might help us disarticulate 
Dickinson’s interest in scarcity from the connotation of illness and to be-
gin to explore the full interest and complexity of Dickinson’s poetic de-
light in lack. The narrow pathologization of Dickinson’s interest in not 
eating and not consuming comes to seem distinctly gendered when we no-
tice how many of her contemporaries, male as well as female,  were inter-
ested in the same subject and  were theorizing modes of freedom— spiritual 
freedom, freedom from capitalism, and more— attendant on refusing to eat 
and consume.
Reading Dickinson’s poetic interest in food, starvation, and lack in its 
nineteenth- century context invites the possibility that definitions of hap-
piness to which critics have held Dickinson might be fruitfully neglected 
in pursuit of unfamiliar, even alien, pleasures. Take poem F748, “God gave 
a Loaf to  every Bird—.” Seemingly, the poem supports the critical ten-
dency to pathologize Dickinson’s speaker’s curbed appetite.
God gave a Loaf to  every Bird—
But just a Crumb—to Me—
I dare not eat it— tho’ I starve—
My poignant luxury— 122
The speaker  here appears to revel in refusing to consume her tiny portion, 
“tho’ [she] starve,” an attitude that indeed might be characterized as dis-
ordered. But as the poem continues, it becomes clear that rather than ab-
stinence for abstinence’s sake, this poem advocates a pleasing form of 
frugality— what the con temporary “ simple living” movement often calls 
“enough.”  Others have more, the speaker tells us, but this one “Crumb” is 
a trea sured, “poignant luxury.”

Joyful Frugality 
75
To own it— touch it—
Prove the feat— that made the Pellet mine—
Too happy— for my Sparrow’s chance—
For Ampler Coveting—
It might be Famine— all around—
I could not miss an Ear—
Such Plenty smiles opon my Board—
My Garner shows so fair— 123
The speaker compares herself to a bird, and the object in question is food, 
but the language of pleas ur able possession (“To own it— touch it—”) is so 
general that it could apply to any cherished material object. The affective 
state being described is not deprivation or depression: The speaker is 
“Too happy,” “Plenty smiles opon” her, and her “Garner shows so fair.” 
She can take plea sure in her “Pellet”  because she has learned the trick of 
satisfaction— rejoicing in what one possesses rather than longing for what 
one does not. As a result, the speaker can conclude,
I won der how the Rich— may feel—
An Indiaman— An Earl—
I deem that I— with but a Crumb—
Am Sovreign of them all— 124
To be wealthy and in de pen dent in this poem is to have mastered one’s ap-
petite not in order to starve (it’s a possibility, not a guarantee— “tho’ I 
starve”) but in order to delight in one’s portion. The poem advocates against 
acquisitiveness in several registers. Most obviously, the poem incorporates 
familiar aspects of Chris tian ity. “Ampler Coveting” weds amplitude, or 
having more than enough, to the most craven and even sinful form of crav-
ing and desire (“Thou shalt not covet”). On the other hand, the speaker’s 
“Crumb” might call to mind the broken bread of the Christian sacrament, 
and her disregard of materialism is Christ- like. The speaker’s rejection of 
consumption is also celebrated through imagery of demo cratic self- 
sufficiency: A pattern of diction casts the speaker as an American farmer 
with a full granary who mea sures wealth (or refuses to) in wheat and 
“Ear[s]” and whose frugality makes her “Sovreign”; her opposites are a Brit-
ish “Indiaman” and “Earl” whose riches come from colonialism, imperial-
ism, slavery, and class exploitation— the  labor of  others, in other words.
One might argue that  there’s something antisocial about the mode of 
being celebrated in “God gave a Loaf to  every Bird—.” The crumb is a 

76 
Joyful Frugality
piece detached from the  whole loaf, it is never consumed (which might 
evoke communion and community), and by the end of the poem this way 
of relating to her “Crumb” has transformed the speaker into a seemingly 
solitary “Sovreign.” Perhaps this way of relating to one’s portion is not so 
much antisocial as singular, however. To prioritize possession and inter-
action (“To own it— touch it—”) over acquisition and consumption goes 
against the way of the world— the wealth- acquisition imperative implied 
by all  those “Rich” Indiamen and Earls.
Dickinson’s cele bration of freedom and satisfaction through voluntary 
simplicity resonates powerfully with Thoreau’s similar portrait in Walden. 
When in poem F806 she writes,
Partake as doth the Bee—
Abstemiously—
A Rose is an Estate
In Sicily— 125
Dickinson is pointing us,  every bit as much as Thoreau, Graham, Child, 
and  others, to the often co- constitutive and frequently fraught relation-
ship between desire and satisfaction. Rather than an empirically determin-
able constant, one’s definition of “plenty” can depend upon one’s habits 
and expectations for consumption. Instead of decreasing one’s plea sure in 
consumption, abstemious or frugal consumption in fact increases the plea-
sure of the  thing consumed— the  simple and highly accessible “Rose” be-
comes a voluptuary “Estate / In Sicily.” Rather than a difficult, externally 
imposed regimen, the poem suggests that this form of consumption is 
highly natu ral—it is how “the Bee” partakes. In other Dickinson poems, 
the bee appears as a figure for sexual and alcoholic indulgence, which re-
inforces the sense of plea sure and plentitude this  little poem paradoxically 
accords moderation.126
Dickinson’s poems often insist that food’s “Significance” is in pro-
portion to its “Distance,” a perspective that yields a surprisingly strong 
and complex theory of consumer desire. For instance, in poem F626, she 
observes,
Undue Significance a starving man attaches
To Food—
Far off— He sighs— and therefore— Hopeless—
And therefore— Good—
Partaken—it relieves— indeed—
But proves us

Joyful Frugality 
77
That Spices fly
In the Receipt— It was the Distance—
Was Savory— 127
This poem offers a theorem of desire: “Far off— He sighs— and therefore— 
Hopeless— / And therefore— Good—.” What the theorem “proves” is the 
ability of desire to distort or magnify the qualities of  things we want. Pos-
session may bring “relie[f],” but it does not bring the full mea sure of de-
light anticipated  because “It was the Distance— / Was Savory—.” Lacking 
food, a “starving man” can never “attach” the correct amount of “signifi-
cance” or meaning to the object of his desire.
This failure of perception or perspective arises  because in Dickinson’s 
poetry, states of desire, want, lack, and even “famine” (one of her favorite 
terms) are relational: They are produced not on their own terms but by 
the experience of plenty. As she writes in poem F870,
The fact of Famine— could not be
Except for Fact of Corn—
Want—is a meagre Art
Acquired by Reverse— 128
The truth or experience of scarcity, even in its most material form, depends 
upon the experience of harvest’s plenty. It is not just that lack and plenti-
tude depend upon one another for their meaning; in Dickinson’s framing, 
the ordinary value of need and possession seem almost reversed. Need, or 
hunger, is the hard- won “Art” (if a “meagre,” fleshless one), while “want” 
is the subject of acquisition. “Reverse” suggests a loss of fortune but also 
alterations of perspective that might be desirous (uncovering, or showing 
the other side of something) and even the act of writing and revising po-
ems (re- versing).129 That Dickinson uses food to destabilize the positive 
valuation of bounty is not only not unusual; it’s precisely in keeping with 
how contemporaries including Thoreau, Graham, and Child approach the 
same questions of appetite and abundance.
What is perhaps most in ter est ing, however, is that Dickinson’s “starv-
ing man” or her abstemious Bee are not the joyless figures temperance or 
vegetarian caricatures would have us imagine. She writes in poem F1447,
Who never wanted— maddest Joy
Remains to him unknown—
The Banquet of Abstemiousness
Defaces that of Wine— 130

78 
Joyful Frugality
Rather than pathology, anorexia, or masochism, Dickinson’s speaker’s “ab-
stemiousness” is born of a complex understanding of the nature of desire 
and its often negative relationship to possession and consumption. Delight 
is not consumption or possession in Dickinson’s account but the moment 
just before, and her poetry frequently seeks to dwell in that moment of 
“maddest Joy,” to dilate it in order to linger inside of it.131 Such forestalling 
is a bid for plea sure, not a rejection of it— it’s a hedonist’s ploy. In fact, one 
effect of Dickinson’s characteristic dashes can be to render formally this 
dilation of desire, to defer linguistic completion or fulfillment. In poem 
F1447, for instance, the dash in the first line defers the delivery of “mad-
dest Joy,” leaving a reader time to “want” it.
“Who never wanted— maddest Joy” adds a new twist to the recurring 
theme that desire is more power ful than possession; by taking up an en-
tire line, Dickinson’s paradoxical “Banquet of Abstemiousness” makes lack 
look and feel expansive, like plenty, an effect reinforced by the line’s extra 
ninth syllable. Dickinson’s use of the word “abstemiousness” might put a 
reader in mind of the kind of chastity and temperance celebrated in Tho-
reau’s “Higher Laws” chapter of Walden, but  here it is not the death of an 
inner animal being idealized; rather, the sheer existence of that appetitive 
inner animal is being celebrated as the source of power ful pleasures. With-
out appetite, poem F1447 suggests, we could not experience the “ban-
quet” of desire that “defaces that of wine.” “Defaces” not only connotes 
obliteration but hints that the appeal of wine’s banquet might be quite su-
perficial (literally, on the surface); the brevity of the line and Dickinson’s 
decision not to repeat “banquet” reinforces that wine’s banquet is paltry 
compared to that of “abstemiousness.”
The poem’s second stanza offers more precise detail about the ideal re-
lationship between “Desire” and “the  Actual”:
Within it’s reach, though yet ungrasped
Desire’s perfect Goal—
No nearer— lest the  Actual—
Should disenthrall thy soul— 132
“Within it’s reach, though yet ungrasped” idealizes and abstracts the mo-
ment in time just before the fulfillment of desire into a kind of general 
princi ple, a suggestive echo of Keats’s “Though winning near the goal yet, 
do not grieve” from the second stanza of “Ode on a Grecian Urn.”133 If for 
Thoreau being in the thrall of desire is a source of limitation, for Dickin-
son to be “disenthrall[ed]” by “the  Actual” is a possibility so painful that 
“the  Actual” must be cordoned off with dashes from the rest of the poem.

Joyful Frugality 
79
Happiness is a  matter of desire, and desire, as John Locke insisted, is a 
 matter of taste: “Though all men’s desires tend to happiness, yet they are 
not moved by the same object.”134 Dickinson’s poems describe again and 
again failures of taste: The feast is achieved, but it is never as delicious as 
the imagination promised. Dickinson’s own taste is therefore for desire it-
self, for the feast of the imagination— for expectation, which tastes better 
than any  actual pre sent or  future consumable. Experiencing “maddest Joy” 
in expectation of food, or delight, rather than its consumption or achieve-
ment is not perverse so much as a legible, contextualizable, if bold and cre-
ative, response to the “happiness scripts” available to Dickinson and to 
many of her female contemporaries.
Critics have become quite comfortable thinking of Dickinson as reject-
ing certain conventional teleologies— the clichés of heteronormative pa-
triarchy, for instance, including traditional roles of wife and  mother, as well 
as many of the expectations for a Victorian female poet— but what about 
the teleology of happiness? As Sara Ahmed argues in The Promise of Hap-
piness, happiness is not something to happen upon or find; it is culturally 
produced and often comes with normative, regulatory power: “What is 
good” may “make us happy,” but when we parse this we find that happi-
ness and claims about happiness “participat[e] in making  things good.”135 
Happiness, Ahmed suggests, reifies par tic u lar “paths” or “scripts” and not 
 others: “Happiness is not simply used to secure social relations instrumen-
tally but works as an idea or aspiration within everyday life, shaping the 
very terms through which individuals share their world with  others, 
creating ‘scripts’ for how to live well.”136 To be unwilling or unable to 
“express happiness in proximity to the right  things” is to be what Ahmed 
calls an “affect alien,”137 and perhaps this is one way we might imagine 
Dickinson—as an affect alien resisting the “happiness scripts” of gender 
and sexuality as well as cap i tal ist imperatives about what it is to be a happy 
 woman: a heterosexual wife and  mother and an  eager consumer of market 
commodities.
Dickinson does occasionally celebrate possession, but even in  these cases 
she seems to be working against accumulation as a princi ple or orienta-
tion to the world. In poem F1267, she meditates on the enjoyment of “Pos-
sessions” in four deceptively  simple lines:
Our own Possessions though our own
’Tis well to hoard anew
Remembering the dimensions
Of Possibility.138

80 
Joyful Frugality
One of the pillars of consumerism is the notion that new possessions 
are portals to new possibilities— new experiences, new forms of self- 
presentation, maybe even new lives and new selves.  Here, instead, the “di-
mensions / Of Possibility” may best be remembered or accessed through 
what we already own. Perhaps also the “dimensions” of plea sure, since 
“Possession” in its 1844 Webster’s definition has a sense of enjoyment built 
right into it, as one of its meanings is “any  thing valuable possessed or en-
joyed.” The speaker calls for us to continually enjoy or trea sure what we 
own (“hoard anew”) even as she recognizes that trea suring what you al-
ready own is difficult (“though our own”). A  great deal of the power of this 
poem hinges on the last line, which is si mul ta neously spare— just two 
words— and expansively polysyllabic; thus “Possibility” enacts how much 
might be contained in a small space.  Because it is linked with “dimensions” 
and with cherishing “our own Possessions,” “Possibility” becomes less ab-
stract and more concrete—it seems like something that might be fathomed 
or even mea sured (the 1844 Webster’s definition links “dimension” with ge-
ometry), and  there is a specific directive for how to achieve it. Altogether, 
Dickinson’s depiction of cherishing what we already possess goes contrary 
to consumerist practice and undermines the essential cap i tal ist imperative 
to “accumulate.”
Dickinson does at times represent desire as something unquenchable 
and as a source of pain. Poem F851 begins with a description that makes 
 human life synonymous with unfulfilled, and perhaps unfulfillable, desire. 
“ ‘I want’—it pleaded— All it’s life—  / I want— was chief it said.”139 The 
poem universalizes desire into the essence of the  human condition, yet, 
paradoxically, to experience desire in this way is to be emptied out, dehu-
manized, transformed into an “it.” In fact, satisfaction of this kind of de-
sire (“That single— steadfast sigh—”) is pos si ble only  after “it” is “newly 
dead.”140 In poem F1311, Dickinson strengthens the connection between 
unfulfilled and unfulfillable desire and  human nature when she represents 
freedom from this kind of desire as transformation out of, or beyond, a 
 human state. “Art thou the  thing I wanted? / Begone—my Tooth has 
grown— ,” the poem begins.141 In the final stanza, it becomes clear that the 
speaker has “grown” beyond the most elemental form of need or desire: 
the need for “the mystery of Food.”142 Such freedom turns out to be liter-
ally inhuman, however; moving beyond the ability to be “goad[ed]” by de-
sire, the speaker “abjure[s]” food, “Subsisting now like God—.”143 Despite 
the divine comparison, such “subsistence”  doesn’t sound particularly sensu-
ous or appealing, given the word’s connotation of bare minimums; certainly 

Joyful Frugality 
81
it requires the figurative death of the  human part of the speaker, which 
requires “Food.” The dash  after “God” that ends the poem further calls 
into question the benefits of the speaker’s new state by raising but refusing to 
answer what God’s “subsistence” is “like.” Thus, the poem si mul ta neously 
invites its readers to imagine the speaker as deathless, timeless, ageless, 
omnipotent, and eternal— above and outside the constituent ele ments of 
mortal existence, in other words— even as it leaves open the possibility that 
the speaker may no more exist than God (whose existence cannot be proven, 
as Dickinson observes in other poems).  Here and elsewhere, Dickinson 
renders the appeal of existing beyond desire doubtful at the very least.
Taken together, Dickinson’s poems deliver consumerism a power ful 
one- two punch: The poems undermine the value of consumption first by 
suggesting that anticipation and desire might be productive of greater joy 
than possession and then by suggesting that it’s pos si ble to take so much 
plea sure in what you have that what you do not have pales in comparison, 
even if it is technically “more.” Moreover, Dickinson disables one of the 
most potent myths of consumerism that keeps  people buying and accumu-
lating: that consumption can fundamentally change the consumer. If, as 
the anthropologist Daniel Miller has argued, most consumerism is about 
bridging the difference between who you are and who social norms claim 
you  ought to be in order to diminish the “discrepancies between the nor-
mative and the  actual,” then consumption is something allied with social 
conformity, not individuality.144 In this context, Dickinson’s famed (and 
sometimes maligned) cele brations of insularity might in fact be helpful. 
For example, in poem F645, she writes,
Exhiliration—is within—
 There can no Outer Wine
So royally intoxicate
As that diviner Brand
The Soul achieves— Herself—
To drink—or set away
For Visitor—or Sacrament—
’Tis not of Holiday
To stimulate a Man
Who hath the Ample Rhine
Within his Closet— Best you can
Exhale in offering— 145

82 
Joyful Frugality
Joy, passion, thrills, cheer: All of  these and more are “within.” We self- 
“intoxicate” to the extent that “The Soul achieves— Herself—.” As the 
poem goes on, the bound aries of inside and outside, which seem so stable 
and distinct initially, are confused with stanza breaks. By the end of the 
poem, the “Exhiliration,” so deeply interior and insular in the first stanza, 
does become peculiarly social; playing on the visual and aural similarities of 
“Exhale” and “Exhiliration,” the last stanza imagines breathy, “stimulat[ing]” 
communion. Like the divine breath of Genesis 2:7, we might enliven one 
another with the life and joy we have “achieve[d]” rather than imagining 
we can buy a self or permanently fulfill our desires with consumption and 
consumerism.
Joyful Frugality for the Pre sent
Learning to enjoy our possessions and, yes, manage desire for commodi-
ties is increasingly demanded of middle- class and wealthy Americans in 
par tic u lar.  These Americans have become ecological debtors, in the sense 
that they have helped draw down the earth’s resources past the point of 
renewal; this debt  will have to be confronted in the po liti cal realm if life, 
 human and not, is to continue to flourish on our planet. Before or along-
side this work, Child, Graham, Thoreau, and Dickinson suggest that many 
of us in the United States must also confront our private appetites and con-
nect them to our public, po liti cal, and ecological failings.
Dickinson and Thoreau help us imagine that curbing consumption 
might be joyful; Sylvia Plath, by contrast, might help us reframe consum-
erism as a death wish. Plath’s “A Birthday Pre sent,” written in 1962, just 
months before her death, ridicules many of our most quin tes sen tial fanta-
sies of commodity consumption. The poem begins,
What is this,  behind this veil, is it ugly, is it beautiful?
It is shimmering, has it breasts, has it edges?
I am sure it is unique, I am sure it is just what I want.
When I am quiet at my cooking I feel it looking, I feel it thinking
“Is this the one I am to appear for,
Is this the elect one, the one with black eye- pits and a scar?
Mea sur ing the flour, cutting off the surplus,
Adhering to rules, to rules, to rules.
Is this the one for the annunciation?
My god, what a laugh!”146

Joyful Frugality 
83
The poem opens with the absolute mystery of the object “ behind this 
veil”— even its most basic features are not known— but quickly shifts into 
certainty about at least some of its qualities: “I am sure it is unique, I am 
sure it is what I want.” The rapid shift in tone between lines 1–2 and line 3 
amplify the absurdity of the speaker’s confidence in the unknown gift’s 
superlative nature and its ability to satisfy her. This absurdity is further 
heightened by the ridiculousness of the gift’s self- important pronounce-
ment in lines 5–10, especially when mea sured against the gift’s description 
of the gift- receiver’s  human shortcomings. The gift receiver, “the elect 
one,” clearly falls far short of deserving “the annunciation” of the gift’s be-
stowal. Her quiet, dull domesticity and adherence “to rules, to rules, to 
rules” is mocked by the gift and perhaps also by the poem. The frugal 
 house wife’s “cutting off the surplus”— a necessary act in baking but also in 
 house hold economy and the management of unruly desire— comes in for 
par tic u lar scorn.
The gift seems at first to be the antidote to a disappointing, spectacu-
larly ordinary life, but ultimately, “A Birthday Pre sent” interrogates the 
common if often unexamined sense that consumption— a lot or a  little, 
generally or of one special item in particular— could fundamentally change 
the consumer, could make a consumer more attractive or happier, could 
make living in a painful world more bearable. In Plath’s poem, this belief 
is violent; by the end of “A Birthday Pre sent,” desire for possession of the 
pre sent blends seamlessly into a desire for death: The one seems to provoke 
the other. The pun of “pre sent”— gift and temporality—is suggestive. The 
speaker does not want to want the temporal pre sent, in which the gift is 
mysterious and unopened; she wants to circumvent desire and possess the 
object, a wish that the poem represents as suicidal. Perhaps more than any 
other single work, “A Birthday Pre sent” represents the death drive of com-
modity consumption, our acquisitiveness despite ( because of?) our clear- eyed 
understanding of its dramatically negative effect on other  people, other 
creatures,  future generations, and the planet as a  whole.
Dickinson and Thoreau work against the idea that consumption  will 
produce transformation or lasting happiness. For Thoreau, consumption 
is what gets in the way of self- transformation and joy; living as a creative 
and po liti cal being is only pos si ble once appetite has been contained and 
controlled. For Dickinson, happiness comes from embracing desire’s ever- 
welling permanence, and transformation happens to the extent that we 
find ways to cherish what we already possess. Thoreau and Dickinson, each 
in their dif fer ent ways, disrupt normative happiness scripts that drive con-
sumption by relocating plea sure elsewhere. Both Dickinson and Thoreau 

84 
Joyful Frugality
are, to return to Sara Ahmed’s term, “affect aliens” unable or unwilling 
“to express happiness in proximity to the right  things.” Walden and Dick-
inson’s poems each reject cap i tal ist imperatives about what it is to be happy; 
neither locates happiness in being a consumer of market goods, in being a 
generator of surplus capital, or in performing the reproductive  labor re-
quired to regenerate the workforce.  They’re anticapitalist killjoys, but contra 
the popu lar and even critical clichés, they are not themselves without joy.
The point is not that we all have to live in the singular modes chosen 
by the historical Henry David Thoreau or Emily Dickinson. Most of us 
cannot, for all kinds of reasons. Rather, the point is that their respective 
rejections of cap i tal ist imperatives and their relocation of plea sure to sites 
other than consumption open up novel possibilities for living— for them-
selves and also for us. The solution to our consumption- driven environ-
mental disaster  will not be found in consumer choice; the source of our 
prob lems  will not be its solution. Shifts in consumer choices do  little to 
bring about the large structural changes that could mitigate economic op-
pression,  labor exploitation, or climate change. Yet we need popu lar ac-
quiescence to the economic shifts that must take place if our environmental 
crisis is to be addressed: Americans in par tic u lar cannot honestly or plau-
sibly demand solutions from our politicians to climate change, pollution, 
and other environmental prob lems when we remain so collectively unwill-
ing to modify our own consumption patterns. The value of Thoreau’s and 
Dickinson’s questioning of cultural imperatives to find plea sure in consum-
ing is not (or not simply) that they might transform our private consump-
tion practices but that their ideas might transform our civic selves into 
selves capable of working for meaningful responses to consumption- driven 
environmental crises.

