73
Aft er a fl urry of translating Emanuel Swedenborg between 1910 and 1915, Suzuki returned 
to the topic of his approach to religion in 1924. It is worth noting that Suzuki described 
Swedenborg’s doctrine of correspondence as “similar to the Shingon philosophy of phe-
nomena.” Th is may explain why he preferred to compare Zen Buddhism not with Sweden-
borg but with Meister Eckhart’s teachings and Francis of Assisi’s life of poverty. In this arti-
cle he also compares the Buddhist paradise, or Pure Land, with the Swedenborgian concept 
of heaven: the land of divine love, attainable by those who rely on the “other-power” of the 
divine will, whereas those with self-love are destined to hell. Swedenborg’s heaven is thus 
more than a location—it is also a spiritual state, consciousness of other-power, that can be 
achieved during this life. So the Swedenborgian and Buddhist paradises draw closer to each 
other than strictly literal interpretations of these religions would suggest.
Th e base text for this essay is D. T. Suzuki, “Swedenborg’s View of Heaven and ‘Other-
Power,’ ” in Swedenborg: Buddha of the North, translated by Andrew Bernstein (West Ches-
ter, PA: Swedenborg Foundation, 1996), 77–86. Notes by Bernstein have been deleted. Orig-
inally published as “Suedenborugu (sono tenkai to tarikikan),” Chūgai nippō, February 3, 4, 
5, 6, 7, and 8, 1924, and later included in Zuihitsu Zen (Tokyo: Daiyūkaku, 1927). See SDZ 
19:634–642.
•
•
•
Swedenborg’s religious philosophy is unfathomably deep; and since it is fairly dif-
fi cult to grasp, few people have made a scholarly study of it. However, when you 
carefully read his seemingly absurd writing with a calm mind, you fi nd that many 
elements become rather diffi  cult to dismiss. In particular, Swedenborg’s Heaven 
and Hell contains profound and fascinating points. Among his many works, this is 
the one most widely read; and having formerly translated it into Japanese, I would 
 10
Swedenborg’s View of Heaven and 
“Other-Power”

74    Swedenborg’s View of Heaven
like to take the opportunity to express my feelings on it, although this essay is 
really no more than an introduction.
Swedenborg does not give a very clear defi nition of heaven. It might be consid-
ered a state aft er death, or it might be that this world, just as it is, is heaven—or 
hell, depending on how you take it. In truth, even among the spirits dwelling in 
heaven, there are very few who can see what heaven is. Because of this, it may be 
impossible to explain to ordinary people like us.
Be that as it may, we can see heaven as a kind of ideal realm with a relationship 
to the material world of the fi ve senses that is one of neither equivalence nor sepa-
ration. Swedenborg uses the word “state” to describe it.
Heaven comprises the good of love and the truth of enlightenment. When good 
and truth return to a state of innocence, they reveal a perfect heaven. Unless one 
enters a state of “no false thoughts” or “artlessness,” even good is not divine good 
and truth is not divine truth. One aspect of this condition is refl ected in the speech 
and actions of children. However, the innocent nature of children is unrefi ned, so 
it cannot be called the genuine state.
As for the source of innocence, it spontaneously fl oods the inner life when we 
completely give up our own thoughts. Doing good, we do not think it good. When 
others comment on it and call it good, that good is not something that arises from 
the self but arises from the Divine. Nothing results from self-power; everything is 
achieved through the addition of divine power to oneself: “Th ose who are in a state 
of innocence attribute nothing of good to themselves, but regard all things as 
received and ascribe them to the Lord . . . and wish to be led by Him and not by 
themselves. . . .”1 All of the highest angels dwell in the purity of this innocence. 
When the degree of purity is low, the angel’s position in heaven naturally falls as 
well. Th e quality of innocence is actually the fundamental principle on which 
heaven’s organization is based.
Because heaven derives from innocence, the fact that the Divine in heaven is 
also innocent is a self-evident truth. Swedenborg occasionally spoke with angels 
and related what transpired. Innocence is the essence of every good, and good is 
truly good to the extent that it has innocence within it. What we call wisdom is 
wisdom only when it arises from this innocence, and the same holds true for love, 
charity, and faith. Th erefore, when they are not innocent, people cannot enter 
heaven. Th e Lord expressed this meaning in the following verse: “Let the children 
come to me; do not try to stop them; for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such as 
these. I tell you, whoever does not accept the kingdom of God like a child will 
never enter it” (Mark 10:14; Luke 18:16). Th e children spoken of here signify inno-
cence. According to Swedenborg, the Bible is composed of many of these symbols. 
Having become conscious of their hidden meanings, he wrote a number of diff er-
ent works. Th is awareness is not something that came from his own mind. He 
personally entered heaven and experienced it as it fl owed from God.

Swedenborg’s View of Heaven    75
Swedenborg’s symbolic philosophy is built on the principle of correspondence. 
Because this principle is one of the major tenets of his philosophy, one certainly 
must know about it to understand Swedenborg. I believe the principle of corre-
spondence originally comes from the idea in the Bible that “God created man in 
his own image” (Genesis 1:27).
Th ose without the perfect good of love and the perfect truth of wisdom cannot 
understand the hidden will of heaven. People have both an internal and an exter-
nal; and not being able to make an adequate correspondence between them, they 
cannot comprehend (heaven’s will). One way to grasp it, however, is through the 
phenomena of the sensual world as perceived through the fi ve senses. All of these 
phenomena contain signifi cance. Th e caw of a crow or the song of a sparrow are 
not simply a caw and a song: there are heavenly signifi cance and infernal signifi -
cance. Th is kind of reading depends on the principle of correspondence. Th ere-
fore, while people are on the earth, they are free to unveil their correspondence 
with heaven according to the nature of their internal enthusiasm. Th at is, this 
world of suff ering can also be considered a Pure Land of tranquil light. Th ose who 
grasp the principle of correspondence stroll through a kingdom of signifi cance.
Heaven, in fact, is composed solely of this signifi cance; it is a place governed by 
pure love and pure truth. Love is warmth and corresponds to the human heart. 
Truth is light and corresponds to the human lungs. Located in the thorax, the 
heart and lungs are distinguished from other organs. When love stirs, the heart 
throbs and heat is released. When truth shines, the breath is regulated and there is 
silence. However, when there is no heat, there is no light, so light is of secondary 
importance. Even without light, there is heat, heat being the fundamental princi-
ple. Dark heat is the fi re of hell, and it is from here that all pain is born. Heat with 
light brings spring to the universe, and it always feels like spring in heaven. Here 
we see the truth of correspondence.
Th e perfect union of love and wisdom is the individual person, and all of heaven 
exhibits itself through the appearance of an individual. Th e full realization of a 
person’s integrity can be seen only in the realm of divine good and divine truth. 
Among modern philosophers, there are those who say things such as, “God is a 
perfect individual. Human consciousness, try as it might, can never seize the sin-
gularity of the individual. Yet it always tries to grasp it, and this longing is fi rst 
satisfi ed upon arrival at the Divine. Th e reason for the existence of this longing is 
simply that the Divine realizes itself in individual human beings.” Can we not see 
traces of Swedenborg in this?
Th e doctrine of correspondence is profound. In terms of Buddhism, it is similar 
to the Shingon philosophy of phenomena. One can also interpret the idea of the 
Pure Land according to the doctrine of correspondence. Even if we say that all 
phenomena interpenetrate without obstacle, we cannot identify hell with paradise. 
Although we can say that the Pure Land’s signifi cance is found in this world of 

76    Swedenborg’s View of Heaven
suff ering, hell, being hell, is not paradise; and Kannon, Amida, Fudō, Yakushi, and 
the eight million gods exist just the same. Th e principle of correspondence cannot 
be divorced from human consciousness. Viewed from the doctrine of correspond-
ence, I believe Shingon teachings on such things as mudras can be interpreted in an 
interesting fashion. If Swedenborg had not communicated with the Christian 
heaven, and had instead mastered Buddhist philosophy, what kind of “hidden will” 
would he have discovered? I believe it is worth engaging in this kind of speculation.
Previously, I noted that the essence of heaven is innocence and that, because this 
innocence cannot be achieved through ordinary knowledge, it must be reached 
through a perfect enlightenment beyond knowledge. What I call enlightenment is 
the perception that we cannot independently achieve good separate from the Lord 
God in heaven. Without this perception, we cannot attain innocence.
Since heaven derives from innocence, its opposite, hell, would have to signify 
noninnocence. In other words, those who believe in self-power without relying on 
other-power will always fall into hell. When my ego’s purpose suddenly arises, I 
shoot into hell like an arrow. Th e purpose of the ego, according to Swedenborg, is 
self-love and worldly love. When the vault of hell is opened, the raging fi re and 
smoke that one sees rising up is what springs from the blaze of these two loves. 
Th ose who are in hell in bodily form are completely consumed by these fl ames. As 
I said before, there is also heat in heaven, the heat of divine love. However, this heat 
is like the warmth of spring, and once this warmth fl ows into the blaze of hell, the 
blaze cools and becomes extremely cold. Th e heat of heaven acts in this mysterious 
way. Flowing from the depths of the Divine is a power that cannot be judged by 
human perception.
Swedenborg was allowed by the Lord to witness hell. A portion of his record 
reads:
Th e hells are everywhere, and their entrances, when looked into, appear pitch black. 
But those who dwell in them think it to be bright. Th is is because their eyes are 
adapted to this degree of light. Th e cave openings fi rst extend inward, and then twist 
obliquely. Some plunge downward into a bottomless abyss, and appear like the caves 
of wild beasts. Other hells seem like the ruins of houses and cities aft er confl agra-
tions. Th e spirits living here are engaged in unceasing quarrels, enmities, fi ghtings, 
and brutalities. Th roughout the scorched city, bands of thieves and robbers swagger 
about. In some of the hells there are nothing but brothels, fi lled with every kind of 
fi lth and excrement. Again, there are thick forests in which spirits roam like wild 
beasts, and where, underground, there are dens into which those fl ee who are pur-
sued by others. Some are wastelands where there is only sand. Th ere are those who 
fl ee as far as such places. In particular, those who contrived intrigues and deceits 
while in the world are driven into the desert, where they must spend their lives.2
I believe there is no one who has written as minutely about the nature of heaven 
and hell as Swedenborg. Dante skillfully applied his art, and he should be 

Swedenborg’s View of Heaven    77
recognized as an exponent of medieval beliefs; but Swedenborg, with an intellec-
tual faculty forged through science and with his amazing power of imagination 
and insight, exhaustively described the spiritual world. At fi rst his writing seems 
ridiculous, but as you read on, you are drawn into it. Although it might contain a 
number of fantasies, it undoubtedly includes many truths as well.
Swedenborg said that heaven arises from love toward the Lord and knowledge 
of the Divine. Hell, conversely, is realized through love of self and love of the world, 
as well as through consciousness of both these loves. Heaven and hell are opposite 
poles. Recognizing these poles, Swedenborg made human beings the midpoint. 
Self-love means grabbing pleasure from others and gathering it only to yourself. 
Worldly love is the desire to make another person’s possessions your own. Th ose 
in the midst of this sort of love may wish to share their own enjoyment with others; 
but since the focus of that motive is still themselves, they do not increase the 
enjoyment of others, but instead reduce it. Swedenborg said he personally experi-
enced this in the spiritual world. Before Swedenborg applied himself to religion, he 
was a prominent scientist, so he did not give abstract explanations. He taught 
through his own observations. Th us, in the spiritual world, he sensed that when an 
egotist merely approached a heavenly society, the level of enjoyment among the 
angels in that society would decline. Swedenborg said the degree of this decline 
was proportional to the intensity of self-love felt by infernal beings. He never 
explained by way of argument or speculation, but with the attitude of a scientist 
describing actual experiences. In this respect, he had a unique worldview.
Heaven is divine love, and hell is self-love, while we, in between, must decide 
our lot for ourselves. Swedenborg called this freedom equilibrium. I fi nd it inter-
esting how his choice of the word “equilibrium” demonstrates that he was a scien-
tist. In any case, we are free and may head toward the love of heaven or love of hell 
as we please. Without free and independent action, true regeneration and salva-
tion are not possible. Without freedom, we cannot act according to our own love. 
Love that fl ows from the internal originates with the Lord; but when we do not act 
from this love, we never attain our true life. Because the external comes from 
memory, it works only through thought, and conceptual living cannot save people. 
In all cases, it is necessary to express the internal will, for it is in this that corre-
spondence with heaven may take place.
According to Swedenborg’s description, there are two gates that people open. 
One leads to hell and the other to heaven. Evil and falsehood fl ow from one direc-
tion, and good and truth from the other. Evil people open wide the gate to hell and 
wantonly accept its fl ow. As for the gate to heaven, several rays of light barely thrust 
through a crack above. Th e fact that evil people also possess the faculties of thought, 
philosophical reasoning, and linguistic expression is due to the power of this light. 
However, they do not recognize that these (faculties) are from heaven, thinking 
them only to be (the properties) of their own reasonable minds. Because of this, the 

78    Swedenborg’s View of Heaven
true nature of these reasonable minds is love for the infernal. All of their thoughts 
are stained by this love and are in darkness. However, they imagine they are in the 
light. Swedenborg entered into and observed the interior of these sorts of people. 
Standing at the entrance to the gate of hell, they smell the foul stench that spills 
out—a stench that induces nausea and dizziness—and laughing merrily, take pleas-
ure in it. If, by any chance, they feel the breath of heaven, these people cannot 
endure the internal suff ering, and with one loud voice cry, “What pain!”
From the viewpoint of human beings, this is a manifestation of free nature; but 
the divine will, which has granted to humans the sensation of freedom, tries, based 
on this freedom, to build the salvation of people through their volition. In truth, 
the desire of people to go to heaven is an act of the divine will, or other-power. 
Again, to have this intention, to be reborn in heaven, is impossible without the 
other-power of the divine will; but from the perspective of freedom, everything 
seems to be the result of the self-power of human beings. Th e reason that people 
must perceive the reasoning of an autonomous will is that, if they do not, they will 
not be able to think about and intend evil and falsehood. A thinking consciousness 
is a condition for this freedom, which allows for the manifestation of an internal 
that tends toward good and truth. Despite the teaching of salvation through other-
power, if we fi rst do not recognize the consequences of karma and the depth of our 
evil passions, other-power can do nothing to help. Th e possibility of listening 
stems from free consciousness.
Th rough the freedom and reason that are granted by other-power, a Buddhist 
recognizes his or her sins and achieves rebirth in paradise, while a Christian gains 
repentance and resurrection. Th e need to repent comes from the fact that we are 
originally in a state of degeneration. Our life is nourished by the heat and light of 
heaven on the one hand, but fueled by self-love and worldly love on the other. 
Th rough these two loves, divine good and divine wisdom are suppressed; stopped 
by various falsehoods and evils, we forget to advance. We are awakened from this 
by the words of the Bible, or in Buddhism, by the name of Amida, the name that 
sounds throughout the ten directions. When freedom and reason are not guided 
by infernal love, but instead turn toward the sun in heaven—that is, the chief 
direction of the Divine—the love and light of the Divine fl ood that person’s inte-
rior to the point of overfl owing, and in this is the reality of regeneration. Th is 
regeneration is accompanied by a heavenly joy. At fi rst, we think this joy is some-
thing natural and do not recognize its origin in the Divine; but the moment of 
recognition fi nally comes, and this moment is perfect enlightenment. We realize 
that various goods and truths stem from the other-power of the Divine and that 
the consciousness of autonomous self-power comes from a blind thought, marked 
with traces of self-love. Without the truth of this enlightenment, there is no real 
regeneration. Th e perfect union of this truth with divine love allows us to lead a 
spiritual life. Th is is said to be the moment when we live the life of the internal.

Swedenborg’s View of Heaven    79
Evil people too are able to discern through reason what is good. Yet, because 
that good has not entered into their lives, their interiors are not illuminated by the 
light of regeneration, and they turn their backs to the Divine. Because Swedenborg 
witnessed this in the spiritual world, it must be true. Imagine here a conversation 
between two people. It appears very intimate, and when you listen to them, it feels 
as if you can discern their internal love. However, viewed with Swedenborg’s 
insight, these two people are standing back to back, and the waves of love arising 
from their inner hearts are dark in color. It looks as if they are crashing into each 
other. Th e internal and external of this world are separated in this way, so that the 
activity of spiritual reason is not clear. But when we enter the world of the internal, 
everything is unconcealed and naked. Th e Bible says, “For there is nothing hidden 
that will not become public, nothing under cover that will not be made known” 
(Luke 8:17). When we recall this, everything is a self-evident truth, says Sweden-
borg. Th is is again the force of other-power.
Th ere is a great deal I wish to write concerning Swedenborg, but that remains 
for another day. He was a Swede who died in England in 1772, that is, 155 years ago. 
He was a man of science until the age of fi ft y-fi ve, and his works on theology, more 
than most could write in a lifetime, span the next (twenty-nine) years. When he 
was eighty-four years old, he predicted the time of his death and accordingly 
returned to heaven.

