Appendix 7
The Barcan Formula
The Barcan formula
◇(∃x) A (x) ⥽(∃x) ◇A (x)
renders an axiom with which axiomatic modal propositional logic can be ex-
tended into a modal predicate logic. The name of this formula refers to Ruth Bar-
can Marcus, who introduced this axiom in 1946 (see Barcan 1946). It has become a
controversial starting point for philosophical discussions, since it suggests an in-
terpretation according to which it entails the supposition (which is not very plau-
sible) that it follows from the fact that it is possible that objects with a certain
property exist that objects (actually) exist which possibly have this property. Ruth
Barcan Marcus herself rejected this interpretation and replaced it with a so-called
‘substitutional’ interpretation. According to the latter interpretation, the Barcan
formula is supposed merely to state that if it is possible that there is a substitution
instance for x which transforms an expression of the form A (x) into a true ex-
pression of the form A (a), there is then a substitution instance for x which trans-
forms an expression of the form ◇A (x) into a true expression of the form ◇A (a).
The substitutional interpretation gives the existential quantifier a reading which de-
parts from the ‘classical’ one and can be applied to non-modalized classical quantifi-
cational logic as well. According to this reading
~ (∃x) A (x) ⊃(∃x) ~ A (x)
does not mean that from a statement of the form ~ (∃x) A (x) it follows that some-
thing, namely x, exists, to which A (x) does not apply, but rather only that from a
statement of the form ~ (∃x) A (x) no true statement can arise by replacing ‘(∃x)
. . . (x)’ with the specification of a suitable singular case, unless by the same re-
placement a true statement also arises from (∃x) ~ A (x). In this way, in place of
the classical assumption that there is for every true particular proposition of the
form (∃x) A (x) an existing object, the substitutional interpretation prefers the
assumption that there is for every such proposition a true singular proposition
even if the object which it treats does not exist.
Yet this assumption is hardly less problematic than the classical one. For sin-
gular propositions which deal with an object that does not exist (or, more pre-
cisely, which does not belong to the domain of individuals, i.e., a “world of
attributions”, which is assumed to be satisfied (see § 20 above)) will not ordinarily
https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110784930-019

be regarded as true (except in the case of certain negative propositions). This or-
dinary view, which agrees with the principle of qualitative existential import, is
accommodated by the definition of the singular categorical proposition I estab-
lished in § 52.
If one places this definition at the basis of universally valid rules and laws of
logic, one cannot expect the Barcan formula to express a universally valid logical
law. One cannot even expect that the expression analogous to the Barcan formula,
H (M I ((′x) A (x), ξ), I ((′x) M A (x), ξ)),
renders a universally valid law of modal logic. Rather, the degree of validity of
the axiom that renders the Barcan formula corresponds at best to the degree of
validity which can be ascribed to the S4- and S5-axioms. (See Appendix 5.)
One can consider the expression (∃x) ◇A (x), occurring on the right side of the
Barcan formula, as an expression of a pure de re modality. For it is a de re expres-
sion which is not (like syllogistic expressions of modality (see § 6 and § 59)) equiva-
lent to a de dicto expression of the same modality. Considered in this way, the
Barcan formula renders the law (which is not universally valid) that the de dicto
possibility which is stated by a problematic particular proposition implies a pure de
re possibility.
According to §§ 31–32 and §§ 64–65, the expression (∃x) ◇A (x) is only an
abbreviation for
‘I ((′x) ◇A (x), ξ)’.
The modality indicated by ‘◇’ here belongs only to the content of a concept,
namely the logical predicate (′x) ◇A (x). It alters nothing in the assertoric affir-
mative form, which the formula ‘I ((′x) ◇A (x), ξ)’ renders as the logical form of
an affirmative proposition. A proposition of this form has existential import that
is unrestricted and independent of its conceptual content. The existential import
of an affirmative proposition is restricted, however, if the prefix ‘◇’ (or ‘M’) is
placed in front of it, as in ‘◇I ((′x) A (x), ξ)’. This prefix decreases its modal-logical
strength. And a proposition of greater logical strength cannot follow from a prop-
osition of lesser logical strength. For this reason, it is not universally valid that ‘I
((′x) ◇A (x), ξ)’ follows from ‘◇I ((′x) A (x), ξ)’, nor that ‘(∃x) ◇A (x)’ follows
from ‘◇(∃x) A (x)’.
358
Appendix 7

