Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen*
Pragmaticism as a logical study of
consciousness
https://doi.org/10.1515/cogsem-2021-2037
Received February 16, 2021; accepted March 26, 2021
Abstract: Pragmaticism states that general rules of action, or habits, are
generalizing tendencies that lead us to action in conceivable situations
describable in general terms. As a method of ‘putting questions to our minds,’ it
assigns meanings to signs in terms of conceivable practical consequences for
rational conduct. Questions are experiments on various ways of finding solu-
tions in thoughts. This paper proposes pragmaticism as a logical method to
study consciousness. In particular, perceptions of relations of differences
create a “temporal contract” between states of minds that give rise to experi-
ences. Peirce’s “dyadic consciousness” is this drafting of a contract between
states of mind, anticipating and occasionally furthering beyond the key notions
of 4E cognitive science.
Keywords: 4E cognition; consciousness; existential graphs; pragmaticism; tempo-
ral contract
1 Introduction: what pragmaticism does
In the Monist for April 1905 I abstractly deﬁne Pragmaticism as the doctrine that the real
meaning, — the intellectual import and value, — of anything lies in the manner of its regulation
of motor reﬂexes; and I there promised that, subject to the permission of the editor, I would next
proceed to answer the question. What, then, according to this doctrine, would be the real
meaning of the word ‘Pragmaticism’? (Peirce R: 1338)
The purpose of this paper is to explain, first, Peirce’s late (post-1905) definition of
pragmaticism, namely, the general theory of meaning that Peirce recounted in 1911
*Corresponding author: Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen, Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia;
and National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia,
E-mail: ahti.pietarinen@gmail.com
Cognitive Semiotics 2021; 14(1): 29–46

to have had in his possession as “pragmatism” since around 1870.1 Second, the
paper proposes that the late meaning of pragmaticism, which Peirce sets out as a
purely logical method, highlights the relevance of mind and consciousness.
In the long intervening years between the earliest and the latest formulations of
pragmatism, Peirce’s preferred way to talk about his theory is that the general rules
of action andreasoning, termed habits, are the “generalizing tendencies” (Peirce CP:
1.409, 1893) that guide agents’ decisions and leads them to act in certain ways in
1 See Peirce’s long letter draft to J. H. Kehler, June 22, 1911:
It was about 1870 — I don’t think it could have been as late as 1872 — that I invented the word
“pragmatism” to mean that way of thinking that regards thinking as consisting not neces-
sarily in talking to oneself [… B]y pragmatism I meant a philosophy which should regard
thinking as manipulating signs so as to consider questions. But attention, whether voluntary
or not, is always an act; and a general conception is a habit, and believing, real genuine belief,
consists in a habit with which one is contented and which one usually recognizes (though not
always) this habit consisting in the general fact that under certain circumstances one would
act in a deﬁnite way, and would be content to do so. And so real a thing is [in] imagination that
not only will a habit be created by acting over and over again in a particular way, but it is
almost as effectually created by repeatedly imagining the same performance in an intense
way, this intensity consisting in a certain stress that one puts upon a mental self-command or
self-imperative at the same time calling up all the essential and all the characteristic cir-
cumstances that belong to the kind of performance that one wishes to inculcate in oneself.
[…] I will venture to guess that you will be surprised to learn by such an experience how true it
is that a habit can be acquired by imaginary practice. Out of such considerations which turn,
as if upon a pivot, about the idea that a thought is nothing but a habit connected with a sign,
one can build up quite a little philosophy which is what I meant by “pragmatism”. I think the
idea was suggested to me by Berkeley’s two little books about vision; and while the idea was a
fresh one for me in the early seventies, I used to talk my friends to death about “pragmatism”.
I never, however, saw ﬁt to use the word in print, and even in 1889, when I had entire charge of
the philosophical, logical, metrological, and various other departments of the Century Dic-
tionary, I decided against inserting the word Pragmatism. (Peirce RL: 231; included in part in
NEM III: 191)
This draft letter of over 100 manuscript pages is a treasure of what may be Peirce’s best ultimate
testimony of his overall thought. Among them is the above recognition of the virtual nature of some
habits (West 2017; Peirce’s “fancied reiterations,” EP2: 413). In dreams, such fancies have been
proposed to play an important role as ‘dream rehearsals:’ distractive and unconstrained
imaginative content adding ‘surprising’ data and noise to the usual training data acquired during
waking experiences (Hoel 2020). The purpose of distractions is to avoid overﬁtting data (failure to
abstract and generalise) in deep neural networks, a problem that occurs when conscious, day-time
reinforcement-based learning cycles are performed. If this is right, dreams perform valuable work
towards habits’ “generalising tendencies” and the agent’s attainment of the “third grade of
clearness” of meanings. [Although dreams as a distraction may prolong, and not remedy, the
issue. Ed.].
30
Pietarinen

certain kinds of situations. Habits map out choices for an action for any conceivable
set of situations “describable in general terms upon every occasion” (Peirce CP:
5.538, 1902).
Furthermore, in Peirce’s 1905 (R: 1334) Adirondack Lecture, he declared that “[t]he
life we lead is a life of signs” — how we behave and how we shape our own conduct
comes not from our actions but from our resolutions to act. We seek to realise not
certain actions per se but general resolutions to act in certain ways in speciﬁc kinds of
circumstances. Our resolutions are signs of action, as they must have sufﬁcient gen-
erality and applicability. Peirce then refers to “habits of action” as such generalised
resolutions to act (Bellucci and Pietarinen 2017; Pietarinen 2005). They refer not to any
individual action or a set of actions as the result of an individual decision but to
general tendencies to act in certain ways in situations describable in general terms.
Pragmaticism was thus set, quite early on, to replace what much later became
our mainstream epistemology, the canonised “knowledge-first” mentality. Instead,
pragmaticism promotes “action-first” attitude to epistemic modalities. All our
knowledge-seeking activities are in fact conducted in terms of question-answer
processes (Pietarinen 2009). The Åquist-Hintikka analysis of the semantics of
questions as requests for information (“Let it be the case/Bring it about/so that I
know … ”) has led to a wealth of works in erotetic logics ever since Whatley-Peirce-
inspired work of Prior and Prior (1955). Peirce anticipated it in his pragmaticism
framed as a logical doctrine (Pietarinen 2006). Conclusive answers to questions are
those that are compelling, so much so that they are logically necessitated by the
questions and their presuppositions; and all doubt is dispelled pro tem. A similar
idea led, in turn, Aristotle to his theory of syllogisms as the special subclass of those
Socraticquestions inwhich the answeristheconclusion that could not beotherwise.
It is equally interesting and non-coincidental that during early 1907, Peirce
modified his earlier characterisation of deductive inferences as apodictic, necessary
inferences. Since then, Peirce discontinued subsuming deduction strictly under
necessary reasoning: in the last lecture of his life in April 1907 (Peirce R: 754) given at
Harvard University’s Emerson Hall B on Logical Methodeutic — the little that is pre-
served and known of its content — Peirce had adopted what may strike one as a rather
surprising view on deduction. In contradistinction to its earlier characterisation as
necessary reasoning, deduction was now taken to be “compulsive reasoning:”
I have hitherto defined [deduction] as necessary reasoning; and no doubt much, perhaps
most, possibly all deduction is necessary. But on reviewing the subject for this talk, it seems to
me more correct to define Deduction as compulsive reasoning. Retroduction seduces you.
Induction appeals to you as a reasonable being. But Deduction first points to the premises and
their relation, and then shakes its fist in your face and tells you “Now by God, you’ve got to
admit the conclusion”. I beg your pardon, with all my heart, I meant to say, “Now by the
eternal world forces spiritual and personal [illeg.]. Necessary reasoning is reasoning from the
truth of whose premises it not only follows that the conclusion is true, but that it would be so
under all circumstances. (Peirce R: 754)
Pragmaticism as a logical study of consciousness
31

This is written in a very shaky hand and one could well raise a question of whether
Peirce, very ill and nearly dying of starvation in these weeks and months, is making
a hasty and unwarranted appeal to psychologistic notions of reasoning that he
earlier would have denounced. However, it is worthwhile not to dismiss the remark
and to give these notions a non-psychologistic gloss.
“Seduction” of retroduction is the quality of conjectured hypotheses that
replaces the vacuum of doubt and wonder and sets the mind to motion by prompting
further inquiry. It is seductive precisely because, in the light of the evolutionary
development of the mind in continuous affinity with the world, the leading principle
of abduction is that the world is explainable. One has no choice other than to
investigate further whether abductively conjectured assertions are indeed matters of
course. A request for information is involved in that imperative, and just as we are
prone to respond to questions presented to us in normal life, active inquirers must
attempt guesses at riddles of vital importance.
Induction is an appeal to our rationality that the tests it tries can decide
whether the hypotheses (reﬁned by deduction into predictions etc.) are on the right
track. In that sense, inductions add to the “concrete reasonableness” (Peirce CP:
2.34, 1902) of our naturally evolving faculties for scientiﬁc beliefs, by accumulating
updated hypotheses about the world.
Now deduction, as the mediating stage of reasoning between retroduction
(abduction) and induction, is, as Peirce in the 1907 lecture explains by an apparently
novel concept, compulsive. It may be characterised as compulsive rather than neces-
sary in the sense in which no living doubt remains in deduction that the conclusion
follows from the premises. “Sceptical tortoises” notwithstanding, deductive conclu-
sions are logically sound (from the truth of the premises it follows that the conclusion
is true) and logically valid (they so follow “under all circumstances”).
Thus, in his reframing of deductive reasoning, Peirce is not in a mental lapse of
talking psychology after all. He is just restating what he by 1903 in his Lowell Lectures
drafts had already concluded and proven (Peirce R: 454, LoF: 2/2). Reasoning in our
elementary logic is both sound (everything deducible is logically true, that is, the
system of elementary reasoning possesses the meta-logical property of soundness)
and semantically complete (everything true is deducible in the system, that is, the
system of elementary reasoning has the meta-logical property of completeness).
Logical consequence signiﬁes that a proposition that holds in all the models is true
(“under all circumstances,” as Peirce states). He then sets up such a system of logical
rules and argues these properties to hold for them (Peirce LoF: 2/1–2).
A sceptic who would deny the necessity of deductive reasoning is thus denying
the power of leading principles that cement the premise-conclusions relationships.
Indoing so,a scepticwouldbe denying thefundamental laws andforcesoperational
in the universe. It is precisely in this sense that deduction is compulsive rather than
32
Pietarinen

necessary: one who dares to deny the evidentiality of deductively inferred conclu-
sions is asserting one’s ignorance of the way the world works.
2 The real meaning of pragmaticism: the
necessity for consciousness as modes of
anticipation
At the same time, in early 1907, Peirce takes a decisive move to fix, for the final time,
his meaning of pragmaticism, now including its true relation to the logic of science.
Having briefly clarified Peirce’s late view of the three stages or reasoning in the light
of his comments in his final public appearance of April 1907, I now turn to the
question of the nature of his philosophy of pragmaticism as it came to be around the
same time. Indeed, also by April 1907, Peirce claimed to have found the “proof of
pragmaticism” (Peirce R: 322; cf. R: 330). The ‘proof’ (a non-demonstrative argu-
mentation for the correctness of the doctrine, see Pietarinen 2011b; Pietarinen and
Snellman 2005) consists of abductive, deductive, and inductive steps. What is more
interesting, however, is that Peirce’s argumentation relies strongly on the interrog-
ative nature of inquiry (Hintikka 2007) and on the framing of the questions in terms of
signs that give their objects as (conclusive) answers to questions. Those objects that
areconclusive answerstoquestionsare theresults ofdeduction, whiletheframingof
the nature of the questions themselves result from reasoning through abduction.
In this rephrasing of the proof of pragmaticism, Peirce is following closely the
pattern of his method of scientific inquiry, though the argument is set up in
semiotic nomenclature. This is to be expected, since by this time logic is fully
conceived as semeiotic (Peirce R: 693), and the method of science is fundamentally
the method of reasoning. In that context, Peirce explained that the mind is a
creatory of signs “in connection with a reaction-machine” (Peirce R: 318: 18, 1907).
Instead of “putting questions to nature” as in the method of experimental logical
inquiry, the method of pragmaticism is to “put questions to mind.” While the
method is the same, the ways in which its objects are conceived differ.
The object of some signs qualify as conclusive answers to questions put to the
mind. By “objects,” Peirce would typically mean “relationships.” In order to
receive answers to questions that concern experimentation of ideas in one’s
thought, one experiments on possible patterns of relationships and hopes to
discover new relationships as answers to those experimental probings (Pietarinen
2010). Questions are experiments on various ways of ﬁnding solutions in our
thoughts.
Pragmaticism as a logical study of consciousness
33

Given this proximity of pragmatism with the logic of inquiry (and semeiotics),
we arrive at the roots of Peirce’s professed proof of pragmaticism. The gist of
Peirce’s argumentation is explained by applying two interpretive tactics: first,
habits are strategic rules of action. Such rules are fallible but prone to self-control,
self-improvement, self-organisation, and self-correction. Second, conceivable
possibilities are real states of affairs or possible worlds or situations that can
become actual, no matter how improbable they may be (Peirce EP1: 131, 1893;
Pietarinen 2008).
These interpretational tactics are derived from Peirce’s own text nearly word-
for-word. “No matter how improbable they may be” constitutes his later 1893
addition to his 1878 pragmatic maxim. As such, the maxim agrees with how
strategies are defined in game theory: not as guides for action under likely or
anticipated situations but as general principles of interaction defined over the full
state space including zero-probable histories (for one has to be prepared for errors
made by other players, including nature, along the course of the interaction).
Second, “the real is what can become actual” was his 1907 signature phrase for the
pragmatic maxim. That statement was given an exact analysis by a quantified
modal logic Peirce had introduced a year earlier, in March 1906, resulting in a
model of how possibilities can be composed with actualities. The composition of
concepts both conceivable and actual can now take place in graphical logic in
continuous (synechistic) fashion.
From these two interpretive bedrocks (the theory of habits as an early game
and action-theoretic account), and the theory of modalities as the theory of
scholastic realism (Pietarinen 2014), we can reconstruct the proof (Pietarinen
2011b; Pietarinen and Snellman 2005). It satisﬁes the three desiderata: (i) It is an
existence proof of suitable game-theoretic solution concepts for perturbed games
that agrees with the fallibilist epistemology (Pietarinen 2018); (ii) it takes into
account the role of modal entities involved in the theory; and (iii) it adheres to
Peirce’s late logic of inquiry and classiﬁcation of signs.
The structure of pragmaticism involves a thorough inventory of Peirce’s late
theory of signs as well as existential graphs (LoF). Is such a theory excellently fitted
for “the man on the street, who naturally hates theory and wants cash returns
immediately,” as James ironically wrote in 1908 as some sort of a corrective to the
emerging canon? By 1907 Peirce had put his finger on the key problem involved in
defining “truth” as “the satisfactory” as F. C. S. Schiller and William James had just
done: “[T]o say ‘satisfactory’ is not to complete any predicate whatever. Satisfactory
to what end?” (Peirce R: 283, EP2: 379).
Peirce, still in Cambridge, felt that now he had arrived at his best statement of
pragmaticism. But he had no way of communicating his final account to the world.
34
Pietarinen

On June 13, 1907, he receives James’ book and immediately writes back an
acknowledgment:
I have just this minute received your book Pragmatism. I just turned to the index and looked
out Peirce, C. Santiago S. — I found a statement of my own thoughts which I can appreciate,
having been laboring and crowding my way for months and months, — crowding through
throngs of technicalities, objections, and stupidities to try to express. There you have put it on
your page with the utmost lucidity and apparent facility. Nothing could be more satisfactory.
(Peirce to James, June 13, 1907)
There is some irony in these sentences, and in the last word in particular. Satis-
factory to what end? Peirce’s story of pragmaticism was, of course, to be told quite
differently from James’ and Schiller’s versions (Pietarinen 2011a). The following
year he rephrases, “If Truth consists in satisfaction, it cannot be any actual satis-
faction, but must be the satisfaction which would ultimately be found if the inquiry
were pushed to its ultimate and indefeasible issue. This is a very different position
from that of Mr. Schiller and the pragmatists of today” (Peirce CP: 6.485, 1908).
A notable chronology emerges from the above comments. Both the novel
characterisation of the three stages of reasoning (as seduction–compulsion-
reason) and his semiotic proof of pragmatism which was included in the long letter
intended for The Nation and The Atlantic Monthly (Peirce R: 318, published in part
in EP2), emerged nearly contemporaneously in early spring of 1907 while Peirce
was lodging at Prescott Hall, Cambridge, MA. This speaks to the importance of
being precise about the textual composition and of the biographical context that
contribute to the interpretation of the evidence from his writings. Here the parallel
emergence of several ideas contributes to the interpretation that Peirce’s semeiotic,
logic, and theory of inquiry, which were nearing their ﬁnal formulations in 1907,
were not only co-evolving perspectives but in fact convergent theories on the real
meaning of pragmaticism.
3 Pragmaticism as a study of consciousness
The relationship of the method of pragmaticism and consciousness can be
preliminarily explained by how Daniel Dennett has described the essence of the
mind: it is what the brain does. Likewise, consciousness is what the mind does, as
its quality of some sort. “What is consciousness” may be too big a question to ask; it
needs to be disassembled in the Socratic fashion into functions, lest one is left
lingering with wonder and doubt on the hard problem. Pragmaticism’s method-
ological pluralism may help when looking for the purposes of consciousness.
Pragmaticism as a logical study of consciousness
35

Moreover, it seems to be a promising and underused model on thought-
experiments as a species of scientiﬁc experiments.2
3.1 Pragmaticism as a definition of purposes
A few years before his final statements of the method of pragmaticism, Peirce took
it to be in the business of defining “what the purpose is a purpose to bring about”
(Peirce R: 478, LoF: 2/2). Purposes, linguistically subjunctive conditionals, are the
possible consequences of an agent’s explorative and enactive active inferences.
They can formally be deﬁned as payoffs of the classes of games that characterise
relevant strategic interactions in problematic situations that the agent encounters.
With these payoffs as goal-directed purposes one can attempt at ﬁnding the
solution concepts (habits of action) for those games. Solutions characterise the
equilibria the game has. Living systems strive for homeostasis through mini-
misation of their variational free energy, so that the principle of free-energy would
be their generalised tendency to act in certain ways in certain kinds of circum-
stances, that is, tendency to act according to habits of reasoning (Beni and
Pietarinen 2021). There is a real connection between intellectual concepts (signs,
generalities and thoughts) and their possible conceivable consequences. This real
connection exerts counterfactual force upon the agent. To get at the meaning of
these counterfactuals, the reality of possible worlds and situations is the right
assumption to be made.
Following such important modifications to Peirce’s earlier formulation of
pragmatism that sprouted from the famous 1878 maxim, the analysis of the
meanings of intellectual concepts is no longer relativised to actual practices.
Language is connected to the world by the mediation of practices of active rea-
soners in the world. Meaning is the reality and generality of habits of action in the
world. By changing our practices and conceivable possibilities as their purposes,
we can change the interpretations of our meanings in any interactive (not only
socio-linguistic) situation. Meaningful discourse arises from common mutual
understanding of what constitutes the common ground. It is this logic that “must
reveal whatever common nature is necessarily shared by the signiﬁcations of all
thoughts” (Peirce R: 296, 1907, added emphasis). Common knowledge is a logical
construct needed for the common ground to emerge, which necessarily entails
some form of awareness, be it concerted/unconcerted forms of consciousness.
2 Champagne (2019) is a rare monographic account that proposes to unravel the tension between
the allegedly non-scientiﬁc ﬁrst-person experiences and their scientiﬁc study of observable effects
by Peirce’s philosophy of signs. The present paper adds to that the late meaning of pragmaticism.
36
Pietarinen

3.2 Firstness and the first-person perspective
At first sight, pragmaticism, as a theory of meaning and purposes, appears to have
less room for explaining phenomena that pertain to the (Cenopythagorean) category
of firstness, such as appearances, sensations and feelings, than for thirdness, such
as thoughts, signs and laws. In addressing the former, Peirce referred to phenomena
and technical terms such as (i) “immediate consciousness of quality” (and not just
any quality per se but a consciousness of it) and “single non-compound sensations”
(and not just any sensation); (ii) classes of signs such as “tones and qualisigns,”
“icons and images,” and “rhemas;” and logical methods including (iii) phanero-
scopic, logical,and diagrammaticanalysisof“logically indecomposableelements of
thought,” “spots and potentials,” “substantive possibilities,” and “sheets of
consciousness” (Peirce R: S-28, 464, 300, 478, 680, RL: 477; LoF).
These are not just “undifferentiated quales” (Peirce RL: 477), qualitative
subjective experiences of what it is like to be, feel, and transcend one’s own
proﬁciencies; what it is to sense the contents of one’s private cognizance. For as
pragmaticism is in the business of ﬁnding out the meaning and purpose of signs
that are of the nature of “thoughts, intellectual concepts and generalities”,
important mental phenomena and experiences involve elements of the category of
thirdness.
Yet a deeper analysis of (i)–(iii) reveals a theoretical structure within which
signs are embedded. Even though ‘conscious experience’ was hardly a household
notion in Peirce’s works, it is the “logic of consciousness” that characterises the
meaning of qualia and “undifferentiated quales” (Peirce RL: 477). In brief, in-
terpreters have their “signs of graphs” (Peirce R: 478, LoF) placed on the “special
area of consciousness” which is similar to the “sheet of consciousness” (Peirce R:
S-28, LoF: 2/2) of existential graphs. That special sheet represents thoughts and
mental experiences in logical terms. Peirce believed that “Objects of Conscious-
ness” such as “the feelings a symphony inspires or that which is in the soul of a
furiously angry man in [the] presence of his enemy” can be expressed in logic. For
this, he devised the “tinctured” modal graphs in particular (Peirce LoF: 3).
Since the above terms belong to the technical nomenclature of setting up the
system of conventions for the logic of existential graphs, which in turn deﬁnes the
semantics and pragmatics of interpreting logical graphs, that process involves
the ambient space of “dyadic consciousness” (Peirce CP: 4.553), which accom-
modates the idea of shared signs. The abundant remarks in Peirce (LoF) testify to
not only how logic is founded upon phaneroscopy (Bellucci 2018; Pietarinen and
Issayeva 2019) but also to his desire for consciousness to arise as a logical subject
for future investigation. Peirce’s late, three-fold classiﬁcation of states of
Pragmaticism as a logical study of consciousness
37

awareness conﬁrms that any meaning one would desire to assign for qualitative
experiences is to derive from logical analysis on the sheet of consciousness.
3.3 Three grades of states of awareness
The nature of appearances, sensations and feelings is explained in Peirce’s late
works in reference to the three kinds of states of awareness that a person has
(Peirce R: 654, 1910). A state of awareness characterises what a person is aware of
during an interval of time, with all that a person might consider to be aware of under
some conceivable circumstances at some other time. To characterise such states of
mind Peirce takes into account both actual and possible and conceivable states,
and the notion of the sign that emerges by abstraction. Thus thirdness, the reality
of possibilities, is involved in appearances, and hence pragmaticism is an appli-
cable method.
A state of awareness lives on three kinds of logical ingredients that a person
finds present in those states.
3.3.1 Monadic (entitative) sheet of consciousness
This is the presence of a “dominant quality of a single state of awareness” (Peirce R:
654), called sensation (quale or feeling-quality) (Peirce R: 502, 1898). Non-
compound, lacking individual identity and related to each other in terms of
likenesses, sensations are essences, and those that inﬂuence other elements of
consciousness are what Peirce calls feelings.
Peirce coined the term quale (which he also termed the feeling-quality and
quali-signs) to refer to sensations that are dominant qualities present in a single
state of awareness; non-compound, simple ingredients of a state of mind. Qualia
lack individual identity, and they are related to each other solely by likenesses or
resemblance. An important passage from a late 1913 letter to F.A. Woods explains
qualia as self-independent, object-free and “undifferentiated” sensations:
I recognize, after a long series of careful experiments, designed to intensify to the utmost one
and another of the apparently elementary psychical ingredients of cognitions while all the
other elements were as nearly abolished as possible, three elementary psychical ingredients.
The first and hardest to find tolerably pure is Sensation or Feeling, which is characterized by
its absolute simplicity. It is that consciousness in which subject and object are not at all
distinguished.
I have only been able to make out this characterization shortly after having been suddenly
awakened from the deepest sleep in altogether strange surroundings having some one
38
Pietarinen

strongly dominant surroundings, when I have been brought to the strange place at night or
put to bed in a state of complete exhaustion. Then after I have begun to recover my senses I
become aware that at first waking my consciousness had been neither an awareness of self
nor of objects as external but a mere undifferentiated quale. (Peirce RL: 477)
Peirce’s characterization differs in important ways from what has defined modern
discussion on qualia. Quale-sensations happen in states of mind that lack the
sense of self-awareness; states devoid of an acknowledgment of first-person
authorities. Such states resemble what one might experience when moving in or
out of the last stages of the NREM cycles; a hypnotic and highly suggestive and
receptive state not unlike the parasomniatic moments in which the mind is awake
or aware of itself within sleep states though only in some altered manner. The fact
that the experience of “the self” arises from the brain slowly switching on has
gained attention in recent sleep research. It is not known what the experiments
may have been that Peirce alluded to in his letter — maybe he had been collecting
data on some unusual states of mind from his own experiences, but no such notes
have been preserved in the Nachlass.
3.3.2 Dyadic (existential) sheet of consciousness
The second ingredient in the state of awareness is to enter into an ambient space of
consciousness that differs from sensations. Activity involved in the perception of
relations constitutes its main character. It is present in mental states of which
agents are aware but is distinguished from sensations by the presence of an idea of
the ‘authorship’ of those states. This plane of consciousness is the ability to regard
mental states as happening to it, states as a thing, as whatever is put before the
mind as an object of those states. A recognition of two sensations as unalike would
be an example of an entering into the state of mind in which a recognition of the
relation of difference takes place. The sensation becomes the object of thought.
Gradually, a conception of an agency arises: someone becomes aware, however
faintly, of the fact that some activity has taken place. This virtually formed agent
now carries out the perception of that relation. As soon as perception takes place,
also the creation of the moment of experience, a relational experience, happens,
which in turn constitutes what one might call “the self” (Peirce R: 654) as the
author of these perceptions.
The self and the object create here a contrast. The object is the object of
awareness, but it need not be anything outside of the state of awareness. The
perception of the contrast, Peirce notices, need not be correlated with any recog-
nition of some physiological change in the states of the brain. Nor do we need to
assume that the object contemplated is real or concretely present in the physical
Pragmaticism as a logical study of consciousness
39

world. Later, when we come to know what the relevant facts responsible for the
recognition of these relations may be, we could say that the objects of those states
exist.
The perceptions of such relations of differences, when increasing in activity and
intensity, create what Peirce (R: 654, 1910) terms a “temporal contract” between
different states of mind. When the contract is sustained in the state of awareness, it
may be called an experience. Peirce’s notion of “dual” or “dyadic consciousness”
(Peirce CP: 4.553) is pertinent to this ‘drafting of a contract’ between one state of
mind and its further incarnations.
It would thus not be quite correct to call qualia, the ﬁrst type of the ingredient
present in a single state of awareness, as an experience or as an experience of an
agent or even as an experience that some ﬁrst-person authority has at its possession.
Experiences are elements of discursive consciousness, the states of awareness
capable of virtual agency formation. Ingredients of the second type are needed for
theformation ofa conception ofanauthorshiporselfhood.Thatconception assumes
that the “temporal contract” has been drawn between the states of minds in some
temporal dimension, not necessarily unidirectional or linearly ordered. It is only
within thestatesofmind acting accordingtosuch contractthatan authority,capable
of real experience, can be said to be a present phenomenon.
3.3.3 Triadic (abstractive) sheet of consciousness
The third ingredient in a person’s state of awareness is the result of a volitional
activity that agents exert upon their own states. By deliberate and intentional
attention drawn to its own mental states an agent may become, for instance,
cognizant of the objects of its own sensations by hypostatisation. Alternatively, the
activity may concern recognition of salient characters of those objects, such as
their relationships, driven by the interests that the object itself has, or perhaps by
some unconscious and unintentional urges involved in the recognition at some
semi-automatic sub-unit levels of an organism. The objects’ agents ability to
discern in these states of awareness (by a sustained focus of attention) need not be
external to the states themselves—the recognition of an increased mental activity
and awareness may itself be the object of those states. It is in the ingredients of this
third type that the essence of the sign emerges: the presence of the sign means
recognition, in one’s state of awareness, that representations involve three sub-
jects: the representation itself, the object of the representation, and the presence of
the sign that interprets the former sign (namely its interpretant).
Peirce divides this third ingredient into three further qualities, which he at one
point called its “perdegenerate,” “degenerescent,” and “generous” forms (Peirce
R: 339, 1898). Perdegenerate thirdness “imparts to its members as might belong to
40
Pietarinen

them though they were not existent” (Peirce R: 339). This concerns the possibility
of a volitional action or force, such as an agent imagining to perform a certain
interpretive act (think of the intended meanings of illocutionary acts, for example).
Degenerescent thirdness is “a thirdness which imparts to its member such char-
acters as involves their brute existence but not their signiﬁcance, or conformity to
general law” (Peirce R: 339). The illocutionary act itself, such as an act of asserting
a performative locution, implies that an agency is in such a state that involves
degenerescent ingredients. Last, generous thirdness “is such as involves the
signiﬁcance of the members of the triad” (Peirce R: 339). It is this third component
that involves the presence of the sign irreducible to any of its further ingredients.
This gives rise to the “indecomposable triad,” and it is such triads that are involved
in signiﬁcance and meaning in the sense that they represent “that mode of being
which is constituted by generous thirdness.” For example, an awareness of the
effect of linguistic conventions concerning the use of explicit performative verbs
would constitute being in this state of mind.
4 Pragmaticism, consciousness, and 4E+
cognitive science
I first comment on Peirce’s above observations. First, “the self” is an idea of the
mind arising in the second state of awareness in which experiences are actively
created. Contemporary philosophers, psychologists and cognitive scientists have
been quite willing of late to concede that the self, as some present and coherent
entity, is “a sop to Cerberus” (Peirce R: 318) lacking both empirical and theoretical
support (Haggard and Eitam 2010). Conscious thought does not look like a process
that needs to be ascribed to a “person” that has some integral unity. At least,
conscious thought needs no singular notion of unity or identity in order to execute
the ofﬁce of an authority of those thoughts.
The second point that Peirce makes is that simultaneous sensations may be
recognised as different because there might be a difference between “what is
remembered and what is anticipated” (Peirce R: 654). As this difference had a time
gradient involved (it concerns measurably simultaneous sensations), it need not
be an experience of some change taking place, although it is a modiﬁcation in the
state of awareness in terms of a recognition of some difference. Cognitive neuro-
scientists call such phenomena predictive consciousness, an element of the
predictive brain (Maldonato 2014). Neurobiologically, the explanation has been
that in order for the brain to create coherent representations of events in its rapidly
changing environment, it invents states that predict both the sources of the sensory
Pragmaticism as a logical study of consciousness
41

inputs as well as their proximal and immediate implications. The respective
mental states are hypotheses about what may happen in the chain of dynamically
unfolding events, even signiﬁcantly before those predictions would actually be
consciously accessed and processed.
I make two further comments on the predictive nature of mental states in
relation to Peirce’s classification. Mental states with hypothetical content may well
be what experiments have proposed them to be. The fast and frugal neural-level
reasoning relates to the mode of inference Peirce terms abduction. In other words,
abductive reasoning reverse-engineers causes from effects. Second, mental
anticipation is a theme that dates back to Hermann von Helmholtz’s pioneering
research on perception. Indeed, Peirce was both well acquainted with and critical
of Helmholtz’s work and the related scientiﬁc advances. Anticipation and the
actual function of perception is to perform inverse reasoning from the presumed
effect to expected causes.
Peirce concluded that consciousness does not process representations. In an
unpublished rejoinder to James’ Syllabus written in 1903, he writes that “Conse-
quently a Thought, being of the nature of a Representation, cannot be ‘present’ to
consciousness. A thought issomething that has to be enacted, and untilitis enacted,
its meaning has not been given, even to itself” (Peirce R: 478, LoF 2/2). Represented
thoughts are meaningless to consciousness.
That in order to be meaningful thoughts have to be enacted certainly resonates
with modern cognitive sciences. But that is not all. Not only need thought to be
enacted, it needs to be embodied. Indeed all thought, being dialogical,3 “is
embodied in signs” (Peirce R: 298). Embodied thought means that there are signs of
which we have knowledge that they will be interpreted as signs. Thought-signs, as
embodiments of thought, are symbols which are “the signs that they are, neither by
processing any decisive qualities nor by embodying effects of any special causa-
tion, but merely, by the certainty that they will be interpreted as signs, and as just
such and such signs” (Peirce R: 298). This is a characterisation of meaning that is
neither internalist nor externalist. One is tempted to liken it to cases such as a
‘synechistic’ interpretation of Markov blankets in the multi-scale integration of
living cognitive systems (Ramstead et al. 2021).
Enacted and embodied, Peirce’s thought-signs propose quite a different
approach to cognitive architecture from those that one has gathered from traditional
representational theories. As a theory of mind that contemplates icons, phanero-
scopy is a theory of undifferentiated sensations. But the theory of signs is, in turn, a
3 “[E]very cognition is a sign as Leibniz and other nominalists have sufﬁciently shown and all
deliberate meditation is of the nature of a dialogue as Plato represented it to be” (Peirce R: 499,
1906; Pietarinen 2006).
42
Pietarinen

general theory of cognition, where the mind is the repository that produces signs.
The sign is the object of the mind (or the quasi-mind). The meaning of signs,
includingthemeaningofthought-signs, isintheirconceivableconsequences, which
are habits of the mind acting in certain ways in certain kinds of circumstances.
This highlights pragmaticism as a general theory of cognition once more. As to
the last point, Peirce came to regard mind to be co-extensive with a “sign-creatory:”
mindis anything that is capable of uttering signs under any “mode of embodying the
thought” (Peirce R: 318: 18). To count as a thought-sign, a thought is to be embodied
and enacted. Clearly, a thought is in Peirce’s philosophy also an extended one. Or,
more accurately speaking, being represented as a symbol by a “quasi-mind,” a
“generous triad” is omnipresent in signs. Are thoughts also embedded, then? Of
course, triadic relations are mediated between utterers and interpreters (organisms
and environments, assertions and their contexts, etc.).
For these reasons, modern 4E-theories of cognition might do well in having a
second look at the key elements of Peirce’s theory of signs, logic and pragmaticism.4
5 Conclusions
[I]t is obvious enough that [pragmatism] is a doctrine that may very easily be carried to
extremes, if one does not mind one’s logic very closely. It is like walking among eggs. [… L]
ogic is the science of regulating your thoughts so as not to be surprised when it can be
avoided; and therefore whatever is said in logic about the modes of being of qualities, of laws,
etc. must be understood as regulative truth in Kant’s sense. (Peirce R: 462, 1903)
There is a close alliance between pragmaticism, logic and cognition: “In the case of
an intellectual concept [there is] an apprehension of a logical meaning”, as Peirce
describes the “kernel of pragmatism” to be (Peirce R: 318: 18) — so much so that
“pragmatism is a purely logical doctrine”, as Peirce had stated in a book review draft
(1904, Notes on Strong, Why the mind has a body?, RL: 427, cf. R: 1463). Pragmatic
meaning refers to how signs having intellectual values are perceived and how they
are described by habits of behaviour that are both concrete and general. The
description is concrete (enactivist-ecological) in the sense that it deﬁnes pragmati-
cism as the theory “that the real meaning, — the intellectual import and value — of
anything lies in the manner of its regulation of motor reﬂexes” (Peirce R: 1338). There
is a connection, at the level of meanings, between signs and a modiﬁcation of both
4 The recent Oxford handbook on 4E cognition (Newen et al. 2018) is silent regarding Peirce’s
pragmatism as the intellectual precursor of 4E cognition.
Pragmaticism as a logical study of consciousness
43

physiology and conduct. The description is also general in that it takes the theory to
assign meanings to signs and assertions that can “mean no more than they can
possibly come to” (Peirce RL: 321, Peirce to Howes Norris, Jr., 1912). These, in brief,
are the senses in which the prospective study of consciousness is both logical and
lived.
Peirce’s lesson is that we have to investigate “practical conduct under all and
every conceivable circumstance, supposing this conduct to be guided by reflexion
carried out to an ultimate limit” (Peirce R: 1482, cf. CP: 6.490). The future conduct is
not only modiﬁed by habits but is guided by profound reﬂective analysis. In order to
carry the reﬂection “to an ultimate limit,” the method is an iterated process of
repeated reﬂections on one’s own reﬂections, up to the formation of generalised
habits of action. This conﬁrmatory process may be likened both to internal feedback
loops from higher-order cortex to sensory areas that integrate sensory information to
behaviour by the increased connectivity of cortical structures (Harris and Mrsic-
Flogel 2013), as well as to external, agent-environment ecological adaptations
through bilateral affordances. In either case, consciousness is a manifestation of
meaning (habit of action) that has robust pragmatic dimensions.5
This paper has proposed pragmaticism as a logical method to study
consciousness. In particular, the perceptions of relations of differences create what
Peirce terms a “temporal contract” between states of mind, which give rise to
experiences. Peirce’s “dyadic consciousness” is the name for this drafting of a
contract between states of mind, one among several other intriguing concepts from
Peirce’s work anticipating and occasionally in furtherance of the key notions of
4E+ cognitive sciences.
Acknowledgments: Support from the Basic Research Program of the National
Research University Higher School of Economics and from the Academy of Finland
(343653) is gratefully acknowledged. Thanks go to Donna E. West and the
reviewers for helpful comments.
References
Bellucci, Francesco. 2018. Peirce on phaneroscopical analysis. Journal Phänomenologie 44.
56–72.
5 Kilpinen (2016: 199) has elaborated on the theme of habits as subject to conscious control and on
the positive correlation between rationalisability and habit-change: “For Peirce, habitual action is
not outside the control of the acting subject’s consciousness. The consciousness is present even in
so radical sense that the habitual character of action is supposed to correlate positively with its
logicality and rationality[…]”.
44
Pietarinen

Bellucci, Francesco & Pietarinen Ahti-Veikko. 2017. Habits of reasoning: On the grammar and
critics of logical habits. In Donna West & Myrdene Anderson (eds.), Consensus on Peirce’s
concept of habit: Before and beyond consciousness, 265–282. Dordrecht: Springer.
Beni, Majid & Pietarinen Ahti-Veikko. 2021. Active inference and abduction. Biosemiotics,
in press.
Champagne, Marc. 2018. Consciousness and the philosophy of signs: How Peircean semiotics
combines phenomenal qualia and practical effects. Dordrecht: Springer.
Engel, Andreas K., Karl J. Friston & Danica Kragic (eds.). 2016 The pragmatic turn: Toward action-
oriented views in cognitive science. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Haggard, Patrick & Baruch Eitam (eds.). 2016. The sense of agency. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Harris, Kenneth & Thomas Mrsic-Flogel. 2013. Cortical connectivity and sensory coding. Nature
503. 51–58.
Hintikka, Jaakko. 2007. Socratic epistemology: Explorations of knowledge-seeking by
questioning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hoel, Erik. 2020. The overﬁtted brain: Dreams evolved to assist generalization. arXiv preprint,
arXiv:2007.09560.
Issajeva, Jelena & Pietarinen Ahti-Veikko. 2020. The heterogenous and dynamic nature of mental
images: An empirical study. Belgrade Philosophical Annual (Trends in Philosophy of
Cognitive Science) 31. 57–84.
Kilpinen, Erkki. 2016. In what sense is Peirce’s habit-concept revolutionary? In Donna West &
Myrdene Anderson (eds.), Consensus on Peirce’s concept of habit: Before and beyond
consciousness, 199–214. Dordrecht: Springer.
Maldonato, Mauro. 2014. The predictive brain: Consciousness, decision and embodied action.
Brighton: Sussex Academic Press.
Newen, Albert, Leon de Bruin & Shaun Gallagher (eds.). 2018. The Oxford handbook of 4E
cognition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Peirce, Charles S. 1911. A letter (draft) to James Howard Kehler, June 22, 1911 (R L 231, R 514, R 515).
Houghton Library.
Peirce, Charles S. 1866–1913 (1931–1958). The collected papers of Charles Sanders Peirce.
Charles Hartshorne & Paul Weiss (eds.), vols. I–VI, Arthur Burks (ed.), vols. VII–VIII.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press. Cited as CP.
Peirce, Charles S. 1866–1913 (1967–1971). Manuscripts held in the Houghton Library of Harvard
University, as identiﬁed by Richard Robin. In Annotated catalogue of the papers of Charles S.
Peirce, Vol. 7, 37–57. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, and in The Peirce papers:
A supplementary catalogue, Transactions of the C.S. Peirce Society. Cited as R.
Peirce, Charles S. 1976. In Carolyn Eisele (ed.), The new elements of mathematics by Charles S.
Peirce, Vols. 1–4. The Hague: Mouton. Cited as NEM.
Peirce, Charles S. 1895–1914 (2019–2021). In Pietarinen Ahti-Veikko (ed.), Logic of the future:
Writings on existential graphs, Vols. 1–3. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter. Cited as LoF.
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko. 2005. Cultivating habits of reason: Peirce and the logica utens vs. logica
docens distinction. The History of Philosophy Quarterly 22(4). 357–372.
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko. 2006. Signs of logic: Peircean themes on the philosophy of language,
games, and communication. Dordrecht: Springer.
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko. 2008. The proof of pragmatism: Comments on Christopher Hookway.
Cognitio 9(1). 85–92.
Pragmaticism as a logical study of consciousness
45

Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko. 2009. The question–answer structures in cognition. In Proceedings of the
10th World Congress in Semiotics, La Coruña: Spain.
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko. 2010. Which philosophy of mathematics is pragmaticism? In
Matthew Moore (ed.), New essays on Peirce’s Mathematical Philosophy, 59–79. Chicago:
Open Court.
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko. 2011a. Remarks on the Peirce–Schiller correspondence. In
Elzbieta H. Oleksy & Wieslaw Oleksy (eds.), Transatlantic encounters: Philosophy, media,
politics, 61–70. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko. 2011b. Moving pictures of thought II: Graphs, games, and pragmaticism’s
proof. Semiotica 186. 315–331.
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko. 2014. A scholastic-realist modal-structuralism. Philosophia Scientiae
18(3). 127–138.
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko. 2018. Conjectures and abductive reasoning in games. Journal of Applied
Logics — IfCoLog Journal of Logics and Its Applications 5(5). 1121–1144.
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko & Jelena Issayeva. 2019. Phaneroscopy and theory of signs as theory of
cognition. In Mohammed Shaﬁei & Pietarinen Ahti-Veikko (eds.), Peirce and Husserl: Mutual
insights on logic, mathematics, and cognition, 199–219. Dordrecht: Springer.
Pietarinen, Ahti-Veikko & Lauri Snellman. 2005. On Peirce’s late proof of pragmaticism. In
Tuomo Aho & Pietarinen Ahti-Veikko (eds.), Acta Philosophica Fennica, Vol. 79, 275–288.
Helsinki: Societas Philosophica Fennica.
Prior, Mary & Arthur Prior. 1955. Erotetic logic. The Philosophical Review 64. 43–59.
Ramstead, Maxwell J. D., Michael D. Kirchhoff, Axel Constant & Karl Friston. 2021. Multiscale
integration: Beyond internalism and externalism. Synthese 198. 41–70.
West, Donna E. 2017. Virtual habit as episode-builder in the inferencing process. Cognitive
Semiotics 10(1). 55–75.
Bionote
Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen
Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia
National Research University Higher School of Economics, Moscow, Russia
ahti.pietarinen@gmail.com
Ahti-Veikko Pietarinen (Ph.D., University of Helsinki) is Professor of Philosophy at the Tallinn
University of Technology, Ragnar Nurkse Department of Innovation and Governance. He
researches philosophy of logic, language and cognition, as well as Peirce and pragmatism. His
journal publications include papers in leading journals such as Synthese, Journal of the History of
Ideas, Semiotica, Perspectives on Science, History and Philosophy of Logic, Linguistics and the
Human Sciences, Studia Logica, Cognitio, History of Philosophy Quarterly, Notre Dame Journal for
Formal Logic, and Pragmatics & Cognition. His recent publications include a three-volume edition
(in ﬁve books) Logic of the future: Peirce’s writings on existential graphs (2019–2021).
46
Pietarinen

