Sergio Torres-Martínez*
The semiotics of motion encoding in Early
English: a cognitive semiotic analysis of
phrasal verbs in Old and Middle English
https://doi.org/10.1515/sem-2019-0104
Received September 26, 2019; accepted October 7, 2020; published online March 27, 2023
Abstract: This paper oﬀers a renewed construction grammar analysis of linguistic
constructions in a diachronic perspective. The present theory, termed Agentive
Cognitive Construction Grammar (AgCCxG), is informed by active inference (AIF), a
process theory for the comprehension of intelligent agency. AgCCxG defends the idea
that language bear traces of non-linguistic, bodily-acquired information that reﬂects
sémiotico-biological processes of energy exchange and conservation. One of the
major claims of the paper is that embodied cognition has evolved to facilitate
ontogenic mental alignment among humans. This is demonstrated by the results of a
corpus study in which the patterns of association between verbs, the particle UP and
argument structure in Old and Middle English have been studied. The conclusion is
that, similar to biological systems, the linguistic sign system displays patterns of
equilibrium and non-equilibrium. In other words, while in Old English usage near
equilibrium was reached through the use of a conservative set of constructional
semiotic templates (attachment patterns), associated with motor modalities, Middle
English displays high rates of randomness resulting in a less stable, yet distinct,
system of constructional attachment.
Keywords: active inference; agentive cognitive construction grammar; construc-
tional attachment patterns; diachronic construction grammar; Early Englishes;
phrasal verbs
Still missing the gist of cognition: That the body, and not the brain alone, is predictive and obeys
entropy reduction rules that are not given, but earned at every step.
(Sergio Torres Martínez, 2023, response to Adele E. Goldberg and Gary Marcus on Twitter)1
*Corresponding author: Sergio Torres-Martínez, Universidad de Antioquia, Medellin, Colombia,
E-mail: surtr_2000@yahoo.es. https://orcid.org/0000-0002-8823-1676
1 https://twitter.com/SergioTorresM71/status/1625166592467169285?s=20 (accessed 5 March 2023).
Semiotica 2023; 251: 55–91

1 Introduction
The present paper departs from a basic principle for the conceptualization of lan-
guage as system: That physical processes governing open biological systems reach
deeply into the linguistic sign system. In the particular case of phrasal verbs (e.g.,
come up, get in, come up with, etc.), I argue that these constructions are motivated by
biological constraints that are reﬂected in the linguistic selections made by speakers
to reconstruct speciﬁc events. This view is informed by Active Inference (henceforth
AIF), a process theory, adopted by diﬀerent disciplines (e.g., computational neuro-
science, Clark 2013; Friston 2005, 2010; Predictive Processing, Clark 2008, 2013; or
mathematical frameworks such as the Free-Energy Principle, Friston 2010, 2019), that
“formalizes perception as inferring the state of the world given sensory data through
minimization of variational free energy” (Da Costa et al. 2021: 2). Among other things,
AIF states that, in order to reduce entropy (that is, systemic disarray leading to
collapse), living organisms need to apply statistical predictions of the state of the
world enabling them to cope with surprise (aka free energy).2 This endless perceptual
loop is captured by speciﬁc modalities (interoception, exteroception, proprioception,
or visceroception) in a Markov blanket (Friston 2010; Pearl 1988),3 and further
organized by a modular structure of neuronal networks (e.g., Corcoran et al. 2020).
The result is the emergence of a model of the world that is constantly updated to suit
the organism’s needs.
1.1 The contribution of the present theory to diachronic usage-
based research and semiotics
Diachronic Construction Grammar (DCxG, e.g., Barðdal 2009; Barðdal and Chelliah
2009; Barðdal et al. 2015; Bergs and Diewald 2008; Bybee 2013; Diewald 2020; Fried
2 The term surprise was coined by Friston (2009, 2010) to refer to the way a living system copes with
high or low discrepancies between expected and new sensory data. This is captured by the standard
information-theoretic log-probability measure −1n p(ϕ). Here, p(ϕ) represents the probability of
encountering speciﬁc sensory data ϕ in an environment. This quantity is large if the amount of new
information is bigger than expected, and zero if it correlates with expected patterns (probability 1).
3 An important distinction is required here. While Pearl’s formulation of a Markov blanket is used
purely for statistical purposes, Friston’s Markov blanket is deﬁned as a true boundary between
internal and external states of a system, similar to a cell’s membrane (Allen and Friston 2018: 2474). In
this paper, a Markov blanket is not a boundary. It refers to the dynamic inﬂuence (energy exchange
momentum) of an agent on an environment, whereby the system and the world can be distinguished
from each other (the system does not possess a distinct boundary itself).
56
Torres-Martínez

2009, 2013, 2015; Smirnova 2015; Sommerer and Smirnova 2020; Traugott and
Trousdale 2013; Trousdale and Norde 2013) departs from four basic assumptions:
–
Linguistic knowledge is composed of form-function pairings (constructions) at
diﬀerent levels of complexity and abstractness.
–
There is no distinction between lexis and syntax.
–
Constructions are learnable, not innately-given. In this sense, language is usage-
based, learned through context-driven experience based on frequency and
entrenchment.
–
All linguistic knowledge is stored in a constructicon.
In addition, DCxG introduces two mechanisms for the analysis of language change,
namely constructionalization and constructional change. According to Sommerer
(2018: 2) constructionalization entails “the emergence of a new schematic, mostly
procedural, form-meaning pairing which previously did not exist in the con-
structicon.” This deﬁnition is, however, not without problems, since “issues with
constructionalization arise from its ambiguity, because constructionalization refers
simultaneously to the processes surrounding the creation of a new node and the
point of node creation itself” (Flach 2020: 46). Constructional change refers to formal
or semantic change occurring at diﬀerent stages that do not aﬀect a speciﬁc node
(Traugott and Trousdale 2013: 26). As we can see, the main problem with these
concepts resides in the idea that constructions, and not the relations they entertain,
are organized in semantically-motivated networks that emerge and become
entrenched through usage, and, eventually, may become obsolete and die out.
Furthermore, since the very notion of construction is far from being uniﬁed under a
single set of binding criteria,4 it is diﬃcult to systematize the methods for identifying
speciﬁc constructions. The most serious shortcoming, however, is that the reasons
for the productivity of some constructions and the obsolescence of others are not
convincingly explained by DCxG beyond frequency criteria (see Gregersen 2018 for a
discussion). Along the same lines, DCxG does not explain the relation between mind
and language. As is the case in synchronic construction grammar, DCxG only says
that language is in the mind of speakers, which is of little use to position its cognitive
claims beyond the role of a constructicon as a learned inventory of symbols stored
in the brain. Another problem is the idea that similarity among constructions is
enough to postulate polysemy networks. For example, GIVE verbs are said to stem
from a “prototypical verb sense” that has been extended through usage to more
specialized contexts (Goldberg 1995, elaborating on Pinker 1989, and Green 1974).
4 For example, construction grammars, e.g., Radical Construction Grammar (Croft 2010), Cognitive
Construction Grammar (Goldberg 1995, 2019), Sign-based Construction Grammar (Sag 2012), diﬀer in
their criteria for positing constructions.
The semiotics of language change
57

Notwithstanding, this appealing claim cannot be used as a proof of the psychological
reality of constructions, which has resulted in criticisms of CxG research as an
example of “the common presupposition that abstract mental representations
correspond to persistent, stored summary representations” (Vandekerckhove et al.
2013: 48). Moreover, experimental evidence shows that form-meaning pairings
departs from a simplistic assumption, namely, “that all linguistic knowledge is
represented in the same format” (Divjak et al. 2022: 26). Expectedly, traditional
Construction Grammar has failed to provide cogent response to the role of speakers
in the construction of meaning through language. For example, Construction
Grammar has proposed two solutions to the characterization of English modals in
English: one of them, defended by Hilpert (2013), states that English modals meanings
can be devised on the bases of collocation preferences over time. Such collocations,
so he states, would introduce systematicity to the classiﬁcation of constructions by
introducing a connectionist view that stresses the meaning of modals through their
connections to other lexical items. This move seeks to bypass the syntactic paradigm
in construction grammar whereby come constructions possess “slots” into which
speciﬁc lexical items should be placed. In other words, English modals, traditionally
considered as lexical items, do not easily ﬁt the syntactic predictions of CxG. Unlike
Hilpert, for whom collocations are only those words coming immediately after the
modal, Cappelle and Depraetere (2016) view the collocational aspect of modal con-
structions as the result of an extended collocational phenomenon integrating more
elements to the left and right of the modal. The approach here is simply that, by
identifying speciﬁc collocations associated with a speciﬁc modal, an inventory of
modal constructions can be reconstructed, which, in addition, may shed light on the
patterns of constructional storage proﬁles of speakers. In this sense, Cappelle et al.
(2019), predict that the identiﬁcation of unfamiliar meanings is facilitated by the
context in which a modal occurs, which, in addition, deﬁne the pragmatic function of
many modals. Following this reasoning, Leclercq (2022), departing from the holistic
hypothesis, has concluded that modals can be identiﬁed as part of n-grams, that is,
corpus-identiﬁed linguistic strings containing a modal, which, so he states, expands
the view that modals should be regarded as formulaic sequences that reveal how
speakers tend to use particular modals along with identiﬁable collocations. While I
agree that the semantics of modals cannot be properly disambiguated from the
positing of lexically-driven meanings, the idea that a subset of modals prime collo-
cations (that can be further conceptualized as constructions) cannot be successfully
determined by a corpus identiﬁcation. Indeed, n-grams and formulaic sequences are
not overlapping concepts, nor is formulaic representation a uniform phenomenon
(see Durrant and Doherty 2010) separated from idiosyncratic speaker decisions.
Therefore, corpus identiﬁcation, however the method used, cannot accurately deﬁne
whether frequent phrasal fragments are represented holistically in the speaker’s
58
Torres-Martínez

mind (see Jiang and Nekrasova 2007; Nekrasova 2009). One solution to this is to deﬁne
a strong theoretical basis from which to postulate usable hypotheses informing
research. Inevitably, one problem with this characterization of modals is that
identiﬁable collocations in a corpus do not reveal the psychological reality of such
strings, since modality requires speakers to push the boundaries of discourse to
become involved in the deﬁnition of events and participants. Thus, the idea that
speakers make use of either semi-idiomatic or fully lexicalized phrasal sequences,
instead of abstract constructions, does not provide a useful means to devise a
cognitive map that reveals the ways language is connected with the speakers’ minds.
As I have shown elsewhere, the agentic proﬁles of language use can be identiﬁed in
large corpora only when some suitable theoretical premises are observed. For
example, if we deﬁne constructions as triads (rather than dyads) of form-function
and intelligent agency, we are in a better position to pin down the semantics of
modals in speciﬁc contexts beyond the coarse mapping of collocational preferences
in a corpus (see Torres-Martínez 2020). Further, when the tendencies of construc-
tional attachment are properly identiﬁed, these constructions can be characterized
not merely as frequency-based strings (e.g., Hilpert 2013).
1.2 The role of speakers in the construction of meaning
through language
At this point it is evident that, instead of relying on a rigid inventory of combinable
symbolic learned constructions (e.g., Cuneo and Goldberg 2023) to make up meaning,
speakers engage in predictions about linguistic outcome in order to reduce uncer-
tainty and reinforce their agentive status in a context of communication. This is
facilitated by semiotic templates termed herein constructional attachment patterns
(CAPs), that is, hypothesis-driven semiotic relations among constructions (see also
Subsection 1.3.2). A good example of this is the way speakers bypass acceptability
constraints in order to deal with complex syntactic strings. Even though acceptability
has been invoked as a criterion deﬁning ﬁller-gap selections, that is, the use of
speciﬁc words along with syntactic arrangements (e.g., Ambridge 2015; Ambridge
and Goldberg 2008), the decisions made by speakers are not based on the form of a
construction,5 but the need of combining a set of constructions in a given manner to
5 The reason is that it is those patterns that have been experienced often enough which have a
psychological reality and not those units (constructions) “that are well-suited to linguistic de-
scriptions of language” (Samuel 2020: 1, pagination added). Therefore, constructional attachment
patterns, and not constructions themselves, become activated as a result of embodied cognitive
selections in a context of usage.
The semiotics of language change
59

create adequate communicative conditions following speciﬁc models of anticipatory
behavior (see Sims 2023). Seen in this light, it becomes apparent that many of the
examples of ill-formedness presented as evidence for, for example, island con-
straints (especially question ﬁller-gaps) in the literature are orthogonal to or at odds
with speaker intuition.6 This is the case of the example used by Ambridge and
Goldberg (2008: 358):
(1)
*Who did he just read the report that was about _?
According to the authors, the language imposes inevitable constraints to the above
attempt to extract the information about the person referred to in the ﬁle (the object
of the action, that is, the undergoer):
Imagine the President was given an incriminating top secret FBI ﬁle about a person who worked
closely with him. Watching him storm out of the room, the people gathered may well wonder
who the report was about. (Ambridge and Goldberg 2008: 357)
However, a more expeditious way to start reconstructing the event in question is to
focus on the precursor event (the actions of the person in question leading to the
president’s reaction), rather than the president’s actual reading of the report. This is
a process of event hierarchization whereby an utterance is split into a precursor
event domain and a commented event domain:
[{E1 (A did/experienced Bprecursor event)}/E2 (C experiences D)commented event]
PRECURSOR EVENT DOMAIN
Agent 1: The president reads a ﬁle [background] QUD what did the president do?
Agent 2: The content of the ﬁle agitated him [background] QUD What caused the president’s
reaction? [focus unknown]
Agent 3: The ﬁle was about someone QUD who was the ﬁle about? [topic unknown]
COMMENTED EVENT DOMAIN
Agent 3: The reaction of the president reveals that someone did something wrong
Why did the president react like that? [topic unknown]
6 The quest for “objective native speaker judgements” corroborating some theoretical claims be-
comes even more opaque when one realizes that speaker use is not as constrained as predicted by
linguists, as is the case, for example, in Chinese (see Myers 2012: 448).
60
Torres-Martínez

The event-based analysis is advantageous in that it provides a framework for the
comprehension of stance, intention, beliefs, processing constraints, as well as
discourse, without there being a need to reduce agentive relations to well-
formedness or acceptability on the basis of standardized linguistic samples. As we
have seen, the infelicity of constituent “extraction” results from a wrong reading of
the agentive relations active in the precursor event domain. Therefore, a suitable
WH-extraction of B would read like this:
(2)
What did the person the president just read about [actually do]?
This is not merely a paraphrase, but an appropriate linguistic reconstruction of the
event aimed at reducing uncertainty conditions (in terms of event disambiguation).
It also sets conceptualizers on the right track to identifying a set of causes, which, of
course, requires a proﬁling of the subject:
(3)
Who is the person the president just read about _ [in the report]?
As shown in Figure 1, events referring to the person being talked about prime WH-
extraction (agent mapping), which downplays the current event deﬁned by the
president’s reaction (commented event). An additional layer in the process of event
disambiguation involves the deﬁnition of object-subject relations (precursor event).
In other words, what people would be more likely interested in is not the president’s
reaction per se, but the reasons why the behavior of the person referred to in the
report have produced the reaction. This is in line with the idea that source-goal event
structures (privileging conceptually peripheral elements encoding either explicit or
implicit movement) are “more susceptible to communicative factors than those
elements which are conceptually privileged (i.e., goals)” (Do et al. 2020: 1).
Inevitably, this is in contrast to the Backgrounded constructions are islands
hypothesis (BCI, Goldberg 2006) which seeks to provide “the most viable alternative
to innate island constraints,” (Phillips 2013: 65), since discourse constraint criteria
are not suﬃcient by themselves to account for speakers’ processing of unbounded
dependencies. To progress beyond this point, we need to acknowledge that the focus
domain is not simply what is “informative,” but, essentially, what is perceptually
salient in terms of agentive-driven event reconstruction. On this view, ﬁller-gap
relations draw on the saliency of the subject argument (topic, indispensable for the
reconstruction of past events) which connects more explicitly with the addressee’s
world knowledge in terms of what is doable by someone/something in relation to an
existing experiential frame (involving object-agent mappings). Therefore, the
persistence of previously acquired knowledge involving perceptual and cognitive
processing “continues to be inﬂuenced by a previously acquired predictable
transitional probability structure even after that structure is removed” (Kóbor
et al. 2020: 10).
The semiotics of language change
61

As we can see, the present theory introduces some criteria for the conceptual-
ization of constructions that includes insights from cognitive science, semiotics, the
philosophy of biology, physics and theoretical neuroscience. As I shall indicate in the
next sections, a good way to avoid the conundrum of deﬁning constructional change
in a diachronic perspective is to focus our attention on the ways constructions
connect to one another and the ways language reﬂect the dynamics of biological
systems. In order to do this, it is necessary to see language in relation to broader
cognitive processes occurring in the mind of the speakers. Therefore, the main
theoretical claim of the embodied cognitive theory of mind introduced in this paper
is that embodied cognition cannot be reduced to “brain cognition” and that concepts,
and the words we use to talk about them, emerge as a result of biological memory and
the agents’ need to cope with ambiguity and uncertainty. In the case of the diachronic
corpus study introduced in Section 2, we will see that diachronic change cannot be
viewed as a process occurring in the linguistic sign system only. Hence, the idea that
constructional schematicity and productivity are the sole criteria by which to
Figure 1: CAP-driven mapping of events in islands.
62
Torres-Martínez

measure linguistic change diachronically (e.g., Perek 2020) needs to be revised.
Clearly, a lot needs to be said about how biology shapes cognition and how agentive
embodied cognitive processes are encoded in language. Moreover, the dynamics of
equilibrium and non-equilibrium exhibited by biological system needs to be taken
into consideration for the analysis of language change. In this sense, I argue that
hypothesis-driven patterns of constructional assembling (constructional attachment
patterns), and not constructions per se, are responsible for the stabilization and
systematization of language as an agentive tool. Moreover, I claim that the con-
struction of experience is not conﬁned to the brain, but stems from the interplay of
body, brain, and environment (the extended mind). As we will see, the role of lan-
guage in this continuity is to facilitate processes of mental alignment among speakers
through the reconstruction of shared bodily-acquired experience. The branch of CxG
emerging from this theory of mind is termed Agentive Cognitive Construction
Grammar (Torres-Martínez 2015, 2016, 2017, 2018a, 2018b, 2019, 2020, 2021a, 2021b,
2021c, 2021d, 2022a, 2022b, forthcoming, accepted).7 As we have seen, some relevant
characteristics of this theory are the reduction of grammatical formalism, the focus
on constructional patterns rather than constructions, the view of constructions as
partially deﬁned by perception, biological memory, and predictive processing, the
non-representational character of linguistic knowledge (language is embodied), and,
ﬁnally, that language is a predictive tool inextricably bound up with the action of
agent conceptualizers in the world. In semiotic terms, it is implied that there is more
to predictive semiosis than the mechanistic reorganization of signs through biolog-
ical coding (e.g., Barbieri 2013). Inevitably, a sort of semiotic scaﬀolding requires the
inclusion of signals as part of a genuine process of objective inference (contra
Vidunas 2021).
1.3 On embodiment, (bio)semiotics and the triadicity of
constructions
1.3.1 Embodiment and (bio)semiotics
A leitmotif running through the whole of the processes involving the ability to
predict, reformulate, continually adjust to and act to survive, is that life is shaped by
7 Agentive Cognitive Construction Grammar is a theory of language learning, processing and use that
provides a solid conceptual structure from which a number of predictions can be made. Importantly,
this contradicts the idea of theoretical framework, postulated in Michaelis (forthcoming), as a model
for construction grammars, since frameworks cannot oﬀer consistent tools to assess the ontological
status of its conceptual objects.
The semiotics of language change
63

uncertainty and that predictive behavior is modeled by forms of inference that need
to be gathered and collected into closely-knit behavioral patterns aﬀecting and
inﬂuencing both the environment and other species. It will therefore help to
distinguish between the body of doctrine (as it were, that is, semiotics), and the
collected phenomena to be explained (living organisms) in order to formulate the
right questions regarding the integration of biological and semiotic processes. Yet,
this explanation should not come from (bio)semiotics itself, but from the discipline it
is meant to assist (Torres-Martínez 2021a). Semiotics (an activity of clariﬁcation) thus
operates at the level of what holds universal for all phenomena by providing con-
ceptual tools (this is why biosemiotics cannot deal with just the “biological dimen-
sion” of semiosis), while science, so it is expected, needs to use these tools in order to
ﬁnd what lies beneath phenomena (however evident the may be) and provide
plausible explanations (by oﬀering conﬁrmation and veriﬁcation). Certainly this
would not require the use of “biosemiotic concepts,” nor the creation of a “research
program that may complement or eventually, in the future, even displace [for
example] the molecular paradigm” (Emmeche 1999: 275).
The implication of this is that the character of an event is of paramount
importance in terms of the processes at play during the perception. To put things
picturesquely, what we perceive is not a collection of contingent objects extracted
from the semiotic ﬂow, but a Given, a pure event of perception, a phenomenal
experience “dependent on the agency of autonomous structures and mechanisms
acting in space and time” (Hoﬀmeyer and Emmeche 1991: 118).8 Thus, the type of
embodiment defended in this paper is radical and clearly opposes current amodal,
8 Some biosemioticians have tried to connect the works of Jakob von Uexküll with the ecological turn
in cognitive sciences, especially with the works of Gibson (1966, 1979): “Uexküll’s ego-tone we would
now call qualia; his meaning-carrier properties of objects are the precursors of Gibson’s … sensori-
motor aﬀordances for sensing the world” (Favareau 2009: 89). However, the suggested theoretical
priority is ungrounded. Apart from the fact that Gibson never mentions von Uexküll in his works, it is
well known that Gibson “began his core enterprise working on the practical problems of ﬂying
airplanes …” (Mace 2015: xxvii). Indeed, the term “ecology,” as a precursor to the Gibsonian
ecological psychology, is more plausibly connected with Ernst Haeckel’s Generelle Morphologie der
Organismen (1866: 286). Moreover, the Peircean synechism underlying this rhetorical strategy
(whereby continuity, rather than fracture or disruption, is embraced) is an uncompelling, unmoti-
vated, and unconstrained reading of semiotics, since sign relations are not determined a priori by the
structure of a sign system. Thus, “the presence of a certain semiotic state x does not need to correlate
to a state y in a diﬀerent species in the future, as x says nothing about y” (Rodríguez Higuera 2019:
418). As a result, “thinking matter” ﬁnds its completion in the act of being there for an agent, and not
as the embodiment of a set of an invisible and indivisible “semiosis within the bodies of organisms”
(Cobley 2016: 6). This conceptual error is echoed by Delahaye (2019: 103): “I believe that the more an
individual is subjected to complex processes, the more important the manifestations are (not
necessarily visible, but important nonetheless) and the more it impacts them on a mental and
physical level.”
64
Torres-Martínez

neo-embodied approaches (e.g., Garcea and Mahon 2012; Lupyan and Winter 2018).
The main claim of neo-embodied approaches is that concepts are purely abstract,
symbolic units of sense existing in the brain and that enter in interaction with
sensorimotor systems (Mahon and Kemmerer 2020: 238). However, perceptual
knowledge may not be located exclusively in the brain, but extended to the envi-
ronment and provided by speciﬁc perceptual maps not dependent on the interaction
with dedicated brain areas.
The present view of embodiment thus defends a non-linear (a-historic), non-
integrationist (exclusively relational) model of niche construction by biological or-
ganisms. According to this, biological systems are disruptors of their eco-niche,
rather than passive repositories of ecologically-shaped features by a “milieu,” that is,
“the part of the external world that aﬀects animals” (Brentari 2015: 63; quoting von
Uexküll). Eco-disruptive processes of environment modiﬁcation and co-construction
(eco-disruptive semiosis) are driven by the organism’s imperative to exhaust, rather
than preserve, environmental conﬁgurations. Thus, harmonious linear meaning-
making in a “sentient togetherness” (Kull and Favareau 2022) is not a true biological
imperative. Balance is hence a result of the combined action of diﬀerent organisms
competing for space and resources through the addition of speciﬁc features that
reduce the impact of extraneous phylogenetic innovation introduced by open bio-
logical systems. This sort of “feature war” is characteristic of system reciprocal
relations which are not determined, as already noted, by a metaphysic semiotic
imperative mysteriously propelled by a causalis in futuro action of signs (e.g.,
Favareau 2021). The present posit thus assumes that what shapes organisms and
biological distinctiveness is not a one-to-one relation with their environment driven
by choice (e.g., Kull 2018), but the interactions providing organisms with resources
for successful environmental adaptation, as well as evolutionary trajectories aimed
to defeat competing adaptive strategies.
1.3.2 Constructional attachment patterns
As previously noted, linguistic content encodes multisensory information organized
and distributed by specialized Constructional Attachment Patterns (CAPs). CAPs are
hypothesis-driven semiotic relations among constructions that are shaped onto-
genically as an alignment prior for a type of reality reconstruction based on
embodied representations (ER). This is captured by the formula below:
ER = r + a
where r stands for reenactment routines activated by the aﬀordances of objects and
entities in the world (Gibson 1966, 1979). For example, “to run out of wiggle room”
expresses a negative-aﬀordance relation whereby an agent is limited to move freely
The semiotics of language change
65

as a result of a lack of suﬃcient space (the space being the negative aﬀordance, which
is translated metaphorically as the impossibility to undo something or change what
you have said).
CAPs are crucial for the emergence and further entrenchment of form-function
symbolic relations in the form of constructions in the linguistic system (LS). CAPs also
express how speciﬁc mental simulations, e.g., speed simulations (SM), whereby
speciﬁc action verbs are selected to accommodate a perceived speed rate “are not
simply shallow re-enactments, but operate at a ﬁne grain according to speciﬁc
properties about real-world interactions” (Speed and Vigliocco 2014: 381):
(1)
a.
The car silently slithered away from the curb.
b.
Fog rippled through the ravines.
c.
He wearily pulled himself into the car.
Along the same lines, embodied content is reﬂected in abstract action sentence
processing (AASP), whereby “sensorimotor processes [are] recruited during abstract
action language comprehension” (Schaller et al. 2016: 19):
(2)
[Caused motion: X causes Y to move from/to Z]
a.
The rear tires chewed up the ground.
b.
Experience it’s all those things that build up who you are.
c.
He turned over his problems to her wife.
In addition, CAPs reﬂect the evolution of spatial perspective taking (SPT), a type of
sensorimotor mental alignment. According to Kessler and Thompson (2010: 86) “SPT
could mark the transition from responsive physical alignment of attention – avail-
able to primates and a few other species – to the conscious and deliberate mental
transformation into another perspective of the world – available to humans only …”
(3)
Let’s see if this dress ﬁts, she said, holding it up to me.
A good example is argument structure constructions (ASCs), that is, abstract syntactic
templates that encode not only feed-forward, exteroceptive content (associated with
path, direction, containment, verticality, etc.), but also combinations of aﬀerent
(sensory) information arising from interoceptive organs responsible for “the gen-
eration and regulation of cognitive and emotional behaviors” (Berntson et al. 2019: 3).
This begs for a new deﬁnition of constructions (see Figure 2):
linguistic constructions are triads of form, function and intelligent agency that emerge through
the combination of speciﬁc constructional attachment patterns, that is, embodied construc-
tional arrangements that organize both high-level (abstract syntactic patterns) and low-level
constructions such as words, morphemes, aﬃxes, etc., in networks of interconstructional re-
lations motivated by agentive selections.
66
Torres-Martínez

Therefore, instead of positing a binary structure of form and function as is the case in
traditional cognitive linguistics (e.g., Depraetere et al. 2023; Hilpert and Perek 2022;
Leclercq 2022; Ruíz de Mendoza Ibáñez 2022), whereby cognitive operations are
deﬁned in terms of semantic transposition from discrete mental frames (Ruíz de
Mendoza Ibáñez and Lozano-Palacio 2019), constructions are more stable when
conceptualized as triads of form, function and agency. The tripartite architecture of
constructions rests on three basic sign relations described by Peirce as follows:
There are three kinds of signs which are all indispensable in all reasoning; the ﬁrst is the
diagrammatic sign or icon, which exhibits a similarity or analogy to the subject of discourse; the
second is the index, which like a pronoun demonstrative or relative, forces the attention to the
Figure 2: The model of Triadic Construction. The structure of triadic linguistic constructions (in contrast
to the Saussurean-inspired idea of a dyadic form-function pairing) points to existence of a bodily self
(agent, that is, A), a requirement for the selection of speciﬁc CAP arrangements. CAPs are responsible for
the semiotic reconstruction of experience through iconic, indexical and symbolic links which converge to
create conventionalized form-function pairings bestowed of agentive properties (that is, triadic
constructions, TC). In particular, iconic (imagistic) links provide a pre-cognitive association between
concepts and referent objects in terms of form and function. During their passing from qualities (icons)
to indices (signs conveying information in terms of contiguity and reaction), referent objects display
relational properties. For example, argument structure constructions become indices in order to map
speciﬁc arrangements of objects and entities during an event. Symbolic links connect concepts, form-
functional relations with referents in the world.
The semiotics of language change
67

particular object intended without describing it; the third (or symbol) is the general name or
description which signiﬁes its object by means of an association of ideas or habitual connection
between the name and the character signiﬁed. (CP 1.369; cf. CP 2.247–249; cf. CP 4.447–448)
We can see that, for Peirce, the levels of iconicity and indexicality are the funda-
mental domains where thought is constructed, while symbolicity represents a con-
ventional mediation anchored in habit or law. In this view, language reﬂects various
forms of inference including iconicity, indexicality, and symbolicity, as well as a
number of semiotic combinations whereby signs organize perception. As a result, the
embodied character of perception presupposes the combination of icons, indices and
symbols: “One sign frequently involves all three modes of representation; and if the
iconic element is altogether predominant in a sign, it will answer most purposes to
call it an icon” (MS 491: 3).
It is a help here to remember that the nature of the linguistic reconstruction of
referents presupposes the categorization of entities, objects and events through
speciﬁc types of concepts. On this view, diﬀerent forms of inference are at play
during category induction: While prototypes are based on information-weighing
(Bayesian reasoning), exemplars and theories are heuristic, that is, based on cues. In
all cases, nonetheless, it is assumed that categories are partially stored in the mind as
networks of relations that become active during induction (cognitive processes).
Moreover, categories are constantly shaped according to a continuous mapping of
perceptually-salient relations among things in the world. At the heart of this char-
acterization is the idea that prototypes are parts of event templates allowing us to
assign category membership to speciﬁc segments of events. The underlying claim is
that grammar reﬂects the statistics implicit in belief propagation within the
speakers’ bodily system through Bayesian belief updating mechanisms. In all cases,
nonetheless, it is assumed that categories are stored in the mind as networks of
relations that become active during induction (cognitive processes). Moreover, cat-
egories are constantly shaped according to a continuous mapping of perceptually-
salient relations among things in the world. At the heart of this characterization is the
idea that prototypes are parts of event templates allowing us to assign category
membership to speciﬁc segments of events. The underlying claim is that grammar
reﬂects the statistics implicit in belief propagation within the speakers’ bodily system
through Bayesian belief updating mechanisms (see Schuster and Degen 2020).
2 Understanding phrasal verbs as constructions
Phrasal verbs (heretofore PVs) have attracted the attention of a number of studies in
both synchronic (Biber et al. 1999; Konopka and Bock 2009; Mahpeykar and Tyler
68
Torres-Martínez

2015; Quirk et al. 1985; Strong and Boers 2019) and diachronic linguistics (Hiltunen
1983, 1994; Rodríguez-Puente 2016; Rodríguez-Puente and Obaya-Cueli 2022; Thim
2012), the nature of these constructions has remained elusive. One of the reasons is
the lack of a consistent ontology that brings systematicity to the comprehension of
the various ways lexical verbs and particles associate to form semantic units of sense.
The main point of controversy is whether PVs are words or phrases. This has resulted
in diverging epistemologies that favor either lexical PV-processing (cf. Cappelle et al.
2010), a phrasal analysis (cf. Konopka and Bock 2009), or a lexical-phrasal processing
(cf. Gonnerman et al. 2007; Blais and Gonnerman 2013; Zhang and Wen 2019).
Traditionally, PVs have been studied from two theoretical perspectives:
1. The lexico-syntactic strand classiﬁes PVs in terms of their compositionality (Biber
et al. 1999; Dagut and Laufer 1985; Darwin and Gray 1999; Hulstijn and Marchena
1989; Kiativutikul and Phoocharoensil 2014; Quirk et al. 1985). This category in-
cludes four verb types: (1) free combinations (compositional); (2) prepositional
verbs, i.e., verbs that take ﬁxed prepositions; (3) phrasal verbs (idiomatic); and (4)
phrasal prepositional verbs, i.e., verbs that take two particles with which they are
semantically related (these verbs are restricted to informal usage).
2. On the other hand, the semantic characterization places the focus on the
description of the nature of the constituents of a PV (the lexical verb+the particle)
to predict its overall meaning (e.g., Celce-Murcia and Larsen-Freeman 1999;
Garnier and Schmitt 2016; Lindstromberg 2022; Quirk et al. 1985).
2.1 Materials and methods
In keeping with the theoretical construction laid out in the previous sections, the ﬁrst
step in the analysis of particle-verb ASC CAPs both Old English (OE) and Middle
English (MidE) was to deﬁne the structure of the corpora to be used. To this end, I ﬁrst
downloaded the full corpus of OE (University of Calgary, see references). Six man-
uscripts (ca. 189.093 words in 348 texts) were then converted to text ﬁles: The Codex
Junius (ca. 975), the Vercelli Book (ca. 1000), the Codex Julius (ca. 1100), the Paris
Psalter (ca. 1050), and the Cotton Vittelius (ca. 1000). These texts were divided into
four historical periods: O1 (ca. 958), O2 (ca 960), O3 (ca. 975–990), and O4 (ca. 1000–
1100). The criterion for this division was to identify the speciﬁc historical context in
which speciﬁc CAPs occur. Note that, as mentioned in Section 1, the notions of
constructionalization and productivity were not crucial in order to judge the
embodied nature of CAPs. In this sense, only texts from O2 and onward were
incorporated in the analysis, since these contained more occurrences of V-UP-ASC
CAPs amenable to an embodied cognitive analysis.
The semiotics of language change
69

With this in mind, the Middle English texts was downloaded from the TEAMS
Middle English Text Series (Peck 2012) and converted to text ﬁles. Following the same
criteria applied for the OE corpus, the Middle English corpus (ca. 236,000 words) was
divided into four standard periods: M1 (1225–1240), M2 (1357–1385), M3 (1385–1430),
and M4 (1430–1483). Using KWIC 5 (O’Donnell 2007), I extracted the strings containing
UP particles in both the OE and that MidE corpora. These were then exported to an
Excel Spreadsheet for the linguistic analysis. The strings were tagged manually for
PV-ASC CAPs associated with speciﬁc ASCs. In addition, variables, such as clause type,
(main, subordinate, and coordinated), and phrase structure were incorporated to the
analysis as a means to align the present study with traditional research in historical
linguistics. Once tagged, the ﬁles were converted to text and exported to UAM Corpus
Tool. The research questions guiding the present study were the following:
1. What reenactment patterns (reﬂecting biological memory) govern V-UP-ASC CAPs
in both Old and Middle English?
2. To what extent do these patterns reveal an ontological alignment of embodied
usage?
2.2 Results
In this section, I report the results of a small-scale corpus study. In the ﬁrst place,
using frequency distributions, we can compare and contrast quantitative patterns of
V-UP-ASC CAPs in both OE and MidE. Overall, the results are in line with previous
research in historical linguistics (e.g., Brinton 1988; Denison 1981, 1985; Elenbaas
2007; Elenbaas and van Kemenade 2014; Hiltunen 1983, 1994; Los et al. 2012; Thim
2012). As regards the frequency of speciﬁc V-UP CAPs in OE, the verb-locative9
(intransitive motion, VL) ASC is the most frequent (60.29%), followed by the verb-
object locative (caused motion, VOL; 23.53%), and the monotransitive (VO; 14.71%; see
Table 1). The intransitive-motion (VL) V-UP-ASC CAP is particularly frequent in the
Codex Junius (26.46%) and the Vercelli Book (13.24%), whereas the transitive (VO)
V-UP-ASC CAP appears more frequently in the Paris Psalter (4.41%). The increments
in productivity of the V-UP-ASC CAP continue in MidE (see Tables 1–4). As can be seen
in Table 3, although the occurrences of VL PVs in MidE decrease (52.14%) the results
are still consistent with the patterns observed in OE (60.29%). As for the frequency
of the V-UP-ASC CAP related with transitive constructions (VO-PVs), these show a
signiﬁcant increment in MidE (30.76%, see Table 6).
9 In the constructionist terminology “locative” does not refer to a speciﬁc case in Old English, but to a
source or target location.
70
Torres-Martínez

In response to research question 1, “What reenactment patterns (reﬂecting bio-
logical memory) govern V-UP-ASC CAPs in both Old and Middle English?,” the results
suggest that there is not much of a change between the use of speciﬁc V-UP-ASC CAPs
Table : Combination of the V-UP construction and the VL (intransitive-motion) ASC in OE.
VL (intransitive-motion) V-UP-ASC CAP in OE
Codex
N = 
%
Codex Junius (ca. )

.%
Exeter Book (ca. )

.%
Vercelli Book (ca. )

.%
Codex Julius (ca. )

.%
The Paris Psalter (ca. –)

.%
Cotton Vittelius (ca. )

.%
TOTAL

.
Table : Frequency of association of the V-UP-ASC CAP in OE.
Frequency of the V-UP-ASC CAP in Old English
N = 
ASC
n
%
VL

.%
VO

.%
VOL

.%
VOO

.%
TOTAL

%
Table : Frequency of the V-UP-ASC CAP in OE.
VO (transitive) ASC in OE
Codex
N = 
%
Codex Junius (ca. )

.%
Exeter Book (ca. )

.%
Vercelli Book (ca. )

.%
Codex Julius (ca. )

.%
The Paris Psalter (ca. )

.%
Cotton Vittelius (ca. )

.%
TOTAL

.
The semiotics of language change
71

containing proprioceptive (involving motor modality) information in OE and ME. In
this sense, while the V-UP-ASC CAP was commonly associated with Verb-locative
ASCs in both OE and MidE, especially in main clauses, the transitive V-UP-ASC CAPs
were more common in subordinate clauses in OE with a shift toward main clause
positions in MidE (see Tables 5–8). In this sense, the V-UP-ASC CAP can be said to have
moved from spatial literal meanings, associated with action verbs in OE, to more
abstract meanings in MidE.
As already pointed out, this process entails the encoding of somatosensory in-
formation by speciﬁc CAPs in order to provide speakers with an embodied mapping
leading to mental representations that can be passed on in a Bayesian context. Thus,
Early English usage reﬂects a process whereby a probability P (A|B) is true, since A is
true, given that B is true. As noted, at this stage both A|B are exteroceptive. As a result,
A (inner-body signal, IbS) is true if B (exteroceptive signal, ES) is true, and also given
that B (exteroceptive signal, ES) is true. On this account the probability that A and B
are true, P (A, B), is the result of A given B, P (A|B), multiplied by the probability of B, P
(B). Likewise, P (A, B) also equals the probability of A, P (A), multiplied by the
Table : Frequency of the V-UP construction associated with speciﬁc ASCs in MidE.
Frequency of the V-UP construction associated with speciﬁc ASCs in MidE
N = 
ASC
n
%
VL PV

.%
VO PV

.%
VOL PV

.%
VOO PV

.%
TOTAL

%
Table : Frequency of the intransitive motion V-UP-ASC CAP in MidE.
VL (intransitive motion) V-UP-ASC CAP in MidE
Period
N = 
%
M

.%
M

.%
M

.%
M

.%
TOTAL


72
Torres-Martínez

probability of B, given A, P (B|A). So, P (A|B) is an index. This leads us to a semiotic
reconstruction of the Bayes’ theorem:
P(A[IbS]|B[ES]) = (P (B[ES]|A [IbS])P (A[IbS])
P(b[IbS])
) →Ag(Sign)
Table : Frequency of the transitive V-UP-ASC CAP in MidE.
VO (transitive) V-UP-ASC CAP in MidE
Period
N = 
%
M

.%
M

.%
M

.%
M

.%
TOTAL

%
Table : Frequency of the caused-motion V-UP-ASC CAP in MidE.
VOL (caused-motion) V-UP-ASC CAP in MidE
Period
N = 
%
M

.%
M

.%
M

.%
M

.%
TOTAL

%
Table : Frequency of the ditransitive (VOO) V-UP-ASC CAP in MidE.
VOO (ditransitive) V-UP-ASC CAP in MidE
Period
N = 
%
Freq. per ,words
M

.%
.
M

.%
.
M

.%
.
M

.%
.
The semiotics of language change
73

Bodily awareness in conceptualization is thus the result of the agent’s bodily
acquired experience with the world (through both self-stabilizing and feed-forward
action) onto which intentional content is projected. At a higher cognitive level, the
conceptualizer becomes an agent (Ag) deﬁned by his/her relation with the event in
which s/he participates (this is what deﬁnes his/her symbolic status in a community).
The V-UP-ASC CAP evolves from the description of exteroceptive-motor events
into more idiomatic meanings associated with interoception in MidE.
(4)
Exteroceptive literal use [action recognition]
Than
owr
Lord
toke
up
hys
modyr
in
hys
armys
Then
our
Lord
took
up
his
mother
in
his
arms
and
kissyd
hir
ful
swetly
and
kissed
her
very
sweetly
“Then our Lord took up his mother in his arms and kissed her very sweetly”
(M4; The Book of Margery Kempe [Book I, Part II, 4450])
The motor modality encoded by a V-UP-ASC CAP can be contrasted in the case of the
PVs sterten up (rise) and geven up (give up). Therefore, whereas sterten up encodes
exteroceptive reenactment patterns in 5a, geven up in 10b displays multisensory
integration of the bodily self for the re-enactment of exteroceptive information and
the interoceptive reconstruction of an enclosure (oblyvyone) associated with
emotional eﬀects:
(5)
a.
[action recognition]
And
stert
hym
up
lightlich …
And
woke
him
up
lightly
(M2; The Canterbury Interlude and Merchant’s Tale of Beryn, [531–532])
b.
[abstract action sentence processing]
…,
than
be
they
fayne
geve
up
her
mater
then
would
they
willingly
give
up
her
mother
to
oblyvyone.
to
oblivion
(M4; Banquet of Gods and Goddesses [1665–1669])
Moreover, the V-UP-ASC CAP construction can be safely associated with particle
verbs in atelic constructions, which, nonetheless, convey intransitive motion
meanings (including verticality):
(6)
[action recognition]
The
forme
tene
the
ﬁfti
cneolinde
up
ant
dun
The
ﬁrst
(group of ten)
the
ﬁfty
kneeling
up
and
down
“… the ﬁrst ten of the ﬁfty who were kneeling [alternatively] up and down”
(M1; Ancrene Wisse [Part 1, The Outer Rule (Hours and Prayers): 332–333])
74
Torres-Martínez

In this sense, the V-UP-ASC CAP in both OE and MidE may be characterized as a
prototypical pattern expressing a range of meanings in which the embodied content
is preserved in language. Although some could argue that the need to cope with
uncertainty in an ever-changing environment is enough to account for the rise of
diﬀerent types of consciousness (reﬂected in linguistic selections), it is a fact that
living organisms are not isolated systems, but create complex networks of relations
with other organisms, including those considered as exhibiting disparate levels of
consciousness. To put it another way: consciousness is possible because it provides us
with a sense of belonging that creates connections with others. Consciousness is thus
constructed upon patterns of interaction associated with agentive perception that
can be projected onto the environment and other entities. In fact, there is a deeper
point to make. It is not just that language evolves as a result of some societal or
cultural constraints, but by the predictive updating of conscious states which can be
shared an enhanced by collective experience. This can be considered as a source of
diachronic development. For example, whereas in OE the V-UP-ASC CAP template
conveys, for the most part, literal exteroceptive meanings, more abstract informa-
tion is encoded by the V-UP-ASC CAP in MidE:
(7)
a.
Main clause (OE):
Let
þa
up
faran
eadige
sawle,
Adames
cyn,
…
let
those
up
go
blessed
souls
Adam’s
kin
‘Then he allowed the blessed souls to go up, the kindred of Adam, …
(O3; Christ and Satan [Codex Junius: 405–7])
b.
Main clause (MidE):
Hwen
his
blawunge
ne
geineth
nawt,
he
bringeth
When
his
blowing
not
gains
nothing
he
brings
up
sum
uvel
word …
up
some
bad
words …
“When [he realized] his blow was useless, he brought up some bad words”
(M1; Ancrene Wisse [Part 8, The Outer Rule: 221–222])
Crucially, the V-UP-ASC CAP encodes bodily-acquired information deployed as a
templatic structure in the mind of the conceptualizer which can be further used as
indices (activated in terms of reaction or contiguity) pointing to non-conﬂicting
CAP associations. As we can see, in the V-UP-ASC CAP faran up in (7a), the particle
contributes directional meaning only (it works as a zero indexical to other mean-
ings), whereas in (7b), the particle up stresses visual modality (making an item visible)
which would relate to the fact that objects that are hidden but then “emerge” (by
going up), thereby becoming visible (people can become aware of them, which, of
course, also mean that the abstract object goes up).
The semiotics of language change
75

Although many factors inﬂuence embodied prototypicality, the evolution of the
[spatial adverb-subject-verbﬁnite] CAP can be partly explained in terms of type/token
frequency. Token frequency refers to the use of a particular exemplar in the input
that contributes to the formation of prototypes deﬁning a category. Thus, the [spatial
adverb-subject-verbﬁnite] CAP, a prototypical exemplar, has been used since the
Anglo-Saxon period as a combination of spatial adverbs and/or prepositions (e.g.,
away, in, into, out, up, etc.) and movement verbs (e.g., come, go, get, etc.) which can be
summarized as follows:
(8)
<The ﬁrst time my son saw me,> I
went intohis room
in the dark
Form
Subj
Verb
ObliquePATH
Meaning
X
moves to Z
Participants
(Causer)
In addition, this CAP has been used in combination with the intransitive motion
construction [X moves from/to Z] to form a prototype. The resulting V-UP-ASC CAP
displays the same level of schematicity, i.e., spatial adverbs can combine with a
number of movement verbs in intransitive motion constructions (type frequency), as
is shown in the examples below:
(9)
a.
þa
wæs
æfter
wiste
wop
up
ahafen,
then
was
after
meal
wailing
up
lifted up
micel
morgensweg
great
cry at morning
“Then a thunderous cry was wailing up after the banquet, a mighty clamor
at morning”
(O3; Beowulf [Cotton Vitellius A XV, 128–129]).
b.
Up
aroose
the
accusours
queyntlich
anoon
up
rose
the
accusers
skillfully
immediately
“Immediately, the accusers stood up.”
(M2; The Canterbury Interlude and Marchant’s Tale of Beryn, B127)
c.
So
up
I
aroose
and
forth
with
hym
went
So
up
I
rose
and
out
with
him
went
“So I stood up and went out with him”
(M4; Banquet of Gods and Goddesses, ca. 1478–1483)
d.
“Out went the candle and we were left darkling”
(King Lear, 1603–1606)
76
Torres-Martínez

e.
“She ran, trying to pick up as many as she could, but the wind was too
strong, the sheer number of cards overwhelming. Away they ﬂew: 1954,
1984, 1645, 1881, 2006, 771, 2041 … all order lost, all knowledge vanishing,
the stairway of intellection crumbling beneath her feet.”
(Haruki Murakami, 1Q84, 1984)
In the particular case of up (expressing telicity and/or vertical direction), this particle
is associated with speciﬁc motion verbs in Old English, e.g., up+áhebban (lift up),
up+cuman (come), etc. In the examples below, the lexical verb and the particle UP
function as a free combination (Quirk et al. 1985: 1152), whereby both the lexical verb
and the particle preserve their individual meaning.
(10)
Old English:
a.
up+plegan (free combination)
þær
aræred
there
lifted
beornes
breostsefa. he
mid
bæm
handum,
Of the noble man breast
he
with
both
hands
eadig
ond
ægleaw,
up
weard*
plegade.
blessed
and
law-wise up
towards clapped
“There was lifted the man’s breast-heart. With both hands raised high,
he clapped, blessed and law-wise.”
(*usually spelt as one word not as two).
(O3; Elene [Vercelli Book, 805–5])
b.
up+áhebban (free combination):
Ic
up
ahof
eaforan
gingne
I
up
lifted
heir
young
ond
bearn
cende,
þam
ic
blæd
forgeaf, …
And
child
begot
those
I
spirit of life
gave
“I raised up high sons, young in years, and begot children, to whom
glory I gave, …”
(O3; Elene [Vercelli Book, 353–354])
ASC: “X causes to move Y (from/to) Z”
As shown, in (10b) UP also expresses the completion of an action (telicity). The use
of up as preﬁx was preserved in some Middle English verbs, such as uppehenten
(‘take up’; contemporary examples of fused Germanic preﬁxes are upvote, download,
upload, outcompete, outlast, etc.). However, the increment in the use of the post-
verbal aspectualizer up observed in Middle English PVs such as taken up (lift up),
The semiotics of language change
77

or sterten up (jump, leap; mount a horse) indicates the development of abstract,
non-compositional V-UP-ASC CAP:
(11)
Middle English
a.
upphenten (preﬁxed verb); b. taken uppe (free combination)
Then Sir
Amadace a
squrd
uppehente,1
the
Sir
Amadace a
sword
took up
To
strike the
ladi
was
his
entente,
to
strike the
lady
was
his
purpose
And thennethe
quite
knyghte bede
‘Sese!’
and then
the
white
knight
bade
‘Stop’
He
toke
uppe2
the
ladi,
and
the
litull knave,
he
took
up
the
lady,
and
the
little child
And to
Sir
Amadacether
he
hom
gave,
and to
Sir
Amadacethere
he
them
gave
And sayd,
‘Now
is
tyme
of
pees!”
and said
‘now
is
time
of
peace’
(M4; Sir Amadace, 800–804).
ASCs: “X acts on Y”
b.
Sterten up (free combination).
Up
sterte
the
yong
knyght
up
leap
the
young
knight
In
herte
he
was
full
lyght
in
heart
he
was
very
light
“The young knight mounted with his heart full of joy”
(M3; Codex Ashmole 61: Libeaus Desconus, 169–170)
ASC: “X moves from Y to Z”
In (11a), the preﬁxed verb uppehenten expresses the completion of an action.
Therefore, the sword is up as a result of picking (Elenbaas and van Kemenade 2014:
143), and in (11b), both the Lady and child are up as a result of the knight’s taking
of them. As is evident from the above examples, all these constructions combine
their semantics with speciﬁc ASCs. Therefore, the verb up+áhebban in (11b) can be
associated with intransitive motion, while uppehenten 1 in (11a, b) expresses tran-
sitivity, and up+sterten in (11b) intransitive motion.
In response to research question 2, “To what extent do these patterns reveal
an ontological alignment of embodied usage?,” we have seen that the V-UP-ASC CAP
does reveal an embodied component in ways that support the existence of shared
systemic character of bodily-acquired information in the evolution and stabilization of
the linguistic system. As can be seen in the examples below, “UP” in (12a) makes use of
78
Torres-Martínez

the CAP template [Of NP UP-V]VP to convey exteroceptive spatial meaning in combi-
nation with the verb aweoxan (grow) and the preposition “of” (from) plus a locative NP
to form a verb-locative (intransitive motion) CAP. In a similar vein, (12b) features the
iconic (imagistic) [V-UP from NP] VP template, whereby the transitive verb áhebban
(raise) and the particle UP (telic and spatial) become fused express intransitive motion
(both are followed by the preposition “from” and the dative construction eorðan):
(12)
a.
[Of NP UP-V]VP
in
ðam
sio
halige
rod
in
which
the
holy
rood
gemeted
wæs,
mærost
beama
discovered
was
most
trees
þara
þe
of
eorðan
up
aweoxe,
there
where
from
Earth-the
up
grew
“… in which the holy rood was discovered, the most famous of trees which
has grown up from the earth …”
(O3; Elene [Vercelli Book, 1223–1225])
b.
[V-UP from NP] VP
Holmas
dælde
waters
divided
waldend
ure
and
geworhte
þa
sovereign
our
and
made
the
roderas
fæsten;
þæt
se
rica
ahof
sky
ﬁrm
then
the
creator
lifted
up
from
eorðan
þurh
his
egen
word
up
from
the earth
through
his
own
word
frea
ælmihtig.
Lord
Almighty.
“Our Lord divided the waters and then created the sky’s vault; then our
sovereign heaved it up from the earth through the power of his word,
Lord Almighty.”
(O3; Genesis A, B [Codex Junius, 146–150])
So we see that the V-UP-ASC CAP entails both an imagistic and emotional recon-
struction of events through a multimodal reconstruction of experience, which is
not attributable exclusively to an imagistic quality of the words used. This is com-
plemented by the reactive function of indexical activation of speciﬁc CAPs in the
presence of non-conﬂicting constructions assembled in a communicative event
deﬁned by intention. Therefore, the intention of the characters must be clearly
modeled for the reader through situated embodied mental alignment mediated by an
information-extraction function associated with “perceptual capacities employing
The semiotics of language change
79

distinct sensory manners” (O’Callaghan 2019: 164). One important consequence of the
syntactic reading is that the imageability of the PV (its ability to create mental
imagery) is not split into the verb’s semantic and that of its components (contra
Lindstromberg 2022). The reason is that PVs are not experienced solely as lexical
items that can be directly experienced through the senses (see Khanna and Cortese
2021: 628), but as perceptual reconstructions of events on the basis of our intuitive
physics (motor representations are not separated from abstract conceptual re-
constructions. see Torres-Martínez forthcoming). Thus, in the verse “storm up gewat
heah to heofunum” (‘A tumult rose high to heaven’; Exodus: 460–461), the V-UP-ASC
CAP is indicative of an embodied reenactment whereby a prepositional locative, ‘to
heofunum’, is activated by the V-UP-ASC CAP. This analysis also applies for V-UP-ASC
CAP in MidE:
(13)
And
than
Seynt
John
was
bor,
and
owyr
Lady
and
then
Saint
John
was
Born
and
our
Lady
toke
hym
up
fro
the
erde
took
him
up
from
the
earth
“And then St. John was born, and our Lady lifted him up from the earth”
(The Book of Margery Kempe: 442–443)
Here, the V-UP CAP encodes caused-motion (VOL), i.e., an agent (owr Lady), a theme
(hym), and a path (fro the erde). As can be seen, the particle UP expresses two
meanings, one related with caused-motion and other with aspect.
2.3 Discussion
Patterns of mental alignment in language point to the human need to reduce am-
biguity and uncertainty in their interactions with the world. This process requires
agents to align actions in order to create an energy landscape in which their actions
can converge. Energy exchange with the world and peers require both system
boundedness and openness (in the form of a dynamic Markov blanket). Thus, an
agent wanting to communicate with others is, at the same time required to deﬁne
him/herself both as a distinct biological entity and a participant aﬀecting their
environment through speciﬁc actions. In this paper, I have argued that active
inference also aﬀects the way human languages evolve in order to help agents
achieve evolutionarily steady-states associated with an ecosystem. An underlying
claim has been that language change is not deﬁned by special patterns within the
linguistic system, but by biological memory and higher-cognitive processes. Thus, I
have shown that embodied content forms a substantial part of constructional
attachment patterns. In contrast to the idea of constructions as the building blocks of
80
Torres-Martínez

linguistic knowledge, constructional attachment patterns display the dynamics of
equilibrium and randomness exhibited by biological systems. This is supported by
the data presented in this paper. Thus, while Old English reﬂects a higher rate of
steadiness in relation to the amount of variation in the description of events (near to
an equilibrium in the system, that is, energy exchange is deﬁned linguistically
by more conservative patterns of mental alignment encoded in language), Middle
English is characterized by a higher level of randomness associated with non-
equilibrium. In other words, increasing complexity in the variables governing
mental alignment required speakers to make use of more complex CAPs in a shorter
period of time (this is reﬂected by the increments in the use of modalities other than
motional encoded in V-UP+VO and V-UP+VOO CAPs). Therefore, the existence of
distinct V-UP-ASC CAPs can be safely attributed to the human proclivity to recon-
struct events through the use of shared embodied cognitive routines. As is summa-
rized in Table 8, both Old and Middle English V-UP-ASC CAPs reﬂect a type of usage
associated with ontologically-led patterns of mental alignment for the construction
of events (that is, Embodied Mental Alignment, EMA). For example, EMAs consisting
of the concept X (trajectory, path, or direction) can be formally represented as the
combination of a P(percept.)1+C(context) associated with distributed brain
networks:10
Concept [X →(P + C)]
The above formula captures the insight that continuous energy exchange between
humans and the world create a distinct continuously updating boundary (an energy
exchange momentum) that creates a contingent gap between an agent and the
environment. Conditional independence from an environment thus oﬀers a suitable
explanatory apparatus, since it favors a view of constructions as triadic composites
possessing semiotic properties associated with biological memory. Several advan-
tages can thus be drawn from the previous study. In the ﬁrst place, it has been shown
that language does not consist in a network of constructions, but patterns of energy
exchange that can be easily identiﬁed despite low frequency rates. The existence of
these patterns licenses, in turn, their status as usage-based linguistic samples. This
shows that, in contrast to other linguistic studies, the identiﬁcation of CAPs in OE and
MidE reﬂects a genuine cognitive dimension that is not purely deﬁned by corpora
structure. By shifting the focus away from symbolic pairings of form and function to
privilege the actual predictive nature of the linguistic system (as a part of the
extended mind), researchers in historical linguistics can explore, for example, the
10 This opposes the view that concepts such as “God” or “justice” cannot be reduced to perceptual
primitives (Carey 2009: 29). Indeed, the concept God is decomposable into percepts such as force and
barrier, whereas justice can be associated with senses such as balance, path and trajectory.
The semiotics of language change
81

patterns of mental alignment associated with speciﬁc reenactment routines. The
process of cognitive alignment can thus be seen as a universal characteristic of
the human cognitive system encoded in language. Expectedly, the idea of a “con-
structicon” is abandoned, since linguistic reconstruction and entrenchment is
deemed to stem from Bayesian processes of entropy reduction through energy
exchange (a Markov blanket). The implication is that grammar reﬂects the statistics
implicit in belief propagation within the speakers’ bodily system through Bayesian
belief updating mechanisms (see Schuster and Degen 2020). However, as previously
argued, the predictive mind is not conﬁned to coarse statistical mappings of sensory-
perpetual states. Indeed,
there is much more to our mental lives than such perceptual responsiveness to the structure of
the distal environment. We don’t just perceive (and act). We reason, deliberate, plan, and reﬂect,
and such psychological processes are often strongly decoupled from immediate perception.
(Williams 2020: 1760)
This is likely the reason why the nonsense phrase “He daxed her the norp” (Goldberg
2019: 33) is recognized by speakers in terms of embodied reenactment (whereby an
animate agent causes an animate recipient to receive an inanimate undergoer),
which uniﬁes and makes explicit the relation between temporal structure and the
spatial relations encoded in the utterance (see Heuer and Rolfs 2022). As previously
noted, utterances serve as belief updating devices containing perceptually-driven
conceptual content (they are not simply combinable symbolic strings). As such, the
speakers’ use of diﬀerent types of concepts (prototypes, exemplars and theories) is
associated with metacognition, that is, the process of monitoring “sensorimotor
performance in relationship to a goal” (Locke et al. 2020: 13). Sensorimotor processes
(see Slepian and Ambady 2014) condition the type of constructions activated for the
reconstruction of speciﬁc events.
In sum, language change is construed as a process of biologically-driven
cognitive specialization that aﬀects form through agentive selections comprising
iconicity (imagistic reenactment), indexicality (reaction and contiguity), and
symbolicity.
The key thing to draw from this is that constructions cannot longer be deﬁned as
symbolic units of form and function retrievable from a hypothetical constructicon,
since constructional evolution and change are the result of recurrent tendencies in
the predictive organization of the world, rather than variations via “network
changes.” The linguistic sources utilized in this paper thus reveal that the prediction
of the authors of the works studied is deﬁned in terms of a need to reduce uncertainty
and align with the audience’s expectations (prior beliefs must also be shared by the
members of a community). Ontogenic mental alignment is thus an overarching
characteristic of human cognition that cannot reduced to constructional selection
(Table 9).
82
Torres-Martínez

Table : EMAs associated with action recognition mental schemas in Old and Middle English.
Text
Period
Example
Type of EMA
Old English
A Prayer [Cotton Julius A. ii, –]
O(c.)
þanon up hraðe Wedera leode on wang stigon, (climbed up)
action recognition
Andreas [Vercelli Book, –]
O(c.)
Cyrm up astáh ða se geonga ongann geomran stefne,
action recognition
Beowulf [Cotton Vitellius A XV, –]
O(c.)
þonon yðgeblond up astigeðwon to wolcnum, þonne wind styreþ,
action recognition
Christ A, B, C [Exeter Book, –]
O(c.)
þa þæt leoht gewat, up siðode, ond se ar somed, on clænra gemang.
action recognition
Middle English
Ancrene Wisse [Part , Temptations,
–]
M(ca. –)
is hwen the thoht geath inward, ant delit kimeth up, ant te lust waxeth.
Thenne, as wes spot ear upo
action recognition
The Canterbury Interlude and Merchant’s
Tale of Beryn, []
M(ca. )
And arose up therewithall and with his felaw spak
action recognition
Prik of Conscience [Part , –]
M(ca.–)
When he styghe up to heven bryght Thus shal he ende by Goddes myght. action recognition
The Parlement of the Thre Ages []
M(ca. )
Then I bende up my bowe and bownede me to schote (prepared),
action recognition
The semiotics of language change
83

3 Conclusion
In this paper, I have shown that perceptual information is encoded in language as a
means to help agents to engage in mental alignment through shared embodied
routines. Admittedly, the Embodied Extended Mind Theory is less concerned with
resolving speciﬁc unexplained anomalies between a past and present state of
languages, its main goal being the study of the ways linguistic phenomena reﬂect
the relationship between perception, memory and consciousness for the joint con-
struction of the bodily self. The advantage of this type of analysis is that linguistic
constructions are not characterized as absolute symbolic units acting independently
from the agentive dimension of the communicative event. As a result, the present
cognitive reading does not seek to provide a “mechanical” proof with “‘non-subjec-
tive’ results, since convincing proof in historical linguistics usually depends instead
on a variety of circumstantial evidence” (Fulk 1992: 11).
EEMT is indebted to an inﬂuential body of research in theoretical neuroscience,
the philosophy of biology, and physics that deﬁnes the brain as a predictive organ
designed to reduce entropy by means of an equilibrium between inner-and outer
states. As I have suggested, in order to understand the brain as a self-organizing
system, any linguistic enquiry needs to answer the question of consciousness and its
relation to perception. I have attempted to provide some provisional answers to this
question from both a ﬁrst-person perspective (phenomenological) and a more
ecological, intention-driven viewpoint. Although some could argue that a focus on a
ﬁrst-person’s need to cope with uncertainty is enough to account for the emergence
of diﬀerent types of consciousness (e.g., Tononi 2004; Tononi and Koch 2015), it is a
fact that living organisms are not isolated systems, but create complex networks of
relations with other organisms that further shape their cognition. Another way
of putting it is to say that consciousness is possible because it provides us with a sense
of belonging that creates connections with others. In other words, the evolution of
human societies follows patterns of energy exchange deﬁned by least action. Con-
sciousness is thus constructed upon patterns of interaction associated with agentive
perception (involving the detection and awareness of one’s bodily state) that can be
projected onto the environment and other entities. As we have seen language reﬂects
these dynamics, since “our [thermodynamic] actions are ultimately limited by our
means, not by our will” (Annila and Salthe 2010: 1327). The introduction of AIF as a
contributing process theory in construction grammar opens up doors to a more
balanced deﬁnition of language as a semiotic tool that has evolved as a means to
unify human experience. In hindsight, we can surely agree that the one condition
for the existence of conscious states is that they can be shared and enhanced by
collective experience. This precludes the reduction of conscious states to an
impoverished version of the brain as a physical support of experience (a quantity).
84
Torres-Martínez

References
Allen, Micah & Karl Friston. 2018. From cognitivism to autopoiesis: Towards a computational framework
for the embodied mind. Synthese 195(6). 2459–2482.
Ambridge, Ben. 2015. Island constraints and overgeneralization in language acquisition. Cognitive
Linguistics 26(2). 361–370.
Ambridge, Ben & Adele E. Goldberg. 2008. The island status of clausal complements: Evidence in favor of
an information structure explanation. Cognitive Linguistics 19(3). 357–389.
Annila, Arto & Stanley Salthe. 2010. Cultural naturalism. Entropy 12. 1325–1343.
Barbieri, Marcello. 2013. Organic codes and the natural history of mind. In Liz Swan (ed.), Origins of mind,
21–52. London/New York: Springer Verlag.
Barðdal, Jóhanna. 2009. The development of case in Germanic. In Jóhanna Barðdal & Shobhana L. Chelliah
(eds.), The role of semantic, pragmatic, and discourse factors in the development of case, 123–159.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Barðdal, Jóhanna, Elena Smirnova, Lotte Sommerer & Spike Gildea (eds.). 2015. Diachronic construction
grammar. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Barðdal, Jóhanna & Shobhana L. Chelliah (eds.). 2009. The role of semantic, pragmatic and discourse factors
in the development of case. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bergs, Alexander & Gabriele Diewald (eds.). 2008. Constructions and language change. Berlin: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Berntson, Gary G., Peter J. Gianaros & Manos Tsakiris. 2019. Interoception and the autonomic nervous
system: Bottom-up meets top-down. In Manos Tsakiris & Helena De Preester (eds.), The interoceptive
mind: From homeostasis to awareness, 3–23. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Biber, Douglas, Stig Johansson, Geoﬀrey Leech, Susan Conrad & Edward Finegan. 1999. Longman grammar
of spoken and written English. London: Longman.
Blais, Mary-Jane & Laura M. Gonnerman. 2013. Explicit and implicit semantic processing of verb-particle
constructions by French-English bilinguals. Bilingualism: Language and Cognition 16(4). 829–846.
Brentari, Carlo. 2015. Jakob von Uexküll: The discovery of the Umwelt between biosemiotics and theoretical
biology. Cham: Springer Verlag.
Brinton, Laurel J. 1988. The development of English aspectual systems: Aspectualizers and post-verbal particles.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Bybee, Joan L. 2013. Usage-based theory and exemplar representation. In Thomas Hoﬀman &
Graeme Trousdale (eds.), The Oxford handbook of construction grammar, 49–69. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Cappelle, Bert, Yuri Shtyrov & Friedeman Pulvermuller. 2010. Heating up or cooling up the brain? MEG
evidence that phrasal verbs are lexical units. Brain and Language 115(3). 189–201.
Cappelle, Bert & Ilse Depraetere. 2016. Short-circuited interpretations of modal verb constructions: Some
evidence from The Simpsons. Constructions and Frames 8(1). 7–39.
Cappelle, Bert, Ilse Depraetere & Mégane Lesuisse. 2019. The necessity modals have to, must, need to and
should: Using n-grams to help identify common and distinct semantic and pragmatic aspects.
Constructions and Frames 11(2). 220–243.
Carey, Susan. 2009. The origin of concepts. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Celce-Murcia, Marianne & Dianne Larsen-Freeman. 1999. The grammar book: An ESL/EFL teacher’s course,
2nd edn. Boston, MA: Heinle and Heinle.
Clark, Andy. 2008. Supersizing the mind: Embodiment, action, and cognitive extension. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
The semiotics of language change
85

Clark, Andy. 2013. Whatever next? Predictive brains, situated agents, and the future of cognitive science.
Behavioral and Brain Sciences 36(3). 181–204.
Cobley, Paul. 2016. Cultural implications of biosemiotics. Dordrecht: Springer Verlag.
Corcoran, Andrew W., Giovanni Pezzulo & Jakob Hohwy. 2020. From allostatic agents to counterfactual
cognizers: Active inference, biological regulation, and the origins of cognition. Biology & Philosophy
35(32). 1–45.
Croft, William. 2010. Radical construction grammar. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Cuneo, Nicole & Adele E. Goldberg. 2023. Two measures of backgroundedness: Predicting island eﬀects in
English for long-distance dependencies in combination with 10 constructions. PsyArXiv. https://doi.
org/10.31234/osf.io/tzrcs.
Da Costa, Lancelot, Thomas Parr, Biswa Sengupta & Karl Friston. 2021. Neural dynamics under active
inference: Plausibility and eﬃciency of information processing. Entropy 23(454). 1–20.
Dagut, Menachem & Batia Laufer. 1985. Avoidance of phrasal verbs – a case for contrastive analysis.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition 7(1). 73–79.
Darwin, Clayton M. & Loretta S. Gray. 1999. Going after the phrasal verb: An alternative approach to
classiﬁcation. Tesol Quarterly 33(1). 65–83.
Delahaye, Pauline. 2019. A semiotic methodology for animal studies. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
Denison, David. 1981. Aspects of the history of English group-verbs, with particular attention to the syntax of the
Ormulum. Oxford University PhD dissertation. chrome-extension://efaidnbmnnnibpcajpcglcleﬁndmkaj/
https://research.manchester.ac.uk/ﬁles/37801136/SUPPLEMENTARY_6.PDF.
Denison, David. 1985. The origins of completive up in English. Neuphilologische Mitteilungen 86. 37–61.
Depraetere, Ilse, Bert Cappelle, Martin Hilpert, Ludovic De Cuypere, Mathieu Dehouck, Denis Pascal,
Susanne Flach, Natalia Grabar, Cyril Grandin, Thierry Hamon, Clemens Hufeld, Benoît Leclercq &
Hans-Jörg Schmid. 2023. Models of modals: From pragmatics and corpus linguistics to machine learning.
Berlin & New York: De Gruyter Mouton.
Diewald, Gabriele. 2020. Paradigms lost—paradigms regained: Paradigms as hyper-constructions. In
Lotte Sommerer & Elena Smirnova (eds.), Nodes and networks in diachronic construction grammar,
278–315. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Divjak, Dagmar, Petar Milin, Srdan Medimorec & Maciej Borowski. 2022. Behavioral signatures of memory
resources for language: Looking beyond the lexicon/grammar divide. Cognitive Science 46. e13206.
Do, Monica L., Anna Papafragou & John Trueswell. 2020. Cognitive and pragmatic factors in language
production: Evidence from source-goal motion events. Cognition 205. 104447.
Durrant, Phillip & Alice Doherty. 2010. Are high-frequency collocations psychologically real? Investigating
the thesis of collocational priming. Corpus Linguistics and Linguistic Theory 6(2). 125–155.
Elenbaas, Marion. 2007. The synchronic and diachronic syntax of the English verb-particle combination.
Utrecht: Netherlands Graduate School of Linguistics PhD dissertation.
Elenbaas, Marion & Ans van Kemenade. 2014. Verb particles and OV/VO in the history of English. Studia
Linguistica 68(1). 140–167.
Emmeche, Claus. 1999. The Sarkar challenge to biosemiotics: Is there any information in a cell? Semiotica
127(1/4). 273–294.
Favareau, Donald. 2009. Essential readings in biosemiotics: Anthology and commentary. Dordrecht: Springer
Verlag.
Favareau, Donald. 2021. Facing up to the hard problem of biosemiotics. Biosemiotics 14. 603–615.
Flach, Susanne. 2020. Constructionalization and the Sorites paradox: The emergence of the Into-
causative. In Lotte Sommerer & Elena Smirnova (eds.), Nodes and networks in diachronic construction
grammar, 45–67. Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
86
Torres-Martínez

Fried, Mirjam. 2009. Construction grammar as a tool for diachronic analysis. Constructions and Frames 1(2).
261–290.
Fried, Mirjam. 2013. Principles of constructional change. In Thomas Hoﬀmann & Graeme Trousdale (eds.),
The Oxford handbook of construction grammar, 419–437. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fried, Mirjam. 2015. Irregular morphology in regular syntactic patterns: A case of constructional re-
alignment. In Jóhanna Barðdal, Spike Gildea, Elena Smirnova & Lotte Sommerer (eds.), Diachronic
construction grammar, 141–174. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Friston, Karl. 2005. A theory of cortical responses. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London
360. 815–836.
Friston, Karl. 2009. The free-energy principle: A rough guide to the brain? Trends in Cognitive Science 13.
293–301.
Friston, Karl. 2010. The free-energy principle: A uniﬁed brain theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience 11(2).
127–138.
Friston, Karl. 2019. A free energy principle for a particular physics. ArXiv. 1–148. https://doi.org/10.48550/
arxiv.1906.10184.
Fulk, Robert D. 1992. A history of Old English meter. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Garcea, Frank E. & Bradford Z. Mahon. 2012. What is in a tool concept? Dissociating manipulation
knowledge from function knowledge. Memory and Cognition 40. 1303–1313.
Garnier, Mélodie & Norbert Schmitt. 2016. Picking up polysemous phrasal verbs: How many do learners
know and what facilitates this knowledge? System 59. 29–44.
Gibson, James J. 1966. The senses considered as perceptual systems. Boston: Houghton Miﬄin.
Gibson, James J. 1979. The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Miﬄin.
Goldberg, Adele E. 1995. Constructions: A construction grammar approach to argument structure. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Goldberg, Adele E 2006. Constructions at work: The nature of generalization in language. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Goldberg, Adele E. 2019. Explain me this – creativity, competition, and the partial productivity of constructions.
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Gonnerman, Laura M., Mark S. Seidenberg & Elaine S. Andersen. 2007. Graded semantic and phonological
similarity eﬀects in priming: Evidence for a distributed connectionist approach to morphology.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General 136(2). 323–345.
Green, Georgia M. 1974. Semantics and syntactic regularity. Bloomington, IN: Indiana University Press.
Gregersen, Sune. 2018. Some (critical) questions for diachronic construction grammar. Folia Linguistica
Historica 39(2). 341–360.
Haeckel, Ernst H. 1866. Generelle Morphologie der Organismen. Erster Band: Allgemeine Anatomie der
Organismen. Zweiter Band: Allgemeine Entwickelungsgeschichte der Organismen. Berlin: Verlag von
Georg Reimer.
Heuer, Anna & Martin Rolfs. 2022. Temporal and spatial reference frames in visual working memory are
deﬁned by ordinal and relational properties. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
and Cognition. https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0001175.
Hilpert, Martin. 2013. Die englischen Modalverben im Daumenkino: Zur dynamischen Visualisierung von
Phänomenen des Sprachwandels. Zeitschrift für Literaturwissenschaft und Linguistik 42. 67–82.
Hilpert, Martin & Florent Perek. 2022. You don’t get to see that every day: On the development of
permissive get. Constructions and Frames 14(1). 13–40.
Hiltunen, Risto. 1983. The decline of the preﬁxes and the beginning of the English phrasal verb. Turku: Turun
Yliopisto.
The semiotics of language change
87

Hiltunen, Risto. 1994. On phrasal verbs in Early Modern English: Notes on lexis and style. In
Dieter Kastovsky (ed.), Studies in Early Modern English, 129–140. Berlin & New York: Mouton de
Gruyter.
Hoﬀmeyer, Jesper & Claus Emmeche. 1991. Code-duality and the semiotics of nature. In
Myrdene Anderson & Floyd Merrell (eds.), On semiotic modeling, 117–166. Berlin & Boston: De Gruyter
Mouton.
Hulstijn, Jan H. & Elaine Marchena. 1989. AVOIDANCE: Grammatical or semantic causes? Studies in Second
Language Acquisition 11(3). 241–255.
Jiang, Nan & Tatiana M. Nekrasova. 2007. The processing of formulaic sequences by second language
speakers. The Modern Language Journal 91(3). 433–445.
Kessler, Klaus & Lindsey Anne Thompson. 2010. The embodied nature of spatial perspective taking:
Embodied transformation versus sensorimotor interference. Cognition 114. 72–88.
Khanna, Maya M. & Michael J. Cortese. 2021. How well imageability, concreteness, perceptual strength,
and action strength predict recognition memory, lexical decision, and reading aloud performance.
Memory 29(5). 622–636.
Kiativutikul, Choorit & Supakorn Phoocharoensil. 2014. A corpus-based study of phrasal verbs: Carry out, ﬁnd
out, and point out. Language Institute: Thammasat University. https://digital.library.tu.ac.th/tu_dc/
frontend/Info/item/dc:95504.
Kóbor, Andrea, Kata Horváth, Zsóﬁa Kardos, Dezso Nemeth & Karolina Janacsek. 2020. Perceiving
structure in unstructured stimuli: Implicitly acquired prior knowledge impacts the processing of
unpredictable transitional probabilities. Cognition 205. 104413.
Konopka, Agnieszka E. & Kathryn Bock. 2009. Lexical or syntactic control of sentence formulation?
Structural generalizations from idiom production. Cognitive Psychology 58(1). 68–101.
Kull, Kalevi. 2018. Choosing and learning: Semiosis means choice. Sign Systems Studies 46(4). 452–466.
Kull, Kalevi & Donald Favareau. 2022. There is Umwelt before consciousness, and learning transverses
both. Biosemiotics 15. 491–495.
Leclercq, Benoît. 2022. From modals to modal constructions: An n-gram analysis of can, could and be able
to. Constructions and Frames 14(2). 226–261.
Lindstromberg, Seth. 2022. The compositionality of English phrasal verbs in terms of imageability. Lingua
275. 103373.
Locke, Shannon M., Pascal Mamassian & Michael S. Landy. 2020. Performance monitoring for
sensorimotor conﬁdence: A visuomotor tracking study. Cognition 205. 104396.
Los, Bettelou, Corrien Blom, Geert Booij, Marion Elenbaas & Ans van Kemenade. 2012. Morphosyntactic
change: A comparative study of particles and preﬁxes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lupyan, Gary & Bodo Winter. 2018. Language is more abstract than you think, or, why aren’t languages
more iconic? Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 373. 20170137.
Mace, William M. 2015. Introduction to the classic edition. In James J. Gibson (ed.), The ecological approach
to visual perception. London & New York: Psychology Press.
Mahon, Bradford Z. & David Kemmerer. 2020. Interactions between language, thought, and perception:
Cognitive and neural perspectives. Cognitive Neuropsychology 37(5–6). 235–240.
Mahpeykar, Narges & Andrea Tyler. 2015. A principled cognitive linguistics account of English phrasal
verbs with up and out*. Language and Cognition 7(1). 1–35.
McGillivray, Murray (ed.). 2007. Online corpus of old english poetry. University of Calgary. http://www.
oepoetry.ca (accessed 13 March 2023).
Michaelis, Laura A. Forthcoming. Staying terminologically rigid, conceptually open and socially cohesive:
How to make room for the next generation of construction grammarians. Constructions and Frames.
88
Torres-Martínez

Myers, James. 2012. Testing adjunct and conjunct island constraints in Chinese. Language and Linguistics
13(3). 437–470.
Nekrasova, Tatiana M. 2009. English L1 and L2 speakers’ knowledge of lexical bundles. Language Learning
59(3). 647–686.
O’Callaghan, Casey. 2019. A multisensory philosophy of perception. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
O’Donnell, Mick. 2007. UAM CorpusTool software (version 2.8.14.). Available at: http://www.wagsoft.com/
CorpusTool/.
Pearl, Judea. 1988. Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: Networks of plausible inference. San Mateo:
Morgan Kaufmann.
Peck, Russell A. TEAMS Middle English Text Series: University of Rochester, Robbins Library Digital Project.
http://d.lib.rochester.edu/teams (accessed 13 March 2023).
Peirce, Charles S. 1931–1966. The collected papers of Charles S. Peirce, 8 vols., C. Hartshorne, P. Weiss &
A. W. Burks (eds.). Cambridge: Harvard University Press. [Reference to Peirce’s papers will be
designated CP followed by volume and paragraph number.]
Peirce, Charles S. 1967. Manuscripts in the Houghton Library of Harvard University, as identiﬁed by Richard
Robin, Annotated catalogue of the Papers of Charles S. Peirce. Amherst: University of Massachusetts
Press. [Reference to Peirce’s manuscripts will be designated MS or L.]
Perek, Florent. 2020. Productivity and schematicity in constructional change. In Lotte Sommerer &
Elena Smirnova (eds.), Nodes and networks in diachronic construction grammar, 141–165. Amsterdam
& Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Phillips, Colin. 2013. On the nature of island constraints I: Language processing and reductionist accounts.
In Jon Sprouse & Norbert Hornstein (eds.), Experimental syntax and island eﬀects, 64–108. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Pinker, Steven. 1989. Learnability and cognition: The acquisition of argument structure. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Quirk, Randolph, Sidney Greenbaum, Geoﬀrey Leech & Jan Svartvik. 1985. A comprehensive grammar of the
English language. London & New York: Longman.
Rodríguez Higuera, Claudio J. 2019. Some challenges to the evolutionary status of semiosis. Biosemiotics
12. 405–421.
Rodríguez-Puente, Paula. 2016. Tracking down phrasal verbs in the spoken language of the past: Late
Modern English in focus. English Language and Linguistics 21(1). 69–97.
Rodríguez-Puente, Paula & María Obaya-Cueli. 2022. Phrasal verbs in Early Modern English spoken
language: A colloquialization conspiracy? English Language and Linguistics 26(4). 807–831.
Ruíz de Mendoza Ibáñez, Francisco. 2022. The causal frame as a motivating factor of ﬁgurative meaning.
In Françoise Gallez & Manon Hermann (eds.), Cognition and contrast: Festschrift for Prof. Dr. Sabine De
Knop, 37–46. Bruxelles: Presses de l’Université Saint-Louis.
Ruíz de Mendoza Ibáñez, Francisco & Inés Lozano-Palacio. 2019. Unraveling irony: From linguistics to
literary criticism and back. Cognitive Semantics 5. 147–173.
Sag, Ivan. 2012. Sign-based construction grammar: An informal synopsis. In Hans C. Boas & Ivan A. Sag
(eds.), Sign-based construction grammar, 69–202. Stanford: CSLI.
Samuel, Arthur G. 2020. Psycholinguists should resist the allure of linguistic units as perceptual units.
Journal of Memory and Language 111. 104070.
Schaller, Franziska, Sabine Weiss & Horst M. Müller. 2016. Pushing the button while pushing the
argument: Motor priming of abstract action language. Cognitive Science 45(1). 1328–1349.
Schuster, Sebastian & Judith Degen. 2020. I know what you’re probably going to say: Listener adaptation
to variable use of uncertainty expressions. Cognition 203. 104285.
The semiotics of language change
89

Sims, Matthew. 2023. Many paths to anticipatory behavior: Anticipatory model acquisition across
phylogenetic and ontogenetic timescales. Biological Theory. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13752-022-
00426-w.
Slepian, Michael L. & Nalini Ambady. 2014. Simulating sensorimotor metaphors: Novel metaphors
inﬂuence sensory judgments. Cognition 130. 309–314.
Smirnova, Elena. 2015. Constructionalization and constructional change: The role of context in the
development of constructions. In Jóhanna Barðdal, Elena Smirnova, Lotte Sommerer & Spike Gildea
(eds.), Diachronic construction grammar, 81–106. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Sommerer, Lotte. 2018. Article emergence in Old English: A constructionalist perspective. Berlin & Boston: De
Gruyter.
Sommerer, Lotte & Elena Smirnova (eds.). 2020. Nodes and networks in diachronic construction grammar.
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Speed, Laura J. & Gabriella Vigliocco. 2014. Eye movements reveal the dynamic simulation of speed in
language. Cognitive Science 38. 367–382.
Strong, Brian & Frank Boers. 2019. Weighing up exercises on phrasal verbs: Retrieval versus trial-and-error
practices. The Modern Language Journal 103. 562–579.
Thim, Stefan. 2012. The English verb particle construction and its history (Topics in English Linguistics 78).
Berlin & Boston: De Gruyter Mouton.
Tononi, Giulio. 2004. An information integration theory of consciousness. BMC Neuroscience 5(42). 1–22.
Tononi, Giulio & Christof Koch. 2015. Consciousness: Here, there and everywhere? Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society B 370. 20140167.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2015. A constructionist approach to the teaching of phrasal verbs. English Today
31(3). 46–58.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2016. Working out multiword verbs within an Applied Cognitive Construction
Grammar framework. European Journal of Applied Linguistics 5(1). 1–32.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2017. Applied cognitive construction grammar: A usage-based approach to the
teaching of phrasal verbs (and other constructions). European Journal of Applied Linguistics 6(2).
279–314.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2018a. Constructions as triads of form, function, and agency: An agentive
cognitive construction grammar analysis of English modals. Cognitive Semantics 4(1). 1–38.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2018b. Exploring attachment patterns between multi-word verbs and argument
structure constructions. Lingua 209. 21–43.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2019. Taming English modals: How a Construction Grammar approach helps to
understand modal verbs. English Today 35(2). 50–57.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2020. On English modals, embodiment, and argument structure: Response to
Fong. English Today 38(2). 105–113.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2021a. Applied cognitive construction grammar: A cognitive guide to the teaching of
phrasal verbs. Medellín: Self-published monograph. Available at: https://a.co/d/82twqcn.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2021b. Applied cognitive construction grammar: A cognitive guide to the teaching of
modal verbs. Medellín: Self-published monograph. Available at: https://a.co/d/gtfmymP.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2021c. The cognition of caused-motion events in Spanish and German: An
agentive cognitive construction grammar analysis. Australian Journal of Linguistics 41(1). 33–65.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2021d. Complexes, rule-following, and language games: Wittgenstein’s
philosophical method and its relevance to semiotics. Semiotica 242(1/4). 63–100.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2022a. Metaphors are embodied otherwise they would not be metaphors.
Linguistics Vanguard 8(1). 185–196.
90
Torres-Martínez

Torres-Martínez, Sergio. 2022b. The role of semiotics in the uniﬁcation of Langue and Parole: An Agentive
Cognitive Construction Grammar approach to English modals. Semiotica 244(1/4). 195–225.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. accepted. Grammaire agentielle cognitive de constructions : Explorations
sémiotico-linguistiques des origines de la représentation incarnée. Signata, Annales de Sémiotique.
Torres-Martínez, Sergio. forthcoming. A radical embodied characterization of German Modals. Cognitive
Semantics.
Traugott, Elizabeth Closs & Graeme Trousdale. 2013. Constructionalization and constructional changes.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Trousdale, Graeme & Muriel Norde. 2013. Degrammaticalization and constructionalization: Two case
studies. Language Sciences 36. 32–46.
Vandekerckhove, Bram, Dominiek Sandra & Walter Daelemans. 2013. Selective impairment of adjective
order constraints as overeager abstraction: An elaboration on Kemmerer et al. (2009). Journal of
Neurolinguistics 26. 46–72.
Vidunas, Raimundas. 2021. Fictionalism of anticipation. Biosemiotics 14. 181–197.
Williams, Daniel. 2020. Predictive coding and thought. Synthese 197(4). 1749–1775.
Zhang, Xiaopeng & Ju Wen. 2019. Exploring multiple constraints on second language development of
English polysemous phrasal verbs. Applied Psycholinguistics 40(5). 1073–1101.
The semiotics of language change
91

