152
Is ‘Academic Language’ a 
Legitimate Theoretical 
Construct?
In this chapter, I consider two diff erent variations of the question that 
forms the title: (1) To what extent is the construct of ‘academic language’ 
empirically adequate, logically coherent, and consistent with instructional 
practice endorsed by educators focused on equity and social justice? (2) To 
what extent does the speciﬁ c distinction between ‘academic language pro-
ﬁ ciency’ (CALP) and conversational ﬂ uency (BICS) meet these same cri-
teria of legitimacy? These questions obviously overlap but they are not 
identical. The general question about the legitimacy of ‘academic lan-
guage’ is independent of the particular conception of ‘academic language’ 
incorporated in the CALP/BICS distinction, and it applies to all educa-
tional contexts, with no particular focus on multilingual or second lan-
guage contexts. By contrast, the CALP/BICS distinction represents one 
prominent but controversial account of the construct of ‘academic lan-
guage’ that emerged from research on L2 academic development among 
immigrant-background students. While its origins were in multilingual 
education contexts, it also references a distinction that applies to students 
in both monolingual and multilingual contexts.
Some researchers who endorse the general construct of ‘academic lan-
guage’ or acknowledge the speciﬁ c linguistic demands of schooling, have 
critiqued the CALP/BICS distinction on the grounds that it oversimpliﬁ es 
both conversational interactions and academic language, or devalues the 
cognitive complexity and instructional centrality of interpersonal com-
munication (e.g. Bailey, 2007; Bunch, 2013; Scarcella, 2003). Others reject 
both the general construct of ‘academic language’ and the speciﬁ c distinc-
tion between academic language proﬁ ciency and conversational ﬂ uency 
(e.g. Flores & Rosa, 2015; García, 2020; García & Solorza, 2020; 
MacSwan, 2000; MacSwan & Rolstad, 2003; Petrovic & Olmstead, 2001; 
Rolstad, 2014, 2017; Valdés, 2004, 2017; Wiley & Rolstad, 2014).
In contrast to critics of the academic language construct, numerous 
researchers accept the legitimacy of the construct. These researchers have 
proposed instructional strategies and/or theoretical frameworks designed 
8

to support teachers in enabling minoritised students to catch up academi-
cally to ﬂ uent speakers of the school language and develop strong literacy 
skills in both the school language and L1 (e.g. Anstrom et al., 2010; Bailey, 
2007; Bunch et al., 2014; DiCerbo et al., 2014; Schleppegrell, 2004; Wong 
Fillmore, 2009, 2014; Wong Fillmore & Fillmore, 2012; Wong Fillmore & 
Snow, 2018; Uccelli & Phillips Galloway, 2018; Uccelli et al., 2015a, 2015b). 
Others accept the legitimacy of the construct but argue that it should be 
conceptualised as one important component of the broad repertoire of semi-
otic tools required for academic communication (Haneda, 2014).
In the sections that follow, I review three major themes that have 
emerged in critiques of the general construct of ‘academic language’ and 
then examine the rationale proposed by those who endorse the legitimacy 
of the construct. I then discuss the more speciﬁ c issues that arise in rela-
tion to the legitimacy of the CALP/BICS distinction, focusing primarily 
on more recent critiques.
Section 1. Critiques of the Construct of ‘Academic 
Language’
Three broad themes have emerged in critiques of the legitimacy of the 
academic language construct:
• 
The constructs of ‘academic language’ and ‘academic language proﬁ -
ciency’ are illegitimate because language development is essentially 
complete by the time the child enters school around age 5. Thus, ‘lan-
guage proﬁ ciency’, by deﬁ nition, has no relationship to academic 
learning, literacy development, or the cognitive functioning involved 
in schooling.
• 
Academic language is synonymous with ‘standard language’. Thus, 
teaching ‘academic language’ to minoritised students inevitably and 
invariably entails replacing their ‘inferior’ home linguistic varieties 
with the standard language. In other words, the construct of ‘aca-
demic language’ is aligned with a deﬁ cit view of minoritised students’ 
L1 and L2 language varieties.
• 
The construct of ‘academic language’ as elaborated in the US Common 
Core State Standards (CCSS) reﬂ ects an ‘autonomous’ orientation to 
language and literacy that ignores the social, economic and political 
contexts in which language and literacy practices are embedded. This 
privileging of ‘autonomous’ over ‘ideological’ perspectives inevitably 
gives rise to deﬁ cit orientations to the spoken language of minoritised 
students and to the language of communities who have not developed 
print literacy.
A common characteristic of these claims is that they are typically made 
without qualiﬁ cations of scope or certainty and without evaluating 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 153

counterevidence or claims, thereby violating basic principles of scientiﬁ c 
analysis (Britt et al., 2014).
Claim 1. Language Proﬁ ciency is Independent of Literacy and 
Academic Knowledge
This position (MacSwan, 1999, 2000; MacSwan & Rolstad, 2003; 
Petrovic & Olmstead, 2001; Rolstad, 2017) is derived from a Chomskian 
perspective that children’s acquisition of ‘core grammar’ in their home 
language is essentially complete by about age 5. Rolstad expressed the 
view that language is an inherent human ability unrelated to literacy, cog-
nitive abilities, and academic achievement as follows:
Indeed, by the time they arrive at school, children have already learned 
most of the rules of their home language, and possess an essentially adult-
like grammar. … Children’s biological endowment for language underlies 
these special linguistic achievements, and suggests that all children should 
be linguistically successful, regardless of their social status. (Rolstad, 
2017: 498)
Based on the same set of assumptions, MacSwan (1999: 268) argued, without 
qualiﬁ cations, that language is independent of literacy and content area 
knowledge. He suggested that it is reasonable to include literacy as part of 
the deﬁ nition of second-language proﬁ ciency but in the case of schoolchil-
dren’s ﬁ rst-language development, literacy-related knowledge, conceptual 
knowledge, and content-area knowledge must be excluded from any concep-
tion of language proﬁ ciency or competence. MacSwan and Rolstad (2003: 
333) expressed their position very clearly: ‘schooling plays little role in devel-
oping language proﬁ ciency in the context of native language ability’.
As part of their rationale for this position, MacSwan (1999) and 
MacSwan and Rolstad (2003) suggested that to include literacy as an 
aspect of ‘language proﬁ ciency’ implies that members of nonliterate cul-
tures and societies, as well as pre-literate emergent bilingual children, 
have relatively low ‘language proﬁ ciency’. In other words, any linkage of 
‘literacy’, ‘conceptual knowledge’, or school-based content knowledge to 
‘language proﬁ ciency’ automatically constitutes a deﬁ cit orientation to 
minority students’ and pre-literate peoples’ language and culture. Rolstad 
elaborated on the connection (or lack thereof) between education and lan-
guage as follows:
School is one social/situational context of many possible ones in which 
language is used and shaped, but the language we use in that context is 
itself no more complex than any other variety. … Instead, many within 
education and psychology have posited dichotomies of language proﬁ -
ciency – representing linguistic diff erences as linguistically diff erent abil-
ity levels – to explain school failure among children in disadvantaged 
communities, cutting across both monolingual and bilingual communi-
ties. (Rolstad, 2017: 499)
154 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

In critiquing MacSwan’s position, I pointed to the counterevidence 
and instructional consequences of deﬁ ning ‘literacy’ as independent of 
‘language’. For example, it implies that any literacy-related knowledge 
such as range and depth of vocabulary, ability to understand and use 
formal discourse patterns, as well as reading and writing expertise have 
minimal or no relationship to language proﬁ ciency as deﬁ ned within the 
social context of schooling (Cummins, 2000).
The radical nature of the positions advanced by MacSwan (1999), 
MacSwan and Rolstad (2003) and Rolstad (2017) can be seen in relation 
to a concrete example used by Lily Wong Fillmore (2009: 4) to illustrate 
the challenges for all students in understanding typical academic texts. 
The example is taken from a Grade 5 language arts anthology: ‘In the 
typical western town, the buildings were often skirted with a sidewalk 
of wooden planks, along with hitching posts and water troughs for 
horses’. It is highly likely that most educators would ﬁ nd it at least 
bizarre to claim that this sentence does not involve language (because 
language development is complete at age 5, and thus vocabulary that is 
not part of the typical 5-year-old’s linguistic repertoire cannot qualify 
as ‘language’). Additionally, any individual diff erences among Grade 5 
students in their ability to understand this sentence are unrelated to dif-
ferences in their knowledge of language (because after age 5, there are 
no academically meaningful individual diff erences in language knowl-
edge or proﬁ ciency).
Furthermore, the curriculum content area of ‘Language Arts’ becomes 
meaningless, as do instructional strategies that are frequently seen as cen-
tral to eff ective pedagogy for all students such as teaching language across 
the curriculum, engaging in instructional conversations about textual 
meanings, and developing critical language awareness. It would also be 
meaningless to talk about developing students’ ability to use language for 
various cognitive functions such as hypothesising, predicting, identifying 
cause-eff ect relationships etc.
The idiosyncratic nature of this position can be appreciated by con-
trasting it with the perspective expressed by Christian Faltis and Sarah 
Hudelson, both of whom have been critical of the conceptual distinction 
between CALP and BICS:
Language and literacy cannot be separated. Put another way, both spoken 
language and written language are language. They are diff erent sides of 
the same coin. Central to both is the creation and construction of mean-
ing. Both are socially constructed. Both are developed in and through 
use, as learners generate, test, and reﬁ ne hypotheses. (Faltis & Hudelson, 
1998: 101–102)
This perspective regarding the fusion of language, learning, and lit-
eracy is shared by the vast majority of educators and educational linguists. 
Palmer and Martínez (2013: 270–271), for example, point to one of the 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 155

problems with the terms ‘English language learner’ and ‘English learner’ 
in the United States context: ‘Are we not all learners of the English lan-
guage throughout our lives, given that language accompanies us as we 
learn about new ideas and engage with new people?’ In the same volume, 
Bunch (2013: 299) notes: ‘Language has long been understood to play a 
central role – perhaps the central role – in teaching and learning’. Barr 
et al. in their description of ‘core academic language skills’ (CALS) simi-
larly point out:
We view language development as inseparable from context and aff ected 
by learners’ accumulated opportunities to participate in literacy prac-
tices inside and outside of school. Contrary to widespread belief, lan-
guage development continues after the early years, with learners 
expanding not only their vocabulary but also their grammatical and 
discourse proﬁ ciencies throughout adolescence and potentially through-
out life as they navigate an increasing number of social contexts. (Barr 
et al., 2019: 982)
Gottlieb and Castro make the same point throughout their immensely 
useful book Language Power, as illustrated in their statement of the 
overall goal of the book: ‘It is our intent to ensure that every teacher has 
an understanding of the importance of academic language use in their 
craft, no matter who their students are and what their discipline is’ 
(2017: xvi).
The same perspective is made explicit in a recent report from the 
European Union Commission entitled Education Begins with Language 
in which the authors highlight key lessons regarding the language of 
schooling:
• 
The language of schooling is a highly complex and foundational skill 
for learning: it has a variety of complex formal registers and gram-
matical structures which structure thought and expression, which are 
crucial for learning in formal educational settings. …
• 
Every teacher is a language teacher: given the complexity of the lan-
guage of schooling and its importance for pupils to succeed at school, 
all teachers have a role to play in supporting their pupils to master the 
language of schooling. It is important to continue raising awareness 
among subject teachers of their role in developing the language of 
schooling through linguistically sensitive teaching. (Staring & 
Broughton, 2020: 13) (emphasis original).
I pointed out that if language development is largely complete by age 
ﬁ ve, it implies that Nobel Literature Prize laureate Toni Morrison had no 
more language proﬁ ciency than a 5-year-old child (Cummins, 2000). 
Because language development, literacy learning, and academic achieve-
ment are conceptualised a priori as unrelated, this dismissal of the 
156 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

construct of ‘academic language’ has nothing to say to educators about 
how they can expand students’ expertise in using academic registers of 
language and enable them to become powerful users of language.
Petrovic and Olmstead (2001) dissented from this argument by claim-
ing that it is ‘linguistically true’ that Toni Morrison had no more linguistic 
expertise than a 5-year-old child: ‘To the extent that this can be read as 
blaming the 5-year-old for not having the literary repertoire that school-
ing has yet to give her, one could indeed interpret it as a deﬁ cit model’ 
(2001: 408). I am at a loss to describe this as anything other than absurd. 
Petrovic and Olmstead appear to be claiming that all teachers who teach 
‘Language Arts’ in school and believe (for some reason) that their goal is 
to expand their students’ agility and expertise in using oral and written 
language (e.g. in debating issues such as systemic racism) are complicit 
with discourses of linguistic deﬁ cit and view all kindergarten students as 
linguistically deﬁ cient. No teacher who tries to expand students’ language 
and literary repertoire beyond the preschool years believes that this 
endeavor constitutes blaming preschool children, or characterising them 
as ‘linguistically deﬁ cient’, because they don’t yet have the language and 
literacy expertise of students in grades 1–12.
Rolstad proposed the construct of second language instructional 
competence (SLIC) which acknowledges linguistic progression during the 
school years among L2 learners but ‘is not relevant to children’s native 
language, which ﬂ ourishes naturally within its community of use’ (2017: 
502). The weirdness of this position can be illustrated with reference to 
The English Language Development Standards developed by the World 
Class Instructional Design and Assessment (WIDA) consortium (WIDA 
Consortium, 2012). WIDA standards, and instructional strategies that are 
aligned with these standards, are used in more than 40 US states to sup-
port and assess ELLs’ academic language development. The standards 
and instructional strategies specify academic language progressions 
aligned with cognitive functions associated with each of the major content 
areas. The WIDA academic language performance criteria that are 
assessed within and across grade levels include Linguistic Complexity, 
Language Forms and Conventions, and Vocabulary Usage.
According to the logic of MacSwan and Rolstad’s (2003) theoretical 
claims about language development, it would be acceptable in principle to 
use the WIDA framework to support second language development 
among ELLs. However, it would not be legitimate for teachers of ﬂ uent 
English speakers to focus on linguistic complexity, language forms and 
conventions, and vocabulary usage across the curriculum because these 
aspects of their native language ‘have already ﬂ ourished naturally within 
their communities of use’. Personally, I am much more persuaded by 
Bunch’s (2013: 299) position that language has long been understood to 
play a central role – perhaps the central role – in teaching and learning. 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 157

The alternative theoretical positions outlined above are presented dia-
grammatically in Figures 8.1 and 8.2.
My reading of the research related to language and school achievement 
suggests that the general relationships depicted in Figure 8.2 are consistent 
with the theoretical understanding of the vast majority of researchers 
(although obviously not all would endorse the constructs of CALP and 
CALS). By contrast, the relationships depicted in Figure 8.1 represent an 
extreme outlier position based on a highly restricted understanding of the 
nature of language and language development.
The theoretical claims advanced by MacSwan, Rolstad, and others, 
and by implication their rejection of the construct of ‘academic language’, 
158 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims
Sociocultural
context
Sociocultural
context
Sociocultural
context
Sociocultural
context
Language
proficiency
Cognitive
functioning
CALP/
CALS
Literacy/School
achievement
Figure 8.2 Theoretical understanding of ‘language development’ as intersecting 
with cognitive functioning and literacy/school achievement in the context of school-
ing; CALP = cognitive/academic language proﬁ ciency, CALS = core academic lan-
guage skills (Uccelli et al., 2015a)
Sociocultural
context
Sociocultural
context
Sociocultural
context
Sociocultural
context
Language
proficiency
Cognitive
functioning
Literacy/School
achievement
Figure 8.1 Theoretical understanding of ‘language development’ as independent 
of cognitive functioning and literacy/school achievement

do not fare well when assessed in relation to the criteria for evaluating 
theoretical constructs and claims discussed in Chapter 7. With respect to 
empirical adequacy, their claims are refuted by the extensive research 
literature (discussed previously) showing highly signiﬁ cant relationships, 
after the early grades of schooling, among various measures of academic 
language proﬁ ciency such as  vocabulary knowledge, reading comprehen-
sion and verbal cognitive functioning (e.g. Grabe, 2004). These data are 
much more consistent with the claim, expressed previously, that students’ 
academic performance in school reﬂ ects a fusion of linguistic, academic 
and cognitive knowledge and functioning involving both declarative and 
procedural knowledge.
With respect to logical coherence, the claim that language develop-
ment is complete at age ﬁ ve essentially denies that there is any involvement 
of language in the expansion of vocabulary, grammatical knowledge, and 
the development of students’ insight about how language functions in 
various forms of discourse over 12 years of schooling. In order to consider 
the consequential validity of this position, I invite the reader to engage in 
a mind game where, in a professional development workshop, Language 
Arts teachers are informed that they are not teaching language (and it 
might even reﬂ ect a deﬁ cit orientation to believe they are). Teaching how 
language works in diff erent disciplines, according to this position, is also 
a futile exercise because language is unrelated, and essentially irrelevant 
to, literacy and academic content knowledge.
In short, (for obvious reasons, in my view) this challenge to the theo-
retical legitimacy of the constructs of ‘academic language’ and ‘academic 
language proﬁ ciency’ has not gained much traction in educational policy 
or instructional practice.
Claim 2. Because the Construct of ‘Academic Language’ is 
Inseparable from the Construct of ‘Standard Language’, 
Educational Policies and Instructional Practice that Position 
Academic/Standard Language as Superior to Nonstandard 
Varieties of Language Stigmatise Minoritised Students’ Spoken 
Varieties of L1 and L2
This claim is rooted in the fact that in both monolingual English class-
rooms in the United States and in some bilingual classrooms, the ‘non-
standard’ varieties spoken by minoritised students are often devalued 
either intentionally or inadvertently by teachers who view the more formal 
‘standard’ variety of L1 and L2 as superior and more appropriate. The 
critiques advanced by Guadalupe Valdés (2004, 2017) and Ofelia García 
(2009, 2020; García & Solorza, 2020) overlap considerably and I examine 
these critiques separately from the critique advanced by Nelson Flores and 
Jonathan Rosa (2015).
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 159

To what extent does the construct of ‘academic language’ 
operate to stigmatise the language practices of minoritised 
students as argued by Valdés and García?
In discussing the ways in which varieties of nonstandard English in the 
United States such as African American Vernacular English (AAVE), 
Native American English and Chicano English have been stigmatised in 
both school and out-of-school contexts, Valdés noted that:
Concern about the limitations and negative impact of the varieties of 
English spoken, especially by African American students, has a lengthy 
history in the ﬁ eld of education, and even though extensive research has 
been carried out by a number of researchers on the impact on students of 
negative attitudes toward their home varieties of language … views and 
beliefs about AAVE endure. … Moreover, instrumentalist language ide-
ologies that argue for the direct and/or explicit ‘teaching’ of the Standard 
inadvertently embrace deﬁ cit theories of minority students’ language. 
(Valdés, 2017: 333)
Valdés goes on to argue that the construct of ‘academic language’ operates 
in a similar way to ‘standard language’ to construct a symbolic/ideological 
border dividing those who ‘have’ academic language from those who do 
not. She notes that in many educational discussions academic language is 
often blended or conﬂ ated with ‘standardness’. She summarised her con-
cerns as follows:
In sum, the scholarly and professional discourse that has positioned the 
imprecise notion of academic language as fundamental to student achieve-
ment suggests that the use of language as a boundary object is moving 
rapidly toward the establishment of a new and enhanced symbolic border 
between two diff erent categories of students: users of academic language 
and users of non-academic language in American schools … [thereby] 
depriving historically disadvantaged students of their original social and 
linguistic capital. (Valdés, 2017: 338–339)
Two examples illustrate the ways in which this devaluation of cultural 
and linguistic capital has been enacted in schools over many years, long 
before the construct of ‘academic language’ entered mainstream educa-
tional discourse. In the ﬁ rst case, Ramphal (1983) carried out a micro-
ethnographic study of 14 reading lessons give to West Indian Creole 
speakers of English in a Toronto-area school. The study demonstrates 
vividly how the stigmatisation of minoritised students’ variety of English 
eff ectively excluded them from participation in learning. Ramphal 
reported that teachers consistently corrected students’ miscues at the word 
level, thereby denying students the opportunity to self-correct. One stu-
dent was interrupted so often in his oral reading in one of the lessons that 
he was able to read only one sentence, consisting of three words, uninter-
rupted. I summarised Ramphal’s conclusions as follows: ‘Ramphal sug-
gests that teachers’ constant focus on surface features of the text and of 
160 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

students’ dialect prevented students from focusing on the meaning of what 
they were reading and also fostered dependent behaviour in that students 
knew that whenever they paused at a word the teacher would automati-
cally pronounce it for them’ (Cummins, 1984a: 238).
The second example highlights similar instructional malpractice, 
albeit well-intentioned, in a middle school dual language programme 
ostensibly designed to promote biliteracy among native Spanish-speaking 
and native English-speaking students. McCollum (1999) documented how 
Spanish-speaking students in this programme came to prefer English over 
their home variety of Spanish as a result of the ways in which the teacher, 
who was from their own community, constantly corrected their speech 
and made negative comments about their nonstandard Spanish or use of 
‘vernacular’ constructions. According to Alfaro and Bartolomé:
Equally incomprehensible to these native Spanish speakers was why their 
ﬂ uent communication in their vernacular was criticized, yet their native 
English-speaking peers were lauded when they produced incomplete 
Spanish phrases. Not only was their Spanish vernacular devalued, their 
teacher also [devalued] the English they spoke. In eff ect, the Spanish-
speaking students were being muzzled because they did not speak 
Standard versions of either Spanish or English. (Alfaro & Bartolomé, 
2017: 23)
Similar concerns have been expressed by García (2020) and García and 
Solorza (2020) in arguing that ‘standard language’ and ‘academic language’ 
operate in similar hierarchical ways to devalue the varieties of Spanish and 
English spoken by Latinx students in the United States. García (2020) iden-
tiﬁ ed two predominant mainstream misunderstandings of Latinx bilin-
guals: (a) they have language deﬁ ciencies, especially in English and (b) their 
language deﬁ ciencies extend to Spanish because what they lack is academic 
language. She claims, correctly, that the concept of a standard language has 
been constructed by nation-states and their institutions in order to control 
those whose language and knowledge systems are rendered invalid. In this 
process, the ‘language of bilingual communities has been made deﬁ cient by 
imposing the knowledge-system of white monolingual middle-class people’ 
(2020: 2). She describes the role of ‘academic language’ in this process of 
linguistic and cultural subordination as follows:
In the last few years, schools have imposed another language construct 
that restricts our view of Latinx bilingual students as knowledgeable 
about language. This construct is what has been called academic lan-
guage. It is now said that Latinx bilingual students fail not just because 
they do not ‘have’ English or Spanish, but because they also do not have 
academic language. … Thus, the concept of academic language adds to 
the burden and the failure of Latinx bilingual students and renders their 
knowledge of language and bilingualism as non-academic, popular, 
intuitive, incomprehensible, or simply wrong. (García, 2020: 2–3) 
(emphasis original)
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 161

It is clear from the observations of García, Valdés, McCollum, Ramphal 
and others that devaluation of minoritised students’ identities can occur in 
both monolingual and bilingual programmes as a result of misconceptions 
on the part of teachers about the appropriateness and ‘correctness’ of the 
varieties of L1 and L2 that students bring to school. As McCollum’s research 
demonstrates, it is not only ‘white monolingual middle-class people’ that 
participate in this process of devaluation but also, in some situations, bilin-
gual teachers from minoritised communities who unintentionally stigmatise 
students’ language and cultural knowledge. It is also clear, that when teach-
ers conﬂ ate ‘academic language’ with ‘standard language’ and stigmatise 
students’ language, culture, and identities in the course of trying to teach 
literacy and academic language proﬁ ciency, they are inadvertently reinforc-
ing stereotypes and coercive relations of power (see Figure 5.1 and Table 
6.2). Rather than connecting to students’ lives and affi  rming students’ iden-
tities, they are invalidating students’ experiences, talents, and identities.
Clearly these examples of instructional malpractice are indefensible 
and implicate not only the lack of awareness of some individual educators 
but also the systemic structures (e.g. teacher education programmes, pro-
fessional development priorities, etc.) that perpetuate these practices. But 
to what extent do these unfortunate examples of misguided practice inval-
idate the legitimacy of the construct of ‘academic language’? Apart from 
designating the construct of academic language as ‘imprecise’, neither 
García nor Valdés address the empirical data that have been invoked to 
support the legitimacy of the construct. They do not engage with the issue 
of whether the linguistic registers typically involved in ‘everyday’ linguis-
tic interactions outside of school are identical to or distinct in certain ways 
from the linguistic registers operating across the curriculum and in class-
room interactions that attempt to socialise students into ﬂ uid use and 
understanding of these registers (Gibbons, 2015).
To illustrate, García and Solorza (2020: 5) note that many scholars 
‘describe academic language as having long and complex sentences and 
using subordinating conjunctions, including frequently long noun phrases 
with embedded clauses; using nominalization, that is, using verbs or adjec-
tives as nouns or noun phrases; and employing complex and unfamiliar 
vocabulary (Bailey 2007; Di Cerbo et al. 2014; Scarcella 2003; Schleppegrell 
2004, 2012; Snow and Uccelli 2009, among others)’. They acknowledge 
that ‘formulations such as these often describe the language of written aca-
demic texts’ (2020: 5) but note that this language is not characteristic of 
typical teacher-student classroom interactions. This argument ignores the 
fact that success in school for all students depends on the extent to which 
they develop competence in reading increasingly complex written texts and 
learning how to write coherently for a variety of audiences across the cur-
riculum. Thus, the characteristics of ‘academic language’ that García and 
Solorza summarise (and do not dispute) create signiﬁ cant learning chal-
lenges for white middle-class students as well as for minoritised students.
162 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

My reading of their work suggests that Valdés and García are more con-
cerned with the ways in which the construct of ‘academic language’ has been 
inappropriately coopted to legitimise problematic instructional practices 
than with the extent to which this construct legitimately reﬂ ects language 
registers that are prominent within the context of schooling. This interpreta-
tion is based on the fact that (a) neither researcher has challenged or 
addressed in any depth the nature of the language registers used in schools 
(e.g. Wong Fillmore & Fillmore, 2012) and (b) both have affi  rmed the impor-
tance of teaching minoritised students the standardised academic language 
that permeates academic texts and school subjects across the curriculum.
Valdés (2004: 123), for example, noted that she is ‘also not arguing 
that students should not be taught the conventions of academic language’. 
She cited approvingly the TESOL (1997) ESL Standards that, among 
other descriptors, speciﬁ ed that students will use English
to obtain, process, construct and provide subject matter information in 
written form. They will retell information, compare and contrast infor-
mation, persuade, argue, and justify, analyse, synthesise and infer from 
information. They will also hypothesise and predict, understand and pro-
duce technical vocabulary and text features according to the content area. 
(Valdés, 2004: 121)
In other words, she endorsed the legitimacy of teaching the academic reg-
isters associated with subject matter content, and also the cognitive func-
tions that students use to acquire, interpret, and act on information. She 
elaborated the pedagogical focus of her concerns as follows:
What I am questioning is whether academic language can, in fact, be 
taught or learned eff ectively in the self-contained, hermetic universes of 
ELL classrooms. … Students must be encouraged to see themselves as 
having something to say, as taking part in a dialogue with teachers, with 
students in their classroom, with students in their school, with members 
of their communities, and with other writers who have written about 
issues and questions that intrigue them. (Valdés, 2004: 123)
Valdés’ concern with segregated ELL classrooms is well-founded. 
Callahan et al., for example, reported that ‘students placed in ESL course-
work exit high school with signiﬁ cantly less academic content, even when 
accounting for English proﬁ ciency, prior achievement, generational status, 
ethnicity, parental education, years in U.S. schools, and school level fac-
tors’ (2010: 26). The alternative pedagogical strategies proposed by Valdés 
are entirely consistent with the emphasis in the present volume on con-
necting instruction to minoritised students’ lives, validating their spoken 
varieties of L1 and L2, affi  rming their identities, and generally promoting 
pedagogies of powerful communication (Walker, 2014).
García similarly acknowledges the importance of engaging students in 
studying aspects of standard and academic language such as syntax, 
vocabulary, and discourse structure in ways that do not devalue the 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 163

nonstandard varieties of L1 and L2 that minoritised students bring to the 
classroom: ‘A translanguaging literacies approach also includes strategies 
such as translation and cross-linguistic study of syntax, vocabulary, word 
choice, cognates, and discourse structure to advance students’ metalin-
guistic awareness of their own bilingual practices, thus heightening their 
engagement with texts’ (García & Kleifgen, 2019: 13). García has also 
acknowledged the reality of academic and standard language and the need 
to teach these registers explicitly:
Because literacy relies on the standard, the standard language itself is 
taught explicitly in school, and it certainly needs to be taught. … We are 
not questioning the teaching of a standard language in school; without its 
acquisition, language minority children will continue to fail and will not 
have equal access to resources and opportunities. But we have to recog-
nize that an exclusive focus on the standard variety keeps out other lan-
guaging practices that are children’s authentic linguistic identity 
expression. (García, 2009: 36) (emphasis original)
What researcher or theorist over the past 60 years has argued that instruc-
tion should focus exclusively on the standard variety and prohibit minori-
tised students from using their authentic spoken varieties of L1 and L2? 
Ever since Labov (1969, 1972) established ‘the logic of nonstandard 
English’, there has been consensus among researchers and applied linguists 
that schools should build on the linguistic resources that students bring to 
school as part of a process of affi  rming the ‘funds of knowledge’ that exist 
in minoritised communities (Moll et al., 1992). I assume that what García 
intends to communicate here is that the teaching of biliteracy, together with 
L1 and L2 academic and standard language skills, should also include 
affi  rmation of minoritised students’ authentic languaging practices, a 
sentiment that virtually every contemporary applied linguist endorses.2
This interpretation is reinforced by García’s (2013) apparent endorse-
ment of the Common Core State Standards (CCSS) with their explicit 
emphasis on teaching academic language. In an introductory article to the 
pioneering CUNY-NYSIEB Guide for Educators (Celic & Seltzer, 2013) 
entitled Theorizing Translanguaging for Educators, García directly dis-
cussed the question of how translanguaging ﬁ ts with the CCSS. She noted 
that a translanguaging pedagogical approach enables emergent bilingual 
students to meet the CCSS even when their English language is not fully 
developed. She pointed out that every instructional strategy in the 
Translanguaging Guide indexes in the sidebar of the page the relevant 
common core standard. She elaborated on the compatibility of translan-
guaging with the CCSS as follows:
In addition, the theory of translanguaging ﬁ ts well with the theory of 
language as action that is contained in the Common Core State Standards. 
Translanguaging off ers bilingual students the possibility of being able to 
164 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

gather, comprehend, evaluate, synthesize and report on information and 
ideas using text-based evidence; engage with complex texts, not only liter-
ary but informational; and write to persuade, explain and convey real or 
imaginary experience, even as their English is developing. (Celic & 
Seltzer, 2013: 3–4)
This perspective is very far removed from Wiley and Rolstad’s claim, 
reviewed later in this chapter, that ‘the CCSS reﬂ ect … an autonomous, 
deﬁ cit orientation’ (2014: 38). But it also seems very far removed from 
García’s (2020) claim that the construct of ‘academic language’ subordi-
nates the linguistic knowledge and expertise of minoritised students. 
Clearly, enabling minoritised students to understand and use academic 
registers (ideally in L1 and L2) by means of the powerful instructional 
strategies elaborated in the Translanguaging Guide (Celic & Seltzer, 2013) 
does not in any way position their language knowledge and expertise as 
deﬁ cient, or devalue their linguistic, cultural, and intellectual identities. 
In short, García’s (2020) problem with ‘academic language’ seems to be 
with the problematic ways in which it has too often been taught rather 
than with the construct itself.
To what extent is there any substance to García and Solorza’s (2020: 
8) claim that the major problem with respect to the construct of ‘academic 
language’ is that the ‘emphasis on academic language has driven instruc-
tion away from what scholars have called an asset-based approach to edu-
cation’. This claim is weakened by their admission in the following 
sentence that ‘the linguistic and cultural practices of Latinx bilingual stu-
dents have always been devalued’. Thus, their case against the construct 
of academic language rests on two questionable propositions:
(1) raciolinguistic discrimination directed against the language practices 
of Latinx students has become more prevalent over the past decade, 
during which there has been an intensiﬁ ed focus on teaching academic 
language (as illustrated for example in the CCSS) than was the case in 
the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s;
(2) This purported intensiﬁ cation of raciolinguistic discrimination can be 
attributed to the construct of ‘academic language’.
No evidence is presented to support either of these propositions. The 
miseducation of Latinx students obviously continues in many US schools 
but, to my knowledge, no researcher has presented any evidence that the 
situation is currently worse than it has been in the past, prior to the 
emphasis on ‘academic language’. By the same token, there is no intrinsic 
relationship between the construct of ‘academic language’ and asset-based 
approaches to education. The inspirational research and school/university 
collaborations pursued by García and colleagues (and many other 
educators – see Chapter 11) have demonstrated how asset-based 
approaches (such as those outlined in Table 6.2) can develop minoritised 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 165

students’ knowledge of academic language and enable them to use it pow-
erfully in a variety of communicative contexts.
In short, despite their concerns with the way the construct of ‘aca-
demic language’ has been interpreted instructionally in some US educa-
tional policies and classroom practices, neither Valdés nor García have 
unequivocally disputed the legitimacy of the construct. Valdés acknowl-
edges that conventions of academic language should be taught ‘in class-
rooms that are open to multiple texts and multiple voices’ (2004: 123), and 
García affi  rms rather than refutes the legitimacy of academic/standard 
language by arguing that it ‘certainly needs to be taught’ (2009: 36).
The positions articulated by both Valdés and García appear similar to 
that advanced by Lisa Delpit (1988, 1995) more than 30 years ago. Delpit 
argued that teachers must recognise the potential conﬂ ict between minori-
tised students’ home discourses and the discourse of the school. The 
appropriate instructional approach, according to Delpit, involves a both/
and rather than either/or orientation. A decontextualised focus on stan-
dard academic language risks devaluing the varieties of language(s) and 
the registers that students and communities use in everyday social interac-
tions. However, attempts to affi  rm students’ language varieties without 
explicitly teaching them the ‘codes of power’ infused in academic lan-
guage risk excluding them from educational achievement and economic 
participation. According to Delpit (1988: 285) the Black community wants 
‘to ensure that the school provides their children with discourse patterns, 
interactional styles, and spoken and written language codes that will 
allow them success in the larger society’. She quoted a parent who 
demanded ‘My kids know how to be Black – you all teach them how to be 
successful in the White man’s world’. The appropriate way for teachers to 
do this, according to Delpit (1995: 164) is to transform the school dis-
course so that Black students can see themselves within it: ‘To do so, they 
must saturate the dominant discourse with new meanings, must wrest 
from it a place for the gloriﬁ cation of their students and their forbears’. 
The poem entitled ‘The Hill We Climb’ written by Amanda Gorman, and 
recited by her at the January 2021 inauguration of President Joe Biden 
(and Kamala Harris as Vice President), illustrates powerfully how minori-
tised young people are more than capable of saturating the dominant dis-
course with new and emancipatory meanings.
To what extent is ‘academic language’ permeated by discourses 
of appropriateness and raciolinguistic ideologies (Flores & Rosa, 
2015)?
Theoretical claims
In an influential article entitled ‘Undoing appropriateness: 
Raciolinguistic ideologies and language diversity in education’, Flores 
and Rosa (2015) argued that additive approaches to the education of 
166 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

bilingual students, heritage language learners, and Standard English 
learners are inherently problematic because ‘discourses of appropriate-
ness’ lie at their core. They suggested that these discourses of appropriate-
ness ‘involve the conceptualization of standardized linguistic practices as 
objective sets of linguistic forms that are understood to be appropriate for 
academic settings’ (2015: 150). Furthermore, these standardised linguistic 
practices are anchored in raciolinguistic ideologies ‘that conﬂ ate certain 
racialized bodies with linguistic deﬁ ciency unrelated to any objective lin-
guistic practices’ (2015: 150). As a result of this process, ‘long-term English 
learners, heritage language learners, and Standard English learners can be 
understood to inhabit a shared position as raciolinguistic Others vis-à-vis 
the white listening subject’ (2015: 151).
Common to Flores and Rosa’s (2015) concern with the ways in which 
discourses of appropriateness impact the educational experiences of these 
three groups or categories of students is the construction, in educational 
policy and practice, of their nonstandard linguistic varieties as inferior 
to the formal standardised ‘academic’ language taught in school. They 
reject what they view as ‘rigid’ distinctions between ‘academic’ and 
‘social’ language use on the grounds that so-called ‘academic’ language 
is eff ectively used outside of formal school contexts and ‘social’ language 
is eff ectively used in conventional classroom settings. They claim that as 
a result of what they label the ‘crude dichotomy’ (2015: 159) between 
academic and nonacademic linguistic practices, the language dexterity of 
ﬂ uent speakers of a language such as Spanish, which students have 
learned in the home, is often stigmatised in formal academic contexts, 
thereby illustrating the operation of raciolinguistic ideologies and dis-
courses of appropriateness.
With respect to long-term English learners, Flores and Rosa critique 
Olsen’s (2010) description of these students as having high functioning 
social language, weak academic language and signiﬁ cant gaps in reading 
and writing skills. They argue that Olsen depicts long-term English 
learners as ‘deﬁ cient in the academic language that is appropriate for a 
school context and necessary for academic success’ (2015: 157). Also seen 
as problematic are Olsen’s (2010: 33) pedagogical recommendations that 
instruction for these students should focus on ‘powerful oral language, 
explicit literacy development, instruction in the academic uses of English, 
high quality writing, extensive reading of relevant texts, and emphasis on 
academic language and complex vocabulary’. Finally, they dispute Olsen’s 
recommendation that long-term English learners should receive additive 
instruction that develops their home language literacy skills. Flores and 
Rosa summarise their critique by claiming that Olsen’s recommendations 
for supporting long-term English learners’ academic development are 
‘squarely focused on molding them into white speaking subjects who have 
mastered the empirical linguistic practices deemed appropriate for a 
school context’ (2015: 157).
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 167

With respect to heritage language learners, Flores and Rosa endorse 
Valdés’ (2001) rejection of ‘prestige’ varieties of linguistic practice as 
inherently more sophisticated than ‘nonprestige’ varieties. But they 
critique her ‘embrace’ of an additive approach to heritage language 
education in which heritage language learners must build from their 
proﬁ ciencies developed outside of the classroom in order to master the 
language that is appropriate in an academic setting. This approach, they 
argue, implicitly accepts the distinction between social and academic uses 
of language and is insuffi  cient to address the raciolinguistic ideologies 
produced by the white speaking subject.
The third focus of the Flores/Rosa critique is Delpit’s (1988, 2006) 
approach to educating African American standard English learners. 
Delpit advocated explicit teaching of the linguistic ‘codes of power’ where 
‘the point must not be to eliminate students’ home languages, but rather 
to add other voices and discourses to their repertoires’ (2006: 163). This 
orientation appears entirely consistent with that proposed by Valdés 
(2004). Flores and Rosa note that Delpit endorses a critical additive 
approach where students learn the codes of power while they are also 
‘helped to learn about the arbitrariness of those codes and about the 
power relationships they represent’ (Delpit, 2006: 45). However, they also 
claim that it is ‘clear that Delpit views the codes of power as a discrete set 
of practices [and as] objective linguistic practices rather than ideological 
phenomena’ (2015: 165).
In order to ‘undo’ appropriateness in language education, Flores and 
Rosa (2015) suggest that we need to shift the focus of scrutiny to the white 
listening subject. They advocate a critical heteroglossic perspective that 
both ‘legitimizes the dynamic linguistic practices of language-minoritized 
students while simultaneously raising awareness about issues of language 
and power’ (2015: 167). A pedagogical focus on critical language aware-
ness combined with a heteroglossic rather than a monoglossic perspective 
has the potential to open up space for unmasking the racism inherent in 
dominant approaches to language education.
Critique of the Flores/Rosa theoretical claims
The legitimacy of Flores and Rosa’s (2015) theoretical claims with 
respect to ‘academic language’ can be analysed with reference to the cri-
teria of empirical adequacy, logical coherence and consequential validity. 
Their claims fall far short of credibility in relation to all three criteria. A 
major problem throughout their analysis is that they repeatedly rely on 
blanket assertions with no qualiﬁ cations regarding the social and educa-
tional conditions under which these assertions might be credible.
Empirical adequacy
Flores and Rosa conﬂ ate ‘standard language’ with ‘academic language’, 
claiming that both are embedded in discourses of appropriateness that reﬂ ect 
168 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

‘racialized ideological perceptions rather than objective linguistic categories’ 
(2015: 152). As noted previously, they also question the distinction between 
linguistic practices that are appropriate for academic and social uses.
 In equating standard language with academic language and implying 
that there is no empirically credible distinction between the language reg-
isters people typically use in everyday social interactions and the language 
registers students encounter in academic contexts, Flores and Rosa ignore 
a signiﬁ cant amount of research pointing to characteristics of written/
academic language found in textbooks, novels, newspapers and schools, 
that diff er signiﬁ cantly from the language we typically use in interper-
sonal face-to-face social interactions (e.g. Biber, 1986; Corson, 1995, 
1997; Massaro, 2015; Wong Fillmore, 1982, 2009, 2014; Wong Fillmore & 
Fillmore, 2012). Bailey (2007: 9), for example, noted that diff erences 
between social and academic language lie in ‘the relative frequency of 
complex grammatical structures, specialized vocabulary, and uncommon 
language functions’. Recent reviews of this issue that reinforce Bailey’s 
conclusions include Cummins (2017c), DiCerbo et al. (2014), Heppt et al. 
(2016), Uccelli et al. (2015a, 2015b), Volodina et al. (2020).
Flores and Rosa’s (2015) claims that there is no legitimate distinction 
between social and academic registers of language and that academic reg-
isters are permeated with discourses of appropriateness and raciolinguis-
tic ideologies are simply asserted with no attempt to even consider 
empirical evidence that might be at variance with these claims. As pointed 
out by von der Mühlen et al. (2016), evidence-free assertion-based claims 
cannot be considered empirically credible. Thus, any attempt to dismiss 
the legitimacy of the construct of academic language that fails to even 
consider the empirical evidence is unconvincing.
Logical coherence
Flores and Rosa’s (2015) claims regarding academic language also fail 
to meet the criterion of logical coherence. To illustrate, they note that 
Delpit (1988, 2006) advocates a critical instructional approach that 
attempts to demystify the arbitrary nature of codes of power and help 
students understand the power relationships these linguistic forms 
represent. Yet in the next paragraph, they claim that Delpit views the 
codes of power as a discrete set of objective linguistic practices rather than 
as ideological phenomena.
I have no idea how Flores and Rosa reached this conclusion. Delpit’s 
statement that the codes of power are arbitrary seems very far from Flores 
and Rosa’s claim that she views them as ‘objective linguistic practices’. 
Their claim that she doesn’t view the codes of power as ideological 
phenomena is hard to reconcile with her statement that the codes of power 
are embedded in societal power relations.3
An additional example of logical inconsistency involves Flores and 
Rosa’s (2015: 167) denial that they are suggesting that ‘people from 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 169

racialized or language-minoritized communities should not seek to engage 
in linguistic practices deemed appropriate by mainstream society’. But it 
appears that they are suggesting that teachers who attempt to extend 
students’ access to these linguistic practices are (inadvertent) agents of 
raciolinguistic ideologies and discourses of appropriateness.
Flores and Rosa might object that their analytic focus is on abstract 
theoretical constructs such as raciolinguistic ideologies, discourses of 
appropriateness, and objective linguistic forms rather than the actual 
instructional work of teachers. They note, for example, that their analysis 
focuses on racial hierarchies rather than individual practices. However, 
racial hierarchies ﬁ nd expression only through the instructional practices 
of individual teachers. For example, few researchers would dispute a 
claim that teachers who encourage minoritised students to replace their 
L1 with English are complicit with, and agents of, raciolinguistic ideolo-
gies, albeit inadvertently in many cases. By the same token, if the con-
struct of ‘academic language’ is rooted in raciolingustic ideologies, then 
teachers who teach students how academic language works in any explicit 
way are clearly complicit in perpetuating raciolinguistic ideologies.
The other side of this coin is that if the pernicious eff ects of racial 
hierarchies are to be resisted or undone, it will surely be through the 
agency of teachers, students, and community members. Menken et al. 
(2011: 103) express this point as follows: ‘promoting multilingualism in 
classroom settings relies on teachers, who are at the epicenter of language 
policy implementation in schools’. Thus, the claim that ‘abstract theoreti-
cal constructs’ are unrelated to the work of teachers is highly problematic 
and raises the question: ‘Why write about these abstract theoretical con-
structs if they are not relevant to what teachers do in their classrooms’?
A ﬁ nal logical issue involves the criteria for deciding which (academic) 
language registers are permeated with discourses of appropriateness and 
raciolinguistic ideologies. The absence of any qualiﬁ cations of scope or 
certainty (Britt et al., 2014) in Flores and Rosa’s analysis suggests that they 
view all forms of standard and academic language as constituting ‘racialized 
ideological perceptions’. Does this theoretical claim imply that the writings 
of Gloria Anzaldúa, Te-Nehisi Coates, Frederick Douglass and Toni 
Morrison, among many others, are infused with raciolinguistic ideologies? 
If the academic registers used by these authors are not characterised by 
raciolinguistic ideologies, then which academic registers, if any, are infused 
with raciolingistic ideologies? What are the criteria for deciding whether a 
textbook, novel, or article is innocent or guilty in this regard? Are educa-
tors of colour who promote their students’ acquisition of academic registers 
also affl  icted with the ‘white gaze’ and raciolinguistic ideologies?
In summary, Flores and Rosa’s unqualiﬁ ed assertion that the construct 
of ‘academic language’ and approaches to teaching academic language are 
permeated by discourses of appropriateness and raciolinguistic ideologies 
invokes the following ﬂ awed logic:
170 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

Because
some educators who teach language arts to minoritised students in both 
bilingual and English-medium programmes disparage, implicitly or 
explicitly, students’ ﬂ uid non-standard language varieties and practices 
by failing to affi  rm and build on these language varieties and practices as 
they teach standard academic language skills,
therefore
all educators who teach literacy and academic language skills to minori-
tised students are complicit in the marginalisation of students’ ﬂ uid lan-
guage varieties and practices.
It is important to emphasise that this analysis in no way disputes the 
reality either of discourses of appropriateness or raciolinguistic ideologies 
(e.g. McCollum, 1999; Labov, 1969, 1972; Lippi-Green, 1997/2012; 
Ramphal, 1983). Clearly, the teaching of language arts (in L1 and/or L2) in 
many school systems may be prescriptive in orientation (as pointed out by 
García, 2020 and Valdés, 2017), and standards documents such as the 
Common Core State Standards in the United States may reinforce prescriptive 
orientations in some school contexts. However, there is no unique or inherent 
linkage between the theoretical construct of ‘academic language’ and 
misguided instructional approaches that attempt to teach academic language 
in highly problematic ways. Both Valdés (2017) and García (2009; García & 
Kleifgen, 2019), and many other researchers (e.g. Cummins, 2001a; Wong 
Fillmore, 1982, 2009, 2014) have pointed to ways of developing minoritised 
students’ expertise in using academic registers of language that affi  rm rather 
than devalue students’ linguistic and cultural capital.
Consequential validity
Flores and Rosa’s (2015) analysis also falls short with respect to the 
criterion of consequential validity. As one example, noted previously, they 
critique Olsen’s (2010: 33) argument that instruction for long-term English 
learners should promote their home language literacy skills together with 
powerful oral language, explicit literacy development, instruction in the 
academic uses of English, high quality writing, extensive reading of rele-
vant texts, and emphasis on academic language and complex vocabulary. 
Flores and Rosa claim that these instructional approaches are designed to 
mold minoritised students into ‘white speaking subjects,’ but they tell us 
very little about what teachers should do to avoid this outcome apart from 
a vague instructional focus on critical language awareness that valorizes 
the home language practices of minoritised students.
Certainly, few if any progressive educators would argue against a 
pedagogical focus on critical language awareness or instruction that 
valorizes the home language practices of minoritised students (see, for 
example, Table 6.2 and Cummins, 2001a). But how is this focus in any 
way inconsistent with Olsen’s recommendations that instruction should 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 171

support students’ home language literacies and expand their abilities to 
use oral and written language in powerful ways? Are Flores and Rosa 
(2015) suggesting that teachers should not encourage the development of 
powerful oral language, high quality writing, and extensive reading of 
relevant texts? If it is problematic for teachers to focus on powerful oral 
language, what should they focus on instead? If extensive reading of 
relevant texts is a problematic instructional goal, how should teachers 
expand their students’ literacy skills? Are teachers who provide conceptual 
and linguistic feedback on minoritised students’ academic writing 
complicit with discourses of appropriateness?4
In short, Flores and Rosa’s critique of the construct of ‘academic lan-
guage’ and teachers’ attempts to expand minoritised students’ access to 
academic language registers has no empirical basis, is logically ﬂ awed, 
and devoid of clear pedagogical directions for teachers. Blanket generali-
sations simply asserted without qualiﬁ cations risk undermining the over-
all credibility of potentially useful theoretical constructs such as discourses 
of appropriateness and raciolinguistic ideologies.
Claim 3. The Construct of ‘Academic Language’ Reﬂ ects an 
‘Autonomous’ Orientation to Language and Literacy that 
Ignores the Social, Economic and Political Contexts in which 
Language and Literacy Practices are Embedded
This claim primarily reﬂ ects the critique of the BICS/CALP distinction 
written by Terrence Wiley (1996) to which I responded in detail (Cummins, 
2000). More recently, Wiley and Rolstad (2014), in an article entitled ‘The 
Common Core State Standards and the Great Divide’, have reprised this 
critique with a more general focus on what they view as the uncritical 
emphasis on ‘academic language’ in the Common Core State Standards 
(CCSS). In this section, I focus on the Wiley and Rolstad critique and, in 
particular, the overly simplistic and rigid way they interpret the distinction 
between autonomous and ideological orientations to literacy proposed 
initially by the late eminent British ‘New Literacies’ theorist Brian Street 
(1984).5
I argue that when viewed as a conceptual distinction to highlight the 
kinds of evidence and theoretical assumptions that underlie diff erent 
approaches to literacy research and instructional practice, the contrast 
between autonomous and ideological orientations represents a useful heu-
ristic tool. However, when adopted as a rigid either-or dichotomy that 
involves rejecting a priori the legitimacy of alternative orientations to lit-
eracy research, the autonomous/ideological distinction loses all credibil-
ity. In place of a scientiﬁ cally unproductive dichotomy, I propose a 
both-and perspective that acknowledges (a) that autonomous and ideo-
logical orientations are each capable of generating legitimate research 
questions and usefully investigating language and literacy issues according 
172 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

to the modes of inquiry appropriate to their respective disciplines, (b) that 
each research orientation has contributed signiﬁ cantly to our understand-
ing of language and literacy development among minoritised students 
and (c) that it makes far more sense to combine the insights from both 
orientations in designing eff ective literacy instruction for minoritised stu-
dents rather than disparaging and dismissing the ‘opposing’ research tra-
dition. The framework presented in Table 6.2 reﬂ ects this ‘both-and’ 
orientation to literacy research and theory.
Autonomous and ideological orientations to literacy and 
academic language: Oppositional or complementary?
An oppositional perspective
Wiley and Rolstad (2014: 39) describe the autonomous orientation as 
concentrating ‘on formal mental properties of decoding and encoding 
text, and comprehending vocabulary, without consideration of how these 
processes are embedded within socio-cultural contexts’. Within this ori-
entation, literacy development is studied from the perspective of individ-
ual psychological development. By contrast, the ideological orientation 
emphasises literacy practices as being embedded in, and shaped by, social, 
economic and political institutions and the power relations operating 
within these contexts.
Wiley and Rolstad point out that social practices scholars are not 
uninterested in individual cognitive development but these scholars argue 
that ‘language and literacy skills or proﬁ ciencies are best understood and 
analyzed in social context, rather than as independent, autonomous skills, 
and that language and literacy emerge from social practice’ (2014: 39). 
They state explicitly, and without qualiﬁ cation, that ‘the CCSS reﬂ ect … 
an autonomous, deﬁ cit orientation’ (2014: 38). Their basic thesis is elabo-
rated in their conclusions:
The Common Core State Standards (CCSS) initiative places a strong 
emphasis on the development of ‘academic English,’ though little eff ort 
has been made to deﬁ ne the construct. One sees the persistence of the idea 
that language itself is the gateway to greater cognitive development, and 
that the language of the literate somehow contributes special qualities 
which permit access and insight into academic disciplines which other 
forms of language do not allow. … It is simply not the case that literacy 
and academic language involve higher order cognition, while other 
domains in which we use specialized language do not. (Wiley & Rolstad, 
2014: 51)
Their argument here is that just as in the ‘Great Divide’ debate, where 
some scholars argued that ‘literate’ people have cognitive advantages in 
comparison to so-called ‘nonliterate’ people, claims that were debunked 
by Scribner and Cole (1978), the CCSS emphasis on ‘academic English’ 
implies that this form of language confers special educational and 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 173

cognitive advantages on people. In opposition to the CCSS emphasis on 
‘academic language’, Wiley and Rolstad claim that expertise in 
understanding and using literate or academic language confers no more 
advantage than other forms of language on students attempting to access 
science, math and social studies content.
This claim immediately raises the question of what is meant by ‘other 
forms of language’ are we talking about the language of horticulture, the 
language of Facebook interactions, or the language of casual, everyday 
interaction between friends, or all registers of language used in out-of-
school contexts? It seems at least highly counter-intuitive, not to mention 
contrary to considerable research evidence (e.g. Barr et al., 2019; Phillips 
Galloway & Uccelli, 2018), to claim that students who have developed 
familiarity with and expertise in using general academic registers have no 
more advantage in accessing subject matter disciplinary content within 
the sociocultural context of schooling than students whose knowledge of 
general academic registers is much less strongly developed.
With respect to Wiley and Rolstad’s claim that higher order cognition 
is involved in human endeavours outside of academic and print literacy-
related contexts, what educator or applied linguist has ever argued that 
this is not the case?6 I know of no serious educational scholar concerned 
with the education of minoritised students who endorses any form of deﬁ -
cit orientation to students’ cognitive or academic development. Thus, 
Wiley and Rolstad’s (2014) invocation of the ‘Great Divide’ debate relating 
to the cognitive abilities of ‘literate’ versus ‘nonliterate’ peoples seems 
little more than a dubious rhetorical device intended to smear by analogy 
theorists who believe that the construct of ‘academic language’ has empir-
ical and logical substance.
Wiley and Rolstad do not reference any empirical support for their asser-
tion that knowledge of academic language is essentially independent of the 
development of students’ ability to access and gain insight into academic 
disciplines. Nor do they acknowledge any of the research that contradicts 
their position showing strong relationships between academic language skills 
and school performance in content-area disciplines (e.g. Grabe, 2004; 
Kaufman et al., 2016). For example, the dimensions of ‘core academic lan-
guage skills’ (CALS), identiﬁ ed by Uccelli and colleagues by means of exten-
sive empirical research, demonstrate that academic language skills are 
strongly related to academic performance across the curriculum (e.g. Uccelli 
et al., 2015a, 2015b; Barr et al., 2019). These relationships are clearly refer-
enced in at least three of the seven domains of CALS identiﬁ ed empirically 
by these authors: Domain 1: Unpacking Dense Information at the Word and 
Sentence Level; Domain 5: Understanding Metalinguistic Vocabulary; and 
Domain 7: Recognizing Academic Language. Domain 1 is described as fol-
lows: ‘Skill in comprehending (a) complex words and (b) complex sentences 
helps readers to unpack dense information in academic texts’ (Barr et al., 
2019: 987). Other scholars have similarly identiﬁ ed skills such as focusing on 
174 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

informational density in content-area texts as central components of the 
development of academic expertise (e.g. Bunch, 2013; Wong Fillmore, 2009, 
2014). In short, contrary to Wiley and Rolstad’s claims, there is overwhelm-
ing empirical evidence showing strong relationships between academic lan-
guage skills and school performance across the curriculum.
I suspect that Wiley and Rolstad would dismiss any empirical research 
that casts doubt on their assertion that ‘academic language’ is unrelated 
to disciplinary knowledge as emanating from an autonomous orientation 
and consequently not credible. This dismissal of all research deriving from 
an autonomous orientation logically also applies to the research con-
ducted by a large majority of applied linguists, cognitive psychologists, 
and second language educators who have explored the nature of academic 
language and ways of enabling students to read and produce complex 
academic text. For example, the bulk of empirical evidence referenced by 
theorists such as Bunch (2013), Bunch et  al. (2014), Gibbons (2015), 
Hiebert and Mesmer (2013), Uccelli et  al. (2015a, 2015b) and Wong 
Fillmore and Fillmore (2012) draws predominantly on psychological and 
applied linguistics research that owes little to ideological perspectives. Are 
all of these, and many other theorists, complicit with deﬁ cit orientations 
to minoritised students’ academic development? Should all of the research 
and theory related to the role of scaff olding academic content in order to 
make it comprehensible for learners (e.g. Gibbons, 2015) be rejected 
simply because it is alleged to reﬂ ect an autonomous perspective? If the 
CCSS focus on academic language reﬂ ects a deﬁ cit orientation to minori-
tised students’ language and cognition, then why should the researchers 
cited above (among many others) who have discussed how to implement 
the CCSS not also be rebuked for promoting a deﬁ cit agenda?
The most useful (and truly inspirational) resource that provides guid-
ance for teachers of multilingual students to implement the CCSS is the 
CUNY-NYSIEB Translanguaging Guide (Celic & Seltzer, 2013; García, 
2013), which aligns translanguaging strategies with relevant Common 
Core standards. Wiley and Rolstad’s (2014) unqualiﬁ ed claim that the 
CCSS reﬂ ect an autonomous, deﬁ cit orientation logically implies that the 
Translanguaging Guide and its authors are complicit with a deﬁ cit orien-
tation to minoritised students’ language and literacy skills. The absurdity 
of this position reﬂ ects the superﬁ ciality of the assertion-based theoretical 
claims that constitute the Wiley and Rolstad (2014) analysis.
Clearly, as pointed out previously, any credible analysis of why deﬁ cit 
orientations allegedly permeate the CCSS, but (perhaps) not the work of 
scholars who have discussed how the CCSS instructional goals might be 
implemented, requires criteria for what constitutes a deﬁ cit orientation 
and what does not. It is not suffi  cient simply to cite Valencia’s (1997) deﬁ -
nition of a deﬁ cit theory as holding ‘that the student who fails in school 
does so because of internal deﬁ cits or deﬁ ciencies…’ (Rolstad, 2017: 501) 
without explaining why the CCSS conception of ‘academic language’ 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 175

constitutes a deﬁ cit theory whereas the work of most other cognitive psy-
chologists and applied linguists who discuss how students can be sup-
ported in accessing and using complex text is innocent of these charges. 
Claims regarding deﬁ cit theories that fail to conduct this kind of analysis 
do not meet the criterion of logical coherence.
A ﬁ nal point concerns Wiley and Rolstad’s implication that educators 
and/or researchers who give credence to the construct of ‘academic lan-
guage’ believe that ELLs cannot engage in intellectually challenging work 
until they have fully developed academic language and literacy. They 
express this perspective as follows:
The alleged Great Divide, whether expressed as cognitive deﬁ cits or as a 
never ending ‘achievement gap,’ does not aid in our understanding, nor 
does the expectation that children cannot engage in intellectually stimu-
lating work until after they have developed academic language and liter-
acy. Instead, we support the eff orts of educators who seek to engage 
students in interesting, challenging work which can then lead to the 
expansion of students’ linguistic repertoires and their development of lit-
eracy, rather than the other way around. (Wiley & Rolstad, 2014: 51)
Once again, no citations are off ered to indicate which researchers have 
ever argued that children should be excluded from intellectually stimulat-
ing work until after they have developed grade-appropriate academic lan-
guage and literacy. The fact that these practices do occur in far too many 
school contexts (e.g. Callahan et al., 2010) does not automatically imply 
that any researchers endorse these forms of instructional malpractice. 
I can think of no current researcher who has argued that ELLs who receive 
appropriate teacher support are not capable of engaging in higher order 
thinking and reading of challenging texts long before they have caught up 
academically to grade expectations in academic English. Certainly, none 
of the scholarly articles or support documents aimed at interpreting the 
implications of the CCSS for teacher education or ELL instruction (e.g. 
Bunch, 2013; Council of Great City Schools, 2014; García, 2013; Hiebert 
& Mesmer, 2013; Wong Fillmore, 2014) have argued that the ability to use 
academic English is a prerequisite for understanding academic content or 
engaging in intellectually stimulating academic work. To illustrate, the 
Framework for Raising Expectations and Instructional Rigor for English 
Language Learners published by the Council of Great City Schools to 
support teachers in helping ELLs meet the academic challenges of the 
CCSS, expressed its ‘theory of action’ in the following way:
… English Language Learners are capable of engaging in complex think-
ing, reading and comprehension of complex texts, and writing about 
complex material. If teachers are given time to analyze the CCSS and plan 
eff ective lessons based on the standards and using grade-level appropri-
ate, complex texts, ELLs will acquire the reasoning, language skills, and 
academic registers they need to be successful across the curriculum and 
throughout the school day. (Council of Great City Schools, 2014: 3)
176 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

In short, Wiley and Rolstad’s claim that ‘the CCSS reﬂ ect … an auton-
omous, deﬁ cit orientation’ (2014: 38) amounts to little more than an evi-
dence-free and logically incoherent assertion. The fact that the CCSS and 
the Council of Great City Schools (2014), together with numerous 
researchers (e.g. Uccelli et al., 2015a, 2015b; Wong Fillmore & Fillmore, 
2012), give credence both to the reality of ‘academic language’ and 
research supporting the construct does not automatically transform these 
researchers into deﬁ cit theorists.
A complementary perspective
In discussing the impact of literacy policies on school curricula, I exam-
ined the claims to knowledge of two opposing orientations to literacy 
research (Cummins, 2015). Rather than using the loaded terms ‘autono-
mous’ and ‘ideological’, I used the minimally value-laden terms individu-
alistic orientations to literacy research and social orientations to literacy 
research. I pointed out that recent educational policies in both the United 
Kingdom (UK) and United States (US) have drawn heavily on the claims of 
researchers whose orientation is individualistic and have largely ignored 
the research and theory of those whose work is rooted in social orienta-
tions to literacy. I suggested that literacy policies in both contexts have 
failed to achieve their goals of reducing achievement gaps because (a) 
research deriving from social orientations was ignored and (b) research 
deriving from individualistic orientations was interpreted by both research-
ers and policymakers in highly problematic ways (Cummins, 2007b, 2015).
The individualistic orientation views reading as a cognitive process 
that takes place within the heads of individuals whereas the social orienta-
tion views reading and other aspects of literacy as social practices inti-
mately dependent on context. The former orientation is predominantly 
rooted in the discipline of cognitive psychology and relies on quantitative 
research methods, ideally experimental and quasi-experimental studies, 
to test hypotheses and generate knowledge (e.g. Ehri et al., 2001; National 
Reading Panel, 2000). By contrast, researchers who view literacy as a set 
of social practices argue that it cannot be reduced to a single linear quan-
tiﬁ able dimension. The term multiliteracies (New London Group, 1996) 
was introduced to highlight the multimodal and multilingual dimensions 
of literacy practices (see also Haneda, 2014, in relation to the connection 
between academic language and the broader toolkit of mediational means 
used to achieve goals of personal importance). The work of these research-
ers and theorists is often referred to as The New Literacy Studies (e.g. 
Pahl & Rowsell, 2005). This work draws on a more varied set of 
disciplinary orientations, including anthropology and sociology, and 
relies predominantly on qualitative research methods such as critical eth-
nographies to articulate claims and generate knowledge.
The oppositional orientation that characterises individualistic and 
social orientations to literacy research is illustrated in the dismissal by 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 177

both sides of research reﬂ ecting the opposing orientation. Wiley and 
Rolstad’s (2014) rejection of individualistic/autonomous orientations was 
analysed in the previous section. The dismissal of social orientations to 
research by scholars representing an individualistic orientation rooted in 
cognitive psychology was illustrated in Chapter 7 by August et al.’s (2008) 
claim that qualitative research can only generate hypotheses about the 
inﬂ uence of instruction on learning because it makes no systematic com-
parisons between treatment and control groups. As a result of its individu-
alistic orientation to research, the National Literacy Panel (NLP) could 
draw virtually no conclusions regarding the impact of sociocultural vari-
ables on linguistically diverse students’ academic achievement.7
I argued that this oppositional perspective between individualistic and 
social orientations to research is scientiﬁ cally unnecessary and unproduc-
tive (Cummins, 2008a, 2015). A complementary perspective that recognises 
the speciﬁ c contributions to knowledge of both orientations is likely to yield 
more useful information and insights to guide instruction and policy 
(Pearson, 2004). Issues related to schooling, equity and literacy are clearly 
rooted in societal ideologies and power structures (see Chapters 5 and 6). 
However, this does not mean that a social practices perspective that high-
lights social and contextually speciﬁ c dimensions of cognition and literacy 
is the best or only way to address all questions of literacy development. It is 
equally legitimate to ask questions regarding issues such as the following:
• 
What cognitive processes are operating within the heads of individuals 
as they perform cognitive or linguistic tasks (e.g. Bialystok, 2020a)?
• 
How long does it typically take linguistically diverse students to catch 
up to grade expectations in school-related language and literacy skills 
(e.g. Cummins, 1981c)?
• 
What are the eff ects of reinforcing students’ knowledge of how aca-
demic language works across the curriculum as opposed to teaching 
the school language only in Language Arts or language support con-
texts (e.g. Callahan et al., 2010)?
• 
What are the eff ects of literacy engagement on reading comprehension 
(e.g. Guthrie, 2004)?
None of these questions reﬂ ect an ‘ideological’ or social orientation to 
language and literacy teaching and development, but research focused on 
these questions has contributed in substantial ways to promoting equity 
in schooling for bilingual students.
An unfortunate consequence of the oppositional orientation to the 
distinction between individualistic and social orientations to literacy 
instruction and research (or ‘autonomous’ versus ‘ideological’ orienta-
tions) is that each side tends to generate caricatures of the other. For 
example, in describing diff erences in instructional practices between 
autonomous and ideological orientations, Skutnabb-Kangas and McCarty 
(2008) point out that an autonomous perspective emphasises discrete 
178 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

language skills, often taught through direct instruction and scripted pho-
nics programmes. It is certainly accurate to claim that this type of instruc-
tional approach is rooted in an autonomous perspective that largely 
ignores social realities associated with literacy (see Cummins, 2007b, for 
a critique). However, it is not accurate to claim that all researchers who 
give credence to cognitively and individually oriented research advocate 
this kind of restrictive (and largely evidence-free) instructional approach 
to teaching reading and writing. For example, as someone who gives cre-
dence, in principle, to both individualistic and social research  orientations, 
I am in full agreement with the legitimacy and importance of Skutnabb-
Kangas and McCarty’s (2008: 4) description of literacy pedagogy rooted 
in ideological perspectives: ‘An ideological view binds reading and writ-
ing to oracy, emphasizing the development of diff erent literacies (and mul-
tiliteracies) for diff erent purposes through meaningful social interaction 
and critical examination of authentic texts’ (emphasis original).
In short, it is no more defensible for researchers who endorse a social 
or ideological orientation to language and literacy to dismiss, in principle, 
research emanating from an autonomous or individualistic orientation 
than it is for individualistic-oriented researchers to dismiss the legitimacy 
of social-oriented or ‘New Literacies’ research. The claims to knowledge 
of each orientation should be examined on their merits rather than on the 
particular research ideology they reﬂ ect. In this regard, I have argued that 
many of the claims regarding reading development, rooted in an individu-
alistic orientation to research, proposed by the National Reading Panel 
(NRP) (2000) and the National Literacy Panel (August & Shanahan, 
2006, 2008a) are empirically unsupported (Cummins, 2007b, 2015). 
Similarly, many claims that profess an ideological or social practices ori-
entation are logically ﬂ awed and without empirical support (e.g. Flores & 
Rosa, 2015; Wiley & Rolstad, 2014).
Thus, the construct of ‘academic language’ is not automatically invali-
dated simply because much of its empirical support derives from psycho-
linguistic and classroom-based research. By the same token, any credible 
account of how literacy and academic language (in L1 and L2) should be 
developed in schools must go beyond a psycholinguistic focus and take 
account of how societal power relations create opportunity gaps that can 
be addressed only through equity-oriented and culturally sustaining 
instruction (Boykin & Noguera, 2011).
Section 2. Legitimacy of the Construct of ‘Academic 
Language’: Empirical, Theoretical and Instructional 
Perspectives
As noted in Chapter 4, over the past 40 years in numerous publications, I 
have highlighted the empirical basis for the distinction between ‘academic 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 179

language proﬁ ciency’ and ‘conversational ﬂ uency’ (e.g. Cummins, 1981b, 
1984a, 2000, 2008a). Brieﬂ y stated, in monolingual contexts the distinc-
tion reﬂ ects the obvious diff erences between the ﬂ uent interpersonal com-
municative skills that (most) children bring to school at age 5 or 6, and the 
expanded range of language registers they acquire through literacy and 
during 12 years of schooling. It also reﬂ ects the diff erence in time periods 
typically required for immigrant-background students to acquire a rea-
sonable degree of ﬂ uency in face-to-face situations compared to the length 
of time required to catch up academically to grade expectations in literacy 
and subject matter content. I also argued (Cummins, 2000) that the legiti-
macy of the diff erence between ‘academic’ and everyday language is sup-
ported by (a) Biber’s (1986) analysis of a corpus of authentic discourse 
gathered from a wide range of communicative situations, both written 
and oral; (b) Corson’s (1995, 1997) documentation of the lexical diff er-
ences between English everyday conversational language and textual lan-
guage, the former deriving predominantly from Anglo-Saxon sources and 
the latter from Graeco-Latin sources; and (c) Snow and Hoefnagel-Höhle’s 
(1979) longitudinal analysis of L1 and L2 development among English 
speakers learning Dutch in a naturalistic setting.
To my knowledge, none of the critics of the construct of ‘academic 
language’ has questioned the credibility of the empirical evidence support-
ing the construct. In recent years, this empirical evidence has been power-
fully elaborated by the research programme of Paola Uccelli of Harvard 
University and colleagues who have conceptualised and investigated what 
they term Core Academic Language Skills (CALS). I review this research 
in the next section.
With respect to theoretical contributions that support the construct of 
‘academic language’, I review the work of Jan H. Hulstijn of the University 
of Amsterdam. Hulstijn does not focus directly on ‘academic language’ 
but his distinction between basic language cognition and extended lan-
guage cognition provides important perspectives on the nature of the ‘lan-
guage cognition’ that schools attempt to promote.
Finally, I review the insights about ‘academic language’ that derive 
from instructional perspectives and particularly the collaborative work 
with teachers carried out over many years by Lily Wong Fillmore of the 
University of California, Berkeley. This work highlights the importance 
of understanding the challenges posed by academic language for all 
 students, ﬁ rst language learners as well as students learning the school 
language, if we are to teach it eff ectively.
Uccelli and Colleagues’ Core Academic Language Skills (CALS)
The starting points for the research agenda that Paola Uccelli and col-
leagues have pursued over the past decade are discussed in the paper ‘The 
Challenge of Academic Language’ (Snow & Uccelli, 2009). The authors 
180 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

pointed to the fact that although there is widespread agreement that the 
development of academic language skills poses challenges for both L1 and 
L2 learners, there is still no precise or validated consensus regarding the 
linguistic characteristics of academic language. They noted that language 
can be more or less academic depending on the prevalence in particular 
texts or utterances of traits that are typical of academic language (e.g. 
nominalisation and lexical density). Thus, there is no basis for designating 
‘academic language’ as a separate category that has passed some threshold 
qualifying it as ‘academic’. They also noted that although academic com-
munication poses particular kinds of challenges compared to other forms 
of language (e.g. explaining the theory of evolution as compared to nego-
tiating the purchase of onions), it is not necessarily more complex than 
colloquial language in any absolute sense. It is, however, more relevant to 
success in school than most forms of colloquial language. Informal col-
loquial language does vary among native speakers but, in most contexts, 
not in ways that are particularly consequential for educational success.
Snow and Uccelli (2009) articulated a research agenda for exploring 
the nature of academic language, which Uccelli and colleagues have pur-
sued in impressive ways. Uccelli et al. (2015b) proposed the construct of 
Core Academic Language Skills (CALS), which they deﬁ ned as: ‘a con-
stellation of the high-utility language skills that correspond to linguistic 
features that are prevalent in academic discourse across school content 
areas and infrequent in colloquial conversations’ (2015b: 338). Phillips 
Galloway et al. elaborated the CALS construct as follows:
CALS refer to knowledge of the lexical, syntactic, and discourse 
resources used for completing common communicative functions in 
classroom learning communities. CALS encompass knowledge of 
abstract vocabulary, intricate sentence structures, connective words, and 
phrases (e.g., therefore, as a result), and stance markers (e.g., probably, 
it might be true …) that are of high utility for their prevalent use in writ-
ten academic discourse to precisely and concisely express information, 
to logically organize thinking, and to express perspectives reﬂ ectively. 
(Phillips Galloway et al., 2020: 4)
Uccelli and colleagues also developed the Core Academic Language 
Skills Instrument (CALS-I), which they deﬁ ned as ‘a theoretically grounded 
and psychometrically robust innovative tool’ (2015b: 337) to assess and 
explore the CALS. They reported that CALS independently predicted 
reading comprehension, even after controlling for academic vocabulary 
knowledge, word reading ﬂ uency, and sociodemographic factors (e.g. SES).
Uccelli et  al. (2015a) locate their research within a sociocultural 
 pragmatics-based view of language development in which language is con-
ceptualised as inseparable from social context, and language learning is 
viewed as context-dependent and usage-based. Thus, language proﬁ cien-
cies emerge as the result of individuals’ socialisation and enculturation 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 181

histories. It is worth noting that the authors see no contradiction between 
this social practices theoretical orientation and their use of the kind of 
assessment instruments that Edelsky et al. (1983: 9) described as ‘out-of-
context, irrelevant nonsense’.
Uccelli et al. (2015b) point to the gap that may exist, for all learners, 
between the colloquial language of the home and community and the aca-
demic language of schooling. Young learners are successfully enculturated 
into the language of face-to-face communication within their communi-
ties; however, these colloquial conversations and interactions through 
social media are not always aligned with language and literacy practices 
characteristic of school such as the language of argumentation and writ-
ten informational discourse:
As a consequence, many colloquially ﬂ uent students may not have been 
granted suffi  cient opportunities to be socialized into academic-language 
and literacy practices either at home or at school. … The available ethno-
graphic and quantitative research ﬁ ndings point to students from minori-
tized linguistic communities and from high-needs environments as 
particularly likely to experience a larger distance between the ways lan-
guage is used outside of school and the ways it is used in school texts. 
(Uccelli et al., 2015b: 339)
Barr et al. (2019) are careful to point out that academic language 
development is just one of many dimensions of language proﬁ ciency that 
develop through adolescence. It is part of the much larger process of 
achieving what they term ‘rhetorical ﬂ exibility’, understood as the ability 
to use ‘an increasing repertoire of lexico-grammatical and discourse 
resources appropriately and ﬂ exibly in an expanding variety of social con-
texts, for instance, mastering the language skills of youth conversation, 
sportscasts, or religious communities’ (2019: 986). However, core aca-
demic language skills reﬂ ect the discourse patterns and challenges of lan-
guage and literacy use within the social context of schooling to a greater 
extent than other registers of language development.
The seven domains of CALS were identiﬁ ed either on the basis of 
existing empirical evidence related to their role in text comprehension or 
on the basis of persuasive arguments in the scholarly literature related to 
their relevance to text comprehension. These domains, as operationalised 
in the Core Academic Language Skills–Inventory (CALS-I), are sum-
marised below (Barr et al., 2019):
Domain 1: Unpacking dense information at the word and sentence level. 
This domain includes the ability to use morphological and syntactic 
skills to comprehend complex words and sentences.
Domain 2: Connecting ideas logically. This domain tests understanding 
of connectives such as consequently, as a result, although, etc.) that 
indicate how ideas are related to each other.
182 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

Domain 3: Tracking participants and themes. This domain assesses stu-
dents’ ability to track expressions that refer to the same participants 
or themes throughout an academic text (e.g. Water evaporates at 100 
degrees Celsius. This process … ).
Domain 4: Organising analytic texts. This domain reﬂ ects students’ skill 
in recognising organisational structures characteristic of academic 
discourse such as argumentative texts (e.g. thesis, argument, counter-
argument, conclusion) and paragraph-level structures (e.g. compare/
contrast; problem/solution).
Domain 5: Understanding metalinguistic vocabulary. Although the rela-
tionship between reading comprehension and this subset of general 
academic vocabulary has not been speciﬁ cally investigated, skill in 
understanding words that refer to thinking or discourse processes (e.g. 
hypothesis, generalisation, argument) has been hypothesised to play 
an important role in comprehension and school learning (Astington & 
Olson, 1990).
Domain 6: Understanding a writer’s viewpoint. This domain assesses the 
student’s understanding of linguistic markers that express the writer’s 
stance in relation to the content of a proposition (e.g. It is quite obvi-
ous from the research data that climate change is happening).
Domain 7: Recognising academic language. This domain reﬂ ects the stu-
dent’s ability to distinguish between academic and colloquial language 
features in a text.
In a large-scale study of more than 7,000 Grades 4–8 students in the 
United States, Barr et  al. (2019) reported the following three major 
ﬁ ndings:
• 
CALS, as measured by the CALS-I instrument, represents a unidi-
mensional set of skills best represented by a higher-order factor com-
posed of distinguishable but interrelated lower-order task-speciﬁ c 
factors: ‘cross-disciplinary academic language proﬁ ciency, as opera-
tionalized in this study, is best represented as a unitary construct made 
up of a constellation of distinguishable skills that co-develop, most 
likely as students engage with all these skillsets concurrently when 
participating in academic discussions and reading and learning at 
school’ (2019: 1006).
• 
CALS showed strong criterion validity when compared to a stan-
dardised assessment of reading comprehension.
• 
CALS captured variability across Grades 4 to 8, with older students 
performing better but with considerable individual diff erences within 
grades.
Phillips Galloway and Uccelli (2019a) also demonstrated a strong rela-
tionship between CALS and the quality of science writing among Grades 
4–7 students. The researchers controlled for students’ reading comprehen-
sion of the source text, the impact of student characteristics such as grade, 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 183

English proﬁ ciency status, SES, and special education status, and the fea-
tures of students’ summaries (misspelling ratio, topic, length, ratio of 
copied text). They reported that ‘both academic language skills and com-
prehension of the source text make unique contributions to science sum-
mary writing quality for students in grades four to seven’ (2018: 750).
An additional study (Phillips Galloway & Uccelli, 2019b) examined 
the development of academic language skills and reading comprehension 
in a sample of Grades 6–7 emergent bilinguals and their English proﬁ cient 
peers (n = 573). Findings indicated that growth rates in CALS over the two 
years of the study were positively associated with growth rates in reading 
comprehension, and initial levels of CALS predicted rates of growth in 
reading comprehension. The authors argue for the potential for CALS-
focused instruction to promote adolescent learners’ reading comprehen-
sion development.
With respect to the question posed in the title of this chapter, the 
CALS research presents a strong case that ‘academic language’ is a legiti-
mate theoretical construct. Uccelli and colleagues have clearly addressed 
the concern expressed by García (2020) and Valdés (2004, 2017) that the 
notion of ‘academic language’ is ‘imprecise’. Not only have Uccelli and 
colleagues speciﬁ ed precisely the dimensions they view as ‘core’ to the 
construct of ‘academic language’, they have also operationalised these 
dimensions in the CALS-I instrument and demonstrated the 
unidimensional coherence of the construct, as well as criterion validity 
with measures of reading comprehension (Barr et  al., 2019; Phillips 
Galloway, 2019b) and science summary writing (Phillips Galloway & 
Uccelli, 2019a). Thus, the claims of these researchers regarding the 
legitimacy of the construct of ‘academic language’ go a considerable way 
to meeting the criterion of empirical adequacy.
The researchers are cautious, however, to acknowledge that further 
research is required to demonstrate the construct validity of CALS. Barr 
et al. also note that the ‘larger construct of academic language proﬁ ciency 
includes both cross-disciplinary and discipline-speciﬁ c skills, and in no 
way does this study suggest that the overarching academic language pro-
ﬁ ciency construct is unidimensional’ (2019: 1011). In other words, 
although their research provides evidence for unidimensionality of cross-
disciplinary language skills, there may be speciﬁ c skills involved in the 
language of math, science, history, and other disciplines that are distin-
guishable empirically from CALS. They also highlight the fact that lan-
guage usage and development, as well as reading comprehension, are 
situated and vary by contexts of use. Thus, their ﬁ ndings are not neces-
sarily generalisable to language skills in general or to contexts of language 
use that diff er signiﬁ cantly from the educational contexts experienced by 
their samples of students.
With respect to logical/theoretical coherence, García and Solorza 
(2020) have critiqued the work of Uccelli and colleagues (2015a) on a 
184 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

number of counts. They argued that the construct of CALS reiﬁ es the 
concept of language as a named autonomous entity without addressing 
how it has been constructed by processes of colonisation and nation-
building. They also argue that CALS presents language learning as a 
simple linear developmental skill focused on acquiring characteristics of 
what is assumed to be a single valid white middle-class linguistic and 
cultural norm.
This critique of the CALS construct is not persuasive to me. In the 
ﬁ rst place, as discussed in a previous section, it is more productive to 
view so-called autonomous and ideological orientations to language as 
complementary rather than as oppositional to each other. Secondly, it 
is logically inconsistent to dismiss standard academic language as the 
property of white middle-class students when García (2009: 36) herself, 
together with other colleagues (e.g. Celic & Seltzer, 2013: 17), has 
clearly articulated the need to teach standard academic language to 
minoritised students. As Uccelli et al. (2020) have argued, all students 
have the right to have their voices heard and the right to develop the 
academic language skills that will enable them to project their voices 
powerfully into multiple social spheres. They speciﬁ cally address how 
the CALS framework can be applied to the education of Latinx students 
by documenting how CALS can be used to affi  rm and amplify students’ 
voices as they engage in critical reﬂ ection and discussion of social 
issues: ‘Integrating insights from our teacher-researcher collaborations, 
we call for practices and dispositions that amplify language resources 
and awareness and affi  rm students’ voices by engaging teachers and stu-
dents in reﬂ ecting about language, context, and power while scaff old-
ing CALS across content areas and grades’ (2020: 75) (emphasis 
original). These goals seem to be completely aligned with those of the 
CUNY-NYSIEB Translanguaging Guide (Celic & Seltzer, 2013; García, 
2013), further undermining García and Solorza’s (2020) critique of the 
CALS project.
As far as consequential validity is concerned, Uccelli et al. (2015) high-
light some of the pedagogical applications of the CALS in the context of 
the emphasis in the CCSS to expose students to more complex texts: 
‘Thus, a potential pedagogical application of the CALS-I might be to help 
make the crucial role of students’ academic language skills visible to edu-
cators and researchers and to support them in identifying language fea-
tures in the complex texts that students must read at school and in 
designing lessons that incorporate the expansion of students’ academic 
language skills as an important pedagogical goal’ (2015: 1101). García and 
Solorza (2020: 7) adopt a very diff erent perspective with respect to the 
consequential validity of CALS: ‘The danger of how CALS is being taken 
up by policy makers and educators is that the construct is being used to 
further enregister Latinx bilinguals who language diff erently, as not only 
lacking “academic language”, but also cognitive skills’. This argument 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 185

echoes the critiques of BICS/CALP by researchers such as Edelsky et al. 
(1983), MacSwan and Rolstad (2003) and others. García and Solorza 
present no evidence or examples of how CALS is being used to stigmatise 
Latinx students as lacking linguistic and cognitive skills.
My perspective on this issue is that it is counter-productive for 
researchers to make the construct of ‘academic language’ a scapegoat for 
the miseducation of minoritised students. It makes far more pedagogical 
sense (1) to acknowledge that the development of academic and literacy 
skills presents challenges for all students that go beyond the challenges 
of acquiring everyday interpersonal language skills and (2) to work col-
laboratively with educators and teacher educators to implement asset-
based instructional approaches that have demonstrated their eff ectiveness 
in enabling minoritised and non-minoritised students to overcome these 
challenges and to use language in powerful and identity-affi  rming ways 
(e.g. CUNY-New York State Initiative on Emergent Bilinguals, 2021; 
Isola & Cummins, 2020; Little & Kirwin, 2019; Nieto & Bode, 2018). 
Gottlieb and Castro (2017: 7) express a similar perspective: ‘an inten-
tional focus on language provides more equitable opportunities for stu-
dents to interact with academic discourse and assures that all students 
have the tools to participate meaningfully in activities designed to medi-
ate learning’.8
In short, the CALS construct has demonstrated its utility as a concep-
tual framework to promote what Uccelli et al. (2019) term ‘critical rhetori-
cal ﬂ exibility’ among both Latinx students and the general school 
population. This initial credibility with respect to consequential validity 
will undoubtedly be reﬁ ned and elaborated as more educators become 
aware of the CALS framework and begin to apply it in their classrooms. 
The CALS research also highlights the lack of credibility of claims that the 
construct of ‘academic language’ reﬂ ects a deﬁ cit orientation to minori-
tised students’ language and cognition (MacSwan, 2000; MacSwan & 
Rolstad, 2003; Rolstad, 2017; Wiley & Rolstad, 2014) or that educators’ 
attempts to promote academic language skills are permeated by discourses 
of appropriateness and raciolinguistic ideologies (Flores & Rosa, 2015).
Hulstijn’s Theory of Basic and Extended Language Cognition
Dutch linguist Jan Hulstijn (2011, 2015, 2019) proposed what he 
termed Basic Language Cognition (BLC) theory to address a variety of 
issues related to variability in bilingualism and L1 and L2 acquisition. He 
used the term ‘language cognition’ as synonymous with language proﬁ -
ciency and language ability to refer both to ‘knowledge of language and 
the ability to access, retrieve and use that knowledge in listening, speak-
ing, reading or writing’ (2015: 20-21). The theory proposed a distinction 
between basic and extended or ‘higher’ language cognition, which he 
described in the following way:9
186 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

BLC refers to the language cognition in the oral domains (comprehension 
and production of speech) that is acquired and thus shared by all adult 
native speakers. … Extended language cognition is the domain of oral 
and written language use where diff erences between native speakers can 
be observed, that is, language cognition not acquired or shared by all 
native speakers. (Hulstijn, 2019: 160-161)
Hulstijn (2015) noted that the distinction between basic and extended 
language cognition (ELC) represents a dichotomy rather than a contin-
uum. This dichotomy is uniﬁ ed within the construct of ‘language proﬁ -
ciency’ or ‘language cognition’. He argued that the preference for a 
dichotomy rather than a continuum ‘is based on the fact that, in the 
domains of lexis, morpho-syntax and pragmatics, there is a minority of 
elements (words, constructions, expressions) that occur extremely fre-
quently, while there is a large majority of elements that occur infrequently’ 
(2015: 22).
BLC involves lexical items and grammatical structures that occur fre-
quently in speech in any communicative situation and is shared by all 
adult ﬁ rst-language speakers, regardless of age, literacy, or educational 
level. Within the BLC construct, the individual’s knowledge of phonetics, 
prosody, phonology, morphology and syntax is largely implicit and 
unconscious whereas lexical-pragmatic knowledge is largely explicit and 
conscious. In both cases, this knowledge is processed with a high degree 
of automaticity.
ELC, on the other hand, involves low-frequency lexical items and 
uncommon morphosyntactic structures that can occur in both written 
text and spoken utterances. These utterances are frequently more complex 
lexically and grammatically and they are often longer than those reﬂ ect-
ing BLC. According to Hulstijn (2011: 231), ELC discourse ‘pertains to 
topics other than simple everyday matters, that is, topics addressed in 
school and colleges, on the work ﬂ oor, and in leisure-time activities’. Any 
diff erences in language proﬁ ciency/cognition that result from experiences 
with literacy will aff ect only ELC because, by deﬁ nition, BLC is invariant 
across individual native speakers in adult native speaker populations.
The relevance of the BLC/ELC distinction in the present context is that 
the constructs of ‘academic language’ and ‘academic language proﬁ ciency’ 
represent one domain of language use, involving both general academic and 
speciﬁ c disciplinary registers, within the broader construct of extended or 
nonshared language cognition. Thus, unlike MacSwan (1999) and Rolstad 
(2017), Hulstijn does not regard the construct of ‘language proﬁ ciency’ as 
pertaining only to the nonvariant species-universal shared language develop-
ment that occurs in the early years. The construct of ‘language proﬁ ciency’ 
extends beyond ‘basic’, ‘universal’, or ‘shared’ language development into the 
realm of individual diff erences among ‘native’ or L1-speakers in their access 
to a wide variety of language registers, some of which are associated with 
literacy and schooling. This understanding of ‘language development’ is 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 187

similar to that of many other educators, researchers and theorists (e.g. 
Cummins, 2000; Uccelli & Snow, 2009; Wong Fillmore, 2014).
Hulstijn (2011, 2015) recognised the similarity between his constructs 
of BLC and ELC and the BICS/CALP distinction but pointed out that 
there are important diff erences in speciﬁ city and theoretical context. 
According to Hulstijn, BICS is deﬁ ned only in a general way whereas BLC 
‘explicitly refers to the distinction between language reception and pro-
duction, to the distinction between representation and online processing 
of linguistic information, and to particular linguistic domains (phonetics, 
prosody, phonology, morphology, syntax, and the lexicon)’ (2011: 233). 
Furthermore, there is a signiﬁ cant diff erence in the motivation or purpose 
underlying the two distinctions. Hulstijn notes that whereas the BICS/
CALP distinction was ‘proposed to help solve a practical issue, my notions 
of BLC and HLC [higher language cognition] and the accompanying 
hypotheses aim to help explain a more fundamental problem of under-
standing individual diff erences in language ability’ (2011: 233).
These are valid observations. The BICS/CALP or conversational/aca-
demic language distinction was focused primarily on identifying and 
addressing multiple examples of educational malpractice associated both 
with assessment of intellectual and academic performance of minoritised 
students and inappropriate placement of these students in particular pro-
grammes. It was also intended simply as a conceptual distinction relevant 
only to educational contexts rather than as a more general theoretical 
framework for conceptualising the construct of ‘language proﬁ ciency’. 
Hulstijn’s distinction is much more detailed in its linguistic speciﬁ cation 
and its purpose goes far beyond the speciﬁ c realm of schooling. He also 
describes the BLC/ELC distinction as a ‘dichotomy’, whereas BICS/CALP 
was elaborated in terms of intersecting continua (see Chapter 4).
However, despite these diff erences, the two sets of distinctions clearly 
point to the same underlying reality. Some aspects of language proﬁ ciency 
develop in the early years and are largely invariant among adult L1 speak-
ers whereas other aspects extend this early development into speciﬁ c 
domains or contexts of language use and vary signiﬁ cantly among L1 
speakers after the early years. Literacy and schooling experiences are 
major drivers of these individual diff erences among native speakers within 
the speciﬁ c context of education.
In short, Hulstijn’s theoretical framework adds speciﬁ city and breadth to 
the constructs of ‘academic language’ and ‘academic language proﬁ ciency’ 
even though he does not use or discuss these constructs in any speciﬁ c way.
Wong Fillmore’s Instructional Exploration of Academic 
Language
How can instructional innovation contribute to our theoretical under-
standing of academic development among monolingual and bilingual 
188 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

students? As noted in Chapter 7, the documentation of innovative instruc-
tion creates phenomena that require explanation and can call into ques-
tion existing theoretical assumptions. In discussing future directions for 
clarifying the linguistic demands of schooling, I suggested that instruc-
tional interventions involving collaboration between researchers and edu-
cators represented a fruitful direction to advance our understanding:
The most productive direction to orient further research on this topic, 
and one that can be supported by all scholars, is to focus on creating 
instructional and learning environments that maximize the language and 
literacy development of socially marginalized students. … Deeper under-
standing of the nature of academic language and its relationship both to 
conversational ﬂ uency and other forms of literacy will emerge from teach-
ers, students, and researchers working together in instructional contexts 
collaboratively pushing (and documenting) the boundaries of language 
and literacy exploration. (Cummins, 2008a: 81)
Lily Wong Fillmore has long been concerned with the speciﬁ c language 
skills English language learners need to participate fully in classroom 
instruction (e.g. Wong Fillmore, 1982). She has explored this issue by 
means of classroom-based research involving observations of students 
engaging with academic learning and through collaborations with teachers 
to enable students to analyse complex academic text. She described char-
acteristics of the academic register students need to acquire as follows:
Informationally dense discourse and complex noun phrases made so by 
clauses and phrases that elaborate and modify head nouns are just two of 
the key features of academic English. Other notable features include:
• 
speciﬁ city of reference, in which full noun phrases are preferred 
over pronouns, except in references that refer to something that 
has just been mentioned.
• 
frequent use of nouns that derive from verbs and adjectives; for 
example, information from inform, conversation from converse, 
moderation from moderate, and so on.
• 
use of the passive voice; for example, the buildings ‘were often 
skirted’ with a sidewalk of wooden planks, a bank ‘made of solid 
brick,’ and so on. (Twenty-ﬁ ve percent of all ﬁ nite verbs in aca-
demic writing are in the passive voice.)
• 
grammatically complex sentence structure, made so by subordina-
tion, coordination and adjunct phrases and clauses. (Wong 
Fillmore, 2009: 7)
In working collaboratively with educators in New York City and other 
contexts, Wong Fillmore (2009, 2014; Wong Fillmore & Fillmore, 2012) 
explored the question of how anyone learns this kind of language. In order 
to understand complex sentences, readers need to unpack the information 
contained in these sentences and use structural cues to interpret the 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 189

intended relationships between the parts. She highlighted the central 
importance of two sets of experiences for native speakers and second lan-
guage learners to acquire expertise in accessing and using academic regis-
ters: (a) active engagement with the language of texts and (b) instructional 
conversations focused on language in the materials students are using in 
school:
We knew this: No one can be a fully proﬁ cient reader or writer without a 
command of such language, and we also recognized that those of us who 
have it learned it by doing massive amounts of reading and writing. The 
fact is that academic language can be learned only from texts in which it 
used, and only by interacting with those texts in nonsuperﬁ cial ways: it 
calls for the reader to read not only for meaning and understanding, but 
also with attention to how things are said. Discussions of such texts are 
an important aspect of the learning process, as are eff orts to write about 
the materials in the text. (Wong Fillmore, 2014: 628-629)
With respect to literacy engagement, Wong Fillmore (2009) argued 
that students need opportunities to get acquainted with books, the world 
of print, and the language of literacy. She cited the 1985 report of the 
Commission on Reading, Becoming a Nation of Readers, which concluded 
that reading aloud to children is the single most important activity for 
building the knowledge required for eventual success in reading. Thus, in 
preschool, adults should read stories aloud to students, and students 
should experience conversations about those stories with adults and 
schoolmates as well as dramatic plays with props that are centered on the 
stories. Students should also be enabled to engage in artistic and musical 
activities that encourage them to play with the concepts, themes, and lan-
guage from those stories (Wong Fillmore, 2009). As discussed in Chapter 
6, longitudinal research carried out in Aotearoa/New Zealand from pre-
school through age 16 has shown that this type of ‘literacy saturation’ in 
the early years signiﬁ cantly predicts later reading comprehension in the 
adolescent years (Wylie & Thompson, 2003; Wylie et al., 2006).
In order to enable learners to ‘see’ how things are said in complex 
texts, teachers need to draw their attention to the structures found in 
sentences and help them notice how meaning is packed into phrases, 
clauses, and sentences. Wong Fillmore developed a series of strategies with 
MaryAnn Cucchiara (2019) and New York educators from kindergarten 
through high school that involved teachers spending about 15 minutes 
each day discussing one or two ‘juicy’ sentences drawn from texts the class 
was working on in subjects such as science, history, or literature. The 
teachers led students in a conversation about the various parts of the sen-
tence (displayed on a chart or whiteboard) ﬁ guring out what information 
was packed into each phrase and clause and what made the sentence com-
plex. After reading the sentence aloud a few times, teachers asked ques-
tions such as, ‘So what is this sentence about?’ ‘Take a look at this part. 
190 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

Who can tell me something about it? Talk to the person next to you and 
compare your ideas about what it means’.
Wong Fillmore (2009, 2014) argued that this focus on systematically 
reinforcing students’ awareness and knowledge of how academic language 
works across the curriculum is particularly important for English lan-
guage learners who are frequently deprived of (a) access to complex grade-
appropriate texts, (b) the instructional support required to help them gain 
access to the meaning of such texts and (c) guidance in understanding how 
such texts are constructed linguistically.
What we ﬁ nd when we look at the school programs for ELLs is a compen-
dium of practices and conditions that add up to a formula for disastrous 
outcomes. ELLs are often in classrooms and schools ﬁ lled with nothing 
but ELLs, learning English from, and practicing it with, one another. 
They are provided instruction on English grammatical structures and 
vocabulary divorced from content that might make the linguistic materi-
als meaningful or reveal how they might be deployed communicatively. 
They are taught to read with instruction focused on building decoding 
skills, and scant attention is given to reading for understanding or for 
learning. (Wong Fillmore, 2014: 625)
Although no formal evaluation has been carried out on the eff ective-
ness of the instructional strategies implemented by Wong Fillmore and 
educators in seven cities across the United States, she noted that ‘there are 
indications that it has given many ELLs the boost into English and lit-
eracy they have needed’ (2014: 630). According to Wong Fillmore, teach-
ers remain supportive of the approach because they see how it enables 
their students to make sense of texts that once seemed impossibly diffi  cult 
for them.
Maryann Cucchiara (2019), former director of research and develop-
ment for English learners in New York City Public Schools, worked with 
Wong Fillmore to develop the instructional strategies intended to demys-
tify the academic language of complex texts. She described the broader 
changes in professional development and whole-school instructional 
approaches that resulted from the focus on academic language imple-
mented in the initial ‘laboratory’ schools:
The approach that grew out of the lab sites … includes seminars for dis-
trict and instructional leaders, teacher training, and laboratories of prac-
tice in which to observe, create, replicate, and assess these instructional 
practices. … we worked with the Council of the Great City Schools to 
develop a series of ﬁ ve online courses … that build on one another to 
transform teaching practices with practical tools, examples, and practice. 
(Cucchiara, 2019: 36)
She noted that more districts are providing models of professional learn-
ing based on the conviction that all students, including ELLs, have the 
capacity to beneﬁ t from rich and robust instruction. Whole-school 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 191

structural changes have resulted from the initial project such as co-teaching 
between classroom and specialist ESL teachers to enable ELLs to learn in 
mainstream classrooms with their peers who are ﬂ uent in English. In addi-
tion, rather than being pulled out of mainstream classrooms for isolated 
skill instruction with simpliﬁ ed texts, ELLs ‘are more often sitting side by 
side with their native speaker classmates, joining in on compelling and 
complex social studies, science, math, and English language arts lessons 
and seizing opportunities to learn and grow in promising ways’ (Cucchiara, 
2019: 36).
These observations provide powerful and credible evidence that the 
instructional focus on ‘academic language’ developed by Wong Fillmore 
and Cucchiara has the potential to ‘engage students in interesting, chal-
lenging work which can then lead to the expansion of students’ linguistic 
repertoires and their development of literacy, rather than the other way 
around’ (Wiley & Rolstad, 2014: 51). The fact that the instructional inno-
vations implemented by Cucchiara (2019), Wong Fillmore (2009, 2014) 
and the Council of Great City Schools (2014) are aligned with the 
Common Core State Standards (CCSS) yet result in virtually identical 
pedagogical approaches to those endorsed by Wiley and Rolstad (2014), 
highlights the lack of credibility of their claim that the CCSS reﬂ ect an 
autonomous deﬁ cit orientation to minoritised students’ language and lit-
eracy development.
In the present context, Wong Fillmore’s work illustrates how the con-
struct of ‘academic language’ can be instructionally deployed within class-
rooms to demystify for emergent bilinguals (and all students) how this 
register of language is structured and how learners can use it productively 
in talking and writing about academic content. Wong Fillmore, together 
with many other researchers and educators (see, for example, Cucchiara, 
2019; DiCerbo et al., 2014), clearly identiﬁ ed the speciﬁ c challenges inher-
ent in complex academic text that make it more diffi  cult for many students 
to process in comparison to everyday conversational language. The instruc-
tional strategies she and colleagues devised are logically coherent insofar 
as they respond directly to the gap between colloquial and academic lan-
guage. The consequential validity of these strategies is reﬂ ected in the fact 
that they were developed and widely implemented in collaboration with 
both ESL specialists and classroom/subject matter teachers.10
When we view this instructional focus on academic language through 
the lens of the various critiques of the construct considered previously in 
this chapter, it is evident that language proﬁ ciency does not cease to 
develop after the early years, as claimed by MacSwan (2000), Rolstad 
(2017) and others, but rather is intimately related to the disciplinary lan-
guage of academic subject matter and depends on sustained engagement 
with complex academic text across the curriculum for its continued devel-
opment through the school years. This engagement with academic text 
takes place primarily through talk and dialogue with teachers and peers.
192 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

With respect to Valdés’ (2017) and García’s (2020) concern that the 
construct of academic language creates a symbolic/ideological border 
dividing those who ‘have’ academic language from those who do not, it 
seems clear that the culprit here is not ‘academic language’ as such, but 
rather the educational malpractice that prevents many emergent bilingual 
students from gaining access to and engaging with the language of com-
plex texts. As emphasised by Uccelli and colleagues, Wong Fillmore, and 
other researchers (e.g. Bunch et al., 2014), instructional conversations 
aimed at explicitly demystifying how academic language works are 
required to erase symbolic or ideological borders related to academic lan-
guage that have been erected as a result of misguided instruction. These 
instructional conversations, however, will only be eff ective when they take 
place in a school context that builds on minoritised students’ cognitive 
expertise and linguistic varieties of L1 and L2.
To what extent does the critique of the construct of ‘academic lan-
guage’ made by Flores and Rosa (2015) apply also to the instructional 
strategies pioneered by Wong Fillmore and educator colleagues? Recall 
that Flores and Rosa (2015) claimed that the instructional approaches 
proposed by Laurie Olson (2010) to support long-term ELLs in catching 
up academically as well as Lisa Delpit’s (1988) insistence that African 
American students be supported in gaining access to the linguistic 
‘codes of power’ were permeated by discourses of appropriateness and 
raciolinguistic ideologies. To what extent are the instructional strate-
gies designed to demystify how academic language works, elaborated 
by Cucchiara (2019) and Wong Fillmore (2009, 2014), likely to mold 
minoritised students into ‘white-speaking subjects’? Is Wong Fillmore’s 
focus on ‘juicy sentences’ permeated by discourses of appropriateness 
and raciolinguistic ideologies?
I believe that Flores and Rosa’s claim that the construct of ‘academic 
language’, and by implication, all instructional approaches designed to 
reinforce students’ knowledge of academic language, are permeated by 
raciolinguistic ideologies would be ridiculed by the vast majority of educa-
tors committed to social justice and educational equity. Not only are such 
claims logically incoherent and devoid of empirical evidence (as docu-
mented previously), they are also highly off ensive to educators whose 
instructional eff orts to promote minoritised students’ literacy skills in L1 
and L2 are being implicitly dismissed, without exception or qualiﬁ cation, 
as raciolinguistic (i.e. ‘racist’).
Section 3. To What Extent are Recent Critiques of the 
CALP/BICS Distinction Valid?
Critiques of the CALP/BICS distinction overlap with more general cri-
tiques of the construct of academic language and most of these issues have 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 193

been considered in previous sections of this chapter. I will examine the 
speciﬁ c critiques of BICS/CALP primarily in the context of the ways they 
are addressed in two recent sources: (a) a special issue of the International 
Multilingual Research Journal (2014: 8/1) focused on ‘Rethinking 
Language at School’, much of which was devoted to critique of the BICS/
CALP distinction and (b) the Baker and Wright (2017) textbook 
Foundations of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism (6th edn). Previous 
editions of this highly regarded textbook were single authored by Colin 
Baker of the University of Bangor in Wales, one of the most respected 
international authorities on issues related to bilingualism and bilingual 
education. The updated 6th edition was co-authored with Wayne Wright 
of Purdue University in the US state of Indiana, an authority on issues 
related to bilingual education in the United States.
Bunch (2014) succinctly outlined both the contributions of the BICS/
CALP distinction and the range of criticisms that have been leveled at the 
distinction:
It has been helpful to uncover the limitations and misuse of language 
proﬁ ciency tests, articulate language demands that language minority 
students are likely to face in mainstream classrooms, and highlight the 
responsibility of educators to help students meet those demands. It has 
also been criticized for privileging certain class-based varieties of lan-
guage, confusing oral language and written literacy, conﬂ ating language 
proﬁ ciency and academic achievement, and ignoring the sociolinguistic 
context of language use. (Bunch, 2014: 71)
Faltis (2014) explains his concerns with the CALP/BICS distinction in 
a particularly clear and useful way. He notes that although he had initially 
uncritically incorporated the dimensions of BICS and CALP into his 
teaching and writing, he became convinced by critiques of these dimen-
sions that what Cummins really meant by CALP was that it was cogni-
tively more complex and consequently more cognitively enriching than 
BICS. Speciﬁ cally, ‘this assertion both confounds language ability with 
academic achievement and privileges the language of the educated classes, 
espousing the belief that the language of CALP is inherently superior to 
other varieties of language’ (2014: 63). He quotes MacSwan and Rolstad:
Rather than identifying cultural and linguistic diff erences which privilege 
some children, Cummins describes CALP as having speciﬁ c context- 
independent properties from which advantages related to academic achieve-
ment are derived, and sees school as the agency by which basic conversational 
skills are transformed into the linguistically complex language of the edu-
cated classes. (MacSwan & Rolstad, 2003: 331) (emphasis original)
In other words, according to Faltis (and MacSwan & Rolstad, 2003), the 
BICS/CALP distinction portrays linguistic diff erences as diff erences in 
language ability, which relate to variation in social and educational class 
membership.
194 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

However, Faltis declared himself much more comfortable with 
Cummins’ later deﬁ nition of CALP as ‘registers of language that children 
acquire in school and which they need to use eff ectively if they are to 
progress successfully through the grades’ (2000: 66). He notes that regis-
ters involve specialised language use, usually but not exclusively lexical, 
for particular knowledge systems:
Referring to academic language as a register avoids the implication that 
school language is inherently more complex or enriching than BICS. It 
simply says that academic language is one of many diff erent registers that 
learners may acquire in order to belong to certain socio-cultural groups, 
in this case, those affi  nity groups that recognize and use academic lan-
guage and literacy to carry out their primary practices. … In this manner, 
learners who do not acquire the academic language register are not cog-
nitively deﬁ cient; rather, they chose to acquire other registers that aff ord 
them access to and recognition in diff erent, non-academic affi  nity groups. 
(Faltis, 2014: 63)
Let us examine some of the issues raised by Bunch (2014), Faltis (2014) 
and MacSwan and Rolstad (2003). More detailed discussion of these 
issues can be found in Cummins (2000, Chapters 3 and 4) and Cummins 
(2008a, 2013, 2017c).
Is There a Fundamental Diff erence between Deﬁ ning CALP in 
Terms of ‘Proﬁ ciency’ as Compared to Deﬁ ning it in Terms of 
‘Register’?
Clearly Faltis (2014), Wiley and Rolstad (2014) and others (e.g. Petrovic 
& Olmstead, 2001) believe that there is a major diff erence between these 
formulations because ‘proﬁ ciency’ is seen to reﬂ ect an autonomous orienta-
tion to language whereas ‘register’ reﬂ ects a social practices or ideological 
orientation. As noted previously, I see these two orientations, which I have 
termed ‘individualistic’ and ‘social’, not as oppositional but as complemen-
tary to each other. If we acknowledge that there is variation within social 
groups in the extent to which students have gained access to linguistic reg-
isters associated with schooling, then it is also legitimate to talk in terms 
of the extent to which students have developed expertise or proﬁ ciency in 
understanding and using diff erent academic registers. As one notable 
example, the construct of ‘proﬁ ciency’ is intrinsic to the Council of 
Europe’s (2020) conceptual framework for language teaching, learning, use 
and assessment. In short, use of the terms ‘proﬁ ciency’ or ‘skills’ (Uccelli 
et al., 2015a) to refer to the extent to which students gain access to linguis-
tic ad academic registers does not in any sense imply a deﬁ cit orientation 
to children’s cognitive or linguistic abilities.
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 195

Does the Construct of CALP Imply that School Language is 
Inherently More Complex or Enriching, or Superior to BICS, and 
are Learners Who Develop Less Expertise in Using Academic 
Language Registers Cognitively Deﬁ cient?
The claim that CALP or ‘academic language’ reﬂ ects a ‘superior’ or 
‘improved’ form of language in comparison to the language of everyday 
conversation represents a core element of virtually all arguments that 
CALP incorporates a deﬁ cit orientation to minoritised students’ language 
and cognition (e.g. Edelsky et al., 1983; MacSwan & Rolstad, 2003). The 
‘logic’ is that if CALP is superior to BICS, then minoritised or low-SES 
students who may have ‘less CALP’ are, by deﬁ nition, inferior, or linguis-
tically/cognitively deﬁ cient.
The only problem with this ‘logic’ is that I have never argued that 
school language is inherently more complex or enriching or superior to 
the language of everyday social interactions. Why would I make such an 
argument? It is totally irrelevant to the issues to which the CALP/BICS 
distinction was directed. Furthermore, anybody who has engaged in 
conversational analysis will testify to the inherent complexity of social 
interactions. The CALP/BICS distinction simply drew attention to the 
fact that the language demands students encounter within the social 
context of schooling are diff erent from and go beyond the language 
demands of everyday social interactions in the ways described by many 
linguists and educators (e.g. Cucchiara, 2019; Wong Fillmore & 
Fillmore, 2012).
As discussed previously, some theorists (MacSwan, 1999; MacSwan 
& Rolstad, 2003; Rolstad, 2017), deny that there are any language 
demands within schooling because language development has essentially 
ceased by the time children arrive in school around age 5 or 6. 
Furthermore, these theorists argue that for native speakers of a language, 
schooling has  minimal impact on expanding ‘language proﬁ ciency’ 
beyond what 5-6-year-old children bring to school (MacSwan & Rolstad, 
2003). MacSwan and Rolstad’s entire critique of the BICS/CALP distinc-
tion, which has been uncritically accepted by numerous researchers (e.g. 
Baker & Wright, 2017; Bunch, 2014; Faltis, 2014; Wiley & Rolstad, 
2014), hinges on this a priori and profoundly counter-intuitive theoretical 
assertion. The fact that, for some of these researchers, the radical claim 
that schools play virtually no role in developing students’ knowledge of 
language directly contradicts much of their own scholarly writing (e.g. 
Faltis & Hudelson, 1998; Bunch, 2013), suggests that they may not have 
fully processed the theoretical basis and implications of the MacSwan/
Rolstad critique of BICS/CALP, which were discussed earlier in this 
chapter.
196 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

Does CALP Privilege Certain Class-Based Varieties of Language, 
Speciﬁ cally the Language of ‘Educated Classes’?
The simple answer to this question is ‘absolutely not’. As in the case of 
core academic language skills (CALS) (Uccelli et al., 2015a, 2015b), the 
construct of ‘CALP’ refers simply to the academic registers that all stu-
dents will encounter within the social context of schooling. It says nothing 
about possible diff erences between social groups in any aspect of language 
development or academic language skills. The characteristics of these aca-
demic registers of schooling have been repeatedly documented, as 
described previously in this chapter and in Chapter 4. The cautions articu-
lated by Phillips Galloway et al. (2020: 5) in relation to how the CALS 
construct should be interpreted apply equally to the construct of CALP:
In privileging these skillsets for assessment, we do not imply that CALS 
is categorically distinct from language resources learned in other con-
texts. CALS comprise knowledge of Spanish and English language 
resources more likely to co-occur with school learning tasks (Snow & 
Uccelli, 2009), but which may also be used for communication in homes 
and communities (just as the language used in home settings is also used 
for learning at school). In addition, in focusing on ALs [academic lan-
guages] we are not suggesting that this language development is more 
consequential than that which results from adolescents’ participation in 
other discourse communities (sports teams, religious groups, with peers 
online).
With respect to Phillips Galloway and colleagues’ (2020) ﬁ rst point, it 
is worth noting that critics of the BICS/CALP distinction have frequently 
mischaracterised it as a ‘dichotomy’ (e.g. Edelsky et al., 1983; Rolstad, 
2017) or as ‘polar opposites’ (Jensen & Thompson, 2020), implying a rigid 
universal categorical diff erence rather than a conceptual distinction 
directed at a particular set of issues in the speciﬁ c context of schooling. 
When critics characterise it as a rigid dichotomy rather than a conceptual 
distinction, they often consider that they have refuted the legitimacy of the 
distinction on the grounds that components of ‘academic language’ are 
used in everyday conversational interactions and everyday colloquial lan-
guage is used in academic interactions and learning in school (e.g. Flores, 
2020; Flores & Rosa, 2015; Jensen & Thompson, 2020). As noted previ-
ously, this characterisation of the BICS/CALP distinction is inaccurate, 
sets up a ‘straw person’, and totally misses the point. The point is that 
there are diff erences in the relative frequency with which certain features 
of language occur in everyday interactions outside of school contexts as 
compared to the language demands faced by all students in disciplinary 
learning and literacy development within the context of schooling.
To my knowledge, not one of the critics of the BICS/CALP distinction 
has disputed this proposition, which is the central tenet of the theoretical 
distinction.
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 197

An additional point, as Phillips Galloway et al. (2020) point out, is 
that CALS (and CALP) is not universally more consequential than the 
language registers that adolescents use in various other discourse com-
munities. For example, CALS/CALP is probably not particularly func-
tional within the adolescent discourse community of video games, which 
for many adolescents is far more salient than the discourse community of 
schooling. However, by deﬁ nition, and as these researchers have repeat-
edly demonstrated empirically, CALS/CALP is more consequential within 
the speciﬁ c discourse community of the school.
The fact that schools in many contexts have discriminated against the 
languages and language varieties that minoritised and socioeconomically 
excluded students have brought to school is unrelated to the terminology 
used to characterise the extent to which students gain access to the academic 
registers of schooling (e.g. CALP, CALS). To argue otherwise is essentially 
to claim that the educational diffi  culties experienced by some minoritised 
students are caused by the inherent nature of the academic registers of 
schooling rather than by the misguided instructional practices implemented 
in far too many schools in the United States and internationally.
Does CALP Conﬂ ate Language Proﬁ ciency, Academic 
Achievement and Cognitive Functioning?
In contrast to the a priori dismissal of any relationship between lan-
guage proﬁ ciency and academic achievement proposed by MacSwan 
(1999), MacSwan and Rolstad (2003) and Rolstad (2017), the construct of 
CALP or academic language proﬁ ciency posits a strong and consistent 
relationship, after the primary grades, between academic language skills 
and achievement in academic subject matter across the curriculum. 
Extensive empirical evidence of these relationships has been reported by 
Grabe (2004), Uccelli and colleagues (e.g. Uccelli & Galloway, 2018), and 
many other researchers.
The fact that there is a consistent relationship between academic lan-
guage skills and academic achievement does not imply that language pro-
ﬁ ciency and academic achievement are identical. Academic subject matter 
knowledge is not reducible to linguistic concepts. Similarly, the cognitive 
functions involved in academic tasks (e.g. hypothesising, analysing cause/
eff ect relationships, etc.) are closely related to, but not identical with, the 
academic language we use to carry out these cognitive functions. The 
operation of these cognitive functions is not conﬁ ned only to academic 
contexts but is also clearly evident in out-of-school contexts that do not 
involve print literacy.
However, as discussed in previous chapters, although the cognitive, 
academic, and linguistic dimensions of CALP are conceptually distinct, 
these dimensions are frequently fused both in the process of acquiring 
academic knowledge and in carrying out academic tasks (see, for example, 
198 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

Starﬁ eld, 1994). The instructional implications of the fusion of cognitive, 
academic, and linguistic dimensions within the construct of CALP was 
expressed as follows:
Cognitive—instruction should be cognitively challenging and require 
students to use higher-order thinking abilities rather than the low-level 
memorisation and application skills that are tapped by typical worksheets 
or drill-and-practice computer programs.
Academic—academic content (e.g. science, math, social studies, art) 
should be integrated with language instruction so that students acquire 
the speciﬁ c language or registers of these academic subjects.
Language—the development of critical language awareness should be 
fostered throughout the program by encouraging students to compare 
and contrast their languages (e.g. phonics conventions, grammar, cog-
nates, etc.) and by providing students with extensive opportunities to 
carry out projects investigating their own and their community’s lan-
guage use, practices, and assumptions (e.g. in relation to the status of 
diff erent varieties and power relations associated with language policies 
and practices). (Cummins, 2000: 98)
To What Extent does the Construct of CALP Ignore or 
Unintentionally Obscure the Fact that Task-Oriented Talk is a 
Crucial Component of Academic Engagement?
Bunch (2014: 71) expressed concern that the contrast between ‘aca-
demic’ and ‘social’ language can unintentionally mask the productive 
ways in which students use a wide variety of linguistic resources to engage 
with academic tasks: ‘In engaging in academic tasks, students’ language 
may include features of interpersonal communication, as well as nondom-
inant regional and social dialects, … “errors” to be expected in the speech 
and writing of second language learners, and normal dysﬂ uencies associ-
ated with spontaneous talk of even the most competent English 
speakers’.
The importance of interactive talk for learning and language/literacy 
development was explicitly acknowledged by Cummins (2000: 79) in 
emphasising that academic language proﬁ ciency develops in a matrix of 
social interaction and students need ample opportunities to talk with each 
other and to the teacher about academic tasks in order to expand their 
command of academic language: ‘Talking about the text in a collaborative 
context ensures that higher order thinking processes (e.g. analysis, evalua-
tion, synthesis) engage with academic language in deepening students’ 
comprehension of the text’. The obvious fact that we use our entire concep-
tual and linguistic repertoire to discuss and engage with academic tasks, 
and socially manage collaborative conversations and group work, is not in 
any way inconsistent with the well-documented diff erences between the 
language demands of school as compared to everyday social interaction.
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 199

To What Extent is CALP ‘Context-Independent’ and a 
‘Prerequisite’ for Participating Successfully in Academic Tasks?
Baker and Wright (2017) misrepresent the BICS/CALP distinction in 
concluding that ‘early theories made a distinction between everyday con-
text-embedded conversational language and decontextualised academic 
language and argued that cognitive academic language proﬁ ciency is a pre-
requisite for academic success in school’ (Baker & Wright, 2017: 168). 
Although I occasionally used the term ‘decontextualised’ in initial formula-
tions of the BICS/CALP distinction, I quickly switched to the term ‘context-
reduced’ in recognition of the fact that all language and literacy practices 
are contextualised (e.g. Cummins, 1981b). This does not mean, however, 
that the degree and range of contextual supports for meaning are equivalent 
in typical academic contexts, such as textbook reading, in comparison to 
the contextual supports available in face-to-face contexts (e.g. intonation, 
eye-contact, gestures, reference to the immediate situation, etc.). Thus, as 
discussed previously, the CALP/BICS distinction was conceptualised in 
terms of two intersecting continua related to degree of contextual support 
and cognitive demand rather than as dichotomous ‘context-independent’ 
(MacSwan & Rolstad, 2003) or ‘decontextualised’ constructs.
The assertion that CALP or knowledge of academic language is a 
‘prerequisite’ for academic participation (Aukerman, 2007; Baker & Wright, 
2017; Bunch, 2014) is similarly misleading and inaccurate. Aukerman, for 
example, misinterpreted the CALP/BICS distinction when she argued in the 
context of initial literacy instruction that ‘I believe it is ultimately destructive 
to view proﬁ ciency in decontextualised language as a prerequisite for 
successful participation in school’ (2007: 632). I agree completely with her 
argument – it would be absurd for anyone to make such a claim. If CALP 
were a prerequisite for academic learning, how would any student develop 
CALP? Together with theorists such as Wong Fillmore (2009, 2014), I have 
argued that CALP is developed through face-to-face interaction in home 
and school and in the process of actively engaging with literacy, discussing 
ideas with peers and adults, and becoming aware of how the registers of 
academic language work across diff erent disciplines. Opportunities for 
collaborative learning and talk about text are crucial constituents of 
academic language learning (e.g. Cummins, 2000). Thus, there is no 
inconsistency or incompatibility between the construct of CALP and the 
fact that all students, including emergent bilingual students, use everyday 
conversational language to grapple with ideas as well as to display their 
academic work for various audiences (what Bunch [2014] calls the ‘language 
of ideas’ and the ‘language of display’).
Concluding Thoughts
The case articulated previously for the legitimacy of the construct of 
‘academic language’ applies equally to the distinction between academic 
200 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

language proﬁ ciency and conversational ﬂ uency (CALP/BICS). The dis-
tinction is supported by substantial empirical evidence pointing to (a) dif-
ferences between everyday colloquial language and the language demands 
of schooling, (b) strong relationships between academic language proﬁ -
ciency and the learning of subject matter content and (c) strong relation-
ships between academic language proficiency and both reading 
comprehension and academic writing performance (e.g. Barr et al., 2019; 
Uccelli et al., 2015a, 2015b; Uccelli & Galloway, 2017). The logic underly-
ing the distinction is transparent, and evident in the fact that conversa-
tional ﬂ uency in everyday social contexts reaches a plateau roughly around 
the age of about 6 whereas our academic language skills continue to 
expand through 12 years of schooling and beyond.
Clearly, cognitive skills are involved in virtually all forms of social 
interaction, and spoken communicative interactions are integral to much 
of the academic work that students undertake in schools. But in everyday 
social interactions, much of our spoken language use and comprehension 
is largely eff ortless, automatised, and involves minimal cognitive load 
(Sweller et al., 2019). By contrast, academic learning in school (and learn-
ing new skills and knowledge in out-of-school contexts) is frequently cog-
nitively demanding and dependent on various forms of instructional 
scaff olding to reduce the cognitive and linguistic load to manageable levels 
(e.g. Bunch et al., 2014). When the BICS/CALP distinction was initially 
introduced, educators very quickly grasped the logic underlying the dis-
tinction because it ﬁ t directly with their experience and their instructional 
goals in the classroom. The distinction explained how many emergent 
bilingual students could quickly attain conversational ﬂ uency in English 
and yet continue to experience diffi  culties in catching up to grade expecta-
tions in English literacy and other academic content.
With respect to consequential validity, the BICS/CALP distinction 
drew attention to the potential for discriminatory assessment of emergent 
bilingual students when their L2 conversational ﬂ uency was taken as an 
index of academic L2 acquisition. It highlighted the need for all teachers 
to reinforce academic language across the curriculum to support students 
in catching up academically. And, ﬁ nally, the fact that academic language 
is found predominantly in written text rather than in everyday spoken 
conversation reinforced the importance of maximising print access and 
literacy engagement from an early age.
How did such a simple straightforward idea become so controversial? 
I don’t have a satisfactory answer to this question. But a partial answer 
resides in the fact that the various critiques were accepted uncritically and 
without analysis by many scholars. For example, in contrast to previous 
editions of the Foundations of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, the 
6th edition of this classic textbook characterised the BICS/CALP 
 distinction as an early (i.e. outdated), oversimpliﬁ ed, problematic and 
 misleading account of language proficiency in both bilingual and 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 201

monolingual populations (Baker & Wright, 2017: 164–168). The various 
criticisms of the BICS/CALP construct were reported uncritically and, 
unlike previous editions which largely reserved judgment, were explicitly 
identiﬁ ed as valid. For example, Baker and Wright (2017) approvingly cite 
Wiley and Rolstad’s (2014: 51) claim that it is ‘simply not the case that 
literacy and academic language involve higher order cognition, while 
other domains in which we use specialised language do not’. They accept 
uncritically Wiley and Rolstad’s evidence-free assertion that the construct 
of CALP implies that people who use specialised registers of language in 
domains outside of the school (e.g. horticulturalists, auctioneers, stand-up 
comedians, etc.) do not use higher order cognition. This is a gross distor-
tion by both Wiley and Rolstad (2014) and Baker and Wright (2017) of 
everything I have written about the BICS/CALP distinction.
None of the many critiques of BICS/CALP, to my knowledge, has even 
addressed, let alone disputed in any systematic way, the empirical evidence 
supporting the distinction between the linguistic demands of everyday 
face-to-face communication and the linguistic demands of schooling. The 
closest they have come is to dismiss any and all assessment data as ‘out-of 
context irrelevant nonsense’ that measures only ‘test-wiseness’ (e.g. Edelsky 
et al., 1983: 9), or as illegitimate because it emanates from an autonomous 
orientation to language and literacy (Wiley, 1996; Wiley & Rolstad, 2014). 
As discussed in Chapter 7, critiques that fail to address the empirical ade-
quacy of a theoretical claim or construct have a credibility problem.
An additional example of inadequate analysis comes from Bunch’s 
(2014) listing of some of the critiques of the BICS/CALP distinction in 
which he notes that critics have claimed that CALP conﬂ ates language 
proﬁ ciency with academic achievement. As discussed previously, he fails 
to take account of the fact that this criticism is based solely on MacSwan 
and Rolstad’s (2003) theoretical claim that language proﬁ ciency is a priori 
totally independent of literacy development and academic achievement. 
Clearly, Bunch does not share this conception of language proﬁ ciency and 
language development as totally independent of everything that happens 
instructionally in schools (e.g. Bunch et al., 2014). Yet, his uncritical artic-
ulation of this radically counter-intuitive criticism lends credibility to a 
position he would clearly oppose.
In summary, just as the construct of ‘academic language’ satisﬁ es the 
criteria of empirical adequacy, logical coherence, and consequential valid-
ity, so too does the BICS/CALP distinction. As a conceptual distinction 
applying to both L1 and L2 contexts, with clear implications for instruc-
tion and assessment of minoritised students, it makes no claim to be a 
comprehensive theory of language proﬁ ciency. Thus, claims that the dis-
tinction is ‘oversimpliﬁ ed’ miss the point (Cummins, 2000, 2008a). It is 
not in any sense opposed to or incompatible with a distinction such as 
Bunch’s (2014) language of ideas and language of display – the two sets of 
distinctions are addressed to very diff erent questions.
202 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

I have sympathy with Bunch’s (2013) concern that teacher education 
programmes in the United States tend to focus on the BICS/CALP distinc-
tion, despite multiple critiques, without pursuing issues of language 
instruction and assessment in more depth. Obviously, teachers’ pedagogi-
cal knowledge should include much more than the fact that there are sig-
niﬁ cant diff erences between informal everyday conversational interactions 
and the academic language demands of schooling. However, I would con-
tend that the BICS/CALP distinction is not a bad place to start in develop-
ing this pedagogical knowledge. Its implications for instruction and 
assessment are immediately relevant:
• 
It explains why emergent bilingual students who have gained consider-
able ﬂ uency in the school language (L2) may still exhibit large gaps in 
L2 literacy skills for several additional years.
• 
It highlights the reasons why all teachers should be prepared to rein-
force academic language in a sustained way across the curriculum for 
both L1 and L2 learners.
• 
It explains one very signiﬁ cant reason why ‘quick-exit’ transitional 
bilingual programmes don’t tend to work particularly well for emer-
gent bilingual students.
• 
It refutes the rationale for highly problematic assessment and account-
ability policies incorporated into federal legislation such as the No 
Child Left Behind (2001) Act that mandated that English language 
learners be assessed by high-stakes standardised tests after just one 
year of learning English (this was extended to three years in the 2015 
Every Student Succeeds Act [ESSA]).
• 
And, going full circle to the origins of the distinction, it highlights the 
need for change in the ways in which exceptional students are identi-
ﬁ ed (both at the ‘gifted’ and ‘handicapped’ ends of the continuum); 
speciﬁ cally, it provides a strong impetus to explore multilingual assess-
ment procedures at least during the initial ﬁ ve years of learning the 
school language (e.g. Schissel et al., 2019).
These immediate applications to instructional practice and educational 
policy explain why many teacher educators have continued to incorporate 
the BICS/CALP distinction into their programmes over the past 40 years.11
Notes
(1) Thomas and Collier’s (1997) Prism model incorporates the same elements as Figure 
8.2, namely sociocultural, linguistic, academic and cognitive processes, although 
these components are arranged somewhat diff erently, with social and cultural pro-
cesses located in the center of the prism that is bounded on three sides by L1 + L2 
academic, cognitive and language development. All components are seen as interde-
pendent in complex ways. The Prism model was developed to account for the ﬁ ndings 
of Thomas and Collier’s research involving more than 700,000 ELLs. One of their 
major conclusions was that ‘the most powerful predictor of academic success in L2 is 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 203

formal schooling in L1. This is true whether L1 schooling is received only in home 
country or in both home country and the U.S.’ (1997: 39). They express their perspec-
tive on the interdependence of language, cognition, and academic development as 
follows: ‘Language and cognitive development go hand in hand. Language is the 
vehicle for communicating cognitively. In school, we develop students’ cognitive 
growth through academic work across the curriculum in science, social studies, math-
ematics, language arts, and the ﬁ ne arts’ (1997: 40).
(2) Although it is beyond the scope of this chapter to address in any detail, it is worth 
acknowledging Richardson’s (2014) critique of Labov’s focus on AAVE as part of the 
problem with respect to reading and academic success. In opposition to Labov’s anal-
ysis, she argues that the problem lies in the fact that ‘poor Black people are trapped 
in a cycle of structural racism, and it will take more than changing our syntax, pho-
nology, and vocabulary to ﬁ x that’ (2014: 191–192).
(3) Flores and Rosa’s (2015) critique of Delpit’s argument regarding the need to teach 
explicitly how the linguistic codes of power operate also appears inconsistent with the 
strong endorsement of Delpit’s position in the CUNY-NYSIEB Translanguaging 
Guide (Celic & Seltzer, 2013), which was produced as part of a project directed by 
Nelson Flores. Celic and Seltzer note that it is critical for bilingual and emergent 
bilingual students to learn the codes and rules discussed by Delpit (1995), ‘which are 
often those that refer to white, middle- class cultural norms’ (2013: 17). They note 
that explicitly teaching minoritised students how to recognise and play by these rules 
equips them with the dominant cultural knowledge that they will need in their future 
lives where they are likely to be judged on the extent to which they have gained the 
linguistic agility to use these codes of power together with a variety of other registers 
of language. Once students have gained access to these arbitrary standardised norms, 
they ‘can then question and challenge the culture of power, thinking about who cre-
ated these codes and rules and why’ (2013: 17). (emphasis original).
(4) The problematic nature of Flores and Rosa’s (2015) claims regarding Olsen’s (2010) 
pedagogical recommendations is reinforced when Olsen’s recommendations are com-
pared to those of other researchers. Table 8.1 compares Olsen’s pedagogical priorities 
with those of Bunch et al. (2014) and Cummins (this volume, Chapter 6). In all three 
cases, the focus is on supporting academic development among ELLs. Olsen’s speciﬁ c 
concern is with ‘long-term English learners’ while Bunch and colleagues’ review of 
research-based instructional strategies is oriented towards the curriculum standards 
articulated in the Common Core State Standards (CCSS). In all three cases, the listing 
of instructional options is not in any order of priority.
 
 Clearly, there is considerable overlap in the three sets of instructional priorities. For 
example, an explicit focus on the language of academic text is common to all three 
sets of instructional strategies. Why do Olsen’s pedagogical recommendations merit 
the accusation that they are designed to mold ELLs into ‘white speaking subjects’ 
(Flores & Rosa, 2015: 157) but (perhaps) the other pedagogical priorities are innocent 
of this charge? If the Bunch et al. instructional priorities are equally complicit with 
raciolinguistic ideologies, then explicit criteria for making this claim should be artic-
ulated. Furthermore, the detailed empirical evidence cited by Bunch et al. in support 
of their choice of pedagogical strategies should either be refuted or accounted for in 
some way (see Chapter 7).
 
 Flores and Rosa (2015) imply that any focus on developing students’ awareness of 
linguistic features of text (Bunch et al., 2014) or reinforcing academic language across 
the curriculum (Cummins, 2001), or teaching the codes of power (Delpit, 1988) auto-
matically renders this instructional focus uncritical and implicated in raciolinguistic 
discourses of appropriateness. This implication is refuted by the fact that Delpit 
(1988, 1995) and Cummins (2001a; this volume) and many other authors (e.g. Janks, 
2014) have strongly advocated that teachers promote critical inquiry into language 
forms and uses in ways that challenge coercive relations of power.
204 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

(5) Although the title of the Wiley and Rolstad (2014) article references the CCSS and the 
‘Great Divide’, the bulk of the article is devoted to a repudiation of the BICS/CALP 
distinction. Since they include virtually no analysis of the CCSS itself, my interpreta-
tion of their position is that the construct of ‘academic language’ automatically implies 
a deﬁ cit position in relation to the language and culture of minoritised students.
(6) It is universally accepted that our experiences growing up in particular social and 
environmental contexts determine the kinds of cognitive skills we develop. Thus, 
Inuit young people growing up in the 1940s Canadian Arctic without access to formal 
schooling were unlikely to have developed formal print literacy, science, or mathe-
matics skills, but they would have developed a wide range of higher order cognitive 
skills related to surviving on the land through navigating, hunting, and trapping as 
well as a deep knowledge of their community’s culture and history. Their cognitive 
skills would have developed in a diff erent direction from those of students who expe-
rienced formal schooling in southern Canada, but it would be absurd to claim that 
their cognitive skills are in any way inferior or less well developed than those of young 
people who had experienced schooling.
 
 Similarly, as Nurmela et al. (2012) point out, the oral culture and traditions of so-
called ‘nonliterate’ communities reﬂ ect highly accomplished forms of reasoning, 
memory, decision-making, and dispute-resolution. A concern for language planners 
involved in extending schooling and literacy to these communities is that the concept 
of ‘literacy’ can render the cultures of Indigenous communities invisible, marked and 
negative: ‘it “minoritises” them, and hides and rationalises power relations instead of 
exposing and questioning them’ (Nurmela et al., 2012: 162). These authors argue that 
children who currently grow up in oral environments should not be subjected to edu-
cation that is predominantly focused on reading and writing. Communities should be 
given the opportunity to maintain the beneﬁ ts of oral traditions at the same time as 
they become literate to a high level in their own and wider societal languages. By the 
same token, any form of schooling that aspires to connect to students’ lives and 
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 205
Table 8.1 Pedagogical strategies for supporting emergent bilingual students
Olsen (2010)
Bunch et al. (2014]
Cummins (this volume)
Promote:
Home language literacy 
and language development
Emphasis on academic 
language and complex 
vocabulary
Instruction in the academic 
uses of English
Powerful oral language
Extensive reading of 
relevant texts
Explicit literacy 
development
High quality writing
Use of students’ home 
language
Focusing students on 
linguistic features of text
Attention to text structure
Integrated pedagogical 
scaff olding
Stimulating reading 
engagement
Comprehension strategy 
instruction
Building and activating 
background knowledge
Promoting disciplinary literacy
Engage students’ multilingual 
repertoires
Reinforce academic language 
across the curriculum
Scaff old comprehension and 
production of language across 
the curriculum
Maximise literacy engagement
Connect instruction to 
students’ lives
Decolonise curriculum and 
instruction through culturally 
sustaining pedagogy
Valorize and build on L1/L2 
language varieties
Affi  rm identities in association 
with academic engagement

engage community funds of knowledge, must prioritise the oral language and cultural 
traditions that students bring to school. This perspective is entirely consistent with 
the theoretical frameworks discussed in Part 1 of the present volume.
(7) A fascinating example of the clash between individualistic and social orientations to 
language and literacy research that is still highly relevant today can be seen in the 
debate between James Paul Gee and Catherine Snow in the Journal of Literacy 
Research (1999-2001). This debate was occasioned by a critical review written by Gee 
(1999) of the Snow et al. (1998) National Research Council report on prevention of 
reading diffi  culties. Gee argued that the social dimensions of reading were largely 
ignored in the report and, in particular, the role of poverty as a contributor to reading 
diffi  culties was minimally addressed. He pointed out that broader indices of language 
development that reﬂ ected the impact of SES were just as strongly related to reading 
achievement as phonological awareness, which the report focused on as a critical 
variable. Underlying the problems with the report, he argued, was a conception of 
reading as an autonomous process divorced from the social realities of children’s lives. 
Gee also highlighted the role of societal power relations and identity negotiation 
between teachers and students as contributors to students’ underachievement:
 
The fact that children will not identify with, or even will disidentify with, teach-
ers and schools that they perceive as hostile, alien, or oppressive to their home-
based identities and cultures is as much a cognitive as a political point. … To 
ignore these wider issues, while stressing such things as phonemic awareness 
built on controlled texts, is to ignore, not merely what we know about politics, 
but also what we know about learning and literacy as well. (Gee, 1999: 360)
 
 In her response, Snow (2000) denied that social realities were ignored in the 
National Research Council report. She noted that Snow et al. (1998) pointed to the 
correlation of 0.68 between reading achievement and the collective poverty level of 
students in a school and acknowledged that this correlation is considerably greater 
than the correlation of approximately 0.45 between reading achievement and early 
literacy indicators such as knowledge of the letters of the alphabet or phonological 
awareness. However, Snow et al. then largely ignored these data, preferring to focus 
on individual cognitive variables. Snow defended the emphasis in the report on the 
cognitive subskills involved with literacy development on the grounds that instruction 
could address these eff ectively whereas schools were relatively impotent to change the 
social conditions of learners. She also challenged the claims of New Literacy Studies, 
arguing that ‘If Gee really wishes to promote the impact of the New Literacies 
approach, he would do well to invest his time in conducting the sort of empirical 
research that proponents of phonological awareness have produced, rather than 
simply arguing for his position as the politically and morally correct one’ (Snow, 
2000: 116).
 
 Gee (2000) responded by pointing out that New Literacies theorists view skills not 
simply as internal cognitive states but as the means whereby individuals participate 
in culturally, historically, and institutionally situated social practices. In this sense, 
skills are not ﬁ xed but rather change according to the social context and students’ 
modes of participation in these contexts. He suggested that if this social perspective 
had been given greater weight, a very diff erent report would have emerged with dra-
matically diff erent policy implications.
(8) 
Uccelli and Galloway (2017) dismiss any notion that academic language is ‘superior’ 
to the colloquial language used in out-of-school contexts. They note that students 
whom they interviewed often characterised the colloquial language they used in 
everyday contexts as ‘incorrect’ or ‘inferior’ reﬂ ecting the fact that they had ‘inter-
nalized the hierarchical societal values associated with diff erent ways of using lan-
guage’ (2017: 402). Uccelli and Galloway instead argue for promoting students’ 
206 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

ability to communicate successfully across boundaries and to move ﬂ exibly across 
cultures, communities, and ways of speaking, goals also promoted by culturally 
sustaining and critical pedagogies (Duncan-Andrade & Morrell, 2008; Paris & 
Alim, 2017):
 
In our view, mastering CALS does not entail using formulaic structures accord-
ing to prescriptive rules but, instead, using language resources ﬂ exibly in the 
service of eff ective communication and learning. A successful language user is 
one that has at her or his disposal the resources and awareness to participate 
ﬂ exibly and eff ectively in a variety of academic and nonacademic contexts. … 
Certainly, among the many ways of using language, school needs to focus on 
expanding students’ academic language resources to support their academic 
achievement. Yet, our research suggests that this learning will be more eff ective 
if students’ voices and their own ways of making meaning are heard and incor-
porated into the discussion. (Uccelli & Galloway, 2017: 403)
 
This perspective is clearly consistent with the views expressed by Valdés (2004, 
2017) and García (2009, 2020). However, in contrast to the concerns expressed by 
these and other researchers (e.g. Flores & Rosa, 2015) in regard to the construct of 
‘academic language’, Uccelli and Galloway see no conﬂ ict between expanding stu-
dents’ academic language resources on the one hand, and incorporating their voices 
and ways of making meaning into classroom instruction on the other.
(9) 
Hulstijn has employed diff erent terms to refer to the distinction between basic and 
extended language cognition. In his 2011 article, the two constructs were named 
basic language cognition (BLC) and higher language cognition (HLC). In his 2015 
book, he used the label ‘extended’ rather than ‘higher’ language cognition and in 
2019, the terms ‘shared’ and ‘nonshared’ are used alternatively with ‘basic’ and 
‘extended’.
(10) The ‘juicy sentences’ approach pioneered by Wong Fillmore and colleagues (e.g. 
Wong Fillmore & Blum Martinez, 2015) has recently been integrated into the EL 
Education grades K-5 and 6–8 Language Arts Curricula. Videos illustrating the 
‘Deep Dive’ into language approach can be viewed at: https://eleducation.org/
resources/implementing-language-dives and https://eleducation.org/resources/
small-group-language-dive-long-version. This approach is described as follows on 
the latter website:
 
A Language Dive empowers students to analyze, understand, and use the lan-
guage of academic sentences by slowing down to have a conversation about the 
meaning, purpose, and structure of a compelling sentence from a complex text 
or tool. Following the engaging deconstruct-reconstruct-practice routine of the 
Language Dive, students play with the smallest ‘chunks’ of the sentence, paying 
close attention to how language works, acquiring the necessary facility with aca-
demic English, and fostering overall language ability.
 
 It is important to clarify here that ‘smallest chunks’ refer to phrases and clauses, 
not individual vocabulary items (personal communication, Lily Wong Fillmore, 
March 15, 2021).
 
 EL Education is a non-proﬁ t organisation that develops open-source curriculum 
materials that are freely accessible on its website. According to EdReports, the EL 
Education’s Language Arts curricula are rated extremely highly (https://www.edre-
ports.org/reports?s=ela). EL Education is strongly committed to equity and antiracism 
(https://eleducation.org/who-we-are/our-commitment-to-equity-and-antiracism), 
illustrating the fact that explicitly reinforcing academic language across the curricu-
lum is fully consistent with an antiracist instructional approach and does not in any 
sense reﬂ ect a raciolinguistic ideology.
Is ‘Academic Language’ a Legitimate Theoretical Construct? 207

(11) Seltzer (2019) also expressed concern that the BICS/CALP distinction continues to 
be taught uncritically in TESOL and bilingual teacher preparation programmes. She 
suggested that ‘[r]esearch has highlighted the deﬁ cit perspectives inherent to concep-
tual frameworks that distinguish between home and school language’ (2019: 988). 
Here she seems to conﬂ ate two diff erent referents for home and school language: (1) 
home language referencing a language such as Spanish in the US context, with English 
being the school language and (2) home language referencing the languaging practices 
in which students engage outside of school contexts as compared to the ‘academic’ 
language of schooling. My interpretation of her argument is that she regards both of 
these distinctions as problematic and implicated in deﬁ cit perspectives.
 
 A challenge for theorists operating within this orientation to translanguaging 
theory, which in Chapter 10 I label unitary translanguaging theory (UTT), is to 
address the internal contradictions that crop up repeatedly. For example, as noted 
previously, García (2009: 36) argued that teachers must teach the standard academic 
language in order not to disadvantage minoritised students. This position clearly 
acknowledges speciﬁ c characteristics of the ‘school language’ that pose challenges 
for students beyond their out-of-school languaging. It seems unlikely that Seltzer 
(2019) would characterise García’s argument as a deﬁ cit position, particularly since 
Celic and Seltzer (2013: 17) also endorse the need for minoritised students to learn 
the codes of power ‘which are often those that refer to white, middle-class cultural 
norms’.
 
 If Seltzer’s argument is more focused on deﬁ cit perspectives inherent in distin-
guishing between, for example, Spanish as the home language and English as the 
school language, then it would be useful to address apparent inconsistencies in the 
way these terms are utilised by researchers operating within the same broad project 
(the CUNY-New York State Initiative on Emergent Bilinguals – https://www.cuny-
nysieb.org/). For example, Menken and Sánchez (2019), in an important article 
documenting the outcomes of school-based professional development focused on 
translanguaging pedagogy, utilise the terms ‘home language’ and ‘home language 
practices’ a combined total of 36 times, as illustrated in the following quotations:
 
Teachers also made the linguistic landscape of their classrooms multilingual, 
whereby students’ home languages were visually displayed. … For example, 
teachers in participating schools created word walls, cognate walls, and false 
cognate walls in English and students’ home languages. (2019: 750–751) (emphasis 
added)
 
Although scholars of TESOL and bilingual education have for years recom-
mended that educators incorporate students’ home languages in instruction … 
the schools in our sample—like most across the United States—failed to do so 
prior to their involvement in CUNY-NYSIEB. By systematically bringing stu-
dents’ languages into their classrooms, teachers in the project normalized the fact 
that students live in bilingual households and that their bilingualism is a resource 
for them. (2019: 753) (emphasis added)
208 Part 2: Critical Analysis of Competing Theoretical Claims

