Cent. Eur. J. Phys. • 8(5) • 2010 • 689-698
DOI: 10.2478/s11534-009-0165-y
Central European Journal of Physics
A Q-Ising model application for linear-time image
segmentation
Research Article
Frank W. Bentrem∗
1 Marine Geosciences Division, Naval Research Laboratory, Stennis Space Center, Mississippi 39529 (present address)
2 Center for Bio/Molecular Science and Engineering, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375
3 Department of Physics and Engineering Physics, Tulane University, New Orleans, Louisiana 70118
Received 9 November 2009; accepted 30 November 2009
Abstract:
A computational method is presented which eﬃciently segments digital grayscale images by directly apply-
ing the Q-state Ising (or Potts) model. Since the Potts model was ﬁrst proposed in 1952, physicists have
studied lattice models to gain deep insights into magnetism and other disordered systems. For some time,
researchers have realized that digital images may be modeled in much the same way as these physical
systems (i.e., as a square lattice of numerical values). A major drawback in using Potts model methods for
image segmentation is that, with conventional methods, it processes in exponential time. Advances have
been made via certain approximations to reduce the segmentation process to power-law time. However, in
many applications (such as for sonar imagery), real-time processing requires much greater eﬃciency. This
article contains a description of an energy minimization technique that applies four Potts (Q-Ising) mod-
els directly to the image and processes in linear time. The result is analogous to partitioning the system
into regions of four classes of magnetism. This direct Potts segmentation technique is demonstrated on
photographic, medical, and acoustic images.
PACS (2008): 75.10.Hk, 89.20.Ff
Keywords:
image segmentation • Potts model
© Versita Sp. z o.o.
1.
Introduction
Segmenting digital images into regions of distinct types
has applications in a great many ﬁelds, e.g.
medical
imaging [1–4], surveillance by synthetic aperture radar [6]
and satellite, and underwater acoustic imaging (e.g. see
Ref. [7]), to name a few. In general, image segmentation is
∗E-mail: frank.bentrem@nrlssc.navy.mil
performed by classifying image regions by color, intensity,
and texture. Of course, only the latter two are considered
in grayscale segmentation, which is the subject we con-
sider in this article. While classiﬁcation by intensity is
a straightforward assessment of the brightness/darkness
of an image pixel or group of pixels (as with histogram
segmentation methods [1]), texture classiﬁcation is much
more complex [1, 8]. Although it is diﬃcult to deﬁne im-
age texture precisely, we can say that it is the spatial
relationship of the intensities (i.e. “graininess”) of an im-
age region. Clearly, there are indeed a large number of
689

A Q-Ising model application for linear-time image segmentation
possible texture types in digital images.
A grayscale digital image may be represented as a matrix
of numerical values, as in Fig. 1, which indicate the inten-
sity or brightness (gray level) of the corresponding image
pixel. Techniques for image segmentation (such as thresh-
olding and histogram methods) that focus solely on inten-
sity are the most computationally eﬃcient since they gen-
erally require just one or two passes through the intensity
matrix. Identifying regions of diﬀerent texture, however,
tend to be relatively expensive in terms of computation
time [8]. Here I describe four types of magnetism using
the Ising model [9] and show how its generalization, the
Q-Ising (or Potts) model [10], can be used analogously to
segment grayscale images into four categories [11]. The
common approach (e.g. see [3, 6, 12, 13]) to segmenta-
tion using the Potts model applies the Potts model to the
categorizing labels, i.e., the segmented image.
(A sim-
ilar approach is also used for more general data clus-
tering [14–16].) The optimal segmentation is often found
using a Monte Carlo approach, which processes in expo-
nential time (time for computer processing increases expo-
nentially with the number of pixels contained in the dig-
ital image [12]). Use of the Bethe approximation [12, 17]
allows an optimal segmentation to be obtained in power-
law time. However, the direct Potts segmentation method
presented in this article, which utilizes both intensity
and texture, processes in linear time–among the fastest
methods currently used. (Other unrelated linear-time or
nearly linear-time segmentation methods are described
in [18–20], though, these contain undesirable feature for
many applications. For example, graph partitioning meth-
ods [19, 20] cannot relate disjoint sets with equivalent
textures and require training sets.)
This computational
speedup arises from applying the Potts model directly to
the original image itself rather than to the segmented
representation. The speedup is important for high-data-
volume/high-resolution applications where time is con-
strained.
2.
Ising model
In 1925, Ernst Ising proposed the model [9, 21, 22], which
now bears his name, as a means to study phase transitions
in magnetism. Ising solved the original Ising model (only
two states–namely 1, or spin up, and -1, or spin down)
in one dimension.
However, the one-dimensional Ising
model did not exhibit a phase transition, and the two-
dimensional Ising model was not solved until 1944. At that
time Onsager [23] demonstrated that the two-dimensional
Ising model did, in fact, exhibit an order/disorder phase
transition. The Ising model and related models have been
Figure 1. On left, a grayscale image varies from black to white in
going from top to bottom. The image is represented as a
matrix of intensity values as illustrated on the right.
widely used to study magnetism and other order/disorder
phenomena in physical systems.
The two-dimensional
model is described here, and it will be used to deﬁne
four classes of magnetism. The image texture analogs will
be presented in a subsequent section.
In the Ising model, given a two-dimensional lattice of mag-
netic spins oriented either up or down as in Fig. 2 (numer-
ically represented as a matrix of 1’s and −1’s), the total
energy E associated with the lattice is
E = −µH
X
i
si −J
X
ij, nn
sisj,
(1)
where i represents a magnetic element, si is the value
of the magnetic spin of i (1 or −1), µ is the magnetic
moment of the element, H is the external magnetic ﬁeld,
and J is the interaction coupling constant. The sum over
all nearest-neighbors pairs i,j is represented by P
ij, nn.
Nearest neighbors are considered to be the elements di-
rectly above, below, left, and right of a given element. If no
coupling interaction is present (J = 0) then µ > 0 creates
an energetically favorable condition for the spins to align
in the direction of the external ﬁeld H, whereas µ < 0
leads to spins aligned in the direction opposite of H (see
Fig. 3).
3.
Four classes of magnetism
In common language, magnetism usually refers to the be-
havior of magnets that attract iron (known as ferromag-
nets). Other materials, however, reveal diﬀerent magnetic
behavior. These behaviors may be classiﬁed into the fol-
lowing four groups:
1. Ferromagnetism is exhibited by materials for which,
even in the absence of an external magnetic ﬁeld, a
net magnetization is present with north and south
poles.
A ferromagnet will both attract and repel
another ferromagnet depending on the alignment
of their poles.
690

Frank W. Bentrem
Figure 2. A spin matrix is shown on the left with arrows indicating
elements whose magnetic states are either spin-up and
spin-down. The matrix on the right represents the same
matrix with the arrows exchanged for 1’s and (-1)’s. In the
absence of an external magnetic ﬁeld (H = 0), a ferro-
magnet’s spins will spontaneously align as depicted in the
top half of the matrices, while the spins for antiferromag-
nets will oppositely align (alternate in opposite directions)
as depicted in the bottom half of the matrices.
Figure 3. Magnetic spins are aligned with (left, top) and against (left,
bottom) the magnetic ﬁeld H. These regions are associ-
ated with paramagnetism and diamagnetism, respectively.
2. Antiferromagnetism is displayed by materials which
do not form magnetic poles even with a modest ex-
ternal magnetic ﬁeld present. An antiferromagnet
will neither attract nor repel another antiferromag-
net. Likewise an antiferromagnet will have no mag-
netic interaction with a ferromagnet.
3. Paramagnetism shows no spin ordering in the ab-
sence of an external ﬁeld, although the paramag-
net’s spins align in the same direction of an exter-
nal ﬁeld when present. A paramagnet will neither
attract nor repel another paramagnet, but will be
attracted to a ferromagnet.
4. Diamagnetism also shows no ordering in the ab-
sence of an external ﬁeld; however, the diamagnet’s
spins will align in the opposite direction of any ex-
ternal ﬁeld. A diamagnet will neither attract nor
repel another diamagnet and will be repelled by a
ferromagnet.
4.
Q-Ising model
This section describes the Q-Ising model, also known as
the Potts model, which will be used to analyze grayscale
images where the pixel intensities are considered in place
of the magnetic “spin” values. The Potts model generalizes
the (2-state) Ising model into a Q-state model by replac-
ing the 1’s and -1’s with the numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , Q −1
(the pixel intensities in a grayscale image). According to
this model, the total energy associated with the system is
E = −µH
X
i
(si −st) −J
X
ij, nn
δ(si, sj),
(2)
where st is the spin threshold (separating light from dark
with 0 < st < Q −1) and the kronecker delta function
δ (1 if the elements are equal, 0 otherwise) replaces the
summand for the second summation in Eq. (1). Now lets
suppose that a magnetic spin matrix represents the inten-
sities in a grayscale image and that a uniform external
magnetic ﬁeld, H = 1, is applied to the system. We wish
to ﬁnd a set of pairs (µα, Jα) for Eq. (2) which character-
izes the regions α in the spin matrix. Then each spin in
the matrix will be associated with a particular parameter
pair.
The “optimal characterization” is taken to be the
partitioning of the spin matrix in such a way that the to-
tal energy of the matrix is minimized. Minimizing Eq. (2)
requires the set of four parameter pairs (µ > 0, J > 0),
(µ > 0, J < 0), (µ < 0, J > 0), and (µ < 0, J < 0). For con-
venience, and without loss of generality, we simply use
(µ1 = 1, J1 = 1), (µ2 = 1, J2 = −1), (µ3 = −1, J3 = 1),
and (µ4 = −1, J4 = −1) for what we will call regions
α = 1, 2, 3, 4 respectively. The energies for the regions
can be written as
E1 = −
X
i∈A1
(si −st) −
X
i∈A1,j∈nn
δ(si, sj),
(3)
E2 = −
X
i∈A2
(si −st) +
X
i∈A2,j∈nn
δ(si, sj),
(4)
E3 =
X
i∈A3
(si −st) −
X
i∈A3,j∈nn
δ(si, sj),
(5)
E4 =
X
i∈A4
(si −st) +
X
i∈A4,j∈nn
δ(si, sj),
(6)
where Aα is the set of all spins i labeled with category
α. The j’s in the interaction terms are nearest-neighbor
spins that may or may not belong to Aα. Then the total
energy E is simply the sum over all regions,
E =
X
α
Eα,
(7)
691

A Q-Ising model application for linear-time image segmentation
where α = 1, 2, 3, 4 are the region segments assigned
to categories 1, 2, 3, and 4, respectively.
These ener-
gies correspond to regions which are 1) paramagnetic and
ferromagnetic, 2) paramagnetic and antiferromagnetic, 3)
diamagnetic and ferromagnetic, and 4) diamagnetic and
antiferromagnetic.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4. Sample grayscale image (a) with regions of visibly distinct intensity and texture. Upper right (b) is the segmented image using the
direct Potts method with Q = 16 and st = 7.5. At lower left (c), the segmented image from (a) is ﬁltered with a despeckle algorithm
to reveal four distinct texture categories. The categories are bright and smooth (white), bright and grainy (light gray), dark and grainy
(dark gray), and dark and smooth (black). Lower right (d) is the despeckled segmentation result produced using the four-level histogram
approach. The histogram method does not properly distinguish regions of diﬀerent textures, which demonstrates the problem in using
the histogram approach for texture analysis.
692

Frank W. Bentrem
Minimizing the total energy (Eq. (7)) eﬀectively partitions
the spin matrix into regions corresponding to these four
classes of magnetism. Reverting back to the grayscale im-
age, these categories correspond to image regions which
are 1) bright and smooth, 2) bright and “grainy”, 3) dark
and smooth, and 4) dark and “grainy”. The direct Potts
segmentation process requires the matrix to be separated
into regions of these four types in such a way as to mini-
mize the total energy. An example image with four distinct
intensity and texture regions is depicted in Fig. 4a and
the result from the direct Potts segmentation is shown in
Fig. 4b. The parameters used in this example are Q = 16
and st = 7.5, and the segmented image is shown with four
shades of gray representing the four texture categories.
The segmented image is ﬁltered using the ImageMag-
ick1 despeckle algorithm and is shown in Fig. 4c.
For
comparison, a segmented image using a simple four-level
histogram method2 is shown in Fig. 4d.
The four-level
histogram method performs poorly in distinguishing the
image texture regions.
5.
Algorithm
To segment a digital grayscale image, we ﬁrst transform
the image into a matrix of intensity values si,j as illus-
trated in Fig. 1.
Since it is common for 8-bit digital
grayscale images to contain 256 gray levels (0 ≤si,j ≤
255), reducing the gray levels to 16 ≤Q ≤64 usually
helps in identifying visual textures. Next we must specify
an intensity threshold st, which separates bright pixels
from dark pixels. For each of the examples in this article,
the threshold is simply st = (Q−1)/2, or halfway between
maximum and minimum intensity. (If texture identiﬁcation
at a certain scale is desired, one may rescale the image.)
Then to perform the energy minimization described above,
we follow these two steps for each of the image pixels
(i, j):
1. If si,j > st then (i, j) is assigned either texture cat-
egory 1 or category 2. Otherwise, (i, j) is assigned
texture category 3 or 4.
1 ImageMagick Studio LLC, Landenberg, PA, USA
2 The four-level histogram method used for comparison
in this article is really a quantization into four equal in-
tensity ranges. In practice, a heuristic is often used to
set the intensity ranges. The Potts method under con-
sideration could similarly use adjusted intensity ranges.
In either case, the intensity ranges would then be image
dependent, which may be an undesirable feature.
2. Check the nearest-neighbor values (i.e., the pixels
directly above, below, left, and right) of pixel (i, j).
If one or more nearest-neighbor values are equal
to si,j, then pixel (i, j) is assigned texture category
1 or 3. Otherwise, (i, j) is assigned either texture
category 2 or category 4).
This algorithm guarentees that the total energy deﬁned
by Eq. (7) is minimized and processes in linear time since
each pixel requires only a ﬁxed number of computations.
Only a single comparison and assignment required in Step
1, and a maximum of four comparisons (nearest neighbors)
and assignment required in Step 2. Note that since the
energy associated with each pixel is independent of the
labeling of its neighbors, choosing an energy minimum for
every pixel guarantees a total energy minimum (Eq. (7))
for the entire image.
Finally, the segmented image is
smoothed by applying the ImageMagick despeckle algo-
rithm.
This serves to eliminate much of the statistical
noise in the image.
6.
Results
Three examples using the direct Potts segmentation will
now be discussed using a photographic image, a medi-
cal image, and an acoustic seaﬂoor image.
Each seg-
mentation result is compared to a histogram segmenta-
tion technique in which the image is partitioned into four
uniformly distributed intensity ranges. The four-level his-
togram method is a very eﬃcient, linear-time process but
does not distinguish grainy regions from smooth regions.
The photographic image in Fig. 5a3 contains depictions
of water, sky, vegetation, and rocks. Using step 1 of the
direct Potts segmentation method as described in the pre-
vious section (with Q = 16 and st = 7.5), sky and rock are
distinguished from water and vegetation according to pixel
intensities. The sky and rock are represented as lighter
shades, while water and vegetation are depicted as darker
shades of gray in Figs. 5b and 5c. To further separate the
shades of gray, step 2 in the previous section eﬀectively
identiﬁes regions of diﬀerent texture (smooth or grainy).
The full (steps one and two) direct Potts segmentation
result is shown in Fig. 5b. After ﬁltering by using the de-
speckle algorithm, we see in Fig. 5c that the sky (white,
bright/smooth texture) is distinguished from the rock re-
gions (light gray, bright/grainy), and water (dark gray,
3 From
the
Berkeley
Segmentation
Data
Set
(http://www.eecs.berkeley.edu/Research/Projects/CS/ vi-
sion/grouping/segbench/). Used with permission.
693

A Q-Ising model application for linear-time image segmentation
dark/smooth) is distinguished from the vegetation (black,
dark/grainy). Segmenting the image by intensity using
the four-level histogram produces the image in Fig. 5d.
The histogram approach does not distinguish sky from rock
(both are light gray) and does comparatively less well in
distinguishing vegetation (lower left of image) from the
background. A comparison of Figs. 5c and 5d underscores
the importance of considering both intensity and texture
in image segmentation.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 5. Grayscale photo (a) showing water, sky, vegetation, and rocks. Segmentation of image using the direct Potts method (b) with Q = 16 and
st = 7.5. Image is from the Berkeley Segmentation Data Set (see [24]). The image at lower left (c) is a 4-level direct Potts segmentation
of (a) that has been despeckled. Here the sky, rock, vegetation, and water are represented as white, light gray, dark gray, and black
regions, respectively. The image at lower right (d) is the segmented and despeckled image using the four-level histogram method
applied to (a).
694

Frank W. Bentrem
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 6. MRI of a tumorous brain at upper left (a). A tumor is seen as the bright spot in the upper left region of the MRI. This image is from the
Iowa Neuroradiology Library. Image at upper right (b) is the direct Potts segmentation with Q = 64, st = 31.5. Lower left (c) is the direct
Potts segmentation that has been despeckled. The clearly visible white segment identiﬁes the tumor. A tumor is clearly visible as the
bright spot in the upper left region. The periphery of the tumor is shown in light gray, while cerebrum is represented as dark gray. Other
brain matter is shown in black. For comparison, lower right (d) is the despeckled four-level histogram segmentation, which identiﬁes the
tumor region, but cannot distinguish cerebrum from other brain matter.
695

A Q-Ising model application for linear-time image segmentation
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 7. Despeckled segmentation images of Fig. 6a using the direct Potts method are shown for diﬀerent values for Q. Results are shown for
Q = 16 (a), Q = 32 (b), and Q = 128. In each case, the intensity threshold is st = (Q −1)/2. For higher values of Q, more of the image
is categorized as textured (light and dark gray).
696

Frank W. Bentrem
Figure 8. Acoustic image of the seaﬂoor formed using a sidescan
sonar system, which creates an image going out on ei-
ther side via an acoustic time series. The direct Potts seg-
mentation with Q = 16 and st = 7.5 separates the region
containing sand ripples (in green) from the rest of the im-
age. The ripples are identiﬁed as a textured region and
is labeled as sand since neither mud nor rock are likely to
exhibit ripples.
Fig. 6a4 shows an MRI image of a brain with a tumor
in the upper left quadrant. The segmented image using
the direct Potts segmentation method with Q = 64 and
st = 31.5 is shown in Fig. 6b. After ﬁltering, we obtain
the the image in Fig. 6c. Here, the white regions may be
interpreted as possible tumorous tissue, light gray corre-
sponds to matter at the periphery of the tumor, dark gray
represents cerebrum, and black is other brain matter. Au-
tomated screening for tumors may be performed by ﬁnding
white regions of signiﬁcant size. Although, the four-level
histogram method (Fig. 6d) also identiﬁes a similar tumor
region, the cerebrum is not distinguished from other brain
matter. The aﬀect of the chosen value for Q is demon-
strated in Fig. 7. Larger values of Q result in more of
the image being categorized as textured (represented as
light and dark gray).
Finally, acoustic seaﬂoor images
may be analyzed in real-time with the direct Potts seg-
mentation method as demonstrated in Fig. 8. Here sand
ripples are identiﬁed (in green) as a grainy texture and is
separated from the remainder of the image. Rapid seaﬂoor
characterization enables eﬀective mine hunting/avoidance
4 From
the
Iowa
Neuroradiology
Library
(http://www.uiowa.edu/c064s01/index.html).
Used with
permission.
operations [7, 25, 26], by indicating where seaﬂoor mines
are likely to be buried (mud), partially buried (sand), or
unburied (rock).
7.
Conclusions
We have examined the direct application of the Potts
model to grayscale image segmentation. The Potts model
is applied to the grayscale image itself rather than its
more common application to the segmented image. The
result is a segmentation method which processes in linear
time instead of the exponential or power-law time required
with conventional Potts segmentation methods. This in-
crease in computational eﬃciency is vital for real-time,
high data volume, and high resolution applications. The
method is analogous to minimizing the total energy in a
two-dimensional magnetic spin glass where the energy is
calculated according to four Potts models. Each of the four
Potts models corresponds to a distinct type of magnetism,
so the direct Potts segmentation method eﬀectively distin-
guishes regions in the spin glass that most closely adhere
to the properties of four classes of magnetism, namely
ferromagnetism, antiferromagnetism, paramagnetism, and
diamagnetism. In digital image segmentation, pixel inten-
sities are substituted for the magnetic spins in the spin
glass. The astute reader will note that no mention has
been made of the physical basis for the coupling constants
Jα for the regions in the segmented image. The origins of
the image pixels’ couplings may, in fact, be complicated
or unknown. Branching of plants give a textured appear-
ance in Fig. 5a, while the distribution of blood vessels
and other brain material likely gives the textured appear-
ance to Fig. 6a. Underwater sand ripples may arise from
the ﬂuid dynamics and saltation [27, 28] at the seaﬂoor.
The direct Potts segmentation has the advantages of be-
ing unsupervised (no training sets needed), very eﬃcient
(linear-time, only a few operation per pixel), and eﬀective
for texture identiﬁcation. For many image segmentation
applications in which texture is important, this direct Potts
method may be expected to produce better results than
other linear-time methods.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Naval Research Labora-
tory’s Advanced Graduate Research Program. The author
thanks the Tulane Center for Polymer Reaction Monitoring
and Characterization (PolyRMC) for resources provided. A
special thanks goes to Dr. Luca Celardo for helpful dis-
cussions. The views expressed in this article are those of
697

A Q-Ising model application for linear-time image segmentation
the author and do not represent opinion or policy of the
US Navy or Department of Defense.
References
[1] D. L. Pham, C. Xu, J. L. Prince, Annu. Rev. Biomed.
Eng. 2, 315 (2000)
[2] Y. H. Yang, M. J. Buckley, S. Dudoit, T. P. Speed, J.
Comput. Graph. Stat. 11, 108 (2002)
[3] S. Peng, B. Urbanc, L. Cruz, B. T. Hyman, H. E. Stan-
ley, P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 100, 3847 (2003)
[4] V. Grau, A. U. J. Mewes, M. Alcañiz, IEEE T. Med.
Imaging 23, 447 (2004)
[5] S. Hadjidemetriou, C. Studholme, S. Mueller, M.
Weiner, N. Schuﬀ, Med. Image Anal. 13, 36–48 (2009)
[6] X. Descombes,
M. Moctezuma,
H. Maître,
J.-P.
Rudant, Signal Process. 55, 123–132 (1996)
[7] F. W. Bentrem, W. E. Avera, J. Sample, Sea Technol.
47, 37 (2006)
[8] T. Asano, D. Z. Chen, N. Katoh, T. Tokuyama, Int. J.
Comput. Geom. Ap. 11, 145 (2001)
[9] E. Ising, Z. Phys. 31, 253 (1925)
[10] R. B. Potts, P. Camb. Philos. Soc. 48, 106 (1952)
[11] F. W. Bentrem, Provisional Patent Application, Navy
Case No. 99, 755 (2009)
[12] K. Tanaka, J. Phys. A-Math. Gen. 35, R81 (2002)
[13] J. P. Neirotti, S. M. Kurcbart, N. Caticha, Phys. Rev.
E 68, 031911 (2003)
[14] M. Blatt, S. Wiseman, E. Domany, Phys. Rev. Lett.
76, 3251 (1996)
[15] M. Blatt, S. Wiseman, E. Domany, Neural Computa-
tion 9, 1805 (1997)
[16] S. Wiseman, M. Blatt, E. Domany, Phys. Rev. E 57,
3767 (1998)
[17] K. Tanaka, H. Shouno, M. Okadak, D. M. Titterington,
J. Phys. A-Math. Gen. 37, 8675 (2004)
[18] E. Sharon, A. Brandt, R. Basriy, Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (IEEE, Hilton Head Island, 2000) 1, 70
[19] P. F. Felzenszwalb, D. P. Huttenlocher, Int. J. Comput.
Vision 59, 167 (2004)
[20] A. X. Falcão, P. A. V. Miranda, A. Rocha, Lect. Notes
Comp. Sci. 4179/2006, 138 (2006)
[21] D. Chandler, Introduction to Modern Statistical Me-
chanics (Oxford University Press, New York, 1987)
[22] J. C. Lee Thermal Physics: Entropy and Free Ener-
gies (World Scientiﬁc Publishing Company, Singa-
pore, 2002)
[23] L. Onsager, Phys. Rev. 65, 117 (1944)
[24] D. Martin, C. Fowlkes, D. Tal, J. Malik, Proceedings of
the 8th International Conference on Computer Vision
2, 416 (2001)
[25] F. W. Bentrem, J. Sample, M. T. Kalcic, M. E. Duncan,
Proceedings of Oceans 2002 (MTS/IEEE, Biloxi) 1, 7
(2002)
[26] F. W. Bentrem, J. T. Sample, M. M. Harris, Scientiﬁc
Computing 25, 30 (2008)
[27] R. A. Bagnold, The Physics of Blown Sand and Desert
Dunes (Methuen, London, 1941)
[28] L. Kang, L. Guo, Phys. Lett. A 330, 198 (2004)
698

