Cent. Eur. J. Phys. • 7(3) • 2009 • 503-508
DOI: 10.2478/s11534-009-0044-6
Central European Journal of Physics
Can Ising model and/or QKPZ equation properly
describe reactive-wetting interface dynamics?
Research Article
Yael Efraim∗, Haim Taitelbaum
Department of Physics, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel
Received 17 December 2008; accepted 23 February 2009
Abstract:
The reactive-wetting process, e.g. spreading of a liquid droplet on a reactive substrate is known as a
complex, non-linear process with high sensitivity to minor ﬂuctuations. The dynamics and geometry of the
interface (triple line) between the materials is supposed to shed light on the main mechanisms of the pro-
cess. We recently studied a room temperature reactive-wetting system of a small (∼150 µm) Hg droplet
that spreads on a thin (∼4000 Å) Ag substrate. We calculated the kinetic roughening exponents (growth
and roughness), as well as the persistence exponent of points on the advancing interface.
In this paper we address the question whether there exists a well-deﬁned model to describe the interface
dynamics of this system, by performing two sets of numerical simulations. The ﬁrst one is a simulation of
an interface propagating according to the QKPZ equation, and the second one is a landscape of an Ising
chain with ferromagnetic interactions in zero temperature.
We show that none of these models gives a full description of the dynamics of the experimental reactive-
wetting system, but each one of them has certain common growth properties with it. We conjecture that
this results from a microscopic behavior diﬀerent from the macroscopic one. The microscopic mecha-
nism, reﬂected by the persistence exponent, resembles the Ising behavior, while in the macroscopic scale,
exempliﬁed by the growth exponent, the dynamics looks more like the QKPZ dynamics.
PACS (2008): 05.10.-a; 68.08.-p; 68.08.Bc; 68.35.Ct; 89.75.Da
Keywords:
reactive-wetting • interface • kinetic roughening • persistence • QKPZ (quenched Kardar-Parisi-Zhang)
equation • Ising model
© Versita Warsaw and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg.
1.
Introduction
The highly widespread process of wetting, e.g. spreading
of liquid droplets on solid substrates is important in many
ﬁelds and is studied extensively. One of the more inter-
esting cases is reactive-wetting [1–3], where the materials
∗E-mail: yaelhos@gmail.com
involved in the wetting process also chemically react. The
reaction changes dramatically the characteristics of the
process. In a series of recent papers [1, 2, 4–8] we stud-
ied the reactive-wetting process of a small (∼150 µm)
Hg droplet spreading on a thin metal substrate in room
temperature.
Since this process is non-linear and very
sensitive to minor ﬂuctuations, one ﬁnds it extremely dif-
ﬁcult to construct a comprehensive model which fully de-
scribes the process. Alternatively, one can analyze the
dynamics and geometry of the interface between the two
503

Can Ising model and/or QKPZ equation properly describe reactive-wetting interface dynamics?
Figure 1. Typical top-view snapshot of the interface at a given time.
The height of the interface is h(x, t), and its second mo-
ment is deﬁned as the interface width, W(L, t) (see Eq. (1)).
metals [4–8], which is in fact the horizontal morphology
of the advancing triple line. The data for this analysis is
obtained using a CCD camera mounted on top of an op-
tical microscope (ZEISS) [5, 6]. A typical snapshot of the
interface at a given time is shown in Fig. 1.
The kinetic roughening properties of an interface of length
L0 are deﬁned on the basis of its width W(L, t), which is
the second moment of the interface height, h(x, t) (Fig. 1),
W(L, t) =
q
⟨h2(x, t)⟩−⟨h(x, t)⟩2.
(1)
According to the Family-Vicsek relation [9],
W(L, t) ∼
(
tβ
t << t∗,
Lα
t >> t∗,
(2)
where t∗is given in terms of the system size as
t∗∼Lα/β
0 .
(3)
The growth exponent β describes the dynamics of the in-
terface, while the roughness exponent α, which is mea-
sured after the interface width reaches saturation, de-
scribes the geometric shape of its ﬁnal stage.
On the
basis of these two exponents one can classify the system
into a certain universality class that may shed light on
the fundamental mechanisms in the process.
The microscopic dynamics of the interface can also be de-
scribed by another measure, the persistence probability.
The persistence, deﬁned as the probability that a stochas-
tic variable will never cross some reference level within a
time interval t, was shown to perform a power law de-
cay (4) with a persistence exponent θ [10–15]
P(t) ∼t−θ.
(4)
The persistence measure gives more detailed information
as it takes into account local, microscopic ﬂuctuations [14].
Moreover, it provides another temporal measure that might
help in the classiﬁcation to a certain universality class. It
was shown [13] that in linear systems there is a simple
relation between the two temporal measures, the growth
and the persistence exponents
θ = 1 −β.
(5)
This hyper scaling relation itself is an additional tool to
characterize a system, and was shown [15] to be valid even
for non-linear systems.
We recently calculated the kinetic roughening exponents
in Hg on Ag (4000 Å) system and found β = 0.67 ± 0.06
and α = 0.83 ± 0.008 [10], in agreement with previous
studies of this system [5, 7, 8]. The result for the growth
exponent was argued in earlier works [5, 7, 8] to be within
the quenched Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (QKPZ) universality
class. For the persistence measure we found rather non-
trivial behavior, according to diﬀerent kinetic regimes of
the system [1, 2, 10], with an exponent θ = 0.37 ± 0.05
in the main growth regime. This result resembles earlier
numerical and analytical results obtained for the 1d Ising
model in zero temperature [11, 12], and obeys relation (5).
In this paper we investigate whether any of the models
mentioned above, the QKPZ equation or the Ising model
in zero temperature, do properly describe the reactive-
wetting interface dynamics. Both models are well known
and were partially studied before with respect to interface
dynamics. The QKPZ equation was studied in the context
of its kinetic roughening exponents [7, 8, 16], but not for
its persistence. On the other hand, the persistence of the
Ising model was calculated before [11, 12], but the kinetic
roughening exponents were not. In this paper we calculate
numerically for each model its persistence, growth and
roughness exponents. This should allow us, for the ﬁrst
time, to study the relation between the temporal measures
in each of the models. The results will be compared with
the experimental data.
2.
QKPZ equation simulation
One of the well known descriptions of a growing interface
in a quenched disordered media is the non-linear QKPZ
equation for the interface height h(x, t),
∂h
∂t = υ∇2h + λ
2(∇h)2 + η(x, h),
(6)
where υ and λ are parameters that represent the
smoothening and roughening mechanisms, respectively. η
is the noise term, which depends on the lateral position, x,
and on the time dependent height of the interface, h(x, t).
It is convenient to represent the quenched noise as a
504

Yael Efraim, Haim Taitelbaum
Figure 2. Part of the noise matrix with fraction of noise sites p = 0.2.
Top-view on the left and side-view on the right.
matrix representing the substrate on which the interface
propagates. Its x-coordinate dimension is a portion of the
interface length, L0 = 400, and its h-coordinate dimen-
sion is a portion of the total duration of the process (2000
steps).
The elements of the noise matrix are randomly
distributed Gaussians, both positive and negative, with
a given occupation probability p. The height and width
of each Gaussian are randomly, uniformly distributed at
the range [-1,1] (Fig. 2). These Gaussians represent the
quenched noise inside the substrate. This noise can either
pin the interface, i.e. to cause local delay in propagation,
or can locally drive the interface to grow further. Hence,
the noise in the matrix is either positive or negative.
The interface dynamics is controlled by the discretized
version of the QKPZ equation,
∆h
∆t = F + υh(x + ∆x) −2h(x) + h(x −∆x)
(∆x)2
+ λ
2
h(x + ∆x) −h(x −∆x)
2∆x
2
+ η(x, h),
(7)
where F is a constant force which drives the whole in-
terface forward, υ is the surface tension coeﬃcient, λ is
the non-linear growth term, and η is the noise matrix de-
scribed above. The interface is initially ﬂat. The solution
of the diﬀerential equation is done by the function ode23s
in MATLAB, which determines h(x, t) using the Runge-
Kutta method.
We calculated the kinetic roughening exponents α and β,
and the persistence exponent θ of the developing interface
in the same method they were calculated for the experi-
mental data [4–8, 10]. In Fig. 3 we show the results for a
single run. We plot the width of the interface W(L, t) as a
function of time in a log-log scale. The slope is the growth
exponent β. The diﬀerent colored lines in Fig. 3 present
W(t) for parts of the interface in diﬀerent sizes L (see also
Fig. 1). The fact that plots of diﬀerent L’s show the same
Figure 3. QKPZ simulation. W as a function of t in a log-log scale
for a single run. The slope is the growth exponent β.
Figure 4. QKPZ simulation. W as a function of L (log-log scale) for a
single run. The slope is the roughness exponent α, which
shows a crossover behavior around L = 30.
trend supports the assumption that the QKPZ interface
is self-aﬃned. Averaging over several independent runs,
we found that for the QKPZ system the growth exponent
is β = 0.61 ± 0.02. This result is in excellent agreement
with previous simulations of the QKPZ equation where
the growth exponent was found to be β ≈0.6 [7, 8] and
β = 0.61 ± 0.06 [16].
When the system is saturated, i.e. the interface width is
no longer growing, the roughness exponent is calculated
by plotting W as a function of length L (see Eq. (2)) on
a log-log scale (see Fig. 4 for a single run).
We ﬁnd
that the roughness exponent, averaged over several runs,
is α = 0.72 ± 0.02 in good agreement with previous re-
sults [8, 16]. We also ﬁnd that there is a crossover behavior
of the interface width from small to large scale, as shown
in Fig. 4.
In large window size L the roughness expo-
nent is α = 0.46 ± 0.02, and the crossover takes place at
approximately L = 30 (in arbitrary units). This crossover
behavior indicates that the lateral correlation length of the
interface is approximately L = 30, as explained in detail
elsewhere [7, 8, 10].
505

Can Ising model and/or QKPZ equation properly describe reactive-wetting interface dynamics?
Figure 5. QKPZ simulation. P(t) (log-log scale) for a single run. The
slope is the persistence exponent θ. The few last points
deviate from the straight line due to ﬁnite size eﬀects.
We also calculated the persistence exponent for the QKPZ
system and found θ = 0.76±0.006 [10]. This was obtained
by plotting the persistence probability P(t) as a function
of time in a log-log scale (Fig. 5).
We note that previous works on the standard non-linear
KPZ equation [17] found diﬀerent persistence exponents
for crossing the reference level from above or from below.
However, we did not ﬁnd such a diﬀerence in our QKPZ
simulation.
3.
Ising model simulation
One of the most important models in Physics is the Ising
model. In spite of its simplicity it seems to be relevant
for a large variety of problems. A given conﬁguration of
an Ising ferromagnetic 1d chain can be converted into a
landscape i.e. can be thought of as an interface. One can
present each spin in the 1d Ising chain as a tiny part of
an interface, pointing up with slope 1, for a positive spin,
or down (slope -1) for a negative one (Fig. 6). As far as
we know, the Ising chain was not studied before in the
context of interface growth.
In our simulation we assume 1d Ising chain in zero tem-
perature, with a nearest neighbor Ising ferromagnetic in-
teraction.
We start with a random conﬁguration of the
chain where each spin is either positive or negative with
probability 1/2. At each time step we choose one spin at
random. If its two neighbors are parallel, the chosen spin
will be aligned with them. If the neighbors are in opposite
directions, it ﬂips with probability 1/2. In order that all
Figure 6. Illustration of the landscape constructed from a 1d Ising
spin chain. Spin up corresponds to slope 1, and spin down
to slope -1.
Figure 7. Kinetic roughening exponents for an Ising chain.
Top:
W(t) for a single run. The slope is the growth exponent
β. Bottom: W(L) for a single run. The slope is the rough-
ness exponent α.
spins in the system will take part in the dynamics, we ﬁx
the time steps to be dt = 1/N, where N is the system size,
typically of order N = 50000. This dynamics follows the
work of Derrida et al. [11] who calculated the persistence
506

Yael Efraim, Haim Taitelbaum
probability of this system, deﬁned as the probability of
a spin not to ﬂip up to time t, and found its persistence
exponent.
The new idea of our work is to present this
spin chain as an interface and calculate also its kinetic
roughening exponents.
We found that the growth exponent for the Ising chain
is β = 0.29 ± 0.017 and the roughness exponent is
α = 0.92 ± 0.012 (Fig. 7). The value of the roughness
exponent is expected to be equal to 1 in the inﬁnite time
limit, since eventually all spins in the chain should face
in the same direction under the ferromagnetic interaction.
The corresponding asymptotic interface should be just a
straight line with slope 1 or -1. In our ﬁnite-time simu-
lation this cannot be reached. As for the persistence ex-
ponent, we found θ = 0.38 ± 0.0017, in consistence with
the previous numerical and analytical works by Derrida
et al. [11, 12].
4.
Summary and discussion
The goal of this paper is to explore whether the Ising
model and/or the QKPZ equation properly describe the
interface dynamics of our reactive-wetting system.
We
should ﬁrst compare the experimental results with the two
simulation systems (Tab. 1).
Table 1. The persistence, growth and roughness exponents for the
systems discussed in the paper.
Reactive-wetting exp.
QKPZ sim.
Ising sim.
θ
0.37 ± 0.05
0.76 ± 0.006
0.38 ± 0.0017
β
0.67 ± 0.06
0.61 ± 0.02
0.29 ± 0.017
α
0.83 ± 0.008
0.72 ± 0.02
0.92 ± 0.012
Regarding the persistence exponent θ, the value obtained
for the experimental system is very close to the one found
for the Ising system, but the Ising’s growth exponent β
does not match the experimental measures.
Regarding
the growth exponent β, the QKPZ exponent is in fairly
good agreement with the one in experiment, but the per-
sistence exponent in the QKPZ system is very diﬀerent
from the one in the experiment. Moreover, none of these
models seem to obey relation (5), which is valid for the
experimental system. Indeed, relation (5) was proved for
linear systems only, so one should not be surprised that
the non-linear QKPZ equation does not obey it. Regard-
ing the Ising model, the constructed interface is not self-
aﬃne, as mentioned above. It is likely that the self-aﬃnity
assumption is necessary for relation (5) to hold.
We therefore conclude that none of these two models give
a complete description of the interface growth dynamics in
our reactive-wetting experiment. However, each of them
has at least one exponent related to the growth regime
that is similar to the experimental system. A reasonable
conjecture is that one has to a priori distinguish between
a macroscopic behavior of the interface under study, re-
ﬂected by the growth exponent, and a microscopic behav-
ior of the particular elements of the interface. While the
kinetic roughening has to do with the collective behavior
of the advancing interface, and allows for estimation of
the lateral correlation length [7, 8], the persistence mea-
sure is much more sensitive [14]. Hence we suggest that
the behavior of our reactive-wetting system is dichotomic.
In the macroscopic scale, presented by the growth expo-
nent, the behavior of the system is QKPZ like, but in
the microscopic scale, presented by the persistence expo-
nent, the system shows Ising-like behavior. This might be
supported by the observation that local surface tension
resembles the neighboring interactions in the Ising chain,
which are dominant for relatively small scales. In larger
scales, however, the non-linear growth of the interface is
more profound, due to the chemical interaction with the
substrate. This growth is better described by the QKPZ
equation. These conjectures should be further substanti-
ated.
As for the roughness exponent α, one should not expect
that the Ising exponent will ﬁt the experimental one, both
because of the ferromagnetic dynamics of the Ising chain
that should lead to α →1 as described above, and be-
cause the kinetic roughening process of the Ising chain is
obviously diﬀerent from the one in the experiment, mani-
fested by the very diﬀerent growth exponent β in the two
systems. But in the QKPZ case, where there is correspon-
dence of the growth exponents in experiment and simula-
tion, one should expect to ﬁnd correspondence also in the
roughness exponent, which is not the case (see Tab. 1).
We suppose that the reason is that in reactive-wetting
experiment, the interface can propagate not only in the
perpendicular direction, but also in the lateral direction,
and to cause overhangs (see Fig. 1). This means that in
the ﬁnal stages of the process h(x, t) is not necessarily
a single valued function. In the QKPZ simulation, how-
ever, the interface direction of advance is deﬁned to be
perpendicular. It is reasonable that these overhangs that
aﬀect the geometry of the interface, also aﬀect the value of
the roughness exponent, and cause the deviation from its
expected value. This conjecture is supported by other sys-
tems that show this overhangs geometry and ﬁnd similar
values for the roughness exponent [18]. For this reason we
conclude that one should compare the experiment and the
models on the basis of the temporal measures only, where
507

Can Ising model and/or QKPZ equation properly describe reactive-wetting interface dynamics?
the interface global width is still growing. This compari-
son yields the dichotomic behavior discussed above.
References
[1] A. Be’er, Y. Lereah, A. Frydman, H. Taitelbaum, Phys.
Rev. E 75, 051601 (2007)
[2] A. Be’er, Y. Lereah, H. Taitelbaum, Mater. Sci. Eng. A
495, 102 (2008)
[3] L. Yin, A. Chauhan, T. J. Singler, Mater. Sci. Eng. A
495, 80 (2008)
[4] A. Be’er, Y. Lereah, H. Taitelbaum, Physica A, 285,
156 (2000)
[5] A. Be’er, Y. Lereah, I. Hecht, H. Taitelbaum, Physica
A 302, 297 (2001)
[6] A. Be’er, Y. Lereah, A. Frydman, H. Taitelbaum, Phys-
ica A 314, 325 (2002)
[7] I. Hecht, A. Be’er, H. Taitelbaum, Fluct. Noise Lett. 5,
L319 (2005)
[8] A. Be’er, I. Hecht, H. Taitelbaum, Phys. Rev. E 72,
031606 (2005)
[9] A. L. Barabasi, H. E. Stanley, Fractal Concepts in
Surface Growth (Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, 1995)
[10] Y. Efraim, H. Taitelbaum, Phys. Rev. E (in press)
[11] B. Derrida, A. J. Bray, C. Godreche, J. Phys. A 27,
L357 (1994)
[12] B. Derrida, V. Hakim, V. Pasquier, Phys. Rev. Lett. 75,
751 (1995)
[13] J. Krug et al., Phys. Rev. E 56, 2702 (1997)
[14] M. Constantin, C. Dasgupta, S. Das Sarma, D. B.
Dougherty, E. D. Williams, J. Stat. Mech.-Theory E.
07011 (2007)
[15] J. Merikoski, J. Maunuksela, M. Myllys, J. Timonen,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 90, 024501 (2003)
[16] Z. Csahok, K. Honda, T. Vicsek, J. Phys. A 26, L171
(1993)
[17] H. Kallabis, J. Krug, Europhys. Lett. 45, 20 (1999)
[18] L. Ponson, D. Bonamy, E. Bouchaud, Phys. Rev. Lett.
96, 035506 (2006)
508

