Part 1
Introduction to Complexity 
Theory


3
1
Complexity is part of the world, but it shouldn’t be puzzling: we can accept it if we 
believe that this is the way things must be [and] explore the nature of complexity, 
relish its depth, richness, and beauty, [and] at the same time… fight against 
unnecessary complications.
Norman (2011: 4)
Over the past several years, complexity and dynamic systems theory 
(CDST) has captured the imagination of many in the field of applied 
linguistics. By way of illustration, consider that Larsen-Freeman’s (1997) 
first proposal that applied linguistics issues could profit by being viewed 
explicitly in complexity terms is now listed as among the most influential 
articles in the field (de Bot, 2015). Similarly, Larsen-Freeman and Cam-
eron’s (2008a) comprehensive, prize-winning, field-specific overview of 
CDST has also been ranked among the most impactful books in applied 
linguistics (de Bot, 2015). We must admit that we find this explosion of 
interest in CDST unsurprising. After all, applied linguistics is a broad and 
inclusive field with a distinct flavor of hybridity – what some refer to as 
interdisciplinarity – and has always been characterized by an openness to 
outside influences (Chapelle, 2014). A general intellectual reorientation 
around complexity theory has swept through the social disciplines more 
broadly, providing evidence that many of the major issues of our time 
are complex and systemic and must be approached with a correspond-
ing shift in perception (Capra & Luisi, 2014). Applied linguistics, too, 
has now ‘gone complex’, and the fact that complexity has emerged as an 
influence on applied linguists’ thinking in important ways is perhaps to 
be expected and welcomed.
Newcomers to such ideas may wonder, however, why adopt a CDST 
framing at all? What does CDST enable us to accomplish that we would 
not otherwise be able to get at, do, see and talk about in applied linguis-
tics research (see e.g. Ortega & Han, 2017)? For starters, complexity is an 
empirical reality of the human and social world. The place of CDST in 
Introduction

4  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
21st-century applied linguistics, for us, is oriented by a claim that Edgar 
Morin has made in his work:
Fragmented thinking makes us unable to connect parts and wholes, to 
deal with change, the unexpected and the uncertain in response to the 
continuing acquisition of new information. We need, instead, a radical 
capacity to reconnect subjects that are disjointed and compartmental-
ized, to think about their complexity, their totality.... We must learn to 
navigate on a sea of uncertainties. (Morin, 2001: 1–3)
CDST, in this sense, allows the ideas and issues that applied linguists 
grapple with, both by design and as a matter of course, to be more closely 
understood in ways that better approximate their dynamic and situated 
realities (see e.g. Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008a).
As recent work (e.g. Larsen-Freeman, 2017) synthesizing current 
strands of applied linguistics that have been informed by CDST shows, 
CDST has continued to permeate questions throughout language devel-
opment/acquisition (de Bot, 2008; Ellis & Larsen-Freeman, 2009; Ver-
spoor et  al., 2008), language attrition (Schmid et  al., 2013), language 
change (Cooper, 1999; Kretzschmar, 2015), language ecology (Cowley, 
2011; Kramsch & Whiteside, 2008), language evolution (Ke & Holland, 
2006; Mufwene et  al., 2017), language policy and planning (Hogan-
Brun & Hogan, 2013; Hult, 2010a; Larsen-Freeman, 2018b), language 
pedagogy (Kostoulas et  al., 2018; Mercer, 2013, 2016), lingua franca 
English (Baird et  al., 2014; Bouchard, 2018; Larsen-Freeman, 2018a), 
linguistic landscapes (Soler-Carbonnell, 2016), bilingualism and mul-
tilingualism (Herdina & Jessner, 2002; Todeva, 2009), sociolinguistics 
(Bastardas-Boada, 2013; Blommaert, 2014), educational linguistics (Hult, 
2010b), conversation analysis (Seedhouse, 2010), communication studies 
(Massip-Bonet & Bastardas-Boada, 2013; Massip-Bonet et al., 2019) and 
countless other areas of applied linguistics.
At the same time, applied linguistics has always had an explicit orien-
tation to practical concerns in the real world. Its application is in relation 
to events, spatiotemporal settings and people for which knowledge of 
language and its use are key to resolving dilemmas of one sort or another 
(Davies & Elder, 2004). Complexity is equally grounded in the phenom-
enological reality of the social world, and in countless conversations with 
other applied linguists we have heard time and again that such a perspec-
tive makes good intellectual sense given its ability to capture the inher-
ent situated and dynamic reality of such phenomena of interest. Equally 
often, however, we have heard that despite close resonances between 
CDST and scholars’ thematic areas of expertise, the methods for ‘doing’ 
CDST and researching such issues using insights from CDST remain elu-
sive (cf. Lowie, 2017; MacIntyre et al., 2015). This is perhaps surprising, 
given what is now clear to us: CDST is grounded in a problem-focused 

﻿Introduction  5
orientation to research methodology and calls for approaches to doing 
science that emerge from the needs of inquiry (Morin, 2008). Clearly, 
the main hurdle to empirical scholarship informed by complexity theory 
has been applied linguists’ uncertainty regarding what designing and 
conducting actual CDST research entails (e.g. MacIntyre et al., 2017). 
The result is a distinct lack of consensus regarding which phenomena 
or questions merit examination, how systematic investigation should be 
structured and conducted (e.g. with regard to instrumentation and data 
collection) and how the results of this research should be analyzed and 
interpreted (e.g. Ellis, 2018).
How We Came to Write This Book
In an intensely emotional recount of the intellectual challenges of 
grappling with new concepts for which scientists’ language and way 
of thinking at the time were inadequate, Nobel Prize winner Werner 
Heisenberg (1901–1976) recalls that
I remember discussions with [Niels] Bohr which went through many 
hours till very late at night and ended almost in despair; and when at the 
end of the discussion I went alone for a walk in the neighboring park I 
repeated to myself again and again the question: Can nature possibly be so 
absurd as it seemed to us in these… experiments? (Heisenberg, 1958: 42)
It took these physicists an extended period of time to accept that com-
plexity and the seeming paradoxes it encompassed were essential to 
understanding the way things exist in nature. Once they did, however, 
they began to ask more precise and insightful questions and discover 
explanations for these seeming contradictions which shaped one of the 
most exciting periods of modern science (Capra & Luisi, 2014).
Though less dramatic, our own experience with complexity theory 
has been marked by a similar struggle as the intellectual challenge these 
quantum physicists encountered – navigating, in a sense, on Morin’s 
(2001) ‘sea of uncertainties’. We both began our scholarly apprenticeship 
and research careers in applied linguistics with an interest in people – that 
is, we developed a fascination with how individuals’ (i.e. learners and 
teachers) thoughts and actions in settings of second and foreign language 
(L2) learning and instruction contribute to their meaningful participation 
and ongoing development in those environments and how such psycho-
social aspects of L2 learning lead to intentional effort, engagement and 
persistence on the part of those individuals. Of course, in our desire to 
understand the ways and means by which individuals actively devote 
effort and attention to L2 learning opportunities, we saw little choice 
but to foreground the interdependencies between the many cognitive, 
affective and behavioral factors at the individual level as well as between 

6  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
individuals and their environment. This natural development was encour-
aged by the thinking and influence of our mentors in the field (Dörnyei, 
2008, 2017; Larsen-Freeman, 2012; Mercer, 2011; Verspoor et al., 2011). 
Our work, like theirs, sought to place an explicit focus on language in 
contexts of learning, teaching and use, and called direct attention to the 
dynamic nature of these phenomena. However, this project was anything 
but straightforward.
We discovered firsthand that one of the pre-eminent challenges of 
doing applied linguistics research from this dynamic and situated per-
spective is, with a handful of notable exceptions (e.g. Larsen-Freeman & 
Cameron, 2008b; Verspoor et al., 2011), very little methodological guid-
ance exists for those intending to design and conduct research informed 
by complexity theory. Even in the social sciences more broadly, the 
sources on complexity research that exist are framed conceptually (see 
e.g. Mitleton-Kelly et al., 2018) – this disconnect is somewhat similar to 
trying to learn to drive a car by referencing an explanation of drive-by-
wire and throttle-by-wire mechanisms instead of taking a practice drive. 
This is not a scenario we would wish on anyone. As we have written else-
where, we discovered almost immediately that scholarly work stops short 
of the level of practical application necessary to ensure compatibility 
between empirical research designs and the theoretical tenets of complex-
ity (Hiver & Al-Hoorie, 2016). In response to this, we expanded the scope 
of our search for such methodological guidance. We read voraciously on 
complexity and research methods – as just one example, the 12,000-page 
Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science (Meyers, 2009) became 
our bedtime reading. This early experience of exploring Lyapunov func-
tions, Feigenbaum constants and Mandelbrot set algorithms was infor-
mative and it convinced us of several things.
Primarily, we became convinced, like our mentors, that uncritically 
importing mathematical methods wholesale from complexity science 
would be of limited productivity, given that the objects of interest in 
applied linguistics sometimes differ radically from those in the natural 
sciences, and because the social sciences do not have the sort of data that 
the physical sciences use to model complexity mathematically (Dörnyei 
et al., 2015; Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008b; Verspoor et al., 2011). 
However, we were equally convinced that the existing templates and 
methods of analysis already well-established in empirical complexity 
research in other human and social domains hold considerable promise 
for studying complex dynamic phenomena in the field of applied linguis-
tics. As we hope to show in Parts 2 and 3 of this book, both quantita-
tive and qualitative methodologies play a vital role in CDST research. 
Complexity’s philosophy of science does not suggest a mutually exclu-
sive approach, and advocating an either/or choice is neither defensible 
nor pragmatic for the range of phenomena that necessitate investiga-
tion. The value of qualitative methods is that they allow finely grained 

﻿Introduction  7
observations of situated developmental processes, and, as we also hope 
to show, advanced quantitative techniques that value variation, intercon-
nectedness and change do exist.
Having said this, we should not be naïve to the fact that the intro-
duction of any ‘new’ research approach frequently leads to two differ-
ent reactions from the research community: the inclination to reject the 
approach as ‘too risky’ (i.e. too difficult to learn and apply), or as ‘noth-
ing new’. Here, we draw inspiration from Lisa Feldman Barrett (2017) 
who writes:
Scientific revolutions are difficult. At the beginning, new paradigms raise 
more questions than they answer. They may explain existing anomalies 
or redefine lingering questions out of existence, but they also introduce 
a new set of questions that can be answered only with new experimental 
and computational techniques. This is a feature, not a bug.... A new 
paradigm barely gets started before it is criticized for not providing all 
the answers. But progress in science is often not answering old questions 
but asking better ones. The value of a new approach is never based on 
answering the questions of the old approach. (Barrett, 2017: 14)
We hope to encourage active engagement with these methods and 
ideas, first, by reassuring readers that the methods for doing CDST 
research in applied linguistics that we have included in this book, though 
not exhaustive by any means, are in widespread use by social complex-
ivists and have a firm methodological basis and examples, albeit outside 
of applied linguistics. In a sense then, we applied linguists are not ‘going 
it alone’. Instead, by adopting these methods we are joining a vibrant 
community of like-minded researchers fascinated with the situated and 
dynamic nature of the human and social world. Second to this, each 
of these methods has a unique flavor as they explicitly address certain 
criteria or corresponding requirements for CDST research. We feel that, 
similar to a broader pivot in applied linguistics research methods to 
address issues of precision and rigor in empirical research, this innova-
tion should be welcomed. In fact, several methods that are in widespread 
use across applied linguistics seem ill-suited to studying its complex 
and dynamic realities and situating these phenomena firmly in context. 
Clearly, an expansion of the available methods is needed. Our field is, 
therefore, following other social and human disciplines that also seek to 
understand complexity by routinely innovating with existing methods 
and borrowing compatible methods from neighboring fields. Our field is 
also catching up with advances in the methodological reform movement, 
including open instrumentation and material, open data, preregistration 
and replication. These initiatives can enrich the CDST research agenda.
Thus, we set out to write a book containing the research guid-
ance that we would have liked to have when we set out to adopt this 

8  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
perspective in our own work. However, our point has never been to 
advance an agenda or provide a set of definitive answers, but rather to 
join a stimulating conversation with others that will make possible a dif-
ferent kind of practice in research. In the end, we have found this process 
to be one that closely mirrors the principles of self-organization and 
emergence. Although we certainly began with an initial picture of what 
kind of book we wanted this to be, how we arrived there was close to 
what Edgar Morin refers to as a chemin faisant (i.e. path-making) pro-
cess in which the progress towards our goal was inherently exploratory 
and became much less bounded than at the outset. This is apropos to the 
focus of the volume, and we would not have wanted it any other way.
Organization of the Book
This book consists of four parts, each addressing a different angle 
of the main topic. Coming immediately after this general introduction, 
Chapter 2 sets out to introduce the conceptual apparatus and terminol-
ogy of complexity theory. This is not intended to be a comprehensive 
overview of complexity science, as our main mission is to link CDST to 
research methods on which applied linguists can draw. However, some 
background context is appropriate to situate the methods we review and 
introduce their empirical modus operandi. This is the purpose of Chap-
ter  2. We discuss the meaning and origins of complexity and systems 
thinking for research, and touch on several key principles and points of 
reference to begin to understand and operate within a CDST paradigm. 
Newcomers to CDST will find that the information presented in Chap-
ter 2 can bring them up to speed relatively rapidly, while those familiar 
with CDST may also find that it sharpens their thinking on the enterprise 
of CDST research.
Chapter 3 takes a step forward from this background knowledge and 
examines the philosophical and methodological issues (e.g. generaliz-
ability, causality) that arise when researching the complex and dynamic 
social world. We do this by drawing a distinction between dealing with 
complexity empirically and doing so in a way that is more paradigmatic 
in nature. In addition, we discuss how the complex realist view of the 
world treads a middle way between realism and relativism, and informs 
a problem-driven approach to CDST research by relying on a pragmatic 
balance of methods determined by the object of inquiry. We then exam-
ine what some of the key tasks of CDST research might be and consider 
what these might mean for a transdisciplinary programme of applied 
linguistics research.
Starting from Part 2, we move from theory to methods in earnest. 
Our aim in the 14 chapters that make up Parts  2 (qualitative) and 3 
(quantitative) is to provide a conceptual introduction to a range of meth-
ods for CDST research. Readers will discover that we do not provide as 

﻿Introduction  9
much detail as can be found in a typical book-length treatment of a single 
method. Put differently, our purpose is not to explain which button to 
click in a given software package for a given method – although we do 
refer the reader to further texts that provide this information. Instead, 
our primary goal in each chapter is to offer an informative conceptual 
introduction to the method in question. Our ultimate aim is to provide 
an overview of the available tools to help an applied linguist decide which 
of these available methods is most relevant to their topic of interest or 
most appropriate for their research questions. Once the reader picks a 
method, we then provide a guide to more in-depth information on actu-
ally applying it.
Each chapter deals with a different method. Each chapter starts by 
introducing the method, a variety of research questions it can address 
and some of its technical features. To make the discussion less abstract, 
all chapters also include an ‘Example Study’ section that provides an 
overview of a published study utilizing the method in question, so that 
the reader will have a more concrete example of how the method is used 
in practice. The example study has been chosen to model best practices in 
the respective method, and interested readers can examine the full study 
for a more detailed illustration. These example studies, despite the title of 
the book, sometimes come from outside of the field of applied linguistics. 
In these cases, we chose to include example studies from the social sci-
ences more broadly and exemplify the methods introduced with them for 
a particular reason: we selected these examples deliberately because the 
method ranges from relatively uncommon to more or less non-existent 
in applied linguistics – which is, after all, the whole point of introducing 
them into applied linguistics – or we have found existing applied lin-
guistics examples insufficiently transparent to be used as a pedagogical 
example for introducing these methods to the uninitiated reader. Each 
chapter ends with a list of annotated readings for readers who would like 
to pursue further learning about a particular method. This list contains 
both introductory and more advanced readings in order to cater for a 
wider audience.
Finally, Part 4 offers a sense of what the future of CDST research in 
applied linguistics might look like when expanded to incorporate mixed 
and multi-method research designs. Chapter  18 presents our initial 
thinking on several dimensions around which such forward-thinking 
programmes of CDST research can be organized, and how such an 
expansion of research designs that integrate qualitative/quantitative, 
group-based/individual and falsificatory/exploratory research designs 
can help push forward methods for CDST research in applied linguistics. 
We then wrap up the entire volume with a helpful glossary of CDST 
terminology used in earlier sections of the book, primarily chapters in 
Part 1, and introduce some excellent online and offline sources and data-
bases related to CDST and CDST research. Our hope is that interested 

10  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
readers will continue their exploration of CDST and its contribution to 
applied linguistics research through these resources.
This book can be read in different ways by different readers. For 
those who are already conversant with complexity theory, Chapter  2 
may be skipped or merely skimmed through. It is there for those looking 
for an introductory guide to complexity theory, its conceptual tools and 
its terminology. Readers wishing for just such a primer on CDST are 
encouraged to begin with Chapter 2, and then progress to the chapters 
either in Part 2 or Part 3, depending on the methodological orientation 
with which they most identify. Chapter 3 establishes our take on what the 
CDST frame of reference means for the enterprise of empirical research. 
We are convinced this background knowledge can lead to a more pro-
found understanding of the CDST paradigm’s potential, and realize 
also that this sort of intellectual deep-dive is an acquired aspect of any 
intellectual journey. Readers who find that these ideas leave them with 
a feeling of vertigo, are encouraged to return gradually to Chapter 3 as 
they sort out the type of research questions they would like to investigate 
and the method(s) they find appropriate for researching them. This will 
allow readers to approach this coming to terms with the philosophical 
underpinnings of CDST at their own pace, reduce unnecessary ambigu-
ity in the process and ultimately lead them to a broader understanding of 
how their research can be informed by CDST.
For readers with a well-defined topic or thematic area of research 
wishing to dive straight into methods, the chapters in Parts 2 and 3 will 
be their immediate point of entry. These parts of the book are about 
how to do CDST research, and the 14 chapters are a guide to applying 
CDST empirically in research designs and methods. The first seven of 
these chapters present qualitative methods while the latter seven intro-
duce quantitative methods. This distinction, which we must admit is 
slightly arbitrary and not essential for CDST research, will be useful 
for researchers who self-identify with a certain approach to research 
and are comfortable with one or the other of these modes of scientific 
inquiry. While we have chosen to keep this organizational scheme for 
Parts 2 and 3, we extend this in Part 4 with a chapter exploring mixed 
methods and the future of CDST research. Through this chapter, we 
hope it will also become obvious that many CDST research methods 
draw on both qualitative and quantitative data, at both individual and 
group levels, and can serve an exploratory or falsificatory function 
depending on how they are applied. In the best sense, CDST research 
has something for everyone.
This book, then, is about the relevancies of CDST for applied linguis-
tics research. However you approach it, we invite you to read on and join 
us as researchers and as applied linguists in this exciting step of putting 
CDST into practice. Have fun!

﻿Introduction  11
References
Baird, R., Baker, W. and Kitazawa, M. (2014) The complexity of ELF. Journal of English 
as a Lingua Franca 3, 171−196.
Barrett, L.F. (2017) The theory of constructed emotion: An active inference account of 
interoception and categorization. Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience 12 (1), 
1–23.
Bastardas-Boada, A. (2013) Language policy and planning as an interdisciplinary field: 
Towards a complexity approach. Current Issues in Language Planning 14 (3–4), 
363–381.
Blommaert, J. (2014) From mobility to complexity in sociolinguistic theory and method. 
Tilburg Papers in Culture Studies, 103.
Bouchard, J. (2018) On language, culture, and controversies. Asian Englishes 20 (3), 
268–278.
Capra, F. and Luisi, P.L. (2014) The Systems View of Life. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Chapelle, C. (ed.) (2014) The Encyclopedia of Applied Linguistics. New York: Wiley.
Cooper, D. (1999) Linguistic Attractors: The Cognitive Dynamics of Language Acquisition 
and Change. Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Cowley, S.J. (ed.) (2011) Distributed Language. Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: John 
Benjamins.
Davies, A. and Elder, C. (eds) (2004) The Handbook of Applied Linguistics. Oxford: 
Blackwell.
de Bot, K. (2008) Introduction: Second language development as a dynamic process. The 
Modern Language Journal 92, 166–178.
de Bot, K. (2015) A History of Applied Linguistics: From 1980 to the Present. New York: 
Routledge.
Dörnyei, Z. (2008, March) Are Individual Differences Really Individual? Plenary given at 
the meeting of the American Association for Applied Linguistics, Washington, DC.
Dörnyei, Z. (2017) Conceptualizing learner characteristics in a complex, dynamic world. 
In L. Ortega and Z. Han (eds) Complexity Theory and Language Development: In 
Celebration of Diane Larsen-Freeman (pp. 79–96). Philadelphia, PA/Amsterdam: 
John Benjamins.
Dörnyei, Z., MacIntyre, P.D. and Henry, A. (eds) (2015) Motivational Dynamics in Lan-
guage Learning. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Ellis, N.C. and Larsen-Freeman, D. (eds) (2009) Language as a Complex Adaptive System. 
Boston, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.
Ellis, R. (2018, October) Oral Corrective Feedback in SLA: Taking a Holistic Perspective. 
Plenary given at the 2018 meeting of the Second Language Research Forum, Montreal, 
Canada.
Heisenberg, W. (1958) Physics and Philosophy. New York: Harper.
Herdina, P. and Jessner, U. (2002) A Dynamic Model of Multilingualism. Clevedon: Mul-
tilingual Matters.
Hiver, P. and Al-Hoorie, A.H. (2016) A ‘dynamic ensemble’ for second language research: 
Putting complexity theory into practice. The Modern Language Journal 100, 741–756.
Hogan-Brun, G. and Hogan, S.J. (2013) Language planning and complexity: A conversa-
tion. Current Issues in Language Planning 14 (3–4), 490–496.
Hult, F. (2010a) Analysis of language policy discourses across the scales of space and time. 
International Journal of the Sociology of Language 202, 7–24.
Hult, F. (2010b) The complexity turn in educational linguistics. Language, Culture and 
Curriculum 23, 173–177.
Ke, J. and Holland, J.H. (2006) Language origin from an emergentist perspective. Applied 
Linguistics 27, 691–716.

12  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
Kostoulas, A., Stelma, J., Mercer, S., Cameron, L. and Dawson, S. (2018) Complex sys-
tems theory as a shared discourse space for TESOL. TESOL Journal 9 (2), 246–260.
Kramsch, C. and Whiteside, A. (2008) Language ecology in multilingual settings: Towards 
a theory of symbolic competence. Applied Linguistics 29, 645–671.
Kretzschmar, W. (2015) Language and Complex Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997) Chaos/complexity science and second language acquisition. 
Applied Linguistics 18, 141–165.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2012) Complex, dynamic systems: A new transdisciplinary theme for 
applied linguistics? Language Teaching 45, 202–214.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2017) Complexity theory: The lessons continue. In L. Ortega and 
Z.H. Han (eds) Complexity Theory and Language Development: In Celebration of 
Diane Larsen-Freeman (pp. 11–50). Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2018a) Complexity and ELF. In J. Jenkins, W. Baker and M. Dewey 
(eds) The Routledge Handbook of English as a Lingua Franca (pp. 51–60). New York: 
Routledge.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2018b) Resonances: Second language development and language 
planning and policy from a complexity theory perspective. In F. Hult, T. Kupisch and 
M. Siiner (eds) Bridging Language Acquisition and Language Policy (pp. 203–217). 
New York: Springer.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Cameron, L. (2008a) Complex Systems and Applied Linguistics. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Cameron, L. (2008b) Research methodology on language devel-
opment from a complex systems perspective. The Modern Language Journal 92, 
200–213.
Lowie, W. (2017) Lost in state space? Methodological considerations in complex dynamic 
theory approaches to second language development research. In L. Ortega and Z.H. 
Han (eds) Complexity Theory and Language Development: In Celebration of Diane 
Larsen-Freeman (pp. 123–141). Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
MacIntyre, P.D., Dörnyei, Z. and Henry, A. (2015) Hot enough to be cool: The promise of 
dynamic systems research. In Z. Dörnyei, P.D. MacIntyre and A. Henry (eds) Motiva-
tional Dynamics in Language Learning (pp. 419–429). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
MacIntyre, P.D., MacKay, E., Ross, J. and Abel, E. (2017) The emerging need for methods 
appropriate to study dynamic systems: Individual differences in motivational dynam-
ics. In L. Ortega and Z.H. Han (eds) Complexity Theory and Language Development: 
In Celebration of Diane Larsen-Freeman (pp. 97–122). Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: 
John Benjamins.
Massip-Bonet, À. and Bastardas-Boada, A. (eds) (2013) Complexity Perspectives on Lan-
guage, Communication, and Society. New York: Springer.
Massip-Bonet, À., Bel-Enguix, G. and Bastardas-Boada, A. (eds) (2019) Complexity Appli-
cations in Language and Communication Sciences. Cham: Springer.
Mercer, S. (2011) The self as a complex dynamic system. Studies in Second Language 
Learning and Teaching 1, 57–82.
Mercer, S. (2013) Towards a complexity-informed pedagogy for language learning. 
Revista Brasileira de Linguistica Aplicada 13 (2), 375−398.
Mercer, S. (2016) Complexity, language learning and the language classroom. In G. Hall 
(ed.) The Routledge Handbook of English Language Teaching (pp. 473–485). New 
York: Routledge.
Meyers, R. (ed.) (2009) Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science. New York: 
Springer.
Mitleton-Kelly, E., Paraskevas, A. and Day, C. (eds) (2018) Handbook of Research Meth-
ods in Complexity Science: Theory and Applications. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Morin, E. (2001) Seven Complex Lessons in Education for the Future. Paris: United 
Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.

﻿Introduction  13
Morin, E. (2008) On Complexity. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Mufwene, S.S., Coupé, C. and Pellegrino, F. (eds) (2017) Complexity in Language: Devel-
opmental and Evolutionary Perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Norman, D.A. (2011) Living with Complexity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ortega, L. and Han, Z.H. (eds) (2017) Complexity Theory and Language Development: In 
Celebration of Diane Larsen-Freeman. Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Schmid, M.S., Köpke, B. and de Bot, K. (2013) Language attrition as complex, non-linear 
development. International Journal of Bilingualism 17, 675–683.
Seedhouse, P. (2010) Locusts, snowflakes, and recasts: Complexity theory and spoken 
interaction. Classroom Discourse 1, 4–24.
Soler-Carbonnell, J. (2016) Complexity perspectives on linguistic landscapes: A scalar 
analysis. Linguistic Landscape 2 (1), 1–25.
Todeva, E. (2009) Multilingualism as a kaleidoscopic experience: The mini-universes 
within. In E. Todeva and J. Cenoz (eds) The Multiple Realities of Multilingualism 
(pp. 53–74). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.
Verspoor, M., Lowie, W. and van Dijk, M. (2008) Variability in L2 development from a 
dynamic systems perspective. The Modern Language Journal 92, 214–231.
Verspoor, M., de Bot, K. and Lowie, W. (eds) (2011) A Dynamic Approach to Second 
Language Development: Methods and Techniques. Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: 
John Benjamins.

14
2
I hope you will abandon the urge to simplify everything, to look for formulas and 
easy answers, and begin to think multidimensionally, to glory in the mystery and 
paradoxes of life, not to be dismayed by the multitude of causes and consequences 
that are inherent in each experience—but to appreciate the fact that life is complex.
Peck (1993: 14)
Complexity: Woven Together
Complexity is a characteristic of the human and social world (Human, 
2015). Despite this near truism, it remains a challenge to define complex-
ity succinctly or to describe what is complex. Surely, one might assume 
that there is a general preference for simplicity, and yet in work looking 
at the historical significance of the term complexity, some (e.g. Morow-
itz, 1996) suggest that over time many of the phenomena researchers wish 
to investigate, in particular those related to the human experience or the 
social realm, have become too complex for the simple tools that exist 
with which to study them. Others go a step further and argue that human 
civilizations are locked in ‘a complexity race’ (Nowotny, 2005: 20): Our 
daily manipulation and intervention in the human and social world seems 
to result in ever more complexity, while researchers and scientists simul-
taneously seek new methods to reduce the increasing levels of complexity 
that result. So what does complexity in the context of the human and 
social world refer to then? The quality of phenomena that these examples 
refer to is far more than the converse of simple – it refers instead to the 
relations between things (Morin, 2008).
The word complexity originates from the Latin cum plectere or com-
plexus. These mean, quite literally, what is woven together. One of the 
first to use the term in this technical sense related to science and scien-
tific inquiry was the physicist and information scientist Warren Weaver 
(1894–1978) in his 1948 paper published in the American Scientist (Davis 
& Sumara, 2006). As a noun, a complex refers to a whole that comprises 
a number of parts, especially parts that are interconnected in a fabric of 
relations. Complexity, then, refers to the idea that the quality of existence 
for many things is intricately interwoven, consisting of various parts 
What is Complexity 
Theory?

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  15
formed in combination, united together and unknowable except as a 
whole (Alhadeff-Jones, 2008).
We should very quickly, however, clear up one possible source of 
confusion between the terms complex and complicated. These terms 
are frequently, but also mistakenly, used interchangeably. Complicated 
denotes something quantitatively different from simplicity; complex-
ity, however, refers to a qualitative difference (Reitsma, 2003). And, 
unlike the complex, what is complicated is fundamentally knowable by 
breaking it down into its component parts. For example, a complicated 
mechanical clock may have many parts big and small, such as a perpetual 
calendar, a chronograph, a moonphase or a repeating chime. In the field 
of horology, these complications built into a timepiece are a source of 
genuine bragging rights. What is more, the complicated tasks of assem-
bling or repairing the mechanical timepiece and its many complications 
may involve many steps in sequence, both familiar and unfamiliar or 
requiring more or less skill. However, this ultra-complicated clock will 
never be anything other than what it is. At the global level of ‘clock-
hood’, for lack of a better word, we will never see a clock undergo a 
qualitative change into something new or different. In other words, a 
complete and accurate picture of what is complicated can be taken from 
the attributes of its internal parts (Byrne & Callaghan, 2014). If we could 
find a way to carefully dismantle and reassemble it, the complicated sys-
tem would work in exactly the same, predictable way.
Complicated things, ideas or issues may involve many elements that 
exist or occur together. Flying a plane and extracting a brain tumor are 
genuinely complicated tasks: they require ‘engineer-designed blueprints, 
step-by-step algorithms, well-trained staff, and… computer software 
running carefully calibrated equipment’ (Cuban, 2010). Change that is 
introduced into complicated structures is highly mechanical: it involves 
laying out a detailed design of what is to be changed at the most minute 
level possible, determining step-by-step procedures to implement the 
change from the top down and overcome any roadblocks. Unlike this 
extreme reduction, what is complex is part of a whole that is not ana-
lytically tractable from its components, and in combination has greater 
capacities than just the sum of its parts. ‘The important point is that in 
complexity and dynamic systems theory (CDST), complex is the sense of 
exhibiting emergent behavior that cannot be anticipated from the behav-
ior of its components’ (Diane Larsen-Freeman, personal communication, 
16 December 2018).
An example that encapsulates these characteristics well is a society 
(Sawyer, 2005). In a society, the interrelated individuals and structures 
as well as the spatiotemporal relations between them produce the entity 
we refer to by this name and allow this complex unit to perform a 
collective function. The interactions of components are not fixed and 
clearly defined, but are vibrant, messy, adaptive and dynamic. Adapting 

16  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
to change and dealing with conflict is natural, not an aberration. Given 
its complex nature, building understanding of a society is not possible 
simply by examining its internal parts and their functions. Much more is 
required to understand the interdependencies and the adaptive dynamics 
that give coherence to the thing we term a ‘society’. Though not reduc-
ible to its parts, all is not lost. As Cilliers (2005: 263) argues, ‘we cannot 
know complex things completely, [but] this does not imply that we can 
know nothing about complex systems, or that the knowledge claims we 
make about them have to be… weak. We can make strong claims, but… 
we have to be modest about them’.
To offer a domain-specific example, consider the increasingly pre-
ferred view of language as complex and adaptive in nature – something 
genuinely irreducible (Ellis & Larsen-Freeman, 2009; Kretzschmar, 
2015). This systems view of language provides a divergent lens that ques-
tions many of the dichotomies prevalent in other non-complex systems 
perspectives, such as the distinction between language as an abstract 
representation and direct experience with the language, between learn-
ing and use, or between performance and competence (Larsen-Freeman 
& Cameron, 2008). Instead, languages – like most human phenomena 
– cannot be usefully separated from their inherent social function or the 
agents (i.e. individuals) who use them to interact through time (Beckner 
et al., 2009). While other perspectives may see the nature of language as 
something close to how we have defined ‘complicated’, when language 
is characterized as ‘complex’ the possibilities are truly novel. Language, 
thought of in this way, exists both in individuals and in communities, 
is constrained by the social structures of interaction and is in constant 
change and adaptation (Douglas Fir Group, 2016). As the Five Graces 
group concludes in pioneering just such a view, ‘[c]ognition, conscious-
ness, experience, embodiment, brain, self, human interaction, society, 
culture, and history are all inextricably intertwined’ (Beckner et al., 2009: 
18).
In this chapter, we will begin with a brief overview of the origins of 
these ideas that together form complexity thinking in the social sciences, 
and how these crystalized more formally in CDST. However, because we 
have a very pragmatic intent with this book, namely to present CDST as 
an appropriate mode of thought for doing research, this chapter is not 
a journey to the heart of complexity, and in its pages we do not intend 
to offer a comprehensive summary or review of complexity. Having said 
that, it is still likely that some newcomers to CDST may find Chapters 2 
and 3 rather dense with information. We assure the reader that this is not 
characteristic of the rest of the book, which is practically oriented.
To frame the issues that are of significance for research, we con-
tinue by surveying the core ideas and principles from CDST that inform 
this approach to planning and carrying out research, and discuss how 
these conceptual tools enable applied linguists to structure and conduct 

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  17
research in ways that are consistent with complexity theory. We pro-
vide just the orientation necessary to prime our reader for the following 
parts of this volume where we look at how such principles are reflected 
in research designs and methods for studying all that is interrelated and 
dynamic.
The Origins of Complexity Thinking in the Social Sphere
Humans, their behavior and their interactions are the primary objects 
of interest in social science. Different intellectual traditions have different 
understandings of the social world, and yet looking at human behavior 
and interaction in all of its richness is not something from which social 
scientists have shied away (Byrne, 2011). A complexity-rich discourse 
in the contemporary human and social sciences can be traced back to 
Adam Smith’s (1723–1790) ‘invisible hand’ that describes the unintended 
consequences of some social actions, the reflections of Edmund Burke 
(1729–1797) on the politics of his time, and in the contrasting writings 
of Ralph Waldo Emerson (1808–1882) and Karl Marx (1818–1883), both 
of whom highlighted how seeming contradictions in social systems were 
in fact what sustained social order (Urry, 2003). Compatible notions are 
apparent throughout the work of the English philosopher Herbert Spen-
cer (1820–1903), and are also evident in Émile Durkheim’s (1858–1917) 
holistic conception of social facts and Vilfredo Pareto’s (1848–1923) 
notions of political economy. With some historical awareness, we can 
now look back in recognition of these scholars’ contribution that pro-
vided the foundation for complexity thinking to germinate over genera-
tions of intellectual thought.
Although at the time complexity theory had not yet been expressed 
explicitly, its ideas loosely parallel the scholarly work of Kurt Lewin and 
George Mead from the 1930s. Prominent social researchers from the sec-
ond half of the 20th century represent additional examples of ideas that 
were not formally associated with complexity but still functioned based 
on such an understanding of the world, including Anthony Giddens’ 
structuration theory, Talcott Parsons’ discussion of the cognitive com-
plex, Jürgen Habermas’s theory of communicative action, Albert Ban-
dura’s reciprocal causation model and Urie Bronfenbrenner’s ecological 
systems theory (see e.g. reviews in Eve et al. [1997]). Even more remark-
able, however, since the middle of the 20th century the human and social 
disciplines have contributed at least as much to theorizing complexity as 
they have drawn on its insights (Capra & Luisi, 2014).
The more direct predecessors of contemporary complexity science are 
cybernetics, general systems theory and system dynamics, all of which 
emerged in the early to mid-20th century. Perhaps not surprisingly, com-
plexity has now become a foundation for scientific inquiry in domains 
such as physics, applied mathematics, computer science, meteorology 

18  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
and neuroscience (Abraham, 2011). Because its roots are in these physical 
and mathematical sciences, borrowing insights and ideas from complex-
ity may appear to some as inherently incompatible with the social phe-
nomena most applied linguists are concerned with and even the existing 
theoretical frameworks that are used to conceptualize these phenomena 
(Lantolf, 2016).
While it is often acknowledged that social science represents a parallel 
reality to the natural sciences (Byrne & Ragin, 2009), the contemporary 
shift toward using complex-systemic understandings as the foundation 
for human and social inquiry suggests that there is a gradual realization 
in these disciplines that the human and social domains, at their core, 
reflect and are characterized by the very principles that make up com-
plexity (Capra & Luisi, 2014). In fact, as some reviews show, the disci-
plinary influence of complexity has firmly extended to include prominent 
areas in the social sciences particularly within sociology and anthropol-
ogy (e.g. politics, health, economics, psychology and management). A 
more general point can be made to address this issue of compatibility, 
and it is the fact that there are many instances when the human and social 
sciences have taken their inspiration from developments in the physical 
sciences or actually developed parallel insights independently from those 
domains (Horn, 2008; Ridley, 2015), to the degree that these have become 
net contributors to the fields initially drawn from and now firmly situate 
these insights within their discipline-specific knowledge base.
For instance, the philosopher Edgar Morin (1921–), famous for first 
drawing a distinction between general and restricted complexity, has 
remained active well into his nineties by applying his thinking across 
disciplines, while Gregory Bateson (1904–1980), an anthropologist by 
training, spent the final decade of his life pulling together various sys-
tems theories and developing a meta-science of epistemology. Other 
substantial contributions to applied complexity have been made by con-
temporary human or social scholars – to highlight just a few – in areas 
of philosophy of science by Roy Bhaskar, John Urry, Willis Overton and 
Paul Cilliers; in systems and complexity thinking by David Byrne, Fran-
cis Heylighen, Robert Axelrod and Derek Cabrera; and in methodology 
by Charles Ragin, Albert-László Barabási, Peter Checkland and Brian 
Castellani. Centers and institutes dedicated to the study of human and 
social complexity now exist at pre-eminent universities across the globe; 
academic journals, conferences and associations for complex dynamic 
systems in the human and social domains have been around for the 
better part of two decades. Complexity, clearly, is no longer – if it ever 
truly was – the domain of the physical and mathematical sciences (e.g. 
Koopmans, 2019).
Complexity and what it offers for the enterprise of research has been 
described as ‘a pioneering break from a moribund Newtonian world-
view’ (Manson, 2001: 412) – in our own experience we have found it to be 

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  19
no less. Let us now examine the assumptions underlying this theoretical 
perspective and look at how it enables its users to think about the social 
world and investigate phenomena of interest.
From Complexity Thinking to Complexity Theory
Early in the year 2000, the prominent physicist Stephen Hawking 
commented, ‘I think the next century will be the century of complex-
ity’. His remark, made in reference to the emergent paradigmatic 
reorientation that is rapidly becoming part of mainstream intellectual 
culture, was strikingly prescient given that as a coherent realm of ideas 
complexity has only come together over the past several decades (Davis 
& Sumara, 2006). ‘Complexity theory’ (also complexity science) is an 
umbrella term that covers mutually intelligible and complementary foci 
such as chaos theory (mathematics), nonlinear dynamical systems theory 
(mathematics), synergetics (physics), complex adaptive systems (phys-
ics), dissipative structures (chemistry), autopoietic systems (biology) and 
emergentism (philosophy).
Complexity, as a broad orientation to scientific inquiry, has no short-
age of terminology attached to fairly specific technical meanings, for 
instance ‘self-organized criticality’ or ‘hysteresis’ (these and other terms 
are defined in the Glossary toward the end of this book). These domain-
general terms, nonetheless, refer to phenomena in which many subfields 
in the aforementioned social sciences share an interest. Consequently, 
exploiting this shared scientific lexicon may help the field of applied lin-
guistics to increase cross-disciplinary communication and lessen mutual 
distances (Larsen-Freeman, 2017). Within applied linguistics specifically, 
use of the hybrid term ‘complex/dynamic systems theory’ or CDST has 
become widespread. For purposes of clarity, we adopt this term through-
out the remainder of this book when we refer specifically to the field of 
applied linguistics.
Over the past few decades, many scholars have worked to clarify the 
ways in which complexity is appropriate and useful for social inquiry 
(Byrne & Callaghan, 2014). Looking to the other social and human dis-
ciplines that draw on complexity enables us to see how these fields and 
their scholars have addressed the potential of this poststructural ecologi-
cal theory (Larsen-Freeman, 2017). Here are a few of the ways in which 
these scholars have suggested complexity functions:
•	
as an interpretive paradigm for understanding the social world 
(Byrne, 1998);
•	
as a methodological frame of reference (Byrne, 2005);
•	
as a worldview or scientific understanding (Cilliers, 2005);
•	
as a transdisciplinary discourse (Klein, 2004);
•	
as principles that constitute a habit of thought (Kuhn, 2008);

20  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
•	
as an approach to describing and explaining change (Mason, 2008);
•	
as a unified conceptual framework for understanding social phenom-
ena (Urry, 2005);
•	
as a conceptual toolbox (Walby, 2007).
The common thread that ties all these understandings of complex-
ity together is that complexity is not articulated in such a way that 
it could be termed a theory per se (Manson, 2001). Our reader may 
wonder then, ‘if not a theory, what is complexity?’ The wide range 
of functions has led some scholars to adopt the more accurate term 
meta-theory (Larsen-Freeman, 2013, 2015; Overton, 2013) – a set of 
coherent principles of reality (i.e. ontological ideas) and principles 
of knowing (i.e. epistemological ideas) that, for applied linguists, 
underpin and contextualize object theories (i.e. theories of language, 
language use and language development/learning) consistent with 
these principles.
Overton (2015: 166) remarks that meta-theories such as CDST ‘cap-
ture concepts whose scope is broader than any particular theory, and 
which form the essential conceptual core within which scientific theory 
and observation function’. Furthermore, while object theories are provi-
sional, and their predictions must constantly be evaluated against obser-
vation of new evidence, the CDST meta-theory pertains to notions of 
what phenomena, questions and aspects of social and human inquiry are 
‘meaningful and meaningless, acceptable and unacceptable, central and 
peripheral’ for a field (Overton, 2007: 154). As such, CDST has unique 
potential to move beyond discipline-specific approaches to address com-
mon problems – what some have termed ‘transdisciplinarity’ (Montuori, 
2013).
The CDST meta-theory groups together a set of relational principles 
(Overton, 2007, 2013), namely that certain phenomena (a) involve mul-
tiple interconnected parts (b) changing together (c) through dynamic, 
nonlinear processes that (d) lead to emergent patterns over time (Hol-
land, 2012). Complexity as a meta-theory represents a set of powerful 
intellectual tools and concepts capable of informing diverse theories. It 
does this by providing researchers with ‘effective ways to organize the 
world, logical structures to arrange their topics of study, [and] scaffolds 
to assemble the models they construct’ (Castellani & Hafferty, 2009: 34). 
CDST, then, is a meta-theory for investigating the nature of, and the 
reasons for, dynamic change and emergent outcomes in the social world 
(Morin, 1992, 2008). It provides an ontological position for understand-
ing the social sphere in complex and dynamic terms. Its conceptual tools 
serve as a rigorous epistemological aid to thinking and theorizing, and 
what is especially important for our purposes is that they function as the 
necessary intellectual blueprint for conducting and evaluating research 
about the human and social world.

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  21
We turn now to the important conceptual tools and ideas that are 
‘baked in’ to a complexity mindset for research.
Complex Systems: Relational Units of Analysis
Francis Heylighen (1960–) has famously noted that several basic prin-
ciples underlie most complexivists’ work, including the work of research-
ers outside the human and social sciences. The most important of these 
is known as the relational principle, which states that phenomena (e.g. 
objects, processes) do not exist on their own, but only in relation to other 
phenomena. The word system derives from the Greek syn histanai mean-
ing ‘to place together’. This is why understanding things systemically 
literally means putting them into a context and establishing the nature of 
their relationships. This meaning also illustrates the importance in CDST 
research of thinking, first and foremost, how parts of the whole relate to 
each other. Thus, a main tool that comes with CDST is a distinctive rela-
tional unit of analysis – a complex dynamic system. Complex references 
the multiple interdependent elements that make up the system, a state of 
affairs sometimes described as complete interconnectedness (Straussfogel 
& Von Schilling, 2009). These systems, defined and understood relation-
ally, are the fundamental unit of analysis in research that adopts this 
perspective (Byrne, 2002).
The unit(s) of analysis that CDST gives us – phenomenologically real 
complex systems situated in context – are as ‘dynamic’ as the human and 
social world (Larsen-Freeman, 2016a). This dynamism is reflected in the 
change that characterizes individual elements as well as in system-wide 
behavior (van Geert, 2009). System outcomes and processes arise from 
a web of relationships that continually grow, change and adapt to new 
situations. The behavior of a system, what much of CDST research aims 
to explain, emerges from system components and their relationships 
on multiple levels – this illustrates the importance of relational units in 
research (Lerner & Overton, 2008).
As we have done elsewhere (Hiver & Larsen-Freeman, 2020), we 
must caution against conceiving of ‘system’ as implying ‘the existence of 
a discrete entity when in fact none exists’ (Osberg & Biesta, 2010: 597). 
Here, we also need to foreground that a system is not a thing, and when 
applied to issues in our field, it is certainly not fixed. A system is a rela-
tional entity ‘produced by a set of components that interact in particular 
ways to produce some overall state or form at a particular point in time. 
Systems differ from sets, aggregates, or collections, in that belonging to 
the system affects the properties of the components’ (Larsen-Freeman & 
Cameron, 2008: 26). Thus, rather than an object-based understanding of 
the field, from this relational perspective, it is complex dynamic systems 
that reflect the ontological assumptions and defining characteristics of 
applied linguistics issues (see also Overton & Lerner, 2014).

22  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
Of course, operationalizing systems can at first appear to be an 
abstract exercise for the newcomer to CDST (see also Mercer, 2013). 
However, the truth of the matter is that ‘there is nothing metaphysical 
about complex systems’ (Cilliers, 2000: 31). For this reason, we feel the 
most tractable approach is to operationalize a system as something that 
has concrete phenomenological validity. This view, that systems are real 
entities that reflect the operation of actual causal mechanisms, is consis-
tent with the notion in social complexity of a case as a complex system 
(Uprichard, 2013). From this systems perspective, individuals, groups and 
interactions are all suitable units of analysis (i.e. cases), but components, 
abstract variables and other artefacts are less so. Later in this chapter, we 
return to the idea of a case as an appropriate unit of analysis for research 
purposes, and why we feel that in CDST research the method does not 
always define the case.
At the same time, the study of human and social systems always 
implicates agency, whether this is individual or distributed (Al-Hoorie, 
2015), and we are not alone in this thinking (see e.g. Kelso [2016] and 
Larsen-Freeman [2019] for more comprehensive treatment of this topic). 
The centrality of agency to human and social systems makes it necessary 
to include within any system’s boundaries an agent, or agents, capable of 
exercising intentional action that contributes causally, though not deter-
ministically, to the outcomes and processes of change that arise from that 
system under investigation (Juarrero, 1999). Complex systems that may 
form the basis for research (Hiver & Al-Hoorie, 2016):
•	
consist of a number of heterogeneous elements or components situ-
ated in context;
•	
these components, at least one of which is an agent, interact with 
each other at multiple levels;
•	
over time, the components change as a result of their interactions 
with other components;
•	
the effects of these interactions result in the system exhibiting 
system-wide and macro-level patterns of behavior.
To illustrate, consider an example offered by Larsen-Freeman and 
Cameron (2008: 37): A speech community is made up of varying social 
groups, individuals and their language resources embedded in a field 
of action; through conversation dynamics and the ongoing negotia-
tion of understanding, discourse patterns and participation take shape 
modifying the nature of those social groups, individuals and their 
language resources; in the complex system of the speech community, 
unique global patterns that emerge through time may range from spe-
cific constructions (e.g. lexical bundles, idioms, memes), to discourse 
events (e.g. encounters, instances of use) and even specific languages 
(e.g. creoles).

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  23
We would suggest that all CDST research proposing to study such 
relational units articulate how these necessary criteria apply to the units 
chosen in order to ensure that these units correspond with the character-
istics of complex systems (see Chapter 3 for further discussion on such 
considerations). Operationalizing the units of analysis this way allows 
researchers to conceptualize relevant phenomena more organically as 
a relational and soft-assembled system – that is, constrained more by 
contextual affordances and material demands – rather than reductionis-
tically (Kloos & Van Orden, 2009). Doing so also allows researchers to 
value the particularity and heterogeneity of individuals that might oth-
erwise be discounted in a study of the aggregate (Larsen-Freeman, 2019; 
Lowie & Verspoor, 2019). CDST is a systems theory, and such complex 
systems in context can be considered the paradigmatic object of interest.
Perceptive readers, however, may have noticed a twist. Adopting 
complex systems as the basic unit of analysis raises what Larsen-Freeman 
(2017) has termed ‘the boundary problem’, which can be summarized 
this way: if everything is connected to everything else in a complex and 
dynamic way, how can a representation of a complex system be reached, 
and how can researchers delineate the systems of interest from context 
and from other systems without drawing lines that break up what is 
being explained? One way to address this problem in doing complexity 
research would be to think in terms of what Larsen-Freeman (2017), citing 
the work of Richard Lewontin, has called ‘functional wholes’ (Lewontin, 
1998). That is, instead of drawing arbitrary boundaries for systems or 
for units of analysis, scholars remain concerned first and foremost with 
explaining phenomena, and any parts, processes or boundaries that are 
examined in the research design depend on what is being explained.
The example often given is that the appropriate unit of analysis for 
explaining the fine motor skills of grasping a pencil differs substantially 
from the appropriate unit of analysis to explain the swing of a tennis 
racquet. Examples of units of analysis that are closer to home include the 
individual language user acting in context as a unit of analysis for study-
ing developmental processes and outcomes (Larsen-Freeman, 2016b), 
interactional collectives of language users in linguistic communities as a 
unit of analysis for exploring emergent patterns in discourse and meaning- 
making, and systems of language components interacting through time 
as a unit of analysis for patterns of language use and language change 
(Kretzschmar, 2015). Thus, when examining complex systems that range 
in scope from the macro to the more micro, specifying the phenom-
enological boundaries of that unit of analysis is crucial as it allows the 
researcher to focus more explicitly on a narrower band of phenomena 
(Harvey, 2009; Ragin, 2009).
The study of complex systems also entails a focus on processes 
of change, an idea we expand on at length later in this chapter. How 
complex systems adapt to their environment in order to maintain their 

24  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
functioning over time is in fact a question with relevance to nearly every 
field (O’Sullivan, 2009). In studying such issues and gaining greater 
understanding of such complex and dynamic occurrences and phenom-
ena, the complex macro-behaviors, dynamic micro-interactions within 
the system and the emergence of new patterns of behavior are all of great 
interest (Hiver & Al-Hoorie, 2016). It is true that applied linguistics 
phenomena operate at different levels and are broad enough to warrant 
multiple ways into any topical area. Several examples that come to mind 
include a focus on the structure of interdependent relations, a focus on 
relational dynamics, a focus on trajectories of change and self-organized 
processes or a focus on emergent outcomes. Of course, relational systems 
also have constituent parts, and one basic approach to research might be 
to describe these parts and their connections. As Hilpert and Marchand 
(2018: 2) suggest, system components can take ‘material, conceptual, or 
semiotic forms such as individual students, and teachers, and techno-
logical objects; motivation, behavioral, affective, epistemological and 
cognitive variables; or words, text, symbols, and discourses’ (see also 
Marchand & Hilpert, 2018). Such descriptive and component-dominant 
research can serve to ‘(a) examine a single element from the center of a 
CS [complex system] and study its dynamic, time-intensive behavior; (b) 
define a natural boundary for a CS and study the underlying, relation 
intensive structure; and (c) choose several critical elements from a CS 
and study their dynamic, time-relation intensive interactions’ (Hilpert 
& Marchand, 2018: 8). However, as we have observed elsewhere (Hiver 
& Al-Hoorie, 2016), it is fundamental for a CDST perspective to adopt 
relational units given that these systems describe and provide coherence 
to the complex, dynamic and emergent processes that shape applied lin-
guistics phenomena at multiple levels.
What follows are some detailed CDST characteristics and principles 
crucial for understanding the behavior of complex systems. These not 
only inform the ways in which researchers can think about the social 
world and its phenomena, but they also provide new parameters for how 
to conduct research within social science.
The CDST Conceptual Toolkit for Researchers
Time and sensitive dependence on initial conditions
One of the most important shifts in adopting a CDST perspective 
for research is that time matters (de Bot, 2015; Lemke, 2000). This gift 
of time entails refocusing attention more explicitly on developmental 
processes than products. This is a message that has begun to gain promi-
nence in studies of language use and language development (e.g. Fogal, 
2019a; Lowie et al., 2014; Lowie & Verspoor, 2015; Polat & Kim, 2014; 
Schmid et al., 2013). A primary way of employing time in understand-
ing processes and outcomes is that each and every system has a history  

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  25
(De Villiers-Botha & Cilliers, 2010). History and context have a critical 
role to play in making sense of where systems end up and how they got 
there. And, in complex systems such as social institutions, language com-
munities or classrooms where many different components and factors 
interact over time, small differences in some factors at an early point in 
time can have a substantial impact on the eventual outcome – a notion 
popularized through the term ‘butterfly effect’ (Kauffman, 1995). This 
highlights the nonlinear quality of complex systems: A small discrepancy 
in one component at one time can lead to large differences in a later state, 
and a slight difference in the initial conditions can have major implica-
tions for future behavior (Prigogine & Stengers, 1984). An example of 
this can be seen in the way that the experiences of newcomers to a social 
and linguistic community may diverge as time passes. For instance, in the 
speech community we used as an example earlier in this chapter, some 
newcomers may integrate and come to establish mutual dependencies 
with those already part of the speech community while other individuals 
may remain relatively isolated despite the same opportunities for partici-
pation. At a further point in time, this may result in more refined levels 
of proficiency and higher degrees of participation for those integrating 
closely in the linguistic community.
Another intriguing aspect of sensitive dependence on initial condi-
tions is that initial conditions allow systems to evolve rules over time. 
Systems opt for the strongest rules (i.e. those that are most plausible and 
salient in the systems’ experience) as they adapt – adaptation is a kind of 
self-organization – and incorporate those that allow the systems to per-
form or develop optimally. Think here of human interactions and how 
they draw on some fairly straightforward but often competing principles 
such as reciprocity and self-interest. These rules can shape the actions 
of the components and by extension the self-organized outcome of the 
system (Holland, 1992). Thus, even in systems that initially appear to be 
identical, the rules that develop to guide the subsequent adaptation may 
diverge significantly (Holland, 2012). This is evidence of the rich interde-
pendence of all the components in the system and further illustrates how 
small differences in initial inputs can become overwhelming differences in 
output over time (Kelso, 1995). Initial conditions are rarely a central fea-
ture of more conventional research paradigms, but they become a critical 
part of researching complex systems as they ‘form the system’s landscape 
and influence the trajectory of the system as it changes’ (Larsen-Freeman 
& Cameron, 2008: 230).
Adaptation to the environment and other systems
Very little in the human and social world is fixed. Change is every-
where. For this reason, a particular added value of CDST for research 
and its explicit focus on time (Elman, 2003) is an emphasis on processes 

26  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
of adaptive development. In domains of language use and development, 
such processes of adaptive change have come to be explicitly investigated 
by numerous scholars (Baba & Nitta, 2014; Fogal, 2019b; Lenzing, 2015; 
Lowie & Verspoor, 2011; Verspoor et  al., 2008, 2012). Systems con-
stantly reorganize their internal working parts to adapt themselves to 
the problems posed by their surroundings or by other systems (Juarrero, 
1999). This is known as co-adaptation (Larsen-Freeman, 2010), and can 
be illustrated for instance through the example of language users’ intel-
ligibility, which might see a speaker adapt their volume, pitch, diction, 
tone of voice and use of paralinguistic features in response to acoustic 
conditions, their purpose for communication and cues from their inter-
locutor. As the latter change from moment to moment, so too will the 
former. By evolving indefinitely over time, systems attempt to optimize 
interactions with their surroundings and with other systems (Nowak 
et al., 2005). This adaptation progresses without a predetermined, fixed 
goal (Rose et al., 2013). Instead, systems are said to iterate so that they 
may return to the same state repeatedly as they continue to move and 
change (Kelso, 2002).
In addition to constantly changing their internal parts while adapting, 
systems also initiate change in the environment, and this nonlinear adap-
tivity that effects change in context in turn influences systems’ ongoing 
behavior (Prigogine & Stengers, 1984). This reciprocity is a prime char-
acteristic of systems. In addition to such gradual and sustained changes, 
systems often change in much more forceful ways. An example of this 
type of change is a bifurcation, or a developmental change in the state 
space that occurs when a small adjustment to system parameters results 
in a major phase shift or a qualitatively different outcome for a complex 
system. Classic examples of such phase shifts can be seen in the physical 
world when molecular changes in water that relate to the temperature 
‘parameter’ cause it to turn to ice (a phase shift) or to steam (another 
phase shift). Yet another instance can be found in the natural gait of a 
horse, where increasing the speed ‘parameter’ will turn a horse’s walk 
to a trot, then to a canter and finally to a gallop. Systems bifurcate in 
ways that lead to greater equilibrium for the system in its environment 
(i.e. period-halving bifurcations) or that result in greater variability and 
complexity (i.e. period-doubling bifurcations). Through this sustained 
adaptation and creative change, systems are capable of producing a rich 
repertoire of behaviors, and this ‘moving target’ (Holland, 1992: 18) can 
therefore be challenging to understand and control.
There is yet another feature that contributes still more complexity 
to these systems: through adapting to their environment and to other 
systems they come to anticipate. In seeking to adapt to changing circum-
stances and other systems they encounter, the parts develop rules that 
anticipate the consequences of certain responses (Holland, 1995, 2006). 
This emergent ability to anticipate is one of the least-understood features 

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  27
of systems, yet it is also one of the most empirically compelling. As a real-
life example, in 2014 Google’s subsidiary DeepMind created a deep learn-
ing program AlphaGo, which started with a large database of human Go 
(a complex board game of spatial logic) games and a learning algorithm. 
Using this large database to learn from previously played human Go 
games, AlphaGo was soon able to anticipate the range of possible human 
moves in particular game-play scenarios and before long routinely beat 
champion human players. Because a temporal view of human and social 
phenomena is part and parcel of CDST, research that is informed by this 
perspective will, by necessity, place a heavy emphasis on development 
and adaptive processes. We say more on this issue in following chapters.
Feedback and self-organized criticality
As we have mentioned, complex systems do not remain passive to 
changing events but rather adapt to and anticipate an ever-changing envi-
ronment, and in turn initiate change to that environment. This precise 
quality gives systems their reputation as nonlinear and feedback sensitive 
(Gell-Mann, 1994). In CDST terms, feedback refers to instances when 
the system’s output loops back as input and influences change (Davis & 
Sumara, 2006). Two-way flows of feedback in language use are a central 
part of any interaction event (e.g. Seedhouse, 2010). Such feedback loops 
are so important to CDST that they have been called the central ‘nervous 
system’ of complex systems (Newman, 2009: 4638).
Although feedback often originates internally from interaction 
between the system’s components, it can also originate from an external 
source such as the environment or another dynamic system. One example 
of such feedback loops from the natural sphere is the human body’s 
mechanism for thermoregulation. The human body is able to maintain 
a relatively constant internal temperature of 37 degrees in conditions of 
high physical exertion and extreme temperatures by constantly adjust-
ing its energy use and optimizing blood flow to the muscles. Negative 
feedback, or self-maintaining feedback, is the most common type found 
in systems; its role is simply to dampen system change or adaptation 
(O’Sullivan, 2009). Negative feedback maintains a system within a cer-
tain set of parameters to enable its stable functioning. For example, in 
instances of language contact and conflict in multilingual communities 
that appear to be headed towards glottophagia (i.e. an occurrence in 
which a major language or dialect absorbs or replaces minority ones), 
stakeholders and policymakers can intervene to reverse these effects 
through strategic initiatives (see also Kretzschmar, 2015). This negative 
feedback impacts the systems by restoring equilibrium and bringing its 
behavior back in line. However, a system governed only by negative feed-
back is by definition ‘dead’ and not adaptive (Banzhaf, 2009).
Positive feedback, or self-augmenting feedback, on the other hand is 
a state of affairs in which A produces more of B which in turn produces 

28  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
more of A. Such positive feedback reinforces a system’s adaptive changes 
along the developmental path on which it is already moving. Doing so 
amplifies change in the system that can spread to a system-wide pattern 
– referred to as loop gain. In extreme cases these iterative patterns of 
feedback with each repetition may lock-in the system to path dependence 
(Lewis, 2005). Positive feedback can also create unstable patterns that 
may reach points of criticality in the system (Straussfogel & Von Schil-
ling, 2009). A field-specific example can be seen in how trends in language 
education have pushed the age of onset for instruction ever earlier; in 
many settings this results in formal policies being put in place to accom-
modate such trends more widely, to which the education sector responds 
with even more extreme and unsustainable tendencies (see also Larsen-
Freeman & Tedick, 2016; Mercer, 2016).
Self-organized criticality takes place when systems reach the between 
(i.e. critical) transition point of two phases of stability or equilibrium. 
For this reason, self-organized criticality is closely related to phase shifts 
(see above). The result of a system reaching this critical value is often a 
dramatic change into a qualitatively different phase or state (Bak, 1996). 
Our previous example of water at its freezing point – and at its boiling 
point – is a critical system. To keep water in a partially frozen state 
requires active control of the temperature. If water is near the critical 
temperature, a small deviation tends to move the system into one phase 
(i.e. solid) or the other (i.e. liquid). A snapshot of self-organized critical-
ity in spoken interaction, which itself is a back and forth between nega-
tive feedback and positive feedback as interlocutors negotiate meaning, 
can also illustrate this concept: too much negative feedback will shut the 
interaction down and lead to an impasse between interlocutors, while too 
much positive feedback can result in overt conflict with one interlocutor 
dominating the interaction, or both interlocutors competing for space in 
the interactive event space.
Finally, a complex system is never perfectly adapted to its environ-
ment because the adaptive processes of the system will themselves change 
the environment so that constant optimizing of the system through adap-
tation is part of its dynamic pulse (Nowak et al., 2010). Continuing with 
the example of a speech community from earlier, not only do the system 
components change as a result of their interaction with other compo-
nents, but the here and now in which this system is embedded is also 
modified as a result of its adaptive dynamics. Seen in this way, feedback 
offers an appropriate way of keeping systems’ changing relationships and 
dynamic processes at the center of a research design or project.
Openness to context
It will be clear at this point that systems not only continuously 
interact with their environment or surroundings, but are themselves 
also an integral part of the context in which they exist (Ushioda, 2015). 

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  29
A classic example here is social and linguistic groups and how their 
purpose, most often, exists in relation to certain times, places and larger 
social settings (see also Kretzschmar, 2015). Any complex system is, by 
definition, an open synthesis of many small parts interacting with one 
another and adapting to the larger context in which it is situated. All 
social and human systems possess or establish functional boundaries 
that situate them within their environment and demarcate where their 
constitutive components start or stop (Eoyang, 2004). Earlier in this 
chapter, we made the case for the importance of establishing and casing 
such boundaries in an empirically and phenomenologically meaningful 
way. To add important conceptual detail to those points, we could say 
that rather than cutting off the system from the rest of the environment, 
these boundaries remain open and allow the system to remain adaptive 
and robust.
For instance, although a social group has certain assumptions or 
formalized guidelines for what constitutes in-group members and non-
members, most groups also have provision built in to them for how 
individuals wishing to do so may join or leave the group. The adaptive 
system-environment or co-adaptive system to system behavior that is 
made possible through the openness of complex systems’ boundaries is 
an important way that these units actively try to turn their experiences to 
their advantage (Eoyang, 2003).
These open boundaries connect a system with its environment 
and to other systems through a notion known as coupling. In the 
absence of a coupling relationship, very little adaptation between the 
system and its environment will take place. And without this transfer 
of energy, resources or information, system-wide adaptive patterns of 
self-­organization are unlikely to occur as there is no impetus to change 
­(Juarrero, 1999). Systems’ openness and coupling to the environment 
give rise to outcomes that can be explained once observed, but not deter-
ministically predicted a priori, and this has important implications for 
designing and carrying out research (Reitsma, 2003).
Soft-assembly
Most research in the social sciences is grounded in the assumption 
that adaptation and development are based on rule-driven mechanisms 
that are hard assembled (Thelen & Smith, 1994). The idea behind this 
is that ‘what works’ is expected to do so fairly reliably across time and 
place. Hard-assembled mechanisms are independent of the immedi-
ate context in which the system is nested; they apply across multiple 
contexts, are discovered independent of performance and exist offline 
in some form of inactive, absolute state (Larsen-Freeman, 2015). In 
contrast, soft-assembled mechanisms emerge, they are contextually 
constrained and they involve a particular adaptation of the system to its 

30  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
environment (van Geert, 2009). This means that CDST research is con-
cerned with determining what works, for whom, in which contexts and 
under what circumstances.
A characteristic feature of many systems is their remarkable flex-
ibility or adaptiveness and their tendency to compensate for varying 
contexts and environmental situations (Kloos & Van Orden, 2009). Soft-
assembly is temporary, takes place in real time and involves only tools 
and structures that are currently available and necessary. Soft-assembled 
mechanisms come into existence and are only realized within the imme-
diate context of a situation or task (Thelen, 2005). Clearly, the context 
or environment in which a system is embedded cannot be seen as merely 
one factor to be considered when interpreting the system’s behavior 
(Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008). Instead, contextual factors must be 
seen as actual parameters or dimensions of the system itself (Goldstein, 
2011a). To exemplify this using the notion of intelligibility from earlier 
in the chapter, one’s purpose for communication, salient cues from their 
interlocutor and spatiotemporal conditions of the interaction, etc. – all 
of which can be seen as salient contextual elements – will help determine 
how a speaker adapts their volume, pitch, diction, tone of voice and use 
of paralinguistic features.
In Chapter  3, we discuss the stance that CDST researchers take 
regarding the core enterprise of research. Here, however, what we can 
say is that the importance of soft-assembly for CDST research does not 
mean that it is radically idiosyncratic. Elucidating causation is still a cen-
tral part of scientific CDST inquiry (Byrne, 2009). Ultimately, in CDST 
research, it is the who, where (i.e. in what settings), how (i.e. under what 
conditions) and when that helps to determine what works.
Understanding Complex Dynamic Behavior
Earlier in this chapter, we suggested that complex systems are the 
units of analysis for CDST research; we can go even further and say 
that cases are the methodological equivalent of complex systems. This 
resonates well with much of social complexity as many of the methods 
used by social complexivists are case-based research methods. This 
also does not lock us in by any means to a certain way of collecting 
and analyzing data – a case-based approach encompasses both high-N 
and low-N, and quantitative and qualitative methods. However, while 
studying such cases and their relations with other cases can be fasci-
nating, this is only half of the picture. Dynamic processes of change 
and emergent outcomes in such systems are arguably as interesting as 
systems themselves (Goldstein, 1999, 2000). In fact, systems only exist 
spatiotemporally, and the process of being and becoming are what give 
systems their meaning. This means that a ‘state’ or ‘outcome’ should be 
understood as a way of looking at a system’s temporal, and dynamic, 

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  31
state of being. For instance, when we ask what a system is doing, we are 
talking about an unfolding pattern of existence. This is what we mean 
by system ‘behavior’.
The term dynamics has its origins in the Greek dynamikos (van Geert, 
1998) meaning ‘powerful’. This is apt because often the most empirically 
compelling thing about systems is their process of development and the 
forces acting to bring about this ongoing and nonlinear change. Forces at 
play in system behavior are also the central concern in much of applied 
linguistics research. As Larsen-Freeman and Cameron (2008: 229) pro-
pose, ‘many of the phenomena of interest to applied linguists can be seen 
as complex systems’ with powerful processes underlying them. Not only 
would we argue that such phenomena should be articulated as systems 
explicitly, we see their processes of becoming as even more compelling 
than their states of being. From this way of thinking ‘understanding 
change in language use, language development, and language learning 
is central’ to applied linguists’ concerns (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 
2008: 229).
Dynamic change is so important to understanding systems and to 
framing research using insights from CDST that we dedicate this section 
of the chapter to exploring three major ingredients of dynamic behavior 
– how it comes about (i.e. self-organization), where it unfolds (i.e. state 
space and attractor states) and the patterns it results in (i.e. emergence). 
These are necessary points of reference for investigating how change 
takes place.
Self-organization and emergence
In order to describe how the elements of a complex system interact 
and use the resulting system dynamics to move through a developmen-
tal trajectory, the notion of self-organization is important. When sys-
tems adapt their internal structure or their overall aggregate function 
in response to external circumstances through a process independent 
from overt direction, instruction or programming, this demonstrates 
self-organization (Dekker et  al., 2011). Haken (2009: 8927) described 
self-organization in his early work on synergetics as ‘the spontaneous 
formation of spatial, temporal… or functional structures’. What he was 
describing was the global cooperation of elements in a system as they 
self-stabilize and self-regulate. Self-organization, which Kauffman (1995: 
71) calls ‘order for free’, may sound like an oxymoron, but it is in fact 
the most common form of order-building and a primary driver of growth 
and change (Goldstein, 2000; Howe & Lewis, 2005). The notion of such 
order for free can be illustrated by how daily life unfolds: Many things 
in life tend to sort themselves out even better, given the right conditions 
and gradually over time, than if those involved had deliberately tried to 
force a solution.

32  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
We have argued that self-organization is a process, across time, 
through which systems acquire their structure and their functions 
without interference (see also Gershenson, 2007). The process of self-
organization is often understood as one of pattern formation because of 
its ties to emergence. We elaborate further on this link later. However, 
self-organization technically does not have a specific end goal or exter-
nal target apart from optimizing the system’s own ongoing existence 
(Deacon, 2012; Rose et al., 2013). In this sense, the entire process is non-
teleological, oriented not to completion or an end-goal, but toward a 
purposeful and intrinsically directed, or ‘immanent’, teleology (Weber & 
Varela, 2002). Self-organization, for example, results in greater coordina-
tion and often increases a system’s complexity. As a consequence, self-
maintenance is an important function of systems that are self-organizing. 
Self-organization is a process that is at the very heart of the behavior of 
systems, so much so that it is easy to take for granted the clearly recogniz-
able patterns it leads to in the lived world (Banzhaf, 2009). Let us look at 
the way it leads to such patterns.
An interesting feature of systems is that while they can lose their 
equilibrium, the result of it all can be the creation of new order. A sys-
tem in flux is potentially, therefore, a system undergoing a process of 
transformation. And, as they self-organize through time, systems display 
new patterns or synchronies that could not have been anticipated by 
looking at their component parts one by one (Goldstein, 1999). It was the 
philosopher C.D. Broad (1887–1971) in the early 1920s who first coined 
the term ‘emergent properties’ for those properties that emerge at a cer-
tain level of complexity but do not exist at lower levels (Capra & Luisi, 
2014). Wholes display novel patterns that do not necessarily follow from 
the parts. Think, for example, how in-depth knowledge of automobile 
parts and how to drive a car would provide almost no insight into the 
traffic patterns that emerge during rush hour. In the domains of speech 
and language use, we would similarly expect language learners who 
arrive at an appropriate mastery of pronunciation in a given language to 
need something more and at another level entirely than simply a precise 
knowledge of that language’s phonological representation through its 
phonetic symbols.
Emergence, across space, occurs when a system shows qualitatively 
new behaviors on a higher level (i.e. the system level) of description which 
could not have been predicted from the interactions of components at the 
lower level. Self-organization, then, refers to the spontaneous pattern for-
mation and change in systems, and can be seen as a robust general pro-
cess that leads to emergent outcomes (Goldstein, 2000, 2011a) – a kind 
of bottom-up causation. These new coordinated patterns of existence 
or behavior are able to affect the lower level of the system components 
and influence them in a way that stabilizes the newly emergent behavior.  

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  33
In this way, the coherent structures forming at the higher level of the 
system exert top-down causation.
State space and attractor states
Social phenomena are unmistakably varied, but one surprising out-
come of complexity is that it is the norm rather than the exception to see 
stable patterns emerge in the world. These stable tendencies for systems 
are called attractor states (aka attractors) (Hiver, 2015). An attractor 
state is a critical value, pattern, solution or outcome toward which a 
system settles down or approaches over time (Newman, 2009). Attractor 
states are essential in understanding emergent outcomes. The evocative 
topographical metaphor CDST uses to capture where dynamic behavior 
unfolds and which patterned outcomes can exist for a system is the state 
space or landscape (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008). This landscape 
is an N-dimensional space of total possible outcome configurations that 
a system can be found in at any given time. In other words, it provides a 
more or less comprehensive idea of all the phenomenological outcomes 
for the system.
A patterned outcome (i.e. attractor state) that results from self-
organization represents a pocket of stability for the system, and it can 
emerge without anyone purposely directing or engineering it into exis-
tence (van Geert, 2008). This closely mirrors phenomena across the 
field of applied linguistics (e.g. in language policy and use, in language 
development) where dynamic collections of variables spontaneously 
self-organize into attractor states that represent higher-order patterns of 
equilibrium (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008). We might think here of 
how second language (L2) learning events on smaller timescales involv-
ing teachers and learners add up to coherent wholes of activity that we 
term ‘comprehension’, ‘development’ or ‘transfer of learning’. Of course, 
the states that the system settles in over time do not have to be described 
numerically. These outcomes are, among other things, often categorical, 
conceptual or phenomenological outcomes (Goldstein, 2011b).
A board game can provide an illustrative analogy of what the state 
space and attractor states represent. The state space for the board game 
is the total potential placements or configurations that can be found for 
the game being played. Gameplay consists of moving pieces around the 
board from configuration to configuration based on the rules of the game, 
and the attractor states of the game are the typical placement patterns of 
pieces on the board. There are a finite number of possible attractor states 
for a given system (De Wolf & Holvoet, 2005), and identifying these can 
reduce much of the unpredictability of complex systems’ functioning and 
allow researchers to make informed choices about how to interact with 
emergent outcomes. An additional aspect of salient outcome patterns are 
the unique signature dynamics (Dörnyei, 2014), or the developmental 

34  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
mechanisms within a system that allow a researcher to offer a parsimo-
nious account of the gameplay that has led that system to produce those 
configurations. An example from our board game would be unraveling 
the turn-by-turn moves and strategies that resulted in one player gaining 
the upper hand or winning altogether.
Attractor states are preferred states of equilibrium that a system 
evolves toward or approaches over time in the landscape or ‘gameboard’ 
of the social and human world. However, these do not actually exert a 
pulling force of attraction in the way that a magnet does (Haken, 2006). 
The term ‘attractor’ is simply a convenient way to describe the behavior 
of a complex system as it moves toward some, and away from other, 
critical values (Holland, 1995, 2012). An attractor state allows us to 
describe what position or state of being a system is in right now or how it 
is currently acting, and the outcome or pattern it has fallen into through 
self-organization (Thelen & Bates, 2003).
The number of such patterned outcomes (i.e. attractor states) observ-
able in the human and social world is finite, but as we have said these 
novel emergent outcomes at the system level cannot be inferred or 
explained from the discrete interactions of system components alone. 
To take an example of group behavior, a collection of individuals is the 
system and we might observe the self-organization that occurs through 
distributed interactions and resulting changes in the group’s intensity of 
emotions. When we imagine the total possible configurations in a land-
scape of group phenomena, we see various possibilities such as a crowd, 
a demonstration, a community, an audience, even a mob. Each of these 
has particular emergent characteristics. In the case of group behavior, 
individual components manage to acquire collective properties that tran-
scend the individual parts (Holland, 2012). In a group, this can lead the 
system to settle into patterns of conformity, isolation, groupthink, activ-
ism or other patterns entirely.
Attractors represent outcomes or states of dynamic equilibrium into 
which a system stabilizes. While outcomes account for what a system 
is doing now and the state in which it has stabilized, it is the adaptive 
changes that provide a temporal narrative for the process of how and 
why the system got to where it is, and the places it may be going to. 
Specific mechanisms of change – or signature dynamics as we have pre-
viously called them – produce a particular time signal or trajectory of 
change over time in the state space that is essential for understanding the 
causal complexities of system development or change (Mackenzie, 2005). 
And, just as the emergent patterns for a system are not unlimited, the 
trajectories to those outcomes are more or less finite.
Attractor states are generally thought to come about through interac-
tions among the system’s components (Banzhaf, 2009). They can also be 
created spontaneously if system parameters pass certain critical values. 
Attractor states may also emerge when a change in a system parameter 

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  35
causes the system to split into divergent paths of behavior (i.e. it bifur-
cates) and to move toward entirely new attractors. Finally, values bor-
rowed from the system parameters themselves can become attractor 
states if they are consistent enough to achieve the critical mass to be 
‘engraved’ in the state space (Nowak et al., 2005: 361).
The simplest type of attractor state is a fixed-point attractor state. 
The fixed point of this state refers to a unique point of equilibrium in 
which the system tends to settle over time (Haken, 2006). An example 
of a fixed-point attractor might be the bottom center position of an 
unpushed pendulum, the position in which it tends to settle over time. 
In reality, because of the immense complexity of life, systems that only 
tend to settle into a single fixed-point attractor state are rarer than one 
might expect (Byrne, 1998, 2002). Periodic attractor states are one step 
up in complexity because they provide more possibilities for variations 
in system behavior than fixed-point attractor states. A periodic attractor 
state, also known as a limit-cycle attractor state, represents two or more 
values that the system cycles back and forth between in a periodic loop. 
An example of this would be a pushed pendulum that swings up and 
down and up again. Patterns emerge when events or behaviors repeat 
themselves at regular intervals (Abraham & Shaw, 1992). Strange attrac-
tor states, also known as chaotic attractor states, are the most complex 
of all. They represent values that a system tends to approach over time 
but never quite reaches (Strogatz, 2003). An example of a strange attrac-
tor might be weather patterns that form from day to day. The motion of 
a system in a strange attractor state is called ‘chaotic’ – but only in the 
mathematical sense – because the dynamics trace a somewhat erratic or 
irregular pattern that never quite repeats itself, although these systems 
do, in fact, show complex forms of organization that can be understood 
after the fact (Gleick, 2008).
Pulling it together: Accounting for self-
organization and emergence in practice
Recall once more that for a phenomenon to be termed emergent it 
should generally be unpredictable from a lower-level description. This 
is why even detailed knowledge of a complex system’s components and 
how they interact often does not provide researchers with the under-
standing needed to predict the patterns that will result from their interac-
tion (Johnson, 2009). At the very lowest level, the phenomenon usually 
does not exist at all or exists only in trace amounts: It is irreducible. This 
does not mean, however, that such dynamism cannot be accounted for 
by CDST researchers. One descriptive model of self-organization comes 
from Lewis’s (2005) work in psychological dynamics and it is broadly 
illustrative of how the self-organization process unfolds in human and 
social systems. In this four-phase heuristic model of self-organization, the 

36  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
first two phases are concerned with behavior and interaction of system 
components on the local level, while the two latter phases shift up to a 
whole-system, global level (Jost et al., 2010).
First, self-organization can only proceed if there is a trigger such as a 
significant perturbation that nudges a system out of an existing attractor 
state (Kiel & Elliott, 1996). A perturbation originates through the interac-
tion of systems with their environment or with other systems and causes a 
system disturbance similar to the ripples caused by a pebble thrown into 
still water. Instability is the generic mechanism that underlies most self-
organized pattern formation, and this is because individual elements in a 
system adjust and reorder themselves in response to changing conditions 
(Kelso, 1995). An important consideration here is the nonlinear relation-
ship between the size of a perturbation and the size of its effect (Kra, 
2009). Large forces may lead to relatively little impact on a system if the 
system is in a deep attractor state, whereas other relatively minor glitches 
can have a sustained impact (Straussfogel & Von Schilling, 2009). Dis-
turbances in a system can follow two possible paths: through amplifying 
they increase in strength to destabilize a system, or they can be subdued 
when subject to a damping force (Boschetti et al., 2011).
During the process of self-organization, behavior can be observed in 
which the system actively tries to turn what is happening to its advantage 
(Manson, 2001). This is when system components interact in a way that 
develops intelligently (Reitsma, 2003). The technical term for element-
to-element interactional linking is coupling (Dooley, 1997). Coupling 
involves an exchange of energy or information in ongoing feedback 
loops. These allow new system-wide patterns of behavior to emerge 
(Haken, 2009). As we mentioned earlier in this chapter, feedback loops 
are a two-way flow of energy or information necessary for the system to 
experience growth and change (Newman, 2009). Positive feedback rein-
forces the local perturbations until they push the entire system toward 
certain new attractor states, while negative feedback reins in change and 
returns the system to its original attractor (O’Sullivan, 2009). Although 
self-organization at times appears to be random, there are in fact many 
systematic variations that steer the path of the emerging stability (Gold-
stein, 2011a, 2011b). These are termed control parameters (aka driving 
parameters) as a reminder that nothing is haphazard, and that there are 
pre-existing parameters that a system must stick to and rules by which 
its components play (Gorochowski et al., 2011). Some common examples 
of control parameters that can act as motors of change in systems range 
from temperature, velocity, pressure or density in physical systems, to 
proximity, scarcity, frequency or novelty in human and social systems.
Shifting now to the higher system-level of self-organization, the result 
of a system continuing to realign its internal structure is that it crosses a 
threshold where there is enough coherence and structure for the system 
to begin to reconfigure itself toward a new attractor basin – the set of 

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  37
conditions that allow a system to evolve to an attractor state (van Geert, 
2009). This return to stability takes place through the emergence of new 
higher-order patterns (Kiel & Elliot, 1996). Because these changes and 
new patterns in the system come about spontaneously, they are said to 
have emerged (Kauffman, 1995). When the outcome pattern of the system 
that emerges through this realignment is different in some of its main 
qualities from what was started with, this new state is termed a major 
phase shift (aka phase change) (Boschetti et al., 2011). Examples of these 
system-level, qualitative changes include the examples of shifting states 
of matter (solid, liquid, gas) and gaits of a horse (walk, trot, canter and 
gallop). The key to understanding changes such as these is that they are 
the emergent result of a system’s adaptive self-organization, and do not 
rely on any one component or on any linear process (Juarrero, 1999).
Once the newly emergent pattern is firmly consolidated system-wide 
– i.e. the system settles into its new attractor state – the emergent out-
come begins to influence and determine future cycles of self-organization 
(Abraham & Shaw, 1992). In other words, it develops into an order 
parameter. Order parameters (aka constraint parameters) spread and 
restrict the future behavior of a system (Haken, 2009) helping to keep 
the new attractor state robust. For instance, though they did not refer 
to them as such, in hindsight we can see that human flight became 
possible once would-be aviators came to understand and harness the 
order parameters that are part of the physics of flight: lift, drag, thrust 
and gravity. This is how reciprocal causality (i.e. both top-down and 
bottom-up simultaneously) becomes possible: The self-organization of 
the component parts causes the new pattern in the system to emerge, and 
this emergent pattern now affects the behavior of the parts (Juarrero, 
1999). Emergent phenomena, as Larsen-Freeman and Cameron (2008: 60) 
propose, ‘entrain the lower levels or scales of activity that have produced 
them in the first place’. Emergence thus allows systems to retain stabil-
ity and functionality by responding to continuing disturbances based on 
their past experience of self-organization (Kelso, 1995).
Segue
We began this fairly lengthy, and possibly dense, chapter by seeking 
to understand the essence of the thing we refer to as ‘complexity’. One 
way we did this was by defining and drawing a distinction between the 
complicated and the complex, terms that are often confused. As our 
examples show, taking a ‘complex’ view of language and related issues 
can be transformative, but it also necessitates a conceptual recalibration 
when thinking about many otherwise familiar issues. To stake out this 
novel ontological territory, we then briefly explored the origins of com-
plexity thinking in the social sciences. In line with other social complex-
ivists, we argued that complexity is best understood as a meta-theory that 

38  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
accompanies a set of powerful intellectual tools and concepts capable 
of informing diverse theories (e.g. theories of language and theories of 
learning). One of the main conceptual tools that is part of the complex-
ity mindset for research, as we show, is adopting a relational rather than 
an object-based understanding of the field of applied linguistics. This 
deliberately entails thinking of complex systems as the fundamental unit 
of analysis. From this point of departure, we then reviewed a handful 
of CDST characteristics and principles crucial for understanding the 
behavior of complex systems. These not only inform the ways in which 
researchers can think about the social world and its phenomena, but they 
also provide new parameters for how to conduct research within social 
science – points we subsequently turn to in Chapter 3.
Finally, in our last section of this chapter, we shifted to the ways in 
which an understanding of complex dynamic behaviors becomes pos-
sible. Here, we made the case that self-organization and emergence are 
pivotal concepts in understanding and accounting for the dynamics of 
system change. Using these CDST insights allows researchers to value 
variation and processes as strongly as states and outcomes (Larsen-
Freeman, 2012, 2013). Determining how such dynamics come about, 
where they unfold and the patterns that result are some of the primary 
goals of CDST (Larsen-Freeman, 1997). Many of the methods we intro-
duce in Parts 2 and 3 of this book are also designed to assist researchers 
in describing and modeling the processes of self-organization in systems 
(Holland, 2006). As such a complex mechanism suggests, conceptualiz-
ing phenomena of interest using insight from self-organization requires 
applied linguists to think in a connected way about both outcomes and 
their processes (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008). This core concep-
tual tool illustrates well how CDST research entails an expansionist per-
spective of the field and requires appropriate methods compatible with 
this mode of scientific inquiry.
We would encourage our readers to explore other excellent sources 
of detailed exposition that are available in the field (e.g. Larsen-Freeman, 
2017; Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008). Some sources also address spe-
cific topics in our field (e.g. Dörnyei et al., 2015; de Bot et al., 2005), while 
others address broader issues in the social sciences (Byrne & Callaghan, 
2014; Morin, 2008; Thelen & Smith, 1994).
References
Abraham, R. (2011) The genesis of complexity. World Futures 67, 380–394.
Abraham, R. and Shaw, D. (1992) Dynamics: The Geometry of Behavior (2nd edn). Red-
wood City, CA: Addison-Wesley.
Al-Hoorie, A.H. (2015) Human agency: Does the beach ball have free will? In Z. Dörnyei, 
P.D. MacIntyre and A. Henry (eds) Motivational Dynamics in Language Learning 
(pp. 55–72). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Alhadeff-Jones, M. (2008) Three generations of complexity theories: Nuances and ambi-
guities. Educational Philosophy and Theory 40 (1), 66–82.

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  39
Baba, K. and Nitta, R. (2014) Phase transitions in development of writing fluency from a 
complex dynamic systems perspective. Language Learning 64, 1–35.
Bak, P. (1996) How Nature Works: The Science of Self-Organized Criticality. New York: 
Springer.
Banzhaf, W. (2009) Self-organizing systems. In R. Meyers (ed.) Encyclopedia of Complex-
ity and Systems Science (pp. 8040–8050). New York: Springer.
Beckner, C., Blythe, R., Bybee, J., Christiansen, M.H., Croft, W., Ellis, N.C., Holland, J., 
Ke, J., Larsen-Freeman, D. and Schonemann, T. (2009) Language is a complex adap-
tive system: Position paper. Language Learning 59 (s1), 1–27.
Boschetti, F., Hardy, P.Y., Grigg, N. and Horowitz, P. (2011) Can we learn how complex 
systems work? Emergence: Complexity & Organization 13 (4), 47–62.
Byrne, D. (1998) Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences: An Introduction. New York: 
Routledge.
Byrne, D. (2002) Interpreting Quantitative Data. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Byrne, D. (2005) Complexity, configurations and cases. Theory, Culture and Society 22 
(5), 95–111.
Byrne, D. (2009) Case-based methods: Why we need them; What they are; how to do them. 
In D. Byrne and C.C. Ragin (eds) The SAGE Handbook of Case-Based Methods (pp. 
1–13). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Byrne, D. (2011) Applying Social Science. Bristol: Policy Press.
Byrne, D. and Ragin, C. (eds) (2009) The SAGE Handbook of Case-Based Methods. Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Byrne, D. and Callaghan, G. (2014) Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences: The State 
of the Art. New York: Routledge.
Capra, F. and Luisi, P.L. (2014) The Systems View of Life. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Castellani, B. and Hafferty, F. (2009) Sociology and Complexity Science: A New Field of 
Inquiry. Berlin: Springer.
Cilliers, P. (2000) Knowledge, complexity, and understanding. Emergence 2 (4), 7–13.
Cilliers, P. (2005) Complexity, deconstruction and relativism. Theory, Culture and Society 
22, 255–267.
Cuban, L. (2010) The difference between ‘complicated’ and ‘complex’ matters. See https​:// 
la​rrycu​ban.w​ordpr​ess.c​om/20​10/06​/08/t​he-di​ffere​nce-b​etwee​n-com​plica​ted-a​nd-co​
mplex​-matt​ers/ (accessed 30 June 2019).
Davis, B. and Sumara, D. (2006) Complexity and Education: Inquiries into Learning, 
Teaching and Research. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
de Bot, K. (2015) Rates of change: Timescales in second language development. In Z. 
Dörnyei, P.D. MacIntyre and A. Henry (eds) Motivational Dynamics in Language 
Learning (pp. 29–37). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
de Bot, K., Lowie, W. and Verspoor, M. (2005) Second Language Acquisition: An 
Advanced Resource Book. London: Routledge.
Deacon, T. (2012) Incomplete Nature: How Mind Emerged from Matter. New York: 
W.W. Norton & Company.
De Villiers-Botha, T. and Cilliers, P. (2010) The complex ‘I’: The formation of identity 
in complex systems. In P. Cilliers and R. Preiser (eds) Complexity, Difference, and 
Identity (pp. 19–38). Dordrecht: Springer.
De Wolf, T. and Holvoet, T. (2005) Emergence versus self-organisation: Different con-
cepts but promising when combined. In S. Brueckner, G. Di Marzo Serugendo, A. 
Karageorgos and R. Nagpal (eds) Engineering Self-Organising Systems: Methodolo-
gies and Applications (pp. 1–15). Berlin: Springer.
Dekker, S., Cilliers, P. and Hofmeyr, J.H. (2011) The complexity of failure: Implications 
of complexity theory for safety investigations. Safety Science 49, 939–945.
Dooley, K. (1997) A complex adaptive systems model of organization change. Nonlinear 
Dynamics, Psychology, and Life Sciences 1, 69–97.

40  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
Dörnyei, Z. (2014) Researching complex dynamic systems: ‘Retrodictive qualitative mod-
elling’ in the language classroom. Language Teaching 47, 80–91.
Dörnyei, Z., MacIntyre, P.D. and Henry, A. (eds) (2015) Motivational Dynamics in Lan-
guage Learning. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Douglas Fir Group (2016) A transdisciplinary framework for SLA in a multilingual world. 
The Modern Language Journal 100 (s), 19–47.
Ellis, N.C. and Larsen-Freeman, D. (eds) (2009) Language as a complex adaptive system 
[Special issue]. Language Learning 59 (s1).
Elman, J. (2003) It’s about time. Developmental Science 6, 430–433.
Eoyang, G. (2003) Conditions for self-organizing in human systems. Unpublished doctoral 
dissertation, The Union Institute and University, Ohio.
Eoyang, G. (2004) The practitioner’s landscape. Emergence: Complexity & Organization 
6 (1/2), 55–60.
Eve, R., Horsfall, S. and Lee, M. (eds) (1997) Chaos, Complexity, and Sociology: Myths, 
Models, and Theories. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Fogal, G.G. (2019a) Tracking microgenetic changes in authorial voice development from 
a complexity theory perspective. Applied Linguistics 40, 432–455. doi:10.1093/applin/
amx031
Fogal, G.G. (2019b) Investigating variability in L2 development: Extending a complexity 
theory perspective on L2 writing studies and authorial voice. Applied Linguistics, 
Advance Online Access. doi:10.1093/applin/amz005
Gell-Mann, M. (1994) Complex adaptive systems. In G. Cowan, D. Pines and D. Melt-
zer (eds) Complexity: Metaphors, Models and Reality (pp. 17–45). Reading, MA: 
Addison-Wesley.
Gershenson, C. (2007) Design and Control of Self-Organizing Systems. Publisher: Author.
Gleick, J. (2008) Chaos: Making a New Science. New York: Penguin Books.
Goldstein, J. (1999) Emergence as a construct: History and issues. Emergence: A Journal 
of Complexity Issues in Organizations and Management 1 (1), 49–72.
Goldstein, J. (2000) Conceptual snares emergence: A construct amid a thicket of con-
ceptual snares. Emergence: A Journal of Complexity Issues in Organizations and 
Management 2 (1), 5–22.
Goldstein, J. (2011a) Emergence in complex systems. In P. Allen, S. Maguire and B. McK-
elvey (eds) The SAGE Handbook of Complexity and Management (pp. 65–78). New 
York: SAGE.
Goldstein, J. (2011b) Probing the nature of complex systems: Parameters, modeling, inter-
ventions. Emergence: Complexity & Organization 13, 94–121.
Gorochowski, T., di Bernardo, M. and Grierson, C. (2011) Evolving dynamical networks: 
A formalism for describing complex systems. Complexity 17 (4), 18–25.
Haken, H. (2006) Information and Self-Organization: A Macroscopic Approach to Com-
plex Systems (3rd edn). Berlin: Springer.
Haken, H. (2009) Synergetics: Basic concepts. In R. Meyers (ed.) Encyclopedia of Com-
plexity and Systems Science (pp. 8926–8946). New York: Springer.
Harvey, D. (2009) Complexity and case. In D. Byrne and C.C. Ragin (eds) The SAGE 
Handbook of Case-Based Methods (pp. 15–38). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Hilpert, J. and Marchand, G. (2018) Complex systems research in educational psychology: 
Aligning theory and method. Educational Psychologist 53, 185–202.
Hiver, P. (2015) Attractor states. In Z. Dörnyei, P.D. MacIntyre and A. Henry (eds) 
Motivational Dynamics in Language Learning (pp. 20–28). Bristol: Multilingual 
Matters.
Hiver, P. and Al-Hoorie, A.H. (2016) A ‘dynamic ensemble’ for second language research: 
Putting complexity theory into practice. The Modern Language Journal 100, 741–756.
Hiver, P. and Larsen-Freeman, D. (2020) Motivation: It is a relational system. In A.H. 
Al-Hoorie and P.D. MacIntyre (eds) Contemporary Language Motivation Theory: 60 
Years Since Gardner and Lambert (1959). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  41
Holland, J.H. (1992) Complex adaptive systems. Daedalus 121, 17–30.
Holland, J.H. (1995) Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds Complexity. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Holland, J.H. (2006) Studying complex adaptive systems. Journal of Systems Science and 
Complexity 19, 1–8.
Holland, J.H. (2012) Signals and Boundaries: Building Blocks for Complex Adaptive Sys-
tems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Horn, J. (2008) Human research and complexity theory. Educational Philosophy and 
Theory 40, 130–143.
Howe, M.L. and Lewis, M.D. (2005) The importance of dynamic systems approaches for 
understanding development. Developmental Review 25, 247–251.
Human, O. (2015) Complexity: E-special introduction. Theory, Culture & Society 3, 1–20.
Johnson, N. (2009) Simply Complexity: A Clear Guide to Complexity Theory. Oxford: 
Oneworld Publications.
Jost, J., Bertschinger, N. and Olbrich, E. (2010) Emergence. New Ideas in Psychology 28, 
265–273.
Juarrero, A. (1999) Dynamics in Action: Intentional Behavior as a Complex System. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kauffman, S. (1995) At Home in the Universe: The Search for the Laws of Self-Organiza-
tion and Complexity. New York: Oxford University Press.
Kelso, J.A.S. (1995) Dynamic Patterns: The Self-Organization of Brain and Behavior. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Kelso, J.A.S. (2002) Self-organizing dynamical systems. In N. Smelser and P. Baltes (eds) 
International Encyclopedia of the Social and Behavioral Sciences (pp. 13844–13850). 
Oxford: Elsevier.
Kelso, J.A.S. (2016) On the self-organizing origins of agency. Trends in Cognitive Science 
20, 490–499.
Kiel, L. and Elliot, E. (eds) (1996) Chaos Theory in the Social Sciences: Foundations and 
Applications. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
Klein, J. (2004) Interdisciplinarity and complexity: An evolving relationship. Emergence: 
Complexity & Organization 6 (1/2), 2–10.
Kloos, H. and Van Orden, G. (2009) Soft-assembled mechanisms for the grand theory. 
In J.P. Spencer, M. Thomas and J. McClelland (eds) Toward a New Grand Theory 
of Development? Connectionism and Dynamics Systems Theory Reconsidered (pp. 
253–267). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Koopmans, M. (2019) Education is a complex dynamical system: Challenges for research. 
The Journal of Experimental Education. Advance Online Access. doi:10.1080/00220
973.2019.1566199
Kra, B. (2009) Introduction to ergodic theory. In R. Meyers (ed.) Encyclopedia of Com-
plexity and Systems Science (pp. 3053–3055). New York: Springer.
Kretzschmar, W. (2015) Language and Complex Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Kuhn, L. (2008) Complexity and educational research: A critical reflection. In M. Mason 
(ed.) Complexity Theory and the Philosophy of Education (pp. 169–180). Chichester: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Lantolf, J. (2016, March) On the (in)commensurability of sociocultural theory and 
dynamic systems theory. Distinguished scholarship and service plenary given at the 
meeting of the American Association for Applied Linguistics, Orlando, FL.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (1997) Chaos/complexity science and second language acquisition. 
Applied Linguistics 18, 141–165.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2010) The dynamic co-adaption of cognitive and social views: A 
chaos/complexity theory perspective. In R. Batstone (ed.) Sociocognitive Perspec-
tives on Second Language Use/Learning (pp. 40–53). Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.

42  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2012) Complex, dynamic systems: A new transdisciplinary theme for 
applied linguistics? Language Teaching 45, 202–214.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2013) Complexity theory: A new way to think. Revista Brasileira de 
Linguistica Aplicada 13, 369–373.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2015) Ten ‘lessons’ from complex dynamic systems theory: What is 
on offer. In Z. Dörnyei, P.D. MacIntyre and A. Henry (eds) Motivational Dynamics 
in Language Learning (pp. 11–19). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2016a) Classroom-oriented research from a complex systems per-
spective. Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching 6, 377–393.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2016b) The psychology of language learning and ‘the science of the 
individual’. Paper presented at the Individuals in Contexts. Psychology of Language 
Learning 2 Conference, University of Jyväskylä, Finland.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2017) Complexity theory: The lessons continue. In L. Ortega and Z. 
Han (eds) Complexity Theory and Language Development: In Celebration of Diane 
Larsen-Freeman (pp. 11–50). Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2019) On language learner agency: A complex dynamic systems 
theory perspective. The Modern Language Journal 103 (s), 61–79.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Cameron, L. (2008) Complex Systems and Applied Linguistics. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Tedick, D.J. (2016) Teaching world languages: Thinking differ-
ently. In D. Gitomer and C. Bell (eds) Handbook of Research on Teaching (5th edn; 
pp. 1335–1388). Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Lemke, J. (2000) Across the scales of time: Artifacts, activities, and meanings in ecosocial 
systems. Mind, Culture, and Activity 7, 273–290.
Lenzing, A. (2015) Relating regularities and dynamical systems in L2 development. Lan-
guage Learning 65 (1), 89–112.
Lerner, R.M. and Overton, W.F. (2008) Exemplifying the integrations of the relational 
developmental system: Synthesizing theory, research, and application to promote 
positive development and social justice. Journal of Adolescent Research 23, 245–255.
Lewis, M. (2005) Bridging emotion theory and neurobiology through dynamic systems 
modeling. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28, 169–245.
Lewontin, R. (1998) The evolution of cognition: Questions we will never answer. In D. 
Scarborough and S. Sternberg (eds) An Invitation to Cognitive Science, Volume 4: 
Methods, models and conceptual issues (pp. 107–132). Cambridge, MA: The MIT 
Press.
Lowie, W. and Verspoor, M. (2011) The dynamics of multilingualism: Levelt’s speaking 
model revisited. In M.S. Schmid and W. Lowie (eds) Modeling Bilingualism: From 
Structure to Chaos (pp. 267–288). Philadelphia, PA: Benjamins.
Lowie, W. and Verspoor, M. (2015) Variability and variation in second language acquisi-
tion orders: A dynamic reevaluation. Language Learning 65, 63–88.
Lowie, W. and Verspoor, M. (2019) Individual differences and the ergodicity problem. 
Language Learning 69 (s1), 184–206. doi:10.1111/lang.12324.
Lowie, W., Plat, R. and de Bot, K. (2014) Pink noise in language production: A nonlinear 
approach to the multilingual lexicon. Ecological Psychology 26 (3), 216–228.
Mackenzie, A. (2005) The problem of the attractor: A singular generality between sciences 
and social theory. Theory, Culture & Society 22, 45–65.
Manson, S. (2001) Simplifying complexity: A review of complexity theory. Geoforum 32, 
405–414.
Marchand, G. and Hilpert, J. (2018) Design considerations for education scholars inter-
ested in complex systems research. Complicity: An International Journal of Complex-
ity and Education 15, 31–44.
Mason, M. (ed.) (2008) Complexity Theory and the Philosophy of Education. Chichester: 
Wiley-Blackwell.

﻿What is Complexity Theory?  43
Mercer, S. (2013) Towards a complexity-informed pedagogy for language learning. 
Revista Brasileira de Linguistica Aplicada 13 (2), 375–398.
Mercer, S. (2016) Complexity, language learning and the language classroom. In G. Hall 
(ed.) The Routledge Handbook of English Language Teaching (pp. 473–485). New 
York: Routledge.
Montuori, A. (2013) Complexity and transdisciplinarity: Reflections on theory and prac-
tice. World Futures: The Journal of Global Education 69, 200–230.
Morin, E. (1992) From the concept of system to the paradigm of complexity. Journal of 
Social and Evolutionary Systems 15, 371–385.
Morin, E. (2008) On Complexity. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Morowitz, H. (1996) What’s in a name? Complexity 1 (4), 7–8.
Newman, L. (2009) Human–environment interactions: Complex systems approaches for 
dynamic sustainable development. In R. Meyers (ed.) Encyclopedia of Complexity 
and Systems Science (pp. 4631–4643). New York: Springer.
Nowak, A., Vallacher, R. and Zochowski, M. (2005) The emergence of personality: 
Dynamic foundations of individual variation. Developmental Review 25, 351–385.
Nowak, A., Bui-Wrzosinska, L., Coleman, P., Vallacher, R., Jochemczyk, L. and Bart-
kowski, W. (2010) Seeking sustainable solutions: Using an attractor simulation 
platform for teaching multi-stakeholder negotiation in complex cases. Negotiation 
Journal 26, 49–68.
Nowotny, H. (2005) The increase of complexity and its reduction: Emergent interfaces 
between the natural sciences, humanities and social sciences. Theory, Culture and 
Society 22 (5), 15–31.
O’Sullivan, D. (2009) Complexity theory, nonlinear dynamic spatial systems, In R. Kitchin 
and N. Thrift (eds) International Encyclopedia of Human Geography (pp. 239–244). 
Oxford: Elsevier.
Osberg, D. and Biesta, G. (2010) The end/s of education: Complexity and the conundrum 
of the inclusive educational curriculum. International Journal of Inclusive Education 
14, 593–607.
Overton, W.F. (2007) A coherent metatheory for dynamic systems: Relational organicism-
contextualism. Human Development 50, 154–159.
Overton, W.F. (2013) A new paradigm for developmental science: Relationism and rela-
tional-developmental systems. Applied Developmental Science 17, 94–107.
Overton, W.F. (2015) Taking conceptual analyses seriously. Research in Human Develop-
ment 12 (3/4), 163–171.
Overton, W.F. and Lerner, R.M. (2014) Fundamental concepts and methods in develop-
mental science: A relational perspective. Research in Human Development 11, 63–73.
Peck, M.S. (1993) Further Along the Road Less Travelled: The Unending Journey toward 
Spiritual Growth. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Polat, B. and Kim, Y. (2014) Dynamics of complexity and accuracy: A longitudinal case 
study of advanced untutored development. Applied Linguistics 35 (2), 184–207.
Prigogine, I. and Stengers, I. (1984) Order Out of Chaos. New York: Bantam New Age.
Ragin, C.C. (2009) Reflections on casing and case-oriented research. In D. Byrne and C.C. 
Ragin (eds) The SAGE Handbook of Case-Based Methods (pp. 523–534). London: 
SAGE.
Reitsma, F. (2003) A response to simplifying complexity. Geoforum 34, 13–16.
Ridley, M. (2015) The Evolution of Everything: How New Ideas Emerge. New York: 
Harper Collins.
Rose, L., Rouhani, P. and Fischer, K. (2013) The science of the individual. Mind, Brain, 
and Education 7, 152–158.
Sawyer, K. (2005) Social Emergence: Societies as Complex Systems. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.

44  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
Schmid, M.S., Köpke, B. and de Bot, K. (2013) Language attrition as complex, non-linear 
development. International Journal of Bilingualism 17 (6), 675–683.
Seedhouse, P. (2010) Locusts, snowflakes, and recasts: Complexity theory and spoken 
interaction. Classroom Discourse 1, 4–24.
Strogatz, S. (2003) Sync. New York: Hyperion Books.
Straussfogel, D. and Von Schilling, C. (2009) Systems theory. In R. Kitchin and N. Thrift 
(eds) International Encyclopedia of Human Geography (pp. 151–158). Oxford: 
Elsevier.
Thelen, E. (2005) Dynamic systems theory and the complexity of change. Psychoanalytic 
Dialogues 15, 255–283.
Thelen, E. and Smith, L. (1994) A Dynamic Systems Approach to Development of Cogni-
tion and Action. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Thelen, E. and Bates, E. (2003) Connectionism and dynamic systems: Are they really dif-
ferent? Developmental Science 6, 378–391.
Uprichard, E. (2013) Sampling: Bridging probability and nonprobability designs. Interna-
tional Journal of Social Research Methodology 16, 1–11.
Urry, J. (2003) Global Complexity. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Urry, J. (2005) The complexity turn. Theory, Culture and Society 22 (5), 1–14.
Ushioda, E. (2015) Context and complex dynamic systems theory. In Z. Dörnyei, P.D. 
MacIntyre and A. Henry (eds) Motivational Dynamics in Language Learning (pp. 
47–54). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
van Geert, P. (1998) We almost had a great future behind us: The contribution of non-
linear dynamics to developmental-science-in-the-making. Developmental Science 1, 
143–159.
van Geert, P. (2008) The dynamic systems approach in the study of L1 and L2 acquisition: 
An introduction. The Modern Language Journal 92, 179–199.
van Geert, P. (2009) Complex dynamic systems of development. In R. Meyers (ed.) Ency-
clopedia of Complexity and Systems Science (pp. 1872–1916). New York: Springer.
Verspoor, M., Lowie, W. and van Dijk, M. (2008) Variability in L2 development from a 
dynamic systems perspective. The Modern Language Journal 92, 214–231.
Verspoor, M., Schmid, M.S. and Xu, X. (2012) A dynamic usage based perspective on L2 
writing. Journal of Second Language Writing 21 (3), 239–263.
Walby, S. (2007) Complexity theory, systems theory, and multiple intersecting social 
inequalities. Philosophy of the Social Sciences 37, 449–470.
Weber, A. and Varela, F. (2002) Life after Kant: Natural purposes and the autopoietic 
foundations of biological individuality. Phenomenology and the Cognitive Sciences 
1, 97–125.

45
3
The starting point of research is, as emphasized by Einstein and others, 
astonishment. As long as a problem remains unsolved we imagine many  
solutions. … [But] the future is not given and therefore we have only a  
probabilistic description and there is no certainty.… Uncertainty and  
surprise are part of human destiny. 
Prigogine (2005: 16)
CDST and the Philosophy of Science
Throughout numerous areas of investigation in social science, com-
plexity theory is becoming de rigueur (Castellani & Hafferty, 2009). 
However, this is not merely because many scholars see it as a set of useful 
metaphors for thinking and theorizing about social phenomena. Com-
plexity is an empirical reality (Morin, 2007, 2008) and – as with applied 
linguistics – has yielded significant insights into complex phenomena 
across many of the human and social disciplines. Consequently, applying 
complexity and dynamic systems theory (CDST) to research starts with 
the notion that complexity is real and progresses from there to investigate 
that reality. CDST research, then, is all about the inherent complexity of 
reality.
If that were all, then doing CDST research would be rather straight-
forward (Byrne & Uprichard, 2012). Applied linguists would need 
fairly little bandwidth to accommodate CDST in their various areas of 
research. However, the fact is that different perspectives exist as to what 
the core scientific ideas within CDST are, what their significance is for 
doing research and what sort of meaningful results they will lead to in 
the enterprise of research (Verspoor et al., 2011). In this chapter, we will 
survey a range of ideas through which we attempt to pin down some of 
the parameters for how to conduct CDST research within a social science 
such as applied linguistics. We examine philosophical and methodologi-
cal issues that arise when researching the complex and dynamic social 
world, and discuss considerations that are part of planning and conduct-
ing studies informed by a CDST frame of reference. We start by revisiting 
the earlier question ‘what is complexity?’ (see Chapter 2) and, in a sense, 
Applying Complexity 
Theory to Research

46  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
widening the playing field by looking at multiple complexities – that is, 
drawing a distinction between dealing with complexity empirically and 
doing so in a way that is more paradigmatic in nature.
Earlier in this book, we pointed out that despite its fairly straightfor-
ward definition, there are many things complexity refers to in a technical 
sense. The work of some complexivists (Manson, 2001; Mitchell, 2009; 
Reitsma, 2003) highlights the many ideas that complexity uses as a refer-
ent, for example complexity as dimensionality or hierarchy, complexity 
as computational capacity, or complexity as degree of informational 
resources for creation. It is clear that these domains see complexity 
research as much more than merely applying metaphors from complex-
ity, a conviction we share. Scholars from these different fields focus on 
one or more of these referents depending on the phenomena of inter-
est (i.e. information, organization, computation, development) in their 
fields. However, since this chapter is concerned with the CDST philoso-
phy of science, we will imagine a continuum of intellectual thought to 
help us explore a more important distinction made by complexivists in 
the social sciences – the distinction between a restricted and generalized 
complexity (Morin, 2007).
Restricted complexity
On one end, this continuum is populated by a non-CDST perspective 
of scientific inquiry. This non-CDST paradigm does not allow disorder, 
change and variability to be compatible with order, coherence and stabil-
ity (Cilliers, 1998). Accompanying this perspective is an important scien-
tific tool: the analytical method. In this intellectual tradition, things that 
are too complex to be grasped as a whole are divided into manageable 
units that can be analyzed separately and then put together again. This 
modus operandi rests on the idea that knowledge of basic constituting 
elements is required for knowing any larger whole, and that these must 
be broken down for study in an orderly and additive way. However, as 
should have been clear from the discussion and examples in Chapter 2, 
complexity is not constituted simply by the sum of components, and 
neither is it located at a specific, identifiable site in a system. Complexity 
is manifested at the level of the system itself, and results from the interac-
tion between the components of a system.
Moving down the continuum of intellectual thought, into the realm 
of CDST perspectives, we find Edgar Morin’s (2007) interesting and use-
ful distinction between two forms of complexity thinking – restricted 
and generalized (aka general) complexity. Elsewhere, Byrne (2005) refers 
to this same distinction using the terms ‘simple’ and ‘complex’ complex-
ity, terms slightly less catchy but that still correspond fundamentally 
with what Morin had in mind in comparing these two different ways of 
designing and doing CDST research.

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  47
The first of these, restricted complexity, deals with complexity empir-
ically rather than epistemologically. That is, it embraces complexity by 
employing modes of thinking and explanation with which more conven-
tional scientific perspectives are comfortable (Byrne & Callaghan, 2014). 
To extend this discussion back to our previous discussion of definitions 
of complexity, a restricted complexity viewpoint may rely on properties 
or metrics of existence exhibited in the world such as the number of con-
nections or interactions, temporal and spatial variability or patterned 
structure present in a complex system. An example of dealing with com-
plexity empirically would be explaining group or system properties first 
‘by modelling the participating individuals, then modelling their interac-
tions, and then simulating the processes whereby collective properties 
emerge from the microsimulation’ (Sawyer, 2005: 148).
Restricted complexity, as a mode of research, forms a hybrid between 
the principles of the conventional scientific method and developing an 
account of a complex reality. In this sense, it recognizes complexity as 
inherent to the human and social world but aims to ‘decomplexify’ it by 
availing itself of traditional issues such as the purposes (e.g. falsifying 
hypotheses) and tools (e.g. measurement validity and reliability) of more 
mainstream science. While CDST does not suggest abandoning these 
concepts wholesale, instead recalibrating these tasks with a complex 
and dynamic reality, some complexivists have observed that restricted 
complexity avoids fundamental epistemological and ontological ques-
tions with which generalized complexity actively grapples (Morin, 2007). 
These include questions regarding the nature of social reality, what con-
stitutes knowing about that reality, whether and how that reality can be 
represented, etc.
Complexivists who practice a form of restricted complexity, such 
as Holland (2006), Johnson (2009) and Mitchell (2009), are interested 
in providing a sophisticated account of complexity that moves from 
multiplicity to simplicity and parsimony. Applied examples of restricted 
complexity can be seen in the way the social sciences study and model the 
behavior of financial markets, traffic systems, organizational structures, 
as well as health and epidemiology. Researchers in these areas apply 
restricted complexity in relation to rule-based models composed of many 
simple components interacting at a micro level in simple ways that give 
rise to complex adaptive behavior such as patterns of self-organization 
and emergent phenomena at a macro level. Holland (1998: 188, emphasis 
added) captures this mode of complexity by explaining that ‘much com-
plexity can be generated in systems defined by a few well-chosen rules. 
When we observe emergent phenomena we ought therefore try to discern 
the rules that generate the phenomenon…. In so doing we will reduce 
our complex observation of emergence to the interactions of simple 
mechanisms’.

48  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
There are several potential issues with this mode of complexity 
research that treats complexity primarily as a property of systems. One 
is the fact that not all complex systems are made up of simple elements, 
simple rules and simple interactions through time (Juarrero, 1999). This 
is especially the case with systems whose components can be thought 
of as sub-systems. Individuals are themselves complex systems, nested 
in other superordinate systems, and any of these systems is likely to be 
substantially more complex than anticipated. Another dilemma is the 
inability of this approach to complexity research to account for human 
agency and volition in the way that individuals or collectives act as causal 
agents in a system (see e.g. Al-Hoorie [2015] and Larsen-Freeman [2019] 
for an extended commentary on this point). Other complexivists, too, are 
wary of complexity-as-property research particularly when its methods 
are applied with little understanding or interest in the processes that give 
rise to them or their implications for any broader endeavors of human 
and social research (e.g. Byrne & Callaghan, 2014).
For these and other reasons, restricted complexity leads down a 
different pathway than generalized complexity. In the first case, CDST 
informs the way a scholar might craft an approach to doing science, and 
it results in designs that are more dynamic and contextually sensitive, but 
it would not necessarily result in any modifications to their practice in the 
sense that they would still be engaged in a conventional programme of 
research. Byrne and Callaghan (2014) offer their take on how restricted 
complexity is applied in research designs:
The core idea behind the mechanism approach [of restricted complex-
ity] is that we explain the state of a social system at a point in time and 
explain the trajectory of that system through past times by referring to 
a constellation both of internal control parameters and of the state(s) 
of systems with which the system of interest intersects. We generalize 
within a scoped range by considering that similar constellations might 
engender the same system state/trajectory for systems sufficiently similar 
to our system of interest. (Byrne & Callaghan, 2014: 48)
This is a precise description of what is meant by restricted complexity 
dealing with complexity empirically rather than epistemologically.
General complexity
As we look now to the other half of the distinction, let us return to 
Morin’s (2007: 23) voice on the matter: ‘restricted complexity rejects gen-
eralized complexity… because restricted complexity [does] not make the 
epistemological and paradigmatic’ commitment required. And, because 
some forms of restricted complexity fail ‘to take into account “emer-
gence”, history and context’, they ‘tend to be either wrong or trivial’ 

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  49
(Mouzelis, 1995: 5–6). Let us look more closely at the target of these 
criticisms.
While restricted complexity is focused on complex systems and on 
providing an accurate empirical representation of complex phenomena, 
generalized complexity goes much further: it entails a much broader 
reorientation to one’s philosophy of science (Capra & Luisi, 2014) that 
highlights the generalized interdependence of everything and everyone. 
Complexity, if we see it as a meta-theory, is far more than mere method 
(Morin, 2008), and this reorientation impacts how we think about the 
world and how we engage in scientific inquiry across all fields (Cilliers, 
2005). Morin (2007: 24) is clear on where his allegiance lies, stating that 
‘it is an error to think that one will find in complexity a method that can 
be applied automatically to the world’.
If complexity is more than mere method, as Morin suggests, we 
must look to this fundamental reorientation that accompanies general-
ized complexity and ask what it achieves in the enterprise of research. 
How can applied linguistics writ large benefit from taking up this 
approach? What we find here is that, similar to those Kuhn (1962/2012) 
outlined, generalized complexity has the ability to offer the applied lin-
guistics research community a set of deliberate, consensus-forming and 
­paradigm-shifting considerations regarding:
•	
what subjects or phenomena our scientific community values and 
chooses to study;
•	
the type of questions that are appropriate for inquiry in relation to 
these topics;
•	
how systematic investigation (i.e. scholarly research) should be struc-
tured and conducted (e.g. with regard to collection of evidence);
•	
how the results of such scientific investigation should be analyzed and 
interpreted (Harvey, 2009).
Morin and Cilliers go even further than these more conceptual impli-
cations for knowing and learning about the social world to highlight 
several unresolved conundrums with which generalized complexity com-
mits itself to grappling. The first problem is the problem of time. As we 
have said earlier, all complex systems have a history and no system can 
be conceived of without taking that history into account. Nonfinality is 
an important aspect of this history; what this means is because final states 
do not exist for system development, complex systems are not defined 
by progressing toward an endpoint (Rose et  al., 2013). The practical 
significance of nonfinality is that what might seem to be an endpoint in a 
temporal window is likely just one of many stable points in an ongoing 
and iterative work in process. In other words, dynamic change is non-
telic in the sense that complex dynamic processes progress through time 
without a predetermined, fixed goal (Howe & Lewis, 2005). The most 

50  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
salient purpose is an autopoietic one of self-regeneration (Maturana & 
Varela, 1980).
Yet another dilemma is the problem of representation which can be 
exemplified through Cilliers’ (2000) question about how scholars should 
best perceive a subject – take for instance language, language use or 
language development – when in reality it is not something that is self-
contained, existing inert and offline in an absolute sense, but instead has 
existence through dynamic interaction. Morin (2007: 6) sounds off on 
this notion by proposing that generalized complexity requires research-
ers ‘to comprehend the relations between the whole and the parts. The 
knowledge of the parts is not enough, the knowledge of the whole as a 
whole is not enough, if one ignores its parts; one is thus brought to make 
a come and go in loop to gather the knowledge of the whole and its parts’. 
For instance, Kretzschmar (2015) makes a compelling case for linguistic 
phenomena such as speech, dialects and language change as being consti-
tuted in new ways each time they are examined, which by necessity calls 
for a richer, multidimensional and multi-temporal way of describing and 
representing these patterns and their associated processes. The view that 
phenomenologically tangible systems are units of analysis with concrete 
validity and coherence in time and space is one we have advanced previ-
ously (see Chapter 2). Representation, then, must begin from the premise 
that complex systems are constituted by rich interactions that are con-
stantly changing. Generalized complexity is, in Cilliers’ (2000: 9) words, 
‘incompressible’ and the fact remains that any reduction of complexity 
will lead to distortions. However, because no perfect representation of 
a system can be achieved by researchers that is simpler than the system 
itself, things must inevitably be left out. This has real consequences for 
generalized complexity, and as a result these unavoidable limitations of 
the representations researchers use should be acknowledged.
Having discussed what these philosophical ideas might entail for 
a programme of research, we need to be clear where all this gets us as 
applied linguistics researchers. In one sense, we have come to think of 
restricted complexity as a sort of ‘gateway drug’ to generalized com-
plexity, and we have witnessed firsthand that by studying complexity 
empirically (i.e. restricted complexity) individuals can adopt such a reori-
entation. For some, however, such a shift in paradigm may be a bridge 
too far. First, as Byrne and Callaghan (2014: 56) admit, ‘any general com-
plexity social science has to get beyond micro-determined emergence. 
It has to allow for structures with causal powers and it has to address 
human agency as capable of transcending narrow rules for behavior’. 
However, coming to grips with how to conceive of and represent causal 
forces in a non-reductionist framework poses significant intellectual chal-
lenges, and only some complexivists (e.g. Kelso, 2016; Larsen-Freeman, 
2019) seem willing to entertain explicit agentic thought and action within 
human and social systems. We turn now to how such considerations for 

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  51
research would be possible within different intellectual traditions and 
explore the utility of such ontological frameworks for doing complexity 
research.
Complex realism: An ontology for CDST research
In his critique of the methodological wars of position between logi-
cal empiricists and radical hermeneuticists in the social sciences – both 
of whom adopt an equally naïve approach to the enterprise of research 
– Roy Bhaskar (2007: 192) argues that it is ironically ‘when things are 
going well [that]…you just have knowledge and you take it that that 
knowledge is of the world. Ontology really only becomes relevant when 
you are not satisfied with knowledge, when what passes for knowledge 
is patently wrong or absurd’. In place of these factional philosophies of 
science, Bhaskar proposes that useful accounts of the human and social 
world must take as their starting point the fact that an inherent complex-
ity – in the sense of exhibiting emergent behavior that cannot be antici-
pated from the behavior of its components – underlies that human and 
social reality. This is echoed by complexivists who also insist that meth-
odology must reflect the distinctive (i.e. complex and dynamic) character 
of human and social phenomena (Byrne & Callaghan, 2014).
Ontology, in essence, represents an understanding of the world, of its 
categories and properties, and of the events both possible and impossible 
given the character of that world (Harvey, 2002). In response to concerns 
that the scientific community had disengaged with the necessary ontolog-
ical thinking behind scientific inquiry, Bhaskar’s work (1975/1997, 1989, 
2007) attempted to fashion a new worldview that would correspond 
more closely with the growing understanding of the complex and situ-
ated nature of all social and human phenomena. This new worldview, 
named critical realism, is compared with its alternatives by Byrne and 
Callaghan (2014: 33): ‘In contrast with positivism this recognizes that 
our scientific (in the widest sense of the meaning of that term) descrip-
tions of reality are social constructions. [But] in contrast with relativism 
it recognizes that they are constructs made from reality and therefore 
shaped by reality’.
Connections between realism as an ontology and fields closer to 
home do exist (see e.g. Bastardas-Boada, 2014; Bouchard, 2018; Cochran-
Smith et al., 2014). As Danermark et al. (2002: 10) suggest, the hallmarks 
of this critical realism are (1) that there exists a human and social real-
ity which is stratified, differentiated, structured and changing; (2) that 
our knowledge about this reality is always fallible; but (3) that there are 
some theoretical and methodological tools we can use in order to inform 
us about that reality. This stands in stark contrast to the ‘explanatory 
myths’ embodied by the relativist and reductionist positions (Archer, 
1998: 193). As the first ontology informed by complexity thinking, critical 

52  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
realism stakes a claim on the ways in which we can and should proceed 
as researchers of that complex social reality. Primarily, its position is that 
‘if the [social] sciences are to remain coherent enterprises, their explana-
tory protocols must embrace… the existence of an objective moment of 
experience, some part of which stands over and against our attempts to 
understand and manipulate our world’ (Harvey, 2009: 24).
Importantly for our efforts as researchers, critical realism does not 
imply that this reality is either fixed or empirically inaccessible (Daner-
mark et  al., 2002). This notion, one we explore later in this chapter 
under the rubrics of complex causality and explanation beyond the 
unique instance, is fully compatible with the principles of CDST, which 
do not reject empirical investigations (Diane Larsen-Freeman, personal 
­communication, 16 December 2018). As Byrne and Callaghan (2014: 
74–75) propose, adopting such a critical realist ontology leads researchers 
to design and conduct research by ‘try[ing] to explore what things – 
complex systems – are, and how they became what they are’ which, 
because it subsequently ‘allows for effective human action and has the 
potential to provide a basis for human action’, can be seen as ‘one of the 
most valuable of all investigative techniques in the repertoire of complex-
ity science as an empirical project’. This is particularly important given 
renewed calls in our field to capitalize on applied linguistics research as 
both the site and the vehicle for social action (e.g. Ortega, 2012, 2019).
This ontology, through the work of David L. Harvey (2001, 2002) 
and Michael Reed (Reed & Harvey, 1992, 1997), has come to be known 
as complex realism. Complex realism, these and other scholars pro-
pose, offers the most compatible philosophy of science to doing CDST 
research. Complex realism holds that there is a ‘real’ reality. However, 
given that reality is dynamic, shaped by inside and outside forces, and 
emerges over time, it is not meaningful to try to isolate and grasp all 
aspects of it. Because of the nature of reality, it can only be apprehended 
imperfectly and probabilistically. This reality must also be properly 
qualified to allow an active role for agency. Complex realism treads a 
middle way between realism and relativism, and adopts a problem-driven 
approach to research by relying on a pragmatic balance of methods 
determined by the object of inquiry. But, what of other non-positivistic 
perspectives, and might postmodernism be a viable alternative as some 
have suggested?
CDST and postmodernist, poststructuralist thinking
In her thorough overview of the many ways CDST has impacted the 
field of applied linguistics in recent years, Larsen-Freeman (2017) makes 
a convincing argument that CDST is rooted in principles that aim to 
reform science, not reject it. We could not agree more and find Larsen-
Freeman’s perspective refreshing and welcome. Inspired, for example, by 

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  53
the work of Paul Cilliers (1998), Larsen-Freeman (2017) demonstrates the 
shared resonances between a CDST perspective of the world, rejecting 
the goal of reducibility as a path to scientific understanding, and insights 
from poststructuralist and postmodernist thinking – both recognizing 
that empirical accounts and understandings can only be partial and 
provisional. The poststructural, postmodern, constructivist paradigms 
highlight the concepts of distributedness and multiplicity, and ques-
tion the search for simple truths, objectivity and absolute certainty. As 
Larsen-Freeman (2017) makes clear, however, because of their radically 
different ontologies these perspectives sharply diverge from CDST in 
their view of how to proceed in a world marked by contingency, emer-
gence and complexity.
The poststructuralist/postmodernist penchant for seeing both the 
means and ends of the scientific enterprise as fundamentally flawed and 
worthy of deconstruction, is not shared by complexivists who instead 
seek to reconstruct science (Price, 1997). CDST does not view knowledge 
as arbitrary, neither does it see the world essentially as verbally/discur-
sively constructed, nor does it seek to ‘dispense with things’ entirely 
(Foucault, 1972: 48, our emphasis). In observing these perspectives’ easy 
adoption of notions such as nonlinearity, interconnectedness, context 
dependence and nonfinality, complexivists have cautioned that the proj-
ect of CDST remains firmly grounded in the scientific tradition (Byrne & 
Callaghan, 2014) with some characterizing postmodernism as a ‘strate-
gic misinterpretation of legitimate scientific ideas’ (Turner, 1997). Even 
social complexivists who some might describe as drawing on postmodern 
thought (e.g. Paul Cilliers) are really much closer in thinking to a critical 
realist perspective: ‘If relativism is maintained consistently, it becomes an 
absolute position. From this one can see that a relativist is nothing but a 
disappointed fundamentalist’ (Cilliers, 2000: 12).
Postmodernists decline to consider a realm beyond the objects of 
discourse, given their view that all beliefs and actions are constructions 
and that there are no neutral, factual or definitive accounts of any human 
or social phenomena (Byrne, 2011). According to Archer (2000: 22), 
this is an ‘anti-humanist stance’ that ironically reifies ‘process-without-
a-maker, discourse-without-a-speaker, and texts-without-an-author’ 
(Archer, 2000: 20). In his blistering takedown of such perspectives in 
social science research, Westergaard (2003) writes:
I think the strand of postmodernism which I found most unfortunate 
was, again, an epistemological relativism which, if taken to its logical 
conclusion, makes you think ‘well, what the hell are we doing?’ If we can 
only look at perceptions, and at other people’s perceptions only as they 
are coloured by our own perceptions, what are we in this business for at 
all? (Westergaard, 2003: 2)

54  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
A similarly vibrant critique exists in our own field (e.g. Block, 2014: 17; 
Gregg, 2000; Kubota, 2016: 487), given the recent prominence of the 
post-positions (i.e. postmodernism, poststructuralism and postcolonial-
ism). Without discounting the very legitimate critical perspectives that 
are now widely recognized by applied linguists of all stripes (e.g. Douglas 
Fir Group, 2016; Ortega, 2019), such critiques rightly problematize these 
approaches to applied linguistics as positions that by default reject most 
assumptions of scientific inquiry, and argue instead for ‘trans- ideas’ (e.g. 
translingual, transhumanist, transcultural) as an antidote to such ‘empty 
pluralism’ (Pennycook, 2018: 34).
Postmodernism ‘has been succeeded by a new sensibility and configu-
ration’ (Peters et al., 2018: 1299), and while postmodern and poststruc-
tural characterizations may resonate with CDST’s rejection of universal 
and reductionist accounts and its emphasis on local understandings, most 
complexity theorists do accept that there is a reality ‘out there’, albeit 
one characterized by complex human and social interactions occurring 
in spatiotemporal contexts that a classical science cannot help explain 
(Price, 1997). We must admit that this is also our viewpoint, and we 
suspect it is shared by many other applied linguists working in the CDST 
paradigm (see e.g. Larsen-Freeman [2017] for just one example).
At the risk of over-caricaturizing the post-positions, an anti-ratio-
nalist and absolute-relativist approach to scientific inquiry strikes us, 
though not only us (see e.g. Archer, 2000; Bhaskar, 1975/1997; Byrne, 
1998, 2011), as devaluing the function of research – particularly in an 
applied social science such as the field of applied linguistics – and as 
entirely unuseful both for informing our understanding of a complex 
dynamic world and for actual CDST research practice. We would there-
fore disagree with calls for a return to postmodern thinking as a way to 
advance transdisciplinary applied linguistics (e.g. Atkinson, 2019: 114; 
McNamara, 2015: 474–475). Instead, we adopt a view, similar to Byrne 
and Callaghan (2014), that CDST’s contribution to research is in how it 
moves beyond arguments between the two extremes of positivism and 
relativism, of thought and of action, of what is internal and what is exter-
nal and of what exists and what comes to be constructed. Rather, CDST 
enables a notion of knowledge which is real but bounded by the complex 
and dynamic contingencies of the social world.
Key Tasks of CDST Research
Henry Louis Mencken, a renowned 20th-century American essayist 
and social commentator, once observed that ‘there is always an easy 
solution to every problem – neat, plausible and wrong’ (cited in Nor-
man, 2011: 41). In this section, we reflect on the lessons we have learned 
firsthand from the challenge of doing complexity research, and from 
searching for easy solutions and often finding they were, just as Mencken 

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  55
describes them, neat, plausible but wrong. The goal of presenting such 
lessons is to systematically raise awareness of some of the things that 
‘good’ applications of CDST research might do and some of the key 
tasks that will ensure the quality of CDST research overall. Again, we 
would like to assure our readers that we have no bully pulpit here, and 
are simply interested in helping others share the hard-won lessons we 
have learned.
The first lesson we have learned is about transparency in adopting 
a CDST framework for research. Good applications of CDST research 
will be transparent about the reasons for choosing to adopt a complexity 
framework and specifying why situating a study within this perspective 
is a sound theoretical and empirical choice (see also Hiver & Papi, 2020; 
Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008b). The reason we advocate for this is 
that within applied linguistics, as in other disciplines, no thematic or top-
ical area inherently functions within the CDST paradigm, but instead it 
is the choice of adopting a given perspective that illuminates or obscures 
certain aspects of the phenomenon under investigation. Articulating how 
CDST informs their perspective or approach to research explicitly can 
help researchers situate the design of their study, their research questions, 
data analyses and the results and discussion more broadly within this 
perspective (Lowie, 2017). This can also guard against using CDST too 
loosely (in the sense that anything with multiple interacting parts can be 
construed as CDST research) and in an opportunistic, post hoc manner.
Related to transparency is the methodological reform movement 
recently witnessed in the social sciences more generally, and in applied 
linguistics more specifically. This movement was originally motivated by 
a perceived replication crisis blighting various fields including biology, 
genetics, medicine and psychology (Schooler, 2014). In response, more 
interest has been directed toward replication, a practice which used 
to be an afterthought and certainly not entertained by major journals 
(Porte, 2012). This movement has also emphasized the value of open 
science practices, such as open materials, open data and preregistration 
(Marsden et al., 2018a). Preregistration refers to specifying the details of 
one’s research plan in advance (e.g. what hypotheses to test, the sample 
size, instruments to be used, statistical tests to apply and criteria to 
exclude data and to handle missing data) that the researcher commits 
to adhering to regardless of whether the results are favorable to the 
theory under investigation. The standard approach is to articulate all 
these decisions and log them at a website dedicated to preregistration 
(e.g. https://osf.io/), which then generates a time-stamped preregistra-
tion protocol. Some journals also offer researchers the chance to pre-
register their studies on the journal’s own website along with the study 
rationale (e.g. Language Learning; Marsden et al., 2018b). The journal 
editors then send out the research plan for peer review. Plans that receive 
favorable reviews are conferred in-principle acceptance, in that they 

56  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
are guaranteed publication regardless of the results the researcher will 
eventually obtain. Another promising open science initiative is multi-
site registered replication (Morgan-Short et al., 2018), where teams of 
researchers independently attempt to replicate a finding while following 
the same preregistered protocols. All these initiatives aim to attain more 
rigor and precision in the published literature. Although CDST certainly 
endorses these initiatives, few actual CDST studies have followed these 
open science principles to-date.
Another best practice we have learned from good applications of 
CDST research is to examine a system’s complex (i.e. interconnected) 
structure as well as its dynamic behavior. After all, as we are reminded 
by Stroup (1997), structure is, in fact, the system’s long-term behavior. 
Applied linguistics research to-date has had a more conventional product 
or outcome focus, and a particular added value of research from a CDST 
perspective comes from investigating how processes evolve over time 
(Verspoor et al., 2011). Framed this way, we are no longer left to choose 
between designs that examine processes of becoming and those that shed 
light on outcomes and patterns of being. Instead, applied linguistics 
research using the CDST perspective requires researchers to talk in a con-
nected way about both the outcomes and the processes through which 
those outcomes are reached, and to acknowledge how entwined these 
are. In order to accomplish this task, CDST research must ‘describe the 
system, its constituents, their contingencies, and also their interactions’ 
(de Bot & Larsen-Freeman, 2011: 23).
Borrowing from previous work (Hiver & Al-Hoorie, 2016; Koop-
mans, 2019; Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008a; Moss & Haertel, 2016), 
here we present a practical catalog of considerations which can inform 
good applications of CDST research flexibly. This dynamic ensemble is 
a user guide for planning and designing CDST research. It is compat-
ible with the methods we introduce in Parts 2 and 3 of the book, and 
presents questions that can be consulted at multiple junctures in the 
research process to inform the choice of research problems, development 
of hypotheses, sampling of participants, types of data collected, and 
analysis and interpretation. These begin with the operational and contex-
tual considerations, and progress to macro-system and micro-structure 
considerations.
Operational decisions
In designing a study, deliberately deciding what to case as a complex 
system, the unit of analysis and level(s) (e.g. a whole-system level, a 
micro-components level) at which to investigate and analyze that system 
and the timescale(s), temporal window or duration at which a phe-
nomenon is to be studied is a useful point of entry. These decisions will 
impact the type of questions appropriate for exploration, the types of evi-
dence that can be collected and, ultimately, the theoretical and empirical 

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  57
advances made (Uprichard, 2013). With regard to operationalizing the 
system, we are concerned with questions such as:
•	
What is the complex system under investigation?
•	
What gives this case phenomenological validity?
•	
Who are the agents in the system?
The goal in CDST research will rarely be to represent the entire com-
plex system in question. In pragmatically deciding the level of granularity 
to adopt in a study, researchers may not be able to claim comprehensive-
ness of all the dimensions that bear on a phenomenon (Cilliers, 2001). 
However, settling on precise levels of detail in data collection and analy-
sis can telescope the analytical focus or perspective breadth of a study 
to simultaneously explore only the most conspicuous segments, aspects 
or interactions of a system. Regarding the level of granularity of choice, 
researchers are concerned with the following questions:
•	
On what timescale(s) will the system outcome(s), system behavior(s) 
or complex phenomena of interest be examined?
•	
What type(s) and what level(s) of data are required to study the sys-
tem or the phenomena of interest?
•	
What do the chosen levels of granularity enable the researcher to 
investigate that other levels would not?
Greater clarity and precision in choosing an appropriate level of granu-
larity may narrow the focus of attention, producing relatively arbitrary 
boundaries in data collection and analysis. However, specifying upfront 
the level of granularity for a study can produce structural definition in 
data and still capture the complex causal dynamics of a system without 
reducing and overly simplifying its essential aspects.
Contextual decisions
As we have tried to convey in Chapter 2, context functions as a way of 
bracketing a system within an environment and giving ecological coherence 
to that system, its actions and its states (Byrne & Ragin, 2009). This is key 
for research designs. Context encompasses the initial situational conditions 
that can either limit or facilitate certain processes and outcomes. These 
conditions will include features that are directly observable (i.e. that can be 
recorded or measured) or that are otherwise empirically relevant (i.e. salient 
in the dataset) to the makeup and location of the system, and which co-
adapt with it. Relevant guiding considerations relating to context include:
•	
What are the contextual factors that are part of the environmental 
frame of reference for the system, its dynamic actions and its pat-
terned outcomes?

58  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
•	
How do these contextual factors permeate the system that is part of 
the context and influence system behavior?
•	
How does the system adapt to the context it is embedded in, and vice 
versa?
In Chapter 2, we laid out a rationale for seeing systems as the basic 
structural building blocks of the complex social world. To this we could 
add that context is pragmatically constrained to include the cognitive, 
psychological and social aspects that form the immediate environment of 
a system’s ecology. Extending this one step further, then, a network is the 
architectural superstructure in which these systems are embedded (Kadu-
shin, 2012). A multi-node hub is composed of interconnected systems, 
their relationships and processes which together form the foundational 
web of the complex social world. This consideration leads to a range of 
possibilities in conducting and designing research with linked and nested 
systems. The questions researchers might consider related to systemic 
networks include:
•	
To which other systems (i.e. nodes) does the system of interest link?
•	
What is the nature of these networked relationships (e.g. co-adaptive, 
competitive)?
•	
For the system under investigation, what processes ensue in coordina-
tion with other systems?
Because any single system is just one of many nodes embedded within this 
dynamic network of interwoven systems, progressively unraveling which 
systems are networked and the precise dimensions in which they recipro-
cate forms a sophisticated agenda for a given strand of CDST research. 
On the other hand, none of this suggests that systems be treated as con-
tiguous or networked simply because they are sampled together. Systems 
can only be thought of as adjacent or networked if they are bounded 
together in some phenomenologically meaningful way (see Chapter 2 for 
more on this).
Macro-system decisions
One might ask, ‘what is it that systems do?’. In response, many com-
plexivists see the pivotal characteristic of complex systems as that of 
dynamic change and adaptation (Verspoor et al., 2011). Whereas emer-
gent outcomes account for the dynamic state in which a system has sta-
bilized, adaptive change provides a temporal narrative for the process of 
how and why the system got there and where it may be going. These are 
points we elaborate on at some length in Chapter 2. Because this change 
is constant, researchers interested in fingerprinting this moving target 

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  59
through their research designs (see also Lowie, 2017) might consider the 
following questions related to dynamic processes:
•	
What general principles of change (e.g. coordinative structures) 
and specific mechanisms of change (e.g. bifurcations) exist for this 
system?
•	
What trajectory has the system followed through state space, and 
how did it get to where it is?
•	
What signature dynamics (e.g. self-organization) have produced the 
system outcomes, and why?
Patterns or trajectories of change over time are essential for understand-
ing the complexities of system development. And as we have explained 
earlier, just as the emergent outcomes for a system are not unlimited, 
the trajectories to those outcomes are also finite, although the system’s 
dynamic behavior may include rich variations that are diachronically 
asymmetrical (Elman, 2003; Koopmans, 2014).
As we mentioned at the start of this section, CDST research treats 
emergent outcomes and the processes through which those outcomes are 
reached in a connected way, acknowledging how entangled these are. 
For researchers, it may seem counterintuitive that emergent outcomes at 
the system level have no direct counterpart at the lower component level 
(Holland, 2012). However, the fact that higher-order patterns of dynamic 
equilibrium for a system are emergent allows for a more accurate and 
parsimonious explanation than is possible by aggregating the individual 
components and their interactions (Jörg, 2011). Questions that research-
ers might attend to concerning emergent outcomes as they design and 
conduct CDST research include:
•	
What dynamic outcome configurations emerge for this system, and 
how/why?
•	
What pockets of stability (i.e. attractor states) does the system tend 
toward over time, and why?
•	
What are the characteristics of these patterns of stability for the sys-
tem in the state landscape?
•	
What variability exists around these patterns of stability?
To reiterate an earlier point, the number of novel emergent outcomes 
observable in the social world is finite (see Chapter 2) (De Wolf & Hol-
voet, 2005). Consequently, identifying these may reduce much of the 
unpredictability of complex systems’ functioning and allow researchers 
to make informed choices about how to interact with respective out-
comes (Vallacher et al., 2015).

60  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
Micro-structure questions
As other CDST scholars also emphasize, the task of describing and 
explaining system behavior is key to CDST research and must take into 
account the makeup of that complex system (see e.g. de Bot & Larsen-
Freeman, 2011: 23). Questions the CDST researcher might consider in 
describing the system and its constituents include:
•	
What are the constituent parts that make up the system under 
investigation?
•	
Which are the most prominent components of the system in a given 
process of change, or for an emergent outcome, and why?
The dilemma this presents is that isolating individual system components 
for examination – regardless of the level of sophistication applied to their 
analysis – cannot give a true measure of their influence. Social complex-
ivists have raised concerns regarding this type of research design (Byrne 
& Callaghan, 2014; Ragin, 2004). Ultimately, CDST rules out the possi-
bility of adequately understanding a complex system and its behavior by 
examining only one level or manifestation of it. Thus, rather than seeing 
the whole system and its parts as being in tension, frequent ‘level jump-
ing’ (Davis & Sumara, 2006: 26) in data collection and analysis may be 
necessary in CDST research.
System outcomes are not the result of sums of components, but of 
dynamic interactions. This means that interactions between components 
of a system and with the environment are a system’s lifeblood. If there is 
no potential for components to interact, there is no complexity (Vallacher 
et al., 2015). Exploring these internal dynamics when designing and con-
ducting CDST research can be guided by the following considerations:
•	
What types of relationships and interactions exist between system 
components, and what are their characteristics?
•	
How do these exchanges manifest and affect system behavior?
•	
How do these relationships change over time?
We have found it helpful to explore these internal dynamics from the 
perspective of their manifestations and their latent characteristics. The 
manifestation of interaction is the specific observable behavior between 
the components themselves, between multiple systems and with the 
environment. The latent characteristics give interactions their causal and 
functional coherence, and include the aim, purpose or intention of the 
interaction; its directionality, intensity, frequency and duration; its utility 
and the rewards or costs that accrue from it.
These interactions are themselves dynamic, and because system 
change is contingent in large part on these interactions, they are essential 

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  61
to understanding a system’s self-organized processes and emergent out-
comes (Overton, 2013).
Parameters reveal yet another layer of understanding for designing 
and conducting CDST research. Some parameters (i.e. order parameters/
constraint parameters) reduce the degrees of freedom within which com-
ponents are able to interact (Gaustello & Liebovitch, 2009) and specify 
the changes and interactions possible within a system (Haken, 2009). 
These guidelines for interaction among a system’s elements function as 
operating rules for interpreting system behavior. Here the question guid-
ing research designs might be:
•	
What are the guidelines and constraints that specify the changes and 
interactions possible within a system, and how do they influence the 
system’s behavior?
Part of the reason why our complex world does not exhibit infinite per-
mutations is because of order parameters. Once these rules are known, 
it becomes possible to make more robust observations and potentially 
influence movement toward a desired outcome (Morrison, 2012).
Other parameters (i.e. control parameters/driving parameters) are 
critical dimensions or values of a system (e.g. temperature, interest rates, 
stress, taxes) which fluctuate and as a result may effect a change in system 
behavior and outcome (Haken, 2009). Control parameters are particu-
larly useful for intentionally inducing change in a system. Determining 
which control parameters a system is particularly sensitive to is a key task 
of CDST research and is one productive way of finding the ‘motors of 
change’ (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008a: 70) for intervention. Here, 
the consideration for research designs would be:
•	
What are the critical dimensions or values of a system (e.g. the motors 
of change) which, when they fluctuate, may result in a change in 
outcome?
System intervention in CDST research, then, may entail setting the con-
ditions and shaping the path of emergent outcomes from a good enough 
design of the relevant control parameters (Byrne & Uprichard, 2012).
We have outlined some of the lessons we have learned firsthand from 
the challenge of doing complexity research, framing these within what 
we see as key tasks of CDST research. Here, we have been inspired by 
de Bot and Larsen-Freeman (2011: 23) who write that ‘teasing out the 
relationships and describing their dynamics for systems at different levels 
of scale are key tasks of the researcher working from a [C]DST perspec-
tive’. Using this as guidance, the core objectives of ‘good’ CDST research 
in applied linguistics are to (a) represent and understand specific complex 
systems at various scales of description; (b) identify and understand the 

62  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
dynamic patterns of change, emergent system outcomes and behavior 
in the environment; (c) trace, understand and where possible model the 
complex mechanisms and processes by which these patterns arise; and (d) 
capture, understand and apply the relevant parameters for influencing the 
behavior of the systems (Hiver & Al-Hoorie, 2016).
Once we have accomplished these already challenging tasks, as 
researchers, we begin to wonder how much farther we can and should 
go. After all, de Bot and Larsen-Freeman (2011: 23) also affirm that 
CDST ‘undoes the conventional expectation that a good theory is one 
that describes, explains, and predicts. Description and explanation are 
possible, and these may be good enough’. CDST research, most com-
plexivists would agree, should be useful in the way that all good research 
should be (Byrne, 1998; Byrne & Uprichard, 2012; Gershenson, 2008). As 
Byrne and Callaghan (2014: 12) write regarding scholars in the applied 
social sciences – of which we also count applied linguists – ‘We are not 
just describers, we are makers and the most important mode through 
which we make is in application’. But, does the enterprise of conven-
tional research contravene the assumptions necessary for investigating a 
complex and dynamic reality? Is CDST research compatible with hypoth-
esis testing, causal explanation and generalization? Is CDST research 
appropriate for intervention and practical application? We turn now to 
exploring these important questions.
Methodological Questions in CDST Research
On 8 April 1986, in a lecture to the Royal Society of London on the 
300th anniversary of Newton’s Principia, Sir James Lighthill (1986) made 
the following statement:
I speak…once again on behalf of the broad global fraternity of practi-
tioners of mechanics. We are all deeply conscious today that the enthu-
siasm of our forebears for the marvelous achievements of Newtonian 
mechanics led them to make generalizations in this area of predictability 
which… we tended to believe before 1960, but which we now recognize 
as false. We collectively wish to apologize for having misled the general 
educated public by spreading ideas about determinism of systems satisfy-
ing Newton’s laws of motion that, after 1960, were proven to be incor-
rect. I am trying to make belated amends by explaining both the very 
different picture that we now discern, and the reasons for it having been 
uncovered so late. (Lighthill, 1986: 38)
What Lighthill went on to explain in his lecture is that with the discov-
ery of the principles of complexity and of complex systems, the limits to 
generalizability and predictability became apparent and scientists had to 
make good-faith efforts to come to grips with these limits and address 
them in research methodology.

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  63
In this section, we turn to examining what these issues might look like 
when they are part of a programme of CDST research.
Generalizability
Variability is at the heart of CDST (Lowie, 2017). Systems in context 
feature multiple components, each interacting in unique ways with the 
others. The strength provided by CDST is its approach to investigating 
this inherent variation and how qualitatively new patterns and functions 
are formed (Larsen-Freeman, 2012, 2013). But what this also means is 
that we may need to reconsider conventional notions of generalizability. 
One inherent quality of researching related phenomena from a CDST 
perspective is the deliberate focus on the complex mechanisms or pro-
cesses through which the outcome is reached (Thelen, 2005; Verspoor 
et al., 2011). Researchers investigating such emergent phenomena would 
perhaps want to be able to make claims beyond the unique instance. For-
tunately, the number of novel emergent outcomes observable in the social 
world seems finite (De Wolf & Holvoet, 2005), and the complex social 
world presents a set of phenomenological outcomes and self-organized 
processes, which are found in recurring instances and guises (Jost et al., 
2010). Because these attractor states (see Chapter 2) are so marked for 
similar systems, investigating them can offer insights that still have gen-
eral relevance.
Due to the complexities involved in generalizing within a paradigm 
that values openness to context, the importance of initial conditions, 
interconnectedness, soft-assembly and nonlinear change and self-orga-
nization, it is worth considering whether the project of generalization is 
a valid one, and how researchers might approach it. Some scholars, for 
instance, see varying logics of generalizability (see e.g. Moss & Haertel 
[2016] for further discussion). We must admit that not all complexivists 
agree that the enterprise of generalizing across contexts, time and systems 
is necessary or indeed realizable. For instance, some have cautioned that 
assuming an understanding of human and social phenomena only when 
there is a high degree of predictability and generalizability is question-
able and relies on simplistic and deterministic principles of ‘fixity’ (Allen 
& Boulton, 2011: 164). This is particularly the case for those operating 
within a strong general complexity frame of reference (Morin, 2001, 
2008).
Complexity, we must also affirm, is not simply the result of lack of 
information or unrefined measurement. In a complex and dynamic world, 
researchers are faced with real limitations to our ability to understand 
phenomena of interest. This is the case because complexity assumes a 
degree of uncertainty in interpreting the behavior of individual elements 
inside a system and the collective behavior of the system; this extends also 
to the way the system interacts with other systems in its environment and 

64  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
how those systems respond to changes in the environment (McDaniel & 
Driebe, 2005). These scholars posit that in place of grand impressions 
of certainty, embracing uncertainty is the fundamental underpinning of 
complexity science as it allows researchers to examine variability as a 
default function of existence – rather than as noise (Allen & Boulton, 
2011). As de Bot and Larsen-Freeman (2011: 23) remind us, ‘instead of 
generalizable predictions, then, we are content to point to tendencies, 
patterns, and contingencies. Instead of single causal variables, we have 
interconnecting parts and subsystems that co-adapt and that may display 
sudden emergence of new modes of behavior’.
There is no disputing these points, and CDST researchers must accept 
the complex dynamic nature of reality and operate within it. Juarrero 
(1999: 258), for instance, similarly reminds us that ‘the price we pay for 
the potential of true novelty and creativity is uncertainty’. While we take 
up these notions in a more concrete way by exemplifying what is and is 
not possible in each method introduced in Parts 2 and 3, here we are also 
guided by the thinking of complexity methodologists David Byrne and 
Charles Ragin (2009: 1) who propose that ‘the central project of any sci-
ence is the elucidation of causes that extend beyond the unique specific 
instance’ (see also Byrne & Callaghan, 2014).
CDST research holds a core set of operational assumptions, namely 
that complex outcomes and their dynamics of change ‘depend on all of 
the whole, the parts, the interactions among parts and whole, and the 
interactions of any system with other complex systems among which it is 
nested and with which it intersects’ (Byrne & Ragin, 2009: 2). For these 
complexivists, scientific inquiry should have generalizing claims, but they 
are equally categorical that ‘generalizing is not the same as universal-
izing’ (Byrne & Ragin, 2009: 1). Generalizing in CDST research, then, 
should be best understood as the act of developing an understanding of 
a phenomenon that goes beyond the unique instance and involves paying 
‘careful attention to the limitations of our knowledge claims in time and 
space’ (Byrne & Ragin, 2009: 9).
Other methodologists have explored how such alternate approaches 
to a nomothetic, and variable-based, mode of generating explanations 
that are invariant across time and settings would work in practice 
(Velicer et al., 2014). These are motivated by the perceived shortcomings 
of the postmodernist approach to this enterprise – i.e. that everything is 
relative and essentially unknowable (Lee, 1997; Price, 1997) – and are 
instead informed, broadly, by a complex realist perspective that what 
we observe in the world is real and that it is the product of complex and 
contingent causal mechanisms which may not be directly accessible to us 
(Byrne, 1998). Writing on this issue, Mouzelis (1995: 152) makes a con-
vincing argument that ‘the only interesting substantive generalizations… 
are those that take into full account context in terms of time and space’. 
As we have proposed in Chapter 2, discovering ‘what works’ within a 

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  65
CDST research paradigm may only be possible by articulating for whom, 
in what settings, under what conditions and when. Others call for greater 
caution regarding generalizing claims (e.g. Biesta, 2007) and propose 
that ‘research can tell us what worked, but not necessarily what works’ 
(Diane Larsen-Freeman, personal communication, 16 December 2018).
One potential CDST approach is generalizing within a system, 
across contexts. The question here is whether a particular account of 
phenomena of interest that is established as valid and reliable for the 
system in one context would be generalizable to other contexts where 
other conditions are at play. For instance, if certain system behavior or 
self-organized development is understood to lead to a particular emer-
gent outcome, this approach to generalizing would entail finding out, in 
a fairly systematic way, the extent to which such an explanation holds 
when the system is in another environment entirely. To take an example 
closer to home, if patterns of language use and language learning can be 
accounted for successfully in one setting or one classroom, it would be 
necessary to ask whether these patterns are also maintained in another 
setting or classroom. Generalizing within a system and across contexts 
is sometimes referred to as the ‘generalization gradient’ (Velicer et al., 
2014: 429), which refers to the relative strength or the degree to which 
an understanding that extends beyond the unique instance varies on a 
continuum of applicability. An added caveat, however, is that ‘from all 
the failures to replicate experiments, one wonders if this is even possible 
in the human world using positivism’ (Diane Larsen-Freeman, personal 
communication, 16 December 2018).
Another alternative is to generalize within a system, across time, 
instances or occasions. As the focus of CDST research is often related to a 
system’s variability across time (Lowie, 2017), generalization should also 
be thought of in terms of the strength of an explanation for such variabil-
ity across time (Velicer et al., 2014). For example, to evaluate the effect of 
policy initiatives on changes in language use trends within a multilingual 
community, the focus would be on the ‘replicability’ of these patterns of 
change in the language community over time, not on attempting to gen-
eralize from one community to another or a focus on how such policies 
impact other communities (cf. van Geert & Steenbeek [2014] for alterna-
tive ideas in policy research). Some of the time-series designs introduced 
in Parts 2 and 3 which are low-N but high-T recommend such replication 
across multiple occasions – sometimes called a box-score approach. That 
is, in order for an account of a system’s variability to be accepted as valid 
and reliable – even if that change is nonlinear and discontinuous, the 
understanding is that it should be coherent across time.
Yet another approach, when generalizing to a heterogeneous popula-
tion is not warranted, would be to generalize to homogeneous systems, 
cases or subgroups. This is similar to the notion of ergodic systems in 
which wholes exhibit the same behavior and properties as their parts 

66  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
over time, and vice versa. Systems and processes exhibit such ergodic-
ity when sequences in time or samples in space are representative of the 
whole entity or developmental trajectory. The ergodic principle is often 
violated when using large-N group-based designs that examine only 
variation between individuals (Hamaker, 2012; Koopmans, 2014, 2019), 
but it is in fact the default option for many of the case-based methods we 
introduce in Parts 2 and 3 of this book. Developing an in-depth familiar-
ity with the systems being examined allows researchers to capture aspects 
of their complexity. Casing systems as the units of analysis in this way 
also enables researchers to study more than just a handful of systems at 
a time, which opens up the possibility of generalizing across cases and 
datasets. Some case-based methods, such as qualitative comparative 
analysis (see Chapter 4), even feature the possibility of including an entire 
population of systems or sub-systems in a sample.
A final approach would be to capitalize on the inherent variability of 
complex systems and, as Larsen-Freeman and Cameron (2008a) propose, 
draw generalized conclusions about the dynamics of systems. This is 
similar to several lines of research that van Geert and Steenbeek (2014) 
advocate for:
[O]ne line of research that is now becoming increasingly important 
focuses on the statistical structure of patterns of intraindividual variabil-
ity, and to use such patterns to discover general properties of the underly-
ing complex dynamic systems from which [this] variability originates… 
Yet another line of research is to apply predictions based on very general 
system descriptions… to observations made in educational systems, for 
instance. (van Geert & Steenbeek, 2014: 35)
There may, in fact, be research topics or issues ‘especially on high levels 
of effect aggregation [where] it is primarily inter-individual variability 
that matters’ (van Geert & Steenbeek, 2014: 34), but this will not always 
be the case. One point of clarification is that, as van Geert and Steenbeek 
(2014: 33, our emphasis) propose, ‘this reasoning is based on the tacit 
assumption that the nature of the causes governing (co-)variation as it 
occurs between individuals is the same as the nature of the causes govern-
ing (co-)variation occurring within individuals’. For research that focuses 
on within-system dynamics, van Geert (2011: 276) emphasizes that CDST 
helps scholars to go beyond the unique specific instance by ‘generat[ing] 
theory-based descriptions of individual trajectories in a non-trivial sense’.
Causality
Causality, Byrne and Callaghan (2014: 11) propose, is ‘a fundamen-
tal task of any science which seeks both to explain and to be useful’. It 
is a way of conceptualizing the real world and observations about life. 

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  67
The way that scholars in the social sciences think about causality has 
been heavily influenced by ideas which originate from a neo-positivist 
paradigm prevalent in the natural sciences – ideas which are frequently 
transposed onto the social sciences (Byrne, 1998). At its core, this manner 
of looking at causality concerns expectations that life is ordered deter-
ministically, that it is governed by absolute laws and that this order and 
regularity allows inference from the particular instance to the general 
conditions of existence (Groff, 2008). It relies on decomposing a system 
into discrete elements or variables, varying them through randomized 
controlled experiments to understand a system’s outcome or behavior 
and what has caused it, and to predict its future behavior (Gershenson, 
2008).
Like others who work within a CDST paradigm, we would character-
ize this ideology of simple mono-causality – i.e. outcomes being driven 
by a single, linear causal agent – as flawed and misleading (Mainzer, 
2007). Even within medicine, a hard science built on randomized con-
trolled experiments, notions of etiology and causality have for some time 
now developed in ways that prioritize multifactorial, related and inter-
sequenced causal explanations (e.g. Kleinberg & Hripcsak, 2011; Koop-
man, 1977; Rizzi & Pedersen, 1992; Ward, 2009). Adopting a simplistic 
view of causes and their effects in the face of the complexity of the social 
and human world, according to Turner (1997), is analogous to trying 
to push a string. The Newtonian assumption that effects cannot occur 
without specific causes relies on condensed, single-factor explanations 
of causality rather than diffuse and system-level ones (Radford, 2008). 
This is clearly inadequate for the CDST paradigm with its concern for 
open systems and their nestedness, networked links and feedback sensi-
tivity (Hedström & Ylikoski, 2010; Morrison, 2012). This is also why 
developing a different logic of explanation is critical to advancing what 
Byrne and Ragin (2009: 1) have called ‘the central project’ of research: 
going beyond the purely idiographic without resorting to being radically 
nomothetic, while still elucidating causation.
How, then, might the notion of causality be reconciled with what we 
have said previously about complex dynamic systems? To start to make 
any progress in resolving this issue, some complexivists propose that ‘we 
have to think first not about causes in complex systems but about the 
nature of effects. We should start with the question: what is an effect?’ 
(Byrne & Callaghan, 2014: 174). We have spent much of Chapter  2 
exploring just such questions by elaborating key insights about systems 
and their operation within a CDST perspective. A fuller answer to this 
question, other experts suggest, lies in developing more nuanced notions 
of a complex and dynamic causality (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 
2008a). This is what Alicia Juarrero (2011: 162), for example, calls a 
‘billiard-ball understanding of causality’.

68  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
The position CDST takes on causality in the complex social and 
human world is that, most often, (a) effects and outcomes are produced 
through a combination of complex conditions, (b) that several differ-
ent combinations of conditions can produce the same phenomena and 
(c) that certain conditions can have a different impact on an outcome 
at different times depending on the context (Jörg, 2011). This complex, 
networked type of causality is at the heart of a transdisciplinary approach 
to scientific inquiry (see also Kleinberg, 2013), on which we have much 
more to say below.
No single rule or principle governs or determines the makeup, 
development or behavior of complex systems (Holland, 1995). As 
Bouchard (2018: 270) writes regarding the critical realist stance on cau-
sality, ‘because social and cultural changes are also multilayered, realist 
researchers are… more interested in multiple determinations – that is, 
the causal potential of multiple factors interacting in complex ways, 
with each factor having a particular effect on other factors’. This revised 
notion of causality is complex because it is likely to be multivariate, mul-
tilevel and path dependent; it is dynamic because it may involve contin-
gent, co-adaptive processes that are nonlinear and non-proportional. The 
most uphill task, then, may be in acknowledging that ‘everything counts’ 
(Thelen, 2005: 261) when it comes to how effects are caused.
A further intriguing aspect of the human social world is the distinc-
tive character of complex social causality since any account of causes and 
outcomes must contend with and account for conscious human agency 
(Byrne & Callaghan, 2014). On this point, Hedström (2005: 72) concurs: 
‘Most of us agree that individuals exist and that they have causal powers 
that enable them to bring about change and to transcend social expecta-
tions’. Human agency then is itself a complex casual force as humans hunt 
causes (i.e. establish what might cause changes in the future state of the 
system) and use causes (i.e. implement choice actions which will result 
in a particular future rather than another future) (Hedström & Ylikoski, 
2010). Byrne and Callaghan (2014: 176) write convincingly on how human 
agency contributes to further causal complexity: ‘in a world of social con-
flict, at whatever level, there are multiple actors with competing interests 
and objectives. So it is not a matter just of establishing causal parameters 
and acting on that establishment to achieve a desired future state’.
While a complex and dynamic treatment of causality and causal 
mechanisms remains more of a conceptual exercise at this stage, and will 
become more concrete as we revisit these notions through the various 
research methods we introduce in Parts 2 and 3, for the time being we can 
propose several guiding principles that are broadly applicable to the field 
of applied linguistics and might allow a more nuanced view of causality:
	(1)	Multiplicity: Patterns flow from conditions, and identifying the 
causal conditions at play for a given outcome is a crucial first step 

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  69
(Kleinberg, 2013). Note our deliberate use of the plural. Thinking in 
terms of multiplicity should be the CDST default as more often than 
not there are likely to be a handful of central causative factors along 
with various peripheral – and in some instances even hidden – ones 
(Stroup, 1997). Here, researchers would reference aspects of the sys-
tem and its context that are most likely to have an impact on, and in 
turn to be impacted by, the outcome. Establishing these is a necessary 
step, but one that is not sufficient on its own (Thelen, 2005). Add-
ing further intrigue to the mix, here we can also borrow a maxim 
from the realm of computer programming where coders acknowl-
edge TMTOWTDI (there is more than one way to do it). Systems 
have more than one way of reaching outcomes, and this is precisely 
what the CDST principle of equifinality suggests: the same outcome 
may be achieved with different initial conditions and via different 
trajectories.
	(2)	Interdependence: Our readers will recall the technical meaning of 
complexity: what is woven together and leads to emergent outcomes. 
Given the prominence of interconnectedness in a system, examining 
the interdependent links between the conditions and factors that 
appear to have causal significance will offer as much insight into the 
workings of the system’s outcome as determining what these factors 
are (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008b). The element-to-element 
and element-to-context relationships that involve loops of reinforc-
ing (i.e. positive) and damping (i.e. negative) feedback will allow 
these causal factors to trigger, interact with and even counteract each 
other. Knowing something about these multilevel interdependencies 
is vital in unraveling the causal threads of a system’s outcome (Lewis, 
2005).
	(3)	Hysteresis: Time is central to understanding complex causality 
(Koopmans, 2014, 2019). However, the default understanding of time 
should be that the point of departure for a cause may not always be 
what it appears to be (de Bot, 2015). Hysteresis concerns the system’s 
previous history and those initial conditions’ influence on subsequent 
outcomes. Time 1 predicts Time 2, and the interaction of both Time 1 
and Time 2 predicts Time 3. In this way, history both provides the 
initial time frame which is necessary to begin thinking about causal-
ity, and contributes to the expanding picture of how effects come 
about (Jörg, 2011). Previous points in time will contribute causally 
to present points in time, and these in combination will continue to 
contribute causally to future points in time. On the hysteretic aspects 
of causal influence in complex dynamic systems, we have written 
elsewhere about an incubation effect (Joe et al., 2017), which is the 
delay between instigating initial conditions of implementation for an 
intervention and the emergence of effects. CDST principles show that 
outcomes may not immediately reveal their underlying cause if the 

70  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
source of that cause is a process whose sustained effect has a much 
earlier inception (Larsen-Freeman, 2017).
	(4)	Directionality: Causality is not a static determinant of a system’s 
outcome. Causes and effects can reciprocate in progressive bidi-
rectional cycles where each modifies the other functionally (Byrne 
& Callaghan, 2014). Thus, these reciprocal and recursive flows of 
causes and effects add another important dimension to how systems 
come to be what they are, or how they come to behave as they do 
(Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008a). Causes shape effects, which 
then return the favor and reshape the causes, where each is at once 
an antecedent and a consequence of the other (van Geert, 1998). The 
capacity to decipher these cycles is likely to result in completely new 
ways of thinking about outcomes.
	(5)	Stochasticity: To compound the foregoing factors, there is also an 
unpredictable, diffuse quality to outcomes. This introduces an ele-
ment of nonlinearity and non-proportionateness to how effects come 
about, often reflected in human behavior which appears to have no 
immediate effect because the antecedents require time and persis-
tence before the effect unfolds (Morrison, 2012). Yet another angle 
to this is the fact that, contingent on context, different mechanisms 
operate to produce different outcomes. Similarly, different mecha-
nisms may produce the same outcome (Byrne & Ragin, 2009). In 
the place of equal and opposite reactions, then, applied linguistics 
researchers must think instead of contingent, threshold effects which 
build up over time until they cascade into one or another outcome 
­(Gershenson, 2008).
Methodological Experimentation and Transdisciplinarity
Until fairly recently, applied linguistics research favored analytical 
methods for partitioning and isolating objects of inquiry into discrete 
variables or mechanisms to determine current behavior, track the past 
or predict a future. This ‘preference for the [methodological] artifice of 
simplicity’ (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 2008a: 1) stands in contrast to 
the way in which CDST informs an approach to scientific inquiry (Ellis & 
Larsen-Freeman, 2006). A conventional, componential way of research-
ing applied linguistics may be compelling in its simplicity and apparent 
coherence, but it does not lend itself to dealing with complex effects or 
situations where results and outcomes are multi-determined – a hallmark 
of how the human, social world functions.
Despite our general enthusiasm toward CDST for applied linguistics 
research throughout these first few chapters, we are perfectly aware that 
CDST research is not without its own set of challenges. Most of these we 
have experienced firsthand in our own research. With regard to meth-
odological choices, some questions for consideration include: (1) What 

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  71
does doing impactful applied linguistics research from a CDST perspec-
tive actually entail? (2) Does CDST research require applied linguistics 
researchers to discard existing methodological toolkits? and (3) How 
should a genuinely meaningful programme of CDST research be designed 
and conducted?
First, it is worth being explicit about the methodological contribution 
CDST makes to the study of applied linguistics: the logic of CDST can 
be used as an aid to designing a programme of research that prioritizes 
adaptive and developmental processes (Larsen-Freeman & Cameron, 
2008a) – focusing on the how and why of a phenomenon – and is equally 
suited to questions of emergent outcomes and holistic pattern finding. In 
addition, while many degrees of freedom exist with regard to the meth-
ods of data elicitation and analysis (ideas we elaborate on in Parts 2 and 
3), as a meta-theory CDST does not offer ready-made research templates 
– nor should it be expected to.
Recent work has proposed ways in which complexity constrains 
methodological choices while at the same time encouraging innovation 
and diversification (Hiver & Al-Hoorie, 2016). Other researchers have 
begun to expand the toolbox of methods available to conduct research in 
a dynamic vein (Verspoor et al., 2011; Dörnyei et al., 2015). Collectively, 
this work features individual and group-based methods with emergent, 
recursive and iterative designs that are suited to studying dynamic change 
in context and interconnectedness. Our field is therefore following other 
social and human disciplines that also seek to understand complexity by 
routinely drawing on and innovating with existing methods.
Secondly, we must also admit what we feel does not go nearly far 
enough to qualify as CDST-informed research: approaching complex 
dynamic phenomena in applied linguistics from a purely semantic or 
metaphorical point of view, and formulating descriptions of those with 
a language borrowed from CDST. Instead, as we see it, using ideas from 
CDST requires researchers to identify pressing issues that need address-
ing or questions that demand answers, and then determine how to shed 
light on possible solutions (Larsen-Freeman, 2016), a CDST research task 
that Castellani (2018: 248) calls ‘addressing the adjacent possible’. At one 
level this might mean using ideas from CDST to analyze empirical data 
and provide more complex descriptions, analyses and interpretations of 
applied linguistics phenomena.
Flexibility and pragmatism are necessary to advance the study of such 
complex dynamic phenomena, and experimentation with data collection 
and analysis techniques that are amenable to CDST research in applied 
linguistics is to be encouraged. Blending research methods, which we 
discuss toward the end of this book, is a genuinely productive way to 
produce a more multidimensional understanding of an issue than adher-
ing to tightly prescriptive methods, and this underscores the value of 
methodological diversity for CDST research. However, as we propose 

72  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
throughout the chapters in Parts 2 and 3 in this book, researchers should 
also endeavor to be meticulous and well-informed so that every step 
within a research design resonates with the principles of CDST (Larsen-
Freeman, 2012).
Because CDST is a meta-theory, it does not dictate the use of unique 
research methods, nor does it exclude existing research methods as long 
as those methods are fundamentally congruent with the principles of 
complexity (Byrne, 2011; Mason, 2008). Instead, complexity is grounded 
in the phenomenological reality of the social world and calls for an 
inquiry-driven approach to research that emerges from the needs of 
inquiry, not one determined by disciplinary boundaries (Morin, 2008). 
So, while CDST provides a truer perspective for looking at existing 
problems and opens the door to reconfiguring the field’s programme of 
knowledge, in a sense there are no such things as methods of complexity 
because CDST encourages innovation and diversification in understand-
ing complex social phenomena (Wolf-Branigin, 2013). This reality is 
demonstrated well by the fact that many of the methods we introduce in 
Parts 3 and 4 are not used exclusively by complexivists in the social sci-
ences and are not described as ‘CDST methods’ per se.
As a further example, we find it to be a rather persistent misunder-
standing among newcomers to CDST that quantitative data elicitation 
and analyses are poorly suited to CDST-informed empirical research or 
that qualitative designs are inherently more compatible with dynamic 
change and interconnectedness (e.g. Molenaar et  al., 2014; Valsiner 
et al., 2009). Qualitative research designs do not by themselves guaran-
tee a more complex and dynamic perspective for research, particularly 
if the research design is not inherently connected to or informed by the 
conceptual framework of CDST (see e.g. Dörnyei et al. [2015] on this 
topic). CDST might gain greater traction in applied linguistics research if 
scholars recognized that CDST encourages repurposing existing methods 
and techniques – both qualitative and quantitative, individual and group 
based – to ensure they are congruent with its philosophy of science (van 
Geert, 2008).
As others have noted, the selection of methods for complexity-based 
inquiry in applied linguistics does not suggest an either/or choice, and 
from CDST’s philosophy of science, advocating a qualitative-only 
approach is neither defensible nor pragmatic for the range of phenom-
ena that necessitate investigation (Molenaar et al., 2014; Valsiner et al., 
2009). CDST adopts a problem-driven, inclusive approach to social 
inquiry that encourages expansion of existing methodological reper-
toires. By its transdisciplinary nature, CDST also opens the door to 
constructing a programme of research that cuts across topical, thematic, 
methodological or discipline-specific lines, and offers a broad solution 
to how CDST research can position its contribution to doing applied 
linguistics research.1

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  73
Multidisciplinary approaches to research, Larsen-Freeman (2012) 
reminds us, feature multiple disciplines contributing distinct perspec-
tives on a shared problem space. Unfortunately, these are additive and 
rarely characterized by interaction across disciplinary lines (see Moss & 
Haertel [2016] for an extended discussion). Perhaps, cross-disciplinary 
approaches to research offer greater promise in this regard. Yet, here too 
we find a state of affairs in which ‘one discipline assum[es] a dominant 
role and draw[s] upon the other whatever can be accommodated within 
its scheme of things’ (Widdowson, 2005: 18), leaving these efforts open 
to potential distortions and lopsided intellectual progeny. This has been 
problematized well by recent reviews of trends in scientific inquiry which 
report the numerous attempts at cross-pollination between up to four or 
five subdisciplines (Mutz et al., 2015) – ‘nutrigenomics’, ‘recombinant-
memetics’ and ‘neurolaw’ are real examples.
Yet another attempt to engineer a creative collision of sorts are inter-
disciplinary approaches to research. These position research and practice 
as being informed by several different perspectives at once. However, as 
some scholars caution, ‘it is simply not possible to see things from two 
different perspectives at the same time’ (Widdowson, 2005: 19), and what 
may look like integrated perspectives are often in fact ‘different views of 
the same topic or problem in serial order but without any explicit inte-
gration’ (Klein, 2010: 17). A further issue concerns the question of how 
methodological rigor and conceptual clarity are possible when competing 
‘integrated’ fields inform the circumscribed area of study (Mutz et al., 
2015).
Transdisciplinarity offers one solution to these dilemmas (Hirsch 
Hadorn et al., 2008). The goal of transdisciplinary research is to build 
‘a comprehensive general view, a theoretical synthesis or an integrative 
framework’ (Klein, 2007: 39) that works at a ‘supra-disciplinary, more 
abstract level offering a general set of patterns, outcomes, and descrip-
tions that can be applied to many different sorts of systems’ (Larsen-
Freeman & Cameron, 2008a: 15–16). A transdisciplinary approach 
to scientific inquiry creates unity beyond disciplinary boundaries and 
turns toward a problem-oriented approach (Halliday & Burns, 2006). 
This is precisely what CDST research does: it transcends knowledge 
boundaries and renders the dominant disciplinary frames of reference 
and methodological silos redundant (Byrne & Callaghan, 2014: 3). What 
transdisciplinary research leaves in place of disciplinary boundaries is a 
problem-oriented approach to scientific inquiry that creates unity beyond 
the disciplinary perspectives (Klein, 2004), and the implications of these 
efforts are far reaching as they allow researchers to achieve common sci-
entific goals (Hirsch Hadorn et al., 2010). The idea in transdisciplinary 
research is to identify pressing issues that need addressing or questions 
that demand answers, and then determine the most appropriate object 
theories, methods (typically multi-method), models, etc., to shed light 

74  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
on possible solutions (Al-Hoorie & Hiver, 2019; Larsen-Freeman, 2017). 
This is why CDST has such potential to add value to the empirical study 
of phenomena of interest in applied linguistics.
An excellent example of how CDST is the natural precursor for 
transdisciplinary approaches to research can be found in how the initia-
tive underlying such ideas led to the genesis of the Santa Fe Institute,2 an 
intellectual hub whose ‘existence seems to be predicated on the porous-
ness of… boundaries between disciplines, or even their nonexistence’ 
(Harris & Krakauer, 2016). Mitchell (2009) recounts how the Santa Fe 
Institute came about:
By the mid-twentieth century, many scientists realized that such phe-
nomena cannot be pigeonholed into any single discipline but require [a 
new] understanding based on scientific foundations that have not yet 
been invented. Several attempts at building those foundations include 
(among others) the fields of cybernetics, synergetics, systems science, 
and, more recently, the science of complex systems. In 1984, a diverse 
interdisciplinary group of twenty-four prominent scientists and math-
ematicians met in the high desert of Santa Fe, New Mexico, to discuss 
these ‘emerging syntheses in science’. Their goal was to plot out the 
founding of a new research institute that would ‘pursue research on a 
large number of highly complex and interactive systems which can be 
properly studied only in an interdisciplinary environment’ and ‘promote 
a unity of knowledge and a recognition of shared responsibility that will 
stand in sharp contrast to the present growing polarization of intellectual 
cultures’. Thus the Santa Fe Institute was created as a center for the study 
of complex systems. (Mitchell, 2009: x)
The methodological openness and experimentation that we advocate 
above, and which the chapters in Parts 2 and 3 of this book showcase, is 
a hallmark of moving beyond discipline-specific approaches to address 
common problems – the very definition of transdisciplinarity (Hirsch 
Hadorn et al., 2010; Nicolescu, 2008). As a final illustration of transdisci-
plinary research, David Krakauer – current director of the Santa Fe Insti-
tute – explains in an interview (Harris & Krakauer, 2016) on this topic:
I don’t like to call the way we do it interdisciplinary, because that’s in 
some sense genuflecting in the direction of a superstition that I know peo-
ple take seriously. So what happens when you ignore all of that and say, 
‘Let’s certainly use the skills that we’ve acquired in the disciplines, but let’s 
leave them at the door and just be intelligent about complex problems’?
This, we feel, is precisely what transdisciplinary research in applied lin-
guistics is about: using all available research tools at our disposal to be 
intelligent about complex problems (see also King & Mackey, 2016).

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  75
Segue
The purpose of the current chapter, which we hope was less dry than 
the previous one, was to chart out what the CDST perspective might 
entail for a programme of social science research, more specifically in 
applied linguistics, that strives for compatibility with a complex and 
dynamic philosophy of science. We provided an overview of some of the 
philosophical and methodological issues that arise when researching the 
complex and dynamic social world. We did this by drawing a distinction 
between dealing with complexity empirically and doing so in a way that 
is more paradigmatic in nature. We then expanded on a novel ontology 
– complex realism – that underpins CDST research.
Following from our previous work in this area (Hiver & Al-Hoorie, 
2016), we attempted to draw some coherence around the key tasks of 
CDST research. In the final portion of this chapter, we then thought 
about big questions and offered some preliminary thoughts to stimu-
late thinking on these issues in CDST research. Much more than just 
a fashion statement or a bandwagon, we see CDST as a rigorous aid 
to thinking and theorizing about social phenomena that represents a 
challenge to conventional methods of scientific thought. Clearly, when 
doing such research in a transdisciplinary way, an expansion of avail-
able methods is called for. This is the goal we turn to now in Parts 2 and 
3 of this book.
Notes
(1)	 Interested readers are encouraged to explore the Map of the Complexity Sciences, 
a visual diagram of the transdisciplinary nature of complexity theory created and 
curated by Brian Castellani (http​://ww​w.art​-scie​ncefa​ctory​.com/​compl​exity​-map_​
feb09​.html​). We introduce this resource further in Chapter 19.
(2)	 Interested readers will find much to explore at www.santafe.edu/ and can also embark 
on a fascinating journey of learning more about CDST at the Santa Fe Institute’s cen-
ter for educating the public on complexity science (www.complexityexplorer.com/). 
We introduce these sources further in Chapter 19.
References
Al-Hoorie, A.H. (2015) Human agency: Does the beach ball have free will? In Z. Dörnyei, 
P.D. MacIntyre and A. Henry (eds) Motivational Dynamics in Language Learning 
(pp. 55–72). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Al-Hoorie, A.H. and Hiver, P. (2019, March) Beyond the Quantitative–Qualitative 
Divide: Toward a Transdisciplinary Integration of Research Purposes and Methods 
for CDST. Paper presented at the meeting of the American Association for Applied 
Linguistics, Atlanta, GA.
Allen, P. and Boulton, J. (2011) Complexity and limits to knowledge: The importance of 
uncertainty. In P. Allen, S. Maguire and B. McKelvey (eds) The SAGE Handbook of 
Complexity and Management (pp. 164–181). London: SAGE.
Archer, M.S. (1998) Realism in the social sciences. In R. Bhaskar, M.S. Archer, A. Collier, 
T. Lawson and A. Norrie (eds) Critical Realism: Essential Readings (pp. 189–205). 
New York: Routledge.

76  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
Archer, M.S. (2000) Being Human: The Problem of Agency. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Atkinson, D. (2019) Second language acquisition beyond borders? The Douglas Fir 
Group searches for transdisciplinary identity. The Modern Language Journal 103 (s), 
113–121.
Bastardas-Boada, A. (2014) Towards a complex-figurational socio-linguistics: Some 
contributions from physics, ecology and the sciences of complexity. History of the 
Human Sciences 27 (3), 55–75.
Biesta, G. (2007) Why ‘what works’ won’t work: Evidence-based practice and the demo-
cratic deficit in educational research. Educational Theory 57 (1), 1–22.
Bhaskar, R. (1975/1997) A Realist Theory of Science. New York: Verso.
Bhaskar, R. (1989) Reclaiming Reality: A Critical Introduction to Contemporary Philoso-
phy. London: Verso.
Bhaskar, R. (2007) Theorizing ontology. In C. Lawson, J. Latsis and N. Martins (eds) 
Contributions to Social Ontology (pp. 192–204). London: Routledge.
Block, D. (2014) Social Class in Applied Linguistics. New York: Routledge.
Bouchard, J. (2018) On language, culture, and controversies. Asian Englishes 20 (3), 
268–278.
Byrne, D. (1998) Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences: An Introduction. New York: 
Routledge.
Byrne, D. (2005) Complexity, configurations and cases. Theory, Culture and Society 22 
(5), 95–111.
Byrne, D. (2011) Applying Social Science. Bristol: Policy Press.
Byrne, D. and Ragin, C. (eds) (2009) The SAGE Handbook of Case-Based Methods. Thou-
sand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Byrne, D. and Uprichard, E. (2012) Useful complex causality. In E. Kincaid (ed.) The 
Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Social Science (pp. 109–129). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Byrne, D. and Callaghan, G. (2014) Complexity Theory and the Social Sciences: The State 
of the Art. New York: Routledge.
Capra, F. and Luisi, P.L. (2014) The Systems View of Life. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Castellani, B. (2018) The Defiance of Global Commitment: A Complex Social Psychology. 
New York: Routledge.
Castellani, B. and Hafferty, F. (2009) Sociology and Complexity Science: A New Field of 
Inquiry. Berlin: Springer.
Cilliers, P. (1998) Complexity and Postmodernism: Understanding Complex Systems. 
London: Routledge.
Cilliers, P. (2000) Knowledge, complexity, and understanding. Emergence 2 (4), 7–13.
Cilliers, P. (2001) Boundaries, hierarchies and networks in complex systems. International 
Journal of Innovation Management 5 (2), 135–47.
Cilliers, P. (2005) Complexity, deconstruction and relativism. Theory, Culture and Society 
22, 255–267.
Cochran-Smith, M., Ell, F., Ludlow, L., Grudnoff, L., Haigh, M. and Hill, M. (2014) 
When complexity theory meets critical realism: A platform for research on initial 
teacher education. Teacher Education Quarterly 41 (1), 105–122.
Danermark, B., Ekstrom, M., Jacobsen, L. and Karlsson, J.C. (2002) Explaining Society. 
London: Routledge.
Davis, B. and Sumara, D. (2006) Complexity and Education: Inquiries into Learning, 
Teaching, Teaching and Research. New York: Routledge.
de Bot, K. (2015) Rates of change: Timescales in second language development. In Z. 
Dörnyei, P.D. MacIntyre and A. Henry (eds) Motivational Dynamics in Language 
Learning (pp. 29–37). Bristol: Multilingual Matters.

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  77
de Bot, K. and Larsen-Freeman, D. (2011) Researching second language development from 
a dynamic systems theory perspective. In M. Verspoor, K. de Bot and W. Lowie (eds) 
A Dynamic Approach to Second Language Development (pp. 5–23). Amsterdam/
Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
De Wolf, T. and Holvoet, T. (2005) Emergence versus self-organisation: Different con-
cepts but promising when combined. In S. Brueckner, G. Di Marzo Serugendo, A. 
Karageorgos and R. Nagpal (eds) Engineering Self-Organising Systems: Methodolo-
gies and Applications (pp. 1–15). Berlin: Springer.
Dörnyei, Z., MacIntyre, P.D. and Henry, A. (eds) (2015) Motivational Dynamics in Lan-
guage Learning. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.
Douglas Fir Group (2016) A transdisciplinary framework for SLA in a multilingual world. 
The Modern Language Journal 100 (s), 19–47.
Ellis, N.C. and Larsen-Freeman, D. (2006) Language emergence: Implications for applied 
linguistics: Introduction to the special issue. Applied Linguistics 27, 558–589.
Elman, J. (2003) It’s about time. Developmental Science 6, 430–433.
Foucault, M. (1972) The Archaeology of Knowledge and the Discourse on Language. New 
York: Pantheon.
Gaustello, S. and Liebovitch, L. (2009) Introduction to nonlinear dynamics and complex-
ity. In S. Gaustello, M. Koopmans and D. Pincus (eds) Chaos and Complexity in 
Psychology (pp. 1–40). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Gershenson, C. (ed.) (2008) Complexity: 5 Questions. Copenhagen: Automatic Press.
Gregg, K.R. (2000) A theory for every occasion: Postmodernism and SLA. Second Lan-
guage Research 16, 383–399.
Groff, R. (ed.) (2008) Revitalizing Causality: Realism about Causality in Philosophy and 
Social Science. New York: Routledge.
Haken, H. (2009) Synergetics: Basic concepts. In R. Meyers (ed.) Encyclopedia of Com-
plexity and Systems Science (pp. 8926–8946). New York: Springer.
Halliday, M. and Burns, A. (2006) Applied linguistics: Thematic pursuits or disciplinary 
moorings? Journal of Applied Linguistics 3, 113−128.
Hamaker, E.L. (2012) Why researchers should think ‘within-person’: A paradigmatic 
rationale. In M.R. Mehl and T.S. Conner (eds) Handbook of Methods for Studying 
Daily Life (pp. 43–61). New York: Guilford.
Harris, S. and Krakauer, D. (2016) Complexity and Stupidity. The Waking Up Podcast. 
See https​://sa​mharr​is.or​g/com​plexi​ty-st​upidi​ty/ (accessed 1 July 2019).
Harvey, D.L. (2001) Chaos and complexity: Their bearing on social policy research. Social 
Issues 1 (2). See http:​//www​.whb.​co.uk​/soci​aliss​ues/h​arvey​.htm (accessed 30 June 
2019).
Harvey, D.L. (2002) Agency and community: A critical realist paradigm. Journal for the 
Theory of Social Behaviour 32 (2), 163–194.
Harvey, D.L. (2009) Complexity and case. In D. Byrne and C.C. Ragin (eds) The SAGE 
Handbook of Case-Based Methods (pp. 15–38). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Hedström, P. (2005) Dissecting the Social. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Hedström, P. and Ylikoski, P. (2010) Casual mechanisms in the social sciences. Annual 
Review of Sociology 32 (1), 46–67.
Hirsch Hadorn, G., Hoffmann-Riem, H., Biber-Klemm, S., Grossenbacher-Mansuy, W., 
Joye, D., Pohl, C., Wiesmann, U. and Zemp, E. (eds) (2008) Handbook of Transdis-
ciplinary Research. Dordrecht: Springer.
Hirsch Hadorn, G., Pohl, C. and Bammer, G. (2010) Solving problems through transdis-
ciplinary research. In R. Frodeman, J.T. Klein and C. Mitcham (eds) Oxford Hand-
book of Interdisciplinarity (pp. 231–252). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hiver, P. and Al-Hoorie, A.H. (2016) A ‘dynamic ensemble’ for second language research: 
Putting complexity theory into practice. The Modern Language Journal 100,  
741–756.

78  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
Hiver, P. and Papi, M. (2020) Complexity theory and L2 motivation. In M. Lamb, K. 
Csizér, A. Henry and S. Ryan (eds) Palgrave Handbook of Motivation for Language 
Learning. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Holland, J.H. (1995) Hidden Order: How Adaptation Builds Complexity. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Holland, J.H. (1998) Emergence: From Chaos to Order. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holland, J.H. (2006) Studying complex adaptive systems. Journal of Systems Science and 
Complexity 19, 1–8.
Holland, J.H. (2012) Signals and Boundaries: Building Blocks for Complex Adaptive Sys-
tems. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Howe, M.L. and Lewis, M.D. (2005) The importance of dynamic systems approaches for 
understanding development. Developmental Review 25, 247–251
Joe, H.-K., Hiver, P. and Al-Hoorie, A.H. (2017) Classroom social climate, self-deter-
mined motivation, willingness to communicate, and achievement: A study of struc-
tural relationships in instructed second language settings. Learning and Individual 
Differences 53, 133–144.
Johnson, N.F. (2009) Simply Complexity: A Clear Guide to Complexity Theory. Oxford: 
Oneworld Publications.
Jörg, T. (2011) New Thinking in Complexity for the Social Sciences and Humanities: A 
Generative, Transdisciplinary Approach. Dordrecht: Springer.
Jost, J., Bertschinger, N. and Olbrich, E. (2010) Emergence. New Ideas in Psychology 28, 
265–273.
Juarrero, A. (1999) Dynamics in Action: Intentional Behavior as a Complex System. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
Juarrero, A. (2011) Causality and explanation. In P. Allen, S. Maguire and B. McKelvey 
(eds) The SAGE Handbook of Complexity and Management (pp. 155–163). London: 
SAGE.
Kadushin, C. (2012) Understanding Social Networks: Theories, Concepts, and Findings. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kelso, J.A.S. (2016) On the self-organizing origins of agency. Trends in Cognitive Science 
20, 490–499.
King, K. and Mackey, A. (2016) Research methodology in second language studies: Trends, 
concerns, and new directions. The Modern Language Journal 100 (s), 209–227.
Klein, J.T. (2004) Interdisciplinarity and complexity: An evolving relationship. Emer-
gence: Complexity & Organization 6 (1/2), 2–10.
Klein, J.T. (2007) Interdisciplinary approaches in social science research. In W. Outhwaite 
and S.P. Turner (eds) The SAGE Handbook of Social Science Methodology (pp. 
32–49). London: SAGE.
Klein, J.T. (2010) A taxonomy of interdisciplinarity. In R. Frodeman, J.T. Klein and C. 
Mitcham (eds) Oxford Handbook of Interdisciplinarity (pp. 15–30). Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Kleinberg, S. (2013) Causality, Probability, and Time. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Kleinberg, S. and Hripcsak, G. (2011) A review of causal inference for biomedical infor-
matics. Journal of Biomedical Informatics 44, 1102–1112.
Koopman, J.S. (1977) Causal models and sources of interaction. American Journal of 
Epidemiology 106, 439–444.
Koopmans, M. (2014) Change, self-organization and the search for causality in educa-
tional research and practice. Complicity: An International Journal of Complexity and 
Education 11 (1), 20–39.
Koopmans, M. (2019) Education is a complex dynamical system: Challenges for research. 
The Journal of Experimental Education. Advance Online Access. doi:10.1080/00220
973.2019.1566199

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  79
Kretzschmar, W. (2015) Language and Complex Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Kubota, R. (2016) The multi/plural turn, postcolonial theory, and neoliberal multicultur-
alism: Complicities and implications for applied linguistics. Applied Linguistics 37 
(4), 474–494.
Kuhn, T.S. (1962/2012) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (4th edn). Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2012) Complex, dynamic systems: A new transdisciplinary theme for 
applied linguistics? Language Teaching 45, 202–214.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2013) Complexity theory: A new way to think. Revista Brasileira de 
Linguistica Aplicada 13, 369–373.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2016) Classroom-oriented research from a complex systems perspec-
tive. Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching 6, 377–393.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2017) Complexity theory: The lessons continue. In L. Ortega and Z. 
Han (eds) Complexity Theory and Language Development: In Celebration of Diane 
Larsen-Freeman (pp. 11–50). Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: John Benjamins.
Larsen-Freeman, D. (2019) On language learner agency: A complex dynamic systems 
theory perspective. The Modern Language Journal 103 (s), xx–xx.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Cameron, L. (2008a) Complex Systems and Applied Linguistics. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Larsen-Freeman, D. and Cameron, L. (2008b) Research methodology on language devel-
opment from a complex systems perspective. The Modern Language Journal 92, 
200–213.
Lee, M.E. (1997) From enlightenment to chaos: Toward nonmodern social theory. In 
R.A. Eve, S. Horsfall and M.E. Lee (eds) Chaos, Complexity, and Sociology: Myths, 
Model, and Theories (pp. 15–29). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Lewis, M. (2005) Bridging emotion theory and neurobiology through dynamic systems 
modeling. Behavioral and Brain Sciences 28, 169–245.
Lighthill, J. (1986) The recently recognized failure of predictability in Newtonian dynam-
ics. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London A 407, 35–48.
Lowie, W. (2017) Lost in state space?: Methodological considerations in Complex 
Dynamic Theory approaches to second language development research. In L. Ortega 
and Z. Han (eds) Complexity Theory and Language Development: In Celebra-
tion of Diane Larsen-Freeman (pp. 123–141). Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: John 
Benjamins.
Mainzer, K. (2007) Thinking in Complexity: The Computational Dynamics of Matter, 
Mind, and Mankind (5th edn). Berlin: Springer.
Manson, S. (2001) Simplifying complexity: A review of complexity theory. Geoforum 32, 
405–414.
Marsden, E., Morgan-Short, K., Thompson, S. and Abugaber, D. (2018a) Replication in 
second language research: Narrative and systematic reviews and recommendations 
for the field. Language Learning 68, 321–391.
Marsden, E., Morgan-Short, K., Trofimovich, P. and Ellis, N.C. (2018b) Introducing 
registered reports at Language Learning: Promoting transparency, replication, and a 
synthetic ethic in the language sciences. Language Learning 68, 309–320.
Mason, M. (ed.) (2008) Complexity Theory and the Philosophy of Education. Chichester: 
Wiley-Blackwell.
Maturana, H.R. and Varela, F.J. (eds) (1980) Autopoiesis and Cognition: The Realization 
of the Living. Dordrecht: Reidel.
McDaniel, R.R. and Driebe, D.J. (2005) Uncertainty and surprise: An introduction. In 
R.R. McDaniel and D.J. Driebe (eds) Uncertainty and Surprise in Complex Systems: 
Questions on Working with the Unexpected (pp. 3–11). Berlin: Springer.

80  Part 1: Introduction to Complexity Theory﻿
McNamara, T. (2015) Applied linguistics: The challenge of theory. Applied Linguistics 
36 (4), 466–477.
Mitchell, M. (2009) Complexity: A Guided Tour. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Molenaar, P., Lerner, R. and Newell, K. (2014) Developmental systems theory and meth-
odology: A view of the issues. In P.C.M. Molenaar, R.M. Lerner and K.M. Newell 
(eds) Handbook of Developmental Systems Theory and Methodology (pp. 3–15). 
New York: Guilford.
Morgan-Short, K., Marsden, E., Heil, J., Issa II, B.I., Leow, R.P., Mikhaylova, A., 
Mikołajczak, S., Moreno, N., Slabakova, R. and Szudarski, P. (2018) Multisite repli-
cation in second language acquisition research: Attention to form during listening and 
reading comprehension. Language Learning 68, 392–437.
Morin, E. (2001) Seven Complex Lessons in Education for the Future. Paris: United 
Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization.
Morin, E. (2007) Restricted complexity, general complexity. In C. Gershenson, D. Aerts 
and B. Edmonds (eds) Worldviews, Science and Us: Philosophy and Complexity (pp. 
5–29). Singapore: World Scientific.
Morin, E. (2008) On Complexity. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Morrison, K. (2012) Searching for causality in the wrong places. International Journal of 
Social Research Methodology 15, 15–30.
Moss, P.A. and Haertel, E.H. (2016) Engaging methodological pluralism. In D. Gitomer 
and C. Bell (eds) Handbook of Research on Teaching (5th edn; pp. 127–248). Wash-
ington, DC: American Educational Research Association.
Mouzelis, N. (1995) Sociological Theory: What Went Wrong? London: Routledge.
Mutz, R., Bornmann, L. and Daniel, H.-D. (2014) Cross-disciplinary research: What con-
figurations of fields of science are found in grant proposals today? Research Evalua-
tion 24 (1), 30–36.
Nicolescu, B. (ed.) (2008) Transdisciplinarity: Theory and Practice. Cresskill, NJ: Hamp-
ton Press.
Norman, D. (2011) Living with Complexity. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Ortega, L. (2012) Epistemological diversity and moral ends of research in instructed SLA. 
Language Teaching Research 16, 206–226.
Ortega, L. (2019) SLA and the study of equitable multilingualism. The Modern Language 
Journal 103 (s), 23–38.
Overton, W.F. (2013) A new paradigm for developmental science: Relationism and rela-
tional-developmental systems. Applied Developmental Science 17, 94–107.
Pennycook, A. (2018) Posthumanist Applied Linguistics. New York: Routledge.
Peters, M.A., Tesar, M. and Jackson, L. (2018) After postmodernism in educational the-
ory? A collective writing experiment and thought survey. Introduction to the Special 
Issue. Educational Philosophy and Theory 50, 1299–1307.
Price, B. (1997) The myth of postmodern science. In R.A. Eve, S. Horsfall and M.E. Lee 
(eds) Chaos, Complexity, and Sociology: Myths, Model, and Theories (pp. 3–14). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Prigogine, I. (2005) Surprises in a half century. In R.R. McDaniel and D.J. Driebe (eds) 
Uncertainty and Surprise in Complex Systems: Questions on Working with the Unex-
pected (pp. 13–16). Berlin: Springer.
Radford, M. (2008) Prediction, control and the challenge to complexity. Oxford Review 
of Education 34, 505–520.
Ragin, C.C. (2004) Turning the tables: How case-oriented research challenges variable-ori-
ented research. In H.E. Brady and D. Collier (eds) Rethinking Social Inquiry: Diverse 
Tools, Shared Standards (pp. 123–138). Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield.
Reed, M. and Harvey, D.L. (1992) The new science and the old: Complexity and realism in 
the social sciences. Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour 22, 356–379.
Reed, M. and Harvey, D.L. (1997) Social science as the study of complex systems. In L.D. 
Kiel and E. Elliott (eds) Chaos Theory in the Social Sciences: Foundations and Appli-
cations (pp. 295–324). Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

﻿Applying Complexity Theory to Research  81
Reitsma, F. (2003) A response to simplifying complexity. Geoforum 34, 13–16.
Rizzi, D.A. and Pedersen, S.A. (1992) Causality in medicine: Towards a theory and termi-
nology. Theoretical Medicine 13, 233–254.
Porte, G.K. (2012) Replication Research in Applied Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Rose, L., Rouhani, P. and Fischer, K. (2013) The science of the individual. Mind, Brain, 
and Education 7, 152–158.
Sawyer, K. (2005) Social Emergence: Societies as Complex Systems. New York: Cambridge 
University Press.
Schooler, J.W. (2014) Metascience could rescue the ‘replication crisis’. Nature 515 (7525), 
9. doi:10.1038/515009a
Stroup, W. (1997) Webs of chaos: Implications for research designs. In R.A. Eve, S. 
Horsfall and M.E. Lee (eds) Chaos, Complexity, and Sociology: Myths, Model, and 
Theories (pp. 125−140). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Thelen, E. (2005) Dynamic systems theory and the complexity of change. Psychoanalytic 
Dialogues 15, 255–283.
Turner, F. (1997) Forward: Chaos and social science. In R.A. Eve, S. Horsfall and M.E. Lee 
(eds) Chaos, Complexity, and Sociology: Myths, Model, and Theories (pp. xi−xxvii). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE.
Uprichard, E. (2013) Sampling: Bridging probability and nonprobability designs. Interna-
tional Journal of Social Research Methodology 16, 1–11.
Vallacher, R.R., van Geert, P. and Nowak, A. (2015) The intrinsic dynamics of psychologi-
cal process. Current Directions in Psychological Science 24, 58–64.
Valsiner, J., Molenaar, P., Lyra, M. and Chaudhary, N. (eds) (2009) Dynamic Process 
Methodology in the Social and Developmental Sciences. New York: Springer.
van Geert, P. (1998) We almost had a great future behind us: The contribution of non-
linear dynamics to developmental-science-in-the-making. Developmental Science 1 
(1), 143–159.
van Geert, P. (2008) The dynamic systems approach in the study of L1 and L2 acquisition: 
An introduction. The Modern Language Journal 92, 179–199.
van Geert, P. (2011) The contribution of complex dynamic systems to development. Child 
Development Perspectives 5, 273–278.
van Geert, P. and Steenbeek, H. (2014) The good, the bad and the ugly? The dynamic inter-
play between educational practice, policy and research. Complicity: An International 
Journal of Complexity and Education 11 (2), 22–39.
Velicer, W., Babbin, S. and Palumbo, R. (2014) Idiographic applications: Issues of ergo-
dicity and generalizability. In P. Molenaar, R. Lerner and K. Newell (eds) Handbook 
of Developmental Systems Theory and Methodology (pp. 425–441). New York: 
Guilford Press.
Verspoor, M., de Bot, K. and Lowie, W. (eds) (2011) A Dynamic Approach to Second 
Language Development: Methods and Techniques. Amsterdam/Philadelphia, PA: 
John Benjamins.
Ward, A.C. (2009) Causal criteria and the problem of complex causation. Medical Health 
Care and Philosophy 12, 333–343.
Westergaard, J. (2003) Interview with John Westergaard. Network 85, 1–2.
Widdowson, H.G. (2005) Applied linguistics, interdisciplinarity, and disparate realities. In 
P. Bruthiaux, D. Atkinson, W. Eggington, W. Grabe and V. Ramanathan (eds) Direc-
tions in Applied Linguistics (pp. 12–25). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.
Wolf-Branigin, M. (2013) Using Complexity Theory for Research and Program Evalua-
tion. Oxford: Oxford University Press.


