56
The Language System of the Street
In general, language can be taken to be ‘a resource for making meaning’ (Halliday & 
Mattheisen, 2013: 3), here extended to non-verbal street signs. This chapter describes 
how street signs convey meaning through grammar, letters, vocabulary and punctua-
tion. The English language is seen here both as the abstract entity used in England and 
as a mental system known by the street user, not necessarily the same as the language 
recorded in dictionaries and grammar books or invoked in popular discussions (Cook, 
2010, forthcoming).
Spoken and Written Language
Aristotle (4th century bce) believed that ‘writing is a symbol of vocal sounds’, that 
is to say, writing represents speech. On no other topic have linguists from diff erent 
schools, continents and millennia spoken with one voice: speech is primary, writing 
secondary (Cook, 2004a, 2016a). Consequently, most linguists have only been con-
cerned with the letter-sound correspondence rules between writing and speech, not 
with the capabilities of written language to express meaning independently of speech.
European linguists within the functionalist tradition have nevertheless treated writ-
ing as an alternative form that language can take rather than a parasite on speech. 
Vachek (1973) maintained that language has both written and spoken norms. Halliday 
and Mattheisen (2013) claim:
The sound system and the writing system are the two modes of expression by which the 
lexicogrammar of a language is represented. (Halliday & Mattheisen, 2013: 7)
Despite writing emerging historically after speech, despite children learning to read and 
write after they have learnt to speak, speech and writing are alternative forms of lan-
guage that do not necessarily depend on each other in actual use. The crucial syn-
chronic relationship is between writing and language, not between writing and speech 
(Cook, 2004a).
The letter/sound correspondence links between speech and writing are of course 
relevant for functions that involve both together, such as reading aloud and the acqui-
sition of literacy. But it seems unlikely that the vast majority of street signs are ever 
read aloud. As we shall see, they make systematic use of meaningful characteristics of 
writing, such as line-breaks and capital letters, that do not exist in speech. While most 
street signs could potentially be read aloud, often this is more like translation than 
3

letter-sound correspondence: how would someone set about reading aloud the Hydrant 
sign (Figure 3.1)? And why would they want to?
The Letters of the Street
De Saussure (1976 [1916]: 165–166) made four points about letters that are relevant 
to the letters of street signs.
– Letter shapes are arbitrary: any letter could represent any sound – a spin-off  from 
Saussure’s general principle of the arbitrariness of the sign. It wouldn’t matter if a 
letter < d > represented a sound /u:/ provided everyone used it in the same way. 
Letter-sound correspondences have varied historically, with the vowel letters of 
modern English far from corresponding to the same speech sounds in Old English. 
Despite Saussure, it is now claimed that certain letter shapes have non-arbitrary 
origins, discussed below. Some street signs indeed replace letters with non-arbitrary 
icons, say a tooth for < I > in KDIP (Figure 2.26).
– Letters work so long as they can be distinguished from each other: The variations 
in the letter < e > seen in Figure 2.5 do not matter so long as they suggest an < e > to 
the user, up to the point of confusion with other letters: a letter can only range so 
far from its prototype form.
– Letters work through a system of oppositions:
… dans la langue il n’y a que des diff érences
(‘In language there are only diff erences’. De Saussure, 1976 [1916]: 166)
 
A < b > is not a < d >, an < o > is not an < e >, so <bin> is not <din> and <ore> is 
not <ere>; at the basic level, computer programs work on the opposition 
between < 0 > and < 1 >. Oppositions are speciﬁ c to particular writing systems; the 
English orthography now opposes 26 letters to each other, with < i > having split 
from < j > and < u > from < v > in the mid-17th century.
– The material form of letters is irrelevant:
Que j’écrive les lettres en blanc ou en noir, en creux ou en relief, avec une plume ou un 
ciseau, cela est sans importance pour leur signiﬁ cation.
(‘Whether I write letters in white or in black, recessed or raised, with a pen or a chisel, 
has no bearing on their meaning’. De Saussure, 1976 [1916]: 166)
 
The surface on which a < b > is written or the tool that is used to make it have no 
eff ect on whether it is an example of a < b >. So far as the modern printed text is 
concerned, variations are indeed minimal: the material is paper and the tool is a 
printer or a printing press; the colour of text is black letters on a white background, 
occasionally the reverse.
 
 But street signs make use of many diff erent materials, which do contribute to their 
meaning. An < E > incised on stone with a chisel implies something rather diff erent 
The Language System of the Street 57

from an < e > scrawled on paper with a biro. Variations in material contribute over-
tones of meaning that are essential to many signs, as discussed in Chapters 4 and 7.
De Saussure’s (1916) requirements are only partially true for street signs. Letter 
shapes and icons may be less than arbitrary; material may be important to their mean-
ing. Nevertheless street signs are as dependent as any area of written language on the 
systematic opposition of letters and their need to be distinguishable.
The Grammar of the Street
Street signs contain not only texts consisting of one or two words and lengthy texts 
with ‘full’ sentences but also non-verbal symbols and icons. Grammar applies to all of 
these in the broad sense of having structured meaning.
Mainstream syntax has taken the sentence as the highest unit of grammatical struc-
ture. Traditionally a sentence has been seen as a relationship between a subject and a 
predicate: Weston Window Cleaning have moved (Figure 7.12) has a subject, Weston 
Window Cleaning, and a predicate, have moved. Bloomﬁ eld (1933: 170–172) rephrased 
this in terms of ‘full’ sentences with actor-action constructions like Dobson designed 
this charitable institution (Figure 7.11) or imperatives, Please ring the bell (Figure 2.20), 
and ‘minor’ sentences that link to previous constructions, say answers to questions, Yes, 
or exclamations, Oh dear!.
The sentence is classically deﬁ ned as a unit ‘of written text that is customarily pre-
sented as bracketted by a capital letter and a period’ (Nunberg, 1990: 22). However, this 
deﬁ nes sentences in eff ect in terms of written language rather than spoken, since there 
are no direct spoken equivalences for capitals and full stops. It is also rather awkward 
for linguists who avow the primacy of speech and useless for children who are learning 
to read, since it presupposes a knowledge of written language they do not yet possess; 
the National Curriculum (Depatment for Education, 2013) nevertheless requires the 
word sentence to be taught to ﬁ ve-year-olds. The OED (2015) reverses the deﬁ nition 
by deﬁ ning capitals as ‘having the distinctive form and size used to begin a sentence, 
proper name, etc.’ Historically, sentence-initial capitals derive from the decorated initial 
letters found in mediaeval manuscripts (Nesbitt, 1957).
However, the texts in most street signs do not have subjects, predicates, full stops 
or actor-action sequences. Hence they hardly count as sentences under any of the deﬁ ni-
tions, other than minor sentences. Traditionally they have been treated as reduced or 
elliptical sentences, ‘lacking’ articles and verbs. Halliday (1967) talked of ‘economy 
grammar’, used when there are constraints on time or space, seen most clearly in the 
days when telegrams were costed by the word, with traces in the message-length restric-
tions in Twitter. Leech (1966) separated ‘block grammar’ which lacks articles and so 
on from ‘abbreviated grammar’, which has a wider range of constructions such as the 
imperative. But treating street texts as reduction and abbreviation ignores their unique 
features. The text of street signs needs to be analysed as an independent genre of its 
own, not just as deviations from print through reduced forms.
58 The Language of the English Street Sign

Syntax and street signs
A basic requirement for syntax is a hierarchy of units, going from the sentence as 
the highest unit, down to clause and phrase, then word, and ﬁ nally morpheme as the 
lowest unit, each rank consisting of the one below it; a sentence consists of clauses and 
phrases, a phrase consists of words, a word of morphemes, as displayed in familiar 
phrase structure trees. Little more apparatus is needed for analysing most street signs.
Figure 3.1 Grammar in street signs (Hydrant, To Let, red mezze, LPR; Planning Notice, SS, 
truncated)
The Language System of the Street 59

Figure 3.1 illustrates the range of grammar in street signs from minimal to maximal. 
The eye-level Hydrant sign uses a letter and two numbers, the positions of which are 
crucial to their meaning, glossed as ‘there is a four-inch mains water pipe 35 feet away’. 
This is not so much syntax as a code for ﬁ reﬁ ghters. The high-level To Let sign has nine 
lines made up of short phrases or numbers. Red mezze shows a typical restaurant fascia 
board, consisting of two two-word noun phrases, a header and a subheader. Planning 
Notice is in full ‘standard’ sentences; such notices are usually tied to lamp posts or trees 
at eye-level and enclosed in plastic that makes them diffi  cult to read.
Nouns and noun phrases make up the bulk of texts on street signs. The bare noun 
is common in naming signs such as Sandgate (Figure 2.9) or nevisport (Figure 2.17). 
The head noun may have elements before it in the phrase (pre-modiﬁ cation):
 –
adjectives as in red mezze;
 –
no as in No Entry (Figure 1.8);
 –
proper nouns with or without ’s, as in Gibson Street (Figure 2.8) and Rosie’s Bar 
(Figure 3.3).
Or elements that follow it (post-modiﬁ cation):
 –
inﬁ nitival phrases such as (the alternative way) to pay (Figure 3.11);
 –
prepositional phrases such as (Pay here) at machine (Figure 3.5);
 –
only as in (Doctors Cars) Only (Figure 3.8).
Both pre- and post-modiﬁ cation can be combined as in No Entry to Doctor’s Surgery 
(Figure 2.13). Articles are rare except when the is part of the name as in The Mandarin 
(Figure 2.4) and The George (Figure 2.12); a few street names in England include a deﬁ -
nite article – The Avenue, say. Coordination is usually between pairs of nouns as in 
<BURGER & BEVVY> (Figure 3.2), with and often realised as an ampersand < & > 
(Figure 2.19), unusual in modern printed text.
Adjectives rarely occur as heads of phrases in street signs apart from the ubiquitous 
open and closed, as in Closed for Family Funeral (Figure 4.7). Verbs are rare; impera-
tives occur in signs controlling movement like Look left (Figure 6.7), sometimes with 
an object noun like Push Button in the Green Man sign (Figure 4.12), or Press Buzzer 
here to get your taxi (Figure 7.1). Occasionally a polite please creeps in, as in Please ring 
the bell (Figure 2.20) and Please use alternate means of entry/egress (Figure 3.17). 
Inﬁ nitival phrases occur like To Let (Figure 3.1). Finite verbs chieﬂ y have the present 
tense such as SORRY This is NOT Part of Mersea Road Surgery (Figure 3.3) or a future 
auxiliary, Unauthorised vehicles will be wheel clamped (Figure 4.10). Adverbs are 
mostly for location, Press Buzzer here to get your taxi (Figure 7.1), or for manner, Please 
drive carefully.
The few signs that have ‘full’ lexical sentences with subjects and verbs are offi  cial 
signs at eye-level so that their longer texts can be read by pedestrians. Planning Notice 
(Figure 3.1), for example, has long sentences to cover the obligation on local councils to 
publicise ‘by site display in at least one place on or near the land to which the applica-
tion relates for not less than 21 days’ (Development Management Procedure, 2010). 
60 The Language of the English Street Sign

The exact wording of the general No Smoking sign (Figure 3.2) is laid down by law. 
The lack of sentence-ﬁ nal full stops shows that these are nonetheless street signs. The 
passive voice is very frequent as in An application for planning permission (Figure 3.1). 
Like the dummy subject it in It is against the law to smoke in these premises in No 
Smoking (Figure 3.2), passives reinforce the anonymity of the writer in speech: it is 
irrelevant who writes the sign; the passive is the impersonal voice of authority.
The syntax of street signs is limited compared to the language of print, mostly due 
to their restricted functions. Treating signs as abbreviated versions of print language 
does not help. Translating To Let (Figure 3.1) into This building is to let is redundant, 
as the sign conveys its message eff ectively in its own way.
Visual grammar and street signs
Kress and van Leeuwen (1996) developed a visual grammar of design based on 
printed pages and artworks to ‘describe the way in which depicted people, places and 
things combine in visual “statements”’. The crucial aspects of visual grammar are posi-
tion and prominence, not linear order (Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996: 223).
A key element in visual grammar is the distinction between Given and New, taken 
from functional linguistics (Halliday & Mattheisen, 2013). Given information is 
already familiar to the reader, usually appears ﬁ rst and is not prominent. New informa-
tion that is novel to the reader usually appears second and stands out in various ways. 
Before-and-after advertisements, for example, often show the before picture of the 
overweight person in black and white on the left as Given and the after picture of the 
slender new person, in full colour and with a better haircut, on the right as New. Indeed 
writing direction has an eff ect on how people think. Children who speak Hebrew or 
Arabic will, for example, put pictures of daily meals in a right-to-left sequence, whereas 
English speaking children will arrange them from left-to-right (Tversky et al., 1991). 
This dependence on left-to-right direction is not absolute in those who have writing 
systems with this direction; Botticelli’s Primavera painting, for instance, has to be inter-
preted from right-to-left (O’Toole, 1994: 29).
Kress and van Leeuwen (1996) interpret Given as appearing on the left and New 
on the right; English before/after advertisements do not therefore work for languages 
with right-to-left direction like Arabic. The inﬂ uence of the left/right division cannot 
be separated from the left-to-right writing direction in English signs. In so far as the 
Given/New distinction relates to the Subject-Predicate construction, this too occurs 
rarely in street signs, as the signs in Figure 3.1 demonstrate. While Planning Notice 
has ‘full’ sentences, it is not arranged as a left-to-right sequence apart from reading 
direction.
Indeed it is not self-evident what Given means in the context of street signs as all 
the information is eff ectively New to the street user. Perhaps the Given information is 
the indexicality of street signs, to be discussed in Chapters 5 and 6. I once joked as a 
student that the To Let sign on a tall London offi  ce building had a giant understood 
subject – many a true word spoken in jest.
The Language System of the Street 61

Kress and van Leeuwen (1996) make two other relevant distinctions. Centre/Margin 
separates crucial information at the centre from ancillary information at the margins. 
Top/Bottom puts Ideal/Real, i.e. ‘idealised or generalised essence’ at the Top and more 
speciﬁ c or practical information at the Bottom (Kress & van Leeuwen, 1996: 194). Both 
these distinctions cannot eff ectively be separated from the top-down, left-to-right 
nature of the English writing system, to be discussed in Chapter 7.
Finally Kress and van Leeuwen (1996: 183) argue for a factor of Salience – attracting 
the viewers’ attention in various ways through foregrounding and backgrounding or 
variations in size, to be discussed later.
Visual grammar as outlined by Kress and van Leeuwen (1996) and Scollon and 
Scollon (2003) is a powerful way of interpreting the elements of signs, based on the 
authors’ careful analysis of a variety of visual signs. But how do the actual street users 
interpret signs? Concepts such as Salience, Centre/Margin and Top/Bottom are 
empirically veriﬁ able in principle through objective evidence such as how people look 
at the sign.
The celebrated Ogilvy Formula put forward by the advertising guru David Ogilvy 
(1983) claims that readers look at advertisements from top-to-bottom as Visual, 
Caption, Headline, Copy (i.e. prose text of some length) and Signature (i.e. the link to 
the product). Today the number of words in the Copy element of advertisements has 
shrunk but the Visual and the Headline are still crucial (PMG, 2015).
Figure 3.2 Street signs and the Ogilvy Formula (No Smoking, LPR; Burger & Bevvy, Colchester)
62 The Language of the English Street Sign

Two street signs that conform to the Ogilvy Formula are seen in Figure 3.2. No 
Smoking has a graphic image of a cigarette at the top (Visual), a short prominent text 
<NO SMOKING.> (Headline), and an ampliﬁ cation text <It is against the law to smoke 
in these premises> (Copy) at the bottom; this sign also demonstrates the problems of 
displaying signs through windows, partly the reﬂ ections, partly the contact with the 
glass. The Burger & Bevvy sign has a decorative letter < B > and graphic (Visual), 
<BURGER & BEVVY> (Headline) and a number <£10.95> and opening hours <mon-fri 
noon-5pm> (Copy). But the Ogilvy Formula applies only to the small minority of street 
signs with Visual and extended Copy texts.
The critical issue is how the street user actually processes and reacts to the sign. 
Some eye-tracking evidence, for instance, shows that restaurant menus are indeed usu-
ally read from top-to-bottom and left-to-right (Yang, 2012), essentially the require-
ments of the English writing system or indeed the Ogilvy Formula. However, there is 
almost total disagreement among researchers over the prominence or eff ectiveness of 
diff erent zones on restaurant menus (Pearlman, 2018: 255–259).
Research in progress extends the eye-tracker technique to street signs (Cook et al., in 
preparation). In one experiment, bilingual Chinese/English L2 users and English L1 users 
were asked to look at simpliﬁ ed estate agent To Let signs and brass plate signs modelled 
on McCowie (Figure 4.6). English L1 users tended to look ﬁ rst at the middle of the sign, 
next at the top and last at the bottom; Chinese/English users looked at the top ﬁ rst, then 
at the middle and ﬁ nally at the bottom. In other words, the reading sequence of top-to-
bottom is, curiously, more typical of these bilinguals than L1 users. People do not neces-
sarily process the sign in the way experts believe; claims about Visual Grammar thus need 
the support of empirical evidence. Chapter 7 discusses this further.
Headers
Further important elements of the street sign are the header and subheader, revised 
from the analysis in Cook (2015). The term header has been preferred to headline 
(Ogilvy, 1983) or heading, as it has less association with printed pages. Multi-line signs 
without headers appear slightly odd, except in formal commemorative inscriptions like 
Earl Grey Memorial (Figure 4.2).
In street signs that have more than one line of text, the header is more salient than 
the rest. In To Let (Figure 3.1) and No Smoking (Figure 3.2), the headers are at the top 
of the sign; in Hydrant (Figure 3.1), the prominent header < H > ﬁ ts the num-
bers < 35 > and < 4 > within its body. In the Ogilvy Formula, the Visual takes prece-
dence, appearing above the header in No Smoking and Burger & Bevvy (Figure 3.2). 
Scollon and Scollon (2003) may be correct in claiming that Top typically takes prece-
dence in English signs, although headers can appear in the middle of signs like Town 
Wall (Figure 1.5) or near the bottom as in No Smoking (Figure 3.2).
The header in a sense dominates the whole sign. It is the header that attracts our 
attention and determines whether we will bother to read the rest of the sign. Headers 
are part of Visual Grammar since it is their visual prominence that is crucial, not their 
internal grammar. The structures used in headers include noun phrases like Planning 
The Language System of the Street 63

Notice (Figure 3.1), particularly for naming signs like red mezze (Figure 3.1), and inﬁ ni-
tival phrases like To Let (Figure 3.1). Indeed, there are diff erent levels of subheaders in 
a sign, as in print, such as Rosie’s Bar (Figure 3.3) or To Let (Figure 3.1), signalled by 
diff erent letter sizes, boldness, colour, and so on.
Distinctive Aspects of the Grammar of Street Signs
The syntax of print language and visual grammar only goes so far in explaining 
street signs. This section looks for their unique features.
Line-breaks as syntactic dividers
A prominent feature of street signs is the use of line-breaks to show grammatical 
divisions, often in lists.
Figure 3.3 Line-breaks in street signs (Rosie’s Bar, SS; Sorry, Colchester)
Figure 3.3 shows some typical signs with line-breaks, called ‘newlines’ by Nunberg 
(1990). Rosie’s Bar has four pairs of lines, one triplet, alternately in white and black 
letters in a serif font, with two ‘second’ lines in a cursive script. Each line starts with a 
capital letter (although so do all the words except spirits and to). The line-break marks 
out complete phrases <ROSIE’S BAR> or separates adjectives from nouns <Traditional 
/ Beers>. In the ﬁ nal triplet of lines, a noun phrase <Big ScreeN> is separated from a 
verb phrase <Showing All The Best> and the ﬁ nal noun phrase is divided into premodi-
ﬁ ers and noun <All The Best / Sports>.
64 The Language of the English Street Sign

The Sorry sign has line-break divisions marking constituents within a single sen-
tence <SORRY / This is / NOT / Part of / Mersea Road / Surgery>. The ﬁ nal noun phrase 
is split between the pre-modifying phrase <Mersea Road> and the noun <Surgery>. It 
is, incidentally, strange how often street signs with this inform you what something is 
not; a sign on a Colchester building, for example, warns This is not the Job Centre.
Line-breaks are one distinctive way of showing grammatical structure in signs. This 
parallels the use of line-breaks in printed poetry, which sometimes mark out grammati-
cal or rhythmic divisions, and sometimes occur within units, alias enjambment. In both 
verse and street signs, new lines usually start with an initial capital letter.
As Waller (1990) points out, line-breaks by themselves may not be suffi  cient to show 
meaning as they could be purely arbitrary divisions of text, like those in printed books. 
So line-breaks may need to be reinforced by bullet points, as in paybyphone (Figure 
3.11), or by change of colour or letter style, as in Rosie’s Bar.
Centring as the norm
Lines of text in street signs are centred rather than left-aligned, as seen in Rosie’s 
Bar and Sorry (Figure 3.3), in To Let (Figure 3.1), and indeed in virtually all of the signs 
in Chapters 1 and 2. Not counting signs without text or those written in other scripts, 
78% of the signs in the NCL sample have centred text, 11% left-aligned, 11% mixed 
alignments. The few signs with left-aligned text mostly involve full sentences, as in 
Planning Notice (Figure 3.1), or street names on direction signs, say Quayside (Figure 
2.15), that is to say, they are formal and offi  cial.
Figure 3.4 Centring in street signs (PO, Function Room, LPR; Abbey Gate St., Colchester)
The Language System of the Street 65

Function Room shows a centred list of services off ered in the Companions Club in 
all-capitals. The manhole cover PO has a design that is centred both horizontally and verti-
cally, again all-capitals. For street name signs like Abbey Gate St. that occupy the full width 
of the sign, centring does not strictly apply (see Figure 3.4). However, the two extra lines 
<FORMERLY> and <LODDER LANE> are centred neatly below <ABBEY GATESt.>. 
Incidentally, the lack of a space between <GATE> and <St.> led me, for one, into thinking 
for many years that the street was called Abbey Gates, not Abbey Gate Street.
Figure 3.5 Centring by columns (Pay here, LPR; Blackfriars Court, SS)
The sign may sometimes in eff ect be divided into centred columns (see Figure 3.5). 
In Pay here, the top two lines of text <Pay here / at machine> are centred in a right-hand 
column, while the iconic < P > is in a left-hand column; the third line <Display Ɵ cket> 
is centred on the whole sign. Similarly, Blackfriars Court has the Newcastle coat of 
arms on the left; <BLACKFRIARS COURT> and <GRAINGER TOWN> centre the 
rest of the sign on the right, superﬁ cially the Ogilvy Formula. Centring within columns 
is also common in menus outside restaurants like Gert & Henry’s (Figure 3.15).
Centring extends to the placement of naming signs in their situations (Figure 3.6). 
Central Arcade centres the Edwardian art deco sign around an arch. The name sign 
Dog & Pheasant is centred at high-level within the architecture of the whole pub, in 
three-dimensional gilt letters. Headgate positions both <HEADGATE> and 
<FORMERLY HOLMER’S LANE …> centrally at high-level between the windows 
(which incidentally feature a tromp-de-l’oeil painting of a diminutive maidservant, 
allegedly starved to death in the cellar of the adjacent pub). There is also a neat contrast 
between the two letter styles from diff erent centuries used for Headgate and Formerly 
Holmer’s Lane. In Nos 30 & 28, < 30 > and < 28 > are centred on the doors at eye-level 
height with gold-coloured serif numbers.
66 The Language of the English Street Sign

Figure 3.6 Centring on objects (Central Arcade, Newcastle; Nos 30 & 28, LPR; Dog & Pheasant, 
Headgate, Colchester)
The Language System of the Street 67

The fact that centring and line-breaks are important to the grammar of the street 
seems obvious as soon as it is pointed out. Yet, apart from title pages, headings and the 
like, centring is not a usual feature of written English, presumably because it would 
interfere with the eye moving from line to line in connected texts; line-breaks are rele-
vant only to printed verse. The street sign relies on special cues of its own.
Capital Letters in English Street Signs
This section discusses the way in which street signs exploit the contrast between 
capitals and lower case available in writing.
The conventions for capitals are mostly laid down in prescriptive guides published 
by self-appointed gatekeepers representing particular institutions. The Penguin Guide 
to Punctuation (Trask, 1997), The Cassell Guide to Punctuation (Todd, 1995) and 
NASA’s Grammar, Punctuation and Capitalization (McCaskill, 1998) are based on 
expert opinion and tradition, not on appropriate text corpora, even if such rules are 
taken as diktats by the general public. Academic writers are subject to similar prescrip-
tivism from dictatorial style guides for journals.
The rule that capitals start sentences is marginally relevant for street signs since 
they have so few full sentences. Planning Notice (Figure 3.1) keeps sentence-initial capi-
tals but dispenses with sentence-ﬁ nal stops. The ubiquitous use of line-initial capitals 
in combination with line-breaks has been mentioned above. The distinctive features of 
street signs are word-initial capitals and texts in all-capitals or all lower case.
Word-initial capitals
Initial capital letters are used in the print system for certain classes of words, such 
as proper names, and for content words in book titles, called ‘headline style’ in 
McCaskill (1998).
Word-initial capitals are common in street signs (Figure 3.7). Motorists shows the 
common practice of starting each word with a capital. In All Time Specials, a handwrit-
ten café blackboard, every word starts with a capital except <in>. The parking notice 
Warning similarly has word-initial caps except for <in operation>. An offi  cial sign on 
Colchester Town Hall, Customer Service Centre, capitalises all the words apart from 
the function words in, of, for, the, or, be and the verb deposited. Capitalising content 
words but not function words harks back to 17th century English in which content 
words were capitalised in some styles, similar to modern German, seen in the capital-
ised nouns of the Constitution of the United States (1787). It survives in book titles such 
as Lord of the Rings or Across the River and into the Trees. Subjectively, these street 
signs seem quaint and amateurish rather than everyday.
All-capitals
In the print system, phrases in all capital letters are used for title pages of books, 
headlines in printed editions of tabloid newspapers, and some restricted uses such as 
acronyms. Texts in all-capitals are attacked as ‘shouting’ in web netiquette and indeed 
68 The Language of the English Street Sign

in contemporary advice to university students, although this goes back to at least the 
mid-19th century:
“YOU DIDN’T GO IN, Rawdon!” screamed his wife. (W.M. Thackeray, 1847, Vanity Fair)
Figure 3.7 Notices with word-initial capitals (Motorists, Coggeshall, Essex; Warning, Newcastle; 
All Time Specials, Customer Service Centre, Colchester)
All-capitals are, however, almost the default mode for street signs: perhaps shouting is 
necessary for signs to get attention. Street and building name signs are typically in all-
capitals, as seen in Abbey GateSt (Figure 3.4), Central Arcade (Figure 3.6) and through-
out Chapter 5. Even entire texts may be written in all-capitals, like those in Alderman 
Fenwick’s House (Figure 2.8).
Figure 3.8 shows the use of gilt capital letters for pub names in The Percy Arms in 
the serif all-capitals of the native English signwriting tradition, with the additional twist 
of non-word-initial letters being small caps. Parking signs like Private and Parking for 
Doctors tend to be in all-capitals, reinforcing their authoritative tone. The shop window 
sign You are man? has all-capitals <YOU ARE MAN?> for a man, and initial capital 
plus lower case <You are woman?> for a woman; the heroically bearded man is natu-
rally in the left-hand window.
Memorials such as the Welcome plaque on the pavement of Eldon Square or Castle 
Park at eye-level at the park entrance (Figure 3.9) are usually incised or raised letters on 
stone or metal, the materials suggesting permanence, as discussed in Chapter 4. 
Welcome skilfully highlights the golden letters in black so that they stand out from the 
The Language System of the Street 69

same-coloured bronze background. Castle Park illustrates how to emphasise incised 
noun-initial capital letters by colouring them red as well as making them larger.
Figure 3.8 Signs in all-capitals (Private, LPR; Percy Arms, LPZ; Parking for Doctors, Colchester; You 
Are Man?, Newcastle)
At the opposite end come unique signs made by ‘non-expert’ writers with a pen or 
a brush, which also favour all-capitals (Walker, 2001). Wet Paint and Sweet Mother’s 
Day (Figure 3.10) epitomise these straightforward temporary notices. Wet Paint has a 
large brush-pointed sign. Sweet Mother’s Day makes partial use of slightly larger word-
initial capitals like the ﬁ rst < S >, made with a felt-tip. It seems to be assumed that capi-
tals are more legible and easier to make, particularly on a large scale with brushes and 
paint, as in No Entry to Doctor’s Surgery (Figure 2.13).
All lower case letters
A text in all lower case letters can be a deliberate rebellion against the print system 
and so become a mark of the avant garde poet, as with Archie, the cockroach:
i was once a vers libre bard
but i died and my soul went into the body of a cockroach (Marquis, 1927)
70 The Language of the English Street Sign

Figure 3.9 Commemorative signs (Welcome, Newcastle; Castle Park, Colchester)
Figure 3.10 All-capitals in ‘non-expert’ hand-drawn signs (Wet Paint, Sweet Mother’s Day, LPR)
although here caused by his inability to use the shift key on a typewriter. This seems 
another spinoff  from the Bauhaus, which adopted all lower case in its offi  cial publica-
tions in 1923, and the Swiss school of typography it inspired: Tschichold (1998 [1928]) 
talked of ‘the great advantage to the national economy’ that would arise from the sole 
use of lower case.
Figure 3.11 shows three street signs in all lower case letters. Elegant signs like the 
terrace seem more about corporate identity than artistic rebellion. The fascia-level mer-
curytheatre illustrates an unusual use of lower case letters for a building name, and also 
omits the word space as if it were an email address. Capitals are absent from the offi  cial 
eye-level parking sign payby phone, with full stops also lacking, giving a more informal 
tone than usual in parking regulations, together with the sans serif letters. But, to my 
eye, this notice is less legible than one with a more liberal use of capital letters.
Mixed capitals and lower case within the same word
The print system uses capitals within a word in Irish- and Scottish-derived surnames, 
which may or may not have a capital after Mac-, MacWhinney versus Macgregor.
The Language System of the Street 71

Figure 3.11 Signs with no capital letters (the terrace, Newcastle; paybyphone, LPR; mercurythe-
atre, Colchester)
Figure 3.12 illustrates the use of word-internal capitals in modern cross-media signs 
for company names. Usually capitals signal morpheme splits within compound words, 
often blended names, as in StarkHartleyAtkinson. The familiar logos NatWest and 
FennWright for high street businesses are used across many media, and so are more part 
of the naming conventions for businesses than of the language of street signs. To take 
some non-street examples of capital use, an experimental system to minimise mistakes 
in dispensing medicat ions found that printing the second part of the name in capitals 
led to fewer errors (Filika et al., 2004); a modern novel is titled HHhH (Binet, 2012).
72 The Language of the English Street Sign

Figure 3.12 Mixing capitals and lower case within the same word (StarkHartleyAtkinson, LPR; 
NatWest, FennWright, Colchester)
The ways of using capitals and lower case in street signs clearly diff er from those in 
the accepted print system. Sentence-initial capitals are rarely seen and then only in 
‘offi  cial’ long-text notices. All-capitals are the norm for inscriptions, warning and non-
expert notices, naming signs and text artwork, rather than ‘shouting’. All lower case 
letters make a statement about individuality and modernity. Line-initial capitals punc-
tuate by separating phrases. Word-initial capitals are used not only for proper names 
but also sometimes for all words, sometimes for content words alone.
The Punctuation of Street Signs
Punctuation started as a way to help poor readers read manuscripts aloud (Parkes, 
1992) by indicating pauses, intonation, etc. (Cook, 2004a) – a system for symbol-sound 
correspondence. Since we have argued that street signs are rarely read aloud, this use 
of punctuation is of marginal relevance here.
But, as the habit of silent reading spread in the Middle Ages, punctuation developed 
into a way of helping the reader to understand the text by marking out its grammatical 
structure. Grammatical punctuation marks show the boundaries of syntactic units and 
the relationships between them, and abbreviation where words are shortened by 
The Language System of the Street 73

omitting letters. Sentences begin with a capital and end with one of the punctuation 
marks < . ! ? >; clauses and phrases are separated by < – , ; : >; words are delimited by 
word spaces. Marks like < ‘ ’ “ ” – > separate units for purposes such as quotation 
(Cook, 2004a). Punctuation links grammatical units through the hyphen < - > in com-
pound words <tea-cup> and the apostrophe <ROSIE’S BAR> (Figure 3.3). The empha-
sis here is on grammatical punctuation.
Punctuation marks occasionally have a meaning in themselves. The from-to 
dash < – > in < pp. 25–27 > has a meaning equivalent to ‘from X to Y’. The colon in 
<Man proposes: God disposes> implies a link between the two clauses, paraphrasable 
as ‘but’. Other uses of punctuation marks include < ’ . > for single or multiple letter 
omission, as in <doesn’t> or <St.> (Figure 3.14). More details are given in Cook (2013b).
Like the shibboleth spelling mentioned in the last chapter, some punctuation ‘mis-
takes’ have been ascribed to illiteracy or lack of class. Confusing the uses of <its> and 
<it’s> as in <Its head/it’s head> <It’s new/its new>, using an ‘Oxford’ comma before the 
and that concludes a list <the birds, the bees, and the sycamore trees>, or referring to 
<Newcastle-upon-Tyne> go beyond simple mistakes to show a depravity of soul. Yet, 
like the shibboleth spelling rules, no authority has the right to lay down such regula-
tions: linguists describe what occurs, as physicists describe electrons. Nevertheless, 
writers of street signs have to take into account the risks of going against popular opin-
ion by deliberately or accidentally using non-standard punctuation.
Table 3.1 compares the frequency of punctuation marks per thousand words in the 
NCL sample with the print sample described in Cook (2013b), which consisted of 459 
thousand words from diverse text types. Given the large number of variables involved, 
such comparisons must be suggestive rather than deﬁ nitive.
Table 3.1 Punctuation mark frequencies per 1000 words
NCL
Print
Full stops
12
65.3
Commas
11.4
61.6
Overall
37
235.2
Source: Cook (2013b, 2020b).
The street signs in the NCL sample had an average of 37 punctuation marks per thou-
sand words, considerably less than the 235.2 for print. Stops used as separators in money 
expressions like < £10.95 > are common in menus and are also found in num-
bers < 3.142 > and web addresses – the decimal stop (Cook, 2015). Setting these aside, full 
stops averaged 12 per 1000 words in street signs, 65.3 in print. Commas occurred 11.4 
times per 1000 words, compared to 61.6 in print; 46% of the commas in street signs were 
for listing items, compared to the 20% found by Bayraktar et al. (1998) in newspaper texts.
The NCL sample averages one punctuation mark for every 11.5 words, the print 
sample one for every 4.3 words. Overall, after excluding decimal and abbreviation stops 
74 The Language of the English Street Sign

and from-to dashes, 53.7% of signs in the NCL sample had no punctuation and only 
4.1% had sentence-ﬁ nal full stops. The NCL sample thus uses punctuation sparingly. 
While the NCL sample is fairly small, it includes all signs, not just, say, shop names.
Although the punctuation in the general sample cannot be reliably quantiﬁ ed 
because the signs were selected, the ﬁ gures conﬁ rm the sparseness of punctuation. 
Sentences in street signs are mostly not signalled by full stops, nor phrases and clauses 
by commas. The <ST THOMAS STREET.> sign (Figure 3.14) is unusual in ending a 
street name with a full stop. Social media texts also frequently do without full stops, 
which can communicate insincerity (Gunraj et al., 2016).
The typical full stop in street signs shows abbreviation in nouns such as street < St.> 
as in <Abbey GateSt.> (Figure 3.4) and saint <St.>, seen together in <St. Thomas St.> 
(Figure 3.14), or <Ltd.> as in McCowie & Co Ltd. (Figure 4.6). The abbreviation full 
stop does not always occur where the letters are expected but after the whole word, as 
in <St.>, often beneath the < t > as in <St. James St.> (Figure 3.14). Other familiar 
examples are <Ave.> and <Mr.> (Figure 4.6). Road marking signs for drivers on the 
roadway sometimes have almost impenetrable abbreviations like So’ton (Southampton) 
or Bps Stortford (Bishops Stortford). Novel punctuation in naming signs is discussed in 
Chapter 7.
A minor use of the full stop is to divide up numbers, for example < £3.99 > in 
Scampi (Figure 3.16) and < £10.95 > (Figure 3.2), known as the decimal point; some 
countries prefer the decimal comma. Interestingly, several handwritten street signs 
show the raised dot formerly used in England for decimal numbers < £3.85 > (Figure 
3.7), < £8.95 > (Figure 3.15) before the currency was decimalised in 1971, presumably 
giving away the writer’s age.
Use of the Apostrophe
When the apostrophe < ’> came into English in the 15th century, its ﬁ rst use was to 
show that a letter had been left out, as in <don’t>, <I’m> or <it’s> (Scholﬁ eld, 2016). 
Indeed, the missing letters in < ’em > in Give ’em hell, reﬂ ect an even earlier Old English 
<hem> of 1200 years ago rather than the <them> of the invading Viking word them.
Many ﬁ nal < e(s) > endings on modern nouns are reduced forms of the Old English 
cases, which died out over the centuries. When the Middle English genitive inﬂ ection 
<es> became irrelevant to speech, the < e > could be replaced by < ’ >, i.e. become silent, 
so <fatheres>, for example, could be written as <father’s>. The replacement 
of < e > by < ’ > was extended to other genitive noun inﬂ ections regardless of whether 
they had < e >, plus an added convention that the apostrophe should follow the geni-
tive < s > when the noun was plural, <fathers’>. The apostrophe shifted from indicating 
the absence of a sound in speech to showing the genitive case, i.e. from correspondence 
punctuation to grammatical punctuation. But this usage was not extended to personal 
pronouns like < hers > (Scholﬁ eld, 2016), let alone to plural nouns not in the genitive case.
The English writing system had therefore come up with a novel way of disambigu-
ating words with the same pronunciation. It is useful to be able to distinguish fathers, 
The Language System of the Street 75

father’s and fathers’, or it’s and its in writing, even if it is unlikely that people actually 
confuse them in speech. Nevertheless this seems to have perplexed English writers 
ever since.
Apostrophes in shop names and building names
The genitive apostrophe < ’ > thus shows ownership in street and building names.
Figure 3.13 Building names with apostrophes (Nancy’s Bordello, Holy Jesus’ Hospital, Newcastle; 
Magistrates’ Courts, Colchester)
The high-level sign Nancy’s Bordello painted on brick has the singular genitive 
<Nancy’s>; despite its fadedness, the restaurant still exists. The apostrophe of Holy 
Jesus’ Hospital in a way shows <Jesus’s> lack of two letters. The sign has a more 
modern sans serif letter style than might be expected on a historical religious building. 
It stands out by being left-aligned rather than centred. It also incidentally illustrates the 
use of graffi  ti writers’ tags, to be discussed later. Magistrates’ Courts is a plural genitive 
<MAGISTRATES’> in silver applied all-capitals in the high zone.
Apostrophes in street names
The question of whether an apostrophe is needed in street name signs has never 
been resolved, as Figure 3.14 shows.
The St Thomas signs come from the LPZ area adjoining Leazes Park Road, the 
St James signs from the area adjacent to St James’ Park stadium. They highlight the 
inconsistency of apostrophes in street signs, sometimes even for the same street. St 
James’ Park names the football stadium, home of Newcastle United, 100 yards or so 
from Leazes Park Road; the apostrophe here relates to two missing letters <es> 
<Jameses>, a form for words ending in < s > seldom found in street signs apart from, 
say, <St Gileses-Terrace> in Oxford.
76 The Language of the English Street Sign

Figure 3.14 Apostrophes in street names (St Thomas Square/Crescent/Street/Terrace, St James 
Street (edited), LPZ; St James Boulevard/Park, Newcastle)
Whether the stadium is <St. James Park> or <St. James’ Park> is a great concern 
for Toonies, the fans of Newcastle United, and debated about with much passion and a 
host of folk etymological arguments in local newspapers and the like. A university col-
league and I were interviewed separately by local television about which was correct – 
and came to opposite conclusions. Nothing much hinges on the choice except some 
sense of identity.
Building and shop names with and without apostrophes
Traditional grammarians for many years had their own version of the apostrophe 
debate in terms of whether one wrote Harrods or Harrod’s, Woolworths or Woolworth’s. 
Zandvoort (1957: 105) related this ‘local genitive’ to an unexpressed noun, say Harrod’s 
(shop), even when this form never actually appears.
 –
Greggs is a classic all-capitals name sign without an apostrophe, despite still being 
run by the Gregg family in Newcastle.
 –
Waterstone’s bookshop changed in the 2010s to Waterstones, having lost its origi-
nal owner, Tim Waterstone; the apostrophe is being faded out almost literally in 
their logo to make it ‘more versatile’ (BBC, 2012), and the letters are now lower case 
black rather than gilt capitals.
The Language System of the Street 77

 –
Master Mariner’s, a house sign, shows the local genitive with implied noun.
 –
Gert and Henry’s restaurant in York appears as <Gert and Henry’s> on Facebook 
but as <Gert and Henry> on Tripadvisor.
 –
Our Lady sign has a curiously logical form <Our Lady and St Annes’ Primary 
School> where the genitive < s > belongs to the compound noun phrase <Our Lady 
and St Anne> and so has been given a plural form; their website (http://www.olsa.
org.uk/), however, gives it throughout as <Our Lady and St Anne’s Primary School>, 
as do other schools with this name.
Figure 3.15 Name signs in < s > with and without < ’ > (Greggs, LPR; Waterstone’s, Colchester; 
Master Mariner’s, Blakeney; Our Lady, Newcastle; Gert & Henry’s, York)
Missing apostrophes on signs are also common, like <DOCTORS CARS> in 
Parking for Doctors (Figure 3.8). Clearly the use of the genitive apostrophe is still as 
variable as it has ever been.
78 The Language of the English Street Sign

The greengrocer’s apostrophe
The greengrocer’s apostrophe is called after their widespread habit of labelling their 
wares <Banana’s> and <Carrot’s>. The everyday ‘mistake’ is generalising the apostro-
phe to all nouns with plural s rather than just those genitive singulars, with some leeway 
for dates <1600’s>, abbreviations <CD’s> and the like, at least for some gatekeepers – 
book editors seem peculiarly hostile to these exceptions.
The failure to observe the < ’s > conventions has become a shibboleth of literacy and 
public discussion of language. What started as a useful minor convenience became a 
millstone on writer’s shoulders, treated with scorn in books such as the massive best-
seller Eats, Shoots and Leaves (Truss, 2004). It inspired a ‘grammar vigilante’ in Bristol 
to paint apostrophes on street signs where he thinks they are needed (BBC, 2017). 
Ironically, from photos, he seems to paint primes < ′ > rather than apostrophes < ’ >, a 
mistake of a diff erent type (Bringhurst, 2005: 316).
Figure 3.16 Greengrocer’s apostrophes (Scampi, LPR; Lecture Theatre’s, Newcastle; Super 
Sunday’s, Colchester)
Scampi shows three greengrocer’s apostrophes on a restaurant sign <Chip’s with 
Pea’s or Bean’s>, Super Sunday’s a single prominent example <Sunday’s>. Although 
Lecture Theatre’s is in an entrance not a street, <LECTURE THEATRE’S> and 
<TOILET’S> illustrate how widespread this practice is, even in higher education.
The Language System of the Street 79

The greengrocer’s apostrophe is an established and enduring element in the lan-
guage of unique street signs, however much self-nominated pundits may complain. 
Further examples can be found on such websites as The Greengrocer’s Apostrophe 
(Cook, 2020a) and The Apostrophe Protection Society (2020). Its critics elevate knowl-
edge of apostrophe use to a shibboleth for literacy. A similar shibboleth is against ’till 
(Figure 4.7). Till and until have been distinct words since Old English rather than till 
being an abbreviation (Cook, 2004b).
The Vocabulary of Street Signs
As a distinctive genre of written language, street signs employ words that are rarely 
heard in speech. Street signs in Colchester say Don’t park on the greensward and 
Cyclists must dismount, vocabulary usually associated with Robin Hood. The 
Newcastle Metro still warns Before boarding let people alight ﬁ rst; I cannot remember 
ever hearing anyone say alight and I do not know whether its past tense is alit or 
alighted; OED (2015) gives both.
Figure 3.17 Old-fashioned written words (Vehicular Access, Hughes’ Fish, Colchester; Main 
Entrance Closed, Newcastle)
One curious pocket of street sign vocabulary is the preservation of archaic trades 
and shops, usually in unique signs. Hughes’ Fish has ﬁ shmongers, rarely heard in 
speech. Signs also feature cheesemongers, apothecary, haberdashers and ﬂ eshers, 
although the latter was only glimpsed in Scotland. Such names are either genuine his-
toric survivals or self-conscious attempts at antiqueness as in SPACE.NK.apothecary 
(Figure 2.25), chosen for the images of corporate businesses.
Other street vocabulary items seem to be selected for their connotations of formal-
ity and offi  cialdom, say, vehicular or egress found in Main Entrance Closed, although 
80 The Language of the English Street Sign

both do occur in the British National Corpus. The vocabulary of traffic signs and of 
street and building names is also restricted by regulation, as seen in Chapter 5; the word 
Road is, for instance, banned from the City of London proper.
Graffiti and Text Art
Graffiti and text art are often considered the most distinctive and interesting of 
street signs. The term graffiti is defined by English Heritage (1999) as ‘words, scribbling 
or drawings used in the deliberate, unauthorised defacement of a surface’, adopting an 
owner’s perspective that graffiti detract from the objects on which they are placed and 
that the motive for making them is defacement, not enhancement or challenge. In Ross 
(2016: 476), graffiti are ‘words, figures, and images that have been written, drawn, and/
or etched into or on surfaces where the owner has NOT given permission’, concurring 
that graffiti are additions to existing surfaces and lack permission but assigning no 
motive to them.
Defacement and lack of permission represent the traditional way of looking at graffiti 
in, say, the classical signs of Pompeii and Rome (Baird & Taylor, 2016) or those in medi-
aeval churches (Champion, 2015). Linguists have mostly seen graffiti as transgressive, 
‘the process of writing/drawing illicitly’ (Pennycook, 2009: 306): Soukup (2020) talks of 
‘illegally placed stickers’ on signs in Vienna without explaining which laws they break.
When graffiti writers are prosecuted in English courts, it is, however, for the offense 
of criminal damage, not for lack of permission. Many graffiti could be said to be 
licensed through deemed permission under the Outdoor Advertisements (DCLG, 
2007) regulations. In England, it is the physical damage the signs cause that needs to be 
punished:
1) A person who without lawful excuse destroys or damages any property belonging to 
another intending to destroy or damage any such property being reckless as to whether 
any such property would be destroyed or damaged shall be guilty of an offence. 
(Criminal Damage Act, 1971)
It is then criminal to write Coca-Cola on a lorry with a spray can but legal to cover the 
whole lorry with an advertisement for Coca-Cola. Banksy claims it is not so much graf-
fiti writers that vandalise our streets as ‘the companies that scrawl giant logos across 
buildings and buses trying to make us feel inadequate unless we buy their products’ 
(Banksy, 2005: 8).
The signs in Figure 3.18 illustrate the pervasive use of all-capitals in graffiti and text 
art. Of the 300 English examples of text art in Cook (2021, unpublished), 64% have 
all-capitals, 2.4% all lower case and 10.1% the usual prose style of sentence and proper 
name initial capitals.
Graffiti like Mark Lvz Liz 4eva are an English tradition that has endured for genera-
tions, whether protestations of love, scatological remarks or mock identities such as 
Chad looking over a wall, often accompanied by the text Kilroy woz here. These shade 
into political slogans like the renowned London campaign Free George Davis that 
The Language System of the Street  81

successfully freed an unjustly convicted bank robber, only for him to be caught red-
handed while robbing another bank shortly after his release; signs were still visible on 
railway bridges 40 years later. Social media have now largely taken over this protest 
role; tweeting a message is easier than climbing a railway embankment in the dark.
Figure 3.18 Graffi  ti and text art (Mark Lvz Lizs 4eva, Newcastle; Self portrait, Mark Wallinger, 
Gateshead; Is this the place of your dreams?, Mark Titchner, Colchester)
Traditional graffi  ti like Mark Lvz Liza 4eva can be readily deﬁ ned in terms of 
defacement and lack of permission. Owners of historic buildings see them as a threat 
in that many can only be removed with diffi  culty, if at all (English Heritage, 1999). 
82 The Language of the English Street Sign

Ironically some graffi  ti are themselves historical monuments, like those inscribed on 
Hadrian’s Wall by Roman soldiers or Lord Byron’s tag preserved in a dungeon at the 
Château du Chillon.
Graffi  ti now usually refers to signs like the name tag on Holy Jesus (Figure 3.13) 
that spread from 1960s New York streets around the world as fast as McDonald’s, 
covered in books such as Ross (2016) and Waclawek (2011). Tags, for example, pro-
claim gang membership and self-identity within a subculture and show off  skill and 
originality (Waclawek, 2011); they involve an element of risk from prosecution and 
from the physical danger of placing signs in spaces only accessible through climbing or 
a ladder, like high zone Invader (4.13). However, in the New York epicentre of modern 
graffi  ti, most works are now done legally with the permission of the site owner and an 
illegal graffi  ti writer only lasts six months (Kramer, 2016).
The hanging banner < I > is a work by Mark Wallinger called Self Portrait, repeated 
in many versions in diff erent locations; the one seen here is on the Baltic Gallery, 
Gateshead, in Times New Roman on a gigantic scale 20 metres high. Is this the place 
of your dreams? forms part of a project by Mark Titchner that appeared in several 
unused Colchester shop windows in 2020 in forceful sans serif capitals.
Invader provides a link to the parallel cultural movement of text art in public spaces, 
glimpsed in I and Is this the place of your dreams?, as likely to be seen in a gallery as in 
a street. Rather than lacking permission, text art is commissioned by owners as artwork 
and commands enormous prices, say the $26,485,000 paid for Apocalypse Now by 
Christopher Wool (Christie’s, 2020). Banksy and Invader straddle both traditions – 
prestigious art originally done without permission in public places – but the motivations 
are rather diff erent. The graffi  ti coverage in The Routledge Handbook of Graffi  ti and 
Street Art (Ross, 2016), for example, has little overlap with the text art in Art and Text 
(Beech et al., 2009).
While graffi  ti and text art need to be mentioned here, they ﬁ t uncomfortably because 
their functions and meanings go beyond social life and movement (Cook, 2021, unpub-
lished), and they belong to international cultural movements rather than being speciﬁ cally 
English. The language of the street framework can at best comment on the prevalence in 
these signs of all-capitals, the crudeness of the execution of much text art compared to the 
work of signwriters, the use of distinctive materials in graffi  ti such as spray paint, and the 
characteristic language content involved, whether slogans, aphorisms or name tags.
Conclusion
In the light of this chapter, the language of the street is a special genre of written 
language that is rarely read aloud and is sometimes eff ectively impossible to read aloud. 
Letter-sound correspondences are more of historical interest than relevant for the 
modern street sign. Meaning depends on how letters contrast with each other and on 
their variable forms, plus the connotations to be dealt with in Chapter 7.
Above letters come grammatical and lexical systems, partly a small subset of the 
standard language, with obvious biases towards nouns and noun phrases, a minimal 
The Language System of the Street 83

use of verbs and punctuation, some archaic vocabulary and common use of novel spell-
ing forms. But, in addition, street signs include: a level at which arrangement in space 
creates meanings, such as the Ogilvy Formula; a notion of salience in which headers, 
etc., are made prominent in various ways; the use of distinctive punctuation such as 
line-breaks and apostrophes; a complex system of capitals and lower case letters con-
veying diverse meanings; and a reliance on centring of text within the sign and of the 
sign within the environment. This goes further than Halliday’s economy grammar in 
establishing a genre of written language all of its own, diff ering from the written lan-
guage of printed books in more ways than the absence of certain features.
A ﬁ nal coda is needed to remind the reader of the standard axiom mentioned in 
Chapter 2 that linguistics is descriptive, not prescriptive. The point of street signs 
research is not to decree what should or should not appear on signs. It is not a matter 
of whether line-breaks, greengrocer’s apostrophes etc. are correct in terms of some 
prescriptive account of English but of how they are used. Although often inappropriate 
in other genres of English, such as printed books and newspapers, they succeed in con-
veying the meanings appropriate to street signs.
84 The Language of the English Street Sign

