CHAPTER 8
Thermal Properties of the Ocean
The oceans of the Earth form an enormously complex sys-
tem whose behavior has important eﬀects on a huge range
of human activities. Oceans contain ﬂows of both seawater
and heat, e.g., the Gulf Stream.
They are acted upon by
solar energy, wind, and freshwater input. Physical quantities
relevant for describing ocean behavior are temperature, ﬂuid
velocity, seawater density, and salinity.
Our treatment of the ocean’s thermal behavior is necessar-
ily brief. In the next two sections, Secs. (8.1) and (8.2), we
introduce the notion of heat current and derive an equation
that can describe the ﬂow of heat in the ocean. In Sec. (8.3),
we present Fermi’s application of the heat equation to the
diurnal behavior of the ocean near its surface.
Finally, in
Secs. (8.4) and (8.5), we give an overview of the variation of
temperature with ocean depth and ocean circulation.

120
CHAPTER 8. OCEAN PROPERTIES
8.1
Heat Current and Thermal
Conductivity
The direction of heat ﬂow in a body is from higher to lower
temperatures. The heat current density, q, normally speciﬁed
in units of watts per square meter (W/m2), measures the rate
at which heat ﬂows across unit area. In the simplest situation
(no convection or mixing), the heat current is linear in the
temperature gradient,
q = −κ∇T,
(8.1)
where κ is the heat conductivity of whatever material is con-
ducting heat. The SI unit of κ is W/m K.1 Examples of κ,
all in W/m K, are copper, 401; seawater, 0.62; air at 25◦C,
0.026. Water, and seawater in particular, has a value of heat
conductivity three or four times greater than wood or wool,
but only a fourth that of common rock and, as seen above,
far less than that of metals. Seawater or water in general
may be said to be a rather poor conductor of heat. In fact
the temperature of the ocean falls only by about 20◦C from
the surface to a depth of 1000 m. Estimating the gradient of
temperature to be 0.02◦C/m, the downward heat current is
approximately 1.2 W/m2, a quite small value.
Fermi emphasizes the relative smallness of the heat conduc-
tivity of seawater by comparing the eﬀects of thermal conduc-
tivity in seawater to the actual rate at which heat is transmit-
ted by “mechanical exchanges” such as currents or convection
in general. The diﬀerence is roughly a factor of 105. Using
κsw = 0.62 W/m K, and multiplying the heat conductivity of
seawater by 105, Fermi deﬁnes an “eﬀective thermal conduc-
tivity,” κeff ∼6.2 × 104 W/m K, or κeff ∼143 cal/cm s K.
1The relation to an older commonly used unit is 1 W/m K = 2.39 ×
10−3cal/cm s K.

8.2. THE HEAT EQUATION
121
Using κeff instead of κsw in Eq. (8.1) provides a simple way
to estimate the eﬀects of mechanical exchanges. An example
of this is given in Sec. (8.3).
8.2
The Heat Equation
Local Heat Absorption
In the thermodynamics of a uni-
form system, the heat transfer and the change in entropy are
related by
dQ = TdS.
(8.2)
For a ﬂuid system in local equilibrium, the heat transferred
to a system per second is given by the surface integral of the
heat current. The rate of heat transfer to a volume of ﬂuid is
dQ
dt = −
Z
S
(q · dA),
(8.3)
where S is the surface bounding the system, and dA is di-
rected along the outward normal of a surface element. The
minus sign in Eq. (8.3) assures that −(q · dA) is the rate
at which heat ﬂows across dA into the volume V. Using the
divergence theorem to transform the surface integral to a vol-
ume integral, we have
dQ
dt = −
Z
V
(∇· q)dV.
(8.4)
From Eq. (8.4), it follows that −∇· q is the local rate of heat
transfer/volume. From the second law of thermodynamics,
this must equal the product of temperature and the rate of
change of the entropy/volume, ρs, where ρ is the mass den-
sity, and s is the entropy/mass. We have
T d
dt(ρs) = −∇· q.
(8.5)

122
CHAPTER 8. OCEAN PROPERTIES
In Eq. (8.5) the time derivative for a moving ﬂuid must be
the “substantial derivative,” or the derivative moving with
the ﬂuid, as in Euler’s ﬂuid equation. Eq. (8.5) thus becomes
T[∂(ρs)
∂t
+ v · ∇(ρs)] = −∇· q,
(8.6)
or
T[s(∂ρ
∂t + v · ∇ρ) + ρ(∂s
∂t + v · ∇s)] = −∇· q.
(8.7)
Since ρ obeys the continuity equation, as we see in Eq. (9.2),
this simpliﬁes to
Tρ(∂s
∂t + v · ∇s) = −∇· q.
(8.8)
Eq. (8.8) ignores viscous eﬀects, but viscosity is negligible for
both water and air. It is worth noting that if ∇· q = 0,
Eq. (8.8) states that s obeys its own continuity equation; mov-
ing with the ﬂuid, the entropy/mass is constant.
Heat Equation
The elimination of entropy in Eq. (8.8)
takes place after a replacement of the form Td(ρs) →cdT,
where c is a speciﬁc heat/mass for the ﬂuid, in this case sea-
water. Fermi does not specify whether c means the speciﬁc
heat at constant volume, cv, or at constant pressure, cp. To
see why, it is useful at this point to review a few facts about
the speciﬁc heat of seawater. These are as follows: (1) at all
depths of the ocean, the values of cp and cv are within 1% of
each other; and (2) over the tremendous range of pressures
that exist between the surface and bottom of the ocean, cp
and cv vary by less than 10%. Remarks (1) and (2) also hold
accurately in going from pure water to water with the saline
content found in ocean water.

8.3. DIURNAL TEMPERATURE VARIATION
123
So, although the pressure varies over a large range in the
ocean, the two common speciﬁc heats are essentially equal
and insensitive to the pressure. In what follows, we will de-
note the common speciﬁc heat as csw, assumed constant, with
the well-determined surface value csw = 4.0 kJ/kg K.
Making the replacement Td(ρs) →cswdT, and using Eq. (8.1)
for q, Eq. (8.8) becomes
(ρc)sw(∂T
∂t + v · ∇T) = −∇· q.
(8.9)
Eq. (8.9) is quite general.
In particular, it can be applied
when convection and mixing are present.
When the heat
current is given by Eq. (8.1) and the ﬂuid is at rest, Eq. (8.9)
reduces to the familiar form of the heat equation,
∂T
∂t = χsw∇2T,
(8.10)
where
χsw = ( κ
ρc)sw
(8.11)
is the “thermal diﬀusivity.” Using ρsw = 1024 kg/m3, κsw =
0.6 W/m K, and csw = 4 kJ/kg K, we have χsw = 1.47 ×
10−7 m2/s. The diﬀusivity is tabulated for many materials.
As is obvious from Eq. (8.11), better heat conductors have
higher χ values. For example the thermal diﬀusivity of gold
is larger than χsw by a factor of roughly 1000.
8.3
Diurnal Temperature Variation
We now turn to Fermi’s application of Eq. (8.10) to the ﬂow
of heat near the surface of the ocean. The heat ﬂow is taken
to be perpendicular to the surface of the sea, so we have a

124
CHAPTER 8. OCEAN PROPERTIES
single spatial derivative,
∂T
∂t = χsw
∂2T
∂z2 .
(8.12)
The solution sought has both oscillatory and nonoscillatory
time variation. The former has a frequency determined by the
length of a day and accounts for the daily variation in heat
incident on the ocean’s surface.
The nonoscillatory terms
allow for a mean temperature and mean temperature gradient
in the ocean. Taking the positive direction for z downward,
a solution of Eq. (8.12) which satisﬁes these conditions is
T(z) = A + Bz + C exp(−iωt) exp(−az + ibz),
(8.13)
where A, B, C, a, b are all constant, and we temporarily drop
the sw subscript. We will eventually superpose the oscillatory
term in Eq. (8.13) and its complex conjugate to obtain a real
function. Demanding that the trial form satisfy Eq. (8.12),
we have
−iω = χ(−a + ib)2 = χ(a2 −2iab −b2),
(8.14)
or
ω = χ[i(a2 −b2) + 2ab].
(8.15)
The real and imaginary parts of this equation give
a2 = b2,
(8.16)
ω = 2χab.
On physical grounds a must be positive. From Eqs. (8.16),
we have |b| = |a|, with b and ω having the same sign. Using
all this, a real form for T(t, z) is
T(t, z) = A + Bz + δT cos(ωt −az + η)e−az,
(8.17)

8.3. DIURNAL TEMPERATURE VARIATION
125
where η is a constant phase. For the application of interest,
ω is determined by the length of a day, 86, 400 s, so
ω =
2π
86, 400 rad/s,
(8.18)
and
a =
r ω
2χ.
(8.19)
Before evaluating a, let us determine A and B. If we average
over one day, the oscillatory terms in T(t, z) give zero. De-
noting the temperature averaged over a day at sea level by
¯T0, and that at depth z = −d by ¯Td, A and B are determined.
Our formula for T(t, z) becomes
T(t, z) = ¯T0 +
¯T0 −¯Td
d
z + δT cos(ωt −az + η)e−az. (8.20)
As reasonable values we may take the average ocean temper-
ature at sea level to be 22◦C and 4◦C at d = 1000 m. These
would give
T(t, z) = 22◦C+(1.8×10−2 C/m)z+δT cos(ωt−az+η)e−az.
(8.21)
We will not attempt to ﬁnd δT quantitatively, but from the
variation of air temperature over a day at sea level, a rough
estimate of δT is a few C.
Finally, let us determine a. Using Eq. (8.18) and our value
of χsw from above, we have
asw = 15.7m−1, or
1
asw
= 6.6 cm.
(8.22)
This result implies that the oscillatory term in the tempera-
ture is damped away at quite small depths. For example, if
z = 25 cm the oscillating term in T(t, z) is reduced to only
2% of its sea level value, and by a depth of 1 m the oscillating

126
CHAPTER 8. OCEAN PROPERTIES
term would be too small to detect. In contrast, actual data
taken from the ocean show diurnal variations of temperature
of approximately 0.15◦C at a depth of 5 m. The likely cause of
this is that the simple form of heat current given in Eq. (8.1)
does not apply. Convection and mixing are certainly present
in the layer of the ocean nearest the surface. A remedy for
the situation is, following Fermi, to use the eﬀective heat con-
ductivity κeff ∼6.2×104 W/m K. This raises χsw by a factor
of 103 and increases 1/a by
√
1000, so we have
1
asw
→
1
aeff
= (
√
1000)6.6 cm = 209 cm,
a step in the right direction. The fact that diurnal tempera-
ture variations are observable at a depth of 5 m is a deﬁnite
indication that the actual heat current is much larger than
the simple form of Eq. (8.1) evaluated using κsw.
For annual variations the a is smaller than the daily value
by a factor of
√
365. The diurnal and seasonal variations in
temperature are smaller in bodies of water than on dry land,
principally because of water’s large speciﬁc heat.
8.4
Temperature of Seawater
The subject of ocean circulation is a complicated one, ordi-
narily treated in an oceanography course, but a few remarks
along the lines of those articulated by Fermi are appropri-
ate here.
The main source of surface water heating is so-
lar radiation, more than twice as great near the equator as
near the poles, while the diﬀerence in re-radiation is compar-
atively small. The average surface temperature is approxi-
mately 17◦C, but temperatures as low as −2◦C have been
recorded near the poles and as high as 36◦C in the Persian

8.4. TEMPERATURE OF SEAWATER
127
Table 8.1: Average surface temperature versus latitude
Latitude (◦N)
0
30
60
90
Temperature(C)
27.1
21.3
4.8
–1.7
Gulf. Temperatures below zero are possible because of sea-
water’s salinity: at the average salinity value of 35 parts per
thousand in weight, water does not freeze until −1.94◦C. In
Table (8.1) we show some average surface temperatures at
diﬀerent latitudes.
-2000
-1500
-1000
-500
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Thermocline
Depth (m)
Temperature (◦C)
Ocean Depth vs. Temperature
Figure 8.1: Ocean temperature vs. depth
Source: NOAA
Though solar heat is absorbed primarily in the top centime-
ters of the ocean’s surface, winds and waves distribute that
surface heat suﬃciently to the top 100 m to keep the temper-
ature relatively uniform. Below that level we have a precip-
itous drop in temperature in a region of rapid temperature

128
CHAPTER 8. OCEAN PROPERTIES
change known as a thermocline; it is shown in Fig. (8.1) for a
latitude near the equator. Further down, starting at a depth
of approximately 1000 m, we reach what is known as the deep
ocean, a region containing some 90% of the ocean’s volume.
From this depth, temperature remains approximately con-
stant, typically at between 0◦C and 3◦C, with an average esti-
mated at 2.5◦C. The thermocline is of course only pronounced
in regions of the ocean where the surface temperature is con-
siderably above that of the deep ocean. The amount of heat
ﬂowing downward in the ocean may also be estimated by cal-
culating κeffdT/dz. Taking a section of the thermocline in
which the temperature drops by 1◦C in a kilometer, we have
κeffdT/dz ≈0.62 W/m2.
(8.23)
For deep freshwater, such as found at the bottom of deep
lakes, the absence of salts leads to an average temperature of
≈4◦C.
8.5
Ocean Circulation
As already mentioned, Fermi emphasizes that what he calls
“mechanical agitation” is by far the primary factor in the ther-
mal balance of ocean water. The presence of currents with
diﬀerent temperatures has been known for centuries; for ex-
ample, Benjamin Franklin documented the existence of what
we now call the Gulf Stream in a record of ocean temperatures
he measured during a crossing of the Atlantic.To understand
the existence of currents, salinity also needs to be taken into
account.
High-salinity water is denser and tends to sink, causing
a sideways movement of less-dense water to replace it. The
interplay between temperature and salinity is so important

8.5. OCEAN CIRCULATION
129
that scientists speak of thermohaline circulation in describ-
ing the system of currents that constitute what is sometimes
known as the global conveyor belt, a system of sinking and
rising masses of water that dictates both the surface and deep
ocean ﬂow of water throughout our planet.

Ocean and lake tidal eﬀects

