CHAPTER 7
Thermal Properties and Radiation at the
Earth’s Surface
7.1
Surface of the Earth
The surface of the solid Earth lies partly below sea level and
partly above sea level. As a glance at a desktop globe makes
clear, the greater fraction of the Earth’s crust lies below sea
level. In terms of area, roughly 29% of the surface area is
above sea level and the remaining 71% is below sea level. The
“hypsographic curve” is shown in Fig. (7.1). This illustrates
what percentage of the Earth’s solid surface lies above a given
elevation. The percentage starts from zero at the top of Mt.
Everest, at an elevation of 8.848 km, and reaches 100% at
the bottom of the Mariana Trench in the Paciﬁc Ocean, at
a depth or negative elevation of 10.984 km. From the top of
Mt. Everest to the bottom of the Mariana Trench spans a

108
CHAPTER 7. RADIATION AT THE SURFACE
-10
-8
-6
-4
-2
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 0
 10
 20
 30
 40
 50
 60
 70
 80
 90
 100
Sea Level
Elevation (km)
Percentage of Earth Surface
Elevation vs. Percentage of Earth Surface 
Figure 7.1: Hypsographic curve-
Source: NOAA
distance of roughly 20 km, a large distance on a human scale,
but less than 1% of the Earth’s radius, so on a planetary
scale, the Earth’s surface is relatively smooth.
7.2
Crust of the Earth
The crust is a layer of rock lying above, or one might even
say “ﬂoating” on, the Earth’s mantle, a layer that near the
top can behave like a very viscous ﬂuid. The oceanic crust
is 5–10 km thick with an average density of 3.0 g/cm3 while
the continental crust is typically less dense, with an average
density of 2.7 g/cm3 and a thickness that ranges from 30 to
50 km. This is a dynamic system with parts of the crust sink-

7.4. SURFACE TEMPERATURE EQUILIBRIUM
109
ing deeper into the mantle until a condition of equilibrium
known as isostasy is reached. In Sec. (12.10) we shall go into
more detail about the behavior of the continental crust.
7.3
Composition of the Oceans
Each liter of seawater contains approximately 35 g of dis-
solved salts. The average density of seawater is 1.027 g/cm3.
The main components of the salts, 27 out of the 35 g, are
sodium and chlorine ions. Sulfur, magnesium, calcium, and
potassium ions constite almost all of the remainder. In Chap. (8),
we will discuss the thermal properties of ocean water.
7.4
Temperature Equilibrium of
the Earth’s Surface
Solar radiation is the main source of the Earth’s energy. The
total power emitted by the Sun in the form of electromagnetic
waves is called the solar luminosity, Q⊙. It is determined from
the average power/area reaching the Earth. This quantity
is known as the solar constant, S⊙. Attempts to determine
the solar constant began in the late nineteenth century. At
present, satellite measurements measure both the time depen-
dence and the mean value of S⊙with great accuracy. When
sunspots are at a minimum in the solar cycle, the mean value
of the solar constant is
S⊙= 1361 W/m2.
(7.1)
This is roughly the same power that would result from thir-
teen one-hundred-watt light bulbs held directly over an area
of one square meter.

110
CHAPTER 7. RADIATION AT THE SURFACE
To evaluate Q⊙, we use the fact that the total power emit-
ted by the Sun passes through every sphere surrounding the
Sun. For a sphere of radius r, the resulting intensity is
( Q⊙
4πr2 )W/m2.
(7.2)
Taking r to be the Earth-Sun distance Res = 149.6 × 106 km,
Q⊙is
Q⊙= 4π(Res)2S⊙= 3.828 × 1026 W.
(7.3)
The solar luminosity is constant to within 0.1% over the last
several 11-year solar sunspot cycles.
7.5
Black Bodies and the Temperature of Sun
and Earth
A so-called black body is simply one which totally absorbs
every wavelength of radiation incident upon it. During the
nineteenth century, physicists proved a number of general the-
orems about black bodies in thermodynamic equilibrium, a
state in which the black body emits the same amount of radi-
ation that it absorbs. It should be noted that the term “black
body” is a bit of a misnomer. A totally absorbing body will
only appear to be black when its temperature is relatively low,
such as room temperature. The body will begin to glow when
its temperature is high enough so that a substantial amount
of energy is emitted in the visible part of the spectrum.
The intensity I (units: power/area/s) radiated from a black
body is known as the Stefan-Boltzmann law, which states
I = σT 4,
(7.4)
where σ is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. The value of σ is
σ = 5.67 × 10−8W/m2/ (K)4.

7.5. BLACK BODY RADIATION
111
The value of σ, known empirically in the nineteenth century,
had been shown by general thermodynamic arguments to be
independent of the substance forming the black body. Early
in the twentieth century, after the discovery of the quantum
nature of light by Max Planck, it was realized that σ can
be expressed in terms of the velocity of light, Boltzmann’s
constant, and Planck’s constant. See Eq. (7.14).
Assuming the Sun and Earth are black bodies, their tem-
peratures can be estimated using the Stefan-Boltzmann law.
The Sun’s radius is Rs = 695, 700 km. Dividing Q⊙by the
Sun’s area, we have an expression for the intensity emitted
by the Sun. Applying the Stefan-Boltzmann law, we have
Is =
Q⊙
4πR2s
= σ(Ts)4.
(7.5)
Solving for Ts gives
Ts = 5772 K.
(7.6)
Another law, derived from thermodynamic principles to-
ward the end of the nineteenth century, provides an indepen-
dent estimate of the temperature of the solar surface. Wien’s
displacement law (Landau and Lifshitz 1980) gives a relation
between the wavelength of the body’s maximum intensity of
radiation and its temperature in kelvins.
λmax · T = 2.898 × 107 Å K,
(7.7)
where Å stands for the angstrom unit of 10−8 cm. The wave-
length range of visible light is 3900 Å to 7000 Å, the mid-
point being 5450 Å. From Wien’s law, a black body with
λmax = 5450 Å would have T = 5317 K, a value within 10%
of Eq. (7.6).
Assuming also that the Earth is a black body, and that the
incident intensity arises solely from incoming solar energy, the

112
CHAPTER 7. RADIATION AT THE SURFACE
total incident solar energy is the product of the solar constant
and πR2
e, the area the Earth presents to the incoming radi-
ation. If the Earth were to re-radiate this energy as a black
body, we would have
S⊙πR2
e = 4πR2
eσT 4
e .
(7.8)
Note that in the left side of Eq. (7.8), it is the area of the
Earth’s cross-section that enters, while on the right-hand side
it is the total surface area of the Earth. Solving this equation
for Te gives
Te = 278 K,
(7.9)
again a reasonable value. This calculation ignores the pres-
ence of the Earth’s atmosphere, which reﬂects part of the
Sun’s energy. The fraction, known as the albedo and denoted
as α, has a value of α = 0.3 for the Earth. The atmosphere
itself can be modeled as a so-called grey body, which satisﬁes
a modiﬁed form of the Stefan-Boltzmann law,
Igrey = ϵσT 4,
(7.10)
where ϵ is the emissivity of the atmosphere, for which a rea-
sonable value is ϵ = 0.8. It is also worth noting, as Fermi
points out, that if the absorption of solar radiation were re-
duced by a factor A ≤1 and the Earth’s radiation by a factor
a ≤1 , Eq. (7.8) should be modiﬁed by multiplying the left
side by A and the right side by a. The result would be
Te = 278 K · (A/a)1/4.
(7.11)
As a rough estimate of these eﬀects, set A = 1−α = 0.7, and
a = ϵ = 0.8. The eﬀect is to reduce the temperature of the
Earth’s atmosphere from Te = 278 K to Te = 268 K.
The assumption that the Earth is eﬀectively a black body
is only a rough approximation. In particular the structure

7.5. BLACK BODY RADIATION
113
of many molecules makes for a very selective absorption. An
example is water, which absorbs strongly in the infrared and
is relatively transparent in the visible range. Despite these
complications, assuming black body behavior for both Earth
and Sun gives a reasonable estimate for the mean temperature
of the Earth’s atmosphere.
With regard to the actual balance between absorption of
solar radiation and re-radiation by the Earth, a full under-
standing is complicated by strong dependence on cloud cover,
the mix of gases in the atmosphere, and a myriad of other fac-
tors. A schematic picture of how that balance is achieved is
presented in Fig. (7.2).
Figure 7.2: Energy balance; ﬁgure courtesy of Kevin
Trenberth, John Fasullo, and JeﬀKiehl, USNCAR
(National Center for Atmospheric Research)
Fermi provides a few lines of estimates of thermal balance,

114
CHAPTER 7. RADIATION AT THE SURFACE
displaying how intake and outtake roughly match for the case
of the sea. He also notes a striking fact that we will return
to and discuss in detail in Chap. (15), namely that the heat
reaching the surface from the Earth’s interior, roughly due in
equal parts to heat from the Earth’s formation and decay of
radioactive isotopes, is negligible compared to heat from the
Sun, less than one part in a thousand. It is nevertheless cru-
cial because it controls the geological features of the Earth:
plate tectonics, igneous activity, etc. Rock is, however, such
a poor conductor that the Earth’s surface is practically insu-
lated from it.
7.6
Planck’s Spectral Radiance Formula
In 1900 Max Planck wrote his famous formula, marking the
beginning of the quantum era. The formula is for the spectral
radiance of a black body at temperature T. The term “radi-
ance” implies power per unit area per unit solid angle. The
addition of “spectral” means per unit frequency. The SI unit
for spectral radiance is watts/meter2/steradian/frequency.
Denoting the spectral radiance by B(ν, T), Planck’s formula
as a function of frequency ν and temperature T is
B(ν, T) = 2hν3
c2 [exp( hν
kT ) −1]−1,
(7.12)
where k is Boltzmann’s constant, c is the velocity of light,
and h is Planck’s constant. Planck’s derivation required the
concept that any form of electromagnetic radiation be made
up of packets of energy, photons, each one having an energy
hν.
Integrating B(ν, T) over all frequencies leaves a quantity
with units of watts/meter2/steradian. A subsequent solid an-
gle integration would produce a quantity with the same units

7.6. PLANCK’S FORMULA
115
as occur in the Stefan-Boltzmann law. The actual relation
between the Stefan-Boltzmann law and Planck’s formula is
σT 4 =
Z 2π
0
dφ
Z π/2
0
sin θ cos θdθ
Z ∞
0
dνB(ν, T).
(7.13)
The angular integral in Eq. (7.13) has two features worth not-
ing: (1) the upper limit of the θ integral is π/2 rather than π;
and (2) there is a factor of cos θ in the integrand. Both can
be understood by considering a cavity containing black body
radiation, with a small opening of area ∆A, from which black
body radiation escapes. Erecting an outward normal to ∆A,
it is clear that radiation which escapes the cavity must have
polar angle θ in the range 0 to π/2. The factor of cos θ can
be understood by considering the current of photons headed
from inside the cavity toward the opening ∆A. Let e(ν, T) be
the energy density of photons/solid angle/frequency in the
cavity. This is related to B(ν) by e(ν, T)c = B(ν, T), where
c is the velocity of light. The energy which arrives at ∆A per
unit time/area/solid angle/frequency is e(ν, T)(c cos θ). It is
evident that the photon energy current is proportional to the
velocity with which the photons approach the opening. For
a photon approaching the opening at angle θ to the normal,
this velocity is c cos θ. This is the origin of the cos θ in the
integral of Eq. (7.13).
The integral in Eq. (7.13) is a standard one.
The ﬁnal
result is
σT 4 = 2k4π5T 4
15c2h3 .
(7.14)
Eq. (7.14) is a striking result in that it shows that constant
σ can be evaluated via Planck’s formula in terms of other
known physical constants, including Planck’s constant. Since
Wien’s displacement law is simply a statement of the location
of the frequency peak of radiation from a black body, it must

116
CHAPTER 7. RADIATION AT THE SURFACE
be equivalent to
∂B(ν, T)
∂ν
= 0.
The constant in Wien’s law is therefore also given by the fun-
damental parameters in Planck’s law. It is worth noting that
the Planck distribution for sunlight regarded as a function of
wavelength has a broad maximum that closely matches the
visible range of 3900 Å to 7000 Å.
7.7
Special Cases
In order to illustrate the range of the formulas derived in
the previous section, Fermi shows how they could be used to
consider the completely unphysical case in which absorption
and emission of radiation from the Sun by the Earth only
took place at a single frequency, ν0. To do so we would have
to replace Eq. (7.8) by absorption and emission at that single
frequency,
B(ν0, Ts)4πR2
s
4πd2 πR2
e = 4πR2
eB(ν0, Te),
(7.15)
where d is equal to the distance between the Earth and the 
Sun (149.5 × 106 km). Rearranging this equation slightly, we 
have
4 d2
R2s
=
exp( hν0
kTe ) −1)
exp( hν0
kTs ) −1)
.
(7.16)
The left-hand side is approximately equal to 18.6×104. Fermi
looked at two limits, one in which hν0/kTe ≪1 and the other
in which hν0/kTe ≫1. In the ﬁrst case we see
18.6 × 104 ≈Ts
Te
⇒Te ≈0.03 K.
(7.17)

7.7. SPECIAL CASES
117
Of course the Earth’s temperature is so low because the pho-
tons being absorbed have very low energy. Conversely, for
hν0/kT ≫1 the equality of Eq. (7.16) implies Te ≈Ts. In
one of these examples the Earth’s temperature is almost ab-
solute zero and in the other it lies close to that of the Sun.

Ocean temperature as function of depth

