I
One of the things I’ve come to value most at the University of Chicago is the 
practice, observed by a number of faculty members, of sitting in on semi-
nars offered by colleagues and visitors. I am pretty sure that I have attended 
more seminars as a professor at Chicago than I did in my years as a graduate 
student. In 2016, the South African neuroscientist and psychoanalyst Mark 
Solms spent the spring quarter at the University of Chicago as a visiting pro-
fessor in the Committee on Social Thought, and I was lucky to be able to sit 
in on his seminar on the neuroscience of feeling, the field largely pioneered 
by Damasio. Solms, who is not only a researcher and clinician but also the 
editor and translator of the Revised Standard Edition of The Complete Psy-
chological Works of Sigmund Freud, coined the term “neuropsychoanalysis” 
to capture his efforts to reconcile neuroscience with Freud’s metapsychol-
ogy. I learned a great deal from Solms, but in the present context, I’d like 
to focus on one aspect of his impressive body of work.
In his rave review of Damasio’s Strange Order of Things, in which he— 
mistakenly, as I have suggested— claims that the book “reads as a neurosci-
entific vindication of Freud’s views” on culture as set out in Civilization and 
Its Discontents, Solms fully endorses Damasio’s identification of homeosta-
sis as the (pleasure) principle of all living things. Unpleasure lets an organ-
ism “know that it has deviated from a homeostatic settling point— that is, 
from a bodily state that is necessary for life and conducive to reproductive 
success,” while pleasure “broadcasts to (and for) the organism the fact that 
it has returned from the biological ‘bad’ toward the biological ‘good’— back 
toward a settling point.”1 Solms follows Damasio in underlining an insight 
we have already rehearsed, namely, that the way that Freud first presents 
1. Mark Solms, review of Antonio Damasio, The Strange Order of Things: Life, Feeling, 
and the Making of Cultures, Journal of the American Psychoanalytic Association 66, no. 
3 (June 2018): 579. Subsequent references are made in the text.
EPILOGUE

222 : : e P i l o g u e
the death drive (and so what is ostensibly beyond the pleasure principle), 
namely, as the “Nirvana principle,” is essentially a reformulation of the 
pleasure principle. “If what the organism is striving for ‘beyond the plea-
sure principle’ is a homeostatic settling point, then the Nirvana principle— 
far from underpinning a death drive— would describe the ideal state of the 
life drives: a state in which the biological needs of the organism are met 
perfectly” (581).2 Finally, Solms gives a full- throated endorsement to Dama-
sio’s view on what is ultimately at issue in the death drive and therewith 
the discontent with civilization, namely, a conflict among component in-
stincts (a word that explicitly retains the biological sense of the forces in 
question), all of which operate according to the pleasure principle. If there 
is stasis in the mind, it is between fully constituted component instincts 
each making demands on the organism within clearly defined domains of 
operation and always and everywhere according to the mechanism of ho-
meostasis. There would seem to be no intrinsic— or better, no extimate— 
source of static on the channels that “broadcast” homeostatic imperatives.
Where Solms parts ways with Damasio concerns the biophysics of ho-
meostasis and its implications for grasping the nature of consciousness. 
At the conclusion of his review, he suggests that the latter’s “revelation of 
the absolute centrality within the life of the mind of such an elementary 
biological function as homeostasis— his understanding that consciousness 
is homeostasis— opens the possibility of a simple algorithmic conception 
of consciousness” (585). Though he confesses to finding the implications 
of such a conception as troubling as Damasio does, his own work, espe-
cially his collaborations with Karl Friston, pushes quite strongly in this 
direction. Taking some distance from Damasio’s use of the terms “maps” 
and “images” to capture the brain’s mode of representing homeostatically 
salient information to itself— of informing itself as to how it’s managing 
the challenges of being alive— Solms insists that all such representations 
“are at bottom . . . probabilistic predictive models of the world and the vis-
cera”; consciousness born in feeling is, on this view, “nothing more than 
a registration by the organism of the existential implications of the model 
evidence— given current external and internal conditions” (585).
The model Solms uses for “model evidence” is itself taken from statis-
tical mechanics, the translation of the laws of thermodynamics into infor-
2. It’s worth noting that in another text, Solms equates such an ideal state with a 
kind of zombiedom. See Mark Solms, “Consciousness by Surprise: A Neuropsychoan-
alytic Approach to the Hard Problem,” in Biophysics of Consciousness: A Foundational 
Approach, ed. R. R. Poznanski, J. A. Tuszynski, and T. E. Feinberg (Singapore: World 
Scientific, 2016), 11.

e P i l o g u e : : 223
mation theory (organized according to principles of Baysian probability) 
and, in particular, the operations of Markov blankets, a kind of membrane 
(or what Freud, in Beyond the Pleasure Principle, referred to as Reizschutz) 
functioning by way of processes of statistical sampling.3 Call it a cyber-
netic or systems- theoretical concept of conatus. The crucial task of any 
bounded or “blanketed” system is that of active inference, the self- reflexive 
processing of aberrant information, that is, systematically coping with a 
surprise to the system (expressed thermodynamically: minimizing entropy, 
binding free energy): “Active inference arises inevitably from the proper-
ties of a Markov blanket, because the internal states of such systems will 
necessarily model— and accordingly act upon— their external states to pre-
serve the functional and structural integrity of the system.”4 In Damasio’s 
terms, active inference is the way an organism registers and initiates a re-
sponse to homeostatic imperatives. In Freud’s terms, it is the way the real-
ity principle comes to supplement the pleasure principle. As Solms puts it, 
“Through acting upon the world— and sampling new sensory states— any 
biological self- organizing system automatically generates new predictions 
concerning the hidden causes of its sensory samples, through an iterative 
process that can be construed as hypothesis testing.”5
What is ultimately at issue in homeostatic processes, then, is maintain-
ing a relatively steady state of information and energy flow within systems, 
to enable them “to place an upper bound on the dispersion of their energy 
states,” in a word, to avoid getting thrown by, to avoid falling apart in the 
face of, new information. “In statistical terms, this dispersion or entropy is 
the expected self- information or surprise that can be quantified in terms of 
variational free energy. In effect, self- organization entails the use of the sen-
3. As Karl Friston et al., have put it, “A Markov blanket defines the boundaries of a 
system (e.g. a cell or a multi- cellular organism) in a statistical sense. It is a statistical 
partitioning of a system into internal states and external states, where the blanket 
itself consists of the states that separate the two. The states that constitute the Mar-
kov blanket can be further partitioned into active and sensory states. Here, states 
stand in for any variable that locates the system at a particular point in state space; 
for example, the position and momentum of all the particles constituting a thermo- 
dynamic system— right through to every detail of neuronal activity that might de-
scribe the state of the brain.” See “The Markov Blankets of Life: Autonomy, Active 
Inference, and the Free Energy Principle,” in Interface (Royal Society Publishing): 
http:// dx .doi .org /10 .1098 /rsif .2017 .0792.
4. Mark Solms and Karl Friston, “How and Why Consciousness Arises: Some Consid-
erations from Physics and Physiology,” Journal of Consciousness Studies 25, no. 5– 6 
(2018): 7.
5. Ibid.

224 : : e P i l o g u e
sory states (of a Markov blanket) to infer external states (that surround the 
Markov blanket).”6 One might characterize this entire approach as neuro- 
pragmatism; life is about coping with, about processing and managing, new 
information under the pressure of homeostatic imperatives. As presented 
by Solms, the neuroscience of consciousness is first and foremost the study 
of this mid- level management of the stresses of surprise.
Among the virtues of this neuro- pragmatism is, as Solms argues, that it 
allows one “to integrate Freud’s concept of repression with contemporary 
notions of the cognitive— unrepressed— unconscious.”7 The concept that 
allows for this integration is that of biological salience, the idea that the 
mind pays attention first and foremost to what has value for the survival 
and reproductive success of the organism. This means, however, that con-
sciousness as the locus of attention is always motivated, always moved— 
always driven— by homeostatic imperatives. Such imperatives— and, thus, 
the consciousness they imply— emanate from the upper brainstem, the 
“deep brain” we share with life- forms dating back hundreds of millions of 
years. Solms characterizes this insight as a critique of the “corticocentric 
fallacy” to which Freud succumbed in his adherence to the neuroanatomy 
of his day that localizes consciousness in the cerebral cortex. Solms’s cri-
tique of “corticocentrism” rests on the claim that consciousness just is the 
feeling of urgency communicated by homeostatic imperatives, what it feels 
like to be awake, to be alive to the challenges of being alive. I’m tempted to 
characterize this critique as a form of “biological correctness.”
It would be more accurate to say that for Solms consciousness has two 
aspects, one consisting of pure auto- affection, a baseline state of being “in 
touch” with oneself, and consciousness as intentionality, consciousness of 
or about something. The former constitutes the background sense that it 
feels like something to be alive— to be me— while the latter signifies that 
it feels like something to be alive to this or that. “Basic (brainstem) con-
sciousness,” Solms writes, “consists in states rather than images. The upper 
brainstem structures that generate consciousness do not map our exter-
nal senses; they map the internal state of the (visceral, autonomic) body. 
This mapping of the internal milieu generates not perceptual objects but 
rather the subject of perception. It generates the background state of being 
conscious” (20). In neuro- Kantian terms, if I might use that formulation, 
6. Ibid.
7. Mark Solms, “‘The Unconscious’ in Psychoanalysis and Neuroscience: An Integrated 
Approach to the Cognitive Unconscious,” in The Unconscious: A Bridge between Psycho-
analysis and Cognitive Neuroscience, ed. Marianne Leuzinger- Bohleber, Simon Arnold, 
and Mark Solms (New York: Routledge, 2018), 16; my emphasis. Subsequent references 
are made in the text.

e P i l o g u e : : 225
perceptions of the world must in each case be accompanied by a sentient 
I. Consciousness as auto- affection constitutes the background feeling of 
Jemeinigkeit, the baseline sense that perceptions are “in each case mine.” 
As Solms puts it, “we may picture this core quality of consciousness as the 
page upon which external perceptual objects are inscribed. The objects are 
always perceived by an already sentient subject. . . . Affects are valenced 
states of the subject” (20). The intentional side of consciousness, that is, 
how affects, while remaining an “interoceptive sensory modality,” register 
what is not- I, “reflects the fact that . . . changing internal conditions . . . are 
closely tied to changing external conditions. This is because, firstly, vital 
needs (represented as deviations from homeostatic set- points) can be sat-
isfied only through interactions with the external world. Secondly, certain 
changes in external conditions have predictable implications for survival 
and reproductive success. Therefore, affects, although inherently subjec-
tive, are typically directed toward objects” (21). Thus Solms, following 
Damasio, proposes that the “basic unit of consciousness” can be expressed 
as, “I feel like this about that” (21). These different aspects of consciousness 
compel Solms to subdivide consciousness into different levels and kinds, 
to solve “the hard problem” of consciousness by way of a division of labor 
immanent to it: “consciousness is affective until it reaches the cortex, at 
which point it becomes conscious perception (‘. . . about that’). This gives 
rise to primary consciousness of objects, which may or may not then be  
re- represented in words (in ‘declarative’ secondary consciousness: ‘this feel-
ing belongs to me and I am feeling it about that’)” (27).
What I am calling Solms’s neuro- pragmatism conceives of the nervous 
system as an inferential activity that is constantly testing, revising, amplify-
ing its “claims” about the world under pressure from vital needs expressed 
as homeostatic imperatives, demands for the work of, precisely, correcting, 
in the most efficient way possible, homeostatic deficits. Feelings of plea-
sure and unpleasure just are the way in which these demands along with 
the success or failure to satisfy them, to redress homeostatic deficits, are 
registered. Once Solms establishes that such felt demands for work— think 
again of Freud’s characterization of the drives as Arbeitsanforderungen— 
just is what we me mean by (affective) consciousness, he goes on to argue 
that the unconscious is best understood in relation to the mind’s capacity 
to delegate this work by way of “mindless,” automatized routines, to man-
age the business of life by way of algorithms that, as it were, hum in the 
background of our daily rounds without need of further attention. Prob-
lems emerge only when new information comes our way, when something 
unprecedented happens, when we are taken by surprise, get flustered, lose 
our orientation, become uncertain as to how to go on. As Solms sees it, 

226 : : e P i l o g u e
the life of the mind— or perhaps better: of the brain— consists of coming 
up with new algorithms that resolve and systematize uncertainties and 
thereby improve— upregulate— the “probabilistic predictive models of the 
world and the viscera” that constitute the sentient core of our being. More 
simply, “the whole purpose of the reality principle (of learning from experi-
ence) is to improve one’s predictive model: that is, to minimize the chances 
of surprise— to solve problems— and thereby to minimize the need for con-
sciousness” (28). In the terms developed in collaboration with Friston, sur-
prise or prediction error is equated with free energy that needs to be bound 
by being encoded in updated, optimized algorithms. And as Solms suggests, 
this is precisely how to understand Freud’s famous pronouncement from 
Beyond the Pleasure Principle, one taken up by, among others, Walter Benja-
min in his writings about Baudelaire and the shocks of modern urban life, 
namely, that “consciousness arises instead of a memory trace.”8 Or as Solms 
puts it, “The two states— consciousness and automatized algorithm— are 
mutually incompatible. They cannot arise from the same neural assemblage 
at the same time” (30– 31).
This view brings with it a significant revision of Freud’s notion of re-
pression and the unconscious more generally, a revision announced at the 
very beginning of the article we’ve been discussing. Recall that Solms’s 
stated goal was to “integrate Freud’s concept of repression with contem-
porary notions of the cognitive— unrepressed— unconscious.” We’ve seen, 
however, that for this to work, Solms needs to amplify and enrich what is 
meant by “cognition” by introducing the central role played in it by affec-
tive consciousness. To paraphrase the title of Habermas’s famous book, 
there can be knowledge only where there is interest, only where possible 
objects of cognition display their biological valence. Call it knowledge on 
a need- to- know basis, a need registered, precisely, as feeling. In a word, 
objects must matter for human flourishing. Or to paraphrase Heidegger, 
once more, things appear to human beings, show themselves as phenom-
ena, only insofar as they appear within a horizon opened by the being of 
human being, which is itself constituted as care. Our question is whether 
what Freud understood as the libidinal value of objects, objects that ap-
8. Sigmund Freud, Beyond the Pleasure Principle, trans. James Strachey (New York: 
W. W. Norton, 1989), 28; Solms, “‘The Unconscious,’” 30. See Walter Benjamin, “On 
Some Motifs in Baudelaire,” in Walter Benjamin, Selected Writings: Volume 4, 1938– 
1940, ed. Michael Jennings and Howard Eiland, trans. Harry Zohn (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 2003), 317. The minimization of the need for consciousness 
in the face of the shocks of urban life is what Georg Simmel meant by the blasé atti-
tude cultivated by urbanites. See “The Metropolis and Mental Life,” in Georg Simmel, 
On Individuality and Social Forms: Selected Writings, ed. Donald Levine (Chicago: Uni-
versity of Chicago Press, 1971), 329.

e P i l o g u e : : 227
pear within a horizon opened by desire, represents just another version of 
this series that for the most part remains oriented by vital needs, the sat-
isfaction of which favor survival and reproductive success. To use Terry 
Eagleton’s term, I suspect that what Solms means by affective conscious-
ness remains within the horizon of somatic materialism and so misses the 
dimension that endows human life with its bit of sarx. What Solms misses, 
that is, is that psychoanalysis is ultimately a form of sarxist materialism. In 
Rosenzweigian terms, psychoanalysis is not primarily concerned with what 
is good in and for human life— the domain of operation of homeostatic 
imperatives— but rather how humans cope with what is very good about it.
Solms argues, in effect, that the unconscious is the domain of those ex-
periences, those encounters, those information inputs, that have already 
been taken care of, have, as it were, been addressed, filed away, and require 
no further attention (in German one would say, erledigt or, perhaps, ad 
acta gelegt). In the concluding remarks of his essay on “consciousness by 
surprise,” Solms offers a clear and concise summary of this view. The first 
part is already familiar to us: “Consciousness registers the state of the sub-
ject within biological scales of values. The primal form of consciousness is 
affect. Pleasurable affect means ‘biologically good’ and unpleasure means 
‘biologically bad.’”9 What is new is the status of the unconscious that here 
seems to have nothing to do with repression in Freud’s sense and that Solms 
might have better characterized as preconscious or even nonconscious. In-
deed, at first and even second glance, this “unconscious” would seem to 
be utterly marginal to the concerns of psychoanalysis; it pertains, rather, 
to the cognitive science of learning. As Solms puts it,
Perceptual/cognitive representations are intrinsically unconscious 
sensory- motor algorithms (learnt predictions as to how biological 
needs can be met in the world). Consciousness samples constellations 
of such representations in order to bestow meaning on them. Object 
representations are stable sensory- motor configurations which can be 
held in mind; they stabilize and shape raw consciousness into mental 
solids. Once meanings are established, the resultant predictions are 
automatized and rendered unconscious once more. (18)
As Solms notes, this work of encoding experience in algorithms is never fin-
ished; “the world is so uncertain, so full of surprises, that this ‘ideal’ state 
is not easily achieved— and not easily maintained. Reality is unpredictable 
9. Mark Solms, “Consciousness by Surprise,” 18. Subsequent references are made in 
the text.

228 : : e P i l o g u e
most of the time” (18). Solms concludes by briefly describing the thermo-
dynamics of this “algorithmitization” of experience, its conversion into an 
automatic, fully routinized biophysical algorhythm:
Prediction errors attract attention to the salient representations. This 
occurs through the generation of what Friston, following Helmholtz 
and Freud, calls “free energy”: Entropy of learnt representations caus-
ing uncertainty. . . . This mechanism may be visualized as a cellular 
process . . . but it is felt as consciousness. Consciousness persists, then, 
until a revised predictive model is reconsolidated (until the free en-
ergy is “bound”). Consciousness of representations is predictive work 
in progress. (18)
Recalling that Solms characterizes himself as a neuropsychoanalyst, the 
question becomes how this rather nonpsychoanalytic take on the uncon-
scious squares with the Freudian one. Solms’s answer is simple and elegant. 
Repression, which Freud understood as a dynamic process of withdrawing 
psychologically inadmissible representations from consciousness, is to be 
grasped as a function of premature automatization: “My principle claim is 
that repressed memories are prematurely consolidated solutions— that is, 
non- solutions— predictions that constantly give rise to prediction errors. 
Hence the ever- present threat of a ‘return of the repressed,’ which gives rise 
to neurotic symptom formation.”10 Because, as Solms notes, cognitive con-
sciousness is a very scarce resource, “when confronted with an insoluble 
problem, it is better to automatize an inadequate solution than to devote the 
precious resources of working memory to a lost cause.”11 Repression is, as it 
were, the way we persist in our defense of lost causes.
Finally, this understanding of the repressed as a domain of dysfunc-
tional cognitive solutions, as what we might characterize as irregular algo-
rhythms, pulsations out of synch with those constituting the regular beats, 
the healthy flow of life, allows for a new appreciation of the significance 
of childhood in psychoanalysis: “Needless to say, insoluble problems are 
more ubiquitous in childhood than in adulthood. How does a child ever 
solve problems like: ‘I want to be big like him, I want a job like him, I want 
a wife like him, I want his wife, I want to make babies with her,’ etc.? It is 
also clear why mental conflicts are particularly apt to become repressed. 
10. Solms, “‘The Unconscious,’” 30. We might say, with Marx, that such tenuous solu-
tions can give rise to a condition in which all that is mentally solid melts into air.
11. Ibid.

e P i l o g u e : : 229
‘Conflict’ in this context is just another word for ‘insoluble problem.’”12 
Solms’s characterization of the neuropsychoanalytic cure is equally concise 
and elegant: “The tragedy of repression (of premature automatization) is 
that it renders childish solutions immune to updating. Hence the central 
task in psychoanalytic therapy is to de- automatize, to render conscious once 
more, to permit reconsolidation to take place, and then to automatize bet-
ter solutions.”13 In Damasio’s terms, repression hinders the process of ho-
meostatic upregulation, and therapy frees it up again, restores a healthy 
plasticity to the brain.
II
I find the Solms- Damasio view of things to be extremely clarifying. I’m 
tempted to say, it makes total sense, were it not for a remainder that leads 
me to those same reservations that Freud himself expressed with respect 
to the tendency he noted among fellow analysts to stay, in their therapeu-
tic work with dreams, at the level of the latent dream thoughts and so to 
forget the work the dream itself is doing. To cite the famous footnote to the 
Traumdeutung once more, “they seek to find the essence of dreams in their 
latent content and in so doing they overlook the distinction between the 
latent dream- thoughts and the dreamwork. At bottom, dreams are nothing 
other than a particular form of thinking, made possible by the conditions of 
the state of sleep. It is the dreamwork which creates that form, and it alone 
is the essence of dreaming— the explanation of its peculiar nature.”14 This 
work is, I’ve been arguing, an attempt to approach and elaborate a repul-
sive void of knowledge by carrying over its encystance in the translation 
of the latent thoughts into the manifest content of the dream. If, as Freud 
put it, the wish provides the capital for every dream, the encystance of the 
void in question here functions as a kind of ghost investor without which 
no dream would ever get off the ground. It is just such encystance that is 
missing in these neuro- pragmatist accounts.
I’ve been arguing throughout these pages that the fundamental prob-
lem that in some sense constitutes the human distinction, that is onto-
logically constitutive of human being, is that human life is haunted by a 
nameless woe that refers to no determinate loss, by a surplus scarcity that 
12. Ibid.
13. Ibid.
14. Sigmund Freud, The Interpretation of Dreams, trans. James Strachey (New York: 
Basic Books, 1955), 510.

230 : : e P i l o g u e
can’t be converted into an accountable deficit, a task to be accomplished, 
not even an infinite one and certainly not a final one, an Endlösung. The 
fundamental problem is that there remains in human life something that 
eternally causes problems that cannot itself be converted into a proper 
problem. In the terms proposed by Lévi- Strauss, this “disability of all fi-
nite thought” stems from the constitutively surprising event of language, 
its all- of- a- suddenness.15 The entropic force released thereby can only be 
provisionally bound by way of signifiers of the mana type— so- called float-
ing signifiers— with reference to which a field of possible problems can be 
configured, though never without a remainder of what insists as unbound 
mana- ical energy.
The etymology of the word “problem” (from the Greek for “forward” 
plus “to throw”) calls to mind Heidegger’s notion of Entwurf, which is usu-
ally translated as “project” and which the philosopher uses to capture the 
dimension of futurity as one of the temporal horizons of Sorge, of care as 
the being of Dasein. Every project is fundamentally a response to a de-
terminate situation in which one happens to find oneself, into which one 
has been, as Heidegger puts it, thrown, geworfen, the word he uses to cap-
ture the dimension of the past in the temporal constitution of care. Every 
Entwurf is an attempt to negate, in some fashion, the Wurf of one’s situa-
tion, to cope with what life happens to have thrown at us (in German, the 
suffix ent-  usually connotes a kind of negation or taking away of whatever is 
signified in the word to which it is attached). All of this can be formulated, 
I think, in the neuro- pragmatic discourse elaborated by both Solms and 
Damasio in which the life of an organism is posited as a series of attempts 
to respond to the homeostatic imperatives guiding its path toward survival 
and reproductive success— to optimal flourishing. Every organism projects 
itself into its environment in response to homeostatic deficits in which it 
periodically finds itself. What separates Heidegger from this pragmatist 
orientation, however, is his focus on the fact of being thrown into this very 
“call and response” of Geworfenheit and Entwurf, this fort/da of homeo-
static deficits and repairs, in the first place; for Heidegger, our “knowledge” 
of the facticity of that “original” throw manifests itself in and as anxiety, in 
the mode of a mood without determinate object or cause. I’ve characterized 
this fundamental mood or Grundstimmung as an attunement to the “static” 
of a stasis, to the white noise of our encystance of/on a nameless woe, to 
a sort of tinnitus emanating from the very core of our being. We owe it in 
large measure to the fine, “cynical” hearing of Kafka’s creatures as well as 
15. Claude Lévi- Strauss, Introduction to the Work of Marcel Mauss, trans. Felicity Baker 
(London: Routledge, 1987), 63.

e P i l o g u e : : 231
to Freud’s evenly hovering attentiveness that the frequencies of that static 
have begun to be more clearly audible to us.16
By referring above to the “final solution,” I am noting the rather glaring 
fact that the phenomenon— we might say the Cause— of anti- Semitism, 
has shown itself to be something like an eternally recurring mode of “prob-
lematization” of this stasis (thus the fantasy of the “wandering Jew,” der 
ewige Jude). Heidegger’s profound anti- Semitism, revealed in all its ferocity 
in the so- called Black Notebooks, testifies to the limits of his thought for 
grasping the dimension at issue, the dimension he himself helped to bring 
into the space of thought. He, too, succumbed to the temptation to trans-
form the uncanny causality in question into that all too familiar Cause. I 
am tempted to see in this anti- Semitism something like the negative face 
of and defensive posture with respect to what Rosenzweig tried to cap-
ture in his remarks about the “Jewishness” of The Star of Redemption, his 
decision to cast the new thinking— a thinking he thought to be shared by 
Heidegger— in the language of the religions of revelation: “[Just as] I have 
received the new thinking in these old words so, in them, have I given it 
back and passed it on.”17 Heidegger’s anti- Semitism partakes in a differ-
ent set of old words in which the new thinking is not so much passed on as 
passed by; by linking the Seinsfrage to the Judenfrage in the way he did, he 
demonstrated that he did not pass the test of his own thinking. The thinker 
of care, of Sorge, came up short with respect to that care of the father of the 
family, die Sorge des Hausvaters, that Kafka’s uncanny yet utterly matter- of- 
fact, utterly sachlich dream- text inscribed under the name of “Odradek.”18 
What I originally imagined as a rewriting of Freud’s major work on sexual-
ity has turned out to be less a continuation of the exalted tradition of high 
theory, the genealogy of which I’ve attempted to track, than a contribution 
to a “new science,” one I have proposed we call “Odradek studies.” The con-
cern at the heart of this science continues to be freedom. “Of course, the 
freedom that is possible today— a stunted growth. But nevertheless free-
dom, nevertheless a possession.”19
16. As noted, Freud uses the expression gleichschwebende Aufmerksamkeit in his 1912 
paper Ratschläge für den Arzt bei der psychoanalytischen Behandlung. See Sigmund 
Freud, Studienausgabe, Ergänzungsband: Schriften zur Behandlundstechnik, ed. Alex-
ander Mitscherlich et al. (Frankfurt am Main: Fischer, 1982), 171.
17. Franz Rosenzweig, The Star of Redemption, trans. William Hallo (Notre Dame, IN: 
University of Notre Dame Press, 1985), 131.
18. One might say that Kafka’s work belongs not to the famous literary movement 
known as die neue Sachlichkeit, but rather to one that could perhaps be called die 
unheimliche Sachlichkeit.
19. Franz Kafka, “Researches of a Dog,” in Corngold, Franz Kafka’s Selected Stories, 161.

232 : : e P i l o g u e
III
Yet another “fantasy project” I’ve had in mind for a while and will most 
likely never write up concerns not three essays on the theory of sexuality 
or any other topic but rather three hammers, a tool that has been invoked 
in the work of three authors I’ve discussed in this volume: Nietzsche, Hei-
degger, and Kafka. The subtitle of Nietzsche’s 1888 text, The Twilight of the 
Idols, is well known: or, How to Philosophize with a Hammer. The surprise 
comes when in his preface he speaks not about the smashing of idols as one 
might expect from that subtitle but rather about sounding them out, about 
using the hammer the way one uses a tuning fork:
For once to pose questions here with a hammer and perhaps to re-
ceive for answer that famous hollow sound which speaks of inflated 
bowels— what a delight for one who has ears behind his ears— for an 
old psychologist and pied piper like me, in presence of whom precisely 
that which would like to stay silent has to become audible . . .20
At the end of the preface, while retaining the analogy with the tuning fork, 
Nietzsche brings the destructive potential of a hammer more into the fore-
ground by characterizing his book as “a grand declaration of war,” adding, 
“and regards the sounding- out of idols, this time they are not idols of the 
age but eternal idols which are here touched with the hammer as with a 
tuning fork.”21 There is no doubt more than one way of understanding this 
thought of a hammer used as a tuning fork. In the present context, I pro-
pose that we “hear” it in relation to Freud’s “evenly hovering attention,” a 
mode of listening for the unconscious of the analysand, the static it emits 
beyond the pleasure principle otherwise regulating the transmission of 
homeostatic imperatives. One might recall the passage cited earlier where 
Freud invokes not a tuning fork but rather a different acoustic technology:
Expressed in a formula, [the analyst] must bend his own unconscious 
like a receptive organ towards the emerging unconscious of the pa-
tient, be as the receiver of the telephone to the disc. As the receiver 
transmutes the electric vibrations induced by the soundwaves back 
again into soundwaves, so is the physician’s unconscious mind able to 
20. Friedrich Nietzsche, Twilight of the Idols, trans. R. J. Hollingdale (London: Pen-
guin, 1990), 31.
21. Ibid., 32.

e P i l o g u e : : 233
reconstruct the patient’s unconscious, which has directed his associa-
tions, from the communications derived from it.22
If I am right, the fundamental agreement between Nietzsche and Freud, the 
difference between favored acoustic technology notwithstanding, is that 
what is ultimately transmitted in and through the vibrations being sounded 
out— for Nietzsche, produced by touching the body of an idol with the tun-
ing fork— is indeed a kind of hollow (in the crown or idol), the encystance 
of a void, the covering over of which is at least part of the business— the 
busy- body- ness— of that psychic idol watching over the ego, the superego.23
No doubt the most famous hammer in twentieth- century philosophy is 
the one invoked by Heidegger in Being and Time to articulate what he pres-
ents as the fundamentally pragmatic orientation proper to human life, to 
our being- in- the- world. Coping with the demands of everyday life means 
that the things we encounter in the world first and foremost appear in the 
mode of their usefulness. To use Marx’s term, we encounter them as man-
ifesting “use value.” As Damasio and Solms would put it, things become 
salient for us first and foremost within a horizon projected by our most fun-
damental concern, that of maintaining life along a range of homeostatic set 
points. “For example,” Heidegger writes, “the thing at hand which we call a 
hammer has to do with hammering, the hammering has to do with fasten-
ing something, fastening something has to do with protection against bad 
weather. This protection ‘is’ for the sake of providing shelter for Da- sein.”24 
As part of a set of nested tasks within a larger project— say, of building a 
house— neither the hammering nor the hammer is thematized as such but 
disappears, as it were, into the flow of the work. “The less we just stare at 
the thing called hammer, the more actively we use it, the more original 
our relation to it becomes and the more undisguisedly it is encountered as 
what it is, a useful thing [als Zeug]. The act of hammering itself discovers 
the specific ‘handiness’ of the hammer.” As Heidegger goes on to empha-
size, “Handiness is not grasped theoretically at all, nor is it itself initially 
a theme for circumspection. What is peculiar to what is initially at hand 
22. Sigmund Freud, Collected Papers: Volume 2, trans. Joan Riviere (New York: Basic 
Books, 1959), 328.
23. In keeping with my bad habit of punning, the business of the superego— the ego’s 
very own prosthetic god— or rather the doxological business of sustaining its author-
ity, of feeding it, might be thought of as the operation of alglorythms.
24. Martin Heidegger, Being and Time, trans. Joan Stambaugh (Albany: SUNY Press, 
1996), 78.

234 : : e P i l o g u e
[des zunächst Zuhandenen] is that it withdraws, so to speak, in its character 
of handiness in order to be really handy.”25 I have, however, already indi-
cated why Heidegger cannot be identified with the pragmatist orientation 
he certainly appears to manifest here. Suffice it to say that when the ham-
mer breaks, when a certain stasis interrupts our work, suspends the flow of 
our projects, a dimension at least potentially comes into view that throws 
us back on our primordial thrownness in the world, allows the question of 
being, die Seinsfrage, to make itself felt as a transmission, as background 
radiation from the “deep past” of our anthropogenesis as speakers who say 
being in many ways.
In a diary entry from February 15, 1920, Kafka adds his own admit-
tedly enigmatic reflections on the nature of hammering. It offers, I think, 
a glimpse of what it might mean to allow the purposeful activities of 
everyday life, the work rhythms of ordinary life, to resonate with those 
of our dreamwork such that the encystance of a void at the navel of every 
dream can be newly, more freely felt as the locus of a kind of natality:
One day, many years ago, I sat on the slope of the Laurenziberg, feeling 
sad. I was considering the wishes I had for my life. The most important 
or the most appealing wish was to attain a view of life (and— this was 
inescapably bound up with it— to convince others of it in writing) in 
which life retained its natural full complement of rising and falling, 
but at the same time would be recognized no less clearly as a noth-
ing, as a dream, as a hovering. A beautiful wish perhaps, if I had truly 
wished it [wenn ich ihn richtig gewünscht hätte]. Somewhat like wishing 
to hammer together a table with painstakingly methodical craftsman-
ship, and at the same time to do nothing at all, and not in such a way 
that people could say: “This hammering is a nothingness to him,” but 
rather: “This hammering is really a hammering to him yet at the same 
time it is also a nothingness,” whereby the hammering would have be-
come still bolder, still more resolute, still more real, and, if you will, 
still crazier [irrsinniger].26
25. Ibid., 65.
26. Franz Kafka, Tagebücher, Band 3: 1914– 1923, ed. Hans- Gerd Koch (Frankfurt am 
Main: Fischer, 1990), 179– 80. Translation cited in Rainer Stach, Kafka: The Early Years, 
trans. Shelley Frisch (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2017), 204; trans. 
modified.

