CHAPTER 13
Surface Seismic Waves and Oscillations
of the Earth
13.1
Surface Waves
There are waves concentrated near the surface in addition to
the S and P waves that travel through the Earth. These, gen-
erally denoted as L waves, are of two types, sometimes known
as Rayleigh (LR) and Love (LQ) waves after Lord Rayleigh
and Augustus Love, who deduced the waves’ existence.
As
revealed by their analyses, the velocity of these surface waves
is smaller then that of either S or P waves. Consequently
surface waves are the last to arrive at a seismograph from a
distant disturbance. But despite their slower velocities, sur-
face waves from an earthquake are very destructive because
their intensity falls oﬀonly as the inverse distance from the
disturbance, while S and P waves lose intensity as the inverse
square of distance. This is illustrated in Fig. (13.1) where it
is seen that although L waves arrive at a recording station

188
CHAPTER 13. SURFACE SEISMIC WAVES
Figure 13.1: Seismic record of 1989 Loma Prieta
earthquake
Source: USGS
later than S and P waves, their amplitudes are considerably
larger.
Rayleigh and Love waves can be distinguished in a seis-
mograph that can detect all three directions of oscillation.
Taking the local vertical direction to be the z direction, sup-
pose the surface wave is traveling in the x direction. Then a
Rayleigh wave has displacements in the z and x directions,
while the displacement of a Love wave is entirely in the y
direction. The treatment of Love waves is somewhat intri-
cate and will not be covered here. However, many interesting
properties of Rayleigh waves are easily derived; an elementary
treatment is given in Appendix C.

13.3. BREATHER MODE
189
13.2
Oscillations of the Earth
In previous sections, we have considered the Earth as a medium
through which seismic waves travel, much as light can travel
through a medium with a variable index of refraction. In this
section, we consider the oscillations of the Earth as a whole,
a problem ﬁrst considered in the nineteenth century by S.
D. Poisson, Lord Rayleigh, and Horace Lamb, among others.
The equation of motion for the various seismic waves applies
here as well.
We will conﬁne the discussion here to the simplest possi-
ble mode of oscillation, namely, the “breather” mode in which
the Earth undergoes only radial oscillations. Fermi does not
discuss this in his lectures, but it provides a possible example
of a “Fermi question,” the type of question that Fermi con-
stantly posed to his colleagues and students. He might have
phrased it as “Given the radius of the Earth and making an
estimate of the Earth’s average elastic properties, what is the
order of magnitude of the fundamental period of the radially
symmetric mode of oscillation?”
The next section answers
that question, and the following section gives more details on
the breather mode of the Earth.
13.3
Breather Mode
Order of Magnitude of the Period
Since the the dis-
placement is purely radial in a breather mode it locally looks
like a longitudinal or P wave. The displacement u is a vector,
but assuming the equation of motion for u can be reduced
to a scalar wave equation for a scalar function ψ, it should

190
CHAPTER 13. SURFACE SEISMIC WAVES
satisfy the wave equation
1
c2
L
∂2ψ
∂t2 = ∇2ψ,
(13.1)
where c2
L is the squared velocity of longitudinal seismic waves,
deﬁned in Eq. (12.44). Assuming a frequency ωb, Eq. (13.1)
can be written
(∇2 + k2
b)Ψ = 0,
(13.2)
where ω2
b = (kbcL)2. The only spherically symmetric solution
of of Eq. (13.2) which is ﬁnite at the origin is
sin(kbr)
kbr
,
so ψ takes the form
ψ = Ab
sin(kbr)
kbr
,
(13.3)
for some constant Ab. The value of kb will be determined by
a boundary condition at r = a. Once a deﬁnite kb is in hand,
the period is determined. We have
ωb = 2π
Tb
= kbcL, or Tb = 2π
kbcL
.
(13.4)
Since we have not speciﬁcally identiﬁed ψ, it is not obvious
what boundary condition to apply. A reasonable guess for
the order of magnitude of kb is obtained by requiring ψ to
vanish at r = a. Requiring ψ(a) = 0 gives kba = π. Setting
kb = π/a, our formula for the period becomes
Tb = 2a
cL
.
(13.5)
Since our goal here is to obtain an order of magnitude esti-
mate, we evaluate Tb from Eq. (13.5) using a range of values of

13.3. BREATHER MODE
191
cL; 5 km/s, 10 km/s, and 15 km/s. Taking a = 6371 km, these
yield Tb ∼42 min, 21 min, and 14 min, respectively. The an-
swer to Fermi’s hypothetical question on the rough magnitude
of Tb is then “a few tens of minutes.” In the next section, we
will analyze Tb more precisely.
The Breather Period for a Homogeneous Earth
In
this section, we ﬁll in the details and derive the breather
period for a homogeneous Earth with constant elastic prop-
erties.
Since the displacement is purely radial, it satisﬁes
∇× u = 0. Therefore
∇× (∇× u) = ∇(∇· u) −∇2u = 0.
(13.6)
As a result, both terms on the right-hand side of the equation
of motion for u (Eq. (12.35)) are of the same form. Assuming
a harmonic time dependence with frequency ωb, Eq. (12.35)
becomes
−ω2
bu = c2
L∇(∇· u) = 0,
(13.7)
where c2
L is deﬁned as before by Eq. (12.44). Setting ω2
b =
(kbcL)2, Eq. (13.7) becomes an equation for u, given ∇· u,
u = −1
k2
b
∇(∇· u).
(13.8)
To ﬁnd ∇·u, we take the divergence of both sides of Eq. (13.7)
and obtain
(∇2 + k2
b)(∇· u) = 0.
(13.9)
Comparing with Eq. (13.2), the scalar function ψ used in the
previous section can be identiﬁed as ∇· u. Again requiring
that the solution for ∇·u be spherically symmetric and non-
singular at r = 0, ∇· u must take the form of Eq. (13.3):
∇· u = Ab
sin(kbr)
kbr
.
(13.10)

192
CHAPTER 13. SURFACE SEISMIC WAVES
The period of the breather mode is determined by impos-
ing a physical boundary condition at the Earth’s surface. The
pressure of the atmosphere at the Earth’s surface is negligi-
ble compared to pressures that occur inside the Earth. The
correct boundary condition is then that there should be van-
ishing stress exerted by the breather mode normal to the
Earth’s surface. For an Earth which is a homogeneous sphere,
the only component of stress at the boundary is σrr, so the
boundary condition is that σrr(a) = 0. The stress tensor is
given in terms of the strain tensor by Eq. (12.29). Omitting
some algebraic details, it is possible to use this equation to
ﬁnd σrr(r) in terms of ∇· u. The formula is
σrr(r) =
E
(1 + σ)(1 −2σ)[(1 −σ)(∇· u)
(13.11)
+ 2(1 −2σ)
(kbr)2
r ∂
∂r(∇· u)].
Requiring that σrr vanish at r = a gives
[(1 −σ)(∇· u) + 2(1 −2σ)
(kbr)2
r ∂
∂r(∇· u)]r=a = 0.
(13.12)
From this equation, we see that the correct boundary condi-
tion requires the vanishing of a combination of the value and
derivative of ∇· u. Setting ∇· u = 0 would only be correct
for 2σ = 1. Using Eq. (13.10) for ∇·u, it is easy to show that
Eq. (13.12) is equivalent to (Stoneley 1961)
(kba) cot(kba) = 1 −1
2( 1 −σ
1 −2σ)(kba)2.
(13.13)
It is reasonable to assume the Earth is isotropic, which corre-
sponds to a Poisson ratio σ = 0.25. For σ = 0.25, the smallest
root of Eq. (13.13) is at kba = 2.563.1 The corresponding pe-
1Note that this is a smaller value of kba than the guessed value of π.

13.3. BREATHER MODE
193
riod is given by
Tb = 2π
kba( a
cL
) =
2π
2.563( a
cL
).
(13.14)
The period of the breather mode has been observed (Ness,
Harrison, and Slichter 1961) to be approximately 20.5 min,
or 1230 s. We may use this value for Tb along with the known
Earth radius of a = 6371 km to deduce a value of cL. The
speed of longitudinal waves is known to be diﬀerent for dif-
ferent regions of the Earth, but since the mantle occupies the
greatest volume, we might expect to obtain a value for cL
characteristic of the mantle. Using Eq. (13.14) to solve for cL
gives
cL = 2πa
kbaTb
=
2π(6371)
2.563(1230) km/s = 12.7 km/s,
(13.15)
a reasonable value for cL in the Earth’s mantle.
While assuming the Earth has constant elastic properties is
clearly an approximation, it would appear that an even more
drastic approximation is the complete neglect of gravity in-
side the Earth. As we saw in Sec. (2.3), due to the inward
pull of gravity, the pressure at the center of the Earth is mil-
lions of times larger than atmospheric pressure. Thus even at
equilibrium, the deep interior of the Earth is in a state where
both stress and strain are deﬁnitely nonzero. As realized by
several physicists in the nineteenth century, the oscillations
of the Earth should be thought of as small oscillations about
a state of hydrostatic equilibrium between the inward force
of gravity and the stress tensor of the Earth’s materials. The
case of an Earth-sized sphere with constant elastic properties
was analyzed in detail by A. H. Love (Love 1911), among
others.
The general eﬀect of gravity on the period of an
Earth oscillation is to lower the period. However, due to its

194
CHAPTER 13. SURFACE SEISMIC WAVES
complete spherical symmetry, the breather frequency is un-
aﬀected, so the analysis given above is correct for an Earth
with constant elastic properties even when gravity is taken
into account.
The ﬁrst observation of a normal mode of vibration of the
Earth took place in the 1950s. By now many higher modes
have been observed with nontrivial angular dependence (Stein
and Wysession 2003). Just as plucking a violin string excites
its normal modes, earthquakes excite the normal modes of
the Earth. A huge eﬀort has gone into explaining the data
on the various modes of oscillation of the Earth in terms of
its internal properties (Schubert 2009). While the breather
mode discussed above is consistent with a homogeneous and
isotropic Earth, the higher modes are not, and they require
models which take detailed account of the variation in the
Earth’s parameters in its diﬀerent regions.


Radioactivity of rocks in Earth’s
crust and mantle

