CHAPTER 6
Coriolis Eﬀects in the Earth’s
Atmosphere
6.1
The Coriolis Force
In this section, we give a brief review of the Coriolis force.
This force plays an important role in understanding the physics
of storms and hurricanes in the Earth’s atmosphere.
It is
a “ﬁctitious force,” arising from the use of an accelerated or
noninertial coordinate system. Such forces share with gravity
the property of being proportional to the mass of the particle
being considered, or the mass density in the dynamics of a
ﬂuid. Despite the nomenclature, the eﬀects of the Coriolis
force are very real.
We consider two coordinate systems; an inertial or space-
ﬁxed coordinate system with unit vectors ˆx, ˆy, ˆz, and a rotat-
ing or body-ﬁxed coordinate system with unit vectors ˆx′, ˆy′, ˆz′.
The body-ﬁxed system is rotating with respect to the space-

94
CHAPTER 6. CORIOLIS EFFECTS
ﬁxed coordinate system around the common z axis. The an-
gular velocity, assumed constant, is ω. The unit vectors in
the two systems are related by
ˆx′ = cos φ ˆx + sin φ ˆy,
(6.1)
ˆy′ = −sin φ ˆx + cos φ ˆy,
ˆz′ = ˆz,
where φ = ωt.
A generic vector such as r, the coordinate of a particle,
can be expanded in either coordinate system;
r = x ˆx + y ˆy + z ˆz = x′ ˆx′ + y′ ˆy′ + z ˆz = r′,
(6.2)
where, since the z axis is common, there is no need for primes
on z components or unit vectors. Furthermore, note that r
and r′ are just diﬀerent notations for the same vector.
Subtleties arise when computing time derivatives of vec-
tors. It is necessary to distinguish the time rate of change
with respect to the space-ﬁxed system from one taken with
respect to the body-ﬁxed system. When r is diﬀerentiated in
the space-ﬁxed system, the result is
d
dtr = dx
dt ˆx + dy
dt ˆy + dz
dt ˆz.
(6.3)
There is no question of taking time derivatives of ˆx, ˆy, ˆz; they
are unit vectors in an inertial system and therefore constant.
Now consider time derivatives from the viewpoint of a body-
ﬁxed observer.
Such an observer will naturally regard the
body-ﬁxed unit vectors as constant, and deﬁne his rate of
change of r as
v′ ≡d
dt
′
r = dx′
dt ˆx′ + dy′
dt ˆy′ + dz
dt ˆz.
(6.4)

6.1. THE CORIOLIS FORCE
95
The diﬀerence between the rates of change from Eqs. (6.3)
and (6.4) comes about because the body-ﬁxed unit vectors ˆx′
and ˆy′ are not constants in the space-ﬁxed system. The rates
of change of the body-ﬁxed unit vectors from the viewpoint
of the space-ﬁxed system are
d
dt ˆx′ = ω ∧ˆx′,
(6.5)
d
dt ˆy′ = ω ∧ˆy′,
where the angular velocity vector is ω = ωˆz. With the aid of
Eq. (6.5), it is easy to relate the two rates of change of r. We
have
d
dtr = d
dt
′
r + ω ∧r,
(6.6)
or
v = v′ + ω ∧r.
(6.7)
Symbolically, the two rates of change are related by
d
dt = d
dt
′
+ ω ∧.
(6.8)
In the space-ﬁxed frame, Newton’s law takes the simple form,
F = md2r
dt2 = m d
dt( d
dtr).
(6.9)
Substituting from Eq. (6.6) gives
F = m d
dt( d
dt
′
r + ω ∧r).
(6.10)
Applying Eq. (6.8), we have
F = m( d
dt
′
+ ω∧)( d
dt
′
r + ω ∧r).
(6.11)

96
CHAPTER 6. CORIOLIS EFFECTS
Expanding the right-hand side gives
F = m
 d
dt
′
( d
dt
′
r) + 2ω ∧d
dt
′
r + ω ∧(ω ∧r)

.
(6.12)
The ﬁrst term on the right side of Eq. (6.12) comes from the
acceleration of the particle as seen in the body-ﬁxed frame,
the middle term is the Coriolis force, and the last term is the
centrifugal force. To write this equation in a more conven-
tional way, deﬁne the body-ﬁxed acceleration by
a′ = d
dt
′
( d
dt
′
r) = d
dt
′
v′.
(6.13)
Then using r = r′, we have
F = ma′ + 2mω ∧v′ + mω ∧(ω ∧r′).
(6.14)
Deﬁning
Feff = F −2mω ∧v′ −mω ∧(ω ∧r′),
(6.15)
Newton’s law in the body-ﬁxed coordinate system takes the
simple form (Goldstein 1999)
Feff = ma′.
(6.16)
For the important case of the rotating Earth, expressing r in
terms of components parallel to and perpendicular to ω, we
have
r = r∥ˆω + r⊥.
(6.17)
Using this form for r, the last term in Eq. (6.15) becomes
−mω ∧(ω ∧r) = mω2r⊥,
(6.18)
which is just the centrifugal force as given in Eq. (2.12).

6.2. CORIOLIS EFFECTS IN THE ATMOSPHERE
97
6.2
Coriolis Eﬀects in the Earth’s Atmosphere
All equations in this section are in a rotating coordinate sys-
tem rigidly attached to the Earth, so primes on vectors and
time derivatives are dropped. For a moving element of ﬂuid,
instead of a mass m subject to a force F , we consider the
force per unit volume f 1 acting on the mass density ρ. The
analog of Newton’s second law is Euler’s ﬂuid equation, which
in our rotating coordinate system takes the form
ρ(∂v
∂t + v · ∇v) = f −2ρω ∧v −ρω ∧(ω ∧r).
(6.19)
In Eq. (6.19),
∂v
∂t + v · ∇v
is the local acceleration moving with the ﬂuid, and the right-
hand side of the equation is the analog for a ﬂuid of Eq. (6.15).
Treating the atmosphere as an ideal ﬂuid (ignoring viscos-
ity), the force/volume is
f = −∇p −ρ∇Vg,
(6.20)
where p is the pressure, and Vg is the gravitational potential
due to the masses in the Earth. As in Sec. (2.2), we combine
the gradient of Vg and the centrifugal force term, deﬁning
g ≡−∇Vg −ω ∧(ω ∧r).
(6.21)
With these deﬁnitions, Eq. (6.19) reads
ρ(∂v
∂t + v · ∇v) = −∇p −2ρω ∧v + ρg.
(6.22)
The middle term on the right-hand side of Eq. (6.22) is the
Coriolis force/volume. It plays a crucial role in many atmo-
spheric phenomena.
1The force/mass f is not to be confused with the Coriolis parameter
f, deﬁned below.

98
CHAPTER 6. CORIOLIS EFFECTS
Wind Circulation around Low- and High-Pressure
Regions
This section deals with the direction that wind
circulates around points of high and low pressure.2
It de-
pends on whether the center of the storm is a local maximum
or minimum of pressure, and whether the storm is in the
upper or lower hemisphere.
Storms typically form a cylindrical structure, the axis of
which is aligned with the local vertical direction. Their cen-
ters do of course move, but very slowly compared to the wind
speeds in the storm, so we assume the storms are stationary,
with their axes along the local vertical direction.
For describing the coordinates of a storm, it is convenient
to take the z axis of the Earth-ﬁxed coordinate system point-
ing in the local vertical direction, parallel to the axis of the
storm. Although storms can extend over hundreds of kilome-
ters, the extent of even a very large storm is still very small
compared to the radius of the Earth. The curvature of the
Earth therefore plays no role in describing the storm, and g
in Eq. (6.22) can be taken to be a constant vector pointing
inward along the z axis.
A point in the storm is located by giving z, the vertical
height above the surface of the Earth, and r, the horizontal
vector from the storm axis to the point of interest.3 A section
of the storm at a deﬁnite elevation z forms a horizontal plane
perpendicular to the z axis. The plane tangent to the Earth
at z = 0 is known as the “f plane” in meteorology.
For
an axially symmetric storm, cylindrical coordinates are very
natural, the coordinates being z, r = |r|, and λ, where λ is
an angle specifying the angle r makes with an axis in the
same horizontal plane. The “radial direction” is simply the
2The storms considered in this section are variously known as “trop-
ical cyclones,” “cyclonic storms,” “cyclones,” and “hurricanes.”
3Note that r is not the usual radial vector in spherical coordinates.

6.2. CORIOLIS EFFECTS IN THE ATMOSPHERE
99
direction of r. Fig. (6.1) shows schematically a cyclonic storm,
the f plane, and the location of a parcel of atmosphere inside
the storm.
Writing the velocity of a point in the storm in cylindrical
coordinates, we have
v = uˆr + vˆλ + wˆz.
(6.23)
In a cyclonic storm, the radial velocity u is the velocity of
the wind heading toward or away from the storm axis, the
azimuthal velocity v is the velocity of the wind circulating
around the storm axis, and w is the wind velocity in the
vertical direction, traveling up or down in the axial direction.
The Coriolis term in Eq. (6.22) is small compared to |g|.
Suppose a hurricane has wind speeds of 100 mph, or 44 m/s.
The duration of a day is Td = 86, 400 s, so the Coriolis term
is maximized by
|ω ∧v| ≤2π
Td
|v| = 3.2 × 10−3 m/s2,
(6.24)
which is completely negligible compared to |g| = 9.8 m/s2.
As a result, Coriolis forces in the vertical direction can be
ignored. However, Coriolis forces in the horizontal direction
play an important role in hurricane dynamics. Such terms
could in principle come from the horizontal component of
ω crossed into the vertical term in v. However, the vertical
velocity w is the smallest wind velocity in a cyclic storm,
typically ≤1 m/s, so this term can also be neglected. The
horizontal Coriolis terms of interest are generated by replac-
ing ω with its vertical component, ω ∧v →ω cos θ(ˆz ∧v).
In meteorology, what is known as the “Coriolis parameter”
is deﬁned by f ≡2ω cos θ, where ω = 2π/Td is the angu-
lar velocity of the Earth and θ is the polar angle as deﬁned
above. Note that due to the factor of cos θ in the deﬁnition of

100
CHAPTER 6. CORIOLIS EFFECTS
f, f is positive in the Northern Hemisphere, negative in the
Southern Hemisphere, and zero on the equator. In terms of
f, the Coriolis term on the right side of Eq. (6.22) becomes a
combination of radial and azimuthal terms,
−2ρω cos θˆz ∧v = ρf(vˆr −uˆλ).
(6.25)
storm
Earth
r
z
θ
f−plane
Figure 6.1: Coordinates for a cyclonic storm
The dominant feature of a cyclonic storm is, as the name
implies, rotation around the center of the storm. The largest
component of v is v. As mentioned above, the vertical velocity
w is quite small, but it is also true that the radial velocity
u is much smaller than the azimuthal velocity v. As a result,
insight into the structure of a storm can be gained by setting
u = w = 0 and looking for a steady-state solution.
The
solution of Eq. (6.22) obtained by doing so is termed “gradient
wind balance.” The vertical component of Eq. (6.22) reduces

6.2. CORIOLIS EFFECTS IN THE ATMOSPHERE
101
to the barometric equation
−∂p
∂z = ρg.
(6.26)
The radial equation is
v2
r + fv = 1
ρ
∂p
∂r.
(6.27)
The v2/r term in Eq. (6.27) is the centripetal acceleration
familiar in elementary mechanics. It arises from the radial
component of the v · ∇v term in Eq. (6.22),
ˆr · (v · ∇v) = ˆr · (v1
r
∂
∂λvˆλ) = −v2
r .
(6.28)
Let us consider the sizes of the terms in Eq. (6.27) for a
typical tropical cyclone. Taking θ = 45◦for deﬁniteness, the
Coriolis parameter is f ∼10−4 s−1. At an intermediate dis-
tance from the axis of such a storm, the velocity might be as
large as v ∼40 m/s, and for r ∼40 km, the centripetal term
v2/r is dominant, approximately ten times larger than the
Coriolis term. However, as the radius increases, the velocity
v decreases, and at r ∼200 km, v ∼10 m/s, the Coriolis term
is twice as large as the centripetal term. At still larger values
of r, the Coriolis term dominates. At very large values of r,
where the Coriolis term dominates, Eq. (6.27) becomes
fv ∼1
ρ
∂p
∂r.
(6.29)
We see that the sign of fv is correlated with the sign of ∂p/∂r.
For a storm which surrounds a pressure minimum, we expect
that ∂p/∂r > 0, so fv must be positive. In the Northern
Hemisphere, where f > 0, v must be positive as well; the
sense of rotation around the pressure minimum is counter-
clockwise. In the Southern Hemisphere, where f < 0, v must

102
CHAPTER 6. CORIOLIS EFFECTS
be negative; the sense of rotation around a pressure minimum
is clockwise. Both of these behaviors have been extensively
documented by satellite photos. Pressure maxima are more
rare, but do occur, e.g., in Siberia. For a storm surrounding
a pressure maximum, the sense of rotation is clockwise in the
Northern Hemisphere, counterclockwise in the Southern.
It is of interest to estimate the kinetic energy of rotation
in a cyclonic storm. At intermediate distances from the axis
of the storm, the whole system is basically in solid body rota-
tion. Taking the storm to be a cylinder of height h ∼15 km,
radius ∼30 km, regarding the system as a giant cylinder ro-
tating at a frequency ∼f, the kinetic energy of rotation is
roughly 6 × 1013 J, quite comparable to the energy released
in the Hiroshima atomic bomb!
Jet Streams
The temperature of the Earth’s atmosphere
is higher near the equator than near the North or South Pole
and the resulting lack of thermal equilibrium causes a ﬂow
of air toward the poles in both hemispheres. The Coriolis
force then deﬂects these poleward ﬂows. To get the overall
direction of the resulting force, let us assume the ﬂow of air
is strictly toward the poles in both hemispheres. This can be
written as
v = vθ ˆθ,
(6.30)
where ˆθ and ˆφ are the usual unit vectors for polar and az-
imuthal angles. In the Northern Hemisphere, poleward ﬂow
implies vθ < 0; the ﬂow is from values of θ < 90◦toward
θ = 0. In the Southern Hemisphere, ﬂow toward the South
Pole corresponds to vθ > 0; the ﬂow is from an angle θ > 90◦
toward θ = 180◦. So vθ has opposite sign in the two hemi-
spheres.
Taking account of the sign change of cos θ in the two hemi-

6.3. HURRICANES
103
spheres, we see from Eq. (6.22) that the resulting Coriolis
force is along the ˆφ or eastern direction in both hemispheres;
the Coriolis force on the poleward ﬂow is always toward the
east, regardless of hemisphere. The resulting deﬂection gives
the general direction of the jet streams in both Northern and
Southern Hemispheres. While this argument does give the
correct west-to-east direction of the jet streams, there are
additional complex behaviors. Perhaps the most important
of these is that jet streams, in addition to their general east-
ward ﬂow, have oscillations in latitude. These have a major
eﬀect on the weather in the northern United States. When
the jet stream “dips” into the northern US, bitter cold win-
ter weather is the usual result. The full physics of the jet
streams was ﬁrst elucidated by the Swedish-American mete-
orologist Carl Gustav Rossby in 1939 (Rossby 1939), and the
term “Rossby wave” is associated with the oscillations of the
jet stream in the atmosphere. Rossby waves also occur in the
ocean.
6.3
Hurricanes
Hurricane as an Example of a Carnot Cycle
Hurri-
canes illustrate how a simple construct can be useful in or-
ganizing and describing the features of a complex physical
phenomenon. In this case the construct is the one discussed
in Sec. (3.3), the Carnot cycle.
Hurricane, a term used in the North Atlantic for a storm
with average winds over 30m/s, is a weather system gener-
ated in tropical zones by a low-pressure area rising over the
ocean being acted upon by the Coriolis force that converts the
inward rush of air toward the eye of the storm into a circu-
lating motion. In the western Paciﬁc such systems are known
as typhoons: the general term is severe tropical cyclone. The

104
CHAPTER 6. CORIOLIS EFFECTS
characteristics are the same everywhere.
In applying the steps of a Carnot cycle to such a storm, the
ocean acts as the heat source of an isothermal step at a con-
stant temperature T2 ≈300 K, the heat energy is provided by
the ocean through the evaporation of water (Emanuel 1991).
This is followed in step two of the Carnot cycle by the rapid
adiabatic expansion of the air as it rises to an altitude of order
15 km, a height where the ambient temperature is T1 ≈200 K.
In step three the air is cooled by radiation to outer space and
compressed; in step four the air descends adiabatically to sea
level and the cycle then resumes.
Calculation of Wind Velocity
As an example of the
analogy’s usefulness, we will use it to obtain a formula for
the wind velocity in terms of the air’s heat gains and loses.
The work done in this cycle goes into the frictional dissipa-
tion that occurs as the air blows over the ocean surface. Of
course frictional dissipation is also the cause of the destruc-
tion wreaked by the storm once it makes landfall. Since the
wind’s drag force Fdrag ∝v2, work is done by the wind over
the ocean at a rate of
dW/dt = −Fdragv = −Av2 · v,
where A is a constant. Heat is given oﬀto the wind by the
ocean at a rate Bv, with B also a constant, representing the
lack of equilibrium between the ocean and the wind. This
heat can optimally be converted into work during the cycle
at the rate proportional to η, the Carnot cycle’s thermal ef-
ﬁciency,
η = T2 −T1
T2
.
At equilibrium we may equate the rate at which heat is con-
verted into work with the rate at which work is done through

6.3. HURRICANES
105
frictional dissipation. This implies that
Av3 = ηBv.
We can therefore expect a hurricane velocity of
v2 = η(B/A) =⇒v =
r
Bη
A =
r
T2 −T1
T1
(B/A).
If, as we said earlier, T2 ≈300 K, T1 ≈200 K, we ﬁnd
v ≈
p
B/2A,
in approximate agreement with experimental observation.

Thermal properties of Earth’s surface above
and below sea level

