CHAPTER 5
Liquid Drop Physics
5.1
Vapor Pressure and Radius of Raindrops
In his discussion of thermodynamics Fermi discussed the prob-
lem of phase transitions between a gas and a liquid, and here
he extends that discussion by considering the formation of
a drop of liquid in a saturated vapor. This requires going
beyond the earlier treatment and examining the eﬀect of the
surface tension of the drop on the phase transition.
Consider a liquid in equilibrium with its vapor, for exam-
ple, a closed container containing pure water in both liquid
and vaporous forms, with liquid water lying at the bottom of
the container and water vapor in the space above. Mechani-
cal equilibrium requires that the pressure in the vapor equal
the pressure in the liquid. Denoting liquid and gas phases by
subscripts 1 and 2, this states
P1 = P2.
(5.1)

84
CHAPTER 5. LIQUID DROP PHYSICS
This equation applies to the case where the interface between
the liquid and vapor is a plane. However, when treating the
mechanical equilibrium between a liquid drop and surround-
ing vapor, there are curved surfaces, and surface tension must
be taken into account. Eq. (5.1) is modiﬁed. Surface tension
has units of force/length and will be denoted in the following
by γ. Numerical values of surface tension in SI units are usu-
ally given in milli-newtons/meter, equivalent to the cgs unit
of dynes/cm. The surface tension of water is approximately
γwat = 73 mN/m.
(5.2)
In the case of a droplet surrounded by vapor, surface tension
acts to minimize the area of the droplet. The result is that
the pressure inside the droplet is larger than the pressure of
the surrounding vapor, so P1 > P2.
An equation for P1 −P2 is easily obtained using a balance-
of-forces treatment, illustrated in Fig. (5.1). Take a spherical
droplet of radius r, surrounded by vapor. Divide the sphere
exactly in half and consider the forces on the upper hemi-
sphere. In the upward direction the pressure of the liquid
exerts a force πr2P1. In the downward direction, the pres-
sure of the vapor exerts a force of πr2P2. The surface tension
also exerts a downward force on the upper hemisphere. Act-
ing along the circumference of the hemisphere, the surface
tension force is 2πrγ. Equating upward and downward forces
gives
πr2P1 = πr2P2 + 2πrγ, or P1 −P2 = 2γ
r .
(5.3)
The spherical drop is a special case of a more general formula
due to Young and Laplace(Landau and Lifshitz 1980) that
involves the two principal radii of curvature of the surface at
the point of contact of the two phases. Eq. (5.3) can be used
to compute the pressure diﬀerence between a raindrop and

5.1. VAPOR PRESSURE AND RAINDROPS
85
2γ
r
2γ
r
P2
P1
liquid
vapor
Figure 5.1: Forces on upper half of a droplet
the surrounding water vapor. Taking γ = 73 mN/m, and a
raindrop of radius1 r = 1 mm, we have
2γ
r = 146 Pa.
(5.4)
This is tiny compared to atmospheric pressure of 101, 325 Pa,
so the pressure inside a typical raindrop is only slightly higher
than atmospheric pressure.
The presence of a droplet also makes a small change in
the vapor pressure of the surrounding vapor, compared to
1The range of raindrop radii is roughly 0.1 mm to 5.0 mm.

86
CHAPTER 5. LIQUID DROP PHYSICS
its value for a plane interface between liquid and vapor. We
follow Fermi’s treatment of this in the next section, where we
will use subscripts that indicate liquid and vapor rather than
the numerical subscripts 1 and 2.
5.2
Change in Vapor Pressure in
the Presence of Liquid Drops
Landau and Lifshitz’s Statistical Physics (Landau and Lif-
shitz 1980) has a formal derivation of the change in vapor
pressure, δPvap, caused by the existence of a drop. Here we
follow Fermi’s heuristic approach which leads to the same re-
sult. Consider a large closed receptacle that contains both
a liquid and a vapor phase of the same substance. A long,
narrow tube with a cross-section of radius r is suspended in
the receptacle; both its ends are kept open (see Fig. (5.2)).
Capillary action creates a diﬀerence in height h between the
ﬂuid in the tube and the ﬂuid in the rest of the container.
The small diﬀerence in the vapor pressure between what is
exerted on the surface of the ﬂuid in the tube and what on
the surface of the rest of the container is simply due to the
diﬀerent amounts of vapor above each surface.
Consider ﬁrst a column of vapor outside the tube. Requir-
ing that this vapor column be in mechanical equilibrium, we
have
δPvap = Pvap(0) −Pvap(h) = ρvapgh.
(5.5)
Turning to the column of liquid in the tube, since the liq-
uid at the bottom of the tube is at the same level as the
vapor outside the tube, the pressure at the bottom of the
tube is Pvap(0). At the top of the tube, the vapor applies the
pressure Pvap(h). In addition, if we take the contact angle to
be 90◦, surface tension provides an upward eﬀective pressure

5.2. LIQUID DROPS AFFECT VAPOR PRESSURE
87
z = 0
z = h
liquid
vapor
Figure 5.2: Diagram for Fermi’s calculation of δPvap
on the liquid of 2γ/r.2 Requiring the tube of liquid to be in
mechanical equilibrium gives
Pvap(0) + 2γ
r = Pvap(h) + ρliqgh.
(5.6)
From Eqs. (5.5) and (5.6) we have two expressions for gh.
Setting them equal gives
gh = Pvap(0) −Pvap(h)
ρvap
= Pvap(0) −Pvap(h) + 2γ
r
ρliq
.
(5.7)
Solving for Pvap(0) −Pvap(h) = δPvap, we have
δPvap =
ρvap
ρliq −ρvap
(2γ
r ) ≈ρvap
ρliq
(2γ
r ),
(5.8)
2We are assuming the surface tension at the vapor-liquid-tube junc-
tion is approximately the same as the surface tension used in Sec. (5.1).

88
CHAPTER 5. LIQUID DROP PHYSICS
where in the last term we used ρvap << ρlig. Deﬁning the
pressure diﬀerence between inside and outside of the liquid
droplet as δPliq = P1 −P2, and using Eq. (5.3), we have
δPvap = (ρvap
ρliq
)δPliq.
(5.9)
We saw from Eq. (5.4) that δPliq is generally quite small.
Eq. (5.9) shows that δPvap, while nonzero, is still smaller by
the ratio ρvap/ρliq. Fermi puts this quantitatively by calcu-
lating the ratio δPvap/Pvap at T = 300 K. He gives
δPvap
Pvap
≈10−7
r(cm).
(5.10)
For r = 1 mm, Eq. (5.10) says that δPvap is a million times
smaller than Pvap itself.
5.3
Radius and Terminal Velocity of
Falling Raindrops
Raindrops typically form at a height that may vary up to
several kilometers.
They do so mainly by condensation of
water vapor around a dust particle. The drops vary as they
fall to Earth and, depending on their size, diﬀerent methods
are used to calculate the resistance they encounter in their
descent. The drops may also undergo change of shape, but we
follow Fermi in making the approximation that they retain
their spherical form.
He considers two limiting cases, one
corresponding to very small raindrops and the other to larger
ones as illustrations of two diﬀerent mechanisms that act to
determine the speed with which drops fall.
The ﬁrst case is that of motion of a sphere of radius r mov-
ing at constant velocity through an inﬁnite incompressible

5.3. PROPERTIES OF FALLING RAINDROPS
89
ﬂuid of constant density and viscosity, a standard problem in
transport phenomena (Huang 1987). The equation that de-
scribes such a state, the balance between the retarding force
of the medium and the force of gravity, is known as Stokes’s
Law. It says
mg = 6πνrv,
(5.11)
where m is the mass of the drop, r is its radius, v, its terminal
velocity, and ν is the coeﬃcient of viscosity.
Taking m =
ρ(4πr3/3), and working in cgs units with ρ = 1 g/cm3, we
ﬁnd the expression for the drop’s terminal velocity to be
v(cm/s) = 2r2ρg
9ν
= 1.26 × 106(r(cm))2,
(5.12)
where we have employed the value of viscosity coeﬃcient for
air that Fermi gives: ν = 17.3 × 10−5 g/s · cm. This relation
holds, however, only for the very smallest of drops because
the viscosity retarding force given in Eq. (5.11) corresponds
to just the ﬁrst term in an expansion:
F = 6πνrv(1 + 3ρvr
8ν
+ ......).
(5.13)
Its validity depends on the relative smallness of ρvr/ν, a
quantity known as the Reynolds number (Landau and Lif-
shitz 1959).
Since the viscosity of air is such a relatively
small number, Stokes’s law is only a good approximation for
the case of for the smallest of raindrops, ones that are essen-
tially mist-like, r ≤2.5 × 10−3 cm. In this case the terminal
velocity is small; a few cm/s (Van Boxel 1998).
For larger drops, terminal velocity is reached diﬀerently.
The force of gravity is now balanced by an upward-directed
aerodynamic drag. The equation describing the balance is
mg = 4πr3
3
ρg = κπr2v2,
(5.14)

90
CHAPTER 5. LIQUID DROP PHYSICS
where κ is the coeﬃcient of air resistance. This is normally
written as
κ = ρairC
2
,
(5.15)
where C is a dimensionless quantity that is of order unity for
air. We thus have
v =
r
8gr
3ρairC ≈1500√r · cm/s
(5.16)
which gives v ≈7 m/s for a raindrop with a 2 mm radius, a ﬁg-
ure in rough agreement with experimentally observed values.
It may also be worth noting that this formula, as expected,
also accounts for the terminal velocity of hailstones.
Fermi quotes two values of terminal raindrop velocity, one
at sea level and the other at an altitude of 4 km. He gives the
ﬁrst as v = 1344√r and the second as v = 2200√r at 4 km
above sea level.The increase, 2200/1344, corresponds roughly
to the decrease in the ratio of the square roots of ρair at the
two altitudes, a dependence indicated in formula Eq. (5.16).


Coriolis eﬀects

