CHAPTER 18
Waves and Plasma in the Earth’s High
Atmosphere
18.1
Ions in the High Atmosphere
The region Fermi refers to as the high atmosphere, roughly
from a little less than a hundred kilometers up to a thousand
kilometers above sea level, is also known as the ionosphere,
a name given to it because of its electromagnetic properties.
The Sun’s ultraviolet radiation in this zone is powerful enough
to ionize atoms and give the released electrons suﬃcient en-
ergy to prevent them from being immediately recaptured by
positive ions. This region’s existence was conjectured in 1911
by Oliver Heaviside and A. E. Kennelly in order to explain
the apparent bending of transmitted radio waves. Its pres-
ence was proved little more than a decade later by E. V.
Appleton and M. A. F. Barnett (Bleeker, Geiss, and Huber
2001).

252
CHAPTER 18. ATMOSPHERIC PLASMA
Given the ionosphere’s extent, it is not surprising that the
details of its behavior are complicated. There are three main
layers of increasing altitude: D, ≤90 km; E, 90−150 km; and
F, ≥150 km; each further subdivided. The principal ions in
the ionosphere are ionized forms of the atmospheric gases
NO, O2, H, He. The variety of the ions depends on altitude,
with O+
2 , NO+ prevalent in the lower layers while O+, H+
are more abundant in the higher layers.
The temperature
also varies accordingly, as does the degree of ionization. This
depends on the action of the Sun, obviously quite diﬀerent
between night and day, and winter as opposed to summer.
The electrons and ions are typically at diﬀerent tempera-
tures, with electron temperatures of thousands of kelvins in
the upper reaches of the ionosphere. Solar ﬂares or ﬂashes
of increased brightness also aﬀect the degree of ionization, as
does lightning, nor can the eﬀect of cosmic rays be neglected.
We shall not go into these details, limiting ourselves instead
to a discussion of how it is that the ionospheric plasma leads
to the reﬂection of radio waves.
18.2
Radio Waves and the
Electron Plasma
The ionosphere can be treated as an ionized gas or plasma,
consisting of electrons, ions, and neutral molecules. We will
denote the diﬀerent charged species by the subscript α, where
α takes values e, i for electrons (e) and ions (i). While as
mentioned, there are several species of ions, we can capture
the relevant physics by assuming a two-ﬂuid plasma in which
there are electrons and a single species of ion. The equations
of motion for this system consist of Euler-type equations for
each of the two ﬂuids, along with Maxwell’s equations (Krall
and Trivelpiece 1973). As in our discussion of gravity waves

18.2. ATMOSPHERIC RADIO WAVES
253
in Sec. (9), we will assume that the waves being discussed are
small oscillations about an equilibrium state.
In the plasma equilibrium state, there are no external elec-
tric or magnetic ﬁelds; the electric and magnetic ﬁelds that
are present are generated by the wave traveling through the
plasma itself. As we will see below, the ions are basically
immobile. Since the ions and neutral molecules are the main
source of mass, gravity plays no role in electromagnetic wave
propagation in the ionosphere. Further, the ionosphere is so
dilute that its pressure is negligible. As a result, both of the
terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (9.3) can be neglected.
The force terms in the Euler-type equations for our plasma
are strictly electromagnetic in origin. The equations are1
mαnα(∂vα
∂t + vα · ∇vα) = nαqα(E + vα × B
c
),
(18.1)
where nα, mα, qα, and vα are number density, mass, charge,
and velocity for species α. Treating the velocities and electric
and magnetic ﬁelds as ﬁrst-order quantities, the term in the
magnetic ﬁeld is the product of two ﬁrst-order terms and so
can be ignored. The equations simplify to
mαnα
∂vα
∂t = nαqαE.
(18.2)
Assuming sinusoidal time dependence exp(−iωt), we can solve
for the vα in terms of the electric ﬁeld,
vα = i qαE
mαω.
(18.3)
With the velocities in hand, the total current is
J =
X
α
qαnαvα.
(18.4)
1This section uses esu units.

254
CHAPTER 18. ATMOSPHERIC PLASMA
Substituting in Maxwell’s generalization of Ampere’s law, we
have
∇× B = 1
c
∂E
∂t + 4πJ
c
= −iω
c E
 
1 −1
ω2
X
α
4πnαq2
α
mα
!
.
(18.5)
At this point, it is useful to simplify the P
α term that appears
in Eq. (18.5). Assuming only one species of ion, we have ne =
ni, and qe = qi = −e. Using these notations, we have
X
α
4πnαq2
α
mα
= 4πn2
ee2
me
(1 + me
mi
).
(18.6)
The electron mass is much smaller than any ion mass, so
me/mi can be ignored compared to 1. The ions are basically
immobile, serving only to provide a neutralizing background
to the electron motion. Eq. (18.5) simpliﬁes to
∇× B = 1
c
∂E
∂t + 4πJ
c
= −iω
c E
 
1 −ω2
p
ω2
!
,
(18.7)
where
ω2
p = 4πnee2
me
.
(18.8)
The frequency ωp is known as the “plasma frequency.” To de-
rive a dispersion relation, we will eliminate B using Faraday’s
law,
∇× E = −1
c
∂B
∂t .
(18.9)
Taking the curl, we have
∇× (∇× E) = −1
c
∂
∂t(∇× B) = iω
c ∇× B.
(18.10)
Using this equation and Eq. (18.7) to eliminate B, we have
∇× (∇× E) = ω2
c2 E(1 −ω2
p
ω2 ).
(18.11)

18.2. ATMOSPHERIC RADIO WAVES
255
Taking the spatial dependence in plane wave form exp(ik·x),
Eq. (18.11) becomes
−k(k · E) + k2E = ω2
c2 E(1 −ω2
p
ω2 ).
(18.12)
In the study of wave propagation in the ionosphere, an or-
dinary electromagnetic wave is launched upward from the
Earth’s atmosphere. Such a wave is transverse, so k · E = 0.
From Eq. (18.12), for E ̸= 0, a transverse wave must have
(kc)2 = ω2 −ω2
p, or ω2 = (kc)2 + ω2
p.
(18.13)
The ionosphere has a number of layers. The electron den-
sity and plasma frequency vary with altitude z within the
ionosphere, so we have ne(z) and ωp(z). These quantities are
measured with a technique called “ionospheric sounding.” A
radio frequency wave launched from the surface of the Earth
will propagate upward into the ionosphere until it reaches
an altitude where k2 = 0. Being unable to travel further in
the vertical direction, the wave is then reﬂected and travels
back to the Earth’s surface where it is detected. By knowing
the frequency and measuring the time delay of the reﬂected
wave, the density of electrons as a function of altitude can be
mapped out.
The density of electrons in the ionosphere is found to vary
from 104 electrons/cm3 in the lower part of the ionosphere to
∼1010 electrons/cm3 in the upper reaches of the ionosphere.
From Eq. (18.8), the plasma frequency itself varies as the
square root of the electron density. At ne ∼107 electrons/cm3,
ωp/2π = fp ∼30 MHz, a frequency at the boundary between
VHF and UHF bands.

256
CHAPTER 18. ATMOSPHERIC PLASMA
18.3
Other Eﬀects
In this section Fermi mentions, without details, a number of
other electric eﬀects that occur in the atmosphere.
18.4
Double Refraction
This phenomenon aﬀecting the propagation of electromag-
netic waves in the ionosphere is also known as magneto-ionic
double refraction. It is is due to the combined eﬀect of the
Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld and the plasma of electric charges
present in the ionosphere. In our discussion, we will, as be-
fore, assume the ions are immobile, and consider only the mo-
tion of electrons. In the presence of a static magnetic ﬁeld,
electrons move in circular orbits at the electron cyclotron fre-
quency, ωc, given by
ωc = eB
mec,
(18.14)
where B is the external magnetic ﬁeld on the plasma.
In
geophysics, the external magnetic ﬁeld is that of the Earth.
Taking the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld to be ∼0.5 G, ωc turns out
to be ∼9 MHz, so in the ionosphere ωc << ωp.
The derivation of the plasma dispersion relation when a
magnetic ﬁeld is present proceeds along similar lines to the
derivation of Eq. (18.13).
Writing Eq. (18.1) for electrons,
again to ﬁrst order, we now have
mene(∂ve
∂t ) = qene(E + ve × B
c
).
(18.15)
In Eq. (18.15), E is, as before, the electric ﬁeld of the wave
itself, a ﬁrst-order quantity, but B is the external magnetic
ﬁeld, a zeroth-order quantity. Using Eq. (18.15) and Maxwell’s

18.4. DOUBLE REFRACTION
257
equations, dispersion relations can be obtained for the vari-
ous waves that can propagate. The presence of the magnetic
ﬁeld complicates the derivation since the plasma is no longer
isotropic. However, the case where the plasma wave propa-
gates parallel to the magnetic ﬁeld is relatively simple and
will be outlined here.
Even in the presence of the external magnetic ﬁeld, there
is rotational symmetry around the direction of the magnetic
ﬁeld. For this case, there are two dispersion relations, one
for right circularly polarized waves and another for left cir-
cularly polarized waves. Recall from elementary physics that
if the magnetic ﬁeld points directly toward the observer, the
electron moves counterclockwise in a circle at frequency ωc.
For a right circularly polarized wave, the electric ﬁeld tends
to be in phase with the circular motion of the electron. The
relation between wave number kR and frequency for that case
turns out to be
(kRc)2 = ω2 −ω2
p
ω2
ω(ω −ωc).
(18.16)
Note that for frequencies such that ω >> ωc this disper-
sion relation reduces to that of Eq. (18.13). As ω is reduced,
kR also decreases and eventually reaches zero at a ﬁnite fre-
quency. Below this frequency, there is a region where right
circularly polarized waves cannot propagate, until the fre-
quency drops below ωc, where a region of allowed propagation
for right circularly polarized waves again opens up.
For left circularly polarized waves, the electric ﬁeld of the
wave tends to be out of phase with the circular motion of the
electrons. For this case, the wave number kL is related to the
frequency by the dispersion relation
(kLc)2 = ω2 −ω2
p
ω2
ω(ω + ωc).
(18.17)

258
CHAPTER 18. ATMOSPHERIC PLASMA
Here again, for frequencies such that ω >> ωc this disper-
sion relation reduces to that of Eq. (18.13). As ω is reduced,
kL also decreases and eventually reaches zero at a ﬁnite fre-
quency. Below this frequency, there is a region where left cir-
cularly polarized waves cannot propagate, and for this case
this remains true all the way to ω = 0.
Coming down from high frequencies, right circularly polar-
ized waves reach their cutoﬀfrequency before left circularly
polarized waves. The diﬀerence between the two cutoﬀfre-
quencies is the cyclotron frequency, ωc.
Spray Electriﬁcation
Starting at the end of the twentieth
century a series of experiments on the subject were carried out
by J. Elster and H. Geitel and soon after that by P. Lenard
(Loeb 1958). These led to the conclusion that falling water,
whether in the form of raindrops or spray, carried a small
electric charge. The phenomenon was also known as the “wa-
terfall eﬀect” since this is where some of the ﬁrst experiments
were carried out. The phenomenon does not have a single
simple explanation and, indeed, its causes are numerous and
situation-dependent. Since the Earth’s surface is generally
negatively charged, it seems natural to assume an electrical
dipole moment is formed in water drops with the positive
charge directed preferentially downward. One can imagine
that as drops fall they preferentially repel positively charged
ions and attract negatively charged ones. This is but one ex-
ample of the reasoning one can adopt to begin explaining the
phenomenon.
Electrical Storms
Electrical storms are commonly known
as thunderstorms because the electrical discharges or light-
ning bolts that characterize them are accompanied by acous-
tic emissions known as thunder. There is no single explana-

18.4. DOUBLE REFRACTION
259
tion for the complicated mechanisms that generate the bolts,
nor are these fully understood, but a broad overview says the
process starts with the rapid rise of warm, moist air. As it
ascends, reaching heights of 15 km or more, it cools and the
moisture condenses, forming a cumulonimbus cloud (Feyn-
man, Leighton, and Sands 1966).


