SQS
1–2/2020
134
Queer Eye
Reviews
Sarita 
Hernández
IRIDESCENT FUTURES 
Imagining Alternatives with Queering the Museum
Sarita Hernández
Nikki Sullivan and Craig Middleton. 
2019. Queering the Museum. London: 
Routledge, 122 pages. 
“Radically different ways of 
knowing and doing are unlikely 
to occur to us, or, if they do, to feel 
‘wrong’, ‘unprofessional’, or too 
risky” (Sullivan and Middleton, 
26).
As I’m preparing for a day of museum 
meetings, I wonder if my young 
femme-domme-gender-queer-of-color aesthetics leaking through my 
fishnets, tattoos, and leather choker reveal “too much” about the queer I 
am - whether or not I’m appropriate or belong in this space. This began 
when I moved up in positions. I was hired initially as a contract laborer in 
the education department in an off-site after-school art program, moved 
into temporary curatorial and installation, then temporary collections 
management, back to temporary curatorial and installation, and finally 
landed a full-time, then thought, permanent position in education as 
the teacher and student program coordinator at the National Museum 
of Mexican Art in Chicago. Unapologetically queer throughout all those 
cycles of uncertain employment within the same institution driven on 
the concept of “la familia” (or the family), I remained hopeful that I could 
contribute to queering this institution. I insisted, but quickly realized 
that the lure of a “stable” position was actually not going to consider 
my holistic well-being even though “we are familia” and I would have to 
perform labor for whatever stakeholders in addition to the work I saw as 
necessary. Madeleine Schwartz describes “Work is not, as the internship 
setting would suggest, an exchange of gifts. Work is an exchange of time 
for money.” (Schwartz, 2013). I would not get compensated for that “extra” 
work, but they would most definitely show it off and lay me off; I was just 
another disposable queer artist, curator, temporary contractor of color. 
My temporary positions lasted longer than my “permanent” position 
did. It would eventually be terminated during the COVID-19 pandemic 
because teacher and student programs were considered “not essential” 
to the museum. As many museum education staffs would be annihilated 

SQS
1–2/2020
135
Queer Eye
Reviews
Sarita 
Hernández
across the United States, I wondered about the multiple queer approaches 
the museum could have taken to not remove people’s livelihoods and 
health insurance during a global pandemic. What would it have meant 
if programming funds were reallocated? If off-site arts education 
was reimagined? Or if the president and the directors’ salaries were 
redistributed more equitably?  How could this moment benefit from queer 
methodologies like that of Amy Levin’s call for “us to question every aspect 
of the institution” (Sullivan and Middleton, 30) versus the predictable 
colonialist approach it eventually took? 
In Nikki Sullivan’s and Craig Middleton’s Queering the Museum, we 
witness alternative offerings that question, deconstruct, and reimagine 
what museums can be doing. They critique the institution of museums 
by exploring queer methodologies within and outside of the museum 
and addressing this institution as much as an entity as an action. Delving 
into critical race theory, indigenous studies, queer studies, feminist 
methodologies, cultural studies, the authors position museums as being 
shaped by the world around them, aspiring for inclusion yet continuing 
to hide and exclude the other-ed, and needing to advocate for museums’ 
participation in critical reflections and approaches to this work. While 
this book can serve as a helpful toolkit for pushing, reimagining, and 
queering museums, Sullivan and Middleton resist the notion that there is 
a prescribed remedy or formula to queering the museum. And rather, “the 
queering of museums is, as we understand it, a process without end, and, 
perhaps more importantly, without a definitive goal (for example, social 
inclusion) that is presumed to be universally beneficial and achievable 
by following a particular path” (5). Both begin by acknowledging their 
positionalities in the work, Nikki Sullivan as a curator at the Migration 
Museum, coming from Gender and Cultural Studies,  and Craig Middleton 
as the manager and curator at the Centre for Democracy in Adelaide, 
South Australia, coming from Museum Studies and Art History. They 
both approach this text from small institutions where they navigated 
working across departments, not simply isolated in curatorial. Illustrating 
their experiences as queer practitioners in the field, they focus on three 
major areas of queer methodologies in museums: display and exhibition 
practices, cataloguing and collections management, and education and 
community engagement. 
Beginning with the construct of heteronormativity, “Chapter 1: From 
LGBTIQ+ Inclusion to Queer Ethics” addresses its maintenance in 
museums that so easily becomes what Lisa Duggan calls “homonormativity” 
via basic assimilationist tactics including supposed gay inclusion in 
museums. They offer the brilliant example of  “London’s Natural History 
Museum’s decision to open Sexual Nature, a temporary exhibition about 
sex in the so-called natural world, ‘just in time for Valentine’s Day’ (Millard, 
2011), thereby reinforcing the association of sex with love…” (29).  They 
could have taken an alternative, queer, anti-capitalist approach to that day 
and address issues of domestic and sexual violence affecting communities 
and deconstruct the notion that violence is natural. Instead, they opted to 
cater to hetero/homo-normativity. 
Even if it’s not as explicit as saying “gay is bad” or “sex equals love,” these 
insidious museum practices literally work as what S. Nikki Ahmed calls a 
“straightening device” (92) and perpetuate white, rich heteronormativity. 
Sullivan and Middleton state, “While monogamous, middle-class, 
respectable, primarily white, cisgendered, able-bodied, gay and lesbian 
couples, and even monogamous same-sex animal couples, may be 
appearing in museums, polyamory, kink, gender queerness, communal 
living, sex work, intergenerational relations, queer bodies, lives, and 
relations remain conspicuous in their absence” (29). This illustrates 
clearly why the politics of LGBTIQ+ inclusion can be unproductive to 
queering the museum, there remains a perpetuation of colonial hierarchies, 

SQS
1–2/2020
136
Queer Eye
Reviews
Sarita 
Hernández
especially in an institution that still benefits from and is founded on such 
structures. Sullivan and Middleton continue on to introduce Joshua Adair’s 
engagement with Elisa Giaccardi’s notion of iridescence in museum work 
by questioning the ownership of knowledge and factual, single truths 
(31). Iridescence is queer possibility, offering infinite approaches and 
interpretations to an object or story without creating a hierarchy of one 
truth being more valid than another. Instead it embraces the vastness 
of difference and ongoing process of seeing, questioning, and knowing. 
This shift from inclusion to queer ethics and movement toward vastness 
and expansiveness takes us deeper into queering display and exhibition 
practices in the following chapter.
In “Chapter 2: Queer/ing Display,” Sullivan and Middleton offer 
inspiration and examples of queering exhibition practices. They draw 
critiques of inclusion and exclusion from examples such as Fred Wilson’s 
“Truth Trophy” installation in Mining the Museum and Ashkan Sepahvand’s 
“Welcome Address” in Odarodle: an imaginary their_story of naturepeoples, 
1535–2017, both addressing the silences and erasures of racist histories 
while creating what Sara Ahmed calls “disorientation” or productive 
discomfort and institutional critique on inclusion. A normative practice 
for LBGTIQ+ inclusion in exhibitions is by way of objects, however what 
would it mean to highlight the lack of access to such objects because of 
hetero white supremacy? 
Sullivan and Middleton offer their Queering the Museum exhibition inspired 
by Jo Darbyshire’s The Gay Museum in the Western Australia Museum 
and Matt Smith’s Queering the Museum at Birmingham Museum and Art 
Gallery in the UK. They highlight Darbyshire’s queer approach to objects 
by reimagining insignificant objects to narrate a story in the exhibition. 
“Rather than offering a linear account of a shift from the bad old days of 
homosexual oppression to the enlightened present, the display at once 
showcases historic abuses and the knowledges that inform them, draws 
attention to the problematics of the repetition of habituated, taken-for-
granted practices (including display practices), and performatively opens 
up sexual pasts, presents, and futures to alternative configurations” (50). 
Inspired by these approaches, Sullivan and Middleton’s pop-up exhibition 
utilized objects that would be considered “non-queer” to mainstream 
audiences to re-define or help define moments in these queer histories such 
as Richard Boyle’s “Lavender Marriage” which was a mannequin with a 
lavender dress, a hat from WWII and a beard. These were essentially found 
objects assembled together to create a literal image for the gay slang and 
metaphor of a Lavender Marriage which was a “marriage of convenience” 
to hide one of the partner’s queer identity (55). They addressed the 
institutional limits of budget and staff resistance to this different approach 
to displaying queer history, but ultimately this playful and risky exhibition 
demonstrated a potential for queering display, in part, through its resistance 
to the norm of what is and isn’t a queer object. 
Continuing to “Chapter 3: Queer/ing Meaning-Making,”  Sullivan 
and Middleton take on queering cataloging practices and collections 
development by questioning authority and the notion of the expert. They 
bring forward an example that is not queer by gender or sexuality, which 
is an important note for addressing queerness in collections since often 
times there is a misconception that an action or object has to be LGBTQI+ 
to engage in queering the museum. However, Sullivan and Middleton 
are offering more of an ethics and a methodology in their analysis of the 
Lindow Man: A Bog Body Mystery exhibition at the Manchester Museum 
in 2008-2009. The museum engaged in community consultation in which 
excerpts from seven interviews were included in the exhibition didactics. 
Many visitors and staff were disappointed with the information because 
they did not know what was “fact” from an expert versus “story” from 
community. Many of the critiques were around a desire to receive facts 

SQS
1–2/2020
137
Queer Eye
Reviews
Sarita 
Hernández
versus engaging in dialogue and interpretation about history. Sullivan and 
Middleton mention, “Drawing on the work of Bruno Latour, we suggest a 
move away from the question of what things mean and towards an analysis 
of what things do, how and why” (64). The Lindow Man essentially unveiled 
the preconceived notions their publics had with the institution and a 
resistance to change, difference, and multiple interpretations. In facilitating 
an exhibition like this, there seems to be more of an undoing and unveiling 
of the way things are, ie heteronormative, patriarchal, hierarchical and in 
turn offering a glimpses of what alternatives could be in mean-making.
The ways in which unveiling and imagining alternatives can occur, could be 
by way of queering engagements with collections similar to that of Lindow 
Man. In “Chapter 4: Queer/ing Engagement,” Sullivan and Middleton call 
for community engagement that is not engagement, but rather a centering 
collaboration on exhibitions and collections within communities. One 
of the examples offered of queering collaboration is the Adelaide’s Feast 
Queer Youth Drop-In. The young queers would mount an exhibition at 
the Migration Museum in the museum’s  Forum Gallery, which is intended 
to be an inclusive space, where the community has full agency over the 
narratives shared on the walls. After meeting the participating youth, 
Sullivan and Middleton realized they were reproducing problematic 
practices. They were operating in what Bernadette Lynch addresses 
as a “rhetoric of service” versus being within or collaborating with the 
community (91). They ultimately ended up participating with the youth 
and hired an artist to lead “drop-in” workshops in which they would not 
direct or have a preset notion or agenda for what the youth should be doing 
based on their shared identity. They ended up making badges together, 
which  would lead participants to get to know each other a little better 
than a more formal verbal back and forth conversation about what the 
exhibition would be in the Forum Gallery. While this is a valuable lesson 
learned around facilitation and community collaboration in the creation 
of OUT in the Museum exhibition, I wonder about the artist that was hired 
to lead the workshops that would connect the museum to the youth in a 
meaningful way. It is often the job of artists to remedy connections between 
communities and museums, yet they more often than not do not have the 
stable income that museum administrators do. How can we reimagine this 
paradigm and think about how pay equity could be illustrated in queering 
the museum?
While I appreciate the movement toward queering the museum in exhibition 
practices, collections management, and community collaboration, I remain 
wondering about the power some museum professionals have and how 
hierarchies within these different positions operate and facilitate queering. 
Someone like me who is an emerging museum professional, constantly 
bouncing between contract work, navigating museums as an artist and a 
hxstorian aspiring to make a difference by constantly pushing projects with 
queer agendas, in contrast to a collections management director that has 
been in the same position for 30 years and who is resistant to new ways 
of knowing or change within a stagnant institution. I wonder about how 
much harm these institutions produce and how to navigate a sustainable 
queering for the queers like me who still don’t have health insurance, and 
often have enormous amounts of academic debt, solely to be considered 
for time-limited fellowships, and those constantly on the chopping block 
when it comes to staff cuts. I am left wondering about sustainable practices 
for those who are in vulnerable contract temporary positions navigating 
a more sensitive uncertainty around employment and equitable museum 
pay. As Cathy J. Cohen writes, “I’m talking about a politics where the non 
normative and marginal position of punks, bulldaggers, and welfare queens, 
for example, is the basis for progressive transformative coalition work” 
(438). I’m interested in a queering of the museum where these precarious 
and marginal positions are at the center of radical museum organizing, 
but who are also not left alone to advocate for themselves by themselves. 

SQS
1–2/2020
138
Queer Eye
Reviews
Sarita 
Hernández
A queering of the museum should acknowledge the power structures 
that have geared the trajectories of museums such as white supremacy, 
heteronormativity, and capitalism, and work toward deconstructing 
and reimagining those power structures with those at the margins at the 
core. Queering the Museum leaves me hopeful for more perspectives and 
conversation around how queering the museum plays out for contract 
laborers such as contract researchers, teaching artists, and temporary 
museum educators. There are many more iridescent patterns to witness, 
illustrate, and process, but Queering the Museum definitely unveils resilient 
and reimagined museum futures. 
References
Adair, Joshua. 2017. “O [Queer] Pioneers! Narrating Queer Lives in Virtual 
Museums.” Museum & Society, 15(2): 114–125.
Ahmed, Sara. 2006. Queer Phenomenology: Orientations, Objects, Others. 
Durham: Duke University Press.
Cohen, Cathy J. 1997. “Punks, Bulldaggers, and Welfare Queens: The Radical 
Potential of Queer Politics?” GLQ, 3(4): 437–465.
Duggan, Lisa. 1992. “Making it Perfectly Queer.” Socialist Review, 22(1): 11–31.
Lynch, Bernadette T. 2017. “The Gate in the Wall: Beyond Happiness-making 
in Museums.” In B. Onciul, M. Stefano, & S. Hawke (eds), Engaging 
Heritage, Engaging Communities. Woodbridge, Suffolk: The Boydell 
Press, 25–49. 
Schwartz, Madeleine. 2013. “Opportunity Costs: The True Price of Internships.” 
Dissent, 60(1): 41–45. www.dissentmagazine.org/article/opportunity-
costs-the-true-price-of-internships.
Sullivan, Nikki and Middleton, Craig. 2019. Queering the Museum. London: 
Routledge.

