See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/220444974
Dynamic Mereotopology: A Point-free Theory of Changing Regions. I. Stable
and unstable mereotopological relations
Article  in  Fundamenta Informaticae · January 2010
DOI: 10.3233/FI-2010-268 · Source: DBLP
CITATIONS
15
READS
343
1 author:
Dimiter Vakarelov
Sofia University "St. Kliment Ohridski", Sofia, Bulgaria, faculty of mathematics and informatics
125 PUBLICATIONS   2,331 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Dimiter Vakarelov on 01 June 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Fundamenta Informaticae 100 (2010) 1–22
1
DOI 10.3233/FI-2010-264
IOS Press
Dynamic Mereotopology:
A Point-free Theory of Changing Regions. I.
Stable and unstable mereotopological relations
Dimiter Vakarelov∗
Soﬁa University, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science
blvd James Bouchier 5, 1126 Soﬁa, Bulgaria
dvak@fmi.univ-soﬁa.bg
Abstract. In this paper we present a point-free theory of Whiteheadean style of space and time. Its
algebraic formulation, called dynamic contact algebra (DCA), is a Boolean algebra whose elements
symbolized dynamic regions changing in time, with two spatio-temporal mereotopological relations
between them: stable and unstable contact. We prove several representation theorems for DCA-
s, representing them in structures arising from products of contact algebras or from products of
topological spaces. We also present a decidable quantiﬁer-free constraint logic for reasoning about
stable and unstable mereotopological relations between dynamic regions. We consider the paper as
a ﬁrst step in point-free dynamic mereotopology.
Keywords: Dynamic mereotopology,point-free theory of space and time, topological representation
theorem, spatio-temporal logic.
Introduction
This paper is a contribution to the Whiteheadean approach to a new integrated theory of space and time.
Here is a quote from his ﬁrst writings on this subject [28], page195 (boldface is ours):
“...It follows from the relative theory that a point should be deﬁnable in terms of the relations
between material things. So far as I am aware, this outcome of the theory has escaped the notice of
mathematicians, who have invariably assumed the point as the ultimate starting ground of their reason-
ing. ... Similar explanations apply to time. Before the theories of space and time have been carried to a
∗Address for correspondence: Soﬁa University, Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, blvd James Bouchier 5, 1126
Soﬁa, Bulgaria

2
D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
satisfactory conclusion on the relational basis, a long and careful scrutiny of the deﬁnitions of points of
space and instants of time will have to be undertaken, and many ways of effecting these deﬁnitions will
have to be tried and compared. This is an unwritten chapter of mathematics...”
The theory of space based on the Whiteheadean approach is known now as Region Based Theory
of Space (RBTS). Unlike classical Euclidean approach based on the primitive notions point, line and
plane, which are abstract features having no existence in reality as separate things, RBTS is based on a
more realistic primitive notions of region (a formal analog of physical body) and some spatial relations
between regions as part-of, overlap and contact (connection in the Whitehead’s terminology). The
relations part-of and overlap are typical in mereology – the philosophical theory of parts and wholes
[20]. The part-of relation formalizes the situations where some region a is a part of another region b. If
we consider regions as certain non-empty sets of points, then this means the standard set inclusion. The
relation of overlap is deﬁnable by part-of relation: two regions a and b are overlapping if they have as
a common part another region c. Contact relation between two regions a and b means that they share a
common point. Since points in mereology are not regions, contact is stronger than overlap. For instance
it is possible that two regions are not overlapping but are in a contact and in this case they have a common
boundary point. So contact has some topological meaning which is a motivation RBTS to be called also
mereotopology.
Other sources of RBTS are also de-Laguna [7] and Tarski [23], who showed how to redeﬁne Eu-
clidean geometry as an extension of mereology with the primitive notion of sphere. Whitehead presented
in [30] a detailed programme how to build a mathematical theory of RBTS in which points (as well as
lines and planes) can be deﬁned as certain collections of regions. Recent surveys on RBTS with some
historical remarks can be found in [4, 18, 24]. It is now commonly accepted that the algebraic counterpart
of RBTS, capturing only some topological aspects of regions, is the notion of contact Boolean algebra
appearing in various versions in [4, 8, 10, 11, 22, 24]. The simplest one was introduced in [8] under the
name contact algebra. Contact algebras are in fact Boolean algebras extended with one binary relation
C called contact, satisfying some obvious axioms capturing some properties of Whitehead’s connection
relation. The elements of the Boolean algebra are called regions and the Boolean operations can be con-
sidered as operations of how to deﬁne new regions from given ones. By means of the Boolean operations
one can deﬁne various mereological relations: part-of is the standard Boolean ordering, overlap aOb is
deﬁnable by a.b ̸= 0, underlap (dual overlap) aUb is deﬁnable by a + b ̸= 1, where ., + and ∗are the
Boolean product, sum and complement respectively. Standard point models of contact algebras, called
topological contact algebras, are Boolean algebras of regular closed subsets of a given topological space
with a contact between two such subsets if they share a common point. It is proved in [8] that each
contact algebra can be represented as topological contact algebra, which fact realizes in some way the
Whitehead’s idea to deﬁne points (and a topological space over the set of the deﬁned points) by means
of the regions and some relations between them. It is important to mention that Whitehead’s ideas of
region-based theory of space ﬂourished, and in a sense have been reinvented, and found applications
in some areas of computer science: Qualitative Spatial Reasoning (QSR), knowledge representation,
geographical information systems, formal ontologies in information systems, image processing, natural
language semantics etc. The reason is that the language of region-based theory of space is more simple
to describe some qualitative spatial features and properties of space bodies. Survey papers concerning
various applications are [5, 6] (see also special issues of Fundamenta Informaticae [9] and the Journal
of Non-classical Logics [2]). One of the most popular among the community of QSR-researchers is the
system of Region Connection Calculus (RCC) introduced by Randell, Cui and Cohn [19]. RCC attracted

D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
3
quite intensive research in the ﬁeld of region-based theory of space, both on its applied and mathematical
aspects. For instance it was unknown for some time which topological models correspond adequately to
RCC, which fact stimulates the investigations of topological representation theory of RCC and RCC-like
systems (see [8, 11]). Another impact of region-based theory of space is that it stimulates the appear-
ance of a new area in logic, namely “Logics of Space” [1], called sometimes “Spatial Logics” (see also
[3, 15, 24, 31]). We have to mention that RBTS, considered as a kind of point-free theory of space,
can be treated also as a special kind of point-free topology. The difference is in the fact that locales,
the standard algebraic models of point-free topology (see [14]), are Heyting algebras, while the standard
algebraic models of RBTS are Boolean algebras.
Whitehead’s theory of time was developed mainly in [29] and was called in [30] Epochal Theory
of Time (ETT). Probably the reason for this name is that the Whitehead’s notion of epoch is one of
the central notions of his theory. Whitehead claims that the theory of time can not be separated from
the theory of space and their integrated theory has to be extracted from the existing things in reality and
some of their spatio-temporal relations considered as primitives. For instance, like points, moments of
time also do not have separate existence in reality and consequently they have to be deﬁned on the base
of the primitives of the theory. Unfortunately, unlike his program how to build mathematical theory of
space, given in [30], Whitehead did not describe analogous program for his theory of time. He introduced
and analyzed many notions related to ETT but mainly in an informal way, which fact makes extremely
difﬁcult to obtain clear mathematical theory corresponding to ETT. So, any such attempt will be only
an approximate partial formalization of Whitehead’s ideas and the claim that it corresponds to what
Whitehead had in mind always will be disputable. Further, when we say that the theory of space and
time is point-free, this always will mean point-free in a double sense: that both space points and time
points (moments of time) should be deﬁnable by the other primitives of the theory.
In this paper we will try to make one of the ﬁrst steps in obtaining an extension of RBTS, con-
sidered as an integrated theory of space and time, containing neither points, nor moments of time as
primitive notions. We introduce a dynamic version of a contact algebra, which is a Boolean algebra
with two additional contact-like relations C∃and C∀. The elements of the Boolean algebra are called
dynamic regions, considered to formalize regions changing or moving in time, while C∀and C∃are two
spatio-temporal relations between dynamic regions called respectively stable and unstable contact. The
obtained system is called dynamic contact algebra (DCA) of stable and unstable contact relations. The
meaning of aC∀b is that a and b are in a contact in each moment of time, while aC∃b means that a and b
are in a contact only in some moments of time. As an example of such relations consider a human body
a, his head b and his hands c and d, considering them as dynamic regions. Obviously we have aC∀b,
because the body a is always in a contact with his head b, and cC∃d, because his hands c and d only
sometimes are in a contact.
Standard models of DCA can be deﬁned as follows. Let T ̸= ∅be a set whose elements are
considered as moments of time and for each t ∈T let (Bt, Ct) be a contact algebra describing the spatial
conﬁgurations of regions of a given domain at the moment t (by the representation theorem of contact
algebras Bt can always be considered as a topological contact algebra). Let Q
t∈T Bt be the product of
Boolean parts of contact algebras and let B(T) be a subalgebra of the product. Then for b ∈B(T),
and t ∈T we denote by bt the t-th coordinate of b; bt means “b at the moment t”, so each b is a vector
containing all instances of b during his change in the time set T. For x, y ∈B(T) we deﬁne the stable
and unstable contact relations as follows:
xC∀y iff (∀t ∈T)(xtCtyt),
xC∃y iff (∃t ∈T)(xtCtyt).

4
D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
Such DCA-s are called product algebras. Note that in this model time has no internal structure, i.e.
it does not contain, for instance, the standard before-after ordering relation between moments of time.
We axiomatize DCA by a set of abstract axioms and prove representation theorems for such systems
representing them in several classes of standard models. We show also that in each DCA one can deﬁne
various stable and unstable mereological and mereotopological relations. Finally we introduce a decid-
able logic for qualitative reasoning about dynamic regions with stable and unstable contact relations.
Using the representation theory of DCA-s we prove a completeness theorem of the logic with respect to
several classes of intended standard models. We end the paper with some concluding remarks and open
problems.
Standard reference book for Boolean algebras is [21] and for topology – [16].
1.
Contact algebras
Deﬁnition 1.1. [8] By a Contact Algebra we mean any system B = (B, C) = (B, 0, 1, ., +,∗, C),
where (B, 0, 1, ., +,∗) is a non-degenerate Boolean algebra with ∗denoting its Boolean complement,
and C – a binary relation in B, called contact and satisfying the following axioms:
(C1)
If xCy, then x, y ̸= 0,
(C2)
xC(y + z) iff xCy or xCz,
(C3)
If xCy, then yCx,
(C4)
If x.y ̸= 0, then xCy.
The elements of B are called regions. The negation of C will be denoted by C. Sometimes we will write
ab instead a.b.
The element 0 is called zero region and is considered as a region which does not exist. Then a ̸= 0
means that a exists. If a ≤b, where ≤is the Boolean ordering, then this will be read as a is a part of b, so
≤is the mereological relation part-of. The region 1 is called the unit region, the region which has as its
parts all other regions. Since 0 ̸= 1 the region 1 always exists. The relation aOb of overlap is deﬁnable
by a.b ̸= 0. Another interesting mereological relation is underlap, aUb - the dual overlap, deﬁnable
by a + b ̸= 1 (or a∗.b∗̸= 0). Using the contact C we may deﬁne many mereotopological relations, for
instance Whitehead’s relation of non-tangential part-of a ≪b iff aCb∗.
The following lemma lists some consequences of axioms.
Lemma 1.1. (i) aCb and a ≤a′ and b ≤b′ implies a′Cb′,
(ii) If aCb then aCa and aC1,
(iii) If a ̸= 0 then aCa and aC1,
(iv) 0C0, 1C1,
(v) If (a.b)C(c.d) then aCc and aCb,
(vi) If pCq and aCb then (p.a∗)C(q.a∗) or (p.b∗)C(q.b∗).
Proof:
The proof of (i)-(v) is easy. For the proof of (vi) substitute p and q in the premise pCq and aCb with
their equals from the following equations
p = p.a.b + p.a.b∗+ p.a∗.b + p.a∗.b∗and q = q.a.b + q.a.b∗+ q.a∗.b + q.a∗.b∗

D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
5
and apply the axiom (C2). Then by the above properties of C show that the result of the distribution
implies the conclusion (p.a∗)C(q.a∗) or (p.b∗)C(q.b∗).
⊓⊔
Topological constructions of contact algebras
The contact algebra of regular closed sets. Let X be a non-empty topological space with the closure
and interior operations denoted respectively by Cl(a) and Int(a). A subset a of X is regular closed if
a = Cl(Int(a)). The set of all regular closed subsets of X is denoted by RC(X). It is a well-known
fact that regular closed sets with the operations a + b = a ∪b, a.b = Cl(Int(a ∩b)), a∗= Cl(X \ a),
0 = ∅and 1 = X form a Boolean algebra. If we deﬁne the contact by a CX b iff a ∩b ̸= ∅then CX
satisﬁes the axioms (C1)–(C4). Such a contact is called standard contact for regular closed sets and the
contact algebra of this example and any its subalgebra is said to be standard contact algebra of regular
closed sets, or simply topological contact algebra. This kind of contact algebras are considered as the
main models of RBTS. Regular-open subsets of X, namely subsets such that a = Int(Cl(a)), can also
be used to construct contact algebras (see [8]).
Since we assume that contact algebra is a non-degenerate Boolean algebra, in the above topologi-
cal example we consider topological space to be non-empty. So, in this paper we always assume that
topological spaces are non-empty.
Recall that X is a compact space if the following condition holds: if T
t∈I At = ∅and all At are
closed sets, then T
t∈I0 At = ∅for some ﬁnite subset I0 of I. The space X is a T0 space if for every two
different points x and y there exists an open set containing exactly one of them. A family of subsets of
X is called a base for closed subsets of X, or closed base, if every closed subset of X can be represented
as an intersection of sets from the base.
In the representation theory of contact algebras more special topological spaces are used, namely
semi-regular topological spaces X having the set RC(X) as a topological base of closed sets of X.
The following representation theorem for contact algebras is proved in [8]:
Theorem 1.1. Topological representation theorem for contact algebras. For every contact algebra
(B, C) there exists a semi-regular and compact T0 space X and an embedding h into the contact algebra
RC(X).
RCC-8 relations
In the language of contact algebras one can deﬁne the well-known RCC-8 relations introduced by Egen-
hofer and Franzosa [13] in topological terms. The deﬁnition given below is equivalent to the original one
having in mind the topological models of contact algebras.
RCC-8 relations:
• disconnected – DC(a, b):
aCb,
• external contact – EC(a, b):
aCb and aOb,
• partial overlap – PO(a, b):
aOb and a ̸≤b and b ̸≤a,
• tangential proper part – TPP(a, b):
a ≤b and a ̸≪b and b ̸≤a,

6
D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
RCC-8 relations
• tangential proper part−1 – TPP−1(a, b):
b ≤a and b ̸≪a and a ̸≤b,
• nontangential proper part – NTPP(a, b):
a ≪b and a ̸= b,
• nontangential proper part −1 – NTPP−1(a, b):
b ≪a and a ̸= b,
• equal – EQ(a, b):
a = b.
where a ̸= 0 and b ̸= 0.
Products of topological spaces and contact algebras
We recall below the deﬁnition of product of topological spaces [16]. Let T ̸= ∅be a set of indices, Xt,
t ∈T, be a family of topological spaces and let X = Q
t∈T Xt be the cartesian product of the sets Xt
(we will write simply Q
t instead of Q
t∈T ). Since we consider only non-empty topological spaces, then
their product will also be a non-empty set. We consider X as a topological space (product of the spaces
Xt, t ∈T) considering as a closed base the family of subsets of X of the form Q
t at, where at is a
closed subset of Xt and at = Xt except for some ﬁnite set of indices t (we may assume that at is from
the closed base of Xt). We will denote closure and interior operations of Xt correspondingly by Clt,
Intt, and for X – by Cl and Int. We will use the following formulas connecting these operations (see
[16] Section 16.III) (we always assume that at ⊆Xt):
(1) Cl(Q
t at) = Q
t Clt(at),
(2) Int(Q
t at) = Q
t Intt(at), where at = Xt except of a ﬁnite subset of indices of t.
If x ∈X we denote by xt the t-th coordinate of x and deﬁne the projection function prt(x) = xt.
For at ⊆Xt we deﬁne pr−1
t (at) = {x ∈X : xt ∈at}. The following equations for prt are obvious:
(3) pr−1
t0 (at0) = (Q
t̸=t0 Xt) × at0,
(4) pr−1
t (at) = X iff at = Xt, pr−1
t (∅) = ∅,
(5) pr−1
t (at ∪bt) = pr−1
t (at) ∪pr−1
t (bt),
(6) pr−1
t (Xt \ at) = X \ pr−1
t (at).

D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
7
Proposition 1.1. Let Xt, t ∈T be a non-empty family of topological spaces and X be their product.
Then:
(i) If all Xt are T0 and compact then X is also T0 and compact,
(ii) If all spaces Xt are semiregular, then X is also semiregular and moreover pr−1
t
is an embedding
of RC(Xt) into RC(X).
Proof:
We consider (i) as a folklore fact. Maybe (ii) is also a folklore result but we provide below a short proof.
Let at0 ∈RC(Xt0). Then by the formulas (1), (2) and (3) we obtain:
Cl(Int(pr−1
t0 (at0)) = Cl(Int((Q
t̸=t0 Xt) × at0)) = (Q
t̸=t0 Clt(Intt(Xt))) × Clt0(Intt0(at0)) =
(Q
t̸=t0 Xt) × at0) = pr−1
t0 (at0).
This shows that pr−1
t0 (at0) ∈RC(X). In a similar way we see that RC(X) is a closed base for X,
which shows that X is semiregular space.
Formulas (4) and (5) show that pr−1
t0
preserves the unit, zero and union operations of RC(Xt0)
and that pr−1
t0 is an embedding. To show that it preserves a
∗t0
t0
= Clt0(Xt0 \ at0), the complement in
RC(Xt0), we proceed as follows, applying (1), (3) and (6):
pr−1
t0 (Clt0(Xt0 \ at0)) = (Q
t̸=t0 Xt0) × Clt0(Xt0 \ at0) = (Q
t̸=t0 Clt(Xt)) × Clt0(Xt0 \ at0) =
Cl((Q
t̸=t0(Xt)) × (Xt0 \ at0)) = Cl(X \ pr−1
t0 (at0)).
⊓⊔
Theorem 1.2. Joint embedding theorem for contact algebras. Let (Bt, Ct), t ∈T be a nonempty
family of contact algebras. Then there exist a semiregular and compact T0 space X and a family of
embeddings gt of (Bt, Ct) into RC(X), t ∈T.
Proof:
By Theorem 1.1 for each (Bt, Ct) there exists a semiregular and compact T0 space Xt and an embedding
ht into RC(Xt). Let X be the product of spaces Xt. By Proposition 1.1 X is a semiregular and compact
T0 space and for each t ∈T the composition gt = pr−1
t
◦ht is an embedding of (Bt, Ct) into RC(X).
⊓⊔
Abstract points of contact algebras
The abstract points which are used in the representation theory of contact algebra developed in [8] are
called clans (the name “clan” is taken from the theory of proximity spaces (see [8] for more details)).
The deﬁnition is the following:
Deﬁnition 1.2. Let (B, C) be a contact algebra. A subset Γ ⊆B is called a clan if the following
conditions are satisﬁed:
(i) 1 ∈Γ and 0 ̸∈Γ,
(ii) If a ∈Γ and a ≤b then b ∈Γ,
(iii) If a + b ∈Γ then a ∈Γ or b ∈Γ,
(iv) If a, b ∈Γ then aCb.
It follows by axiom (C4) of contact algebra that every ultraﬁlter in (B, C) is a clan. The following
construction of clans is introduced in [8]. Deﬁne in the set of ultraﬁlters the relation U1ρU2 iff U1×U2 ⊆
C. It is easy to see that the relation ρ is reﬂexive and symmetric. Let Ui, i ∈I be a nonempty family of

8
D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
ultraﬁlters such that every two are in the relation ρ. Then Γ = S
i∈I Ui is a clan and every clan can be
represented in this form. The set of all ultraﬁlters of a contact algebra B = (B, C) is denoted by UF(B)
and the set of all clans is denoted by CLANS(B). For a ∈B we denote by h(a) = {Γ ∈CLANS(B) :
a ∈Γ}. It is shown in [8] that the set CLANS(B) with the set {h(a) : a ∈B} as a closed base deﬁne
a semiregular and compact T0 space and h is an embedding of B into RC(CLANS(B)) required in
Theorem 1.1.
Later on we will need the following lemmas in which B is a contact algebra.
Lemma 1.2. (i) aCb iff (∃U1, U2 ∈UF(B))(U1ρU2 and a ∈U1 and b ∈U2) [8, 10],
(ii) aCb iff (∃Γ ∈CLANS(B))(a, b ∈Γ) [8].
The clan Γ from (ii) is denoted by Γ(aCb).
Note that the clan Γ from (ii) is just U1 ∪U2 from (i).
Lemma 1.3. Let Γ ∈CLANS(B). Then a∗.b ̸∈Γ and b ∈Γ implies a ∈Γ.
Proof:
Suppose a∗.b ̸∈Γ and b ∈Γ. Since b ≤a + b then a + b ∈Γ. Then by the equality a + b = a∗.b + a
we obtain a∗.b + a ∈Γ and since a∗.b ̸∈Γ we obtain a ∈Γ.
⊓⊔
Let ∆be an ideal in B. It is known from the theory of Boolean algebras that the relation a ≡∆b
iff a.b∗+ a∗.b ∈∆is a congruence relation in B and the factor algebra B/ ≡∆under this congruence
(called also factor algebra under ∆and denoted by B/∆) is a Boolean algebra. Denote the congruence
class determined by an element a of B by |a|∆(or simply by |a|). Boolean operations in B/∆are
deﬁned as follows: |a| + |b| = |a + b|, |a|.|b| = |a.b|, |a|∗= |a∗|, 0 = |0|, 1 = |1|. Recall that Boolean
ordering in B/∆is deﬁned by |a| ≤|b| iff a.b∗∈∆(see [21] for details).
Let B be a contact algebra and α ⊆CLANS(B), α ̸= ∅. Now we will deﬁne a construction of a
contact algebra Bα corresponding to α. Deﬁne I(α) = {a ∈B : α ∩h(a) = ∅}. It is easy to see that
I(α) is a proper ideal in B, i.e. 1 ̸∈I(α). The congruence deﬁned by I(α) is denoted by ≡α. So we
have a ≡α b iff a∗.b + a.b∗∈I(α) iff a∗.b ∈I(α) and a.b∗∈I(α). Now deﬁne Bα to be the Boolean
algebra B/I(α). We deﬁne a contact relation Cα in Bα as follows: |a|αCα|b|α iff α ∩h(a) ∩h(b) ̸= ∅.
Lemma 1.4. (Bα, Cα) is a contact algebra.
Proof:
Since I(α) is a proper ideal then Bα is a non-degenerate Boolean algebra.
Second, we have to show that the deﬁnition of contact relation Cα is correct and does not depend
on the representatives a and b of equivalence classes |a|α and |b|α. So we have to prove the following
statement:
(#) a1 ≡α a2 ∧b1 ≡α b2 →(α ∩h(a1) ∩h(b1) ̸= ∅↔α ∩h(a2) ∩h(b2) ̸= ∅).
Case (→). Suppose
(1)
a1 ≡α a2,
(2)
b1 ≡α b2 and
(3)
α ∩h(a1) ∩h(b1) ̸= ∅. From here we obtain that there exists a clan Γ such that:
(4)
Γ ∈α,

D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
9
(5)
a1 ∈Γ and
(6)
b1 ∈Γ.
From (1) we obtain
(7)
a1.a∗
2 ∈I(α), so α ∧h(a1.a∗
2) = ∅.
From (4) and (7) we get
(8)
a1.a∗
2 ̸∈Γ.
Conditions (5) and (8) imply by Lemma 1.3
(9)
a2 ∈Γ and hence Γ ∈h(a2).
In a similar way we obtain from (2), (4) and (5) that
(10)
b2 ∈Γ and hence Γ ∈h(b2).
Now (4), (9) and (10) imply
(11)
α ∩h(a2) ∩h(b2) ̸= ∅.
Case (←). The proof is similar to the proof of case (→). This ﬁnishes the proof of (#) which shows
that Cα is correctly deﬁned.
The veriﬁcation of axioms (C1) – (C3) is easy. For (C4) let |a|α.|b|α ̸= |0|α, i.e. a.b ̸≡α 0. This
implies that (a.b).0∗+(a.b)∗.0 = a.b ̸∈I(α), and consequently α∩h(a.b) ̸= ∅. Then there exists a clan
Γ ∈α such that a.b ∈Γ, so a ∈Γ and b ∈Γ. This implies that Γ ∈α∩h(a)∩h(b), α∩h(a)∩h(b) ̸= ∅,
and ﬁnally |a|αCα|b|α.
⊓⊔
2.
Dynamic contact algebras
Deﬁnition 2.1. By a dynamic contact algebra (DCA for short) we mean any system B = (B, C∃, C∀) =
(B, 0, 1, ., +,∗, C∃, C∀) where (B, 0, 1, ., +,∗, C∃) is a contact algebra and C∀is a binary relation in B
satisfying the following axioms:
(C∀1)
1C∀1,
(C∀2)
0C∀0,
(C∀3)
If pC∀q and aC∀b then (p.a∗)C∃(q.a∗) or (p.b∗)C∃(q.b∗).
The elements of B are called dynamic regions and the relations C∀and C∃are called correspond-
ingly stable contact and unstable contact. These names are motivated by the standard examples of
DCA which will be given below.
Since DCA-s are algebraic systems, we adopt for them the standard deﬁnitions of subalgebra, homo-
morphism, isomorphism, isomorphic embedding, etc.
In the next lemma we list some consequences of axioms.
Lemma 2.1. The following conditions hold in every DCA:
(i)
If pC∀q then pC∃q,
(ii)
If pC∀q then qC∀p,
(iii)
If pC∀q, p ≤p′ and q ≤q′ then p′C∀q′,
(iv)
If pC∀q then pC∀p and qC∀q.
Proof:
(i) By axiom (C∀2) and (C∀3) we obtain: pC∀q and 0C∀0 implies (p.0∗)C∃(q.0∗) and by simpliﬁcation
– pC∃q.

10
D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
(ii) Suppose for the sake of contradiction that pC∀q and qC∀p. Then by (C∀3) we obtain (p.q∗)C∃(q.q∗)
or (p.p∗)C∃(q.p∗). Since q.q∗= p.p∗= 0, in both cases we obtain a contradiction, which proves the
statement.
The proofs of (iii) and (iv) are similar to that of (ii).
⊓⊔
Lemma 2.2. Subalgebras of DCA. Let (B, C∃, C∀) be a DCA and B♯be a Boolean subalgebra of B.
Then (B♯, C∃♯, C∀♯) is a DCA-subalgebra of (B, C∃, C∀), where C∃♯, C∀♯are restrictions of C∃, C∀on
B♯.
Proof:
The proof follows from the observation that all of the axioms of DCA are universal sentences, which
implies that they are satisﬁed in B♯.
⊓⊔
The next corollary is a consequence from Lemma 2.2 and the well known fact from the theory of
Boolean algebras that every ﬁnite subset A = {a1, . . . , an} of a given Boolean algebra B generates a
ﬁnite subalgebra of B with no more than 22n elements.
Corollary 2.1. Let (B, C∃, C∀) be a DCA. Then every ﬁnite subset A of B generates a ﬁnite DCA-
subalgebra of (B, C∃, C∀) with cardinality ≤22n, where n is the number of the elements of A.
Examples of DCA
Lemma 2.3. Let (B, C) be a contact algebra and let C∀= C∃= C. Then (B, C∀, C∃) is a DCA.
Proof:
The proof follows from Lemma 1.1.
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 2.2. Products of contact algebras. Let T ̸= ∅be a set and let for each t ∈T, (Bt, Ct)
be a contact algebra and let B(T) = Q
t∈T Bt denote the product of Boolean parts of contact algebras.
Since contact algebras are non-degenerated Boolean algebras, then their product is also a non-degenerate
Boolean algebra. For x, y ∈B we deﬁne the stable and unstable contact relations as follows:
xC∀y iff (∀t ∈T)(xtCtyt),
xC∃y iff (∃t ∈T)(xtCtyt), where xt and yt denote the t −th
coordinate of x and y.
Lemma 2.4. The algebra (B(T), C∃, C∀) introduced by Deﬁnition 2.2 is a DCA, called product DCA
(PDCA for short). The components (Bt, Ct) are called coordinate algebras of the product.
Proof:
The proof is by an easy veriﬁcation. Note that the veriﬁcation of axiom (C∀3) follows directly from
Lemma 1.1 (vi).
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 2.3. Let (Bt, Ct), t ∈T be a non-empty family of contact algebras and (B(T), C∃, C∀) be
the PDCA deﬁned by this family. If for any t ∈T the algebra (Bt, Ct) is a subalgebra of RC(Xt) for
some topological space Xt, then PDCA is called topological DCA and the spaces Xt – its coordinate
spaces. If all contact algebras from the product are subalgebras of RC(X) of a single topological space
X, then PDCA is called coherent DCA. Subalgebras of product (topological, coherent) DCA-s are called
standard PDCA-s, (standard topological DCA-s, standard coherent DCA-s).

D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
11
Remark 2.1. Lemma 2.4 presents a concrete examples of DCA named PDCA, by products of contact
algebras. We consider subalgebras of PDCA-s as standard examples of DCA describing their dynamic
meaning (that is why they are called standard in Deﬁnition 2.3 in three differen but natural meanings).
In the next section we will show that every DCA is isomorphic to a standard PDCA, to a standard
topological DCA, and to a standard coherent DCA . The elements of the indexed set T are considered
as moments of time and the element x ∈B as a region changing in time. Then for each t ∈T, xt
is just the region x at time t. Each contact algebra (Bt, Ct) can be considered as a picture describing
the spatial conﬁgurations of regions from a given spatial domain D at the moment t. So the series
((Bt, Ct), t ∈T) is in a sense a ﬁlm describing the dynamic change of the spatial domain D. Note that
in this model the set of time moments T has no any internal structure, like for instance the precedence
relation between moments. Points of a standard topological DCA, are the points of the corresponding
coordinate topological spaces Xα for each α ∈T; points of a standard coherent DCA are the points of
the unique space X in which coordinate algebras of the product are embedded. So each topological and
coherent standard DCA has both kind of points: time moments and spatial points. The representation
theory for DCA-s given in the next section will show how these two kinds of points can be extracted
from the point-free deﬁnition of DCA.
Other stable and unstable relations in DCA
Stable zero elements 0∀and stable unit elements 1∀. In the dynamic model it is natural to deﬁne
0∀= {x ∈B : (∀t ∈T)(xt = 0t)}. Obviously 0∀= {0}. Similarly, 1∀of B can be deﬁned by
1∀= {1}.
Unstable zero elements 0∃. In the dynamic model it is natural to deﬁne 0∃as the set {x ∈B : (∃t ∈
T)(xt = 0t)}. It is easy to see that in the dynamic model we have 0∃= {x ∈B : xC∀x}. This suggests
to take the same deﬁnition of 0∃in all DCA-s.
Stable and unstable existing: EXIST ∀and EXIST ∃. In contact algebras x ̸= 0 means “x
exists”. The stable analog of this property in dynamic models can be deﬁned by EXIST ∀= {x ∈B :
(∀t ∈T)(xt ̸= 0t)}. It is easy to see that EXIST ∀= {x ∈B : x ̸∈0∃}, so EXIST ∀is just the
complement of 0∃. Note that EXIST ∃= {x : x ̸= 0}.
Unstable unit elements 1∃. The expected deﬁnition is 1∃= {x ∈B : x∗∈0∃}.
Stable part-of ≤∀. In contact algebras part-of relation is just the Boolean ordering. In dynamic
model ≤∀also coincides with the Boolean ordering of B.
Unstable part-of ≤∃. The deﬁnition in the dynamic model is x ≤∃y iff (∃t ∈T)(xt ≤t yt). It can
be seen that this deﬁnition is equivalent to the following one: x ≤∃y iff x.y∗̸∈0∃, which we adopt for
all DCA-s.
Stable and unstable equality: =∀and =∃. Obviously we have x =∀y iff x = y. The deﬁnition of
unstable equality in dynamic models is x =∃y iff (∃t ∈T)(xt = yt) iff (∃t ∈T)(xt.y∗
t + x∗
t.yt = 0t)
iff x.y∗+ x∗.y ∈0∃.
Unstable overlap O∃. In contact algebras overlap relation is deﬁned by xOy iff x.y ̸= 0. Then the
deﬁnition of O∃in dynamic models is: xO∃y iff (∃t ∈T)(xt.yt ̸= 0t) iff x.y ̸= 0, which we adopt also
for all DCA-s.
Stable overlap O∀. In dynamic models the deﬁnition is: xO∀y iff (∀t ∈T)(xt.yt ̸= 0t). It can be
seen that this deﬁnition is equivalent to the following: xO∀y iff x.y ̸∈0∃, which we adopt also for all
DCA-s.

12
D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
Unstable underlap U∃. In contact algebras underlap (dual overlap) is deﬁnable by xUy iff x∗.y∗̸=
0 or by x + y ̸= 1. In dynamic models the expected deﬁnition of U∃is the same, so we adopt it for all
DCA-s.
Stable underlap U∀. In dynamic models the deﬁnition is: xU∀y iff (∀t ∈T)(xt + yt ̸= 1t). This
deﬁnition is equivalent to: xU∀y iff x + y ̸∈1∃.
Unstable non-tangential part-of ≪∃. In contact algebra we deﬁne x ≪y iff xCy∗. The expected
deﬁnition in the dynamic models is x ≪∃y iff (∃t ∈T)(xtCty∗
t ). It can be seen that this deﬁnition is
equivalent to the following one: x ≪∃y iff xC∀y∗, which we adopt for all DCA-s.
Stable non-tangential part-of ≪∀. We deﬁne this relation as follows: x ≪∀y iff xC∃y∗. It can be
seen that in the dynamic models this is the expected deﬁnition.
We may deﬁne also stable and unstable versions of negations of some of the introduced relations, for
instance:
xC
∀y iff xC∃y, xC
∃y iff xC∀y, xO
∀y iff xO∃y, xO
∃y iff xO∀y, x(̸≤)∀y iff x≤∃y.
In a similar way as above one may express in the language of DCA the stable versions of all
Egenhofer–Franzosa RCC-8 relations. It is not known, however if the unstable versions of this rela-
tions are deﬁnable in the language of DCA (most probably they are not deﬁnable). The same can be said
for the following interesting time relation: the Whitehead’s relation of contemporaneity –
x and y are contemporaries iff (∃t ∈T)(xt ̸= 0t and yt ̸= 0t), i.e. if x and y simultaneous exist at
some moment of time T.
This will be discussed in more details in the concluding section of the paper.
3.
Representation theory of DCA
Throughout this section we assume that B = (B, C∃, C∀) be a ﬁxed DCA and let CLANS(B) be the
set of clans of the contact algebra (B, C∃). We will deﬁne time moments of B as special subsets of
CLANS(B).
Deﬁnition 3.1. Time moments. A subset α of CLANS(B) is called a time moment of B if it satisﬁes
the following condition:
(tm)
(∀p, q ∈B)(pC∀q =⇒(∃Γ ∈α)(p ∈Γ and q ∈Γ)).
We denote by T(B) the set of all time moments of B.
Lemma 3.1. The following holds for all a, b ∈B: aC∃b iff (∃α ∈T(B))(∃Γ ∈α)(a ∈Γ and b ∈Γ).
Proof:
(→) By Lemma 1.2 (ii) for each p, q ∈B such that pC∃q there exists a clan Γ = Γ(pC∃q) such that
p, q ∈Γ. Deﬁne α = {Γ(pC∃q) : pC∃q, p, q ∈B}. Suppose now aC∃b. Then there exists Γ ∈α such
that a, b ∈Γ. It remains to show that α ∈T(B). Let pC∀q. Then by Lemma 2.1 (i) we obtain pC∃q and
by the deﬁnition of α there exists Γ ∈α such that p, q ∈Γ, which shows that α ∈T(B).
(←) The proof follows from the fact that the clan Γ contains a and b.
⊓⊔
Lemma 3.2. If pC∀q and aC∀b then (∃Γ ∈CLANS(B))(p ∈Γ and q ∈Γ and either a ̸∈Γ or b ̸∈Γ).
The clan Γ is denoted by Γ(pC∀q, aC∀b).

D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
13
Proof:
Let pC∀q and aC∀b. By axiom (C∀3) we obtain (p.a∗)C∃(q.a∗) or (p.b∗)C∃(q.b∗).
Case 1: (p.a∗)C∃(q.a∗). By Lemma 1.2 there are ultraﬁlters U1, U2 such that U1ρU2, p.a∗∈U1
and q.a∗∈U2. From here we obtain: p ∈U1, a ̸∈U1, q ∈U2 and a ̸∈U2, Γ = U1 ∪U2 is a clan. Thus
p, q ∈Γ and a ̸∈Γ.
Case 2: (p.b∗)C∃(q.b∗). As in case 1 we construct a clan Γ such that: p, q ∈Γ and b ̸∈Γ. Combining
the two cases we obtain a clan Γ such that p, q ∈Γ and either a ̸∈Γ or b ̸∈Γ.
⊓⊔
Lemma 3.3. The following holds for all a, b ∈B: aC∀b iff (∀α ∈T(B))(∃Γ ∈α)(a ∈Γ and b ∈Γ).
Proof:
(→) Suppose that aC∀b and α ∈T(B). Then the conclusion follows by (tm).
(←) In this direction we will reason by contraposition. Suppose aC∀b. We have to show that (∃α ∈
T(B))(∀Γ ∈α)(a ̸∈Γ or b ̸∈Γ).
Deﬁne α = {Γ(pC∀q, aC∀b) : p, q ∈B and pC∀q}, where Γ(pC∀q, aC∀b) is the clan from Lemma
3.2. It follows from Lemma 3.2 that α fulﬁls the required condition.
⊓⊔
Lemma 3.4. The following is true for the set of time moments T(B):
(i) T(B) ̸= ∅,
(ii) Each time moment is a non-empty set of clans.
Proof:
(i) By Lemma 2.1 and axiom 1C∀1 we obtain 1C∃1. By Lemma 3.1, 1C∃1 implies (∃α ∈T(B))(∃Γ ∈
α)(1 ∈Γ). From here we get that T(B) is not empty.
(ii) Let α ∈T(B). Then by the axiom 1C∀1 and condition (tm) it follows that there exists a clan
Γ ∈α such that 1 ∈Γ, hence α is a non-empty set of clans.
⊓⊔
Deﬁnition 3.2. Coordinate contact algebras. By Lemma 3.4 the set of time moments T(B) is not
empty and each time moment α is a nonempty set of clans. Hence the ideal I(α) is proper, so the
Boolean algebra B/I(α) is non-degenerate. Then to each time moment α ∈T(B) we associate the
contact algebra (Bα, Cα) deﬁned in Lemma 1.4 and let (B(T(B)), C∃, C∀) be the PDCA determined
by the non-empty family (Bα, Cα), α ∈T(B). We deﬁne a mapping g from the DCA (B, C∃, C∀)
into B(T(B)) as follows: for each a ∈B we deﬁne g(a) as an element in B(T(B)) such that for each
α ∈T(B) we have g(a)α = |a|α, so, |a|α are the coordinates of g(a) (for the deﬁnition of |a|α see the
text before Lemma 1.4).
Proposition 3.1. The mapping g is an isomorphic embedding of (B, C∃, C∀) into the PDCA
(B(T(B)), C∃, C∀).
Proof:
Since coordinates of g(a) are |a|α, it follows from the construction of the Boolean algebra Bα that g
preserves Boolean constants and operations. Let us show how g preserves the basic relations C∃, C∀and
Boolean ordering ≤.

14
D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
– Unstable contact: aC∃b iff (by Lemma 3.1) (∃α ∈T(B))(∃Γ ∈α)(a ∈Γ and b ∈Γ) iff
(∃α ∈T(B))(α ∩h(a) ∩h(b) ̸= ∅) iff (by Lemma 1.4 (iii)) (∃α ∈T(B))(|a|αCα|b|α) iff g(a)C∃g(b).
– Stable contact: aC∀b iff (by Lemma 3.3) (∀α ∈T(B))(∃Γ ∈α)(a ∈Γ and b ∈Γ) iff (∀α ∈
T(B))(α ∩h(a) ∩h(b) ̸= ∅) iff (by Lemma 1.4 (iii)) (∀α ∈T(B))(|a|αCα|b|α) iff g(a)C∀g(b).
– Boolean ordering: a ≤b iff a.b∗= 0 iff (by the properties of C∃as a contact) (a.b∗)C∃(a.b∗) iff
( by Lemma 3.1) (∀α ∈T(B))(∀Γ ∈α)(a.b∗̸∈Γ) iff (∀α ∈T(B))(∀Γ ∈α)(α ∩h(a.b∗) = ∅) iff
(∀α ∈T(B))(a.b∗∈I(α)) iff (∀α ∈T(B))(|a|α ≤α |b|α) iff g(a) ≤g(b). The obtained equivalence
shows also that g is an isomorphic embedding.
⊓⊔
Theorem 3.1. Representation theorem for DCA-s. For each DCA (B, C∃, C∀) the following condi-
tions hold:
(i) (B, C∃, C∀) is isomorphic to a standard PDCA.
(ii) (B, C∃, C∀) is isomorphic to a standard topological DCA, with semiregular and compact T0
coordinate spaces.
(iii) (B, C∃, C∀) is isomorphic to a standard coherent DCA such that all coordinate topological
algebras of the product are subalgebras of one semiregular and compact T0 space X.
Proof:
(i) follows from Proposition 3.1
(ii) By Theorem 1.1 each coordinate algebra Bα, α ∈T(B) is isomorphic to a subalgebra of
RC(Xα) of some semiregular and compact T0 space Xα, α ∈T(B). Then apply Proposition 3.1 to
the corresponding subalgebras.
(iii) By Theorem 1.2 applied to the coordinate algebras Bα, α ∈T(B) there exists a semiregular and
compact space X such that each coordinate algebra is isomorphic to a subalgebra of RC(X). Then, as in
(ii) apply Proposition 3.1 to the corresponding subalgebras. The obtained product algebra is a coherent
DCA.
⊓⊔
Corollary 3.1. Any DCA is isomorphic to a standard DCA in all three meanings of standardedness in
Deﬁnition 2.3.
Proof:
Direct corollary of Theorem 3.1.
⊓⊔
Remark 3.1. Theorem 3.1 (i) expresses the dynamic meaning of DCA. Theorem 3.1 (ii) says that each
moment of time α deﬁnes his own local space - the space Xα in which the regions of Bα are placed.
Theorem 3.1 (iii) says that all local spaces can be embedded into one absolute space X.
4.
Logics based on DCA-s
In this section, as an application of the theory of DCA-s, we will construct a quantiﬁer-free logic, named
DCL (Dynamic Contact Logic) for reasoning about stable and unstable mereotopological relations with
a semantics over DCA-s. The motivation to use quantiﬁer-free logic is that the introduced logic DCL is
decidable. Shortly speaking DCL is just the quantiﬁer-free fragment of the ﬁrst-order theory of DCA-s.
Since all axioms of DCA-s are universal formulas, the axiomatization of this fragment can be done in the

D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
15
quantiﬁer-free ﬁrst-order language. It contains denumerable set of variables, called Boolean variables,
two symbols for the Boolean constants 0 and 1, symbols +, .,∗for the Boolean operations and three
two place predicate symbols =, C∃, C∀. Terms of this language (called Boolean terms) are build in the
standard way from Boolean variables and constants. Atomic formulas are of the form a = b, aC∃b
and aC∀b, where a, b are Boolean terms. Formulas are build from the atomic formulas by means of the
propositional operations ¬, ∧, ∨, ⇒, ⇔in a standard way. Abbreviations: ⊥.= α ∧¬α, a ̸= b .= ¬(a =
b), a ≤b .= a.b∗= 0, aOb .= a.b ̸= 0 and many other abbreviations already introduced in the theory of
DCA-s.
Semantics of DCL
The intended semantics of the introduced language is in various classes of DCA-s. Let B = (B, C∃, C∀)
be a DCA, a valuation v in B is a mapping from the set of Boolean variables and constants to B extended
homomorphically to the set of all terms. The pair (B, v) is called a model. The truth of a formula α in
the model (B, v), denoted by (B, v) |= α is deﬁned inductively as follows:
(B, v) |= a = b iff v(a) = v(b),
(B, v) |= aC∃b iff v(a)C∃v(b),
(B, v) |= aC∀b iff v(a)C∀v(b),
(B, v) |= ¬α
iff (B, v) ̸|= α,
(B, v) |= α ∧β iff (B, v) |= α,
and similarly for the other propositional connectives.
We say that α is true in the algebra B if it is true in all models over B; α is true in a class Σ of DCA-s
if it is true in all algebras from Σ. A formula α has a model in a given class of DCA-s if there is a model
in this class in which α is true. A set A of formulas has a model in a given class of DCA-s if there is a
model in that class in which all members of A are true.
Axiomatic system for DCL
The logic DCL has the following Hilbert-style axiomatization.
(I) Axiom schemes for classical propositional logic
Here one can use any Hilbert-style axiomatization of classical propositional logic with axiom schemes
with metavariables ranging in the set of formulas.
(II) Axiom schemes for Boolean algebra with the axioms of equality.
Since Boolean algebras can be axiomatized by universal formulas in a ﬁrst-order logic with equality,
one can take any such set of axiom schemes plus the axioms of equality, all written in a quantiﬁer-free
form. For example a = a, a.(b + c) = a.b + a.c, a.a∗= 0, a + a∗= 1, etc where a, b, c are arbitrary
Boolean terms.
(III) Speciﬁc axioms for DCA
Since the axioms of DCA are all universal sentences, we rewrite them as formulas of our language:
(C1)
xC∃y ⇒x ̸= 0 ∧y ̸= 0,
(C2)
xC(y + z) ⇔xCy ∨xCz,
(C3)
xCy ⇒yCx,

16
D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
(C4)
x.y ̸= 0 ⇒xCy.
(C∀1)
1C∀1,
(C∀2)
0C∀0,
(C∀3)
pC∀q ∧¬(aC∀b) ⇒(p.a∗)C∃(q.a∗) ∨(p.b∗)C∃(q.b∗).
where a, b are arbitrary Boolean terms.
Rules of inference: The only rule is Modus Ponens (MP) α,α⇒β
β
Remark 4.1. Since the relation C∃is a contact relation, the logic DCL is an extension of the logic
BRCC-8, introduced by Wolter and Zakharyschev in [31]. BRCC-8 was introduced as a constraint logic
for reasoning about Egenhofer-Franzosa topological relations with Boolean terms as arguments (see
Section 1). These relations are deﬁnable in arbitrary contact algebra and this fact was used in [3] to
present for it an axiomatization and completeness theorems over various classes of contact algebras (in
[3] BRCC-8 is deﬁned over the language of contact algebras under the name PWRCC). If we consider
DCA as a dynamic version of contact algebras, then DCL is in a sense a dynamic version of BRCC-8.
Canonical models and completeness theorems for DCL
In the completeness theorem for DCL we will use a canonical-model construction, described in details
in [3] for similar systems. In a sense this is a simpliﬁed version of the Henkin canonical construction for
the First-order logic. Here we will only sketch the construction just to ﬁx notations and terminology.
Theories. A set Γ of formulas is called a theory, if it contains all theorems of DCL and is closed
under the rule (MP), namely if α and α ⇒β are in Γ then β is also in Γ. Γ is called a consistent theory
if ⊥̸∈Γ. Γ is a maximal theory if it is a consistent theory and for any consistent theory ∆, if Γ ⊆∆
then Γ = ∆. Sometimes maximal theories are called maximal consistent sets.
The following lemma lists some well-known facts about theories and maximal theories.
Lemma 4.1. (i) Let Γ be a theory and α be a formula. Then the set Γ + α = {β : α ⇒β ∈Γ} is the
smallest theory containing Γ and α. Γ + α is an inconsistent theory iff ¬α ∈Γ.
(ii) The following conditions are equivalent for any theory Γ:
(a) Γ is maximal,
(b) For any formula α: ¬α ∈Γ iff α ̸∈Γ.
(c) For any formulas α, β: α ∨β ∈Γ iff α ∈Γ or β ∈Γ.
(iii) Any consistent theory can be extended into a maximal theory (Lindenbaum Lemma).
(iv) If α is not a theorem of DCL then there is a maximal theory Γ such that α ̸∈Γ.
A set of formulas A is consistent if A is contained in a consistent theory and hence, by the Linden-
baum Lemma A is contained in a maximal theory.
Canonical models. Let Γ be a maximal theory in DCL. We will construct in a canonical way a DCA
associated with Γ imitating the Lindenbaum-algebra construction. Deﬁne an equivalence relation in the
set of Boolean terms B: a ≡b iff a = b ∈Γ. It can be proved that the relation ≡is a congruence relation
depending on Γ, so we may deﬁne equivalence classes of Boolean terms |a| = {b : a ≡b} and to deﬁne
the canonical DCA BΓ over Γ putting: |a|.|b| = |a.b|, |a| + |b| = |a + b|, |a|∗= |a∗|, 1 = |1|, 0 = |0|,
|a|C∃|b| iff aC∃b ∈Γ and |a|C∀|b| iff aC∀b ∈Γ.

D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
17
Using the axioms of the logic it can be proved that BΓ is indeed a DCA. Let for example verify some
of the axioms of DCA.
Axiom (C∀1). By the corresponding axiom in the logic 1C∀1 and the deﬁnition of a theory we obtain
1C∀1 ∈Γ. Then by the deﬁnition of C∀we obtain that |1|C∀|1| holds in BΓ.
Axiom (C∀2). By the corresponding axiom in the logic we get ¬(0C∀0) ∈Γ. By the maximality
of Γ we get 0C∀0 ̸∈Γ and by the deﬁnition of C∀we obtain |0|C
∀|0|. In a similar way, applying the
properties of maximal theories one can verify that each of the speciﬁc axioms of the logic implies the
corresponding algebraic axiom.
Axiom (C∀3). Suppose |p|C∀|q| and |a|C∀|b|). From here and the properties of Γ we obtain that
pC∀q ∧¬(aC∀b) ∈Γ. By the corresponding axiom of the logic we obtain that pC∀q ∧¬(aC∀b) ⇒
(p.a∗)C∃(q.a∗)∨(p.b∗)C∃(q.b∗) ∈Γ. Since Γ is closed under (MP) we get (p.a∗)C∃(q.a∗)∨(p.b∗)C∃(q.b∗) ∈
Γ. By the maximality of Γ we obtain (p.a∗)C∃(q.a∗) ∈Γ or (p.b∗)C∃(q.b∗) ∈Γ, which implies
(|p|.|a|∗)C∃(|q|.|a|∗) or (|p|.|b|∗)C∃(|q|.|b|∗). This fulﬁls the proof that axiom (C∀3) holds in BΓ.
We deﬁne a canonical valuation for Boolean variables putting vΓ(p) =def |p|, then the pair MΓ =
(BΓ, vΓ) is called a canonical model over Γ. It can be proved then that for any Boolean term a we have
vS(a) = |a| and (BΓ, vΓ) |= α iff α ∈Γ. Then the following lemma is true.
Lemma 4.2. Canonical model Lemma. The following conditions are equivalent for any formula α:
(i) α is a theorem of DCL,
(ii) α is true in all canonical models.
Proof:
(i) →(ii) Let (BΓ, vΓ) be a canonical model of DCL and α be a theorem of DCL. Then α ∈Γ and
consequently (BΓ, vΓ) |= α.
(ii) →(i) Suppose that α is not a theorem of DCL. Then by Lemma 4.1 (iv) there exists a maximal
theory Γ such that α ̸∈Γ. Let (BΓ, vΓ) be the canonical model over Γ. Then we have (BΓ, vΓ) ̸|= α.
⊓⊔
Theorem 4.1. Completeness Theorem for DCL. The following conditions are equivalent for any for-
mula α of DCL:
(i) α is a theorem of DCL,
(ii) α is true in the class of all DCA-s,
(iii) α is true in the class of all standard topological DCA-s over semiregular and compact T0 spaces,
(iv) α is true in the class of all standard coherent DCA-s over semiregular and compact T0 spaces,
(v) α is true in the class of all ﬁnite DCA-s with cardinality ≤22n, where n is the number of Boolean
variables occurring in α.
Proof:
The implications (i) →(ii) →(iii) →(iv) and (ii) →(v) consist of the soundness part of the theorem
and are easy because the axioms of DCL are the same as the axioms of DCA. The implication (v) →(ii)
follows from Lemma 2.1 in the following way. Suppose that α is falsiﬁed in a DCA B by some valuation
v and let the Boolean variables of α are a1, . . . , an. Then take the BCA-subalgebra of B generated by
v(a1), . . . , v(an). Obviously α is falsiﬁed in the obtained ﬁnite DCL algebra B′ by the restriction of the
valuation v over B′. The equivalences (ii) ↔(iii) ↔(iv) follow by Theorem 3.1. It remains to prove

18
D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
the implication (ii) →(i). Suppose that α is true in the class of all DCA-s. Then α is true in all models
and hence α is true in all canonical models in DCL. By the canonical model Lemma 4.2 α is a theorem
of DCL.
⊓⊔
Corollary 4.1. The logic DCL is decidable.
Proof:
The proof follows from the equivalence (i) ↔(v) of Theorem 4.1 and the fact that DCL has ﬁnitely
many axiom schemes.
⊓⊔
In a similar way we can prove a stronger version of Theorem 4.1 (see [3] for similar proofs).
Theorem 4.2. Strong completeness theorem for DCL. The following conditions are equivalent for any
set of formulas A:
(i) A is consistent in DCL,
(ii) A has a model in the class of all DCA-s.
(iii) A has a model in the class of all standard topological DCA-s over semiregular and compact T0
spaces,
(iv) A has a model in the class of all standard coherent DCA-s over semiregular and compact T0
spaces.
5.
Concluding remarks
Related systems
• Stable and unstable mereological relations. In [17] we presented an axiomatic characterization of
the dynamic mereological relations ≤∃, O∃, U∃, ≤∀, O∀, U∀(see Section 2), considering them not in
the context of Boolean algebra, but as a separate relational system in which all relations are treated
as primitives. In the representation theorem for this system we used methods quite different from the
methods used in this paper and the reason was that in the abstract theory of these relations we can not
use the rich theory of Boolean algebras and in a sense we have to imitate it in a very abstract way.
• Dynamic representation of contact algebras. If we remove from the deﬁnition of dynamic contact
algebra the relation C∀we obtain a contact algebra. Then one may wonder if for contact algebra we can
simulate a similar representation theory as for dynamic contact algebras. We have shown in [27] that
this is possible and in this way we obtained a new representation theorem for contact algebras. The new
models of contact algebras are deﬁned as follows. Let Bt, t ∈T be a nonempty family of non-degenerate
Boolean algebras and let B(T) be their cartesian product. Deﬁne a contact relation in B(T) as follows:
for a, b ∈B(T) put aCb iff (∃t ∈T)(at ̸= 0t and bt ̸= 0t). Intuitively this relation means that a and
b exist simultaneously at some time t, i.e. a and b are contemporaries - one of the basic relations in
Whiteheadean theory of space and time. So this model does not give the expected spatial meaning of the
contact relation, but another, temporal meaning. So it is natural to call this relation temporal contact
and to denote it by Ct. It is shown in [27] that each contact algebra is representable in the above dynamic
sense. If we want to have in the dynamic representation all coordinate algebras to be also contact algebras
in which the corresponding contact to be considered in its spatial meaning (denoted by Cs), we have to
consider bi-contact algebras with two contact relations - Ct and Cs interpreted in products of (ordinary)

D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
19
contact algebras as follows: Ct – as above, and Cs as the unstable contact C∃. In this model these two
relations satisfy the following axiom: aCsb implies aCtb, which has very intuitive meaning: meeting
somewhere in the space must be at some moment of time. In the above model one can generalize the
temporal contact by deﬁning the contemporaneity relation of a group as a property of the group as
follows. Let A be a group of regions in B(T), then the members of A are contemporaries iff there exists
a moment of time t ∈T such that for all a ∈A, at ̸= 0t. All these considerations are strongly related to
the Whiteheadean epochal theory of time and will be a subject of a subsequent paper.
• A modal approach to stable and unstable mereotopological relations. A logical system which is
closed to the present paper was introduced in [25] under the name MCL ( Modal Contact Logic). It is
obtained by replacing the axioms of classical propositional logic from the axiomatization of BRCC-8
given in [3] with the axioms of the modal logic S5. The relations of stable and unstable contact are
deﬁnable in MCL by the following deﬁnitions: aC∀b .= □(aCb) and aC∃b .= ♦(aCb). Let us note
that in the product models of dynamic contact algebras we just imitate this modal meaning of C∃and
C∀. Note also that the axioms of DCL with the above modal deﬁnitions of C∃and C∀are provable in
MCL, which shows that it contains DCL. However, the logic MCL and the other logics described in [25],
although related to the theory of space and time, can not be addressed to the point-free approach by some
obvious reasons: their mathematical apparatus is too weak for that purpose. Moreover, they are based on
modal logic, which, till now is not used as a tool in the set-theoretical building of ordinary mathematical
theories.
• D¨untsch and Winter’s system of “timed contact structures”. In [12] D¨untsch and Winter presented a
system of dynamic nature called “timed contact structures”. These are structures of the form (T, B, {Ct :
t ∈T}), where T is a nonempty set of “moments of time”, B is a Boolean algebra, and Ct, t ∈
T are binary relations in B satisfying some axioms weaker than the axioms of contact algebra. The
intuitive meaning of aCtb is “a and b are in a contact at the moment of time t”. The paper presents a
representation theory of timed structures in models, similar to our coherent standard DCA-s. So, the
system of timed structures contains explicitly as primitives the notion of moment of time and hence it
does not satisfy the Whitehead’s requirement to consider neither space points, nor moments of time as
primitives. Nevertheless timed contact structures are related to the subject of our paper because they can
express our relations C∃and C∀by the following obvious deﬁnitions: aC∃b iff (∃t ∈T)(aCtb) and
aC∀b iff (∀t ∈T)(aCtb). One can expect that all of our axioms for C∃and C∀should be true in timed
structures, but this is not the case (there are counterexamples), which is quite strange, because all axioms
of DCA are true in the models of timed structures presented in [12]. This requires a further study of the
relationships between these two systems.
Open problems and future work
In this paper we introduced a point-free system - dynamic contact algebra, in which one can extract in a
canonical way a spatio-temporal system containing time moments and space points. The time moments
are explicitly deﬁned by Deﬁnition 3.1, while space points are introduced by the topological represen-
tation for coordinate contact algebras (Theorem 1.1) or by the joint embedding of coordinate contact
algebras (Theorem 1.2) . Dynamic contact algebras contain two spatio-temporal relations between dy-
namic regions - stable and unstable contact. However, the obtained set of moments of time is too weak -
it does not have any speciﬁc internal structure, for instance it does not have the ordering relation between
time moments. The reason is that the two spatio-temporal relations C∃and C∀do not need for their

20
D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
meaning such a structure. So, we formulate as an open problem to ﬁnd suitable spatio-temporal relations
between dynamic regions whose meaning depend on the order of time and to give for them point-free
abstract characterization. Analogous to the developed theory of dynamic contact algebras in this paper,
the standard models will be of the type of cartesian products of contact algebras, whose indexed set of
time moments has a structure of an ordered set. One simple example of such a relation is stabilized
contact, to be denoted by R, with the following deﬁnition: aRb iff (∃t ∈T)(∀s ≥t)(asCsbs). Another
example, which is a property of dynamic regions, is: (∃t ∈T)(∀s ≥t)(as ̸= 0). This property, which
among others is deﬁnable by R as aRa, has the following temporal meaning: a is for ever existing since
a given moment of time.
As we mentioned in Section 2, it is probable that unstable versions of Egenhofer-Franzosa rela-
tions and the relation of time contact are not deﬁnable in the language of DCA-s, so extending this
language with some of them and obtaining for the extension an abstract characterization is meaningful.
For instance some of the principles of continuous change need some of these relations to be expressed.
Example:
(∀t1, t2)((t1 < t2) ∧(∀t)((t1 < t < t2) →(at ̸= 0t ∧bt ̸= 0t)) ∧(at1 ≤t1 bt1) ∧(at2Ct2bt2)) →
(∃t)((t1 < t < t2) ∧(at.bt = 0t) ∧(atCtbt))).
Informally: if a and b are nonempty in some time interval [t1, t2] and at t1 a is included in b and in t2 a
is disjoint from b, then in some middle point of time a is in an external contact with b.
The reader may deﬁne many other such properties but the problem is in their abstract characterization.
More simple open problem: characterize abstractly an extension of DCA with the time contact.
Thanks
This work is supported by a Contract with the National Science Fund of the Bulgarian Ministry of
Education and Science “Theories of space and time: algebraic, topological and logical aspects”. I would
like to thank the anonymous referees for their detailed and helpful remarks and suggestions. Thanks are
also due to Philippe Balbiani, Georgi Dimov and Tinko Tinchev for many fruitful discussions.
References
[1] M. Aiello, I. Pratt-Hartmann and J. van Benthem (eds.), Handbook of spatial logics, Springer, 2007.
[2] Ph. Balbiani (Ed.), Special Issue on Spatial Reasoning, J. Appl. Non-Classical Logics 12 (2002), No. 3–4.
[3] Ph. Balbiani, T. Tinchev and D. Vakarelov, Modal Logics for the Region-based Theory of Space. Fundamenta
Informaticae, Special Issue: Topics in Logic, Philosophy and Foundation of Mathematics and Computer
Science in Recognition of Professor Andrzej Grzegorczyk, vol. (81), (1-3), (2007), 29-82.
[4] B. Bennett and I. D¨untsch, Axioms, Algebras and Topology. In: Handbook of Spatial Logics, M. Aiello, I.
Pratt, and J. van Benthem (Eds.), Springer, 2007, 99-160.
[5] Cohn, A., and Hazarika, S. Qualitative spatial representation and reasoning: An overview. Fundamenta
Informaticae 46 (2001), 1–29.
[6] A. Cohn and J. Renz. Qualitative spatial representation and reasoning. In: F. van Hermelen, V. Lifschitz and
B. Porter (Eds.) Handbook of Knowledge Representation, Elsevier, 2008, 551-596.
[7] T. de Laguna, Point, line and surface as sets of solids, The Journal of Philosophy, 19 (1922), 449–461.

D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
21
[8] G. Dimov and D. Vakarelov, Contact Algebras and Region-based Theory of Space. A proximity approach. I
and II. Fundamenta Informaticae, 74(2-3):209-249, 251-282, 2006
[9] I. D¨untsch (Ed.), Special issue on Qualitative Spatial Reasoning, Fundam. Inform. 46 (2001).
[10] I. D¨untsch and D. Vakarelov, Region-based theory of discrette spaces: A proximity approach. In: Nadif, M.,
Napoli, A., SanJuan, E., and Sigayret, A. EDS, Proceedings of Fourth International Conference Journ´ees
de l’informatique Messine, 123-129, Metz, France, 2003. Journal version in: Annals of Mathematics and
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 49(1-4):5-14, 2007.
[11] I. D¨untsch and M. Winter. A representation theorem for Boolean contact algebras. Theoretical Computer
Science (B), 347, (2005), 498-512.
[12] I. D¨untsch and M. Winter. Moving Spaces.In: St. Demri and Ch. S. Jensen Eds. Proceedings of the 15th
International Symposium on Temporal Representation and Reasoning (TIME2008), 59-63. IEEE Computer
Society, 2008.
[13] M. Egenhofer, R. Franzosa. Point-set topological spatial relations. International Journal of Geographical
Information Systems, 5 (1991), 161–174.
[14] P. T. Johnstone, Stone Spaces, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 1982.
[15] R. Konchakov, A. Kurucz, F. Wolter and M. Zakharyaschev, Spatial Logic + Temporal Logic = ? In:Handbook
of spatial logics, M. Aiello, I. Pratt, and J. van Benthem (Eds.), 497-564, 2007.
[16] K. Kuratowski. Topology, vol I. Academic Press, New York and London, 1966.
[17] V. Nenchev and D. Vakarelov, An Axiomatization of Dynamic Ontology of Stable and Unstable Mereological
Relations, Proceedings of the 7-th Panhellenic Logic Symposium, July 15-19, 2009, Patras, Greece, 137-141.
[18] I. Pratt-Hartmann, First-order region-based theories of space, In: Handbook of Spatial Logics , M. Aiello, I.
Pratt and J. van Benthem (Eds.), Springer, 2007, 13-97.
[19] Randell, D. A., Cui, Z.and Cohn, A. G. A spatial logic based on regions and connection. In: B. Nebel, W.
Swartout, C. Rich (EDS.) Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference Knowledge Representation and
Reasoning, Morgan Kaufmann, Los Allos, CA, pp. 165–176, 1992.
[20] P. Simons, PARTS. A Study in Ontology, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1987.
[21] R. Sikorski, Boolean Algebras, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 1964.
[22] J. Stell, Boolean connection algebras: A new approach to the Region Connection Calculus,Artif. Intell. 122
(2000), 111–136.
[23] A. Tarski Foundations of the geometry of solids. In Woodger, J.H., editor, Logic, Semantics, metamathemat-
ics, pp 24-29. Clarendon Press. Oxford, 1956. Translation of the summary of address given by Tarski to the
First Polish Mathematical Congress, Lw´ow, 1927.
[24] D. Vakarelov, Region-Based Theory of Space: Algebras of Regions, Representation Theory and Logics. In:
Dov Gabbay et al. (Eds.) Mathematical Problems from Applied Logics. New Logics for the XXIst Century. II.
Springer, 2007, 267-348.
[25] D. Vakarelov: A modal approach to dynamic ontology: modal mereotopology.Logic and Logical Philosophy,
(17)(2008):167-187.
[26] D. Vakarelov, Dynamic Mereotopology: A point-free Theory of Changing Regions. MASSEE, International
Congress of Mathematics MICOM 2009, Book of abstracts, page 109.
[27] D. Vakarelov, Temporal representation of contact algebras. An extended abstract in the Proceedings of “Spe-
cial Session 120 years Faculty of mathematics at Soﬁa University”. 2009. To appear.

22
D. Vakarelov / Dynamic Mereotopology
[28] A. N. Whitehead, The Organization of Thought, London, William and Norgate, 1917
[29] A. N. Whitehead,Science and the Modern World. New Work, The MacMillan Company, 1925.
[30] A. N. Whitehead, Process and Reality, New York, MacMillan, 1929.
[31] F. Wolter. and M. Zakharyaschev, Spatial representation and reasoning in RCC-8 with Boolean region terms,
In:Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (ECAI 2000), Horn W. (Ed.), IOS
Press, pp. 244–248.
View publication stats

