The Theory and Practice  
of Online Learning 


The Theory and Practice  
of Online Learning
Second Edition 
edited by
Terry Anderson

Copyright © 2008 Terry Anderson 
Fifth printing 2011
First edition published 2004
Published by AU Press, Athabasca University 
1200, 10011 – 109 Street 
Edmonton, AB T5J 3S8
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication  
Theory and practice of online learning / edited by Terry Anderson. – 
 2nd ed. 
Includes bibliographical references and index.  
Issued also in electronic format.  
ISBN 978-1-897425-08-4 
1. Computer-assisted instruction.  2. Internet in education.   
3. Distance education.  I. Anderson, Terry, 1950- 
LB1044.87.T54 2008                  371.33’4            C2008-902587-3 
Printed and bound in Canada by Marquis Book Printing
This publication is licensed under a Creative Commons License,  
see www.creativecommons.org. The text may be reproduced for  
non-commercial purposes, provided that credit is given to the  
original authors.
Please contact AU Press, Athabasca University at  
aupress@athabascau.ca for permission beyond the usage  
outlined in the Creative Commons license.

Today, online learning is the most accessible pathway to the new knowledge 
economy and related jobs for the majority of working people. To be effective for 
the next generation, online learning has to include mobile learning, e-gaming, 
online communities, and learning management systems that engage each user. 
Athabasca University is a leading institution in the design, testing, and 
application of new e-learning environments. The contributors to this second 
edition of The Theory and Practice of Online Learning exemplify that 
leadership. With this book, Athabasca University, its faculty, and staff share 
their expertise, knowledge, and enthusiasm for the learning tools and techniques 
that promise to extend access, while retaining high-quality learning 
opportunities.
Frits Pannekoek
President, Athabasca University


Chapter 2
Table of Contents
Foreword to the Second Edition. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .   	
xi
Introduction 
Terry Anderson. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  	
1
Part I: Role and Function of Theory in Online Education  
Development and Delivery
	 1.	 Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning 
Mohamed Ally . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	
15
	 2.	 Towards a Theory of Online Learning 
Terry Anderson. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	
45

viii	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
	 3.	 Situating Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition (PLAR)  
in an Online Learning Environment 
Dianne Conrad. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	
75
	 4.	 Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice through  
Philosophies-in-Practice 
Heather Kanuka . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	
91
Part II: Infrastructure and Support for Content Development
	 5.	 Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning 
Alan Davis, Paul Little & Brian Stewart . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 121
	 6.	 Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning) 
Rory McGreal & Michael Elliott. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 143
	 7.	 Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media 
Patrick. J. Fahy. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 167
	 8.	 “In-Your-Pocket” and “On-the-Fly:” Meeting the Needs  
of Today’s New Generation of Online Learners  
with Mobile Learning Technology 
Maureen Hutchison, Tony Tin & Yang Cao . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 201
	 9.	 Social Software to Support Distance Education Learners 
Terry Anderson. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 221
Part III: Design and Development of Online Courses
	10.	 The Development of Online Courses  
Dean Caplan & Rodger Graham. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 245
11.	 Value Added – The Editor in Design and Development  
of Online Courses 
Jan Thiessen & Vincent Ambrock. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 265
12.	 Making Relevant Financial Decisions about Technology  
in Education 
David Annand. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 277
13.	 The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited  
Nancy K. Parker. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 305
Part IV: Delivery, Quality Control, and Student Support  
of Online Courses
14.	 Teaching in an Online Learning Context 
Terry Anderson. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 343

Table of Contents	
ix
15.	 Call Centres in Distance Education 
Alex Z. Kondra, Colleen Huber, Kerri Michalczuk & Andrew Woudstra. .  . . . 	 367
16.	 Library Support for e-Learners: e-Resources, e-Services,  
and the Human Factors 
Kay Johnson, Houda Trabelsi & Elaine Fabbro. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 397
17.	 Supporting the Online Learner 
Susan D. Moisey & Judith A. Hughes. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 419
18.	 Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing  
Team Projects Online 
Deborah Hurst & Janice Thomas. .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 	 441


Chapter 2
Foreword to  
the Second Edition
The revised version of the Theory and Practice of Online Learning, edited 
by Terry Anderson, brings together recent developments in both the 
practice and our understanding of online learning.
Five years have since passed between this new edition and the first 
version. Five years is certainly a long time in this business as this second 
edition illustrates. The improvement in versatility and sophistication of 
the technologies that have been coming into common use has been so 
significant that a revisit of our knowledge of learning technologies and 
their application was becoming increasingly necessary. Anderson and the 
other authors of this text have responded to the need and have done 
the higher education community a great service by bringing it out in 
the electronic open access format under a Creative Commons License. 
Those of us from the other world are beneficiaries of this generosity and 
intellectual benevolence.
Online learning has begun to embed itself as a part of our edu-
cational environment, especially in the higher education and training 

xii	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
sectors. The practice is not widespread yet but the growing number of 
institutions and individuals resorting to this innovation seems to be 
increasing exponentially. This increase is not limited to the developed 
world; colleagues in the developing world are equally enthusiastic about 
mediated learning for any number of reasons, including expanding 
access and providing flexibility to populations hungry for learning 
and training.
This revised publication with new knowledge and additional 
­chapters is a great help for many of us who are still very much on the 
learning curve in our understanding of online learning.
Raj Dhanarajan
Vice Chancellor
Wawasan Open University
Penang, Malaysia
4 April 2008

Chapter 2
Introduction
Terry Anderson
This second edition of the Theory and Practice of Online Learning is an 
updated version of the highly successful 2004 first edition. Each of the 
chapters has been revised to reflect current theory and practice, and 
four new chapters have been added.
The first edition was a landmark experiment: it was both pro-
duced in paper copy and made available for free download under a 
Creative Commons license. The 400 paper copies sold rapidly and over 
80,000 copies of the full text have been downloaded, in addition to 
thousands of copies of individual chapters. A number of the chapters 
have also been translated into five languages and reprinted regionally. 
The text and individual chapters have also been widely cited by other 
scholars. A December 2007 search of Google Scholar shows that the full 
text has been cited 65 times and the individual chapters a further 
243 times. Finally, each of the authors has received positive feedback, 
both for the quality of the work and for its availability.

2	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
As with the first edition, this is a collection of works by ­practitioners 
and scholars actively working in the field of distance education. The text 
has been written at a time when the field is undergoing fundamental 
change. Although not an old discipline by academic standards, distance 
education practice and theory has evolved through five generations in 
its 150 years of existence (Taylor, 2001). 
For most of this time, distance education was an individual pursuit 
defined by infrequent postal communication between student and 
teacher. The last half of the twentieth century has witnessed rapid devel-
opments and the emergence of three additional generations, one sup-
ported by the mass media of television and radio, another by the 
­synchronous tools of video and audio teleconferencing, and yet another 
based on computer conferencing.
The early twenty-first century has produced the first visions of a 
fifth generation – based on autonomous agents and intelligent, database-
assisted learning – that has been referred to as the educational Semantic 
Web (Anderson, 2004) and Web 2.0. Note that each of these generations 
has followed more quickly upon its predecessor than the previous ones. 
Moreover, none of these generations has completely displaced previous 
ones, so that we are left with diverse yet viable systems of distance educa-
tion that use all five generations in combination. Thus, the field can 
accurately be described as complex, diverse, and rapidly evolving.
Acknowledging complexity does not excuse inaction. Distance 
educators, students, administrators, and parents are daily forced to make 
choices regarding the pedagogical, economic, systemic, and political 
characteristics of the distance education systems within which they par-
ticipate. To provide information, knowledge, and, we hope, a measure 
of wisdom, the authors of this text have shared their expertise, their 
vision, their concerns, and their solutions to distance education practice 
in these disruptive times.
Each chapter is written as a jumping-off point for further ­reflection, 
for discussion, and, most importantly, for action. Never in the history of 
life on our planet has the need for informed and wisdom-filled action 
been greater than it is today. We are convinced that education – in its 
many forms – is the most hopeful antidote to the errors of greed, of 
ignorance, and of life-threatening aggression that menace our ­civilization 
and our planet.
Distance education (of which online learning is a major subset) 
is a discipline that subsumes the knowledge and practice of pedagogy, 
of psychology and sociology, of economics and business, of production 

Introduction	
3
and technology. We attempt to address each of these perspectives through 
the words of those trained to view their work through a particular disci-
plinary lens. Thus, each of the chapters represents the specialized exper-
tise of individual authors who address that component piece of the whole 
with which they have a unique familiarity. This expertise is defined by a 
disciplinary background, a set of formal training skills, and a practice 
within one component of the distance education system. It is hardly 
surprising, then, that some of the chapters are more academic, reflecting 
their authors’ primary role as scholar, while others are grounded in the 
more practical application focus of their authors.
In sum, the book is neither an academic tome nor a prescriptive 
“how to” guide. Like the university itself, the book represents a blend-
ing of scholarship and of research; practical attention to the details of 
­teaching and of provision for learning opportunity; dissemination  
of research results; and mindful attention to the economics of the 
­business of education.
In many ways, the chapters represent the best of what makes for 
a university community. According to the Allwords English Dictionary 
(2008), the word university comes from the Latin universitas (totality or 
wholeness), which itself contains two simpler roots, unus (one or singu-
lar) and versere (to turn). Thus, a university reflects a singleness or sense 
of all-encompassing wholeness, implying a study of all that is relevant 
and an acceptance of all types of pursuit of knowledge. The word also 
retains the sense of evolution and growth implied by the action embed-
ded in the verb to turn. In our progress through the first part of the 
twenty-first century, the world is in the midst of a great turning as we 
adopt and adapt to the technological capabilities that allow information 
and communication to be distributed anywhere, anytime.
The ubiquity and multiplicity of human and agent communication, 
coupled with tremendous increases in information production and retrieval, 
are the most compelling characteristics of the Net-based culture and 
economy in which we now function. The famous quote from Oracle 
Corporation, “The Net changes everything,” applies directly to the formal 
provision of education. Institutions that formerly relied on students gather-
ing in campus-based classrooms are suddenly able (and many seem eager) 
to offer their programming on the Internet. Similarly, institutions accus-
tomed to large-scale distance delivery via print or television are now being 
asked to provide more flexible, interactive, and responsive Net-based alter-
natives. Each of the chapters in the book reflects the often disruptive effect 
of the Net on particular components of a distance education system.

4	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
This book is written in large part by authors from a single univer-
sity – Athabasca University – which has branded itself “Canada’s Open 
University.” As an open university, we are pleased to be the first such 
institution to provide a text like this one as an open and free gift to 
others. The book is published by Athabasca University’s AU Press, one 
of the world’s first open-access presses. It is published under a Creative 
Commons license (see http://creativecommons.org) to allow for free 
use by all, yet the copyright is retained by the university (see the copyright 
page for license details).
This open-access license format was chosen for a number of reasons. 
First, it is true to the original spirit of a university, and especially of an 
open university. We believe that knowledge is meant to be shared, and 
further, that such sharing does not diminish its value to its creator. Thomas 
Jefferson eloquently expressed these ideas in 1813 when he wrote,
He who receives an idea from me, receives instruction himself 
without lessening mine; as he who lights his taper at mine, receives 
light without darkening me. That ideas should freely spread from 
one to another over the globe, for the moral and mutual instruc-
tion of man, and improvement of his condition, seems to have 
been peculiarly and benevolently designed by nature, when she 
made them, like fire, expansible over all space, without lessening 
their density in any point, and like the air in which we breathe, 
move, and have our physical being, incapable of confinement or 
exclusive appropriation. (1854, pp. 180–181)
As you will see from the quotations and references that augment 
the text in most chapters, we have learned much from the works of 
others, and thus feel bound to return this gift of knowledge to the 
wider community.
Second, we believe that education is one of the few sustainable 
means to equip humans around the globe with the skills and resources 
to confront the challenges of ignorance, poverty, war, and environmental 
degradation. Distance education is perhaps the most powerful means 
of extending this resource and making it accessible to all. Thus, we 
contribute to the elimination of human suffering by making as freely 
available as we can the knowledge that we have gained from developing 
distance education alternatives.
Third, the Creative Commons license provides our book as a form 
of “gift culture.” Gift giving has been a component of many cultures; 

Introduction	
5
witness, for example, the famed Potlatch ceremonies of Canadian West 
Coast First Nations peoples. More recently, gift giving has been a major 
motivation of hackers developing many of the most widely used open-
source products on the Internet (Raymond, 2001). Distributing this text 
as an open-access gift serves many of the same functions that gift giving 
has done through millennia. The gift weaves bonds within our commu-
nity and empowers those who benefit from it to create new knowledge 
that they can then share with others and with us. Interestingly, research 
on neuro-economics is showing that freely giving and sharing is a behav-
iour that has had important survival functions for humans groups since 
earliest times (Grimes 2003). David Bollier (2002) argues that gift cul-
tures are surprisingly resilient and effective at creating and distributing 
goods, while protecting both long-term capacity for sustained production 
and growing cultural assets. Bollier also decries the private plunder of 
our common wealth, and discusses the obligation of those employed in 
the public sector to ensure that the results of publicly-funded efforts are 
not exploited for personal gain.
Open-access gifts also provide those from wealthy countries with 
some small way to redress many economic inequalities and to share more 
equitably the gifts we receive from our planet home. We hope especially 
that this text will be incorporated as an open educational resource into 
the syllabi of the growing number of programs of distance education study 
that are being offered by both campus and distance education universi-
ties throughout the world. In the words of Sir John Daniel, President 
and CEO of the Commonwealth of Learning, sharing offers a viable 
means to “increase the quality and quantity of electronic courseware as 
materials are refined, versioned and adapted by academics around the 
world and made freely available in these new formats” (Daniel, 2001, 
p. viii). We believe that the free sharing of course content is a powerful 
tool to encourage the growth of public education institutions. We also 
think that such sharing will not result in a net value loss for the deliver-
ing institution. Rather, its reputation will be enhanced and its saleable 
services will increase in value.
Fourth, providing this book as open access frees us from poten-
tially acrimonious debates over ownership, return for value, and distribu-
tion of any profit. Educational books rarely make large profits for their 
authors, and most of us have personally witnessed the old aphorism that 
“acrimony in academic arguments runs so high because the stakes are 
so low.” Open-access licensing allows us to go beyond financial arguments 
that are likely to have little consequence in any case.

6	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Finally, our experience with the first edition has proven that open 
access allows the work to be more widely distributed and read. Through 
this dissemination, the ideas proposed are exposed to critical dialogue 
and reflection. We hope that much of this commentary will make its way 
back to the authors or flow into the discussion forums associated with 
the text’s web site. Through review within the community of practice, 
ideas are honed, developed, and sometimes even refuted. Such discourse 
not only improves the field as a whole, but also directly benefits our work 
at Athabasca University, and thus handsomely repays our efforts.
In summary, we license the use of this book to all – not so much 
with a sense of naïve idealism, but with a realism that has been developed 
through our life work – to increase access to and opportunity for all to 
quality learning opportunities.
Book Organization and  
Introduction to the Chapters
In the following pages, we briefly review the main themes covered in 
this book and its chapters. Part I serves as a foundational and theoretical 
base for the full book. In Part II, we describe the essential infrastructure 
with particular focus on media and technology – critical carriers of dis-
tance education programming. In Part III, we examine issues related to 
course development and instructional design. In Part IV, the structures, 
tools, and resource centres necessary to support students are reviewed.
Part I: Role and Function of Theory in Online Education  
Development and Delivery
The opening section provides the theoretical foundations for this volume. 
Chapter 1 presents the foundation of education theory for online learn-
ing. It opens the debate by discussing the contributions of behaviorist, 
cognitivist, constructivist, and connectivist theories to the design of online 
materials, noting that behaviorist strategies can be used to teach the facts 
(what), cognitivist strategies the principles and processes (how), and 
constructivist strategies the real-life and personal applications that con-
textualize learning. This edition of the chapter introduces connectivism, 
with its capacity to exploit the connections to knowledge and to people 
afforded by the now ubiquitous Internet and its applications. The chapter 
notes a shift toward constructive learning, in which learners are given 
the opportunity to construct their own meaning from the information 

Introduction	
7
presented during online sessions. Learning objects will be used to promote 
flexibility and the reuse of online materials to meet the needs of indi-
vidual learners. And online learning materials will be created in such a 
way that they can be redesigned for different learners and different 
contexts. Finally, online learning will become increasingly diverse to 
allow it to respond to diverse learning cultures, styles, and motivations.
Chapter 2 presents a general assessment of how people learn, 
including the unique characteristics of the Web to enhance these gen-
eralized learning contexts, and discusses the six forms of interaction and 
their critical role in engaging and supporting both learners and teach-
ers. The author presents a model of online learning, a first step toward 
a theory in which the two predominant forms of online learning – col-
laborative and independent study – are considered, along with a brief 
discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of each. Finally, the chapter 
discusses the emerging tools of the Semantic Web and the way they will 
affect future developments of the theory and practice of online learning.
In this first new chapter in the second edition, Chapter 3 details 
the important role of Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition (PLAR) 
in open education. Recognizing, in a formal structure, the knowledge 
that learners have garnered, both within and outside of formal educa-
tion, is a challenge for educational institutions. We need to control the 
quality of the credential awarded but at the same time we need to value 
learners’ time and ensure that they are not needlessly completing courses 
with knowledge they already own, solely to earn credits. The means by 
which Athabasca University has developed and implemented systems 
and tools that effectively measure an individual’s knowledge, cost, and 
time are outlined in the chapter. In particular, the role of portfolios, 
composed by learners and assessed by faculty, is highlighted.
Chapter 4 is also new to this edition and adds a philosophical 
dimension to the text. It focuses first on the importance of understand-
ing our philosophy of practice-in-practice. It then overviews commonly 
held philosophies of technology and of teaching. This chapter helps 
us, as individuals and as institutional decision makers, to make sound 
pedagogical and technological decisions that will then be reflected 
in the nature, quality, cost, and effectiveness of our distance education 
programming.
Part II: Infrastructure and Support for Content Development
This section covers the necessary infrastructure to produce and delivery 
quality distance online learning. Chapter 5 discusses the various factors 

8	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
that must be considered in developing the infrastructure for online 
learning, including planning, structural and organizational issues, the 
components of a system and the interfaces among them, and various 
related issues, such as human resources, decision-making, and training. 
The authors explain why any designed online learning infrastructure 
must also be able to evolve and work in a context of constant and accel-
erating change to accommodate changing student needs, technologies, 
and curricula.
Chapter 6 examines some available and potential technologies 
and features used in online instruction. Rather than continue to focus 
on how technology has helped or can help the instructor, teacher, or 
tutor, this chapter concludes with a look at how technologies – existing 
and emerging – can aid this first generation of online learners. This 
chapter has been updated to explore some of the technologies, includ-
ing blogs and wikis, that have become prominent in online learning 
since the date of the first edition.
Chapter 7 discusses attributes of media, and of the modes of teach-
ing presentation and learning performance they support, in relation to 
some influential learning models. It also clarifies some of the implica-
tions in the choice of any specific delivery or presentation medium. The 
author notes that the decision to adopt online technology is always 
complex and can be risky, especially if the adopting organization lacks 
structural, cultural, or financial prerequisites, and concludes that, while 
education has a responsibility to keep pace with technological change, 
educational institutions can reduce the costs and uncertainties of inven-
tion by following the technological lead of the corporate sector.
Chapter 8 is another new chapter for this edition that focuses 
on the use of mobile technologies to support teaching, learning, and 
research. The drastic reduction in the cost of portable electronic devices, 
coupled with increasing access to mobile connectivity, allows online 
learning to begin to situate online education anywhere. This chapter 
overviews the affordances and restrictions of this technology and provides 
examples of products developed at Athabasca University.
Chapter 9 was added as a suggestion from an anonymous learner 
who suggested (quite correctly) that new social software and Web 2.0 tools 
are being used very extensively, and that a discussion on the opportunities 
and challenges they afford for online learning was missing from the first 
draft. While still in the future for mainstream use, this chapter documents 
the development of a social software suite (http://me2u.athabascau.ca) 
and explains why we believe this type of student and community tool 

Introduction	
9
will provide new opportunity for creating learning communities and 
student-support groups. The chapter argues that distance education 
students may soon be able to avail themselves of similar social and 
­collaborative support enjoyed by on-campus students.
Part III: Design and Development of Online Courses
This section is concerned with operations, design, and production of 
quality online courses. Five chapters are organized to shed light on these 
processes. Chapter 10 presents the role of instructional media develop-
ers in the course development process. These professionals are involved 
from the beginning, to consult with and advise course team members 
on development-related topics as they arise. The author presents peda-
gogical standards designed to help all those involved in online instruc-
tional development, to ensure that their efforts are rewarded, ultimately, 
with satisfied learners.
Chapter 11 describes the role of instructional design, multimedia 
development, and editing in the design and development process by 
describing a professional role that has been developed to accommodate 
all these functions – the Multimedia Instructional Design Editor (MIDE). 
Mainly, this role is concerned with facilitating communication between 
the author and the learner, and between the author and the technical 
staff who create the multi-media tools and instructional technology used 
in course delivery. The MIDE brings together elements and participants 
in the value chain, and adds value to the course development process 
by enhancing the ability of other participants to produce effective online 
learning experiences. One of the MIDE’s most important contributions 
to course design and development is quality control. The quality control 
function has become more critical as courses have come to contain 
multimedia components and other  learning objects from many diverse 
sources.
Chapter 12 provides a detailed look at the costs of online ­learning. 
The chapter will appeal to the inner accountant in each of us as it digs 
deeply into fixed, variable, recurring and other ways to understand (and 
thus be in a position to control) the important cost and revenue implica-
tions of online learning.
Chapter 13 provides a discussion of the contexts of quality assur-
ance activities in higher education in general, and of the competing 
paradigms highlighted by online learning. The author notes that the 
greatest challenge for trying to define quality is that it remains a relative 
experience, realized in large part through an individual’s level of 

10	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­expectation. On the basis of this insight, the chapter goes on to examine 
quality standards that have been proposed for the delivery of online 
instruction in four jurisdictions: Australia, the United Kingdom, Canada, 
and the United States.
Part IV: Delivery, Quality Control, and Student Support  
of Online Courses
The final section is concerned with the last two parts of the organization’s 
online learning value chain: delivery and service. Chapter 14 focuses on 
the role of the teacher or tutor in an online learning context. It uses a 
theoretical model that views the creation of an effective online educa-
tional community as involving three critical components: cognitive pres-
ence, social presence, and teaching presence. The chapter provides 
suggestions and guidelines for maximizing the effectiveness of the 
­teaching function in online learning.
Chapter 15 presents the call centre concept for course delivery 
and student support in online courses. In distance education in particu-
lar, the call centre can be an effective communication tool, enabling 
the institution to provide and improve service to students in many 
areas, including instruction. This chapter describes how the call centre 
concept is used at Athabasca University and how it has proven to be 
effective in three areas: increasing student service and retention, allow-
ing for direct marketing, and enhancing management information and 
learner feedback.
Chapter 16 discusses the library support needed by online ­learners. 
It examines how libraries are responding to the challenges and oppor-
tunities of delivering core services to online learners. This chapter por-
trays some of the library practices and technologies now being applied 
in the construction of virtual libraries. The authors stress the importance 
of providing support within a collaborative environment, which ­considers 
human factors, such as communication and interaction.
Chapter 17 continues this discussion by stressing the importance 
of setting up a supportive learning environment for online learners, and 
provides some practical advice. Underlying this advice is a philosophy 
that encourages an environment which aims to develop the learner’s 
independence, while ensuring that supports are readily available when 
needed. Student supports that are flexible, clear, and continually avail-
able are described, and best practices outlined.
Chapter 18 describes several experiences in developing knowledge 
of team dynamics and communications and accomplishing team project 

Introduction	
11
work in an online environment. In describing aspects of teaching and 
applying team dynamics online, the authors highlight the unique values 
and capabilities of an online learning environment.
References
Anderson, T. (2004). The educational semantic web: A vision for the 
next phase of educational computing. Educational Technology, 44(5), 
5–9.
Allwords Dictionary. University. Retrieved Feb. 2008, from http://www.
allwords.com/word-unisersity.html 
Bollier, D. (2002). Private theft: The private plunder of our common wealth. 
New York: Routledge.
Daniel, J. (2001, May 18). Evolution not an e-revolution in global learn-
ing. Times Higher Education Supplement, p. VIII.
Grimes, K. (2003). To trust is human. New Scientist, 178, 32–37.
Jefferson, T. (1854). Letter to Isaac McPherson. In H. A. Washington 
(Ed.), Writings of Thomas Jefferson (Vol. 6, pp. 180–181). Philadelphia: 
Lippincott.
Raymond, E. (2001). The cathedral and the bazaar. Cambridge, MA: 
O’Reilly.
Taylor, J. (2001). The future of learning – learning for the future: Shaping 
the transition. Proceedings of the 20th ICDE World Congress. Retrieved 
Dec. 2007 from http://www.fernuni-hagen.de/ICDE/D-2001/final/
keynote_speeches/wednesday/taylor_keynote.pdf


Part i
Role and Function of Theory  
in Online Education  
Development and Delivery


Chapter 1
Introduction
There is ongoing debate about whether using a particular delivery 
­technology improves the learning (Beynon, 2007; Clark, 2001; Kozma, 
2001). It has long been recognized that specialized delivery technologies 
can provide efficient and timely access to learning materials; however, 
Clark (1983) claims that technologies are merely vehicles that deliver 
instruction, and do not themselves influence student achievement. As 
Clark notes, meta-analysis studies on media research show that students 
gain significant learning benefits from audiovisual or computer media, 
as opposed to conventional instruction; however, the same studies also 
suggest that the reason for those benefits is not the medium of instruc-
tion, but the instructional strategies built into the learning materials. 
Similarly, Schramm (1977) suggests that learning is influenced more by 
the content and instructional strategy in the learning materials than 
by the type of technology used to deliver instruction.
Foundations of Educational 
Theory for Online Learning
Mohamed Ally
Athabasca University 

16	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
According to Bonk and Reynolds (1997), to promote higher-order 
thinking on the Web, online learning must create challenging activities 
that enable learners to link new information to old; acquire meaningful 
knowledge; and use their metacognitive abilities; hence, it is the instruc-
tional strategy, not the technology, that influences the quality of learning. 
Kozma (2001), on the other hand, argues that the particular attributes 
of the computer are needed to bring real-life models and simulations 
to the learner; thus, according to Kozma, the medium does influence 
learning. Kozma claims that it is not the computer per se that makes 
students learn, but the design of the real-life models and simulations, 
and the students’ interaction with those models and simulations. The 
computer is merely the vehicle that provides the processing capability 
and delivers the instruction to learners (Clark, 2001).
Online learning allows participants to collapse time and space 
(Cole, 2000); however, the learning materials must be designed properly 
to engage the learner and promote learning. The delivery method allows 
for flexibility of access, from anywhere and usually anytime, but the 
learning must use sound instructional design principles. According to 
Rossett (2002), online learning has many promises, but it takes commit-
ment and resources, and must be done right. Doing it right means that 
online learning materials must be designed properly, with the learners 
and learning in focus, and that adequate support must be provided. 
Ring and Mathieux (2002) suggest that online learning should have 
high authenticity (i.e., students should learn in the context of the work-
place), high interactivity, and high collaboration. This chapter discusses 
the foundation of educational theory for the design of effective online 
learning materials, and suggests a model for developing online ­instruction 
based on appropriate educational theory.
Different terminologies have been used for online learning, which 
makes it difficult to develop a generic definition. Terms commonly used 
for online learning include e-learning, Internet learning, distributed learn-
ing, networked learning, tele-learning, virtual learning, computer-assisted 
learning, web-based learning, and distance learning. All of these terms 
imply that the learner is at a distance from the tutor or instructor, that the 
learner uses some form of technology (usually a computer) to access 
the learning materials, that the learner uses technology to interact with the 
tutor or instructor and with other learners, and that some form of support 
is provided to learners. This paper will use the term online learning 
throughout. There are many definitions of online learning in the litera-
ture, reflecting the diversity of practice and associated ­technologies. 

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
17
Carliner (1999) defines online learning as educational material that is 
presented on a computer. Khan (1997) defines online instruction as an 
innovative approach for delivering instruction to a remote audience, 
using the Web as the medium. Online learning, however, involves more 
than just the presentation and delivery of materials using the Web: the 
learner and the learning process should be the focus of online learning. 
As a result, the author defines online learning as
[t]he use of the Internet to access learning materials; to interact 
with the content, instructor, and other learners; and to obtain 
support during the learning process, in order to acquire knowl-
edge, to construct personal meaning, and to grow from the 
­learning experience. (Ally, p. 7)
Benefits of Online Learning
Increasingly, organizations are adopting online learning as the main 
delivery method to train employees (Simmons, 2002). At the same time, 
educational institutions are moving toward the use of the Internet for 
delivery, both on campus and at a distance. For organizations and insti-
tutions to make this often expensive move, there must be a perception 
that using online learning provides major benefits. Some of the benefits 
for learners and instructors are detailed below.
For learners, online learning knows no time zones, and location 
and distance are not issues. In asynchronous online learning, students 
can access the online materials anytime, while synchronous online learn-
ing allows for real-time interaction between students and instructors. 
Learners can use the Internet to access up-to-date and relevant learning 
materials, and can communicate with experts in the field which they are 
studying. Situated learning, or the application of knowledge and skills 
in specific contexts, is facilitated, since learners can complete online 
courses while working on the job or in their own space, and can contex-
tualize the learning.
For instructors, tutoring can be done anytime, anywhere. Online 
materials can be updated, and learners can see the changes immediately. 
When learners are able to access materials on the Internet, it is easier 
for instructors to direct them to appropriate information based on their 
needs. If designed properly, online learning systems can be used to 
determine learners’ needs and current level of expertise, and to assign 

18	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
appropriate materials for learners to select from, to achieve their desired 
learning outcomes.
Designing Online Learning Materials
The goal of any instructional system is to promote learning. Therefore, 
before any learning materials are developed, educators must tacitly or 
explicitly know the principles of learning and how students learn. This 
is especially true for online learning, where instructors and learners are 
separated. The development of effective online learning materials should 
be based on proven and sound learning theories. As discussed above, 
the delivery medium is not the determining factor in the quality of learn­
ing per se; rather, course design determines the effectiveness of the 
learning (Rovai, 2002).
There are many schools of thought on learning, and no one 
school is used exclusively to design online learning materials. As there 
is no single learning theory to follow, we can use a combination of theo-
ries to develop online learning materials. In addition, as research pro-
gresses, new theories that should be used are emerging and evolving. A 
recent example is connectivist theory, which is needed for the emerging 
age of distributed and network learning. Some may question the need 
for a new learning theory, however, especially when there are already 
well-established theories used successfully to design instruction. Also, 
past learning theories have been adapted to address new and changing 
learning contexts. These existing learning theories, however, were devel-
oped before distributed and networked learning was used widely by 
educators. According to Siemens (2004), we now need a theory for the 
digital age to guide the development of learning materials for the net-
worked world. Educators should be able to adapt existing learning theo-
ries for the digital age, while at the same time using the principles of 
connectivism to guide the development of effective learning materials. 
What is needed is not a new stand-alone theory for the digital age, but 
a model that integrates the different theories to guide the design of 
online learning materials.
To select the most appropriate instructional strategies, the online 
developer must know the different approaches to learning. Strategies 
should be selected to motivate learners, facilitate deep processing, build 
the whole person, cater to individual differences, promote meaningful 
learning, encourage interaction, provide relevant feedback, facilitate 

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
19
contextual learning, and provide support during the learning process. 
The remaining sections of this chapter present the different schools of 
thought on learning and suggest how these different schools of thought 
can be used to develop effective online materials.
Schools of Learning
Early computer learning systems were designed based on a behaviorist 
approach to learning. The behaviorist school of thought, influenced by 
Thorndike (1913), Pavlov (1927), and Skinner (1974), postulates that 
learning is a change in observable behaviour caused by external stimuli 
in the environment (Skinner, 1974). Behaviorists claim that observable 
behaviour indicates whether or not the learner has learned something, 
and not what is going on in the learner’s head. In response, some educa-
tors claim that not all learning is observable and there is more to learning 
than a change in behaviour. As a result, there has been a shift away from 
behaviorist to cognitive learning theories.
Cognitive psychology claims that learning involves the use of 
memory, motivation, and thinking, and that reflection plays an important 
part in learning. Cognitive theorists see learning as an internal process, 
and contend that the amount learned depends on the processing capacity 
of the learner, the amount of effort expended during the learning process, 
the depth of the processing (Craik & Lockhart, 1972; Craik & Tulving, 
1975), and the learner’s existing knowledge structure (Ausubel, 1974).
Recently, there has been a move towards constructivism. Construc-
tivist theorists claim that learners interpret the information and the world 
according to their personal reality, that they learn by observation, pro-
cessing, and interpretation, and then personalize the information into 
personal knowledge (Cooper, 1993; Wilson, 1997). Learners learn best 
when they can contextualize what they learn for immediate application 
and personal meaning.
A recently proposed theory under discussion is connectivism 
(Downes, 2006; Siemens, 2004). According to Siemens, connectivism is 
the integration of principles explored by chaos, network, complexity 
and self-organization theories. Due to the information explosion in the 
current age, learning is not under the control of the learner. Changing 
environments, innovations, changes in the discipline and in related dis-
ciplines all suggest that learners have to unlearn what they have learned 
in the past, and learn how to learn and evaluate new information. What 

20	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
must be learned is determined by others and is continually changing. 
And since machines are becoming smart with the use of intelligent 
agents, Siemens also asks whether, in fact, learning may reside in 
machines. Some knowledge will reside in machines while some will reside 
in humans. The challenge for educators, therefore, is how to design 
instruction for both machines and humans, and how the two can interact 
with each other. For example, if there is a change in a procedure on 
how to use a machine, the wireless capability in the machine will allow 
the updated procedure to be downloaded into the machine’s memory. 
When a learner goes to interact with the recently updated machine, that 
learner will be informed that the procedure has changed and that the 
machine will guide them through the procedure (Siemens 2004).
Under a close analysis of the behaviorist, cognitivist, and construc-
tivist schools of thought, many overlaps in the ideas and principles 
become apparent. The design of online learning materials can include 
principles from all three schools of thought. According to Ertmer and 
Newby (1993), the three schools of thought can, in fact, be used as a 
taxonomy for learning. Behaviorists’ strategies can be used to teach the 
what (facts); cognitive strategies can be used to teach the how (processes 
and principles); and constructivist strategies can be used to teach the 
why (higher-level thinking that promotes personal meaning, and situated 
and contextual learning). Janicki and Liegle (2001) analyzed different 
instructional design models to identify the components that support 
quality design of web-based instruction. They identify components from 
each of the behaviorist, cognitivist, and constructivist schools of learning, 
and explore connectivist theory to help designers use it to guide the 
design of learning materials.
Behaviorist School of Learning
The behaviorist school sees the mind as a black box, in the sense that a 
response to a stimulus can be observed quantitatively, thereby ignoring 
the effect of thought processes occurring in the mind. This school, there-
fore, looks at overt behaviours that can be observed and measured as 
indicators of learning (Good & Brophy, 1990).
Implications for Online Learning
1.	 Learners should be told the explicit outcomes of the learning so 
they can set expectations and judge for themselves whether or 
not they have achieved the outcome of the online lesson.

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
21
2.	 Learners must be tested to determine whether or not they have 
achieved the learning outcome. Online testing or other forms of 
testing and assessment should be integrated into the learning 
sequence to check individual learner’s achievement level and 
provide appropriate feedback.
3.	 The learning materials must be sequenced appropriately to 
promote learning. The sequencing could take the form of simple 
to complex, known to unknown, and knowledge to application.
4.	 Learners must be provided with feedback so that they can monitor 
how they are doing and take corrective action if required.
Cognitivist School of Learning
Cognitivists see learning as an internal process that involves memory, 
thinking, reflection, abstraction, motivation, and metacognition. 
Cognitive psychology looks at learning from an information processing 
point of view, where the learner uses different types of memory during 
learning (Figure 1). Sensations are received through the senses into the 
Information from
the senses
Sensory store
Short-term
memory
Long-term
memory
Figure 1.  Types of memory

22	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
sensory store before processing occurs. The information persists in 
the sensory store for less than one second (Kalat, 2007), and if it is not 
transferred to working memory immediately, it is lost. Online instruction 
must use strategies to allow learners to attend to the learning materials 
so they can be transferred from the senses to the sensory store and then 
to working memory. The amount of information transferred to working 
memory depends on the amount of attention that was paid to the incom-
ing information and whether cognitive structures are in place to make 
sense of the information. The duration in working memory is approxi-
mately 20 seconds, and if information in working memory is not pro-
cessed efficiently, it is not transferred to long-term memory for storage 
(Kalat, 2007). So, designers must check to see if the appropriate existing 
cognitive structure is present to enable the learner to process the infor-
mation. If the relevant cognitive structure is not present, pre-instructional 
strategies, such as advance organizers, should be included as part of the 
learning process (Ausubel, 1960).
Online learning strategies must present the materials and use 
strategies that enable students to process the materials efficiently. Since 
working memory has limited capacity, information should be organized 
or chunked in pieces of appropriate size to facilitate processing. Accord-
ing to Miller (1956), because humans have limited short-term memory 
capacity, information should be grouped into meaningful sequences, 
such as five to nine (i.e., 7 ±2), meaningful units.
After the information is processed in working memory, it is 
stored in long-term memory. The amount transferred to long-term 
memory is determined by the quality and depth of processing in 
working memory. The deeper the processing, the more associations 
the acquired new information forms in memory. Information trans-
ferred from short-term memory to long-term memory is either assimi-
lated or accommodated in long-term memory. During assimilation, the 
information is changed to fit into existing cognitive structures. Accom-
modation occurs when an existing cognitive structure is changed to 
incorporate the new information.
Cognitive psychology postulates that information is stored in long-
term memory in the form of nodes which connect to form relationships; 
that is, in networks. So, information maps that show the major concepts 
in a topic, and the relationships between those concepts, should be 
included in the online learning materials. According to Stoyanova and 
Kommers (2002), information-map generation requires critical reflection 
and is a method for externalizing the cognitive structure of learners. To 

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
23
facilitate deeper processing, learners should be encouraged to generate 
their own information maps.
Implications for Online Learning
1.	 Strategies used should allow learners to perceive and attend to 
the information so that it can be transferred to working memory. 
Learners use their sensory systems to register the information in 
the form of sensations. Strategies to facilitate maximum sensation 
should be used. Examples include the proper location of the 
information on the screen, the attributes of the screen (e.g., 
colour, graphics, size of text), the pacing of the information, and 
the mode of delivery (audio, visuals, animations, or video). 
Learners must receive the information in the form of sensations 
before perception and processing can occur; however, the learner 
must not be overloaded with sensations, which could be counter-
productive to the learning process. Non-essential sensations 
should be avoided, to allow learners to attend to the important 
information. Strategies to promote perception and attention for 
online learning include the following:
•	Important information should be placed in the centre of the 
screen for reading, and learners must be able to read from left 
to right.
•	Information critical for learning should be highlighted to 
focus learners’ attention. For example, in an online lesson, 
headings should be used to organize the details, and format-
ted to allow learners to attend to and process the information 
they contain.
•	Learners should be told why they should take the lesson, so that 
they can attend to the information throughout the lesson.
•	The difficulty level of the material must match the cognitive 
level of the learner, so that the learner can both attend to and 
relate to the material. Links to both simpler and more com-
plicated materials can be used to accommodate learners at 
­different knowledge levels.
2.	 Strategies used should allow learners to retrieve existing informa-
tion from long-term memory to help make sense of the new infor-
mation. Learners must construct a memory link between the new 
information and some related information already stored in long-
term memory. Strategies to facilitate the use of existing schema 
are the following:

24	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
•	Use advance organizers to activate existing cognitive structure 
or to provide the information to incorporate the details of the 
lesson. A comparative advance organizer can be used to help 
learners recall prior knowledge to help in processing, and an 
expository advance organizer can be used to help incorporate 
the details of the lesson (Ausubel, 1960). Mayer (1979) con-
ducted a meta-analysis of advance organizer studies, and found 
that these strategies are effective when students are learning 
from text that is presented in an unfamiliar form. Since most 
courses contain materials that are new to learners, advance orga-
nizers should be used to provide the framework for learning.
•	Provide conceptual models that learners can use to retrieve 
existing mental models or to store the structure they will need 
to use to learn the details of the lesson.
•	Use pre-instructional questions to set expectations and to acti-
vate the learners’ existing knowledge structure. Questions pre-
sented before the lesson facilitate the recall of existing knowl-
edge, help learners to learn the materials, and motivate them 
to find additional resources to achieve the lesson outcome.
•	Use prerequisite test questions to activate the prerequisite 
knowledge structure required for learning the new materials. 
With the flexibility of online learning, students with diverse 
background and knowledge can choose the most appropriate 
path to review previous or prerequisite learning before new 
information is presented.
3.	 Information should be chunked to prevent overload during 
­processing in working memory (Miller, 1956). To facilitate effi-
cient processing in working memory, online learning materials 
should present between five and nine items on a screen. If there 
are many items in a lesson, their organization should be shown 
in the form of information maps. A generalized information map 
is provided as an overview for the online lesson, and can be linear, 
hierarchical, or spider-shaped, as illustrated in Figures 2 to 4 
(Holley, Dansereau, McDonald, Garland, & Collins 1979; Smith 
& Ragan, 1999). As the lesson progresses, each item in the gen-
eralized information map is presented and broken down into 
sub-items. At the end of the lesson, the generalized map is shown 
again, but with the relationships among the items illustrated.
	
  To facilitate deep processing, learners should be asked to 
­generate the information maps during the learning process or as 

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
25
Item 2
Item 1
Item 3
Item 4
Figure 2.  Linear information map
Item 3
Item 4
Item 1
Item 6
Main topic
Item 5
Item 2
Figure 3.  Spider-shaped information map
Main Topic
Item 1
Item 4
Item 3
Item 2
Sub-item 1
Sub-item 3
Sub-item 2
Figure 4.  Hierarchical information map

26	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
a summary activity after the lesson (Bonk & Reynolds, 1997). In 
addition to ­facilitating deep processing, information maps can 
provide the big picture, to help learners to comprehend the 
details of a lesson. Online learning can capitalize on the process-
ing and visual capabilities of the computer to present information 
maps to learners, or to ask learners to generate information maps 
using map-making software.
4.	 Other strategies that promote deep processing should be used to 
help transfer information to long-term storage. To make the trans-
fer to long-term memory more effective, strategies should be used 
that require learners to apply, analyze, synthesize, and evaluate 
promote higher-level learning. Online strategies to allow learners 
to apply the information in real life should also be included, to 
contextualize the learning and to facilitate deep processing.
5.	 A variety of learning strategies should be included in online 
instruction to accommodate individual differences and learning 
styles (Cassidy, 2004). Learning style refers to how a learner per-
ceives, interacts with, and responds to the learning environment; 
it measures individual differences. Different learning style instru-
ments are used to determine students’ learning styles. The Kolb 
Learning Style Inventory (LSI) looks at how learners perceive and 
process information (Kolb, 1984), whereas the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator uses dichotomous scales to measure extroversion versus 
introversion, sensing versus intuition, thinking versus feeling, and 
judging versus perception (Myers, 1978). In the following discus-
sion, we consider the Kolb Learning Style Inventory.
	
  Kolb suggests that two components make up our learning expe-
rience: perceiving and processing. Perceiving refers to the way 
learners sense and absorb the information around them, from 
concrete experience to reflective observation. Concrete experi-
ence relates to learners’ desire to learn things that have personal 
meaning. During reflective observation, learners like to take the 
time to think about and reflect on the learning materials. The 
second component, processing, refers to how learners understand 
and process the information that is absorbed after perceiving. 
Processing ranges from abstract conceptualization to active experi-
mentation. Learners who have a preference for abstract conceptu-
alization like to learn facts and figures and research new information 
on different topics. Learners who have a preference for active 
experimentation like to apply what they learn to real-life situations 

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
27
and to go beyond what was presented. They like to try things 
and learn from their experience. Online learning can cater for 
individual differences by determining a learner’s preference 
and providing appropriate learning activities based on that 
­learner’s style.
	
  Online learning materials should include activities for the dif-
ferent styles, so that learners can select appropriate activities based 
on their preferred learning style. Concrete-experience learners 
prefer specific examples in which they can be involved, and they 
relate to peers more than to people in authority. They like group 
work and peer feedback, and they see the instructor as a coach 
or helper. These learners prefer support methods that allow them 
to interact with peers and obtain coaching from the instructor. 
Reflective-observation learners like to observe carefully before 
taking any action. They prefer that all the information be available 
for learning, and see the instructor as the expert. They tend to 
avoid interaction with others. Abstract-conceptualization learners 
like to work more with things and symbols and less with people. 
They like to work with theory and to conduct systematic analyses. 
Active-experimentation learners prefer to learn by doing practical 
projects and participating in group discussions. They prefer active 
learning methods and interact with peers for feedback and infor-
mation. They tend to establish their own criteria for evaluating 
situations. Adequate supports should be provided for students 
with different learning styles. Ally and Fahy (2002) found that 
students with different learning styles have different preferences 
for support. For example, the assimilator learning style prefers 
high instructor presence, while the accommodator learning style 
prefers low instructor presence.
	
  Cognitive style refers to a learner’s preferred way of processing 
information; that is, the person’s typical mode of thinking, remem-
bering, or problem solving. Thus, cognitive style is another indi-
vidual difference indicator. Cognitive style is considered to be a 
personality dimension that influences attitudes, values, and social 
interaction. One of the dimensions of cognitive style that has 
implications for online learning is the distinction between field-
dependent and field-independent personalities (Witkin, Moore, 
Goodenough, & Cox, 1977). Field-independent personalities 
approach the environment in an analytical manner; for example, 
they distinguish figures as discrete from their backgrounds. 

28	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­Field-independent individuals experience events in a more global, 
less differentiated way. Field-dependent individuals have a greater 
social orientation compared to field-independent personalities. 
Field-independent individuals are likely to learn more effectively 
under conditions of intrinsic motivation, such as self-study, and 
are influenced less by social reinforcement. 
6.	 Information should be presented in different modes to facilitate 
processing and transferring it to long-term memory. Where pos-
sible, textual, verbal, and visual information should be presented 
to encourage encoding. According to dual-coding theory (Paivio, 
1986), information received in different modes (textual and 
visual) will be processed better than that presented in a single 
mode (text). Dual-coded information is processed in different 
parts of the brain, resulting in more encoding. Presenting informa-
tion in different modes also accommodates individual differences 
in processing.
7.	 Learners should be motivated to learn. It does not matter how 
effective the online materials are, if learners are not motivated, 
they will not learn. The issue is whether to use intrinsic motivation 
(driven from within the learner) or extrinsic motivation (instruc-
tor- and performance-driven). Designers of online learning mate-
rials should use intrinsic motivation strategies to motivate learners 
(Malone, 1981); however, extrinsic motivation should also be used 
since some learners are motivated by externally driven methods. 
Keller proposes the ARCS model (Attention, Relevance, Confi-
dence, Satisfaction) for motivating learners during learning (Keller, 
1983; Keller & Suzuki, 1988):
•	Attention: Capture the learners’ attention at the start of the 
lesson and maintain it throughout the lesson. The online learn-
ing materials must include an activity at the start of the learning 
session to connect with the learners.
•	Relevance: Inform learners of the importance of the lesson and 
how taking the lesson could benefit them. Strategies could 
include describing how learners will benefit from taking the 
lesson, and how they can use what they learn in real-life situa-
tions. This strategy helps to contextualize the learning and make 
it more meaningful, thereby maintaining learners’ interest 
throughout the learning session.
•	Confidence: Use strategies such as designing for success and 
informing learners of the lesson expectations. Design for success 

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
29
by sequencing from simple to complex, or from known to 
unknown, and use a competency-based approach where learners 
are given the opportunity to use different strategies to complete 
the lesson. Inform learners of the lesson outcome and provide 
ongoing encouragement to complete the lesson.
•	 Satisfaction: Provide feedback on learners’ performance and allow 
them to apply what they learn in real-life situations. Learners 
like to know how they are doing, and they like to contextualize 
what they are learning by applying the information in real life.
8.	 Encourage learners to use their metacognitive skills to help in the 
learning process (Mayer, 1998; Sternberg, 1998; Yorke & Knight, 
2004). Metacognition is a learner’s ability to be aware of his or her 
cognitive capabilities and use these capabilities to learn. When 
learning online, learners should be given the opportunity to 
reflect on what they are learning, collaborate with other learners, 
and check their progress. Self-check questions and exercises with 
feedback throughout a lesson are good strategies to allow learners 
to check how they are doing, so they can use their metacognitive 
skills to adjust their learning approach if necessary.
9.	 Online strategies that facilitate the transfer of learning should 
be used to encourage application in different and real-life situa-
tions. Simulation of the real situation, using real-life cases, should 
be part of the lesson. Also, learners should be given the oppor-
tunity to complete assignments and projects that use real-life 
applications and information. Transfer to real-life situations could 
assist the learners to develop personal meaning and contextualize 
the information.
	
  Cognitive psychology suggests that learners receive and process 
information to be transferred into long-term memory for storage. 
The amount of information processed depends on the amount 
that is perceived, and the amount stored in long-term memory 
depends on the quality of the processing in working memory. 
Effective online lessons must use techniques to allow learners to 
sense and perceive the information, and must include strategies 
to facilitate high-level processing for transfer of information to 
long-term memory. After learners acquire the information, they 
create personal knowledge to make the materials meaningful. 
The constructivist school of learning, which is discussed below, 
suggests that learners construct personal knowledge from the 
learning experience.

30	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Constructivist School of Learning 
Constructivists see learners as active rather than passive. Knowledge is 
not received from the outside or from someone else; rather, the indi-
vidual learner interprets and processes what is received through the 
senses to create knowledge. The learner is the centre of the learning, 
with the instructor playing an advising and facilitating role. Learners 
should be allowed to construct knowledge rather than being given knowl-
edge through instruction (Duffy & Cunningham, 1996). The construction 
of knowledge includes both physical and intellectual learning ­activities 
(Phillips, 2005). A major emphasis of constructivists is situated learning, 
which sees learning as contextual (Hung, Looi, & Koh, 2004). Learning 
activities that allow learners to contextualize the information should be 
used in online instruction. If the information has to be applied in many 
contexts, then learning strategies that promote multi-contextual learning 
should be used to make sure that learners can indeed apply the informa-
tion broadly. Learning is moving away from one-way instruction to 
­construction and discovery of knowledge (Tapscott, 1998).
In his transformation theory, Mezirow (1991) uses both constructiv-
ism and cognitivism to explain how people learn. He sees learning as “the 
process of using a prior interpretation to construe a new or revised inter-
pretation of the meaning of one’s experience in order to guide future 
action” (p. 12). Transformative learning involves “reflectively transforming 
the beliefs, attitudes, opinions, and emotional reactions that constitute 
our meaning schemes or transforming our meaning perspectives” (p. 223). 
Mezirow claims that learning involves five interacting contexts: the frame 
of reference or meaning perspective in which the learning is embedded; 
the conditions of communication; the line of action (process) in which 
the learning occurs; the self-image of the learner; and the situation 
encountered during the learning process (p. 13).
Implications for Online Learning 
1.	 Learning should be an active process. Keeping learners active 
doing meaningful activities results in high-level processing, which 
facilitates the creation of personalized meaning. Asking learners 
to apply the information in a practical situation is an active process, 
and facilitates personal interpretation and relevance.
2.	 Learners should construct their own knowledge, rather than 
accepting that given by the instructor. Knowledge construction is 
facilitated by good interactive online instruction, since the ­students 

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
31
have to take the initiative to learn and to interact with other 
­students and the instructor, and because the learning agenda is 
controlled by the student (Murphy & Cifuentes, 2001). In an online 
environment, students experience the information first-hand, 
rather than receiving filtered information from an instructor 
whose style or background may differ from theirs. In a traditional 
lecture, instructors contextualize and personalize the information 
to meet their own needs, which may not be appropriate for all 
learners. In online instruction, learners experience the informa-
tion first-hand, which gives them the opportunity to ­contextualize 
and personalize the information themselves.
3.	 Collaborative and cooperative learning should be encouraged to 
facilitate constructivist learning (Hooper & Hannafin, 1991; 
Johnson & Johnson, 1996; Palloff & Pratt, 1999). Working with 
other learners gives learners real-life experience of working in a 
group and allows them to use their metacognitive skills. Learners 
will also be able to use the strengths of other learners, and learn 
from others. When assigning group work, membership should be 
based on the expertise level and learning style of individual group 
members, so that individual team members can benefit from one 
another’s strengths.
4.	 Learners should be given control of the learning process. There 
should be a form of guided discovery where learners are allowed 
to made decisions about learning goals, with some guidance from 
the instructor.
5.	 Learners should be given time and the opportunity to reflect. When 
learning online, students need the time to reflect and internalize 
the information. Embedded questions about the content can be 
used throughout the lesson to encourage learners to reflect on 
and process the information in a relevant and meaningful manner; 
or learners can be asked to generate a learning journal during the 
learning process, to encourage reflection and processing.
6.	 Learning should be made meaningful. Learning materials should 
include examples that relate to the learners so that they can make 
sense of the information. Assignments and projects should allow 
learners to choose meaningful activities to help them apply and 
personalize the information.
7.	 Learning should be interactive to promote higher-level learning 
and social presence, and to help develop personal meaning. 
According to Heinich, Molenda, Russell, and Smaldino (2002), 

32	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
learning is the development of new knowledge, skills, and attitudes 
as the learner interacts with information and the environment. 
Interaction is critical to creating a sense of presence and a sense 
of community for online learners, and to promoting transforma-
tional learning (Murphy & Cifuentes, 2001). Learners receive the 
learning materials through the technology, process the informa-
tion, and then personalize and contextualize the information. In 
the transformation process, learners interact with the content, 
with other learners, and with instructors to test and confirm ideas 
and to apply what they learn. Garrison (1999) claims that the 
design of the educational experience includes the transactional 
nature of the relationship between instructor, learners, and 
content that is of significance to the learning experience.
Different kinds of interaction will promote learning at different 
levels. Figure 5 shows interactive strategies to promote higher-level 
Learner-interface
interaction
Learner-content
interaction
Learner-support
interaction
Learner-instructor
Learner-learner
Learner-expert
Learner-context
interaction
Figure 5.  Levels of Interaction in online learning

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
33
learning (Berge, 1999; Gilbert & Moore, 1998; Schwier & Misanchuk, 
1993). Hirumi (2002) proposes a framework of interaction in online 
learning that consists of three levels. Level one is learner-self interac­
tion, which occurs within learners to help monitor and regulate their 
own learning. Level two is learner-human and learner-non-human inter-
actions, where the learner interacts with human and non-human 
resources. Level three is learner-instruction interaction, which consists 
of activities to achieve a learning outcome. This chapter goes one step 
further and proposes interactions that go from lower-level to higher-
level interactions, based on behaviorist, cognitivist, and constructivist 
schools of learning.
At the lowest level of interaction, there must be learner-interface 
interaction to allow the learner to access and sense the information. 
The interface is where learners use their senses to register the informa-
tion in sensory storage. In online learning, the interface is with the 
computer, to access the content and to interact with others. Once learn-
ers access the online materials, there must be learner-content interaction 
to process the information. Learners navigate through the content to 
access the components of the lesson, which could take the form of pre-
learning, learning, and post-learning activities. These activities could 
access reusable learning objects from a repository to present to learners 
(McGreal, 2002; Wiley, 2002), or they could use content custom-created 
by the designer or instructor. Students should be given the ability to 
choose their own sequence of learning, or should be given one or more 
suggested sequences. As online learners interact with the content, they 
should be encouraged to apply, assess, analyze, synthesize, evaluate, and 
reflect on what they learn (Berge, 2002). During the learner-content 
interaction, learners process the information to transform it from short-
term to long-term memory. The higher the level of processing, the more 
associations are made in the learners’ long-term memory, which results 
in higher-level learning.
As learners work through the content, they will find the need for 
learner support, which could take the form of learner-to-learner, learner-
to-instructor, instructor-to-learner, and learner-to-expert interactions 
(Moore, 1989; Rourke, Anderson, Garrison, & Archer, 2001; Thiessen, 
2001). There should be strategies to promote learner-context interac-
tion, to allow learners to apply what they learn in real life so that they 
can contextualize the information. Learner-context interaction allows 
learners to develop personal knowledge and construct personal meaning 
from the information.

34	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Connectivist Theory for Online Learning
According to Siemens (2004), connectivist theory is for the digital age, 
where individuals learn and work in a networked environment. As a 
result, we do not have control over what we learn since others in the 
network continually change information, and that requires new learning, 
unlearning old information, and/or learning current information. 
Siemens proposes some guidelines for designing learning materials for 
the learner, based on connectivist theory. Below is an elaboration of 
these guidelines for the development of online learning materials.
•	Because of the information explosion, learners should be allowed 
to explore and research current information. Learners of the 
future need to be autonomous and independent learners so that 
they can acquire current information to build a valid and accurate 
knowledge base. Appropriate use of the Internet is an ideal 
­learning strategy in a networked world.
•	Some information and procedures become obsolete because of 
changes in the field and innovation; learners must therefore be 
able to unlearn old information and mental models and learn 
current information and mental models. The information that is 
valid today may not be valid tomorrow.
•	The rapid increase of information available from a variety of 
sources means that some information is not as important or 
genuine as other information. As a result, the learner must be 
able to identify important information from unimportant 
information.
•	Learners must have the ability to recognize what knowledge is no 
longer valid so they can acquire the new knowledge for a disci-
pline. This requires that learners keep up-to-date in the field and 
be active participants in the network of learning.
•	Because of globalization, information is not location-specific, and 
with the increasing use of telecommunication, technologies 
experts and learners from around the world can share and review 
information. Learning and knowledge rests in a diversity of opin-
ions. As a result, learners must be allowed to connect with others 
around the world to examine others’ opinions and to share their 
thinking with the world. Mobile learning promises to help learn-
ers function in a networked world where they can learn at any 
time and from anywhere (Ally, 2005).

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
35
•	The world is connected by telecommunication technology. Hence, 
information for learning should not be taken from one source 
but should be assembled from many sources to reflect the net-
worked world and the diversity of thinking. Learning should be 
delivered in a multi-channel system where different communica-
tion technologies are used to deliver the learning materials to 
facilitate optimal learning (Mukhopadhyay & Parhar, 2001).
•	The field of computer systems is altering the learning process. 
The intelligent agents that are being built into devices and appli-
ances will affect how students learn and where they obtain their 
learning materials. For example, devices and appliances will have 
built-in learning materials. When learners interact with the equip-
ment, the training will be provided to them. Or, if the learner 
makes a mistake while using the equipment, the system will detect 
the mistake and provide the correct information. Hence, what 
learners need to learn depends on the type of equipment  they 
use and their prior knowledge.
•	Because of the information explosion, learners of the future must 
be willing to acquire new knowledge on an ongoing basis. Online 
teaching strategies must give learners the opportunity to research 
and locate new information in a discipline so that they can keep 
up-to-date in the field. In addition to using the Internet to deliver 
flexibility, instruction must be designed for experiential and 
authentic learning (Schmidt & Werner, 2007).
•	The Internet is expanding education into a global classroom, 
with learners, teachers, and experts from around the world. As 
a result, learners must network with other students and experts 
to make sure that they are continually learning and updating 
their knowledge.
•	Because of innovation and our increasing use of technology, 
­learning is becoming more multidisciplinary. Learners must be 
exposed to different fields so that they can see the connections 
between the information in the fields. For example, learning 
about learning theories requires that learners be exposed to what 
the research says in psychology and information technology.
Siemens (2004) suggests that because of the networked society, 
globalization, and the constant changes to information and new infor-
mation, educators need to look at new ways to design learning materials. 
He proposes a theory based on connectivism to prepare learners to 

36	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
function in the digital and networked age; however, further work needs 
to be done on how this theory can be used by educators to design and 
develop learning materials.
Conclusion
This chapter concludes by proposing a model, based on educational 
theory, that shows the important learning components that should be 
used when designing online materials. Neither placing information on 
the Web nor linking to other digital resources on the Web constitutes 
online instruction. Online instruction occurs when learners use the Web 
to go through the a sequence of instruction, to complete the learning 
activities, and to achieve learning outcomes and objectives (Ally, 2002; 
Ritchie & Hoffman, 1997). A variety of learning activities should be used 
to accommodate the different learning styles. Learners will choose the 
appropriate strategy to meet their learning needs. Refer to Figure 6 for 
key components that should be considered when designing online 
­learning materials.
Learner Preparation
A variety of pre-learning activities can prepare learners for the details 
of the lesson, and to connect and motivate them to learn the online 
lesson. A rationale should be provided to inform learners of the impor-
tance of taking the online lesson and to show how it will benefit them. 
A concept map is provided to establish the existing cognitive structure, 
to incorporate the details of the online lesson, and to activate learners’ 
existing structures to help them learn the details in the lesson. The 
lesson concept map also gives learners the big picture.
Learners should be informed of the learning outcomes of the 
lesson, so they know what is expected of them and will be able to gauge 
when they have achieved the lesson outcomes. An advance organizer 
should be provided to establish a structure, to organize the details in 
the online lesson, or to bridge between what learners already know and 
need to know. Learners must be told the prerequisite requirements so 
that they can check whether they are ready for the lesson. Providing the 
prerequisites to learners also activates the required cognitive structure 
to help them learn the materials.
A self-assessment should be provided at the start of the lesson to 
allow learners to check whether they already have the knowledge and 

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
37
Learning outcomes
Advanced organizer
Content map
Prerequisites
Content map
Prerequisites
Journalizing
Apply
Research
Practise
Read, listen,
and view
Summarize
Real-life
application
Personal
meaning
Learner-interface
Learner-content
Learner-context
Learner-support
Learner
preparation
Learner
activities
Learner
transfer
Learner
interaction
Figure 6.  Components of effective online learning

38	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
skills taught in the online lesson. If learners think they have the ­knowledge 
and skills, they should be allowed to take that lesson’s final test. The 
self-assessment also helps learners to organize the lesson materials and 
to recognize the important materials in the lesson. Once learners are 
prepared for the details of the lesson, they can go on to complete the 
online learning activities and to learn the details of the lesson.
Learner Activities
Online learning should include a variety of learning activities to help 
students achieve the lesson’s learning outcome and to cater for their 
individual needs. Examples of learning activities include reading textual 
materials, listening to audio materials, and viewing visuals or video mate-
rials. Learners can conduct research on the Internet or link to online 
information and libraries to acquire further information. Having learners 
prepare a learning journal will allow them to reflect on what they have 
learned and provide the information with personal meaning. Appropriate 
application exercises should be embedded throughout the online lesson 
to establish the relevance of the materials. Practice activities, with feed-
back, should be included to allow learners to monitor how they are 
performing, so that they can adjust their learning method if necessary. 
To promote higher-level processing and to bring closure to the lesson, 
a summary should be provided, or learners should be required to gener-
ate a lesson summary. 
Learner Interaction
As learners complete the learning activities, they will be involved with a 
variety of interactions. Learners need to interact with the interface to 
access the online materials. The interface should not overload learners, 
and should make it as easy as possible for learners to sense the informa-
tion, for transfer to sensory store and then into short-term memory for 
processing. Learners need to interact with the content to acquire the 
information needed and to form the knowledge base. There should be 
interaction between the learner and other learners, between the learner 
and the instructor, and between the learner and experts to collaborate, 
participate in shared cognition, form social networks, and establish social 
presence. Learners should be able to interact within their context to 
personalize information and construct their own meaning.

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
39
Learner Transfer
Opportunities should be provided for learners to transfer what they 
learned to real-life applications, so that they can be creative and go 
beyond what was presented in the online lesson.
Looking Ahead
Behaviorist, cognitivist, and constructivist theories have contributed in 
different ways to the design of online materials, and they will continue 
to be used to develop learning materials for online learning. Behaviorist 
strategies can be used to teach the facts (what); cognitivist strategies, the 
principles and processes (how); and constructivist strategies to teach 
the real-life and personal applications and contextual learning. There 
is a shift toward constructive learning, in which learners are given the 
opportunity to construct their own meaning from the information pre-
sented during the online sessions. In addition to the existing learning 
theories, connectivism should be used to guide the development of 
online learning, since the other learning theories were developed before 
we became a networked world. Globalization has also affected what stu-
dents learn and how they learn. The use of learning objects to promote 
flexibility, and reuse of online materials to meet the needs of individual 
learners, will become more common in the future. Online learning 
materials will be designed in small coherent segments, so that they can 
be redesigned for different learners and different contexts. The integra-
tion of 3D interactive graphics and web technologies (Web3D) will allow 
educators to develop highly interactive and realistic learning environ-
ments to enhance online learning (Chittaro & Ranon, 2007). Finally, 
online learning will be increasingly diverse in response to different 
­learning cultures, styles, and motivations.
References
Ally, M. (2002, August). Designing and managing successful online 
­distance education courses. Workshop presented at the 2002 World 
Computer Congress, Montreal, Canada.

40	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Ally, M. (2005). Using learning theories to design instruction for mobile 
learning devices. In J. Attwell and C. Savill-Smith (Eds.), Mobile learning 
anytime everywhere (pp. 5–8). Proceedings of the Third World Conference 
on Mobile Learning, Rome.
Ally, M., and Fahy, P. (2002, August). Using students’ learning styles to 
provide support in distance education. Proceedings of the Eighteenth Annual 
Conference on Distance Teaching and Learning, Madison, WI.
Ausubel, D. P. (1960). The use of advance organizers in the learning 
and retention of meaningful verbal material. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 51, 267–272.
Ausubel, D. P. (1974). Educational psychology: A cognitive view. New York: 
Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Berge, Z. L. (1999). Interaction in post-secondary web-based learning. 
Educational Technology, 39(1), 5–11.
Berge, Z. L. (2002). Active, interactive, and reflective learning. The 
Quarterly Review of Distance Education, 3(2), 181–190.
Beynon, M. (2007). Computing technology for learning – in need of a 
radical new conception. Educational Technology & Society, 10(1), 
94–106.
Bonk, C. J., & Reynolds, T. H. (1997). Learner-centered web instruction 
for higher-order thinking, teamwork, and apprenticeship. In B. H. 
Khan (Ed.), Web-based instruction (pp. 167–178). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Educational Technology Publications.
Carliner, S. (1999). Overview of online learning. Amherst, MA: Human 
Resource Development Press.
Cassidy, S. (2004). Learning Styles: An overview of theories, models, and 
measures. Educational Psychology, 24(4), 419–444.
Chittaro, L., & Ranon, R. (2007). Web3D technologies in learning, edu-
cation, and training: Motivation, issues, and opportunities. Computers 
and Education, 49(1), 3–18.
Clark, R. E. (1983). Reconsidering research on learning from media. 
Review of Educational Research, 53(4), 445–459.
Clark, R. E. (2001). A summary of disagreements with the ‘mere 
­vehicles’ argument. In R. E. Clark (Ed.), Learning from media: Argu-
ments, analysis, and evidence (pp. 125–136). Greenwich, CT: Informa-
tion Age Publishing.
Cole, R. A. (2000). Issues in web-based pedagogy: A critical primer. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood Press.
Cooper, P. A. (1993). Paradigm shifts in designing instruction: From 
behaviorism to cognitivism to constructivism. Educational Technology, 
33(5), 12–19.

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
41
Craik, F. I. M., & Lockhart, R. S. (1972). Levels of processing: A frame-
work for memory research. Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, 
11, 671–684.
Craik, F. I. M., & Tulving, E. (1975). Depth of processing and the reten-
tion of words in episodic memory. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General, 104, 268–294.
Downes, S. (2006). An introduction to connective knowledge. Retrieved March 
26, 2007, from http://www.downes.ca/post/33034
Duffy, T. M., & Cunningham, D. J. (1996). Constructivism: Implications 
for the design and delivery of instruction. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), 
Handbook of research for educational communications and technology 
(pp. 170–198). New York: Simon & Schuster Macmillan.
Ertmer, P. A., & Newby, T. J. (1993). Behaviorism, cognitivism, construc-
tivism: Comparing critical features from an instructional design per-
spective. Performance Improvement Quarterly, 6(4), 50–70.
Garrison, D. R. (1999). Will distance disappear in distance studies? A 
reaction. Journal of Distance Education, 13(2), 10–13.
Gilbert, L., & Moore, D .L. (1998). Building interactivity into web courses: 
Tools for social and instructional interaction. Educational Technology, 
38(3), 29–35.
Good, T. L., & Brophy, J. E. (1990). Educational psychology: A realistic 
approach (4th ed.).White Plains, NY: Longman.
Heinich, R., Molenda, M., Russell, J. D., & Smaldino, S. E. (2002). Instruc-
tional media and technologies for learning. NJ: Pearson Education.
Hirumi, A. (2002). A framework for analyzing, designing, and sequenc-
ing planned e-learning interactions. The Quarterly Review of Distance 
Education, 3(2), 141–160.
Holley, C. D., Dansereau, D. F., McDonald, B. A., Garland, J. C., & Collins, 
K. W. (1979). Evaluation of a hierarchical mapping technique as an aid 
to prose processing. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 4, 227–237.
Hooper, S., & Hannafin, M. J. (1991). The effects of group composition 
on achievement, interaction, and learning efficiency during computer-
based cooperative instruction. Educational Technology Research and 
Development, 39(3), 27–40.
Hung, D., Looi,, C. K., & Koh, T. S. (2004). Situated cognition and com-
munities of practice: First-person ‘lived experiences’ vs. third-person 
perspectives. Educational Technology & Society, 7(4), 193–200.
Janicki, T., & Liegle, J. O. (2001). Development and evaluation of a 
framework for creating web-based learning modules: A pedagogical 
and systems approach. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 5(1). 

42	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Retrieved June 10, 2007, from http://www.sloan-c.org/publications/
jaln/v5n1/pdf/v5n1_janicki.pdf 
Johnson, D. W., & Johnson, R. T. (1996). Cooperation and the use of 
technology. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Handbook of research for educational 
communications and technology (pp. 170–198). New York: Simon & 
Schuster Macmillan.
Kalat, J. W. (2007). Introduction to psychology. Pacific Grove, CA: Wadsworth-
Thompson Learning.
Keller, J. M. (1983). Motivational design of instruction. In C. M. Reigeluth 
(Ed.), Instructional design theories and instruction: An overview of their 
current status (pp. 383–429). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Keller, J. M., & Suzuki, K. (1988). Use of the ARCS motivation model in 
courseware design. In D. H. Jonassen (Ed.), Instructional design for micro-
computer courseware (pp. 401–434). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Khan, B. (1997). Web-based instruction: What is it and why is it? In 
B. H. Khan (Ed.), Web-based instruction (pp. 5–18). Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Educational Technology Publications. 
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning 
and development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Kozma, R. B. (2001). Counterpoint theory of ‘learning with media’. In 
R. E. Clark (Ed.), Learning from media: Arguments, analysis, and evidence 
(pp. 137–178). Greenwich, CT: Information Age Publishing Inc. 
Malone, T. W. (1981). Towards a theory of intrinsically motivating instruc-
tion. Cognitive Science, 5(4), 333–369.
Mayer, R. E. (1979). Twenty years of research on advance organizers: 
Assimilation theory is still the best predictor of results. Instructional 
Science, 8(2), 133–167. 
Mayer, R. E. (1998). Cognitive, meta-cognitive, and motivational aspects 
of problem solving. Instructional Science, 26(1–2), 49–63.
McGreal, R. (2002, February). A primer on meta-data standards. Session 
presented at Athabasca University.
Mezirow, J. (1991). Transformative dimensions of adult learning. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Miller, G. A. (1956). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: 
Some limits on our capacity for processing information. Psychological 
Review, 63, 81–97.
Moore, M. G. (1989). Three types of interaction. The American Journal of 
Distance Education, 3(2), 1–6.
Mukhopadhyay, M., & Parhar, M. (2001). Instructional design in multi-
channel learning system. British Journal of Education Technology, 32(5), 
543–556.

Foundations of Educational Theory for Online Learning	
43
Murphy, K. L., & Cifuentes, L. (2001). Using web tools, collaborating, 
and learning online. Distance Education, 22(2), 285–305.
Myers, I. (1978). Myers-Briggs type indicator. Palo Alto, CA: Consulting 
Psychologists Press.
Paivio, A. (1986). Mental representations: A dual coding approach. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Palloff, R. M., & Pratt, K. (1999). Building learning communities in cyberspace. 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Pavlov, I. P. (1927). Conditioned reflexes. London: Clarendon Press.
Phillips, D. C. (2005). Theories of teaching and learning. In A companion 
to the philosophy of Education. Blackwell Synergy: Online Journals for 
Learning, Research, and Professional Practice. Retrieved March 26, 
2007, from http://www.blackwellreference.com/subscriber/tocnode 
?id=g9781405140515_chunk_g978140514051519 
Ring, G. & Mathieux, G. (2002, February). The key components of 
quality learning. Paper presented at the ASTD Techknowledge 2002 
Conference, Las Vegas.
Ritchie, D. C., & Hoffman, B. (1997). Incorporating instructional design 
principles with the World Wide Web. In B. H. Khan (Ed.), Web-based 
instruction (pp. 135–138). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational ­Technology 
Publications. 
Rossett, A. (2002). Waking in the night and thinking about e-learning. 
In A. Rossett (Ed.), The ASTD e-learning handbook (pp. 3–18). New York: 
McGraw-Hill.
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Garrison, D. R., & Archer, W. (2001). Assessing 
social presence in asynchronous text-based computer conferencing. 
Journal of Distance Education, 14(2). Retrieved June 10, 2007 from 
http://cade.athabascau.ca/ vol14.2/rourke_et_al.html
Rovai, A. (2002). Building sense of community at a distance. Interna-
tional Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 3(1). Retrieved 
June 10, 2007, from http://www.irrodl.org/index .php/irrodl/article/
view/79/152 
Schmidt, J. T., & Werner, C. H. (2007). Designing online instruction for 
success: Future oriented motivation and self-regulation. Electronic 
Journal of e-Learning, 5(1), 69–78.
Schramm, W. (1977). Big media, little media. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Schwier, R. A., & Misanchuk, E. (1993). Interactive multimedia instruction. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Technology Publications.
Siemens, G. (2004). A learning theory for the digital age. Retrieved March 26, 
2007 from http://www.elearnspace.org/Articles/connectivism.htm 

44	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Simmons, D. E. (2002). The forum report: E-learning adoption rates 
and barriers. In A. Rossett (Ed.), The ASTD e-learning handbook (pp. 19–
23). New York: McGraw-Hill.
Skinner, B. F. (1974). About behaviorism. New York: Knopf.
Smith, P. L., & Ragan, T. J. (1999). Instructional design. New York: John 
Wiley & Sons.
Sternberg, R. J. (1998). Meta-cognition, abilities, and developing exper-
tise: What makes an expert student? Instructional Science, 26(1-2), 
127–140.
Stoyanova, N., & Kommers, P. (2002). Concept mapping as a medium 
of shared cognition in computer-supported collaborative problem-
solving. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 13(1,2), 111–133.
Tapscott, D. (1998). Growing up digital: The rise of the Net generation. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Thiessen, J. (2001). Faculty attitudes in delivering undergraduate distance 
education. Unpublished master’s thesis, Athabasca University, Athabasca, 
Alberta.
Thorndike, E. L. (1913). Educational psychology: The psychology of learning. 
New York: Teachers College Press.
Wiley, D. (2002). Learning objects need instructional design theory. In 
A. Rossett (Ed.), The ASTD e-Learning Handbook (pp. 115–126). New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Wilson, B. G. (1997). Reflections on constructivism and instructional 
design. In C. R. Dills & A. J. Romiszowski (Eds.), Instructional develop-
ment paradigms (pp. 63–80). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Educational Tech-
nology Publications.
Witkin, H. A., Moore, C. A., Goodenough, D. R., & Cox, P. W. (1977). 
Field-dependent and field-independent cognitive styles and their 
­educational implications. Review of Educational Research, 47, 1–64.
Yorke, M., & Knight, P. (2004). Self-theories: Some implications for teach-
ing and learning in higher education. Studies in Higher Education, 29(1), 
25–37.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Mohamed Ally is an associate professor for the Centre for Distance 
Education at Athabasca University. Dr. Ally teaches courses in distance 
education and is involved with research on improving design, develop-
ment, delivery, and support in distance education.

Chapter 2
Towards a Theory  
of Online Learning
Terry Anderson
Athabasca University 
It is the theory that decides what we can observe.
– Albert Einstein
There is nothing more practical than a good theory.
– Lewin, K., Field Theory in Social Science
Introduction
Theory has been both celebrated and condemned in educational ­practice 
and research. Many proponents have argued that theory allows and even 
forces us to see the big picture and makes it possible for us to view our 
practice and our research from a broader perspective than envisioned from 
the murky trenches of our practice. This broader perspective helps us make 
connections with the work of others, facilitates coherent frameworks and 
deeper understanding of our actions, and perhaps most importantly, allows 
us to transfer the experience gained in one context to new experiences and 
contexts. Critics of theory (McCormick & McCormick, 1992) have argued 
that too strict adherence to any particular theoretical viewpoint often filters 
our perceptions and thus blinds us to important lessons of reality. The 
intent of this chapter is to look at learning theory generally, and then to 
focus in on those attributes of the online learning context that allow us to 
focus and develop deeper and more useful theories of online learning.

46	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Wilson (1997) has described three functions of a good educational 
theory. First, it helps us to envision new worlds. Few of us need help 
envisioning new worlds in the midst of the hype and exuberance of online 
learning proponents that flood the popular press. We do need theory, 
however, to help us envision how education can best take advantage of the 
enhanced communication, information retrieval, creative tools, and man-
agement capability provided by the Net. It is all too easy to consider new 
innovations in a horseless-carriage manner, and attempt to ­develop 
new actions based on old adaptations to now obsolete contexts.
Second, a good theory helps us to make things. We need theories 
of online learning that help us to invest our time and limited resources 
most effectively. There are many opportunities, but always critical short-
ages of resources – time being perhaps the scarcest of these – demanding 
that we maximize the efficiency of our development and educational deliv-
ery efforts. This book has a number of chapters with particular recom-
mendations and suggestions for online course development and teaching. 
Hopefully, this chapter provides a theoretical big picture to make sense 
of these specific recommendations. Third, Wilson argues that a good 
theory keeps us honest. Good theory builds upon what is already known, 
and helps us to interpret and plan for the unknown. It also forces us to 
look beyond day-to-day contingencies and ensure that our knowledge and 
practice of online learning is robust, considered, and ever expanding.
This chapter begins with a general assessment of how people 
learn, based on Bransford, Brown, and Cocking’s (1999) work. It then 
assesses the unique characteristics or affordances of the Web to enhance 
these generalized learning contexts. The chapter then discusses the six 
forms of interaction and their critical role in engaging and supporting 
both learners and teachers. It then presents a model of e-learning, a first 
step towards a theory, in which the two predominate forms of e-learning 
– collaborative and independent study modes – are presented with a 
brief discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of each. The chapter 
ends with a discussion of the emerging tools of the Semantic Web, and 
the way they will affect future developments of theory and practice of 
online learning.
Attributes of Learning
As many theorists have argued (Herrington & Oliver, 1999) and practi-
tioners have experienced for themselves, online learning is but a subset 

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
47
of learning in general – thus, we can expect issues relevant to how adults 
learn generally to also be relevant in an online learning context. 
Bransford, Brown and Cocking (1999), in an insightful book on the new 
science of learning, provide evidence that effective learning environments 
are framed within the convergence of four overlapping lenses. They 
argue that effective learning is community-centred, knowledge-centred, 
learner-centred, and assessment-centred. Discussing each of these lenses 
helps us to define learning in a general sense before we apply this analysis 
framework to the unique characteristics of online learning.
Learner-Centred
A learner-centred context is not one in which the whims and peculiari-
ties of each individual learner are slavishly catered to. In fact, we must 
be careful to recognize that learner-centred contexts must also meet the 
needs of the teacher, the institution, and of the larger society that pro-
vides support for the student, the institution, and often for a group or 
class of students, as well as for the particular needs of individual learn-
ers. For this reason, I have argued earlier (Anderson 2005) that this 
attribute may be more accurately labelled learning-centred, as opposed 
to learner-centred.
Learner-centred, according to Bransford and colleagues (1999), 
includes awareness of the unique cognitive structures and understand-
ings that learners bring to the learning context. Thus, a teacher makes 
efforts to gain an understanding of students’ prerequisite knowledge, 
including any misconceptions that the learner starts with in their con-
struction of new knowledge. Further, the learning environment respects 
and accommodates the particular cultural attributes, especially the lan-
guage and particular forms of expression that the learner uses to inter-
pret and build knowledge. Learner-centred activities make extensive use 
of diagnostic tools and activities to make visible these pre-existing knowl-
edge structures to both the teacher and the students themselves.
Online learning can present challenges to educators, as the tools 
and opportunities to discover students’ preconceptions and cultural 
perspectives are often limited by bandwidth constraints, which limit the 
users’ view of body language and paralinguistic clues. Some researchers 
argue that these restrictions negatively affect communication efficacy 
(Short, Williams, & Christie,1976). Others argue that the unique char-
acteristics that define online learning (appropriate combinations of 
asynchronous and synchronous voice, text, and video) can actually lead 
to enhanced or hyper communications (Richardson, 2000). For example, 

48	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
we have found evidence of significant social presence in text-based 
­computer conferencing contexts (Eggins & Slade, 1997a; Smolensky, 
Carmondy, & Halcomb, 1990). Nonetheless, it is fair to say that assessing 
student preconditions and cultural prerequisites is often more challeng-
ing in an online learning context, because teachers are less able to 
interact transparently with students – especially in the critical early stages 
of learning community formation. It is for this reason that experienced 
online learning teachers must make time at the commencement of their 
learning interactions to provide incentive and opportunity for students 
to share their understandings, their culture, and the unique aspects of 
themselves. This can be done formally through electronically adminis-
tered surveys and questionnaires, but is often more effectively accom-
plished by virtual icebreakers (Dixon, 2007) and providing opportunities 
for students to introduce themselves and express any issues or concerns 
to the teacher and the class.
The online learning environment is also a unique cultural context 
in itself. Benedikt (1991) argues that cyberspace “has a geography, a 
physics, a nature, and a rule of human law” (pp. 123). Increasingly, 
students come to online learning with preconceptions gathered from 
both formal and informal experience in virtual environments. They 
exercise their mastery of communication norms and tools, some of 
which are not be appropriate to an educational online context. 
Researchers have attempted to quantify students’ proficiency and 
comfort with online environments through use of survey instruments 
that measure learners’ Internet efficacy (Kirby & Boak, 1987). They 
argue that it is not Internet skills alone which determine competency, 
but the users’ strong sense of Internet efficacy that enables them to 
effectively adapt to the requirements of working in this environment. 
Thus, the effective online teacher is constantly probing for learner 
comfort and competence with the intervening technology, and provid-
ing safe environments for learners to increase their sense of Internet 
efficacy. Learner-centred online learning contexts thus are sensitive to 
this cultural overlay that interacts with the technical affordances and 
skill sets acquired in offline contexts.
Knowledge-Centred
Effective learning does not happen in a content vacuum. John McPeck 
(2000) and other critical thinking theorists argue that teaching general 
thinking skills and techniques is useless outside of a particular knowledge 
domain in which they can be grounded. Similarly, Bransford et al. (1999) 

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
49
argue that effective learning is both defined and bounded by the epis-
temology, language, and context of disciplinary thought. Each discipline 
or field of study contains a world view that provides unique ways of 
understanding and talking about knowledge. Students need opportuni-
ties to experience this discourse and the knowledge structures that 
undergird discipline thinking. They also need opportunities to reflect 
upon their own thinking; automacy is a useful and necessary skill for 
expert thinking, but automacy without reflective capacity greatly limits 
learners’ capacity to transfer their knowledge to unfamiliar contexts or 
to develop new knowledge structures.
Online learning neither advantages or disadvantages knowledge-
centred learning in comparison to campus-based learning. As I discuss 
below, however, the Net provides expanded opportunities for learners 
to plunge ever deeper into knowledge resources, providing a near limit-
less means for them to grow their knowledge and find their own way 
around the knowledge of the discipline, benefitting from its expression 
in thousands of formats and contexts. This provision of resources, 
however, can be overwhelming, and the skillful e-teacher needs to provide 
the big-picture scaffolding upon which students can grow their own 
knowledge and discipline-centred discoveries. The recent emergence of 
theories of learning that are based on networked contexts, such as “heu-
tagogy” (Phelps, Hase, & Ellis, 2005) and “connectivism” (Siemens, 
2005), helps us to understand that learning is about making connections 
with ideas, facts, people, and communities. Obviously the Net excels at 
allowing users to both find and utilize these connections.
Assessment-Centred
Bransford et al. (1999) present the necessity for effective learning 
­environments to be assessment-centred. By this term, they do not give 
unqualified support for summative assessments (especially those suppos-
edly used for high stakes accountability), but they look at formative 
evaluation and summative assessment that serve to motivate, inform, 
and provide feedback to both learners and teachers.
Quality online learning provides many opportunities for ­assessment 
– opportunities that involve the teacher, but also ones that exploit the 
influence and expertise of peers and external experts, others that use 
simple and complex machine algorithms to assess student learning, and 
perhaps most importantly, those that encourage learners to reflectively 
assess their own learning. Understanding what is most usefully – rather 
than most easily – assessed is a challenge for online learning designers. 

50	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Development in cognitive learning theories and their application to 
assessment design are helping us to develop assessments that are aligned 
with the subject content and assess cognitive processes, in addition to 
end results. For example, Baxter, Elder, and Glaser (1996) find that 
competent students should be able to provide coherent explanations; 
generate plans for problem solution; implement solution strategies; and 
monitor and adjust their activities. However, when reviewing assessments 
that my own children are subjected to in school and at university, I am 
continually disappointed to note the very high percentage of recall ques-
tions and the lack of strategies that effectively measure the four sets of 
competencies identified by Baxter and others.
Can we do any better in online learning? The diminution of 
opportunities for immediate interaction between learners and teachers 
may reduce opportunities for process assessment. The enhanced com-
munication capacity of online learning, as well as the focus of most adult 
online learning in the real world of work, however, provide good oppor-
tunities to create assessment activities that are project- and workplace-
based, that are constructed collaboratively, that benefit from peer and 
expert review, and that are infused with opportunity and requirement 
for self-assessment.
A danger of assessment-centred learning systems is the potential 
increase in workload demanded of busy online learning teachers. 
Strategies that are designed to provide formative and summative assess-
ment with minimal direct impact on teacher workload are most needed. 
A growing list of tools provide such assessment without increased teacher 
participation. These tools include
•	the use of online computer-marked assessments that extend 
beyond quizzes to simulation exercises, virtual labs, and other 
automated assessments of active student learning;
•	collaborative learning environments that students create to 
­document and assess their own learning in virtual groups;
•	 mechanisms such as online automated tutors that support and scaf-
fold students’ evaluation of their own work and that of their peers;
•	student agents who facilitate and monitor peer activities to allow 
students to informally assess and aide each other;
•	the development of project-based and product-based assessment 
in which artefacts are created and their value is attested to by 
users within the formal learning class or program, as well as those 
lifelong learners spread out on the long tail of the Net (Anderson, 
2004);

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
51
•	use of sophisticated software tools, such as LSA (see http://lsa.
colorado.edu/), or neural networks to machine score even 
­complicated tasks, such as students’ essays (Lee, 2006);
•	informal social networks wherein students can post and reflect 
upon the ideas of others enrolled in the course and beyond 
(Farmer, 2005).
Thus, the challenge of online learning is to provide very high 
quantity and quality of assessment, while maintaining student interest 
and commitment – something that is often best done by developing a 
learning community, to which we turn next.
Community-Centred
The community-centred lens allows us to include the critical social 
­component of learning in our online learning designs. Here we find 
Vygotsky’s (2000) popular notions of “social cognition” relevant, as we 
consider how students can work together in an online learning context 
to collaboratively create new knowledge. These ideas have been expanded 
in Lipman’s (1991) “community of inquiry,” and Etienne Wenger’s 
(2002) ideas of “community of practice,” to show how members of a 
learning community both support and challenge each other, leading to 
effective and relevant knowledge construction. Wilson (1997) has 
described the characteristics of participants in online communities as 
having a shared sense of belonging, trust, expectation of learning, and 
commitment to participate in and contribute to the community.
Although many online learning researchers celebrate the capacity 
to create learning communities at a distance (Byrne, Flood, & Willis, 
1999), others note problems associated with lack of attention and par-
ticipation (Morris & Ogan, 1996), economic restraints (Annand, 1999), 
and an inbuilt resistance among many faculty and institutions to threat-
ening competition from virtual learning environments (Cutler, 1995). 
Ethnographic studies of the Net (Jonassen & Carr, 2000) illustrate how 
the lack of “placedness” and the complications of anonymity attenuate 
different components of community when located in virtual space. In 
short, it may be more challenging than we think to create and sustain 
these communities, and the differences may be more fundamental – dif-
ferences that are linked to lack of placedness and synchronicity in time 
and place, the mere absence of body language, and the development of 
social presence.
I have been struck by the wide variation in expectation of learners 
towards participation in a community of learners. Traditionally, the 

52	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­independent modes of distance education have attracted students who 
value the freedom and independence of time and place. Contrary to 
popular belief, the major motivation for enrolment in distance educa-
tion is not physical access per se, but the temporal freedom that allows 
students to move through a course of studies at a time and pace of their 
choice. Participation in a community of learners almost inevitably places 
constraints upon this independence – even when the pressure of syn-
chronous connection is eliminated by use of asynchronous communica-
tions tools. The demands of a learning-centred context at times may 
force us to modify the proscriptive participation in communities of learn-
ing, even though we may have evidence that such participation will likely 
advance knowledge creation and attention. The flexibility of virtual com-
munities allows for more universal participation, but a single environ-
ment that responds to all students’ needs does not exist. Thus, the need 
for variations that accommodate the diverse needs of learners and teach-
ers at different stages of their life cycles is necessary. Finally, we are seeing 
the proliferation of new types of communities and networks that exist 
far from the formal constraints of educational communities. These social 
software networks, such as mySpace, flickr, SecondLife, and Facebook, support 
millions of participants in the creation of friendship and sharing net-
works. We are only beginning to understand how these environments 
can be useful for formal education, or if they truly are “myspaces” and 
not institutional or school spaces.
All of these potential barriers and opportunities argue for a theory 
of online learning that accommodates but does not prescribe any par-
ticular format of time and place “boundedness,” and that allows for appro-
priate substitution of independent and community-centred learning. To 
this requirement, we add the need for a theory of e-learning to be learning-
centred, provide a wide variety of authentic assessment opportunities, 
and be attuned to – and grounded in – existing knowledge contexts.
Affordances of the Net
Effective educational theory must address the affordances and the limi-
tations of the context for which it is designed (McDonald, 1998). The 
World Wide Web is an extremely multifaceted technology that provides 
a large – and seemingly ever-growing – set of communication and infor-
mation management tools which can be harnessed for education 

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
53
­provision. Similarly, it suffers from a set of constraints that are also briefly 
overviewed in this section.
Online learning, as a subset of all distance education, has always 
been concerned with provision of access to educational experience that 
is, at the least, more flexible in time and in space than campus-based 
education. Access to the Web is now nearly ubiquitous in developed coun-
tries. In Canada, 2005 data shows that 68% of the population are regular 
Internet users – figures that are undoubtedly higher today, and much 
higher again among younger users and students. This high percentage 
of users would likely include well over 95% of those interested in taking 
a formal education course. Access to the Web is primarily through home 
or workplace machines, followed by computer placements in public librar-
ies, Internet cafes, and by personal wireless devices. In sum, access is 
non-problematic for the vast majority living in developed countries. Access 
is also faster and more convenient, as demonstrated by annual increases 
of 33% in broadband connectivity in the thirty-member Organisation for 
Economic and Cooperative Development countries between 2005 and 
2006 (OECD, 2006). I have also been surprised by access availability in 
developing countries, as exemplified by numerous Internet cafes in nearly 
every major city of the world. Access is still problematic for those with a 
variety of physical handicaps. However, in comparison to books or video 
media, the Web provides much greater quality and quantity of access to 
nearly all citizens – with or without physical disabilities.
Not only is access to technology increasing, but access to an ever-
growing body of content is also increasing. The number of open-access 
scholarly journals (see http://www.doaj .org/); educational objects (see 
www.merlot.org); educational discussion lists and communities (see 
http://lists.topica.com/dir/?cid=4); online courses and educational 
resources (see http://www.oercommons.org/); and general references 
to millions of pages of commercial, educational, and cultural content 
(see www.google.com) is large and increasing at an exponential rate. 
Thus, online learning theory must acknowledge the change from an era 
of shortage and restriction to an era of abundant content; content 
resources are now so large that filtering and reducing choice is as impor-
tant as provision of sufficient content itself.
The Web is quickly changing from a context defined by text 
content and interactions to one in which all forms of media are sup-
ported. Much of the early work on instructional use of the Internet 
(Smith, Feld, & Franz, 1992) assumed that asynchronous text-based 

54	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­interaction defined the medium (Short, Williams, & Christie, 1976), 
thus techniques were developed to maximize interaction using this rela-
tively lean media. We are now entering an era, however, where streaming 
video, video, and audio-conferencing, pod and videocasts, and immersive 
worlds are readily available for educational use. Thus, online learning 
theory needs to help educators decide which of the numerous techno-
logical options is best suited for their application.
The Web’s inbuilt capacity for hyperlinking has been associated 
with the way in which human knowledge is stored in mental schema and 
the subsequent development of mental structures (Jonassen, 1992). 
Further, the capacity for students to create their own learning paths 
through content that is formatted with hypertexts links is congruent with 
constructivist instructional design theory, which stresses individual 
­discovery and construction of knowledge (Shank, 1993).
Finally, the growing ease with which content can be updated 
and revised, both manually and through use of autonomous agent 
technology, is making online learning content much more responsive 
and potentially more current than content developed for any other 
media. The explosion of web blogs (Richardson, 2006) and user-
friendly course content management systems built into web delivery 
systems, such as Blackboard® and Moodle, are creating environments in 
which teachers and learners can easily create and update their course 
contents without the aide of programmers or designers. Naturally, this 
ease of creation and revision leads to potential for error and less than 
professional standard output; however, educators who are anxious to 
retain control of their educational content and context welcome this 
openness and freedom.
Education, however, is not only about access to content. The 
­greatest affordance of the Web for education use is the profound and 
multifaceted increase in communication and interaction capability. The 
next section discusses this affordance in greater detail.
Role of Interaction in Online Learning
Interaction has long been a defining and critical component of the edu-
cational process and context (Anderson, 2003b). However, the term itself 
is used in many ways to describe many different types of exchanges between 
different actors and objects associated with teaching and learning.

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
55
Defining and Valuing Interaction in Online Learning
It is surprisingly difficult to find a clear and precise definition of this 
multifaceted concept in the education literature. In popular culture, 
the use of this term to describe everything from toasters to video games 
to holiday resorts further confuses precise definition. I have discussed 
these varying definitions at greater length in an earlier document 
(Anderson 2003a), and so I will confine discussion here to an acceptance 
of Wagner’s (2001) definition as “reciprocal events that require at least 
two objects and two actions. Interactions occur when these objects and 
events mutually influence one another” (p. 8).
Interaction – or its derivative term interactivity – serves a variety 
of functions in the educational transaction. Sims (1999) lists these func-
tions as allowing for learner control, facilitating program adaptation 
based on learner input, allowing various forms of participation and com-
munication, and aiding meaningful learning. In addition, interactivity 
is fundamental to creating the learning communities espoused by Lipman 
(1991), Wenger (2002), and other influential educational theorists who 
focus on the critical role of community in learning. Finally, the value of 
another person’s perspective, usually gained through interaction, is a 
key learning component in constructivist learning theories (Shank, 
1993), and in inducing mindfulness in learners (Visser, 2000).
Interaction has always been valued in distance education – even 
in its most traditional, independent study format. Holmberg (1981) 
argues for the superiority of individualized interaction between student 
and tutor when supported by written postal correspondence or via real-
time telephone tutoring. Holmberg also introduces us to the idea of 
simulated interaction, which defines the writing style appropriate for 
independent study models of distance education programming, and that 
he refers to as “guided didactic interaction.” Garrison and Shale (1990) 
define all forms of education – including that delivered at a distance – as 
essentially interactions between content, students, and teachers. 
Laurillard (1997) constructs a conversational model of learning in which 
interaction between students and teachers plays the critical role.
As long ago as 1916, John Dewey’s writings refer to interaction as 
the defining component of the educational process that occurs when 
students transform the inert information passed to them from another 
and construct it into knowledge with personal application and value 
(Esposito, 2003). Bates (1991) argues that interactivity should be the 

56	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
primary criteria for selecting media for educational delivery. Thus, there 
is a long history of study and recognition of the critical role of inter­action 
in supporting and even defining education.
The Web affords interaction in many modalities. In Figure 1, we 
see the common forms of interaction media used in distance education 
charted against their capacity to support independence (of time and 
place) and interaction. The higher and richer the form of communica-
tion, the more restrictions are placed upon independence. Figure 2 
shows the capability of the Web to support these modalities. As can be 
seen, nearly all forms of mediated educational interaction are now sup-
ported, and if one adds the use of the Web to enhance classroom-based 
education, the Web supports them all. Thus, describing the character-
istics of online learning in general is usually too large a domain for 
meaningful discussion until one specifies the particular modality of inter-
action in use.
Interaction can also be delineated in terms of the actors partici-
pating in the interaction. Michael Moore first discussed the three most 
common forms of interaction in distance education – student-student; 
student-teacher and student-content (Christenson & Menzel, 1998). 
These interactions were expanded by Anderson and Garrison (1988) to 
include teacher-teacher, teacher-content, and content-content interac-
tion. In 2002, I developed an equivalency theorem describing the capac-
ity to substitute one form of interaction for another, based upon cost 
Educational media
Interaction
Face-to-face
Video conferencing
Audio conferencing
Independence of time and distance
Computer conferencing
Correspondence
Radio
Television
CAI
Figure 1.  Attributes of educational media

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
57
and accessibility factors (Anderson, 2003b). Figure 3 illustrates these six 
types of educational interaction; they are also briefly described below.
Student-Student Interaction
Student-student interaction has traditionally been downplayed as a 
requirement of distance education, due to constraints on availability of 
technology and an earlier bias amongst distance education theorists 
towards individualized learning (Andersen et al., 1981). Modern con-
structivist and connectivist theorists stress the value of peer-to-peer inter-
action in investigating and developing multiple perspectives. Work on 
collaborative learning illustrates potential gains in cognitive learning 
tasks, as well as increasing completion rates and acquisition of critical 
social skills in education (Kirby & Boak, 1987). Work related to peer 
tutoring, by Resnick (1996) and others, illustrates the benefits that can 
result for both tutor and learner from a variety of forms of “reciprocal 
teaching.” In our work, we found that student-led teams can result in 
higher levels of cognitive, social, and even teaching presence, than those 
led by teachers (Rourke & Anderson, 2002). Finally, peer interaction is 
critical to the development of communities of learning (Rumble, 1999; 
Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002), that allow learners to develop 
interpersonal skills and investigate tacit bodies of knowledge shared by 
community members as well as the formal curriculum of studies (Seely, 
Brown, & Hagel, 2005).
Educational media
Interaction
Face-to-face
Video conferencing
Audio conferencing
Independence of time and distance
Computer conferencing
Web based
learning
Correspondence
Radio
Television
CAI
Figure 2.  Educational media subsumed by the Web

58	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Student-Content Interaction
Student-content interaction has always been a major component of 
formal education, even in the forms of library study or reading textbooks 
in face-to-face instruction. The Web supports these more passive forms 
of student-content interaction, but also provides a host of new oppor-
tunities, such as immersion in micro-environments, exercises in virtual 
labs, and online computer-assisted learning tutorials. The development 
of interactive content that responds to student behaviour and attributes 
(often referred to as a student model) allows for customization of 
content in unprecedented ways to support the individual needs of each 
unique learner. Eklund (1995) lists some potential advantages of such 
approaches to
•	provide an online help facility, or an intelligent help, if the user 
is modelled and their path is traced through the information 
space;
•	use an adaptive interface, based on several stereotypical user 
classes, that modifies the environment to suit the individual 
user;
•	provide adaptive advice and model users’ acquisition of knowledge 
through their use of the environment (including navigational use, 
L
e
a
r
n
e
r
-
t
e
a
c
h
e
r
L
e
a
r
n
e
r
-
c
o
n
t
e
n
t
T
e
a
c
h
e
r
-
c
o
n
t
e
n
t
L
e
a
r
n
e
r
-
l
e
a
r
n
e
r
C
o
n
t
e
n
t
-
c
o
n
t
e
n
t
T
e
a
c
h
e
r
-
t
e
a
c
h
e
r
LEARNER
CONTENT
TEACHER
Figure 3.  Educational interactions

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
59
answers to questions, help requested), to intelligently suggest a 
preferred individualized path through the knowledge base.
To these must be added the capacity for immediate feedback: not only 
formal learning guidance, but also just-in-time learning assistance pro-
vided by job aides and other forms of performance support tools.
Student-Teacher Interaction
Student-teacher interaction is supported in online learning in a large 
number of varieties and formats that include asynchronous and synchro-
nous communication in text, audio, and video communications. The 
volume of such communication often overwhelms many new teachers. 
Moreover, students often hold unrealistic expectations for immediate 
responses from their teachers. Emerging best practices now recognize 
the flow of communication in online courses to be much less “teacher-
centric” than in traditional classroom discourse; teachers do not have 
to respond immediately to every student question and comment, and 
playing a less dominant role in class discourse can actually support the 
emergence of greater learner commitment and participation.
Teacher-Content Interaction
Teacher-content interaction focuses on the teacher’s creation of content: 
learning objects as well as units of study, complete courses, and associ-
ated learning activities. Teacher-content interaction allows teachers to 
continuously monitor, construct, and update course content resources 
and activities.
Teacher-Teacher Interaction
Teacher-teacher interaction creates the opportunity to sustain teachers 
with professional development and support through supportive com-
munities. These interactions encourage teachers to take advantage of 
knowledge growth and discovery, in their own subject area and within 
the scholarly community of teachers.
Content-Content Interaction
Content-content interaction is a new and developing mode of educational 
interaction wherein content is programmed to interact with other auto-
mated information sources to constantly refresh itself and acquire new 
capabilities, through updates and interaction with other content sources. 
For example, a weather tutorial may take its data from current meteo-
rological servers, creating a learning context that is up to date and 

60	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­relevant to the students’ learning context. Content-content interaction 
also provides a means to assert control of rights and facilitate tracking 
content use by diverse groups of learners and teachers. The recent devel-
opment of tagging (both “folksonomie” and formal ontological systems) 
and syndication tools, such as RSS Atom, allow for automated machine 
harvesting, distribution, and selection of content. Such automation allows 
for the effective harvesting and selection of content-by-content.
Having exhausted all the pair-wise permeations of student/
content/teacher above, I thought I had covered all the bases. I was 
wrong. I was surprised to read Jon Dron’s (2007) paper, in which he 
argues that the group itself is an educational resource with characteristics 
that are different than the bounded interaction among two or more 
learners registered in a course. Dron’s groups include responses from 
strangers retrieved from services like Google Answers, referrals from net-
works of friends and friends of friends, such as those supported in 
MySpace and other social software sites, and discussions in communities 
of avatars clustered in virtual spaces in immersive environments. These 
groups support far more diverse and often less reliable interactions. 
Nonetheless, they are far more generative than the discourse that typi-
cally merges from interaction among a bounded class of students and 
teachers. Thus, learner-group and teacher-group interaction opens the 
online classroom door to viewpoints, resources, and insights gathered 
from throughout the Net.
A Model of e-Learning
A first step in theory building often consists of model building, in which 
the major variables are displayed and the relationships between the 
variables schematized. In Figure 4, the two major modes of online learn-
ing (collaborative, community-of-inquiry models, and independent study 
models) are illustrated.
The model illustrates the two major human actors: learners and 
teachers, and their interactions with each other and with the content. 
Learners can, of course, interact directly and spontaneously with any 
content that they find, in multiple formats and especially on the Web; 
however, many choose to have their learning sequenced, directed, and 
credentialed through the assistance of a teacher in a formal education 
system. This interaction can take place within a community of inquiry, 
using a variety of net-based synchronous and asynchronous (video, audio, 

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
61
computer conferencing, chats, or virtual world) interactions. These envi-
ronments are particularly rich and allow for the learning of social skills, 
collaboration, and the development of personal relationships among 
participants. The community, however, binds learners in time, and thus 
forces regular sessions – or at least group-paced learning. Community 
models are also generally more expensive simply because they cannot 
scale up to serve larger numbers of students. The second model of learn-
ing (on the right) illustrates the structured learning tools associated with 
independent learning.

Figure 4.  A model of online learning

62	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Common tools used in this mode include computer-assisted 
­learning tutorials, drills, and simulations. Virtual labs, where students 
complete simulations of lab experiments and have access to sophisti-
cated search and retrieval tools, are also becoming common tools. Texts 
in print – and now distributed and read online – have long served as 
the basis for conveying teacher interpretations, insights, and knowledge 
in independent study. It should also be emphasized, however, that 
although engaged in independent study, the student is not alone. Often 
colleagues in the workplace, peers located locally or distributed across 
the Net, formal and informal groups, and family members, have been 
significant sources of support and assistance to independent study learn-
ers (Potter, 1998). Emerging social software solutions also allow students 
to meet and develop common interests, such as forming study-buddy 
or study-group relationships or engaging in cooperative course-related 
activities – even while engaged in independent study programs 
(Anderson, 2005). Finally, as noted earlier, Dron (2007) argues that 
knowledge can be created through many knowledge networks and 
through collective activities – the wisdom of crowds – that are supported 
and aggregated on the Net.
Using this online model then requires decision making on the 
part of teachers and designers. A key deciding factor is based on the 
nature of the learning that is prescribed. Marc Prensky (2001) argues 
that different learning outcomes are best learned through particular 
learning activities. Prensky asks not how students learn, but more specifi-
cally how do they learn what? 
Prensky postulates that in general, we all learn
•	behaviours through imitation, feedback, and practice
•	creativity through playing
•	facts through association, drill, memory, and questions
•	judgment through reviewing cases, asking questions, making 
choices, receiving feedback, and coaching
•	language through imitation, practice, and immersion
•	observation through viewing examples and feedback
•	procedures through imitation and practice
•	processes through system analysis, deconstruction, and practice
•	systems through discovering principles and graduated tasks
•	reasoning through puzzles, problems, and examples
•	skills (physical or mental) through imitation, feedback, ­continuous 
practice, and increasing challenge

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
63
•	speeches or performance roles by memorization, practice, and 
coaching
•	theories through logic, explanation, and questioning (156)1
Prensky also argues that forms and styles of games can be used 
online or off-line to effectively facilitate learning each of these skills. 
I would argue that each of these activities can be accomplished 
through e-learning, using some combination of online community activi-
ties and computer-supported independent study activities. By tracing 
the interactions expected and provided for learners through the model 
(see Figure 4), one can plan for and ensure that an appropriate mix of 
student, teacher, and content interaction is uniquely designed for each 
learning outcome.
Online Learning and the Semantic Web
We have entered an era in which the Web has expanded from a medium 
to display content created by professional designers and publishers, to 
one where commercial content is augmented, annotated, enhanced, 
and, in some cases, displaced by content created by the end users them-
selves. Increasingly, ways are being developed to have content harvested, 
filtered, repurposed, and transformed, through the manipulation of 
both human and automated processes. This enhanced capacity is based 
on two emerging network technologies. The first is the set of formal 
technologies prominently championed by the original designer of the 
Web, Tim Berners-Lee, and named the Semantic Web (Berners-Lee, 
1999). This technology is used to annotate information using formal 
taxonomies so that the information becomes aware of itself. For example, 
a data heading might be “author’s telephone number,” rather than 
simply information about the font size and colour in which the informa-
tion is to be displayed – this is what once defined the HTML capacity 
of the original World Wide Web. The Semantic Web, on the other hand, 
allows the defining of the label in taxonomy such that autonomous 
agents and humans could determine that this set of numbers corre-
sponded to a telephone number, and that in turn, this telephone 
number is related to an individual or an organization. Given this addi-
tional information, autonomous agent programs can then sort, query, 
format, and even make calculations and inferences based upon the 
additional information.

64	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
The second technology is the development of social technologies 
that add a self-organizational capacity to the Net, through explicit tagging 
by users and through the tracking of usage. This data is then used to 
search, retrieve, reconfigure, and filter information on the Net, a capabil-
ity that has application for many educational, entertainment, and com-
mercial applications. For example, the CiteULike site (see http://www.
citeulike.org/) allows users to upload, annotate, and rate scholarly articles 
they have read. The resulting database can be used by the individual 
contributor as an aide in their scholarly production, but more importantly, 
the database of articles can be searched (and further annotated and evalu-
ated) by others to generate a collective assessment of the article.
In the first edition of this chapter, I perhaps over-optimistically 
championed the emergence of the Semantic Web. Though work con-
tinues in the formal classification and annotation of content, there have 
been significant problems noted with the near impossible challenges of 
formally describing all data on the Web using standardized terminology 
and language (McCool, 2006). In response, advocates of the Semantic 
Web are turning to a second technology of user-tagged content, infor-
mally described by emergent folksonomies to proclaim a Semantic 
Web 2.0 (Spivack, 2007).
The vision of the Semantic Web includes extensive use of autono-
mous agents to support and facilitate learning. Student-alert agents are 
used for intelligent searching of relevant content (see Google Alerts at 
http://www.google.com/alerts): secretaries booking and arranging for 
collaborative meetings (see http://meetingwizard.com); reminding stu-
dents of deadlines (see http://www.calendarhub.com); and negotiating 
with the agents of other students for assistance, collaboration, or social-
ization (see http://ihelp.usask.ca/). Teacher agents are used to provide 
remedial tuition, to assist with record keeping and monitoring of student 
progress, and even to mark and respond to student communications. 
The content itself can be augmented with agents that control rights to 
its use, automatically update content, and track means by which the 
content is used by students (Yu, Brown, & Billett, 2007; Feng, Shaw, Kim, 
& Hovy, 2006; Clements & Nastassi, 1988).
The Semantic Web also supports the reuse and adaptation of 
content through support for the construction, distribution, and retrieval 
of digitized content that is formatted and formally described, using 
semantic web technologies (Eggins & Slade, 1997b). The emergence of 
educational modelling languages (Koper, 2001) allow educators to for-
mally describe, in the language accessible on the Semantic Web, not 

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
65
only the content but also the activities and context or environment of 
learning experiences. Together, these affordances of the Semantic Web 
allow us to envision an e-learning environment that is rich with student-
student, student-content, and student-teacher interactions that are 
affordable, reusable, and facilitated by active agents (see Figure 5).
Towards a Theory of Online Learning
The Web offers a host of very powerful affordances to educators. Existing 
and older education provision have been defined by the techniques and 
Figure 5.  Educational interactions on the Semantic Web

66	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
How People  
Learn Framework  
(Bransford et al.)
Affordances of the Current Web
Affordances of the Semantic Web 2.0
Learner-Centred
Capacity to support individualized and  
community-centred learning activities
Content that changes in response to individualized 
and group learner models.
Content that is created, augmented and annotated 
through student and teacher use
Knowledge-Centred
Direct access to vast libraries of content 
and learning activities organized from  
a variety of discipline perspectives
Agents and user referrals for selecting, personalizing, 
and reusing content.
Social augmentation and book marking by  
communities of experts, practitioners, and other  
students filter and qualify information so as  
to transform to knowledge
Community-Centred
Asynchronous and synchronous;  
collaborative and individual interactions 
in many formats
Agents and content management systems for  
translating, reformatting, time shifting, monitoring, 
and summarizing community interactions.  
Communities tagging content and issue of interest 
and value
Assessment-Centred
Multiple time and place shifted  
opportunities for formative and  
summative assessment by self, peers,  
and teachers
Agents for assessing, critiquing, providing ‘just-in-time 
feedback’
Table 1.  Affordances of Network environment and the attributes of the “way people learn.”

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
67
tools designed to overcome limitations and exploit the affordances of 
earlier media. For example, the earliest universities were built around 
medieval libraries that afforded access to rare handwritten books and 
manuscripts. Early forms of distance education were constructed using 
text and the delayed forms of asynchronous communications afforded 
by mail services. Campus-based education systems are constructed around 
physical buildings that afford meeting and lecture spaces for teachers 
and groups of students. The Web now provides near-ubiquitous access 
to quantities of content that are many orders of magnitude larger than 
that provided in any other medium.
From earlier discussions, we see that the Web affords a vast 
­potential for education delivery that generally subsumes almost all the 
modes and means of education delivery previously used – with, perhaps, 
the exception of rich face-to-face interaction in formal classrooms, 
though even its supremacy is now being challenged by immersive envi-
ronments such as Activeworlds (see http://www.activeworlds.com) and 
SecondLife (see http://secondlife.com/). We have also seen that the most 
critical component of formal education consists of interaction between 
and among multiple actors – human and agents included.
Thus, I conclude this chapter with an overview of a theory of 
online learning interaction which suggests that the various forms  
of student interaction can be substituted for each other, depending upon 
costs, content, learning objectives, convenience, technology used, and 
time availability. The substitutions do not decrease the quality of learn-
ing that results. More formally: Sufficient levels of deep and meaningful 
learning can be developed as long as one of the three forms of interac-
tion (student–teacher; student-student; student-content) is at very high 
levels. The other two may be offered at minimal levels or even eliminated 
without degrading the educational experience. (Anderson 2003b)
The challenge for teachers and course developers working in an 
online learning context, therefore, is to construct a learning environ-
ment that is simultaneously learner-centred, content-centred, commu-
nity-­centred, and assessment-centred. There is no single best media of 
online learning, nor is there a formulaic specification that dictates the 
type of interaction most conducive to learning in all domains and with 
all learners. Rather, teachers must learn to develop their skills so that 
they can respond to both existing and emergent student and curriculum 
needs. Teacher can do this by developing a repertoire of online learn-
ing activities that are adaptable to diverse contextual and student needs. 
Table 1 illustrates how the affordances of these emerging technologies 

68	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
can be directed to create the environment most supportive of how 
people learn.
Conclusion
This discussion highlights the wide and diverse forms of teaching and 
learning that can be supported on the Web today, and the realization 
that the educational Semantic Web 2.0 will further enhance the possibili-
ties and affordances of the Web, thus making it premature to define a 
particular theory of online learning. What we can expect, however, is 
that online learning – like all forms of quality learning – will be knowl-
edge-, community-, assessment-, and learner-centred. Online learning 
will enhance the critical function of interaction in education, in multiple 
formats and styles, among all the participants. These interactions will be 
supported by autonomous agents and the aggregated contribution of 
other users. The task of the online course designer and teacher now, 
therefore, is to choose, adapt, and perfect, through feedback, assessment, 
and reflection, educational activities that maximize the affordances of 
the Web. In doing so, they will create learning-, knowledge-, assessment-, 
and community-centred educational experiences that will result in high 
levels of learning by all participants. Integration of the new tools and 
affordances of the educational Semantic Web and emerging social 
­software solutions will further enhance and make more accessible and 
affordable quality online learning experiences.
Our challenge as theory builders and online practitioners, there-
fore, is to delineate which modes, methods, activities, and actors are 
most cost- and learning-effective in creating and distributing quality 
e-learning programs. The creation of a model is often the first step towards 
theory creation. The model presented illustrates most of the key variables 
that interact to create online educational experiences and contexts. Our 
next step is to theorize and measure the direction and magnitude of the 
effect of each variable on relevant outcome variables, including learning, 
cost, completion, and satisfaction. The models presented in this chapter 
do not yet constitute a theory of online learning per se, but hopefully 
they will help us to deepen our understanding of this complex educa-
tional context, and lead us to hypotheses, predictions, and most impor-
tantly, improvements in our professional practice. Hopefully, the model 
and discussion in this and other chapters in this book will lead us towards 
a robust and comprehensive theory of online learning.

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
69
Notes
1.	 I am grateful to Joo Khim Tan (email JooKhim@np.edu.sg) for making 
this link between the model and the work of Marc Prensky in a 
­discussion on ITForum in September, 2002.
References
Anderson, T. (2003a). Modes of interaction in distance education: Recent 
developments and research questions. In M. Moore & W. Anderson 
(Eds.), Handbook of distance education. (pp. 129–144). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum.
Anderson, T. (2003b). Getting the mix right: An updated and theoreti-
cal rational for interaction. International Review of Research in Open and 
Distance Learning, 4(2). Retrieved August 27, 2007, from http://www.
irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/149/230 
Anderson, T. (2004). Student services in a networked world. In J. ­Brindley, 
C. Walti, & O. Zawacki-Richter (Eds.), Learner support in open, distance 
and online learning environments. Oldenburg, Germany: Bibliotheks-und 
Informationssystem der Universität Oldenburg.
Anderson, T. (2005). Distance Learning – Social software’s killer app? 
Proceedings of the Open & Distance Learning Association (ODLAA) of 
­Australia. Adelaide: ODLAA. Retrieved August 27, 2007, from http://
www.unisa.edu.au/odlaaconference/PPDF2s/13%20odlaa%20-%20 
Anderson.pdf 
Anderson, T., & Garrison, D.R. (1998). Learning in a networked world: 
New roles and responsibilities. In C. Gibson (Ed.), Distance learners in 
higher education (pp. 97–112). Madison, WI: Atwood.
Andersen, T., Norton, J.R., & Nussbaum, J. (1981). Three investigations 
exploring relationships between perceived teacher communication 
behaviours and student learning. Communication Education, 30,  
377–392.
Annand, D. (1999). The problem of computer conferencing for distance-
based universities. Open Learning, 14(3), 47–52.
Bates, A. (1991). Interactivity as a criterion for media selection in ­distance 
education. Never Too Far, 16, 5–9.

70	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Baxter, G. P., Elder, A. D., & Glaser, R. (1996). Knowledge-based cogni-
tion and performance assessment in the science classroom. Educational 
Psychologist, 31(2), 133–140.
Benedikt, M. (1991). Cyberspace: Some proposals. In M. Benedikt (Ed.), 
Cyberspace: First steps (pp. 119–224). Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Berners-Lee, T. (1999). Weaving the Web: The original design and ultimate 
destiny of the World Wide Web by its inventor. San Francisco: Harper.
Bransford, J., Brown, A., & Cocking, R. (1999). How people learn: Brain, 
mind experience and school. Washington, DC: National Research 
Council. Retrieved August 27, 2007, from http://www.nap.edu/html/
howpeople1/
Byrne, M., Flood, B., & Willis, P. (1999). Approaches to learning of Irish 
students studying accounting. Dublin City University Business School 
Research Paper Series, 34. Retrieved August 27, 2007, http://www.dcu.
ie/business/research_papers/no36.html
Christenson, L., & Menzel, K. (1998). The linear relationship between 
student reports of teacher immediacy behaviors and perceptions of 
state motivation, and of cognitive, affective, and behavioral learning. 
Communication Education, 47(1), 82–90.
CiteULike. (n.d.). CiteULike homepage. Retrieved August 28, 2007, from 
http://www.citeulike.org/ 
Clements, D., & Nastassi, B. (1988). Social and cognitive inter­actions in 
educational computer environments. American Educational Research 
Journal, 25(1), 87–106.
Cutler, R. (1995). Distributed presence and community in cyberspace. 
Interpersonal Computing and Technology: An Electronic Journal for the 21st 
Century, 3(2), 12–32. Retrieved August 27, 2007, from http://www.
helsinki.fi/science/optek/1995/n2/cutler.txt
Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and Education. New York: Macmillan.
Dixon, J. (2007). Breaking the ice: Supporting collaboration and the 
development of community online. Canadian Journal of Learning and 
Technology, 32(2). Retrieved August 27, 2007, from http://www.cjlt.
ca/content/vol32.2/dixon.html
DOAJ. (n.d.). Directory of Open Access Journals (DOAJ) web site. Retrieved 
August 15, 2007, from http://www.doaj.org/
Dron, J. (2007). Control and constraint in e-learning: Choosing when to choose. 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Pub.
Eggins, S., & Slade, D. (1997a). Analyzing casual conversation. Washington, 
DC: Cassell.

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
71
Eggins, S., & Slade, D. (1997b). Approaches to analyzing casual conver-
sation. In S. Eggins & D. Slade (Eds.), Analyzing casual conversation 
(pp. 23–66). Washington, DC: Cassell.
Eklund, J. (1995). Cognitive models for structuring hypermedia and implica-
tions for learning from the World Wide Web. Retrieved Feb. 2008, from 
http://ausweb.scu.edu.au/ aw95/hypertext/eklund/
Esposito, J. (2003). The processed book. First Monday, 8(3). Retrieved 
August 15, 2007, from http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue8_3/
esposito/index.html
Farmer, J. (2005). Communication dynamics: Discussion boards, weblogs, 
and the development of communities of inquiry in online learning 
environments. James Farmer’s BlogSavvy blog. Retrieved August 15, 2007, 
from http://www.commoncraft.com/james-farmers-­blogsavvy
Feng, D., Shaw, E., Kim, J., & Hovy., E (2006). An intelligent discussion-
bot for answering student queries in threaded discussions. Paper pre-
sented at the International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces  
(IUI-2006. Sydney, Australia.
Garrison, D. R., & Shale, D. (1990). A new framework and perspective. 
In D. R. Garrison & D. Shale (Eds.), Education at a distance: From issues 
to practice (pp. 123–133). Malabar, FL: Robert E. Krieger.
Google. (n.d.). Google search engine. Retrieved August 15, 2007, from 
http://www.google.com 
Google Answers. (n.d.). Google Answers homepage. Retrieved August 28, 
2007, from http://answers.google.com/answers/
Herrington, J., & Oliver, R. (1999). Using situated learning and multi-
media to investigate higher-order thinking. Journal of Interactive Learn-
ing Research 10(1), 3–24.
Holmberg, B. (1989). Theory and practice of distance education. London: 
Routledge.
Jonassen, D. (1992). Designing hypertext for learning. In E. Scanlon & 
T. O’Shea (Eds.), New directions in educational technology (pp. 123–130). 
Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
Jonassen, D., & Carr, C. (2000). Mindtools affording multiple knowledge 
representations for learning. In S. Lajoie (Ed.), Computers as cognitive 
tools: No more walls (pp. 65–96). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Kirby, D., & Boak, C. (1987). Developing a system for audio-teleconfer-
encing analysis. Journal of Distance Education, 2 (2), 31–42.
Koper, R. (2001). Modeling units of study from a pedagogical perspec-
tive: The pedagogical meta-model behind EML. In R. Koper (Ed.), 

72	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Modeling units of study from a pedagogical perspective: The pedagogical ­ 
meta-model behind EML. Heerlen: Open University of the Netherlands. 
Retrieved August 28, 2007, from http://dspace.ou.nl/bitstream/1820/ 
36/1/Pedagogical+metamodel +behind+EMLv2.pdf 
Laurillard, D. (1997). Rethinking university teaching: A framework for the 
effective use of educational technology. London: Routledge.
Lee, A. (2006). Learning and transfer in two web-based and distance 
applications. Web-based learning: Theory, research and practice. In H. O’Neil 
& R. Perez (Eds.), Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Lipman, M. (1991). Thinking in Education. Cambridge: Cambridge 
­University Press.
McCool, R. (2006). Rethinking the Semantic Web. IEEE Internet Comput-
ing, 10(1), 93–96.
McCormick, N., &McCormick. J. (1992). Computer friends and foes: 
Content of undergraduates’ electronic mail. Computers in Human 
­Behavior, 8(4), 379–405.
McDonald, J. (1998). Interpersonal group dynamics and development 
in computer conferencing: The rest of the story. American Journal of 
Distance Education, 12(1), 7–25.
McPeck, J. (1990). Teaching critical thinking. New York: Routledge.
MERLOT. (n.d.). Multimedia Educational Resource for Learning Online 
­Technology (MERLOT) homepage. Retrieved August 15, 2007, from http://
www.merlot.org/merlot/index.htm 
Morris, M., & Ogan, C. (1996). The Internet as mass medium. Journal 
of Computer Mediated Communications, 4(1), 39–50.
MySpace. (n.d.). MySpace homepage. Retrieved August 28, 2007, from 
http://www.myspace.com/
OECD. (2006). Organisation for Economic and Cooperative Development 2006 
factbook. Retrieved August 15, 2007, from http://lysander.sourceoecd.
org/vl=8150559/cl=19/nw=1/rpsv/fact2006/
Opencontent.org. (n.d.). Opencontent.org homepage. August 15, 2007, from 
http://opencontent.org/
Phelps, R., Hase, S., & Ellis, A. (2005). Competency, capability, ­complexity 
and computers: Exploring a new model for conceptualising end-user 
computer education. British Journal of Educational Technology, 36(1), 
67–85.
Potter, J. (1998). Beyond access: Student perspective on support service 
needs in distance education. The Canadian Journal of University Continu-
ing Education, 24(1), 59–82.
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital game-based learning. New York: McGraw-Hill.

Towards a Theory of Online Learning	
73
Resnick, M. (1996). Distributed constructivism. Proceedings of the Interna-
tional Conference on the Learning Sciences Association for the Advancement 
of Computing in Education. Chicago: Northwestern University.
Richardson, J. (2000). Researching student learning: Approaches to studying 
in campus-based and distance education. Buckingham, UK: Open Univer-
sity Press.
Richardson, W. (2006). Blogs, wikis, podcasts and other powerful Web tools 
for classrooms. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Rourke, L., & Anderson, T. (2002). Using peer teams to lead online discus-
sions. Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 1. Retrieved August 15, 2007, 
from http://www-jime.open.ac.uk/2002/1/rourke-anderson-02-1.pdf 
Rumble, G. (1999). Cost analysis of distance learning. Performance Improve-
ment Quarterly, 12(2), 122–137.
Seely Brown, J., & Hagel, J. (2005, April). IT platforms for business 
innovation. Milestone Group. Retrieved August 15, 2007, from http://
www.milestone-group.com/news/05_04/seely-hagel.htm
Shank, G. (1993). Abductive multiloguing: The semiotic dynamics of 
navigating the Net. The Arachnet Electronic Journal on Virtual Culture, 
1(1). Retrieved August 15, 2007, from http://infomotions.com/serials/
aejvc/aejvc-v1n01-shank-abductive.txt
Short, J., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social psychology of telecom-
munications. Toronto: John Wiley and Sons.
Siemens, G. (2005). A learning theory for the digital age. Instructional 
Technology and Distance Education, 2(1), 3–10.
Sims, R. (1999). Interactivity on stage: Strategies for learner-designer 
communication. Australian Journal of Educational Technology, 15(3), 
257–272.
Smith, C., Feld, S., & Franz, C. (1992). Methodological considerations: 
Steps in research employing content analysis systems. In C. Smith 
(Ed.), Motivation and personality: Handbook of thematic content analysis 
(pp. 515–535). New York: Cambridge University Press.
Smolensky, M., Carmondy, M., & Halcomb, C. (1990). The influence of 
task type, group structure and extraversion on uninhibited Speech in 
computer-mediated communication. Computer in Human Behavior, 6(3), 
261–272.
Spivack, N. (2007). Minding the planet: The meaning and future of the 
Semantic Web. Lifeboat Foundation Special Report. Retrieved August 15, 
2007, from http://lifeboat.com/ex/minding.the.planet
TOPICA. (n.d.). TOPICA email discussion list webpage. Retrieved August 
15, 2007, from http://lists.topica.com/dir/?cid=4 

74	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Visser, J. (2000). Faculty work in developing and teaching web-based 
distance courses: A case study of time and effort. American Journal of 
Distance Education, 14(3), 21–32.
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological 
processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Wagner, E. D. (1994). In support of a functional definition of inter­action. 
The American Journal of Distance Education, 8(2), 6–26.
Wenger, E., R. McDermott, R. & and W. Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating 
communities of practice: A guide to managing knowledge. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard Business School Press.
Wilson, B. (1997). Thoughts on theory in educational technology. 
­Educational Technology, 37(1), 22–26.
Yu, J., Brown, D., & Billett, E. (2007). Design of virtual tutoring agents 
for a virtual biology experiment. European Journal of Open and Distance 
Learning. Retrieved August 24, 2007, from http://www.eurodl.org/ 
materials/contrib/2007/Yu_Brown_Billett.htm 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Terry Anderson (terrya@athabascau.ca) is a professor and Canada 
Research Chair in Distance Education at Athabasca University – Canada’s 
Open University. He has published widely in the area of distance educa-
tion and educational technology and has co-authored three books: 
Anderson and Kanuka (2002) eResearch: Methods, Issues and Strategies; 
Garrison and Anderson (2002), Online Learning in the 21st Century: A 
Framework for Research and Practice; and Haughey and Anderson, Networked 
Learning: Pedagogy of the Internet. Terry graduated with a PhD from the 
University of Calgary in Educational Psychology, has a MSc from the 
University of Oregon in Computer Education, and a BA and BEd from 
the University of Alberta. He teaches educational technology courses in 
the Centre for Distance Education at Athabasca. He is the founding 
director of the Canadian Institute for Distance Education Research (see http://
cider.athabascau.ca) and currently serves as the editor of the International 
Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning (see www.irrodl.org).

Chapter 3
Situating Prior Learning  
Assessment and Recognition 
(PLAR) in an Online  
Learning Environment
Dianne Conrad
Athabasca University
Introduction
Open and distance educational institutions share a commitment to 
­principles of access and flexibility which, in turn, reflect a set of foun-
dational beliefs that shape learning activity. Housed within this broad 
mandate is an explicit recognition of the presence and value of mature 
learners’ prior learning. This chapter describes and situates prior learn-
ing assessment and recognition (PLAR) as a knowledge-building process 
within an online post-secondary learning culture. In doing so, it briefly 
reviews the history and context of PLAR; discusses the pedagogy of 
portfolio construction; outlines PLAR’s operational functionality; and 
considers the potential of the e-portfolio as a learning tool. Athabasca 
University’s use of PLAR in an open and distance university setting will 
serve as context.

76	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
The Role of Prior Learning Assessment  
and Recognition in Adult Education and  
Open and Distance Learning (ODL) Environments
By definition and through practice, distance education has become syn-
onymous with innovative models of program delivery that offer more gen-
erous open and flexible learning opportunities to wider and more diverse 
audiences than did traditional classrooms. The commonly accepted ways 
in which open and distance learning (ODL) institutions are perceived to 
serve diverse student populations centre around issues of scheduling and 
geography, typically allowing easier access to post-secondary education 
for those who have not previously enjoyed that option. And while the 
complex relationship between the concepts of diversity, access, and facili-
tating adults’ learning through the recognition of their prior learning 
raises philosophical questions around social and power relationships, the 
presence of PLAR within post-secondary systems nonetheless provides 
viable alternative learning opportunities to many distance learners.
PLAR is practiced globally as a means of honouring and building 
on mature learners’ past experiential learning. Grounded in ancient 
philosophies, the recognition of prior learning is defined by UNESCO 
as “the formal acknowledgement of skills, knowledge, and competencies 
that are gained through work experience, informal training, and life 
experience” (Vlãsceanu, Grünberg, & Pârlea, 2004, p. 55). More recent 
history on PLAR can be found in the works of Pestalozzi (1907), Dewey 
(1938), and Kolb (1984).
Dewey presented a sound pedagogical rationale for recognizing 
adults’ experiential learning – “the beginning of instruction shall be 
made with the experience learners already have…this experience and 
the capacities that have been developed during its course provide the 
starting point for all further learning” (1938, p. 74) – while advocating 
a progressive philosophy whose real-world learning echoed through the 
work of many adult educators. In North America, Moses Coady (1971) 
and Myles Horton (1990) were among those whose parallel views were 
instrumental in bringing educational opportunities to the oppressed 
and poverty-stricken. Farther abroad, Paulo Freire’s work with farm 
workers in South America rested on the foundational premise of their 
experiential learning (1970). More recently, in exploring transforma-
tional learning across the span of adults’ lives, Welton (1995) cites 
Mezirow’s understanding of the role of educators in helping learners 
mine their past for reflexive learning, thereby declaring the value of 

Situating Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition	
77
experiential learning as an active-learning occasion by involving the 
teaching role in the re-creation of learners’ pasts.
ODL and the Commitment to PLAR at Athabasca University
As do other ODL institutions, Athabasca University outlines its commit-
ment to reducing barriers to university education in its mandate and 
vision statements. Following on this, Athabasca University adopts as a 
key pillar in its foundation the process of recognizing learners’ prior expe­
ri­en­tial learning. To implement a coherent and integrated prior learning 
recognition policy, AU maintains a central office where personnel cham-
pion, direct, and manage the PLAR process. The existence of such an 
internal and integrated structure makes Athabasca University somewhat 
unique among Canadian universities; the size of its operation places it 
at the forefront of university prior learning practice in Canada.
AU implements PLAR using both challenge-for-credit and ­portfolio 
assessment methods, thereby reflecting the field’s general understanding 
of the twin practices for PLAR implementation, challenge, and equiva-
lency (Ontario Ministry of Education, 2001). Under the challenge-for-
credit policy, learners may choose to target a specific course for which 
they feel they already possess the required knowledge or skills. Working 
with the course professor, they then engage in a contractual relationship 
to meet the challenge conditions that have been pre-established for the 
course. While this processes honours their right to bring forward their 
prior knowledge, learners applying to have their prior knowledge rec-
ognized in this fashion are obliged to tailor their learning histories to 
fit into pre-determined knowledge clusters that look like Athabasca 
University courses. While this is just one model of PLAR – and an accept-
able one – it is not a model that gives learners the opportunity to build 
new knowledge on the foundation of their prior knowledge. Rather, it 
is the process of preparing a portfolio that permits learners to demon-
strate their prior knowledge through the careful selection, reflection, 
connection, and projection of learning artefacts. In so doing, learners 
can most fully exercise the scope and latitude of their prior knowledge 
while learners’ cognitive engagement with their learning histories gives 
rise to new knowledge – of self, of self situated within the trajectory of 
growth, and of self situated within the profession.
It is important to note that the portfolio approach is necessarily 
guided by sets of university-provided criteria and outcomes. That said, 

78	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
portfolio criteria and outcomes serve as guidelines and structuring devices 
rather than as hard-and-fast targets. They provide signposts around which 
learners can rally and organize their own learning, rather than ­stipulating 
for them what they must know to be successful in their petition.
Knowledge-building Through PLAR Portfolios
In many post-secondary PLAR systems, the portfolio is the vehicle through 
which learners’ prior learning can be assessed for credit toward a uni-
versity credential. More broadly, portfolios serve as repositories of achieve-
ment and methods of celebrating growth for lifelong learners. Outside 
of learning venues, portfolios are used as performance assessment tools 
for those seeking advancement in the workplace; they also serve as show-
case vehicles for those seeking recognition of their accomplishments.
PLAR Paradigms and Politics
Universally, portfolios are being touted more widely than ever as an 
essential part of citizenship, personal performance, or learning. To this 
end, the European Union promotes the development of a personal 
portfolio for each of its citizens by 2010 (European Commission, 2005). 
Similarly, many post-secondary institutions now include a portfolio as 
an essential component for graduation from the institution. Such a port-
folio would capture a graduate’s entire learning history from the institu-
tion, featuring papers, assignments, reflections, triumphs, and struggles, 
as well as indications of present and future career aspirations. Barrett 
and Carney (2005) describe the many functions of portfolios in terms 
of low-stakes and high-stakes assessment. High-stakes assessments reap 
considerable rewards: learning portfolios that are submitted for ­university 
credit are prime examples of high-stakes assessment.
PLAR-by-portfolio generates controversy within the university 
culture, in part as a result of its existence as a high-stakes assessment tool 
that offers learners opportunities to sidestep course-taking or fast-track 
through university credentials, even though, in ODL institutions, meeting 
learners’ needs in this way generally contributes to university mandates. 
More than that, however, portfolio assessment generates even deeper 
controversy around issues of power and voice (Harris, 1999; Michelson, 
1996). Several questions arise: Who controls knowledge? How can those 
who step forward with non-university learning be expected to conform 
to the language of the university so that they can attain fair recognition 

Situating Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition	
79
of their knowledge? Peters (2005) is among many who contest the ability 
of academic faculty to fairly assess portfolio learning.
Promoting PLAR to its critics depends, at a meaningful ­pedagogical 
level, on being able to demonstrate a system that is rigorous, sound, and 
capable of initiating self-reflection and critical thinking. To do this, it is 
necessary to return to PLAR’s first principles on two levels, the first of 
which is recognizing the value of mature learners’ prior learning. PLAR 
literature is indebted to Dewey (1938) and Kolb (1984) for their work 
on experiential learning and its value to individuals and their societies. 
Of no less importance, however, is the belief in a constructivist-based 
approach to learning. In this view, the portfolio process allows learners 
to begin at a point of their own choosing and to select and reflect upon 
learning that is important to them. Their learning challenge is to inte-
grate that knowledge into the knowledge asked of them by the institu-
tion. Following this view, portfolio development would be analogized as 
a journey, complete with all the meandering, false starts, corners, 
­surprises, and difficulties that any journey holds.
PLAR Practice and Process
Using the metaphor of portfolio-as-journey, learners move along a 
route of portfolio preparation comprised of a number of cognitive 
stages. Somewhat glibly labelled reflect, select, connect, and project, 
each of these steps requires intense and laborious thought; each step 
may spark the “aha” moment that occasions learning. The process is 
described below.
Reflect
Among adult learners – and PLAR participants by definition are usually 
adult learners – learning is a voluntary action that centres around what 
is already known. From a starting point of personal meaning and rele-
vance, adult learners enter into a relationship with their environment 
to construct new meaning (Angelo, 1993; Mackeracher, 2004). This 
process is one of thoughtful reflection, resulting in what Crites (1971) 
terms a movement from the mundane to the sacred – learning to under-
stand experience beyond its isolated, secular level. Helping learners to 
settle at this level of interpreting their experiences is a process intended 
to elevate their stories beyond the confines of their own immediacy to 
more generic levels of knowledge. For example, a single mother who 
wrote about her demanding personal schedule, that included shuttling 
her sons back and forth to hockey practice and assuming multiple 

80	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­parental roles, used those experiences to highlight her organizational 
skills and the resultant value that her inter-collegial skills brought to her 
workplace. As she worked through the process of reflecting on the lessons 
emanating from her household tasks, she drew new meaning from those 
tasks and learned that she had actually been honing new skills.
Select
When preparing PLAR portfolios, applicants must mine their rich and 
varied learning experiences selectively for the events that can most effec-
tively anchor the learning narrative that they are creating. Their selec-
tions constitute a type of scaffolding upon which they build the stories 
of their learning. In putting together this framework, they map both 
their histories and their futures in a form of strategizing, which is similar 
to the cognitive processes that would formulate the answer to an essay 
question asking, say, for a detailed explanation of the events leading up 
to the fall of the Berlin Wall. In learning portfolios, however, the value 
and nature of the knowledge incidents are related to self; selecting 
them and denoting them as valuable labels them as integral pieces in 
the exercise of building self-knowledge.
Connect
The act of connection occurs both subsequently to, and concomitantly 
with, the act of selection. As in the example of the Berlin Wall used 
above, once the “knowledge items” have been identified, they must be 
linked or arranged into an order that serves the purpose at hand. 
Mackeracher (2004) cites the “basic learning cycle” that incorporates 
the work of Kolb (1984) and other theorists into five basic phases of 
learning. In brief, the five phases include a) participation in experiences 
and activities; b) making sense of experience by giving it meaning or 
value, using pattern recognition and other cognitive processes; c) apply-
ing meanings and values to problem-solving and decision-making 
processes to make choices; d) implementing action plans; and e) receiv-
ing feedback both from others and from self-observation. The integral 
theme of connecting experience to meaning recurs in situated cognition 
theory (Brown, Collins, & Duguid, 1989) and also in transformation 
theory (Mezirow, 1995). Using the same processes that Mezirow outlines 
for engendering transformational learning by critically reflecting on and 
modifying current assumptions and understandings, the PLAR process 
also asks learners to engage in knowledge-building activity.

Situating Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition	
81
Project
The last step for PLAR applicants in demonstrating learning is to deter-
mine an appropriate presentation method – to project the evidence of 
their learning in a format deemed acceptable by the receiving institution. 
In conforming to a structured set of expectations, learners meet another 
set of learning outcomes by fulfilling process (or generic) outcomes that 
might be labelled thus: using and constructing documents accurately; 
communicating appropriately in text; understanding one’s learning style; 
and adapting it to tasks at hand. The foundational importance of this 
type of learned skill is reflected in the compilation of national-level 
­outcomes for all learners (Government of Canada, 2006).
The projection of PLAR applicants’ learning, according to 
­template-type guidelines, results in the production of a substantial port-
folio document. The portfolio format itself is designed to triangulate 
learners’ demonstration of knowledge, and in constructing such a docu-
ment, learners are further encouraged to apply their organizing and 
prioritizing cognitive skills. The entire document should contain most 
of the following parts: table of contents, resume, narrative autobiography 
or personal narrative, chronological learning history, educational and 
career goals, demonstration of learning through learning statements, 
and documentation of learning. The documentation of learning often 
forms the bulkiest part of the portfolio as learners include many types 
of documents, including letters of attestation written by externals to 
validate their learning claims, and copies of credentials, awards, certifi-
cates, and other artefacts.
The heart of the knowledge construction exercise in this text-based 
portfolio method rests in the process of writing learning statements. 
Learning statements form the body of the demonstrated evidence of the 
learning that PLAR applicants claim to have acquired. The documenta-
tion described previously must support these claims. Based on Bloom’s 
Taxonomy (1956), which stratifies cognitive achievement into six hierar-
chical categories – knowledge, comprehension, application, analysis, 
synthesis, and evaluation – learners compose statements that appropri-
ately reflect the learning outcomes they feel they have achieved. The 
process of writing learning statements presents a vigorous cognitive chal-
lenge to most learners and most PLAR applicants struggle with this task. 
At the end of it, however, with the clarity that arises from successfully 
resolving a task, their reactions reflect both satisfaction with, and wonder 
at, the nature and extent of the learning that they realize has occurred.

82	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Operationalizing PLAR  
in an Online Environment
Recognizing learners’ prior learning may appear to provide solutions 
to many traditional situational, attitudinal, and institutional barriers to 
learning; however, the relationship between the concepts of diversity, 
access, and the issue of facilitating adults’ learning through the recogni-
tion of their prior learning is both complex and dichotomous. An 
uneasy type of teeter-totter balance exists between the fact of open and 
distance access and PLAR processes, exacerbated by the presence of 
philosophical and social power relationships (Conrad, 2007). As a result, 
the use of PLAR processes confronts, and opens the door to, a network 
of ­resulting tensions.
Online learning environments are also viewed as opening the 
door to educational opportunities where none existed before, and, in 
many cases, this is exactly what happens. Technology, however, brings 
with it its own set of encumbrances and difficulties, and its successful 
implementation requires careful networks of student support (Davis, 
Little & Stewart, 2008; Moisey & Hughes, 2008; Johnson, Trabelsi, & 
Fabbro, 2008). Superimposing the online learning environment on top 
of portfolio learning opportunities requires not only sensitivity and 
awareness, therefore, but an acutely informed understanding of online 
learners and the challenges that confront them. A discussion of these 
areas of challenge follows.
Adult Learners, Andragogy, ODL
Not all online learners are adults, nor are all online learners mature.1 
That said, online theory supports the view that online learning holds 
the most potential for mature learners following a constructivist approach 
(Kanuka & Anderson, 1998). Experiential learning certainly favours 
maturity (Dewey, 1938; Kolb, 1984). Given the confluence of these two 
educational streams at the junction described in this chapter, it stands 
to reason that success in this domain requires a good understanding of 
what it means to be a mature learner in a distance learning environment, 
as regards issues of motivation, learning styles, community, and social, 
cognitive, and instructional presence. The pervasive problematic and 
underlying irony in the implementation of PLAR is that often it is not 
well understood in its role as a learning activity – a role that would bring 
into play all of the literature suggested above – and is instead relegated 
by both supporters and detractors to the purview of registrars, credit 

Situating Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition	
83
transfer, and credit counting. Adequate educational foundations for 
PLAR’s operation, therefore, are often missing.
Assessment Methodology
There are many ways to assess prior learning. They include performance 
displays, interviews, examinations, projects, and portfolio assessments, 
as well as combinations of these various methods. The fact of a distance 
institution limits the choice, effectively ruling out interviews or perfor-
mance displays, for example; Athabasca University chooses to use only 
the portfolio method of assessment. While not unusual in this situation, the 
use of only one method of assessment increases the importance of 
the structure and integrity of the PLAR process, specifically as it involves 
and relates to learners’ and assessors’ text-based abilities. The need for 
learners to be able to display their learning largely in a written format2 
demands a high level of communication structure, as discussed below.
Communication
In many other venues, PLAR is conducted in informal or semi-formal 
face-to-face venues where applicants are able to engage in discussion 
with mentoring or coaching staff. Because of the nature of the task – 
helping applicants grapple with understanding the extent of, and the 
value of, their past learning – an iterative format is best, as it allows a 
level of deep understanding to evolve through reflection (Schön, 1987). 
ODL institutions that are not privy to face-to-face access must rely on a 
well-developed structure and responsive systems of communications in 
order to accomplish the interaction necessary for the successful manage-
ment of a PLAR process. Facilitating such complex communication 
requires excellent and continual application of written and verbal skills, 
and the manufacture and maintenance of high-quality resources (see 
the section on Resources, below).
In another communication twist occasioned by a distributed envi-
ronment, internal communications among staff and faculty must also 
operate at a highly efficient level. At Athabasca University, for example, 
where PLAR is integrated across all programs, a complex many-to-many 
system of interactions arises from each portfolio assessment. The ­potential 
of lost or misunderstood communications is high. 
Resources
It is well understood by online educators that not all learners want to 
forsake paper-based resources. The current generation of online ­learners, 

84	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
at least, prefer to access their online resources in moderation.3 In keeping 
with principles of access that attempt to provide maximum opportunity 
to its clientele, Athabasca University’s PLAR system provides both paper-
based and online resources for potential applicants. A large web site 
forms the online resource (http://priorlearning.athabascau.ca/index.
php). A virtual portfolio located on the web site permits almost-hands-on 
access to the real thing. High-quality PLAR resources form one of the 
bases for the strong platform of support required by distance learners.
Support
The need for generous provision of student support is well documented 
in ODL literature (for example, see Moisey & Hughes, 2008). Support 
for distance learners takes many forms, most obviously advising, counsel-
ling, coaching, mentoring, and supporting with technology and the web 
site. Within the pedagogy of online learning, the need for community 
support, also well documented, manifests itself in the form of learning 
communities, communities of practice, virtual learning environments, 
and applications of social software. PLAR learners require an equal 
amount of support for successful completion. While numerous material 
resources provide one level and type of support, an essential and more 
sophisticated level of support relies on human interaction, achieved 
through telephone and email contact. Ideally, collegial peer support 
involving those who are concomitantly engaged in preparing PLAR port-
folios would provide a high level of effective interaction. Given the posi-
tioning of PLAR as a learning activity within the institution, PLAR learner 
support mechanisms should look no different than any other type of 
course-oriented learner support.
Introducing the e-Portfolio
What is the future of the e-portfolio in an ODL environment, therefore, 
given the conditions for successful management of a portfolio system, 
as described in this chapter? At Athabasca University, as in most post 
secondary institutions’ high-stakes assessment portfolio use, materials 
must be assembled for the exact purpose of attaining credit at the insti-
tution. The learning portfolio described in this chapter
contains work that a learner has collected, reflected, selected, 
and presented to show growth and change over time. A critical 

Situating Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition	
85
component of an educational portfolio is the learner’s reflection 
on the individual pieces of work (often called ‘artefacts’) as well 
as an overall reflection on the story that the portfolio tells. 
(Barrett, 2005, p. 4)
From this rigorous structure that is defined by educational require-
ments comes a very targeted and precise document, the production of 
which encourages reflective learning activity in its participants and 
demands evidence of that learning. Does the electronic portfolio format 
permit learners to engage in the same type of thoughtful process? Tosh, 
Light, Fleming, and Haywood (2005) outline that, as with paper-based 
portfolios, the 
e-portfolio is – or should be – part of a student-owned, student-
centred approach to learning that makes it possible for students 
to actively engage in their learning rather than just be the recipi-
ents of information. This is consistent with constructivist theory, 
which argues students actively construct their own knowledge 
rather than simply receive it from instructors, authors, or other 
sources. (Jonassen, cited in Tosh et al., p. 90)
Ideally, advocates of learning portfolios, whether paper-based or elec-
tronic, will strive to support the concept of learners’ portfolios-as-learning 
while adhering to the rigours and accountability of high stakes assess-
ment for the purpose of credit allocation. In fact, in fields that value 
computer, technology, multimedia, or design skills, learners’ use of  
e-portfolios could provide not only a more engaging demonstration of 
skills, but also a more technically correct demonstration of skills. However, 
Tosh and colleagues’ contention that e-portfolios offer opportunity for 
learner control and promote deep learning should be true of any good 
portfolio process and should be no less true of the traditional paper-
based portfolio. The introduction of another layer of technology brought 
about by e-portfolio use, however, raises several concerns for learners 
and educators in online environments.
Focus
If, as Barrett (2000, para. 3) suggests, “the e-portfolio draws on two bodies 
of literature, multimedia development (decide, design, develop, ­evaluate) 
and portfolio development (collection, selection, reflection, projection),” 
will the e-portfolio’s necessary emphasis on software design ­potentially 

86	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
lessen learners’ attention to content? Is there the potential of e-portfolios 
favouring form over content?
Assessment Equity
On the other side of the equation, will the e-portfolio’s emphasis on 
software design potentially lessen the assessors’ attention to content? 
Will assessors searching for an individual’s learning story feel less attuned 
to the applicant who submits an electronic portfolio?
In a similar vein, e-portfolio technology has the potential to alien-
ate assessors. Universities such as Athabasca University use assessors who 
tend to be academic faculty; they have the time and the inclination to 
contribute to the PLAR process because they are older faculty members, 
secure in their positions. Cumbersome as paper-based portfolios often 
are, some faculty prefer them due to the increased computer usage that 
e-portfolios require.
Diversity
Issues of diversity reshape themselves when technology is added to the 
portfolio mix. As outlined in the discussion above, a number of types 
of diversity already exist within the portfolio process; it is naïve to con-
sider that access to PLAR offers a level playing field. Similarly, relying 
on technology or introducing a technological platform to the produc-
tion of a portfolio privileges some learners above others. That said, 
critics argue that a paper platform also disadvantages some learners 
while privileging others.
Pedagogy
Tosh and colleagues’ (2005) assumption, based on the adult education 
premise that learners engage more successfully when they have control 
(Ramsden, 2003), skirts the deeper cognitive issues of how learners 
connect to, or feel ownership of, their learning. Do today’s learners feel 
more connection to electronic portfolios? Research maintains that as 
the number of learners who can be labelled “digitally native” increases 
over time, e-resources and e-materials will rise in popularity among learn-
ers (Eshet & Geri, 2007). Currently, however, as manifested in similar 
discussions of the merits of print-based journals versus those of e-journals, 
each option has supporters and detractors.

Situating Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition	
87
Conclusion
Nowhere does the practice of prior learning assessment and recognition 
make more sense than in the adult learning environment. That said, 
theory also supports the integration of PLAR processes into the online 
teaching and learning environment, and current practice confirms that 
ODL institutions, such as Athabasca University, are leaders in the imple-
mentation of PLAR at the university level.
As demonstrated through literature and practice, however, 
­consensus remains to be found around issues of prior learning. The 
practice of recognizing prior learning will hopefully inform post-
­secondary educators’ perceptions of learning while it continues to offer 
learners fertile ground for cognitive and personal growth.
Notes
1.	 The issue of maturity is hotly debated among adult educators, as is 
the complementary issue of defining the term adult. Generally, a 
psycho-social definition that outlines individuals’ acceptance of social 
roles in terms of their society’s expectations is what is used to define 
adulthood. In a learning context, maturity is understood to entail 
responsibility and some degree of control and self-direction. While 
institutions and agencies are often required to attach an age to adult 
learner status, it is understood pedagogically that age alone consti-
tutes arbitrary and somewhat artificial boundaries.
2.	 Although portfolios are classified as text-based, in reality, material may 
be presented in other ways. A portfolio, for example, will often contain 
graphics or pictures, and may contain CDs or audio recordings of 
some sort. A portfolio may be submitted on a CD, although it will still 
comprise mostly text. Some of the issues that surround the introduc-
tion of web-based e-portfolios are discussed later in this chapter.
3.	 Internal studies conducted by Athabasca University’s Institutional 
Studies unit have produced statistics to support external research, 
which shows that learners still prefer paper-based resources, or that 
they are willing to spread their resource menu among various modal-
ities. Other external research shows that learners’ level of comfort 
with online resources is dependent on their status as digital natives; 

88	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
in the future, this figure is expected to rise accordingly (Eshet & 
Geri, 2007).
References
Angelo, T. A. (1993, April). A ‘teacher’s dozen’: Fourteen general, 
research-based principles for improving higher learner in our class-
rooms. AAHE Bulletin, 3–13.
Barrett, H. (2000). Electronic portfolios = multimedia development + 
portfolio development: The electronic development process. electron-
icportfolios.org web site. Retrieved August 14, 2007, from http://electronic 
portfolios.org/portfolios/EPDevProcess.html
Barrett, H. (2005). Conflicting paradigms and competing purposes in 
electronic portfolio development. TaskStream web site. Retrieved August 
13, 2007, from http://www.taskstream.com/reflect/whitepaper.pdf
Barrett, H., & Carney, J. (2005). Conflicting paradigms and competing 
purposes in electronic portfolio development. Retrieved April 16, 
2007, at http://www.taskstream .com/ reflect/whitepaper.pdf
Bloom, B. S. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives, Handbook I: The 
cognitive domain. New York, NY: David McKay.
Brown, J. S., Collins, A., & Duguid, A. (1989). Situated cognition and 
the culture of learning. Educational Researcher, 18(1), 32–42.
Coady, M. M. (1971). The man from Margaree: Writings and speeches 
of M. M. Coady. Toronto: McClelland & Stewart.
Conrad, D. (2007). Recognizing prior learning: Exploring the diversity 
of learners’ experiential learning through PLAR. In T. Evans, ­D. Murphy 
& M. Haughey (Eds.), World Handbook of Distance Education. Oxford: 
Elsevier.
Crites, S. (1971). The narrative quality of experience. American Academy 
of Religion Journal, 39(3), 291–311.
Davis, A., Little, P. & Stewart, B. (2008). In T. Anderson (Ed.), Theory 
and practice of online learning, 2nd ed. (pp.121–142). Edmonton, AB: 
AU Press.
Dewey, J. (1938). Experience and education. NewYork, NY: Macmillan.
Eshet, Y., & Geri, N. (2007). Print versus digital: Critical reading of infor-
mation. New Learning 2.0? Proceedings of EDEN Conference, Naples.
European Commission. (2005). Implementing the ‘Education and 
­Training 2010’ work programme. Brussels.

Situating Prior Learning Assessment and Recognition	
89
Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Herder & Herder.
Government of Canada. (2006). Essential skills. Human Resources and 
Skills Development Canada. Retrieved August 14, 2007, from http://
srv108.services.gc.ca/english/general/home_e.shtml
Harris, J. (1999). Ways of seeing the recognition of prior learning (RPL): 
What contribution can such practices make to social inclusion? Studies 
in the Education of Adults, 31(2), 124–138.
Horton, M. (1990). We make the road by walking: Conversations on education 
and social change. Philadelphia: Temple University Press.
Johnson, K., Trabelsi, H., & Fabbro, E. (2008). Library support for  
e-learners: E-resources, e-services and the human factors. In T. ­Anderson 
(Ed.), Theory and practice of online learning, 2nd ed. (pp. 397–418). 
Athabasca, AB: AU Press.
Jonassen, D. (1991). Evaluating constructivist learning. Educational 
­Technology, 36(9), 28–33.
Kanuka, H., & Anderson, T. (1998). Online social interchange, discord, 
and knowledge construction. Journal of Distance Education, 13(1). Retrieved 
August 14, 2007, from http://cade.athabascau.ca/vol13.1/kanuka.html
Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning 
and development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Mackeracher, D. (2004). Making sense of adult learning (2nd ed.). Toronto, 
ON: University of Toronto Press.
Mezirow, J. (1995). Transformation theory of adult learning. In ­M. Welton 
(Ed.) In defense of the lifeworld: Critical perspectives on adult learning 
(pp. 39–70). Albany, NY: State University of New York Press.
Michelson, E. (1996). Usual suspects: Experience, reflection, and the 
(en)gendering of knowledge. International Journal of Lifelong Education, 
15(6), 438–54.
Moisey, S., & Hughes, J. (2008). Supporting the online learner. In 
­T. Anderson (Ed.), Theory and practice of online learning, 2nd ed. 
(pp. 419–439). Edmonton, AB: AU Press.
Ontario Ministry of Education. (2001). Policy/program memorandum 
No. 129. Retrieved August 14, 2007, from http://www.edu.gov.on.ca/
extra/eng/ppm/129.html
Pestalozzi, J. H. (1907). How Gertrude teaches her children: An attempt to help 
mothers to teach their own children, 4th ed. Lucy E. Holland & Frances 
C. Turner, Trans. London: Swan, Sonnenshein & Co.
Peters, H. (2005). Contested discourses: Assessing the outcomes of 
­learning from experience for the award of credit in higher education. 
Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 30(3), 273–285.

90	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Ramsden, P. (2003). Learning to teach in higher education (2nd ed.). 
London: RoutledgeFalmer.
Schön, D. (1987). Educating the reflective practitioner. San Francisco:  
Jossey-Bass.
Tosh, D., Light, T. P, Fleming, K., & Haywood, J. (2005). Engagement 
with electronic portfolios: Challenges from the student perspective. 
Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology, 31(3), 89–110.
Vlãsceanu, L., Grünberg, L., & Pârlea, D. (2004). Quality assurance and 
accreditation: A glossary of basic terms and definitions. Papers on Higher 
Education. Bucharest:
UNESCO-CEPES. Retrieved August 13, 2007, from http://www.cepes.
ro/ publications/Default.htm
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Dianne Conrad (diannec@athabascau.ca) is a practicing adult educator 
with over 25 years of experience. Dr. Conrad is currently the director of 
the Centre for Learning Accreditation at Athabasca University in Alberta, 
Canada. She is actively engaged in e‑learning research that focuses on 
the development of community among online learners and the position-
ing of e-learning as a societal phenomenon.

Chapter 4
Understanding e-Learning 
Technologies-in-Practice 
through  
Philosophies-in-Practice
Heather Kanuka 
University of Alberta
Theory without practice leads to an empty idealism, 
and action without philosophical reflection leads to 
mindless activism.
– Elias & Merriam, 1980, p. 4
Introduction:  
Why is Understanding our Philosophies Important?
Existing and emerging e-learning technologies are having intense, 
­immediate, and disruptive transformations on education systems (Archer, 
Garrison & Anderson, 1999); nowhere is the impact felt more than on 
the practitioners who teach. More specifically, education has moved into 
a third decade of profound change in how courses and programs are 
designed and delivered. During this time, many new possibilities have 
become apparent, but also many new challenges.
With the rise of e-learning technologies in all sectors of education, 
there has been one most frequently asked and investigated question: 
Has e-learning delivered on its promises? Leaders in the field of educa-
tion have argued that e-learning technologies can effectively respond to 
accelerating global competition (Daniel, 2000), increase the quality of 
learning experiences (Garrison, 2002), remove situational barriers 

92	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
(Bates, 2005), and be more cost effective (Twigg, 2003). In an effort to 
provide evidence for the promises forwarded by e-learning advocates, 
interventions and explorations into the use of e-learning technologies 
have been conducted. Based on these investigations, commonly cited 
advantages of e-learning technologies include an ability to provide just-
in-time learning; increased access; removal of time, place and situational 
barriers; cost effectiveness; greater accountability; increased interaction; 
provision of future employment skills for students; and effective support 
for lifelong learning.
As e-learning has become more pervasive, however, expressions 
of uncertainty, concern, and scepticism have also emerged. The growing 
lists of concerns include commercialization of teaching; lack of face-time 
between students and teachers; techno-centric models prioritized over 
face-to-face culture; devaluation of oral discourse/discussion practices; 
centralization of decision-making and service provision; concerns that 
complex and deep learning cannot be satisfactorily achieved without 
real-time classroom experience; increased technological and pedagogical 
uniformity; surveillance options that violate privacy policies; recontex-
tualization of established cultural practices, such as education as a 
­cultural discourse; and concern about the growing digital divide and 
downloading of costs to students.
When this kind of schism between opinions occurs, it can be useful 
to step back, reflect, and consider the nature of the disagreement. If we 
reflect on our own as well as others’ opinions about both technology 
and education through a philosophical lens, it is possible to become 
aware that these kinds of differences can be reduced to perspectives on 
philosophies-in-practice. Draper (1993) asserts that an examination of our 
opinion, or philosophy-in-practice, is more than an academic exercise. 
Our philosophy determines how we perceive and deal with our preferred 
teaching methods – which includes how (or if) we choose and use  
e-learning technologies.
Why is Knowing Our Philosophies-in-Practice Important?
At present, education at all levels is to a great extent minimally regulated 
in terms of what will be taught, how it is taught and, in particular, what 
role e-learning technologies play. Individual teachers, schools, colleges, 
and/or faculties often determine the content and scope of what they 
will teach, then choose methods or strategies, instructional materials, 

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
93
and the e-learning technologies they believe will best help the learners 
to gain new knowledge, skills, and/or attitudes. As such, educators have 
the freedom as well as the responsibility to set learner expectations and 
to determine the purpose and outcomes of the learning activities (Zinn, 
1990) – which includes a decision on the use of e-learning technology. 
These decisions are embedded in our philosophical views about both 
education and technology; underlying these views is our interpretation 
of the world and our actions within it. As such, knowing our ­philosophical 
views is important.
And yet, many educators’ philosophies are often unrecognized 
and rarely expressed, though they may be understood implicitly (Elias 
& Merriam, 1980). More importantly, educational practices concerned 
with using and choosing e-learning technologies could be conducted 
more effectively if basic philosophical differences were understood. Dif-
ferences over the benefits of e-learning technologies are linked to 
­differences over the ends our educational purposes are to achieve 
(Kanuka & Kelland, forthcoming). For example, the debate over whether 
or not we need to prepare our learners for a pervasively networked world 
revolves around what types of persons we expect our education systems 
to produce.
When considering the interrelationship of philosophy and the 
choices we make about e-learning technologies, it is important to be 
aware that philosophy inspires our activities and gives direction to our 
practices. Specifically, when we are aware of the philosophies of teaching 
and technology, we can then articulate our own personal philosophy. 
Knowing our personal philosophy helps us to understand why we act 
and think the way we do about using e-learning technologies, as well as 
why others think and act the way they do about e-learning technologies. 
Moreover, knowing our own and others’ philosophies provides us with 
the ability to understand the consequences of our technological choices, 
as well as the effect that our philosophical orientation has on our learn-
ers. Further, it can facilitate effective communication with others when 
we can explain not only what we are doing, as well as why (Draper, 1993; 
Darkenwald & Merriam, 1982; Zinn, 1990). 
The following sections of this chapter describe the philosophical 
orientations of teaching and technology, and discuss how our views of 
e-learning technologies are grounded in our philosophy-in-practice. Our 
beliefs about teaching and technology guide our practice and, as such, 
understanding our beliefs can result in informed practices where we can 
articulate not only what we are doing, but why.

94	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
What is a Philosophy of Teaching and Technology?
A philosophy of teaching and technology can be defined as a conceptual 
framework that embodies certain values from which we view the many 
aspects of education (Zinn, 1990), including the field of e-learning. A 
philosophy of e-learning technology is necessary because too often edu-
cators are concerned with what to do with e-learning technologies 
without examining sufficiently why they should do it (Draper, 1993; Elias 
& Merriam, 1980).
Embedded in our opinions on e-learning technologies are views 
on the (non) neutrality of technology. The debate over technological 
neutrality revolves around whether or not technologies are neutral and 
whether or not biases can arise only from the ways in which technologies 
are used by teachers and students – or whether biases can occur through 
the technologies themselves. An analogy to contextualize and bring rele-
vance to views on the neutrality of technologies can be gained from the 
catch phrase, “People kill people, not guns.” A comparable catchphrase 
in the field of e-learning might be, “Educators reshape education, not 
technologies.” Many educational technologists agree with Jonassen (1996), 
who asserts that “carpenters use their tools to build things; the tools do 
not control the carpenter. Similarly, computers should be used as tools 
for helping learners build knowledge; they should not control the learner” 
(p. 4). While Jonassen’s argument sounds solid in its rationale, media 
theorist Marshall McLuhan (1964) suggests otherwise. Specifically, even 
though the neutrality of a tool speaks to our common sense with respect 
to the ways in which tools are used, McLuhan and Fiore (1962) maintain 
that media can profoundly transform society and the human psyche. 
McLuhan also made famous the aphorism, “The medium is the message,” 
giving pause to the assumption of the non-neutrality of technology.
Building on the assumption of the non-neutrality of technologies, 
Chandler (1996) postulates that media shapes our experiences, and it 
does so in part through its selectivity. In particular, Chandler asserts that 
when we interact with media, we act and are acted upon, use and are 
used. In this respect, we can use the work by Brent (2001) to illustrate 
the changes caused by technologies when we look at this through the 
lens of a gestalt perspective, where certain elements of the learning 
process are brought to the foreground while others are moved to the 
background. Consistent with McLuhan’s and Brent’s views, Postman 
(1993) maintains that, “embedded in every tool is an ideological bias, a 
predisposition to construct the world as one thing rather than another, 

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
95
to value one thing over another, to amplify one sense or skill or attitude 
more loudly than another” (p. 13). Postman and McLuhan hold definitive 
views about the non-neutrality of technology. Others, such as Ihde (1979) 
and Dahlberg (2004), adopt moderate views of technological determin-
ism, or a “nonreductionist” orientation. Ihde, for example, suggests that 
the use of instruments both amplifies and reduces human experiences.
Similar to mainstream philosophies of education (e.g., Zinn, 1990; 
see also Elias & Meriam, 1980), when we use the purposes of technology 
as the basis for organizing the philosophical literature, it becomes appar-
ent that there are different and opposing perspectives. Educators who 
choose and use e-learning technologies should be knowledgeable about 
the philosophies of teaching, as well as the multidimensionality of 
­technological determination, and be reflexive about the limits of their 
activities in both areas.
Overview of Philosophical Orientations
Knowledge of philosophical orientations provides us with insights into 
the nature of the use of e-learning technologies. A philosophy of teaching 
and technology is essential for answering e-learning questions, and their 
relationship to other activities within the education sector. Of course, 
these kinds of technologically-related concerns have recurred throughout 
the decades; indeed, some have even persisted over the centuries. The 
common thread of persistent technological debates in the field of educa-
tion is that they have tended to have varying implicit assumptions about 
the basic nature of an education. It is apropos for those of us concerned 
with education to at least attempt to address the principal concerns and 
issues that are currently being put forward; such efforts can help ­legitimize 
and give direction to the growing field of e-learning.
The following sections in this chapter outline the differing philo-
sophical orientations for teaching and technology. As you read the phi-
losophies presented, you may want to ask yourself which philosophy you 
find yourself most in agreement with, especially regarding their aims 
and values.
Philosophies of Technology
In regard to e-learning technology, there is a tendency to orientate 
­ourselves to one of three orientations (Dahlberg, 2004). The first ­position 

96	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
is referred to as uses determinism. This view pertains to the instrumental 
the uses of technological artefacts and, correspondingly, the uses effects 
on technological artefacts and society. The second position is referred 
to as technological determinism. This view focuses on the forms and effects 
that technological artefacts have on uses and society. The third position 
is referred to as social determinism. This view asserts that social contexts 
and cultures affect forms and uses of technological artefacts. Following 
is a broader discussion of each orientation.
Uses Determinism
In its simplest sense, this position emphasizes technological uses and 
focuses on the ways in which we use technologies within learning and 
teaching transactions. In this approach, technologies are perceived as 
neutral tools and are simply devices that extend our capacities. As users, 
we determine the effects of technological artefacts. Scholars commonly 
associated with this orientation include Fiske (1987), Harrison and 
Stephen (1999), Katz and Rice (2002), Sudweeks, McLaughlin and 
Rafaeli (1998), Garramone, Harris and Anderson (1986), Ebersole 
(2000), and Welchman (1997).
In educational technology, we see this view expressed by Jonassen 
(1996) and Clark (1994). As noted in the introduction, Jonassen asserts 
that “carpenters use their tools to build things; the tools do not control 
the carpenter. Similarly, computers should be used as tools for helping 
learners build knowledge; they should not control the learner” (p. 4). 
This view is consistent with the seminal writings of Clark (1983; 1985), 
who argues that our uses of instructional strategies are the active ingre-
dient in effective learning, not the technology. In his writings, Clark 
claims, in part, that technologies are “mere vehicles that deliver instruc-
tion but do not influence student achievement any more than the truck 
that delivers our groceries causes changes in our nutrition” (1983, 
p. 445). Such views assert that the technological artefacts we use for 
educational purposes (e.g., course management systems) are neutral 
tools, able to serve the aims and objectives of agents (e.g., educators) 
employing them.
This perspective is certainly not new, emerging as a response to 
the pessimism of the Frankfurt School. Indeed, today the majority of  
e-learning technologists would likely state that this is their view of the 
role of e-learning technology within the learning process. This view is 
appealing – especially in North America – because it asserts that, as 
individuals, we have control and autonomy over the technology (Morley, 

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
97
1989). Dahlberg (2004) observes that this should be of little surprise, 
given that American communications studies has been significantly influ-
enced by the liberal pluralist uses and gratification model that developed 
in response to effects traditions.
While appealing in many respects, uses determinism can result 
in a number of contradictions and problems when educators hold this 
perspective in a singular fashion (Dahlberg, 2004). In particular, viewing 
e-learning technology as a neutral tool assumes that there is a techno-
logical fix for an educational problem. This instrumentalist line of think-
ing assumes that technologies exist without social or political origins, 
and that uses and users are the causal agents in the production of social 
action (Lacroix & Tremblay, 1997) – often celebrating unconstrained 
consumer sovereignty, and resulting in instrumentalism and/or struc-
turalism (Golding & Murdock, 2000). The problem with instrumentalism 
is that there is an inclination to place emphasis upon the intentionality 
of agents, with an unbalanced focus on the interactions between the 
actors and the technologies. As a result, educators tend to narrowly focus 
on the role of agents and disregard the broader social structures and/or 
technological artefacts’ effects on the learning outcomes, leading to 
explanations that overemphasize the power and autonomy of actors. 
The belief that individual actors have complete control over the effects 
of a technological artefact is a misguided and naïve assumption. “Such 
an assumption overlooks the structuring of actions by technological 
systems and neglects the social ‘embeddedness’ of these systems and 
their users” (Dahlberg, 2004).
Social Determinism
In this perspective, educators are concerned with the integration of 
technological artefacts within social systems and cultural contexts. This 
perspective emphasizes the way our uses of technologies are affected by 
the social structures and the social construction of technological arte-
facts. Educators holding this view are concerned about the ways that 
social and technological uses shape the form and content of the learning 
experiences. Scholars commonly associated with this orientation include 
Golding and Murdock (1997), Mosco (1996), Garnham (1990), Woolgar 
(1991a; 1991b; 1996; 2002), and Schiller (1999).
Many e-learning futurists and pundits fall within this perspective, 
such as Larry Ellison (chair and CEO of Oracle Corporation), Peter 
Drucker (author of The Effective Executive and Management Challenges for 
the 21st Century; recipient of the Presidential Medal of Freedom from 

98	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
President George W. Bush; and featured on the front cover of Forbes 
Magazine), and Jaron Lanier (virtual reality pioneer). All of these suggest 
the possibility of changes with respect to who will be the dominant pro-
viders of education should long-established providers of education not 
respond to accelerating globalization and increasing competition. 
Typically, the solution presented is a move to technologically innovative 
and consumer-oriented education. Peter Drucker, in an interview with 
Forbes Magazine (1997), claims that social changes will result in the physi-
cal presence of universities ceasing to exist within ten years. One might 
even imagine a Darwinian process emerging, with some institutions 
­consuming their competitions in hostile takeovers. 
These views rest upon the way technology is socially embedded 
and constituted. In particular, social choices shape the form and content 
of technological artefacts (Dahlberg, 2004). As with uses determinism, 
however, social determinism has logistical issues that are difficult to 
resolve. Specifically, this orientation can lead to flawed understandings 
of educational technology if developed without reference to user control 
or material limits (Dahlberg). The line of reasoning in this orientation 
– that technologies embody social choice – negates a multifaceted under-
standing of the place of personal control in technological development. 
Many of the pundits and futurists cited above have an inaccurate view 
of the power of social context and its ability to impact education. Social 
contexts do not simply manipulate education systems at will. In our 
everyday lives, there is a dynamic mutual shaping between the social, 
technology, and users’ environments. 
Technological Determinism
Within this orientation, technologies are viewed as causal agents deter-
mining our uses and having a pivotal role in social change. Scholars 
most commonly associated with this orientation include Dubrovsky, 
Kiesler and Sethna (1991), Sproull and Kiesler (1986), Argyle (1996), 
Spears and Lea (1994), Marcuse (1941), Habermas (1970), Bell (1973), 
Lyotard (1984), Baudrillard (1983), Castells (1999), Gates (1995), Pool 
(1983), Toffler and Toffler (1994), Heidegger (1977), Postman (1993), 
and Marx (1997).
The label technological determinism has tended to have a ­negative 
connotation that educational technologists who hold this view regard 
technology as a distracting and potentially even harmful component of 
education systems. The origin of technological determinism is connected 
to a Marxist class analysis, which views technology as an instrument 

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
99
of dominance by the advantaged class over others. Within the field of 
­education, this historical view led to a belief that technology could be a 
means towards the end of oppressing students – with Technics and 
Civilization (Mumford, 1934) as one of the first pieces of literature to 
make this analysis. By the 1960s, Mumford was joined by other critics – 
such as Landgon Winner (1977), Albert Borgmann (1984), and Don 
Ihde (1979) – responding to the changing political climate of the day. 
During this period, Marcuse (1964) and Foucault (1977) were also influ-
ential critics of the role of technological determinism and the formation 
of modern hegemonies (Feenberg, 1999).
More recently, some educators such as David Noble have been 
labelled as technological determinists. Noble and colleagues (Noble, 
1991; Noble, Shneiderman, Herman, Agre, & Denning, 1998) have written 
extensively on the relationships between distance-delivered e-learning 
and de-professionalization of the academy. These scholars are concerned 
about the erosion of academic freedom, and thus they are aggressive 
critics arguing that the expansion of distance-delivered e-learning as a 
leading-edge movement to commercialize education will work to de-
professionalize faculty members and erode academic freedom (e.g., 
Noble, 1998). Other prominent scholars who have on occasion fallen 
into this category include Erich Fromm (1968), Marshall McLuhan (1962), 
Neil Postman (1993), Hubert Dreyfus (2001), and Jean Baudrillard 
(1983). These scholars question modern technologies and many condemn 
technology for disseminating an onslaught of incoherent and fragmented 
trivialities to the world at the expense of engagement, reflectivity, and 
depth. They also argue that modern technologies and growing neo-
­liberalism are creating a rising capitalistic climate that includes ­political-
economic interests such as comodification, commercialization, and 
­corporatization of education.
The assumption underpinning these views is that technology 
determines our uses and impacts society – in a negative way. Although 
not often given the label of technological determinist, scholars who view 
technology as influencing our education systems in positive ways also 
hold the same assumption that technology determines our uses and 
impacts society, but in a beneficial way. In the area of e-learning, for 
example, Garrison and Anderson (2003) assert that educational tech-
nologies can transform the learning experiences in positive ways, ­resulting 
in increasing the quality of learning experiences.
Other positive views presented in the literature include the opinion 
that e-learning communication tools facilitate the development of argu-

100	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
ment formation capabilities, increased written communication skills, 
complex problem-solving abilities, and opportunities for reflective delib-
eration (Abrami & Bures, 1996; Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2001; 
Hawkes, 2001; Winkelmann, 1995). The rationale underpinning these 
beliefs rests on the assumption that the technologies (e.g., asynchronous 
text-based Internet tools which have a time lag when communicating) 
provide the inherent potential to effectively facilitate higher levels of 
learning. For example, Lapadat (2002) argues that with asynchronous 
text-based Internet technology, learners have the means to compose their 
ideas and thoughts into a written form of communication. This, accord-
ing to Garrison and Anderson, provides learners with the ability to criti-
cally reflect on their views, which is necessary for higher-ordered learning. 
In regard to educational systems, Archer, Garrison, and Anderson (1999) 
have written about disruptive technologies, arguing that technologies 
are a catalyst of change, resulting in the need for educators and institu-
tions to adapt and/or transform. The assumption here is that the effects 
of technical change are inevitable and unquestioned.
As these examples illustrate, both advocates and opponents of  
e-learning believe that e-learning technologies determine the uses and 
the agents. In less bi-polar positions, this orientation also asserts that the 
effect of new media (e.g., social software) has influenced post-modern 
ideas. Poster (1997), for example, puts forth the notion that the Internet 
has instantiated new forms of interaction and power relations between 
users, resulting in significant social impacts. Nguyen and Alexander 
(1996) assert further that the Internet has produced new realities in our 
everyday lives. Technological determinism is also consistent with much 
of the existing technology theory, perhaps most notably, McLuhan’s 
(1964) “the medium is the message” slogan, as well as the idea of the 
world now being a global village. These views are representative of the 
cultural products of mass media and agents of socialization and political 
indoctrination, and correspond with the social impact of technology 
literature that emphasizes the transformations caused by technologies 
acting on society.
Theorists of post-industrialism and post-modernity also view 
­technology as a causal agent, having a central role in social change 
(Dahlberg, 2004). Lyotard (1984) and Baudrillard (1983) likewise argue 
that technology is instrumental in the development of the post-modern 
condition. Within the field of education, de Castell, Bryson, and Jenson 
(2002) express concerns that e-learning technologies result in yet another 

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
101
form of cultural colonization, resulting from curricular development 
designed to mimic the cognitive styles of recognized experts.
An understanding of the impact of technology on educational 
systems is important for educators to know and recognize. As with the 
other technological orientations, however, an overemphasis on the impact 
of technology on the learning process can lead to problems when there 
is a lack of recognition of the social and user embeddedness of technol-
ogy. Without question, there is a significant effect of e-learning technology 
on modern education, including, as Chandler (1996) notes, the numer-
ous unanticipated consequences – which should not be underestimated. 
Likewise, Winner (1977) asserts that technological artefacts may embody 
affirmation, but may also become a betrayal. There is little doubt that 
education is increasingly being encompassed by e-learning technologies 
and that they increasingly shape the way we think and learn. Nevertheless, 
this impact is not as independent of human control as the techno-utopian, 
techno-cynic, techno-zealot, and techno-structuralism theorists indicate 
(Boshier & Onn, 2000). Accounts from such theorists either reify reduc-
tive consequences or claim too much for what is increasingly a shift in 
the growing use of e-learning technology in education.
This one-dimensional view of technology suffers similar logistical 
problems with the uses- and social-determinist orientations. Educators 
positioning themselves from a one-dimensional view of the impact of 
technology perceive the properties of a particular technology as having 
the ability to predetermine educational outcomes. Little, if any, attention 
is given to the effects of educational, social, and historical forces that 
have shaped both educational systems and educational technologies.
Philosophies of Teaching
The following section highlights the philosophical orientations or frame-
works that are most often used by educators in today’s society. It is based 
on the writings of Elias and Merriam (1980), Zinn (1990), Draper (1993), 
and Brameld (1969). At the end of the descriptions for each teaching 
orientation is a description of the philosophy of technology most closely 
associated with it.
Liberal/Perennial
This orientation is the oldest and most enduring philosophy of education. 
The earliest efforts of education in the Western world were developed 

102	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
under the influence of this philosophy. The primary aims of educators 
holding this orientation are twofold: (1) to search for truth, and (2) to 
develop good and moral people. As such, an educated person should 
possess these components: rational, intellectual, and evolving wisdom; 
moral values; a spiritual or religious dimension; and an aesthetic sense. 
Its historical origins are derived from the classical Greek philosophers 
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle. Some contemporary philosophers who 
espouse this viewpoint include Mortimer Adler (1937), Robert Hutchins 
(1953; 1968), Jacques Maritain (1943), and Mark Van Doren (1943).
Instructional methods used in this position lend themselves to the 
facilitation of rigorous intellectual training that begins with knowledge 
of grammar and rhetoric; extends to the national sciences, history, and 
literature; and ends with a study of logic and philosophy. Students are 
encouraged to question all assumptions – which is in keeping with the 
search for truth. The person who “knows the truth” will also “do the truth.” 
The lecture method is recognized as an efficient instructional strategy 
when well organized and followed with dialogue. Through dialogue, stu-
dents clarify the real meaning of concepts and can thus build syntheses 
of knowledge. Intuition and inner contemplation are also encouraged.
In this view, the teaching focus is primarily on the content of 
education with an emphasis on the art of investigation, criticism, and 
communication, through an intimate acquaintance with the Great Books 
(e.g., Plato, Aristotle, Aurelius, Augustine, Bacon, Descartes, Milton, 
Marx), philosophy, and religion. The humanities are believed to be supe-
rior to science. The teacher has a prominent role in dissemination of 
the content and the student is a receptacle of this information. An edu-
cation system following this orientation aims to create leaders and respon-
sible citizens. Though information and knowledge are necessary, it is 
only in the possession of wisdom that one truly becomes educated. The 
learning process moves from information to knowledge to wisdom.
Critics of the liberal orientation have argued that this form of 
education does not lend itself much to statements, analyses, and evalu-
ations; has a class and elitist bias; and does not address vocational educa-
tion and life-related subjects. In addition, knowledge of past civilization 
and culture does not itself liberate persons.
Role of Technology
Aligning most closely with technological determinism, liberal demands 
for intellectual training would not normally involve the use of technol-
ogy. For example, automated courses (quizzes, exams) with modularized 

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
103
units, tutorials and/or simulations, in and of themselves, cannot achieve 
the aim of a liberal education. As the ultimate aim and essence of educa-
tion is in the development of character, a standardized curriculum typi-
cally associated with online courses and economies of scale is viewed as 
robbing the student of an intellectual experience. While some existing 
social software (e.g., synchronous audio, Internet-based tools) might be 
viewed somewhat more positively by educators of this orientation, the 
current widespread use of textual communication technologies would 
conflict with both the spirit and the aims of this orientation, as well as 
with its focus on critical dialogue.
The position that e-learning can be a flexible and convenient 
alternative serving the needs of the institutions’ clients (students) would 
also be problematic for educators of the liberal orientation. Indeed, 
liberal educators believe that learning should not be convenient and 
students should not be viewed as clients or customers. Rather, students 
should submit themselves to the rigours of intellectual development and 
be stretched intellectually as far as they can go. Convenience and flexibil-
ity, in ways that meet the needs of the learners, would be at odds with 
this orientation. In a general sense, e-learning technology is viewed by 
educators closely associated with the liberal orientation as interfering 
with their aims and objectives.
Progressive
The aim of the progressive orientation is personal growth, maintenance, 
and promotion of a better society. The preferred methods of instruction 
include the experimental, problem-solving, and situation approaches to 
learning. This includes the organization of curriculum around problems 
and situations which relate to the experiences of the students. The focus 
of the learning activities is always toward movement of democratic coop-
eration and personal enlightenment. The chief exponent of pragmatism 
and progressive thought, especially as it relates to education, is John 
Dewey (1910; 1916; 1938) and William James (1909). Elements of pro-
gressive thought are found in the writings of all major theorists in the 
field of education, including Malcolm Knowles (1970), Cyril Houle 
(1972), Eduard Lindemen (1956), and Paul Bergevin (1967).
Education itself is viewed as both practical and pragmatic; ­utilitarian 
educators of this orientation strive to maintain the standards of compe-
tence, knowledge, wisdom, and skill. Accordingly, a good society requires 
these standards. Educators also see themselves as having a role in social 
reform and social reconstruction. Specifically, education should be aimed 

104	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
at improving the individual’s life in society; improving individuals 
through education leads to a better society. Students and society cannot 
be separated, as the student’s interests, needs, problems, and ambitions 
are products of their environment.
The teacher/student relationship is best characterized as a 
­partnership. Learning is something that students do for themselves. 
Education involves experience, which is reflected and acted upon by the 
student. The result is knowledge that is inseparable from ever-changing 
experiences. Learning also involves liberating the learner for the poten-
tial improvement of society and culture. In particular, learning is not 
enough; sooner or later, students must act as a consequence of their 
learning. The teacher’s role is to organize, stimulate, instigate, and evalu-
ate the highly complex process of education. This can be effectively 
achieved by being a helper, consultant, and/or encourager. When the 
teacher provides a setting that is conductive to this form of learning, 
the teacher also becomes a learner.
The main criticism of the progressive orientation is the tendency 
to place too much influence on the power of education to bring about 
social change and to replace the fixity of ideas with the fixity of the 
problems. Another criticism has been that, in their view, the student 
should be placed at the centre of the learning process, failing to give 
sufficient attention to the role of the teacher and to the importance of 
the subject matter.
Role of Technology
Aligning most closely with uses determinism, progressives view certain 
educational technologies as being well suited to the learning process. 
For example, using the conferencing options in course management 
systems (e.g., WebCT®, Blackboard®, Lotus Notes®), learning activities can 
effectively be designed as an interactive partnership between and among 
the teacher and students. Perhaps more important is the ability of asyn-
chronous communication technologies to give students equal opportuni-
ties to contribute. When facilitated effectively by the teacher, this can 
result in a democratic learning environment for all students. Further, 
given that the teacher’s role is to organize, stimulate, instigate, and 
evaluate the highly complex process of education, as well as to be a 
helper, consultant, and/or encourager, e-learning technologies can be 
very effective at facilitating this kind of environment because they 
­effectively facilitate a learner-centred environment.

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
105
Behaviourist
The ultimate goal of the behaviourist orientation is to bring about 
­observable changes in behaviour. Methods of instruction begin with stated 
learning objectives, accompanied by the inclusion of rewards and punish-
ments toward and away from the stated behavioural objectives. Examples 
of well-known methods include mastery learning, personalized systems of 
instruction, individually guided instruction, and individually prescribed 
instruction. The focus of the learning is on the content, with a subject-
centred approach. Early behaviourists include Edward Thorndike (1932) 
and John Watson (1914), with the most prominent behaviourist philoso-
phy originating from B. F. Skinner (1938). A more contemporary behav-
iourist is Ralph Tyler (1949), who is well known for the introduction of 
needs assessments in curriculum and instruction.
Behaviourists tend to view most of societies’ problems arising 
from the behaviour of people living in them. The solution to creating 
a better society is to control human behaviour. Behaviourists believe 
that the purpose of education is to change the behaviour of people so 
they can work with each other to design and build a society that mini-
mizes suffering and maximizes the chances of survival. The role of the 
teacher is to design an environment that elicits desired behaviour 
toward meeting these goals and to extinguish behaviour that is not 
desirable. The teacher is a contingency manager or an environmental 
controller. The students’ role is active rather than passive, and it is 
essential that students act, so that their behaviour can be reinforced. 
As such, responsibility lies primarily with the student. According to 
behaviourists, students have learned something if there is a change in 
behaviour and if their response occurs again under similar circum-
stances. Learning how to learn is also an important skill, needed if one 
is to adapt successfully to a changing environment.
There have been many criticisms of the behaviourist orientation. 
Perhaps the most important criticism revolves around the stated behav-
ioural objectives that predetermine the end product of a learning experi-
ence. This activity has been attacked for not accounting for other kinds 
of learning, such as incidental learning; dehumanising students and 
their learning; lacking in concern for the student; inhibiting creativity; 
and, fragmenting the curriculum into bits and pieces while overlooking 
the whole.

106	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Role of Technology
Aligning most closely with technological determinism, the majority of 
behaviourists believe that the use of e-learning technologies, in all 
forms, results in effective and efficient learning. There are many posi-
tive transformations that occur through the use of technology, with the 
sine quo non being computer-based tutorials and simulations. Standardized 
course management systems (e.g., WebCT®, Blackboard®, Moodle) and 
the integrated use of learning objects into the learning process can 
also benefit educational institutions in terms of providing efficient and 
effective learning. 
Moreover, the use of course management systems can regulate 
teacher activities. As such, the teaching can be controlled to student assess-
ment and grading administration. Course management tools can track 
the students’ activities and provide immediate feedback via the assessment 
tools. It is possible, then, to track exactly what the students have learned 
through observable changes in behaviour. Overall, behaviourists tend to 
view e-learning technologies as more reliable, accurate, faster, and cost-
effective than humans. Social interaction can be expensive, and when the 
learning is content-centred, interaction is generally not an important 
function within the learning events. E-learning courses that focus on the 
content and are presented in a modularized format, with stated learning 
objectives and end-of-unit assessment tools to provide positive or negative 
feedback, are an effective and efficient way to teach students.
Humanist
The primary aim of the humanist orientation is to support individual 
growth and self-actualization. Key constructs emphasized in this approach 
are freedom and autonomy, trust, active cooperation and participation, 
and self-directed learning. The philosophical roots of this orientation 
are found in such writers as Martin Heidegger (1977), Jean-Paul Sartre 
(1949), and Albert Camus (1940; 1942; 1951). The Third Force psycholo-
gists who have been equally responsible for the development of this 
approach include Abraham Maslow (1976), Carl Rogers (1967), Malcolm 
Knowles (1970), and Erich Fromm (1968).
Humanists use instructional methods such as group dynamics, 
group relations training, group processes, sensitivity workshops, encoun-
ter groups, values clarification workshops, transactional analysis, human 
potential workshops, and self-directed learning to achieve their aims. 
Group activity is the favoured technique, but experimentation and 

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
107
­discovery methods are also encouraged. Decisions made by the teacher 
about curriculum are viewed as interfering with individual students’ 
ability to identify their own learning needs. The focus on the learning 
activities is always on the individual student’s growth and development 
rather than the content, and on affective rather than cognitive aspects 
of education. This focus, in turn, assists in the development of respon-
sible selfhood; fostering persons who are open to change and continuous 
learning; and the striving for the self-actualization of fully-functioning 
individuals. As such, the whole focus of education is on the individual 
learner rather than a body of information.
The role of the teacher is that of facilitator, helper, and partner 
in the learning process. The teacher does not simply provide informa-
tion; he or she must create the conditions within which learning can 
take place. The teacher should facilitate the process of the students to 
be self-directed, by serving as a resource person and by encouraging 
students to set their own goals. The responsibility for learning therefore 
rests with the student. Students are free to learn what and how they want. 
The act of learning is a personal activity that involves intrinsic motiva-
tion, self-concept, perception, and self-evaluation. Indeed, according to 
humanists, self-evaluation is the only meaningful test of whether learning 
has taken place.
As with the other philosophical orientations, there have been 
numerous criticisms of the humanist orientation. For example, at times 
self-directed learning can be impossible or undesirable. It can also be 
difficult to conduct discussion groups when one considers time con-
straints, organizational expectations, and group size composed of many 
diverse learning environments. Perhaps most importantly, this orienta-
tion lacks administrative accountability in terms of what is going to be 
taught, what is actually taught, and what has been learned.
Role of Technology
Aligning themselves most closely with uses determinism, humanists 
­typically would agree that e‑learning technologies can, under certain 
circumstances, serve an important role in so far as providers of the learn-
ing activities can provide flexibility, convenience, and meet individual 
student needs with just-in-time learning. Specifically, uses of technology 
can play a critical role in providing flexible and open access to the 
growing needs of individual students.
For the humanists, learning is viewed as a highly personal 
­endeavour and, as such, intrinsic motivation, self-concept, self-­perception, 

108	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
self-evaluation, and discovery are important learning and thinking skills. 
Many e-learning technologies, especially social software, can provide 
learners with opportunities to facilitate their learning needs. Further, 
online classrooms make it difficult, if not impossible, for the role of the 
teacher to be anything but a facilitator, or a guide on the side. It should 
be noted that some humanists have objected to arbitrary decisions by 
educational institutions and/or instructors about the kinds and uses of 
technologies. These arbitrary decisions are viewed by most humanists 
as a violation of students’ abilities to identify their own learning needs, 
which includes their choices about which technologies to use or not 
use. Few humanists, however, would disagree with the opinion that new 
group communication tools can play an important role in facilitating 
access for students to participate in group discussions. Group relations 
are an extremely important component in facilitating the learning 
process, and under certain circumstances, many humanists would argue 
that online discussions can be effective, perhaps even more effective 
than face-to-face discussions, due to their ability to meet the diversity 
of student needs.
Radical
The overarching aim of the radical perspective is to invoke change in 
the political, economic, and social order in society via the intersection 
of education and political action. Radical educators of the past include 
George Counts (1932), Theodore Brameld (1969), Jonathan Kozol 
(1972), John Holt (1967), Paul Goodman (1994), and Ivan Illich (1979). 
Contemporary prominent educators of this philosophic position include 
Paulo Freire (1973) and Jack Mezirow (1991).
Preferred instructional methods are dialogic encounters that lead 
to praxis. These instructional methods include problem posing and 
problem identification, through dialogue based on respect, communica-
tion, and solidarity. Collective dialogue, ideal speech, and critical ques-
tioning in a risk-free environment should be offered in place of traditional 
lecture and dissemination of information. Dialogic and problem-posing 
encounters will involve students engaged in questioning the basic values, 
structure, and practices of society.
Many radicals view traditional lecturing as offending the freedom 
and autonomy of the student. Indeed, these practices are viewed as a 
form of violence, because imposing facts and values submerges the con-
sciousness of the student, perpetuates the evils of an oppressive society, 
dehumanizes, and stifles individual freedom. Education is viewed as 

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
109
value-laden and never neutral, because it includes the transmission and 
reification of attitudes and development of character. As such, the role 
of the teacher is to raise students’ consciousness of the social and politi-
cal contradictions in their culture. Radicals view their role as a catalyst 
to increasing the learners’ objective reality or to eliciting distorted 
assumptions. The teacher is also a learner with equal status, but the 
teacher will have expert knowledge. Information, however, must be 
imparted in a dialogic manner with the student. In order for action to 
be authentic, participants must be free to create the curriculum along 
with the teacher. Students are viewed as unfinished and, as such, are 
free and autonomous learners.
Through these activities, students become enablers of radical 
social change. Radicals perceive education as being closely connected 
with our social, political, and economic understanding of cultures, 
and with the development of methods to bring people to an awareness 
of responsible social action. Learning, then, must include the develop-
ment of insight into the state of the students’ oppression, achieved only 
through critical reflection. This kind of learning can lead to action, 
which may significantly transform aspects of one’s life.
The main criticism of the radical orientation is that the methods 
used to achieve perspective transformation are not doable in most edu-
cational environments. Mandatory grading in most educational systems, 
for example, diminishes the prospect of a risk-free environment. Another 
difficulty with this orientation is that knowledge is viewed as power, and 
power is seen as something political. Thus, when the teacher provides 
information, the teacher will then be exercising power and control over 
the student. The premise, then, that education can be neutral and non-
value-laden with a knowledgeable teacher, becomes a paradox.
Role of Technology
Radicals align themselves most closely with social determinism. The 
biggest problem associated with the use of e-learning for radicals is not 
so much the technologies, per se, as the fact that most educational 
institutions use technologies that are owned by large corporations. Com-
mercialized products, such as WebCT®, Blackboard®, Lotus Notes®, and 
so on, are viewed as enforcing a corporate communication paradigm 
onto the learning process. For example, a risk-free and trusting environ-
ment is not achievable with corporate technologies that have surveillance 
features. Alternatively, open-source technologies (e.g., Moodle) would 
not be problematic for most radical educators.

110	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Analytical
The primary aim of the analytical orientation is the development of 
rationality, which is assisted by the fearless transmission of educationally 
worthwhile knowledge (e.g., truth that is morally, socially, and politically 
neutral). Philosophers of education in this traditional view include Israel 
Scheffler (1960), R. S. Peters (1967), and Thomas Green (1971).
Guided and directed by the teacher, dialogue through class 
­discussion is considered the ideal instructional method. It is important 
that the dialogue include communication of information that is 
­educationally significant. Specifically, analytical educators focus on content 
that is worthwhile, while emphasising the need for clarifying concepts, 
arguments, and policy statements. The result is to bring about deepened 
awareness, in meaningful touch with reality; this is accomplished through 
the provision of worthwhile knowledge. Education is never complete and 
lifelong education is a necessity for full human development.
Educators from the analytical orientation see the need for 
­teachers to identify what the students do not know and then to deter-
mine their aims and objectives. The primary role of teachers is to make 
choices about the things that are educationally worthwhile. Teachers, 
then, are essential for introducing learners to knowledge beyond them-
selves; learners are subordinate to the teachers. Analyticals believe that 
students need to temporarily give up their freedom and subject them-
selves to being guided, criticized, and tested according to the standards 
of a discipline.
Analyticals also believe that society and education should not be 
linked to each other. The problem inherent in linking educational aims 
to social values becomes particularly acute in a multicultural or pluralistic 
society where there are differences of opinion as to what ends are most 
desirable. Based on established scientific truths, education should involve 
the fearless transmission of neutral knowledge, guided by the liberal 
studies. There is, however, a cognitive element and a need for the under-
standing of principles. Specifically, learning is cognitively connected with 
other areas of learning so that each area is understood in relation to 
other areas, and what is learned should be usable.
Many critics of this philosophical orientation raise the troubling 
question of whether any programmatic decision can be neutral or value-
free. Taking a neutral position on social questions, for example, is itself 
a contradiction.

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
111
Role of Technology
Aligning most closely with uses determinism, analytical educators view 
e-learning technologies as serving the learning process well under certain 
circumstances. For example, lectures can be downloaded to web pages, 
and follow-up dialogue can be facilitated, effectively moderated, and 
directed by the teacher, using group communication tools.
Knowing Your Teaching  
and Technology Philosophies in Practice:  
Avoiding Mindless Activism
Reflecting on and becoming aware of our philosophical orientations is 
important; it provides a basis for how we choose and use e-learning 
technologies. Education effects change, whether that change is the ability 
to engage in rational thought, personal growth, or to bring about politi-
cal and social change (Zinn, 1990). The desired changes are based on 
what we believe should happen through education. This, in turn, will 
be reflected in how we choose and use e-learning technologies.
When we are aware of our philosophical orientation, it is then 
possible to make informed decisions about choosing and using e-­learning 
technology. Without knowing our philosophical orientation, other strate-
gies are used (Zinn, 1990). Often swept up by unbridled – but unin-
formed – enthusiasm by technological advocates, many decisions by 
educators are based on following the latest trend. Unfortunately, these 
strategies often lead to incongruence and inconsistency in action between 
and among instructors, administrators, and students, and the ensuing 
disagreements that revolve around the means rather than the ends of 
education. Moreover, when there is incongruence between beliefs and 
actions, the promises of what e-learning technologies can provide will 
never be delivered. Unless we can systematically identify what we value 
in education, we cannot justify the choices we make with e-learning 
technologies, or deliver the promises. For these reasons, it is important 
to take time out from our doing and ask why it is important. “Thoughtful 
practitioners know not only what they do, but why they are to do it. 
Experience combined with reflection leads to purposeful and informed 
action” (Darkenwalk & Merriam, 1982, p. 37).

112	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
References
Abrami, P. C., & Bures, E. M. (1996). Computer-supported collaborative 
learning and distance education. American Journal of Distance Education, 
10(2), 37–42.
Adler, M. (1937). The revolution to education. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Archer, W., Garrison, R., & Anderson, T. (1999). Adopting disruptive 
technologies in traditional universities: Continuing education as an 
incubator for innovation. Canadian Journal of University Continuing 
­Education, 25(1), 13–30.
Argyle, K. (1996). Life after death. In R. Sheilds (Ed.), Cultures of Internet: 
Virtual spaces, real histories, living bodies (pp. 58–69). London: Sage.
Bates, A. W. (2005). Technology, e-learning and distance education (2nd ed). 
New York: Routledge Falmer Studies in Distance Education.
Baudrillard, J. (1983). In the shadow of the silent majorities. New York: 
Semiotext(e).
Bell, D. (1973). The coming of post-industrial society: A venture in social 
­forecasting. New York: Basic Books.
Bergevin, P. (1967). A philosophy of adult education. New York: Seabury.
Borgman, A. (1984). Technology and the character of contemporary life. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Boshier, R., & Mun Onn, C. (2000). Discursive constructions of web 
learning and education. Journal Distance of Distance Education, 15(2). 
Retrieved September 27, 2007, from http://cade.athabascau.ca/
vol15.2/boshieretal.html
Brameld, T. (1969). Ends and means in education. Westport, CT: 
­Greenwood.
Brent, D. (2001). Teaching as performance in the electronic classroom. Retrieved 
September 27, 2007 from http://www.quasar.ualberta.ca/cpin/­
cpinfolder/papers/Doug_Brent.htm
Camus, A (1940). The myth of Sisyphus. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Camus, A. (1942). The stranger. London: Vintage Books.
Camus, A. (1951). The rebel. Harmondsworth: Penguin.
Castells, M. (1999). The information age: Economy, society and culture (Vol. I, 
II and III). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell.
Chandler, D. (1996, February). Engagement with media: Shaping and 
being shaped. Computer-Mediated Communication Magazine. Retrieved 
September 27, 2007 from http://users.aber.ac.uk/dgc/determ.html 

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
113
Clark, R. E. (1983). Reconsidering research on learning from media. 
Review of Educational Research, 53(4), 445–459.
Clark, R. E. (1985). Confounding in educational computing research. 
Journal of Educational Computing Research, 1(2), 445–460.
Clark, R. E. (1994). Media will never influence learning. Educational 
Technology Research and Development, 42(2), 21–30.
Counts, G. (1932). Dare the school build a new social order. New York: John 
Day.
Dahlberg, L. (2004). Internet research tracings: Towards non-reduction-
ist methodology. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 7(1). 
Retrieved September 27, 2007 from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol7/
issue1/dahlberg.html
Daniel, J. (2000, July 18). The university of the future and the future of 
universities. Keynote address from the Improving University Learning 
and Teaching 25th International Conference. Retrieved September 27, 
2007, from http://www.open.ac.uk/johndanielspeeches/FrankfurtJuly 
2000.htm
Darkenwald, G., & Merriam, S. (1982). Adult education: Foundations of 
practice. Cambridge: Harper & Row. 
de Castell, S., Bryson, S., & Jenson, J. (2002). Object lessons: Towards 
an educational theory of technology. First Monday, 7(1). Retrieved 
September 27, 2007 at http://www.firstmonday.org/issues/issue7_1/
castell/
Dewey, J. (1910). How we think. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dewey, J. (1916). Democracy and education. New York: Macmillan.
Dewey, J. (1938). Experience and education. New York: Macmillan.
Draper, J. A. (1993). Valuing what we do as practitioners. In T. ­Barer-
Stein and J. A. Draper (Eds.), The craft of teaching adults (pp. 55–67). 
Toronto, ON: Culture Concepts.
Dreyfus, H. (2001). On the Internet: Thinking in action. New York: 
­Routledge.
Drucker, P. (1997). Interview. Forbes, March 1997.
Dubrovsky, V., Kiesler, S., & Sethna, B. (1991). The equalization phe-
nomena: Status effects in computer-mediated and face-to-face ­decision-
making groups. Human-Computer Interaction, 6(2), 119–146.
Ebersole, S. (2000). Uses and gratifications of the web among students. 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 6(1). Retrieved Septem-
ber 27, 2007 from http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol6/issue1/ebersole.
html

114	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Elias, J. L., & Merriam, S. (1980). Philosophical foundations of adult 
­education. Malabar, FL: Robert E. Krieger.
Feenberg, A. (1999). Questioning technology. New York: Routledge.
Fiske, J. (1987). Television culture. London: Routledge.
Foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and punish. A. Sheridan (Trans.). New 
York: Pantheon.
Freire, P. (1973). Education for critical consciousness. New York: Seabury.
Fromm, E. (1968). The revolution of hope, toward a humanized technology. 
New York: Harper & Row.
Garnham, N. (1990). Capitalism and communication: Global culture and the 
economics of information. London: Sage.
Garramone, G. M., Harris, A. C., & Anderson, R. (1986). Uses of politi-
cal computer bulletin boards. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
30(3), 325–339.
Garrison, D. R. (2002). Cognitive presence for effective online learning: 
The role of reflective inquiry, self-directed learning and metacogni-
tion. Invited paper presented to the Sloan Consortium Asynchronous 
Learning Network Invitational Workshop, Lake George, NY, September. 
Retrieved December 26, 2005, from communitiesofinquiry.com/­
documents/SLOAN%20CP%20Chapter%202003.doc
Garrison, D. R., & Anderson, T. (2003). E-learning in the 21st Century: A 
framework for research and practice. London: Routledge Falmer.
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2001). Critical thinking, 
cognitive presence and computer conferencing in distance education. 
American Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 7–23.
Gates, B. (1995). The road ahead. New York: Viking.
Golding, P., & Murdock, G. (Eds.) (1997). The political economy of the media 
(Vol. I and II). Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elger.
Golding, P., & Murdock, G. (2000). Culture, communication, and polit-
ical economy. In J. Curran & M. Gurevitch (Eds.), Mass media and 
society (3rd ed., pp. 71–92). London: Edward Arnold.
Goodman, P. (1994). Crazy hope and finite experience: Final essays of Paul 
Goodman. Taylor Stoehr (Ed.). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Green, T. F. (1971). The activities of teaching. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Habermas, J. (1970). Toward a rational society: Student protest, science, and 
politics. Boston: Beacon.
Harrison, T. M., & Stephen, T. (1999). Researching and creating 
­community networks. In S. Jones (Ed.), Doing internet research: Critical 
issues and methods for examining the Net (pp. 221–241). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
115
Hawkes, M. (2001). Variables of interest in exploring the reflective 
­outcomes of network-based communication. Journal of Research on 
­Computing in Education, 33(3), 299–315.
Heidegger, M. (1977). The question concerning technology. David Krell 
(Trans.). New York: Harper & Row.
Holt, J. (1967). How children learn. New York: Pitman.
Houle, C. (1972). The design of education. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Hutchins, R. (1953). The conflict in education in a democratic society. New 
York: Harper & Row.
Hutchins, R. (1968). The higher learning in America. New Haven: Yale 
University Press.
Ihde, D. (1979). Technics and praxis. London: D. Reil.
Illich, I. (1979). Deschooling society. New York: Harper & Row.
James, W. (1909). The meaning of truth: A sequel to Pragmatism. New York: 
Appleton.
Jonassen, D. H. (1996). Computers in the classroom: Mindtools for critical 
thinking. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Kanuka, H., & Kelland, J. (in press). A deliberative inquiry with experts in 
e-learning: Contentions in need of further research.
Katz, J. E., & Rice, R. E. (2002). Social consequences of Internet use: Access, 
involvement, and interaction. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Knowles, M. (1970). The modern practice of adult education. New York: 
Association Press.
Kozol, J. (1972). Free schools. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Lacroix, J. G., & Tremblay, G. (1997). The ‘Information Society’ and 
cultural industries theory. Current Sociology, 45(4), 1–153.
Lapadat, J. C. (2002). Written interaction: A key component in online learn-
ing. Journal of Computer Mediated Communication, 7(4). Retrieved April 8, 
2004, from http://www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol7/issue4/lapadat.html
Lindeman, E. (1956). The democratic man: Selected writings of Eduard 
­Lindeman. Boston: Beacon. 
Lyotard, J.-F. (1984). The postmodern condition: A report on knowledge. 
­Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Marcuse, H. (1941). Some implications of modern technology. Studies 
in Philosophy and Social Science, 9, 414–39.
Marcuse, H. (1964). One-dimensional man. Boston: Beacon.
Maritain, J. (1943). Education at the crossroads. New Haven: Yale University 
Press.
Marx, L. (1997). Technology: The emergence of a hazardous concept. 
Social Research, 64(3), 965–988.

116	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Maslow, A. (1976). Education and peak experience. In C. D. Schlosser 
(Ed.), The person in education: A humanistic approach. New York: 
­Macmillan.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media: The extensions of man. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
McLuhan, M., & Fiore, Q. (1962). The medium is the message. New York: 
Bantam.
Mezirow, J. (1991). Transformative dimensions of adult learning. San 
­Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Morley, D. (1989). Changing paradigms in audience studies. In E. Seiter, 
H. Borchers, G. Kreutzner & E. M. Warth (Eds.), Remote control: Televi-
sion, audiences, and cultural power (pp. 16–43). New York: Routledge.
Mosco, V. (1996). The political economy of communication. London: 
Sage.
Mumford, L. (1934). Technics and civilization. New York: Harcourt, Brace 
& Company.
Nguyen, D. T., & Alexander, J. (1996). The coming of cyberspacetime 
and the end of the polity. In R. Sheilds (Ed.), Cultures of Internet: 
Virtual spaces. Real histories, living bodies (pp. 99–124). London: Sage.
Noble, D. (1991). The classroom arsenal: Military research, information tech-
nology and public education. New York: Falmer.
Noble, D. (1998). Digital diploma mills: The automation of higher edu-
cation. First Monday, 3(1). Retrieved September 23, 2007 from http://
www.firstmonday.org /issues/issue3_1/noble/
Noble, D., Shneiderman, B., Herman, R., Agre, P., & Denning, P. J. 
(1998). Technology in education: The fight for the future. Educom 
Review, 33(3). Retrieved on July 26, 2005, from http://www.educause.
edu/pub/er/review/reviewArticles/33322.html
Peters, R. S. (1967). What is an educational process? In R. S. Peters (Ed.), 
The concept of education. Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Pool, I. D. S. (1983). Technologies of freedom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press.
Poster, M. (1997). Cyberdemocracy: Internet and the public sphere. In 
D. Porter (Ed.), Internet culture (pp. 201–217). New York: Routledge.
Postman, N. (1993). Technopoly: The surrender of culture to technology. New 
York: Vintage Books.
Rogers, C. R. (1967). The process of the basic encounter group. In  
J. F. T. Bugental (Ed.), Challenges of humanistic psychology. New York: 
McGraw-Hill.

Understanding e-Learning Technologies-in-Practice	
117
Sartre, J. P. (1949). Nausea. Lloyd Alexander (Trans.). London: Purnell 
& Sons.
Scheffler, I. (1960). The language of education. Springfield, IL: Charles 
Thomas.
Schiller, D. (1999). Digital capitalism: Networking the global market system. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Skinner, B. F. (1938). The behaviour of organisms. Cambridge, MA: B. F. 
Skinner Foundation.
Spears, R., & Lea, M. (1994). Panacea or panopticon? The hidden power 
in computer-mediated communication. Communication Research, 21(4), 
160–176.
Sproull, L., & Kiesler, S. (1986). Reducing social context cues: Electronic 
mail in organizational communications. Management Science, 32, 1492–
1512.
Sudweeks, F., McLaughlin, M., & Rafaeli, S. (Eds.) (1998). Network and 
netplay: Virtual groups in the Internet. Cambridge, MA: MIT.
Thorndike, E. (1932). The fundamentals of learning. New York: Teachers 
College, Columbia University.
Toffler, A., & Toffler, H. (1994). Creating a new civilization: The politics of 
the third wave. Atlanta: Turner Pub.
Twigg, C.A. (2003). Improving learning and reducing costs: New models 
for online learning. EDUCAUSE Review, 38(5), 29–38.
Tyler, R. (1949). Basic principles of curriculum and instruction. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press.
Van Doren, M. (1943). Liberal education. Boston: Beacon.
Watson, J. B. (1914). Behavior: An introduction to comparative psychology. 
New York: Norton.
Welchman, A. (1997). Funking up the cyborgs. Theory, Culture & Society, 
14(4), 155–162.
Winkelmann, C. L. (1995). Electronic literacy, critical pedagogy, and 
collaboration: A case for cyborg writing. Computers and the Humanities, 
29(6), 431–448.
Winner, L. (1977). Autonomous Technology: Technics-out-of-control as a theme 
in political thought. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Woolgar, S. (1991a). Configuring the user: The case of usability trials. 
In J. Law (Ed.), A sociology of monsters: Essays on power, technology and 
domination (pp. 58–97). London: Routledge.
Woolgar, S. (1991b). The turn of technology in social studies of science. 
Science, Technology, & Human Values, 16(1), 20–50.

118	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Woolgar, S. (1996). Technologies as cultural artefacts. In W. H. Dutton 
(Ed.), Information and communications technologies: Visions and realities 
(pp. 87–101). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Woolgar, S. (Ed.) (2002). Virtual society? Technology, cyberbole, reality. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Zinn, L. M. (1990). Identifying your philosophical orientation. In 
­M. Galbraith (Ed.), Adult Learning Methods (pp. 39–77). Malabar, FL: 
Krieger.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
At time of writing, Heather Kanuka (heather.kanuka@ualberta.ca) was a 
Canada Research Chair and associate professor in the Centre for Distance 
Education at Athabasca University. Dr. Kanuka is currently academic direc-
tor of the University Teaching Services unit at the University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Canada. Dr. Kanuka’s research interests are in faculty devel-
opment, higher education, and the effects of mediated learning.

Infrastructure and Support  
for Content Development
Part iI


Chapter 5
Developing an Infrastructure 
for Online Learning
Alan Davis
Vancouver Community College,  
British Columbia, Canada
Paul Little
Red River College, Manitoba, Canada
Brian Stewart
Athabasca University, Alberta, Canada
Introduction
Before embarking on the development of an online learning system, in 
part or in whole, careful stock needs to be taken of the needs of the 
intended learners, the curriculum to be offered, and the context for the 
project. This chapter considers the various factors that must be consid-
ered for the infrastructure for online learning, including planning, 
structural and organizational issues, the components of a system and 
the interfaces among them, and various related issues, such as human 
resources, decision-making, and training.. Once developed, any infra-
structure must be able to evolve in order to accommodate changing 
student needs, technologies, and curricula.
In 2003, as a result of the implementation of an e-learning plan, 
Athabasca University (AU) declared itself to be an online institution 
(Athabasca University, 2002a). As for many institutions and organiza-
tions, much had changed in a very short time with respect to the ­adoption 

122	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
of information and communications technologies. With the advent of 
Web 2.0, another era of change is now underway. While distance educa-
tion institutions and departments have been the vanguard of the devel-
opment of online learning, campus-based teachers and students have 
increasingly been mixing and matching their classroom and online 
­learning in all sorts of (often unanticipated) ways.
For AU, the selection of and engagement with Moodle as the 
institution’s single Learning Management System (LMS) has acted as 
a catalyst in moving the university’s course creation, production, and 
delivery processes online. The experiences of AU as it works its way 
through the transition have borne out many of the ideas and issues 
raised here; of note are governance and change issues. Without effec-
tive structures and processes, the selection, deployment, and ongoing 
performance of an online learning system will prove challenging, and 
perhaps unsuccessful.
Building the infrastructure for online learning has many inter­
connected components and many factors must be considered, so it is 
hard to provide a straightforward checklist or recipe to follow. Distance 
education has provided an understanding of how the entire system of 
course design, development, and delivery occurs, and how these link to 
related learner services and other components, all of which are vital 
aspects of ensuring effectiveness and quality. Elsewhere in this book, 
readers will find chapters that provide a wealth of information and detail 
the specifics of how to develop and deliver online learning. The focus 
here is on the planning and organization of an online learning system, 
and some of the associated issues that must be considered.
A concept often used by scientists, classifying systems as ideal versus 
non-ideal (more commonly understood as real) may be helpful. In this 
way, we can define the ideal, and then look at the deviations from the 
ideals that manifest themselves in the real (Lu, 2006).
The ideal online learning and teaching system is developed from 
scratch, with no restrictions on costs and staffing, and uninhibited by 
resistance to change from previous practices. A real system, however, is 
one where any or all of the following deviations from the ideal occur: 
limited resources; legacy systems that have loyal advocates; key staff who 
have to be retrained; unworkable policies and practices that require 
reinvention; inadequate governance processes; back-end administrative 
systems that may or may not be interfaceable; plus an evolving under-
standing of the pedagogical underpinnings of online learning. 
Furthermore, after these deviations from the ideal are initially factored 

Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning	
123
in, any real system must also be able to change constantly, specifically 
because curriculum, learning technologies, and approaches evolve all 
the time. Using this framework, the key aspects of an ideal online learn-
ing infrastructure are described and then adjusted for real situations; 
some ideas are also presented on how the subsequent and inevitable 
change can be managed.
Basic Thinking
Any social system is built within a context. The social context of ­education, 
in general, has evolved significantly over the centuries. The increasingly 
open approach to educational systems, supported by global village tech-
nologies, takes the social context of education beyond the windows and 
into the world. As such, for any online learning endeavour, each disci-
pline, department, faculty, institution, or company must have its own 
mission, mandate, goals, and values that need to be considered when 
planning and designing its own ideal system. For a real system, even at 
the conceptual level, there will be many internal and external environ-
mental factors, such as competing priorities, budget constraints, faculty 
and student preparedness, professional bodies’ requirements, and so 
on. All these factors must be well understood and accounted for from 
the outset.
All teaching and learning systems should be built from two vantage 
points: the needs of the intended students, and the intended learning outcomes 
of the course or program – i.e., the knowledge, skills, and attributes that 
students will gain. An ideal online learning system will be based on a 
plan that flows from a full understanding of these two fundamentals.
For intended students, it’s necessary to understand their prior 
learning, background with technology, expectations, financial and other 
resources, access to the web or other online networks, bandwidth limita-
tions, and any other pertinent information about their preparedness 
and ability to participate equally and fully in the online learning experi-
ence. In reality, of course, it is rare that such a complete picture is avail-
able, and a judgement call must be made on how the system balances 
common solutions for maximum efficiency and yet still accommodates 
students’ individual needs. For example, how much do we employ tech-
nologies, which we know the students are already familiar with and have 
access to, versus those which are new and unfamiliar and/or which are 
expected to become widely available? A good example of this question 

124	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
is the extent to which distance students have access to high-speed con-
nectivity. Since bandwidth is expanding steadily, and depending on 
student demographics and other factors, a system that assumes high band-
width might be preferred, with alternative access to certain online ­learning 
components such as CD-ROMs or DVDs for the few not yet ready.
There is also the need for clear identification of the intended 
learning outcomes of any course, program, or training event in order to, 
for instance, design a learning assessment system, determine the degree 
of prior learning that may be accepted, measure the quality of the offer-
ing, or use as a basic determinant of an online learning system. In applied 
and professional fields, describing the intent of the educational experi-
ence in terms of the knowledge, skills, and attributes expected of the 
successful completers is typically routine, and a curriculum and associated 
teaching and learning system can be devised and cross-referenced with 
those ends clearly in mind (Red River College, 2004).
In academic fields – the real world in this context – such outcomes 
are not so well, nor very often, explicitly stated. All programs claim to 
develop critical thinking skills, for instance, without much definition of 
what these are, what taxonomy is used to determine the extent of stu-
dents’ achievement, or how exactly the content and program design link 
to them. If the outcomes include the ability to work in groups, to under-
take independent research from a wide range of resources, or to critically 
analyze case studies, these will drive the design and functionality of the 
online learning system needed to deliver that curriculum. Having com-
prehensive and clearly stated intended learning outcomes, as well as a 
curriculum and associated teaching approaches designed accordingly, 
makes the task of building the ideal online learning system so much 
easier. In addition, at least some understanding of and linking with good 
principles of teaching and learning should be in place (Chickering & 
Ehrmann, 1996).
Closely related to these two fundamental educational design 
­perspectives – student needs and the learning outcomes – are the size, 
scope, and scalability needed for the online learning system. Whether 
the program is to be delivered to a well-defined and selected cohort of 
students once a year, or made available to all comers at all times (as 
driven by mandate or a business plan predicated on growth) will have 
a strong impact on how the system is designed.
The real situation, of course, is much less rational. Online ­learning 
initiatives often spring from the well-intentioned experimentation of an 
individual or small group of educators and/or technologists, oftentimes 

Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning	
125
with no clear idea of what the benefit to the learning experience will be 
(or not be). Sometimes, the addition of a new functionality, piece of 
content, or tool does not add value and is ignored by students; in other 
cases, a simple enhancement can reap great educational and other rewards 
for all concerned, sometimes in ways which were unanticipated. The 
degree to which an organization (department, faculty, company, or insti-
tution) wants to foster and allow more random experimentation versus 
keeping tight control over a single online learning system will be driven 
by that organization’s mission, mandate, core values, technological capa-
bilities, systems architecture, and financial resources. There are interest-
ing case studies of how institutions have adopted various strategies – 
intentionally or unintentionally – along this centralization/decentralization 
spectrum (see the International Review of Open and Distance Learning, 2001, 
1(2)). This is a very important decision, however, since it will determine 
how the online learning system should be designed, developed, resourced, 
and governed.
Even where the student market is well understood and learning 
outcomes clearly defined or prescribed, the implementation of online 
learning often involves a good deal of trial and error. With the best 
information and intentions, the results and experience rarely meet 
expectations, and thus the ability to adapt and refine the online learning 
system is crucial.
Overall Structure and Organization
The ideal case is based upon a good understanding of an institution’s 
or company’s core business and values, the nature of the intended 
student market, and the needs of the curriculum. This understanding 
is expressed through the learning outcomes of the program to be devel-
oped and delivered. On this basis, an overall online learning framework 
can be developed. This framework shows the organization of the various 
components of the proposed system, after which a relatively complete 
business plan for the endeavour can be developed. Figure 1 describes 
one such framework for a post-secondary institution, on which the 
­discussion of the various components is based.
Ideally, the learning outcomes (1) are translated into course 
content and resources plus appropriate strategies for the teaching and 
learning process that will enable students to achieve those intended 
outcomes. Once these basic parameters have been determined, the 

126	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­development team (2) shares the responsibility of translating the theory 
and intentions into practice in the form of courseware (stored on a 
Content Management System) and online learning functions, which are 
delivered by (3), the Learning Management System (LMS), which is 
interfaced with the library and other digital resources (4), related ­services 
(5), and the student information system (6) via a secure server (7) that 
can authenticate the student login.
This is but one view of an ideal system; there are increasing 
­perceptions that LMSs in themselves may be less significant in the system. 
i. Learning outcomes
Pedagogy, content
ii. Courseware
    development team
    instructional 
    design, editing, 
    visual design, 
    multimedia, 
    templates, 
    guidelines, 
   “look and feel,”
    copyright
Students
viii. User’s portal
v. Services
    advising, 
    registry,
    helpdesk, 
    exams etc.
iv. Other 
    learning
    object 
    repositories
ix. Quality
     assessment
     process        
iv. Library via 
     on-line 
     gateway
     and digital 
     resources
iii. Curriculum
     delivery via
     the learning 
     management 
     system
vii. Secure 
      server
vi. Student 
     information
     system
Figure 1.  An online learning system framework

Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning	
127
Indeed, the context of learning is so varied or open that the confines 
of an LMS may be too restrictive. For our purposes here, it is enough 
to recognize that learning and the connection to learning resources or 
experiences need to be managed, and that this process can be facilitated 
through some sort of LMS.
The students will connect to the LMS and related services via a 
user-friendly portal system (8) so that, with a single login, they can also 
have access to their courses. Finally, to ensure ongoing improvement, 
an independent evaluation process for the effectiveness of the system 
(based on achievement of the learning outcomes and students’ feed-
back), and an independent quality assessment process will be in place 
(9), which also feeds back into the development cycle.
Using this rough framework, aspects of the online learning infra-
structure will be discussed, but to conclude this section on overall organiza­
tion, the general relationships, particularly among the units responsible 
for information technology support, should be discussed. In 1990, Paul 
(1990) raised a number of important issues regarding the incorporation 
of technology into learning systems, many of which we still grapple with. 
Two in particular are pertinent here and are intertwined.
The first issue is the relationship between academic and admin-
istrative computing, whether they should be connected or not, and in 
either case, how these two information technology functions can inter-
face with each other. These questions are a significant aspect of the 
centralization/decentralization issue. While the normal structure is often 
to have them separated and reporting through different executive offi-
cers, the online learning staff and systems need a lot of support and 
maintenance from the central administrative computing unit, as do key 
service areas such as student registration, the library, and other learning 
resources. The second and tightly related issue is that of centralized 
control versus decentralized freedom. Normally, the administrative com-
puting units prefer a more centralized system, in order to improve inte-
gration, avoid duplication, ensure security, and minimize the divergent 
approaches and the subsequent complexity of support. Those involved 
in the design and delivery of educational programming prefer a more 
decentralized approach, with more freedom to innovate, and to choose 
platforms and applications that suit their specific needs and preferences. 
Of even greater possible political consequence is their deep desire for 
academic values and needs to have priority over those of the central 
administrative unit.

128	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
The separation of academic and administrative computing at an 
organizational level makes the implicit assumption that they can be 
separated on the technological level also. Such is unlikely to be the case 
as system interdependencies are a critical requirement of the ability to 
offer a seamless service to the student and, indeed, to the teacher. The 
growing complexity of learning systems requires a jointly developed 
vision for the technological architecture that provides flexibility and 
sustainability for both groups. Separating the activities into a bifurcated 
stream of development will ultimately compromise the ability of the 
organization to provide students with a responsive, flexible, and dynamic 
learning system.
In an ideal case, it should not matter how such units are organized 
or linked, since the overall goals and values of the institution or company 
surely will govern people’s behaviour and attitudes, and everyone will 
accommodate each other’s needs, responsibilities, and functions. In the 
real world of online learning, conflicting priorities and approaches quickly 
arise, and very tangible structures, clear roles and responsibilities, and 
processes and policies have to be established to help balance the relative 
needs for control/centralization and freedom/decentralization.
An additional organizational issue, more relevant to traditional 
institutions, is the question of discipline ownership. With much online 
learning emerging from the continuing/distance education departments 
and from the growth of online programming in other academic faculties, 
there is sometimes organizational conflict in who “owns” the discipline.
The Components of an Online Learning System
The following represent the typical components and functionality of a 
comprehensive online learning system.
Development of Courseware
Even at the initial stages of thinking about the development of an online 
learning program, it is wise to involve all those who are likely to be 
involved at any stage. This can be done by the sponsors of the program 
preparing a preliminary proposal, laying out the objectives of the 
program, determining the intended student market, and proposing an 
online learning approach. This gives various service units a chance to 
comment on matters that will affect them, and for fellow educators 
to comment on the proposed content and pedagogy. The proposal 

Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning	
129
should also identify the composition of the development and delivery 
teams that will be established to undertake the project. The nature of 
these teams can vary widely. The small team could be just one person, 
the content expert who is also an experienced educator and well trained 
to use a comprehensive web-learning platform and related technologies 
which are already fully supported by the institution or company. This 
person would just need routine support from areas such as copyright, 
library, and other departments.
Alternatively, a very complex team involves content experts, 
­educators, instructional designers, editors, visual designers, multimedia 
designers, programmers, systems staff, and so on, in the design of a 
course that needs new online learning functions, connects uniquely to 
the other systems, and involves the creation of new multimedia digital 
learning objects. In either case, the preliminary proposal must have suf-
ficient information for all concerned to understand what their likely 
role and responsibilities would be, and what direct and indirect costs 
would be involved.
For those familiar with formal project management processes and 
techniques, the identification and discussion around the proposal with 
the project team will seem redundant, but in academe, it is surprising 
how little attention is paid to this much needed process. Much of it is 
just common sense, common courtesy, and good planning. Depending 
on the size and scope of the task, some basic understanding and applica-
tion of the principles of project management is also required to develop 
online learning courseware. The roles of team members can vary widely, 
but, as a guideline, the following types of positions and the roles they 
play in the team are described further in Chapters 10 (Development of 
Online Courses) and 18 (Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing 
Team Projects Online) in this volume.
Learning Management System 
Another key decision to be made at the development phase is the choice 
of Learning Management System (LMS), which leads quickly to a discus-
sion of using commercial, proprietary software versus developing an in-
house system, which may or may not also be based on freely available, 
imported, open-source software. For the former, there are a host of very 
good and comprehensive packages, some which come as an add-on to 
the student information system, while others can be interfaced accord-
ingly. Training events, conferences, and meetings allow staff to be ori-
ented and updated on the software’s development and functionality. 

130	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Assessing which of the purchased options is the best fit for a particular 
online learning system’s needs can be an onerous task. All choices must 
be carefully considered and aided by some independent evaluation 
sources (Course Management Systems, 2007).
For the in-house system, there are many free, open-source 
­solutions also available, which emulate the functionality of the proprie-
tary systems and can be adapted in any manner needed. This approach 
may require more initial development and different skill sets among 
staff, to ensure the robustness of the system, provide a higher level of 
technical support on an ongoing basis, prepare documentation and 
training, and interface with other systems as necessary. Having an active 
community supporting and contributing to an open-source application 
provides considerable benefit, through access to a knowledge base and 
a continuing stream of developments.
In the ideal case, this choice of LMS is based on the needs of the 
course, without worrying about costs, the availability of qualified staff, 
or any limitations to using existing systems. The real case, however, is 
often more complicated: one is either constrained to a single solution 
based on previous institutional or company decisions (which some would 
think of as ideal), or one’s choice is limited (as it should be) by practi-
calities, such as the costs of adopting yet another proprietary LMS or 
the human resources needed and other implications of building or 
adapting an open-source LMS. Each new solution adds considerable 
pressure on back-end systems, especially services such as the technical 
helpdesk and training, and can have a negative impact on both the stu-
dents’ and teacher’s experience having to adapt to each LMS. Lastly, 
there is a lock-in factor: the costs of changing systems is very high, mainly 
due to the organizational relearning required to switch, and although 
much effort is being made to develop standards for online learning that 
will better enable interoperability and reusability of online content, the 
promise has not yet been met (Friesen, 2004).
The selection of the open-source Moodle LMS at Athabasca was 
achieved through the involvement of a broad section of experts in the 
community. An essential first task was the development of an evaluative 
criteria under the following headings:
•	Mandate
•	Systems Administration
•	Cost
•	Instructional Design
•	Teaching and Learning Tools

Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning	
131
These criteria provided guidelines to the evaluators to try out the 
applications under consideration and helped to establish a degree of 
objectivity to the process. A final report, produced for the entire 
Athabasca University community, outlined the reasons for the selection 
of Moodle (Stewart, 2007). The process proved effective in gaining accep-
tance of the selection within the institution, which has proven essential 
to its subsequent deployment.
Content Management System
The potential afforded by the LMS to have a more contextualized and 
dynamic learning environment sets in motion the need for a responsive, 
flexible, and potentially real-time content development system. Thus, 
upon deployment of an LMS, the provision of course materials or course-
ware using efficient and effective workflows will require the adoption of 
a Content Management System (CMS). There is no single description 
of a CMS or its functionality and there are many varieties available. In 
the main, these divide into two essential although not exclusive types: 
web content management systems and document management systems. 
The essential capabilities required for courseware are a system that can 
manage web content and provide a secure, accessible, and collaborative 
environment for the creation and storage of content in XML format. 
The importance of XML is that it allows content to be rendered through 
different media, such as print, web, and mobile devices.
As with LMSs, there are a considerable number of both open-
source and proprietary choices available (MIT, 2006). The selection and 
adoption of a CMS should follow closely in both time and methodology 
the choice of the LMS, although the expert groups may be different. A 
CMS will provide the functionality for the creation, collaboration, pro-
duction, and publishing of learning materials. As the delivery will be 
through the LMS it needs to be integrated into a seamless environment 
from the user’s perspective, requiring that both systems be technologi-
cally compatible.
Library and Digital Resources
Linking the course or program LMS to the necessary online resources 
is now a key element of any online system. Institutional and public librar-
ies have been leaders in the development of systems and protocols to 
acquire and share resources. Many now have electronic gateways to their 
own holdings; those housed elsewhere; digital databases of journals, 
magazines and government publications (including much in the way of 

132	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
full-text materials); and specially developed supplementary databases of 
materials selected for a particular course. In addition, learning objects 
will increasingly be accessible through in-house and external digital 
repositories. A key contribution to the development of online delivery 
is the librarian’s understanding of knowledge management and intel-
lectual property issues. These components are discussed in much more 
detail in Chapter 16, but the key point in developing the infrastructure 
for online learning is that the availability of such online resources should 
be ensured or at least anticipated, so that the courseware is developed 
accordingly, the LMS is appropriately configured, and any access for the 
student is enabled.
Learner Services
Most attention in online learning must be paid to the courseware and 
delivery platform. Those who have worked in various forms of distributed 
learning for many years know only too well the vital importance of the 
non-academic learner support needed to ensure student success and 
satisfaction. Depending on the enterprise involved, this support would 
include technical help, educational advising, various forms of counsel-
ling, services for learners with special needs, and so on (see Chapter 17). 
In an ideal online learning system, these aspects would be given equal 
priority and developed in concert with the curriculum. In a real situa-
tion, such services likely already exist, but are designed for traditional 
educational environments, and so their conversion and enhancement 
for online learning is needed, with the ability to adapt and change as 
new options and learner expectations change.
Interface with the Student Information System
Ideally, the LMS is linked to the Student Information System (SIS) in 
such a manner that the right student is automatically placed in the right 
course at the right time with all the right student information easily 
available to the right instructor and to anyone else who needs it. This 
interface avoids the need to input student names into the LMS, with all 
the associated errors and wasted time. Instructors should be able to 
manipulate the student data as needed for the course (e.g., submitting 
and editing final marks), and to contact the students as a group, in ­sub-
groups, and individually.
All these capabilities require integration between the LMS, CMS, 
portal, and the SIS, allied to strong identity and access management that 
will authenticate students to enter their individual learning space. An 

Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning	
133
integrated SIS/LMS system may seem attractive if one is building an 
online learning system from scratch. However, in many real situations, 
there are one or more LMSs, each of which needs to be interfaced as 
needed to the SIS, and any or all of these may be proprietary, imported, 
or home-built systems.
The User’s Portal
As for most sophisticated online enterprises (travel, banking, shopping, 
and so on), the nature of the portal provided to the learner (and indeed 
to staff in various ways) is important. At minimum, the portal should 
allow the learner, with one secure login, to access everything that is of 
interest to them: the LMS (and from there to other essential links), their 
grades, other applicable documentation on their student file, and related 
learner services and accounts. The portal environment should also be 
open for students to exhibit their preferences through the customization 
of the interface and the information and user communities they choose 
to access or give accesses to.
The growth in portal sophistication represents a major ­improvement 
in student services that is only achievable through online delivery. The 
ability to personalize a student’s experience is not economically or practi-
cally conceivable in the off-line world. Further, the involvement of stu-
dents in the creation of their own personal spaces provides a level of 
control and convenience that, by itself, adds significantly to the student’s 
understanding of their learning environment.
Initial forays into this portal-enabled space include social network-
ing, e-portfolios, and course support applications. On the horizon are 
automated support capabilities, such as e-advising and e-counselling, 
that would review the information provided through the institution’s 
SIS to provide students with advice as to choice of programs, course 
schedules, and related communities of practice. The network ability of 
portals enables an interconnected and real-time analysis of Internet-
available information to be used in the provision of such services. 
Although such services will not provide a complete picture or replace 
the higher-level counselling or advising functions, they can provide ­real-
time assistance to students that will improve both their learning experi-
ence and ­learning outcomes.
Quality Assessment
Most institutions and organizations have a unit dedicated to providing 
thorough and independent evaluation of any enterprise, as part of the 

134	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
routine process of quality assurance and improvement. Ideally, the 
­development of an e-learning system should include a plan for the inde-
pendent evaluation of all aspects of the system, but especially the degree 
to which it enables or enhances the achievement of the stated learning 
outcomes (especially in the opinion of its users). Furthermore, such an 
evaluation would also provide information about the system’s return on 
investment, especially the unanticipated or unseen costs of ­implementation 
from back-end systems, staff attitudes, infrastructure, and so on. 
In the real situation, where there may be a variety of systems in 
place, the tendency will be for each group to undertake its own research, 
which can often be biased (intentionally or not) and difficult to compare 
with others, unless a strict and common framework is in place. Even if 
only one system exists, larger corporate pressures may ensure that a 
project is “doomed to succeed.” This is an aspect of online learning 
where a strong and centralized approach is preferred. The type, scope 
and framework for evaluation must be independent and structured if 
the results are to lead to real improvement in systems and good decisions 
on whether to scrap the systems or build on them with new resources.
Related Issues
Many institutions and organizations who have shifted significant areas 
of their core business to an online environment may have noticed the 
predicted and unanticipated effects on all aspects of their enterprise. 
For online learning, some of these impacts are straightforward and can 
be factored in early on, with systematic updates.
•	Back-end hardware (servers, switches, etc.) and connectivity will 
need to be estimated up front, then routinely adjusted as the 
number of users grows and the system evolves, as well as standards 
and expectations for up-time (usually 24 hours, seven days a 
week). With the expectations that video will be increasingly used 
routinely in online learning, this back-end element will be under 
ever-increasing demands.
•	Polices related to access to servers, security, and the use of the 
online learning system need to be in place, to balance the need 
for stability and security with the need to innovate (Athabasca 
University, 2003).
•	Technical help and helpdesk support needs to be in place, possibly 
linked to a training, orientation, and documentation function, 

Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning	
135
which can provide support to students and staff on the online 
learning system. Since this function can be spread among the core 
information service and the teaching units, clear mandates and 
lines of responsibility must be in place to avoid duplication of 
effort or gaps in support.
•	A host of human resource issues need to be addressed. Some are 
tied to collective agreement and employment contract terms and 
conditions, especially those related to service standards and expec-
tations (which go beyond the normal working day) and the auto-
matic flexibility that online learning provides not only to the 
student, but also to the staff in terms of the place and times that 
they work. By way of examples, online activities such as chatting, 
discussion within forums, blogging, pod-casting, and wiki editing, 
will likely be new to many faculty and need to be integrated into 
accepted practice. Such integration may require new policies on 
attendance and standards for being in touch with the central 
office for administrative matters.
•	Another human resource issue is the constantly shifting nature of 
the work that staff undertake. Many individuals working in online 
learning have had no official (or dated) training, but have learned 
and adapted successfully to new approaches and new technologies. 
There are many stories of staff who entered organizations at a 
junior level and worked their way into key roles in online learning, 
often quite unexpectedly, as organizational needs and their abili-
ties evolved. Traditional approaches to hiring, appointment, pro-
motions, position classification, access to training and professional 
development have to be adapted in order to maximize the oppor-
tunity to invest in and reward staff in such in such a dynamic 
environment, and/or to avoid exploiting staff who may be working 
well above the level for which they are paid. The long-term sustain-
ability of the online learning system will depend, to a large extent, 
on how this new human resource environment is addressed, if 
only to retain valuable staff. The online learning system itself 
should inspire new types of flexible training for staff, with inter-
institutional and intrainstitutional support groups and learning 
communities, information links, and so forth.
•	Lastly, the process for decision-making and resource allocation 
related to online learning in an institution or organization must 
be carefully considered. If new committees are to be established 
to provide recommendations on direction and investments, care 

136	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
must be taken to balance the discussion between those who know 
and understand a lot (but may proselytize one approach in favour 
of another), central technical staff, decentralized technical staff 
who directly support the online system (and who often want more 
freedom), the central administration (who likely do not know as 
much, but are accountable for the success and effectiveness of 
the system), and the users (teachers and learners). The role of 
independent and thorough evaluation becomes very important 
in this process.
Organizational Change
Any educational endeavour, if it is of any credibility, is dynamic in nature, 
responding to new knowledge, understanding, and approaches to the 
disciplines, to new employment market needs, to changing student 
demographics, and so on. In a traditional campus or classroom environ-
ment, the expectation is on the teachers and/or curriculum developers 
to ensure this currency, and the same is true in online systems. In the 
online system, however, change is more complicated, because any change 
in content or approach can have wide impact on a number of aspects 
of the system. Online learning technologies themselves evolve just as 
quickly as the curriculum, as do students’ expectations, their level of 
connectivity, and so on (sometimes in unexpected ways). In short, the 
organization’s capacity and capability of effectively managing change is 
of vital importance.
Assuming that the organization as whole respects and encourages 
change in such systems, there still remains the matter of how it is to be 
managed within the context of online learning. The first issue is balance: 
specifically, between every time a new idea or product comes into view 
(including those good for students) versus sticking with an established 
system (typically for administrative ease and staff convenience). In short, 
such changes often take place long after they have been superseded by 
better, proven systems.
The degree of centralization or decentralization of a system (or 
systems) also drives the change process. To what extent will some units 
be free to explore and try new systems, and to what extent will those 
lagging behind be forced to update their approaches? Such questions, 
since they relate to core aspects of an organization’s business and culture, 
can only be answered within that context. Thus, following the dimen-
sions of an online system infrastructure would appear to be the key to 
handling change well.

Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning	
137
Leadership
As for any organizational issue, effective change starts with leadership. 
Having the right attitude towards change, its importance and value, is 
essential. Change should be embraced, and not seen to be just another 
headache to be dealt with. Kotter (1996) gives a concise explanation of 
why change is inevitable and crucial in modern business, and provides 
specific ideas on how change can be led. Organizations have different 
mandates, cultures, leadership styles, and competitive positions. 
Universities, for example, have consensual cultures, and therefore 
leaders of change in such environments require the ability to understand 
the needs of the broad group of stakeholders before implementing 
change initiatives.
Scouting Reports
Some staff, as part of their work, must look around for emerging trends 
and ideas in online learning systems, and provide a place for others to 
feed information they come across. These scouting reports need to be 
compiled and shared. In addition, staff members who support online 
learning applications, particularly in cases where open-source software 
is used, need to incorporate themselves into the communities that plan 
and develop applications. By so doing, they may influence and contribute 
to the applications’ development roadmaps, while providing a knowledge 
base for the organization’s community. This function is well supported 
by regular reports such as the annual Horizon Report (2007).
Governance
A governance body is needed that deals not only with current issues 
related to online systems, but also provides a forum for discussion of 
emerging trends, organizes meetings and events to share and demon-
strate new ideas, and revisits the vision for the online learning system 
regularly (e.g., every year or two). This vision should be detailed enough 
to allow affected managers to adjust their plans and budgets accordingly, 
within the context of the organization’s regular cycle. The terms of ref-
erence and reporting relationship of this body should be commensurate 
with the importance of online learning to the organization.
Membership in such a body can be difficult to determine. The 
first impulse is typically to include those most intimately involved in 
online systems – technical experts and educational technology champi-
ons – simply because their opinions are valuable. A more important 

138	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­criterion for membership for such an expert, however, is an individual’s 
willingness to consider a wide variety of alternatives, and to not stub-
bornly defend their own particular preferred approach. In addition, 
users of the online systems, neophyte teachers, students, and user support 
staff, provide an important balance to discussions which otherwise can 
degenerate into purely technical banter. Finally, this body should be 
chaired by the highest possible level of relevant management.
The governance body also plays an important role in the alloca-
tion of resources to specific initiatives. Such decision-making ability and 
authority is essential to effective governance; a broad strategic perspec-
tive should be channelled through the governance body to prioritize 
and allocate limited resources to projects with the most potential to 
achieve the institution’s objectives. Without effective governance, initia-
tives are not likely to be funded on the basis of best fit or strategic 
importance, but instead on more local or individual concerns.
At the same time, governance must not stifle innovation. Gover-
nance, therefore, should have three levels of decision-making: enterprise, 
departmental, and individual, each level with defined criteria for accep-
tance, and each level armed with a clear understanding of how the tech-
nology will be used. Having clear guidelines will help engender ­innovation 
while ensuring its effective usage within the larger community.
Communication
The requirement to continuously communicate at all levels of the orga-
nization cannot be overstated. From concept to commissioning, all stake-
holders must be aware of what is going on. The adoption of transparent 
processes with effective governance provides the basis for developing 
trusting relationships among the greater community, and serves to lessen 
the inevitable apprehension that change typically engenders.
Through the governance body, there needs to a process whereby 
developments and ideas in online education are regularly broadcast 
internally though newsletters and in multiple forums, and, where appro-
priate, externally via journals and conferences. Simplicity of language 
is important, as is the opportunity to receive input and explain any 
apparent inconsistencies in approach.
Pilot Projects and Evaluation
An important dimension of change is the use of pilot projects for new 
developments, plus effective evaluation of their impact before proceed-
ing to wider adoption. The governance body could provide the approval 

Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning	
139
for such pilots, and have pool of resources to allocate accordingly. 
Unfortunately, pilots often become the first phases of deployment, and 
actions taken eventually result in the organization scrambling to retro-
actively provision and support what has essentially become an operational 
system. Having clear expectations of the pilot communicated to the 
project owners in advance of the project will help to ensure that such 
misunderstandings are avoided from the outset. Evaluation of any pilot 
system should be at arm’s length, and the results should be shared widely 
throughout the community. In this way, the organization can receive 
the fullest benefit and intelligence from its pilots, and the process of 
­innovation can be seen by all involved to be open and effective.
Change Management
As implied, new ideas and approaches must be fostered, not only by 
words, but also by financial and in-kind resources. Moreover, these 
resources must be coordinated via an open and widely representative 
governance body. The goal here is to balance the organization’s need 
for control over implementing innovations (which can deviate rapidly 
if separate units are left to their own devices) versus the organization’s 
need to constantly explore new innovations and foster the culture of 
change needed to support such innovation. For the human resources 
involved, the same balance of recognition and rewards for individuals’ 
contributions to implementation and innovation must be found.
A defined process must also be employed to provide a framework 
for any proposed changes. As mentioned above, project management 
provides transferable practices which can be used for this purpose, par-
ticularly as the changes are typically complex, ranging from developing 
a new module in-house to deploying an existing, turnkey module. The 
process must also allow broad input into both the approval process and 
the precise specifications of the desired change.
Change is a concomitant outcome of all technological develop-
ments. Indeed, even relatively minor amendments to existing work prac-
tices can have disruptive effects. As the impact is in the mind of the 
changed and not the changer, effective change management requires a 
high level of sensitivity and understanding, to help assist the group to 
adapt to the new environment. It should always be kept in mind, however, 
that any technological innovation is only as effective as the weakest user’s 
ability to use it. An adequate technology that is well accepted will be 
more effective than a good technology that is not. All change initiatives 
therefore need to have the usability of the system as their main goal and 

140	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
focus on organizational change; in other words, in the people, not the 
functionality of a particular piece of technological wizardry.
Conclusion
In order to develop an infrastructure that supports excellence in online 
leaning, the issues to be addressed are almost all the same as for any 
post-secondary educational enterprise: a clear understanding of the goals 
of the curriculum and the characteristics of the intended students’ needs, 
coupled with a healthy working environment with committed staff, where 
implementation can proceed and where constant change is understood 
to be the norm. Within these general areas, there are, of course, a host 
of technical, procedural, and policy decisions to be made. Nonetheless, 
online learning is now mature enough that such decisions need not be 
made haphazardly: there are many successful examples of online learning 
systems to learn from and plenty of research and information available, 
including this online text. As opposed to those who were the vanguard 
of this exciting educational development, new contributors can now 
focus their efforts on getting the basic principles and goals in order 
before proceeding to implementation. Ultimately, as with any educa-
tional system, online learning is fundamentally a human endeavour, with 
technology available to support the agreed-upon principles and goals, 
not vice-versa.
References
Athabasca University. (2002a). Athabasca University Education Plan web 
page. Retrieved December 1, 2002, from http://intra.athabascau.ca/ 
reports/edplan_0ct4_02.doc
Athabasca University. (2002b). Athabasca University Student Academic ­Services 
web site. Retrieved December 1, 2002, from http://intra.­athabascau.
ca/reports/ student_satisf_acad_services_2002.doc
Athabasca University. (2003). Athabasca University Sever Policy web page. 
Retrieved May 19, 2007, from http://www.athabascau.ca/policy/­
computingservices/serverpolicy.htm
Chickering, A., & Ehrmann, S. C. (1996, October). Implementing the seven 
principles: Technology as lever. Retrieved May 19, 2007, from http://www.
tltgroup.org/programs/seven.html 

Developing an Infrastructure for Online Learning	
141
Course Management Systems. (2007). Course management systems on www.
edutools.info web site. Retrieved May 19, 2007, from http://www.edutools.
info/course/index.jsp
Friesen, N. (2004). Editorial: A gentle introduction to technical  
e-­learning standards.
Canadian Journal of Learning and Technology, 30(3). Retrieved March 6, 
2007, from http://www.cjlt.ca/content/vol30.3/normeditorial.html
Horizon Report. (2007). NMC.org ‘Horizon Report’ web page. Retrieved 
May 19, 2007, from http://www.nmc.org/horizon/
International Review of Open and Distance Learning. (2001). Interna-
tional Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 1(2). Retrieved 
May 19, 2007, from http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/issue/
view/10
Kotter, J. P. (1996). Leading change. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School 
Press.
Lu, M. (2006). SparkNotes on ideal gases. Retrieved May 19, 2007, from 
http://www.sparknotes.com/chemistry/gases/ideal
MIT. (2006). Peer review of course/learning management systems. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT. Retrieved May 19, 2007, from http://www.wcet.info/services/ 
publications/MIT07-19-06.pdf 
Paul, R. H. (1990). Open learning and open management: Leadership and 
integrity in distance education. New York: Nichols Publishing.
Red River College. (2004). Red River College, learning outcomes web page. 
Retrieved May 19, 2007, from https://me.rrc.mb.ca/LearningOutcome 
Support/
Stewart, B., Briton, D., Gismondi, M., Heller, B., Kennepohl, D., McGreal, 
R., & Nelson, C. (2007). Choosing Moodle: An evaluation of learning 
management systems at Athabasca University. Journal of Distance 
­Education Technologies, 5(3), 1–7.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Alan Davis is vice-president of Education at Vancouver Community College. 
Since 1989, Dr. Davis has held senior positions at the BC Open University, 
Athabasca University, and Niagara College. His original discipline was 
chemistry, and he received his doctorate from Simon Fraser University in 
1980. He has special interests in learning assessment and accreditation, 
the management of online learning, and higher education consortia.

142	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Paul Little is dean of the School of Learning Innovation, Red River 
College, Winnipeg, Canada.
Brian Stewart is the chief information officer at Athabasca University – 
Canada’s Open University.

Chapter 6
Technologies of  
Online Learning  
(E-learning)
Rory McGreal
Athabasca University
Michael Elliott
Mosaic Technologies
Introduction
This chapter includes an examination of some of the most exciting 
technologies and features used in online instruction today, and those 
we may use tomorrow. Education is one of the fastest-growing economic 
and social sectors in the world, and the use of new technologies is an 
integral and driving component of that growth. Multimedia applications 
have long been popular on the Web, and these combined with streaming 
audio and video podcasts, such as the myriad music sites or video sites 
like YouTube, are opening up different opportunities for educators. 
Audio chat using Skype has become common, and web conferencing is 
used for teaching and for creating podcasts. Other useful applications 
in this chapter include instant messaging and peer-to-peer file sharing. 
The possibilities of using the new hand-held third-generation mobile 
technologies are also explored along with blogs, RSS, wikis, learning 
objects, digital games, and virtual worlds.

144	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Many of these applications are seamlessly combined in the latest 
social networking sites such as Facebook, MySpace, and Bebo. These 
sites allow students, in classes or as informal learners, to create a 
­community online. Although the sites are public, individuals or groups 
can choose to close off their space, limiting it to “friends” or to  
their classmates.
Multimedia on the Internet
Multimedia incorporates text, graphics, and audio media (often with 
real video or animations) and combines them, using a computer. Almost 
every personal computer built today is capable of delivering multimedia 
presentations for entertainment, advertising, or education. Edutainment 
is a word for applications that incorporate multimedia entertainment 
with educational objectives.
Multimedia on the Internet is still not an everyday reality in the 
same sense as multimedia on CD-ROM or DVD, which may be com-
monplace in the home or classroom. Internet connection speeds limit 
the quality and quantity of what can be transmitted. Even with wired/
wireless and high-speed advances, the transmission of large sound, ani-
mation, and video files can be time-consuming and often frustrating.
With the introduction of streaming multimedia in the past five or 
six years, however, large multimedia files can now be delivered even 
over modem connections. Streaming multimedia is an Internet data 
transfer method that facilitates the transfer of audio and video files from 
computer to computer in a “stream.” Streamed media packets can be 
played as soon as the data starts arriving at the receiving computer – 
users do not have to wait until the full file has been downloaded. 
Streaming audio has been more successful than video, which has gener-
ally been limited to small picture sizes or low resolution (grainy) video 
projections, but as the bandwidth increases, higher quality, full-screen 
video becomes possible.
The key to this breakthrough is the format in which the files are 
distributed, or served, over the Internet. Large audio or video files are 
converted into a format that can be sent as a continuous stream of small 
pieces to a user’s computer. At the user’s end of the connection, special 
software interprets the stream of data and begins to play the sample. 
While the first part of the sample is being played, the next is being 
downloaded. The second sample begins seamlessly, the first is deleted, 

Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)	
145
and the third is downloaded. Using this format, hours of audio and video 
content can be received over a slow modem connection.
Recommended Links
The following links provide some good examples of educational 
­multimedia on the Web:
•	Athabasca University Astronomy 230: Northern Lights/Northern 
Skies: http://astro.whytespace.ca/
•	Math Open Reference – Plane Geometry: http://www.mathopenref. 
com/index.html
•	Kbears (Knowledge Bears): http://www.kbears.com/
•	National Museum of American History: http://americanhistory.
si.edu/kids/athome.cfm
•	University of Washington, EDGE streaming video web site: http://
www.engr.washington.edu/edge/streaming.html
•	Free-ed.net: http://www.free-ed.net/free-ed/
•	Malloy, T. Understanding ANOVA Visually: http://www.psych.utah.
edu/stat/introstats/anovaflash.html
Streaming Audio
Audio was the first type of multimedia to be delivered over the Internet 
in a streaming format; concerts and live radio broadcasts were among 
the first examples of streamed audio to appear. A wide range of stream-
ing audio formats is in use on the Web today, but while each is different 
in name, the basic technology remains the same.
When a sound file is prepared for streaming, it is compressed to 
reduce the overall size of the file. For example, a news broadcast consist-
ing of a single recorded voice would normally be a smaller file than an 
orchestral sample. In some cases, compression also means that the quality 
of the file is affected.
Different programs are available for receiving streaming audio, 
each with its own proprietary sound or media format. Quality varies from 
format to format, but all are compatible with modem connections. 
Recently, these programs have become more generic, which is good news 
for the end user, who no longer faces the hassle of installing three dif-
ferent programs in order to listen to three different sound formats. 
Instead, the newer, more powerful media players can decode, ­decompress, 
and play a variety of proprietary sound samples.

146	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Many of the Internet’s most widely-publicized firsts have happened 
as a result of streaming media events. The longest continuous Internet 
broadcast in history was in the form of a “jam session” held during the 
Canadian East Coast Music Awards in Moncton, New Brunswick, in 1997; 
that record was bettered during the following year’s ceremony (East 
Coast Music Association, n.d.). Producing a live, continuous stream of 
music (and in subsequent years, video) for over 80 hours was truly an 
impressive feat. Another, more widely known first was Paul McCartney’s 
1999 return to The Cavern, the bar in Liverpool where the Beatles first 
played (Fab Four, n.d.). This live broadcast over the Internet was the 
most listened-to sound production in Internet history.
Educational Uses
Streaming audio is currently used as a supplement to classroom-based 
and online course delivery, usually in the form of prerecorded lectures, 
interviews with guests, student projects, samples of student classroom 
interaction, or sound bytes of content relevant to the course of study. 
For music or English composition courses, it can be used by teachers or 
students to record samples of their work and make them available to 
the teacher and other students. Streaming on demand is becoming a 
key feature in web-based education. For example, listen to Gustav Holst’s 
musical interpretation of The Planets included in the list of recommended 
links given below.
Recommended Links
•	Trussler, B., Gustav Holst: The Planets Suite: http://www.aquarianage. 
org/lore/holst.html
•	Internet.com News Channel: http://www.Internet.com/sections/
news.html
•	East Coast Music Association, Your Music: http://www.ecma.ca
•	Streaming Media World: http://www.streamingmediaworld.com
Streaming Video
First came radio, and then television. And on the Web, first came 
­streaming audio, and then streaming video. When a video sample is 
presented in electronic format, there are many more “layers” of data to 
be converted and compressed than with audio alone. As a result, when 
this multimedia format is delivered over the Internet in a streaming 

Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)	
147
delivery system, more technical and educational issues must be taken 
into consideration.
Size is the first issue. Video files are much larger than audio files, 
and video combined with audio is larger still. Video samples also demand 
more processing power on the part of the receiving computer. It is rela-
tively simple to record sound – music, voice, or both – even on a home 
computer. Recording video and saving it in an electronic format, however, 
is more demanding on hardware and requires additional software. 
Because of the size and other issues, video has taken longer to become 
an industry standard, and it is harder to find educational applications 
for streaming on the Web.
Receiving streaming video feeds on a home computer is not 
­difficult. Newer versions of Windows®, Apple OS®, and Linux come 
with pre-installed streamers for audio and video. Generally, these stream-
ers are sufficient for most educational applications. As is the case with 
streaming audio, different formats require different applications; 
however, most multimedia applications now available for the home 
market have been designed to receive both audio and video streams. 
Superbowl XXXV (Clancy, n.d.), held in January 2001, saw the recre-
ational and commercial use of streaming multimedia go to new heights. 
Long known for its glamorous halftime shows and extremely expensive 
commercials, this event was different from those of past years because 
of the means by which the commercials were broadcast. For those unable 
or unwilling to sit through hours of football to see a few commercials, 
several online video streaming sites encoded and broadcast the com-
mercials within minutes of their traditional broadcast. By noon of the 
next day, hundreds of thousands of people had a chance to see what 
they had missed the night before. This application illustrates how events 
or sequences can be decomposed to extract only the relevant compo-
nents. This technique is now driving the creation of modular, chunk-sized 
content objects, often referred to as learning objects, or more precisely, 
as knowledge objects.
Educational Uses
The stiff, unemotional “talking head” of a professor or tutor in the corner 
of an e-learning web page is the image that most quickly comes to mind 
when one considers video clip use in an online educational situation. 
In such a presentation, a professor or tutor delivers a prepared lecture 
or shows an example of a hands-on activity; however, almost any video 
sample with educational value can be converted to a streaming format, 

148	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
and many will serve as excellent additional resources on an educational 
web page, for classroom courses, or for online courses delivered syn-
chronously. When implemented wisely, video can alleviate the page-
turning boredom of many online courses. The LearnAlberta.ca project, 
included in the list of recommended links below, is an example of an 
educational video streaming project with a variety of video-based curri-
cula for Alberta teachers and students. This project was established to 
define and deploy a prototype K–12 application.
Recommended Links
•	YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/
•	University of Washington, EDGE, Streaming Video Site: http://
www.engr.washington.edu/edge/streaming.html
•	CyberTech Media Group, Streaming Video over an Intranet: 
http://www.cybertechmedia.com/intranet.html
•	MP3, Top 40 Charts: http://www.mp3charts.com
Audio Chat and Voice-Over Internet Protocol
Text chat has long been a popular feature of the Internet. Within the 
past decade, audio chat has also emerged and become quite popular 
(Romero, 2000). Point-to-point audio connections can be made between 
almost any two computers on the Internet, and some Internet service 
providers (ISPs) and online services are now offering free Internet-based 
long-distance service that connects individuals calling through a personal 
computer to the public telephone system.
Although the robustness of Internet phone calls, or Voice-over 
Internet Protocol (VoIP), is currently somewhat inferior to that of dial-
up long-distance telephone, consumers are increasingly attracted to 
Internet telephony. Most of the time, the quality is very high, and the 
price is free when calling computer to computer, or extremely cheap 
when calling telephones. The success of Skype and other VoIP services is 
due to the relative simplicity of making a call, requiring only an Internet 
hookup, headphones or speakers, and a microphone. After signing up 
with an Internet telephony provider, users can make local or long-
­distance calls to people with any type of phone. However, since voice 
transmissions are carried over the Internet in small packets, in the same 
manner as data transmissions, conversations can be subject to delays. 
Without a high-speed Internet connection, the quality of an Internet 

Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)	
149
call can deteriorate affecting the robustness of the call, but companies 
are working to improve it.
Educational Uses
Classroom-based, email pen pal programs have been used for a long time 
as a way of making intercultural connections between schools. Internet 
telephony will add an opportunity for students to speak to others in their 
age group, almost anywhere in the world. It will therefore facilitate more 
fluid and natural communication between different cultural groups, and 
will be especially useful for foreign language exposure and practice.
Teacher or tutor and student communication can be greatly 
enhanced by opportunities to speak with one another, to discuss an 
assignment or a difficult concept without the expense of long-distance 
tolls. An electronic blackboard can be used along with VoIP for synchro-
nous teaching. This practice is known as audio-graphic teleconferencing. 
Microsoft’s NetMeeting is can be used in this manner.
Recommended Links
•	Skype: http://www.skype.com/
•	ICUII.com. ICUII Video Chat (I See You Too, audio and video 
phone): http://www.icuii.com
•	PC-Telephone.com: http://www.pc-telephone.com
•	Microsoft Corp., NetMeeting: http://www.microsoft.com/windows/ 
netmeeting
Web Conferencing
Web conferencing is a form of graphic teleconferencing, used in 
­combination with VoIP as a single tool in general web applications that 
support real-time collaboration. The “whiteboarding” feature emulates 
writing or drawing on a blackboard. With a whiteboard, both teachers 
and learners can create, manipulate, review, and update graphical infor-
mation online in real time while participating in a lecture or discussion. 
Using a mouse, an electronic stylus with a tablet, or even a large elec-
tronic classroom-sized whiteboard, users can annotate by writing, cutting 
and pasting, or clicking, dragging, and dropping. In web conferencing, 
content can be saved and used in future presentations. Imported graph-
ics can be used as underlays that the user can trace over, using an “onion-
skin,” “placed” on top of the image; for example, routes can be drawn 

150	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
and redrawn on maps. The providers listed in the Recommended Links 
section below sell or rent virtual classrooms, with size (i.e., number of 
simultaneous logons permitted) determined by the license and the band-
width available at the central site. These products are now incorporating 
small video images, “web safaris” in which the teacher leads the class to 
visit various sites, and application sharing which allows any of the 
­distributed users to control a single application.
Educational Uses
These audio and graphics-enhanced web conferencing applications allow 
for the emulation of classroom lessons. Students in different locations 
can participate actively and collaboratively with the teacher and with 
other students in the creation and adaptation of graphical information. 
This application is particularly appropriate for brainstorming sessions.
Recommended Links
•	Saba Centra Software, Inc. Saba Centra.com: http://www.saba.
com/products/centra/ 
•	Elluminate, Inc., Elluminate.com: http://www.elluminate.com
•	Luidia Inc., eBeam: http://www.e-beam.com
•	WBD Whiteboard (open source): http://www-mice.cs.ucl.ac.uk/
multimedia/software/wbd/
Instant Messaging
ICQ (I seek you), a commercial product distributed freely over the Net, 
can be described as an Internet paging device. It has some similarities 
to other modes of text-based communication, such as email or Internet 
Relay Chat (IRC). ICQ allows short messages to be sent electronically 
from computer to computer. As with email, the messages are stored on 
a central server until the recipient collects them; however, ICQ is more 
dynamic, in that it shows all of the group members when the recipient 
logs on. Thus, the exchanges are often very rapid and work much like 
synchronous text exchanges. Attachments and web addresses (URLs) 
can also be sent. Unlike email, however, ICQ also allows group chat ses-
sions to be opened and voice chats to be established. In addition, and 
unlike most email systems, ICQ is highly transportable: a user could have 
ICQ on a computer at work, at home, and on a laptop, and receive 
“pages” only on the active computer.

Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)	
151
ICQ is one of a growing number of instant messenger services 
that are available online. Users can also choose from MSN Messenger 
(MSN.com), AIM, and a bevy of similar applications. ICQ has been 
popular for some time, especially with technically proficient Internet 
users. More recently, because of the capacity of central servers, immedi-
ate and delayed message delivery, and increased functionality, instant 
messaging has become a popular choice for millions of users.
Educational Uses
Instant messaging has not yet been used as an efficient content-delivery 
teaching tool. Its strength lies in its ability to facilitate immediate contact 
with other students and teachers, or with a tutor who is supervising chat 
sessions.
Recommended Links
•	ICQ, Inc., ICQ: http://www.icq.com
•	MSN.com, MSN Messenger: http://messenger.microsoft.com
•	AIM Instant Messenger: http://www.aim.com/ 
•	Instant Messaging Planet: http://www.instantmessagingplanet.
com
• International Engineering Consortium, Instant messaging (­tutorial): 
http://www.iec.org/online/tutorials/instant_msg
Hand-held and Wireless Technologies
Imagine the power of the Internet in the palm of your hand, using a 
Portable Digital Assistant (PDA), a third generation (3G) mobile phone, 
or even an iPhone®. Wireless technologies, cellular modems, and hand-
held devices are moving from elite gadgetry into the mainstream. How 
will this cord-free revolution change how we work and learn? Hand-held 
devices are very powerful small computers. They are now used not only 
for voice communications, but also for listening to music, downloading 
email, sending Short Message Service (SMS) messages, and surfing the 
Web. Some are now using mobile devices to pay bills or pay for soft 
drinks at dispensing machines. Many people are choosing mobile devices 
over desktop computers. These include ultra-notebook computers,  
e-books, web pads, and tablet computers.
Mobile computing has arrived. Already, wireless devices are being 
chosen over desktop and even laptop computers, not only as the preferred 

152	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Internet access tool, but also for common computing applications such 
as word processing and spreadsheets. These devices are disguised as tele-
phones, tablets, e-books, and web pads, and now include a web browser, 
an instant messenger, and an email feature, along with other functions.
So your next computer probably will not be just a computer. It 
will also be a phone and an organizer, and will include other serious 
and gaming applications. You will use it to check your bank balance, buy 
groceries, and bet on the lottery. Cordless devices, pocket PCs, and PDAs 
are the wallets, cheque books, calculators, and Rolodexes of the 21st 
century. The size of a calculator (or even smaller), these devices are 
capable of basic computing tasks such as handwriting-recognition text 
processing and contact management. More complex and higher-end 
hand-helds have multimedia capabilities, wired or wireless Internet 
access, and the ability to send and receive data and text alike. With the 
advent of infrared networking, these hand-held computer devices can 
offer students and teachers a previously unknown degree of flexibility.
Athabasca University is preparing for the mobile and wireless 
world with its digital reading room, that has made course-related library 
materials accessible to a wide variety of mobile devices. And the AU 
English Second Language project has put a full basic English grammar 
course on the Web, accessible to mobile devices.
Educational Benefits and Uses
As affordable access to high bandwidth increases, and the cost of ­wireless 
devices that can incorporate all the features of a PC decreases, the 
educational possibilities are unlimited. It might mean the end of paper-
based teaching and learning, lost homework, missing tests, and costly 
textbooks. In the Philippines, for example, people living in rural envi-
ronments, even in communities without electricity, are using their cel-
lular phones for text-based digital messaging. Newer applications for 
small devices are opening up the possibility of using wireless to deliver 
graphics and video to users, no matter where they are. Learning becomes 
universally accessible.
Recommended Links
•	PDA Verticals Corp., pdaED.com: http://www.pdaed.com
•	 Palm Inc., Palm Products: http://www.palmone.com/us/­products/
•	Tucows, Mobile/PDA (PDA and handheld device software): 
http://tucows.com/PDA 

Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)	
153
•	Athabasca University Digital Reading Room: http://library. 
­athabascau.ca/drr/
•	Athabasca University ESL Grammar: http://eslau.ca
Peer-to-Peer File Sharing
Perhaps the most publicized Internet event in the past couple of years 
has been the controversy surrounding peer-to-peer, or file-sharing, appli-
cations. Peer-to-peer applications allow users, regardless of location or 
connection speed, to share practically any kind of file with a limitless 
population of other Internet users. In contrast to the currently predomi-
nant client-to-server model, where users retrieve information from a 
centralized server, the peer-to-peer model allows members of its “com-
munity” to transfer files directly between users, without having to access 
or be constrained by a centralized server.
Of all the peer-to-peer (P2P) applications, Napster became the 
most well known, because of its popularity and its ultimate demise in 
the courtrooms. Napster became prominent because of its focus on 
facilitating the distribution and sharing of files, and especially of copy-
right-protected media (mainly music files) encoded in the MP3 format. 
While P2P software and services have been considered mainly a means 
of downloading music files, the technology and goals behind the peer-
to-peer concept allow for much more wide-ranging uses.
Andy Oram, editor of Peer-To-Peer: Harnessing The Power of Disruptive 
Technologies, notes that communities on the Internet have been limited 
by the flat interactive qualities of email and network newsgroups, and 
that users have great difficulty commenting on each other’s postings, 
structuring information, and so forth. As such, he recommends the use 
of peer-to-peer applications with structured metadata for enhancing 
the activities of almost any group of people who share an interest 
(Oram, 2001).
Educational Uses
It is easy to make connections between learning objects, intelligent 
­educational systems, and the peer-to-peer model. Research and other 
materials can easily be offered online and “harvested” by a well-designed 
P2P program, offering students or teachers a wealth of knowledge that 
might not otherwise be available.

154	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Recommended Links
•	Napster (the infamous P2P application): http://www.napster.ca/
•	Audiogalaxy: About the satellite (the next generation of P2P): 
http://www.audiogalaxy.com/satellite/about.php
•	Kazaa Media Desktop (P2P continues): http://www.kazaa.com/
us/index.htm
Blogs (Web Logs)
Blogs are becoming very popular. They are generally personal journals 
or newsletters that are more or less frequently updated by the owner. 
Most blogs are available to the general public. Blogging software exists 
so that people who are not technically sophisticated can maintain one 
without difficulty. Blogs range from the deeply philosophical to the 
mundane, from the generic to those dedicated to very specific issues, 
such as sports, politics, or travel. Many blogs serve as mini-portals, con-
taining links of interest to the blog owner, or to the community which 
they serve; these are sometimes called linklogs. Visitors to a blog site can 
normally add comments and ideas. Blogs can serve as effective commu-
nications tools for people who wish to maintain connections. Although 
primarily text-based, some blogs can support different types of media, 
including audio and video. One of the most popular is the vlog or video 
blog. Other blogs define themselves by the type of device, such as specialty 
blogs for PDAs or other mobile devices.
Educational Uses
Blogs have many uses in education, including their importance for 
­knowledge sharing in any specific subject area, either with other students, 
the instructor, or external professionals. Blogging can also provide key 
networking opportunities between students and with outside profession-
als in the field. Blogs can also be used by teachers for assigning course-
work, and serve as a place for students to submit their work. Course 
announcements and annotated links to readings, along with advice on 
how to approach their studies, can also be delivered using blogs. Blogs 
are used successfully in creative or reflective writing courses, and in 
courses that require journals or e-portfolios. And they also provide stu-
dents with experience in real-world digital knowledge management, 
working with groups, and information sharing.

Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)	
155
Recommended Links
•	Edublogs: http://edublogs.org/
•	Blogdigger.com: http://www.blogdigger.com/
•	Technorati.com: http://technorati.com/ 
•	University of Houston. Blogs in Education: http://awd.cl.uh.edu/ 
blog/
RSS and Atom Feeds
Rich Site Summary or Really Simple Syndication (RSS) is a subset or 
protocol of the XML programming language that supports the distribu-
tion of content over the World Wide Web. RSS aggregators are computer 
programs which subscribe to a feed through a hyperlink that checks rel-
evant sites for new content. RSS is heavily used for delivering news items, 
comments, descriptions, or images to subscribers, and enables the per-
sonalization of news items, by allowing a user’s computer to fetch infor-
mation that is of interest, using their PC, notebook, PDA, or mobile 
phone. This information can be tracked and personalized, using RSS. It 
facilitates access to the vast store of information that is increasing daily 
on the Web. Rather than having to go and search specific web sites or 
blogs, RSS sends the information directly to the user’s web site as it 
becomes available. Atom is a proposed standard that attempts to overcome 
the problem of incompatible RSS formats with poor interoperability.
Educational Uses
Sharing of information with other teachers is probably one of the main 
uses of RSS for educators. As content is updated, relevant teaching 
content can be aggregated in a timely fashion. From one site, informa-
tion will be available to view from a wide variety of relevant sources, 
including podcasts and videocasts. More recently, RSS feeds have been 
used to support social networks of students with peer-produced content. 
Another area for RSS sharing is in open-source productivity applications 
and educational games.
Recommended Links
•	RSS – A quick start guide for educators by Will Richardson: http://
weblogg-ed.com/wp-content/uploads/2006/05/RSSFAQ4.pdf
•	RSS Ideas in Education: http://www.teachinghacks.com/wiki/
index.php?title=RSS_Ideas_in_Education

156	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
•	RSS, The next killer app for education by Mary Harsch: http://
technologysource.org/article/rss/
•	Feedster: http://www.feedster.com/
•	Syndic8: http://www.syndic8.com/
Wikis
A wiki is a web site or, more accurately, a collection of web sites where 
users can insert and edit content collectively. Users can also insert rele-
vant hyperlinks, using a simple markup language. A wiki exists on an 
easy-to-use database and is normally maintained by the user community. 
Many wikis are open to the public, although some are closed and require 
users to log in. Wikipedia is the best-known wiki.
Educational Uses
Wikis can be used effectively by instructors for posting course ­information 
or lecture notes and inviting participation from students. These notes 
can be distributed in the form of simple text, PowerPoint slides, or audio 
and video components. Students can participate by adding their own 
notes and comments, along with relevant links that they may have found, 
creating a discussion environment for a particular topic. Students or 
groups of students can be invited to create their own wiki, either with 
personal information or project information related to the topics being 
studied. Wikis can also be used as e-portfolios of students’ work, for 
evaluation by the instructor. Brainstorming activities can be especially 
powerful using a wiki, and FAQ pages are also possible.
Recommended Links
•	Wikipedia: http://www.wikipedia.org
•	Curriki: http://www.curriki.org
•	Wikiversity: http://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Wikiversity_Reports
•	 Wiki Pattern’s Blog on Wiki use in Education: http://www.ikiw.org/
•	Wikiineducation.com’s A Wiki book: http://www.wikiineducation.
com/display/ikiw/Home
Virtual Worlds
Virtual worlds are sometimes referred to as 3D Internet or metaverses. 
Perhaps the most well-known example is Second Life, which is used by 

Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)	
157
millions of people. A virtual world is a simulated environment that exists 
on a server and is accessed by users via the Internet. Users interact with 
avatars, which are simulated characters that may or may not resemble 
the actual user. Normally, virtual worlds are inhabited by many users 
simultaneously. Real-time communication is possible in these worlds, 
using VoIP or live video. Virtual worlds are used for massive multiplayer 
gaming, particularly role-playing games.
Educational Uses
Virtual worlds can be exploited by educators who are interested in 
­flexible environments that are limited only by the imagination. Learning 
can be promoted in these worlds using traditional methods, such as 
lectures and other classroom-based types of activities, or through 
­computer-based simulations, new media applications, electronic 
gaming, and other forms of experiential learning. Learners can prac-
tice skills and try out new ideas in a safe environment, and thus learn 
from their mistakes without adverse consequences. Students and 
instructors from anywhere in the world can participate together in 
these simulated worlds.
Recommended Links
•	Virtual World Comparison Page: http://oz.slinked.net/compare.
php
•	Second Life: http://secondlife.com/
•	ActiveWorlds: http://www.activeworlds.com/
•	Open Source Metaverse Project: http://metaverse.sourceforge.
net/
Digital Games
Computer games are very popular. The most popular types include ­shoot-
em-ups, racing, and sports games that normally include two or more 
simultaneous players. Games which are used extensively in education 
include puzzlers, crosswords, sudoku, and types of chess. Role-playing 
games require users to adopt a character who must reach an end goal, 
typically by overcoming obstacles and traversing several levels. Strategy 
games are used for military training as well as for entertainment.

158	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Educational Uses
Educational games are becoming very popular. For the most part, educa-
tional games today are used to reinforce learning that has been introduced 
in traditional ways. Games reinforce learning by their ability to offer imme-
diate feedback and recurring gratification. In addition, they can be used 
to support students who learn differently. They prolong the interest of 
learners, keeping them on task while reinforcing the concepts taught. 
Above all, games motivate learners by making learning enjoyable.
Recommended Links
•	Learning Light: e-Learning Centre, Games-based Learning: http://
www.e-learningcentre.co.uk/eclipse/Resources/games.htm
•	Prensky, M. Twitchspeed: http://www.twitchspeed.com/site/news.
html
•	Carlton College’s Game-based Learning: http://serc.carleton.edu/
introgeo/games/index.html
Learning Objects
Knowledge objects are discrete items that can be integrated into lessons as, 
for example, a text, graphic, audio, video, or interactive file. Learning 
objects are more highly developed, consisting of discrete lessons, learning 
units, or courses. For example, a video clip from a speech is a simple 
knowledge object, but it becomes a learning object when a lesson is 
added to it. Many different learning objects can be created from one 
such component; for example, lessons in politics, history, ethics, media 
studies, and many other subjects could be created from a single video 
clip. They could subsequently be made available in online databases, 
using international standards for efficient access by learners. Imagine 
having seamless access to a vast store of learning objects in the form of 
animations, videos, simulations, educational games, and multimedia 
texts, in the same way that Napster users had access to music files.
Educational Uses
The principal benefit of knowledge and learning objects comes  
from their reusability. As discrete units, they can be incorporated into 
a wide range of courses or learning scenarios. Their standards-based 

Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)	
159
structure makes them available for use in many different learning 
management systems and other applications. They also appear to be 
pedagogically effective:
NETg compared typical expositive courses with a blend of case-
based learning and self-study learning objects. They found that 
the students who used the objects-based course enjoyed a 41% 
drop in the time required to complete the task that was taught. 
(Clark & Rossett, 2002)
Recommended Links
•	MERLOT, Welcome to MERLOT!: http://www.merlot.org/merlot/
index.htm
•	CAREO: http://www.careo.org
•	Connexions: http://www.connexions.com
•	Longmire, W., A primer on learning objects: http://www.learning 
circuits.org/2000/mar2000/Longmire.htm
•	McGreal & Roberts, 2001. A primer on metadata for learning objects: 
http://auspace.athabascau.ca:8080/dspace/handle/2149/231 
Conclusion
Does the Web offer us the potential to expand our classrooms and study 
halls beyond the school grounds, beyond provincial and national bound-
aries? Can our educational systems evolve into entirely new institutes 
that support learning by taking full advantage of the emerging technolo-
gies? Certainly, distance education and traditional correspondence 
courses will never be the same because of the World Wide Web. All levels 
of education stand to benefit from what the Internet has to offer. For 
educators, web participation could range from simply putting class notes 
and lecture materials online for absent students, to integrating dynamic 
online quizzing systems, to preparing classes for upcoming tests and 
examinations, all the way to enabling learners to participate in highly 
interactive, true-to-life simulations and games.
With the evolution of more user-friendly applications and inter­
active content encapsulated in learning objects, one need not be a coding 
expert to take advantage of the learning opportunities that are becom-
ing available on the Web. Many instructors and learners are already 

160	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
bridging the divide by using hybrid access and delivery models, complete 
with an Internet component. As the cost of hardware, software, and 
telecommunications declines, even developing countries can look 
forward to a future where access to the wealth of the world’s knowledge 
is commonplace. The future has arrived.
References
ActiveWorlds. (n.d.). ActiveWorlds: Home of the 3D Chat, virtual reality build-
ing platform web page. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from http://www.
activeworlds.com/
AIM Instant Messenger. (n.d.). AIM 6.5. Retrieved March 7, 2008, from 
http://www.aim.com 
AOL Canada. (2002). AOL Instant Messenger. Retrieved August 15, 2007, 
from http://www.aol.ca/aim/index_eng.adp
Athabasca University. (n.d.). Astronomy 230: Northern Lights/Northern  
Skies web site. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from http://astro. 
whytespace.ca/
Athabasca University. (n.d.). Athabasca University ESL Grammar. 
­Athabasca University Mobile ESL web site. Retrieved September 1, 2007, 
from http://eslau.ca
Athabasca University. (n.d.). Digital Reading Room. Retrieved September 
1, 2007, from http://library.athabascau.ca/drr/
Audiogalaxy. (2003). About the satellite. Retrieved August 15, 2007, from 
http://www.audiogalaxy.com/satellite/about.php
Blogdigger. (n.d.). Blogdigger.com home page. Retrieved September 27, 
2007, from http://www.blogdigger.com/
CAREO. (2002). Campus Alberta Repository of Educational Objects (CAREO) 
home page. Retrieved August 15, 2007, from http://www.careo.org
Carlton College. (n.d.). Game-based learning. In Starting point: Teaching 
entry level Geoscience. Retrieved September 27, 2007, from http://serc.
carleton.edu/ introgeo/games/index.html
Clancy, K. J. (n.d.). Super Bowl XXXV: Advertising’s night of nights? In 
Copernicus Marketing Communications. Retrieved September 1, 2007, 
from http://www.copernicusmarketing.com/about/superbowl.shtml
Clark, R., & Rossett, A. (2002, September 10). Learning solutions – learn-
ing objects: Behind the buzz. Chief Learning Officer online. Retrieved 

Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)	
161
August 15, 2007, from http://www.clomedia.com/content/templates/
clo_feature.asp?articleid=24&zoneid=30
Connexions. (n.d.). Connexions telecommunications web site. Retrieved 
­September 1, 2007, http://www.connexions.com
Curriki. (n.d.). Curriki home page. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from 
http://www.curriki.org
CyberTech Media Group. (n.d.). Streaming video over an Intranet. Retrieved 
August 15, 2007, from http://www.cybertechmedia.com/intranet.
html
East Coast Music Association. (n.d.). Your music. Retrieved September 1, 
2007, from http://www.ecma.ca
Edublogs. (n.d.). Edublogs home page. Retrieved September 27, 2007, from 
http://edublogs.org/
Elluminate, Inc. (2007). Elluminate V.8, web site. Retrieved August 15, 
2007, from http://www.elluminate.com
Fab Four. (n.d.). Paul McCartney rocks the Cavern Club. Retrieved Septem-
ber 1, 2007, from http://www.fabfour.addr.com/paulcavern.htm
Feedster. (n.d.). Feedster 2.0 beta version home page. Retrieved September 
27, 2007, from http://www.feedster.com/
Free-ed.net. (n.d.). Free-Ed.Net: Free education on the Internet web site. 
Retrieved September 26, 2007, from http://www.free-ed.net/­free-
ed/
Harsch, M.(2003) RSS: The next killer app for education. The Technology 
Source. Retrieved March 7, 2008, from http://technologysource.org/
article/rss/
ICQ. (n.d.). ICQ hompage. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from http://www.
icq.com
ICUII.com. (n.d.). ICUII 8.0 Video Chat. Retrieved August 15, 2007, from 
http://www.icuii.com
Instant Messaging Planet. (n.d.). Instant Messaging Planet home page. 
Retrieved September 27, 2007, from http://www.instantmessaging-
planet.com/
International Engineering Consortium. (2003). Instant messaging (Tuto-
rial). Retrieved September 27, 2007, from http://www.iec.org/online/
tutorials/instant_msg
Internet.com. (n.d.). Internet.com news channel. Retrieved September 26, 
2007, from http://www.Internet.com/sections/news.html
Kazaa V3.2.5. (n.d.). Kazaa P2P Desktop. Retrieved September 1, 2007, 
from http://www.kazaa.com/us/index.htm

162	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
kbears.com. (n.d.). Knowledge Bears home page. Retrieved September 27, 
2007, from http://www.kbears.com/
Learning Light. (n.d.). Games-based learning. In Learning light e-learning 
centre. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from http://www.e-learningcentre.
co.uk/ eclipse/Resources/games.htm
Luidia. (1997). eBeam. Retrieved August 15, 2007, from http://www. 
e-beam.com
Longmire, W. (2000, March). A primer on learning objects. Learning 
Circuits: ASTD’s online magazine all about e-learning. Retrieved Septem-
ber 1, 2007, from http://www.learningcircuits.org/2000/mar2000/­
Longmire.htm
Malloy, T. (2000). Understanding ANOVA visually. University of Utah 
Faculty of Psychology. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from http://www.
psych.utah.edu/stat/introstats/anovaflash.html
Math Open Reference. (n.d.). Plane geometry. Retrieved March 7, 2008, 
from http://ww.mathopenref.com/index.html
McGreal, R., & Roberts, T. (2001). A primer on metadata for learning objects: 
Fostering an interoperable environment. Retrieved April 29, 2004, from 
http://auspace.athabascau.ca:8080/dspace/handle/2149/231
MERLOT. (n.d.). Welcome to MERLOT! Multimedia Educational Resource 
for Learning and Online Teaching (MERLOT) home page. Retrieved Sep-
tember 1, 2007, from http://www.merlot.org/merlot/index.htm
Microsoft Corporation. (n.d.). NetMeeting. Retrieved September 1, 2007, 
from http://support.microsoft.com/ph/2457
MP3.com Inc. (n.d.). Top 40 charts. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from 
http://www.mp3charts.com
MSN.com. (n.d.). MSN Messenger. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from 
http://webmessenger.msn.com/
Napster, LLC. (n.d.). Napster. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from http://
www.napster.ca/
National Museum of American History. (n.d.). Kids: Things to do at 
home. National Museum of American History web page. Retrieved 
­September 27, 2007, from http://americanhistory.si.edu/kids/athome.
cfm
NeoPlanet, Inc. (n.d.). NeoPlanet Browser. Retrieved September 1, 2007, 
from http://www.neoplanet.com/site/products/browser.html
Open Source Metaverse Project. (n.d.). Metaverse open source software project 
homepage. Retrieved September 27, 2007, from http://metaverse.source-
forge.net/

Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)	
163
Oram, A. (Ed.). (2001). Peer-to-peer: Harnessing the power of disruptive 
­technologies. Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly and Associates.
Palm Inc. (n.d.). Palm products. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from http://
www.palm.com/us/products/
PC-Telephone.com. (n.d.). PC Telephone web site. Retrieved September 1, 
2007, from http://www.pc-telephone.com
PDA Verticals Corp. (n.d.). pdaED.com. Retrieved September 1, 2007, 
from http://www.pdaed.com/vertical/home.xml
Prensky, M. (n.d.) Twitchspeed: Reaching younger workers who think differently. 
Retrieved March 7, 2008 from http://www.marcprensky.com/writing/ 
Prensky%20-%20Twitch%20Speed.html
Richardson, R. (2005). RSS – A quick start guide for educators. Retrieved 
September 27, 2007, from http://weblogg-ed.com/wp-content/
uploads/2006/05/RSSFAQ4.pdf
Romero, S. (2000, July 6). IP: Millions phoning online: Price is right 
even if quality isn’t. New York Times, C1. Retrieved September 1, 2007, 
from http://query.nytimes .com/gst/abstract.html?res=F30F13FD355
D0C758CDDAE0894D8404482
RSS Ideas in Education. (n.d.). Teaching Hack.com’s wiki entry. Retrieved 
September 1, 2007, from http://www.teachinghacks.com/wiki/index.
php?title=RSS _Ideas_in_Education
Richardson, W. (2006). A quick start guide for educators. Retrieved 
March 7, 2008 from http://weblogg-ed.com/wp-content/uploads/ 
2006/05/RSSFAQ4.pdf
Saba Centra Software. (n.d.). Saba Centra.com. Retrieved August 15, 2007, 
from http://www.saba.com/products/centra/ 
SecondLife. (n.d.). SecondLife home page. Retrieved September 1, 2007, 
from http://secondlife.com/
Skype. (n.d.). Skype.com web site. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from 
http://www.skype.com/
Streaming Media World. (n.d.). Streaming Media World.com web site. Retrieved 
September 1, 2007, from http://www.streamingmediaworld.com
Syndic8.com. (n.d.). RSS 2.0. Syndic8.com home page. Retrieved September 
1, 2007, from http://www.syndic8.com/
Technorati.com. (n.d.). Technorati.com web site. Retrieved September 27, 
2007, from http://technorati.com/
Trussler, B. (1995). Gustav Holst: The Planets Suite. AquarianAge web site. 
Retrieved September 1, 2007, from http://www.aquarianage.org/lore/
holst.html

164	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Tucows. (n.d.). Mobile/PDA. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from http://
tucows.com/PDA
University of Houston. (n.d.). Blogs in education. Retrieved September 
27, 2007, from http://awd.cl.uh.edu/blog/
University of Washington. (n.d.). Education at a Distance for Growth and 
Excellence (EDGE) Streaming Video. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from 
http://www.engr.washington.edu/edge/streaming.html
Virtual World Comparison Page. (2004). Oz World’s Virtual World Com-
parison web page. Retrieved September 27, 2007, from http://oz.slinked.
net/compare.php
WBD Whiteboard. (n.d.). Department of Computer Science, University College 
London. Retrieved August 15, 2007, from http://www-mice.cs.ucl.ac.
uk/multimedia/ software/wbd/
WikiinEducation.com. (n.d.). Using wikis in education: A wiki book. 
Wikineducation.com web site. Retrieved September 27, 2007, from http://
www.wikiineducation.com/display/ikiw/Home
Wiki Patterns. (n.d.). Wiki Pattern’s blog on wiki use in education. Retrieved 
September 27, 2007, from http://www.ikiw.org/
Wikipedia. (n.d.). Wikipedia homepage. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from 
http://www.wikipedia.org
Wikiversity. (n.d.). Wikiversity home page. Retrieved September 27, 2007 
from http://en.wikiversity.org/wiki/Wikiversity_Reports
YouTube. (n.d.). YouTube web site. Retrieved September 1, 2007, from 
http://www.youtube.com/
About the Author
Rory McGreal is Associate Vice President, Research, at Athabasca 
University – Canada’s Open University. Previously, he was the executive 
director of TeleEducation New Brunswick, a province-wide bilingual 
(French/English) distributed distance learning network. Before that, 
he was responsible for the expansion of Contact North (a distance educa-
tion network in Northern Ontario) into the high schools of the region. 
His present interest in mobile learning research grows from his investi-
gations into learning objects and standardization for interoperability 
among different applications and devices. He is leading efforts at AU to 
build a learning object repository that will facilitate data output to a wide 
variety of mobile devices.

Technologies of Online Learning (E-learning)	
165
In the past, he has worked in Canada as a teacher and teacher 
representative, and abroad in the Seychelles, the Middle East, and 
Europe in various capacities, as a teacher, union president, ESL techno-
logical training co-ordinator, instructional designer, language and com-
puter laboratory co-ordinator, and educational advisor. He was the recipi-
ent of the US Wedemeyer Award for excellence as a distance education 
practitioner.


Chapter 7
Characteristics of Interactive 
Online Learning Media
Patrick J. Fahy
Athabasca University 
Introduction
This chapter describes technologies used to overcome distance in online 
learning. Online learning media are tools for cooperation, collaboration, 
and communication. These devices allow for provision of individual 
amounts of teaching presence, structure, learning and technology 
support, orientation to new roles and processes, and interaction (dia-
logue) with the tutor and others. Multimedia principles applicable to 
online pedagogy are described, as are the specific characteristics of indi-
vidual media-based tools. Developments such as new intranets, inexpen-
sive and more robust hardware, and open-source and social-collaborative 
tools are discussed. The chapter concludes that distance educators 
should monitor technological trends in society, as such trends tend to 
translate rapidly from the culture to the (virtual) classroom.
Online technologies for learning and teaching have continued 
to evolve and become more varied, though more in developed than 

168	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
developing countries (UC College Prep, 2006). In 2006, the Internet 
was estimated to have achieved a penetration of 65–75% in economically 
developed countries, while the rate in developing countries was only 
10–20% (“Fun Facts,” 2007). However, the consensus was emerging that 
media in widely varying socio-cultural and economic contexts could give 
“global reach to individual voices...killing once and for all the idea that 
togetherness requires physical proximity” (“Wireless Nonstop,” 2005).
The impact of media has become dominant in teaching and 
­learning. In 2005, the largest university in the United States was the 
University of Phoenix, a for-profit institution featuring distance and 
distributed learning; one of the largest law schools in the U.S. was 
Concord Law School, all of whose courses are online; and the University 
of Monterey grew rapidly, using teleconferencing to offer courses 
throughout Mexico and Latin America. Going online has not, however, 
proven to be a guarantee of growth and success for educational institu-
tions. For example, Columbia University, Wharton University of 
Pennsylvania, Temple University, and New York University (NYU) all 
experienced expensive failures in online programming during this 
same period (“Higher Education Inc.,” 2005).
In North America, the personal computer (PC) has been the 
technology of choice for education and training. Early in the new mil-
lennium, it was estimated that two-thirds of Canadians over the age of 
15 had used a computer in the previous 12 months; 60% of Canadians 
(90% of students) had a computer at home; and 50% of Canadians (70% 
of students) had Internet access from their homes (Statistics Canada, 
2001). The computer has become so important in developed countries 
that Negroponte (an architect and computer scientist best known as the 
founder and Chairman Emeritus of the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology’s Media Lab) was able to gain support from countries such 
as Brazil, Argentina, Libya, Thailand, Nigeria, and China for his $100 
Laptop or One Laptop Per Child plan, an initiative that was initially regarded 
as “wildly ambitious” and a “pipe dream” (Surowiecki, 2006). Today, that 
verdict has begun to appear both technologically and pedagogically 
accurate (“Today’s Startup Lesson,” 2007; “Of Internet Cafés,” 2008), 
but by whatever criteria are applied, it is clear that the computer had 
demonstrated impressive adaptive capabilities worldwide.
At the same time, a better understanding of some of the ­limitations 
of computer-based technology has developed. Oliver and McLoughlin 
(1998) argue that computers alone cannot transform the learning 

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
169
­experience, and Vrasidas and McIsaac (1999) warn that “intrusive 
­technologies” could actually create barriers to interaction in the online 
learning climate. Rovai and Barnum (2003) summarize the debate over 
“media and learning” with the observation that course design and peda-
gogy are always more important than media, and Walther, Gay, and 
Hancock (2005) remind technophiles that previous research should not 
be ignored in their enthusiasm for new tools.
Experience with new media, as technologies and as innovations, 
might now allow a more balanced assessment of impacts and shortcom-
ings. Advantages, such as greater flexibility for learners, reduced spending 
on construction, greater computer and technical literacy of graduates, 
alleviation of overcrowding on campus, the capability to reuse course 
materials, more capability for transfer and collaborative credit, improved 
graduation rates, and more attention to the requirements of special-
needs students are counterbalanced by disadvantages, such as concerns 
about quality, issues related to fair treatment of distance faculty, continu-
ing (but declining) scepticism of some employers about graduates of 
distance programs, and reduced opportunities for spontaneous interac-
tion between faculty and students (Newby, Stepich, Lehman, & Russell, 
2000; Grandzol & Grandzol, 2006). A balanced view of ­technology con-
siders all potential impacts and outcomes.
This chapter attempts to provide a balanced assessment of common 
distance teaching and learning media. It is based on the assumption that 
no medium, however technologically elegant, is de facto appropriate for 
all student audiences or learning contexts. The task of practitioners and 
the purpose of this chapter are to understand and better appreciate the 
implications of the various affordances and limitations of technologies, 
and to monitor their readiness for use in online teaching and learning, 
as they change and develop.
Media in Distance Learning
The following is a discussion of media’s perceived relation to learning, 
the impact of media on learners’ perceptions of isolation (transactional 
distance vs. community), and the role of teaching presence in meeting 
individual learning needs. Santoro, Borges, and Santos (2004) describe 
the key uses of media as coordination, cooperation, and co-construction. 
This view reflects the importance of both group goals (“common and 

170	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
shared”) and individual priorities. While these authors do not use the 
term “learning communities,” they do nicely describe the process by 
which learning communities are constructed.
Interactive media support communities, based on what people do 
together, not where or when (Rovai & Barnum, 2003). Community becomes 
a process, not merely a place (Cannell, 1999), in which “structured and 
systematic” social interaction, using media, is essential to significant 
learning (Fulford & Zhang, 1993; Ragan, 1999; Dilworth & Willis, 2003; 
Garrison & Cleveland-Innes, 2005; Conrad, 2005).
In addition to helping communities to develop and evolve, media 
allow individualized learning, reducing transactional distance (Moore, 
1991). Online learners experience transactional distance differently (if 
at all – learning styles and preferences affect perceptions of isolation), 
requiring varying forms and amounts of interaction, including instructor 
support (Fahy & Ally, 2005). A major implication is that all interaction 
is not equally useful; interaction should be adjusted to individual needs 
and preferences (Walther, 1996; Chen & Willits, 1998).
Responding to individual online learning preferences requires 
skilled uses of media. In most traditional learning, the learner is largely 
passive (Garrison & Cleveland-Innes, 2005); online learning designs, on 
the other hand, usually expect the learner to exercise more autonomy 
and control (Vrasidas & McIsaac, 1999). Research showing that field-
dependent students experience less success and satisfaction with online 
learning because it is less compatible with their preferred communica-
tion style confirms the importance of these learner characteristics 
(Maushak, Chen, Martin, Shaw, & Unfred, 2000). Another difference 
concerns structure in the learning environment, usually plentiful in 
face-to-face situations, and potentially essential where sound study skills 
or habits may be lacking (Loomis, 2000). The finding that undergradu-
ates tend to benefit less than graduate students from distance methods 
suggests the importance of maturity, and of a “watchful and helpful” 
instructor stance (Davies, 1981; Bernard et al., 2004).
To summarize: individual participant’s success with online com-
munication depends on effective use of the technical resources available, 
along with the guidance and leadership provided by a skilled instructor-
­moderator (Garrison & Cleveland-Innes, 2005), and tempered by the 
learner’s own capabilities and preferences for collaborative, cooperative, 
active, and self-directed learning (Oliver & McLoughlin, 1998). Combined, 
these factors enable online learners to engage in both collaborative and 
autonomous adult learning experiences (Knowles, 1980).

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
171
It should be emphasized here, however, that individuals do differ 
and not all students are capable of, nor do they necessarily desire, the 
same kinds or amounts of autonomy or self-direction in their learning 
experiences (Grow, 1991). They also differ in important skills. Biesenbach-
Lucas (2004) points out that online learners must not only understand 
ideas and concepts, they must be able to explain them articulately to 
others, using text. Successful online learners need an environment where 
they can both acquire and exercise their skills to achieve personal learn-
ing goals, and receive compensating media-based assistance and support 
as required.
The formal learning process should not be a lonely one. Dialogue, 
as pointed out by Moore (1991), affects perceived isolation and can 
reduce the need for structure. Mere interaction, however, does not in 
itself constitute critical discourse (Garrison & Cleveland-Innes, 2005), 
and talking together does not assure collaboration or “social thinking” 
among group members (Oliver & McLoughlin, 1998). A key role of 
instructor-moderators is to provide individually required amounts  
of structure and dialogue online, through their teaching presence 
(Anderson, Rourke, Garrison, & Archer, 2001).
Teaching presence is the leadership and facilitation necessary for 
individuals to achieve “meaningful understanding” through interaction 
and collaboration (Garrison, Anderson, & Archer, 2001). Teaching pres-
ence recognizes that students may not spontaneously use discussion 
effectively, and that collaboration, especially among those still learning 
its forms, is facilitated by appropriate amounts of structure (Biesenbach-
Lucas, 2004). In the terms of Garrison et al. (2001), teaching presence 
includes design and organization, discourse facilitation, and direct 
instruction. The inclusion of design as a specific element of the role 
shows the importance attached by these observers to the systematic pro-
vision of structure. It also supports purposeful interaction (discourse) 
in learning, whether the environment is online or not (Chickering & 
Gamson, 1987; Beaudoin, 1990; Chickering & Ehrmann, 1996; McCabe, 
1997; French, Hale, Johnson, & Farr, 1999).
In summary, two findings in the research on distance education 
compared with face-to-face instruction, reported by Bernard et al. (2004), 
are particularly important here, and applicable to the rest of this chapter. 
First, media research confirms that what the learner does with media is 
more important than what the teacher does; second, in terms of student 
learning outcomes, the teaching experience of the instructor does not 
matter as much as the instructor’s experience with technology. This finding 

172	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
underscores the importance to online learners of appropriate media 
and design, supported by media-competent instructors (Mandell & 
Herman, 1996; Ragan, 1999; Conrad, 2005).
Media, Modes, and Learning
The following section presents principles that affect the impact of 
­multimedia in learning, distinguishes between media and modes of pre-
sentation, and then applies these principles to a discussion of specific 
tools used in online learning.
Multimedia Principles
The impact of multimedia in teaching, whether online or face-to-face, 
is dependent upon certain principles. Mayer (2001, p. 184) has suggested 
seven multimedia principles, each with implications for online design and 
instruction:
1.	 Multimedia principle: Students learn better from words with ­graphics 
or pictures than from words alone.
2.	 Spatial contiguity principle: Students learn better when correspond-
ing words and pictures are presented closer to each other on the 
page or screen.
3.	 Temporal contiguity principle: Students learn better when corre-
sponding words and pictures are presented simultaneously rather 
than successively.
4.	 Coherence principle: Students learn better when extraneous words, 
pictures, and sounds are excluded rather than included.
5.	 Modality principle: Students learn better from animation and 
audible narration than from animation and on-screen text.
6.	 Redundancy principle: People have a limited capacity to process visual 
and auditory material that is presented simultaneously; therefore, 
students learn better from animation and narration than from a 
combination of animation, generation, and on-screen text.
7.	 Individual differences principle: Design effects are stronger for low-
knowledge learners than for high-knowledge learners, and for 
high-spatial-ability learners than for low-spatial-ability learners 
(Note: Spatial ability is the mental capacity to generate, maintain, 
and manipulate visual images.).
These seven principles and variants independently arrived at by 
others are referred to in the following discussion.

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
173
Media and Modes of Learning
Technologies, as channels through which modes (symbols acting as stimuli) 
pass, differ in the responses they evoke. For example, text is a mode of 
presentation. Print-on-paper is one possible medium (channel) for text, 
but there are others: a computer monitor, overhead projection, a ­television 
screen, film (moving or still), the screen of a PDA or smart-phone, and 
so on. Wherever text is used, it retains its characteristic affordances 
and limitations (highly portable and compact, but demanding of literacy, 
for example). Despite their differences, useful online teaching and learn-
ing media have in common their ability to bring students into timely 
contact with their tutors, the content, and their peers (Moore, 1989), 
by reducing transactional distance (Chen & Willits, 1998).
Although similar in producing these outcomes, the differences 
in how various technologies accomplish their effects have important 
implications for online teaching practice. The following is a discussion 
of some salient differences among media and modes of interaction in 
distance learning and teaching. (The generic term tools can be used to 
avoid unnecessary distinctions between media and modes of teaching 
and learning.)
Characteristics of Specific Tools
The following discussion of online tools includes print and text, video 
and graphics, audio, mobile devices such as PDAs and smartphones, and 
the Internet. The intention is to summarize some of the technical and 
pedagogical characteristics of each, in the context of their potential 
usefulness as tools for online teaching and learning. In the next section, 
promising developments affecting these tools are presented.
Print and Text
There is still no medium more ubiquitous than print, and no mode of 
presentation more familiar than text in its many forms. Print was part 
of the first teaching machine – the book – and books were the first mass-
produced commodity (McLuhan, 1964). Print was the dominant medium 
initially in distance education (Scriven, 1993), and distance students 
have traditionally spent much of their time in solitary study of text-based 
materials (Bates, 1995). The strengths and weaknesses of text and print 
include the following:
Strengths:
•	Cost: Print is one of the lowest cost one-way technologies (Bates, 
1995).

174	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
•	Flexibility and robustness (Koumi, 1994).
•	Portability and ease of production: Especially with desktop pub-
lishing, printing has become enormously simpler and its quality 
much higher (Bates, 1988). Costs may be further reduced with 
in-house production.
•	Stability: Text-only print and online materials can be reorganized 
and resequenced with relative ease by cut-and-paste operations, 
using word processors and editors (Kozma, 1991).
•	Convenience, familiarity, and economy: Instruction and feedback 
are facilitated, as are, for the appropriately skilled, higher-order 
thinking and concept formation (Pittman, 1987).
Weaknesses:
•	Print is static, sometimes failing to produce adequate involvement 
from low-functioning readers; attention, perception, and recall, 
and active learner participation, may also be reduced.
•	Print is relatively non-interactive or non-responsive, and may lead 
to passive, rote learning.
•	Revisions to print materials are more costly and slower than 
­revisions to online databases.
•	Print may be seen by some as the “slightly seedy poor relation” of 
other instructional media (Pittman, 1987).
Text’s lack of appeal is somewhat ameliorated by multimedia-based 
alternatives to reading, and improvements in voice reproduction technolo-
gies that make reading less critical for users, including for the visually 
impaired (Hadenius, 2004; “Speak to Me, ” 2006). With these develop-
ments, non-print multimedia-based technologies and utilities that trans-
late text to voice are cost-effectively available in situations where high 
levels of literacy cannot be assumed, where learners prefer or find audi-
tory content more convenient, or where the costs of reading ­inaccuracies 
or inefficiencies are high.
Technical developments may affect the economies and appeal of 
text and print. Downloadable books, such as the Sony Reader, HP’s ebook, 
the E Ink initiative, and the Philips Readius, make books more available 
(though not necessarily inexpensive: Amazon’s Kindle came to market 
in 2007 at $400 [Epstein, 2008]). Some books that are not meant to be 
read from cover to cover (i.e., directories, encyclopaedias, cookbooks, 
technical references) are increasingly available in easily searchable digital 
forms (Makris, 2005; “Readius,” 2005; Greene, 2006; “Not Bound By 
Anything,” 2007; “White OLEDs Brighten,” 2007; “Displays To Keep An 
Eye On,” 2007). 

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
175
A worrying finding in relation to technology and literacy is the 
suggestion that extensive technology use early in life may inhibit 
reading later: a national survey of children in Britain in 1997 found 
that 23% said they did not like reading, a proportion that by 2003 had 
risen to 35% (“Catching Up,” 2006). This trend obviously must be 
monitored and its relation, if any, assessed as to the timing of technol-
ogy introduction.
Given the above, the trend to make online reading materials even 
more accessible may seem somewhat ironic. Google’s book digitizing 
project, intended to place all non-copyright books on the Web, continues 
(Roush, 2005), and e-textbooks have been piloted in Canada at Mount 
Royal College in Calgary and the University of British Columbia in 
Vancouver (Schmidt, 2007).
Graphics and Video
Earlier research showed that graphics can increase the motivation of 
users to attend, prompt their perception and aid recall, and assist in the 
development of higher-order thinking and concept formation (Saettler, 
1990; Szabo, 1998). Furthermore, still (non-animated) graphics combine 
high information content (illustrating abstract or unfamiliar concepts) 
with relatively low production and distribution costs. Online compres-
sion formats, such as JPEG, permit ready distribution of high quality 
graphics. This factor is particularly relevant when delivery is to PDAs, 
smart-phones, or other mobile devices with limited bandwidth, display, 
storage, or memory.
The advantages of various forms of video content in actual practice 
continue to be debated. In some studies, animation has been shown to 
result in “more efficient learning” (Szabo, 1998, p. 30). There is, however, 
also some indication that when compared with “highly imaginative 
examples and illustrations,” the advantages of animated simulations are 
less obvious (Rieber & Boyce, in Szabo, 1998, p. 30).
General graphics principles include the following (Dwyer, in 
Szabo, 1998, p. 20):
•	Visuals that emphasize the critical details relevant to learning are 
most effective. Unnecessary visuals may be distracting, especially 
to learners with limited attention spans or discrimination skills. 
(See Mayer’s [2001] multimedia principles, above.)
•	The addition of detail and realism to displays may not increase 
learning; unnecessary detail can add to learning time without 
increasing achievement, and increase transfer times. Depending 

176	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
on the relevance of detail to the learning task, simple line ­drawings 
may be superior to photographs or more realistic drawings.
•	Winn (in Szabo, 1998) cautions that diagrams, charts, and graphs 
should not be assumed to be self-explanatory; graphics should 
include clearly written supporting captions.
Colour is routinely expected in online instructional materials, but 
designers and user should be aware that, with the exception of instruc-
tion that directly employs colour for teaching (e.g., identifying colour-
coded elements), there is little evidence that colour enhances learning, 
and it may even distract some users (Dwyer, in Szabo, 1998, pp. 38–39). 
Some other generalizations about colour follow:
•	Colour may increase the speed at which lists can be searched.
•	Too many colours may reduce the legibility of a presentation.
•	The most highly recommended colours are vivid versions of green, 
cyan, white, and yellow.
•	Colours may be displayed differently by various receiving 
technologies.
•	End-users should be able to control colour in displays, given the 
prevalence of colour-blindness (found to some degree in 8% of 
men and 0.5% of women); the best colour display combinations 
are blue, black, or red on white; or white, yellow, or green on 
black (Rockley, 1997).
Based on his review of the data, Szabo (1998) concludes that “the 
disparity between effectiveness and perceived effectiveness is nowhere 
as great as it is in the realm of colour” (p. 27).
For online uses of still graphics, the following characteristics of 
the computer as a delivery medium should be noted by developers 
(Rockley, 1997):
•	A PC screen is about one-third of a piece of paper in display area 
(hand-held devices may be much smaller), and most display 
devices are less sharp than the best laser printers or photographic 
reproductions. What works on paper may not work, without trans-
lation or redesign, online. (Also, designers should not assume 
that users have superior equipment; design should be for displays 
of mid-range quality.)
•	Screen positioning is critical: important information should go 
to the top-left; the lower-left is the least noticed area of the 
page/screen.

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
177
•	Single-colour backgrounds, with a high contrast ratio between the 
background and the text, are easiest for readers; white or off-white 
is best for the background (see above).
•	Textured backgrounds display differently on various systems, and 
should be used with care, if at all.
•	Sans serif fonts, with mixed upper and lower case, are best for 
legibility and reading ease.
•	The size of the font depends on the purpose. For extended 
reading, smaller (12–14 point) fonts are suitable; for presenting 
information that will be skimmed or scanned, larger fonts may 
be more appropriate.
•	Font changes (size and type) can be effective for emphasis, as can 
capitals, underlining, and especially bolding. The use of colour 
alone for emphasis should be avoided.
All of the above techniques should be used sparingly, to preserve 
their impact (Rockley, 1997).
Videoconferencing
According to Roberts (1998), videoconference sessions have the ­following 
pedagogic characteristics. They
•	add a sense of direct involvement and physical presence among 
geographically dispersed learners.
•	provide quality learning opportunities (as good as or better than 
those offered by other methods and technologies).
•	provide live, interactive learning opportunities to distant sites, 
including delivery of global expertise to remote learners.
•	eliminate or reduce travel time.
The following strengths of videoconferencing for learning and 
teaching can be exploited with appropriate instructional strategies. 
Teleconferencing
•	fosters social presence and cohesion among users, and may 
improve motivation.
•	permits the sharing of visual resources, including demonstra-
tions.
•	makes collaborative learning more attractive and feasible.
•	may help in the teaching of abstract, time-protracted, hazardous, 
or unfamiliar concepts.

178	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Design is important in videoconference-based learning. According 
to Roberts (1998, p. 96), critical issues in video-based training include
1.	 proper training of instructors
2.	 user self-consciousness
3.	 integration of other media into video-based presentations
4.	 optimum length of sessions and size of groups
5.	 session variety
6.	 technical design and support
7.	 professional quality visual elements
Cost and accessibility remain issues with online video of all kinds 
(Bates, 1995). Costs vary enormously in video implementations (Simpson, 
Pugh, & Parchman, 1993). The Halo videoconferencing system, launched 
in late 2005 and highly regarded (“Halo: Video Conferencing Done 
Right,” 2006), was priced at its inception at $550,000 to install, and 
$18,000 per month to run. Its customers, including DreamWorks, HP, 
PepsiCo and other multinationals, could afford the high costs (“Halo 
Effect,” 2005), but potential educational users likely could not. If one-
way video and two-way audio are used, costs drop dramatically, as does 
the bandwidth needed. The least expensive variant (when amortized 
over large numbers of users) is one-way video with one-way audio (a 
broadcast), but there are significant pedagogical implications.
Audio: iPods®, MP3 players, and VoIP
The iPod®, Apple’s downloadable audio device, has become the standard 
for portable music (sales reached 100 million units and 2.5 billion songs 
in 2007 (“Apple Said,” 2007). Pontin (2007) regards the iPod® (along 
with the Palm® and the Blackberry®) as not only highly functional but 
“beautiful designs” for technology (p. 10). The fact that Apple has made 
iTunes® software compatible with the Microsoft operating system, a previ-
ously unthinkable concept, suggests that this protocol and the iPod® 
will remain this medium’s standard (“You’ve Heard This Song Before,” 
2006). In comparison, early versions of Zune, Microsoft’s iPod® competi-
tor, were not capable of receiving podcasts or video downloads (Ulanoff 
& Costa, 2007).
In Canada, experiments in learning with iPods® have been 
­conducted at the University of Guelph, the University of Saskatchewan, 
and Carleton University (Hounsell, 2006). Video iPods® provide full 
lecture downloads (sound and pictures), or live streaming. Some observ-
ers question whether these technologies will be commercially successful 
beyond the early adopters who made them popular initially (Miller, 

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
179
2006a); others (in one case, a Google vice-president) predict continued 
evolution and expansion for educational purposes (“Pocket Power,” 
2007). Standards defining best practices for the design of mobile-­learning 
(m-learning) materials have appeared (Rabin & McCathie-Nevile, 2006), 
largely driven by security threats (Rubenking, 2007).
With MP3 software, users can download or rip (copy), mix, encode, 
convert, clean, and organize audio files, and then burn (copy) them to 
CDs, DVDs, or flash-based devices like iPods® (“Make Your Own Music,” 
2004). The MP3 compression algorithm employs “psychoacoustic theo-
ries” to achieve smaller file sizes (Murphy, 2005). The software also 
permits editing and copying of JPEG video files.
Podcasts permit iPods® and MP3 players (or other portable or 
mobile digital media players) to download lectures or other presenta-
tions. Interest in these media appears age-dependent: 50% of 18- to  
28-year-olds have engaged in podcasts, compared with only 20% of  
29-year-olds and up (“Podcasting Hits the Mainstream,” 2005).
Voice-over Internet protocol (VoIP), like the other broadband-
dependent technologies in this group, was regarded as a highly promis-
ing new technology immediately after it appeared (Pescovitz, 2003). 
Subsequent rulings in the United States by the Federal Communications 
Commission (FCC), reducing regulations and oversight of VoIP, made 
this a “new standard for voice communications” (Miller, 2004, p. 7). 
Versions of VoIP (Vonage, Skype) that allow users to plug traditional 
telephones into computers to make free long-distance phone calls glob-
ally have great social (and educational) potential (“The War of the 
Wires,” 2005). For teaching, synchronous voice-based tools such as 
Elluminate (see http://www.elluminate.com/), iLinc (see http://www.
ilinc.com/), Dimdim (see http://www.dimdim.com/), and Paltalk (see 
http://www.paltalk.com/) provide a virtual space for learning interac-
tions, including excellent audio, whiteboard (with PowerPoint display 
capability), web-touring and desktop control, textbox chat, small-format 
videocam, and various teacher tools (i.e., hand-raising, microphone 
control, individual note exchange, quiz utility, graphing capability for 
math, and tools for students to provide feedback to the presenter. 
(Dimdim is open source.)
Audio in teaching raises technical – storage and bandwidth – as well 
as pedagogical challenges. Online audio can be particularly useful in teach-
ing for several reasons (recall Mayer’s [2001] multimedia principles):
•	 An audio summary of previous material can aid recall, help reten-
tion, and promote concept formation and higher-order thinking.

180	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
•	Although audio in many formats may be asynchronous (DVDs, 
iPods®, blogs), and therefore one-way and non-interactive (like a 
lecture or a radio broadcast), these access-delivery formats offer 
significant learner control (Morgan, 2007).
•	DVDs persist because they are relatively easy and cheap to produce 
and ship, but downloadable audio (and video) are more accessible 
to the end-user, and increasingly preferred by users.
•	The mode of presentation most often found in this medium, the 
human voice, is a familiar and powerful teaching tool.
•	Audio may be more motivating than print alone, and together 
with print may form a powerful alternative and aid to reading 
alone (Newby et al., 2000).
An important issue in selecting a mix of other technologies for 
use with synchronous audio is the relative pedagogic importance of rela-
tionship building vs. information exchange. Picard (1999) sees synchronous 
audio’s key contribution as its ability to promote relationship-building. 
The need for other technologies, according to Picard, is dependent upon 
the degree to which there is also a need to exchange information (for 
which, she warns, audio may not be particularly effective).
Information exchange
Audio + data
Audio + video
(high)
(low)
Audio only
Audio + data + video
Relationship building
Figure 1.  Association of synchronous audio, data exchange, and video 
presence, with information exchange and relationship-building objectives 
(Picard, 1999)

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
181
In Picard’s (1999) analysis, when the needs for relationship 
­building and information exchange are both low, audio alone may 
suffice. When both needs are high, however, audio, video, and data 
(including text) should all be present. Relationship building can be 
enhanced by combining audio-conferencing and video with data, espe-
cially text. (Text has formidable relationship-building capabilities, as 
anyone who has ever had a pen pal knows, but literacy is required, and 
the absence of non-verbal cues, especially body language, can be inhibit-
ing, as noted earlier.) Video increases the likelihood that interaction will 
promote relationships, while audio alone is less capable of promoting 
this outcome. Data exchange alone seems to do little to promote 
­relationships among those with access to no other form of interaction.
As technological evolutions permit more audio-based delivery, 
both synchronous (interactive such as VoIP or wireless) and one-way 
(streaming) audio research findings become applicable (Szabo, 1998):
•	Learning gains from one-way audio alone are, at best, weak (a 
form of Mayer’s [2001] multimedia principle).
•	Learners possessing higher verbal skills usually do not benefit 
from audio added to text (Mayer’s individual differences principle).
•	There are little or no apparent immediate recall effects between 
text-only and text-plus audio, except that, on occasion, audio may 
lengthen the time required to complete instruction (Mayer’s 
modality and redundancy principles).
•	The quality and utility of digitized speech depend upon the 
amount of compression, the sampling rate, the bandwidth avail-
able, and the quality of the device.
•	Users may relatively quickly become accustomed to synthetic 
speech; however, more cognitive effort is needed, and increased 
demands on short-term memory may reduce retention. (Synthe-
sized speech may be more useful in reading back a learner’s work, 
for example from a word processor, than in presenting unfamiliar 
learning content.)
•	For general audiences, the possible benefits of audio must be 
weighed against the increased costs. Exceptions include uses such 
as language training, music instruction, and as an aid to the 
­visually impaired.
•	Where possible, the learner should be able to decide whether or 
not to use available audio (another form of Mayer’s individual 
differences principle).

182	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
PDAs
The probable future direction, at least in the short term, of video for 
online teaching can be seen in personal digital assistants (PDAs), smart 
phones, and other handheld devices. PDAs are small, wireless, highly 
mobile Internet receivers which, despite their size, can deliver movie-
length video. On PDAs, a feature film requires a megabyte of memory 
for each minute, permitting a 128 Mb memory card to store two hours 
of video (Rupley, 2003). The emergence of very small, high-capacity 
(2GB) microdrives boosted the popularity of PDAs for a time (Rupley, 
2005), but the emergence of highly capable smart phones has led some 
observers to comment that PDAs might become a “dying breed” (DeFeo, 
2004; “The Device That Ate Everything?” 2005). 
High bandwidth is essential for mobile video. Ultrabroadband, 
wireless video cellphones support voice- and email, web access, MP3 
audio, picture-taking capability, video clips, and, of course, telephony. 
With robust support, high broadband speeds and an accepted mobile 
wireless standard (“Mobile Net,” 2007), and assuming the threat of 
phone viruses can be controlled (Hutson, 2005; “Airborne Outbreak,” 
2005; “Why Wait for WiMax?” 2005), a major delivery vehicle for 
­distance education and training may evolve from this technology 
(Copeland, Malik, & Needleman, 2003). Paulsen (2003) and Rekkedal 
(2005) report the use of devices such as pocket PCs/PDAs with portable 
keyboards and mobile phones at Norway’s NKI, as part of accessibility 
projects (although Rekkedal added that the team was still “uncertain” 
as of his report whether such technologies comprised a mobile learning 
“future solution”).
The Internet
As noted at the outset of this chapter, online learning almost always denotes 
learning on the Internet, which offers both advantages and challenges 
to educators and trainers. The advantages arise from the Internet’s enor-
mous capacity to link participants with information and with each other 
(Haughey & Anderson, 1998). Problems with navigation, structure, inter-
activity, complexity, security, stability, and time wasted by undisciplined 
or confused users does affect its usefulness, however.
The Internet is potentially a powerful linking and communication 
vehicle, surpassing one hundred million web sites in 2007 (“Watching 
the Web Grow Up,” 2007). Heinich, Molenda, Russell, and Smaldino 
(1996) suggest that the Internet’s power lies in its capacity for providing 

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
183
rapidly growing numbers of connections to potentially engrossing, multi-
sensory experiences, while remaining adaptable to individual needs. The 
fact that the Net can be modified by teachers themselves, can be tailored 
to individual students’ needs, and can support meaningful collaboration 
and interaction also makes it a potentially powerful learning tool.
At the same time, there are weaknesses. The Web’s inherent lack 
of structure may result in some users getting unintentionally “lost in 
cyberspace” or making poor use of their time (surfing or exploring 
interesting but irrelevant minutiae). Also, especially in “Web 1.0” 
(Borland, 2007), Internet materials may lack interactivity, providing 
merely a one-way presentation of information. The reliability of informa-
tion on the Internet may also be suspect. Finally, successful use of the 
Internet currently demands proficient literacy and computer skills.
The Internet offers a means for gaining the attention of learners, 
and of presenting opportunities for focusing perceptions and prompting 
recall. Learner participation can also be supported, especially with com-
puter-mediated communications (CMC) and the use of collaborative 
learning projects. Providing instruction and assuring appropriate orga-
nization, sequencing, and higher-order outcomes are less easily accom-
plished with the Internet, for reasons discussed below.
Web 2.0 and the emerging Web 3.0 are intended to address some 
of these problems. Web 2.0 is characterized by tagging, social networks, 
and user generation of content, using tools such as Wikis, blogs, and 
podcasts. Web 2.0 is called the “writing web,” because it allows individual 
users to create and circulate their own materials (Borland, 2007). The 
present web (Web 1.0) was originally planned to be two-way, but as it 
grew exponentially in the late 1990s, publishing tools failed to keep up 
with web browsers in ease of use; now, with the rise of blogs and wikis, 
the balance is being redressed (“Watching the Web Grow Up,” 2007).
Growth and acceptance of Web 3.0, called the “Semantic Web,” 
is predicated on three areas of development: 1) the spread of Internet 
access to millions of new users via mobile devices; 2) growing interest 
in this technology’s potential socially; and 3) the practice of consistently 
labelling information so that it makes sense to machines as well as people 
(“Watching the Web Grow Up,” 2007). The Semantic Web incorporates 
widespread mobile broadband access to full web services, including tech-
nologies that allow computers to organize and draw conclusions from 
online data. In Web 3.0, online content is encoded so that computers 
are capable of locating and extracting the information. In this version 
of the Web, machines will be able to read web pages much as humans 

184	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
do, and software agents will “troll the Net and find what they’re looking 
for” in an Internet that will resemble “one big database” (Metz, 2007, 
p. 76).
Many authorities believe the above cannot happen within the 
existing Internet, due to the fact that the present Web has become 
increasingly “fragile” (Talbot, 2005), and because of the immense chal-
lenge of accurately ascribing standardized forms of metadata to the 
millions of items already on the Internet.
Promising Developments
Developments such as new versions of the Internet, more equable 
Internet access globally, social software, and the open-source movement 
constitute promising new developments in media evolution.
New Internets
New versions of the Internet are being developed to address the weak-
nesses of the old. Because of problems described above, both Canada 
and the U.S. have projects to create a new high-speed Internet to serve 
the research and academic communities worldwide. As well, the National 
Science Foundation (NSF) in the U.S. is studying the feasibility of devel-
oping “clean-slate” Internet architectures that will be secure, accom-
modate new technologies, and be easier to manage (characteristics the 
current Internet manifestly lacks). Talbot (2005) reports that among 
these are the university-based programs PLANETLAB (Princeton), 
EMULAB (University of Utah), DETER (USC, Information Sciences 
Institute), and WINLAB (Rutgers). Two National Science Foundation 
initiatives are the Global Environment for Networking Innovations 
(GENI), and Future Internet Design (FIND). GENI is a redesign project 
for Internet protocols and applications, and FIND is intended to gener-
ate a new vision of the future Internet (“Reinventing the Internet,” 
2006). Shibboleth, an open-standard authentication system under devel-
opment at Brown University, is an element of the Internet2 project, and 
a sign that the new Internets will better address present security and 
management concerns (Talbot, 2006a).
All of the above initiatives are prompted by various assumptions, 
some of which are applicable to virtual and distance education:
• Present world-wide Internet growth, already very high, will 
continue.

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
185
• World-wide Internet-based research, and academic, government, 
and corporate cooperation and collaboration, will continue and 
increase.
• The Internet has proven it is a powerful tool for productive 
­collaboration and communication.
• Governments have a responsibility, in the national interest, to 
fund and maintain such a network (NGI, 2001).
• Ease of use, power/speed, cost, and accessible content determine 
the growth of wireless Internet developments (Machrone, 
2001).
• Designers will assure that new Internets will not be more failure-
prone as they become more complex, employing more leading-
edge technologies (Talbot, 2005; “The Next Internet,” 2005).
Reality-based Internet Access for the Developing World
In much of the developing world, or where necessary infrastructure 
elements (such as reliable power) cannot be assumed, sophisticated 
computer-based communications and access systems are not feasible. In 
such instances, technologies must recognize both socioeconomic and 
technological issues. Alternate-powered technologies are more suitable, 
in the form of wind-up medical devices (“Power From The People,” 
2008), communications tools (“Human-Powered Health Care,” 2004), 
radios (Freeplay Foundation, 2006), and computers that derive their 
power from springs (Miller, 2006b), or even from the energy of the typ-
ist’s keystrokes (Pontin, 2005). The ability of developing societies to skip 
over stages of infrastructure growth (adopting wireless, for example, 
without first becoming fully “wired”) is a major reason that emerging 
nations move more quickly than developed ones to adopt new technolo-
gies (“Of Internet Cafés,” 2008).
Other technologies, such as the cellphone, may also turn out to 
be more useful than computers in some societies. There were 2.8 billion 
active cellular telephones (cellphones) worldwide in 2007 (“A World of 
Connections,” 2007), and purchases of cellphones that also function as 
PDAs vastly increased in the preceding two-year period (Roush, 2005). 
At that time, some 80% of the world’s population lived within range of 
a cellphone network, but only 25% owned a cellphone (“Less is More,” 
2005). These facts make cellphones a potentially important global wire-
less communications technology, a “genuine productivity tool” (Kamen, 
2003) capable, in the minds of some, of spurring economic growth and 
timely learning (“Cellphones vs. PDAs,” 2004). Some believe the 

186	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­economic impact of cellphones could powerfully affect social develop-
ment in third-world countries, improving gross domestic product (GDP) 
and reducing poverty (“Calling an End to Poverty,” 2005). The potential 
of this technology can be seen in the Bangladesh Grameen Phone project 
(“Power to the People,” 2006; “Yogurt or Cucumber?” 2008); the TradeNet 
initiative in Africa, which exploits the fact that over 60% of the popula-
tion now have cellular coverage – expected to rise to 85% by 2010 (“Buy, 
Cell, Hold,” 2007; “A Cash Call,” 2007); and the benefits that download-
ing books from satellites to Linux-based PDAs, avoiding print altogether, 
has had on the availability of quality training resources in rural areas of 
developing countries (Talbot, 2006b; “Calling For a Rethink,” 2006).
Social Software
Social software refers to software that supports group interaction (Shirky, 
in Owen, Grant, Sayers, & Facer, 2006). Lefever (cited in Anderson, 
2005) is less general, and suggests the educational potential of these 
tools: “Where normal software links people to the inner workings of a 
computer or network, social software links people to the inner workings 
of each others’ thoughts, feelings and opinions” (p. 4).
Boyd (in Owen, et al., 2006) refines the definition further, specify-
ing three types of interaction support provided by social software:
•	Support for conversational interaction between individuals or groups, 
from real-time instant messaging to asynchronous collaborative 
teamwork, including blogs.
•	Support for social feedback, in which a group rates the contributions 
of others, producing a digital reputation for participants.
•	Support for social networks to explicitly create and manage partici-
pants’ personal relationships, and to help them develop new ones.
Owen and colleagues (2006) have observed that social software 
also causes changes to community function: the group benefits from 
others acting in more social, community-oriented ways – the social whole 
becomes greater than the sum of its parts. This concept reflects the belief 
that important knowledge and significant learning opportunities may 
be missing from mainstream institutions and traditional learning envi-
ronments, and that the design of most learning management systems 
and related software fosters isolation and competition rather than com-
munity. Social software emphasizes the importance of interpersonal 
interaction in groups that are dedicated to learning and teaching. There 
is the expectation that learning structures, including tools and 

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
187
­environments, will reflect and facilitate social equality, collaboration, 
cooperation, and mutual support.
In education and training situations, social software encourages 
collaborative, community-oriented learning, based on voluntary affiliation and 
participation. Members join these learning groups motivated by intrinsic 
interests, rather than the pursuit of credentials, credits, or other extrinsic 
motivations. Instead of being assigned membership in classes or pro-
grams, participants seek out others who possess the knowledge that 
matches their needs or interests, join voluntarily, and, using social soft-
ware systems, contribute to group success by learning and, when appro-
priate, teaching (Wikipedia, n.d.a). Groups are based upon trust and 
are democratically governed. Conrad (2005) found that such groups, 
drawing on the group’s resources, were more able to identify – and 
survive – poor teaching.
Any medium that promotes collaboration, group formation, and 
support could qualify as social software. Anderson (2005) suggests that 
social software is defined by the activities it supports, such as “meeting, 
building community, providing mentoring and personal learning assis-
tance, working collaboratively on projects or problems, reducing com-
munication errors, and supporting complex group functions” (p. 4), 
and by its other affordances, such as “combinations of blogging, portfolio 
management, discussion and file sharing, group file management, and 
search and linking capacity” (p. 8).
Presently, examples of social software include instant messaging, 
Internet relay chat (IRC), Internet forums, blogs (weblogs), wikis, social 
network services, peer-to-peer social networks, massively multiplayer 
online games, virtual presence sites, even social shopping applications 
(Wikipedia, n.d.a). (Note: Wikis are “an effective tool for collaborative 
authoring,” and “a type of web site that allows the visitors themselves to 
easily add, remove, and otherwise edit and change some available content, 
sometimes without the need for registration” [Wikipedia, n.d.b])
Social software, though popular, has its critics. Dvorak (2006) calls 
virtual immersion experiences “a complete waste of time,” since “there’s 
no hint of reality and its consequences in these worlds” (p. 138). Second 
Life itself has been called “lawless” (Talbot, 2008). Recognizing these 
criticisms, New York University planned a “Facebook in the Flesh” session 
for incoming freshmen in 2007, believing that undergraduates immersed 
in online interaction might need help relating to classmates face-to-face 
(Shulman, 2007).

188	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Further, some research shows that social networks do not benefit 
from Metcalfe’s Law, which, in relation to traditional networks, holds 
that the value of a network is proportional to the square of the number 
of users. Social networks, on the other hand, appear to lose value as 
membership increases; one Silicon Valley forecaster comments, “the 
value of the social network is defined not only by who’s on it, but by 
who’s excluded” (“Social graph-iti,” 2007, p. 83). By this perspective, 
exclusivity, not accessibility, is an online social network value (Costa, 
2007), because “people want to hobnob with the chosen few, not to be 
spammed by random friend-requests” (p. 83).
Finally, there is also evidence that participation in some of these 
more self-revelatory virtual environments may be short-lived for many 
who try them. Dalton (2007) reports that, while 175,000 new blogs were 
started daily in early 2007, half of those blogs were abandoned within 
three months, leaving 200 million inactive blogs on the Internet. While 
some observers disagree (citing the trend to commercialization and 
corporate uses of blogs as an indication of their vitality), Dalton pre-
dicted that the number of authentically active blogs would level off after 
2007, at about 30 million.
Open Source
Open source began as a reaction to the power that proprietary software 
makers were seen to wield (sometimes symbolized by Microsoft’s alleged 
monopolistic practices). Open-source supporters advocate the use of 
software that is open to modification, and is free (or nearly so), as a way 
of supporting experimentation and competition, features they regard 
as lacking in both the organizations and the software packages of the 
big software producers. While open source may have begun as a reac-
tion, it has become a credible movement, representing a growing and 
diverse community of seasoned information technology professionals 
who, because so many are involved and check each other’s work, produce 
software of consistently high relative quality (Constantine, 2007; 
Goldman, 2007).
The appeal of open source is broad: the movement is supported 
by companies such as Sun Microsystems, AOL, American Express, Novell, 
and Bank of America, as well as the UK’s Ministry of Defense and the 
French tax authority. Corporate users of Linux, the open-source operat-
ing system, include Orbitz, Schwab, L.L Bean, and the New York Stock 
Exchange; Linux is supported by IBM, Hewlett-Packard, Dell, Intel, 
Oracle, and Google, (Null, 2003; Miller, 2003; Ferguson, 2005; “Business,” 

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
189
2005). In late 2006, Linux was selected to become the operating system 
of the world’s fastest computer (Rupley, 2006). It was predicted that, by 
2008, 6% of operating systems shipped by commercial vendors would 
be Linux-based (Roush, 2004). Linux server software was growing at 
40% annually in 2005, while the rate for similar Windows products was 
less than 20% and Unix usage was declining (Ferguson, 2005). The 
suggestion that Linux servers were considerably more resistant to 
malware attacks than Windows servers helped to pique interest (Vaughan-
Nichols, 2005).
The desire to address the problem of too-centralized software 
development may ironically contain another serious issue, however:
Because there are so many individual voices involved in an open-
source project, no one can agree on the right way to do things. 
And, because no one can agree, every possible option is built into 
the software, thereby frustrating the central goal of the design, 
which is, after all, to understand what to leave out. (Gladwell, 
2005, 132)
There may also be questions of intellectual property rights in 
open-source products, since no one author is completely responsible for 
them (“Open, But Not As Usual,” 2006). Obviously, if not addressed, 
these criticisms could constitute serious obstacles to the eventual success 
of the open-source movement. There are also strong opposing arguments 
for the standards, support, and sheer endurance of commercial software, 
such as Windows (Miller, 2005).
Conclusion
Online learning continues to mature in relation to media and technolo-
gies, and to an appropriate pedagogy for their use. There are many 
outstanding and, in some cases, vexing issues: costs, though declining, 
still limit widespread access, especially in the developing world, and for 
those whose purchases (including seemingly constant upgrades) are not 
subsidized; further training remains a need for many (teachers, trainers, 
and learners) to assure mature use of online media and systems 
(Garfinkel, 2003; Bernard, et al., 2004); administrators and policy-makers 
often misread or oversell the likely impacts of going online (Nikiforuk, 
1997; Dvorak, 2002), resulting in confusion, disappointment, and, in 

190	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
the worst cases, recriminations and disillusionment; systems and inter-
faces generally remain too complex (Fahy, 2005); and the relation of 
learning outcomes to technology use, for specific populations and in 
particular circumstances, remains unclear, at least partially because it is 
under-theorized, (Garrison, 2000; Walther, et al., 2005), but also because 
so much research on technology use in distance learning is weak (Rovai 
& Barnum, 2003).
At the same time, there are promising signs, especially in post-
secondary education and training (“Higher Education Inc.,” 2005; Rhey, 
2007). Access to the Internet is improving, especially for some previously 
disenfranchised groups (U.S. Department of Commerce, 2004; OECD, 
2007; Miller, 2006b; “Fun Facts,” 2007). For example, women as a group 
have for some time exceeded men in numbers of Internet users (Pastore, 
2001). Some consensus about good practice is emerging, including 
models of clearly successful uses of technology to meet persistent user 
(including learner) needs (“Inculcating Culture,” 2006). And much 
needed in-service training is increasingly available to users and potential 
users (Biesenbach-Lucas, 2004).
Will these useful trends continue? Change has been a constant 
in the online learning world, so that as technical capabilities come out 
of the lab, they are quickly packaged and made available to users by 
entrepreneurs. Education could keep pace and avoid the costs and uncer-
tainties of invention by following the technological lead of the corporate 
sector, and of society in general, and learning from their experiences.
Whether online learning follows this path or not, it has a good 
chance to grow, because online access to training using various media 
is an established social and economic reality globally (“The Best is Yet 
To Come,” 2005). Whether one deplores or applauds this fact, it is still 
true that as a society, we increasingly go online for a widening array of 
purposes, including learning. The implications for every educator – espe-
cially distance educators and trainers – are becoming more obvious.
References
A cash call. (2007, February 17). The Economist, 382(8516), 71–73.
Airborne outbreak. (2005). Technology Review, 108(4), 22.
A world of connections. (2007, April 28). Special Report on Telecoms. 
The Economist, 383(8526), 3–4. 

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
191
Anderson, T. (2005). Distance learning – Social software’s killer app? 
Paper presented at the Open and Distance Learning Association of ­Australia 
(ODLAA) Conference. November, 9–11, 2005, Adelaide, South Australia. 
Retrieved May 10, 2007, from www.unisa.edu.au/odlaaconference/
PPDF2s/13%20odlaa%20-%20Anderson.pdf
Anderson, T., Rourke, L., Garrison, D. R. & Archer, W. (2001). Assessing 
teaching presence in a computer conferencing context. Journal of 
­Asynchronous Learning Networks, 5(2), 1–17.
Apple said. (2007, April 14). The Economist, 383(8524), 7.
Bates, A. W. (1988). Technology for distance education: A 10-year 
­prospective. Open Learning, 3(3), 3–12.
Bates, A. W. (1995). Technology, open learning and distance education. New 
York: Routledge.
Beaudoin, M. (1990). The instructor’s changing role in distance educa-
tion. The American Journal of Distance Education, 4(2), 21–29.
Bernard, R., Abrami, P., Lou, Y., Borokhovski, E., Wade, A., Wozney, L., 
Wallet, P. A., Fiset, M., & Huang, B. (2004). How does distance educa-
tion compare to classroom instruction? A meta-analysis of the empir-
ical literature. Review of Educational Research, 74(3), 379–439.
Biesenbach-Lucas, S. (2004). Asynchronous web discussions in teacher 
training courses: Promoting collaborative learning – or not? Association 
for the Advancement of Computing In Education, 12(2). Retrieved August 
29, 2007, from http://www.aace.org/pubs/aacej/temp/03lucas155-
170.pdf 
Borland, J. (2007). A smarter web. Technology Review, 110(2), 64–71.
Business. (2005). The Economist, 377(8447), 9.
Buy, cell, hold. (2007, January 27). The Economist, 382(8513), 48.
Calling an end to poverty. (2005, July 9). The Economist, 376(8434),  
51–52.
Calling for a rethink. (2006). The Economist, 378(8462), 57–58.
Cannell, L. (1999). Review of [distance education] literature. Winnipeg: 
Distance Education Association of Theological Schools. Unpublished 
paper.
Catching up. (2006, December 23). The Economist, 381(8509), 86–87.
Cell phones vs. PDAs. (2004). Business 2.0, 5(1), 32.
Chen, Y. & Willits, F. (1998). A path analysis of the concepts in Moore’s 
theory of transactional distance in a videoconferencing environment. 
Journal of Distance Education, 13(2), 51–65.
Chickering, A. & Ehrmann, S. (1996). Implementing the seven ­principles: 
Technology as lever. American Association for Higher Education ­Bulletin, 

192	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
49(2), 3–6. Retrieved August 29, 2007, from http://www.tltgroup.org/
programs/seven.html
Chickering, A. & Gamson, Z. (1987, March). Seven principles for good 
practice in undergraduate education. AAHE Bulletin, 39, 3–7.
Conrad, D. (2005). Building and maintaining community in cohort-
based online learning. Journal of Distance Education, 20,(1), 1–20.
Constantine, L. (2007, January/February). The open-source solution. 
Technology Review, 110(1), 26.
Copeland, M., Malik, O. & Needleman, R. (2003). The next big thing. 
Business 2.0, 4(6), 62–64.
Costa, D. (2007, November 6). My Space is not your space. PC Magazine, 
26(21/22), 62.
Dalton, A. (2007, March 6). All typed out? PC Magazine, 26(5), 17–18.
Davies, R. (1981). The rebel angels. Toronto: Penguin.
DeFeo, J. M. (2004). Sony halts the Clie. PC Magazine, 23(13), 17.
Dilworth, R. L., & Willis, V. J. (2003). Action learning: Images and pathways. 
Malabar, FL: Kreiger.
Displays to keep an eye on. (2007, March 10). The Economist, 382(8519), 
Monitor 4–Monitor 6.
Dvorak, J. C. (2002). The nine assassins of broadband. PC Magazine, 
21(2), 55.
Dvorak, J. C. (2006, December 26). Unreal life? Get a life. PC Magazine, 
25(23), 138.
Epstein, J. (2008, March/April). What’s wrong with the Kindle? Technol-
ogy Review, 111(2), 12–13.
Fahy, P. J. (2005). Two methods for assessing critical thinking in com-
puter-mediated communications (CMC) transcripts. International 
Journal of Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 2(3) (March). 
Retrieved June 1, 2005, from http://www.itdl.org/Journal/Mar_05/
article02.htm.
Fahy, P. J., & Ally, M. (2005). Student learning style and asynchronous 
computer-mediated conferencing. American Journal of Distance Educa-
tion, 19(1), 5–22.
Ferguson, C. (2005). How Linux could overthrow Microsoft. Technology 
Review.com. Retrieved May 17, 2005, from http://www.technologyreview.
com/ articles/05/06/issue/feature_linux.asp?p=1
Freeplay Foundation. (2006). What is Lifeline radio? Retrieved August 
29, 2007, from http://www.freeplayfoundation.org/
French, D., Hale, C., Johnson, C. & Farr, G. (Eds.) (1999). Internet-based 
learning. London: Kogan Page.

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
193
Fulford, C. P., & Zhang, S. (1993). Perception of interaction: The critical 
predictor in distance education. The American Journal of Distance 
­Education, 7(3), 8–21.
Fun Facts: Worldwide Internet usage. (2007, March 6). PC Magazine, 
26(5), 21.
Garfinkel, S. (2003). Class struggle. Technology Review, 106(3), 33.
Garrison, D. R. (2000). Theoretical challenges for distance education 
in the twenty-first century: A shift from structural to transactional 
issues. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 
1(1). Retrieved August 29, 2007, from http://www.irrodl.org/index.
php/irrodl/article/view/2/333 
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2001). Critical thinking, 
cognitive presence, and computer conferencing in distance education. 
The American Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 7–23. 
Garrison, D. R. & Cleveland-Innes, M. (2005). Facilitating cognitive pres-
ence in online learning: Interaction is not enough. The American Journal 
of Distance Education, 19(3), 133–148.
Gladwell, M. (2005, September 5). The bakeoff. The New Yorker,  
124–133.
Goldman, R. (2007). Open source and you. Technology Review, 110(2), 
34.
Grandzol, J. R., & Grandzol, C. J. (2006). Best practices for online busi-
ness education. International Review of Research in Open and Distance 
Learning, 7(1). Retrieved August 29, 2007, from http://www.irrodl.
org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/246/ 475
Greene, K. (2006, March/April). Stretchable silicon. Technology Review, 
109(1), 70.
Grow, G. (1991). Teaching learners to be self-directed. Adult Education 
Quarterly, 41(3), 125–149.
Hadenius, P. (2004). No. 6,529,871 – A voice of approval. Technology 
Review, 107(4), 68.
Halo effect. (2005, December 17). The Economist, 377(8457), 63.
Halo: Video conferencing done right. (2006, March 7). PC Magazine, 
25(4), 22.
Haughey, M., & Anderson, T. (1998). Networked learning: The pedagogy of 
the Internet. Montreal: Chenelière/McGraw-Hill.
Heinich, R., Molenda, M., Russell, J. D., & Smaldino, S. E. (1996). Instruc-
tional media and technologies for learning (5th ed.). Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
Higher Education Inc. (2005). The Economist, 376(8443), 19–20.

194	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Hounsell, K. (2006, February). Lectures just a download away. University 
Affairs, p. 5.
Human-powered health care. (2004). The Economist, 373(8404),14–50.
Hutson, S. (2005). Wireless devices catch bad code through the air and 
then infect supposedly secure computer systems. Technology Review.com. 
Retrieved April 19, 2005, from http://www.technologyreview.com/
articles/05/05/ issue/feature_emerging.asp?p=9
Inculcating culture. (2006, January 21). The Economist, 378(8461), 
11–12.
Kamen, D. (2003). Technology where it’s needed. Business 2.0, 4(6), 
124.
Knowles, M. (1980). The modern practice of adult education: From pedagogy 
to andragogy (2nd edition). New York: Association Press.
Koumi, J. (1994). Media comparisons and deployment: A practitioner’s 
view. British Journal of Educational Technology, 25(1), 41–57.
Kozma, R. (1991). Learning with media. Review of Educational Research, 
61(2), 179–211.
Less is more. (2005, July 9). The Economist, 376(8434), 11.
Loomis, K. D. (2000). Learning styles and asynchronous learning: Com-
paring the LASSI model to class performance. Journal of Asynchronous 
Learning Networks, 4(1), 23–32.
Machrone, B. (2001). The price of wireless shopping. PC Magazine, 20(6), 
77.
Make your own music. (2004). PC Magazine, 23(11), 28.
Makris, S. (2005, June 18). Creative new designs make computing fun. 
The Edmonton Journal, F-1.
Mandell, A., & Herman, L. (1996). From teachers to mentors: Acknowl-
edging openings in the faculty role. In R. Mills & A. Tait (Eds.), Sup-
porting the learner in open and distance learning (pp. 3–18). London: 
Pitman Publishing.
Maushak, N., Chen, H. H., Martin, L., Shaw, B., & Unfred, D. (2000). 
Distance education: Looking beyond the no significant difference. 
Annual proceedings of Selected Research and Development Papers, National 
Convention of the Association for Educational Communications and ­Technology, 
Denver, October. ERIC Document: ED 455 779.
Mayer, R. E. (2001). Multimedia learning. New York: Cambridge University 
Press.
McCabe, M. (1997). Online classrooms: Case studies of computer conferencing 
in higher education. Unpublished PhD dissertation. Columbia University 
Teachers’ College.

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
195
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media: The extensions of man. Toronto: 
McGraw-Hill.
Metz, C. (2007, April 10). Web 3.0. PC Magazine, 26(7/8), 74–79.
Miller, M. J. (2003). IBM takes on the world. PC Magazine, 22(16), 8.
Miller, M. J. (2004). Consumer electronics leads the way. PC Magazine, 
23(4), 5.
Miller, M. J. (2005). Windows at 20: Competition is a good thing. PC 
Magazine, 24(19/20), 7–8.
Miller, M. J. (2006a, February 7). The phone as a platform. PC Magazine, 
25(2), 7–8.
Miller, M. J. (2006b, June 27). Will digital access make the world a better 
place? PC Magazine, 25(11), 61.
Mobile net. (2007, January). PC Magazine, 26(1/2), 16.
Moore, M. G. (1989). Three types of interaction. American Journal of 
Distance Education, 3(2), 1–6. Retrieved August 29, 2007, from http://
www.ajde.com/ Contents/vol3_2.htm#editorial 
Moore, M. G. (1991). Editorial: Distance education theory. The American 
Journal of Distance Education, 5(3), 1-6.
Morgan, R. (2007, March 20). Believe the hype. PC Magazine, 26(6), 
87.
Murphy, D. (2005). Audio format glossary. PC Magazine, 24(12), 122.
Newby, T., Stepich, D., Lehman, J., & Russell, J. (2000). Instructional 
technology for teaching and learning (2nd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Merrill.
NGI. (2001). Next Generation Internet (NGI) Initiative. Retrieved 
August 29, 2007, from http://ecommerce.hostip.info/pages/794/
Next-Generation-Internet-Initiative-NGI.html
Nikiforuk, A. (1997, Oct. 4). The digerati are bluffing. The Globe and 
Mail, D15.
Not bound by anything. (2007, March 24). The Economist, 382(8521), 
93–94.
Null, C. (2003). At Orbitz, Linux flies first-class. Business 2.0, 4(6), 53.
OECD. (2007). Key ICT indicators. Retrieved August 29, 2007, from http://
www.oecd.org/document/23/0,3343,en_2825_495656_33987543_1_
1_1_1,00.html
Of Internet cafés and power cuts. (2008, February 9). The Economist, 
386(8566), 75–77.
Oliver, R. & McLoughlin, C. (1998). Interactivity in telelearning environ-
ments. Open Praxis: The Bulletin of the International Council for Open and 
Distance Education, 1, 9–13.

196	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Open, but not as usual. (2006, March 18). The Economist, 378(8469), 
73–75.
Owen, M., Grant, L., Sayers, S., & Facer, K. (2006). Social software and 
learning: An open education report from Futurelab. Retrieved August 29, 
2007, from http://www.futurelab.org.uk/resources/documents/
opening_education/Social_Software_report.pdf
Pastore, M. (2001). Women maintain lead in Internet use. Cyberatlas.com. 
Retrieved July 18, 2002, from http://cyberatlas.Internet.com/big_
picture/demographics/ article/05901_78679100.html
Paulsen, M. F. (2003). Online education and Learning Management Systems: 
Global e‑learning in a Scandinavian perspective. Oslo: NKI Forlaget.
Pescovitz, D. (2003). The best new technologies of 2003. Business 2.0, 
4(10), 109–115.
Picard, J. (1999, June 10). Creating virtual work teams using IP videoconfer-
encing. Presentation at the Distance Education Technology ’99 Work-
shop, Edmonton, Alberta.
Pittman, V. V. (1987). The persistence of print: Correspondence study 
and the new media. The American Journal of Distance Education, 1(1), 
31–36.
Pocket power. (2007, January). PC Magazine, 26(1/2), 16.
Podcasting hits the mainstream. (2005). PC Magazine, 24(9), 23.
Pontin, J. (2005). Mediating poverty. Technology Review, 108(8), 14.
Pontin, J. (2007). On beautiful machines. Technology Review, 110(3), 10.
Power from the people. (2008, February 9). The Economist, 386(8566), 
87.
Power to the people. (2006, March 11). Technology Quarterly. The 
­Economist, 378(8468), 37–38.
Rabin, J., & McCathie-Nevile, C. (2006.) Mobile web best practices 1.0: Basic 
guidelines. Retrieved August 29, 2007, from http://www.w3.org/TR/
mobile-bp/
Ragan, L. C. (1999). Good teaching is good teaching: An emerging set 
of guiding principles and practices for the design and development 
of distance education. CAUSE/EFFECT Journal, 22(1).
Readius: The ultimate e-reader? (2005). PC Magazine, 24(19/20), 24.
Reinventing the Internet. (2006, March 11). Technology Quarterly. The 
Economist, 378(8468), 32–33.
Rekkedal, T. (2005). Online flexible distance education or Internet based 
e-learning – The evolutionary development of the NKI Internet college. 
Presentation, eLearning Project (Exemplo – Elex) Conference, Rome, 

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
197
­December 15-16. Retrieved August 29, 2007, from http://www.nki.
no/eeileo/research/nki/tor1.htm
Rhey, E. (2007, January). Top 10 wired colleges. PC Magazine, 26(1/2), 
112–123.
Roberts, J. (1998). Compressed video learning: Creating active learners. 
Toronto: Chenelière/McGraw-Hill.
Rockley, A. (1997). Intranet publishing. Stouffville, ON: The Rockley 
Group.
Roush, W. (2004, April). An alternative to Windows. Technology Review.
com. Retrieved October 1, 2007, from http://www.technologyreview.
com/articles/04/09/ roush0904.asp?trk=nl
Roush, W. (2005, May). The infinite library. Technology Review.com. 
Retrieved October 1, 2007, from http://www.technologyreview.com/
articles/05/05/issue/ feature_library.asp?trk=nl
Rovai, A. P. & Barnum, K. T. (2003). Online course effectiveness: An 
analysis of student interactions and perceptions of learning. Journal of 
Distance Education, 18(1), 57–73.
Rubenking, R. (2007, May 8). Invasion of the data snatchers. PC ­Magazine, 
26(10), 42.
Rupley, S. (2003). Tiny film festival. PC Magazine, 22(9), 23.
Rupley, S. R. (2005). A 60GB microdrive? Never say never. PC Magazine, 
24(9), 24.
Rupley, S. (2006). Meep! Meep! Roadrunner will be the fastest PC ever. 
PC Magazine, 25(19/20), 23.
Saettler, P. (1990). The evolution of American educational technology. 
­Englewood, CO: Libraries Unlimited, Inc.
Santoro, F. M., Borges, M. R. S., & Santos, N. (2004). Evaluation of 
­collaborative learning processes. Advanced technologies for learning, 1(3), 
164–173.
Schmidt, S. (2007, January 24). E-books far from a bestseller with 
­students. The Edmonton Journal, A-5.
Scriven, B. (1993). Trends and issues in the use of communication tech-
nologies in distance education. In G. Davies & B. Samways (Eds.), 
Teleteaching (pp. 71–78). North Holland: Elsevier Science.
Shulman, M. (2007, September 17). Social studies. The New Yorker, 37.
Simpson, H., Pugh, H. L., & Parchman, S. (1993). Empirical comparison 
of alternative instructional TV technologies. Distance Education, 14(1), 
147–164.
Social graph-iti. (2007, October 20). The Economist, 385(8551), 83–84.

198	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Speak to me. (2006). PC Magazine, 25(14), 19.
Statistics Canada. (2001, March). Overview: Access to and use of information 
communication technoplogy. Catalogue No. 56-505-XIE. Retrieved August 
27, 2007, from http://www.statcan.ca/english/freepub/56-505-XIE/ 
0000156-505-XIE.pdf 
Surowiecki, J. (2006). Philanthropy’s new prototype. Technology Review, 
109(5), 48–56.
Szabo, M. (1998). Survey of educational technology research. The Educational 
Technology Professional Development Project (ETPDP) Series. 
Edmonton, AB: Grant MacEwan Community College and Northern 
Alberta Institute of Technology.
Talbot, D. (2005, November 29). Next-generation networks. Technology 
Review. Retrieved August 29, 2007, from http://www.technologyreview.
com/InfoTech-Search/wtr_15937,308,p1.html
Talbot, D. (2006a, March/April). Universal authentication. Technology 
Review, 109(1), 65–66.
Talbot, D. (2006b, May/June). Beaming books. Technology Review, 109(2), 
21–22.
Talbot, D. (2008, Jan.–Feb.). The fleecing of the avatars. Technology Review, 
111(1), 58–62.
The best is yet to come. (2005). The Economist, 376(8443), 20–22.
The device that ate everything. (2005). Rational Consumer. The Economist, 
376(8441), 16.
The next Internet. (2005). PC Magazine, 24(18), 20.
The war of the wires. (2005). The Economist, 376(8437), 53–54.
Today’s startup lesson: Fewer orders = higher price. (2007, 30 October). 
The Globe and Mail, B 13.
UC College Prep. (2006). The state of online learning in California: A 
look at current K-12 policies and practices. Santa Cruz: University of 
California, UC College Prep Online.
Ulanoff, L., & Costa, D. (2007, January). iPod enemy #1. PC Magazine, 
26(1/2), 42.
U.S. Department of Commerce. (2004). Economics and Statistics Admin-
istration. (2004). A nation online: Entering the broadband age. National 
Telecommunications and Information Administration. Retrieved 
August 29, 2007, from http://www.ntia .doc.gov/reports/anol/Nation 
OnlineBroadband04.htm#_Toc78020933
Vaughan-Nichols, S. J. (2005). Linux lasts longer. PC Magazine, 24(9), 
64.

Characteristics of Interactive Online Learning Media	
199
Vrasidas, C., & McIsaac, M. S. (1999). Factors influencing interaction in 
an online course. American Journal of Distance Education, 13(3), 22–36.
Walther, J. B. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, 
interpersonal and hyperpersonal interaction. Communication Research, 
20(1), 3–43.
Walther, J. B., Gay, G., & Hancock, J. T. (2005). How do communication 
and technology researchers study the Internet? Journal of Communica-
tion, 55(3), 632–657.
Watching the Web grow up. (2007). The Economist, 381(8519), 31–32.
White OLEDs brighten. (2007). Technology Review, 110(1), 18.
Why wait for WiMax? (2005). The Economist, 376(8440), 51.
Wikipedia (n.d.a). Social software. Retrieved August 29, 2007, from http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_software 
Wikipedia (n.d.b). Wiki. Retrieved August 29, 2007, from http://en.­
wikipedia.org/wiki/Wiki
Wireless non-stop. (2005). Technology Review, 108(8), 18.
Yogurt or cucumber? (2008, February 23). The Economist, 386(8568), 
103.
You’ve heard this song before. (2006). The Economist, 381(8503), 75.
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Patrick J. Fahy, Ph.D. (patf@athabascau.ca), is a professor in the Centre 
for Distance Education (CDE), Athabasca University. His career has 
included high school and adult teaching, and research from basic literacy 
to graduate levels, private sector management and training, and private 
consulting. Currently, in addition to developing and teaching educa-
tional technology courses in the Master of Distance Education (MDE) 
program, Pat coordinates the MDE’s Advanced Graduate Diploma in 
Distance Education Technology program and the CDE’s annual Distance 
Education Technology Symposium, and he is designing and will teach 
the first doctoral course. Pat is Past-President of the Alberta Distance 
Education and Training Association (ADETA), the Alberta Association 
for Adult Literacy (AAAL), and the Movement for Canadian Literacy 
(MCL). His current research interests include measures of efficiency in 
online and technology-based training, interaction analysis in online 
­conferencing, and ethics in online research.


Chapter 8
“In-Your-Pocket”  
and “On-the-Fly:”  
Meeting the Needs of  
Today’s New Generation of 
Online Learners with Mobile 
Learning Technology
Maureen Hutchison, Tony Tin,  
& Yang Cao
Athabasca University
Introduction
Mobile devices are ubiquitous in today’s business and social environ-
ments, and they are shaping the way that individuals learn, communicate, 
and share information. A given technology for those approaching and 
just entering adulthood, mobile devices have also become central to the 
business demographic, who have a need or expectation to be always 
connected, mobile, and online. Today’s online learners require flexibility, 
and mobile devices are a solution to remove the barrier of a fixed time, 
place, and mode of learning. Tailoring online education to meet the 
needs of those who wish to learn “anywhere, anytime,” however, will be 
an ongoing challenge.
The emergence of the “Net Generation” into the halls and cyber-
space of higher education has challenged educators to better understand 
the makeup of a new generation of learners within our highly connected, 
technological society. As Canada’s leading distance education and  

202	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
e-learning institution, Athabasca University (AU) is exploring tools, 
­techniques, and the learning preferences of this tech-savvy demographic 
who are now just crossing our threshold. This chapter outlines what 
mobile learning is, its benefits and challenges, and discusses several of 
the issues faced. We also provide examples of how Athabasca University 
has applied mobile learning and mobile technology to support online 
teaching and learning, and offer our “lessons learned” in practice.
What is Mobile Learning?
Although mobile learning is considered to be a relatively new concept, 
it has experienced significant growth with the onset of the new millen-
nium. Mobile technologies, such as mobile phones, personal digital 
assistants (PDAs, such as Palm®, iPAQ®); smartphones (integrated tele-
phony, computing, and communication devices, such as BlackBerry®, 
Treo™, iPhone™); and portable media players (such as MP3 players, iPod®) 
have become embedded in our social and business milieu, transforming 
the way we work, live, and, indeed, learn. According to a recent Statistics 
Canada Innovation Analysis Bulletin (McDonald, 2006), over 16.6 million 
Canadian individuals subscribed to mobile communications services by 
the end of 2005, and from 1997 to 2004, Canadian households increased 
their total communications expenditures on wireless services by 253% 
and on Internet access by 600%. 
Mobile learning (m-learning) is the delivery of electronic learning 
materials with built-in learning strategies on portable computing devices, 
to allow access from anywhere and at any time (Ally, 2004). In the con-
tinuum of educational technology, m-learning is emerging to build on 
the advances of e-learning, or the use of Internet and learning manage-
ment systems (Georgiev, Georgieva, & Smrikarov, 2004). Milrad (2003) 
concurs and describes the differences between m- and e-learning:  
e-learning is “learning supported by digital ‘electronic’ tools and media,” 
whereas mobile learning is “e-learning using mobile devices and wireless 
transmission” (p. 151). 
Everywhere today, people are connected: they are checking email 
on their PDAs; they are text-messaging, listening to music, or playing 
games on their cellphones or iPods®; and they are surfing the Internet 
via a wireless connection for sports scores, stock prices, and even for 
dinner and flight reservations. The rise of mobile devices is allowing a 
broad range of consumers – from those owning a basic cellphone to 

“In-Your-Pocket” and “On-the-Fly”	
203
those on the periphery with cutting-edge smartphones – to connect in 
ways that foster learning and the exchange of ideas within a more uni-
versal social “mind,” beyond the restrictions of age, gender, national 
identity, and socio-economic status.
Mobile Learning and the Net Generation
Mobile learning allows individuals to connect with just the right content, 
using just the right technology, at just the right time. In today’s egoistic 
society, learning, too, can be on demand and attuned to the specific 
interests of the individual.
The Net Generation (also known by the monikers Net Gen, Genera-
tion Y, Millennials, the Google Generation, iGeneration, Me Generation) 
describes a demographic born between 1980 and 1994 who are very 
tech-savvy, accustomed to multi-tasking, and expect to control what, 
when, and how they learn (Tapscott, 1998). This demographic poses a 
new challenge for educators, who must consciously be aware of being 
made technically obsolete by the younger generation. According to 
Richard Sweeney (cited in Carlson, 2005), a university librarian at the 
New Jersey Institute of Technology, “higher education was built for us 
[baby boomers and previous generations] under an industrial-age model” 
(p. A34); the Net Generation is far from this design. This new genera-
tion of learners is smart but impatient, creative, expecting results imme-
diately, customizing the things they choose, very focused on themselves, 
and reliant on an “arsenal of electronic devices – the more portable the 
better” (Carlson, 2005, p. A34). They are more apt to learn and work in 
teams, are very achievement-oriented, are comfortable in image-rich 
environments, crave interactivity, and prefer to learn by doing rather 
than reflecting (Oblinger & Oblinger, 2005). 
The e-book Educating the Net Generation (Oblinger & Oblinger, 
2005) is a compilation of articles that explores this theme and discusses 
how higher education must better understand the Net Generation to 
remain relevant for today’s and tomorrow’s learners. One key to under-
standing the Net Generation, however, is recognizing that this demo-
graphic is not specifically about technology; rather, it is about the activities 
or experiences that technology enables (Roberts, 2005). Technology is 
merely a tool that may or may not support the various learning activities 
that are available, as part of one’s individualized approach to ­learning, 
for selection from a cafeteria-style array of learning services.

204	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Today’s learners have what Oblinger and Oblinger (2005) describe 
as “multiple media literacy” (p. 2.14). As such, educators today must not 
only prepare students for future careers, but also prepare students for 
the “real world,” where state-of-the-art technologies will be encountered 
on a regular basis. Alvin Toffler’s book The Third Wave (1980) illustrates 
society’s transition from a brute force economy (the Agricultural and 
Industrial Revolutions) to a brain force economy (the Information 
Revolution). Toffler’s subsequent book, written a decade later and titled 
Powershift: Knowledge, Wealth, and Violence at the Edge of the 21st Century 
(1990), explores power, based on individualism, innovation, and infor-
mation. In today’s economy, workers are increasingly dependent on 
knowledge and technology. Levy (2005) further builds on Toffler’s ideas 
with his concept of “the fourth revolution,” a movement to develop the 
full potential of knowledge workers, in order to gain maximum return 
from human capital. Emphasis is placed on the knowledge container, 
the “knower” whereby the learner is in full control and learning is no 
longer linear. These learners have the freedom and power to select what 
they wish to learn – central characteristics of the Net Generation. A key 
issue to consider for educators of this new demographic, therefore, is 
how to measure quality, given the new demographics’ preference for 
learner-centred, cafeteria-style educational choices to meet their learning 
needs. If the learner is in control and can choose what he or she wishes 
from a selection of educational materials, can quality be achieved? How 
will we credential and certify learning competence?
If one assumes that the learner is in full control, what influence 
does this have on preferences for mobile learning? Given our knowledge 
of the Net Generation, Wagner and Wilson (2005) argue that mobile 
learning – while enabling equal opportunity access, ubiquitous connec-
tivity, multi-generational uses and users, services for the mobile worker, 
and services for the mobile learner – will benefit most those who can 
leverage their digital communication skills in a world that has been 
­levelled by mobile technologies.
Mobile Learning in Distance Education Today
Muirhead (2005), in his paper, “A Canadian Perspective on the Uncertain 
Future of Distance Education,” sees distance education to be at a “criti-
cal juncture in its historical development,” and views distance educators 
as no longer leaders in an environment of “technology-enhanced, hybrid, 

“In-Your-Pocket” and “On-the-Fly”	
205
flexible learning environments” (p. 239). The educational marketplace 
is increasingly literate and competent with information and communica-
tion technologies, a phenomenon that forces distance educators to adapt 
to a rapidly changing technological social and learning environment. 
Muirhead believes that “distance education must focus on how to recon-
ceptualize itself and reconcile the increasing role of computer technol-
ogy in everyday educational activities, with the growing adoption of 
­distance-like educators” (p. 253). According to Clyde (2004), “the chal-
lenge is to identify the forms of education for which m-learning is par-
ticularly appropriate, the potential students who most need it and the 
best ­strategies for delivering mobile education” (p. 46).
In 1996, the University of Hagen and FernUniversität, Germany’s 
Open University, developed a virtual university system, the first e-­learning 
platform and university in Germany offering services via the Internet. 
Within the past five years, the University of Hagen has evolved this virtual 
university model to the pocket university, where m-learning is being inves-
tigated for teaching and learning (Bomsdorf, Feldmann, & Schlageter, 
2003). As with Athabasca University, the University of Hagen’s typical 
students are employed, study part-time, prefer to attend virtual events 
asynchronously, and need access to information and materials while 
travelling. For these students, efficient learning is key to educational 
success, and the flexibility to learn at a time and place which they choose 
is critical.
Researchers cited in this chapter are focusing on the tools, tech-
niques, style, structure, user interface, and the multitude of formats 
available for mobile learning and mobile devices. As such, educators are 
discovering various advantages and disadvantages of mobile devices for 
education. While some benefits of mobile devices include portability, 
collaboration and sharing, anytime-anywhere flexibility, “just-in-time” 
learning, and advantages for learners with learning difficulties and dis-
abilities, there are also disadvantages in using mobile devices for learning 
(Riva & Villani, 2005).
Central disadvantages of using mobile devices are the small display 
screen (Rekkedal & Dye, 2007), reduced storage capacity, and reliance 
on a battery-powered device. Waycott and Kukulska-Hulme’s (2003) 
research found that using PDAs for reading and note taking was not 
ideal. For older learners, diminishing eyesight makes viewing small 
screens a challenge. In addition, the lack of a common platform among 
the various manufacturers and equipment available (e.g., smartphones, 
cellphones, PDAs), complicates the development of content. There are 

206	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
also security issues inherent in using a wireless device and connecting to 
an “outside” environment. Also, as more users access a wireless network, 
bandwidth can be compromised, affecting the immediacy expected by 
today’s learners. Some educators opine that mobile devices are not the 
be-all, end-all solution to addressing the needs of today’s learners, and 
that performance improvement and optimized environmental conditions 
for learning should be the focus – rather than the technology itself 
(Rushby, 2005). Nonetheless, these emerging technologies appear to 
complement many of the characteristics of today’s learners and of other 
media used for delivery of distance education programming. 
Next-generation learning environments are being designed to be 
highly interactive, meaningful, and learner-centred. Kirkley and Kirkley 
(2005) believe these elements are important, as educators consider how 
to use technological affordances to provide a learning environment 
that reflects the same cognitive authenticity as the domain area or envi-
ronment being trained. In Going Nomadic: Mobile Learning in Higher 
Education, Alexander (2004) describes the emergence of learning swarms, 
wherein the socializing powers of mobility and wirelessness are influenc-
ing the way we look at traditional education methods and the traditional, 
physically sedentary campus. Alexander (2003) argues that “m-learning 
shifts the educational center of gravity towards students, raising funda-
mental and practical questions about learning for every instructor and 
campus” (p. 3). Knowing the intended learning audience allows for 
more options to engage them in the learning process. Chris Dede 
(2005) of Harvard University’s Graduate School of Education argues 
that campuses which make strategic investments in “physical plant, tech-
nical infrastructure, and professional development will gain a consider-
able competitive advantage in both recruiting top students and teaching 
them effectively” (p. 15).
Mobile Learning and Educational Opportunities
What does mobile learning mean to providers of higher education today? 
Removing barriers to enable learning anytime, anywhere for learners 
worldwide and increasing the equality of educational opportunities can 
be provided by using mobile devices, as several of the researchers and 
educators cited earlier in the chapter have noted. Dede suggests that 
new methods of teaching and research must be explored to better serve 
students. Various university mandate statements affirm several of the 

“In-Your-Pocket” and “On-the-Fly”	
207
themes relating to mobile learning discussed earlier, such as accessibility, 
flexibility, meeting the needs of the learner and the workplace, and a 
commitment to research, learning technologies, and individualized 
­distance education methods (Athabasca University, 1999, 2002, 2005; 
University of Waterloo, 2002; Royal Roads University, 2004). 
Although technology has regularly transformed the preparation 
and delivery of distance education materials (from print to television to 
online, to mention just a few technologies), institutional mandates give 
impetus to further work in the field of learning technologies and 
methods, and to the newest evolution of e-learning. The methods and 
outputs of print-based educational publishing have been replaced largely 
with a new digital paradigm. Faculty and subject matter experts now 
interact with increasingly specialized team members skilled in multime-
dia and digital communication. Gone is distance higher education’s 
reliance on paper-based manuscripts, hard-copy texts, broadcast tech-
nologies, and traditional course packs. Institutions once at the vanguard 
of the distance education movement must now compete with newcomers 
to the e-learning environment, as well as with the traditional bricks-and-
mortar institutions, in the new arena of online, individualized, and 
­collaborative learning.
Mobile Learning at Athabasca University
In what ways has Athabasca University addressed the needs of the new 
generation of learners with mobile learning and associated technologies? 
How is Athabasca University different from other educational providers, 
and how can the university capitalize on its rich history of distance edu-
cation, individualized approaches to learning, and the removal of bar-
riers to learning? In October 2006, Athabasca University illustrated its 
commitment to mobile learning by hosting mLearn 2006, the fifth world 
conference on mobile learning, in Banff, Alberta (see: http://www.
mlearn2006.org/). Topics of discussion included building and imple-
menting m-learning strategies in educational institutions, corporations, 
and government; m-learning theory and pedagogy; cost-effective man-
agement of m-learning processes, digital rights management, and  
m-learning management systems (mLMSs); emerging hardware and 
software for m-learning; creating interactive and collaborative m-learning 
environments; intelligent agents, learning objects, and metadata for  
m-learning; mass personalization and socialization; m-learning in 

208	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­developing countries; and the evaluation, implementation, instructional 
design, student support, and quality of m-learning. Various case studies, 
papers, poster sessions, workshops, and speeches were presented by con-
ference attendees from around the globe. Several Athabasca University 
projects have since applied e-learning and m-learning pedagogy to 
support learners, and are discussed below.
The Digital Reading Room
The Digital Reading Room (DRR) at Athabasca University enables 
­students to access library materials that have been selected by faculty for 
a particular course. The DRR is an interactive online reading room, 
offering digital files for course readings and supplementary materials. 
It can accommodate a range of formats, including online journal articles, 
electronic books, audio or video clips, web sites, and learning objects. 
In 2007, the DRR housed more than 20,780 resources, serving 235 
courses (Tin, 2007). The resources available have been specially selected 
by faculty, are organized by course and by lesson for the convenience of 
students, and are accessible using persistent links (PURLs). The library’s 
Web Access Management (WAM) function manages access to licensed 
resources, including password protection of copyrighted intellectual 
property (Magusin, Johnson, & Tin, 2003). The Athabasca University 
DRR can be accessed at http://library.athabascau.ca/drr/ 
The Mobile Deployment
Mobile access has been used to articulate the resources that are also 
­suitable for m-learning, currently available in the Athabasca University 
DRR. This work has resulted in the implementation of a comprehensive 
mobile library web site that contains relevant digital reading files, applica-
tion tools and software, and learning resources. These materials include
•	mobile device-ready learning objects, including MP3 versions of 
journal articles, video clips, and e-books
•	existing AU library electronic resources, organized for m-learning
•	an m-library web site
•	a comprehensive list of m-learning application tools
•	A best-practice document for m-learning instructional design.
Figure 2 illustrates how the desktop version of the DRR has been 
adapted for mobile display.

“In-Your-Pocket” and “On-the-Fly”	
209
Figure 1.  Athabasca University DRR interface for MBA program 
(­desktop display)

210	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 2.  DRR desktop display (left) and mobile display (right)
Mobile ESL Project
E-learning, or using computers to study, is a well-established pedagogy in 
Canada. Athabasca University has taken e-learning one step further by 
using mobile phones to deliver interactive course materials. The AU 
Mobile English as a Second Language (ESL) Project provides English 
grammar lessons and interactive exercises to anyone with a mobile device 
(cellphone, PDA, or smartphone) and access to the Internet. Students 
can brush up on their English language skills while waiting for a bus, 
over their lunch break, or whenever they have time to review grammar. 
The AU Mobile Learning Project was sponsored by the Canadian Council 
on Learning, Alberta Science and Research Authority, Canada Foundation 
for Innovation, Athabasca University, Canadian Virtual University, and 
the National Adult Literacy Database. 
The digital ESL content is based on Penguin’s bestselling intro-
ductory English grammar lessons and exercises, which was released by 
the author as open-source material (O’Driscoll, 1988; 1990). Students 
have access to the basic tools of English grammar in an interactive 
modular format, accessible on mobile and fixed computing devices. The 
course content consists of 86 lessons and related exercises that teach the 
basics of the English language, ranging from the difference between is 
and are to verb tenses, countable nouns, and other aspects of basic 
grammar. These digital lessons have been adapted into reusable multi-
media learning objects that are accessible to anyone on the Internet, 
either as stand-alone lessons, groups of lessons in units, or as full-course 
modules. The content materials are in a digitized format with interactive 
elements added to enhance flow and learner motivation. Specifically, 
the content has been rendered interactive by using a variety of multiple-

“In-Your-Pocket” and “On-the-Fly”	
211
choice, short-answer, jumbled-sentence, matching/ordering and fill-in-
the-blank exercises on the World Wide Web. The content is specifically 
formatted for output on small mobile devices. Figure 3 illustrates the 
mobile ESL content on a basic cellphone. This familiar learning context 
lends a sense of security to teachers and learners when using the mobile 
devices for learning. It adheres to the principle of introducing new 
technologies in a familiar context, as one would introduce new pedagogi-
cal approaches in traditional contexts. The course site has been devel-
oped to also auto-detect for desktop display; PDF and Microsoft® Word 
documents are provided for download or printout, should the learner 
prefer to use these document formats.
Figure 3.  Mobile ESL display on a basic cellphone

212	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Adult learners from three institutions – the Edmonton Mennonite 
Centre for Newcomers, the Chinese Evangelical Baptist Church, and 
Global Community College – assisted Athabasca University by pilot 
testing this project. The pilot testing indicated the following interesting 
results (Woodburn and Tin, 2007):
a)	 Test Scores: A slight improvement was shown after the students 
accessed and studied the grammar units on the mobile phone. The 
improvement was still noted the week following the pilot testing.
b)	 Accessibility: Almost all participants (90%) either “agree” or 
“strongly agree” that the mobile technology provided flexibility 
for them to learn anytime and anywhere.
c)	 Quality of Learning: Most participants (69%) thought that learning 
with mobile technology increased the quality of their learning 
experience.
d)	 Taking More Mobile Lessons: Most of the students (60%) chose either 
“5- Strongly Agree” or 4- Agree” when asked if they would like to 
take more lessons using mobile technology.
e)	 Recommend to Friends: Most (60%) agreed that this technology 
could be useful to others. 
Mobile ESL learners have reported three main benefits from this 
project. First, students are provided with immediate feedback. As stu-
dents work through the exercises one by one, they receive instant feed-
back on how they scored (after clicking Submit, they are told which 
questions they answered correctly or incorrectly); if they have answered 
incorrectly, they can try again and learn from their initial mistake. 
Second, this project allows for cross-referencing to other sites and 
resources. Mobile devices with constant wireless online access enable 
users to surf the World Wide Web and view related web sites on grammar 
that may assist them in their language learning. Last, this project increases 
motivation and opportunity for learning. Having the content online and 
right at students’ fingertips, “one click away,” means they can learn wher-
ever they are, despite the constraints of busy work and personal schedules 
which take them from place to place. Moreover, as students achieve 
success and progress through the exercises, they may be motivated to 
learn more of the English language. The Athabasca University mobile 
ESL project can be accessed at http://eslau.ca 
Athabasca University AirPac
The Athabasca University AirPac project is another example of mobile 
learning technology. AirPac is a software module of Innovative Interfaces 

“In-Your-Pocket” and “On-the-Fly”	
213
Inc. (III), an automated library system specially designed for ­compatibility 
with wireless mobile devices. AirPac runs on the library’s server and 
sends out JavaServer Pages (JSP), formatted for mobile devices request-
ing information. AirPac allows mobile users with wireless Internet access 
to search and browse the library catalogue, check due dates, request 
materials, and view their patron records in real time. Library staff and 
patrons, including people with disabilities, can now access the online 
public catalogue via wireless LANs, WiFi, 802.11b, and Bluetooth. Digital 
information is reformatted “on-the-fly” for different browsers and screen 
resolutions. AirPac also recognizes that information needs to be format-
ted in Wireless Access Protocol (WAP). If the user submits a search from 
a wireless PDA (such as a mobile phone or handheld computer), AirPac 
formats a response for that type of device. For example, a mobile phone 
will receive a minimal display to accommodate the smaller screen area, 
while AirPAC will send a larger display to a PDA with more screen area 
available. Athabasca University’s AirPac can be accessed at http://aupac.
lib.athabascau.ca/airpac/.
The DRR and MP3 Technology
Moving Picture Experts Group Audio Layer III – more commonly known as 
MP3 – is a format that compresses digital audio file size, yet retains nearly 
the original quality of the audio. The DRR takes advantage of this new 
technology by offering MP3 audio-reading files for curriculum use. In 
particular, the DRR features the use of MP3Producer, a CD-ripping and 
MP3-encoding program (see http://www.softsia.com/MP3Producer-
­download-8ts0.htm). Using MP3Producer, a series of CD audio tracks were 
converted to MP3 files for use in French language lessons at Athabasca 
University. The resulting encoded files are more compact, suitable for 
playback on an iPod® or on a media player program on a mobile device.
In another Athabasca University example, pre-coded MP3 files 
were obtained with copyright permission and streamed for use in the 
Global Strategic Management (EGSM-646) course of Athabasca 
University’s online MBA program. These Harvard University clips com-
plement the study of several specific Harvard cases in the course. Students 
commented favourably on the learning value they provided; the video 
clips also provided the instructor with another medium for teaching 
course concepts. The MP3 files were converted into Realplayer’s Real 
Media (rm) streaming format. They are available in both high-speed 
and low-speed versions, to accommodate bandwidth restrictions and thus 
remove another barrier for learning (see http://library.athabascau.ca/

214	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
drr/mba _template.php?course=mba&id=585). This type of technology 
is ideal for busy, time-pressed executive or adult learners engaged in 
graduate studies such as the MBA, undergraduate studies, or specific 
work-related training, while juggling family and business commitments, 
including travel. Although typically older than members of the Net 
Generation, Athabasca University students embrace many of the char-
acteristics of this younger demographic, especially given their multiple-
media exposure through the technologies and practices of business, the 
expectation of “digital connectedness” at all times, and the need to be 
highly efficient at multitasking. Today’s office, like today’s learning 
­environment, increasingly knows no boundaries.
The Mobile DRR also features the use of text-to-speech (TTS) 
technology to convert machine-readable text into MP3 audio files. Using 
a software program called River Past Talkative (RPT; see http://www. 
­riverpast.com/), a curriculum guide for a Master of Arts in Integrated 
Studies course, was converted from text into an audio-WAV file, provid-
ing a choice of natural human voices (see http://library.athabascau.ca/
drr/view.php?course=mais&id=496&sub=0 ).
Once created, these audio files can be saved as MP3 files and lis-
tened to on a mobile device or portable MP3 player. The interface con-
tains simple and readily accessible controls for different voices, including 
AT&T® Natural Voices™ (see http://www.naturalvoices.att.com). This 
program is also used to convert books and articles into MP3 audio books 
and audio articles for use in the mobile DRR. For an example, see http://
library.athabascau.ca/drr/view.php?course=demo&id=418. To further 
enhance the audio books and articles with full-text display and content 
reading aloud, a software program called MP3 Stream Creator is used (see 
http://www.guangmingsoft .net/msc/).
IRRODL and MP3 Technology
The International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning (www.
irrodl.org) is a renowned, refereed, open-access e-journal that aims to 
disseminate research, theory, and best practices in open and distance 
learning worldwide. IRRODL is housed at Athabasca University’s Open 
University Press web site. It is available free of charge to anyone with 
access to the Internet. IRRODL has pioneered the use of MP3 technolo-
gies for e-journal development (Killoh, Smith & Wasti, 2007). Individuals 
with iPods®, mobile phones, and other mobile devices are able to access 
IRRODL’s content anytime, anywhere. The inclusion of MP3 audio tech-
nology increases access for those with disabilities. IRRODL has featured 

“In-Your-Pocket” and “On-the-Fly”	
215
more than 40 MP3 audio articles for download and iPod®-casting. 
IRRODL uses NeoSpeech’s VoiceText® technology to convert the written 
text into MP3 audio files. The MP3 version of IRRODL is available at 
http://www.irrodl .org/index.php/irrodl/index.
Podcasting
Podcasting is a term that describes the combination of a Rich Site 
Summary (RSS) feed and multimedia materials. It has become popular 
as multimedia-capable devices such as the Apple iPod® and other hand-
held “smart” devices have become ubiquitous. Most podcasts are in MP3 
audio format. The iPod® is not wireless-enabled, so it functions simply 
as an audio player. Using the DRR, Athabasca University researchers 
added multimedia clips of different formats and created a podcast RSS 
channel. Athabasca University has aimed at testing and exploring three 
different groups of multimedia clips: audio, video, and enhanced audio 
with pictures, and chaptering capabilities and their applications.
Podcasting works like a radio, but with better audio quality and 
no need to tune in at a specific show time. With a combination of iTunes® 
on the desktop and the mobile iPod®, students can retrieve materials 
when they connect the device at their desk, or listen to the materials on 
the road. iPod® is far superior to analog devices such as cassette tapes. 
Educational developers can add chapters in the clip, allowing learners 
to jump to the appropriate section. For some MPEG 4 audio files, pic-
tures can also be encapsulated for each chapter. iPod® allows students 
to listen to audio lectures, anytime and anywhere. The subscription 
model streamlines the process for students to locate and retrieve newly 
available learning materials. As such, podcasting opens up a new and 
better way to deliver audio clips.
Effectiveness and Future of Mobile Learning
Is m-learning effective? Avellis and Scaramuzzi (2004) remind us that, 
although there is great potential for m-learning, there are relatively few 
successful implementations from which best practices can be studied. The 
“distinction between software and supporting learning is blurred because 
of the way the application runs, which affects its educational effectiveness, 
and the educational purpose, which underlies the design of the software...
therefore, both aspects must be carefully considered” (p. 16). Further, 
Avellis and Scaramuzzi state that it is “difficult to develop a pre-defined 

216	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
set of standards against which the educational value of the software can 
be defined, because it is not possible to define a unique and general 
instructional approach” (p. 16). One group of researchers has developed 
a set of “quality function deployment” tools to identify and classify four 
types of learning, using mobile devices and learning environments: 
context, presentation, management, and communication (Baber, Sharples, 
Vavoula, & Glew, 2004). These aspects are reflective of the functions con-
sidered important for mobile learning, such as the ability to “adapt func-
tionality for learner characteristics and learning context; discover, access, 
evaluate, store, retrieve learning objects; monitor, utilise, evaluate learning 
outcomes; assist in the recovery of breakdowns and errors during and 
due to learning; support the learner’s mobility” (p. 23).
Although mobile technology is still in its infancy, it holds 
unbounded promise and potential as a key medium for learning and 
training in the future. The challenge for higher educators and learning 
professionals, therefore, is to harness the burgeoning growth of this 
technology and transform it into educational formats that speak to 
today’s new generation of online learners.
References
Alexander, B. (2003, April 7). Teaching in the wireless cloud. TheFeature, 
3. Retrieved May 1, 2003, from http://www.thefeature.com/
Alexander, B. (2004). Going nomadic: Mobile learning in higher educa-
tion. EDUCAUSE Review 39(5). Retrieved August 25, 2007, from http://
www.educause.edu/pub/ er/erm04/erm0451.asp?bhcp=1 
Ally, M. (2004). Using learning theories to design instruction for mobile 
learning devices. Paper published in the Mobile Learning 2004 Interna-
tional Conference Proceedings. Rome, July 2004.
Athabasca University (1999). Athabasca University mandate statement. 
Retrieved August 26, 2007, from http://www.athabascau.ca/aboutAU/
mission.php
Athabasca University (2002). Athabasca University mission statement. 
Retrieved August 26, 2007, from http://www.athabascau.ca/aboutAU/
mission.php
Athabasca University (2005). Athabasca University strategic university plan: 
2006-2011. Retrieved August 26, 2007, from http://www.athabascau.
ca/sup/ SUP_highlights_09_08.pdf

“In-Your-Pocket” and “On-the-Fly”	
217
Avellis, G., & Scaramuzzi, A. (2004). Evaluating non-functional require-
ments in mobile learning contents and multimedia educational software. 
In J. Attewell & C. Savill-Smith (Eds.), Learning with mobile devices: Research 
and development. London: Learning and Skills Development Agency.
Baber, C., Sharples, M., Vavoula, G., & Glew, P. (2004). A ‘learning space’ 
model to examine the suitability of different technologies for mobile 
learning. In J. Attewell & C. Savill-Smith (Eds.), Learning with mobile 
devices: Research and development. London: Learning and Skills Develop-
ment Agency.
Bomsdorf, B., Feldmann, B., & Schlageter, G. (2003). Pocket university: 
Mobile learning in distance education. Learning Technology Newsletter, 
5(2), 19–21.
Carlson, S. (2005). The net generation goes to college. The Chronicle of 
Higher Education, 52(7), A34.
Clyde, L. A. (2004). M-learning. Teacher Librarian, 32(1), 45–47.
Dede, C. (2005). Planning for neomillenial learning styles: Implications for 
investments in technology and faculty. In D. Oblinger & J. Oblinger (Eds.), 
Educating the Net Generation (p. 15.19). Washington, DC: ­EDUCAUSE.
Georgiev, T., Georgieva, E., & Smrikarov, A. (2004). M-Learning: A new 
stage of E-Learning. International Conference on Computer Systems and 
Technologies. Rousse Bulgaria, June. 28–31. Retrieved August 26, 2007, 
from http://ecet.ecs.ru.acad.bg/cst04/Docs/sIV/428.pdf
Killoh, K., Smith, P., & Wasti, S. (2007, July). OJS-MP3 article usage: A 
pilot study. Presented at the PKP Scholarly Publishing Conference 2007, 
at Simon Fraser University, July 13–16. Retrieved August 24, 2007, from 
http://pkp.sfu.ca/ocs/pkp2007/index.php/pkp/1/paper/view/39
Kirkley, S. E., & Kirkley, J. R. (2005). Creating next generation blended 
learning environments using mixed reality, video games and simula-
tions. TechTrends, 49(3), 42–53.
Levy, J. (2005). The fourth revolution. T+D, American Society for Training 
and Development, 64–65.
Magusin, E., Johnson, K., & Tin, T. (2003). Library services: Designing 
the digital reading room to support online learning. In Proceedings 
of the 19th Annual Conference on Distance Teaching and Learning. Madison, 
WI: University of Wisconsin, Madison.
McDonald, C. (2006). Are cell phones replacing traditional home 
phones? Innovation Analysis Bulletin, 8(2), 12–13.
Milrad, M. (2003). Mobile learning: Challenges, perspectives, and reality. 
In N. Kyiri (Ed.), Mobile learning essays on philosophy, psychology and 
education. (pp. 151–164). Vienna: Passagen Verlag.

218	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Muirhead, B. (2005). A Canadian perspective on the uncertain future 
of distance education. Distance Education, 26(2), 239–254.
Oblinger, D., & Oblinger, J. (2005). (Eds.) Educating the Net Generation. 
Washington, DC: EDUCAUSE.
Oblinger, D., & Oblinger, J. (2005). Is it age or IT: First steps towards 
understanding the Net Generation. In D. Oblinger & J. Oblinger 
(Eds.), Educating the Net Generation. Washington, DC: EDUCAUSE.
O’Driscoll, J. (1988). Basic English grammar. London: Penguin 
Books.
O’Driscoll, J. (1990). English grammar exercises. London: Penguin 
Books.
Rekkedal, T., & Dye, A. (2007). Mobile Distance Learning with PDAs: 
Development and testing of pedagogical and system solutions support-
ing mobile distance learners. International Review of Research in Open 
and Distance Learning, 8(2). Retrieved August 25, 2007, from http://
www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/349/871
Riva, G., & Villani, D. (2005). CyberEurope. CyberPsychology & Behavior, 
8(5), 510–511. 
Roberts, G. R. (2005). Technology and learning expectations of the Net 
Generation. In D. Oblinger & J. Oblinger (Eds.), Educating the Net 
Generation (pp. 3.1–3.7). Washington, DC: EDUCAUSE.
Royal Roads University (2004, July 21). RRU policy on quality. Retrieved 
August 26, 2007, from http://www.royalroads.ca/NR/rdonlyres/
776F046C- BEDC-4BB0-9006-22797347AA07/0/CurriculumQuality 
AssurancePolicy.pdf
Rushby, N. (2005). Editorial. In N. Rushby (Ed.), British Journal of Educa-
tional Technology, 36(5), 709–710.
Tapscott, D. (1998). Growing up digital: The rise of the Net Generation. 
New York: McGraw-Hill.
Tin, T. (2007). DRR report Athabasca University. Internal report. Athabasca, 
AB: Athabasca University. 
Toffler, A. (1980). The third wave. New York: Bantam.
Toffler, A. (1990). Powershift: Knowledge, wealth, and violence at the edge of 
the 21st century. New York: Bantam.
University of Waterloo. (2002). 2002 strategic directions. Retrieved August 
26, 2007, from http://www.adm.uwaterloo.ca/infocist/Directions2002/
Strategies2002.html
Wagner, E. D., & Wilson, P. (2005). Disconnected: Why learning profes-
sionals need to care about mobile learning. T+D, American Society for 
Training and Development, 43, 40–43.

“In-Your-Pocket” and “On-the-Fly”	
219
Waycott, J., & Kukulska-Hulme, A. (2003). Students’ experiences with 
PDAs for reading course materials. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 
7(1), 30–43.
Woodburn, T., & Tin, T. (2007). Athabasca University Mobile ESL Research 
Project. Unpublished. Athabasca, AB: Athabasca University.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Maureen Hutchison (maureenh@athabascau.ca) is the manager of 
­Learning Services at Athabasca University’s Centre for Innovative Man-
agement. Her work bridges the operational and academic elements of 
course development, production, and deployment for the centre’s busi-
ness courses and programs. Her career with CIM began as a course pro-
duction coordinator, working closely with CIM faculty in the development, 
editing, instructional design, and production of online MBA courses. 
Maureen holds a B.A. (with distinction) in English literature from the 
University of Western Ontario and a Management Development certifi-
cate (with distinction) from the University of Alberta. 
Tony Tin (tonyt@athabascau.ca) is the electronic resources librarian at 
Athabasca University Library. Tony holds a BA and MA in History from 
McGill University and a BEd and MLS from the University of Alberta. He 
maintains the Athabasca University Library’s web site and online resources, 
and is the Digital Reading Room project leader. Tony is the co-­coordinator 
of the Athabasca University Mobile library and Mobile ESL learning 
project. He was also the recipient of the Athabasca University’s Sue and 
Derrick Rowlandson Memorial Award For Service Excellence.
Yang Cao (yangc@athabascau.ca) is the digital objects & repository 
network developer in Library Services at Athabasca University. Yang 
received her BEng from Northeastern University and her MSc in 
Computer Science from the University of Saskatchewan. Her research 
interests are in the areas of e-learning, mobile learning, and the applica-
tion of advanced technology in online distance education. Yang develops 
and maintains Athabasca University Library’s web site and other online 
applications, including Digital Reading Room (DRR), Digital Theses 
and Project Room (DTPR), and mobile-friendly library web sites. In 
2006, Yang and her team won the Athabasca University’s Sue and Derrick 
Rowlandson Memorial Award for Service Excellence.


Chapter 9
Social Software to Support 
Distance Education Learners
Terry Anderson
Introduction
This chapter discusses the challenges of developing modes of distance 
education that afford maximum freedom for learners, including the 
ability to enroll continuously and to pace one’s own learning, and yet 
still create opportunities and advantages to working cooperatively in 
learning communities with other students. To resolve these often con-
flicting priorities, a new genre of networked-based learning tools, known 
as Educational Social Software (ESS), is defined, described, and its attri-
butes discussed. These tools have applications for both on-campus and 
blended-learning applications, but my focus is on distance education – 
specifically, their use in self-paced, continuous enrolment courses. Finally, 
I briefly discuss the open-source social software tool, ELGG, and our 
plans for deploying it with both cohort-based and self-paced continuous 
enrolment courses at Athabasca University.

222	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Social Challenges in Distance and Online Education
The integration of information technologies, and especially of commu-
nications technologies, into distance education programming has sig-
nificantly altered both the processes and the content of much of this 
programming. Nonetheless, distance education, especially those forms 
that maximize individual freedom by allowing continuous enrolment 
and individual pacing, is often perceived and experienced as a lonely 
way to learn. It is likely that the implicit requirement for self-motivation 
reduces accessibility to many students who have little exposure to, or 
sufficient experience with, programming that is not structured and 
orchestrated by a live (and often face-to-face) teacher. This challenge, 
to permit maximum student freedom while supporting opportunities 
for community building and mutual individual support in cost-effective 
ways, is perhaps the greatest challenge (and opportunity) facing the 
distance education community.
Many programs attempt to meet these challenges of isolation and 
self-direction by developing models of learning based upon cohort 
groups of students, interacting either through real-time audio, video or 
immersive conferencing, or asynchronously through text conferencing 
with a teacher and other students. However, this model has not been 
demonstrated to be cost-effective (Annand, 1999; Fielden, 2002) when 
compared to self-paced distance learning (Rumble, 2004). Few pub-
lished accounts of such cohort-based programming support more than 
30 students per teacher in a class, and a very frequent outcome is that 
teachers find such models of delivery require more time expenditure 
than equivalent classes delivered on campus (Jones & Johnson-Yale, 
2005; Lazarus, 2003).
Much of the high cost of such programming is related to the time 
requirements placed upon instructors to interact with students. Although 
I have argued elsewhere (Anderson, 2003) that student-teacher interac-
tion can be substituted by student-student and student-content interac-
tion, it is not easy to orchestrate and support such interactions, and both 
traditionally minded students and teachers easily slip into cost-ineffective 
models of e-learning. A 2005 study of e-learning programs (Ramage, 
2005) offered by 12 U.S. colleges concludes that all but two of these are 
cost-inefficient and again highlights the need to create cost effective  
e-learning by gaining economy of scale or changing the nature of the 
instructional processes. Before arguing for the capacity of new social 
software tools to alleviate these concerns, I briefly overview theoretical 

Social Software to Support Distance Education Learners	
223
models that highlight social presence and interaction issues in distance 
education programming.
Social Presence
Randy Garrison and I worked to develop a model of e-learning that we 
refer to as the Community of Inquiry model. Figure 1 revisits this model.
Note the pivotal role of social presence, not only in setting the 
educational climate but in supporting discourse and creating the edu-
cational experience. We define social presence as “the ability of learners 
to project themselves socially and affectively into a community of inquiry” 
(Rourke, Anderson, Archer, & Garrison, 1999). We spent some time 
Educational
experience
Social 
presence
Supporting
discourse
Teaching presence
(structure/process)
Selecting
content
Setting
climate
Cognitive
presence
Figure 1.  Community of Inquiry model from Garrison, Anderson, and 
Archer (2000)

224	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
developing tools to measure social presence in asynchronous text-
­conferencing systems and validating these tools via interviews and surveys 
(Rourke & Anderson, 2002; Arbaugh, 2007 ). This work has been 
extended and quantified by a number of researchers (Tu, 2002; Stacey, 
2002), demonstrating amongst other findings that social presence cor-
relates with student satisfaction and higher scores on learning outcomes 
(Richardson & Swan, 2003).
Although the key variable, interaction, is critical in all three of 
the presences, it is perhaps most important in the development and 
support of the participants’ sense of social presence. Assuming that inter-
action is necessary to develop social presence leaves us with the questions: 
which forms of interaction are most critical, and amongst which partners 
is the interaction most critical and most cost- and learning-effective?
Learner Freedom and Social Presence
Beyond access to content, perhaps the greatest benefit to both formal 
and lifelong learners afforded by the Net is the freedom to control one’s 
learning experience in a number of dimensions. Paulsen (1993) models 
these forces in a “theory of cooperative freedom,” in which six different 
dimensions of freedom are described. These include the familiar freedom 
of space and freedom of time that have defined much traditional distance 
education programming. But he also describes the freedom to pace 
one’s learning in response to individual competencies or time availability. 
A fourth dimension concerns the freedom of media, that allows choice 
of learning medium to match a host of media access and usability con-
straints, as well as communication system qualities and preferences. Fifth 
is the freedom of access that includes removal of the barriers of prereq-
uisites and high costs. Finally, Paulsen’s sixth dimension, freedom of 
content, allows the learner to have control over the subject and instruc-
tional style of their learning. I have suggested to Paulsen the need for a 
seventh dimension, freedom of relationship, where learners are allowed 
to engage in the type of learning relationship with other learners that 
best fits their individual social needs and capacities.
Paulsen argues that individual learners are more or less concerned 
with each of these dimensions of freedom and are interested in learning 
designs and activities that meet their individual freedom preferences 
and constraints in each dimension. Further, these dimensions are not 
stable, but shift in response to individual and group preferences, 

Social Software to Support Distance Education Learners	
225
­constraints, and opportunities. Traditional campus-based programming 
developed into the form it takes today because it evolved in times of very 
severe personal constraints imposed in each of these dimensions. For 
example, the first universities offered classes centered around rare 
volumes of text found in medieval libraries. Later, school schedules were 
designed to allow students to work on their parents’ farms in summer 
months. As these constraints are reduced by technical and social innova-
tion, opportunity and demand are created for the development of much 
freer learning opportunities that are evolving to co-exist with traditional 
campus-bound educational programming (Friesen & Anderson, 2004). 
Recent interest in blended learning (Bersin, 2004; Garrison & Kanuka, 
2004) shows that it is very possible to combine different formats and 
media of delivery. However, the challenge is to select and invent those 
forms of education that offer the greatest degrees of freedom and yet 
retain high levels of cost- and learning-effectiveness.
Social Software
The term social software is often attributed to the writing and promotion 
of Clay Shirky (2003), who defined it as “software that supports group 
interaction”. This definition is so broad that it includes everything from 
email to Short Message System (SMS), so it has been qualified by a 
number of authors. Allen (2004) notes the evolution of software tools 
as the Net gains in its capacity to support human interaction, decision 
making, planning, and other higher-level activities across boundaries of 
time and space, and less adeptly, those of culture and language. Levin 
(2004) builds on Allen’s historical description by noting how much the 
technology has defined the field and how that technology has radically 
changed and improved since the earlier generations of software that 
were designed to connect and support human communications. Similar 
to Anderson’s (2004) affordances of the semantic web, Levin notes the 
ubiquity of the Net and especially the “findability” of content afforded 
by even current generations of brute-force searching with tools like 
Google. Second, she notes the pervasive and multiple formats of com-
munication supported, ranging from synchronous to asynchronous; from 
one-to-one, to many-to-many, from text to full multimedia, from com-
munications in a dedicated home theatre to that supported on a mobile 
phone while in transit. Finally, Levin notes the affordance of the Web 
to support new patterns of interconnection that “facilitate new social 
patterns: multi-scale social spaces, conversation discovery and group 
forming, personal and social decoration and collaborative folk art.”

226	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Coates (2002) provides functional characteristics of social software 
to extend human communications capabilities. Coates describes the 
enhanced communications capacity provided by social software over 
time and distance (the traditional challenges of access addressed by 
distance education). He goes on to note that social software adds tools 
to help us deal with the complexities and scale of online context, such 
as filtering, spam control, recommendation, and social authentication 
systems. Finally, he argues that social software supports the efficacy of 
social interaction by alleviating challenges of group functioning, such 
as decision making, maintaining group memory, documenting processes, 
and so on. Butterfield (2003) is much broader in his discussion of the 
qualities of social software. He characterizes social software as tools that 
support communication, using the five “devices” of identity, presence, 
relationships, conversations, and groups.
Cervini (2003) also notes the capacity of social software to 
perform directed searches for specific people or for those with specific 
interests or skills in complex social networks. She argues that, “without 
the ability to execute directed searches, through a social network, the 
transition cost of finding other users within the system is simply too 
high to warrant using the system” (p.2). Obviously, in educational 
systems characterized by high degrees of freedom, it becomes much 
more difficult to find fellow students and initiate and develop supportive 
learning interactions.
Just as social software defies precise definition, the classification 
and categorization of social software tools is also evolving. Stutzman 
(2007) makes an interesting distinction between social software tools 
and suites that are focused upon objects (object-centric) and upon 
people (ego-centric). Object-centric sites allow users to share, comment 
upon, and display a wide range of digital media, such as photos, music, 
books owned or read, citations, or music recordings. Ego-centric sites 
usually contain profiles, personal diary spaces (blogs), lists of friends, 
community discussions, and other tools that allow users to locate, work, 
and play with each other. Jon Dron and I (Dron & Anderson, 2007 ) 
have also been classifying the functions of social software into the tools 
that support groups, that support networks, and that support collectives 
or aggregated users.
Social software shares some of the defining features of what 
Tim O’Reilly first referred to as Web 2.0 tools. O’Reilly (2005) defines 
Web 2.0 as

Social Software to Support Distance Education Learners	
227
the network as platform, spanning all connected devices; Web 
2.0 applications are those that make the most of the intrinsic 
advantages of that platform: delivering software as a continually-
updated service that gets better the more people use it, consum-
ing and remixing data from multiple sources, including individual 
users, while providing their own data and services in a form that 
allows remixing by others, creating network effects through an 
“architecture of participation,” and going beyond the page 
­metaphor of Web 1.0 to deliver rich user experiences.
Many social software tools are network-centric, and most get 
better as more people use them, creating network effects and building 
on an “architecture of participation.” However, social software predates 
Web 2.0, and it focuses more on supporting the social relationships than 
the more technical and network-intensive applications referred to as 
Web 2.0. To summarize, many of the newer social software tools can also 
be described as Web 2.0 tools, but not all Web 2.0 tools are focused on 
meeting social needs.
One can see both common threads and divergences in the 
­definition and classification of this relatively new genre of tools. Social 
software tools can be applied to many tasks and in many domains. A few 
social software tools have been developed with explicit educational goals; 
however, most are general purpose tools that can be used by individuals, 
groups, or networks of users, either as a component, support, or not 
associated at all with formal education. 
Since there no single definition of social software has evolved in 
the literature, and none specifically related to education applications – I 
have coined my own (Anderson, 2006a)! I have tried to combine the 
sense of freedoms from Paulsen’s categories to define educational social 
software as networked tools that support and encourage individuals to learn 
together while retaining individual control over their time, space, presence, activ-
ity, identity, and relationship. Obviously, popular educational tools such as 
computer conferencing and email qualify as social software under this 
definition. However, these and other common communication tools are 
primitive examples of a variety of tools, services, and support that 
­distributed networked learners require.
In summary, a concise and precise definition of social software still 
seems to elude us, but it is clear that the problems social software 
addresses (meeting, building community, providing mentoring and 

228	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­personal ­learning assistance, working collaboratively on projects or 
­problems, reducing communication errors, and supporting complex 
group functions) apply to educational use, and especially to those models 
that maximize individual freedom by allowing self-pacing and continuous 
enrolment. Educational social software (ESS) may also be used to expand, 
rather than constrain, the freedoms of their users. In the next section, I 
turn to the requirements of educational social software, with examples.
Features of Educational Social Software (ESS) 
Applications
In this section, I overview functions and features of social software that 
are can be used be used to enhance distance education processes. The 
details below are condensed and updated from those presented in an 
earlier book chapter (Anderson, 2006a).
Presence Tools
ESS tools should allow learners to make known (or conceal) their 
­presence, both synchronously and asynchronously. An example of pres-
ence notification was provided in my early experience with computer 
conferencing software. The first full course I taught used the First Class 
system and notified learners when other members of their cohort were 
currently online. This notification allowed one to see and communicate 
(by an instant text message) with other students. Students could then 
agree to meet in the chat room for more sustained and perhaps larger-
group, real-time interaction. When I changed educational institutions, 
I began teaching with WebCT, which lacked this notification of presence, 
and I found that the built-in chat rooms were almost never used, and 
certainly not in a spontaneous fashion. Hanging out in an empty chat 
room waiting for someone to drop by is not an engaging activity!
Presence notification can also operate to support presence in 
physical space, as provided by the tools for mobile social networking, or 
for helping to identify those in social proximity who share a common 
interest in an educational- or discipline-related interest. Presence indica-
tors are also being added to text, audio, and video communication and 
conferencing tools to allow us to see which of our friends or colleagues 
are available for instant answers, feedback, and interaction. Of course, 
this sense of presence must be under the control of the individual 
learner; there are times when I welcome the presence of other “kindred 

Social Software to Support Distance Education Learners	
229
souls,” while there are other times when I need the freedom to protect 
and maintain my privacy and anonymity.
Notification
Contributing to a learning community and not receiving feedback or 
acknowledgment of that contribution quickly discourages and tends to 
extinguish further participation. Good ESS provides both pushed and 
pulled forms of notification. Using push tools such as RSS, instant mes-
saging, or even email provides notification to the learner when new 
content or communication is entered into a learning space. Quality ESS 
tools also allow historical and persistent display and searching of these 
interventions, so that the learning space can be searchable and span 
across significant lengths of time.
Filtering
The assault on our systems, caused by both legitimate avalanches of 
potentially useful information as well as non-legitimate spam, creates 
the need for ESS to contain collaborative filtering systems. These systems 
need to be able to filter out illegitimate information, as well as filtering 
in items of potential interest. Filtering out is being handled with various 
degrees of success by many of the commercial spam filters. But filtering 
in relevant information is a greater challenge. Downes (2005) discusses 
the use and limitations of various semantic web tools such as RSS and 
FOAF to create and maintain critical dimensions of identity. The solu-
tions (like most other semantic web applications) seem inviting and even 
plausible, but many have noted the slow emergence of relevant and 
effective semantic web applications.
Cooperative Learning Support
Paulsen (2003) makes a distinction between cooperative learning activi-
ties in which learners are encouraged (though not required) to cooper-
ate in learning activities that are alluring to the individual learner, and 
collaborative activities where members are compelled to work together 
through the duration of an activity. This distinction between collabora-
tion and cooperation, based upon the compulsion to interact, is unique 
and fits well with ESS programming. Cooperative activities are generally 
short term, bounded in temporal space (for example, a week-long 
project), and often not time-centric, such that learners can cooperate 
outside of the knowledge of where and in which order they are studying, 
and can cooperate with both those engaged in the class and that larger 

230	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
group of family, friends (virtual and face-to-face), and colleagues not 
formally enrolled in a program of studies. Colleagues at the Dutch Open 
University (Kester et al., 2007) have been supporting the emergence of 
“ad hoc transient communities” of self-paced learners in which coopera-
tive activities, cooperative problem solving, and team-teaching activities 
are designed.
Referring
Humans and other social animals tend to flock to activities in which 
others are engaged. ESS tools track activities which students engage in, 
noting indicators of success (time spent, assessments attempted and past, 
formal evaluations, and so on). These referrals can be used by students 
to select learning activities and courses, and by teachers and administra-
tors to evaluate, refine, and continuously improve the learning activities. 
Koper (2005b; 2005a) has developed interesting models of implicit refer-
ral systems in which students’ activities leave trails, much like the phero-
mone trails left by ants to guide other members of the colony to food 
sources. His simulations of these models show how individual student 
experiences can be used to improve learning networks and provide useful 
referral services to new students. Dron (2007; 2004) has expanded this 
further and defines such stigmergic activities as one of ten design features 
of effective social software.
Student Modelling
Much of the previous functionality depends upon or is enhanced when 
it is possible to identify, classify, and quantify the individual profiles of 
learners. Such systems might capture interests, learning styles, goals and 
aspirations, accomplishments, and progress through a course of studies; 
personal characteristics such as professional interest and experience; 
family status; and other individual and group information (Towle & 
Halme, 2005). These profiles can then be used by ESS software to custom-
ize referrals, notification, filters, and so on. Considerable work is being 
done in this area by scholars working in the field of artificial intelligence 
in education (see, for example, Boticario, Santos, & Rosmalen, 2005; 
Shute & Towle, 2003). Such systems usually produce an XML-based 
learner profile that is explicitly altered by the learner. Others (McCalla, 
2004) use more active techniques, where the learner profile is updated 
in real time by activities, assessments, and interactions between the learner 
and other learners, teachers, and content. These systems are all migrating 
to exposure in XML that can be read and interpreted by both humans 

Social Software to Support Distance Education Learners	
231
and autonomous agents. Various standards bodies, including the IMS 
(see http://www.imsglobal.org/profiles/), are working to create standard-
ized schemas for formally defining learner profiles in such as way that 
they can be read and interpreted as components of the Educational 
Semantic Web (Anderson & Whitelock, 2004). It is worth emphasizing 
that learner profiles must be under the ultimate control of the learner if 
critical issues of trust and privacy are to be maintained in ESS systems.
Stephen Downes (2005) argues that we need to link resources 
with the humans who have built, used, recommended, or otherwise 
commented upon them. This “explicit conjunction of personal informa-
tion and resource information within the context of a single distributed 
search system will facilitate much more fine-grained searches than either 
system considered separately.” This step would take learner profiles 
beyond their instantiation as a means to modify content, and to allow 
systems where learners can meet with and engage with others based on 
their individual experience of learning activities and outcomes.
Introducing Learners to Each Other
Some of the most successful commercial social software (for example, 
LinkedIN and Facebook) are based upon providing selective referrals to 
other persons for social or commercial motivations and effective encoun-
ters. Most of these referral systems assume that those people you regard 
as friends are more likely to be become friends of each other than of a 
random selection of individuals. Thus, mining both weak and strong 
connections allows us to become acquainted with, and possibly work or 
learn together with others, with a greater probability of developing profit-
able exchanges. This system can provide distance learners with the well-
known capacity of campus-based education systems to serve as meeting 
places for diverse individuals from many groups, as well as for developing 
stronger links to those sharing common cultural identities. Thus, ESS 
tools can serve distance learners as environments in which learners are 
free to share their interests, connections, communities, and friends. It is 
also worth noting that ESS tools facilitate the development and sharing 
of reputation, since documented postings and interactions can be used 
as referencing trails to determine the past contribution of learners to 
other learners or, more broadly, to the learning community.
Helping Others
The study group and study buddies have long been features of successful 
campus-based learning systems. Developing these groups in virtual and 

232	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
independent study contexts is challenging. Very interesting work has 
taken place at the University of Saskatchewan in the development of the 
I-Help system (Greer et al., 2001). For each student, the I-Help system 
configures an autonomous agent that knows its owner’s skills, prefer-
ences, and fiscal capacity (in real or play money) to provide and request 
help from other students. When students require help, they release their 
agent into the learning space to negotiate with the agent of another, 
more skilled learner. These negotiations may lead to a request for help 
by email or telephone, the subsequent exchange of funds, and evalua-
tion by both the helper and the helped. Of course, this help can also be 
used for activities that violate academic standards and morals, such as 
cheating and plagiarism. In my own institution, providing our indepen-
dent students with the capability to meet each other has raised some 
faculty concerns about the increased possibility and efficacy of such 
activities; it threatens our on-demand, continuous exam system that 
seems to be based upon an assumption that students are not in contact 
with each other. Since these concerns also affect campus-based systems, 
technical and social fixes have been developed to at least partially con-
strain these opportunities. More importantly, ESS will force us to develop 
competency-type examinations that build upon and exploit social 
­learning, rather than attempting to eliminate it.
Documenting and Sharing of Constructed Objects
Much formal learning is based on students learning and relearning a 
very slowly evolving body of knowledge. Educational strategies designed 
for such contexts are not highly productive in contexts when useful 
information and knowledge is under continuous revision. More cur-
rently, educational authors (Grabinger & Dunlap, 2002; Collis, B., & 
Moonen, 2001) have argued that students should be actively creating 
rather than consuming knowledge. Our own experiences of assigning 
students the tasks of creating learning portals and learning objects for 
each other have been very positive (Anderson & Wark, 2004). But often, 
the co-creation of content has assumed that students are actively working 
and designing learning content in synchronous fashion. ESS tools will 
need to support students working continuously to update content that 
was initiated months or even years before by other students. Wikis and 
collaborative blogs are first-generation tools to support this type of inter-
action. However, more sophisticated tools are needed, capable of includ-
ing multimedia, tracking both contributor and learner use, controlling 
access to creation tools, and assessing learning outcomes.

Social Software to Support Distance Education Learners	
233
From the generic potential functionality of ESS, this chapter now 
moves to specific descriptions of ESS tools, focusing on those that are 
open source and available. In particular, I give an overview of our initial 
design-based study, using the ELGG system developed by David Tosh 
and his colleagues at the University of Edinburgh.
Current Educational Social Software (ESS) Tools
Many of the social software tools developed for business, social, and 
entertainment activities can be used for educational application. However, 
many are proprietary offerings providing a service, but not distributing 
the software itself. Such solutions may be useful for individual student 
exploration and small class work, but they do not allow the freedom to 
design and create value-added instances of ESS that are customized for 
particular groups of learners, nor do they provide the type of security 
and control demanded by many formal education institutions.
Generally, ESS tools that have been developed to date offer 
­combinations of blogging, portfolio management, discussion and file 
sharing, group file management, and search and linking capacity. Due 
to ideological issues, low budgets and our desire to have control, we 
limited our search for a development platform for our use to open-source 
products. In our search, we found a number of generic database/content 
management tools (notably Plone http://plone.org and Drupal http://
drupal.org/) that could be developed as ESS applications. However, the 
programming and customization work would be considerable. Fortunately, 
we discovered two OS tools that were already focused on ESS use. 
BarnRaiser offers an interesting program known as the Aroundme plat-
form (http://www.barnraiser.org/index.php?wp=software). The current 
version (1.5) offers the usual blogging, polls, group tasks, and a very 
interesting tool to measure the “social capital” of contributors. The 
second tool, ELGG (version 0.90, http://elgg.org), offers many of the 
same tools, and was chosen for our installation due to the strength of 
its ad hoc folksonomie-style linkages, its provision for individual control 
of personal information and postings, its support for e-portfolios, and 
its Canadian connection (David Tosh, one of the principal developers, 
is a Canadian with whom we have developed a long-distance friendship 
and is friend of a number of our friends – how social!).
An instance of ELGG was installed at Athabasca (with minimal 
problems) and rechristened me2u.athabascau.ca (Figure 2).

234	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Figure 2.  Me2U.athabascau.ca
We were interested in testing an ESS application within formal 
education programs, and have chosen to create a resource that is exclu-
sive to students registered at our institution. Downes (2005) and others 
argue that such “silos” are inherently restrictive, but they do offer a safer, 
more controlled environment for educational testing. Naturally, these 
environments should support RSS and other notification tools such that 
learners are not expected to spend a great deal of time waiting for action 
on their institutional ESS installation. ELGG has what we believe to be 
the most versatile privacy control system in current ESSs. Figure 3 illus-
trates how the display of every field of information in a learner’s profile, 
plus all the items in their e-portfolio and their blog postings, can be 
restricted to only the author, their friends, particular communities, 
logged-on members (registered Athabasca University students), or the 
general public (including search-engine spiders).
There has also been considerable debate about the role of ESS 
in relationship to the more firmly established learning management 
systems, such as Blackboard or Moodle. I have compared the affordances 
of both systems elsewhere (Anderson, 2006b) and concluded that “per-
sonal learning systems” do not offer the types of document control and 
learner management currently built into LMS systems. It is also interest-
ing to note the inclusion of blogs, profiles, wikis, e-portfolios, and other 

Social Software to Support Distance Education Learners	
235
social tools in the ever-growing, monolithic LMS systems. Debate about 
the advantages of personal versus institutional systems is beyond the 
scope of this chapter, but current developments portray an interesting 
future as Web 2.0 tools increase the capacity for working together (mash-
ups). This development will allow for very fine-tuned customization of 
learning contexts, not just by teachers and administrators, but by ­students, 
as they gain control over their own learning environments.
Design-based Research Development of Me2U
The final section of this paper describes our research design used to 
assess this intervention. Bannan-Ritland (2003) describes four stages of 
design-based research and maps these to more traditional forms of edu-
cation research and publication. The first stage is informed exploration. 
Our earlier 2004 survey of student experience with interactive inter-
ventions and consultations with global distance educators (Anderson, 
Annand, & Wark, 2005) has set the stage and detailed the need for social 
software solutions. Our primary focus is on students enrolled in unpaced 
and continuous enrollment courses. We hope to design an informal 
place for the development of social presence and tools to allow students 
to engage in voluntary, for-credit learning activities that contain 
Figure 3.  Selecting Access provisions in ELGG

236	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­cooperative learning components. Through engagement in these ­learning 
activities, as well as through profiling services allowing them to connect 
online or in person with other students, we hope to allow them to form 
relationships with other learners in loosely structured learning com-
munities. We also continue to track innovations in social software and 
to develop conceptual models for their effective adoption in formal 
learning educational contexts.
In the second stage of development, we have installed the ELGG 
tools and are developing support documentation and systems to facilitate 
its use in pilot applications. We plan to work with our colleague (Morten 
Paulsen) at the Norwegian Knowledge Institute in Norway to develop an 
optional student profile system that encourages learners to develop and 
share their individual learning plans. Finally, development in this phase 
includes adoption and development of new learning designs that create 
compelling, but optional learning activities to support the ­learning com-
munity while retaining student freedoms.
In the third phase, our educational social software interventions 
are piloted in one or more local contexts. We are working with design-
ers, program and course managers, and faculty in a selected number of 
academic departments at Athabasca University. Our approach will move 
towards a grounded theory model, in which we will use a variety of data 
sources (interviews, observations, final exam scores, completion rate 
data, student perceptions of learning, cost accounting, machine-log 
analysis, and transcript analysis) to develop and test a grounded theory 
of educational social software use in learner-paced e-learning.
The fourth phase of a design-based research project focuses on 
understanding the innovation’s effect in multiple contexts. Working 
with national and international partners, we will provide the tools and 
techniques developed and tested in Phases 2 & 3 to a wider variety of 
contexts. The evaluation tools that have proved most useful in pilot 
testing and development in Phase 3 will be refined and used to gather 
data across these diverse sites. And the theory that has emerged in 
Phase 3 will be validated, tested, and refined in this phase. We will use 
the community and repository tools developed at the Canadian Institute 
for Distance Education Research (http://cider.athabascau.ca) to build 
and support a community of researchers and practitioners in their own 
implementations of ESS theories and tools developed in the earlier 
phases of this research.

Social Software to Support Distance Education Learners	
237
Conclusion
This overview of ESS tools is perhaps yet another instance of “it will be 
perfect when...” ESS tool development and application is in its very early 
stages, and doubtless there are many blind alleys as well as very produc-
tive avenues yet to explore. I remain convinced that using the tools and 
affordances of the emerging educational semantic web will result in very 
significant improvements (both in cost- and learning-effectiveness) to 
our current practice and theory of distance education. Social software 
needs a “killer app” and distance education needs new cost- and ­learning-
effective tools, to develop and enhance the creation and maintenance 
of social presence. These are indeed exciting times!
Notes
This chapter is a revised and updated version of a paper presented in 
2005 at the 17th Biennial Conference of the Open and Distance Learning 
Association of Australia, held in Adelaide Australia.
References
Allen, C. (2004). Tracing the evolution of social software. Life with alac-
rity. Retrieved Dec 14, 2007, from http://www.lifewithalacrity.com/2004/ 
10/tracing_the_evo.html
Anderson, T. (2003). Getting the mix right: An updated and theoretical 
rational for interaction. International Review of Research in Open and 
Distance Learning, 4(2). Retrieved Dec. 14, 2007, from http://www.
irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/ article/view/149/708
Anderson, T. (2004). The educational semantic web: A vision for the 
next phase of educational computing. Educational Technology, 44(5), 
5–9.
Anderson, T. (2006a). Higher education evolution: Individual freedom 
afforded by educational social software. In M. Beaudoin (Ed.), Perspec-
tives on the future of higher education in the digital age. New York: Nova 
Science Publishers.

238	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Anderson, T. (2006b). PLEs versus LMS: Are PLEs ready for Prime time? 
Virtual Canuck. Retrieved Dec., 2007, from http://terrya.edublogs.org/ 
2006/01/09/ples-versus-lms-are-ples-ready-for-prime-time/
Anderson, T., Annand, D., & Wark, N. (2005). The search for learning 
community in learner-paced distance education programming or 
“having your cake and eating it, too!” Australian Journal of Educational 
Technology, 21(2), 222–241. Retrieved Dec. 12, 2007, from http://www.
ascilite.org.au/ajet/ajet21/res/anderson.html
Anderson, T., & Wark, N. (2004). Why do teachers get to learn the most? 
A case study of a course based on student creation of learning objects. 
e-Journal of Instructional Science and Technology, 7(2). Retrieved Dec.11, 
2007, from http://www.usq.edu.au/electpub/e-jist/docs/Vol7_no2/
FullPapers/WhyDoTeachers.htm
Anderson, T., & Whitelock, D. (2004). The educational semantic web: 
Visioning and practicing the future of education. Journal of Interactive 
Media in Education, 1. Retrieved Dec. 16, 2007, from http://www-jime.
open.ac.uk/2004/1
Annand, D. (1999). The problem of computer conferencing for distance-
based universities. Open Learning, 14(3), 47–52.
Arbaugh, B. (2007) An empirical verification of the community of inquiry 
framework. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 11(1). Retrieved 
Dec. 14 2007, from http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v11n1/pdf/
v11n1_9arbaugh.pdf
Bannan-Ritland, B. (2003). The role of design in research: The integra-
tive learning design framework. Educational Researcher, 32(1), 21–24. 
Retrieved Dec. 14, 2007, from http://www.aera.net/uploadedFiles/
Journals_and_Publications/Journals/Educational_
Researcher/3201/3201_Ritland.pdf
Bersin, J. (2004). Blended learning: Finding what works. Chief Learning 
Offficer, 1. Retrieved Dec., 2007, from http://www.clomedia.com/
content/templates/clo _feature.asp?articleid=357&zoneid=30
Boticario J.G., Santos, O.C., & Rosmalen, P. (2005). Technological and 
management issues in providing adaptive education in distance learn-
ing universities. EADTU. Retrieved Dec. 19, 2007 from http://www.
ia.uned.es/~jgb/publica/ TechMngIssuesALMS-jgbosmpvr.pdf
Butterfield, S. (2003). Sylloge. Retrieved Feb. 12, 2008, from http://www.
sylloge .com/personal/2003_03_01_s.html
Cervini, A. (2003). Network connections: An analysis of social software 
that turns online introductions into offline interactions. Unpublished 

Social Software to Support Distance Education Learners	
239
Master’s thesis. New York University. Retrieved Mar. 21, 2008, from 
http://www.frimfram.com/thesis/ print.html 
Coates, T. (2002). My working definition of social software... plasticbag.
org blog. Retrieved January, 16, 2006, from http://www.plasticbag.org/
archives/2003/05/my_working_definition_of_social_software/
Collis, B., & Moonen, J. (2001). Flexible learning in a digital world. London: 
Kogan Page.
Downes, S. (2005). Semantic networks and social networks. The Learning 
Organization, 12(5), 411–417. Retrieved Dec.,10, 2007, from http://
www.downes .ca/cgi-bin/page.cgi?post=31624
Dron, J. (2004). Termites in the schoolhouse: Stigmergy and transac-
tional distance in an e-learning environment. In AACE (Ed.). Retrieved 
Dec. 14 2007, from http://www.cmis.brighton.ac.uk/staff/jd29/papers/ 
dronedmedia2004.doc
Dron, J. (2007). Control and constraint in e-learning: Choosing when to choose. 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Pub.
Dron, J., & Anderson, T. (2007). Collectives, networks and groups in 
social software for e-Learning. Paper presented at the Proceedings of 
World Conference on E-Learning in Corporate, Government, Healthcare, and 
Higher Education Quebec. Retrieved Feb. 16, 2008, from www.editlib.
org/index.cfm/files/paper_26726.pdf?fuseaction=Reader.
DownloadFullText&paper_id=26726 -.
Fielden, J. (2002). Costing e-learning: Is it worth trying or should we 
ignore the figures? London: The Observatory on Borderless Higher 
Education. Retrieved Sept. 16, 2005, from http://www.obhe.ac.uk/
products/reports/pdf/August2002.pdf
Friesen, N., & Anderson, T. (2004). Interaction for lifelong learning. 
British Journal of Educational Technology, 35(6), 679–688.
Garrison, D. R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2000). Critical inquiry in 
text-based environments?: Computer conferencing in higher ­education. 
The Internet and Higher Education, 2(2-3), 87–105. Retrieved Dec. 14, 
2007, from http://communitiesofinquiry.com/documents/CTinText 
EnvFinal.pdf
Garrison, D. R., & Kanuka, H. (2004). Blended learning: Uncovering its 
transformative potential in higher education. Internet and Higher 
­Education, 7(2), 95–105.
Grabinger, S., & Dunlap, J. (2002). Applying the REAL model to web-
based instruction: An overview. In P. Barker & S. Rebelsky (Eds.), 
Proceedings of 2002 World Conference on Educational Multimedia, ­Hypermedia 

240	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
and Telecommunications (pp. 447–452). Chesapeake, VA: AACE. http://
www.editlib.org/index.cfm?fuseaction=Reader.ViewAbstract& paper_
id=10128
Greer, J., McCalla, G., Vassileva, J., Deters, R., Bull, S., & Kettel, L. (2001). 
Lessons learned in deploying a multi-agent learning support system: 
The I-Help experience. Proceedings of Artificial Intelligence in Education, 
2001. Retrieved Dec. 4, 2007, from http://julita.usask.ca/Texte/Aied01-
camera.pdf
Jones, S., & Johnson-Yale, C. (2005). Professors online: The Internet’s 
impact on college faculty. First Monday, 10(9). Retrieved Sept. 13, 2007, 
from http://firstmonday.org/issues/issue10_9/jones/
Kester, L., Sloep, P., Van Rosmalen, P., Brouns, F., Kone, M., & Koper, 
R. (2007). Facilitating community building in learning networks 
through peer tutoring in ad hoc transient communities. International 
Journal of Web Based Communities, 3(2), 198–205. Retrieved Dec. 16, 
2007, from http://dspace.ou.nl/bitstream/1820/ 609/4/Facilitating
+Community+Building+-+titlepage.pd
Koper, R. (2005a). Designing learning networks for lifelong learners. In 
R. Koper & C. Tattersall (Eds.), Learning Design (pp. 239–252). Berlin: 
Springer.
Koper, R. (2005b). Increasing learner retention in a simulated learning 
network using indirect social interaction. Journal of Artificial Societies 
and Social Simulation, 8(2). Retrieved Jan.8, 2006, from http://jasss.soc.
surrey.ac.uk/8/2/5.html
Lazarus, B. (2003). Teaching courses online: How much time does it 
take. Journal of Asynchronous Learning, 7(3). Retrieved Dec. 1, 2003, 
from http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v7n3/v7n3_lazarus.asp
Levin, A. (2004). Social software: What’s new. Many 2 Many. Retrieved 
Dec., 2007, from http://www.alevin.com/weblog/archives/001492.
html
McCalla, G. (2004). The ecological approach to the design of e-learning 
environments: Purpose-based capture and use of information about 
learners. Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 10. Retrieved Dec. 12, 
2007, from http://www-jime.open.ac.uk/2004/7/
O’Reilly, T. (2005) What is Web 2.0: Design patterns and business models 
for the next generation of software. Retrieved Feb, 2008, from http://
www.oreilly.com /pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-
20.html 
Paulsen, M. (1993). The hexagon of cooperative freedom: A distance 
education theory attuned to computer conferencing. DEOS, 3(2). 

Social Software to Support Distance Education Learners	
241
Retrieved Dec. 16, 2007, from http://www.nettskolen.com/forskning/ 
21/hexagon.html
Ramage, T. (2005). A system-level comparison of cost-efficiency and 
return on investment related to online course delivery. E-Jist, 8(1). 
Retrieved Dec. 14, 2007, from http://www.usq.edu.au/electpub/ 
e-jist/docs/vol8_no1/fullpapers/ Thomas_Ramage.pdf
Richardson, J. C., & Swan, K. (2003). Examining social presence in online 
courses in relation to students’ perceived learning and satisfaction. 
Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks, 7(1). Retrieved Dec. 14, 2007, 
from http://www.sloan-c.org/publications/jaln/v7n1/pdf/v7n1_
­richardson.pdf
Rourke, L., & Anderson, T. (2002). Exploring social presence in com-
puter conferencing. Journal of Interactive Learning Research, 13(3), 
259–275. Retrieved Dec.14, 2007, from http://communitiesofinquiry.
com/documents/ Rourke_Exploring_Social_Communication.pdf
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Archer, W., & Garrison, D. R. (1999). Assessing 
social presence in asynchronous, text-based computer conferences. 
Journal of Distance Education, 14(3), 51–70.
Rumble, G. (2004). Papers and debates on the economics and cost of distance 
and online learning. Oldenburg: University of Oldenburg.
Shirky, C. (2003). A group is its own worst enemy. Clay Shirky’s writings 
about the Internet. Retrieved Dec. 14, 2007, from http://www.shirky.
com/writings/ group_enemy.html
Shute, V., & Towle, B. ( 2003). Adaptive e-learning. Educational ­Psychologist, 
38(2), 105–114. Retrieved Dec. 2, 2007, from http://www.leaonline.
com/doi/abs/ 10.1207/S15326985EP3802_5
Stacey, E. (2002). Social presence online: Networking learners at a dis-
tance, education and information technologies. Education and Informa-
tion Technologies, 7(4), 287–294. Retrieved Dec. 16, 2007, from http://
www.springerlink.com/content/ m3370313r055xh73/
Stutzman, F. (2007). Thoughts about information, social networks, iden-
tity and technology. Unit Structures. Retrieved Dec.3, 2007, from http://
chimprawk.blogspot.com/2007/11/social-network-transitions.html
Towle, B., & Halme, M. (2005). Designing adaptive learning environ-
ments with learning design. In R. Koper & C. Tattersall (Eds.), ­Learning 
Design (pp. 215–226). Berlin: Springer.
Tu, C.H. (2002). The measurement of social presence in an online ­learning 
environment. International Journal on E-Learning, 1(2), 34–45.


Design and Development  
of Online Courses
Part iii


Chapter 10
The Development  
of Online Courses
Dean Caplan
Canadian Pacific Railway
Rodger Graham
Athabasca University
Introduction
In an ideal world, instructional media developers – those who will ­actually 
create the planned instructional materials with which the student will 
interact – are included in the course development process from the 
beginning, to consult with and advise course team members on develop-
ment-related topics as they arise. Then, on receiving a detailed design 
document from the subject matter expert or instructor, developers will 
set to work, assured that
•	the instructional designs of the learning materials are stable 
because they have been based firmly on sound, proven learning 
theories
•	these instructional designs will meet the institution’s identified 
and articulated internal and external standards for quality, 
­usability, and interoperability
•	appropriate media have been selected to meet these standards

246	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
•	the technologies selected for course delivery are not superfluous 
– rather, the course design will exploit the unique characteristics 
of the selected media to engage and support both learners and 
teachers (such characteristics may include accessibility of content, 
multimedia, hyperlinking, multiple or global perspectives, ease 
of revision, and accommodation of many forms of interaction)
•	the designs are practical and can be developed in a cost-effective 
and timely way.
Of course, most of us do not have the luxury of working in an ideal 
world. There is a good chance that a very thick file has just landed on your 
desk(top), and you are not sure where to start! The first part of this chapter 
discusses the infrastructures that must be in place to support the develop-
ment of course materials. The second part considers the key roles on a 
course production team, a few instructional development models, and 
some technical issues in the process of developing an online course.
What Must Be in Place before Development Can Occur
Computer-mediated distance education is becoming ubiquitous, and is 
now being demanded more and more by students. Despite what some 
might believe, however, Internet-based instruction is by no means the 
magic bullet that automatically guarantees a rich learning environment. 
Although research continues to confirm that there is no significant dif-
ference among student outcomes based on mode of course delivery 
(Russell, 1999), we must keep in mind that web-based distance education 
technology and pedagogy is still very much in its infancy. Hence, those 
of us working in Internet-based instruction are blazing new trails to 
develop the essential elements and processes that will lead to high quality, 
active, online learning environments.
It is generally agreed that the World Wide Web is a compelling, 
resource-rich, multimedia environment with great potential to serve large 
numbers of widely dispersed students at relatively low cost. Although 
many educational institutions have undertaken strategic planning for 
the systematic implementation of web-based distance education, not all 
have succeeded. The fundamental requirement to gain support for web-
based instruction from faculty, administrators, and students is an institu-
tional model that is distinct from the traditional instructional-planning 
model and supports the design, development, and implementation of 
high-quality instruction on the Internet. Each of these stakeholder groups 

The Development of Online Courses	
247
– faculty, administrators, and students – must be assured that web-based 
instruction is a viable means of delivering courses and programs, and of 
accommodating student needs. To create those assurances, the web-based 
instructional model that is to be implemented must deal with some 
­fundamental issues that may have never been addressed before.
Definition of an Online Course
What does it mean for a course to be considered online? Since the web-
based delivery option is new to many institutions, there is no standard 
or accepted definition of what constitutes an online course. An examina-
tion of Internet-based courses currently offered reveals two basic catego-
ries, with a large middle ground: courses that are primarily text-based 
(the text being delivered either online or by mailed hard copy), with 
computer-mediated enhancements; and courses that are designed spe-
cifically for the distributed Internet setting, and that merge several 
smaller educational components into a single course of study.
In the early days of online learning, from the mid 1990s to the 
early 2000s, the majority of distance-education courses found on the Web 
were of the former type, involving text that had merely been converted 
to electronic form and placed on a web site for students to read, or, 
more likely, to print and then read. The advantages of this method of 
delivery included circumventing postal delays and getting the materials 
to the student almost immediately; facilitating easy searching and manip-
ulation of the text by the student; cutting the costs of publishing and 
shipping; and increasing the ease of development (often using a course 
template), updating, and revision. In addition, the communication 
capacity of the Internet allows for a variety of forms of student-student, 
student-content, and student-teacher interactions, which could be used 
to augment the students’ independent interaction with the printed 
course contents.
The loudest criticisms of this type of course are that it does not 
make any use of the multi-modal, computer-mediated instructional 
means that are available, and that the printing costs are off-loaded onto 
the student. Also, these text-based online courses are often supplemented 
by electronic interactive tools, such as discussion forums and chats, which 
are typically implemented as “extras” or afterthoughts to the course, and 
thus their pedagogical value is often artificial and suspect.
As the nature of Internet users evolves, so do their demands and 
expectations from e-learning. Since the beginning of the twenty-first 
century, there has been a marked shift in online course development 

248	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
toward the second type of course mentioned above, which attempts to 
take advantage of the strengths of the Internet as a teaching and learn-
ing environment: its open, distributed, dynamic, globally accessible, fil-
tered, interactive, and archival nature (McGreal & Elliot, 2008). In the 
first generation of this type of online course, where all course materials 
and activities are Internet-based, text can still play a part in instruction, 
although it generally appears in short, concise “chunks.” The instruction 
is also distributed among other multimedia components, commonly 
known as learning objects; ideally, learning objects are designed to be 
shareable, reusable, and repurposed so that they can work in multiple 
contexts (McGreal & Elliott).
The first-generation, learning-object-based online course is often 
delivered through a learning management system (LMS), a software 
application suite that organizes and standardizes learning content, divid-
ing the course into modules and lessons, supported with quizzes, tests 
and discussions (Downes, 2005). Today, most LMSs afford developers 
the use of text; email; asynchronous discussion boards; synchronous 
utilities such as voice over Internet protocol (VoIP); instant-messaging 
chat features; desktop and application sharing; on-demand video clips 
and demonstrative animations; interactive activities, simulations, and 
games; self-grading exercises, quizzes, and examinations; and secure 
assignment “drop boxes” where students and instructors exchange 
­assignments and feedback one-on-one.
Some well-known examples of Learning Management Systems are 
Blackboard®, Moodle, and Desire2Learn®. The eduSource Canada Network 
of Learning Object Repositories brings together several online collec-
tions of learning objects, which can be searched and contributed to by 
developers free of charge.
While debate and research continues about the value of the first 
generation online courses, the ground is shifting beneath our 
feet. As we approach the halfway mark of the new millennium’s 
first decade, the nature of the Internet, and just as importantly, 
the people using the Internet, have begun to change. These 
changes are sweeping across entire industries as a whole, and are 
not unique to education; indeed, in many ways education has 
lagged behind some of these trends and is just beginning to feel 
their wake. One trend that has captured the attention of numer-
ous pundits is the changing nature of Internet users themselves. 
Sometimes called ‘digital natives’ and sometimes called ‘n-gen,’ 

The Development of Online Courses	
249
these new users approach work, learning and play in new ways. 
(Tapscott,1997, in Downes, 2005)
In learning, these trends are manifest in what is sometimes called 
learner-centred or student-centred design. This is more than just adapting 
for different learning styles or allowing users to change the font size and 
background colour; it is the placing of the control of learning itself into 
the hands of the learner (Marzano, 1992).
What is emerging from the learner-centred approach to online 
learning is “E-learning 2.0,” the next generation of online learning that 
is characterized primarily by a shared domain of interest where members 
interact and learn together, and develop a shared repertoire of resources 
(Wenger, 1998). In other words, the shift in learning is moving from the 
didactic teacher-to-learner model to a networked, community-based 
model of learner-to-learner. This evolution, of course, has significant 
implications for instructional design and development, the scope of 
which is not the intent of this chapter. As instructional developers, 
however, we are being called upon to become familiar with a new set of 
tools that will facilitate those engaged in e-learning 2.0.
The type of online learning you are planning to develop might 
fall into one of the two categories above, or it might fit somewhere in 
between, and it might contain any combination of learning objects. 
Regardless of how you define your online instructional materials, your 
course should contain certain administrative documents to help instruc-
tors organize, prepare, and orient students, especially if they are new to 
online learning. These documents could include
•	a personalized letter of welcome for each new student
•	general information about online learning, technology require-
ments, and the resources available to students for technical help, 
and for obtaining the proper software and Internet services 
required for the course
•	information on how to access the course on the Web, and how to 
navigate it successfully
•	student log-in and password information for course web site
•	rules, procedures, and help for use of the interactive tools
•	a course syllabus (preferably on public pages so that prospective 
students can browse in advance of registration); course overview; 
course schedule; list of required text and materials (if applicable); 
clearly defined pre-requisite academic and computer skills; course 
expectations; instructions on activities, assignments, and ­deadlines; 

250	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
faculty and tutor contact information and office hours; and 
student support information
•	administrative regulations, including guidelines on plagiarism, 
privacy, academic appeal procedures, library facilities, and access 
to counselling and advisory services
Faculty Buy-in
While the World Wide Web has been with us for well over a decade now, 
only in the past few years has it begun to be accepted as a workable 
vehicle for the delivery of instruction. Consequently, many faculty 
members working in post-secondary educational institutions were not 
hired with the expectation that they would use educational technologies 
in their teaching. This new mode of learning is also redefining teaching. 
Access to new cohorts of students and new media makes it possible, 
sometimes necessary, to teach in new and innovative ways.
Some faculty take to these new methods immediately, while others 
are unsure if they have, or even want, the technical abilities to develop 
an online course. Do not underestimate the importance of the degree 
to which faculty feel they are receiving encouragement and support in 
all areas of online development. Administrators can initiate certain poli-
cies designed to encourage and support faculty acceptance of online 
teaching. Faculty should be reassured that they are not about to lose 
their jobs to technology, but that they can expand the ways they do their 
jobs by employing technology. Finally, it is crucial to adequately reward 
all who undertake the considerable personal effort and risk to develop 
courses and teach online, especially within the merit award and ­promotion 
processes associated with performance reviews.
Focus on Sound Pedagogy
Any instructional strategy can be supported by a number of contrasting 
technologies – old and new – just as any given technology might support 
different instructional strategies. For any given instructional strategy, 
however, some technologies are better than others: “Better to turn a screw 
with a screwdriver than a hammer – a dime may also do the trick, but a 
screwdriver is usually better” (Chickering & Ehrmann, 1996, para. 4).
Faculty concerns about using new teaching methods and media 
often centre on pedagogy. Unfortunately, many examples of poor peda-
gogical application in web-based instruction can be found, often in the 
form of the text-based online courses described above. The prevalence 
of such examples is largely due to the novelty of online instruction, or 

The Development of Online Courses	
251
the fact that critical mass has yet to be achieved in design or practice, 
to prove the value of online learning. One way to address concerns about 
inferior pedagogy online is to dictate that the same educational standards 
must apply to the development of instruction for the Internet as to any 
other delivery medium, such as the classroom.
The American Association of Higher Education’s Seven Principles 
for Good Practice in Undergraduate Education is one such set of standards 
(Chickering & Gamson, 1987). Originally written for classroom instruc-
tion, it was later revised to include online educational practice, and is 
now widely accepted by post-secondary institutions. Good practice in 
undergraduate education
1.	 encourages contacts between students and faculty
2.	 develops reciprocity and cooperation among students
3.	 uses active learning techniques
4.	 gives prompt feedback
5.	 emphasizes time on task
6.	 communicates high expectations
7.	 respects diverse talents and ways of learning (p. 3)
Arthur Chickering and Steve Erhmann have recently updated 
these practice guidelines to illustrate how communications technologies, 
and especially the Internet, can be used to support these seven “good 
practices” (see http://www.tltgroup.org/programs/seven.html).
Another set of standards is presented in the Western Interstate 
Commission for Higher Education’s (WICHE) Balancing Quality and 
Access: Principles of Good Practice for Electronically Offered Academic Degree 
and Certificate Programs. (n.d.). Some of these principles are paraphrased 
as follows:
•	Programs provide for timely and appropriate interaction between 
students and faculty, and among students.
•	The institution’s faculty assumes responsibility for and exercises 
oversight over distance education, ensuring both the rigour of 
programs and the quality of instruction.
•	The institution provides appropriate faculty support services 
­specifically related to distance education.
•	The institution provides appropriate training for faculty who teach 
in distance education programs.
•	The institution ensures that students have access to and can 
­effectively use appropriate library resources.
•	The institution provides adequate access to the range of student 
services appropriate to support the programs, including ­admissions, 

252	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
financial aid, academic advising, delivery of course materials, and 
placement and counselling.
Your institution may have its own set of standards. The point, 
however, is that all instructional endeavours, regardless of their medium 
of delivery, should be measured equally against an explicitly stated set 
of criteria.
New Teaching Paradigm
The unique possibilities inherent in web-based instruction originate not 
from the Web itself, but from the instructionally innovative ways in which 
it may be used. It is helpful to consider the Web not simply as a new 
medium for distance education delivery, but also as a partnership offer-
ing a new teaching paradigm and new technology, creating the potential 
for fundamental changes in how we undertake teaching and learning. 
Instructors and other members of the online course development team 
should strive to create learning environments that exploit the features 
inherent in computers and the Web, to promote active learning that 
resides in the control of the student, and that can effectively lead to the 
development of high-order and critical thinking skills. In addition to 
the AAHE’s seven principles cited above, Fox and Helford (1999) list 
several more suggestions specific to effective teaching online. They are 
paraphrased below:
•	Develop tolerance for ambiguity (recognize that there may be no 
“right” answer to a given question, and emphasize cognitive 
flexibility).
•	Use scaffolding principles (create material that is slightly too 
­difficult for the student, to encourage cognitive “stretch”).
•	Use problems that require students to understand and manipulate 
course content.
•	Create opportunities for high levels of interaction, both student-
student and instructor-student.
•	Integrate formative assessment throughout the course.
Teacher Education is Critical
One of the WICHE principles of good practice recommends appropriate 
training for faculty who use technology to teach by distance education. 

The Development of Online Courses	
253
Many of the skills that faculty had honed in face-to-face settings no longer 
apply online; indeed, some teachers must unlearn certain teaching 
methods as much as they need to learn new ones. For the sake of both 
teacher and learner, faculty should undergo some training before 
­beginning to teach online.
One way for faculty to become familiar with the skills and resources 
needed to be successful online teachers is to become online learners 
themselves. Many institutions advocate that their online teaching faculty 
initially enrol in an online course that teaches them how to develop 
online instruction. This strategy often proves valuable, as teachers expe-
rience the same challenges that their students typically will face: prob-
lems with inadequate computer abilities, learning about the variety of 
interactive tools, and underestimating the amount of time needed to 
complete the online readings and homework. To be successful in the 
online course, faculty must not only develop new pedagogical skills; like 
their students, they must also gain new administrative and technical 
skills. The lists below summarize the most crucial of these new skills.
Pedagogical Proficiencies
•	Think of the online environment as just a different kind of 
­classroom for interacting with students.
•	Look at other online courses, take some yourself, and ask 
­colleagues if you can access theirs.
•	Be prepared to invest the time and effort necessary to deliver a 
course online. Exploit technology to respond to students’ ques-
tions and requests for assistance, as well as to provide timely feed-
back on assignments and grades.
•	Always remember to weigh how important something is against 
how much time it will take to transmit and receive it. And remem-
ber to ask yourself whether or not users can see and hear exactly 
what you intended to communicate.
•	Be creative in planning how to use technology to teach more 
effectively. To inform your planning, invest time and effort in 
gaining a basic understanding of how the technology works (see 
Technical Skills below).
Administrative Skills
•	Teaching online often requires more anticipatory effort than the 
teaching effort which is typical of a face-to-face classroom setting. 
Lay out your ground rules right away. Unless you explicitly tell 

254	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
students otherwise, they will want to interact with you at the 
moment they need you. Create a course syllabus. This syllabus 
should include the class rules, and you must make sure that your 
students read it, so that they are aware of the rules. Then stick to 
those rules.
•	Find out where your help is, and know when use it. As mentioned 
in the WICHE principles paraphrased above, your institution 
should have people whose job it is to support you (e.g., comput-
ing help-desk staff or media development departments). Find out 
who those people are before you need them, and do not wait to 
call on them, when you first discover you need them.
Technical Skills
•	Determine whether you possess basic PC skills (at minimum, a 
familiarity with file structure, with opening, copying, saving, and 
moving files, with creating and managing backup files, with key-
board and mouse functions, with screen and windows features, 
and with web browser functions.
•	Determine whether you need to learn new software applications 
for teaching online, and if so, whether you are willing to learn 
them, and to use support systems outside of your institution.
•	Determine whether your institution supplies regular training in 
new software applications.
•	 Make certain that you are very comfortable with using email. It may 
be the most common means of communication with students.
•	Make certain that you understand basic Internet functionality, 
bandwidth, and connections speed issues. Your computer and 
computing environment is probably not like the ones that your 
students are using (i.e., some students will be dealing with low 
bandwidth situations). At work, you are likely to be using a local 
area network (LAN), but when you log on using a modem and 
an older computer, you will get a better sense of what your some 
of your students will see and experience.
•	Make certain that you have a basic understanding of how web 
browsers on different types of machines affect the appearance 
and functionality of your material.

The Development of Online Courses	
255
Time and Resource Management
During the semester in which the course is implemented, the instructor’s 
time is frequently taken up with responding to student emails, marking 
assignments, and dealing with other interactive components of the class, 
such as discussion forums and chats. Due to the inherent nature of web 
courses, student interaction will likely be sporadic, and will at times 
produce a surge of email messages for the instructor to respond to. For 
example, an instructor should expect to receive many email messages 
at the beginning of the course (students will initially have many ques-
tions about online learning), if technical problems make course material 
inaccessible or students experience difficulty in submitting their assign-
ments. To deal with the influx of email messages, instructors can
•	solicit help from a technical assistant (graduate student, teaching 
assistant) to respond to course emails,
•	create a frequently asked questions (FAQ) page, where students 
can find the information typically needed throughout the 
course,
•	create a protocol in which students must ask questions over the 
course forum (bulletin board), prior to emailing the instructor,
or
•	refer students to a help-desk contact to handle the inevitable tech-
nological obstacles that are inherent in accessing a web-based 
course.
In short, it is important that you get your course online, but it is 
equally important that you plan and design your course completely 
before it is opened to students. Indeed, positive first impressions in this 
new medium are vital for the success of teachers and learners. And 
remember, trying to develop course materials while teaching the course 
can be overwhelming. Many instructors typically underestimate the time 
and assets required to develop, maintain, and offer an online course. 
Efficient planning and time management are fundamental to its success. 
Faculty are therefore strongly advised to become familiar with their 
institution’s web development unit, technical training unit, information 
technology unit, and other support units, and to build a strong working 
relationship with those support units.

256	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Rewarding Faculty
A final strategic building block in the success of online course offerings 
is the institutional development of a process that encourages and inspires 
faculty to be creative in a web-based environment. Faculty can often be 
suspicious about technology-based instruction, and many will be hesitant 
to experiment with it. Establishing the supportive systems described 
above will go a long way toward gaining faculty “buy-in.” It is often more 
meaningful, however, for faculty members to know that they will receive 
recognition for their willingness to engage in innovative online educa-
tion activities, and that their efforts will reward them with tenure, 
­promotion, salary merit increases, and other tangible benefits.
Online Course Development
Online course development is a complex endeavour, and it is not 
­reasonable to believe that a high calibre online course of instruction 
can be created by just one or two people. Quality courseware production 
requires a highly organized, concerted effort from many players.
Centralizing the Online Development Unit
Centralizing web development roles into one departmental unit has 
proved beneficial to ensure that courses are of high quality and meet 
institutional guidelines. Members of this department may be described 
as para-academics, a role comparable to that of paramedic in medicine. 
Para-academics are the “first on the scene” of course development; they 
liaise with the course author or subject matter expert (SME) throughout 
the authoring process to prevent or remove any instructional barriers 
that might arise. They also look after the interests of the institution (e.g., 
obtaining copyright permissions for images used in the course) and 
undertake other routine tasks that must be dealt with before a course 
can be published. Roles in this group include project manager, copy 
editor, information technology expert, HTML and XML coder, media 
developer, instructional designer, graphic designer, administrative 
­assistant and, sometimes, copyright officer.
Reusable Learning Objects
There has been some development in recent years toward creating reposi-
tories of reusable learning objects, where educators can submit, use, or 

The Development of Online Courses	
257
exchange learning objects. Some examples of successful repositories are 
Merlot (see http://www.merlot.org), EDNA (see http://www.edna.edu.au/
edna/go), and SMETE (see http://www.smete.org/smete/). When these 
and other repositories first appeared, the vision was to build a large infra-
structure of networked repositories, to provide the education community 
with reusable, interoperable, searchable learning objects, and to some 
extent they have achieved this goal. However, there are still issues around 
interoperability that limit the usefulness of these objects. It remains diffi-
cult to build an object specific enough to meet the requirements at hand, 
yet generic enough to be adapted to other unknown requirements.
Web 2.0
Web 2.0 is not an update to the Web, but a phrase that refers to a dif-
ferent way we use the Web, based more on social networking and virtual 
communities running on hosted services. This new use includes blogs, 
wikis, podcasts, RSS feeds, multi-user domains, and so forth. The poten-
tial benefits of Web 2.0 for education are especially apparent when con-
sidering the opportunities for social networking now available. From 
simple discussions to more complex social software, it becomes easier 
and more effective for learners to engage with one another as well as 
with the content.
The Course Development Team
The core of an online course development team might comprise as few 
as five key roles: SME or author, graphic designer, web developer, pro-
grammer, and instructional designer. In larger commercial organizations, 
it is not uncommon for development teams to be much larger, as the 
expertise in each of these five roles is typically further subdivided and 
specialists are employed. In non-profit education circles, however, where 
budgets are tight, it is more likely that a few people will fulfill hyphen-
ated roles, such as web developer-programmer, for example.
There are both advantages and disadvantages to these hyphenates. 
Although one person who performs multiple roles can often exercise 
more creative control, their workload can, in essence, double. Hyphenates 
can also see their capabilities and their output become “watered down” 
as they end up working in areas in which they may not have expertise. 
The reality is that, in online educational development today, those who 
already possess strong skills in at least one of the areas described above 
are considered even more valuable if they also possess the ability and 
desire to learn new skills in other areas.

258	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
It is worth noting that, as the popularity of the Internet continues 
to increase, software applications and other development tools that 
combine and automate several development tasks into a single package 
are being introduced. Macromedia’s Flash® application is one such 
example: it allows its users to create script-based interactions without 
actually writing any programming code, and to automatically export 
the results in a web-based format, without having any in-depth knowl-
edge of web development. Although the team roles are described and 
discussed linearly here, each member works with other team members, 
often in different combinations and at different stages within the 
­development process.
Subject Matter Expert
Subject Matter Experts (SMEs) ensure that the content of the online 
course is an appropriate alternative to the lecture content normally given 
in a traditional course. In addition, the SME must write the exercises, 
activities, and examinations needed to reinforce the new learning. It is 
also essential that SMEs commit to working as an integral part of the 
team throughout the development process, ensuring that the online 
course content is easy to access and interesting for students. Other tasks 
that SMEs perform include
•	identifying or creating textbooks, readings, and resources
•	ensuring a pedagogical match among the course objectives, 
content, exercises, examinations, and assignments
•	identifying materials that require copyright clearance, and provid-
ing the instructional designer with the necessary information
•	providing other team members with a legible copy of any written 
material
Instructional Designer
While there are hundreds of instructional design models, certain generic 
processes emerge from their common features (Seels & Glasgow, 1998). 
These processes are described as follows.
•	Analysis – the process of defining what is to be learned
•	Design – the process of specifying how learning will occur
•	Development – the process of authoring and producing the 
materials
•	Implementation – the process of installing the instruction in the 
real world

The Development of Online Courses	
259
•	Evaluation – the process of determining the impact of instruction 
(Seels & Glasgow, p. 7)
In practical terms, the instructional designer
•	helps to make the SME aware of appropriate pedagogical ­strategies 
and options
•	helps to determine, create, and adapt instructional resources
•	provides advice on how best to present information
•	writes statements of learning outcomes
•	sequences learning outcomes
•	sequences activities
•	evaluates instruction
•	arranges technical production and services
•	usually acts as project manager
•	acts as editor
•	acts as web developer
Web Developer
One of the challenges that web course designers face is to create an 
atmosphere of confidence in the process during the early stages of devel-
opment. Web developers should show faculty examples of online materi-
als which illustrate various kinds of content and interactive options that 
are available to them. They should then describe to faculty how their 
courses can be produced using a consistent organizational template that 
provides students with knowledge of the learning objectives, an outline 
of the content, assignments, evaluation information, resources, links, a 
list of requirements, and FAQs.
Other roles of the web developer include
•	helping the SME or instructor to use tools to create the course 
web pages, and to maintain the course when complete
•	helping the instructor or tutor to use the tools needed, such as 
email and chat utilities, to make the course interactive 
•	working with the graphic designer to conceptualize the screens, 
backgrounds, buttons, window frames, and text elements in the 
program
•	creating interactivity, and determining the look and feel of the 
interface
•	creating design storyboards
In a small production group, the web developer may also act as 
the graphic designer, photographer, and director, and as the editor of 

260	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
video, audio, and animations. In a larger group, the web developer would 
typically consult with other team members for the additional aspects of 
the program; for example, collaborating with the sound designer on the 
music, or working with the programmer on functionality issues.
Graphic (Visual) Designer
Visual design for Athabasca University courses, whether print-based or 
electronic, is driven by the needs of students and academics, and by the 
content of the course itself. Distance education can be enhanced by 
including technical drawings, illustrations, graphics, and photography 
to interpret course content. Visual design for electronic courses, or 
optional electronic enhancements of print-based courses, includes the 
development and creation of generic or customized templates, naviga-
tional icons, icons or images to aid recognition of location within a 
non-linear presentation of materials, and visuals or graphics to enhance 
textual content (Athabasca University, 2007).
The World Wide Web has turned the Internet into a compelling 
visual medium; however, in production terms, good visual design and 
development can often consume the largest amount of time in a project. 
As the Web allows educational media to rely more and more on visuals, 
clear visual design is essential. The visuals that students, especially those 
new to online learning, encounter in an online course often set the tone 
for their entire learning experience.
As content is being developed, the graphic designer works with 
the web developer and the author to create a unique course look, while 
at the same time integrating the course’s functionality into the common 
institutional template. The use of these common elements provides 
familiarity for online students and makes it possible for them to take 
several courses while learning how to learn online only once. The graphic 
designer ensures continuity for the faculty by designing consistent 
­graphical elements when courses are updated or revised.
For graphic designers, Adobe Photoshop® has been the must-have 
software tool for years. For those developing specifically for online deliv-
ery, Photoshop has recently incorporated the features of an adjunct appli-
cation, ImageReady®, which formats bitmap images for the Web. Other 
applications that are becoming more important in the visual designers 
tool box create vector-based images (as opposed to bitmaps); examples 
include Adobe Illustrator® and Macromedia Freehand®.

The Development of Online Courses	
261
Programmer and Multimedia Author
The programmer is responsible for program functionality. The program-
mer uses specialized software tools to enable the interactivity that is 
suggested and desired in online courses. In the most productive teams, 
programming is treated as a highly specialized and separate discipline.
Many software applications are available to programmers, who 
each seem to have a favourite working tool. Programmers should endea-
vour to provide development team members with a basic understanding 
of the two classes of programming tools and their capabilities: code-based 
programming languages and graphical-user-interfaced (GUI) authoring 
programs. Code-based languages require that programmers use a pro-
prietary computer language to create applications, which can then be 
delivered over the Internet. For example, these languages enable the 
processing of information which users supply on web-based forms. GUI 
authoring programs enable similar processes, but they also offer some 
automated generation of computer code. 
This chapter is not meant to be a comparison of these tools – 
­hundreds of articles cover that – but currently, there does seem to be a 
clear line between the followers of code-based programming techniques 
and those who prefer GUI applications. One clear advantage of code-
based programming is that these tools are often open source; that is, 
they are created from freely available, stable code that encourages col-
laborative development. Commercial GUI software often requires less 
technical expertise to use than code programming, but such software 
can be expensive, and the companies who publish these proprietary 
software programs update them often, rendering earlier versions obso-
lete and constantly forcing developers who rely on them to purchase 
new versions.
Below is a partial list of the types of applications that programmers 
typically work with in a web-based course. Open-source code-based 
­programming languages include
•	Hypertext markup language (HTML)
•	Java
•	Javascript
•	Perl
•	Extensible markup language (XML)
•	PHP
•	MySQL

262	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Proprietary GUI web-development software packages include
•	Macromedia Dreamweaver®, Flash®, Director®, Authorware®
•	Microsoft .NET®, Visual Basic®
•	Adobe GoLive®, Photoshop®, Illustrator®
Conclusion
Developing effective instructional materials depends on a great deal of 
planning, collaboration, and concerted efforts from many people skilled 
at using the right tools. These requirements are even more crucial in 
online multimedia and course development, which is highly dependent 
on ever-changing computer technologies. Pedagogical standards must 
not be compromised, regardless of the instructional medium employed. 
Employing the principles and guidelines offered in this chapter will help 
all stakeholders involved in online instructional development to ensure 
that their efforts are rewarded, ultimately, with satisfied learners.
References
Athabasca University. (2007). Visual design. Athabasca, AB: Athabasca 
University. Retrieved October 10, 2007, from http://emd.athabascau.
ca/service_design.htm
Chickering, A., & Ehrmann, S. (1996). Implementing the seven prin-
ciples: Technology as lever. American Association for Higher Education 
Bulletin, 49(2), 3–6. Retrieved October 10, 2007, from http://www.
tltgroup.org/programs/seven.html
Chickering, A., & Gamson, Z. (1987). Seven principles for good practice 
in undergraduate education. American Association for Higher Education 
Bulletin, 39(7), 3–7. Retrieved October 10, 2007, from http://www.
umflint.edu/resources/centers/tclt/resources/evaluating_teaching/
pdf-bin/Development%20and%20Adaptations%20of%20the%20Sev
en%20Principles%20for%20Good%20Practice%20in%20Undergrad
uate%20Education.pdf
Downes, S. (2005). Are the basics of instructional design changing? In 
Stephen’s web.
Retrieved April 17, 2007, from http://www.downes.ca/cgi-bin/page.cgi? 
post=6

The Development of Online Courses	
263
Fox, M., & Helford, P. (1999). Northern Arizona University: Advancing 
the boundaries of higher education in Arizona using the World Wide 
Web. Interactive Learning Environments, 7(2–3), 155–174.
Marzano, R. (1992). A different kind of classroom: Teaching with dimensions 
of learning. Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum 
Development. Retrieved October 10, 2007, from http://pdonline.ascd.
org/pd_online/ dol02/1992marzano_chapter1.html
McGreal, R., & Elliott, M. (2008). Technologies of online learning:  
E-learning. In T. Anderson (Ed.), Theory and Practice of Online Learning 
(2nd. ed.). Edmonton, AB: AU Press.
Russell, T. (1999). The no significant difference phenomenon. Raleigh, NC: 
North Carolina State University.
Seels, B., & Glasgow, Z. (1998). Making instructional design decisions (2nd. 
ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill.
WICHE. (n.d.). Balancing quality and access: Principles of good practice for 
electronically offered academic degree and certificate programs. Boulder, CO: 
Western Interstate Commission for Higher Education. Retrieved 
October 10, 2007, from http://www.wiche.edu/Telecom/projects/­
balancing/principles.htm 
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Dean Caplan was employed as an instructional media analyst at Athabasca 
University until 2002 and is currently an instructional designer at 
Canadian Pacific in Calgary, Alberta. Dean’s professional interests include 
the design, development, usability, and usage of multimedia in computer-
mediated communications. He earned a B.Mus.Ed and an MEd from 
the University of Saskatchewan.
Rodger Graham (rodgerg@athabascau.ca) joined Athabasca University 
as an instructional media analyst in 2003. Since 2007 Rodger, has been 
Acting Manager, of Course Design in the Educational Media Development 
department. He received a BA and a BEd from the University of Alberta, 
and an MEd from the University of Saskatchewan. 


Chapter 11
Value Added – The Editor  
in Design and Development  
of Online Courses
Jan Thiessen & Vincent Ambrock
Athabasca University
Introduction
The editor has traditionally played a key role in the design and 
­development of instructional and educational materials. As the Web and 
the technology and processes for delivering instructional materials on 
it have evolved, so too has the editor’s role in course design and delivery. 
The dynamic nature of the Web and the explosive growth of user-driven 
collaborative applications such as blogs, wikis, and social software – the 
Web 2.0 – have expanded the scope of most editors’ roles even further. 
The typical web editor in education has a broad and changing range of 
responsibilities, from editing and verifying course content to evaluating 
the efficacy of online instructional tools, from unsnarling copyright issues 
to testing and applying new multimedia applications. One aspect of the 
editor’s role, however, has remained unchanged in the course develop-
ment process – the editor adds value to the course development value 
chain by improving course material quality, enhancing students’ learning 

266	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
experiences, and ensuring that course-quality standards are set and 
­maintained for the delivering institution.
Our model for defining and studying the online editor’s role in 
the course development process is the School of Business at Athabasca 
University (AU). The School of Business has taken a leadership role in 
delivering online distance education courses at AU, by adding online 
features for existing print-based courses, converting print courses to 
online formats, or designing and developing new courses for exclusive 
web delivery. The multimedia instructional design editor (MIDE) is a 
key member of the School’s online course design, development, and 
production team. The job title, MIDE (and the particular configuration 
of skills and duties associated with it), is unique to the School of 
Business, combining, as it suggests, the tasks of integrating multimedia 
instructional components into online course materials, applying instruc-
tional design principles, and editing course materials. Although the 
MIDE is unique to Athabasca University’s School of Business, many of 
the duties and responsibilities of the job are typical of other online 
course development projects.
The School of Business has developed the MIDE role to achieve 
a number of course development objectives. To ensure that standards 
of product and pedagogical quality are achieved (an institutional objec-
tive), the MIDE is responsible for editing course materials before they 
are delivered to students. In addition, the MIDE applies instructional 
design principles and strategies to online courses and course materials. 
Many School of Business courses were instructionally designed for print-
based delivery, so converting them for online delivery has raised a host 
of instructional design issues. Other School of Business print-based 
courses make use of some online features; the MIDE assesses the peda-
gogical value of multimedia components and online interactivity tools, 
and develops or incorporates them in each course.
The MIDE’s role adds value to the School of Business’ online 
course development process in three ways: first, by linking other par-
ticipants in the value chain, and so increasing the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the entire process; second, by increasing the ability of 
value chain participants to produce effective online learning experi-
ences; and third, by providing a measure of quality control to ensure 
that online courses are consistent, technologically innovative, and 
­pedagogically sound.

Value Added	
267
Distance Education and the Online  
Instructional Environment
School of Business courses are delivered at a distance. Course materials 
for distance education, whether online or print, “take a learner-centred 
approach, rather than the traditional content-centred approach of text-
books” (Swales, 2000, p. 1). This learner-centred feature enables students 
“to become involved and motivated by the materials and to take ownership 
of the skills and knowledge that they acquire” (p. 1). It also means that 
distance education course materials are a key to motivating, engaging, 
directing, and supporting students, which makes the course editor an impor-
tant contributor. The hybrid role of the MIDE is particularly well suited to 
a distance delivery model, especially when courses are delivered online.
In online delivery, the learning environment becomes a particular 
and important consideration. Kuboni (1999) notes that the term learning 
environment has emerged “as one of the key metaphors associated with 
teaching and learning through the new telecommunications and 
­computer-networked technologies” (p. 1). As a context in which learning 
takes place, the online learning environment has several features: it 
encourages a reduction in the emphasis on the didactic role of the teacher, 
while emphasizing collaboration; it enables the development of process 
skills and knowledge building, rather than information and knowledge 
acquisition; and it supports collaborative group activities (Kuboni).
Like other departments at AU, the School of Business has faced 
a number of challenges in developing an online learning environment 
that delivers all of these envisioned features. Building the tools that 
support online collaboration and self-directed learning requires resources 
and time, so logistical issues, such as resource acquisition and allocation, 
have a significant impact on course development, and on design con-
siderations such as increasing the longevity, currency, and applicability 
of learning tools and materials. In addition, technology constraints and 
demands must both be considered in designing the learning environ-
ment; most students expect self-directed, web-accessible course materials 
and resources, online access to AU services (such as the registrar and 
the library), and the ability to communicate with other students, admin-
istrative staff, and faculty. Lastly, Athabasca University has built its reputa-
tion and student base on providing certain continuous-intake course 
delivery models (i.e., self-paced, individualized study; paced group semi-
nars), and adapting these models to fit their new online environment 
requires some ingenuity. In response to all of these considerations, the 

268	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
School of Business has built a learning environment in Lotus Notes that 
is web-accessible and supports a range of collaborative applications and 
tools. The Notes platform provides an interface for accessing individual-
ized study, self-paced courses and paced, grouped courses, as well as 
other AU web-based services and administrative and technical support.
If the online instructional and learning environment presents 
opportunities and challenges not found in conventional face-to-face or 
traditional distance delivery, so too do the multimedia tools used within 
it. Nunes and Gaible (2002) contend that multimedia is “the most effec-
tive and egalitarian of computer-based resources available.” Multimedia, 
and the online learning environment that delivers and supports it, pro-
vides for “artful interaction between learners and content.” As with con-
ventional distance delivery practice, it is possible to offer “learning in 
different locations...for students working at different rates and levels, 
[as well as] repetition when repetition is warranted” (p. 95). Nunes and 
Gaible state that multimedia is especially well suited to “dynamic fields” 
and that “web-based multimedia content ware is itself dynamic” (p. 95). 
That multimedia and the online environment are dynamic seems an 
obvious conclusion when we imagine the myriad ways in which learners 
can interact with content in text, visual, audio, animated, and other 
forms, through graphic and other interfaces. This conclusion is rein-
forced by the online environment’s possibilities for learner interaction 
with teachers and other learners, at any time, and from any place.
The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines the word “dynamic” as the 
opposite of static; it is the reverse of “stationary; not acting or changing; 
passive” (Thompson, 1995, p. 1,361). As dynamic entities, multimedia 
and the online environment offer opportunities for various kinds of 
interaction and active learning, and for “the chance to work with current 
and even cutting-edge knowledge” (Nunes & Gaible, 2002, p. 95). Rather 
than confine the design, development, and delivery of learning content 
to technical and production experts, it may be possible to “engage all 
stakeholders in the education system...in the development of multimedia 
learning resources” (p. 95).
The dynamic nature of the online environment, however, also 
presents unique challenges for course developers and editors. Web 
content, links, and interactive elements are always changing and require 
constant vigilance to maintain their currency. Moreover, taking full 
advantage of the many multimedia and graphic enhancements available 
in this dynamic environment comes at a price. A simple-looking but 
effectively designed multimedia tool often requires many resources, a 

Value Added	
269
significant amount of time to produce and test, and increases the 
­workload and knowledge level required of instructional, technical, and 
­production staff to implement and maintain it.
The online environment has the potential for fast and easy inter­
action among diverse and distributed users, a fact that raises a number 
of issues about how this interaction is accomplished, when it is appropri-
ate, and how it is managed. Similarly, although a myriad of learning expe-
riences and opportunities are available through the online environment, 
questions of how much diversity to offer, what instructional purposes each 
tool serves, and how to manage the tools selected, also become important. 
The MIDE addresses these issues from a learner’s (student’s) perspective 
in both the multimedia and instructional design components of the job. 
More recently, as learners and instructors have become more skilled in 
using web-based collaborative (social) software and user-driven applica-
tions, and as online information sharing and communication has moved 
closer to the connectivity promised by Web 2.0, new questions have arisen 
about the pedagogical value and methods of providing learners and 
instructors with more choices and control over their learning environment 
and interactions, while adhering to instructional standards and goals. 
When determining the effectiveness of online learning and interactive 
tools and technology, the MIDE must consider all these perspectives.
These varied demands present great challenges for the MIDE, 
who must apply precise editorial and instructional design standards 
across the various course components. Increasing the number of people 
engaged in the development process and the number of times learning 
content is subject to revision or change makes it difficult to achieve and 
maintain control over these standards. Furthermore, the MIDE requires 
an ever-growing range of skills, as well as flexibility in defining the scope 
of their duties, to check and evaluate the diverse components that make 
up an online course, and faces a constant challenge in balancing the 
learning needs of students against technological and course production 
constraints and requirements.
Course Development in an Online Environment –  
the Role of the MIDE
As a School of Business course moves from concept through production 
to online delivery, the MIDE guides the production process and plays 
an integral role in each stage of course development.

270	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Multimedia Development
In their capacity as editors, School of Business MIDEs develop an intimate 
knowledge of the content of each course. They are one of the final links 
in the content chain, reviewing all online course components when they 
are ready to be integrated into the web-based delivery template. The 
MIDEs occupy a unique position in the design and development process, 
far enough along that they see a course in its entirety and can clearly 
identify good locations for using particular multimedia and interactive 
components, but early enough to develop and integrate those compo-
nents and to explore new ideas for enhancing educational materials.
As a means of making course production more efficient, and in 
keeping with a general trend toward collecting and reusing effective 
multimedia tools, the MIDEs play an important role in identifying online 
components and tools that have widespread applicability for use in 
several courses. The School of Business is still exploring ways to store 
these components and simplify their use across an array of course mate-
rials; the trend at Athabasca University, and in online learning in general, 
toward storing and reusing multimedia applications, learning objects, 
and databases presents many choices and opportunities for research. 
The MIDE is a vital link in this research, working as a liaison between 
School of Business academics, production teams, and other departments 
throughout the university that are developing data and learning object 
storage strategies (e.g., the library and the Educational Media 
Development department).
Instructional Design
All new or significantly revised online courses are submitted to School 
of Business instructional staff for a preliminary assessment of their design, 
content, and learning objectives. At this point, the MIDE performs a 
cursory instructional design (ID) assessment of the proposed course. At 
this stage, too, a School of Business instructional designer also reviews 
the proposal and offers ideas to the course author for improving the 
course’s instructional efficacy. However, as courses and their constituent 
elements often undergo significant transformation between proposal 
and delivery, the bulk of the MIDE’s ID evaluation necessarily happens 
after the course has been written or revised, when it is submitted for 
editing and production. Although this strategy can shorten the amount 
of time available for evaluating and testing new ideas for ID and multi-
media tools in a course, it is, overall, a good use of limited resources. 
New courses are reviewed by the School of Business instructional designer, 

Value Added	
271
but existing courses (often high enrolment courses) that are being 
revised or converted for online delivery might or might not have had 
the benefit of ID at some point in their development (the School has 
only one instructional designer, but many new courses that require ID). 
In many cases, the content of a course has been revised regularly, but 
issues related to its instructional efficacy have not been systematically 
addressed in the revisions. This is where the ID role of the MIDE and 
its late application in the production process is especially useful in assess-
ing and dealing with instructional quality issues, without returning a 
course to the beginning stages of development.
As part of their instructional design role, MIDEs also check and 
evaluate course design and layout for instructional efficacy, providing 
input to authors and production staff. The MIDE ensures that all 
resources are relevant, linked, and coordinated. It is essential that course 
components intended to present and deliver information are clearly 
differentiated from learning activities, which are designed for applica-
tion or practice. The purpose of the learning activities must be clearly 
presented, and it must be obvious to learners what action the learning 
activities require, as well as how and where to obtain feedback. The 
MIDE also determines if the learning resources work, if they work as 
intended, and if the instructions for their use are clear. This function is 
particularly crucial with multimedia components.
While working with existing courses in the instructional design 
role, the MIDE reviews course components at a number of levels (Swales, 
2000). At a course level, the MIDE determines if the course components 
support and conform to course objectives. At the unit level, it is essential 
that unit objectives support, build toward, and align with the larger 
course objectives. Each learning objective in each unit or lesson is 
assessed to ensure that it is clear, unambiguous, measurable, and related 
to the content in the lesson or unit. The MIDE determines whether or 
not the lesson and review activities, as well as technical elements such 
as multimedia components and interactivity tools, contribute to students’ 
ability to meet the learning objectives of the course, and to see for 
themselves that they have done so. In online courses, as with traditional 
distance delivery, this “seeing” must take place in the absence of ­same-
time and face-to-face interaction with a teacher.
Editing
The MIDE’s primary role in course development is as an editor. In the 
online course development and production process, the MIDE provides 

272	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
feedback at the same point as editors in more traditional course devel-
opment models. The MIDE reviews all course materials and components, 
revising and, in consultation with course authors, clarifying content, 
ensuring that the text is grammatically correct, concise, and online-
ready. As do all editors, the MIDE ensures that the tone of the course 
materials is appropriate for the audience, and helps learning to happen; 
the MIDE also checks that coauthored materials communicate either a 
consistent voice or a clearly defined set of individual voices, as desired 
by the authors and as is suitable for the content. Editors ensure that 
course materials and do not contain bias or plagiarism and that all 
necessary copyright clearances have been obtained. Finally, web-ready 
content is copy edited to ensure that all i’s are dotted and t’s crossed, 
and that the rules of grammar and punctuation have been correctly and 
consistently applied.
As editors, more so than in their other roles, the MIDEs serve as 
proxies for the learners who will work through all components of the 
online course. They ensure that the information about assignments, 
including instructions to students, assignment questions, guidelines for 
assignment marking, and examination guidelines, is correct, consistent, 
and readily available. Well-edited course materials anticipate and address 
learner concerns and needs for information, preventing work at the 
“back end” of the course delivery process (instructor and technical 
support assistance calls), and building student confidence in and 
­satisfaction with School of Business online course materials.
Adding Value – The MIDE in the Design  
and Development Process
The MIDE, then, contributes to many aspects and levels of course design 
and development, and at each level affects the online-learning value 
chain. The effects of this contribution, however, are difficult to measure 
empirically. The MIDE works in the design and development component 
of the online learning value chain, between upstream logistics (described 
in earlier chapters as infrastructure for online learning, technology 
choice, and attributes of various media) and downstream logistics (to 
be discussed in subsequent chapters, and including learner supports 
such as tutoring, call centres, and electronic library and other digital 
resources). As such, the MIDE’s contribution to the online delivery 

Value Added	
273
process is perhaps best measured through their interactions with the 
other participants in the value chain.
In each role – instructional design, multimedia development, and 
editing – the MIDE is concerned with facilitating communication between 
the author and the learner, and between the author and the technical 
staff who create the multimedia tools and instructional technology used 
in course delivery. The MIDE explores new resources and opens lines 
of communication between the many participants in the design and 
development value chain, and looks for solutions to instructional issues 
that will satisfy technical staff, academic experts, students, and upstream 
and downstream support resources. The MIDE searches for and evalu-
ates ways to enhance the overall instructional efficacy of each course, 
and constantly works to bring the various elements of the online-delivery 
value chain together as efficiently and effectively as possible.
But just as the MIDE brings together elements and participants 
in the value chain, they also add value to the course development process 
by enhancing the ability of other participants to produce effective online 
learning experiences. Rowntree (1990) refers to this role in course devel-
opment as the transformer, “a skilled communicator who can liaise with 
any subject specialists whose writing is obscure, winkling out their key 
ideas and re-expressing them in ways learners will be able to understand” 
(p. 21). The MIDE helps authors to refine and distill the material they 
want learners to grasp, and looks for the best tools and techniques for 
presenting this material concisely and effectively. MIDEs review and 
evaluate each element in the content and design of a course, so they 
have an opportunity to share their expertise and knowledge with the 
course development team and to facilitate communication and knowl-
edge sharing among authors, production and support staff, and technical 
personnel. This knowledge sharing benefits everyone in the process, 
and enhances the ability of all value chain participants to make an 
­effective contribution to course development.
The MIDE’s most important contribution to the course design 
and development value chain is quality control. This function has become 
more critical, and more challenging to define and maintain, as more 
courses have incorporated multimedia components and moved into the 
online learning environment, and as learners and course creators have 
gained knowledge and demanded more control over their learning envi-
ronment and interactions. The MIDE plays a balancing act between 
ensuring that rigorous institutional, instructional, and aesthetic standards 

274	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
are applied to learning materials, and providing learners and instructors 
with some degree of flexibility and control over their learning environ-
ment. McGovern (2002) points out that “trillions of words are published 
on millions of web sites [and] much of this publishing is of appalling 
quality” (para. 2).
On the surface, online publishing, which has eliminated the 
highly technical tasks of typesetting, printing, and distribution, appears 
deceptively simple. In particular, revising online material seems to be 
quick, simple, and straightforward. And in many ways, it is: open the 
source document, use a simple text editor, save the changes to the server, 
and every course can contain what Nunes and Gaible (2002) refer to as 
“cutting-edge knowledge” (p. 95). If consistent presentation and appear-
ance were the only issues to address, this capacity for multiple partici-
pants to revise courses “on-the-fly” would be a serious enough concern 
for the MIDE. However, “technology is founded on the promise of auto-
mation” (McGovern, para. 4), and “you simply can’t automate the cre-
ation of quality content” (para. 8). Putting poor content into the online 
learning environment can have especially serious consequences, both 
for students and for the delivering institution.
As editors do in any course development project, the MIDEs ensure 
that all course materials are complete and functional, and that they meet 
the instructional, aesthetic, and editorial standards established by Athabasca 
University and other educational and publishing institutions. With the 
course learning goals in mind, the MIDE critically evaluates course mate-
rials from the learner’s perspective, and considers the learner’s needs 
and likely responses to the information presented in the course. The 
MIDE ensures that all the pieces of a course work toward the same goal, 
and that the pieces fit together in a unified whole to provide effective 
instruction for students. By ensuring that the course materials delivered 
to students are of consistently high quality, the MIDE contributes to stu-
dents’ confidence in School of Business courses, removes material-based 
obstacles to their learning, and enhances Athabasca University’s reputa-
tion as a credible, learning-centred distance education institution.
References
Kuboni, O. (1999). Designing learning environments to facilitate 
­reflection in professional practice: Some initial thoughts. Paper 

Value Added	
275
­presented at TEL-isphere ’99, The Caribbean and technology-enhanced 
­learning [conference], St. Michael, Barbados, November 24–27, 1999. 
Retrieved July 16, 2007, from http://www.col.org/colweb/webdav/
site/myjahiasite/shared/docs/kuboni.pdf 
McGovern, G. (2002, October 14). Words make your web site a success. 
New Thinking. Retrieved July 16, 2007, from http://www.gerrymcgovern.
com/nt/ 2002/nt_2002_10_14_words.htm
Nunes, C. A. A., & Gaible, E. (2002). Development of multimedia mate-
rials. In W. D. Haddad & A. Draxler (Eds.), Technologies for education: 
Potentials, parameters, and prospects (pp. 95–117). Paris and Washington, 
DC: UNESCO and Academy for Educational Development.
Rowntree, D. (1990). Teaching through self-instruction: How to develop open 
learning materials. London: Kogan Page.
Swales, C. (2000). Knowledge series: Editing distance education materials. 
Vancouver, BC: Commonwealth of Learning.
Thompson, D. (Ed.). (1995). The concise Oxford dictionary (9th ed.). 
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Jan Thiessen is a multimedia instructional design editor (MIDE) in 
Athabasca University’s School of Business. She received a BEd (English) 
from the University of Alberta, and MA in Distance Education from 
Athabasca University. Her research on faculty attitudes towards interaction 
in distance education helps inform her work with course authors and 
teams, developing quality distance learning materials and experiences.
Vincent Ambrock also works as a multimedia instructional design editor 
(MIDE) in the Athabasca University School of Business. He holds a BA 
(Honours) in English Literature from the University of Alberta, and has 
worked extensively as an editor and writer on an array of electronic and 
print-based publishing projects. 


Chapter 12
Making Relevant 
Financial Decisions about 
Technology in Education
David Annand
Athabasca University
Introduction
This chapter shows how relevant costs can be used by managers in 
­educational institutions like universities, or related sub-units like com-
puter services, to make more informed financial decisions about the use 
of technology. Fixed and variable cost behaviours are described, as well 
as the nature of cost-volume-profit analysis and how it is used to predict 
net revenue for a given level of services or production. Time value of 
money (present value) concepts and the effect of time horizons on plan-
ning and investment decisions are introduced. Finally, the means to cost 
­services through time-driven, activity-based costing is described.

278	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Direct and Indirect Costs
Cost objects are items for which a separate measurement of costs is desired. 
They are usually measured in a currency like dollars. In an online learn-
ing environment, cost objects can be courses, registration services, 
­projects, students, departments, or academic programs.
Direct costs can be associated with a cost object in a cost-effective 
manner. They are generally material in amount, linked to a specific area 
or responsibility, or related to a particular cost object by contractual require-
ments. Let’s assume that the cost object is an academic program at an 
institution. Direct costs would include the salary for the program coordi-
nator, salaries of contracted faculty who teach only in the program, and 
the cost of a learning software system used exclusively to deliver the 
program of study. A rule of thumb to determine a direct cost is to con-
sider whether the cost would disappear if the cost object was eliminated. 
In the example above, the salaries of the program coordinator and 
faculty, and the software system costs would cease if the program was 
discontinued, so they are direct costs.
Indirect costs do not bear a discernible relationship to a particular 
cost object, or cannot be determined in a cost-effective manner. So, if 
the cost of an online program is the cost object, insurance for the entire 
institution would be an indirect cost of operating this program. It is 
required for the institution to function, but would not be affected if a 
particular online program was discontinued. The means to allocate these 
indirect costs to cost objects is discussed later in this chapter.
Classifying costs as direct or indirect is often determined by the 
particular cost object. For example, building maintenance costs might 
be relatively immaterial when calculating the costs of several online 
courses, and thus be an indirect cost. The same maintenance costs 
would be important direct costs if the cost object was a particular 
campus building.
Fixed and Variable Costs
Variable costs change as the activity level of a cost object changes. For 
example, if an institution provides all textbooks for online students, 
these costs vary in direct proportion to the number of students registered 
in a program. Fixed costs remain unchanged over a given period of time 
– for example, salaries for tenured faculty members would be fixed costs 

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
279
if the objective was to forecast the costs of operating Faculty of Medicine 
programs. All costs tend to be variable over time or a wide range of 
activity. For instance, faculty salaries may be fixed for a particular year, 
but will vary as long-term registration levels fluctuate. They may be fixed 
if a 2% increase in registrations levels is forecast in the next year, but 
not for a 20% increase. Thus, determining the relevant range is necessary 
when categorizing costs as fixed or variable.
The distinction between fixed and variable cost behaviours is 
important. Unit costs can misinform if they contain elements of fixed 
costs. For example, if you are a bookstore manager and have a choice 
between a) buying textbooks from a supplier for $600 per year for a class 
of students (with15 students presently registered); or b) buying texts for 
$30 per student; what choice would you make? At 15 students, the per 
unit cost under the first option is $40 per student ($600/15). This com-
parison suggests that paying the variable rate of $30 per student under 
the second option would be preferable. However, if registrations turn 
out to be for 20 students, the average cost per student under the fixed 
level is the same as under the variable (per student) option ($600/20 
= $30). If registration levels exceed 20 students, then the flat purchase 
price of $600 should be chosen, all other factors remaining constant.
Though this is a simple example, the point is that making financial 
decisions based on per unit costs which include a fixed cost component 
can produce incorrect decisions. This error often occurs when calculat-
ing relative costs of online versus traditional classroom delivery, because 
each of these modes has a fundamentally different cost structure. Most 
forms of online course delivery have a significantly greater fixed-cost 
component than classroom instruction; there may be a need to invest 
in computers, communication equipment, and production staff, for 
instance. Because of the different behaviours of fixed and variable costs 
over a certain level of activities, when comparing costs among alternative 
modes of delivery, it is necessary to identify both the fixed and variable 
components. Using cost-volume-profit analysis more accurately predicts 
total costs over a range of activity levels, once costs have been classified 
into variable- and fixed-cost categories.
Cost-Volume-Profit Relationships
Multiple revenue and cost drivers (causal factors) can be used to predict 
total revenues and costs over a range of activity. It is often useful, 

280	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
however, to focus on only one such causal factor and study how ­variations 
in this factor affect revenues and costs. CVP analysis does this by first 
calculating the total contribution margin (total revenue less total variable 
costs), then the net revenue (total contribution margin less fixed costs). 
In other words,
	
Measure:	
Calculated as:
	
Total Revenue	
Units of output times selling price per unit
Less	
Total Variable Costs	
Units of output times variable cost per unit
Equals	 Total Contribution  
	
Margin
Less	
Total Fixed Costs
Equals	 Net Revenue
CVP analysis assumes that
1.	 total costs can be divided into fixed and variable components;
2.	 the behaviour of total revenues and total costs is linear in relation 
to units of output, within the range of output under consideration 
(for example, no per unit cost savings result from purchasing 
large volumes of instructional material);
3.	 selling price and variable costs of one unit of output are known;
4.	 time value of money is ignored. This assumption will be relaxed 
later.
Using CVP analysis, the break-even point can be determined. This 
is the point where Total Contribution Margin equals Total Fixed Costs 
and net revenue is therefore zero. The formula is:
	
Break-even in units =            Total Fixed Costs          
	
	
Per-unit Contribution Margin
For instance, a university pays $3,000 to an instructor per online 
course. Tuition fees are $300 per course. Variable costs for Course A are 
$100 per student, which represents the cost of the textbook. Fifteen 
students must be registered for the course to break even, calculated as 
$3,000/($300–100) = 15 students. An income statement prepared in 
contribution margin format would show the following:

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
281
Per student
Total
Revenue
$300
$4,500
Variable costs
100
1,500
Contribution margin
$200
3,000
Fixed costs
3,000
Net revenue
$ -0-
Table 1. Course A Net Revenue
Now suppose that Course B is offered and the instructor is paid 
$2,600. Tuition is $280 and the textbook costs $180. Twenty-six students 
are enrolled. The net revenue at this registration level is:
Per student
Total
Revenue
$280
$7,280
Variable costs
180
4,680
Contribution margin
$100
2,600
Fixed costs
2,600
Net revenue
$ -0-
Table 2. Course B Net Revenue
Each course is operating at its break-even point, as net revenue 
is zero in each case. Using the break-even formula, the minimum number 
of students necessary in each course to cover fixed costs – the break-even 
point – can also be calculated as follows: 
Course A: $3,000/($300–$100) 	= 15 students
Course B: $2,600/($280–$180) 	= 26 students
Total in A and B 	
= 41 students
CVP analysis can inform other financial decisions. For instance, 
if a student is indifferent between choosing Course A or B, which course 
should be recommended if the institutions wants to maximize net 
revenue? The answer is Course A, as the contribution margin per student 
is $200 ($300–100), versus $100 for Course B ($280–180). That is, for 
every additional student registered in Course A, an extra $200 is con-
tributed to net revenue, as opposed to only $100 for Course B. This 

282	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
assumes, however, that fixed costs will not increase if one more student 
enrols in either course. At some point, another instructor will need to 
be hired for Course A. Just prior to that point, students should be 
directed to Course B, until another instructor needs to be hired for 
that course.
Segment Margin Analysis
Let’s assume that Course B is not needed for program requirements. If 
only 25 students are enrolled, should Course B be offered at all? The 
operating loss at this level is $100, because there is one student less than 
the break-even point of 26 students and the contribution margin per 
student is $100. This question brings up another important point with 
respect to cost and revenue analysis. In the example above, fixed costs 
are all assumed to be direct costs. In other words, if either or both 
Courses A and B were cancelled, the associated fixed costs ($3,000 and 
$2,600 respectively) would disappear. Fixed costs, however, can also be 
indirect costs. Some or all of these fixed costs may remain whether or 
not Course A or B is cancelled. The process of expanding the contribu-
tion margin analysis by analyzing the fixed cost components as direct or 
indirect costs is called segment margin analysis.
Using the same example, let’s assume that the fixed costs of 
Courses A and B – $3,000 and $2,600 respectively – are composed of 
the following:
	
Course A	
Course B
Course-specific costs	
$2,000	
$1,600
Central administration salaries, allocated  
  equally between Courses A & B	
1,000	
1,000
Total	
$3,000	
$2,600
Disclosing direct and indirect costs separately, a segment margin 
analysis of both courses would show the following:

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
283
Course A
Course B
Combined 
Total
Per 
student
Total
Per 
student
Total
Revenue
$300
$6,000
$280
$7,000
$13,000
Variable costs
100
2,000
180
4,500
6,500
Contribution  
  margin
$200
4,000
$100
2,500
6,500
Direct fixed costs
2,000
1,600
3,600
Segment margin
$2,000
$900
2,900
Indirect fixed costs
2,000
Net revenue
$900
Table 3. Segment Margin Analysis – Courses A and B
Based on this analysis, Courses A and B both have positive segment 
margins ($2,000 and $900 respectively). At the given registrations levels, 
both courses help to cover central administration salaries. Course B 
should not be cancelled. If it was, overall net revenue for the institution 
would decrease by the amount of Course B’s segment margin – $900 – to 
zero. Using segment margin analysis, the recalculated break-even points 
are as follows:
Course A: $2,000/($300–100) 	= 10 students
Course B: $1,600/($280–180) 	= 16 students
Total in A and B 	
= 26 students
Segment margin analysis illustrates the danger of making ­decisions 
based on arbitrary allocations of costs. It is important to remember that 
direct fixed costs only include costs that can be controlled by the orga-
nizational unit or activity under consideration, and that would disappear 
if the unit or activity was discontinued. In the above example, central 
administration salaries were allocated to Courses A and B as if these 
were direct fixed costs. When these indirect fixed costs are appropriately 
segregated, the registration levels at which direct fixed costs are covered 
are significantly lower, and more accurate financial ­decisions result.

284	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Relevant Costs
In the context of making financial decisions about online education, 
the avoidance of arbitrarily allocating costs is one component of deter-
mining relevant costs. Relevant costs fall into three categories. First, they 
must be costs that differ between alternatives. In the above example, 
allocated indirect fixed costs of administrative support staff were irrel-
evant to the decision because these costs remained whether or not 
Courses A or B were offered.
Second, relevant costs are future costs. Past costs (those that have 
already been incurred) are referred to as sunk costs. They are irrelevant 
to future decisions because they cannot change the course of future 
events once they have been incurred. For example, a community college 
decides to implement an institution-wide document management system. 
Costs over the three-year implementation period are estimated at 
$1,000,000. Savings over the life of the system are estimated at $1,200,000. 
As a result of the estimated $200,000 overall savings, the project is 
approved. Two years into the project, however, incurred development 
costs amount to $2,000,000. Additional costs are virtually certain to 
amount to another $800,000. In other words, the project will cost 
$2,800,000, not the once-estimated $1,000,000. Estimated savings remain 
at $1,200,000. At this point, the Board of Governors decides to cancel 
the project based on the following analysis:
Estimated total savings	
$1,200,000
Estimated total costs	
2,800,000
Net cost of project	
$(1,600,000)
This decision, however, is incorrect. At the end of Year 2, the 
project should still go ahead to minimize loss, based on this analysis:
Estimated future savings	
$1,200,000
Estimated future costs	
800,000
Net incremental benefit	
$400,000
In other words, the $2,000,000 project costs to date are sunk costs 
and irrelevant to the decision at the end of Year 2. If they are considered 

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
285
and the project is cancelled at the end of Year 2, the college will lose 
$2,000,000. If the project is completed, the college will only lose 
$1,600,000. Granted, the project should not have been started in the 
first place, but this conclusion is based on hindsight. To minimize loss 
at the current point of decision, the college should ignore the sunk costs 
and continue with the project to completion.
Third, relevant costs are only those that involve cash outlays. An 
important example of this concept relates to amortization of capital 
assets. Amortization is a process that allocates the cost of acquiring some-
thing with future benefit over more than one year (for example, a com-
puter) over its estimated useful life. Suppose the nursing faculty in a 
university develops a series of online courses for its Bachelor of Nursing 
program. Based on projected revenue exceeding costs over the five-year 
estimated life of the project, the nursing faculty is given a capital grant 
of $100,000 by the university to purchase the computers to launch this 
initiative. The computers are expected to have a useful life of five years 
and be worthless at the end of this period.
Amortization cost of $20,000 ($100,000/5 yrs.) is netted against 
the revenue generated by this online program. A programmer is hired 
by the faculty to develop the learning platform. Courses in the program 
are taught by faculty, who are paid additional money to teach them. 
These are all direct costs of the program.
At the end of Year 3, the following financial report is prepared 
by the administrative staff in the Faculty of Nursing:
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Revenue
  Capital grant
$100,000
$  -0-
$  -0-
  Registration revenue
5,000
100,000
120,000
    Total revenue
105,000
100,000
120,000
Costs
  Faculty salaries
20,000
30,000
40,000
  Programmer salary
60,000
60,000
60,000
  Amortization
20,000
20,000
20,000
    Total costs
100,000
110,000
120,000
Net revenue (loss)
$5,000
$(10,000)
$(10,000)
Table 4. Three Year Net Revenues for Online Program Faculty of Nursing

286	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
At the end of Year 3, the dean considers whether to cancel the 
program. Losses of about $10,000 per year are expected to continue 
since registrations in the online program are not expected to grow after 
reaching Year-3 levels. 
Despite the appearance that the program will continue to lose 
money into the future, the online program should be continued. The 
reasons for this may not be readily apparent, but the financial analysis 
needs to be revamped to exclude the amortization costs, as these do not 
involve cash outlays. Also, the purchase of the computers needs to be 
recorded in its entirety in Year 1, as this is when the related cash outflow 
occurs. After this point, the cash outlay is a sunk cost. Restated on these 
bases, the financial results would be as follows:
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Revenue
  Capital grant
$100,000
$  -0-
$  -0-
  Registration revenue
5,000
100,000
120,000
    Total revenue
105,000
100,000
120,000
Costs
  Faculty salaries
20,000
30,000
40,000
  Programmer salary
60,000
60,000
60,000
  Computers
100,000
-0-
-0-
    Total costs
180,000
90,000
100,000
Net revenue (loss)
$(75,000)
$10,000
$20,000
Table 5. Revised Three Year Net Revenues for Online Program Faculty of 
Nursing
The restated results indicate that the program should be ­continued. 
Not considering cash flows and recording amortization in Years 1–3 
obscures the fact that a net cash inflow is being generated by the project 
in Years 2–3. The program will contribute net revenue of $20,000 in 
Years 4 and 5 if the same results as Year 3 are achieved. If the program 
is dropped at the end of Year 3, no net revenue will be generated in 
Years 4–5.
Overall, however, the university will not recoup its initial invest-
ment over the five-year period. The final results are projected to show 
an overall $5,000 net cash outflow, as follows (table 6).
If these results had been known at the start of the project, it might 
not have proceeded. After the initial decision to proceed has been made, 

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
287
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Total
Revenue
  Capital grant
$100,000
$  -0-
$  -0-
$  -0-
$  -0-
$100,000
  Registration revenue
5,000
100,000
120,000
120,000
120,000
465,000
    Total revenue
105,000
100,000
120,000
120,000
120,000
565,000
Costs
  Faculty salaries
20,000
30,000
40,000
40,000
40,000
170,000
  Programmer salary
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
60,000
300,000
  Computers
100,000
 -0-
-0-
-0-
-0-
100,000
    Total costs
180,000
90,000
100,000
100,000
100,000
570,000
Net revenue (loss)
$(75,000)
$10,000
$20,000
$20,000
$20,000
$(5,000)
Table 6. Five Year Net Revenues for Online Program Faculty of Nursing

288	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
however, the program should continue because a positive cash flow is 
generated in Years 2–5. A significant re-investment will be needed to 
replace the computers at the end of Year 5, so the decision whether to 
continue the program should be made at that point.
Examples of Various Decisions Using Relevant Costs
Relevant costing concepts can be used to inform a variety of financial 
decisions in a university context – for example, whether to accept one-
time orders for services at a price that is less than usual. Let’s assume 
you are the dean of your university’s Faculty of Extension. An important 
part of your faculty’s mandate is to contract with outside institutions 
and businesses to develop, market, and deliver online courses for their 
employees. Your unit is required to generate net revenue for the uni-
versity. The Faculty’s online learning system staff and related techno-
logical infrastructure can feasibly produce and support about 50 courses 
per year, about 20 more than at present. Average production costs are 
$20,000 per course, based on 30 courses per year and ­calculated 
as follows:
	
Per-course 
	
Cost
Production staff time	
$4,000 	(all variable on a per course basis)
Instructors	
4,000	 (all variable on a per course basis)
Online delivery system 	 10,000	 ($300,000/30 = $10,000 total per course;  
	
	   $9,000 fixed + $1,000 variable)
Marketing	
2,000	 ($60,000/30 = $2,000 total per course;  
	
	   $1,500 fixed + $500 variable)
Total cost per course	
$20,000
An outside firm has asked your unit to develop, market, and 
deliver a suite of six courses. The firm has offered to pay $19,000 per 
course for these services. Let’s assume that by accepting this contract, 
the Faculty of Extension will incur no additional fixed costs. The ­question 
is whether this offer should be accepted.
Using average costs per course, accepting the offer would produce 
a loss of $6,000 on the contract, calculated as follows:

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
289
Total revenue (6 × $19,000)	
$114,000
Total costs (6 × $20,000)	
120,000
Net loss	
$(6,000)
It appears that a price of $19,000 per course is insufficient. 
Remember, however, that only costs that differ among alternatives and 
involve future cash flows are relevant. Using these two criteria, the allo-
cated fixed costs associated with the online delivery system ($9,000) and 
marketing ($1,500) are irrelevant. They will not change if the outside 
contract is accepted. Eliminating these costs from the analysis and using 
the contribution margin format, the restated results would show the 
following incremental revenues and costs if the contract is accepted:
	
Per Course	
Total
Revenue	
$19,000	
$114,000
Variable Costs
  Production staff time	
$4,000	
24,000
  Instructors	
4,000	
24,000
  Online delivery system	
1,000	
6,000
  Marketing	
500	
3,000
    Total variable costs	
9,500	
57,000
Contribution margin	
$9,500	
$57,000
Since an additional $57,000 would be contributed to the faculty, 
the offer to produce the six courses should be accepted. In the original 
analysis, including allocated fixed costs that will not change produces 
the wrong decision. Relevant costing eliminates this conflating factor, 
because the fixed costs that do not change are identified and omitted.
Now let’s use the same information as above, except that an addi-
tional fixed online delivery platform cost of $40,000 must be incurred 
to accommodate development and delivery of the additional six courses. 
Should these still be produced for $19,000 revenue per course?
The answer is that yes, they should, if other factors remain the 
same. Incremental net revenue will be $57,000 – 40,000 = $17,000 higher. 
As we can see in this example, fixed costs can be relevant if incurred as 
a result of the decision at hand. Again, the essential cost characteristics 

290	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
represent cash flows that can be expected in the future and are different under 
the various alternatives.
Having said this, non-quantitative factors always need to be weighed 
and subjectively assessed. In the above example, for instance, lower prices 
may be demanded by current on-campus customers if the potential con-
tract with the outside firm is accepted and the terms become known. 
Though these subjective considerations are not within the scope of this 
chapter’s analysis, the point is that relevant costing concepts can improve 
financial decision making in any environment, for profit or otherwise.
Often, cost-volume-profit decisions need to consider competing 
alternatives. For instance, let’s assume that you are the manager of the 
learning technology division of your university. You enter into contracts 
with various Faculties to produce multimedia courses. Your division also 
has the opportunity to produce courses for either the Faculty of Medicine 
or the Faculty of Arts, and can sell all the courses that can be produced 
to these faculties. Detailed information about course production costs 
is as follows:
	
Faculty	
Faculty 
	
of Arts	
of Medicine
Revenue per course	
$30,000	
$80,000
Variable production costs per course	
$20,000	
$50,000
Contribution margin per course	
$10,000	
$30,000
In this case, the Faculty of Medicine opportunity should be 
pursued, since each additional course will produce an additional $30,000 
of contribution margin compared to only $10,000 for each Faculty of 
Arts course. What happens, though, if the learning technology unit is 
operating at capacity? This is a capacity constraint. Under capacity con-
straints, managers should look at the highest contribution margin per 
unit of the scarce resource, not just total contribution margin. 
Assume that a total of 40 person-hours are available per day in 
your unit. Faculty of Arts courses take 1,000 person-hours to produce 
and Faculty of Medicine courses take 4,000 person-hours to produce. 
The appropriate analysis is as follows:

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
291
	
Faculty	
Faculty of 
	
of Arts	
Medicine
Contribution margin per unit (see above)	
$10,000	
$30,000	 (a)
Person-hours to produce	
1,000	
4,000	 (b)
Contribution margin per person-hour	
$10	
$7.50	 (a/b)
In this case, with other factors being equal, the Faculty of Arts 
courses should be produced because this activity produces the highest 
contribution margin per unit of scarce resource ($10 per hour). Looking 
at this decision another way, the learning technology unit can produce 
only one Faculty of Medicine multimedia course in the same time that 
it can produce four Faculty of Arts courses. Because each Faculty of Arts 
course contributes $10,000, a total of $40,000 of contribution margin 
can be generated in the same time it takes to produce one Faculty of 
Medicine course that produces only $30,000 of contribution margin. 
This difference may not be apparent unless the contribution margin is 
recast in terms of the scarce resource – in this case, of staff time.
Relevant cost concepts can also be applied to capital asset replace-
ment decisions. Capital assets are tangible items like machines or build-
ings that have value to an organization for some time into the future, 
generally for longer than one year. The key to this type of analysis is to 
recognize that past costs, like the purchase price of capital assets in the 
past, are irrelevant to replacement decisions. These costs are sunk. Only 
future cash flows that differ among alternatives are relevant – for example, 
the cost of a new machine to be purchased, the amount that the old 
machine can be sold for, and differences in future maintenance costs 
or production efficiency savings.
Let’s assume you have a photocopier that cost $20,000 when 
­purchased yesterday. Today, you find out that you can buy another pho-
tocopier for $25,000, and it will save you $.03 per page in production 
costs compared to yesterday’s purchase. Each machine has an estimated 
useful life of 1,000,000 pages. The expected life of both machines is five 
years. The maintenance contract with the vendor will remain at $50 per 
10,000 pages produced, regardless of whether the newer machine is 
purchased. The one-day-old machine can be sold for $2,000. Should the 
one-day old machine be replaced?
Yesterday’s cash outlay of $20,000 is irrelevant, as it is a sunk cost. 
Maintenance costs are irrelevant, as they do not differ between the two 

292	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
alternatives. Focusing on future cash flows that differ among the 
­alternatives, the relevant cost analysis would be as follows:
	
Cash Inflow 
	
(Outflow)
Purchase price of new machine	
$(25,000)
Sale of one-day old machine	
2,000
Production savings over estimated life 
  of new machine (1,000,000 × $.03)	
30,000
Net cost savings if new machine  is purchased	
$7,000
As a result, the new machine should be purchased. Net costs 
savings of $7,000 will be realized.
Time Value of Money
Recall that future, differing cash flows are the only relevant costs for a 
variety of decisions. Because these cash inflows and outflows may occur 
over several future years, however, the time value of money needs to be 
considered. This factor considers that a dollar received today is worth 
more than a dollar received in the future, because interest can be earned 
on the money in the meantime.
Let’s assume you can invest $100 at 8% per year. By the end of 
the first year, your $100 would grow to $100 × 1.08 = $108. By the end 
of the second year, your investment of $108 would grow to $108 × 1.08 
= $116.64 (earning interest on the accumulated interest is known as 
compounding). By the end of the third year, the investment would total 
$116.64 × 1.08 = $126. In general mathematical terms, the future value 
of your investment can be calculated as
F = P(1 + r)n , where 	P = present value
	
F = future value of P
	
r = rate of return
	
n = number of periods

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
293
Substituting the information in the above example, the future 
value (F) of $100 received today (P), assuming that interest of 8% is 
paid and compounded at the end of each year, is
100(1.08)3 = 100 × 1.08 × 1.08 × 1.08 = $126
P is the present value of some amount to be received in the future. 
It is simply the inverse of future value. In this case, the present value 
of $126 received three years from now is $100, assuming the funds can 
be invested in the interim at 8%. Similarly, the general mathematical 
equation to calculate present value is merely the inverse of the future 
value equation: 
P = F/(1 + r)n
As an example, if you could receive $100 two years from now, what 
amount of money would you be indifferent to receiving today, assuming 
that you could invest the money in the meantime at 10%? Substituting 
into the equation, you would get P = $100/(1.10)2 = $82.60. In other 
words, if you received $82.60 today, you could invest this at 10% per year 
and have $100 at the end of two years ($82.60 × 1.10 × 1.10 = $100). You 
should therefore be indifferent between receiving $82.60 now, or $100 
two years from now.
Mathematical tables have been developed to make present value 
calculations easier. (Refer to Appendix A.) The present value of $1, 
compounded annually at 10% for a period of two years, is .826 (see 
bolded cell in Appendix A). Applying this factor to the amount to be 
received in the future ($100) would produce a present value of $100 
× .826 = $82.60, as above.
A somewhat similar process is available to determine the present 
value of a series of equal payments received at the end of each year, for 
a number of years into the future. For instance, if you received $100 per 
year at the end of each year for three years, and could invest this at 8% 
per year, how much money would you have at the end of three years? 
To calculate this, determine what the future value of each $100 amount 
received would be at the end of Year 3 and total these. At the end of 

294	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Year 3, the total of each year’s revenue would grow to $324.64, calculated 
as follows:
Yr. 1: $100 × 1.08 × 1.08 	
= $116.64
Yr. 2: $100 × 1.08 	
=   108.00
Yr. 3: 	
=   100.00
Total future value	
$324.64
There is also a general mathematical formula to determine this:
P = F[1 - (1 + r)-n]/r, where 	 P = amount of each revenue payment
	
F = future value of all revenue payments
	
r = rate of return
	
n = number of periods
Substituting the information from the example above, 
F = 100[(1.08)3 – 1] = $324.64
	
.08
However, this formula does not tell us how much we would require 
if we wanted to receive just one lump sum today, invest this amount for 
three years at 8% per year, and have $324.64 at the end of the third year. 
Similar to the present value of a one-time payment to be received at a 
future date, the present value of a future revenue stream received at the 
end of each year can be determined by a mathematical formula. This 
formula is:
P = F[(1 + r) n – 1]/r, where 	P = present value of all future revenue streams
	
F = future value of each revenue amount
	
r = rate of return
	
n = number of periods
In the example at hand, this formula can determine the lump-sum 
amount one would be indifferent to receiving today rather than ­receiving 

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
295
$100 at the end of each of three years, assuming the money could be 
invested at 8% in the meantime:
P = 100[(1 + .08)3 – 1] = $257.70
	
.08
Proof: $257.70 × 1.08 × 1.08 × 1.08 = $324.64 
Note that the $324.64 amount is the same as the future value 
­calculated above, assuming a revenue stream of $100 received at the end 
of each of three years. As shown in Appendix B, a mathematical table 
can also be used to determine this amount. Referring to the bolded cell 
in Appendix B, the present value of a future revenue stream received at 
the end of each of three years and invested at 8% compounded each 
year is 2.577. $100 × 2.577 = $257.70, the same present value amount 
calculated above.
Time Value of Money and Relevant Costs
The essential relevant cost concepts – future cash flows that differ among 
alternatives – combined with the concept of the time value of money 
are the essential components of discounted cash flow (DCF) analysis. 
This technique enables decision makers to translate future cash flows 
that are projected to occur at different times back to the same point in 
time by using present value techniques, and thus to more accurately 
assess investment alternatives.
Capital budgeting is the process of planning purchases of assets that 
will be used for more than one year. Using the same relevant costing 
concepts discussed previously, future cash inflows and outflows that differ 
among alternatives are evaluated. Based on when these relevant cash 
flows are projected to occur, they are translated back to present values, 
using the techniques discussed above.
Let’s assume you are the dean of the Faculty of Business. You are 
trying to determine whether to replace equipment in a multimedia class-
room. The new equipment will cost $24,000. This new equipment, 
however, should require less maintenance time and expenditures, saving 
approximately $6,000 per year over the four-year estimated life of the 
new equipment. The old equipment was purchased five years ago for 
$100,000. You estimate that this equipment can be sold for $8,000, but 

296	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
that it will likely take one year to find a buyer. Assume that you will have 
to borrow money from the university’s central revenue fund, at 10% 
annual interest, to finance this possible capital purchase.
To evaluate this decision, first calculate the relevant costs. Ignore 
the time value of money concepts for now. Note that the $100,000 origi-
nal purchase price of the old equipment is irrelevant to this decision; it 
is a sunk cost. The relevant cash inflows (outflows) are as follows:
Purchase price of new equipment	
$(24,000)
Maintenance savings over life of new equipment (4 × $6,000)	
 24,000
Sale of old equipment	
8,000
Net cost savings	
$8,000
Based on this analysis, the new equipment should be purchased. 
To account for the differing time frame in which cash inflows and out-
flows will occur, however, they need to be discounted back to the present, 
using discounted cash flow analysis as follows:
Cost of purchasing new equipment today ($24,000 × 1)	
$(24,000)
Maintenance savings over life of new equipment  
  ($6,000 × 3.170 – see app. B) 	
19,020
Sale of old equipment ($8,000 × .909 – see app. A)	
7,272
Discounted net cost savings	
$2,292
Note that the net cost savings, using discounted cash flow analysis, 
is still positive. This indicates that the new equipment should be pur-
chased, all other things being equal. The positive cash flow, however, is 
now much lower than when cash flows are not discounted back to the 
present. Cash inflows related to the maintenance savings and the sale 
of the old equipment are worth less in present value terms because they 
are not realized until some time in the future.
Now assume that the university requires all its centrally-funded 
projects to earn a return of 20% per year. Recalculate the cash flows.

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
297
Cost of purchasing new equipment today ($24,000 × 1)	
$(24,000)
Maintenance savings over life of new equipment 
  ($6,000 × 2.589 – see app. B) 	
15,534
Sale of old equipment ($8,000 × .833 – see app. A)	
6,664
Discounted net cost	
$(1,802)
The discount applied to future cash inflows is much higher if a 
higher rate of return is required. This calculation reduces the present 
value of the future cash flows to amounts that are less than the purchase 
price of the new equipment today. In this case, the equipment should 
not be replaced, since the discounted net cost is $1,802.
Activity-based Costing
Recall the earlier example about whether to produce six multimedia 
courses. In this analysis, the fixed online delivery system and marketing 
costs were irrelevant to the decision at hand because they did not differ 
between the alternatives. There are instances, however, where all costs 
need to be identified and allocated on some rational basis: to determine 
what price should be charged for a product or service. For instance, time-
driven, activity-based costing (TDABC) is a means to accomplish this; it esti-
mates the cost of all resources needed to produce a product or service.
Let’s examine the case of a multimedia unit at a community 
college. The unit must break even on an annual basis; revenues must 
cover all costs incurred. The unit staff consists of a manager, a program-
mer, and an administrative assistant. The unit rents computers and space 
in a privately owned building near the campus. It is also responsible for 
purchasing liability insurance against unforeseen legal actions, and for 
paying all utilities. The estimated annual cash outlays are as follows:
Programmer salary	
$60,000
Manager salary	
80,000
Administrative assistant salary	
40,000
Office supplies	
3,000
Rent	
12,000
Utilities	
8,000
Liability insurance	
2,000

298	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Various academic units at the college and, at times, private firms, 
contract with your multimedia unit to produce online course material. 
You need to determine the amount you should charge for each project 
to ensure that your unit’s costs do not exceed revenues. To accomplish 
this, the following steps should to be taken.
1.	 Identify the direct costs of producing multimedia courses, but only 
to the point where this exercise is worth the time and effort 
involved. In the example above, the programmer’s time would 
likely be a direct cost, as this could be identified with the ­production 
of a specific online course (e.g., if time sheets are maintained).
2.	 Combine the remaining (indirect) costs into various “cost pools.” 
Each cost pool should consist of indirect costs that are incurred by 
the same general sort of activity. For example, the manager’s and 
administrative assistant’s salaries could be grouped together with 
office supplies, as these relate to general day-to-day activities of the 
unit. Call this the Administrative cost pool. Utilities and rent could 
be lumped into another cost pool, as these relate to the costs of 
maintaining the physical premises, without regard to the level of 
course production activity. Call this the Building cost pool. Liability 
insurance (the Insurance cost pool) could be a third cost pool, 
assuming that legal action is equally possible for any project.
3.	 Identify a basis for cost allocation that has some relationship to 
the incurrence of costs for each indirect cost pool. For example, 
the manager’s and administrative assistant’s salaries, as well as 
office supplies, could be allocated on the basis of the manager’s 
estimated hours incurred on a project. Building costs could be 
allocated based on the estimated number of working days that a 
project is active. Liability insurance could be allocated based on 
the number of expected projects in a year.
4.	 Calculate an appropriate hourly rate for each type of cost. To do 
this, it is important to choose a realistic allocation base, not an 
ideal one. For instance, although ideally staff might work 1,920 
hours per year [(52 weeks-4 weeks holidays) × 8 hrs/day], their 
actual hours worked will be less than this, due to sickness, breaks, 
socializing, and training time. A more realistic estimate might be 
80% of 1,920 hours, or 1,536 hours per year. On this basis, the 
allocation of the programmer’s $60,000 salary would amount to 
($60,000/1,536 hours) = $39 per hour. Using the same estimate 
of hours per year, the first indirect cost pool (Administration) 
application rate could also be calculated, as follows:

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
299
Cost
Allocation 
Base
Allocation 
Amount
Application 
Rate
Manager salary
$80,000
Admin. Assistant  
  salary
40,000
Office supplies
3,000
Total
$123,000
Mgr.hours/yr
1,536 hrs.
$80/hr.
Table 7. Calculation of Application Rate Cost, Pool 1 – Administration
Let’s assume that an estimated 40 projects will be completed in 
the upcoming year and that there are 250 business days per year. The 
second type of indirect costs (Building) can be allocated as follows:
Cost
Allocation 
Base
Allocation 
Amount
Application 
Rate
Rent
$12,000
Utilities
8,000
Total
$20,000
Project-days/yr 
(40 × 250 days)
10,000
$2/day
Table 8. Calculation of Application Rate Cost, Pool 2 – Building
The third type of indirect costs (Liability Insurance) can be allocated 
across the estimated number of projects to be completed, as follows:
Cost
Allocation 
Base
Allocation 
Amount
Application 
Rate
Insurance
$2,000
Projects/yr
40
$50/project
Table 9. Calculation of Application Rate Cost, Pool 3 – Liability 
­Insurance
To provide an estimated cost for the project, these rates can now 
be combined, as applicable, with estimates of the programmer’s and 
manager’s time, the number of days the project will be active, and a 
fixed amount to cover liability insurance ($50 per project). Assume that 
Project 1 is estimated to take 280 hours of the programmer’s time and 
60 hours of the manager’s time, and should be completed over a period 
of 150 days. The quoted price would be:

300	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Programmer’s time (280 hours × $39)	
$10,920
Administration (60 hours × $80)	
4,800
Building (150 days × $2)	
300
Insurance	
50
Quoted price	
$16,070
Let’s assume that the terms are accepted and the project proceeds. 
In the end, it turns out that Project 1 actually took 300 hours of program-
mer time to complete, over a period of 200 days. The manager’s time 
on this project amounted to 50 hours. The net revenue on this project 
would be calculated as follows:
Revenue, as quoted
$16,070
Less actual costs
  Programmer
300 hrs. × $39
11,700
  Administration
50 hrs. × $80
4,000
  Building 
200 days × $2
400
  Insurance
50
    Total costs
16,150
Net loss, Project 1
$(80)
Table 10. Calculation of Net Loss – Project 1
At this point, if the loss of $80 is deemed significant, the manager 
would compare the actual allocated costs to the original estimated costs 
to determine if inaccurate estimates were used. If warranted, rates for 
estimating total costs would then be adjusted. Also, if additional types 
of fixed costs are incurred, new cost pools and application rates can be 
created and the estimated cost of the new activity included in future 
price quotations.
At the end of a reporting period (let’s assume one year for this 
example), total costs for all projects and for each cost pool can be cal-
culated and compared to the actual costs incurred for the year in each 
category. This process will indicate further adjustments that may be 
needed to estimate future costs more accurately.
Assume that 35 projects were actually completed during the year, 
and that the financial results for the year’s activities are as follows:

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
301
Project 1 
(see above)
Projects 
2 through 35 
(summarized)
Total Costs 
Allocated
Total 
Actually 
Incurred
(Under)- 
Over- 
Allocated
Revenue
$16,070
$182,000
N/A
N/A
N/A
Less costs
  Programmer
11,700
50,000
$61,700
58,000
$3,700
(a)
  Administration
4,000
115,000
119,000
125,000
(6,000)
(b)
  Building
400
18,000
18,400
21,000
(2,600)
(c)
  Insurance
50
1,700
1,750
2,000
(250)
(d)
    Total costs
16,150
184,700
$200,850
$206,000
$(5,150)
Net revenue (loss)
$(80)
$(2,700)
N/A
N/A
N/A
Table 11. Calculation of Net Revenue – All Projects

302	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Analyzing this information indicates the following:
a.	 More of the programmer’s time was assigned than actually 
incurred, resulting in a $3,700 over-application of this cost to all 
projects. Two possible causes should be investigated to inform 
future pricing decisions:
i.	 The salary actually paid may be less than the original estimate. 
This appears to be the case, as the programmer’s salary was 
estimated at $60,000 at the start of the year, but actually only 
amounted to $58,000.
ii.	In total, the actual hours billed to individual projects may add 
up to more than the original estimate of 1,536 hours.
b.	 Less of the Administration cost pool was allocated to the year’s 
projects than actually incurred, resulting in a $6,000 under-
­application of this cost pool. This may have occurred for the 
­following reasons:
i.	 Salaries actually paid to the manager and administrative 
­assistant, or actual office supplies costs may have exceeded 
estimates.
ii.	Fewer manager’s hours may have been charged to individual 
projects than estimated.
c.	 Less of the Building cost pool wasallocated than incurred, result-
ing in a $2,600 under-application. Part of the cause is the fact that 
fewer projects werecompleted than originally estimated (35 vs. 
40). There are other possible causes:
i.	 Actual costs may have exceeded original estimates. This appears 
to be the case. Estimated building costs at the start of the year 
were $20,000. Actual costs totalled $21,000.
ii.	The average number of days to complete each project may have 
been less than the original estimate of 250 days.
d.	 Less of the professional liability insurance costs wereallocated 
than incurred. Since the actual costs incurred were the same as 
originally estimated ($2,000), the cause of this under-application 
is solely the result of fewer projects being completed than ­originally 
estimated.
All of these possible explanations should be investigated to deter-
mine if the estimated application rates for each type of cost are reason-
able. If not, appropriate adjustments should be made to future estimates. 
Also, notice that initial estimates do not need to be extremely accurate. 
If they are grossly in error, the results will be obvious over time and 
adjustments can be made. Overall, the use of TDABC can provide more 

Making Relevant Financial Decisions	
303
accurate information about the costs and underlying efficiency of value-
creating processes.
Conclusion
Decision-makers in any organization need to base financial decisions on 
relevant costs. These include only the estimates of future cash flows that 
differ among alternatives. When cash flows from investment decisions 
will occur over a longer period of time, techniques should also be used 
to equate these amounts back to their present values. Finally, time-driven 
activity-based costing is a useful and relatively powerful method to inform 
pricing decisions. With increased interest in online learning and greater 
reliance on revenue-generating activities, all of the concepts discussed 
in this chapter are useful means to analyze the financial decisions that 
all institutions of higher learning face.
APPENDIX A
Present Value of $1 
P = F/(1 + r)
Periods
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
Periods
  1
0.980
0.962
0.943
0.926
0.909
0.893
0.877
0.862
0.847
0.833
  1
  2
0.961
0.925
0.890
0.857
0.826
0.797
0.769
0.743
0.718
0.694
  2
  3
0.942
0.889
0.840
0.794
0.751
0.712
0.675
0.641
0.609
0.579
  3
  4
0.924
0.855
0.792
0.735
0.683
0.636
0.592
0.552
0.516
0.482
  4
  5
0.906
0.822
0.747
0.681
0.621
0.567
0.519
0.476
0.437
0.402
  5
  6
0.888
0.790
0.705
0.630
0.564
0.507
0.456
0.410
0.370
0.335
  6
  7
0.871
0.760
0.665
0.583
0.513
0.452
0.400
0.354
0.314
0.279
  7
  8
0.853
0.731
0.627
0.540
0.467
0.404
0.351
0.305
0.266
0.233
  8
  9
0.837
0.703
0.592
0.500
0.424
0.361
0.308
0.263
0.225
0.194
  9
10
0.820
0.676
0.558
0.463
0.386
0.322
0.270
0.227
0.191
0.162
10

304	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
APPENDIX B
Present Value of a Future Revenue Stream of $1 
P = F[1 - (1 + r)-n]/r
Periods
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
Periods
  1
0.980
0.962
0.943
0.926
0.909
0.893
0.877
0.862
0.847
0.833
  1
  2
1.942
1.886
1.833
1.783
1.736
1.690
1.647
1.605
1.566
1.528
  2
  3
2.884
2.775
2.673
2.577
2.487
2.402
2.322
2.246
2.174
2.106
  3
  4
3.808
3.630
3.465
3.312
3.170
3.037
2.914
2.798
2.690
2.589
  4
  5
4.713
4.452
4.212
3.993
3.791
3.605
3.433
3.274
3.127
2.991
  5
  6
5.601
5.242
4.917
4.623
4.355
4.111
3.889
3.685
3.498
3.326
  6
  7
6.472
6.002
5.582
5.206
4.868
4.564
4.288
4.039
3.812
3.605
  7
  8
7.325
6.733
6.210
5.747
5.335
4.968
4.639
4.344
4.078
3.837
  8
  9
8.162
7.435
6.802
6.247
5.759
5.328
4.946
4.607
4.303
4.031
  9
10
8.983
8.111
7.360
6.710
6.145
5.650
5.216
4.833
4.494
4.192
10
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
David Annand, Ed.D., M.B.A., C.A., is the Director of the School of 
Business at Athabasca University. His research interests include the 
­educational applications of computer-based instruction and computer-
mediated communications to distance learning, and the effects of online 
learning on the organization of distance-based universities.

Chapter 13
The Quality Dilemma  
in Online Education Revisited
Nancy K. Parker
Athabasca University 
Introduction
With the proliferation of online learning providers, and the challenges 
presented by the distance education sector to state regulators and accred-
iting bodies, it is not surprising that “buyer beware” is the watchword for 
students, institutions, and public agencies alike. In the current environ-
ment, organizations must demonstrate the quality of their services in 
ways that are intelligible to potential students and their employers; faculty 
and staff; regulators; and government agencies. The admirable attempts 
to define quality standards and best practices for online education, 
however, have done little to assuage the scepticism of representatives in 
the academy who are more accustomed to face-to-face delivery, directed 
to bounded communities. Fully addressing the roots of such scepticism 
is beyond the scope of this paper; however, its presence informs much 
of the technical discussion around quality assurance frameworks, in 
higher education in general, and in online delivery in particular.

306	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Purveyors of online learning programs may be inclined to ­attribute 
a lack of broad acceptance among their colleagues to the paradigm shift 
that higher education has been undergoing in the past 15 years. In many 
cases, however, it must be admitted that the potential of electronic deliv-
ery modes has not been fully realized in the implementation of online 
courses. Some have suggested that these shortcomings are the result of 
trying to replicate the classroom environment, instead of maximizing 
the new configurations of knowing and community formation possible 
in an interactive online environment (Schank, cited in Caudron, 2001). 
Others have traced some of the potentials and limitations of online 
education to issues resident in the founding principles of distance 
­education (Larreamendy-Joerns & Leinhart, 2006). 
Finding appropriate comparators for the efficacy of any particular 
mode of delivery is difficult when the broader questions of quality assur-
ance in higher education are far from settled. The spectrum ranges from 
detailed critiques of the regulatory burdens and dubious outcomes of 
quality assurance audits in Australia (Reid, 2005) and England (Harvey, 
2005) on one end, to the accreditation debates spawned by the Spellings 
Commission in the United States on the other (Zemsky, 2007). An exami-
nation of definitional issues points to a long-standing conflict in values 
between business modelling and public services. It is important to 
acknowledge these tensions fully before turning to the more technical, 
but admittedly value-laden, exercise of reviewing the standards proposed 
by different quality assurance agencies.
After a discussion of the contexts of quality assurance activities in 
higher education in general, and of the competing paradigms high-
lighted by online learning, this chapter examines quality standards that 
have been proposed for the delivery of online instruction in four differ-
ent jurisdictions. The full range of state licensing, voluntary accreditation, 
and market-driven seals of approval reveals tensions between externally 
driven compliance and internally driven improvements. Although the 
regulatory frameworks for quality assurance vary dramatically in Australia, 
England, Canada, and the United States, there is still enough common 
ground to establish some general characteristics for a scholarly approach 
to online teaching and learning. At a basic level, the characteristics of 
quality educational delivery demonstrated in these frameworks include 
providing clear statements of educational goals; sustaining the institu-
tional commitment to support learners; and engaging in a collaborative 
process of discovery; which contributes to improving the ­teaching and 
learning environment.

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
307
Another area of commonality is the fact that, while self-review can 
be a key component for any of the frameworks, to a large degree they 
are being driven by external concerns. Changes in the sources and levels 
of funding, the rise of an international market, and the ever-present 
concern over “rogue operators” have challenged higher education insti-
tutions and their state regulators alike. These issues, in turn, have 
spawned an international dialogue around accreditation processes and 
guidelines for the transnational – or cross-border – delivery of higher 
education made viable through web-based technologies (UNESCO/
OECD, 2005). While the articulation of standards may propose base 
levels of operational integrity, the rhetoric of most regulatory bodies and 
accrediting agencies suggests much more than minimal compliance.
On a wider level, each of the projects seeking to establish quality 
standards for online education appears to aim at inculcating a set of 
values that prizes management by measurement. A confluence of what 
might be considered “best practices” is mixed in with suggestions for 
regulatory minimums in a number of these statements of standards. In 
the past decade, the process of measurement has gained greater com-
plexity, with the various iterations of e-learning benchmarking projects 
undertaken in New Zealand (Marshall, 2006), Australia (Bridgland & 
Goodacre, 2005), and England (Morrison, Mayes & Gule, 2006). A con-
sistent area of contention, the degree to which quality assurance activities 
can or should be targeted to outcomes, as opposed to internal processes, 
is addressed in a separate section. Recognizing that the terms quality and 
online education are burdened with assumptions enough to create their 
own problematic is a necessary prelude to what follows.
Definitional Issues
The greatest challenge for trying to define quality in any product or 
service is that quality remains a relative experience, realized in large 
part through an individual’s level of expectation. Since quality necessarily 
rests in the eye of the beholder, at first glance, systems developed around 
the concept must necessarily be exercises in subjectivity. In higher edu-
cation, quality is a construct 
relative to the unique perspectives and interpretations of different 
stakeholder groups (students, alumni, faculty, administrators, 
parents, oversight boards, employers, state legislatures, local 

308	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­governing bodies, accrediting associations, transfer institutions, 
and the general public). (Cleary, 2001, p. 20)
It follows, therefore, that the effectiveness of any quality improve-
ment activities will be as much a function of the ability to foster ­agreement 
around common goals as of any substantive input or process adjustments 
attempted by an institution. Fostering agreement, however, is much more 
difficult when the term quality is burdened with the legacy of failed 
management fads.
In many circles, quality is understood as shorthand for Total 
Quality Management (TQM) or its close cousin, Continuous Quality 
Improvement (CQI). Some may believe that these fads peaked and 
retreated in the last century (Birnbaum, 2001). However, recent model-
ing (Widrick, Mergen & Grant, 2002), and examples of the pursuit, by 
individual institutions, of the Malcolm Baldridge Awards (Spahn, 2000) 
or ISO9000 recognition suggest that TQM still has a foothold in higher 
education, in spite of the problems posed by the fact that its language 
carries a corporate flavour (Banta & Associates, 2002). The Sloan 
Consortium “Quality Framework” explicitly references CQI in its aims 
to “establish benchmarks and standards for quality” for asynchronous 
learning networks (Moore, 2005. p.1). The pressure to apply manage-
ment techniques to higher education came from a perceived crisis in 
confidence with post-secondary systems, and from the growth of ­state-
sponsored accountability systems.
For supporters, it “has long been understood in organizations 
that when you want to improve something, you first must measure it” 
(Widrick, Mergen, & Grant, 2002, p. 130). But measurement systems are 
about much more than the technical specifications of various indicators 
– they are about control. The first iteration of TQM/CGI provoked a 
debate about its social as well as technical implications, and demon-
strated the “disconnect between the philosophy of the management 
process and the purposes of the institution[s] for which it was being 
proposed” (Birnbaum, 2001, p.107). The engineering (or re-­engineering) 
of systems designed to guarantee that manufacturing processes would 
meet technical specifications seems to imply a uniformity that may not 
be possible, or even desirable, in the dynamic and heterogeneous envi-
ronment of higher education. The International Standards Organization 
(ISO) makes clear the central principle of the pursuit of quality: to 
establish processes that will maximize service to customers. To many 

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
309
within the academy, the “learner as consumer/information as ­commodity” 
world presupposed by the business model of higher education remains 
antithetical to independent scholarship in pursuit of the advancement 
of knowledge (Bok, 2003).
Traditionally, universities achieved quality in intellectual endeav-
ours through the professionalism of academics, the principles of scholar-
ship, and the rigours of peer review; they gained standing in society by 
communicating those standards to political and social elites. More 
recently, massification, diversity, and cuts to funding, along with a wider 
political movement to demonstrate efficiency and responsiveness, have 
spawned different conceptions of accountability (Brennan & Shah, 
2000). The attempt to lift the meaning of quality education to something 
beyond short-term fiscal efficiencies and taxpayer benefits is a matter of 
trying to regain some of the ground lost in previous decades. It is also 
an encounter with what has been represented as a paradigm shift in 
higher education, highlighted by the advent of online education.
It must also be admitted at the outset that, with the shift to mobile 
wireless technologies, “online” education may well appear to be out-
moded shorthand for computer or web-enabled activities. The term has 
appeal, however, since it carries the sense of a linked community of 
learners. It still resonates of bounded communities with the possibilities 
of transformative experiences, rather than the sporadic or strictly utili-
tarian viewing of information on screens. It has been suggested that 
online learning is best conceptualized as “an environment that inte-
grates collaboration, communication, and engaging content with spe-
cific group and independent learning activities and tasks” (Sims, Dobbs, 
& Hand, 2002, p. 138). More particularly, the ability of students to 
engage in “asynchronous interactive learning activities” has been 
described as the “signature characteristic of this technology” (Phipps 
& Mertisotis, 2000, p. 6). The importance of the flexibility inherent in 
asynchronous activities challenges the assumption that emulating the 
classroom constitutes best practice in online teaching and learning 
environments. However, the degree to which technology has driven, or 
simply enabled, the paradigm shift in higher education, is debatable. 
Whether their adherents have overstated the changes that have taken 
place as a result of web-enabled learning technologies is another 
­question worthy of consideration.

310	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Paradigm Shift
Although there had been many examples of applications of computer 
technology in classrooms for at least a decade before 1995, Michael 
Dolence and Donald Norris have been credited with issuing a wake-up 
call for higher education administrators. In Transforming Higher Education, 
Dolence and Norris (1995) purport to offer ways for colleges and uni-
versities to survive the transition from the Industrial Age to the Age of 
Information. Even though their vision for the future has not been real-
ized on a wide scale, many of the conceptual juxtapositions they offer 
have gained currency in higher education. These juxtapositions include 
a shift from episodic access to clusters of instructional resources, to 
integrated perpetual learning, with a separation of teaching and certi-
fication of mastery, and a re-conceptualized role for faculty – from 
deliverers of content to mentors and facilitators of learning. The most 
pervasive of these changes is the shift from a provider focus to a learner 
focus, with its suggestions for mass customization through individualized 
learning systems.
Elaborations on this theme indicate that the capabilities of the 
Internet have overturned “the traditional roles of the college or ­university 
as the leading (1) research source and knowledge creator, (2) archivist 
and gateway to knowledge, (3) disseminator of advanced knowledge, and 
(4) referee and evaluator of truth” (Quinn, 2001, p. 32). If the produc-
tion and dissemination of knowledge are no longer the restricted purview 
of higher education, the roles of post-secondary institutions in the world-
wide network are increasingly vulnerable. Students and faculty alike need 
to be more open and to promote capacities to analyze, interrelate, and 
communicate about facts gleaned from network-based knowledge.
The traditional quality measures associated with accreditation or 
state-administered quality assurance frameworks do not match this new 
climate of teaching and learning. One of the most common measures, 
“seat time” does not translate to an online or even a blended environ-
ment. Even when adapted to an online environment, other common 
measures rely on inputs (averages of entering students; number of stu-
dents; qualifications of instructors; systems development) or outputs 
(numbers completing courses; satisfaction ratings by students and 
alumni; revenue generated from tuition, intellectual property, or com-
mercial partnerships), but lack in measures to address the fundamental 
integrity of the online learning environment.

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
311
Wallace Pond (2002) summarizes some of the old and new para-
digms for accreditation and quality assurance as follows. The old 
­paradigm measures could be characterized as teacher-institution-centred, 
centralized, hegemonistic, “one-size-fits-all,” closed “us versus them,” 
quantitative, prescriptive, time-as-constant with learning-as-variable, 
teacher-credentialed, consolidated experience, regional/national, static, 
single-delivery mode, process, infrastructure. In contrast, the new para-
digm measures can be seen as learner-centred, local, tailored, open, 
collaborative, respectful, qualitative, flexible, learning-as-constant with 
time-as-variable, teacher-skilled, aggregated experience, international/
global, dynamic, distributed-delivery model, outcomes, services (Pond, 
2002). The degree to which these measures might apply is discussed the 
next section, but they do not address some of the other questions gener-
ated by the university’s entry into online course delivery.
The first questions must ask the degree to which online learning 
environments have delivered, or can deliver on, their promises. The 
greater access afforded through web-based delivery systems has been 
one of the key advantages cited by observers of the technological trans-
formation in higher education. Whether depicted as an advantage in 
developing greater economies of scale for delivery systems or in amelio-
rating social inequalities, broader access has been lauded as a key feature 
of the new paradigm. Electronic learning systems, however, are not always 
as billed. Academic leaders doubt the faculty’s acceptance of the legiti-
macy of online education (Allen & Seaman, 2006). Potential employers 
also remain doubtful (Adams & DeFleur, 2006). Despite student-focused 
rhetoric, the administrative momentum for distance delivery can over-
whelm the voices of mature students who may not be as confident with 
technologies, and of younger students with expressed preferences for 
face-to-face instructional contact (Arthur, Beecher, Elliot, & Newman, 
2006). Some faculty doubt that the necessary social integration, particu-
larly needed to improve the success of first-generation students, can be 
provided in a distributed environment (Allen, 2006). Another caution 
rests in the comparative completion rates between online and classroom 
delivery. If intended economic and social transformations are to be real-
ized, access must be examined at more than just the point of entry.
The promise that economies of scale will make education more 
affordable is perhaps even less persuasive to most academics. That “pro-
prietary institutions are likely to enter the market by contracting with 
the best professors to provide video-based courses with exclusive rights 

312	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
to their distribution and use” was a vision of higher education in the 
1990s (Hooker, 1997, p. 8). Obviously, the proponents of such models 
have missed the significance of interactive technologies. Providing more 
efficient delivery of “lectures by famous faculty” would recreate in cyber-
space the “world of the passive listener and single speaker that has 
marked much of what passes for higher education” (Lairson, 1999, 
p. 188). Despite the growing popularity of pod-casting on campuses, 
making the doubtful system of mass lectures more efficient does not 
appear to be much of an advancement over the correspondence school’s 
traditional course-in-a-box. Another tension emanates from the fact that 
the bulk of what is delivered in the online environment consists of dis-
crete training modules directed to particular job skills or competencies. 
While there seems to be slippage between what is articulated in the realm 
of learning outcomes (the skills we expect graduates to demonstrate) 
and our expectations around the values associated with the liberal arts, 
it is fair to say that higher education aims should be broader than the 
goals of the corporate training sector.
Critics such as David Noble (2001) present almost apocalyptic 
views on the incursion of educational technologies into the classroom. 
The Web’s “dark side” is depicted as the “rapidly growing trend of uni-
versity corporatism” and the exploitation of knowledge workers (Kompf, 
2001). Challenges from the for-profit sector, the influence of corporate 
training agendas, and “the ‘rush to serve’ different clienteles”are 
described as jeopardizing the position of the post-secondary sector as 
the “source of objective analysis of the society in which it exists” (Crow, 
2000, p. 2). Acting as the conscience of civil society speaks to a much 
broader purpose than meeting the immediate training needs of corpora-
tions. If this ideal is taken seriously, then one should expect that faculty 
would lead the debate from a perspective broader than their own 
­protectionist instincts.
An alternative vision of democratic ideals in the digital age would 
have education enabling “people to learn about, with, and beyond tech-
nology” to open the “doors of economic, educational, and personal 
empowerment” (Milliron & Miles, 2000, p. 61). However, the reconcep-
tualization of higher education should be done by – not to – the academy. 
Establishing the terms through which to assess online education should 
not be left either to the marketplace or to self-perpetuating bureaucracies. 
Taking back some of the momentum will be a challenge, since the articu-
lation of regulator standards and consumer-focused best practices are 
already well underway. Attempts to transform codes of practice into 

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
313
­benchmarking tools, which may provide frameworks more compatible to 
academic ­traditions of self-reflection and collegial review, have inherited 
many ­elements from these early efforts but are, as yet, largely unproven.
Standards from Four Jurisdictions
The formulation of quality assurance systems for online education, while 
most frequently regulated at a regional or national level, has in recent 
years been driven by international developments. The global reach of 
the Internet and the lack of ways to regulate transnational commercial 
activities allow fraudulent operators to spring up. One possible approach 
is to promote consumer education through online directories or con-
sortiums. Another possibility is free-lance course reviews from former 
students, similar to the book reviews found on the sites of online book-
sellers such as Amazon.com (Carnevale, 2000). This possibility was echoed 
in the findings of the symposium sponsored by the Pew Charitable Trust, 
which observed deficits in consumer-focused information, especially at 
the course level (Twigg, 2001). Student dialogues in facebook.com and the 
growth of sites like ratemyprofessor.com, along with the development of 
“viral marketing” campaigns, all point to the demand for information. 
Not surprisingly, the appetite is not large for allowing the marketplace 
to determine outcomes in a wide-open, for-profit model. Simply stated, 
it does not seem either ethical or efficient to leave students to bear the 
full risks for product testing various online-education ventures.
In the past two decades, there has been a marked increase in the 
size and influence of the cadre of higher-education, quality-assurance 
technologists working directly for government or in semi-autonomous 
agencies. Various quality assurance agencies are engaging in international 
discussions aimed toward at least equitable, if not reciprocal, recogni-
tion of accreditation processes. For example, the potential of harmo-
nizing systems of higher education in Europe under the Bologna 
Declaration (European Ministers of Education, 1999) provided impetus 
for commission-supported projects sponsored by the European Quality 
Observatory (see http://www.eqo.info) and its parent organization, the 
European Foundation for Quality in e-Learning (EFQUEL). These proj-
ects include advocating for a federated approach to establish a European 
Quality Mark, to address an obvious “lack of credibility” with potential 
consumers of e-learning (EFQUEL, 2007, p.1). The UNESCO/OECD 
joint statement on cross-border delivery is another example of the 

314	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­intentions for international cooperation that would reduce the potential 
for abuses left open by regulatory gaps (UNESCO/OECD, 2005). Even 
with these international aspirations, however, the regulation of higher 
education, like the selection processes of most potential students, is a 
much more localized matter.
Responses from national and local quality assurance interests have 
varied. Some of the differences rest in the degree to which state-­sponsored 
quality-auditing procedures have become entrenched in the past decade; 
others reflect the suspicions or traditions associated with distance educa-
tion in general. The elaborate state licensing approach has been depicted 
as excessive and a sign of the erosion of the autonomy of higher educa-
tion. To some, these measures demonstrate the drive to “harness the 
universities to perceived economic priorities” (Greatrix, 2001, p.12). In 
that light, it is interesting that the criteria of the state licensing agency 
have largely subsumed standards first developed for a peer review model 
of accreditation. In other locales, it appears that efforts have been made 
to use quality assurance standards to inform “buyer’s guides.”
The legislative and accountability frameworks for universities in 
Australia are confounded by the federal governance structure and the 
changes in funding sources. Under the Australian constitution, education 
is a matter within the jurisdiction of the states/territories, but the uni-
versities established through their own state’s enabling legislation are 
directly funded by the Commonwealth (DEST, 2002a, p.5). The split in 
legislative authority and oversight, and the increase in non-governmental 
sources of revenues provided an impetus for the joint Ministerial Council 
on Education, Employment, Training and Youth Affairs to endorse 
­protocols for state approval processes and to establish the Australian 
Universities Quality Agency, with the power to audit universities over a 
five-year cycle, using institutional self-assessment and visits from expert 
panels. The rationale for the development of the national system was 
explicitly framed in terms of competitive challenges, domestic and inter-
national, and of policies that have encouraged the universities to “align 
themselves more closely with industry needs” (DETYA, 2000, p.1). Under 
the revised regime, creditable quality assurance systems, providing evi-
dence of the quality of service and skills of graduates, were explicitly 
intended to make the universities more attractive to business investors. 
The systems include national qualification frameworks to communicate 
expected standards for each level of post-secondary achievement.
The use of the term “university” in Australia is restricted by state 
or territorial legislation, and in order to be “self-accrediting,” universities 

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
315
must demonstrate that they have appropriate quality assurance proce-
dures in place. Within this framework, “universities are expected to 
engage in a pro-active, rigorous and ongoing process of planning and 
self-assessment which will enable them to ensure the quality outcomes 
expected by their students and the wider community” (DETYA, 2000, 
p.17). The Australian government policy framework has been presented 
as a marketing tool to address the advantages that global competitors 
enjoy by having “centralised, separate, and highly visible” bodies respon-
sible for quality assurance (Vidovich, 2001, p. 258). Yet only two years 
after the Australian Universities Quality Agency was established, a more 
broadly framed review of the higher education system was initiated. 
Concerns expressed about the quality assurance system included “too 
much emphasis on institutional quality assurance and not enough on 
learning outcomes,” and deficits in both the presentation and form of 
data (DEST, 2002b, p. ix-x). Concerns raised about e-learning initiatives 
included the introduction of a new range of costs, along with what appear 
to be the standard questions of “equity of access, cost-effectiveness, the 
quality of courses, the impact on learning outcomes and the impact on 
academic work” (DEST 2002b, p. 6). The results of these consultations 
and the intentions to simultaneously increase diversity in the range of 
recognized providers and improve the clarity and effectiveness of 
­standards have met with mixed reviews (King, 2006; Nunan, 2005). 
The selected examples of quality assurance frameworks from the 
United Kingdom centre on open and distance learning, with e-learning 
issues as acknowledged variables within a spectrum of delivery mecha-
nisms. Three different external approaches to assessing the offerings 
by individual institutions include licensing procedures under the aus-
pices of a government agency, a voluntary accreditation association, 
and a scheme for certification through quality marks. Again, much of 
the drive to enhance quality assurance schemes has been presented in 
the context of potential regional and global competition. Each of these 
examples also demonstrate ongoing tensions between external regula-
tory approaches and internal aspirations for improvement. It should 
be noted that the full network of subject-based auditing includes bench-
mark information linked to the national frameworks for higher 
­education qualifications.
It has been suggested that the Quality Assurance Framework in 
the United Kingdom is not just comprehensive; it is “the most complex 
anywhere in the world” (Brown, 2000, p.335). The Quality Assurance 
Agency for Higher Education (QAA) was incorporated in 1997, with the 

316	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
aim of reducing some of the reporting burdens created by a ­combination 
of external assessments by funding agencies and quality assurance pro-
cesses driven by peer review. Its mission is to “promote public confidence 
that the quality of provision and standards of awards in higher education 
are being safeguarded and enhanced” (QAA, 2000, p.1). While the 
purpose of reviews has remained the same, the 2004 revision of the 
handbook describes the features of academic review as 
•	a focus on the students’ learning experience;
•	peer review;
•	flexibility of process to minimise disruption to the college;
•	a process conducted in an atmosphere of mutual trust; the review-
ers do not normally expect to find areas for improvement that 
the college has not identified in the self-evaluation;
•	an emphasis on the maintenance and enhancement of academic 
standards and the engagement with the academic infrastructure;
•	use of self-evaluation as the key document; this should have a 
reflective and evaluative focus; 
•	an onus on the college to provide all relevant information; any 
material identified in the self-evaluation should be readily avail-
able to reviewers; and 
•	evidence-based judgements. (QAA, 2004b, p. 3)
While the less proscriptive tone of these statements would seem 
to signal more recognition for the expertise of academic institutions, it 
may not appease the vocal critiques of the “audit culture” (Shore & 
Wright, 2000).
Initiated in 1998 through 2001 with revisions starting in 2004, 
the QAA also developed Codes of Practice for ten areas: post-graduate 
research programs; collaborative provision and flexible and distributed 
learning (including e-learning); students with disabilities; external exam-
ining; assessment of students; program approval, monitoring and review; 
career education, information and guidance; placement learning; 
recruitment; and admissions (QAA, n.d.a). The first iteration of the 
guidelines for distance learning included five system design elements, 
six elements for academic standards, program design and approval, 
three on the management of delivery, one on student development and 
support, three on student communication and representation, and five 
on student assessment. The main thrust of the original guidelines for 
distance learning was the integration between distance delivery and the 
general quality standards for teaching and learning activities expressed 
in the other codes of practice. The 2004 revision to the code of practice 

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
317
encompasses what were deemed to be good practices for a wide ­variation 
of delivery options which in “general do not require the student to 
attend particular classes or events at particular times and particular 
locations (QAA, 2004a, p. 3).
The QAA distance learning guidelines reference the work of the 
voluntary accreditation association in the United Kingdom’s distance 
education sector, citing the Open and Distance Learning Quality Council 
(ODLQC) standards. The ODLQC (2005) accreditation standards, first 
established in 1999, revised in 2000, and again in 2005, are organized 
in six sections: outcomes (9 standards); resources (4 standards); support 
(7 standards); selling (9 standards); providers (10 standards); and col-
laborative provision (5 standards). While the detailed accreditation stan-
dards tilt toward institutional and process issues, the quality council also 
produced a succinct Buyers Guide to Distance Learning, listing questions 
that prospective students should ask of providers and of themselves. The 
list of questions on courses begins, “Can you look at the course first? Is 
the course right for you? How much support does it offer? Is there face-
to-face training? Can you talk to former students? Have previous learners 
been successful? Can you compare courses?” The outcomes questions 
are, “What do you want to achieve? Is this the right qualification? Will 
there be an exam at the end? Are there restrictions?” The cost questions 
are, “How much will it cost? Is financial support available? When can 
you get your money back? Finally, for quality, “Is the provider indepen-
dently inspected/accredited?” This last element carries a warning about 
other quality marks or schemes like ISO which “may suggest that the 
distance learning provision is of good quality, but do not guarantee it” 
(ODLQC, 2003, p.1). The statement points to the competitive nature 
of the quality assurance agencies and the presence of alternate quality 
markers, like those advocated by the British Association for Open 
Learning (BAOL), that explicitly reference the European Foundation 
for Quality Management (BAOL, 2002). The momentum behind such 
projects appears to be shifting, however, with amalgamation of BAOL 
and the Forum for Technology in Training into the British Learning 
Association (BLA, 2005).
With such an array of quality assurance prospects, it is noteworthy 
that in their study of “borderless education,” higher education agencies 
in the UK have acknowledged that public accountability arrangements 
and elements of the credentialing or qualification schemes have been 
challenged by developments in for-profit, virtual, and corporate provid-
ers in the domestic and international higher education market. They 

318	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
propose that the quality frameworks addressing these developments 
would include
currency and security of qualifications; audit of the system for 
design and approval of curricula or appropriate learning con-
tracts; an internationally recognized system of educational credit; 
licensing of staff; security of assessment; adequate and accurate 
public information about learning opportunities; approved guid-
ance and complaints systems for learners; transparent quality 
management processes for each agent in the educational supply 
chain; access to learning resources assured by the provider; and 
publication of guidance relevant to different modes of provision. 
(CVCP, 2000, p. 30)
It has also been suggested that the thinking on quality assurance 
will have to shift dramatically, from external compliance-based approaches 
toward comparative benchmarking and mutual recognition arrange-
ments for international quality standards. Attempts to integrate an array 
of international standards have been made in other jurisdictions.
In Canada, the responsibility for education rests at the provincial, 
not the national, level. Each province has its own quality assurance frame-
work or approach to determining whether post-secondary programs are 
eligible for student funding or to receive public money. The degree to 
which a province might regulate, or even provide, subsidies to private 
or for-profit educational institutions varies widely. It is fitting, then, that 
the Canadian example of quality guidelines originates with a private 
corporation sponsored by community and government-funded agencies 
(Barker, 2002a).
The Canadian Recommended e-Learning Guidelines (Barker, 2002a) 
bill themselves as “consumer-oriented, consensus-based, comprehensive, 
futuristic, distinctively Canadian, adaptable, and flexible.” The latter 
feature admits that “not all guidelines will apply to all circumstances” 
(p. 2). This qualification is only realistic, as the list is exhaustive. The 
138 recommendations are organized into three distinct sections: Quality 
Outcomes from e-Learning Products and Services, that includes 15 items 
related to how students acquire content skills, knowledge, and learning 
skills; Quality Processes and Practices, that includes 20 items on the 
management of students and the delivery and management of learning, 
using appropriate technologies; and Quality Inputs and Resources, that 
includes the remaining 103 items, which range through intended 

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
319
­learning outcomes, curriculum content, teaching and learning materials, 
product and service information, learning technologies, technical design, 
personnel, learning resources, comprehensive courses packages, routine 
evaluation, program plans and budgets, and advertising, recruitment, 
and admissions information. A more succinct adaptation issued under 
the same initiative is the Consumer’s Guide to e-Learning (Barker, 2002b), 
which structures 34 questions into basic, discerning, and detailed levels. 
These questions are paraphrased in Tables 1 to 3 of Appendix A to allow 
for comparison with the other frameworks, but the instructions to 
­consumers provided with the Consumer’s Guide are more telling.
Before you sign up for an e-learning course or program, you are 
to ask yourself:
•	What is my purpose for taking this course? Do I know what I want 
or need to learn?
•	Do I need a credit or certificate when I finish . . . or do I just want 
to know more?
•	How much can I afford to spend? How much time can I invest?
•	What hardware and software do I have, and is it enough?
•	Where will I access the Internet, what will it cost, and how 
­convenient will it be?
•	Are my computer and Internet skills good enough for the course 
I have in mind? Will I need technical help? (Barker, 2002b)
Institutions intending to adapt their offerings to the online teach-
ing and learning environment would be well advised to rephrase these 
questions along the following lines: 
•	What is our purpose for offering this course?
•	Do we know what we expect students to learn?
•	Do we have the technological infrastructure to support our 
­students? Is it up-to-date?
•	How skilled are our course developers and instructors in the 
online environment?
•	What technical assistance do we have available?
Such questions are at the heart of the two models proposed in 
the United States.
In an analysis of the impact of electronically delivered distance 
education, undertaken for the American Council of Education, Judith 
Eaton (2002) suggests that the emergence of electronically delivered 
degrees, programs, courses, and services has the potential to undo the 
delicate balance between “accreditation to assure quality in higher 
­education, the self-regulation of higher education institutions, and the 

320	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
availability of federal money to colleges and universities” (p. 1). Although 
U.S. higher education institutions are subject to state funding and regu-
latory bodies, and although the systems of accountability may vary from 
state to state, the federal government relies on accredited status to signal 
that institutions and programs are of sufficient quality to allow the release 
of federal funds in the forms of student grants and loans, research grants, 
and other federal program funds. Under traditional approaches to 
accreditation, the focus was on the verification of site-based resources 
contributing to a learning environment (e.g., the number of volumes 
in the library). To address some of the concerns raised by electronic 
delivery, the eight regional accrediting commissions in the United States 
developed the “Statement of Commitment for the Evaluation of 
Electronically Offered Degree and Certificate Programs,” which declares 
the resolve of the commissions to sustain the following values:
•	That education is best experienced within a community of ­learning 
where competent professionals are actively and cooperatively 
involved with creating, providing, and improving the instructional 
program;
•	That learning is dynamic and interactive, regardless of the setting 
in which it occurs;
•	That instructional programs leading to degrees having integrity 
are organized around substantive and coherent curricula which 
define expected learning outcomes;
•	That institutions accept the obligation to address student needs 
related to, and to provide the resources necessary for, their 
­academic success;
•	That institutions are responsible for the education provided in 
their name;
•	That institutions undertake the assessment and improvement of 
their quality, giving particular emphasis to student learning;
•	That institutions voluntarily subject themselves to peer review. 
(reprinted in Eaton, 2002, p. 26)
The regional commissions also committed themselves to a common 
statement, “Best Practices for Electronically Offered Degree and Certifi-
cate Programs,” which was developed by the Western Cooperative for 
Educational Telecommunications (Howell and Baker, 2006). The state-
ment is organized into five discrete sections: institutional context and 
commitment; curriculum and instruction; faculty support; student 
support; and evaluation and assessment (WCET, n.d). Taken together, 
the Statement of Commitment and the Best Practices propose a ­consistent 

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
321
framework for developing quality standards. How those standards might 
translate into benchmarks was the subject of a study prepared by the 
Institute of Higher Education Policy (Phipps & Merisotis, 2000).
For “Quality on the Line,” Phipps and Merisotis (2000) surveyed 
the literature to compile a list of 45 possible benchmarks. They then 
determined whether those benchmarks were recognized at various insti-
tutions delivering online courses, and examined the importance of each 
benchmark to administrators, staff, faculty, and students at those institu-
tions. The result is a list of 24 benchmarks that should be considered 
“essential to ensure the quality in Internet-based distance education” 
(p. 2). The elements (see Table 4 in Appendix A) include institutional 
support, course development, teaching and learning, course structure, 
student support, faculty support, and evaluation and assessment bench-
marks. The similarities between these benchmarks and the proposals 
from the accrediting agencies clearly demonstrate a common concep-
tualization of distance education in the United States. Where they diverge 
is in the degree to which the actual curriculum elements are prescribed, 
and in the relative weights given to institutional structures.
Both sets of standards are designed more for traditional face-to-
face institutions introducing distance education programs than for dis-
tance education providers updating their mode of delivery. The currency 
of these standards within the accreditation community was confirmed 
by a U.S. Department of Education study, which observed that despite 
difference in their standard and means of assessment, “there was remark-
able consistency” in how reviewers “evaluated distance education pro-
grams, and in what they considered to be most important indicators” 
(U.S. Department of Education, 2006, p. 2). The provider focus remains 
a strong orientation under both schemes and, unlike the accreditation 
standard for open and distance learning in the UK, neither U.S. scheme 
speaks to the importance of encouraging learners to take responsibility 
for their own learning.
Process versus Outcomes
One of the first principles in all of the quality assurance schemes 
­considered here is guaranteeing consistency in the product’s results. In 
the view of Total Quality Management advocates, “many quality manage-
ment initiatives, especially in service industries, die because we fail in 
measurement of the outcomes” (Widrick et al., 2002, p. 130). The 

322	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
dangers of presenting higher education outcomes as strictly utilitarian 
competencies are familiar features in the debate about quality assurance 
activities (Gerard, 2002). Even if outcomes could be framed in wider 
terms, however, there is also a hazard of sliding into what has been aptly 
described as a variation on the “naming fallacy” – that is, assuming that 
“explicitness about standards” somehow provides assurance that the 
standards have been or can be achieved (Greatrix, 2001).
Major efforts have been directed to identifying “quality in under-
graduate education,” but according to Ernest Pascarella (2001), some 
of these efforts are “based on a naive understanding of just how difficult 
it is to accomplish in a valid manner” (p. 19). Most notably, he argues 
that institutional reputation and resources, and student or alumni out-
comes are “potentially quite misleading,” and that results based on 
either of these common approaches are more likely to be driven by 
inputs than by effective educational practices (pp. 19-21). The solution 
to this problem should rest in careful measures that address the integrity 
of the teaching and learning processes within institutions. The seem-
ingly insatiable appetite for comparable measures, regardless of their 
validity, is a dimension of the operating environments of most post-
secondary institutions. While it is clear that the rhetoric of accountability 
and the bureaucratic systems it has spawned are not likely to disappear, 
it may be possible to present a framework for quality online teaching 
and learning that attends to more than short-term transactional or 
­monetary values.
Externally defined and inspected standards can lead to ­compliance-
oriented responses in institutions. Benchmarking frameworks have been 
proposed in some jurisdictions as an antidote to mechanistic audit cul-
tures. In keeping with the self-accrediting and international focus of 
Australian universities, the council on open, distance, and e-learning 
(ACODE), constituted in 2002, is open to accredited universities in 
Australasia – of which Australia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, and 
the South West Pacific are entitled to be members (see www.acode.edu.
au). Beginning with a survey in 2002-03, the initiative followed up with 
a collaborative pilot project between the Universities of Melbourne and 
Tasmania to develop a trial framework with the following components: 
institutional context, purpose, scope, principles of service delivery, 
benchmarking priorities, indicators for priority areas, self-assessment/
ranking, comparative matrix of strengths and weaknesses against indica-
tors, and finally, an action plan for self-improvement (Bridgland & 
Goodacre, 2005). The full articulation of benchmarks includes scoping 

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
323
statements, a good-practice statement, performance indicators, and per-
formance measures (ratings) in eight areas:
1)	 Institutional policy and governance for technology supported 
learning and teaching;
2)	 Planning for, and quality improvement of the integration of tech-
nologies for learning and teaching;
3)	 Information technology infrastructure to support learning and 
teaching;
4)	 Pedagogical application of information and communication 
technology;
5)	 Professional/staff development for the effective use of technolo-
gies for learning and teaching;
6)	 Staff support for the use of technologies for learning and 
teaching;
7)	 Student training for the effective use of technologies for learning;
8)	 Student support for the use of technologies for learning. (ACODE, 
2007)
The process of benchmarking in this instance involved scoring 
the stages of planning, development, and implementation across differ-
ent elements within each of the eight areas listed above. Other approaches 
to benchmarking reflect the interoperability questions, and try to apply 
software development principles and suggest finer levels of granularity. 
The areas investigated in a New Zealand project included scoring five 
process levels (delivery, planning, definition, management, and optimi-
zation) against 35 standards. The domains under investigation included 
ten factors for processes with impacts on learning; seven factors on the 
development of e-learning resources; six factors related to student and 
operational support; three factors related to evaluation and quality con-
trols; and nine factors related to institutional planning and management 
(Marshall, 2006). An example which bridges two jurisdictions (The Open 
University in the UK and the University of Sydney in Australia) empha-
sizes the importance of the relationship between institutions and the 
prospective approaches which benchmarking might provide (Ellis & 
Moore, 2006).
Reshaping the Debate
Whether or not the demands of stakeholder groups (however ill-defined), 
the threat of fraud, or the intensification of competition from local or 

324	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
international providers are behind the current impulses for elaborating 
quality assurance mechanisms, a dual challenge is being presented to 
the providers of online teaching and learning. The common thread 
across quality assurance schemes in the four jurisdictions is the need to 
address the concerns from both inside and outside the academy. Even 
if online and distance delivery institutions have been made scapegoats 
for a wide range of changes, not the least of which is the erosion of 
higher education institutions’ power to regulate themselves, there may 
still be an opportunity to address some of the concerns presented by 
colleagues in more traditional institutions. It follows that an overarching 
principle of any proposal to address quality assurance in online teaching 
and learning environments must recognize the integrity of higher educa-
tion – no matter how it is delivered. The rhetoric of both the Australian 
and British qualification frameworks suggests just such an integrated 
approach, but the regulatory burdens they have spawned do little to 
reassure those who value the independence of higher education.
While institutional and regulatory sectors have debated ­appropriate 
consumer input tools, the Web has offered an array of solutions. Various 
directories proffer advice on how to select an institution with revenues 
tied to referrals or “pay-for-click.” One of the more explicit rating schemes 
from the United States can be found at the Online Education Database 
(OEDb, n.d.), which ranks institutions that are accredited by the Distance 
Education and Training Council; found in other listings like eLearners.
com or the U.S. News & World Report E-learning Guide. Much of the 
institution descriptions and rating factors used by OEDb relies upon the 
U.S. Department of Education’s College Opportunities Online Locator 
(COOL, n.d.). For institutions which offer at least 50% of their degree 
programs online, the Department of Education OEDb digests the avail-
able data on acceptance rates, financial aid, retention and graduation 
rates. Other consumer-focused metrics selected by OEDb are peer web 
citations based on Yahoo’s link domain search, scholarly citations based 
on Google Scholar, and the student-faculty ratio and years accredited as 
reported in Peterson’s College Search (OEDb, n.d.). Established online pro-
grams are also making their way into discipline-based league tables like 
the business school ratings from the Financial Times. Similarly, for all the 
professional debates over the degree of asynchronous or blended experi-
ences, on ratemyprofessors.com, students do not seem inclined to distinguish 
between face-to-face and online courses.
In the process of taking back some of the momentum in the 
debate, the academy must provide clear statements of educational goals. 

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
325
Such goals need not be restricted to technical mastery in specific subjects. 
Moreover, the opportunity to pursue ideas beyond the needs of corporate 
sponsors should not be ignored. The measure of the effectiveness of the 
articulation of the educational goals should be the ways that a course, 
program, and institution’s goals align with one another. Demonstrating 
a consistency of purpose should be persuasive to internal and external 
stakeholders alike, but should not presuppose that students are respon-
sible for seeking their own learning outcomes. This suggestion returns 
to the essential need for quality to be constructed through consensus 
building among a range of institutional stakeholders, who must, at the 
same time, not promise, or be promised, more than can be delivered.
A second theme running through all of the frameworks presented 
here is the need for sustained institutional commitment to support dis-
tance learners. The precise nature of that support would be determined 
by the nature of the programs and by what students need in order to 
have a reasonable chance of attaining their aspirations in a given 
program. All too often, online delivery of courses and programs has 
been presented in an experimental mode, without long-term, planned 
infrastructure development. Whether it involves investing in technical 
systems, or in-training for support and instructional staff, the process of 
developing robust online teaching and learning environments should 
not be attempted as “one-offs.” Some observers have gone so far as to 
suggest that digital technology may hamper rather than promote edu-
cational change, because investment focuses on short life-cycle technolo-
gies rather than the longer view needed for effective education (Ehrmann, 
n.d.). An institutional commitment to supporting learners will go a long 
way to satisfying other stakeholders without displacing the fundamental 
project of scholarship. This commitment can only be true, however, if 
students and educators are engaging in a collaborative process of dis-
covery; that is, if academics are not simply dispensers or interpreters of 
content for passive students.
Learning technologies can promote powerful connections to 
content, context, and community. Unfortunately, they can also offer 
broad access to poorly designed and executed courseware. There are 
deliberate choices to be made in how to accommodate a generation of 
students who expect independent investigation, collaboration, and peer 
contacts to be facilitated in an online environment.
The threats to traditional delivery, and most especially the disag-
gregation of tasks associated with teaching in higher education, are pro-
viding new opportunities for exploring the constructions of community 

326	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
and knowledge, teaching and learning. In generating documented 
­evidence of interactions with content and with others, the structure of 
the online environment lends itself to new kinds of exploration. 
Eventually, the goal of such inquiries should be to point to ways to 
improve the teaching and learning environment. Ultimately, online pro-
grams should be able to mobilize recent theory and research into how 
people learn, and enhance learning by “enabling the identified charac-
teristics of effective learning environments and ensuring that they are 
present and accessible” (Herrington, Herrington, Oliver, Stoney, & Willis, 
2001, p. 266). From that perspective, the pursuit of quality online teach-
ing and learning environments may become as much an exercise in 
scholarship as it has been in market positioning or state control.
References
ACODE. (2007). ACODE benchmarks for e-learning in universities and 
guidelines for use. Australasian Council on Open, Distance, and e-Learning 
(ACODE) web site. Retrieved August, 14, 2007, from http://www.acode.
edu.au/aboutus/acodebenchmkwksp/ acodebmguideline0607.pdf
Adams, J., & DeFleur, M. (2006). The acceptability of online degrees 
earned as a credential for obtaining employment. Communication 
­Education, 55(1), 32–45.
Allen, I. E., & Seaman, J. (2006). Making the grade: Online education in the 
United States, 2006. Sloan Consortium. Retrieved September 13, 2007, 
from http://www.sloan-c.org/publications/survey/pdf/making_the_
grade.pdf
Allen, T. (2006). Is the rush to provide on-line instruction setting our 
students up for failure? Communication Education, 55(1), 122–126.
Arthur, L., Beecher, B., Elliot, R., & Newman, L. (2006). E-learning: Do 
our students want it and do we care? Proceedings, 23rd annual ASCILITE 
Conference, Sydney, Australia, Retrieved August 14, 2007, from http://
www.ascilite.org.au/conferences/sydney06/ proceeding/pdf_papers/
p192.pdf
Banta, T. W. & Associates (2002). Building a scholarship of assessment. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
BAOL. (2002). The development, implementation and use of the BAOL 
Quality Mark: A report to the Department for Education and Skills. 

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
327
British Association for Open Learning (BAOL) web site. Retrieved July 29, 
2003, from http://www.baol.co.uk/PDF/ qmrepdfes.pdf
Barker, K. (2002a, January). Canadian recommended e-learning guidelines 
(CanREGS). LICEF Research Centre web site. Retrieved July 29, 2003, from 
http://www.licef.teluq .uquebec.ca/fr/pdf/CanREGs%20Eng.pdf
Barker, K. (2002b, January). Consumer’s guide to e-learning. LICEF 
Research Centre web site. Retrieved July 29, 2003, from http://www.licef.
teluq.uquebec.ca/eng/pdf/ ConGuide%20Eng%20CD.pdf
Birnbaum, R. (2001). Management fads in higher education: Where they come 
from, what they do, why they fail. San Francisco: John Wiley & Sons.
BLA. (2005). Origins of the British Learning Association. British Learning 
Association web site. Retrieved August 15, 2007, from http://www.british-
learning.org/about/origins.htm
Bok, D. (2003). Universities in the marketplace: The commercialization of higher 
education. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Brennan, J., & Shah, T. (2000). Managing quality in higher education: An 
international perspective on institutional assessment and change. ­Buckingham: 
Open University Press.
Bridgland, A., & Goodacre, C. (2005). Benchmarking in higher educa-
tion: A framework for benchmarking for quality improvement pur-
poses. In Proceedings EDUCAUSE Australasia, Auckland, New Zealand. 
Retrieved August 5, 2007, from http://eprints.infodiv.unimelb.edu.
au/archive/00000891/
Brown, R. (2000). The new UK quality framework. Higher Education 
­Quarterly, 54(4), 323–342.
Carnevale, D. (2000, February). Assessing the quality of online courses 
remains a challenge, educators agree. The Chronicle of Higher Education, 
46(24). Retrieved September, 13, 2007 from http://chronicle.com/
weekly/v46/i24/24a05901.htm
Carnevale, D. (2002, May). Accreditors offer views on distance programs. 
Chronicle of Higher Education, 48(37), A36.
Caudron, S. (2001). Evaluating e-degrees. Workforce, 80(2), 44-48.
Cleary, T. S. (2001). Indicators of quality. Planning for Higher Education, 
29(3), 19-28.
COOL. (n.d.). College opportunities online locator (COOL). Institute 
of Education Sciences; U.S. Department of Education web site. Retrieved 
September 13, 2007, from http://165.224.221.98/ipeds/cool/
Crow, S. (2000, January/February). Accreditation of online institutions. 
Technology Source Archives at the University of North Carolina web site. 

328	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Retrieved September 13, 2007, from http://ts.mivu.org/default.asp? 
show=article&id=663
CVCP. (2000) Committee of Vice Chancellors and Principals and Higher 
Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE). (2000, March). 
The business of borderless education: UK perspectives, summary report. 
Retrieved July 30, 2003, from http://www.universitiesuk.ac.uk/­bookshop/
downloads/BorderlessSummary.pdf
DEST. (2002a). Meeting the challenges: The governance and manage-
ment of universities. Commonwealth of Australia, Department of Education, 
Science & Training (DEST) web site. Retrieved August 2, 2007, from 
http://www.backingaustraliasfuture.gov.au/pubs.htm
DEST. (2002b). Striving for quality: Learning, teaching and scholarship. 
Commonwealth of Australia, Department of Education, Science & Training 
(DEST) web site. Retrieved August 2, 2007, from http://www.backing 
australiasfuture.gov.au/pubs.htm
DETYA. (2000). The higher education quality assurance framework. Com-
monwealth of Australia, Department of Education, Training and Youth 
Affairs (DETYA). Retrieved July 29, 2007 from http://www.dest.gov.
au/archive/highered/occpaper/00g/00g.pdf
Dolence, M. G., & Norris, D. M. (1995). Transforming higher education: A 
vision for learning in the 21stt Century. Ann Arbor, MI: Society for College 
and University Planning.
Eaton, J. S. (2002). Maintaining the delicate balance: Distance learning, higher 
education accreditation, and the politics of self-regulation. Retrieved July 29, 
2003, from http://www.acenet.edu/bookstore/pdf/distributed-­learning/ 
distributed-learning-02.pdf
EFQUEL. (2007). Quality assurance and accreditation for European eLearn-
ing: The case for a European Quality Mark initiative. Brussels: European 
Foundation for Quality in eLearning (Green Paper No.4). Retrieved 
July 15, 2007, from http://cms.eun.org/ shared/data/pdf/efquel_
quality_mark.pdf
Ehrmann, S. C. (n.d.). Technology changes quickly but education changes 
slowly: A counter-intuitive strategy for using IT to improve the outcomes 
of higher education. TLT Group Web. Retrieved July 30, 2003, from 
http://www.tltgroup.org/resources/ Visions/Outcomes.html
eLearners.com. (n.d.). eLearners.com web site. Retrieved September 13, 
2007, from http://www.elearners.com/
Ellis, R., & Moore, R. (2006). Learning through benchmarking: Develop-
ing a relational, prospective approach to benchmarking ICT in ­learning 
and teaching. Higher Education, 51, 351–371.

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
329
European Ministers of Education. (1999). The European higher education 
area: Joint declaration of the European ministers of education. Convened in 
Bologna on June 19, 1999. Retrieved September 13, 2007, from http://
www.cepes.ro/information_services/ sources/on_line/bologna.pdf
Gerard, D. (2002). The governance of universities: What is the role of 
the university in the knowledge society? Canadian Journal of Sociology, 
27(2), 185–194.
Greatrix, P. (2001). Quality assurance into the 21st Century: Command 
and control or enlightened accountability? Perspectives, 5(1), 12–16.
Harvey, L. (2005). A history and critique of quality evaluation in the UK. 
Quality Assurance in Education, 13(4), 263–276.
Herrington, A., Herrington, J., Oliver, R., Stoney, S., & Willis, J. (2001). 
Quality guidelines for online courses: The development of an instru-
ment to audit online units. In G. Kennedy, M. Keppell, C. McNaught, 
& T. Petrovic (Eds.), Meeting at the crossroads: Proceedings of ASCILITE 
2001, pp. 263–270. Melbourne: University of Melbourne. Retrieved July 
29, 2003, from http://elrond.scam.ecu.edu.au/oliver/2001/qowg.pdf
Hooker, M. (1997). The transformation of higher education. In Diana 
Oblinger & Sean C. Rush (Eds.), The learning revolution. Boston, MA: 
Anker Publishing Company Inc. Retrieved July 30, 2003, from http://
horizon.unc.edu/projects/seminars/Hooker.asp
Howell, Scott L. and Baker, K. (2006). Good (Best) practices for 
­electronically offered degree and certificate programs: A 10-year 
­retrospect. Distance Learning, 3 (1), 41-47.
King, R. (2006). Globalization, institutional aspirations and regulation: 
The Australian national protocols. Observatory on borderless higher educa-
tion strategic information service report. Retrieved February 3, 2006, from 
http://www.obhe.ac.uk/products/reports/
Kompf, M. (2001, September). ICT could be the death knell of profes-
soriate as we know it. CAUT-ACPPU Bulletin Online. Retrieved July 30, 
2003, from http://www.caut.ca/ english/bulletin/2001_sep/commen-
tary.asp
Lairson, T. D. (1999). Rethinking the ‘course’ in an online world. Campus-
wide Information Systems, 16(5). Retrieved July 30, 2003, from http://fox.
rollins.edu/~tlairson/online.html
Larreamendy-Joerns, J., & Leinhart, G. (2006). Going the distance with 
online education. Review of Educational Research. 76(4), 567–605.
Marshall, S. (2006). E-learning maturity model version two: New Zealand 
tertiary institution e-learning architectural change and development, 
project report. Document on the University of Victoria, Wellington 

330	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­University web site. Retrieved August 5, 2007, from http://www.utdc.vuw.
ac.nz/research/emm/documents/versiontwo/
20060726TeLRFReport.pdf
Milliron, M. D., & Miles, C. L. (2000, November/December). Education 
in a digital democracy: Leading the charge for learning about, with 
and beyond technology. EDUCAUSE Review, 50–62. Retrieved July 30, 
2003, from http://www.educause.edu/pub/er/erm00/articles006/
erm0064.pdf
Moore, J. C. (2005). The Sloan consortium quality framework and the five 
pillars. The Sloan Consortium. Retrieved July 15, 2007, from http://
www.aln.org/publications/ books/qualityframework.pdf
Morrison, D., Mayes, T., & Gule, E. (2006). Benchmarking e-learning in 
UK higher education. Proceeding of the 23rd annual ASCILITE Conference, 
Sydney, Australia. Retrieved August 5, 2007, from http://www.ascilite.
org.au/conferences/sydney06/proceeding/pdf_papers/p96.pdf
Noble, D. F. (2001). Digital diploma mills: The automation of higher ­education. 
New York: Monthly Review Press.
Nunan, T. (2005). Markets, distance education, and Australian higher 
education. International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 
6(1). Retrieved September 13, 2007, from http://www.irrodl.org/index.
php/irrodl/article/view/223/306
ODLQC. (2003). A buyer’s guide to distance learning: Finding the course 
you want. Open and Distance Learning Quality Council web site. Retrieved 
August 14, 2007, from http://www.odlqc.org.uk/documents/bg2003.
pdf
ODLQC. (2005). Standards in Open and Distance Learning. Open and 
Distance Learning Quality Council web site. Retrieved August 14, 2007, 
from http://www.odlqc.org.uk/standard.htm
OEDb. (n.d.). Online Education Database web site. Retrieved September 
13, 2007, from http://oedb.org/
Pascarella, E.T. (2001, May/June). Identifying excellence in undergrad-
uate education: Are we even close? Change, 19–23.
Phipps, R. A., & Merisotis, J. P. (2000). Quality on the line: Benchmarks 
for success in Internet-based education. The Institute for Higher Educa-
tion Policy web site. Retrieved September 13, 2007, from http://www.
ihep.com/Pubs/PDF/Quality.pdf
Pond, W. K. (2002). Distributed education in the 21st Century: Implica-
tions for quality assurance. Online Journal of Distance Learning Admin-
istration, 5(2). Retrieved September 13, 2007, from http://www.westga.
edu/%7Edistance/ojdla/ summer52/pond52.html

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
331
QAA. (2000). Handbook for academic review. Quality Assurance Agency 
for Higher Education (UK) web site. Retrieved July 29, 2007, from http://
www.qaa.ac.uk/reviews /academicReview/handbook2000/acrevhbook.
pdf
QAA. (2004a). Code of practice for the assurance of academic quality 
and standards in higher education. Quality Assurance Agency for Higher 
Education UK web site. Retrieved July 29, 2007, from http://www.qaa.ac.
uk/academicinfrastructure/codeOfPractice/section2/collab2004.pdf
QAA. (2004b). Handbook for academic review: England, 2004. Review 
of directly funded higher education in further education colleges. 
Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education UK web site. Retrieved July 
29, 2007, from http://www.qaa.ac.uk/reviews/academicReview/acrevh 
book2004/HandbookAcademicReview.pdf
QAA. (n.d.a). Code of practice for the assurance of academic quality 
and standards in higher education. Quality Assurance Agency for Higher 
Education (UK) web site. Retrieved July 29, 2007 from http://www.qaa.
ac.uk/academicinfrastructure/codeOfPractice
QAA. (n.d.b). Guidelines on the quality assurance of distance learning. 
Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education (UK) web site. Retrieved 
July 29, 2003, from http://www.qaa.ac.uk/public/dlg/dlg_textonly.
htm
Quinn, J. B. (2001, July-August). Services and technology: Revolution-
izing higher education. EDUCAUSE, pp. 28–37. Retrieved July 30, 2003, 
from http://www.educause.edu/ir/library/pdf/erm0141.pdf
Reid, I. (2005). Quality assurance, open and distance learning, and 
­Australian universities. The International Review of Research in Open and 
Distance Learning, 6(1). Retrieved September 13, 2007, from http://
www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/222/305
Shore, C., & Wright, S. (2000). Audit culture and anthropology: ­Neo-
liberalism in British higher education. Journal of the Royal Anthropo-
logical Institute, 5(4), 557–575.
Sims, R., Dobbs, G., & Hand, T. (2002). Enhancing quality in online 
learning: Scaffolding planning and design through proactive evalua-
tion. Distance Education, 23(2), 135–148.
Spahn, K. (2000, May). Baldridge and institutional research: Quality 
measures for the next millennium. Paper presented at the 40th Annual 
Association of Institutional Research Forum, Cincinnati, OH.
Twigg, C. (2001) Quality assurance for whom? Providers and consumers in 
today’s distributed learning environment. Retrieved August 5, 2007, from 
http://center.rpi.edu/ Monographs/Mono3.pdf

332	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
UNESCO/OECD. (2005). Guidelines for quality provision in cross-border 
higher education. Retrieved February 20, 2007, from http://www.oecd.
org/dataoecd/27/51/35779480.pdf
U.S. Department of Education. (2006, March). Evidence of quality in dis-
tance education programs drawn from interviews with the accreditation com-
munity. Office of Postsecondary Education document. Retrieved July 
15, 2007, from http://www.itcnetwork.org/Accreditation-Evidenceof 
QualityinDEPrograms.pdf
Vidovich, L. (2001). That chameleon ‘quality’: The multiple and con-
tradictory discourses of ‘quality’ policy in Australian higher education. 
Discourse: Studies in the cultural politics of education, 22(2), 249–261.
WCET. (n.d.). Best practices for electronically offered degree and cer-
tificate programs. Western Cooperative for Educational Telecommunications 
website retrieved July 15, 2007 from http://wcet.info/resources/accred-
itation/Accrediting%20-%20Best%20Practices.pdf. Also available at 
http://wiche.edu/attachment_library/Accrediting_BestPractices.pdf 
and at http://www.neasc.org/cihe/best_practices_electronically_offered_ 
degree.htm 
Widrick, S. M., Mergen, E., & Grant, D. (2002). Measuring the dimen-
sions of quality in higher education. Total Quality Management, 13(1), 
123–131.
Zemsky, R. (2007, January 26). The rise and fall of the Spellings 
­commission. Chronicle of Higher Education, 53(21), B6.

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
333
APPENDIX A
Tables 1 through 3 summarize the recommendations presented in the 
Consumers Guide to E-learning for post-secondary and adult education 
levels, which was produced by the Canadian Association of Community 
Education (Barker 2002b). The first level in the guide defines basic 
information needs. These guidelines anticipate that potential suppliers 
of all e-learning products will provide written advice to their students on 
these matters.
  1.	What are the intended learning outcomes, and what entry-level 
knowledge or skill is necessary for a reasonable chance of success?
  2.	What recognition will be awarded upon successful completion (e.g., 
transferable credits, degree, professional designation, etc.)?
  3.	What are the necessary learning skills needed for success (e.g., the 
ability to write, to manage time, to take examinations, etc.)?
  4.	What types of material are to be covered, and what are the sources and 
the relevance of this content?
  5.	What is the format for instruction and assignments (i.e., group or 
individual)?
  6.	Who will be teaching and assessing the students?
  7.	What is the nature of the assessments, and what are the criteria for 
success?
  8.	How long can the course can be expected to take, including mandatory 
or flexible timelines?
  9.	What are the minimum computer and operational system requirements, 
and what options exist, if any?
10.	What technical skills will be required to access the course materials?
11.	What are the total costs, including tuition, books and materials, 
equipment, and other fees?
12.	How credible is the product? What are the qualifications of the design 
and delivery personnel, and how objective are the evaluation reports?
13.	How does one get started? What are the complete registration 
procedures and services?
14.	How does one get help? Who does one contact for technical assistance 
and content expertise?
15.	What are the policies for withdrawal and refunds?
Table 1. Consumer’s Guide to e-Learning recommendations

334	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
The second level, designed to help potential students distinguish 
among programs meeting all of the preceding criteria, is considered 
evidence of good e-design and e-delivery. The second-level recommenda-
tions are summarized below. 
  1.	Systems work consistently for the learner.
  2.	Navigation is logical and well organized.
  3.	Content is relevant, well organized and presented in an interesting 
manner.
  4.	Materials are updated on a regular basis.
  5.	Access is provided to the learning resources, and advice is given on how 
to access institutional services.
  6.	Learning packages allow options for individuals to personalize the 
course.
  7.	Scheduled expectations (e.g., synchronous instruction and 
communication) are present for a reason.
  8.	What learners need to succeed is easily accessible to them online.
  9.	There are ways to connect to the instructor and to other students.
10.	Assessment of learning takes a variety of forms, and is conducted against 
clear, achievable criteria.
Table 2. Consumer’s Guide to e-Learning recommendations

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
335
The final level presents more detailed evidence of good e-design 
and e-delivery.
1.	 Individuals are made to feel like valued customers.
2.	 Scheduling of when to register, learn, and be assessed is flexible.
3.	 Materials are interesting and motivating.
4.	 Approaches and materials are free of cultural, racial, class, age, and 
gender bias.
5.	 Students are given opportunities to demonstrate current skills and 
knowledge for advanced credit or a shortened program.
6.	 The program provides a statement of acquired skills and knowledge, not 
just a completion certificate.
7.	 Various approaches are offered to appeal to different learning styles.
8.	 The institution provides access to objective evaluation reports on all 
delivery components: instructors, curriculum, student success, processes, 
and resources.
9.	 Courses and programs demonstrate a favourable comparison of benefits 
to costs.
Table 3. Consumer’s Guide to e-Learning recommendations
Two documents recommending standards for quality distance edu-
cation delivery have been widely circulated in the United States. As 
reported in Phipps and Merisotis (2000), the National Education 
Association (NEA), in conjunction with Blackboard®, validated 24 proposed 
benchmarks. The Western Cooperative for Educational Telecommunications 
(WCET) first developed a draft best-practices document in 1995 to inform 
regional accreditation agencies (Howell and Baker, 2006). The Best Practices 
for Electronically Offered Degree and Certification Programs were subsequently 
published by the Council for Regional Accrediting Commissions in 2001 
(WCET, n.d.). The elements of these documents are presented in Table 4; 
the order in which the paraphrased WCET elements have been presented 
has been altered to facilitate comparisons. 

336	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
NEA – 2000
WCET – Best Practices
Institutional support
Institutional context  
and commitment
  1.	A documented technology plan is 
in place that includes electronic 
security measures.
Each program is consistent with the 
institution’s mission.
  2.	Reliable delivery systems are in 
place.
Each program is compliant with 
the statement of accreditation, and 
with the regulatory environments in 
which it operates.
  3.	Centralized support is available 
for building and maintaining 
the distance education 
infrastructure.
The institutional plan and budget 
demonstrates commitment to dis-
tance students and program sustain-
ability.
Sufficient infrastructure is available, 
and staffing is appropriate.
The organization of the institution 
supports the process of program 
design and approval, and coordi-
nates student services for distance 
students.
Articulation and transfer agreements 
are consistent with the guidelines.
Technical systems and training pro-
grams are in place for staff, faculty, 
and students.
Technical requirements and the 
availability of support are communi-
cated clearly.
There is an explicit match between 
the technology used and the pro-
gram requirements.
Course development 
Curriculum and instruction
  4.	Guidelines are in place for 
minimum course design 
standards where learning 
outcomes (not technology) drive 
the content.
Academic rigour and breadth are 
assured through evidence from the 
approval processes, and by having 
academically qualified people define 
outcomes, develop curriculum, and 
determine assessment criteria.
Table 4. NEA 2000 and WCET benchmarks and best practices 
(per Phipps and Merisotis, 2000; and WCET, n.d.)

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
337
  5.	Instructional materials are 
reviewed periodically to ensure 
they meet program standards.
In programs, presentation, man-
agement, and assessment are the 
responsibility of people with appro-
priate academic qualifications.
  6.	Courses are designed to require 
students to engage in analysis, 
synthesis and evaluation.
Teaching/learning 
  7. 	Student interaction with faculty 
and other students is facilitated 
in a variety of ways.
Appropriate student-to-student, and 
student and instructor interactions 
are demonstrated and evaluated to 
inform the delivery design.
  8. 	Feedback on student assignments 
and questions is constructive and 
provided in a timely manner.
  9. 	Students are instructed in proper 
methods of effective research.
Course structure 
10.	Before starting, students are 
advised about the program 
so that they can determine 
if they have the motivation 
and commitment to learn at a 
distance, and the technology 
required by the course design.
Program requirements are com-
municated, including technical, 
financial, and time commitments. 
Career opportunities and certifica-
tion parameters are communicated, 
clearly and honestly.
11.	Students are provided with 
supplemental course information 
that outlines the course 
objectives, concepts, and ideas; 
and learning outcomes for each 
course are summarized in a 
clear, straightforward written 
statement.
Where consortium agreement exist, 
performance expectations, appropri-
ate oversight, training, and benefits 
are specified, and conform to regula-
tory and quality assurance standards.
12.	Students have sufficient access to 
library resources.
13.	Faculty and students agree on 
expectations about times for 
student assignment completion 
and faculty response.
Table 4. (continued)

338	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Student support
Student support (IV) 
14.	Students receive information 
about programs, including 
admission requirements, tuition 
and fees, books and supplies, 
technical and proctoring 
requirements, and student 
support services.
Programs are designed to meet the 
needs of specific student popula-
tions. Program plans, communica-
tions, and infrastructure demon-
strate ongoing commitment.
15.	Students are provided with 
hands-on training and 
information to aid them in 
securing material through 
electronic databases (and other 
sources).
Admission, technical, and financial 
requirements are communicated 
clearly prior to admission to the 
program, along with information on 
timeframes, the criteria of assess-
ment, the availability of advisory and 
support services, and technical help. 
16.	Technical assistance is available 
throughout the course or 
program, including practice 
sessions prior to the beginning 
of the course and access to 
technical support staff.
Students can access appropriate sup-
port services without coming to the 
physical campus. 
17.	Questions directed to student 
support service personnel 
are answered accurately and 
quickly, and structured systems 
are in place to address student 
complaints.
Distance students are demonstrably 
part of the academic community.
Faculty support 
Faculty support (III)
18.	Technical assistance in course 
development is available to 
faculty.
Workload and compensation policies 
are consistent. Faculty are aware of 
intellectual property issues. 
19.	Faculty members are assisted in 
the transition from classroom 
teaching to online instruction, 
and are assessed during the 
process.
Technical design and production 
support are provided for faculty, 
including design and instructional 
support services.
20.	Instructor training and 
assistance, including peer 
mentoring, continues through 
the online course.
Faculty orientation and training are 
provided as needed; support for 
ongoing development and course 
management is demonstrated.
Table 4. (continued)

The Quality Dilemma in Online Education Revisited	
339
21.	Faculty members are provided 
with written resources to deal 
with issues arising from student 
use of electronically accessed 
data.
Support is available for those pro-
viding direct services to students, 
including training and mentoring.
Evaluation and assessment 
Evaluation and assessment
22.	Each program’s educational 
effectiveness and teaching/
learning process is assessed 
through an evaluation process 
that uses several methods and 
applies specific standards.
As a component of the institution’s 
overall assessment activities, docu-
mented assessment of student 
achievement is conducted in each 
course and at the completion of the 
program by comparing student per-
formance to the intended outcomes.
23.	Data on enrolment, costs, and 
successful or innovative uses of 
technology are used to evaluate 
program effectiveness.
When examinations are employed, 
they are written in circumstances 
that include firm measures for stu-
dent identification.
24.	Intended learning outcomes 
are reviewed regularly to 
ensure clarity, utility, and 
appropriateness.
Procedures are in place to secure 
personal information.
Overall program effectiveness is 
measured.
Table 4. (continued)

340	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Nancy Parker (nancyp@athabascau.ca) is the Director of Institutional 
Studies at Athabasca University and is actively engaged in a wide range 
of quality assurance and accreditation activities, including serving on 
Alberta Learning’s Performance Measurement and Management 
Information Committee, and as Athabasca’s institutional liaison officer 
to the Middle States Commission on Higher Education.

Delivery, Quality Control,  
and Student Support  
of Online Courses
Part iv


Chapter 14
Teaching in  
an Online Learning Context
Terry Anderson
Athabasca University
Introduction
This chapter focuses on the role of the teacher or tutor in an online 
learning context. It uses the theoretical model developed by Garrison, 
Anderson, and Archer (2000) that views the creation of an effective 
online educational community as involving three critical components: 
cognitive presence, social presence, and teaching presence. This model 
was developed and validated through content analysis and by other quali-
tative and quantitative measures. The work has been referenced by hun-
dreds of scholars and is arguably the most popular model used for both 
the research and practice of online learning (Arbaugh, 2007). The origi-
nal papers describing and validating the model, as well as links to more 
current work, are available at http://www.atl.ualberta.ca/cmc.
In many ways, learning and teaching in an online environment 
are much like teaching and learning in any other formal educational 
context: learners’ needs are assessed, content is negotiated or prescribed, 

344	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
learning activities are orchestrated, and learning is assessed. The perva-
sive effect of the online medium, however, creates a unique environment 
for teaching and learning. The most compelling feature of this context 
is the capacity for shifting the time and place of the educational interac-
tion. Next comes the ability to support content encapsulated in many 
formats, including multimedia, immersive environments, video, and text, 
which gives access to learning content that exploits all media attributes. 
Third, the capacity of the Net to access huge repositories of content on 
every conceivable subject – including content created by the teacher 
and fellow students – creates learning and study resources previously 
available only in the largest research libraries, but now accessible in 
almost every home and workplace. Finally, the capacity to support 
human and machine interaction in a variety of formats (i.e., text, speech, 
video, and so on), in both asynchronous and synchronous modalities, 
creates a communications-rich learning context.
To provide a mental schema for thinking about learning and 
teaching in this context, Garrison, Anderson, and Archer (2000) devel-
oped a conceptual model of online learning that they refer to as a “com-
munity of inquiry” model. This model (see Figure 1) postulates that 
deep and meaningful learning results when there are sufficient levels of 
three component “presences.” The first is providing a sufficient degree 
of cognitive presence, such that serious learning can take place in an envi-
ronment that supports the development and growth of critical thinking 
skills. Cognitive presence is grounded in and defined by the study of a 
particular content; thus, it works within the epistemological, cultural, 
and social expression of the content in an approach that supports the 
development of critical thinking skills (McPeck,1990; Garrison, 1991). 
The second, social presence, relates to establishing a supportive environ-
ment such that students feel the necessary degree of comfort and safety 
to express their ideas in a collaborative context, and to present them-
selves as real and functional human beings. The absence of social pres-
ence leads to students’ inability to express disagreements, share viewpoints, 
explore differences, and accept support and confirmation from peers 
and teachers. Finally, in formal education, as opposed to informal learn-
ing opportunities, teaching presence is critical, for a variety of reasons that 
create the rationale for this chapter.
Anderson, Rourke, Archer, and Garrison (2001) delineate three 
critical roles that a teacher performs in the process of creating an effec-
tive teaching presence. First, teachers design and organize the learning 
experience that takes place, both before the establishment of the 

Teaching in an Online Learning Context	
345
­learning community and during its operation. Second, teaching involves 
devising and implementing activities to encourage discourse between and 
among students, between the teacher and the student, and between indi-
vidual students, groups of students, and content resources (Anderson, 
2003b). Third, the teaching role goes beyond moderating the learning 
experiences when the teacher adds subject-matter expertise through a 
variety of forms of direct instruction. The creation of teaching presence 
is not always the sole task of the formal teacher. In many contexts, espe-
cially when teaching at senior levels, teaching presence is delegated to 
or assumed by students as they contribute their own skills and knowledge 
to the developing learning community.
In addition to these tasks, in formal education the institution and 
its teacher employees are usually fulfilling a critical credentialing role 
that involves the assessment and certification of student learning. This 
Educational
experience
Social 
presence
Supporting
discourse
Teaching presence
(structure/process)
Selecting
content
Setting
climate
Cognitive
presence
Figure 1.  Community of Inquiry

346	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
chapter focuses on these component parts of teaching presence, by defin-
ing and illustrating techniques to enhance this presence and providing 
suggestions for effective teacher practice in an online ­learning context.
Designing and Organizing the Online Learning Context
The design and construction of the course content, learning activities, 
and assessment framework constitute the first opportunity for teachers 
to develop their teacher presence. The role the teacher plays in creating 
and maintaining the course contents varies from a tutor working with 
materials and an instructional design created by others, to a “lone ranger” 
or teacher who creates all of the content. Regardless of the formal role 
of the teacher, online learning creates an opportunity for flexibility and 
revision of content in situ that was not provided by older forms of medi-
ated teaching and learning. The vast educational and content resources 
of the Net, and its capacity to support many different forms of interac-
tion, allow for negotiation of content and activity, and a corresponding 
increase in autonomy and control (Garrison & Baynton, 1987). Teachers 
are no longer confined to the construction of monolithic packages that 
cannot be easily modified in response to students’ needs. Rather, the 
design and organization of activities within the learning community can 
proceed while the course is in progress. Of course, such flexibility is not 
without cost, as customization of any product is more expensive than 
mass production of a standardized product. Thus, the effective online 
learning teacher makes provision for negotiation of activities, or even 
content, to satisfy unique learning needs. As they become more informed 
participants and consumers of formal education, learners are also demand-
ing increased input into the control of their learning (Dron, 2007). 
Within this flexibility and negotiation of control, however, the need to 
stimulate, guide, and support learning remains. These tasks include the 
design of a series of learning activities that encourage independent study 
and community building, that deeply explore content knowledge, that 
provide frequent and diverse forms of formative assessment, and that 
respond to common and unique student needs and aspirations (see 
Anderson, “Towards a Theory of Online Learning,” in this volume).
The design of e-learning courses is covered in greater detail in 
earlier chapters of this book, but this process provides opportunities 
for teachers to instill their own teaching presence by establishing a 

Teaching in an Online Learning Context	
347
­personalized tone within the course content. This presence is created 
by allowing students to see the personal excitement and appeal that 
inspires the teacher’s interest in the subject. Borge Holmberg (1989) 
first wrote about a style of expression, “guided didactic interaction,” that 
presents content in a conversational – as opposed to academic – style. 
This writing style helps the learner to identify, in a personalized way, 
with the teacher. Techniques, such as illustration of content issues with 
personal reflections, anecdotes, and discussions of the teacher’s own 
struggles and successes as they have gained mastery of the content, have 
been inspirational and motivating to students.
Activities in this category of teaching presence include building 
curriculum materials. The cost of creating high quality, interactive learn-
ing resources has led to renewed interest in reusing content which is 
encapsulated and formally described using metadata and often referred 
to as “learning objects” (Wiley, 2000; McGreal, 2004). These resources 
are then made accessible in repositories such as the Multimedia 
Educational Resource for Learning and Online Teaching (MERLOT: 
see http://www.merlot.org/merlot/index.htm), or retrieved from the 
open Internet through the use of search engines. We have also seen an 
explosion in the availability of whole courses, a phenomenon that was 
ignited by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), which with 
support from two large foundations, made a commitment to put com-
ponents from all of that institution’s courses online by 2008, freely avail-
able for download by anyone in the world. This challenge has led to the 
establishment of numerous open courseware sites and indices, linking 
and providing search services across institutional courseware repositories 
(see http://www .ocwconsortium.org/).
Creating or “repurposing” materials, such as lecture notes, to 
provide online teacher commentaries, mini-lectures, personal insights, 
and other customized views of course content, is another common activ-
ity that we assign to the category of teaching presence. We anticipate 
that work on educational standards for describing, storing, and sequenc-
ing of educational content, and for formally modelling the way in which 
learning activities are designed, will significantly change the design role 
of many teachers from content creation to customization, application, 
and contextualization of learning sequences (Koper, 2004). Finally, this 
design category of teaching presence also includes the processes through 
which the instructor negotiates timelines for group activities and student 
project work, a critical coordinating and motivating function of formal 

348	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
online course design and development, and a primary means of setting 
and maintaining teaching presence.
Getting the Mix Right
The modern Web supports a number of media, each of which can be 
incorporated into the design of an online learning course. Getting the 
mix right between opportunities for synchronous and asynchronous 
interaction and group and independent study activities remains a chal-
lenge, however (Daniel & Marquis, 1988; Anderson, 2003a). There are 
two competing models of online learning, each of which has strong 
adherents and a growing body of research and theoretical rationales for 
its effective application. The first, the community of learning model, uses 
real-time synchronous or asynchronous communication technologies to 
create virtual classrooms that are often modelled, both pedagogically 
and structurally, on the campus classroom. This model evolved from 
telephone-based audio (and later video and web) conferencing. Its evo-
lution to the Net has allowed for delivery directly to the learner’s office 
and home, bypassing expensive remote learning centres that were a 
feature of the older virtual classroom models.
Web-based computer conferencing systems allow for asynchronous 
collaboration among and between student and teachers. The synchro-
nous virtual classroom model has advantages, in that it is a familiar 
educational model with a great deal of similarity to teaching and learn-
ing in campus-based classrooms. It provides increased access by spanning 
geographic distance; however, it constrains participants in terms of a 
single time that learners and teachers must be present. This problem is 
compounded when a class spans many time zones. The asynchronous 
version of the virtual classroom overcomes the temporal limitations, but 
can result in a shortage of coordination and reduce opportunities for 
students to feel “in sync” with the class (Burge & Howard, 1994). 
Designing effective online courses will increasingly involve judicious 
selection of combinations of media and formats that balance the differ-
ential capacities of media to support the creation of social and cognitive 
presence with the educational need for variety, the special communica-
tions characteristics demanded of particular content, and the cost, access, 
and training requirements of the media.
The second model of online learning involves independent 
­learners who work by themselves and at their own pace through the 

Teaching in an Online Learning Context	
349
course of instruction. This model maximizes flexibility, but challenges 
the institution’s and teacher’s capacity to facilitate group, social, or col-
laborative learning activities. The independent study model is almost always 
selected in online learning models to allow for continuous enrolment 
or “just-in-time” access to educational content. It is very challenging to 
create collaborative learning or social activities when students are at very 
different places in the curriculum. The recent development of social 
software (Bryant, 2006; Dalsgaard, 2006), however, has inspired some us 
to begin thinking of ways in which “unpaced” learners can find each 
other, engage in short-term cooperative projects, and otherwise develop 
supportive networks and study-buddy relationships, even when their 
formal programming is unpaced (Anderson, 2005).
Fortunately, it is possible to combine synchronous, asynchronous, 
and independent study activities in a single course. In my own discus-
sions with online students over the years, I have noticed a deep division 
between those who yearn for the immediacy of real-time communica-
tion, and those who are adamant that they have chosen online learning 
alternatives to avoid the time constraints imposed by synchronous or 
paced learning activities. Thus, many institutions, including Athabasca 
University, are developing both paced and unpaced models of delivery 
to accommodate student learning preferences and needs. Within a 
single class, it is possible to offer optional synchronous activities, and I 
usually build real-time Net-based audio-graphic sessions into the begin-
ning section of my classes. These sessions allow me to quickly get to 
know the students from both a personal and professional viewpoint, 
explore their aspirations for the course, outline my own interests in the 
subject, discuss assessment activities, and provide an opportunity for 
students to ask pressing questions. Synchronous activities are also useful 
for guest interviews, for special activities such as debates and presenta-
tions, and of course, for holding the end-of-class social gathering – 
parties held in asynchronous time never seem to work! However, these 
activities can be “canned” and streamed for viewing by students in 
­independent study mode.
Even if one’s course design or the available technology precludes 
synchronous interaction, there are still opportunities to inject more than 
text-based lectures and discussions into the course. Online learning 
­provides an opportunity for the teacher to build in video or audio 
­presentations of themselves to enhance their presence to distributed 
learners. I have created two five-minute video productions that I link to 
my courses. The first provides an introduction to me and focuses on my 

350	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
professional growth within the discipline that I teach. The second 
­discusses my own research agenda, and not only helps establish my aca-
demic credentials, but also, I hope, conveys my excitement for the 
research process within my discipline.
Thus, the challenge for teachers designing and organizing the 
online learning context is to create a mix of learning activities that are 
appropriate to student needs, teacher skills and style, learning objectives 
of the program of study, and institutional technical capacity. Doing so 
within the ever-present financial constraints of formal education systems 
is a challenge that will direct online learning design and implementation 
for the foreseeable future.
Facilitating Discourse
The second component of teacher presence is the critical task of facili-
tating discourse. We use the term discourse rather than discussion, as it 
conveys the meaning of relating to the “the process or power of reason-
ing” (Pickett, et al., 2007), rather than the more social connotation of 
conversation. Discourse not only facilitates the creation of the commu-
nity of inquiry, but also the means by which learners develop their own 
thought processes, through the necessity of articulating their ideas to 
others. Discourse also helps students to uncover misconceptions in their 
own thinking, or disagreements with the teacher or other students. Such 
conflict provides opportunity for exposure to cognitive dissonance which, 
from a “Piagetian” perspective, is critical to intellectual growth. In fulfill-
ing this component of teaching presence, the teacher regularly reads 
and responds to student contributions and concerns, and constantly 
searches for ways to support understanding in the individual student, 
and the development of the learning community as a whole.
The first task for the e-learning teacher is to develop a sense of 
trust and safety within the electronic community. In the absence of this 
trust, learners will feel uncomfortable and constrained in posting their 
thoughts and comments. We usually facilitate this “trust formation” by 
having students post a series of introductory comments about themselves. 
It is useful to request specific information, and to model an answer to 
the response request yourself. For example, the e-teacher may request 
that students articulate their reasons for enrolling in the course or their 
interest in the subject matter. I have seen this technique successfully 
extended at the beginning of regular online synchronous sessions by 

Teaching in an Online Learning Context	
351
asking each student to respond spontaneously to a content-related “ques-
tion of the week” that sets the tone for the growth of both social and 
cognitive presence. Other ideas for stimulating development of social 
presence, such as “icebreakers” (Dixon, Crooks, & Henry, 2007) and 
other activities borrowed from face-to-face adult education and training 
activities, can be very effective in breaking down inhibitors to free and 
open discourse.
Many online courses rely extensively on a model of discourse 
where the teacher posts questions or discussion items relevant to the 
readings or the other forms of content dissemination. I have found that 
overreliance on this form of discourse soon becomes boring, and allows 
much of the learning to be focused on responding to teacher-initiated 
items, rather than challenging students to formulate their own questions 
and comments about course content. We have seen much greater levels 
of participation, motivation, and student satisfaction when discussion 
groups are led by student moderators (Rourke & Anderson, 2002). It 
cannot be assumed, however, that students have the necessary skills to 
undertake successful moderation of class discussion, so role modelling 
by the teacher for the initial discussions is usually helpful. Finally, in an 
insightful critique of discourse in asynchronous computer conferencing, 
Rourke and Kanuka (2007) note the barriers felt by learners in develop-
ing critical discourse and recommend the need for “well-structured learn-
ing activities with clearly defined roles for teachers and students, and a 
method of assessing students’ participation that reflects the time and 
effort required to engage in critical discourse” (p. 105).
Since the first issue of this text, a variety of social software tools 
have been demonstrated in both blended and online courses. Perhaps 
most popular has been “web logs” or “blogs” (Richardson, 2006). While 
it is unclear to what degree these new tools will hold advantages over 
older, threaded discussion groups that dominated the early forms of  
e-learning, there is little doubt that these new blog forms of discourse 
have generated renewed interest in reflective forms of writing to support 
learning (Cameron & Anderson, 2006).
Assessment in Online Learning
No element of course design concerns students in a formal educational 
context more assessment. Effective teaching presence demands explicit 
and detailed discussion of the criteria by which student learning will be 

352	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
assessed. A teacher who cultivates a presence of flexibility, concern, and 
empathy will reflect these characteristics in the style and format of assess-
ment. In an earlier work (Garrison & Anderson,2003), my colleague 
Randy Garrison and I discuss assessment in online learning in greater 
detail. Here, I summarize the main features of assessment, and provide 
two examples of frameworks for the challenging task of assessing 
­contributions to the online learning community.
We know from research on assessment that timely and detailed 
feedback provided throughout, and as near in time as possible to the 
performance of the assessed behaviour, is the most effective in provid-
ing motivation, shaping behaviour, and developing mental constructs 
(Shepard, 2000). For this reason, machine evaluations, such as those 
provided in online multiple-choice test questions or in simulations, can 
be very effective learning devices (Prensky, 2001). Most models of 
online learning, however, also stress the capacity for direct communica-
tion and feedback from the teacher to the student (Laurillard, 1997). 
This feedback is an integral part of the online teacher’s function of 
facilitating discourse.
A commonly used component of student assessment in formal 
online education is to require students to post comments. The useful-
ness and efficacy of this practice, however, has been hotly debated on 
discussion lists about online learning. Jiang and Ting (2000) report 
that college students studying online perceived that learning was sig-
nificantly correlated to the percentage of grade weight assigned to 
participation and their resulting participation in discussion. For some, 
however, the practice of marking for participation seems only to recall 
the onerous practice of attendance marking that rewards the quantity, 
and not the quality, of participation (Campbell, 2002). Others counter 
that in the absence of incentive for participation, a community will not 
be created. For instance, Palloff and Pratt (1999) argue that, given the 
emphasis on the process of learning in a social context that defines 
much constructivist-based learning design, participation in the process 
must be evaluated and appropriately rewarded. Most online students 
are practical adults facing much competition for their time; thus, 
they are less likely to participate in activities that are marginalized or 
viewed as supplemental to the course goals and assessment schema. 
Many courses I have reviewed have assessed participation in online 
activities as a component of the final mark, usually with a weighting of 
between ten and twenty-five percent.

Teaching in an Online Learning Context	
353
Student assessment of any kind requires that the teacher be 
explicit, fair, consistent, and as objective as possible. The following 
­examples illustrate how two experienced online learning teachers assess 
participation and thereby enhance their own teaching presence.
Assessment Frameworks
Susan Levine (2002) has developed a very clear set of instructions that 
she has used in graduate-level education courses to describe her expecta-
tions for student contributions to asynchronous online learning courses. 
She posts the following message to her students:
1.	 The instructor will start each discussion by posting one or more 
questions at the beginning of each week (Sunday or Monday). 
The discussion will continue until the following Sunday night, at 
which time the discussion board will close for that week.
2.	 Please focus on the questions posted. But do bring in related 
thoughts and material, other readings, or questions that occur to 
you from the ongoing discussion.
3.	 You are expected to post at least two substantive messages for each 
discussion question. Your postings should reflect an ­understanding 
of the course material.
4.	 Your postings should advance the group’s negotiation of ideas 
and meanings about the material; that is, your contributions 
should go beyond a “ditto.” Some ways you can further the 
­discussion include
•	expressing opinions or observations. These should be offered 
in depth and supported by more than personal opinion;
•	making a connection between the current discussion and previ-
ous discussions, a personal experience, or concepts from the 
readings;
•	commenting on or asking for clarification of another student’s 
statement;
•	synthesizing other students’ responses; or
•	posing a substantive question aimed at furthering the group’s 
understanding. (Levine, 2002)
Notice how Levine’s instructions guide students on both the 
­quantity (“two substantive postings” per discussion question) and the 
quality of contributions expected. Levine then goes on to describe 

354	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­qualitative aspects of a substantive posting. Notice also that from this 
posting of requirements, Levine reveals her teaching presence as struc-
tured and explicit, yet appreciative of qualitative outcomes associated 
with deep learning and critical thinking.
Nada Dabbagh (2000), from George Mason University, offers a 
slightly more prescriptive set of recommendations for posting:
•	Postings should be evenly distributed during the discussion 
period (not concentrated all on one day or at the beginning 
and/or end of the period).
•	Postings should be a minimum of one short paragraph and a 
maximum of two paragraphs.
•	Avoid postings that are limited to “I agree” or “great idea,” etc. 
If you agree (or disagree) with a posting then say why you agree 
by supporting your statement with concepts from the readings 
or by bringing in a related example or experience
•	Address the questions as much as possible (don’t let the 
­discussion stray)
•	Try to use quotes from the articles that support your postings. 
Include page numbers when you do that
•	Build on others’ responses to create threads
•	Bring in related prior knowledge (work experience, prior 
coursework, readings, etc.)
•	Use proper etiquette (proper language, typing, etc.)
Table 1 shows Dabbagh’s sample framework for assessing messages 
on a weekly basis. Note that one of the protocols is the use of proper 
etiquette, including language, typing, and, I assume, spelling. The impo-
sition of a requirement to adhere to particular protocols or standards 
is a hotly contested question among e-learning teachers. Some suggest 
that new forms of expression, grammar, and even spelling are arising in 
this medium, and that the lack of common tools (such as spell checkers) 
that plague many conferencing systems should allow for a much more 
relaxed form of expression. Others argue that requiring a high standard 
of written communication helps students learn to communicate effec-
tively in the online learning academic context. Given my own problems 
with spelling and the growing number of online learning students whose 
first language is not their language of instruction, I tend to be much 
more tolerant of language informalities in postings than I do when 
marking formal academic papers for term assignments.
Notice how Dabbagh requires more frequent postings than Levine, 
and further stipulates that the messages should be spread through the 

Teaching in an Online Learning Context	
355
week. The second set of criteria (responsiveness and demonstration of 
understanding) illustrates the way the online discussion is used to moti-
vate students to complete the weekly readings. Finally, compelling the 
learners’ adherence to a list of online protocol categories links their 
grading explicitly to quantitatively measurable behaviours.
Both of the above instruction and marking schemes provide 
extremely valuable guidance to learners, and make clear and explicit 
the requirements of the teacher. But what are the costs of such evalua-
tion? Assuming 20-30 students participate in an online learning class, 
the weekly assessment proscribed by Dabbagh could be a very time con-
suming activity. The amount of time required for assessment depends, 
in part, on the tools available to the online teacher. A good online learn-
ing system facilitates the display of the weekly postings by each student. 
An exemplary system would incorporate a number of active teacher 
agents that would
•	scan the postings for spelling and grammatical errors.
•	total the number of words.
•	 allow the display of preceding or subsequent postings and the loca-
tion of the posting in its thread to help assess “responsiveness.”
Criterion 
Timely discussion 
contributions
Responsiveness to 
discussion and 
demonstration of 
knowledge and 
understanding 
gained from 
assigned reading
Adherence to 
online protocols
Points
Excellent
5-6 postings 
well 
distributed 
throughout 
the week
very clear that 
readings were 
understood 
and incorpo-
rated well into 
responses
all online 
protocols 
followed
9-10
Good
4-6 postings 
distributed 
throughout 
the week 
readings were 
understood and 
incorporated 
into responses
1 online 
protocol not 
adhered to 
8
Average
3-6 postings 
somewhat 
distributed
postings have 
questionable 
relationship to 
reading material
2-3 online 
protocols not 
adhered to
 
6-7
Poor
2-6 not 
distributed 
throughout 
the week
not evident 
that readings 
were 
understood 
and/or not 
incorporated 
into discussion
4 or more 
online 
protocols not 
adhered to 
5 or less
Table 1.  Evaluation Criteria for Facilitating an Online/Class Discussion 
(Dabbagh, 2000)

356	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
•	graph the posting dates to allow quick visual identification of the 
timeliness of each contribution.
•	present a grade book for easy entry of weekly scores.
•	when appropriate, provide assistance for the teacher to create 
and automatically mark a variety of multiple-choice, matching, 
and fill-in-the-blank-type questions for student self-assessment.
•	automatically alert students when a grade has been posted 
or altered.
Finally, it should be noted that creating teaching presence is a 
challenging and rewarding task – but should not be a life-consuming 
one! Research on assessment in distance education shows that rapid 
feedback is important for both understanding and motivation to com-
plete courses (Rekkedal, 1983). The instantaneous nature of online 
learning, however, can lead to an unrealistic expectation by learners that 
teachers will provide instant feedback and assessment on submitted 
assignments. The virtual teacher has to lead a real life, so setting and 
adhering to appropriate timelines helps students to hold realistic expec-
tations and relieves teachers of the unrealistic expectation of providing 
instantaneous, 24/7 feedback. In addition, online teachers must become 
ruthless time managers, guarding against the tendency to check online 
activity constantly, and to do everything to support the learners that can 
be done, rather than everything that can reasonably be done within the 
constraints of a busy professional and personal life.
Some online teachers, especially those teaching at graduate levels, 
may be uncomfortable with the prescriptive nature of the guidelines 
presented above. These teachers are often more comfortable with sub-
jective assessments of students’ contributions to the online community 
and with demonstrations of their individual learning. This type of assess-
ment presents challenges to both students and teachers, due to the 
subjective nature of the assessment and the time required to review all 
contributions made during a course before assigning a grade. For these 
reasons, a number of authors have written about ways in which the stu-
dents’ own postings can be used as the basis for student assessment 
(Davie, 1989; Paulsen, 1995). Typically, these self-reflective assessments 
require students at the end of the course to illustrate both their contri-
butions and evidence of learning by composing a “reflection piece,” in 
which they quote from their own posting to the course. They should be 
given guidance to help them extract quotations that illustrate their con-
tributions. Obviously, students who have not participated will not be able 
to provide any transcript references from their previous postings, and 

Teaching in an Online Learning Context	
357
thus will generally receive lower evaluation scores on this project. 
Alternatively, a vicariously participating student (i.e., a lurker) may still 
be able to show learning by selective extraction of relevant postings from 
other students.
The increasing use of blog forms of discourse has resulted in  
the production of new rubrics for assessment. Bowling Green State 
University (n.d.), for example, provides links to 16 examples of such 
rubrics at http://facultydevelopmentbgsu.blogspot.com/2005/11/rubrics- 
to-evaluate-classroom-blogging.html. They are similar to the rubrics 
above, but perhaps pay greater attention to the reflective nature of 
learning that defined blogs from their origin as online diaries. 
In summary, giving directions for modelling effective online 
­discourse is a critical component of creating effective teaching presence. 
Assigning a portion of the assessment for class participation is a common 
practice in online learning courses. If participation is a formal and 
assessed requirement of the course, then developing and implementing 
an explicit assessment framework is an essential, but potentially time-
consuming, teaching task. Some online learning teachers make this assess-
ment into a more reflective exercise by assigning students the task of 
using their postings in the class conference, or their blogs, as evidence 
of their understanding the content concepts and their intellectual growth 
during the class. This type of assessed learning activity forces students to 
make quality contributions and then to reflect on them. Such a strategy 
moves the locus of responsibility from the teacher to the student, a 
­solution that can save teacher time while contributing to students’ 
­understanding and metacognition.
Provision of Direct Instruction
In this final category, teachers provide intellectual and scholarly leader-
ship, and share their subject matter knowledge with students. The online 
teacher must be able to set and communicate the intellectual climate 
of the course, and model the qualities of a scholar, including sensitivity, 
integrity, and commitment to the unrelenting pursuit of truth. The 
students and the teacher often have expectations that the teacher will 
communicate content information directly. Ideally, this knowledge is 
enhanced by the teacher’s personal interest, excitement, and in-depth 
understanding of the content and its application, in the context of 
formal study. The cognitive apprenticeship model espoused by Collins, 

358	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Brown, and Newman (1989), Rogoff’s (1990) model of “apprenticeship 
in ­thinking,” and Vygotsky’s (1978) scaffolding analogies illustrate a 
helping role for teachers, from their position of greater content knowl-
edge, in providing instructional support to students. Although many 
authors recommend a “guide-on-the-side” approach to teaching in  
e-learning settings, this type of laissez-faire approach diminishes a fun-
damental component of teaching and learning in formal education. A 
key feature of social cognition and constructivist learning models is the 
participation of an adult, expert, or more skilled peer who, in turn, 
“scaffolds” a novice’s learning. This direct instruction makes use of the 
subject matter and pedagogical expertise of the teacher. Some theorists 
argue that online teaching is unlike classroom-based teaching, in that 
“the teacher must adopt the role of facilitator, not content provider” 
(Mason & Romiszowski, 1996, p. 447). This arbitrary distinction between 
facilitator and content provider is troublesome. Garrison (1998), in a 
lively exchange, focuses on differentiating so-called teacher-centred and 
student-centred instruction, and makes the point that “the self-directed 
assumption of andragogy suggests a high degree of independence that 
is often inappropriate from a support perspective and which also ignores 
issues of what is worthwhile or what qualifies as an educational 
­experience” (p. 124).
Gilly Salmon (2000) describes the role and functions of an  
“e-moderator.” In this model, the teacher’s role in online conferencing 
is to facilitate learning. Her description suggests that the e-moderator 
does not require extensive subject matter expertise; instead, she writes, 
“they need a qualification at least at the same level and in the same topic 
as the course for which they are moderating” (p. 41). Such minimal 
subject-level competency seems to be less than that expected by learners 
and peers in higher education settings, however. Anderson, Garrison, 
Archer, and Rourke (2001) write:
We believe that there are many fields of knowledge, as well as 
attitudes and skills, that are best learned in forms of higher edu-
cation that require the active participation of a subject matter 
expert in the critical discourse. This subject matter expert is 
expected to provide direct instruction by interjecting comments, 
referring students to information resources, and organizing activi-
ties that allow the students to construct the content in their own 
minds and personal contexts.

Teaching in an Online Learning Context	
359
Often, students hold misconceptions that impair their capacity 
to build more correct conceptions and mental schemata. The design of 
effective learning activities leads to opportunities for students themselves 
to uncover these misconceptions, but the teacher’s comments and 
­questions as direct instruction are also invaluable.
Although teaching presence is most commonly set in synchronous 
or asynchronous activities of the virtual classroom, it can also be set 
through fixed formats such as access to frequently-asked-questions data-
bases or audio-, video-, or text-based presentations. Direct instruction 
can also be provided through an instructor’s annotations of the scholarly 
work of others, including reviews of articles, textbooks, or web sites. 
These annotations can easily be shared by the class (and optionally by 
the whole Net) through social bookmarking tools such as Del.icio.us 
(see http://del.icio.us/) and Diigo (http://www.diigo.com/). Finally, the 
teacher may be asked to provide direct instruction on technical questions 
about access to net-based resources, manipulation of the networking 
software, operation of other tools or resources, and other technical 
­concerns related to effective use of subject related resources.
The Process of Building Teaching Presence
Salmon (2000) has developed a model for e-moderators that demarcates 
the progression of tasks which the online teacher moves through in the 
process of effectively moderating an online course. The process begins 
by providing students with access and motivation. In this stage, any tech-
nical or social issues that inhibit participation are addressed, and students 
are encouraged to share information about themselves to create a virtual 
presence, as described above. In the second stage, Salmon suggests that 
the e-moderator continue to develop online socialization by “building 
bridges between cultural, social, and learning environments” (p. 26). In 
the third stage, the “information exchange,” Salmon suggests that the 
teaching task moves to facilitating learning tasks, moderating content-
based discussions, and bringing to light student misconceptions and 
misunderstandings. In the fourth stage, “knowledge construction,” stu-
dents focus on creating knowledge artefacts and projects that collabora-
tively and individually illustrate their understanding of course content 
and approaches. In the final “development” stage, learners become 
responsible for their own and their group’s learning by creating final 

360	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
projects, working on summative assignments, and demonstrating the 
achievement of learning outcomes.
Salmon’s model provides a useful guide and planning tool for 
online learning teachers; however, it should not be considered prescrip-
tive. For example, students may be entering the online class with a great 
deal of technical and social experience with the online learning envi-
ronment. In such cases, technical and social issues may have been 
resolved some time ago. Alternatively, a heterogeneous group may have 
some very sophisticated net-savvy students and some novices new to the 
online learning environment. Busy adult students may be anxious to 
avoid what they perceive as unproductive icebreakers associated with 
Stages 1 and 2, and desire to proceed to the more content-rich and 
potentially more meaningful learning activities associated with later 
stages. Thus, Salmon’s model must be customized to the unique needs 
of each online learning community.
Qualities of the e-Teacher
This chapter concludes with a discussion of the three sets of qualities that 
define an excellent e-teacher. First and primarily, an excellent e-teacher 
is an excellent teacher. Excellent teachers like dealing with learners; they 
have sufficient knowledge of their subject domain; they can convey enthu-
siasm both for the subject and for their task as a learning motivator; they 
are equipped with a pedagogical (or andragogical) understanding of the 
learning process, and have a set of learning ­activities at their disposal by 
which to orchestrate, motivate, and assess effective learning.
Beyond these generic teaching skills is a second set of technical 
skills. One does not have to be a technical expert to be an effective 
online teacher. One must, however, have sufficient technical skill to 
navigate and contribute effectively within the online learning context, 
have access to necessary hardware, and have sufficient Internet efficacy 
(Eastin & LaRose, 2000) to function within the inevitable technical chal-
lenges of these new environments. Internet efficacy is a personal sense 
of competence and comfort in the environment, such that the need for 
basic troubleshooting skills does not send the teacher into terror-filled 
incapacity. Finally, during this period of creation and adoption of new 
learning contexts and tools, the effective online learning teacher must 
have the type of resilience, innovativeness, and perseverance typical of 
all pioneers in unfamiliar terrain.

Teaching in an Online Learning Context	
361
Conclusion
This chapter has outlined the three major components of teacher 
­presence, and provided suggestions and guidelines for maximizing the 
effectiveness of the teaching function in online learning. I have not 
provided a lengthy list of “do’s and don’ts” for online teaching in a 
cookbook fashion; rather, I have attempted to provide a broad ­theoretical 
model, focusing on the three main tasks of the online teacher.
The context of online learning is still very much in a fluid and 
changing state. The Web itself, and the technologies that underlie it, 
are evolving rapidly to create a second web – the “Semantic Web” 
(Berners-Lee, 1999), and a social web which is often called “Web 2.0” 
(O’Reilly, 2005). The development of teacher and student agents, the 
structuring of content into learning objects (Wiley, 2000), the social 
construction and annotation of content by learners, teachers, and prac-
titioners, and the formal expression of learning interactions (Koper, 
2001) are creating a second-generation web that provides new capabili-
ties and challenges for online teachers and learners. As yet, we are at 
the early stages in the technological and pedagogical development of 
online learning. The fundamental characteristics of teaching and learn-
ing, however, and the three critical components of teaching presence – 
design and organization, facilitating discourse, and direct instruction 
– will continue to be critical components of teaching effectiveness in 
both online learning and classroom instruction.
References
Anderson, T. (2003a). Getting the mix right again: An updated and 
theoretical rationale for interaction. International Review of Research in 
Open and Distance Learning, 4(2). Retrieved August 24, 2007, from 
http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/ irrodl/article/view/149/230
Anderson, T. (2003b). Modes of interaction in distance education: 
Recent developments and research questions. In M. Moore & W. 
Anderson (Eds.), Handbook of Distance Education, (pp. 129–144). 
Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Anderson, T. (2005). Distance learning – Social software’s killer app? In 
Proceedings of the Open & Distance Learning Association of Australia, 
­Adelaide: ODLAA. Retrieved August 21, 2007, from http://www.unisa.

362	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
edu.au/odlaaconference/PPDF2s/13%20odlaa%20-%20Anderson.
pdf
Anderson, T. (2008). Towards a theory of online learning. In T. ­Anderson 
(Ed.), Theory and Practice of Online Learning, 2nd ed. (pp. 45–74). 
Edmonton, AB: AU Press. 
Anderson, T., Rourke, L., Archer, W., & Garrison, R. (2001). Assessing 
teaching presence in computer conferencing transcripts. Journal of the 
Asynchronous Learning Network, 5(2). Retrieved January 2008 from 
http://www.aln.org/publications/jaln/v5n2/v5n2_anderson.asp
Arbaugh, J. B. (2007). An empirical verification of the community of 
inquiry framework. Journal of Asynchronous Learning Networks,11(1). 
Retrieved August 21, 2007, from http://www.sloan-c.org/publications/
jaln/v11n1/
Berners-Lee, T. (1999). Weaving the Web: The original design and ultimate 
destiny of the World Wide Web by its inventor. San Francisco: Harper.
Bowling Green State University (n.d.). Rubrics for enhancing and teaching 
@ BGSU. Retrieved August 24, 2007, from http://facultydevelopment-
bgsu.blogspot.com/ 2005/11/rubrics-to-evaluate-classroom-blogging.
html 
Burge, E. & Howard, J. (1994). Audio-conferencing in graduate educa-
tion: A case study. American Journal of Distance Education 4(2), 3–15.
Bryant, T. (2006). Social software in academia. EDUCAUSE Quarterly, 2. 
Retrieved August 21, 2007, from https://www.educause.edu/ir/library/
pdf/eqm0627.pdf
Cameron, D., & Anderson, T. (2006). Comparing weblogs to threaded 
discussion tools in online educational contexts. International Journal of 
Instructional Technology and Distance Learning, 2(11). Retrieved August 
24, 2007, from http://www.itdl.org/Journal/Nov_06/article01.htm
Campbell, K. (2002). Power, voice and democratization: Feminist peda-
gogy and assessment in CMC. Educational Technology and Society, 5(3). 
Retrieved August 24, 2007, from http://www.ifets.info/journals/5_3/
campbell.html
Collins, A., Brown, J. S., & Newman, S. E. (1989). Cognitive apprentice-
ship: Teaching the crafts of reading, writing, and mathematics. In L.B. 
Resnick (Ed.), Knowing, learning, and instruction: Essays in honor of Robert 
Glaser, (pp. 453­494). Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.
Dabbagh, N. (2000). Online-protocols. Retrieved March 2008 from http://
mason.gmu.edu/~ndabbagh/wblg/online-protocol.html
Dalsgaard, C. (2006). Social software: E-learning beyond learning man-
agement systems. European Journal of Open, Distance and E-Learning, 2. 

Teaching in an Online Learning Context	
363
Retrieved August 24, 2007, from http://www.eurodl.org/materials/
contrib/2006/ Christian_Dalsgaard.htm
Daniel, J., & Marquis, C. (1988). Interaction and independence: Getting 
the mix right. In D. Sewart, D. Keegan, & B. Holmberg (Eds.), Distance 
education: International perspectives (pp. 339–359). London: ­Routledge.
Davie, L. (1989). Facilitation techniques for the online tutor. In R. Mason 
& A. Kaye (Eds.), MindWeave (pp. 74–85). Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Dixon, J., Crooks, H., & Henry, K. (2007). Breaking the ice: Supporting 
collaboration and the development of community online. Canadian 
Journal of Learning and Technology, 32(2). Retrieved August 24, 2007, 
from http://www.cjlt.ca/content/ vol32.2/dixon.html
Dron, J. (2007). Control and constraint in e-learning: Choosing when to choose. 
Hershey, PA: Information Science Pub.
Eastin, M., & LaRose, R. (2000). Internet self-efficacy and the psychology 
of the digital divide. Journal of Computer Mediated Communications, 6(1). 
Retrieved August 24, 2007, from http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol6/issue1/
eastin.html
Garrison, D. R. (1991). Critical thinking in adult education: A conceptual 
model for developing critical thinking in adult learners. International 
Journal of Lifelong Education, 10(4), 287–303.
Garrison, D. R. (1998). Andragogy, learner-centeredness, and the edu-
cational transaction at a distance. Journal of Distance Education, 3(2), 
123–127.
Garrison, D. R., & Anderson, T. (2003). E-Learning in the 21st century. 
London: Routledge.
Garrison, D. R., & Baynton, M. (1987). Beyond independence in distance 
education: The concept of control. American Journal of Distance Educa-
tion, 1(3), 3–15.
Garrison, R., Anderson, T., & Archer, W. (2000). Critical inquiry in text-
based environment: Computer conferencing in higher education. The 
Internet and Higher Education, 2(2–3), 87–105.
Holmberg, B. (1989). Theory and practice of distance education. London: 
Routledge.
Jiang, M., & Ting, E. (2000). A study of factors influencing students’ 
perceived learning in a web-based course environment. International 
Journal of Educational Telecommunications, 6(4), 317–338.
Koper, R. (2001). Modeling units of study from a pedagogical perspective: The 
pedagogical meta-model behind EML Heerlen. Open University of the Nether-
lands. Retrieved May 1, 2007, from dspace.ou.nl/bitstream/1820/36/1/ 
Pedagogical+metamodel+behind+EMLv2.pdf

364	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Koper, R. (2004). Use of the Semantic Web to solve some basic problems 
in education: Increase flexible, distributed lifelong learning, decrease 
teacher’s workload. Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 6. Retrieved 
August 24, 2007, from http://www-jime.open.ac.uk/2004/6
Laurillard, D. (1997) (Ed.) Rethinking university teaching: A framework for 
the effective use of educational technology. London: Routledge.
Levine, S. (2002). Replacement myth. IT Forum. Retrieved March 2008 
from http://www.listserv.uga.edu/cgi-bin/wa?A2=ind0208&L=itforum
&P =R7059&X=60858A07F2C0090FD4 
Mason, R., & Romiszowski, A. J. (1996). Computer-mediated communi-
cation. In D. Jonassen (Ed.), The handbook of research for educational 
communications and technology. (pp. 438–456). New York: Simon & 
Schuster Macmillan.
McGreal, R. (2004). Online education using learning objects. London: 
­Routledge Falmer.
McPeck, J. (1990). Teaching critical thinking. New York: Routledge.
O’Reilly, T. (2005). What is Web 2.0? Design patterns and business models for 
the next generation of software. Retrieved August 24, 2007, from http://
www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-is-web-
20.html
Palloff, R., & Pratt, K. (1999). Building learning communities in cyberspace. 
San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Paulsen, M. (1995). Moderating educational computer conferences. In 
Z. Berge & M. Collins (Eds.), Computer mediated communication and the 
online classroom (pp. 81–90). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press. 
Pickett, J. P., et al. (2007) The American heritage dictionary of the English 
language: Fourth edition. Retrieved August 24, 2007, from http://www.
bartleby.com/cgi-bin/texis/webinator/ahdsearch?search_type=enty&
query=Discourse&db=ahd&Submit=Search
Prensky, M. (2001). Digital game-based learning. New York: McGraw Hill.
Rekkedal, T. (1983). The written assignments in correspondence educa-
tion: Effects of reducing turn-around time. Distance Education, 4(2), 
231–250.
Richardson, W. (2006). Blogs, wikis, podcasts and other powerful web tools for 
classrooms. Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press.
Rogoff, B. (1990). Apprenticeship in thinking: Cognitive development in social 
context. New York: Oxford University Press.
Rourke, L., & Kanuka, H. (2007). Barriers to online critical discourse. 
International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 2(1), 

Teaching in an Online Learning Context	
365
105–126. Retrieved August 24, 2007, from http://www.springerlink.
com/content/r3243740340t0847/
Rourke, L., & Anderson, T. (2002). Using peer teams to lead online 
discussions. Journal of Interactive Media in Education, 1. Retrieved August 
27, 2007, from http://www-jime.open.ac.uk/2002/1/
Salmon, G. (2000). E-moderating: The key to teaching and learning online. 
London: Kogan Page.
Shepard, L. A. (2000). The role of assessment in a learning culture. 
Educational Researcher, 29(7), 4–14. Retrieved August 24, 2007, from 
http://www.jstor.org/view/0013189x/ap040287/04a00020/0
Vygotsky, L. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological 
processes. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Wiley, D. (2000). Connecting learning objects to instructional design 
theory: A definition, a metaphor, and a taxonomy. In D. A. Wiley (Ed.), 
The instructional use of learning objects: Online version. Retrieved August 
24, 2007, from http://www.reusability.org/read/chapters/wiley.doc


Chapter 15
Call Centres  
in Distance Education
Alex Z. Kondra, Colleen Huber, 
Kerri Michalczuk & Andrew Woudstra
Athabasca University 
Introduction
In the past decade, call centres and contact centres have evolved to become 
the front line for customer interaction in many types of organizations. As 
such, they have a critical importance in the implementation of organiza-
tional strategy (Evanson, Harker, & Frei, 1998). Call centres have applica-
tions in many industries which offer customer service, as they can provide 
customers with a single access point to diverse services; they can also be 
critical in the management of an organization’s relationship with its cus-
tomers. While many organizations use call centres to solicit clients or 
customers for new sales or donations, they are also used to accomplish 
surveys of customer satisfaction or public opinion and provide services to 
customers. Despite their growing ubiquity, call centres have been subject 
to severe criticism as poor places to work (Taylor & Bain, 1999). Nonetheless, 
not all call centres are subject to the common criticisms of being highly 
Tayloristic and unrewarding places to work (Holman, 2002).

368	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
In education, call centres can be useful to an educational 
­institution in many ways, ranging from simple provision of information 
to prospective students, to fundraising, collection of survey data, and 
even provision of instructional services (Hitch & MacBrayne, 2003). In 
distance education in particular, the call centre concept can be an effec-
tive communication tool, enabling the institution to provide and improve 
service to students in many areas, including instruction (Adria & 
Woudstra, 2001; Kondra & Michalczuk, 2007). When coupled with cus-
tomer relationship management (CRM) software, a call centre can 
become a powerful tool in the development and maintenance of the 
student-university relationship, and provide a critical link to the univer-
sity for an often isolated learner (Kondra & Michalczuk, 2007). CRM 
software can also provide for quality control in student interaction and 
even help in instructional design. At Athabasca University, call centres 
are used in a number of contexts and show the potential for expansion 
and consolidation, to take advantage of economies of scale.
Organizational Strategy and Call Centres
Strategy and strategic decision-making have long been areas of active 
academic and practitioner inquiry. Chandler (1962) studied the develop-
ment of American corporations in the early twentieth century, and pos-
tulated that corporate structure was designed to implement strategy; in 
other words, structure followed strategy. Much recent work (Eisenhardt, 
1999; Kim & Mauborgne, 1999; Markides, 1999; Pascale, 1999) suggests 
that strategy is a dynamic that emerges from the competitive environ-
ment, evaluates that environment in an ongoing manner, and flexibly 
adjusts the corporate course when necessary. Organizations compete on 
the edge, adjusting their deployment of employees and other resources 
as necessary strategic changes are made (Hamel & Prahalad, 1994).
Over the past 20 to 25 years, experience has shown that ­information 
technology is an increasingly important potential contributor to an 
organization’s productivity, and that organizations experience maximum 
value when information technology investments are strategically driven. 
Davenport and Short (1990) studied the relationship between informa-
tion technology and business process redesign, and postulate an enabling 
link between, on the one hand, the development of strategic vision and 
process objectives, and on the other, successful, information-technology-
driven process redesign.

Call Centres in Distance Education	
369
Call centres provide an example of the application of these 
­concepts. Call centre design has been enabled by the use of telecom-
munications technology and its ongoing integration with information 
technology. Call centre concepts are becoming integral to the redesign 
of business processes (particularly informational processes as distin-
guished from those focused on physical objects), and where call centre 
implementations are strategically driven and aligned, their value to the 
organization increases.
It is important that the objectives established for a call centre 
support and enhance the organization’s strategic direction. For example, 
a call centre focused on routing telephone calls to the appropriate staff 
member or department has a relatively narrow task; it will be suited to 
an organization that needs to give short, concise answers to a high call 
volume. An inbound telemarketing call centre focused on sales will allow 
longer calls, focusing on minimizing waiting times and maximizing sales 
impact. If the organization as a whole is strategically focused on the 
creation of customer loyalty, however, the call centre would be a primary 
means to achieve that goal, and both of the examples above would fall 
short in contributing to this corporate strategy (Holt, 2000).
Many call centre managers are looking for ways to build cost-
­effective, competitive operations using industry benchmark information:
We’ve become obsessed in this industry with mass comparison. 
We survey and benchmark and publish averages, quartiles and 
percentages. These numbers get proclaimed as ‘industry stan-
dards’ that your call centre should aspire to match. (Cleveland 
& Hopton, 2002)
As these authors go on to note, however, the surveys reveal that, 
overall, customers were not happy with the service. Call centres are in 
a chronic state of balancing productivity and quality (Kantsperger & 
Kunz, 2005), and balancing this inherent tension between call centre 
standardization and customization will always be a concern (Frenkel, 
Tam, Korczynski, & Shire, 1998).
Given the diversity of mission and function in call centres, it is 
likely that what fits one will not fit all. It is much better to examine what 
the organization is trying to achieve, and to build processes and systems 
that help to achieve these goals in effective and efficient ways. Call 
centres can be a sound strategic asset for an organization, because they 
can strengthen customer relationships, and enable the organization to 

370	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
learn more about customers, to serve them better. Adria and Chowdhury 
(2002) make a strong case for using call centres to improve an organi-
zation’s ability to serve its customers. They argue for the empowerment 
of call centre managers and employees to enhance customer service, 
and they note that the main responsibility for workers in a call centre 
operation is to maintain and enhance the reputation of the organization. 
That is, the organization’s carefully developed customer service culture 
is at risk during each customer interaction.
As universities deal with a more competitive environment, they 
are adopting a student-as-customer strategy (Driscoll & Wicks, 1998). 
Integrating a call centre into an overall strategic plan can separate one 
distance education provider from another. Given that the competition 
for students in the distance education environment is increasing, careful 
strategic positioning of the distance education provider is essential.
One of the strategic decisions that must be made by an ­organization 
is whether or not to outsource a call centre. A call centre can outsource 
as much or as little of the technology and services as they choose. By 
outsourcing, companies aim to benefit quickly from the fast and efficient 
resources from an outside source. The complexity of managing outsourc-
ing relationships and gaining an accurate picture of results, however, is 
proving to be very difficult and costly. Outsourcing call centres in the 
education arena could prove to be even more difficult as customer 
service representatives (CSRs) are an important part of the overall teach-
ing team and relationship management, thereby increasing the risk 
associated with outsourcing.
Call Centres in Organizations
Traditionally, call centres have been implemented in businesses to 
improve cost effectiveness and the delivery of customer services, as well 
as to generate additional revenue. While their popularity has been 
growing, they have a bad reputation and have been described as a 
“modern form of ‘Taylorism’” (Zapf, Isic, Bechtoldt, & Blau, 2003, 
p. 311), and even as “satanic mills” (Kinnie, Hutchinson, & Purcell, 2000, 
p. 967). Criticisms of call centres include Batt & Moynihan (2002):
•	Low skilled work
•	Poor working conditions
•	Fast, machine pacing of work
•	Routine, standardized, and boring tasks

Call Centres in Distance Education	
371
•	High stress
•	Short, fast job cycles
•	Poor job security
•	Low pay, possibly piece rate
•	Extreme employee monitoring
These criticisms are associated with the mass-production, high-
volume, low-value-added examples particularly associated with surveying 
and telemarketing, which are the most visible examples of call centres. 
Despite these criticisms, alternative models do exist that ameliorate these 
problems (Batt & Moynihan, 2002). Call centres can help streamline 
and enrich customer service, and provide customers and staff with a 
knowledge base through technology that complements labour, rather 
than replaces it, and does not create a frenetic pace of work. Some call 
centres have been designed in a manner that requires highly skilled 
workers with associated job security, high pay, task variety, and worker 
satisfaction (Batt, 2002). It is also possible to design enriched jobs by 
mixing administrative and other work to improve task variety, and by 
introducing high-commitment human resource management practices 
to increase overall job and user satisfaction (Houlihan, 2002).
The professional service and mass customization models are two 
high value-added call centre models that attempt to overcome many of 
the standard criticisms of call centres (Batt & Moynihan, 2002). In the 
professional service model, technology does not replace labour but 
­complements it; employees need to be educated and highly skilled. 
Collaborative decision making with elements of discretion in decision 
making and teamwork are essential. Individuals develop substantial firm-
specific social capital that hinges on trust among professionals. The mass 
customization model is a hybrid between the professional service model 
and the mass production model. This hybrid model attempts to keep 
costs down while providing a quality, customized service. Automation and 
process reengineering are essential to help keep costs down while trying 
to provide a high quality interactive experience. The hybrid model also 
requires CSRs to exercise a high degree of discretion and skill, as they 
are usually expected to deal with relatively complex user interactions.
In both of these high-involvement models, technology is intended 
to complement rather than replace labour; work is highly skilled, discre-
tion is involved, and collaborative work is essential. Collaborative structures 
generally provide better call centre service (Batt & Moynihan, 2002), and 
both models are consistent with high-commitment human resource man-
agement practices that should improve overall job and user satisfaction.

372	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Call centres have particular significance in three areas: customer 
service and retention, direct marketing, and information sources for 
management and customer feedback (Friedman, 2001).
•	Customer/student service and retention: In business operations, call 
centres have become the primary contact point with customers, 
and serve as the means by which the organization creates a long-
term relationship with individual customers and maintains cus-
tomer satisfaction. Customer satisfaction will generally lead to 
retention and to word-of-mouth recommendations. In distance 
education, call centres can help create the same type of relation-
ship. In the context of a university’s service standards for process-
ing applications, marking assignments, or answering calls and 
messages, call centre staff are the consistent point of contact with 
the student, and can even become their advocates.
•	Direct marketing: The support provided by a call centre is increas-
ingly seen as a service that customers expect to find integrated 
with product offerings, and available by phone and on the Internet. 
This contact with the customer (who, in the case of online or 
distance education, is a student) may result in opportunities to 
help the student choose additional products (programs or courses) 
and services (e.g., advising, counselling, tutoring), or may be used 
to prompt students to complete courses or programs.
•	Management information and student/customer feedback: A call centre 
with good software accumulates a great deal of information about 
customers or students and courses. This information is collected 
by analysing call documentation data, or by directly presenting 
questions to the customer or student. The information can range 
from simple to complex, from student’s opinions about university 
policies or problems with courses, to aiding in the design of web 
sites and even course design. Distance education institutions 
should make the collection and analysis of information a major 
call centre goal, particularly given that the distributed nature of 
this work makes the collection of such information difficult.
Customer/Student Service and Retention
The help desk first emerged to help customers and staff of organizations 
deal with technical problems associated with computer use. Noel Bruton 
(2002), a well-known information technology (IT) consultant in Great 

Call Centres in Distance Education	
373
Britain, notes that the IT help desk took on its current form in the mid-
1980s. The call centre concept used today came later, in the 1990s, to 
deal with issues and queries not related to technology. According to 
Bruton, a key difference between a help desk and a call centre lies in 
how the two functions deal with knowledge management. He contends 
that help desks, while they do impart prepared or pre-manufactured 
information, also require diagnostic skills from their staff. In addition, 
we exist in an information society where people desire immediate answers 
to questions, and the distance education environment is no different 
(Howell, Williams & Lindsay, 2003). Many colleges and universities 
support multiple software and hardware platforms. With increasing offer-
ings in online distance education, students will not only be calling with 
questions related to course content; they will also require technical assis-
tance. Good service to students requires a single contact point for both 
technical- and content-related questions.
Call centre services to students engaged in e-learning require that 
call centre staff have diagnostic skills. These skills enable them to work 
with students to determine the nature of, and solutions to, their course 
content queries (tutoring), and to work through program issues (advis-
ing). To deliver a one-stop shop for students engaged in e-learning, it is 
important that the diagnostic skills offered by help desk personnel are 
combined with the directive and prepared services of a typical call centre. 
In a consolidated call centre/help desk, the use of a knowledge base is 
important for both functions; however, with diagnostic situations, the 
bigger issue is usually trying to deduce the actual problem. The knowl-
edge base built up for many course-related, program-related, and techni-
cal questions can be straightforward, comprised of simple questions and 
answers. The knowledge base for diagnostic questions must also include 
a step-by-step guide for asking questions to determine the nature of the 
problem, followed by steps for solving the problem. Learning to deduce 
the actual problem is a unique skill set and takes time to learn.
The staff of an online learning call centre must incorporate skills 
from both call centre and help desk environments, and have specialists 
available to deal with particularly complex issues. Good skills within an 
environment such as this usually include strong communication skills, 
student (or customer) service experience, and an ability to adapt to new 
situations. A good set of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs), complete 
with step-by-step solutions, should be made available to call centre staff. 
And, as with course content queries, technical expertise should be 
­available for more complex issues. 

374	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Brandt (2002) notes that only 14% of all help desk calls involve 
new problems that require serious attention, while the remaining 86% 
could all be resolved automatically, without human intervention, via web-
based features. It has also been shown that if end-users are equipped with 
better documentation or automated self-help web-based facilities, calls 
to the call centre or help desk can be greatly reduced (Brandt, 2002; 
Jordan 2003; Lawlor, 2001). Lawlor further points to surveys showing that 
organizations that reduced the number of help desk/call centre calls by 
creating self-help options had a higher level of user satisfaction.
Doherty (2001) points out that help desks are typically organized 
in layers or tiers. Tiers can start at web-based self-help, which Lawlor 
(2001) designates as Tier 0, and move up in the hierarchy to the front-
line facilitator, Tier 1, through the desktop analyst, Tier 2, to the network 
specialist, Tier 3. A consolidated call centre/help desk in education would 
likewise be layered in tiers. Where possible, web-based self-help (Tier 0) 
should be developed, providing extensive FAQ files, bulletin boards, and 
conference and chat areas. These are the least expensive solutions, and 
provide an immediate source of information. Call centre staff that are 
the first contact with students are Tier 1, technical experts to whom 
questions are referred are Tier 2, and the academics serve as Tier 3.
Direct Marketing Opportunities 
Early uses of call centres included marketing and promotion, as well as 
the provision of technical assistance. There are two primary operating 
modes for these functions. The first is to field calls from current custom-
ers wishing to place more orders or discuss products, and from new 
customers directed to the call centre number by advertising and promo-
tional materials. This is the function that increasingly involves the 
Internet. The second operating mode for a call centre is the outgoing 
cold call. A possible customer is identified by region, income, or some 
other factor, and is called at home with an offer of the organization’s 
product, a solicitation of a donation, etc. A carefully prepared script is 
provided for the call centre staff to use in their contacts. This is a popular 
function of a call centre for charities and long-distance phone compa-
nies. Call centres are also used to carry out surveys (Coen, 2001; Hitch 
& MacBrayne, 2003).
In education, the primary use of call-centre technology in 
­marketing and promotion is to field incoming calls from students who 
have learned of the educational institution through advertising, word-
of-mouth referral, Internet search, or other means (Hitch & MacBrayne, 

Call Centres in Distance Education	
375
2003). Many institutions accept volumes of queries from prospective 
students and their parents, for which they provide information about 
their programs, both educational and extracurricular. Often, large 
numbers of attendants are only needed during peak recruiting seasons. 
In distance education, where students are not on campus, there is addi-
tional pressure to fill the information needs of current students on a 
day-to-day basis, typically by answering questions about course availability, 
helping a student get information about their performance, and so on. 
Finally, the student advising function, wherein an advisor works through 
program planning issues with a prospective or current student, is also 
an ideal candidate for applying the technologies and organizational 
format found in call centres. The question of cold calling to solicit cus-
tomers or students is more questionable, but should perhaps not be 
dismissed out-of-hand. Cold calls could be used to remind students of 
impending course deadlines, possibly increasing completion rates and 
future enrolments, or to (re)inform them of potential new course or 
program opportunities. The structure of such calls and the criteria for 
initiation would require careful consideration.
Management Information and Student/Customer Feedback
Knowledge management (KM), rather than information management, 
can be a source of competitive advantage for an organization. A central-
ized call centre, when coupled with appropriate software, is now a key 
element of successful organizational strategy. Good knowledge manage-
ment consists of more than collecting and disseminating information – it 
includes organizing and analyzing information to provide the maximum 
benefit for the organization and its customer:
Customer service organizations require easy access to accurate, 
consistent information in order to answer customers’ questions. 
KM provides the process to capture relevant information and 
make it readily accessible by agents and customers via self-service. 
(Jordan, 2003, p. 44)
Greater accumulation of knowledge and good management of 
that knowledge can allow CSRs to engage in a wider variety of tasks, 
allowing for greater economies of scales (Mitchell, 2001), and increasing 
task variety has benefits in terms of user and job satisfaction (discussed 
below). Good management of data is also important if CSRs are to locate 
and disseminate information quickly and accurately. It can also increase 

376	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
the efficiency of the overall operation by increasing CSRs’ ability to resolve 
issues on first contact. rather than requiring a call-back or ­escalation to 
another level (Kotwal, 2004).
One of the significant advantages for instructional designers and 
academics is that CRM software enables tracking of all contacts to a call 
centre. CRM data can provide information on the nature of all inquiries 
about a course, and whether they are related to administrative matters 
or academic content which, in turn, can be mined by faculty or instruc-
tional designers. This tracking can identify instructional design issues 
related to a course and/or identify subject matter that could require 
supplemental material or remedial exercises to improve student success. 
Ideally, academics and instructional designers should provide self-service 
help for distance students. Given that they increasingly want instant 
access to information (Howell, et al., 2003), this specialized service would 
be the ideal solution. Also, in distance education, it is typical that one 
person designs a course while many deliver it; and as enrolments increase, 
an increasing number of people are involved in course delivery. As a 
result, KM becomes particularly important in situations of added-course 
delivery complexity. Collecting relevant feedback from a large group of 
individuals who deliver a course and from a large number of students 
enrolled in a course can be improved through CRM software that can 
track inquires by course. This provides for a systematic collection of 
information, and does not suffer from the so-called “recency effect,” 
meaning that people tend to recall the most recent events, or recall 
errors. Clearly, this software can be particularly useful in the distributed 
work environment common in distance education. CRM software can 
help to overcome some of the communication problems associated with 
distributed work environments by being a central collection point for a 
myriad of information.
Call Centre Consolidation
It is not uncommon for an organization to have more than one call 
centre, each one focusing on a specific function. Nonetheless, call centre 
consolidation makes sense for a number of reasons, including the rapid 
progression in technological advances enabling better access to organi-
zational information for call centre agents and customers (through KM), 
and improved employee satisfaction through increasing task variety and 
skill levels. When there are similarities in the tasks performed and overlap 
in the services provided by separate call centres, there is potential for 
economies of scale. An agent in a large group can handle more calls at 

Call Centres in Distance Education	
377
a given service level than they can in a small group. Mitchell (2001) 
points out that “efficiencies” can be achieved up to a call-centre size of 
approximately 50 agents. After this point, incremental gains are minimal, 
if they occur at all. While many call centres contain many more than 
50 agents, the maximum optimal size for their subunits or teams is 50. 
Other motivators for call centre consolidation include reduced equip-
ment costs, simplified implementation of new technologies, better 
control over service quality, reduced management staff requirements, 
and consolidated KM.
In the past, call centres segmented calls on the basis of skills. 
Consolidation can also occur within a call centre by rationalizing the 
segmentation of some agent groups. For example, in a bank, commercial 
loans require different skills than personal loans. In other settings, tech-
nical help requires different skills than service, which requires different 
skills than sales. According to Mitchell (2001), knowledge management, 
process management, just-in-time training, and CRM all contribute to 
the tearing down of skills barriers to service. Mitchell notes that
Today’s segmentation strategies no longer look to agent skills as 
the basis for routing calls, but instead focus on client value to 
determine what services to provide through what media. Low 
value customers get routed to self-service technologies. High value 
customers get high-touch service. No matter who or what the 
customer ends up interacting with, the agent, human or com-
puter, has all of the services, corporate knowledge and process 
flows needed to handle the customer requests. (p. 26)
In an educational environment, the concepts of “low value” and 
“high value” customers have no place; however, the concept of segmen-
tation is potentially useful. Such segmentation could be based on student 
characteristics (graduate versus undergraduate, area of study, and so 
on), as well as the type of query. Many queries may be routed to self-
service areas and others are routed to specialized agents. Data collected 
within the call centre through CRM software will inform the segmenta-
tion. Improving KM will allow each agent to handle more diverse and 
more difficult calls, and as more knowledge becomes incorporated into 
knowledge systems, training becomes more an exercise in teaching 
agents the “how to’s” of developing customer relationships than focusing 
on each product or service offered. This can increase task variety and 
the skills and training required by CSRs that, in turn, can have a ­significant 

378	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
influence on employees’ job satisfaction, absenteeism, and retention 
(discussed below). The integration of call centres also encourages the 
integration of knowledge management systems that, in turn, increases 
the consistency of messages from the organization to the customer and 
provides the organization with a “single face” (Kotwal, 2004). Integration 
can also lead to increased customer satisfaction, by having one person 
deal with different inquiries in a single customer contact, rather than 
requiring customers to make numerous contacts with an organization.
Critical Success Factors for Call Centres
Distance education shares the trends affecting many firms in financial 
service, telecommunication, and technology industries. A dominant 
trend is the increasing distance from the customer (or student). Phone 
companies, utility providers, and banks once operated many small outlets 
scattered throughout cities and were present in every small community; 
now, however, there are a few large facilities (and increasingly, online 
services) are backed up by call centres. For call centres to be successful 
and productive in any field, including distance education, a number of 
critical success factors must be in place. Successful call-centre implemen-
tation requires the development of effective processes and policies, the 
implementation of appropriate technology, and the adoption of effective 
human resource management processes (Evanson et al., 1998).
Processes and Policy
Once a call centre business strategy has been developed, and the pro-
cesses required to carry out the designated objectives have been adopted, 
it is crucial that those processes be evaluated. A key part of this evalua-
tion involves looking at the types of contacts the call centre is receiving, 
how contacts are routed, and how contact processes are managed. The 
call centre should also establish polices and standardized operational 
procedures. Most importantly, quality monitoring and reporting pro-
cesses must be in place so that the call centre can continue to meet 
established objectives.
Call centres had their genesis and have been particularly effective 
in organizations that received large volumes of calls from customers who 
experienced uncertain results in seeking the right individual or depart-
ment to deal with their specific issue. Staff in such organizations were 
also frustrated and not utilized effectively, as they forwarded calls or tried 

Call Centres in Distance Education	
379
to help in areas outside their experience. Now, the direction of calls to 
one area allows call centre agents to handle queries in volume. Only calls 
requiring additional expertise not available in the call centre are referred 
to other areas of the organization. Call centres become a collection point 
for organizational information as databases are created to allow agents 
to handle a wider range of queries. Thus, over time, the expertise and 
information available to a call centre is expanded, so it can handle more 
incoming calls without resorting to referrals and call-backs.
A call centre concept can also be used to allocate and distribute 
workload in the organization. Without such a centre, highly paid pro-
fessionals are often used to handle tasks that underutilize their exper-
tise. A call centre with good call-routing processes can distribute calls 
to the individuals or automated agents most qualified to handle them. 
Ideally, all relevant information about a customer and their issues is 
documented and available to all agents within a call centre using CRM 
software. In addition, with collaborative systems, several agents can 
simultaneously work on a particularly difficult issue with a customer, 
with each staff member contributing their particular expertise in ­resolving 
the problem.
Customer-focused organizations use call centres most successfully 
(Evanson et al., 1998). Many firms seeking to become more customer-
oriented purchase and install elaborate CRM software suites that track 
and record service transactions. If this installation occurs without sig-
nificant planning, however, and especially if managers are dazzled by 
the “promises of the technology,” the implementation often fails. Rigby, 
Reichheld, and Dawson (2003) emphasize that CRM installations work 
best if the organization starts with a customer strategy, then realigns its 
structure and processes to fit the strategy, and finally selects the technol-
ogy that is appropriate for the chosen strategy and processes. Whether 
implementing CRM technology, call centre technology, or both, the 
organization must first ensure that its strategy is appropriately customer-
focused, and that the technology under consideration fits with that 
­strategy (Hitt, Frei, & Harker, 1998; Rigby et al.).
CRM products have helped call centres to organize some of their 
customer contact processes, and increase efficiencies and quality of 
service. According to Kiska (2002), a new approach must be added to 
follow up on CRM processes. Customer experience management (CEM) 
is emerging as a means to retain valued customers. It is widely known 
that retention of current customers is cost effective and highly profitable 
for an organization (Reichheld, 1996). This can also be true for a ­distance 

380	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
education organization that benefits from program or long-term ­students. 
A CEM process begins by identifying key measures for customer satisfac-
tion and retention. The statistics it gathers can help organizations make 
sound decisions when it comes to call centre operations and policies 
(Kiska). Holt (2000) holds opinions similar to Kiska’s, indicating that 
customer loyalty and satisfaction are closely linked to the success of the 
organization and call centre:
If call centre operators used customer contact to understand 
attitudes to the company, to assess brand perceptions, to research 
responses to marketing activity, and to begin to unlock the secrets 
of long-term loyalty and advocacy, the value of that call centre 
operation would increase immeasurably. It will enable other parts 
of the organisation to assess the relevant issues and take the 
­necessary action.  (p. 11)
Technology
Information technology is increasingly important to a wide range of firms, 
and is the “enabling platform” for call centres, the Internet, and other 
innovations. Earlier in this chapter, we noted work by Davenport and 
Short (1990) on the relationship between information technology 
and business process redesign. Hitt and colleagues (1998) investigated 
the adoption of technology in the financial industry. They note that 
research has found IT investment to be a substantial contributor to 
­productivity and productivity growth.
In the last 15 years, various call-centre technologies have become 
available to the market, including voice-over-Internet protocol (VoIP), 
customer-relationship-integration tools, and Internet and web commu-
nication tools and products. In their study of call centres in the financial 
services industry, Evanson and colleagues (1998) note that call centres 
need to ensure their technology is effective or appropriate for its strategy. 
Krol (2002) indicates that while excesses in the adoption of technology 
were common in the technology bubble, organizations are now return-
ing to basics. That is to say, call centres are more interested in products 
that provide mission-critical services. Customer loyalty and service 
­objectives should drive call centre technology investments.
Technology is transforming the traditional call centre, allowing 
staff to be in contact with customers in a number of different ways, 
including, but not limited to, email, chat, web browsing, and voicemail. 

Call Centres in Distance Education	
381
Finding the right technology is not an easy task, but the first steps must 
be to determine the organization’s needs and to link customers with the 
information and services they require quickly. Knowledge databases, 
CRM or customer tracking, CEM or customer follow-up and retention, 
and handling of multiple contact media must be integrated into a system 
that is easily accessible to front-line staff, or to customers directly. 
Automated systems can match customers with call centre staff, based on 
the customer’s profile and the staff member’s knowledge focus. The 
banking industry is experimenting with such “intelligent routing,” to 
direct calls from the bank’s best customers to particular representatives 
(Knowledge at Wharton, 2002).
The first generation of call centres focused on answering ­telephone 
calls from customers (students). As the Internet has become more widely 
used, call centres have made use of it as well. Internet technology allows 
feedback to customers or students to occur through either of these two 
channels, and the more flexible Internet media provide a variety of tools, 
including web chat, asynchronous conferencing, video conferencing, 
and web call-backs.
Recently, call centres have also begun to make use of web sites to 
provide their customers with more information. There has been a push 
to provide customers with Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) pages, 
where customers can look up and provide answers to their own questions, 
while intelligent question-and-answer systems can look up answers for 
clients automatically (Brandt, 2002). For example, Athabasca University 
has developed such a tool, called AskAU (see http://www.askau.ca).
When considering any of the web-based tools for use with a call 
centre, it is important to consider their positive and negative aspects, 
and how they will affect call-centre operations. Since the Internet gives 
customers (or students) the power to seek out answers on their own, 
organizations are challenged to develop integrated systems to allow 
delivery of services that are better and operate faster than those that 
customers can find for themselves. In addition, people tend to like “multi-
channel” services, meaning they may use the web site, but also have 
direct contact with CSRs. These channels should be viewed as comple-
mentary, not competitive.
The Internet is capable of providing vast amounts of information 
for call centre staff, as well as for current and potential customers or 
students. Developing user interfaces that make this information quickly 
available, in a format that satisfies the diverse needs of users, is an 
ongoing challenge, however. A major impact of the new Internet-based 

382	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
technologies is that the “service bar” is being raised. If routine issues are 
handled on the Web through automatic agents, call centres must be in 
a position to handle more sophisticated calls.
Human Resources 
Human, not financial, capital must now be the starting point and 
­foundation for a successful strategy. Financial capital and also technology 
are increasingly being commodified, and each is found in abundant 
supply (Bartlett & Ghoshal, 2002). As a result, the skills, knowledge, and 
ability of an organization’s staff to innovate will increasingly be the dis-
tinguishing factors for successful strategy implementation and value 
creation (Pfeffer, 1994).
Customer service studies show that when something goes right, 
customers give credit to the individual employee dealing with the 
problem; when something goes wrong, customers usually blame the orga-
nization itself. This makes it crucial for any organization to have the right 
number of people with the right skills, at the right place and the right time, 
ready to answer customer demands (Krol, 2002).
Given that personnel costs consume 60% of budgets in call centres 
(Batt, 2002), recruitment and hiring of front-line and call-centre manag-
ers, training and coaching of staff, and ongoing performance manage-
ment are of critical importance to a call centre’s success. Call-centre staff 
are the front-line human element for the customer. To promote the 
reputation of the organization, they need to feel they are a vital part of 
the organization. Selection of staff with customer service skills, such as 
excellent communication skills, writing skills, and a positive attitude, is 
extremely important. It is also important to recruit personnel with appro-
priate experience and educational background, to ensure they are 
capable of providing quality services to customers or students.
Training and ongoing coaching is also extremely important, as 
call-centre environments, technologies, and processes tend to change 
rapidly. Staff members must be involved in the changes, buy into the 
new processes, and have the information they need to be able to carry 
them out.
Assessment and performance checks are essential. What are the 
employee satisfaction levels? What are your customers saying about 
the service they are receiving? Retention of staff is as important as reten-
tion of customers, so that loyalty to service is maintained. Rigby and 
colleagues (2003) note that the prime driver of customer loyalty is the 
loyalty of the organization’s employees. Creating a positive and healthy 

Call Centres in Distance Education	
383
environment for employees and empowering employees reduces ­turnover. 
Institutions with higher employee empowerment tend to have higher 
overall employee retention (Evanson et al., 1998).
Adria and Chowdhury (2002) argue that call centres can and 
should allow employees to upgrade their skills, make more and better 
decisions, and participate in a team-based organizational culture. Skills 
training leads to higher employee satisfaction and higher productivity. 
Frontline staff should be corporate ambassadors for the organization. 
They also argue that organizations should pursue decentralization and 
team building: frontline employees are more productive if they are 
empowered to make decisions and provide input into the operation of 
the call centre; and customer service is more effective if employees feel 
they are part of the common effort to achieve excellence.
All of these factors lead to the conclusion that distance education 
providers need to develop high value-added call centres, coupled with 
high-commitment management techniques. These techniques include 
such things as increasing CSRs’ discretion, high task variety, reduced 
surveillance, intensive training, self-directed team-oriented work struc-
tures, and the like (Houlihan, 2002; Kinnie et. al, 2000). It is hoped that 
by increasing CSRs’ work satisfaction and retention, customer service 
will improve.
Call Centres at Athabasca University
Athabasca University serves more than 32,000 students annually. Courses 
are offered primarily through independent study, which gives students 
the flexibility to set their own schedules in terms of time and place and, 
in effect, to pursue part-time studies and a full-time career if they wish. 
The university strives to remove the barriers of time, space, past educa-
tional experience and, to some degree, level of income. Athabasca 
University’s mission and mode of operation make effective methods of 
communicating with students and prospective students of central impor-
tance. Using the call-centre model to build student satisfaction is an 
attractive alternative for Athabasca University.
Over the past 15 years, Athabasca University has developed three 
unique call centres:
•	The Information Centre, the call centre operating as a “first point 
of contact,” was established in 1995. Information Centre staff field 
all incoming calls not directed to a private line or to one of the 

384	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
other call centres, and determine the purpose of the call. 
Information Centre attendants are well informed about the uni-
versity’s services, programs, and courses, and have access to a wide 
range of information. Many calls to the Information Centre are 
redirected to student advisors, to the Office of the Registrar, the 
Computing Services Help Desk, the School of Business Call 
Centre, or to course assistants. Prior to 1995, incoming calls came 
to a single telephone number in the Office of the Registrar, and 
many calls were lost. In addition, students expressed frustration 
with their experience in finding the right person in the institution 
to deal with their particular problem. Since 1995, many of these 
problems have been resolved, and the volume of calls and students 
served has increased exponentially. In the past five years, the 
volume of email queries has also risen rapidly, and an automated 
information system, AskAU (see http://www.askau.ca), has been 
added for students to obtain answers to questions without the 
intervention of a staff member.
•	The Computing Services Help Desk, established in 1994, provides 
technical assistance primarily to help university staff obtain infor-
mation and support for university computing resources; it helps 
staff to resolve problems with their Athabasca University equip-
ment and supported software. The Help Desk does provide some 
assistance to students in computing science and psychology 
courses, but students are generally referred to appropriate 
­academic units for courseware support.
•	The School of Business Call Centre was created in 1994 as a pilot 
project to investigate the feasibility of alternative tutoring methods. 
It has grown to include almost all School of Business undergradu-
ate courses, which account for approximately 18,000 registrations, 
or almost 30% of the university’s undergraduate course registra-
tions. The Call Centre is the central focus of student support in 
the undergraduate School of Business, and is integrated with its 
online course delivery platform, described in detail below.
Call Centres in Distance Education and Distributed Learning
Can a call centre be used as a vehicle for academic coaching and 
­advising? In distance and online education, instructors and students are 
separated by eliminating the classroom. The historical practice in dis-
tance education has been to prepare detailed and thorough learning 
packages to guide students in their study, and to provide tutorial support 

Call Centres in Distance Education	
385
by mail and telephone. The traditional tutor at Athabasca University is 
the focal point for student/institution contact, with the tutor answering 
many administrative queries, relaying marks, and directly helping in an 
instructional role.
In the early 1990s, the business faculty at Athabasca University 
developed a call-centre model as a “one-window” approach for its instruc-
tional tutoring (Adria & Woudstra, 2001). The key to its success has been 
the development of a groupware, “call-back conference” (an electronic 
bulletin board), to which call centre staff (referred to as undergraduate 
student advisors) post student subject-matter queries they cannot answer, 
and requests by students to speak to the course academic. In this way, 
academics field only substantive, course-related questions or problematic 
administrative issues. This system helps ensure that someone quickly 
responds who can answer students’ questions and discuss the subject 
matter in depth.
The model also allows for the separation of the tutoring and 
marking roles, which are combined in the traditional tutor model at 
Athabasca University, and which can form a bottleneck in the effective-
ness and efficiency of the instructional function by preventing the use 
of economies of scale, in both marking and handling administrative 
queries. In the traditional Athabasca University model, a tutor is respon-
sible for all academic contacts for an assigned group of 28 to 40 students, 
and marks all assignments for this group. Tutors, who are paid regardless 
of whether they have contact with students, are typically available by 
telephone in three-hour blocks, once per week. Unfortunately, tutors 
are generally underutilized during this time by students. In the call-
centre model, because students in any given course are not broken into 
groups, administrative questions are answered by the undergraduate 
student advisors, who form Tier 1 of the model; an academic expert role 
exists purely for answering students’ academic content queries; and a 
specialist marker role has been created to handle marking duties.
Under the School of Business call-centre model, students in any 
course can call a toll-free 1-800 telephone number, five afternoons and 
six evenings per week. This call centre now provides students with about 
60 hours of access to telephone and email assistance each week, and 
deals with approximately 80% of the calls directed to it (Adria & 
Woudstra, 2001), thus referring only 20%of the calls to academic support 
(academics and tutors). Course academics over a broad range of courses 
are thus freed from 80% of the calls that they (or their tutors) would 
otherwise receive. Moreover, students’ queries are answered more quickly, 

386	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
rather than once per week during an academic’s telephone contact 
hours. It is anticipated that the knowledge available to and level of exper-
tise expected of selected staff will increase to allow direct answers to 
more of the 20% of the queries now referred to academic experts.
Prior to the implementation of the call-centre model, payments 
to telephone tutors were one of the School of Business’s largest expenses. 
Each academic advisor now handles calls from about three times as many 
students per week as an average telephone tutor previously did. As a 
result, student support costs have dropped by approximately 25% in the 
School of Business undergraduate independent study courses, allowing 
resources to be deployed elsewhere. In addition, through the use of 
groupware, an online course-development and delivery system incorpo-
rating the call centre was developed for most School of Business under-
graduate courses. Online course materials are continually developed 
and improved, allowing students to access course help through their 
course web sites, as well as to interact with call centre staff and academics 
via the Web, using chat or discussion boards.
The call-back conference database enables undergraduate student 
advisors and academics to track and resolve student queries online. 
However, the tracking in the call-back conference only accounted for 
approximately 20% of the student contacts that could not directly be 
answered by the undergraduate student advisors (Adria & Woudstra, 
2001). Beginning in the 2002–2003 academic year, a comprehensive 
student tracking system has tracked all queries to the call centre, includ-
ing those handled by the call-back conference, whether by email or 
telephone. This system is web-enabled and allows academics and other 
university staff to access the database from virtually anywhere, using a 
standard web browser. The database can produce reports and statistics 
on student contacts for use, among other things, in improving course-
ware. Reports such as these, and tracking information received from 
call-centre databanks, inform decisions about how services can most 
effectively be distributed to students.
There are numerous other advantages in addition to the ones 
already mentioned (i.e., improved data gathering, faster access to infor-
mation, and reduced costs). When a contact centre is teamed with a 
central electronic bulletin board for posting academic student inquiries 
and a collaborative teaching environment (multiple academics and/or 
tutors assigned to a single course), it allows for the seamless handing-off 
of student inquiries from one academic/tutor to another, and the moni-
toring of service standards – factors that reduce the potential for ­litigation. 

Call Centres in Distance Education	
387
When student requests for academic support are posted centrally, an 
academic administrator can assign and re-assign the academic/tutor 
contact with the student accordingly. Academics/tutors are thus assigned 
by the time of day or day of the week that students are available, thereby 
meeting students’ learning needs. Given that Canada spans six time 
zones, this level of flexibility is of particular importance. Also, in a 
­continuous-enrolment (non-semester) environment, such a system is of 
great use. When an academic or tutor goes on leave, vacation, or is 
unavailable (i.e., illness, separation, or negligence), an academic admin-
istrator can immediately re-assign academic inquiries to another qualified 
person. It also allows for monitoring of student inquiries to determine 
if their queries are being dealt with in a timely manner and in compli-
ance with service standards. Problems quickly come to light in the call-
centre environment. This system can be compared to the long delays 
typical of the direct student-to-tutor model, which is hard to monitor 
and flag problem areas. Finally, CSRs are continually trained and updated 
in university policies, procedures, and programs. Under a direct-tutor 
model, the tutor is often the first line of contact for the student on 
matters beyond the academic (i.e., administrative). On occasion, aca-
demics and tutors have provided erroneous advice on administrative 
matters, leaving the institution open to litigation; this situation has 
created more work for administrators, who must then resolve resulting 
problems. Students are becoming increasingly litigious. As a result, it is 
in the best interest of the institution to have those with the most up-to-
date knowledge – CSRs – provide administrative support to students.
Potential Developments in Athabasca University Call Centres 
The Information Centre has operated as an inbound call centre and 
does not make outward calls, except to return messages. It has been 
effective in provision of information, which, in turn, supports and facili-
tates the recruitment process. In the future, there is no reason why the 
Information Centre could not expand its role to also make outgoing 
calls to potential students (i.e., high school and college graduates), 
informing them of opportunities at Athabasca University (should the 
university decide to pursue such a recruitment strategy). Of course, it 
would be necessary to balance the drive for efficient outgoing call prac-
tices with the need for customer focus. When call-centre staff have time, 
they could make outgoing calls, but clearly their main focus must be 
customer-retention calls (Evanson et al., 1998). For example, the School 
of Business Call Centre contacts students when they appear to be behind 

388	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
in their course work, and inquires if any support is needed, to encourage 
them to complete their course(s).
At Athabasca University, there is potential to consolidate the three 
call centre groups into a single organizational structure; together, they 
have less than 50 staff and some areas of service overlap. Organizational 
efficiencies are available. Even without consolidation of functions that 
involve direct student contact, significant quality improvements could 
be obtained by centralizing operations, such as centre design, staff plan-
ning, network design and management, ongoing standards reporting, 
IT liaison, contact automation, quality assurance, and training. Consoli-
dation could also simplify disaster-recovery issues, as well as increase the 
CSR’s task variety that, in turn, could improve job satisfaction, retention, 
and customer service. The integration of call-centre databases could 
provide a consistency of message and a single face, to help the university 
build solid relationships with its students.
The three call centres have enough overlap to make the econo-
mies of scale attractive. Achievement of such economies would logically 
involve widening the call-centre service to include all of the university’s 
academic units. Many of the calls handled by the Information Centre 
deal with academic administration, and thus mirror calls handled by the 
call centre. The call-centre concept could also be extended to include 
functions served by the course assistants, who also answer student queries, 
relay mark and assignment information, and so forth. As more of these 
functions and those handled by staff from the Office of the Registrar 
are placed online, the group of services eligible for call-centre service 
will expand.
Overcoming Barriers to Call  
Centre Implementation in Delivery
It is likely that there will be some resistance to implementing call centres 
in distance education, particularly with respect to course delivery. In 
part, using a customer-service model when dealing with students is not 
universally accepted and the use of the word “customer” when referring 
to students is in itself controversial. Nonetheless, although distance edu-
cation providers are increasingly accepted in the mainstream, they are 
sensitive to criticisms around the commercialization of education and 
the use of a call centre in the delivery of education. Further, distance 
education providers are already criticized for their lack of personal 

Call Centres in Distance Education	
389
­interaction with students (Noble, 2001); implementing a call centre 
could further distance the learner from the academic, and depersonalize 
the learning experience even more. As a result, any potential implemen-
tation of a call centre on the delivery side of distance education must 
be strategically considered and carefully framed, so as not to be viewed 
as another example of universities relying on business models.
Rogers (1995, p. 36) posits that “the characteristics of an innova-
tion, as perceived by the members of the social system, determine its 
rate of adoption.” Major change requires that changes be framed prop-
erly in order for them to be accepted (Garvin & Roberto, 2005; Reger, 
Mullane, Gustafson, & DeMarie, 1994). When attempting to implement 
a call centre, senior administration must demonstrate how its implemen-
tation is (a) consistent with the culture and values of the organization, 
(b) consistent with academics’ professional values, and (c) in the best 
interest of the students and organization.
Distance education “should be built on two foundations: the 
needs of the intended students, and the learning outcomes of the course or 
program” (italics original, Davis, Little & Stewart, 2008), and shifts the 
education model from the standard campus-centric model to a student-
centred model (Yick, Patrick, & Costin, 2005). These are fundamental 
values of distance education. In addition, students typically want imme-
diate answers to their inquires, most of which can be accommodated by 
the call centre. When combined with team teaching and an electronic 
bulletin board, calls centres can more easily meet the demands of stu-
dents who require flexibility. Students are also more apt to receive the 
timely academic support they need, simply because their inquiries are 
being handled quickly, efficiently, and by the right person. Nonetheless, 
academics must be reassured about the nature of the inquiries that will 
be handled by the call centre, and those that will be passed along to 
academics and tutors.
In short, there needs to be a clear understanding of what is and 
is not an academic inquiry, so that academics and tutors do not feel 
threatened. By making a clear distinction between what is and what is 
not an academic inquiry, the integrity of the educational experience is 
maintained. The elimination of tedious administrative inquiries, for 
which academics and tutors typically have little or no interest and/or 
training, should also be appealing. Indeed, academics and tutors tend 
to be more interested in having thoughtful interactions with students, 
not dealing with routine administrative matters. If one can take the 
savings gained from implementing a call centre, and encourage course 

390	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
designs that increase meaningful interaction with students, such a model 
should be particularly appealing. The addition of more meaningful inter-
action adds to the value of the course and helps negate criticisms of 
distance education, specifically that it is an industrial model of education 
with little or no student-academic interaction. It would both improve 
the quality of students’ learning experience and academics’ teaching 
experience. CRM software could provide academics with valuable insights 
by gathering student inquiries on certain courses into a single location 
for analysis, a feature that could be valuable for course re-writes. When 
many people develop and deliver a course in a distributed work environ-
ment, CRM software could be particularly helpful.
Distance education students often feel isolated, as they tend to 
lack a community of learners upon which to rely. Having a single, instant 
source of support can reduce student frustration in attempting to gain 
information. Students in distance education are less able to rely on other 
students to gain information needed to navigate educational and insti-
tutional issues. A single, instant source of support can also help build 
the relationship between the student and the institution. The improved 
level of service to the student, in terms of obtaining timely academic 
assistance, may improve completion rates and increase student retention, 
both tangible benefits to students and the institution. The institution 
also benefits by being able to more proactively manage the student rela-
tionship, ensuring that their learning needs are met in a timely manner. 
The student, on the other hand, benefits from the provision of instant 
and accurate administrative information.
Conclusion
There are viable opportunities for the use of call centres in distance 
education. Call centres can provide a strategic opportunity for an institu-
tion facing dramatic increases in student numbers. Call centres hold the 
potential to reduce costs, improve student retention, improve student 
service, and possibly even improve student success. Nonetheless, those 
contemplating implementing a call centre in distance education must 
be cognizant of the criticisms associated with call centres, and thus 
should strive to develop a value-added call-centre model. By utilizing 
high-involvement human-resource practices, meaningful and engaging 
jobs can be designed that hold the potential to improve user satisfaction 
and reduce employee absenteeism and turnover.

Call Centres in Distance Education	
391
Over time, the roles and responsibilities of a call centre could 
expand, and with sufficient economies of scale, might even be able to 
provide direct academic support, rather than just provide for the escala-
tion of academic inquiries beyond the call centre. The advantages of a 
call centre are numerous; however, attempts to implement a call centre 
in distance education will likely meet some resistance. As a result, carefully 
framing the issue in terms of fundamental organizational and profes-
sional values, and clearly outlining these advantages to students, academics, 
and the institution, will be essential in order for call centre implementa-
tion to be successful.
References
Adria, M., & Chowdhury, S. D. (2002). Making room for the call centre. 
Information Systems Management, 19, 71–80.
Adria, M., & Woudstra, A. (2001). Who’s on the line? Managing student 
interactions in distance education using a one-window approach. Open 
Learning, 16(3), 249–261.
Bartlett, C. A., & Ghoshal, S. (2002). Building competitive advantage 
through people. Sloan Management Review, 43(2), 34–41.
Batt, R. (2002). Managing customer services: Human resource practices, 
quit rates, and sales growth. Academy of Management Journal, 45(3), 
587–597.
Batt, R., & Moynihan, L. (2002). The viability of alternative call centre 
production models. Human Resource Management Journal, 12(4), 14–34. 
Brandt, D. S. (2002). Automating your IT help desk. Computers in ­Libraries, 
22(3), 52.
Bruton, N. (2002). Help desks and call centres – a comparison. Retrieved 
October 23, 2003, from http://www.bruton.win-uk.net/articles/hdcc.
htm 
Chandler, A. D., Jr. (1962). Strategy and structure: Chapters in the history of 
the American industrial enterprise. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Cleveland, B., & Hopton, T. (2002, Oct. 5). Industry standards cannot 
replace sound decisions. Call Centre Magazine. Retrieved September 
15, 2007, from http://www.callcentremagazine.com/article/CCM2002 
1005S0002
Coen, D. (2001). Building a powerful telephone sales presentation. Direct 
Marketing, 64(7), 52–53.

392	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Davenport, T. H., & Short, J. E. (1990). The new industrial engineering: 
Information technology and business policy redesign. Sloan Manage-
ment Review, 31(4), 11–27.
Davis, A., Little, P., & Stewart, B. (2008). Developing an infrastructure 
for online learning. In T. Anderson (Ed.) Theory and practice of online 
learning. (pp. 121–142) Edmonton, AB: AU Press. 
Driscoll, C., & Wicks, D. (1998). The customer-driven approach in busi-
ness education: A possible danger? Journal of Education for Business, 
74(1), 58–61.
Doherty, S. (2001). Help desk salvation. Network Computing, 12(7), 42–
48.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1999). Strategy as strategic decision making. Sloan 
Management Review, 40 (3), 65–72.
Evanson, A., Harker, P. T., & Frei, F. X. (1998). Effective call centre manage-
ment: Evidence from financial services. Retrieved September 15, 2007, 
from http://www.hbs.edu/research/facpubs/workingpapers/papers2/ 
9899/99-110.pdf
Frenkel, S. J., Tam, M., Korczynski, M., & Shire, K. (1998). Beyond 
bureaucracy? Work organization in call centres. The International Journal 
of Human Resource Management, 9(6), 957–979.
Friedman, T. (2001). Call centre management: Balancing the numbers. 
Industrial Management, 43(l), 6–10.
Garvin, D. A., & Roberto, M. A. (2005). Change through persuasion. 
Harvard Business Review, 83(2), 104–112.
Hamel, G., & Prahalad, C. K. (1994). Competing for the future. Boston: 
Harvard Business School Press.
Hitch, L. P., & MacBrayne, P. (2003). A model for effectively supporting  
e-learning. Retrieved October 23, 2003, from http://ts.mivu.org/default.
asp?show=article&id=1016 
Hitt, L. M., Frei, F. X., & Harker, P, T. (1998). How financial firms decide 
on technology. Retrieved October 23, 2003, from http://grace.wharton.
upenn.edu/~lhitt/itdec.pdf
Holman, D. (2002). Employee wellbeing in call centres. Human Resource 
Management Journal, 12(4), 35–50.
Holt, B. (2000). Calling out for the human touch. Customer Loyalty Today, 
8(1), 11.
Houlihan, M. (2002). Tensions and variations in call centre management 
strategies. Human Resource Management Journal, 12(4), 67–85.
Howell, S. L., Williams, P. B., & Lindsay, N. K. (2003). Thirty-two trends 
affecting distance education: An informed foundation for strategic 

Call Centres in Distance Education	
393
planning, Online Journal of Distance Education Administration, 6(3). 
Retrieved September 15, 2007, from http://www.westga.edu/~distance/
ojdla/fall63/howell63.html
Jordan, J. (2003). Knowledge management: From nebulous to necessary 
for customer service. Customer Inter@ction Solutions, 21(10), 44–48.
Kantsperger, R., & Kunz, W. H. (2005). Managing overall service quality 
in customer care centres: Empirical findings of a multi-perspective 
approach. International Journal of Service Industry Management, 16(2), 
135–151.
Kim, W. C., & Mauborgne, R. (1999). Strategy, value innovation, and the 
knowledge economy. Sloan Management Review, 40(3), 41–54.
Kinnie, N., Hutchinson, S., & Purcell, J. (2000). Fun and surveillance: 
The paradox of high commitment management in call centres. Inter-
national Journal of Human Resource Management, 11(5), 967–985.
Kiska, J. (2002). Customer experience management. CMA Management, 
76(7), 28–30.
Knowledge at Wharton (2002). Web based call centres transform customer 
service. Retrieved September 15, 2007, from http://knowledge.wharton.
upenn.edu/article.cfm?articleid=129
Kondra, A., & Michalczuk, K. (2007). Implementing call centres in 
­distance education: Overcoming organizational resistance. Paper pre-
sented at the 39th Annual Administrative Sciences Association Conference, 
Management Education Division, Ottawa.
Kotwal, A. (2004). Contact centre knowledge management. Customer 
Inter@ction Solutions, 23(2), 40–42.
Krol, C. (2002). Firms stick to basics with call centre tools. B to B Chicago, 
87(10), 22.
Lawlor, T. (2001, February 1). The people factor. Computer Weekly.com. 
Retrieved September 15, 2007, from http://www.computerweekly.com/
Articles/2001/02/01/178224/the-people-factor.htm
Markides, C. C. (1999). A dynamic view of strategy. Sloan Management 
Review, 40(3), 55–63.
Mitchell, I. (2001). Call centre consolidation – does it still make sense? 
Business Communications Review, 31(12), 24–28.
Noble, D. F. (2001). Digital diploma mills. New York: Monthly Review 
Press.
Pascale, R. T. (1999). Surfing the edge of chaos. Sloan Management Review, 
40(3), 83–94.
Pfeffer, J. (1994). Competitive advantage through people. Boston: Harvard 
Business Press.

394	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Reger, R. K., Mullane, J. V., Gustafson, L. T., & DeMarie, S. M. (1994). 
Creating earthquakes to change organizational mindsets. Academy of 
Management Executive, 8(4), 31–43.
Reichheld, F. F. (1996). The loyalty effect. Boston: Harvard Business School 
Press.
Rigby, D. K., Reichheld, F., & Dawson, C. (2003, March/April). Winning 
customer loyalty is the key to a winning CRM strategy. Ivey Business 
Journal. Retrieved September 15, 2007, from http://www.iveybusiness-
journal.com/article.asp?intArticle_ID=409
Rogers, E. M. (1995). Diffusion of innovations. New York: The Free 
Press.
Taylor, P., & Bain, P. (1999). An assembly line in the head: Work and 
employee relations in the call centre. Industrial Relations Journal, 30(2), 
101–117.
Yick, A. G., Patrick, P., & Costin, A. (2005). Navigating distance and 
traditional higher education: Online faculty experiences. The Interna-
tional Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 6(2). Retrieved 
September 15, 2007, from http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/
article/view/235/320
Zapf, D., Isic, A, Bechtoldt, M., & Blau, P. (2003). What is typical for call 
centre jobs? Job characteristics, and service interaction in different 
call centres. European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology, 
12(4), 311–340.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Alex Z. Kondra (alexk@athabascau.ca) is the executive director of 
Athabasca University’s MBA program in the Centre for Innovative 
Management in St. Albert, Alberta. He obtained a PhD in Industrial 
Relations from the University of Alberta in 1995. Previously, he was on 
faculty at the Fred C. Manning School of Business of Acadia University 
in Wolfville, Nova Scotia. At Athabasca University, he has taught organiza-
tion theory, managing change, and administrative principles. His current 
research interests focus on changing organizational and industry struc-
tures and organizational culture. He has published in the journals 
Organization Studies, Journal of Labor Research, Journal of Individual Employment 
Rights, and the Journal of Collective Negotiations in the Public Sector. He also 
serves as an academic reviewer for numerous academic journals and 

Call Centres in Distance Education	
395
conferences and has chaired the organizational theory division of the 
Administrative Sciences Association of Canada Conference.
Colleen Huber joined Athabasca University in 1994, when she became 
the first facilitator in the School of Business Call Centre. At the time of 
writing, she held the position of Learning Systems Manager, responsible 
for the systems used to deliver courses and manage information, as well 
as training staff on their use. Since 2003, she has worked as a consultant 
in the area of e-learning.
Kerri Michalczuk has been with Athabasca University since 1984. For 
the last five years, as Course Production and Delivery Manager, she has 
managed the day-to-day operation of the School of Business tutorial Call 
Centre, the first point of contact for students registered in business 
courses. Kerri also manages the production processes for developing 
online and print-based learning materials, including coordinating the 
work of production staff, such as editors, instructional designers, typeset-
ters, and copyright personnel. Kerri has extensive knowledge of Athabasca 
University’s administrative andproduction systems, and she sits on many 
committees that review, plan, and implement University systems.
Andrew Woudstra, MBA, CMA, is Professor Emeritus in the School of 
Business at Athabasca University, where he worked for the past 24 years 
before retiring in January, 2006. In addition to his teaching duties, he 
also served the University in various administrative capacities including 
Centre Chair; Associate Dean; Acting Dean; and Acting Vice President, 
Finance and Administration. Andrew has been involved in a number of 
innovative process changes in the School of Business, including the 
development of e-learning and the School of Business Call Centre, and 
has published in a variety of distance education journals and books.


Chapter 16
Library Support  
for e-Learners:  
e-Resources, e-Services,  
and the Human Factors
Kay Johnson, Houda Trabelsi 
& Elaine Fabbro
Athabasca University 
Introduction
The growth of e-learning or online learning, in which education is 
­delivered and supported through computer networks, is transforming 
academic libraries. E-learners and traditional learners have access to a 
universe of digital information, which frequently removes the need to 
visit a physical library. New information and communications technolo-
gies, as well as new educational models, require librarians to re-evaluate 
the way they develop, manage, and deliver resources and services.
Historically, librarians have provided services to distance learners 
that are equivalent to those available to on-campus learners (Slade & 
Kascus, 1998); this aspiration is grounded in the philosophical frame-
works of the Canadian Library Association’s Guidelines for Library Support 
of Distance and Distributed Learning in Canada (2000) (see http://www.
cla.ca/about/distance.htm) and the Association of College and Research 
Libraries’ Guidelines for Distance Learning Library Services (2004) (see 

398	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
http://www.ala.org/ala/acrl/acrlstandards/guidelinesdistancelearning.
htm). Both the Canadian and American Guidelines recognize that dis-
tance learners frequently do not have direct access to the full range of 
library services and materials, and that this necessitates equitable ser-
vices that are more personalized than might be expected on campus. 
The library literature provides a rich record of service models and best 
practices; as such, there has been an explosion of publications as librar-
ians consider ways to support learners in a networked environment 
(Slade, 2000).
What do e-learners need from librarians? Suggestions advocating 
changes to librarians’ roles, in support of distance learning in the infor-
mation age, appear throughout the literature. Librarians “must assert 
themselves as key players in the learning process thereby changing their 
roles from information providers to educators” (Cooper & Dempsey, 
1998); they have become providers of technical support (Hulshof, 1999); 
and they have been transformed from “information gatekeepers” to 
“information gateways” (Haricombe, 1998). Lippincott (2002) advocates 
librarian involvement, as teachers and learners, in learning communities: 
“The librarian can shift the focus from explaining library resources to 
meeting the ongoing information needs of the students in the broad 
information environment” (p. 192).
In responding to the need to provide ongoing online library 
support, librarians have worked at translating what they do in a tradi-
tional library into virtual or digital environments, while customizing 
their services and resources for e-learners. Traditionally, libraries offer 
circulation services, interlibrary loans, course reserves, an information 
desk, a reference desk, and library instruction. To serve learners con-
nected to their institutional library primarily through a computer 
network, librarians provide remote access to, and electronic delivery of, 
library resources, and use communication technologies to deliver 
­electronic reference services and instructional support.
When we speak of providing support to e-learners, we are refer-
ring to a wider community of learners than the term “student” suggests. 
An academic library’s learners may include students, faculty, staff, 
researchers, and others. The library is seen as a source of training and 
guidance to a community of learners concerned with navigating the 
complexities of locating and using digital resources and services. 
Moreover, the move toward an online environment has resulted in a 
shift from the systematic one-to-one information flow of the past to a 
new model in which the users and the providers of information are able 

Library Support for e-Learners	
399
to relate in a many-to-many, dynamic relationship. For example, in the 
traditional model, a librarian provides a bridge between learners and 
information providers by selecting and cataloguing resources and by 
providing assistance with these resources. In the new model, the librar-
ian serves as a facilitator by offering ongoing support which enables 
learners to interact and exchange knowledge with others, to communi-
cate directly with the publishers and vendors of information resources, 
and to participate in a collaborative endeavour to make available rich 
collections of online scholarly information resources.
This chapter examines how libraries are responding to the 
­challenges of delivering core services and library resources to e-­learners. 
We look at library practices and technologies being applied in the 
development and maintenance of virtual libraries. We also consider 
the challenges and opportunities that virtual libraries bring to the 
support of e-learners, as well as the importance of providing support 
within a collaborative environment which stresses human factors, such 
as communication and interaction.
Defining the Virtual Library
Gapen (1993) defines the virtual library as
the concept of remote access to the contents and services of 
libraries and other information resources, combining an on-site 
collection of current and heavily used materials in both print and 
electronic form, with an electronic network which provides access 
to, and delivery from, external worldwide library and commercial 
information and knowledge sources. (p. 1)
Additional terms for the virtual library include the digital library, 
the electronic library, and the library without walls. Many libraries are 
hybrids, providing virtual access to electronic resources and services, 
while maintaining and supporting the use of a physical collection housed 
in a library building.
With the tremendous growth of the Internet, e-learners have 
access to an overwhelming range of information sources, available at 
the click of a mouse, including library and academic resources, the sites 
of governments, non-governmental organizations, corporations and 
professionals, mainstream and alternative news, and an immense 

400	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
­blogosphere. Librarians have traditionally selected and organized 
limited collections of resources with great care and provided assistance 
and instruction to their patrons in accessing and using these collections. 
Their task in the information age is to rescue e-learners from informa-
tion overload, and to foster the competencies and critical reflection 
required to navigate an information environment characterized not by 
scarcity but by abundance and a multiplicity of formats and voices. A 
virtual library links e-learners to library catalogues, licensed journal 
databases, electronic book collections, selected Internet resources, elec-
tronic course reserves, tutorials, and to opportunities for communica-
tion and interaction with librarians. The virtual library permits e-­learners 
to access and use library and networked resources and services anytime 
and anywhere that an Internet connection and computing equipment 
are available.
The Landscape of Library Resources
Technology offers opportunities to be innovative, as the following 
­discussion of electronic resources and services demonstrates, but it is 
important to bear in mind inequalities such as access to computing 
equipment, the availability, speed, and stability of Internet connections, 
and the information skills required to make optimum use of virtual 
libraries. Access to print-based library materials continues to be impor-
tant, because not all of the information resources that e-learners need 
are available in electronic format; many of our most valuable research 
materials are still print-based.
Although there has been a shift away from purchasing print 
­materials to be housed in a physical building, and toward providing access 
to licensed digital resources made available over a computer network, 
librarians continue to work to resolve issues pertaining to distance deliv-
ery of resources that are unavailable in digital format. Online catalogues, 
indexing, and abstracting systems provide e-learners with convenient 
access to bibliographic information about valuable scholarly documents. 
When those documents are not available in full-text form online, demand 
is generated for delivery from a library’s print collection or from the 
collections of other libraries through interlibrary loans. Typical solutions 
for delivery of non-digital formats include the use of mail and courier 
services, the establishment of collections at designated sites, and the 
negotiation of agreements with other libraries through consortia.

Library Support for e-Learners	
401
Given that a growing number of learners are accessing library 
collections online, librarians are working to develop an integrated 
approach to providing access to electronic resources that facilitates 
retrieval and reduces confusion. A library web site can function as an 
information portal and an entry point to a range of online resources, 
with the library catalogue and journal databases as key components. 
Most online catalogues permit the integration of electronic books and 
electronic journals, enabling users to locate items from digital and physi-
cal collections with one search. User services – such as the ability to 
check due dates, renew materials, and request materials online – are 
also provided.
A number of electronic tools have come into play recently in the 
provision of distance library services. Federated search tools such as 
WebFeat (see http://www.webfeat.com/home/index.cfm); dbWiz (see 
http://dbwiz.lib.sfu.ca/dbwiz/), an open-source product created at Simon 
Fraser University Library (n.d.); and Google Scholar (see http://scholar.
google.com) allow users to search a number of electronic resources simul-
taneously, using one interface. Libraries have the capability to customize 
the federated-search tool so that it searches a given set of electronic 
resources. Federated-search solutions offer e-learners a faster and easier 
way to search multiple resources, but they can also be a good starting 
point for researching a topic, in that they can help to identify the most 
suitable databases (McCaskie, 2004), a task which is often extremely 
challenging in the world of ever-expanding digital resources.
Google Scholar searches for scholarly articles, books, and other 
resources. Indexed items come from a variety of sources, including “aca-
demic publishers, pre-print societies, universities and other scholarly 
organizations” (Google Scholar, 2007). These items may be available 
online, or they may only be available in print. While having the ability 
to search for multiple resource types in one place is beneficial to the 
user, what makes Google Scholar so important is that it allows users to 
choose which libraries they want to search. Google Scholar’s Library Links 
program allows libraries that use link-resolving software to make their 
library holdings available in Google Scholar’s results lists. An e-learner, 
wishing to access a particular article, clicks on the link to the library to 
retrieve a list of databases that hold the article; the e-learner must then 
provide identifying information to enter the database via the library’s 
authentication process in order to access the article. Google Scholar’s 
Library Links program also makes it possible to search library catalogues 
for items held by local libraries. Through a partnership with Online 

402	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Computer Library Center (OCLC)’s Open WorldCat project (http://
www.worldcat .org/whatis/default.jsp), it is possible to search the col-
lections of libraries whose holdings are in OCLC. A more recent addition 
is the ability to search AMICUS, the catalogue of Libraries and Archives 
Canada (see http://www .collectionscanada.ca/amicus/).
Link-resolving software products, such as SFX from ExLibris (see 
http://www.exlibrisgroup.com/sfx.htm), and WebBridge from Innovative 
Interfaces Inc. (see http://www.iii.com), allow users to link out from one 
database to another to retrieve full-text articles. Link resolvers or link 
servers work with open URL-compliant databases, and pass the user’s 
library authentication information from one database to another, thereby 
allowing seamless access to full-text content without requiring the user 
to log in again. If an item is not available from an open URL-compliant 
database, link resolvers can direct users to search other library resources, 
including library catalogues and A-Z serials lists. All learners benefit from 
these products because they allow greater access to full-text materials 
without needing to search a number of databases; however, for online 
learners – and in particular those who are internationally based – the 
immediacy of retrieval is especially important. Providing easy online 
access and reducing the need to request print copies of articles enables 
libraries to provide better service to e-learners, and increases the  
e-­learners’ sense of connectedness to their library.
Personalized digital libraries have become another way to increase 
the connectedness of e-learners. While the tools mentioned above 
provide e-learners with greater access to resources, personalized digital 
libraries “streamline access to frequently used resources and create a 
friendlier online environment by permitting users to build their own 
digital collections in a personal workspace” (Johnson & Magusin, 2005, 
p. 129). One of the earliest instances of a personalized digital library 
was MyLibrary@NCState, which was released in 1998 as a way to combat 
the information overload that learners were facing, due to the library’s 
recent expenditures on electronic resources (Morgan & Reade, 2000). 
The system requires learners to choose an area of academic interest 
during the account creation process (Morgan, 1999) and was developed 
in a way that can assist librarians in making collection management 
decisions, as it is possible to study the usage patterns of subscribers. 
The Open University of the UK has developed a pilot project called 
MyOpenLibrary (see http://myopenlibrary.open.ac.uk/), a personalized 
environment for their learners that uses the MyLibrary@NCState software, 
which was made public in 2000. According to the web site, MyOpenLibrary 

Library Support for e-Learners	
403
is “a personal library page, which knows who you are, what you are 
­studying and presents the relevant electronic library resources...selected 
from Open Library” (Open University Library, 2005). It allows learners 
to select their own resources, as well as having resources supplied to 
them, based on the courses which they are registered in. Other examples 
include MyCybrary at the University of Winnipeg Library (see http://
cybrary.uwinnipeg.ca/myCybrary/index.cfm), which offers learners 
opportunities to check their library account, keep up to date on new 
resources, and manage personal information services.
Librarians have become increasingly creative in enhancing their 
web sites. Because not all e-learners have physical access to reference 
tools – quick fact-finding tools that are the staple of library collections – 
libraries can perform a valuable service by providing learners with point-
ers to online versions. Athabasca University Library’s Digital Reference 
Centre (see http://library.athabascau.ca/drc/), for example, offers a 
digital version of an academic library’s reference collection, including 
almanacs and directories, atlases and maps, data and statistics, and dic-
tionaries and encyclopedias. Librarians select quality Internet resources 
to help e-learners navigate the Web. For example, the Open University 
Library’s ROUTES database (1999; 2004) contains quality-assessed, course-
related Internet resources (see http://routes.open.ac.uk/).
It is impossible to ignore the phenomenon called “Web 2.0.” 
There has been an explosion in the number of web users who are 
­creating social content through weblogs, wikis, social bookmarking, pod-
casting, and other means (see Anderson, Chapter 12 in this volume). 
Librarians are increasingly cognizant of these tools, and have been inves-
tigating how they can be used within the library to provide services and 
instruction to learners, as “Library 2.0.”
Weblogs are used by librarians in a number of ways. Blogs, such 
as The Distant Librarian (see http://distlib.blogs.com/distlib/) and The 
Shifted Librarian (see http://www.theshiftedlibrarian.com/), are designed 
as professional development tools for librarians. In other instances, blogs 
are used by librarians to keep patrons up to date on issues in the library, 
and to answer frequently asked questions. An example is Frequently Asked 
Questions (see http://frequanq.blogspot.com/), a blog maintained by 
the distance education librarian at Southern Connecticut State University. 
Weblogs can also be used for instructional purposes. Georgia State 
University Library (see http://www.library .gsu.edu/news/) has created 
subject-specific blogs that provide information about new resources in 
particular subject areas. 

404	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Social bookmarking, or social tagging, is a way for users to classify 
and share resources with others. Users assign tags, or keywords, to the 
sites that they bookmark, and these tags are then used in finding materi-
als. This folksonomy, or informal classification, has exploded in popularity 
on the Web. A number of different social bookmarking sites are avail-
able, including del.icio.us (see http://del.icio.us/), CiteULike (see 
http://www.citeulike.org) and FURL (see http://www.furl.net). Some 
scholars and librarians are choosing to use these tools as a way to classify 
materials in their area of interest. Social tagging is used in academic 
libraries as a way to allow users to add content to the library web site. 
These resources may be in the form of web sites, bibliographies in spe-
cific content areas, or other items. The University of Pennsylvania 
Libraries created PennTags (see http://tags.library.upenn.edu/), a service 
that can be used by members of the University of Pennsylvania com-
munity. In addition to allowing users to tag web sites, PennTags allows 
users to tag resources from library catalogues, magazines, journals, and 
newspapers. It is possible to annotate resources, which can increase the 
pedagogical benefits associated with the use of social bookmarking. 
Integrated library system vendors are also beginning to explore the 
possibilities created by social tagging. For example, Innovative Interfaces 
Inc. is in the process of developing a new product called Encore (see 
http://www.iii.com/encore/main_index2.html), which allows librarians 
and patrons to tag resources found in library catalogues, including 
e-resources.
As libraries work to enhance their presence on the Web, a growing 
number have incorporated electronic course reserves (e-reserves). The 
traditional course reserves desk of an academic library, with its limited 
copies, short loan periods, and high late fines, can be a considerable 
source of frustration for students. In the e-reserves model, the library 
makes available, through the Web, items that faculty have selected and 
“placed on reserve” for students in a particular course. San Diego State 
University (SDSU) pioneered e-reserves in the early 1990s (see http://ecr.
sdsu.edu/). SDSU uses Docutek ERes (2000-2007), a system that provides 
access to course readings, chat rooms, and bulletin boards. Many other 
libraries have initiated their own projects, using commercially available 
products or systems developed in-house. The library literature points to 
a diversity of approaches (Calvert, 2000; Lowe & Rumery, 2000; Algenio, 
2002; Wilson, 2002; Warner, 2006).
Athabasca University Library’s Digital Reading Room (DRR) (see 
http://library.athabascau.ca/drr/) is an e-reserves system developed ­ 

Library Support for e-Learners	
405
in-house at Athabasca University, using open-source software. Scanning 
and mounting hardcopy materials is time consuming and requires 
­securing of copyright permissions. The DRR encourages optimizing the 
value available from the library’s electronic subscriptions through direct, 
persistent linking to content from the subscribed databases. Each course 
in the DRR has a digital reading file. The licensed contents, such as journal 
database articles, require authentication through the library’s proxy 
server, permitting only Athabasca University’s community of users to 
access them; non-licensed resources, such as web sites, are freely avail-
able to the public. A search engine permits e-learners to search across 
courses, providing a multidisciplinary approach to course reserves. By 
encouraging the inclusion of resources in a variety of digital formats, 
such as video, audio, and simulations, the DRR supports a wide range 
of learning objectives and styles.
Managing the remote access and authentication issues involved 
in making digital resources available has become a significant area of 
support to users of virtual libraries (Hulshof, 1999). Librarians may be 
called upon to respond to questions concerning login and password 
information, browser configuration, software installation, and a range 
of troubleshooting needs. Access problems are hugely frustrating for  
e-learners and must be resolved quickly. Ensuring that front-line library 
staff is adequately trained, providing clear instructions on the library’s 
web site, and coordinating support activities with computing services 
personnel can contribute to effective technical support. E-learners also 
benefit from having a variety of means to contact the library, including 
email, web forms, and a toll-free telephone number.
Library Services: Challenges and Opportunities
The provision of appropriate and meaningful reference and instructional 
services to e-learners is fraught with both challenges and opportunities.
Reference
E-learners require more than access to e-resources. Traditionally, a 
­reference librarian acts as an additional resource, someone who can be 
counted upon to provide expertise in making sense of library systems 
and research tools, and to offer a helping hand along that often slippery 
path known as the research process. Virtual library users face additional 
challenges in mining relevant information out of a computer system that 

406	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
“obstinately” returns zero hits in response to a query that does not match 
the character strings in its database files.
The most common means of providing electronic reference 
­services to remote users has been email, the advantages and disadvan-
tages of which have been well documented in the literature (Slade, 
2000). The around-the-clock and around-the-world accessibility of email 
enables e-learners to connect with librarians beyond the walls of library 
buildings and outside the usual hours of operation. Email provides a 
written record of requests and responses, permits the electronic trans-
mission of search results, and allows librarians time to reflect on requests. 
One of the most serious concerns about email reference services is their 
impact on traditional face-to-face reference interviews, particularly the 
absence of verbal and non-verbal cues, which typically assist a librarian 
in effectively responding to a question.
A well designed reference web form, such as that provided on the 
Athabasca University Library’s “Ask about a Research Topic” web page 
(see http://library.athabascau.ca/about/contacts.php), encourages  
e-learners to include full identifying and course information. This web 
page encourages users to clearly describe their research problem and 
search terminology, and to state the parameters of their assignment. The 
feature also clarifies requests for librarians and reduces the need for 
email (Sloan, 1998). Automated email replies sent out in response to 
the receipt of a message reassure e-learners that their messages have 
been received and lets them know what to expect in terms of service.
Email reference service can be enhanced and supplemented with 
additional technologies that raise the level of interaction via real-time 
communication. Chat technology allows e-learners and librarians to send 
text messages back and forth instantly, using a form of communication 
that is familiar to most Internet users. A number of issues surround the 
use of chat in the provision of reference services to remote users. 
Choosing the appropriate program for the library’s specific needs and 
resources is essential if the virtual reference initiative is to be successful. 
Available programs range from vendor-based systems that offer features 
such as “co-browsing, patron queuing, sharing files, and the ability to 
keep more extensive statistics” (Ward & Kern, 2006, p. 417-418), to 
instant messaging programs, which are freely available. Some chat pro-
grams require downloads on the part of users, which can be problematic 
and may also discourage e-learners from using the service. In an effort 
to reach more e-learners, some libraries have begun using instant mes-
saging programs such as AOL’s AIM product, MSN’s Messenger, and Yahoo! 

Library Support for e-Learners	
407
Messenger, primarily because many e-learners are already using these 
systems. More recently, libraries have begun experimenting with pro-
grams such as Trillian (see http://www.ceruleanstudios.com/) and Pidgin 
(formerly Gaim; see http://www.pidgin.im), which log into a number of 
instant messaging accounts simultaneously and allow librarians the flex-
ibility to respond to instant messaging questions coming into the library, 
no matter which system the e-learner is using. This reduces the need to 
monitor several different instant messaging programs at the same time.
Virtual reference consortia have the potential to expand the 
library’s abilities to serve its community of users effectively. Libraries in 
the consortia answer questions from e-learners in other parts of the 
consortium service area. Traditionally, chat reference services are only 
available during specified hours, so virtual reference consortia are ben-
eficial for e-learners in different time zones than their home institution, 
because they increase the likelihood of a librarian being available to 
answer questions immediately. Even if the initial reference transaction 
is received through chat, however, it may ultimately prove difficult to 
provide a complete answer using this method. If a user requires assistance 
in learning how to use a particular library resource, it may be possible 
to provide a complete response via chat. However, if the user is request-
ing assistance to find information on a complex topic, the librarian may 
need time to determine appropriate search strategies before responding. 
In these cases, the follow-up response is often done by email. Providing 
e-learners with a toll-free telephone number remains an effective and 
convenient reference services strategy, particularly for intricate inquiries. 
The telephone reference interview works best when both librarian and 
e-learner are working in front of computers connected to the Internet.
Instruction
E-learners are frequently silent and invisible as they search and explore a 
library’s online resources, and they do not have the same access that on-
campus learners have to formal library instruction sessions. With the array 
of digital resources available to them, the many different interfaces and 
search tools, and the need for evaluation and critical thinking when using 
the Internet for research, information literacy skills are essential. Informa-
tion literacy has been defined in relation to competencies, with infor-
mation sources in a variety of formats. According to the Association of 
College and Research Libraries (2000), an information-literate student 
1.	 determines the nature and extent of the information needed.
2.	 accesses needed information effectively and efficiently.

408	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
3.	 evaluates information and its sources critically and incorporates 
selected information into his or her knowledge base and value 
system.
4.	 individually, or as a member of a group, uses information ­effectively 
to accomplish a specific purpose.
5.	 understands many of the economic, legal, and social issues 
­surrounding the use of information, and accesses and uses infor-
mation ethically and legally.
Supporting the integration of information literacy skills training 
into the core curriculum has become an important issue for libraries 
(Slade, 2000). A discussion is also emerging around the need to promote 
critical reflection in relation to information and knowledge, to concep-
tualize a critical information literacy that goes beyond a focus on competen-
cies. Critical information literacy draws on scholarship in critical theory 
and critical education to provide librarians with a theoretical framework 
that acknowledges their responsibility to help students see that knowledge 
is not neutral but socially constructed and contested (Luke & Kapitzke, 
1999; Simmons, 2005; Elmborg, 2006). Teaching the value of incorporat-
ing peer-reviewed journals in research papers, for example, need not 
preclude a discussion about how alternative voices may be silenced by 
the peer-review process and how to find alternative literature.
As an extension of their traditional role in providing library 
instruction sessions and developing instructional materials, librarians 
design online tutorials and courses that promote information literacy 
and encourage active learning. Particularly fine examples are the 
University of Texas System Digital Library’s (1998-2004) TILT – Texas 
Information Literacy Tutorial (see http://tilt.lib.utsystem.edu/); and 
Utah Academic Library Consortium’s (2001) Internet Navigator (see 
http://medlib.med.utah.edu/navigator/), a multi-institutional online 
course developed by a team of librarians and web developers. The Open 
University Library created SAFARI (2001) (see http://www .open.ac.
uk/safari), a freely available interactive tutorial, as well as an information 
literacy course called Making Sense of Information in the Connected 
Age or, more commonly, MOSAIC (Needham, Parker, & Baker, 2001). 
Athabasca University offers the undergraduate course, Information 
Systems 200: Accessing Information (see http://www.athabascau.ca/
courses/infs/200/).
Many libraries provide instruction to e-learners by making 
­information available on their web pages, including research guides and 
“how-to” pages. See, for example, Athabasca University Library’s Help 

Library Support for e-Learners	
409
Centre (see http://library.athabascau.ca/help.php). An awareness of the 
importance of context-specific help has grown and it is quite common 
to find links to tutorials at the point of need. Software packages for 
developing animated tutorials, such as ViewletBuilder (see http://www.
qarbon.com/), Camtasia (see http://www.techsmith.com/camtasia.asp), 
and Captivate (see http://www.adobe.com/products/captivate/) enable 
librarians to demonstrate effective database searching techniques asyn-
chronously. Brief tutorials that incorporate voice-over and demonstrate 
database features within the context of real searches are particularly 
effective. Joining an existing, collaborative initiative reduces workload 
and removes the need to “reinvent the wheel.” The Council of Prairie 
and Pacific University Libraries (COPPUL), a consortium of twenty uni-
versity libraries located in Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta, and British 
Columbia, is responsible for the Animated Tutorial Sharing Project (ANTS). 
Participating libraries, including libraries outside of COPPUL, access a 
wiki where they can adapt databases for tutorial development, upload 
tutorials, and download tutorials developed by other libraries (see http://
www.brandonu.ca/Library/COPPUL/).
Online tutorials usually operate on a model in which the e-learner 
interacts in isolation with a computer. Their effectiveness can be 
enhanced by the addition of more interactive forms of instruction. The 
librarians at the Florida Distance Learning Reference and Referral 
Center, for example, have experimented with chat software to simulate 
a virtual classroom and open a “live” group instruction to e-learners 
(Viggiano & Ault, 2001). Librarians can be incorporated through the 
learning management system, participating in online courses as teaching 
assistants, co-instructors, or co-designers. This ‘embedded librarian’ 
approach increases learner awareness of the value of the library in 
research and scholarship, and improves access to the expertise of librar-
ians within the context of course needs and assignments (Matthew & 
Schroeder, 2006; Ramsay & Kinnie, 2006).
In addition, podcasting and video clips have become a popular 
choice in the delivery of instructional materials to remote users, as librar-
ies recognize the popularity of mobile devices such as the iPod®. 
According to a Pew Internet and American Life survey, “more than 
22 million American adults own iPods® or MP3 players, and 29% of 
them have downloaded podcasts” (2005, p.1). These methods allow  
e-learners to access the materials “anytime, anywhere,” while still provid-
ing them with the type of instruction that their on-campus counterparts 
may receive. Tutorials range from a simple orientation to the library and 

410	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
its services to more in-depth tutorials on the research process or ­searching 
specific databases. For example, Mount Allison University Library (2006) 
makes audio libcasts available (see http://www.mta.ca/library/­libcasts.
html). These libcasts can be downloaded or subscribed to and listened 
to, using iTunes® or a similar product.
The Successful Virtual Library:  
Partnership and Collaboration
In reviewing definitions of the virtual library, Sloan (1998) identifies an 
emphasis on the technological and informational building blocks, and 
a neglect of the human components, such as the service tradition and 
human interaction. The continuing changes in technology have been 
truly astonishing, and the scope for building new information services 
and new ways of representing content seem unlimited. Although tech-
nology is the key infrastructure of the virtual library – a tool used to 
support library goals – human factors are the most important determi-
nant of the success of the virtual library. As noted by Colgate, Buchanan-
Oliver, and Elmsly (2005), technology could cause problems in building 
relationships because of the difficulty in developing a successful rapport 
between people via remote contact. One of the major challenges that 
virtual libraries face is the lack of opportunity for face-to-face reference 
service and communication. Combine this with a lack of awareness of 
library services (Nicholas & Tomeo, 2005) and the end result is poor 
communication between library staff and e-learners.
The digital library serves mainly as a facilitator in organizing and 
providing knowledge and resources to its users. Sharing knowledge 
and information among library staff, researchers, faculty, students, and 
other departments within the institution encourages them to work 
together, develop their skills, and form strong and trusting relationships. 
One method which can be effective in the development of strong rela-
tionships with faculty is the librarian-liaison role, where a librarian liaises 
with specific departments regarding resources, library services, and the 
provision of instructional support for students in those departments 
(Glynn & Wu, 2003). When the liaison focuses on building effective 
channels of communication and understands the effects of technology 
on communication, it becomes easier to share knowledge and informa-
tion among institutional stakeholders. In addition, the focus on col-
laboration between the library and the faculty promotes a responsive 

Library Support for e-Learners	
411
approach to course design and supports teaching and learning objec-
tives, particularly when this collaboration incorporates student contri-
butions and feedback. This approach considers the library as an active 
partner of the learning community, helping e-learners to become “infor-
mation literates” by integrating information literacy skills into the curricu-
lum. The library can help e-learners to think critically about information, 
offer reference and instructional support, mentor their work by offering 
one-to-one communication and interaction, and work collaboratively 
with them to achieve a deeper level of understanding of what e-learners 
need.
A number of models can be involved in creating an environment 
that is responsive to the scholarly information needs of a diverse group 
of e-learners. Librarians select, describe, and ensure access to quality 
digital resources, providing e-learners with content from a wide range of 
resources and publications, including peer-reviewed journals. Within this 
framework, the library works with faculty, researchers, scholarly societies, 
and publishers to develop and manage a collection of enriched online 
scholarly resources. Such a partnership enables researchers to interact 
with others, exchange experiences, and publish their works online. The 
library role is thus transformed from simply providing library resources 
to meeting the ongoing support needs of the parties involved. The library 
also fosters research skills by encouraging e-learners to search, investigate, 
discover, and take advantage of these valuable online resources.
Further, senior management support and involvement is as much 
a key to success in developing the virtual library as in any other project. 
They need to work closely with the library staff to understand the nature 
of services, values, and support the library should be offering, and to 
adopt successful communication and interaction strategies. An institu-
tion providing distance and online education has an ethical obligation 
to ensure that its learners have access to appropriate library support. 
The Canadian Library Association Guidelines (2000) categorize respon-
sibilities in terms of funding, administration, personnel, facilities, 
resources, services, publicity, and professional development of librarians. 
The Guidelines note as essential advance planning by the library in con-
sultation with faculty, program administrators, and other appropriate 
campus personnel, and with librarians at unaffiliated libraries. The 
Guidelines also advocate that leadership should come from all levels of 
the institutional administration, but particularly from the library.
All staff involved in providing library support to e-learners must 
be included in the partnership. Technological changes have been the 

412	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
dominant force reshaping library services. Instilling a culture of sharing, 
motivation, equity, and active partnering encourages library staff to 
respond positively to the changing roles, responsibilities, and skills that 
the integration and use of technology requires. A well-designed, ongoing 
training program enables library staff to upgrade their skills to their new 
assignments, and helps them to understand and control fear of change.
The home institution has primary responsibility for library support, 
but can benefit from external partnerships, collaborative efforts, and 
consortia in supporting e-learners. Within Canada, university libraries 
extend in-person borrowing privileges to students, faculty, and staff from 
across the country, through the Canadian University Reciprocal Borrowing 
Agreement (Council of Prairie and Pacific University Libraries, et al., n.d.; 
see http://www.coppul.ca/rb/rbindex.html). There are also initiatives 
to share virtual reference desks, such as the Library and Archives Canada’s 
Virtual Reference Canada (see http://www.collectionscanada.ca/vrc-rvc/
index.html), through which e-learners benefit from the range of infor-
mation resources and staff expertise available at a variety of participating 
institutions. Consortia approaches to database subscriptions enable 
libraries to expand the scope of the electronic resources they are able 
to offer their e-learners in a time of shrinking budgets and escalating 
journal costs. The Lois Hole Campus Alberta Digital Library (LHCADL) ini-
tiative, through funding provided by the Government of Alberta, pro-
vides participating post-secondary institutions in Alberta with digital 
information resources for teaching, learning, and research (The Alberta 
Library, 2006; see http://www.thealbertalibrary.ab.ca/viewChannel.
asp?channelID=3). LHCADL includes an information literacy and aware-
ness component dedicated to sharing expertise and training resources 
with participating libraries.
Conclusion
In summary, library services are an essential component of a quality 
online learning experience. As access to online courses grows, an 
increasing number of e-learners are dispersed around the globe, often 
in parts of the world where physical access to the collections of large 
academic and research libraries is impossible or severely limited. These 
learners are largely dependent on the quality and academic usefulness 
of services that the library can offer electronically. The strength of virtual 
libraries and digital collections depends on the relationships libraries 

Library Support for e-Learners	
413
develop and maintain with the creators, publishers, and aggregators of 
e-resources, as well as with those who use, learn from, and evaluate these 
resources. Providing ongoing technical, reference, and instructional 
support to e-learners requires that libraries redefine their values and 
services, collaborate with their users and other partners, and approach 
their tasks creatively.
References
Algenio, E. R. (2002). The virtual reserve room: Extending library 
­services off-campus. In P. B. Mahoney (Ed.), The tenth off-campus library 
services conference proceedings (pp. 11–18). Mount Pleasant, MI: Central 
Michigan University.
AMICUS. (n.d.). Libraries and Archives Canada. Retrieved September 
1, 2007, from http://www.collectionscanada.ca/amicus/
Anderson, T. (2008). Towards a theory of online learning. In T. ­Anderson 
(Ed.), Theory and practice of online learning, 2nd ed. (pp. 45-74). Edmonton, 
AB: AU Press.
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2000). Information literacy 
competency standards for higher education. Retrieved May 21, 2007, 
from http://www.ala.org/ala/acrl/acrlstandards/informationliteracy 
competency.htm
Association of College and Research Libraries. (2004). Guidelines for dis-
tance learning library services. Retrieved May, 21, 2007, from http://www.
ala.org/ala/acrl/ acrlstandards/guidelinesdistancelearning.htm
Athabasca University Library. (n.d.). Ask about a research topic. Retrieved 
May 21, 2007, from http://library.athabascau.ca/about/contacts.php
Athabasca University Library. (n.d.). Digital Reading Room. Retrieved May 
21, 2007, from http://library.athabascau.ca/drr/
Athabasca University Library. (n.d.). Digital Reference Centre. Retrieved 
May 21, 2007, from http://library.athabascau.ca/drc/
Athabasca University Library. (n.d.). Help Centre. Retrieved May 21, 2007, 
from http://library.athabascau.ca/help.php
Athabasca University. (n.d.). Information systems 200: Accessing information. 
Retrieved May 21, 2007, from http://www.athabascau.ca/courses/infs/ 
200/
Calvert, H. M. (2000). Document delivery options for distance education 
students and electronic reserve service at Ball State University ­Libraries. 

414	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
In P. S. Thomas (Ed.), The ninth off-campus library services conference 
proceedings (pp. 73–82). Mount Pleasant, MI: Central Michigan 
­University.
Canadian Library Association. (2000). Guidelines for library support of 
­distance and distributed learning in Canada. Retrieved May 21, 2007, from 
http://www.cla.ca/about/distance.htm
CiteUlike. (n.d.). CiteUlike.org home page. Retrieved May 27, 2007, from 
http://www.citeulike.org/
Colgate, M., Buchanan-Oliver, M., & Elmsly, R. (2005). Relationship 
benefits in an Internet environment. Managing Service Quarterly, 15(5), 
426–436.
Cooper, R., & Dempsey, P. R. (1998). Remote library users – needs and 
expectations. Library Trends, 47(1), 42–64.
Council of Prairie and Pacific University Libraries. (n.d.). ANTS: Animated 
tutorial sharing project. Retrieved May 22, 2007, from http://www. 
­brandonu.ca/Library/COPPUL/
Council of Prairie and Pacific University Libraries, Council of Atlantic 
University Libraries, Ontario Council of University Libraries, & Con-
férence des Recteurs et des Principaux des Universités du Québec. 
(n.d.). Canadian university reciprocal borrowing agreement. Retrieved May 
21, 2007, from http://www.coppul.ca/rb/ rbindex.html
The Distant Librarian. (2008). Retrieved March 24, 2008, from http://
distlib .blogs.com/distlib/
Elmborg, J. (2006). Critical information literacy: Implications for instruc-
tional practice. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 32(2), 192–199.
FURL. (n.d.). FURL: Your personal web file home page. Retrieved May 27, 
2007, from http://www.furl.net/
Gapen, D. K. (1993). The virtual library: Knowledge, society, and the 
librarian. In L. M. Saunders (Ed.), The virtual library: Visions and ­realities 
(pp. 1–14). Westport, CT: Meckler.
Georgia State University Library. (n.d.). Library news and subject blogs. 
Retrieved June 7, 2007, from http://www.library.gsu.edu/news/
Glynn, T., & Wu, C. (2003). New roles and opportunities for academic 
library liaisons: A survey and recommendations. References Services 
Review, 31(2), 122–128.
Google Scholar (2007). About Google Scholar. Retrieved May 24, 2007 from 
http://scholar.google.ca/intl/en/scholar/about.html
Haricombe, L. J. (1998). Introduction. Library Trends, 47(1), 1–5.
Hulshof, R. (1999). Providing services to virtual patrons. Information 
Outlook, 3(1), 20–23.

Library Support for e-Learners	
415
Innovative Interfaces. (n.d.). Encore product home page. Retrieved May 27, 
2007, from http://www.iii.com/encore/main_index2.html
Innovative Interfaces. (n.d.). Innovative Interfaces.com home page. Retrieved 
May 27, 2007, from http://www.iii.com/
Johnson, K., & Magusin, E. (2005). Exploring the digital library: A guide for 
online teaching and learning. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Library and Archives Canada. (n.d.). Virtual Reference Canada. Retrieved 
June 7, 2007, from http://www.collectionscanada.ca/vrc-rvc/index.
html
Lippincott, J. K. (2002). Developing collaborative relationships: Librar-
ians, students, and faculty creating learning communities. College & 
Research Libraries News, 63(3), 190–192.
Lowe, S., & Rumery, J. (2000). Service to distance learners: Planning for 
e-reserves and copyright. In P. S. Thomas (Ed.), The ninth off-campus 
library services conference proceedings (pp. 213–220). Mount Pleasant, MI: 
Central Michigan University.
Luke, A. & Kapitzke, C. (1999). Literacies and libraries: Archives and 
cybraries.
Pedagogy, Culture and Society, 7(3), 467–491.
Matthew, V. & Schroeder, A. (2006). The embedded librarian program. 
EDUCAUSE Quarterly, 29(4). Retrieved May 22, 2007, from http://www.
educause.edu/apps/eq/eqm06/eqm06410.asp
McCaskie, L. (2004). What are the implications for information literacy ­training 
in higher education with the introduction of federated search tools? ­Sheffield, 
UK: University of Sheffield. Retrieved May 24, 2007, from http://dagda.
shef.ac.uk/dissertations/2003-04/External/McCaskie_Lucy_MALib.pdf 
Morgan, E. L. (1999). MyLibrary@NCState. Retrieved May 27, 2007, from 
http://www.infomotions.com/musings/sigir-99/
Morgan, K., & Reade, T. (2000). Pioneering portals: MyLibrary@NCState. 
Information Technology and Libraries, 19(4), 191–198.
Mount Allison University Libraries. (2006). Libcasts. Retrieved June 7, 
2007, from http://www.mta.ca/library/libcasts.html
Needham, G., Parker, J., & Baker, K. (2001). Skills for lifelong learning 
at a distance: Information literacy at the Open University. The New 
Review of Libraries and Lifelong Learning, 2, 67–77.
Nicholas, M., & Tomeo, M. (2005). Can you hear me now? Communicat-
ing library services to distance education students and faculty. Online 
Journal of Distance Learning Administration, 8(2). Retrieved May 7, 2007, 
from http://www .westga.edu/%7Edistance/ojdla/summer82/­nicholas 
82.htm

416	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Open University Library. (1999; 2004). ROUTES (Resources for Open 
­University Teachers and Students). Retrieved May 21, 2007, from http://
routes.open.ac.uk/
Open University Library. (2001). Safari (Skills in Accessing, Finding, and 
Reviewing Information). Retrieved May 21, 2007, from http://www.open.
ac.uk/safari
Open University Library. (2005). MyOpenLibrary. Retrieved May 24, 2007, 
from http://myopenlibrary.open.ac.uk/
Open WorldCat. (2008). What is WorldCat? Retrieved March 24, 2008, 
from http://www.worldcat.org/whatis/default.jsp
Pew Internet and American Life. (2005). Reports: Online activities & pur-
suits: Podcasting. Retrieved May 24, 2007, from http://www.pewInternet.
org/pdfs/PIP_podcasting2005.pdf
Ramsay, K. M., & Kinnie, J. (2006). The embedded librarian. Library 
Journal, 131(6), 34–35.
San Diego State University. (2000–2007). Docutek ERes. Ereserves Home. 
Retrieved May 21, 2007, from http://ecr.sdsu.edu/
SFX.com. (n.d.) SFX.com home page: Context sensitive linking. Retrieved 
May 27, 2007, from http://www.exlibrisgroup.com/sfx.htm
The Shifted Librarian. (2008). Retrieved March 24, 2008, from http://www.
theshiftedlibrarian.com/
Simmons, M. H. (2005). Librarians as disciplinary discourse mediators: 
Using genre theory to move toward critical information literacy. portal: 
Libraries and the Academy, 5(3), 297–311. 
Simon Fraser University Library. (n.d.). dbWiz – database selection wizard. 
Retrieved May 27, 2007, from http://dbwiz.lib.sfu.ca/dbwiz/
Slade, A. (2000). Keynote address – International trends and issues in 
library services for distance learning: Present and future. In P. Brophy, 
S. Fisher & Z. Clarke (Eds.), Libraries without walls 3: The delivery ­of library 
services to distant users. London: Library Association ­Publishing.
Slade, A., & Kascus, M. (1998). An international comparison of library 
services for distance learning. In P. S. Thomas & M. Jones (Eds.), The 
eighth off-campus library services conference proceedings (pp. 259–297). 
Mount Pleasant, MI: Central Michigan University.
Sloan, B. (1998). Service perspectives for the digital library remote 
­reference services. Library Trends, 47(1), 117–144.
The Alberta Library. (2006). The Lois Hole Campus Alberta Digital Library. 
Retrieved May 21, 2007, from http://www.thealbertalibrary.ab.ca/view 
Channel.asp?channelID=3

Library Support for e-Learners	
417
University of Pennsylvania Libraries. (n.d.). The University of Pennsylvania 
Library’s PennTag’s web page. Retrieved May 27, 2007, from http://tags.
library.upenn.edu/
University of Texas System Digital Library. (1998–2004). TILTTexas 
Information Literacy Tutorial. Retrieved May 21, 2007, from http://tilt.
lib.utsystem.edu/
University of Winnipeg Library. (n.d.). MyCybrary. Retrieved June 7, 2007, 
from http://cybrary.uwinnipeg.ca/myCybrary/index.cfm
Utah Academic Library Consortium. (2001). Internet Navigator. Retrieved 
May 21, 2007, from http://medlib.med.utah.edu/navigator/
Viggiano, R., & Ault, M. (2001). Online library instruction for online 
students. Information Technology and Libraries, 20(3), 135–138. 
Ward, D., & Kern, M. K. (2006). Combining IM and vendor-based chat: 
A report from the frontlines of an integrated service. portal: Libraries 
and the Academy, 6(4), 417–429.
Warner, D. (2006). Electronic reserves: A changed landscape. Journal of 
Interlibrary Loan, Document Supply & Electronic Reserves, 16(4), 125–133.
Wilson, P. (2002). The ins and outs of providing electronic reserves for 
distance learning classes. In P. B. Mahoney (Ed.), The tenth off-campus 
library services conference proceedings (pp. 413–422). Mount Pleasant, MI: 
Central Michigan University.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Kay Johnson (kayj@athabascau.ca) is a tutor and course author with 
Athabasca University. During her seven years of service with AU Library, 
she specialized in the delivery of reference, instruction, and circulation 
services to distance learners. Kay received her BA (English) and BA 
Honours (History) from the University of Ottawa, and her Master of 
Library and Information Studies from McGill University. Kay is co-author 
of Exploring the Digital Library: A Guide for Online Teaching and Learning 
(Jossey-Bass, 2005).
Houda Trabelsi (houdat@athabascau.ca) is an e-Commerce course 
­coordinator at Athabasca University. She received a M.Sc. in business 
administration from Sherbrooke University and a M.Sc.(Information 
Technology) from Moncton University. Her research interests include 
electronic commerce, business models, e-learning, strategy, customer 

418	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
relationships management, trust and privacy in electronic commerce, 
World Wide Web navigation, and interface design.
Elaine Fabbro (elainef@athabascau.ca) is Head, Information Literacy & 
Public Services at Athabasca University Library. Elaine received her BA 
(Music) from the University of British Columbia and her Master of 
Library and Information Science from the University of Western Ontario. 
Her primary responsibilities are the provision of instructional and refer-
ence services to the AU community. She also tutors the AU course INFS 
200: Accessing Information. Elaine is co-author of Exploring the Digital 
Library: A Guide for Online Teaching and Learning (Jossey-Bass, 2005).

Chapter 17
Supporting the Online Learner
Susan D. Moisey & Judith A. Hughes
Athabasca University
Introduction
Creating a supportive learning environment for online learners is crucial 
for ensuring success, promoting persistence, and avoiding drop-out. The 
ideal learning environment aims to develop the learner’s independence 
and facilitate the learning process by providing supports that are flexible, 
accessible, and readily available when needed. Certainly strong academic 
and tutorial support is necessary, and the special considerations in the 
case of online learning are the subject of earlier chapters. This chapter, 
however, deals with non-academic supports for the online learner and 
the important role they play in promoting a successful learning experi-
ence. In addition, practical advice is offered, as well as examples of the 
way such supports are provided in a variety of online learning contexts.
The ability and potential of online learning to enhance access to 
education, particularly higher education, is well recognized and evidenced 
by the way it has grown and expanded. Increasing numbers of learners 

420	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
are finding that online courses best meet their needs. At the same time, 
increasing numbers of distance education organizations are finding that 
online learning best meets the diverse needs of their students.
The types of organizations that provide online learning vary and 
each has particular characteristics and ways of providing support to their 
online learners. One type is what Daniel (1996) refers to as the “mega-
university” – distance-teaching universities with 100,000 or more stu-
dents. Indira Gandhi National Open University, with an enrolment of 
750,000 students, is one example, as is the Open University of Hong 
Kong, with more than 400,000 students. Due to the high concentration 
of students in geographic areas, these universities typically rely on a 
network of local learning centres to provide student support, tutorials, 
and other services as an adjunct to the distance and online courses they 
offer. While these centres continue to be used, there is increasing avail-
ability of online support services as well.
Another type is the distance education organization that serves a 
population of learners spread over a wide geographical area. Athabasca 
University – Canada’s Open University – is an example of this type of 
institution, with a current population of nearly 34,000 students worldwide 
(Athabasca University, 2006). Online student support is essential for 
serving students over such a great area. Athabasca University relies pri-
marily on web-based information and resources, complemented by email, 
to provide learner supports, although telephone communications are 
used as well, especially with students located in Canada.
Still another type of organization providing online learning is the 
dual-mode institution, which provides face-to-face, classroom-based pro-
grams in addition to its online offerings. Such institutions are plentiful 
and their numbers are growing as traditional educational institutions 
embrace distance and online learning. These organizations, however, 
commonly face particular challenges associated with having to provide 
student support to two very different groups of learners – one onsite 
and the other at a distance – and often with very different needs. 
Thoughtful planning and significant financial commitment is often 
required to ensure high-quality student support for both groups.
Regardless of the context, student support is essential for success-
ful online learning. Although supports may be provided in a variety of 
ways, the overall goal is to provide a learner-support-services system 
“where students feel at home, where they feel valued, and which they 
find manageable” (Tait, 2000, p. 289). Supports should be flexible, con-

Supporting the Online Learner	
421
tinuously available, easily accessible, and also genuinely useful. Learners 
have clearly told us that they need to see the value added by a resource; 
otherwise, they will not use it. They have also asked that supports be 
available, but not intrusive. With these caveats in mind, a constellation 
of learner supports is discussed in the sections that follow.
Supports for Prospective Students
We can identify support needs best when we know our learners well. Each 
learner brings a unique set of skills, experiences, and expectations to the 
learning environment. As students’ characteristics and needs are diverse, 
so too are their needs for supports and services. Therefore, we should ask 
questions about areas such as the prospective learner’s readiness for online 
learning, access to and familiarity with the technology required, proficiency 
in the language of instruction, individual learning style or learning prefer-
ence, and educational goals. These are things we need to know about 
our learners, and also things that learners need to know about themselves, 
in order to receive the greatest benefit from the learning experience.
With this information at hand, we can determine what supports 
are most critical for learners and establish priorities to ensure that 
resources, which are always limited, are directed to the most useful sup-
ports. When doing so, we must keep in mind that some learners will 
require more support than others, and that sometimes learners need 
more help at one point in their educational career than at others. 
Throughout the process, the focus should be on self-assessment to 
encourage independence in the learner, although counselling backup 
should be available when needed.
Making an informed decision to pursue online learning is the 
first step to a successful educational experience. The following section 
outlines resources that can assist potential online learners to a) assess 
their readiness for this form of learning; b) determine if they have ade-
quate computing and connectivity requirements; and c) obtain advice 
for making specific program and career-related decisions.
Learner Readiness 
The list below provides a series of questions for learners thinking about 
taking an online post-secondary program of studies, and identifies self-
assessment tools that are available to help answer these questions.

422	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
•	Am I ready for university (or college)? This online resource allows 
prospective learners to determine their readiness, from academic, 
financial, family support, and time perspectives. Prospective stu-
dents are provided with a series of questions to help them examine 
their expectations and readiness; the process serves to highlight 
areas that might need special attention. Once the self-assessment 
is complete, follow-up email counselling concludes the process. 
For an example of such a self-assessment tool, see the “Am I 
Ready” web site (Athabasca University, 2007) at http://amiready.
athabascau.ca/.
•	Am I ready for studies in the English language (or other language of 
instruction)? This online resource assists the learner to determine 
if their command of the language is sufficient to allow for success, 
and places the learner in specific language course levels. The 
learner may be directed to online remedial resources, and should 
always have the option of contacting an advisor. For an example 
of such a resource, see the Online Resources at http://www. 
­athabascau .ca/main/studserv.htm.
•	Am I ready for university-level mathematics? Proficiency in ­mathematics 
has proven to be a significant success factor for certain courses, 
particularly for adult learners returning to the educational envi-
ronment after some time away. Assisting prospective learners to 
identify their strengths and weaknesses in mathematics, and 
making remediation available, can avoid difficulties and promote 
success. Online self-assessment tools can help learners to deter-
mine their readiness for particular mathematics courses, to rec-
ommend a mathematics course appropriate to the learner’s level, 
and to identify remediation resources. For an example of such a 
tool, see the Online Resources at http://www.athabascau.ca/main/
studserv.htm.
•	 Do I have the skills to be successful in my chosen program? This online 
resource outlines what skills are needed for particular areas of study. 
The resource should be program-specific and refer the student to 
online tutorials if needed. For an example of a resource that assists 
the learner to make program choices, see “Study at the OU” at the 
Open University (UK) web site at http://www.open.ac.uk.
Minimum Computer Requirements
At its most basic level, information should be provided so potential 
learners can determine if they have (or have access to) the necessary 

Supporting the Online Learner	
423
hardware, software, and connectivity to study online. Additional resources 
may be provided to help prospective students gauge their comfort with 
an online learning environment; for example, short sample experiences 
can be described to show students what they can expect, such as those 
provided in Deakin University’s (2003) Learning Toolkit web site at 
http://www .deakin.edu.au/dlt2007/.
Career-Planning Resources 
Potential learners often seek out online learning opportunities to ­initiate, 
further, or enhance their careers. Indeed, most learners will experience 
several career changes – some of them quite significant – throughout 
their working lives. As such, viewing the educational experience within 
the context of career development is important.
Online resources that assist learners to determine their interests 
and skills and that provide a career map aligned with educational pro-
grams are valuable. For example, see the United Kingdom’s Open 
University (2007) web site at http://www.open.ac.uk, which focuses on 
the learner’s need to contemplate the future in making educational 
choices, or “Mapping Your Future” on Athabasca University’s (2007) 
Services to Students web site at http://amiready.athabascau.ca/. Resources 
such as these provide learners with a means of exploring career clusters 
and the credentials required to pursue them. After an initial exploration, 
learners may wish to communicate (via email and/or telephone) with 
a counsellor or program advisor to refine their career goals. Once this 
is achieved, electronic program plans may be designed, which take career 
goals as well as prior learning into account. In this process, it is important 
to have the learner explore first, and then to have the counsellor or 
advisor provide assistance as needed.
Program Advising 
Distance and online learners frequently extend their learning over a 
number of years. As such, they require program planning that will help 
them achieve their educational goals in the most expedient manner 
possible. Moreover, learners often transfer between institutions and juris-
dictions, increasingly so in our global learning environment, and as such 
require a means of coordinating their studies and ensuring transferability 
of courses when necessary. Proper academic advising is essential to meet 
the diverse needs of these online learners.
The role of the program advisor is to help learners understand 
program requirements, to take into account any courses being ­transferred 

424	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
into a program, and then to plan the remainder of their program accord-
ingly. Moreover, as learners frequently change career and educational 
goals during the process of completing a program, academic advisors 
need to be readily available and have access to all program and transfer 
information in order to accommodate changes in students’ program 
plans throughout their period of study.
Supporting the Learner
By assisting potential learners to make an informed decision to pursue 
online learning, we have enhanced their chances for success. Once a 
student has enrolled in a course, however, quite different support is 
required. Learners need to know what kinds of support they can expect 
and from whom, how to interact with the institution, what is expected of 
them, and how to know when they need assistance. As educators, we must 
anticipate an array of needs, and then plan accordingly to ensure that 
learners have what they require throughout their ­educational programs.
Learners require support in a variety of areas, such as administra-
tive and logistic support, information and technological support, and 
assistance with studying, exam-taking, and writing skills. For learners with 
disabilities or other limiting conditions, specific supports may also be 
necessary. Some learners find that peer support or the availability of a 
learning community adds significantly to their educational experience. 
In addition, a students’ union and an alumni association, as well as oppor-
tunities to participate in institutional governance, can be invaluable for 
promoting a successful and meaningful educational experience.
Administrative and Logistic Support
Daniel (2000) points out that a key component of supported open learn-
ing is effective administration and logistics. Institutions engaged in dis-
tance and online education know that smooth administrative processes 
can be as much a factor in learner satisfaction and success as the design 
of learning resources, and learners themselves report that flexibility of 
access and smooth administrative support are important to creating a 
supportive learning environment.
As online learning has grown and evolved, so too have online 
administrative supports and services. Institutions that provide online 

Supporting the Online Learner	
425
learning report that students express a preference for having the control 
that online administrative processes afford. Online functions, such as 
course registrations, examination requests, or purchasing textbooks 
and course materials have become commonplace. Still, there are par-
ticular considerations in the provision of these services to online ­learners, 
such as those discussed below.
•	Course registration and the maintenance of student records for 
dual-mode institutions may pose particular challenges, especially 
for organizations that offer continuous enrolment for online 
learners, as well as semester- or term-based enrolment for on-site 
students. Maintaining two forms of course registration may prove 
problematic and create redundancy and parallel systems along 
with commensurate high costs for maintaining them.
•	 Even though much of the course content may be provided online 
in a web-based course, there is usually still a need for print-based 
course materials, such as textbooks or readers. Students may obtain 
these materials in a number of ways. For example, some institutions 
provide these through their own course materials distribution 
system; however, factors such as warehousing, inventory control, 
and materials distribution must also be considered in this arrange-
ment. Other institutions are choosing to use commercial online 
booksellers to fill students’ textbook orders. Dual-mode institutions 
often “piggyback” an online ordering component to their existing 
bookstore operation to serve the needs of their online learners.
•	Increasingly, publishers are offering online resources to ­supplement 
their textbooks as well as electronic versions of texts for students 
who may prefer these over-bound versions. Also, customized 
­publishing is offered by many publishers.
•	Some institutions provide printed versions of online learning 
materials for students who do not wish to read online, or to reduce 
their need for printing materials themselves. Some materials may 
be made available on CD-ROM or other storage media to reduce 
the need for lengthy downloads. These materials may be included 
as part of the course package or may be available on demand, 
perhaps for an additional charge.
•	In addition to books and printed course materials, students may 
purchase some additional products at an online bookstore. 
Students often wish to purchase memorabilia or “logo-wear” as 
a symbol of belonging to the university or college. Computer 
­software may be also sold at reduced student rates.

426	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Above all, learners need to know what services they can expect to 
receive from the institution and how they will be provided. Service stan-
dards, such as those implicit in the following questions, should be clear 
and easily available: How long should it take to receive confirmation of 
a course registration? How much time does it take to receive an exami-
nation grade or feedback on an assignment? How quickly should a 
response be expected to an email message? How long does it take to 
receive a requested book from the library? These standards should be 
readily available to students and should serve as benchmarks for service 
units within the institution.
Information and Technological Support
Drawing the line between academic support on the one hand and 
­students’ needs for information and technological support on the other 
is often a challenge, and these types of support must be coordinated 
carefully. There are three common formats for providing information 
and technological support:
1.	 An information centre, which provides institutional and program 
information; 
2.	 A computing helpdesk, which troubleshoots students’ ­technological 
difficulties and provides information; and 
3.	 A call centre, which fields students’ questions and requests, 
­typically in a particular program area. 
All three can work together to support the online learning process. 
Ideally, each should have the following characteristics:
•	Reliable networks;
•	Asynchronous access (e.g., email) with “24/7” availability;
•	Synchronous access (e.g., toll-free telephone) at clearly identified 
times;
•	Quick response, with acknowledgement and follow-up;
•	Follow-through to resolution of issues or difficulties that students 
encounter;
•	Simple, clear instructions;
•	Access by attendants to all critical databases and expertise; and
•	Ability to identify problems with policies, procedures, or systems, 
and to suggest change.

Supporting the Online Learner	
427
Portals 
Increasingly, portals are used to provide learners with easy access to their 
online courses, as well as to a variety of web-based functions. Online 
learning is often accompanied by a plethora of different web sites to 
access, and multiple sign-on procedures and passwords. Portals can alle-
viate this situation by individualizing and integrating online interactions, 
thus enhancing the learner’s experience by making access easier and 
more efficient.
Metacognitive Supports
Some online learners are returning to learning after some time away, 
others may be new to post-secondary study altogether, and many may 
not have experienced online learning before and do not know how best 
to approach this new mode of study. By providing metacognitive supports 
like the ones described in this section, we can help online learners 
develop more effective and successful learning processes.
Metacognitive skills are those associated with “learning how to 
learn.” For online learners, these kinds of supports enhance their ability 
to study online and facilitate their access to and retention of knowledge. 
Providing such supports can increase students’ confidence, reduce stress, 
and enhance their learning experience. Resources to enhance the 
­metacognitive skills of online learners include the following:
•	Web-based resources that assist in the development of time 
­management strategies and study schedules and that help students 
balance educational pursuits with other life demands;
•	Online strategies and exercises to reduce exam anxiety;
•	Resources that teach how to become a successful online learner;
•	Online services and web-based resources that assist students in 
writing papers;
•	Intellectual property-related resources that teach students how to 
use appropriate referencing, make correct citations, and avoid 
plagiarism;
•	Library resources that teach students how to search online data-
bases, critically analyze information from online publications, and 
so forth;
•	Community-building tools and social software for facilitating 
learner interactions, such as making “study-buddy” connections 
for peer assistance.

428	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Learning How to Learn Online
Learning online is different than learning in a conventional classroom-
based setting. The pedagogical approach underlying online learning 
is commonly based on constructivism, where learners actively create 
knowledge in a personally relevant and meaningful manner. This mode 
of learning lies in stark contrast to the passive, receptive mode typical 
of traditional face-to-face instructional settings. To make the transition 
to online learning, Wang (2005) describes a “whole person” campaign 
aimed at transforming passive, receptive students into competent, self-
directed, active learners (a description of this campaign is provided in 
Mandarin (http://www.beiwaionline.com/degree/zx/daohang/t200409 
24_1110.htm). However, the need for learners to become more inde-
pendent, involved, and dynamic – actively seeking and using online 
information and supports – is certainly not restricted to China. Such 
resources are no doubt useful for distance learners worldwide, particu-
larly those for whom online learning is a new experience.
Writing Resources
Good writing skills are a mainstay of successful learning. The ability to 
produce well-written assignments, cogent reports, and clear presentations 
is facilitated by providing online learners with resources to assist with 
improving their writing skills. Online resources, such as the Paradigm 
Online Writing Assistant (http://powa.org/my/), provide instruction in 
a variety of different types of writing. Online support services are also 
useful. For example, Athabasca University’s Write Site (http://www. 
­athabascau.ca/html/services/write-site/), allows students to submit a 
draft of an academic assignment and receive feedback about organiza-
tion, mechanics, grammar, and style before submitting it for marking.
Intellectual-Property-Related Resources
Traditions regarding what constitutes intellectual property and what is 
generally accepted common knowledge are not universal concepts, nor 
are they always understood. Cultural views about ownership of knowledge 
vary. Students do not always understand the concept of plagiarism, much 
less how to avoid it.
Institutions should ensure that intellectual honesty expectations 
are readily available to online learners and referred to frequently. 
Reminders in directions for assignments, links to approved style guides, 
links to anti-plagiarism services (see, for example, www.turnitin.com), 
and online tutorials on correct attribution of scholarly material and 

Supporting the Online Learner	
429
bibliographic citations reduce the chance that learners will fail to provide 
proper scholarly acknowledgement in their assignments and research. 
For example, the University of Puget Sound (2003) has designed an 
excellent resource that provides learners with exercises to enhance their 
understanding of the concept of plagiarism and to assist them in ­avoiding 
it (see http://library.ups.edu/research/guides/plagrsm.htm).
Community-Building Tools
As online learning has grown and evolved, so too has recognition of the 
importance of student interaction and the role it plays in peer support 
and the creation of an online or virtual community of “groups of people 
who share a concern, a set of problems, or a passion about a topic, and 
who deepen their knowledge and expertise in this area by interacting 
on an ongoing basis” (Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002, p. 4). Indeed, 
Lentell and O’Rourke (2004) include “supporting self-directed learner 
groups” and “supporting discussions” (online or face-to-face) that build 
“communities of practice” as a promising means of providing learner 
support for institutions with large numbers of students, especially those 
with limited resources in underdeveloped countries.
Tools to support interaction among online learners include asyn-
chronous computer-mediated conferencing (electronic bulletin boards), 
text-based chat, synchronous audio conferencing, blogs, and wikis, among 
others. New forms of social software are constantly being developed with 
the aim of fostering student interaction, supporting individual and collec-
tive learning, and promoting a sense of belonging and mutual support.
While most online student interaction typically takes place within 
the course environment, usually in asynchronous conferences moderated 
by instructors or facilitators, there are also opportunities for students to 
join together informally outside of the courses in which they are enrolled. 
For example, program web sites may include an interactive “meet-and-
greet” area where students can introduce themselves or discuss shared 
interests and concerns. At Athabasca University (2008), the Student 
Union offers clubs and groups, study buddies, mentoring, and discussion 
forums and chat through their web site at http://www.ausu.org/.
Library Resources
In the early years of distance education, providing library support to 
learners was a challenge. Courses were developed in print format and 

430	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
comprehensive course packages were sent to each learner. The library 
typically provided a collection that was made available to the learner on 
request, either by mail or fax. Online sources of information, however, 
have transformed libraries in distance education. Where libraries once 
focused on holdings, they now focus on access; where they once were 
information repositories, they now are gateways to information. This 
transformation has allowed the library to become better integrated within 
courses and more actively involved in the overall learning process. Online 
learners require resources and support to make full use of the digital 
library that has evolved, and to use it effectively in their studies and 
written work. Moreover, as distance education institutions expand into 
offering post-graduate programs, there is increasing need for the library 
to be involved in facilitating student research, providing web-based 
­information on topics such as searching online journals or conducting 
­literature reviews.
Online Educational Counselling
Well-prepared resources can be provided online, but counselling 
­assistance, both synchronous and asynchronous, is required as well, par-
ticularly for learners who are experiencing difficulty. In the online envi-
ronment, learners can “fall through the cracks” if assistance is not readily 
available. From time to-time, a learner may need someone to assist in 
keeping a positive outlook and determining if an intervention is needed. 
Learners need to know that help is there if they need it. The institution 
should provide this resource and all institutional staff should be trained 
to identify when a learner might benefit from a session with a counsellor. 
It is important to remember, however, that while referrals can be made, 
the decision to pursue them belongs to the learner.
The work of the counsellor in an online learning environment 
has three aspects. The first is to be involved in the development of 
online resources that help learners to identify and address barriers to 
reaching their educational goals. The second is to interact with the 
learners when an intervention is required. The third is to work with 
other institutional staff to ensure that processes and procedures support 
and enhance learning.
While educational and career counselling are well suited to the 
online environment, personal counselling is less so. Generally speaking, 
personal counselling should be limited to immediate crisis resolution 

Supporting the Online Learner	
431
and referral. As such, counselling staff need information about local 
community resources, in a variety of locations, to which they can refer 
students in need. 
Student Rights and Ombuds Services
Online learners have as much need of clearly articulated rights as do 
learners in traditional educational settings. An advocacy process designed 
for online learners is one in which the learner is made aware of student 
rights and responsibilities. An institution can fulfill its basic legal respon-
sibility by making a student code of conduct available online and in print 
upon request. A prudent institution, however, will go well beyond this 
demonstration of due diligence, particularly with regard to intellectual 
property and plagiarism, as discussed earlier.
All efforts to provide smooth interactions between the learner 
and the institution notwithstanding, there will be situations in which the 
learner becomes ensnared and does not know where to turn. A highly 
visible ombuds office should be available. Moreover, from an institutional 
perspective, the ombuds office can assist in identifying policy and pro-
cedure problems that require attention within the institution. Information 
about the Ombud’s Office at Athabasca University can be found at http://
www.athabascau.ca/ombuds/index.php.
Institutional Governance and the Students’ Union
Institutions involved in distance and online learning may wish to provide 
opportunities for students to participate in institutional governance, as 
online learners can make valuable contributions and contribute unique 
insights in policy, planning, and similar matters. Including student rep-
resentatives on the Board of Governors and on senior-level administrative 
and academic committees helps to ensure that student perspectives are 
considered and results in more informed decision-making. Involving 
students in such capacities also sends an important message – that stu-
dents are valued, respected, and contributing members of the organiza-
tion with a legitimate role to play in how the organization is governed.
Student government in the form of a student union is also ­possible 
in such institutions, although administration may need to make special 
arrangements to facilitate the process. In many ways, a student union 
faces the same issues as the institution to keep in touch with its constitu-
ency. Both are vying for the attention of learners, who are often juggling 

432	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
learning with many other life demands. Still, it is in the institution’s 
best interests to have a healthy student union and to work together to 
meet the needs of the learners. Some means by which to achieve these 
goals include
•	making networks available to the student union;
•	providing one main institutional contact with whom student union 
representatives can interact;
•	assisting in collecting student union fees;
•	making information available, within confidentiality provisions;
•	including student representatives on governing and decision-
making bodies;
•	having decision-making bodies meet through electronic means 
(e.g., teleconference, online conference) to maximize ­participation 
of students;
•	keeping the student union and student representatives apprised 
of significant events, initiatives, and issues (e.g., strategic planning, 
budgeting, tuition fee increases);
•	engaging in shared initiatives with the student union (e.g., 
­including student union representatives in convocation, co-
­publishing newsletters);
•	seeking advice from the student union on important issues; and
•	demonstrating appreciation for the work of the student union.
Resources for Alumni
After graduation, students often wish to maintain contact with the insti-
tution and with fellow students. The educational institution, either on 
its own or through the student union, may wish to provide resources for 
alumni. Including a section for alumni on the institution’s web site is 
one way to keep former students involved and informed. In addition, 
opportunities for fundraising and planned giving may be included. Some 
institutions have established an alumni association to maintain contact 
with former students.
Resources for Online Learners with Disabilities
Increasing numbers of students with disabilities are recognizing the 
­benefits of distance education and realizing the enhanced access it 
­provides to post-secondary educational opportunities. Flexibility in the 

Supporting the Online Learner	
433
location of study, scheduling, and delivery of distance and online pro-
grams provide many students with disabilities with what may be their 
first real access to higher education (Paist, 1995; Kim-Rupnow, Dowrick, 
& Burke, 2001). On the other hand, distance learners with disabilities 
also face numerous barriers to success, including factors related to 
learner characteristics, life circumstances, workload, social integration, 
locus of control, study-time management, organization, satisfaction, 
motivation, and interaction with the instructor and other students.
Online learning presents additional challenges, especially for stu-
dents with physical, sensory, and learning disabilities (Burgstahler, 2001; 
Fichten, Asuncion, Barile, Fossey, & De Simone, 2000). For example, 
•	keyboarding is difficult (or impossible) for learners with fine-
motor problems or conditions such as Carpal Tunnel Syndrome;
•	learners with hearing impairments are unable to comprehend 
uncaptioned video presentations;
•	learners with hearing impairments or communication disorders 
(e.g., aphasia, severe stuttering) are unable to participate in 
audio-conferences;
•	accessible web pages are a must for learners with visual impair-
ments who use screen-reading software;
•	the text-based nature of distance and online learning materials 
presents difficulties to students for whom the written word is a 
barrier, such as those with certain learning disabilities or reading 
comprehension problems.
These are but some of the challenges that online learning presents 
to the diverse population of learners with disabilities. To overcome bar-
riers and achieve success, these online learners require appropriate, 
individualized, disability-specific support services and, when required, 
suitable assistive technology, as discussed in the case below.
Disability Services at Athabasca University
In April 1998, the Office for Access to Students with Disabilities (ASD) 
at Athabasca University was established (see http://www.athabascau.ca/
asd/). Two years later, in November 2000, the Policy for Students with 
Disabilities was adopted. This policy defines students with disabilities as 
“those individuals who are disadvantaged by reason of any verifiable and 
persistent physical, learning, cognitive, sensory, psychological, ­neurological, 

434	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
or temporary impairment that may affect their academic progress” 
(Athabasca University, 2000). The policy further states that students with 
disabilities will receive the following services:
•	Information
•	Assessment of academic and technological accommodations and 
support requirements
•	Educational and career counselling as it pertains to the disability
•	Referrals to additional services or agencies
•	Program planning as it pertains to the student’s disability
•	Time-management assistance (respective to the disability)
•	Monitoring of progress in course work
•	Registration assistance
•	Information and assistance with applications for funding
•	Assistance to obtain alternate format materials if materials cannot 
be produced on campus
•	Support service arrangements (e.g., tutoring, academic strategist, 
interpreting, aide, reader, scribe)
•	Exam accommodations
•	Time extensions for courses
•	Advocacy
•	Liaison with departments and faculties
•	Available volunteer assistance, including note taking, exam-writing 
assistance, mobility assistance, taping of readings, library research 
help, study help, tutoring, special project help.
The list above reflects the broad nature of services required by 
distance and online learners with disabilities. Certainly, not all of these 
learners require extensive services, but some do. Also, like any student, 
some learners with disabilities require more support at certain times in 
their program of studies than at others. This is especially true for pro-
spective students. We have found that taking a proactive approach and 
planning disability-specific supports prior to enrolment is important in 
order to initiate a supportive environment that will promote successful 
learning and avoid many problems encountered after studies have com-
menced. As the statistics below show, prospective students make up a 
significant number of the total students receiving disability services at 
Athabasca University.
Students Receiving Disability Services
Since its inception, the number of students receiving services from the 
Office for Access to Students with Disabilities (ASD) has grown steadily. 

Supporting the Online Learner	
435
In the five-year period between 2002 and 2007, numbers nearly doubled 
(see Figure 1). In April 2002, 709 active students and an additional one 
hundred prospective students received services through the ASD office; 
in April 2007, there were 1,584 active students and 193 prospective 
­students receiving services.
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
2000
2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007
Prospective
Active
Figure 1.   Students Receiving Disability-Specific Services at Athabasca 
University (Source: Athabasca University, Office for Access for Students 
with Disabilities, 2007)
To obtain a greater understanding of the nature of students with 
disabilities at Athabasca University and the services they receive, an 
exploratory study (Moisey, 2004) was conducted to coincide with the 
first three years of the operation of the ASD office (1998–2001). A total 
of 604 undergraduate students with disabilities were enrolled during 
this period. More than half (52%) had a physical disability, 20% had a 
learning disability, 20% had a psychological disability, and 7% had some 
form of sensory (hearing or vision) impairment. Their overall course 
completion rate – 45.9%, including early withdrawals – was somewhat 
lower than the general Athabasca University population – 52.5% when 
early withdrawals were included; and 59.5% when early withdrawals 
were excluded.
The study also found that students who received disability-specific 
services tended to have more success in terms of course completions. 
This finding is further supported by a more recent study, as yet unpub-
lished, involving undergraduate students with disabilities (n = 652) 

436	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
enrolled between April 2003 and April 2005 at Athabasca University. 
Statistical analysis reveals that students who received disability-specific 
services had significantly higher course completion rates than students 
with disabilities who did not receive such services. In short, it appears 
that providing support for distance and online learners with disabili- 
ties is important for promoting success in the courses in which they 
are enrolled.
Services and Accommodations 
Learners with disabilities at Athabasca University are identified in three 
ways: a) they indicate on the General Admissions Form that they have a 
disability; b) they self-refer, often after viewing the ASD web site (espe-
cially true for prospective learners); or c) they are referred by their tutor 
or instructor (usually after encountering difficulty in a course). Once 
the initial contact is made, the next step in determining the student’s 
particular needs is assessment.
Determination of learner support begins with a comprehensive, 
detailed self-assessment, which ascertains the student’s level of ability in 
a variety of functional areas. Following verification of the assessment, 
consultation takes place with a specially trained service coordinator to 
determine what services and accommodations may be required.
Course accommodations: The most common type of course accom-
modation involves adding one or more two-month extensions to the 
normal six-month contract time for completing a course. Another form 
of course accommodation involves providing alternative formats of 
course materials (e.g., electronic or recorded audio versions of textual 
material, transcripts of audio materials).
Exam accommodations: These learner supports involve four types 
of accommodation: a) accommodation to the timing of an examination 
(e.g., deferral, additional time to complete the examination, provision 
for breaks during the exam); b) assistance with presenting questions 
and recording answers (e.g., printing the exam in larger font, giving an 
oral exam instead of a written exam, use of a scribe to record answers); 
c) environmental changes involving the exam room (e.g., taking the 
examination alone; playing relaxing music); and d) using an alternative 
format for the examination (e.g., substituting multiple-choice test items 
with short-answer questions). 
External support: This service involves the provision of support from 
outside the university (e.g., the use of an academic strategist, interpreter, 
note-taker, study aide, support worker).

Supporting the Online Learner	
437
Assistive technology: This service involves assessment of learner 
needs for special equipment or software to assist in the learning process. 
Assistive technology commonly includes using adaptive software, such 
as programs for text-to-speech conversion and word prediction, screen 
readers, voice input and optical character recognition, and screen enlarg-
ers. Assistive-input devices may also be recommended, such as large-key 
keyboards or special trackballs. Services also include procurement of 
equipment, liaison with funding sources, and training.
Depending on their circumstances, students may receive one-time, 
occasional, or ongoing support to attain their educational goals. Because 
the characteristics of students with disabilities are as diverse as those of 
the general student population, a variety of services and accommoda-
tions is required. Each student’s situation is different, and each has a 
unique set of goals and abilities; therefore, each requires an individual-
ized set of supports to maximize their learning and to achieve the highest 
possible level of success.
Conclusion
Creating a supportive environment in which the online learner can ­flourish 
is a complex task requiring careful analysis, thoughtful planning, and 
ongoing monitoring and revision to ensure that students’ needs are truly 
met. A constellation of resources and array of services are required to 
support the online learner in a manner that acknowledges individual 
differences and addresses them in the design of learner support services. 
Depending on the nature of the organization – a mega-university, a dedi-
cated distance learning institution, or a dual-mode institution – the manner 
in which services and supports are provided may vary. But the aim remains 
the same: to provide an ideal learning environment that promotes the 
learner’s independence while facilitating the learning process with ­supports 
that are flexible, accessible, and readily available when needed.
References
Athabasca University. (2000). Policy on students with disabilities. Retrieved 
May 22, 2007, from http://www.athabascau.ca/policy/studentservices/ 
policyforstudentswithdisabilities.htm 

438	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Athabasca University. (2006). Annual report. Retrieved May 24, 2007, from 
http://www.athabascau.ca/report2006/report2006.pdf
Athabasca University. (2007). Am I Ready? Student support web site. Retrieved 
September 25, 2007, from http://amiready.athabascau.ca/
Athabasca University. (2008). Athabasca University Students’ Union web site. 
Retrieved March 23, 2008, from http://www.ausu.org/
Burgstahler, S. (2001). Real connections: Making distance learning accessible 
to everyone. Seattle: Washington University. (ERIC Document Repro-
duction Service No. 475789). Retrieved May 26, 2007, from http:// 
p-adl.ucf.edu/events/seminars/ resources/distancelearn_1_0.pdf
Daniel, J. S. (1996). Mega-universities and the knowledge media: Technology 
strategies for higher education. London: Kogan Page.
Daniel, J. S. (2000). At the end of now – Global trends and their regional 
impacts. In V. Reddy & S. Manjulika (Eds.), The world of open and 
­distance learning (pp. 451–461). New Delhi: Viva Books.
Deakin University. (2003). Deakin learning toolkit. Retrieved May 11, 2007, 
from http://www.deakin.edu.au/dlt2007/
Fichten, C. S., Asuncion, J., Barile, M., Fossey, M., & De Simone, C. 
(2000). Access to educational and instructional computer technologies 
for post-secondary students with disabilities: Lessons from three empir-
ical studies. Journal of Educational Media, 25(3), 179–201. 
Kim-Rupnow, W. S., Dowrick, P. W., & Burke, S. L. (2001). Trends in 
distance education: Implications for improving access and outcomes 
for individuals with disabilities in post-secondary distance education. 
The American Journal of Distance Education, 15(1), 25–40.
Lentell, H., & O’Rourke, J. (2004). Tutoring large numbers: An unmet 
challenge. The International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learn-
ing, 5(1). Retrieved May 23, 2007, from http://www.irrodl.org/index.
php/irrodl/article/view/171/253
Moisey, S. (2004). Students with disabilities in distance education: 
­Characteristics, course enrolment and completion, and support ser-
vices. Journal of Distance Education, 19(1), 73–91. Retrieved May 11, 
2007, from http://cade.athabascau.ca/vol19.1/MOISEY_article.pdf
Open University (UK). (2007). Home page. Retrieved May 13, 2007, from 
http://www.open.ac.uk
Paist, E. (1995). Serving students with disabilities in distance education 
programs. The American Journal of Distance Education, 9(1), 61–70.
Tait, A. (2000). Planning student support for open and distance ­learning. 
Open Learning, 15(3), 287–299.

Supporting the Online Learner	
439
University of Puget Sound, Collins Memorial Library. (2003). Academic 
honesty: Recognizing plagiarism. Retrieved May 10, 2007, from http://
library.ups .edu/research/guides/plagrsm.htm
Wang, T. (2005). Tensions in learner support and tutor support in ter-
tiary web-based English language education in China. International 
Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 6(3). Retrieved May 
6, 2007, from http://www.irrodl.org/index.php/irrodl/article/view/ 
266/425
Wenger, E., McDermott, R., & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating communities 
of practice: A guide to managing knowledge. Boston, MA: Harvard ­University 
Press.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Susan Moisey (susanh@athabascau.ca) is an associate professor in the 
Centre for Distance Education at Athabasca University, where she teaches 
courses in instructional design, learning theory, and systems analysis. 
Dr. Moisey’s research interests include inclusive education, distance edu-
cation for learners with disabilities and other marginalized groups, online 
community building, and alternative models for instructional design.
Judith Hughes retired from Athabasca University in 2005. Most recently, 
Dr. Hughes served as Vice-President, Academic; Vice-President, Student 
Services; and Vice-President, External Relations. Her history is rooted 
in adult education, teaching and research, and administration. 


Chapter 18
Developing Team Skills  
and Accomplishing  
Team Projects Online
Deborah Hurst & Janice Thomas
Athabasca University
Introduction
Virtual teaming with members dispersed over geography, time zone, 
and functional roles has become commonplace as result of proliferating 
communication technologies (Tran & Latapie, 2007; Hawkrigg, 2007). 
Communication technologies in synchronous and asynchronous form 
are not only used within business teams but also increasingly to facilitate 
online learning in management education (Lee, Bonk, Magjuka, Su, 
& Liu, 2006; Kalliath & Laiken, 2006; Brewer & Klein, 2006; Clark & 
Gibb, 2006; Williams & Duray, 2006). Though many discuss virtual 
teaming, there does not appear to be a lot of empirical evidence dis-
cussing the effectiveness of this type of team or the processes used 
(Mihhailova, 2007).
Early critiques of online and distance learning at the MBA or 
professional education level suggest weakness in the teaching of team 
and other soft-skill and process areas of the curriculum. Some academics 

442	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
question the suitability of topics such as team dynamics, communications, 
or leadership as candidates for online learning, believing that such “soft” 
aspects of the curriculum cannot be adequately taught through distance 
means. Challenges associated with leadership of teams, recognizing 
member talent, creating and transferring knowledge, building and pro-
moting trust, engaging members, and dealing with isolation all contribute 
to ongoing scepticism (Hawkrigg, 2007; Lawley, 2006; Brewer & Klein, 
2006; Tran & Latapie, 2007). The argument behind such scepticism is 
that what occurs in typical team training programs often involves expe-
riential forms of human interaction and skill building for conflict resolu-
tion, goal setting, trust building, and collaborating – all difficult to imagine 
happening without face-to-face interaction. While questions remain sur-
rounding the ability to develop such soft skills online, and whether online 
methods allow for sufficient social interactive experience among learners, 
some evidence suggests that computer-mediated teaming interaction 
may in fact be deeper, long-term, and thus exceed those in face-to-face 
environments (Brewer & Klein, 2006; Kalliath & Laiken, 2006).
In this chapter, we present our experience with teaching about 
and developing soft team skills by exercising teaming skills within an 
online environment. Three examples illustrate online team training and 
building/practicing skills in action. These cases exemplify what is pos-
sible with respect to developing knowledge of team dynamics and com-
munications, and accomplishing team project work. The chapter begins 
by describing the first case, a professional designation learning program 
known as the professional logistician (P. Log), delivered by the Canadian 
Professional Logistics Institute (CPLI), where team concepts and practice 
are delivered online and at a distance with mid-career professionals. In 
describing aspects of one of the courses within this program, the team 
dynamics and communication module (TDC), we highlight the unique 
value and capability of an online learning environment.
The second part of the paper elaborates further on ideas about 
online learning and working, through two more case studies. Case 2 
examines the operation and characteristics of a highly successful online 
project team. Case 3 presents some collected experiences of MBA-level 
online learning teams. This section synthesizes lessons learned from all 
three cases. We highlight key benefits gained through structured interac-
tion which incorporates solid project management and team develop-
ment practices, specifically gaining agreement on how members will 
work together, assign accountability, manage flexibility, monitor progress, 
and incorporate social interaction. These areas, we believe, are the key 

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
443
ingredients for the successful use of online teaming in learning – or any 
other – environments. Two key topics arise from our experiences with 
developing and working with online teams, and are emphasized in a 
discussion of technology and trust. We make some summary comments 
on the impact and role of these two concepts as cross-cutting themes, 
and conclude with some practical recommendations about managing 
online learning teams.
Ultimately, we are interested in challenging the perceived barriers 
surrounding the ability of online learning to contribute to soft-skill and 
competency development. It is our view that this method of team devel-
opment learning is not only effective in the development of soft skills 
and social interaction competency, but that online learning may in fact 
be the superior method. We hope that our experiences of what is pos-
sible in online learning environments provide some specific and practi-
cal guidance on what it takes to accomplish team development and 
training online.
Developing Team Skills Online
In this section of the chapter, we discuss the online team dynamics and 
communication (TDC) module, part of the Canadian Professional Logis-
tics Institute’s (LI) professional logistician (P. Log) designation program. 
Our purpose in emphasizing this module is to provide concrete evidence 
of how one institution is providing effective soft-skill training online, 
through the creative use of technology and other distance tools.
The module described herein is part of an overall package that 
the LI created in response to the increasing development needs of 
emerging professionals within the logistics field.1 In their early version 
of this program, the LI combined face-to-face with online learning 
methods within their program. Modules delivered online included team 
dynamics, integrated logistics networks, and logistics process diagnosis. 
Modules delivered in a face-to-face format included those on leading 
and managing change, supply-chain strategies, ethics, and leadership. 
In this hybrid-learning program, methods have blended in a unique way 
to develop “soft” and “hard” practical skills, and understanding with a 
heavier emphasis on soft skills than is typically provided in this field. 
Courses also seek to develop tacit understanding, insight, trust, and 
confidence in an online collaborative process for learning and working. 
Given the success of the hybrid-learning program, and building interest 

444	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
in moving to a global program and providing additional flexibility for 
learners, the LI took a further step. In 2006, in collaboration with 
Athabasca University’s Centre for Innovative Management (AU-CIM), 
the LI developed a fully online pathway in their program for earning the 
P. Log. New online courses include ethics and decision making, strategic 
supply-chain management, and leading through change, running parallel 
with face-to-face courses of similar content. As a result of adding the 
fully online pathway, students have increased access to courses regardless 
of their global location, greatly increasing the diversity of the student 
body and of learner flexibility.
We focus on the TDC module delivered as part of this program 
online. The module content is similar to that delivered in face-to-face 
team-learning sessions, drawing in part on ideas from practitioner 
approaches to teaming such as Aranda et al. (1990). Learners are asked 
to build on insights and ideas taken from Katzenbach and Smith (1999), 
among others, to develop key success indicators of teams. The online 
delivery method is different, however, in that people connect only 
through collaborative technologies and do not meet face-to-face during 
the module. In the hybrid program, learners meet face-to-face in other 
modules, usually after they have completed the team dynamics module. 
With the introduction of the fully online pathway, however, learners 
typically only meet virtually. The online learning environment allows 
students and their employers to access courses and get beyond the signifi-
cant challenges of cost, time, place, and risk imposed by more traditional 
forms of corporate training and university teaching. Using communica-
tion technologies to provide team training mirrors work completed in 
organizations, by developing the communication, coaching, teaming, 
and collaborative skills needed in highly complex and distributed cor-
porate work environments (Clark & Gibb, 2006). Students develop soft 
skills online, such as the process skills highlighted, and gain grounded 
experiential learning that contributes to developing ­managerial-process-
skill competence. The LI online program values and supports adult 
learners by providing them with a program that aligns with their daily 
business realities (Waight & Stewart, 2005).
The TDC module uses technology to support learning in two ways. 
The module is four weeks in duration and encompasses two phases: a 
stand-alone CD-based computer simulation that each student interacts 
with and completes independently, and student interaction with fellow 
learners that is facilitated pedagogically by an engaged and available 

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
445
academic facilitator, and the use of an asynchronous message board and 
synchronous chat tools. We describe both phases of the module in some 
detail, and explore the value of both the simulation and facilitated team 
work in providing important teachable moments from which both tacit 
and explicit learning derives.
The Team Dynamics and Communications (TDC) Module – 
Phase 1
The first part of the TDC module has learners engage in experiential 
individual learning through a simulation containing scenarios of typical 
team challenges. Research has shown that simulations and web-based 
games used in conveying specific aspects of course material can be a 
highly effective way to learn by doing (Chipman, 2007). In the TDC 
course, the learner is expected to interact with simulated team members 
(filmed scenarios and pre-recorded graphics) on a time-sensitive, critical 
mission, gathering information, and experiencing team and team-
­relevant issues as they progress through the various scenarios. Overall, 
the TDC simulation focuses on process skills needed for effective team 
dynamics and online teaming: team process discussions, role assignments, 
leadership, conflict resolution, decision making, and planning for goal 
success. Many of the scenarios crafted were taken from real experiences 
that highlighted the most salient issues of team development. Information 
on how different people store information and label organizational 
stories was used to construct the decision paths in each scene of the 
scenario. Cultural ideas around probable failures and interpretations of 
these failures were used to inform the scripting. The resulting scenarios 
were dramatic and interesting, and encouraged participation.
The setting for the simulation is a remote area where lightning has 
started a forest fire and damaged a telecommunications tower. The learner 
enters the online space and becomes part of an emergency response team 
that has been given the responsibility of repairing the tower. To ensure 
some team struggle at this stage of learning, participants are required to 
deal (online) with the challenges of travel by canoe, and must arrive within 
a set period of time. If the team functions poorly on the tasks and arrives 
late, the consequence presented is that telecommunications in the area 
will go down, and firefighters will not be able to prevent the forest fire 
from approaching a small nearby town. Every decision that learners make 

446	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
has been designed to have immediate ­consequences in the simulated 
world. The result is that the risk of failure is clearly conveyed.
Teachable Moments
Although an individual learner’s poor decision or mistake may cause the 
team to lose valuable time on the “trip,” mistakes create important teach-
able moments.2 Failure on any task is considered to be a learning oppor-
tunity, by determining what went wrong. To facilitate learning at these 
moments, an online coach pops up within the simulated environment 
to provide just-in-time positive and negative feedback, depending on the 
learner’s decisions. Learners therefore immediately face their mistakes, 
and are able to learn from them in a private and safe environment.
It is Schank’s (1997) view that real learning occurs only when 
people are thrown into scenarios in this manner. Participants make deci-
sions, solve problems, make mistakes, and have access to an expert as 
required, to answer questions and to give them advice. Because simula-
tions are private, Schank believes that learners may be more willing to 
risk failure and use that experience for learning. By contrast, failure in 
organizations is more often negatively perceived, a fact that stifles cre-
ativity. In a simulation, people can fail privately with dignity rather than 
feel humiliated when failure occurs in a public way. Failure, like having 
fun and telling stories, is a powerful way to induce emotion and a 
­powerful learning tool.
Emotions coupled with technology can produce a further positive 
situation. Computers store the learning that has occurred, and can 
retrieve it if similar patterns are observed later on, thus making learning 
more specific to individual needs. It is our view that learning facilitated 
by emotional drive and technological tools is very powerful. Underlying 
this statement is a key assumption that through this unique approach, 
individuals are provided with an opportunity to learn to do something 
extremely relevant to them (rather than simply learning about some-
thing), making the knowledge gained through experience both explicit 
and tacit (Schank, 1997; Stewart, 2001).
Scenarios come to life and require that learners interact with 
conceptual information built into the scenarios. Different conceptual 
aspects of team structure, culture, accountability, and politics are woven 
into the module design. Information is presented sequentially. Scripts 
were built in a way similar to a child’s multiple-path story; the develop-
ment of the story depends on the choices made. Learning becomes 

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
447
customized, allowing participants to spend greater amounts of time 
dealing with concepts and skills that are more unfamiliar or challenging. 
Storytelling is incorporated into the simulated environment as a means 
of relating content and experiences back to the workplace.
Getting beyond Technological Apprehension
In an earlier evaluation of this product, Hurst and Follows (2003) state 
that as participants entered the module for the first time, some learners 
experienced technical challenges and apprehension regarding the use 
of technology. The challenges were not only related to computer incom-
patibility, but also the degree to which participants were ready to engage 
in online learning environments. For many, there appeared to be an 
initial hesitancy and fear associated with learning in a technologically 
mediated environment. In the evaluation phase, many related their early 
experiences with the technology to their later impressions of the module. 
They found the module to be “fun, challenging...an overall good learn-
ing experience,” but noted that it had been “quite different and a little 
scary in the beginning.” For some, technical problems persisted.
It was interesting that, when probed, individuals remained worried 
that they would fail in a public way and as a result become embarrassed, 
because of their unfamiliarity with learning online. This finding high-
lights the need to do further work in making participants feel comfort-
able with, and trusting of, the online environment early in the process. 
Lawley (2006) describes trust and member-comfort level as foundational 
ingredients for effective teamwork and collaboration, regardless of how 
or where the team interactions take place. The strength of the apprehen-
sion surrounding the idea of failure prior to entry into the simulation 
and online discussion was very apparent, and provides clear evidence 
that Schank’s (1997) claim about a learner’s willingness to take risks and 
fail privately is of critical importance.
To deal with this learning barrier, further facilitation was intro-
duced before learners used the simulation tool; the intent was to encour-
age a greater level of comfort and to minimize any emergent stress. Once 
the apprehension surrounding technical difficulties was dealt with in 
this manner, learners’ evaluations of their online learning experience 
became much more positive. One participant noted that, “I thought that 
the interactive CD [simulation tool] was very well put together and a 
neat way to learn. I know I now have a better understanding of team 
building, conflict resolution, and the importance of communication.”

448	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Capturing and Building on the Learning
Learners are asked from time to time to make notes of what they are 
thinking and feeling about their experiences, so that they can use their 
insights later in online discussions. Self-evaluation tools concerned with 
communication preferences, leadership style, and conflict handling are 
built into the module to give learners an opportunity to focus on specific 
issues, and to develop and reflect on new skills and competencies. Self-
reflective tools are intended to supplement the experience of the simula-
tion through private assessment of personalized feedback. The feedback 
and record keeping both provide learners with input prior to entering 
the second portion of the module, where they engage in a more tradi-
tional teamwork situation with live team members, albeit facilitated 
online and at a distance.
TDC Module – Phase 2
In the second phase of the TDC module, learners engage with a 
­synchronous chat environment to attend weekly team meetings. They 
are assigned tasks during each meeting and expected to figure out how 
to work together over the course. Students use various technical tools 
such as chat, email, voice over Internet protocol (VoIP), and message 
boards to divide tasks, discuss ideas, and prepare summary documents. 
Participants are provided with an asynchronous message board for 
posting their documents and questions for review. During the initial 
chat meeting, teams are formed, and members are encouraged to 
introduce themselves to one another, discuss their impressions of the 
simulation experience, and practice brainstorming and consensus 
decision-making processes, by beginning with a minor task to come up 
with a team name. The new team is then asked to review their experi-
ences of the first phase of the module, and state which aspects they find 
to be most important to their learning, and most helpful in early stages 
with forming the new team. Members are encouraged to discuss aspects 
of team structure, roles, processes, measures of success, accountability, 
and so forth. The new team is also asked to review a chat protocol, 
provided below, encouraging them to discuss conduct expectations and 
to provide additional information, based on their perception of the 
new team’s needs.

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
449
Chat Protocol
•	Allow each learner to complete his/her thought before ­responding 
– this means do not interrupt or intrude with your thought while 
another is speaking.
•	Be patient – not everyone has advanced keyboard skills.
•	Avoid having side conversations; it’s rude not to pay attention.
•	Signal when you’ve finished a statement [some use a happy face 
to signal they have completed their input J].
•	Signal when you don’t understand something; use a question mark 
to get the facilitator’s attention.
•	Signal your “reactions” by using an exclamation mark (!) for 
­surprise, a sad face for disagreement L, or some combination of 
symbols.
•	 Do not shout [CAPITALS MEAN THAT YOU ARE SHOUTING].
•	Do not leave your computer during a scheduled session; it is 
impossible to get your attention if you leave the room.
•	Officially sign on and off so that everyone knows when you are 
present.
•	Keep statements brief and to the point; the chat box has a limit 
of 256 characters per statement; you can keep talking, but in 
spurts.
•	Prepare notes and key ideas ahead of time so that you can engage 
in the discussion without trying to figure out how to word your 
statements. (CPLI, 2000, p. 45)
Once the new virtual team establishes ground rules, it is assigned 
the task of creating a reverse logistics plan as a follow-up to their personal 
work with the simulation in Phase 1. This task provides continuity as 
well as additional time for social interaction, allowing participants to 
get to know one another and become comfortable with the facilitated 
online chat environment. During this initial stage, it is important for 
participants to establish and re-establish how their conversations will 
take place, who will speak, and in what order, to ensure full participation 
in the experience.
To launch the team task, members are presented with a scenario 
update, and advised that the fire is almost under control, and that the 
crew will be finished repairing the tower in approximately six hours. 
The team task is to work together to create a plan to get team members 
and the used and remaindered supplies back to the point of origin. They 
are given three possible options to discuss, as well as many contingencies 

450	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
to consider while coming up with a detailed reverse logistics plan. The 
facilitator emphasizes the importance of consensus decision making for 
the task, and reminds team members of lessons learned during the first 
part of the module.
The facilitator also works to introduce new constraints in an effort 
to surprise the team, and as a way of introducing potentially conflicting 
ideas, to get the team working through the developmental phases expe-
rientially as well as intellectually. Additional constraints imposed include 
transport route changes, modes of transportation, environmental condi-
tions, presence of wildlife, handling and disposing of hazardous goods, 
and other options to challenge the team and to bring out different and 
creative points of view. The goal in this part of the module is to force 
differences among team members to the surface, with the hope of incit-
ing conflict, so that participants have the opportunity to experience and 
work through new ideas, skills, and competencies in working with others 
in teams.
The second task assigned to the online team is the creation of a 
team-charter template, a tool for governing the team’s work and social 
interaction. This is the core activity for the module. The completed 
team-charter template resembles a checklist, and represents the collec-
tive wisdom of what the team members believe to be the important issues 
to be addressed in creating and deploying an effective team as quickly 
as possible. The document contains ideas on how teams should be formed 
and structured; how their purpose should be defined; how team culture 
should be developed, and how the team should collaborate, ensure 
accountability, measure success, and achieve high performance. Learners 
are instructed first to respond individually to the questions posed, and 
then to work in their teams to synthesize the information and create one 
common document. Individuals attend weekly meetings in the chat room 
to discuss the work that is needed over the course of the week, as well 
as what should and should not be included in the document. Members 
volunteer for the roles of leader, scribe, and timekeeper – roles that are 
rotated among participants, to allow for skill development. By the time 
learners are given this assignment, they are typically comfortable with 
the online environment and appear to forget the lack of face-to face 
cues. The module steps are similar to the principles outlined by Clark 
and Gibb (2006) regarding the design of grounded experiential learning 
for virtual teams. The LI module provides for individuals to
•	meet electronically and build rapport through exchange of 
­personal information

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
451
•	establish team name/identify
•	set out rules for engagement, plan for work
•	develop communication planning and coordination processes.
Encouraging Explicit and Tacit Learning
In each offering of the module thus far, learners completing the task 
have spent most of their time discussing team structure and process issues. 
Interestingly, a parallel of explicit and tacit learning occurs; that is, as 
team members discuss pertinent team-development issues, participants 
also appear to experience the same issues. During a more recent offering 
of the module, a discussion took place around conflict resolution. There 
was mild disagreement among team members over how conflicts at an 
impasse should be resolved. While some argued that “troublemakers 
had the option to leave the team,” others stressed that this was not an 
appropriate option. Their view was that “consensus must occur.”
The discussion heated and circled for some time, until the simi-
larities between the topic under discussion and the discussion itself 
were pointed out. This created a powerful learning moment, combin-
ing intellectual and experiential elements. Since participants had 
already discussed effective listening at length, they were able to recog-
nize the value of the discussion, and moved forward with developing a 
process they could all live with. The learning opportunity or teachable 
moment was noted as one in which concepts were both discussed and 
experienced. The template task provided the opportunity for learners 
to crystallize their learning in the creation of the document itself, to 
take stock of what they had learned individually and collectively, and 
to consider where such learning could be recreated in future teams 
beyond the module.
Increasing Trust in Technology, the Process and Each Other
At the end of the module, participants seemed quite comfortable with 
the technologically mediated environment, with one another, and with 
the facilitator. The participant comfort level increased after the first chat 
meeting experience. One learner noted that, “I initially found it difficult 
to converse electronically with ten other people, although I see my chil-
dren doing it all the time. Once I got the hang of it, it became enjoyable.” 
People commented increasingly on the content of the module as they 
became more comfortable with the technology, and the use of it became 

452	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
tacit during Phase 2. Team members took control of the work, held 
additional meetings, assigned tasks to sub-group members, posted longer 
documents, and so on. They often used email and the message board 
for in-depth communications, and the chat tool for work planning or 
coming to final decisions. This type of technology use is consistent with 
other findings (Gareis, 2006). Phase 2 activities grounded the learner’s 
new skills and knowledge in additional collaborative experiences. 
Individuals also had an opportunity to discuss their ideas with others in 
a facilitated environment.
Participants also suggested improvements; for example, they 
thought that the short introductions at the beginning of Phase 2 to break 
the ice should be extended, and should perhaps include personal auto-
biographies, to allow for further confidence building, and comfort with 
the communications medium and with each other in social interaction. 
However, while many learners thought that the initial introductions were 
too brief and should be extended, it is interesting to note that when 
asked to provide those same introductions at the beginning of each 
module, they seemed guarded and reluctant to share personal informa-
tion. It was only as team members became comfortable with one another, 
trusting other team members and the overall process, that sharing of 
personal information and humour surfaced.
Learners also provided feedback for how to improve team 
­communications during each session. One idea was to develop a speak-
er’s order, so that all would have a chance to contribute fully to the 
conversation. When used, this approach appeared to generally improve 
the team’s performance and interactions during the discussions, decision 
making, and collaborating in subsequent tasks.
Team adjournment activities asked learners to comment on what 
they found to be the most positive characteristics of the team experience 
of each team member. Interestingly, during the first pilot offering of the 
module, team members decided that they did not want to comment on 
each individual in the way requested, because they did not want to single 
out individuals – they were a team. They met offline to discuss this issue, 
and the team as a unit presented their revised version of the exercise to 
the facilitator, clearly demonstrating their commitment to the team and 
their internalization of the learning. 
We can now take lessons from the online development module 
and apply them more broadly to further online teaming experiences. 
Important aspects of team development experience highlighted include 
an emphasis on member roles and competencies, such as autonomy, 

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
453
coordination, and collaboration. Here we must note, in particular, 
­organizational factors, the use of technology, personal management, 
and interpersonal skills. Organizational factors include networking, 
knowing the organizational landscape, and maintaining guidelines. The 
use of technology in online teaming requires knowledge of when to 
communicate, coordinate, and collaborate, as well as how to communi-
cate effectively and conform to expected communication etiquette. The 
personal management category includes the ability to prioritize work, 
set limits, create opportunities for learning and growth, collect and 
provide feedback, discuss strengths and weaknesses, manage boundaries, 
and understand cultural perspectives and how these differences can 
affect perception.
Accomplishing Team Projects Online: Two Further Cases
Building from our previous discussion of online team development, we 
use this section of the chapter to explore and compare the operation of 
a highly successful online project team and the operation of online learn-
ing teams used in an MBA program. In the MBA program, online teams 
are groups of task-driven individuals who behave as a temporary team, 
but who may be separated by geographic or temporal space, and who 
use network-based communication tools to bridge these spaces. By 
reviewing the experience of these teams, we hope to provide insights 
into the practices that facilitate collaboration and learning in an online 
world. Recommendations from these experiences may help others working 
in the online world or endeavouring to use online learning teams, and 
so may further develop online team learning programs in a distance 
education environment. 
We explore experience with two different types of online teams: 
the first is an online research team that conducted a major, practitioner-
sponsored research study in three phases over a three year term; the 
other is one of the online learning teams used in Athabasca University’s 
(AU) MBA program.
Online Research Team – Case 1
The first case study of a real-life online project team provides a way to 
explore common assumptions and theories. The online team in question 

454	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
participated in a meaningful project under serious resource constraints 
and within a tight schedule. The project was completed slightly behind 
schedule and over budget, but to great critical acclaim.
At any one time, the project team was composed of between four 
to eight members. The core team was made up of four members over 
the course of the first phase. During the second and third phases, only 
three members participated throughout. All of the core team members 
were academics and researchers (students). Each team member took 
the lead on different project tasks; however, one member acted as the 
formal team lead on contract documents and in the majority of corre-
spondence. The fourth core team member, who joined the team after 
the project had been initiated and only worked on the first phase of the 
project, tended to play a lesser role overall. While three of the four core 
team members actually lived in the same city, the team rarely met in 
person because of travel and work schedules.
At the end of Phase 1 of the project, the four core team members 
participated in a series of Jungian-based personality and team assess-
ments. The tests were chosen for their simplicity, availability, and poten-
tial to provide interesting insights into the operation of the team; 
however, they are not represented as the best or most suitable tests. An 
earlier paper (Delisle, Thomas, Jugdev, & Buckle, 2001) presents the 
results of the State (behavioural – trust orientation, and team process) 
and Trait (personality) assessments, highlighting the traits and behav-
iours that contributed to the operation of this creative and successful 
online project team. Insights gained as a result of several assessments 
showed that the team as a whole was relatively balanced, with a slight 
proclivity towards introverted, sensing, thinking, and judging approaches 
to the world. All of the members tended to take a thinking stance, 
leading to a potential weakness on the feeling factors. In addition, all 
four team members had a relatively trusting orientation in general. 
Finally, team process assessments provided evidence of a highly effective 
team, approaching synergistic operation. Further discussion of the 
impacts of these differences and the usefulness of these tools can be 
found in Delisle et al (2001).
The team explicitly recognized its activities as a project and engaged 
in good project management practices. The team did not purposely set 
out to ‘build an effective team’ or pay attention to what the teaming 
­literature would suggest to build effective teams.

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
455
MBA Online Learning Teams – Case 2
The MBA learning teams were made up from a student population with 
an average age of 40 years, and who typically worked full-time in middle 
management roles in a variety of industries and organizations of many 
different sizes. The students were randomly placed in learning teams at 
the beginning of each course. Most courses required that the team com-
plete two or three major assignments (usually based on a Harvard-
Business-School-type case assessment) over the eight-week-long semester. 
These cases were done in three stages. Two weeks were spent on prepar-
ing and analysing the case situation and providing recommendations in 
a report format. One week was devoted to critiquing another group’s 
case report, and then responding to the critique of one’s own case report. 
In addition, the students engaged in asynchronous text-based discussion 
of course materials.
In the first class of the MBA program, students were given an 
orientation to the online technology and appropriate ways of working 
in the online environment, along with a quick introduction to best prac-
tices in team development. Typically, they were assigned to learning 
groups with others they had never met before. As the program pro-
gressed, there were increasing chances that the teams could include a 
few members who had worked together before. This situation was a rela-
tively accurate simulation of the work environment that individuals face 
in modern organizations. More often than not, a team must rapidly come 
together with individuals who may or may not know one another, and 
must quickly begin to perform assigned tasks.
Unlike the research project team, students in learning teams were 
encouraged to review and adopt good teaming practices early in each 
and every course. As in the TDC module discussed earlier, online learn-
ing groups were assigned at the outset, and given the task of developing 
of an operating team charter, intended to shape the way they would work 
together. This activity, however, was not graded, and was done with 
varying degrees of competence and intensity by each learning team.
Another key difference that the MBA learning team had from 
the research project team was the formal application of project manage-
ment practices to the operations of each learning team. The research 
team consistently viewed their work as project work, and although the 
duration of various memberships within the actual team varied, all 
worked toward a common completion goal. On the other hand, the 
MBA teams tended to view their work as process work, toward an individual 

456	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
end result in a course or MBA program, rather than work on a specific 
project – an attitude that might have been due to lack of exposure 
to project management principles, and/or to the nature of the learning 
environment itself.
The contexts experienced by a team working on an assigned 
project for the sake of the project and a team of students working on 
a project for grades are quite different. In each case, however, we noticed 
important knowledge being transferred through explicit and tacit learn-
ing while the team members worked towards their goals. Several practices 
seemed to facilitate these learning processes. We turn now to a discus-
sion of the practices that we believe support both learning and teaming 
in an online environment.
Key Practices in Successful Online Teaming
Looking across the research project and MBA learning team experiences 
and drawing from our earlier discussion on teachable moments and 
tacit and explicit learning from the TDC module, we see a number of 
key attributes associated with the successful use of online teams emerg-
ing. It is our view that these key practices include agreement on how 
teams will work together, how accountability is assigned, how progress 
is monitored, and how social interaction is incorporated. We discuss 
each of these practices with examples from the three cases.
Agreement on How Teams Will Work Together 
In the case of the highly successful online research project team, there 
was very little initial discussion of how the team would work together. 
The three initiating team members were driven over-achievers who were 
highly motivated by the task. All were known to each other. Two had 
worked on a small project together earlier, and so had already established 
a certain amount of trust and goodwill. This relationship and common 
understanding of the importance of meeting goals played a significant 
part in helping them to form and start working quickly. These team 
members understood the need to define deadlines and complete deliv-
erables on time. The common focus on agreed-upon goals and timelines 
enabled team members to monitor their own personal goals to ensure 
alignment with the overall project goals.
The project began with almost impossible deadlines from the 
beginning. Whereas this reality could be a recipe for failure on any team, 

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
457
in this case, the common threat allowed the team to coalesce quickly 
and was the catalyst for many spin-off projects. As the project careened 
towards its first “drop-dead deadline” about two weeks after the project 
started, tempers were frayed and workloads heavy. Once the first deadline 
was met, there was a one-month period in which the team waited to see 
if the proposal would be accepted. During this time, the group exchanged 
numerous emails, sharing their situations and discussing their goals, 
objectives, and personal commitments for the period ahead.
By the time the proposal was accepted, the team had a much 
clearer idea of each member’s individual commitments, and how difficult 
it would be to get this project successfully completed. One team member 
was working 80 hours a week on a high-pressure professional job. Another 
had a two-month-old baby, two other children, a full-time job, and a 
thesis to finish, in addition to this project. The third was halfway through 
a Ph.D. project and had a faltering marriage. They discussed how they 
would meet the upcoming deadlines and who would take the lead on 
various tasks. Sharing issues, life experiences, and challenges allowed 
the team to feel a greater sense of cohesion and cooperation, and 
­ultimately to jump in and help each other out when necessary.
Slowly, and in an emergent rather than conscious fashion, an 
agreement on how the team would work solidified. It was never written 
down or formally agreed upon, but it seemed to involve the principles 
noted below.
•	The deadlines must be met. This project was important to all.
•	Whoever was best able to lead on a particular task would do so.
•	Each member would contribute 150% to this project, and 
­endeavour not to let the other team members down.
•	Team members would raise a flag (let others know about tasks 
not likely to get done on time).
•	Team members would pitch in to complete work as needed.
It seemed clear that this team would never have been able to make 
the progress they did if they had not had this one-month “breathing 
space” to figure out how they would work together. They learned these 
lessons experientially, by being thrown into the process, and the result 
was fortunately positive. If this team had clearly applied team-building 
approaches to their own work prior to commencement, rather than after 
the first deadline, they might have been able to tackle this task explicitly 
and incorporate some best practices earlier, and avoided some angst 
later on. Whatever the case, what is highlighted here is once again the 
unique marriage of explicit and tacit learning about team process. This 

458	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
team learned the importance of dealing with social interaction issues 
and established rules for working together as they stormed through their 
first real process issues, realizing the teachable moment.
Experience with MBA learning teams suggests, however, that 
explicit teaming might not have helped. Students in every offering of 
the project management course are encouraged to develop a formal 
team charter before starting to work on the learning exercise. Some 
individuals and some teams take this task very seriously and tease out 
the details of how they will work together before beginning their work; 
nonetheless, most do not appear to think this task important until after 
problems begin. This difference may be due to individual orientations 
toward working in teams in MBA courses (Williams & Duray, 2006). Tight 
timelines and task-driven individuals do push the teams into action, 
however, as in the case of the research team above. When conflicts began 
to brew or issues around collaboration become important, charters were 
worked out-on-the-fly, during the course of the first team assignment. 
Some teams were compelled to revisit this exercise; others failed com-
pletely on the first task before they recognized the need for and value 
of this process element. In any case, students’ perceptions regarding 
what was needed to get teams on track and implications for not doing 
so became real (Williams & Duray).
The importance of this part of team process appears to be learned 
explicitly, but as highlighted by the case examples, does not become 
“real” until conflicts occur within the process and teams acquire knowl-
edge experientially. It seems that once the importance of the charter 
becomes clear and the gap between theory and practice obvious, the 
teachable moment occurs. In some teams, this moment may be lost; 
however, it appears that in the experience of each online team to date, 
it was not. Within the learning module, the facilitator was able to use the 
moment to pull out or convey some important information. Within both 
actual teams, the members were able to go back to information provided, 
recognize the source of difficulty, and move on to develop a charter.
In our view, it is what occurs in the gap between failure and the 
recognized need for additional information or work to deal with the 
failure that builds capability. This moment is where we believe online 
development products are most powerful. What is also clear about this 
“gap experience” is that trust in technology, trust in process, and trust 
and cooperation between individuals are critical factors (Williams & 
Duray, 2006). Such aspects are built and supported through effective 
leadership and tools, such as the team charter. Team charters and chat 

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
459
protocols, as noted in first case with LI students, are some of the tangible 
tools that force teams to explore these issues in advance. Incorporating 
these products into any online teaming experience is likely to improve 
the ability of the team members to work together. 
Assignment of Accountability and Building in Flexibility
Team charters also outline forms of accountability and flexibility for 
team-identified roles and responsibilities that are fundamental for high 
performance. In traditional team literature, the need for clearly defined 
roles is fairly well recognized. It is believed that it is absolutely essential 
that everyone clearly know who is doing what, particularly in online 
teams, where you may not be able to observe what others are working 
on. At the same time, online teams require a certain amount of flexibility 
to get the most out of their members. If one member of an online team 
has a time differential that is advantageous, it only makes sense for that 
person to take responsibility for certain tasks even though someone else 
may be accountable for them. Sometimes, given the asynchronous nature 
of much online teaming, this necessity can cause problems.
Lipnack and Stamps (1997) found that in online teams, team 
roles defy definition, because online teams focus on achieving tasks in 
a fluid and flexible manner. Shifts in leadership can also drive changes 
in team members’ roles (Miller, Pons, & Naude, 1996). In online teams, 
leadership fluidly moves from one group member to another, from one 
geographic or temporal site to another, or both. In many cases, more 
than one team member possessed information vital to the overall team’s 
functioning and well-being, and as a result accepted leadership status 
assigned by the team based on that expertise. Team members seemed 
willing to step into and out of the leadership role, careful not to step on 
one another’s toes.
At times, roles and leadership may not be as clearly defined in 
the online environment. The literature suggests that the need for bound-
ary spanning and communication may intensify as roles and objectives 
become more ambiguous (Eccles & Crane, 1987; Weick, 1982). Further, 
the amount of boundary spanning may vary over time, influencing com-
munication patterns and the ability to shift roles easily (Burt, 1993; 
Weick, 1982; White, Boorman, & Breiger, 1976). Such ambiguity can 
prove uncomfortable for those used to working within traditional, rule-
based organizations. Research suggests that teams who have met, or have 
first established face-to-face relationships, form bonds more easily and 
tend to be more comfortable when faced with shifting roles (Walther, 

460	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
1996). This finding points to the need for some form of “kick-off event” 
for online teams. Indeed, face-to-face may be superior, but voice and 
online also work, as evidenced by the research team.
Sometimes the trick is simply to assign an initial responsibility and 
then trade it off as necessary. This was certainly the case in the online 
research team. Tasks were initially accepted or assigned to an individual, 
based on their availability or their inclination to take responsibility for 
the task. If there was some reason that deadlines could not be met, the 
task was reassigned or shared. Careful record keeping helped to know 
who was doing what and when. Such “tracking” facilitated the develop-
ment of more ambiguous roles among team members by helping them 
to juggle responsibilities and maintain accountability for deliverables.
In the MBA teams, we have witnessed good use of role assignment 
in the beginning of most courses. Everyone signs up for a particular task. 
It sometimes falls down when individuals are assigned tasks for which 
they are not well suited, or when circumstances make it difficult for 
individuals to fulfill their assigned roles. Many do not adapt well to the 
fluid nature of work that is characteristic of asynchronous online teams. 
Because work is not done at the same time, it is important that people 
speak up and volunteer when they see that someone needs help. For 
people used to doing their own jobs and letting someone else worry 
about the big picture, this can be a difficult skill to master.
Teams who quickly come together and share details of their 
­personal schedules, why they are only available at certain times, and 
when they may not be available, tend to work better. In the online 
research team, due to work commitments, one member could only work 
on the project early or very late in the day. Another “night owl” was 
productive between 10 p.m. and 4 a.m. The third and fourth members 
used flexible daytime schedules. Each member picked up and organized 
their work after another member stopped, to enable them to finish 
­elements quickly and without delays.
The balance between accountability and flexibility introduces an 
ambiguity into the working relationship that many find difficult to deal 
with. Can I count on you or not? Do I need to monitor you or not? How 
do I know when to help? To make the process work, individuals must 
engage in self-monitoring, team process monitoring, and proactive com-
mitment to the work of learning. Individuals whose goal is completion 
of the course or project task are the least likely to engage in this type of 
behaviour, and the most likely to exhibit free-loader tendencies. It is the 
commitment to the project, the learning, or to the individuals that fosters 

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
461
team members’ ability to deal with the ambiguity of shifting roles and 
responsibilities. Without the necessary commitment and trust, a team 
will not be able to balance accountability with the flexibility needed to 
achieve true synergy.
Monitoring Progress
The research team used minutes, email, conference calls, and deadlines 
to monitor task progress. Weekly conference calls were boisterous, 
friendly events that each member looked forward to. While this team 
rarely met face-to-face, each individual’s personal urgency and commit-
ment to deliver on the commitments they made, and to check another 
item off their weekly list of deliverables, kept the team moving forward. 
When commitments could not be met, team members openly admitted 
the reason behind their tardiness and took steps to complete the task 
or accepted another’s offer of help.
The research project team teleconferenced weekly for one hour. 
The first five minutes of each conference call was devoted to catching 
up on “social history.” Approximately 45 minutes was reserved for detailed 
discussion of upcoming project deliverables and the status of outstand-
ing tasks. Team members took turns chairing these meetings. The final 
10 minutes of each meeting was used to report on team members’ exter-
nal commitments (i.e., thesis progress, work promotions, baby’s first 
steps) and relevant personal issues.
The team members considered themselves to be quite introverted, 
so they marvelled at the extroverted nature of their interactions, both 
in email and conversations. One member stated that, “although we have 
three introverts, you’d never know it from our interactions. Feeling com-
fortable, trusting, and sharing with each other brings out the E in us” 
(Delisle et al., 2001). Conference calls allowed the team to stay on top 
of three critical elements of progress – social activities, project activities, 
and external activities – each of which added an important component 
to the interaction. Shared goals and open communication around objec-
tives and limitations combined with trust to ensure future reciprocity 
and accountability.
In addition, the research project team submitted monthly status 
reports to the funding sponsor on their project activities and accomplish-
ments. This formal requirement forced the research team to take stock 
on a regular basis of accomplishments and outstanding tasks. This 
“taking-stock” activity encouraged accountability and the meeting of 
deadlines. It also provided a formal arena for tackling outstanding issues 

462	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
and raising concerns that needed to be dealt with by all major stake-
holders in the project.
The MBA learning teams worked on much shorter timelines, 
­measured in weeks versus years. Their use of status reporting seemed to 
be much lower. Some teams did status checks during the course of the 
project, but most tended to set a plan and then try to work to that plan. 
As in any project, this is where many of the problems become apparent, 
as the team fails to manage the ambiguous and changing nature of the 
work environment.
With the Logistics Institute’s TDC module, regularly scheduled 
weekly “chats” served a similar structuring function to the monthly status 
reports and weekly conference calls used by the research team. The 
requirement to engage with all members of the team at one time and 
be ready to make good use of the time served to facilitate regular ­progress 
monitoring and progress checking.
Competing demands and disparities in commitment and desired 
outcomes (pass vs. “A” students) created traps for many learning teams. 
Competing demands, however, are no different in the working world. 
Resolution rests with team members’ open communication of goals and 
expectations, and working around each individual’s peculiar demands 
and interests. Status reporting and regular discussions of process and 
feedback were catalysts for this type of sharing, and for ensuring that 
important issues were addressed on a timely basis.
Incorporation of Social Interaction
In general, the research team’s social interaction occurred by email and 
in person, but most often by conference calls. They tended to be boister-
ous, laughter-filled, productive, valued time. Conference calls can act as 
a welcome counterbalance to release pressure, meet stakeholder expec-
tations, help team members deliver results on time and on budget, and 
work through the many obstacles that typically emerge. They create a 
supportive camaraderie that helps members manage their own substan-
tial professional workloads above and beyond the online project activities 
(Delisle et al., 2001).
Hartman (2000) suggests that fun on projects is a substantial moti-
vator, and contributes to a culture where work is accomplished without 
the same level of burnout as in other environments. In general, the 
research team did three things to explicitly to ensure that the project 
was fun for all involved:

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
463
•	Celebrate success: The beginning of each conference call always 
included kudos to anyone having completed a task or reached 
some other milestone. E-cards were used judiciously to celebrate 
any success or other event. Status reports started with accomplish-
ments for the period, even when the more critical part, remaining 
concerns or issues, had yet to be addressed.
•	Plan for interaction: Some of the project’s limited funds were set 
aside to support celebratory dinners or events when all the parties 
could be found in the same locale. One research conference a 
year was funded so the entire team could meet face-to-face. This 
face-time provided continuing benefits in keeping the team 
­motivated and onside for the more tedious and grinding work.
•	Communicate about other than project activities: The research team 
regularly made an effort to catch up on the social aspects of the 
various team members’ lives. Knowing how every team member’s 
life was going provided insight into what one could be expected 
to do, and where others might be able to help out. Socializing 
also allowed trust to grow on a number of levels. It is one thing 
to trust someone’s competence; it is quite another to care about 
an individual and to trust that they will care about you.
Admittedly, the second of the above goals is difficult to accomplish 
or imagine in an online learning environment. It is surprising, however, 
how innovative students can be when given the opportunity. Since its 
inception, the Athabasca University MBA program has provided a non-
graded workspace for students to use as they wish. This workspace is 
akin to the online water cooler or coffee house. It provides MBA students 
with “room” to get to know each other away from the pressure cooker 
of the team project workspace. Although the space is used to varying 
degrees, it works most effectively as a way of enhancing the learning 
environment. One student has very successfully run “Joe’s Bar” in the 
roundtable workspace of every course, much to the delight of fellow 
students and of academics. Sharing jokes, humour, frustration, births, 
deaths, and other life occurrences in these informal settings allows stu-
dents to get to know each other in ways that they would normally do 
over a cup of coffee or mug of beer outside of class time.
A variation of this phenomenon also began to occur in each 
­offering of the TDC module. Participants appeared to regret the comple-
tion of the module, insofar as it meant losing access to the rich social 
interaction they’d experienced with their new team. We found that 

464	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
adjournment ceremonies and behaviours online and in the synchronous 
and asynchronous environments were quite similar to those experienced 
in the adjournment phase of a face-to-face team. MBA students often 
exhibited withdrawal at the end of the program in a similar fashion. The 
research team experienced similar “mourning” at the end of their project, 
as the unique circumstances of the project drove a fiercely supportive 
and productive working relationship that has been difficult to replicate 
since completion.
Further research on the effectiveness or contribution of these 
technologically enhanced social realms to the learning activity is needed. 
Lee and colleagues (2006) suggest that task, social, and technological 
dimensions need consideration as well. They also state that critical to the 
success of virtual teams is a “pedagogical transformation of teaching and 
learning skills … [and] … shifting mindsets from residential programs 
to online environments” (Lee et al., p. 507). It would be interesting to 
see if the number of team entries, such as jokes and other forms of social-
izing in the various learning programs, actually correlates with grades; 
effort or entries in the course or case work; student satisfaction; or other 
measures defined as team success. Some evidence also suggests that stu-
dents use a variety of communication technologies for different social 
and intellectual tasks (Rourke, Anderson, Garrison & Archer, 2001).
Cross-cutting Themes
Across all the team experiences highlighted in this chapter, we note 
three important common themes with respect to using teams and teach-
ing about teams in an online context. The first theme deals with the use 
of technology to enable online teaming. The second suggests that trust 
in the technology, the process, and the people is a prerequisite to both 
the learning and the functioning of the teams. Finally, developing and 
leading supportive cultures through instilling beliefs, values, and pro-
cesses that facilitate open communication, support, and trust is important 
in realizing learning and teaming in this environment. 
Technology as Enabler
Technology played two important roles in the online learning or teaming 
experience. First, apprehension and preconceived notions about 
­technology-mediated discussion caused problems in getting teams 
started, as evidenced in the team module and reaffirmed in every run 

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
465
of the MBA courses. Second, technology failure in online teams could 
be a convenient excuse: “I didn’t get that note.” “I couldn’t participate 
in the teamwork because my computer hard drive crashed.” Or technol-
ogy failure in teams could produce significant levels of frustration. In 
an eight-week course, having your hard drive go can take you down for 
a significant portion of the course, and make it very difficult to carry 
your end of the team commitment.
The Role of Trust
With respect to trust, we distinguish further between online and traditional 
teams in their situational awareness. Online teams function on an inten-
tional awareness, because only specific characteristics of suitable resources 
or providers may be known (Chen, 1997). Situational awareness for online 
teams is contrasted to the extensional awareness more likely in face-to-face 
teams, where the specific resources or providers are known. This different 
kind of awareness plays a big role in how the team becomes an entity, as 
well as how it weaves together its skills sets, and how it builds trust.
It is our view that the level of trust among participants (perhaps 
from having members who had worked on other teams together, or from 
a shared level of trust in the experience through the culture of the 
program, or as a result of trust in the coach) determines how well people 
work together and how seriously the charter is taken. It was clear to the 
team members of the online research team that they would have had 
difficulty working together without a strong desire to do so, and without 
trust in the other team members’ abilities. Thus, trust in competence, 
contract, commitment (Reina & Reina, 1999), and character (Marshall, 
2000) are all significant in the initial stages of online team development. 
Lawley (2006) supports this by suggesting that trust is fundamental to 
effective teaming, and that the lack of trust will seriously hinder the team’s 
work. Further, good leadership is essential for building and nurturing 
the cultural conditions that allow trusting relationships to flourish.
Weick (1996) states that people organize cooperatively on teams 
to learn and complete their work. There is a continuous mix of agency 
and communion that creates reciprocity between individuals, and that 
benefits both learning and team function. As highlighted in this chapter, 
trust is also required for meaningful cooperation, and is not clear in the 
early stages of relationship building. 
The development of trust is not, nor can it be, a quick and easy 
task. There is a need to look behind learners’ apprehension and fear, 
to listen to and capture individuals’ hearts before trust can follow. Here 

466	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
is an interesting paradox when considering trust. On the one hand, we 
see that a team must be productive quickly, and that individuals need 
to trust and to be trusted within the team. On the other hand, few people 
on teams or in any relationship will trust immediately. Team members 
thrown together are more likely to distrust the motives of others at the 
outset. This has implications for development, early sharing of personal 
information, and hence, charter development, as found in our three 
cases. The cases also highlight the distance that people will go when they 
do trust, and how reluctant they are to let go of a team member once a 
trusting relationship is in place. Social interaction and trust are key 
attributes in any team and learning process.
We need to know more about how to discern trust levels early, 
and what we can do to build them rapidly. A team member’s decision 
to trust other team members will likely show the degree of leeway or 
freedom members have to act without controls in place, the level of 
benevolence felt, the evidence of openness, and the degree of risk taking 
realized. When a high level of trust exists, fewer rules or controls may 
be necessary. Trust is a tricky concept and a necessary consideration in 
online teaming. If we can invoke a culture and process that encourages 
rapid development of trust, then this can only facilitate our learning 
and teaming processes.
Importance of Learning and Teaming Culture
Another point highlighted by our discussion of trust, trust building and 
the implications for team performance, is how we might create or trans-
form a culture to allow meaningful, trusting relationships to develop. 
Marshall (2000) states that “to create a truly customer-driven, team-based, 
and trust-centered organization… require(s) a fundamental change in 
the organization system….” (p. 66). Transforming a business culture to 
become more team- and relationship-based, where trust would flourish, 
is challenging and likely requires agreements between management and 
others to spell out trade-offs between risk, skill, labour, rewards, and how 
people should treat each other. Such an agreement would have to deal 
with underlying beliefs about human nature, drivers of the business, and 
how management and other actors in the workplace will work together. 
The examples described in this chapter may provide tools for 
developing a culture of trust, accountability, and transparency conducive 
to rapid trust development. The importance of establishing a team 
charter early on to focus the team is only one example of the importance 

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
467
of engineering the culture of teams. The establishment of the team 
charter and acknowledgement of culture was important in our three 
cases; in each case, team members ignored this fact until faced with situ-
ations of conflict. Support from Malhotra, Majchrzak, and Rosen (2007) 
indicates that educators and leaders must work to develop and nurture 
a culture that allows for trust between people to develop effective 
teaming. To this end, leaders should
•	establish and maintain trust through use of communication 
technology.
•	ensure diversity is understood and appreciated.
•	manage work/life cycle.
•	monitor team members’ progress and enhance recognition of 
member contributions.
•	enable members to benefit from the team. (p. 60)
Conclusions
This chapter sheds light on some of the challenges in teaching teams 
and using online teaming in distance education programs, by providing 
some insights into the operations of a team-building distance simulation, 
a successful online research project team, and the use of teams in a dis-
tance-based MBA program. Our experience in these and other online 
team teaching and working situations convince us that these skills are 
teachable and transferable to an online learning environment.
In multiple runs of the Logistics Institute’s team-learning module, 
we found the CD simulation to be an effective way to introduce the 
concepts of, and process tools needed for, effective teamwork. Following 
up with online teamwork in an online facilitated setting, it appears that 
individuals are developing understanding and needed skills online.
Over the 14-year history of the distance MBA programs at 
Athabasca University, we have witnessed similar results. Our students 
develop not only an explicit understanding of online team dynamics, 
but also tacit skills to make it happen. Two of the primary skills developed 
in traditional MBA programs are networking and oral presentation of 
information. In our program, we work on these skills too, but the main 
skills our students develop as a result of the program are the ability to 
share information, insights, and criticism over the web, and to build and 
work very effectively in online teams.

468	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
The biggest problem for any team is the assumption that you can 
put people together to work on a task, and they will automatically become 
a team and know how to work together. This assumption is equally false 
in face-to-face and online team environments. In the online world, it 
may be even easier to ignore the human process side of teamwork, in 
the absence of physical clues revealing the psychological health (or lack 
of) in the team. The trick is to put the effort into the process side of 
teaming and teaching, even when it is less visible than in the face-to-face 
environment. We reiterate, however, that it can and must be done.
Project team learning in an online world has become a fact of life 
at work and in educational settings. The experience from the three cases 
described provides some suggestions for how to approach this activity 
in learning or work settings.
Notes
1.	 Dr. Hurst worked with a team invited by the LI to develop learning 
modules for their millennium project. The invitation was based on 
her research interests and previous experience in the logistics field. 
The team dynamics and communications module was developed as a 
two-part learning program, the first part an individual experience of 
a simulation product intended to allow the participant to learn about 
concepts while interacting within a simulated team, and the second 
part an online learning environment allowing the participant to learn 
how to participate within a team or with real participants working at 
a distance. The real-team sessions are facilitated while students work 
through and apply concepts. Dr. Hurst has facilitated, evaluated, and 
revised the module on an ongoing basis. The experiences described 
here are drawn from her experiences in facilitating the module, with 
the permission of the students and the Logistics Institute.
2.	 Teachable moment is the precise point at which a learner makes a 
mistake and wants to correct it, or to learn alternative information 
with which to interpret questions or responses. It is a brief window 
where the learner is most receptive to new information that is 
focused, personalized, and in context. Schank (1997) adds that learn-
ers are emotionally aroused when making a mistake. If error occurs 
publicly, they close off from embarrassment; if failure is private, as 
in online learning, the moment of failure is when the learner is most 

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
469
receptive to new information and learning. Teachable moments often 
begin with a question and an individual’s personal curiosity (see 
Bennett, 2000). 
References
Aranda, E. K., Aranda, L. & Conlon, K. (1998). Teams: Structure, process, 
culture and politics. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Bennett, C. (2000). Capturing the teachable moment: In-house staff 
development. Oregon Library Association Quarterly, 5(4). Retrieved 
October 18, 2003, from http://www.olaweb.org/quarterly/quar5-4/
bennett.shtml
Brewer, S., & Klein, J. D. (2006). Type of positive interdependence and 
affiliation motive in an asynchronous, collaborative learning environ-
ment. Educational Technology, Research and Development, 54(4), 331–354.
Burt, R. (Ed.) (1993). The social structure of competition in networks and 
organizations. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Canadian Professional Logistics Institute (2000). Team dynamics and 
­communications module.
Toronto: CPLI.
Chen, L. L. J. (1997). Modeling the Internet as cyberorganism: A living systems 
framework and investigative methodologies for online cooperative interaction. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of Calgary.
Chipman, A. (2007, April 4). Game Teaches Business Skills by the Scoop. 
Wall Street Journal, B4B.
Clark, D. N., & Gibb, J. L. (2006). Virtual team learning: An introductory 
study team exercise. Journal of Management Education, 30(6), 765–
787.
Delisle, C., Thomas, J., Jugdev, K., & Buckle, P. (2001, November). Virtual 
project teaming to bridge the distance: A case study. Paper presented 
at the 32nd annual Project Management Institute Seminars & Sympo-
sium, Nashville, TN. 
Eccles, R.G., & Crane, D. B. (1987). Managing through networks in 
investment banking. California Management Review, 30(1), 176–195.
Gareis, E. (2006). Virtual teams: A comparison of online communication 
channels. The Journal of Language for International Business, 27(2), 6–21.
Hartman, F. (2000). Don’t park your brain outside. Philadelphia: PMI 
­Publications.

470	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Hawkrigg, J. (2007, March 12). Virtual teams need human touch. 
­Canadian HR Reporter, 20(5), 16.
Hurst, D., & Follows, S. (2003). Virtual team development building intel-
lectual capital and cultural value change. In M. Beyerlein (Ed.), The 
collaborative work systems fieldbook, (pp. 543–560). Denton, TX: Univer-
sity of North Texas.
Kalliath, T. & Laiken, M. (2006). Use of teams in management ­education. 
Journal of Management Education, 30(6), 747–750.
Katzenbach, J. R., & Smith, D. K. (1999). The wisdom of teams: Creating the 
high-performance organization. New York: Harper Collins.
Lawley, D. (2006). Creating trust in virtual teams at Orange: Overcoming 
barriers to collaboration. Knowledge Management Review, 9(2), 12–17.
Lee, S. H., Bonk, C. J., Magjuka, R. J., Su, B., & Liu, X. (2006). Under-
standing the dimensions of virtual teams. International Journal on 
­eLearning, 5(4), 507–523.
Lipnack, J., & Stamps, J. (1997). Online teams: Reaching across space, time 
and organizations with technology. New York: John Wiley and Sons.
Malhotra, A., Majchrzak, A. & Rosen, B. (2007). Leading virtual teams. 
Academy of management executive perspectives, 21(1), 60–70.
Marshall, E.M. (2000). Building trust at the speed of change: The power of 
the relationship-based corporation. New York: American Management 
­Association.
Mihhailova, G. (2007, Summer). Virtual teams: Just a theoretical concept 
of a widely used practice: The Business Review, Cambridge 7(1), 186–192.
Miller, P., Pons, J. M. and Naude, P. (1996, June 14). Global Teams. 
Financial Times Mastering Management Series, p. 12.
Reina, D. S., & Reina, M. L. (1999). Trust and betrayal in the workplace: 
Building effective relationships in your organization. San Francisco: Berrett-
Koehler.
Rourke, L., Anderson, T., Garrison R., & Archer, W. (2001). Assessing 
teaching presence in computer conferencing transcripts. Journal of Asyn-
chronous Learning Networks, 5(2). Retrieved October 9, 2007, from http://
www.sloan-c.org/publications/jaln/ v5n2/pdf/v5n2_anderson.pdf
Schank, R. (1997). Online learning: A revolutionary approach to building a 
highly skilled workforce. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Stewart, T. A. (2001). The wealth of knowledge: Intellectual capital and the 
twenty-first century organization. New York: Currency.
Tran, V. N., & Latapie, H. M. (2007, Summer). Developing virtual team 
problem-solving and learning capability using the case method. The 
Business Review, Cambridge, 8(1), 27–33.

Developing Team Skills and Accomplishing Team Projects Online	
471
Waight, C. S., & Stewart, B. L. (2005). Valuing the adult learner in  
e-learning: Part two – insights from four companies. Journal of Workplace 
Learning, 17(5/6), 398–414.
Walther, B. J. (1996). Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, 
interpersonal, and hyper personal interaction. Communication Research, 
23(1), 3–43.
Weick, K. E. (1982). Management of organizational change among 
loosely coupled elements. In P. S. Goodman (Ed.) Change in organiza-
tions: New perspectives on theory, research and practice (pp. 375–408). San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Weick, K. (1996). Enactment and the boundaryless career: Organizing 
as we work. In M. B. Aruther & D. M. Rousseau (Eds.), The Boundary-
less career: A new employment principle for a new organizational era (pp. 40–
57). New York: Oxford University Press.
White, H. C., Boorman, S. A., & Breiger, R. L. (1976). Social structure 
from multiple networks I – Block models of roles and positions. Amer-
ican Journal of Sociology, 81(4), 730–780.
Williams, E. A., & Duray, E. (2006). Teamwork orientation, group cohe-
siveness, and student learning: A study of the use of teams in online 
distance education. Journal of Management Education, 30(4), 592–616.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
Deborah Hurst (deborahh@athabascau.ca) is an associate professor of 
Organizational Behaviour and an academic area manager for Work and 
Organization Studies at the Centre for Innovative Management, Athabasca 
University. Deborah’s research contributions include dealing with 
teaming for knowledge transfer, cultural organization change, learning 
and knowledge management, building leadership capability through 
knowledge sharing and managing the contributions of contingent knowl-
edge workers. In 2007, Deborah along with colleagues Kay Devine and 
Lindsay Redpath, received the Best Careers Papers award from the 
Western Academy of Management. Before coming to Athabasca 
University, Deborah was a faculty member at the School of Business at 
Acadia University. In addition, she worked in the private sector for several 
years, most notably with General Motors Canada.

472	
Theory and Practice of Online Learning
Janice Thomas (janicet@athabascau.ca ) is the program director for 
the Executive MBA in Project Management at the Centre for Innovative 
Management, Athabasca University. Dr. Thomas brings to her academic 
role 25 years’ experience in the field of project management. Prior to 
becoming an academic, she spent 10 years as an information technol-
ogy and organizational change project manager. Dr. Thomas is a schol-
arly researcher who actively presents and publishes her research for 
academic and practitioner audiences around the world. She also super-
vises masters and doctoral students. In 2006, Dr. Thomas was recog-
nized by the PMNetwork as one of the 50 most influential women in 
project management.

