“We learn, adapt, and bring forth our worlds
through the networks of conversation in
which we participate.”
—Humberto Maturana
onsider all the learning that
occurs as people move from
place to place inside and outside an
organization, carrying insights and
ideas from one conversation to
another.The invisible connections
among these conversations and the
actions that emerge from them help to
build the organization’s collective
C
TOOLBOX
6
Fine-Tuning Your Causal Loop 
Diagrams—Part I
FROM THE RESOURCE 
8
SHELF 
Building Relationships with Respect
at the Center
VIEWPOINT/FEEDBACK 
9
The Imperfect Storm
SYSTEMS THINKING
11
WORKOUT
Reader’s Response to “Moving Beyond 
the E-Vent Level”
FROM THE FIELD 
12
Continued on next page ➣
I N S I D E
THE WORLD CAFÉ: LIVING KNOWLEDGE THROUGH 
CONVERSATIONS THAT MATTER
B Y  J U A N I T A  B R O W N ,
W I T H  D A V I D  I S A A C S  A N D  T H E  
W O R L D  C A F É  C O M M U N I T Y
knowledge and shape its future. But
the process of co-creating the future
through conversation is so natural we
usually overlook it.
Since our early ancestors gathered
in circles around the warmth of a fire,
conversation has been a primary
process for making sense of our world,
discovering what we value, sharing
knowledge, and imagining our future.
Small groups exploring important
questions—and connecting with other
groups that are doing the same—have
always played a
major role in social
and institutional
renewal. Consider
the sewing circles
and “committees of
correspondence”
that helped birth
the American
Republic; the con-
versations in cafés
and salons that
spawned the
French Revolution;
and the Scandina-
vian “study circles”
that stimulated an
economic and
social renaissance in
Northern Europe.
Reaching out in
ever-widening 
circles, members of
small groups spread
their insights to
larger constituen-
cies, carrying the seed ideas for new
conversations, creative possibilities, and
collective action (see “Conversation as
a Path to Large-Scale Change”).
Today, especially with the advent
of the Internet, we are becoming
increasingly aware of the power and
potential of these dynamic networks
of conversation and their systemic
importance for large-scale collabora-
tion, learning, and change.The cross-
pollination of ideas from group to
group can lead to the emergence of
surprising creativity and focus as we
discover innovative ways to support a
“system thinking together.”
What if we could create an inten-
tional, simple, and effective approach
SYSTEMS 
T H I N K E R
B
U
I
L
D
I
N
G
 
S
H
A
R
E
D
 
U
N
D
E
R
S
T A
N
D
I
N
G
T
H
E
®
V O L U M E  1 2
N U M B E R  5
J U N E / J U L Y
2 0 0 1
C O N V E R S A T I O N  A S  A  P A T H
T O  L A R G E - S C A L E  C H A N G E
Reaching out in ever-widening circles, members of small groups spread
their insights to larger constituencies, carrying the seed ideas for new
conversations, creative possibilities, and collective action.
Source: Susan Kelly
Copyright © 2001 Pegasus Communications, Inc. (www.pegasuscom.com).
All rights reserved. For permission to distribute copies of this article in any form, please contact us at permissions@pegasuscom.com.

T H E  S Y S T E M S  T H I N K E R ® V O L . 1 2 , N O. 5
w w w. p e g a s u s c o m . c o m        © 2 0 0 1  P E G A S U S  C O M M U N I C AT I O N S
2
for fostering greater collaborative
learning and coherent thought than is
often available in large group settings?
Our research reveals that what we have
come to call “The World Café” has a
unique contribution to make when
the goal is the focused use of dialogic
inquiry to foster collective insight
around real-life challenges and key
strategic questions at increasing levels
of scale.
What is The World Café? It is an
innovative methodology that enhances
the capacity for collaborative thinking
about critical issues by linking small-
group and large-group conversations.
In the process, knowledge grows, a
sense of the whole becomes real, and
new possibilities become visible.The
World Café utilizes the principles of
dynamic networks and living systems
to access a source of deeper creativity
and shared knowledge that might not
be available through more traditional
approaches to collaborative work.
The World Café is also an evoca-
tive metaphor that enables us to pay
attention to aspects of organizational
life that are often invisible, hidden by
formal structures and policies. It high-
lights the naturally occurring net-
works of conversation and social
learning through which we access
collective intelligence, create new
knowledge, and bring forth desired
futures. Using The World Café as an
organizing image allows leaders to
intentionally design processes that
take advantage of the natural dynam-
ics that are already at play in order to
➣Continued from previous page
create sustainable business and social
value.
How The World Café Was
Born 
Several years ago, we serendipitously
discovered the unique power of Café-
style conversations. One rainy morning,
we wanted to provide a comfortable
setting for participants in a global dia-
logue on intellectual capital to enjoy
their coffee while waiting for the ses-
sion to begin.We set up small tables in
our living room and covered them
with paper tablecloths.We added flow-
ers and set out colored crayons, like in
many neighborhood cafés.
People were delighted and
amused.They got their coffee and
gathered in small, informal groups
around the tables. Soon, everyone was
deeply engaged in conversation.As
they talked, people scribbled ideas on
the tablecloths.After a while, some-
one expressed curiosity about what
was happening in other conversations.
One person agreed to stay at each
table as a host while others traveled to
other tables to discover what interest-
ing ideas were pollinating there.
People buzzed with excitement.
At a certain point, they decided to
leave a new host at each table.The
other members traveled to new tables,
connecting ideas, testing assumptions,
and adding to each other’s diagrams
and pictures on the tablecloths.
As lunchtime drew near, we took
a “tour” of all the tablecloths, seeing
what new connections and questions
had emerged. Our interactive graphics
specialist captured collective insights
from the morning on a large piece of
newsprint in the middle of the room.
We suddenly realized that we had
tapped into something very simple
but potentially very powerful.
Through the Café conversations, a
shared knowledge base, larger than
any individual or group in the room,
had become accessible to us. Our
unique contributions had combined
and recombined into rich new pat-
terns of living knowledge and innova-
tive thought that had not been visible
when we started.
The World Café As 
Methodology 
What makes such a seemingly simple
practice—that of talking together
about things we care about and inten-
tionally linking the essence of our
conversations with others in ever-
widening circles—so useful? We think
it’s because Café conversations offer
us the opportunity to notice the pos-
sibilities for mutual insight, innova-
tion, and action that are already
present in any group, if we only knew
how to access them.We are discover-
ing that this process offers a unique
mixture of freedom and focus, of
coherence without control. Depend-
ing on an organization’s needs, Café
events can be designed around partic-
ular themes or topics.The Café for-
mat is flexible and adapts to different
circumstances, based on a few simple
practices and principles (see “Café
Hosting Tips”).
Groups as small as 12 and as large
as 1,200 from around the world have
engaged in Café learning conversations
in a wide range of settings. In a global
consumer products company, execu-
tives from over 30 nations used Café
principles to integrate a new world-
wide marketing strategy. In New
Zealand, Maori leaders combined The
World Café with indigenous meeting
formats during regional treaty negotia-
tions. Mexican government and cor-
porate leaders applied The World Café
to scenario planning.A Fortune 100
company is using “Creative Cafés” to
explore corporate responsibility with
stakeholders.And faculty members in
the U.S. and Europe are creating 
C A F É  H O S T I N G  T I P S
While Café hosting is limited only by your imagination, consider including the follow-
ing elements as you experiment with Café conversations:
• Set up Café-style tables or another relaxed setting.
• Provide food, beverages, music, art, natural light, and greenery.
• Encourage informal conversation focused on key questions.
• Allow time for silence and reflection.
• Encourage members to “cross-pollinate” ideas and insights across groups.
• Have materials available for visually representing key ideas—markers and paper.
• Weave and connect emerging themes and insights.
• Honor the social nature of learning and community building.
• Help members notice that individual conversations are part of and contribute to a
larger field of collective knowledge and wisdom.

© 2 0 0 1  P E G A S U S  C O M M U N I C AT I O N S        7 8 1 . 3 9 8 . 9 7 0 0       T H E  S Y S T E M S  T H I N K E R ®
J U N E / J U LY  2 0 0 1
3
virtual online “Knowledge Cafés” to
conduct distance-learning programs.
After participating in Café con-
versations, members share comments
such as,“I developed productive rela-
tionships and learned more from oth-
ers than I ever expected.You can
actually see the knowledge growing.”
Participants often develop an
increased sense of responsibility for
making use of the practical insights
they gain and for staying connected as
they expand the conversation to
larger constituencies.
The practice of The World Café
is based on a set of working assump-
tions that we continue to explore:
• The future is born in webs of
human conversation.
• Compelling questions encourage
collective learning.
• Networks are the underlying 
pattern of living systems.
• Human systems—organizations,
families, communities—are living
systems.
• Intelligence emerges as the system
connects to itself in diverse and 
creative ways.
• We collectively have all the wisdom
and resources we need.
Five Key Operating 
Principles
We are discovering that the unique
contribution of Café learning seems to
come from translating these working
assumptions into the following five
operating principles that, when used in
combination, increase the likelihood of
generating breakthrough thinking.
Create Hospitable Space. Café
hosts around the world emphasize the
power and importance of creating a
welcoming environment to enliven
collaborative conversation.We thrive
and are better able to confront diffi-
cult questions, explore underlying
assumptions, and create what we care
about in surroundings that evoke
warmth, friendliness, and authenticity
than in those that are less hospitable
to the human spirit. Most meeting
places are sterile, cold, and imper-
sonal. Consider choosing environ-
ments with natural light. Create
comfortable seating. Honor our tradi-
tions of human hospitality by offering
refreshments. Play soft music as people
enter. Decorate the walls with art.
Hospitable space means “safe” space—
where everyone feels free to offer
their best thinking.
Hosts can create hospitable space
even in large, impersonal venues. For
instance, at a conference for 1,000
people, we asked the hotel staff to set
up small, round cocktail tables instead
of rows of chairs in the cavernous
ballroom.We then decked out each
table with a red-checked tablecloth
and a vase of red and white carna-
tions.Volunteers placed sheets of
white paper over the tablecloths and
left small containers of colored mark-
ers for doodling.We also brought in
palm trees and other greenery.When
people entered the room, they were
greeted by soft jazz music.The buzz
of conversation almost instantly filled
the space.
Explore Questions That Matter.
One of our most important learnings
in working with The World Café is
that discovering and exploring “ques-
tions that matter” opens the door to
catalytic conversation, insight, and
innovation. Knowledge emerges in
response to compelling questions that
“travel well” as they attract collective
engagement and exploration through-
out a system. Powerful questions pro-
vide focus and coherence to networks
of conversation that might otherwise
spin off in random directions.Well-
crafted strategic questions define
intention, focus energy, and direct atten-
tion toward what really counts.
Hone the skill of shaping open-
ended questions that are relevant to
the group’s real-life concerns.These
questions need not imply immediate
action steps or problem solving.Allow
the questions to invite inquiry and
exploration.At one Café in Denmark
focused on improving a school sys-
tem, the hosts framed the central
question as “What could a good
school also be?” rather than as “How
can we fix the problems in this
school?” In doing so, they opened up
the conversation to appreciating what
might be possible in the future, rather
than limiting the focus to what is
wrong in the present.
Connect Diverse People and Per-
spectives. “Intelligence emerges as the
system connects to itself in diverse and
creative ways,” according to Margaret
Wheatley, author of Leadership and the
New Science (Berrett-Koehler, 1992).
By cross-pollinating ideas among
tables in several rounds of conversa-
tion, we intentionally invite a more
accelerated and richer network of dia-
logic interactions on a larger scale than
is common in most dialogue circles.
One technique for enriching the
ways in which the system connects to
itself is to vary the different rounds of
conversation. Hosts stay at each table
to welcome guests while the other
members travel to new tables to share
as well as gather insights.Travelers
might then return to their home
Cafés or continue to move from table
to table for several iterations. Some-
times the hosts change, with the first
host becoming a traveler during the
second cycle. Or several members
might stay at the table while the oth-
ers go out for brief visits as “ambassa-
dors” to other tables, collecting new
seed ideas that bring diverse perspec-
tives to the home table.
Additionally, all living systems—
including human systems—benefit
from diversity. In her book The Quan-
tum Society: Human Nature and Con-
sciousness Defined by the New Physics
(William Morrow and Company,
1994), Danah Zohar states:“Social
evolution requires that different points
of view, different ideas, different ways
of life, and different traditions recom-
bine into larger, more complex emer-
gent wholes.” Breakthrough thinking
is more likely to emerge when diverse
viewpoints and perspectives contribute
to the exploration. For example,
“Strategy Cafés” that engage multiple
Continued on next page ➣
Knowledge emerges in
response to compelling 
questions that “travel well” 
as they attract collective 
engagement and exploration
throughout a system.

T H E  S Y S T E M S  T H I N K E R ® V O L . 1 2 , N O. 5
w w w. p e g a s u s c o m . c o m        © 2 0 0 1  P E G A S U S  C O M M U N I C AT I O N S
4
stakeholders, including employees from
all levels as well as customers and sup-
pliers, can offer richer opportunities for
innovation than traditional strategic
planning activities among senior 
executives alone.
Listen Together for Patterns,
Insights, and Deeper Questions.
Through Café conversations, partici-
pants often discover coherent patterns
of meaning in what may appear, at first
glance, to be a chaotic and messy self-
organizing exchange of ideas and per-
spectives.The emphasis is on shared
listening—listening for the wisdom or
insight that no individual member of
the group might have access to by
themselves.To that end, invite mem-
bers to offer their unique perspectives
and listen for new connections
in the “space in-between.”
Allow for silence and
reflection.Ask members
to notice what’s evolv-
ing in the middle of the
table. By focusing on
these special qualities of
collective attention, we
have a greater opportunity
to experience what our
Danish colleague Finn Voldtofte
calls “the magic in the middle.”
For example, in Sweden, hosts of a
multi-stakeholder forum used Café
conversations to clarify areas of inquiry
that could influence the future of both
the information/communications
industry and the environment.They
began the first round of conversation
by giving each table of participants a
“talking stone.” Each member took the
talking stone in turn and presented his
or her key insights, thoughts, or deeper
questions about the query “How can
information technology contribute to
a sustainable future?”
The three other participants at
each table were to listen carefully and
draw any connections they noticed
between ideas in the middle of the
tablecloth. In the second and third
rounds, the Café hosts asked everyone
to begin listening as a group for the
deeper assumptions underlying their
perspectives and to write them on the
tablecloth as well.When the final
round was over, the group pooled the
collective insights and “ahas” that had
emerged from linking the small-group
dialogues from Café tables and creating
a “conversation of the whole.”
Through this intentional process of
discovering and connecting underlying
assumptions and insights, participants
who might have opposed each other
in a different setting came to a mutual
appreciation of the deeper questions
they faced together in contributing to
a sustainable future.
Make Collective Knowledge Visible
to the Group. We’ve come to realize
that the simple act of scribbling ideas
and pictures on a paper napkin or
tablecloth so that the others at the Café
table can literally “see what you mean”
is integral to knowledge creation and
innovation.As Michael Schrage says in
Shared Minds:The New Tech-
nologies of Collaboration
(Random House,
1990),“The
images, maps, and
perceptions
bouncing around
in people’s brains
must be given a
form that other peo-
ple’s images, maps, or
perceptions can shape,
alter, or otherwise add value to. . . . It
takes shared space to create shared under-
standing.” By providing paper and
markers, we encourage the use of
“shared space” where people can build
on each other’s ideas, weave together
their thoughts, and engage in deeper
collective listening.
Many Café events include an
interactive graphics specialist, who cre-
ates large visual maps that synthesize
key insights and ideas. Commented
Nancy Margulies, who has hosted
many Cafés,“It’s like having a big
‘tablecloth’ in the middle of the whole
group. Participants can quite literally
see that they are creating something
new together.” Other possibilities for
making collective knowledge visible
include having a “gallery walk,” with
participants taking a tour of the table-
cloths created by the different groups;
publishing a Café newspaper on the
spot; and creating theater presentations
that reflect group discoveries. Each of
these techniques allows participants to
capture and build on the momentum
and ideas that emerge. In addition,
creating “storybooks” from the session
allows participants to take the results 
of their work to larger audiences after
the event.
The five operating principles seem
quite simple, but embodying them as
an integrated practice demands creativ-
ity, thoughtfulness, artistry, and care.
The creativity of the host can make
the difference between an interesting
conversation and the magic of experi-
encing what our colleague Tom Atlee
calls co-intelligence in action.
Conversation As Action
But is all of this talk just that, talk?
What about the urgent need for action
in our organizations today? We have
found that, by its nature,The World
Café challenges the ways most of us
think about creating desired results in
organizational and community life.
Many leaders still preach that we
should “stop talking and get to work”
—as if talk and work were two sepa-
rate things. Humberto Maturana, a
pioneering evolutionary biologist, has
helped us see that human beings think
together and coordinate action in and
through language. Conversation is “real
work.”Through conversation people
discover who cares about what and
who will be accountable for next steps.
We are finding that when people come
to a new level of shared understanding
around real-life issues, they want to
make a difference.When participants
return from Café conversations, they
often see additional action choices that
they didn’t know existed before.
Café As Metaphor 
As reported by members of Café
events,The World Café is a powerful
methodology for collaborative learning
and knowledge evolution.We are also
finding that it is a provocative
metaphor that can help us see organi-
zational and societal change in a new
light. How might the metaphor of
“The World as Café” invite us to think
differently about ways to catalyze 
system-wide innovation and action?
We are learning that Café con-
versations are based on a larger natu-
ral process of mutual inquiry and
➣Continued from previous page
Source: Nancy Margulies

© 2 0 0 1  P E G A S U S  C O M M U N I C AT I O N S        7 8 1 . 3 9 8 . 9 7 0 0       T H E  S Y S T E M S  T H I N K E R ®
J U N E / J U LY  2 0 0 1
5
discovery that does not depend on
small, round tables and red-checked
tablecloths. By experiencing the
power of focused networks of conver-
sation on a small scale, members see
how they might utilize this strategic
insight in the larger systems they are
part of.What if conversation were as
much a core business process as mar-
keting, distribution, or product devel-
opment? What if it were already the
core process—the source of organiza-
tional intelligence that allows all of
the others to generate positive results?
For example, imagine your
organization as a series of Café tables,
with employees moving between
functions inside the organization as
well as connecting with multiple
“tables” of customers, suppliers, dis-
tributors, and other conversation part-
ners.What difference would it make
to your own action choices if you
viewed your workplace as a dynamic,
living network of conversations and
knowledge creation rather than as a
traditional hierarchy (see “What We
View Determines What We Do”)?
Based on an understanding of
The World Café, leaders can take
greater responsibility for designing
infrastructures that bring coherence
and focus to organizational conversa-
tions. For example, they come to rec-
ognize the key role they play in
discovering “the big questions” and
hosting strategic conversations with
multiple stakeholders.This shift of lens
also has practical implications for how
leaders work with strategy formation,
organizational learning, information
technology, the design of physical
space, and leadership development.
In one Café session, senior leaders
from major corporations were mapping
the implications of taking this view.
The director of global operations for a
company with more than 50,000
employees suddenly jumped up from
his seat and exclaimed,“Do you know
what I’ve gone and done? I’ve just
reorganized my entire global operation.
I’ve broken up the informal knowledge
networks and relationships that have
developed over the years. If I had
looked at my reorganization through
these glasses, I would have done it a lot
differently. It’s going to take us a long
time to recover!” His heartfelt com-
ments stimulated a lively conversation
about the role of leaders in developing
organizational strategies that honor
these less visible but critical conversa-
tional and learning processes.
We’re seeing many practical exam-
ples of how people are intentionally
using the metaphor of The World Café
to guide strategic work in larger sys-
tems. Executives in a high-tech corpo-
ration helped to decrease the injury
rate dramatically by using Café princi-
ples to engage existing networks of
conversation and introduce questions
about safety risks.The World Café has
led intellectual capital expert Leif
Edvinsson of Sweden to observe that
the office design of the past is inade-
quate to support effective knowledge
work. In response, he has engaged
leading-edge architects in alternative
space design.
World Café principles are also
being used to redesign a Museum of
Science and Industry in Florida to
highlight not only formal exhibits but
also learning conversations as doorways
to discovery.And the initiative From
the Four Directions: People Every-
where Leading the Way is intentionally
weaving a global network of conversa-
tions among leaders of all ages on sev-
eral continents. Using the Internet and
other information technologies, local
conversation circles feed insights back
into the network, catalyzing these
worldwide leadership dialogues into a
growing force for societal innovation.
Creating Sustainable Value
The World Café is one path for stimu-
lating courageous conversation about
questions that matter to our lives and
work—especially in large group set-
tings.We are now seeing the systemic
ways in which focused networks of
conversation, especially with the sup-
port of collaborative technologies, can
help organizations and communities
evolve. Using The World Café as a
methodology and as a metaphor offers
a practical yet innovative way to culti-
vate both the knowledge required to
thrive today and the wisdom needed
to create the futures we want, rather
than being forced to live with the
futures we get.
Juanita Brown and David Isaacs serve as strate-
gists and thinking partners with senior leaders,
applying living systems principles to the evolution of
knowledge-based organizations and large-scale
change initiatives.They have hosted Café conversa-
tions and strategic dialogues internationally in a
wide variety of business and community settings.
(Contact info@theworldcafe.com or call 
415-381-3368). The World Café Community is
comprised of a growing global group of leaders and
others committed to courageous conversations and
positive futures.We thank Anne Dosher, Ken
Homer, Susan Kelly, Janice Molloy, Nancy Margulies,
Karen Speerstra, and Sue Wetzler for their special
contributions to this article.
•
If key knowledge sharing, learning, and strategic innovation happen in networks of
conversation through personal relationships, then . . .
• What is the unique contribution of leadership?
• What learning tools/methods/approaches have the most leverage?
• What are the implications for strategy evolution?
• How might you design physical space differently to support knowledge sharing?
• How would you approach the process of organizational change and renewal?
• What is the most strategic use of information technology?
• What are the indicators of success?
W H A T  W E  V I E W
D E T E R M I N E S  W H A T  W E  D O
• Notice the generative power of
conversation and shared listening.
• Explore what you would do differ-
ently if you viewed your organiza-
tion or community as a network of
conversations and social learning
through which we co-evolve the
future.
• Consider how you might “seed”
your own networks of conversa-
tion with questions that matter.
• Convene a Café conversation 
in your organization or community
(for ideas, go to 
www.theworldcafe.com).
N E X T  S T E P S

