Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice 
by 
Allison Robbins Koslow 
B.A. Philosophy 
Yale University, 2010 
Submitted to the Department of Linguistics and Philosophy 
on September 8, 2020 in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy in Philosophy 
at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
September 2020 
© Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2020. All rights reserved
Signature of Author: ___________________________________________________ 
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy 
September 9, 2020 
Certified by: __________________________________________________________ 
Alex Byrne 
Professor of Philosophy 
Thesis Supervisor 
Accepted by:__________________________________________________________ 
Bradford Skow 
Laurance S. Rockefeller Professor of Philosophy 
Chair of the Committee on Graduate Students 

Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice 
by 
Allison Robbins Koslow 
Submitted to the Department of Linguistics and Philosophy 
on September 8, 2020 in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements 
for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in 
Philosophy 
ABSTRACT 
Semantic change is of interest in its own right in the philosophy of language. For instance, it sheds 
light on the relationship between the meaning of a word and its use. It also plays a role in ideology 
critique. Philosophy of language often focuses on explaining synchronic features related to truth, 
entailment, and implicature. It is presumed an account of language’s diachronic features will 
follow. But the tools developed are imperfectly suited, and mask phenomena of interest. 
Chapter 1 concerns volitional meaning change of the sort advocated in conceptual engineering and 
amelioration. The question addressed is not what our concept, say, WOMAN, is, but what our 
concept should be. I bring to bear underappreciated empirical constraints on this normative project. 
Usage finely reflects equilibrium between communicative pressures (just as sales do between 
market pressures). Revising concepts is not an impossible task, but has significantly different 
contours than its proponents, and opponents, believe. 
Chapter 2 concerns a family of cases that resemble those found in the mid-20th century. Austin’s 
famous example is of a bird that looks for all the world like a goldfinch and then blows up like a 
grenade. Is it a goldfinch? A more realistic case involves the word “food”: are meal replacement 
capsules food? Hard to say. There could be a separation, where British speakers affirm they are, 
and Americans deny it, without either appearing to misapply “food.” Is this kind of open texture 
reducible to familiar linguistic phenomena, like vagueness? I argue not. It is a sui generis feature 
of meaning worthy of its own theory.  
Chapter 3 addresses the charge that radical conceptual analyses, or revisions, change the subject. 
On a standard picture of meaning, they do. But some puzzles about diachronic synonymy suggest 
otherwise. I defend a radical position: truth-conditions are projected. They are partly a function of 
how, in the interpreter’s community, it is reasonable to go on with the expression in question. For 
example, from our present perspective, “meal replacement capsules are food” may be false even 
as that very utterance is true from the perspective of future (or subaltern) speakers. 
Dissertation Committee 
Alex Byrne (Chair), Professor of Philosophy, Department Chair 
Sally Haslanger, Ford Professor of Philosophy and Women’s and Gender Studies 
Jack Spencer, Associate Professor of Philosophy 
Stephen Yablo, David W. Skinner Professor of Philosophy 

 3 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to thank Alex, my chair, as well as the rest of my committee Sally, Steve, and Jack.  
Thank you also to Allison Balin, Dylan Bianchi, Cheryl Chen, Annalisa Coliva, Cosmo Grant, Jon 
Koslow, Katy Meadows, Erin Miller, Rebecca Millsop, Sofia Hinojosa Ortiz, Kevin Richardson, 
Kate Ritchie, Michael Della Rocca, Kieran Setiya, Bob Stalnaker, Kirsi Teppo, Michael Thornton, 
Jonathan Vogel, Ian Walling, and Mallory Webber. Finally, I am eternally grateful to my parents, 
Susan and Jon, for their endless patience and support. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 4 
Chapter 1: Conceptual Engineering: Problems and Prospects 
Conceptual analysis concerns the concepts we do use. Can some concepts be defined in 
other terms? Conceptual engineering is the normative successor to conceptual analysis. It asks 
what concepts we should use. Should we use concept CNEW in place of concept COLD? While 
conceptual analysis has fallen into disfavor largely because of pessimism about its prospects for 
success, enthusiasm for conceptual engineering is on the rise.1 
The idea that some cognitive and linguistic technology is more desirable than others is 
familiar from the early days of analytic philosophy. Frege, in the Begriffsschrift, promotes his 
concept notation as an instrument to “break the domination of words over the human mind” 
(1879/1967: 7). Carnap, in Meaning and Necessity, recommends the task of explicating, or taking 
an inexact “concept used in everyday life or in an earlier stage of scientific or logical development” 
and “replacing it by a newly constructed, more exact concept” (1947/1956: 8).2 In Individuals, P. 
F. Strawson (himself no fan of explication) famously contrasts descriptive metaphysics, which “is
content to describe the actual structure of our thought about the world” with revisionary
metaphysics, which “is concerned to produce a better structure” (1959: 9). The latter, he suggests,
is “essentially an instrument of conceptual change, a means of furthering or registering new
directions or styles of thought” (10).
Conceptual analysis reached concepts through language; so does conceptual engineering. 
Paradigmatically a conceptual engineer identifies a word—say, “woman”—that expresses a 
concept—WOMAN—and proposes that we use the word to express a new but related concept in 
some area of discourse. (For the purposes of this paper, concepts are taken to be word meanings, 
or semantic values.) The target area of discourse may be exclusive to a cabal of philosophers, but 
often it is broader. The reasons for conceptual engineering are potentially many. They include 
facilitating a better account of some phenomenon, furthering some malevolent aim or making for 
better puns. 
1 See, for instance, Bach 2019, Brun 2016, Burgess 2019, Cappelen and Plunkett 2019, Brigandt and Rosario 
forthcoming, Cantalamessa 2019, Diaz-Leon 2019, Fassio and McKenna 2015, Goetze 2019, Koch 2019, Lutz 2018, 
Nado 2019, Pinder 2017 and forthcoming, Plunkett 2015 and 2016, Queloz 2019, Shea 2019, Sterken 2019, and 
Tanswell 2018. 
2 For a discussion of explication and conceptual engineering see Brun 2020, Novaes 2017, Kitsik 2017 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 5 
But mostly conceptual engineering has commanded recent philosophical attention when 
proposed as a tool for social justice and ideological reform.3 In that guise it is often called 
“conceptual amelioration.” Where traditional activists may correct our implicit theory of, say, race 
or addiction, conceptual engineers advocate changing our concept RACE or ADDICTION. For 
instance, one might argue that “person” should express an agential concept, rather than a species 
concept, to promote more appropriate treatment of animals like chimpanzees. (Activist lawyers 
may be said to engage in a related project when they use habeas corpus litigation to persuade courts 
to count chimpanzees as legal persons.4) The case for correcting mistaken theories hardly needs 
stating; the case for adjusting our concepts is less clear.5 
The suggestion that we can feasibly improve the world by revising our cognitive and 
linguistic technology is undeniably exciting. This paper asks whether it is correct. The question 
can be factored into two components. First, would it actually promote social justice if we were to 
revise our concepts in the way the conceptual engineer proposes?6 Second, is revising our concepts 
in the proposed way an achievable goal? If conceptual engineering is to be justified by the good it 
promotes, then this second question is paramount. But curiously little attention has been paid to 
it.7 This paper makes a start.  
Conceptual engineering requires a theory of what sorts of semantic changes can, as a 
practical matter, be induced. Fortunately, much is known about semantic change as it occurs in the 
wild. Questions about the feasibility of conceptual engineering projects are like questions about 
whether a particular product will succeed in a new market, or whether a nonnative species will 
3 It sometimes isn’t: Scharp 2013 proposes that logicians use a revised truth rule to facilitate a coherent logic of 
truth. 
4 See www.nonhumanrights.org/blog/first-habeas-corpus-order-happy and aldf.org/article/though-denied-by-new-
york-court-of-appeals-habeas-corpus-claim-for-chimpanzees-prompts-reflection/ 
5 Amelioration relates to recent work on hermeneutical injustice. See Fricker 2007, Manne 2017. Not all projects 
that go by the name “amelioration” advocate conceptual change. Some are purely epistemic, more in the mold of 
good old-fashioned conceptual analysis: they set out to clarify what, say, women are, what we mean by talk of, say, 
“women,” what we are (unreflectively) doing with such thought and talk, and how it contributes to creating the 
unjust social reality it represents. See Haslanger 2005, 2010. To the extent these do not also involve claims about 
what concepts we should use, they are beyond the scope of this paper. See Haslanger 2019 for a discussion of 
different kinds of ameliorative projects. 
6 See Saul’s contribution to Haslanger and Saul 2006. 
7 For instance, the attention paid to whether we should conceptual engineer in the event doing so may lead to false 
beliefs, or epistemic losses, may seem premature. We have yet to determine when and whether conceptual 
engineering can even succeed in areas of discourse where such problems may result. For discussion on the epistemic 
value of conceptual engineering, see Simion 2017, 2018, McKenna 2018, and Podosky 2020. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
6 
thrive in our ecosystem. They are not questions to be settled from the armchair. Much of the 
relevant work in the linguistic realm has employed the methods of empirical pragmatics and 
diachronic semantics, including the study of linguistic innovation. I bring this work to bear on 
conceptual engineering projects.  
This paper concerns the hope that revising our linguistic classifications may make that 
world morally better. I suggest a method for assessing the feasibility of the proposed revisions. 
The picture that emerges undermines the sorts of engineering projects most likely to appeal to 
philosophers. As we’ll see, some projects may stand to succeed, but they have significantly 
different contours than the typical ones.  
1. Conceptual Engineering and Semantic Replacement 
For the purposes of this paper, projects to revise or change our concepts may be thought of as 
projects to change the distribution of expressions with particular meanings.  
Distinguish three sorts of engineering project: introduction, elimination, and replacement. 
All three are familiar. Introduction: experts and ordinary speakers alike frequently introduce words 
and phrases to make useful distinctions. Sometimes they are neologistic (“mansplaining”, 
“laser”8). Sometimes they are borrowed from ordinary language, and sometimes have related 
meanings (“contract,” “safety,” “sexual harassment”, “woke”). Elimination: speakers may also 
actively discourage the use of certain expressions (slurs, for instance, or failed theoretical terms 
like “phlogiston”). Mostly expressions drop from favor as a biproduct of changing fads, interests 
and technology. (The vocabulary of falconry has gone the way of the birds, and so has 
“typewriter.”) Others, like “apricity”, gradually fade from public consciousness.9 Replacement: 
sometimes the introduction of one expression results in the elimination of another, as has (nearly) 
happened by rebranding prunes as “dried plums.” In effect, use of one word-meaning pair <W, C> 
 
 
8 The expression “mansplaining” was inspired by Rebecca Solnit’s essay “Men Explain Things to Me: Facts Didn't 
Get in Their Way” (2014), but its exact origin is unknown. “Laser” originated in the scientific community as an 
acronym for “light amplification by stimulated emission of radiation,” and gained currency with the broader public 
in the 1960s.  
9 The term, now obsolete, meant the warmth of the winter sun. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
7 
replaces use of another. These may share the meaning-component (as do “dried plums” -dried 
plums and “prunes”-dried plums), or share the word component, or neither.10  
Conceptual engineering as commonly advocated by philosophers is a kind of replacement 
project. One word-meaning pair <W, CNEW> is introduced to replace use of another, <W*, COLD>, 
where CNEW≠COLD. Replacement rather than simply introduction is part of the picture because not 
only is CNEW deemed good, but COLD is deemed bad. We can call this semantic replacement since 
an expression with one meaning replaces uses of an expression with another meaning. Typically, 
W=W*. Retaining the familiar word for the new concept seems a natural, though unforced, choice. 
Thus, in the case of the concept WOMAN, the conceptual engineer urges us to use another 
concept instead of the existing one. The obvious suggestion is then to lexicalize the new concept 
in the time-honored way, as “woman” (rather than, say, “femina”). Speakers are antecedently 
likely to continue carving up the world with habitual expressions. These are the expressions caught 
up in our verbal dispositions, written into our laws and on our signs. They trigger social obligations 
and figure in instinctive self-descriptions. Short of rewriting everything, the best strategy would 
seem to be to keep the words but change their meaning.11 
Some clarificatory remarks before we go any further. “Concept” is used in multifarious 
ways.12 If (as assumed here) concepts are meanings or semantic values, then it may seem that 
conceptual engineering as previously explained changes the subject—at least absent some account 
of how expressions may concern the same subject despite having different semantic values.13 
Moreover, some conceptual engineers resist identifying concepts with meanings and think of their 
project not as changing our concepts, but as keeping them while making them better.14 Fortunately 
there is no need to wade into these controversies here. 
 
 
10 It’s easy to see how these projects stand to be socially significant. Rebranding “prunes” increased sales. Coining 
the phrase “sexual harassment” helped us attend to and track its instances as well as confer about them in ways we 
did not do beforehand. To the extent, use of “sexual harassment” replaced some uses of, say, “overly flirtatious,” it’s 
easy to see how replacement projects may be socially significant. 
11 For an extended discussion, see Haslanger 2000. 
12 See Machery 2011, Fodor and Lepore 2002, Laurence and Margolis 1999, 2015. 
13 For discussion of the so-called discontinuity objection, see Prinzing 2017, Pinder 2020, Koch 2020, Riggs 2019. 
For a discussion of preserving the topic, see also Cappelen 2018, chs. 9-10.  
14 For instance, in Haslanger (2019)’s terminology, the concept associated with a term is a set of practical capacities 
that roughly correspond to its social role. What I call a concept is much closer to what Haslanger calls “the 
informational content” associated with a term (where that may be understood as something like a semantic value). 
Thus the informational content of, say, “family” may change while remains conceptually continuous in Haslanger’s 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
8 
Quinean skepticism aside, there is an intuitive notion of a word “changing in meaning” that 
figures in lexicography and diachronic linguistics.15 Without it, these legitimate empirical 
disciplines would not exist. No controversial conceptions of concepts, or disputed theories of 
linguistic meaning, are required to observe that in Chaucer’s day “girl” was correctly applied to 
children of any sex and in Queen Elizabeth I’s day “one myriad” was ten thousand.16 These 
changes in application cannot be explained by changes in background belief. Chaucer knew all 
about the birds and bees when he wrote of “girle knights,” and we have not forgotten any math 
since the Elizabethan era. The conceptual engineer proposes to change the meaning of words in 
the mundane sense of “meaning” in which it is true that “myriad” and “girl” are used today with 
different meanings than they once were. 
Real life examples of semantic replacement abound. “Shore,” for instance, originally meant 
the tidal zone where boats run aground. As the beach changed from a place of business to leisure, 
it was convenient and clear enough to call the place beachgoers went the “shore” instead of 
reaching for a new word. Repeated usage eventually resulted in “shore” acquiring a new meaning, 
the whole beach. Gradually uses of “shore”-meaning-the whole beach have replaced some but not 
all uses of “shore”-meaning-tidal zone. The conceptual engineer’s project is to push this organic 
process of meaning change in the preferred direction. 
2. Five Examples 
Having clarified the kind of conceptual engineering at issue, I will now turn to five illustrative 
examples of it. The most widely discussed comes from Haslanger (2000) and concerns race and 
gender. She describes her project as follows: 
 
 
sense: “Our concept of family has evolved, improved, at least in part, through the political work done by LGBTQ and 
adoption activists in conceptual engineering with slogans such as ‘we are families too’” (2019: 21). Asking whether 
we may induce use of one word-meaning pair to replace use of another is thus roughly analogous to asking whether 
the concept associated with a word, in Haslanger’s sense, is likely to evolve with the result that the word come to be 
associated with an informational content of a particular sort. For discussion of the significance of concepts in 
amelioration, see Sawyer 2019. 
15 This is compatible with meanings being Fregean senses, external objects and properties, or what must be known for 
competent use. It is also compatible with an externalist metasemantics, or a metasemantics where idiolects are 
pervasive. Talk of an expression “changing its meaning” may even be compatible with natural language lacking a 
genuine analytic/synthetic distinction: an expression may be said to “change its meaning” when there is some change 
in the canonical delineation of “statements true in virtue of their meaning.”  
16 See the OED entries for “myriad” and “girl” (http://www.oed.com).  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
9 
The questions “what is gender?” or “what is race?” require us to consider what work we 
want these concepts to do for us; why do we need them at all. The responsibility is ours to 
define them for our purposes…My priority in this inquiry is not to capture what we do mean, 
but how we might usefully revise what we mean for certain theoretical and practical 
purposes. (2000: 33-4) 
Haslanger argues that those concerned with intersectional theoretical projects and activism should 
use “woman”/“man” so that they correctly apply to those subordinated/privileged on the basis of 
perceived reproductive capacity, and “race” so that it correctly applies to those subordinated (or 
privileged) on the basis of perceived ancestry. It is worth noting that while Haslanger thinks that 
using “woman” for the new concept is desirable, she does not think it essential:  
[T]here are rhetorical advantages to using the terms ‘gender’, ‘man’ and ‘woman,’ and 
‘race’ for the concepts I’ve defined, but if someone else is determined to have those terms, 
I’ll use different ones. (52) 
Unlike a conceptual analysis of, say, “woman”—an account of what women are—ameliorative 
projects of this sort are not subject to traditional counterexamples:  
[T]here could be females who aren’t women in the sense I’ve defined, but these individuals 
(or possible individuals) are not counterexamples to the analysis. The analysis is intended 
to capture a meaningful political category for critical feminist efforts, and non-oppressed 
females do not fall within that category. (46) 
Haslanger thus offers an account of what “woman” should mean with the goal of 
empowering critical social agents. However, whether the terminological shift I’m 
suggesting is politically useful will depend on the contexts in which it is employed and the 
individuals employing it. The point is not to legislate what terms to use in all contexts, but 
to offer resources that should be used judiciously. (48)  
Jenkins (2016) provides our second example. She argues that the word “woman” should express 
the concept PERSON WITH A FEMALE GENDER IDENTITY rather than our present concept WOMAN, or 
the one proposed by Haslanger. She writes: 
 [T]he adoption of [Haslanger’s WOMAN] concept would exacerbate the existing and 
illegitimate marginalization of trans women within feminist discourse [in or out of the 
academy]. (2016: 396) 
Arguably “woman” as traditionally understood fails to apply to transgender women and applies to 
transgender men; Haslanger’s “woman” at least fails to apply to some transgender women and 
applies to some transgender men. “Woman” understood with Jenkins’ meaning is intended to have 
neither of these supposed defects.  
Ameliorative analysis is not bound to comply with our ordinary understanding or use of a 
concept: the target concept may be revisionary, provided that it furthers the goals guiding 
the analysis. (395) 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
10 
In this instance the goals guiding Jenkins’ project include facilitating feminist theorizing, 
respecting the gender identities of trans individuals, and combatting transphobia.17  
 
The third example concerns the ordinary concept SEXUAL ORIENTATION, which pertains to 
match or mismatch between a person’s sex and the sex of those they are attracted to. It is unclear 
how SEXUAL ORIENTATION, and associated concepts like LESBIAN and STRAIGHT, apply to those 
outside the gender binary. Dembroff (2016) “sets out to engineer a revised concept of sexual 
orientation” (2) such that: 
the sexual orientation one has is grounded in what sex[es] and gender[s] of the persons one 
is disposed to sexually engage, without reference to the sex or gender of the person so 
disposed. (18, emphasis added) 
This is supposed to have beneficial effects: 
we can think of the engineering project as one that sets out to elucidate and possibly revise 
or replace our everyday concepts in light of the impact we would like them to have. (3, 
emphasis added)  
In this framework, lesbians and straight men exclusively attracted to women would have the same 
“sexual orientation,” an orientation shared with some who are gender non-binary or transgendered. 
Thus, if successfully implemented, the project “implies a new taxonomy of sexual orientation” (4) 
that stands to 
eliminate and replace the everyday concepts associated with the taxonomy of sexual 
orientation. (4) 
If Dembroff’s new concepts replaced LESBIAN, STRAIGHT, and so on, the divide between 
“cisheterosexuality” (heterosexuality among non-transgender people) and queer sexual 
orientations (e.g. trans woman attracted to other trans women) would disappear from view. The 
conceptual revision is supposed to provide: 
a taxonomic schema capable of recognizing persons outside the gender or sex binary…[and] 
conducive for establishing legal and social protections for persons who have queer sexual 
orientations. (19) 
 
 
17 Jenkins writes: 
Failure to respect the gender identifications of trans people is a serious harm and is conceptually linked to 
forms of transphobic oppression and even violence. It follows from this that an important desideratum of a 
feminist analysis of gender concepts is that it respect these identifications by including trans people within 
the gender categories with which they identify and not including them within any categories with which they 
do not identify. (396) 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
11 
And to reduce or eliminate: 
the presumption that cisheterosexuality is the normatively standard sexual orientation and 
all queer sexual orientations are normatively deviant. (19) 
The fourth example comes from Barnes (2016). Admittedly, her own description of her project 
does not involve changing the meaning of anything:  
I want to figure out what disability is. This is a project in social metaphysics—I’m not 
investigating what our word ‘disability’ means, nor trying to give a theory of our folk 
concept of disability. I’m asking what it is for something to be a disability. (2016: 10) 
She summarizes her theory of physical disability as follows: “disability just is whatever the 
disability rights movement is promoting justice for” (43); it is not, as is commonly supposed, a 
matter of diminished bodily capacity. Disability is “a social category people have found useful 
when organising themselves in a civil rights struggle” (41). However, she also thinks of her project 
as ameliorative in something like Haslanger’s sense:  
When evaluating theories of social categories, the ameliorative project asks us to consider 
what role these categories have to play in social progress—with the background assumption 
that understanding and explaining social injustice is part of what will help us to address it. 
(41) 
One might well wonder whether Barnes’s account of disability is faithful to the ordinary meaning 
of “disability.” Insofar as it isn’t, her account may be recast as conceptual engineering, without 
too much loss of fidelity. As she says: 
I am using ‘disabled’ rather than a replacement term like ‘differently-abled’. Words are hard 
to replace. I think it’s easier to shift meanings. (6) 
The fifth and final example is from Manne (2018). We have words for animus or bigoted attitudes 
towards women—one of them is “misogyny.” What is of theoretical interest, Manne argues, does 
not lie in malevolent attitudes towards women and girls, but rather in whatever produces certain 
bad outcomes for women and girls. In particular:  
Misogyny ought to be understood as the system that operates within a patriarchal social 
order to police and enforce women’s subordination and to uphold male dominance (2017: 
33) 
[It] primarily targets women because they are women in a man’s world (i.e., a historically 
patriarchal one, among other things), rather than because they are women in a man’s mind, 
where that man is a misogynist… the relevant hostilities may be manifested by individual 
agents, collective (or “mob”) activity, or purely structural mechanisms … and [target] 
particular women and particular kinds of women (64) 
Manne’s project is advertised as an ameliorative one, and she acknowledges that “ameliorative 
projects are partly stipulative in nature” (62). Using “misogynist” with this new meaning is 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
12 
supposed to “highlight the political dimensions” of particular phenomena and “render…[them]… 
psychologically more explicable” (34). She suggests her “analysis also yields an extension for the 
term ‘misogyny’ that dovetails nicely with usage patterns among feminists” (34). 
 
Are engineering projects like these five at all feasible? Cappelen (2018) shares my doubts 
about the feasibility of conceptual engineering projects, but not my reasons for them. His case 
against conceptual engineering needs to be examined first. 
3. Cappelen Against Conceptual Engineering 
Cappelen offers two main arguments. Here’s the first: 
 [T]o effectively make a change in the extension and intension of [a] term, you would need 
to understand the mechanisms of reference change. These mechanisms are also not known 
to any of us and might in effect be unknowable. ... That makes it an illusion to think that we 
can be in a position to effectively predict and implement changes. (2018: 73-4) 
This argument is unsuccessful. It assumes that if the A facts are somehow constituted by or 
supervene on the B facts, then instrumental reasoning about how to change the A facts requires 
knowing how they depend on the B facts. But that cannot be right. I know how to change your 
mind without knowing how the mental relates to the physical (I can talk with you) or how to age 
a photograph without knowing how pixels arranged thus-and-so give rise to a particular image of 
a face (I can draw in some smile lines).  
 
Cappelen’s second argument is that even if one could acquire such knowledge, semantic 
changes would be impossible to implement. 
Even if we were perfectly coordinated as a group (something we are decidedly not), [that] 
would not give the group control [of the reference fixing facts] because the actions and 
intentions of groups have at best a messy and unpredictable effect on our semantic values. 
We can of course try to influence other speakers and experts—but that will hardly ever 
amount to more than a drop in the ocean. (74) 
This is akin to arguing that individual voters cannot control who is governor, because no 
individual’s vote is decisive. Of course, there may be something to this, but it is not impossible to 
influence electoral outcomes. If it were, people would not work so hard to do so. There are ways 
to amplify one’s voice. Some involve persuasive campaigning. Some involve organizing. And, of 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
13 
course, it doesn’t hurt to select a candidate that stands, given the right kind of organizing and 
campaigning, a decent chance of success.18  
 
Conceptual engineering is not impossible, because it has actually happened, at least in the 
sense that there have been premeditated changes to English that have stuck. Talk of the “disabled” 
has for the most part replaced talk of the “handicapped.” Words like “housewife” have gradually 
given way to less gendered alternatives. The use of “queer” has lost in many contexts its negative 
connotations. Guatemalans and Nicaraguans are less likely nowadays to be called “Mexicans” by 
white Americans; they are likelier to be called “Latinos.” No committee decided to implement 
these changes, but they were motivated, not accidental. Cappelen’s second argument gives us no 
reason to believe that more coordinated attempts at conceptual engineering would not succeed.  
 
A drop in the ocean can have momentous consequences. Introducing a few cane toads into 
Australia in 1935 created an environmental catastrophe decades later. Introducing a few penguins 
would not have had that effect. We need to understand the mechanisms by which a small 
intervention may propagate. What’s needed is a strategy to assess which conceptual engineering 
projects—understood as semantic replacements—are worth attempting, given their comparative 
odds of success and the ends they stand to promote. A felt need for linguistic revision, by itself, is 
not enough.19  
 
The contemporary linguistics literature on semantic change is small but growing, driven in 
part by the booming interest in Neo-Gricean approaches to the semanticization of pragmatics, 
inference and grammaticalization.20 Other attempts to develop theories of semantic change have 
 
 
18 Cappelen offers a third argument:  
…Even if we had all the information about the metasemantics of a term (about the use patterns, the histories, 
the sources of information, the interaction between the experts, etc.), it would appeal to factors that are in 
large part out of our control. For example, past facts play a role in determining the meaning of terms, but we 
can’t change the past. (73-4) 
This is no more persuasive than the first two. Since we need not know a term’s metasemantics to affect its meaning, 
it is irrelevant whether having that information would help us do so. Even if we cannot now control some of the factors 
that determine meaning, it does not follow we cannot now control some of the factors that will do so going forward. 
19 Despite a long-recognized need for an English epicene pronoun, only recently has singular “they” gained purchase. 
Dozens of candidates were proposed in the 19th century, including “hiser” and “thon”, with little success. Horace 
Greeley (founder of the Herald Tribune) reputedly offered a cash prize to whoever identified one people would actually 
use. Singular “they”, of course, has been tripping off tongues for centuries, including Shakespeare’s and Jane Austen’s, 
but social priorities and grammatical pieties had to shift before it achieved widespread use. 
20 Most notably Horn 1984, 1999, 2000a, 2000b. For a discussion of semantic change and grammaticalization for 
generativists, see von Fintel 2014. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
14 
loomed large in sociolinguistics,21 cognitive linguistics,22 and game theoretic semantics.23 Some 
efforts have been made to extend relevance theory and optimality pragmatics to the study of 
semantic change.24  
 
Drawing on some this literature, I’ll now suggest a way to approach semantic replacement 
that allows the identification of projectable, even illuminating, generalizations. Then, in the 
following three sections, I’ll elaborate on some generalizations of particular relevance to 
conceptual engineers. 
4. Generalizing about Semantic Change  
A common sense understanding of development in a language has served as a theoretical model 
for other sorts of developments. Seeds of Adam Smith’s theory of the economy’s invisible hand 
may be found in his earlier work on linguistic change.25 In The Descent of Man, Charles Darwin 
approvingly cites the linguist Friedrich Müller as having remarked:  
“A struggle for life is constantly going on amongst the words and grammatical forms in 
each language. The better, the shorter, the easier forms are constantly gaining the upper 
hand, and they owe their success to their own inherent virtue.” To these more important 
causes of the survival of certain words, mere novelty may, I think, be added; for there is in 
the mind of man a strong love for slight changes in all things. The survival or preservation 
of certain favoured words in the struggle for existence is natural selection. (1871: 60-1)26 
 
 
21 See Labov 1994, 2012, and Eckert 2006. 
22 See Blank and Koch 1999, Bybee 2009, Sweetser 2006, and Traugott 1999. 
23 See Deo 2015 and 2014. Another relevant strand of research involves iterated learning frameworks. See Kirby 
1999 and Smith et al. 2003. Some linguists are turning to corpus data to identify generalizations about words liable 
to undergo semantic change. https://www.aclweb.org/anthology/W11-0134. 
24 Optimality pragmatics may be thought of as formalizing and extending the Gricean principles of cooperative 
communicative behavior as found in Horn 1984 and Levinson 1995, 2000. For example, a principle of strength 
generates a preference for readings that are informationally stronger, a principle of consistency generates a 
preference for interpretations that do not conflict with the extant context, a principle of faithful interpretation 
generates a preference for interpretations of the utterance without leaving out any aspect of what the speaker says. 
The interaction of such constraints, founded on Levinson’s heuristics, explains how the hearer arrives at the intended 
interpretation. At the same time, this model can be regarded as producing default, presumed interpretations. For 
applications of this sort of approach to explaining semantic change, see Falkum 2007, Carston 2002, Sperber and 
Wilson 1985/1991, Wilson 2003, Wilson and Carston 2006, 2007.  
25 See Smith 1759/1976, 1761/1983 and Otteson 2002.  
26 Müller was vehemently anti-Darwinian in the sense that he thought no selection process could have produced 
articulate humans out of inarticulate apish proto-humans. That said, he did think that a selection process of sorts had 
operated among the roots themselves, winnowing down an initially large set to the smaller number that in turn 
formed the basis of the major language groups. Darwin used evidence of selectional change among languages to 
defend his view that language use promoted the selection of humans over primates (and, debatably, that so-called 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
15 
In economics and evolutionary biology, we have systems that are chaotic at the micro level. The 
behavior of individual buyers and beetles is unpredictable in part because they are subject to 
unsurveyably many influences. Nevertheless there are stable patterns at the macro level. Other 
things being equal, inexpensive products tend to sell better than more expensive ones, and well 
camouflaged beetle species tend to outcompete worse camouflaged ones. Economics and 
evolutionary biology are largely concerned with these stable macro patterns, in some cases with 
an eye towards influencing micro behavior. Taxing a product, for instance, is one way of inducing 
buyers to prefer an untaxed competitor.  
 
Our use of words is undeniably chaotic at the micro level, the more so if we construe use 
broadly to include spoken applications of a particular word, thoughts involving it, and inferences, 
presuppositions and associations triggered by the word’s application. Usage is sensitive to personal 
factors, including what a speaker believes about the meaning of words and her interests. It is also 
sensitive to her physical and social environment, including when the word in question was last 
used, how it was used, by whom, with what intonation, and under what circumstances.  
But this is no obstacle to identifying stable patterns at the macro level. Are there laws of 
semantic change, akin to what we find in biology? There are certainly generalizations that have 
some predictive power and obvious partial explanations.27 Let’s dwell on this for a moment. Why 
is the use of “niggardly” in decline? This is clearly not a coincidence. Speakers tend to avoid 
expressions that are easily confused with slurs. Neither is it surprising that “myriad” acquired the 
meaning quite a lot. Terms for large quantities often go imprecise in this way after becoming 
popular stock metaphors (see, “a ton” and “a lot”, once the quantity of something, e.g., hay, 
contained on a parcel, or lot, of land). It stands to reason that easily pronounced abbreviations 
would replace over time the longer terms that they abbreviate (“car” came from “carriage”).28 
 
 
primitive human races should speak evolutionarily lower languages than so-called civilized races). For discussion 
and controversy, see Radick 2001 and Alter 1999. 
27 Traugott 2017. See Norde 2009, Geeraerts 1990. Lass (1980) issued the last gasp of skepticism that semantic 
change was simply too chaotic to be studied. He argued, roughly, that because there are not exception-less laws of 
history or psychology, projectable regularities in semantic change cannot be identified, only retrospectively 
described. But he has since given up this position, see Lass 1997. Of course, phonology was once thought too 
chaotic to be studied, but has since become a scientific discipline. Even if semantic change is not as regular, or 
predictable, as phonological change, there are still useful generalizations to be had about what sorts of semantic 
changes are and are not likely.  
28 Efforts are underway to create algorithms to extract generalizations about semantic change from corpus data (like 
that in the Corpus of Contemporary American English and the British National Corpus). Preliminary work suggests 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
16 
Language associated with youth culture tends to become popular. Speakers tend to speak in ways 
that fit with how they want to be seen: funny, hip, sophisticated or of the people.  
 
Certain types of expressions have a tendency to pejorate (acquire more negative secondary 
meanings) rather than ameliorate (acquire positive secondary meanings). Euphemisms, for 
instance, are likely to pejorate (see the chronology tracked in the OED entry for “toilet”). But so 
are terms for the average (“mediocre,” “mean,” “common,” “vulgar”) and the inexpensive 
(“cheap” but also “vile” and “shoddy”). When an expression acquires a more negative meaning, 
often it stops being used with its original meaning. For instance, the use of “notorious” to mean 
famous or well known fell off quickly when the word acquired scandalous overtones (in the 17th 
century). Why? It could be as simple as this: we try not to speak in ways that are easily 
misinterpreted, particularly to untoward effect.  
 
Generalizations of the foregoing sort are well attested. But they cannot be expected to hold 
universally. For example, expressions tend on the whole to acquire broader rather than narrower 
meanings, and more abstract rather than more concrete ones. But sometimes it works in reverse.29 
(“Business” first meant anxiety, then purposeful activity; only relatively recently did it acquire the 
meaning of occupation or trade. Or, see, “segue.”) 
 
How then are we to go about extracting generalizations relevant to those hoping to promote 
semantic replacement? One strategy is experimental. Linguistic innovations often originate and 
attain stable use in sub-communities prior to spread to the wider public. One sober-minded 
approach involves studying sub-communities for innovations and promoting those that seem 
promising. Another involves beta-testing several proposals by seeding them in small communities 
and promoting more widely those that catch on. Perhaps philosophers should see themselves as 
promoting experiments in new usage within counter publics. But more can be said. 
 
 
that frequently used and shorter words are more likely to acquire secondary meanings. See Tang 2018, and Feltgen, 
Fagard, and Nadal 2017.  
29 Setting aside disagreement about why a particular generalization obtains, there is also controversy about whether 
some such tendencies hold universally, or are “unidirectional”, and, if so, why. Some candidates involve perceptual 
vocabulary and deontic modals. For instance, it is cross-linguistically attested that perceptual vocabulary tends to 
acquire broader attitudinal meanings and deontic modals tend to acquire epistemic meanings (“I see your point, feel 
pleased, am touched”; “could” and “must”). But it is disputed how much our cognitive architecture—including our 
intuitive feeling that “see” (as opposed to “kick” or “smell”) is suited to figure in metaphors for knowledge—is 
responsible. See Grossman and Noveck 2015, Sweetser 1988, Traugott 2017, Traugott and Dasher 2002, Urban 
2015.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
17 
The fact that we speak so as to achieve certain goals is critical to understanding language 
change. These goals are sometimes shared—coordinating our plans—and sometimes not—social 
advancement. In pursuit of these goals, speakers observe various rough rules. The most familiar 
of them, at least to philosophers, are the Gricean maxims. Grice made a few observations about 
meaning change, e.g., that habitual implicatures are apt to find their way into lexical meaning, 
though that was not his main focus. Others, including Neo-Griceans, have tried to locate the causes 
of language change in the opposing interests of speaker and hearer. They have appealed, for 
instance, to souped-up versions of the maxim of relevance (say no more than you must!) and the 
maxim of quality (say as much as you can!).30 
 
Conversational goals are served not only by advancing the right propositions, but 
expressing them via the right the words. A word-meaning pair is helpful to the extent that the 
speech behavior it enables is, for example, 
Convenient (easily done), 
Efficient (good ratio of energy expended to the value of the message conveyed), 
Clear (unlikely to be misunderstood), 
Smooth (unlikely to raise irrelevant issues or distract from the point), 
Transparent (makes clear what question is being addressed), 
Flattering (it casts the speaker in some desired light), 
Concordant (it fits in with the speech of one’s chosen group). 
A new word-meaning pair meeting these desiderata is likelier to gain a foothold than one that flouts 
them. There are of course exceptions—the behavior of individual speakers is unpredictable—but 
these are the types of linguistic innovations we’d expect from a macro-perspective to stand a 
chance of succeeding. Conversely, innovations are less likely to succeed in areas of discourse 
 
 
30 This idea is developed in many ways. It is found in Zipf 1949 and Martinet 1952 as well as earlier sources like 
Paul 1888 and Bréal 1900. More recently, Horn 1985, and then other Neo-Griceans have attempted to derive Grice’s 
maxims from the hearer-oriented Quality-principle (what isn’t said isn’t, modulo the Relevance-Principle) and the 
speaker-oriented Relevance-principle (speak with minimal effort, modulo the Quality-principle). Cognitive linguists 
like Geeraerts 2010 have attempted to explain the phenomenon of prototypicality as reflecting an equilibrium 
between these two opposing forces. Bidirectional optimality theorists (see, Blutner 2000, Blutner and Zeevat 2004) 
model optimization of the linguistic output against a system of ranked constraints that evaluates form-meaning pairs. 
These ranked constraints include expressive optimality and interpretative optimality. The particular theoretical 
commitments of such approaches are irrelevant to the present purpose. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
18 
where their use is unclear, inefficient, discordant, distracting (or so on). Thus, our speaking in 
accord with the above desiderata generates patterns at the macro level.31  
For instance, our tendency to clear expressions (enshrined in Grice’s Maxim of Manner) is 
partly responsible for the fact that languages have a well-documented tendency to avoid 
homonymy, in particular confusing homonymy. In English there are a mere 1600-2000 homonyms 
and far fewer where audiences are unlikely to be able to recover the speaker’s intended meaning 
from context.32 A beloved example of homonymy avoidance occurred in 12th century Gascon 
French: the terms “cattus” (cat) and “gallus” (rooster) merged to “gat.” The resulting ambiguity 
was highly inconvenient especially in a farming context. Two things quickly happened: speakers 
withheld “gat” from roosters and three other words acquired rooster as a secondary meaning—aza 
(pheasant), begey (vicar) and put (chick). When languages do tolerate homonymous expressions, 
their uses rarely clash on account of occupying disjoint regions of discourse. (Consider the 
differential interpretations of “sheet” on a yacht, at a printer’s shop or at a linens shop).  
Some macro patterns, including homonymy avoidance, are of particular relevance to 
engineering projects. The study of what semantic replacements are achievable is closely related to 
the study of what semantic replacements are likely to eventuate in the normal course. Both require 
 
 
31 Linguists have painstakingly accumulated much data about—and proposed explanations for—cross-linguistically 
attested pathways of semantic change. Usually these pertain to the descriptive semantics of a particular group of 
words, not the properties of form-meaning pairs that make them more or less prone to semantic changes. For 
example, body part terms tend to acquire spatial means, and explanations proposed for the development of body-part 
terms into spatial terms cannot necessarily be generalized to words of other semantic classes. Limited work in this 
direction can be found in Neo-Gricean theories (for instance in the work of Wilson 2003, Carston 2002, Wilson and 
Carston 2007) and cognitive theories of semantic change, metaphor and conventional inference (Sweetser 1990, 
Traugott 1999). Both emphasize the role of the structure of the lexicon in explaining semantic change. For example, 
it is often observed that changes in words’ meanings are due to a tendency of languages to avoid ambiguous form-
meaning pairings, such as homonymy, synonymy, and polysemy (Horn 1985, Anttila 1989). On the other hand, 
when related words are examined together, it has been observed that one word’s change of meaning often “drags 
along” other words in the same semantic field, leading to parallel change (Lehrer 1985). These seemingly 
contradictory patterns of change lead to the conclusion that if ambiguity avoidance is indeed a reason for semantic 
change, its role is more complex than initially assumed.  
32 That is a problem that arises only when there is identity of sound, category (e.g., animal), subcategory (e.g., 
rooster), and register between the homophonous lexical items. Notice that a variety of linguistic and extralinguistic 
factors conspire to alleviate potential homonymy or polysemy, including grammatical gender (as in French le foie, 
liver, vs. la foi, faith,), inflection (brothers/brethren, hanged/hung, rang/ringed), word order (Fr. pauvre homme 
unfortunate man vs. homme pauvre indigent man), and orthography (draft/draught, metal/mettle, knight/night), 
pronunciation (human/e). When all else fails, speakers use modifiers or other repair strategies to disambiguate 
underspecified items, as observed: fair-sized/fair-minded/fair-haired, “Funny how? Funny-strange or funny ha-
ha?”). 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
19 
investigating how convenient, clear, inconspicuous, hip, distracting, etc. uses of various word-
meanings are likely to be in the linguistic environment and how their introduction is likely to shift 
in the linguistic environment. One sort of empirical question is how to shift the environment to 
favor of some engineering proposal, say by exposing the public to it in regular but inconspicuous 
ways, or alternatively in memorable and politically charged ones. Another sort of empirical 
question is, holding fixed how the public is exposed to a word-meaning pair, whether the drivers 
of use put any additional constraints on what pairs are likely to become popular. The question is 
what may be said—what macro generalizations may be identified—that directly bear on which 
semantic replacements are achievable. It turns out quite a lot. 
So now we have seen how to approach the topic and that there are results to be had. Let’s 
now turn to these more specific conjectures that bear on the project of conceptual engineering. 
Section 5 elaborates some of the generalizations we have identified—expressions are unlikely to 
be replaced by more fraught or opaque ones, usage tends to be efficient and avoid unclear 
homonymy—and applies them to engineering projects. There is some bad news. Section 6 offers 
some positive but highly circumscribed suggestions in view of the fact that semantic replacement 
predictably involves expressions being replaced by slightly broader ones or, occasionally, slightly 
narrower ones. Section 7 returns to the negative: more dramatic semantic replacements are usually 
the product of successive more subtle replacements. 
5. Negative Applications 
Successful conceptual engineering requires introducing <W, CNEW>, thus eventually driving out 
<W, COLD>. This faces (at least) four obstacles. I’ll use the proposals described earlier to illustrate, 
but the obstacles generalize to others.  
 
The first obstacle we have already met: homonymy avoidance. It presents a problem for 
conceptual engineering because once a word-meaning pair is stably in use, a homonym, 
particularly a clashing homonym, is unlikely to replace it—even one that would otherwise be more 
desirable. But this is precisely what conceptual engineers most often propose to do. As we see in 
the marketplace, it is difficult to destabilize a product that already stably occupies a large market 
share (say Hershey’s chocolate bars) even by introducing a more desirable competitor. It may be 
that conceptual engineers are stacking the deck against themselves by endorsing homonymy-style 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
20 
proposals rather than neologistic ones. If their proposed homonyms do find stable use, it will likely 
be within a restricted area of discourse (which may be sufficient for some purposes).  
The problem of homonymy avoidance suggests one of three outcomes: either the new 
word-meaning pair will not spread, or it will only attain use in restricted bands of discourse where 
that use is unambiguously clear, or the new word-meaning pair will spread but use of the old pair 
will be replaced by a non-homonymous synonym. 
 For instance, consider proposals to conceptually engineer “woman” like those found in 
Jenkins 2016 and Haslanger 2000. The phenomenon of homonymy avoidance suggests that 
<“femina”, WOMANNEW> is more likely to replace <“woman”, WOMAN> than is <“woman”, 
WOMANNEW> in areas of discourse where the homonymous use would read as ambiguous.33 To the 
extent “woman”-has a female gender identity is already gaining a hold in usage, the phenomenon 
of homonymy avoidance predicts that it will be confined to areas of discourse where the usage is 
not read as ambiguous. Such areas will be tightly circumscribed. For instance, they may include 
some avowals and debates about who counts as a woman, without including generic discourse 
about, say, what teas women tend to order. 
 
The second problem is the problem of enduring communicative desires. Meanings that 
serve communicative ends persist even when the words used to express them do not. This is a 
problem in part because some of our communicative desires are orthogonal to social projects. In 
the late 19th century, a shift in American slang made mere mention of the traditional term (“cock”) 
for unneutered male chickens unacceptably awkward. But the desire to discuss them was 
unaffected and so “rooster”—originally a term for neutered male chickens—was soon recruited. 
In 16th century England, a revolution in cheese-making technology expanded the kinds of cheese 
beyond what was traditionally available (a farm cheese). These new sorts of cheese were also 
called “cheese.” Several new expressions for farm cheese quickly came to be used (“farm cheese,” 
“cottage cheese,” “unripe cheese,” “greene cheese” as in what the moon is made of…). Speakers 
had a continuing desire to single out the soft traditional cheese in an efficient way. 
 
If the goal is to have certain meanings expressed less, then what is needed may be not 
conceptual engineering, but something that addresses the desires, something which eliminates part 
 
 
33 On the whole, ambiguous speech is avoided; whether such confusion would or would not be productive is 
irrelevant. (For an argument that such confusion would be productive, see Sterken 2019). 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
21 
of what drives expression of the problematic meaning. For the conceptual engineer this problem 
arises in both parts of semantic replacement. A new word-meaning pair that fails to serve our 
communicative agenda is unlikely to be used, and a familiar meaning that better serves our 
communicative agenda is likely to continue being expressed.  
Consider a proposal like Dembroff’s: if implemented, talk of “sexual orientation” will 
undergo semantic replacement and expressions like “lesbian” and “straight” will drop from usage, 
replaced by novel orientation vocabulary, including expressions for those attracted to men who 
were assigned “male” at birth and those attracted men who were assigned “female” at birth. So 
long as queer women do not want straight men to fill their events, they will find some phrase that 
excludes them, likely one synonymous with women who are attracted to women. Likewise, so long 
as homophobia persists, the phrase “because so-and-so is gay” will sometimes be more succinctly 
explanatory of harms done than some more specific delineation of so-and-so and his proclivities.34 
Sexual orientation vocabulary may not be ideal for the reasons Dembroff identifies, but the way 
forward is unobvious.35 
 
The problem of communicative desires is very general. It is that use of language is finely 
calibrated to what we desire to talk and think about and how we desire to do so (e.g., conveniently, 
as opposed to, say, grandly). That is, our use of language is efficient to our communicative desires: 
it reflects a good ratio of energy expended to the value of the total message conveyed. The problem 
is that only some of our communicative desires are tied up in socially significant projects. 
Supplanting usage of one word-meaning pair with usage of another, whose meaning component 
better serves these social projects, may be even more difficult than it appears for somewhat subtle 
reasons.  
 
Let’s briefly return to “woman.” Plausibly, part of what drives use of “woman”-woman 
(whatever the contours of its meaning may be) is a need to describe or acknowledge someone 
quickly, on the basis of their presentational gestalt, in a way that requires few epistemic 
commitments. Pointing down the street, I might say, “The car is parked way down by that woman” 
or, “That woman, she’s a good doctor” and be well understood. Presumably, having a female 
 
 
34 See Stock 2019. 
35 Sometimes expressions that find stable use within a subculture enter the mainstream. Novel orientation 
vocabulary may originate this way. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
22 
gender identity and being a person subordinated on the basis of perceived reproductive capacity 
are highly correlated with someone’s overall look and behavior. But it seems unlikely that 
expressions for these properties may become more reflexively trigger-able by presentational 
gestalt than “woman”-woman, without loss of clarity. Suppose use of “woman”-woman drops 
suddenly (say, it is made illegal, or becomes taboo, or a recent homonym renders its use confusing). 
Synonyms that serve the same communicative desires are likely to enter usage swiftly, like 
expressions for roosters or farm cheese once did. 
 
This leads us to the third problem: loading. Loaded words—words that are potentially 
offensive, uncomfortable, awkward, merely distracting, and especially words that are taboo—are 
avoided in favor of expressions that are less loaded. Speakers avoid expressions that cast them in 
the wrong light or set the wrong tone in a conversation. The phenomenon of taboo avoidance (and 
euphemistic substitution) is well documented. Words may also exhibit a kind of guilt by 
association.36 Where once we spoke of haycocks and stopcocks we speak of haystacks and 
faucets.37 Uses of “mensuration” – once a common term for computing surface area—fell off as 
“menstruation” entered the public consciousness. (Computation and the horror of periods were 
unaffected.) Use of “gender” sometimes replaces use of “sex,” which has more explicit and clinical 
connotations.  
 
Similarly, words that have pejorated—acquired more negative meanings—may tend to be 
avoided in favor of those that have not. When “notorious” acquired the meaning notorious, 
“notorious”-well known was avoided in favor of other expressions. Likewise, words that have 
acquired a socially controversial meaning tend to be avoided in favor of those that have not. As 
“liberal” and “conservative” have become more prominent as political terms, their non-political 
 
 
36 The entry in the first edition of the OED in 1893 read: “the current name among the people, but, pudoris causa, not 
admissible in polite speech or literature; in scientific language the Latin is used.” 
37 Cicero (45 BCE) recognized the phenomenon:  
What you in your letter call by its own name [“mentula”] he with more reserve calls penis; but because so 
many people use it so, it has become as obscene as the word you used. [...] Ruta [path] and menta [mint]—
we use both words without impropriety. I want to use the diminutive of menta, as one might say rutula [lit. 
little path]; it is not done [non licet]. (Epistulae ad Familiares, IX.xxii) 
Examples need not be so phallocentric. See the OED entry for “coney” (once a word for juvenile rabbits like 
“kitten” is for cats). Today, thanks to the rise of a piece of vulgar slang, it survives only in “Coney Island” (with 
altered pronunciation).  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
23 
uses have fallen off outside of fairly set formulae. (For instance, directions to “sprinkle liberally,” 
or talk of “conservative dressers”.)  
 
“Queer” provides a particularly clear example. The precise origins of the term are 
unknown, but beginning in the 16th century it meant something like peculiar. By the 17th century 
it acquired stable use as a euphemism for unwell (itself a euphemism) and ultimately assumed that 
as its literal meaning. By the 19th century “queer”-unwell began to function as a euphemism for 
drunk, and soon acquired that meaning as well. Sometime around the turn of the 20th century, 
“queer” began to function in euphemisms associated with homosexuality in select circles, 
eventually acquiring a string of related meanings. As these gained prominence in the later quarter 
of the 20th century, these other uses of “queer” dropped off. This is partially attributable to 
homonymy avoidance, but not entirely. “He seems queer” threatens to be ambiguous, but “what 
queer weather” can only mean one thing. What may be going on here is that usages are avoided 
that evince a cluelessness about the present moment, or otherwise call to mind a charged topic 
when doing so may distract the audience.38  
 
Loading afflicts some otherwise attractive semantic replacements. Insofar as they reveal 
hard or unexpected truths about the forces sustaining some classificatory practice, they threaten to 
distract the audience, or make the conversation unnecessarily awkward.  
For example, PETA’s “meat”-murdered animal is unlikely to spread beyond protests, or 
debates about vegetarian ethics, to school lunches, shipping contracts, or, deciding what to bring 
to a potluck. Why do people use the word “meat”? Sometimes they use it to say what they want 
(at a store, for dinner, etc.). But a word highly evocative of cruelty is likely to be avoided. To the 
extent PETA’s “meat”-murdered animal colors “meat” with uncomfortable associations, 
euphemistic substitution seems a likely outcome. How much shopping behavior will be affected 
along the way, is not well researched from the armchair.  
Haslanger’s proposals for race and gender may win the day in expert discourse concerned 
with intersectionality, but speakers are likely to avoid her proposed meaning reassignments at the 
 
 
38 “Gay” has a related trajectory. It entered English meaning merry, acquired via euphemistic substitution the 
meaning lascivious (“gay halls” were brothels staffed mainly by women). Further euphemistic substitution resulted 
in acquiring the meaning homosexual. Once that usage was well known, use of “gay” with these other meanings 
dropped precipitously.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
24 
water cooler and children’s birthday parties. Well-wishers will not want to express thoughts like 
the following: “I hope you grow up to be a strong and powerful person subordinated on the basis 
of your perceived reproductive capacity.” 
 
The phenomenon of loading may suggest the following strategy. Introduce two expressions, 
where the first—say, a phrase that rhymes with “woman” but which is un-useable in most 
company—is a means to curtail an objectionable expression and the second is a replacement for the 
objectionable expression. But the problem of communicative desires tells against this strategy. If 
“woman” is driven out of use, the likely outcome is that a synonym replaces it, not an artificially 
supplied expression, let alone a homonym. 
 
The fourth problem for conceptual engineering is the problem of opacity. Words that are 
unclear to audiences, such as technical terms and ones whose meanings are particularly difficult 
to recall, tend to be replaced by those that are clearer. That is, the primary meaning of a word tends 
to contract around the subject it is used most often to discuss. Take expressions ripe for folk 
etymological speculation, like “begging the question” and “inflammable.” (We encounter the 
prefix “in” and negate what follows—along the model of “inactive” rather than “inhabit.” 39) Such 
expressions tend to acquire a secondary meaning in line with popular belief (“begging the 
question” may already mean raises the question), if they are not replaced by a synonym (like 
“flammable”). 
 
Another kind of opaque term is a technical one that has migrated to ordinary discourse. 
Take the vocabulary originating in the wildly popular theory of the four humors developed by 
Hippocrates of Kos (460-370 BCE): “sanguine,” “choleric,” “phlegmatic,” “melancholy,” and 
“humor” itself. A 1728 compendium of arts and sciences records that “Sanguine Constitutions 
require a frequent Use of Phlebotomy,” due to an excess (relative to the other three humors) of 
blood. But “sanguine” (and the others) as of the early 14th century acquired two non-technical 
secondary meanings each associated with a salient symptom of sanguinity: ruddy (as in “a 
 
 
39 So much so the American Fire Safety organization has discouraged labeling products as “inflammable” since the 
1920s. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
25 
sanguine complexion”) and optimistic.40 As popular knowledge of the theory declined, use of 
“sanguine,” the medical term, further faded from ordinary discourse. 
 
“Begging the question” and “sanguine” persist with their original meanings in specialized 
discourse, discourse where the original meanings are well known and transparent in conversation. 
These considerations suggest reasons to be hesitant about proposals to introduce theoretically rich 
word-meanings. Imagine an activist who believes the revolution will be hastened by causing the 
public to use “worker”-exploited in virtue of selling his or her labor largely in place of “worker”-
worker. This word-meaning pair is unlikely to be adopted outside of Marxist discourse where the 
background theory is not only well understood but presumed true and conversationally relevant. 
To the extent it does gain everyday currency, it will be crowded out by more transparent word-
meaning pairs unencumbered by Marxist theory. 
 
A Barnes-style proposal for “disability” may fare well with respect to the problem of 
loading, but less so for the problem of opacity.41 The revision is theoretically sophisticated, and so 
not conversationally transparent to the uninitiated in most areas of discourse. Even if the revision 
takes off, activists may need to constantly remind speakers what talk of “disability” is all about. 
Understandable folk-etymological speculation may lead audiences to negate what follows the “dis-
” and take “disability” to mean a lack of relevant abilities. (Like words for what’s average, 
“disabled” also has a long history of pejoration). Perhaps a better alternative is to lexicalize 
WHATEVER THE DISABILITY RIGHTS MOVEMENT IS PROMOTING JUSTICE FOR with an acronym (along 
the lines of “LGBTQ”) and promote its widespread usage.  
To the extent that the word “disability” is used most frequently among the disabled and 
those expressly concerned with disability rights and access, a proposal like Barnes’s could come 
to predominate in disability-focused subcultures (as Barnes suggests it may already have). It may 
even gain some foothold among analytic philosophers, but it is unlikely to predominate in 
theoretical discourse about disability, since one salient issue is precisely what disability is.  
 
 
40 Sheridan in a 1735 letter to Swift: “Do not think me sanguine in this; for more unlikely and less reasonable 
favours have been granted.” See the OED entry for “sanguine.”  
41 For a discussion of celebratory-based, rather than solidarity-based, ameliorative projects for disability, see 
Dougherty 2019. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
26 
 
Opacity may partly explain the success of reclamations, whereby in-group members begin 
to self-identify using a derogatory expression. “Queer” is a recent example. Plausibly this well-
publicized reclamation resulted in fewer derogatory uses of “queer” (though perhaps not of related 
expressions). One explanation is that public and confident uses of “queer” destabilized the belief 
among homophobes that statements involving the word “queer” would land with the right 
derogatory zing. Reclaimed uses of “queer” changed the linguistic environment in a way that 
reduced derogatory uses of “queer.” 42 Perhaps the phenomenon of reclamation may shed light on 
whether “disability”-whatever the disability pride movement is celebrating is more likely than a 
Barnes-style proposal to gain currency in usage. The former might fare better with respect to 
loading considerations (unless it proves divisive).43 
The foregoing problems suggest some hurdles for the would-be conceptual engineer. They 
tell against proposals that involve introducing homonyms of stably used expressions. They tell 
against proposals that involve replacing a usage sustained by communicative desires by one that 
does not better satisfy those desires. They tell against proposals that involve broad use of a word-
meaning pair that will paint someone in a political light that some people are keen to be seen in 
and others are loath to be seen in. Finally, they tell against proposals that require speakers to use 
more epistemic effort to successfully apply an expression.  
But the news isn’t all bad: there are patterns of meaning change that the conceptual 
engineer can exploit.  
6. Positive Applications  
Often a word will acquire a broader or generalized meaning. For instance, use of generic “xerox” 
has mostly replaced use of “XeroxTM ” and “copier.” Occasionally a word’s meaning narrows. 
“Accident”, originally a neutral term for any happenstance, acquired the narrower meaning of 
unfortunate happenstance. This narrowed term replaced some negative uses of the original term 
(as the original term became loaded, it was avoided in favor of less loaded alternatives, like 
“coincidence,” “occurrence”). Broadening replacement mostly occurs in broader areas of 
 
 
42 Whether reclamation projects like this are well understood as involving semantic replacement depends on whether 
the derogatoriness of derogatory statements resides in their meaning, their implicatures or something else. See Sosa 
2018. 
43 Dougherty 2019. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
27 
discourse (the make of a copier is mostly irrelevant), while narrowing replacement mostly occurs 
in narrower areas of discourse (to some salient exemplar). 
 
Narrowing and broadening sometimes operate in tandem. In Old English “dogca” referred 
to a particular breed of dog (thought to be a hunting dog rather like a mastiff). “Hound” denoted 
the entire kind dog (as German “hund” continues to do). Sometime in the 14th century, when 
Chaucer’s warning “It is nought good a slepyng hound to wake” was turning into Heywood’s “It 
is evyll waking of a sleepyng dog,” “dog” presumably had both a narrow and a general meaning. 
Eventually “hound” (broad) was displaced by “dog” (broad). But a narrower use of “hound” 
remained in use among hunters who took them to be ideal representatives of the species, dogs par 
excellence. Today what we call “hounds” are very like what English speakers once called “dogges” 
and before that “dogca”—large slobbery dogs traditionally used for hunting. We began with a term 
for dogs, and a more specific term for slobbery hunting dogs, and still have them today, although 
what we then called “hounds” we now call “dogs,” and vice versa.  
 
Cases of broadening and narrowing often involve some culturally salient subordinate or 
superordinate category and do not re-carve ordinary felt distinctions. For instance, semantic 
changes did not redraw the happenstance/bad-happenstance distinction.  
 
But there are two strategies in this area that might be of help to the conceptual engineer. 
Broadening-type replacement can result in the expression of a novel meaning. Female-inclusive 
“guys” has replaced some uses of the female-exclusive term, but not all (“He’s going out with the 
guys tonight”). “Aunt” once exclusively referred to the sister of the father. Broadening of this sort 
may occur naturally in response to shifting social realities. “Selfie” originated as Internet slang for 
a self-portrait using a web camera. As cell phone technology improved, it broadened to include 
large group shots. Broadening may also be spurred on by collective effort, as when female-
exclusive uses of “actor” began to be replaced by female-inclusive ones.44 
 
It might be feasible in a similar spirit to broaden “hat” to include earmuffs. This would be 
convenient and not particularly confusing (suppose in winter I say “everybody have their hats?” 
and you brought earmuffs). Earmuff-exclusive “hat” might persist among milliners and in settings 
 
 
44 The original meaning of “actor” was gender-neutral, although almost all players were male. “Actress” (and most 
other gendered occupational terms) entered English in the 18th century as part of American efforts to standardize 
English along Latinate lines. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
28 
where the distinction between traditional hats and earmuffs is relevant, but in ordinary settings the 
hat/not-hat distinction will be effectively redrawn. 
 
If there are socially significant conceptual engineering projects that involve gradual 
broadening of a similarly convenient sort, that is a mark in their favor. There may well be. Today 
those with a Jewish father, but not a Jewish mother, are now often considered “Jewish.” To the 
extent the primary meaning of “family” excluded non-heterosexual-bionormative-nuclear 
families, but no longer does, “family” has broadened along these lines.45 
 
But few conceptual engineering proposals with a revolutionary flavor will involve 
broadening or narrowing in this sense. Consider Manne’s proposal, that “misogyny”-the law 
enforcement arm of the patriarchy should replace some uses of “misogyny” with its ordinary 
meaning. This goes beyond simply endowing “misogyny” with a broader meaning in the sense 
discussed above. “Misogynist” (like “racist”) has already broadened in that way. Today we may 
say a university is misogynist when its policies are as if made and applied by misogynists—those, 
in the narrower sense, who have bigoted attitudes or animus towards women. (One might 
conjecture this occurred as the desire to address institutional sexism grew and the perceived gap 
between perpetuating certain harmful practices and being culpable for doing so shrank.) 
“Rewinding” has broadened in a similar way, though for different reasons. Where once it meant 
winding back physical tape, now it means whatever turns back the recording. If Manne’s proposal 
is offered only to those interested in theorizing about patriarchy, it may well succeed, but her 
ambitions seem to be greater.  
 
A second strategy for the conceptual engineer takes a particular sort of narrowing as a 
model. When “bitch”-female dog entered English, there was no sex specific mate. As a result the 
general term “dog” developed narrower meaning designating the males of the species. (These sex-
specifics terms have since pejorated). The existence of the more informative term (“bitch”) 
together with the choice by an informed speaker to employ a less informative term (“dog”) in a 
 
 
45 Haslanger (2019) offers a somewhat different analysis of this case (assuming “family” indeed has undergone 
meaning change in the last 50 years, which, again, is not obvious). She suggests the changes it has undergone are 
consistent with a pattern of dual character concepts: terms that have one meaning associated with some activity, 
another with some virtue or underlying characteristic that disposes individuals to participate in that activity. Whether 
anything so sophisticated is required to describe what happened to family is unclear. Outside of some highly 
contentious circumstances, it was clear and, above all, convenient and polite to call non-HBNFs “families,” more so 
than any alternative. Exclusive “family” was replaced by subtly broader inclusive “family.” 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
29 
context where the additional information would have been relevant licenses the inference that the 
speaker was not in position to employ the more informative term. The conventionalizing of this 
inference is thought to have contributed to “dog” acquiring the meaning dog (excluding bitches). 
Some uses of the broader “dog” were replaced by the sex-specific term, notably in the limited areas 
of discourse where the sex of dogs was at issue.46  
 
It may be the case that the best way to get “woman” to mean what one wants it to mean is 
indirect. It may involve introducing some other term that means the complement of the target 
meaning of “woman.” For instance, “lady”-benefitted from her perceived reproductive capacity. 
Then “woman” may acquire a complementary meaning in the way “dog” did. But “woman” with 
its ordinary meaning is likely to dominate use.  
 
In a similar spirit, perhaps an environmental activist might promote use of “recyclables” 
and “compostables” as a means to narrow the meaning of “trash” and “garbage” (to exclude 
recyclables and compostables). To the extent calling a recyclable or compostable “trash” is roughly 
as uncomfortable as calling a thumb “a finger” (that is, somewhat in some situations), these terms 
may replace some uses of “trash.” If calling something “recyclable” conduces to actually filing it 
in the recycling bin, a project like this might enhance garbage-sorting compliance.  
 
Diachronic semantic phenomena may be of interest to social justice minded projects other 
than conceptual engineering. Take the well-documented phenomenon of synonymy 
differentiation. Just as languages tend to avoid homonyms, they tend to avoid true synonyms. Often 
this avoidance is attributed to hearer-based effects: use is sensitive to what audiences are likely to 
understand, which is conditioned by what sorts of speech they have recently been exposed to. This 
in turn foments synonyms accreting increasingly disparate associations before diverging. The size 
acceptance movement’s attempts to reclaim “fat” (in part to increase value-neutral vocabulary for 
body size) may succeed in promoting further semantic differentiation between “fat” and, say, 
“overweight.” The latter is more clinical and more susceptible to folk etymology, and so more 
likely to pejorate after a period of euphemistic substitution. 
 
 
46 There is no shortage of cases like this one. When “hue” entered English, “color” acquired a hue-exclusive 
meaning. When “thumb” entered English, “finger” acquired a thumb-exclusive meaning. See also “cow” (excluding 
bulls), “rectangle” (excluding squares), “gay” (excluding lesbians).  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
30 
7. Semantic Replacement: Predictably Predictable or Unpredictably Dramatic 
Some semantic replacements are not a matter of narrowing or generalization. But these are unlike 
what engineers hope to achieve, or else are unpredictable. “Shore” acquired a new meaning 
because our communicative desires shifted to involve the whole beach, but that shift was driven 
by unforeseeable technological changes. Sometimes an expression figuring in a stock metaphor or 
metonymy is replaced by one that has acquired the related literal meaning. (Calling a glass 
drinking-vessel “a glass” was once metonymic). But the replacements that conceptual engineers 
tend to favor are not obviously achievable via stock figuration.47  
Dramatic semantic replacements are often unpredictable precisely because they involve a 
series of successive more predictable narrowings, broadenings, or literalized figurations. Take the 
case of “livid.” Today’s livid bruises are flushed purple-red, a vivid or angry sort of color. Some, 
but not all, may have a similar cast to “a bruise quite livid” in 1501 (see the OED entry for “livid”), 
when “livid” meant black-and-blue.48 Plausibly some modern uses of “livid” have replaced some 
uses of expressions meaning black-and-blue. Our reflexive classification of bruises have shifted, 
but only somewhat.  
But this rather subtle effect is the product of the semantic profile of “livid” undergoing a 
series of changes, not one. When “livid” entered English, it functioned more or less as a synonym 
of “black-and-blue.”49 Webster’s Word Histories (1989) recounts: 
A slight extension of meaning had by the end of the eighteenth century given it the sense of 
“ashen” or “pallid,” as in describing the appearance of a corpse. “Livid” eventually came to 
be used in this sense to characterize the complexion of a person pale with anger; such as, 
“livid with rage.” In the twentieth century…because of association with words 
like lurid and vivid, and in part because an angry person is at least as likely to be red-faced 
as pallid, livid has acquired the sense “reddish.” Its frequent occurrence in phrases like 
“livid with fury” has also given rise to a sense entirely unrelated to color, with livid now 
commonly functioning simply as a synonym of furious or enraged.  
 
 
47 It is a striking fact that native speakers tend to broadly agree about which figurations are salient. To the extent the 
proposed word-meaning does not appear to mean literally what some salient use of that word with its ordinary 
meaning may be said to mean figuratively, a semantic replacement via figuration is unlikely to occur. Sweetser 
1990. 
48 A socially more significant case of semantic replacement might be that of “usury.” 
49 The word entered English as a loan from the Middle French “livide”, itself deriving from the Latin adjective 
lividus (meaning dull, greyish, or leaden blue).  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
31 
Described from 30,000 feet, the sorts of conceptual engineering proposals most attractive to 
philosophers require dramatic semantic changes to which there is no predictable path via a series 
of smaller changes.  
8. Conclusion 
The engineering projects that are advertised as producing the best results face serious obstacles to 
implementation. As we saw in section 5, such projects face the problems of homonymy avoidance, 
enduring communicative desires, loading and opacity. As we saw in sections 6 and 7, semantic 
replacement is predictably gradual and unpredictably dramatic. All is not lost: semantic 
replacements that involve broadening or indirect narrowing may be feasible. Even so, these lack 
the revolutionary feel likely to appeal to philosophers.  
Those serious about semantic replacement as a tool for effecting social change must 
recognize that the devil is in the (empirical) details. There is an applied science of how to increase 
a widget’s share of the market. So, too, there could be an applied science of how to increase a 
word’s share of use. It would be rooted in facts about how word usage evolves over time, 
identifying more fine-grained generalizations than I have here. Whether developing such a science 
is ultimately of interest to philosophers partly depends on how seriously would-be conceptual 
engineers and ameliorators take their own projects.  
Nothing I’ve said tells against engineering proposals catching on among a small band of 
activist-minded philosophers with unified aims, and homogenous circumstances. Carnapian 
explication projects, undertaken for circumscribed theoretical projects, often do succeed. But 
conceptual engineers typically want more. Many of the social conditions one may hope to change 
are facts about the broader community. Pay gaps, equity in domestic labor, and the number of 
accessibility ramps are unlikely to be affected by usage in an erudite enclave. Even so, some 
significant social conditions—for instance, how respected, valued and included some members of 
a community feel—are affected by usage in that community.  
There may be other reasons to go in for innovating new concepts, even if they are unlikely 
to catch on. Proposing novel concepts may raise consciousness, provoke dialogue, or perform a 
gestalt shift on audience members. But if conceptual engineering is worthwhile for these reasons 
only, it stands accused of false advertising. Bringing about semantic replacement was supposed to 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
32 
be a means to a better world, when, in fact, it is proposing semantic replacement that is the means 
to a better world. 
Studying which words with what meanings are likely to thrive in a better world may be 
worthwhile, but it risks being like ideal biology, studying the species that would thrive in a better 
ecosystem, or like science fiction. Jules Verne, while prescient, didn’t invent the solar sail even if 
he inspired it. An expression’s potential use in a brighter future is not by itself a reason it can 
realize that potential today. This observation generalizes to expressions promoted as tools to 
facilitate theorizing.50 Identifying a replacement that would figure in fruitful explanations, if used, 
is not yet a reason the replacement is feasible. One reason a replacement is not feasible is if 
speakers, on the ground, experience it as subject changing, diverting from their concerns. Studying 
what word-meanings should be used in broader discourse, never mind constraints driving that 
discourse, is perhaps rather like studying what the equilibrium pricing of milk should be nevermind 
its relationship to supply and demand. It may be the lead question is not even well formed.  
Things do not look good for ambitious conceptual engineering projects of the sort hopes 
most ride on. They risk being like semantic perpetual motion machines or blueprints for a bridge 
that is elegant in theory but unbuildable in practice. Correcting our vocabulary might have 
beneficial effects, but is vastly harder than is usually presumed. Activists taking the old-fashioned 
route of correcting our mistakes and trying to change hearts and minds are likely to have better 
luck. 
 
 
 
References 
Alter, Stephen G. (1999). Darwin and the Linguistic Image: Language, Race and Natural 
Theology in the Nineteenth Century. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Antilla, Raimo. (1989). Historical and Comparative Linguistics, Current Issues in Linguistic 
Theory. Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
Barnes, Elizabeth. (2016). The Minority Body: A Theory of Disability. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press  
Blank, Andreas. (1999). "Why Do New Meanings Occur?" in Blank and Koch, eds. Historical 
Semantics and Cognition Berlin: de Gruyter. 
 
 
50 Say, on the basis of their expected explanatory utility, see Carballo 2019. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
33 
Blank, Andreas, and Peter Koch. (1999). Historical Semantics and Cognition. Berlin: Mouton De 
Gruyter. 
Blutner, Reinhard. (2000). "Some Aspects of Optimality in Natural Language Interpretation," 
Journal of Pragmatics, vol. 17: 189-216. 
Blutner, Reinhard, and Henk Zeevat. (2004). "Editors’ Introduction: Pragmatics in Optimality 
Theory" in Blutner and Zeevat, eds. Optimality Theory and Pragmatics London: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
Bogardus, Tomas. (2020). "Some Internal Problems with Revisionary Gender Concepts," 
Philosophia. 
Breal, Michel. (1900). Notebooks on Language. London: Heinemann. 
Brigrandt, Ingo and Esther Rosario. Strategic Conceptual Engineering for Epistemic and Social 
Aims. Edited by Burgess, Conceptual Engineering and Ethics. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Brun, Georg. (2016). "Conceptual Re-Engineering: From Explication to Reflective Equilibrium," 
Erkenntnis, vol. 81: 1211–41. 
Burgess, Alexis. "Never Say 'Never Say 'Never''" in Burgess, Cappelen and Plunkett, eds. 
Conceptual Engineering and Conceptual Ethics Oxford: Oxford University. 
Burgess, Alexis and David Plunkett. (2013). "Conceptual Ethics I," Philosophy Compass, vol. 8: 
1091-101. 
———. (2013). "Conceptual Ethics Ii," Philosophy Compass, vol. 8: 1102-10. 
Bybee, Joan. (2009). Language, Usage, and Cognition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Cantalamessa, Elizabeth Amber. "Disability Studies, Conceptual Engineering, and Conceptual 
Activism," Inquiry. 
Cappelen, Herman. (2018). Fixing Language: An Essay on Conceptual Engineering. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Cappelen, Herman, and David Plunkett. (2019). "Introduction: A Guided Tour of Conceptual 
Engineering and Conceptual Ethics" in Burgess, Herman Cappelen and Plunkett, eds. 
Conceptual Engineering and Conceptual Ethics Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Carballo, Alejandro Pérez. "Conceptual Evaluation: Epistemic" in Burgess, Cappelen and 
Plunkett, eds. Conceptual Ethics and Conceptual Engineering Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Carnap, Rudolf. (1947/1956). Meaning and Necessity: A Study in Semantics and Modal 
Logic. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Carston, Robyn. (2002). Thoughts and Utterances: The Pragmatics of Explicit Communication. 
Berlin: Blackwell. 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius. (45 BCE/1988). "Epistulae Ad Familiares." in Watt, ed. Loeb Classics 
Series Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Darwin, Charles. (1871). The Descent of Man. London: J. Murray. 
Dembroff, Robin. (2016). "What Is Sexual Orientation?," Philosopher's Imprint, vol. 16: 1-27. 
Deo, Ashwini. (2014). "Formal Semantics and Language Change" in Bowern and Evans, eds. 
Routledge Handbook of Historical Linguistics London: Routlege Press. 
———. (2015). "Diachronic Semantics," The Annual Review of Linguistics, vol. 1: 179-95. 
Diaz-Leon, Esa. "Descriptive Vs. Ameliorative Projects: The Role of Normative Considerations" 
in Burgess, Cappelen and Plunkett, eds. Conceptual Engineering and Conceptual Ethics 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
34 
Dougherty, Tom. "Disability as Solidarity: Political Not (Only) Metaphysical," Phenomenological 
and Philosophical Research. 
Eckert, Penelope. (2006). "Variation, Meaning, and Social Change" in Coupland, ed. 
Sociolinguistics: Theoretical Debates Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Falkum, Ingrid Lossius. (2007). "A Relevance-Theoretic Analysis of Concept Narrowing and 
Broadening in English and Norwegian Original Texts and Translations," Languages in 
Contrast, vol. 7: 119-42. 
Fassio, Davide, and Robin McKenna. (2015). "Revisionary Epistemology," Inquiry: An 
Interdisciplinary Journal of Philosophy, vol. 58: 755-79. 
Fodor, Jerry, and Ernie Lepore. (2002). The Compositionality Papers. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Fortson, Benjamin W. IV. (2003). "An Approach to Semantic Change" in Janda, ed. The Handbook 
of Historical Linguistics Oxford: Blackwell. 
Frege, Gottlieb. (1879/1967). Begriffsschrift: Eine Der Arithmetischen Nachgebildete 
Formelsprache Des Reinen Denkens. Translated by in v. Heijenoort. Edited by 
vanHeijenoort, From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical Logic, 1879–1931. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Fricker, Miranda. (2007). "Hermeneutical Injustice" Epistemic Injustice: Power and the Ethics of 
Knowing Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Geeraerts, Dirk. (1990). "Homonymy, Iconicity, and Prototypicality" in Geeraerts, ed. Diachronic 
Semantics Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
———. (2010). Lexical Semantics. Philadelphia: John Benjamins Publishing Company. 
Goetze, Trystan. "Conceptual Responsibility," Inquiry. 
Haslanger, Sally. "Going on, Not in the Same Way" in Burgess, Cappelen and Plunkett, eds. 
Conceptual Ethics and Conceptual Engineering Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
———. (1999). "What Knowledge Is and What It Ought to Be: Feminist Values and Normative 
Epistemology," Philosophical Perspectives, vol. 13: 459-80. 
———. (2000). "Race and Gender: (What) Are They? (Do) We Want Them to Be?," Nous, vol. 
34: 31-55. 
———. (2005). "What Are We Talking About? The Semantics and Politics of Social Kinds," 
Hypatia, vol. 20: 10-26. 
———. (2010). "Language, Politics, and "the Folk": Looking for "the Meaning" of 'Race'," The 
Monist, vol. 93: 169-87. 
Haslanger, Sally & Jennifer Saul. (2006). "Philosophical Analysis and Social Kinds," Proceedings 
of the Aristotelian Society, vol. 106: 89-118. 
Horn, Laurence R. (1984). "Toward a New Taxonomy for Pragamtic Inference: Q-Based and R-
Based Implicature" in Schiffrin, ed. Meaning, Form, and Use in Context: Linguistic 
Applications Washington, D.C.: Georgetown University Press. 
———. (1999). "Etymythology and Taboo." Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society of America 
Boston. 
———. (2000). "From If to Iff: Conditional Perfection as Pragmatic Strengthening," Journal of 
Pragmatics, vol. 32: 289-326. 
Horn, Laurence R., and Steven R. Kleinedler. (2000). "Parasitic Reference Vs. R-Based 
Narrowing: Lexical Pragmatics Meets He-Man." Annual Meeting of the Linguistic Society 
of America Chicago. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
35 
Janda, Richard D., and Brian D. Joseph. (2003). "On Language, Change and Language Change - 
or, of History, Linguistics and Historical Linguistics" in Janda and Brian D. Joseph, eds. 
The Handbook of Historical Linguistics Oxford: Blackwell. 
Jenkins, Katharine. (2016). "Amelioration and Inclusion: Gender Identity and the Concept of 
Woman," Ethics, vol. 126: 394-421. 
Kitsik, Eve. "Explication as a Strategy for Revisionary Philosophy," Synthese. 
Koch, Steffen. (2019). "Carnapian Explication, Experimental Philosophy, and Fruitful Concepts," 
Inquiry, vol. 62: 700-17. 
———. (2019). "The Externalist Challenge to Conceptual Engineering," Synthese. 
Labov, William. (1994). The Principles of Language Change. London: Blackwell. 
———. (2012). Dialect Diversity in America: The Politics of Language Change. Charlottesville: 
University of Virginia Press. 
Lass, Roger. (1980). On Explaining Linguistic Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
———. (1997). Historical Linguistics and Language Change. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
Laurence, Stephen, and Eric Margolis. (1999). Concepts. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
———. (2015). "The Conceptual Mind: New Directions in the Study of Concepts."  Cambridge: 
MIT Press. 
Levinson, S. C. (1995). "Three Levels of Meaning" in Palmer, ed. Grammar and Meaning: Essays 
in Honour of Sir John Lyons Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
———. (2000). Presumptive Meanings: The Theory of Generalized Conversational Implicature. 
Cambridge: MIT Press. 
Lightfoot, David. (1999). The Development of Language: Acquisition, Change, and Evolution. 
London: Blackwell. 
Lutz, Sebastian. "Armchair Philosophy Naturalized," Synthese. 
Machery, Edouard. (2011). Doing without Concepts. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
———. (2017). Philosophy within Its Proper Bounds. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Manne, Kate. (2018). Down Girl: The Logic of Misogyny. New York: Oxford University Press. 
McKenna, Robin. (2018). "No Epistemic Trouble for Engineering 'Woman'," Logos and Episteme, 
vol. 9: 335-42. 
Merrriam-Webster. (1989). "New Book of Webster’s Word Histories." Merriam Webster 
Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster Inc., Publishers. 
Miranda, Rogelio. "Carnapian Explication and the Canberra Plan’s Conceptual Analysis: A 
Comparison and Critique," Logical Analysis and History of Philosophy. 
Nado, Jennifer. "Conceptual Engineering Via Experimental Philosophy," Inquiry: 1-21. 
———. "Conceptual Engineering, Truth, and Efficacy," Synthese. 
Novaes, Catarina Dutilh (2018). "Carnapian Explication and Ameliorative Analysis: A Systematic 
Comparison," Synthese: 1-24. 
Otteson, James. (2002). "Adam Smith's First Market: The Development of Language," History of 
Philosophy Quarterly, vol. 19: 65-86. 
Pinder, Mark. "The Austerity Framework and Semantic Normativity," Inquiry: 1-19. 
———. (2017). "On Strawson's Critique of Explication as a Method in Philosophy," Synthese. 
Plunkett, David. (2015). "Which Concepts Should We Use?: Metalinguistic Negotiations and the 
Methodology of Philosophy," Inquiry, vol. 58: 828–74. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
36 
———. (2016). "Conceptual History, Conceptual Ethics, and the Aims of Inquiry: A Framework 
for Thinking About the Relevance of the History/Gealogy of Concepts to Normative 
Inquiry," Ergo, vol. 3: 27-64. 
Podosky, Paul-Mikhail Catapang. "Ideology and Normativity: Constraints on Conceptual 
Engineering," Inquiry. 
Prinzing, Michael. (2018). "The Revisionist's Rubric: Conceptual Engineering and the 
Discontinuity Objection," Inquiry, vol. 61: 854-80. 
Queloz, Matthieu. (2019). "The Points of Concepts: Their Types, Tensions, and Connections," 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy, vol. 49: 1122-45. 
Radick, Gregory. (2002). "Darwin on Language and Selection," Selection, vol. 3: 7-16. 
Riggs, Jared. "Conceptual Engineers Shouldn’t Worry About Semantic Externalism," Inquiry. 
Sawyer, Sarah. "The Role of Concepts in Fixing Language," Canadian Journal of Philosophy. 
———. "Talk and Thought" in Burgess, Herman Cappelen and David Plunkett, eds. Conceptual 
Engineering and Conceptual Ethics Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
———. "Truth and Objectivity in Conceptual Engineering," Inquiry. 
———. (2018). "The Importance of Concepts," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, vol. 118: 
127-47. 
Scharp, Kevin. (2013). Replacing Truth. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Schupbach, Jonah. (2017). "Experimental Explication," Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, vol. 94. 
Shea, Nicholas. "Concept-Metacognition," Mind and Language. 
Simion, Mona. (2017). "The ‘Should’ in Conceptual Engineering," Inquiry, vol. 61: 914-28. 
———. (2018). "Epistemic Trouble for Engineering 'Woman'," Logos and Episteme, vol. 9: 91-
98. 
Smith, Adam. (1759/1976). The Theory of Moral Sentiments. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
———. (1761/1983). "Considerations Concerning the First Formation of Languages, and the 
Different Genius of Original and Compounded Languages" in Bryce, ed. Smith’s Lectures 
on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Sosa, David. (2018). Bad Words: Philosophical Perspectives on Slurs. Edited by Sosa. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Sperber, Dan, and Deirdre Wilson. (1985/1991). "Loose Talk" in Davis, ed. Pragmatics: A Reader 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Sterken, Rachel Katharine. "Linguistic Interventions and Transformative Communicative 
Disruption" in Cappelen, Plunkett and Burgess, eds. Conceptual Engineering and 
Conceptual Ethics Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Stock, Kathleen. (2019). "Sexual Orientation: What Is It?," Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 
vol. 119: 295-319. 
Strawson, P. F. (1959). Individuals: An Essay in Descriptive Metaphysics. London: Methuen. 
Sweetser, Eve. (1988). "Grammaticalization and Semantic Bleaching." in Axmaker, Jaisser and 
SIngmaster, eds. Berkeley Linguistics Society. 
Sweetser, Eve E. (1990). From Etymology to Pragmatics: Metaphorical and Cultural Aspects of 
Semantic Structure. Vol. 54, Cambridge Studies in Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Tang, Xu. (2018). "A State-of-the-Art of Semantic Change Computation," Natural Language 
Engineering, vol. 24: 881-913. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
37 
Tanswell, Fenner Stanley. (2018). "Conceptual Engineering for Mathematical Concepts," Inquiry, 
vol. 61: 881-913. 
Taylor, John R. (1999). "Cognitive Semantics and Structural Semantics" in Blank and Koch, eds. 
Historical Semantics and Cognition Berlin: de Gruyter. 
Trask, R. L. (1994). Language Change. London: Routledge. 
Traugott, Elizabeth Closs. (1999). "The Rhetoric of Counter-Expectation in Semantic Change: A 
Study in Subjectification" in Blank and Koch, eds. Historical Semantics and Cognition 
Berlin: de Gruyter. 
———. (2017). "Semantic Change." in Aronoff, ed. Linguistics Oxford Research Encyclopedia 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Traugott, Elizabeth Closs, and Richard Dasher. (2002). Regularity in Semantic Change, 
Cambridge Studies in Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Urban, Matthias. (2015). "Lexical Semantic Change and Semantic Reconstruction" in Bowern and 
Evans, eds. Routledge Handbook of Historical Linguistics Abingdon: Routledge. 
Wikforss, Asa Maria, and Teresa Marques. "Shifting Concepts: The Philosophy and Psychology 
of Conceptual Variability."  Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Wilson, Deirdre. (2003). "Relevance Theory and Lexical Pragmatics," Rivista di Linguistica, vol. 
15: 273-91. 
Wilson, Deirdre and Robyn Carston. (2006). "Metaphor, Relevance and the 'Emergent Property' 
Issue," Mind & Language, vol. 21: 404-33. 
Wilson, Deirdre, and Robyn Carston. (2007). "A Unitary Approach to Lexical Pragmatics: 
Relevance, Inference and Ad Hoc Concepts " Mind & Language, vol. 21: 404-33. 
Zipf, George. (1949). Human Behavior and the Principle of Least Effort. Cambridge: Addison-
Wesley. 
 
 
 
 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
38 
Chapter 3: Open Cases and Open Texture 
1. Introduction 
Is bitcoin money?51 Are gestational surrogates mothers? Are glass walls windows? Cases like these 
are easy to identify, and even easier to imagine. (Suppose we invent meal replacement capsules: 
are they food?) Identify an invention, or a discovery, or a changing interest—real or imagined—
that forces a decision about how to apply a familiar term, though nothing in past usage, our 
dispositions, patterns of deference, or the social and physical environment, apparently settles the 
matter. When such cases arise, we settle on something eventually. Life must go on. But neither 
appears entailed by the meaning of our expressions, or to change them. Call these “open cases”. 
I’ll discuss a number of them without any pretense that they are clear examples of the very 
same phenomenon. Some may be amenable to standard treatments in the semantic medicine 
cabinet, but some are not. My conclusion is that these reveal a distinct phenomenon, worthy of its 
own account. While the predicates in question certainly have familiar features—like most terms, 
most are vague—these features are not responsible for the openness of the cases. I’ll cycle through 
various ways of analyzing this openness, starting with vagueness. I then consider other semantic 
phenomena that might be used a model (independently of any vagueness), including partial 
definition, context-sensitivity, indeterminate reference, and underdetermination.  
2. Open Texture 
The cases mentioned at this paper’s start call to mind a group of cases familiar from mid-20th 
century literature objecting to the verification criterion of meaning, and the search for definition. 
Let’s start by discussing these. They identify a vagueness-like phenomenon that is distinct from 
vagueness as we think of it today. In Philosophical Investigations, Wittgenstein imagines his chair 
disappearing:  
I say, “There is a chair”. What if I go up to it, meaning to fetch it, and it suddenly disappears 
from sight? —“so it wasn’t a chair, but some kind of illusion”. —But in a few moments we 
see it again and are able to touch it and so on. –’so the chair was there after all and its 
disappearance was some kind of illusion”. —But suppose that after a time it disappears 
again-or seems to disappear. What are we to say now? Have you rules ready for such cases 
 
 
51 https://www.nber.org/papers/w19747  
https://cointelegraph.com/news/defining-bitcoin-money-currency-or-store-of-value 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
39 
—rules saying whether one may use the word “chair” to include this kind of thing? But do 
we miss them when we use the word “chair”; and are we to say that we do not really attach 
any meaning to this word, because we are not equipped with rules for every possible 
application of it? (1953/1968: 80)52  
Likewise, in his discussion of games, he notes that the rules of tennis say nothing about how high 
or hard one may throw the ball, so the concept of a legitimate move in tennis is unregulated in a 
certain respect (1953: 68). It is not that we know that one meter is permissible while one hundred 
are not: this height has never been a factor in the game and there are no rules concerning it. By 
contrast, if we make a gesture towards a region of roughly one meter in diameter and say, “Stay 
roughly here” (71), then this determines, although not sharply, the boundaries of a region.53 Austin, 
discussing the criterial theory of knowledge, gives another such example:  
If we have made sure it’s a goldfinch, and a real goldfinch, and then in the future it does 
something outrageous (explodes, quotes Mrs. Woolf, or what not), we don’t say we were 
wrong to say that it was a goldfinch, we don’t know what to say. Words literally fail us: 
“What would you have said?” “What are we to say now?” “What would you say?” … It 
seems a serious mistake to suppose that language (or most language, language about real 
things) is “predictive” in such a way that the future can always prove it wrong. What the 
future can always do, is to make us revise our ideas about goldfinches or real goldfinches 
or anything else. (1946: 160) 
Again, the situation seems different from vagueness. For one, we know what a borderline goldfinch 
would be like: it resembles paradigmatic goldfinches but can also mate with, say, cardinals. We 
know to say: it’s not definitely a goldfinch, not definitely not a goldfinch. Austin’s case brings out 
two phenomena. The first we might call “semantic dumbfounding”. As he wrote some years 
earlier: 
Ordinary language breaks down in extraordinary cases. (In such cases, the cause of the 
breakdown is semantical.) Now no doubt an ideal language would not break down, 
whatever happened. In doing physics, for example, where our language is tightened up in 
order precisely to describe complicated and unusual cases concisely, we prepare 
linguistically for the worst. In ordinary language we do not: words fail us. (1940: 36–37) 
 
 
52 Kripke 1984/2000 identifies a more radical lesson in PI’s discussion of rules, namely that no considerations are 
sufficient to uniquely determine the applicability of a term, even mathematical expressions like “+”. But even 
granting some facts are sufficient to determine the meaning of “+”, an, say, the application of “window” to typical 
household ones, it may seem open or unsettled whether “window” is truly applicable to glass walls. 
53 This is the way, claims Wittgenstein, in which we use the concepts of number. When the complex numbers and 
the transfinite cardinals were invented (not discovered), what we already counted as numbers did not 
determine whether these new mathematical entities should also be considered as such. It is not that they were on 
some vague borderline separating numbers from other mathematical creatures: they constituted a new mathematical 
dimension, and our use had to be extended towards it. (e.g., 1956: II.22-23). 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
40 
The second phenomenon we might call “semantic dogmatism”:  
If there’s a lusus naturae, a miracle… that would not mean I was wrong [about their being 
goldfinches] (163) 
On the one hand, there’s the inclination that, even when experience takes a strange turn, there are 
some things we cannot be wrong about (they are definitely goldfinches).. Alongside it, there are 
competing inclinations to say that we were completely wrong (they are definitely not).54 We might 
imagine a heated argument. Vagueness, by contrast, tends to elicit equivocal reactions, and 
agreement that equivocality is the right response. Suppose we start quarreling about whether 
skateboards are vehicles. We’re likely to quickly realize that there’s no good question here: I’m a 
little more inclined to say they are than you, but when we realize that, we see it’s one of those 
unclear cases. We know what to say, in the skateboard case: it’s not clearly a vehicle and it’s not 
clearly not a vehicle. So, if the vagueness of “goldfinch” (or “chair”) were at issue in the case, we 
agreement that such and so is not clearly a goldfinch, not clearly not a goldfinch. But that does not 
appear to be our reaction.55  
The person who made the most of such goldfinch-like cases was Friedrich Waismann, who, 
by 1937, was Austin’s colleague, and before that a collaborator of Wittgenstein.56 (He emigrated 
from Austria to England officially in 1938). Waismann argued such cases revealed something he 
called “the open texture of language”:  
Open texture is a very fundamental characteristic of most, though not of all, empirical 
concepts, and it is this texture which prevents us from verifying conclusively most of our 
empirical statements. Take any material object statement. The terms which occur in it are 
non-exhaustive; that means that we cannot foresee completely all possible conditions in 
which they are to be used; there will always remain a possibility, however faint, that we 
have not taken into account something or other that may be relevant to their usage; and that 
means that we cannot foresee completely all the possible circumstances in which the 
 
 
54 Stebbing makes much of this tension, roughly identifying the former—goldfinches wisecrack—with Cambridge 
analysis and Moorean directional analysis, as opposed to what she calls “postulational analysis”, more or less 
Carnap’s method of explication. Scientific discovery cannot overturn every day usage, and: 
We have to think about what we were thinking about. The philosopher considers a given expression, and 
analyses it in order to find another expression which says more clearly what the original expression said less 
clearly. This investigation is not linguistic. We must first know what facts are the case before we can 
fruitfully employ analysis for the purpose of clarifying our thoughts about the world. (1933: 86) 
55 Talk of open texture as it appears in the law more closely applies to cases of vague predicates. So, in legal theory, 
unclarity about whether skateboards, and electric wheelchairs, are prohibited in the park is symptomatic of the open 
texture of the law. Waldron 1994, Schauer 2008 
56 See Bunikowski 2016. Waismann emigrated from Austria in 1938.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
41 
statement is true or in which it is false. There will always remain a margin of uncertainty. 
Thus the absence of a conclusive verification is directly due to the open texture of the terms 
concerned (1945: 3)57  
To illustrate the idea, Waismann used numerous extravagant examples, including a disappearing 
friend (2), gold that emits a new sort of radiation (2), a cat-like object that grows to enormous 
proportions, or speaks Latin, or is resurrects from death (3). In all those extraordinary, 
unforeseeable circumstances, he insisted, we would be hesitant about what to say, because it is not 
provided for in the meaning of the statement. Our understanding of “that is a cat” gives us no basis 
on which to choose between the statement and its negation in such a case.  
While he used the phrase “vague” differently than we do today, he distinguished between 
open texture and the features of paradigmatically vague predicates, like “heap” or “pink”. 
Vagueness should be distinguished from open texture. A word which is actually used in a 
fluctuating way (such as “heap” or “pink”) is said to be vague; a term like “gold”, though 
its actual use may not be vague, is nonexhaustive or of an open texture in that we can never 
fill up all the possible gaps through which a doubt may seep in. ... Vagueness can be 
remedied by giving more accurate rules, open texture cannot. An alternative way of stating 
this would be to say that definitions of open terms are always corrigible or emendable... 
[Open texture is the] the permanent possibility of vagueness (1945: 123) 
But there is no suggestion, for instance, that the fluctuating use of the color term “pink” would be 
the fate of chemical “gold” should science turn up a surprise. 
Verificationism involved the idea was that the meaning of empirical statements, such as 
“that is a cat”, might be identified with the kind of experience that conclusively verified it. 
Metaphysical statements such as “God is love” were dismissed as meaningless on the grounds that 
they had no method of verification. Since verification is something carried out by speakers of the 
language, the positivist theory promised to anchor the semantics of the language in the practice of 
using it, without a spooky metaphysics of meaning. The fatal difficulties for the program are 
familiar. If the meaning of “that is a cat” is exhausted but the kind of experience that would 
conclusively verify it, then one might expect it to be translatable into a statement about those 
experiences. But no one could provide a remotely plausible translation.  
 
 
57 W.C. Kneale suggested this translation of Waismann’s phrase, “porosität der Begriffe”, which more literally 
translates, “the porosity of language”. Waismann’s discusses open texture in a series of essays from 1949 to 1953 
concerning the analytic-synthetic distinction, and, most famously in 1968. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
42 
Waismann tried to describe a subtler connection between meaning and verification. On his 
view, empirical statements are never conclusively verified, for two reasons. First, although a finite 
number of experiences provide good enough evidence to warrant the assertion of “that is a cat” 
they are never logically sufficient for its truth (in principle one might always turn out to be the 
victim of a demon, or an elaborate hoax). Second, more interestingly, suppose that all other 
relevant experiences, future, as well as past, are somehow given. They may still be logically 
insufficient to decide the truth or falsity of “that is a cat”, even without assuming the truth-value 
of the statement can transcend all possible experiential evidence.58 Thus, according to him, the 
failure of the verification criterion of meaning—the claim that the content of an expression is 
exhausted by the evidence for its truth:  
is not, as has been suggested, due to the poverty of our language which lacks the vocabulary 
for describing all the minor details of sense experience, nor is it due to the difficulties 
inherent in producing an infinite combination of sense-datum statements, in the main it is 
due to a factor which though it is very important and really quite obvious, has to my 
knowledge never been noticed–– to the “open texture” of most of our empirical concepts. 
(1968: 118-119) 
Sometimes Waismann’s objection is glossed as a claim about the difficulty of supplying complete 
necessary and sufficient conditions for ignorant or cognitively limited creatures like ourselves. 
That’s only part of it. Another part is that it is often in principle impossible to supply a complete 
verbal definition, as there are always conditions that can be added, or removed. The claim is not 
that proper definitions are infinitely long and that practical limitations block us from constructing, 
or identifying, them. The claim is there is some “open” or “porous” feature of meanings 
themselves.59  
 
 
58 To this end, his point strikes the verificationist criterion of meaning perhaps as the view that meanings are 
intensions: 
How, then, should we formulate the “method of verification” – that is, the connection between a 
proposition p and the statements s1, s2…sn which are evidences for it? I propose…the evidences s1, s2…sn 
speak for or against the proposition p, that they strengthen or weaken it, which does not mean that they 
prove or disprove it strictly. (1968: 107) 
59 The idea of open texture was also intended just soften a number of dichotomies, most notably between the 
analytic and the synthetic. Two claims must be distinguished. There’s the banal claim that “analytic” and 
“synthetic”, like most words, have borderline cases between them. (Quine’s: all green things are extended; the 
bride’s emotional father: she was born our youngest daughter). The more contentious claim that open texture in the 
object language entails open texture in the metalinguistic terms “analytic” and “synthetic” requires more elaborate 
argument than Waismann supplies. For one of the ways this could go, see Richard 2019 for a discussion of 
analyticity at a time. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
43 
3. Modernizing 
Verificationism has been gleefully buried many times over.60 But if rightly so, there is a question 
about what feature, or features, of meaning Waismann’s cases bring out. It is not hard to see why 
natural language meanings were once traif: they cannot be kicked, and appear to defy exhaustive 
statement in other words (unlike some mathematical sentences). But metaphysical sentences have 
been brought back into the fold since the heyday of verificationism. It is now widely accepted that 
sentences have observation transcendent truth conditions, including sentences about natural 
language meaning. Waismann’s cases, or ones like them, deserve another look. 
Much philosophy of language has gone under the bridge since 1945 and it’s hard to say 
what precisely these earlier figures had in mind. It’s sometimes said that they ran together what 
we have learned to properly distinguish.61 For example, the cases exemplifying open texture 
frequently involved what are now called “natural kinds”, like cat, water, goldfinch, and gold. Yablo 
(2000), (2002), argues that the Kripke-Putnam’s theory of rigid designation suggests such cases 
either involve a conceivability illusions (where we imagine discovering something with surface 
properties very like gold, but which is not), or else a skeptical scenario (where we imagine the 
underlying features giving rise to gold’s characteristic properties are actually very different than 
evidence presently suggests they are). If things do turn out to be very different than we thought—
if the underlying microphysical properties are not at all as believed—then we will rearrange. 
 
 
60 Wittgenstein 1953, Quine 1951, Kripke 1980. 
61 Austin, master of distinctions, illustrates:  
We say, for example, that a certain statement is exaggerated or vague or bald, a description somewhat rough 
or misleading or not very good, an account rather general or too concise. In cases like these it is pointless to 
insist on deciding in simple terms whether the statement is "true or false." Is it true or false that Belfast is 
north of London? That the galaxy is the shape of a fried egg? That Beethoven was a drunkard? That 
Wellington won the battle of Waterloo? There are various degrees and dimensions of success in making 
statements: the statements fit the facts always more or less loosely, in different ways on different occasions 
for different intents and purposes. What may score full marks in a general knowledge test may in other 
circumstances get a gamma. And even the most adroit of languages may fail to "work" in an abnormal 
situation or to cope, or cope reasonably simply, with novel discoveries: is it true or false that the dog goes 
round the cow? What, moreover, of the large class of cases where a statement is not so much false (or true) 
as out of place, inept ("All the signs of bread" said when the bread is before us)? (1950: 11-12) 
By my count, he gestures towards about seven different phenomena, and inexplicably considers a dog running round 
a cow an unexpected turn (though perhaps slightly more exotic than James’ squirrel round a tree). Among these 
perhaps is vagueness—is Belfast North of London?—which is distinguished from a dog going round a cow, and 
unexpected turns, however those may inexplicably be related. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
44 
Perhaps we will say “that’s not gold!” (At least that’s what we did say when learned to identify 
pyrite, fool’s gold).62 
But as things stand, there is plenty of reason to believe the underlying properties of what 
we call “gold”—being Au—give rise to its distinctive properties, and plenty of reason to believe 
only they can do that.63 The truth conditions associated “gold” encode facts about what this actually 
is, not information about how to apply “gold” taking other ways the world might be as actual. So, 
on the one hand, what it is reasonable to believe of gold is largely an a posteriori matter. On the 
other hand, the meaning of “gold” revealed from the armchair will not dictate how to rearrange if 
things go sideways, because meanings do not encode that sort of information. One way to take the 
argument is this: meanings are not open; but what it is reasonable to judge is, especially in the face 
of surprising circumstances. But in many cases, there remains a question about what those 
meanings are like. Notice that a Kripkean treatment of “goldfinch” does not explain why people 
have the reactions they do to Austin’s goldfinch case. At best, it delivers the result that goldfinches 
cannot explode, or cannot wisecrack, but it doesn’t explain why we are semantically dumbfounded, 
or else dogmatic. 
Take a more straightforward case. I drink, and bathe in, water, which is necessarily H2O, 
but I do not know that. If the chemists announced that water is composed of this substance they 
call XYZ, I would defer to them, or, express faint interest, and go on reporting that I drink, and 
bathe in, water. Words would not fail me. Austin’s example is supposedly one where even the 
experts say, “My God, what would you say?”, and ordinary speakers are supposed to also have the 
reaction that they have no idea what the expert would say, or that it is totally meaningless, or that 
something else has gone badly wrong. This is the dumbfounded response. Assume there is this 
difference when it comes to the reference of natural kind terms like “goldfinch” and “water” and 
non-natural kind terms (and I’m somewhat skeptical there is). Still, rigid designation doesn’t seem 
like it can explain the difference in our reaction to Austin’s case and the water case.64 The same 
 
 
62 Kripke 1980 
63 See Yablo 2000, 2002. He identifies a related thought in Waismann, in developing arguments against anti-
physicalism and two-dimensional approaches to conceptual analysis. 
64 The same may be said for children’s stories where mice marry. What’s fictional is that they have a townhall, and a 
sense of propriety, not that, somehow, the marriage relation can obtain between rodents. Stuart Little is not 
conceptual fiction. If Peter Rabbit is not a rabbit, the reason is that fictions are not rabbits, or fictions do not exist. 
The reason is not that it is an a posteriori necessity that rabbits lack the mechanisms to speak (in contrast to Farmer 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
45 
goes for dogmatic responses to the case, say, that, it is perfectly obvious that, then, goldfinches 
wisecrack and explode.65  
Being stymied as to what to say, may be chocked up to a hesitance to generate the 
implicatures assertion would herald, rather than a feature of the meaning of terms involved (“Ow! 
Why didn’t you warn me about the chair?”). There are many reasons for an utterance to be 
inappropriate, and being untrue just one of them.66 Perhaps semantic dogmatism is not so much a 
semantic phenomenon, as a pragmatic one: speakers communicate diagonal propositions as a 
means of narrowing down live options for ways the world might be in the context of the 
conversation. They do not utter true sentences (and may be ignorant about the meaning of 
“goldfinch”), but they do adjust the context set correctly.67 
But neither response obviously catches the full the story. In 1899, Rutherford made the 
shocking discovery that atoms were mostly empty space. Years later he remarked: “It was almost 
as incredible as if you fired a 15-inch shell at a piece of tissue paper and it came back and hit you”. 
A classic example of semantic dogmatism followed in the exchange between Sir Arthur Eddington 
(science popularizer and physicist) and L. Susan Stebbing about how to describe the discovery. 
Eddington’s position was that science shows us that floorboards are not solid (1927/1958). In his 
so-called “two tables problem”, he wonders how to reconcile the table of science, which is not 
solid, with the table of everyday experience, which is. Stebbing infamously maintained, in direct 
 
 
MacGregor). That seems right, whatever else we may say about the truth value of sentences in fictions. To hive off 
this phenomenon to a theory of fiction strikes me as misconstruing ordinary language in a fairly deep way.  
65 Also notice science fiction-like speculation mostly comes out as intelligible. As it turns out, it is not physically 
possible to make capsules nutrient dense enough to replace meals, and it is physically possible for a woman to bear a 
child without donating any gametes. Does it follow that it is a posteriori necessary that meal replacement capsules 
are not food on account of this fact? Surely, at one point speakers would have avowed that “mother” (with its 
biological meaning) rigidly designated the woman who gestated a child, and bore those risks, and any suggestion 
otherwise was subject changing of the highest order. One reaction is that, in the case of “mother”, we were mistaken, 
and that the evidence can underdetermine theory in surprising ways. The rise of gestational surrogacy has prompted 
further collective revising of our theory of motherhood. But however we go on does not appear to have been 
antecedently baked into the meaning of “mother” (/“food”), or to herald changing the subject from mothers (/food) 
to something else. 
66 See Grice 1989.  
67 See Stalnaker 1984, 1999a, 1999b. The semantic content of a sentence on an occasion of use is distinguished from 
the content asserted by an utterance of that sentence on that occasion. In general, the default option for the assertoric 
content is the semantic content of the utterances, but on this picture, the mechanisms of conversation—and peculiar 
revelation—sometimes force the two apart. In this connection, he outlines some principles for asserted content that 
systemize cases of divergence. Central to his framework is the notion of a context of communication, which is 
roughly the set of live options at each point in a conversation and a conception of the role of assertion as that of 
cutting down the live options and so narrowing the context.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
46 
reply, that most obviously floorboards, and tables, are solid, and science cannot overturn 
commonsensical usage (1937). Whatever else we may say about the exchange, neither was 
confused about the discovery, and neither were their readers. The dispute concerned the application 
of terms in ordinary English descriptions, and plausibly not what they implicated. There was 
certainly no deep difference in the readers of Eddington and Stebbings, or their context. And, 
again, the Kripkean strategy does little to explain the strength of conviction on either side. 
There are many cases structurally similar to Waismann’s, et al.’s, but that are at least not 
obviously well-resolved by appeal to the machinery of rigid designation. For one, they do not 
involve science fiction. For another, they do not include terms that, at the time, were good 
candidates for being rigid designators (how many of these there are depends on who you ask).  
4. Cases and Modernizing 
Five cases will be helpful. I will call the phenomena they exemplify “open texture” as a nod to 
Waismann, but without more pretense of doing exegetical work. I am in good company. 
Waismann’s evocative phrase, and cases of the sort described, have been recruited in support of a 
wide range of philosophical positions, if rarely in a starring role.68 The cases may exemplify more 
than one phenomenon. That’s fine. The rest of the paper will argue the balance of these cases are 
not well analyzed using familiar semantic tools.  
We have already met the first and third cases.69 Each apparently involves a linguistic choice 
about what applications of a predicate should serve as precedent, and which similarities should 
count. The choice is triggered by learning that criteria which in the past we explicitly, or implicitly, 
believed were jointly satisfied, and would continue to be, are not. Some of these choices passed 
unnoticed, and some involve reassessing what we once took applications of the term to entail.  
“Window”: Are glass walls windows? It is hard to say. Yes, insofar as windows are views 
to the world. No, insofar as windows are lodged into walls. Our judgements as competent 
speakers pull in different directions. Mostly we settle on calling glass walls “windows”, but 
our hand does not seem forced by the meaning of “window”. For instance, if there were a 
readily available term for both windows and glass walls, we might have been more disposed 
to deny glass walls are windows.  
 
 
68 Legal theory is a notable exception. See Hart 1963, Schauer 2008.  
69 Many more cases are to be found in Green 2011, LaPorte Wilson 1980, 2006. See also Brown 2000, Jackman 1999, 
2005, LaPorte 2000.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
47 
“Blackbirds”: The first English-speaking colonists arrived in the New World with a stock 
of classificatory predicates that had unproblematic applications in the Old World. These 
included “blackbird”, as well as “rabbit”, “oriole”, “robin”, and others. Their common 
linguistic training disposed them to apply many of these predicates to New World objects. 
“Blackbird”, for example, was applied to 26 of the species in the family Icterids, completely 
different from the Turdus merula, members of the Turdus, or thrush, family called 
“blackbirds” in Europe. They had in common that they were mostly black (though the New 
World birds had bright batches of color, brighter than many Old World black non-
blackbirds, like starlings). Today, we distinguish Old World and New World blackbirds (the 
former being Turdus merula, the latter 26 species of icterids that do not correspond to a 
formal taxon). 
“Solid”: Eddington (1927/1958) told the public that science reveals that a floorboard “has 
no solidity of substance” (39) because it is composed of elementary particles that lie 
comparatively far apart. Stebbing (1937) maintains Eddington abuses non-scientific 
language: “The point is that the common use of language enables us to attribute a meaning 
to the phrase ‘a solid plank’; but there is no common usage of language that provides a 
meaning for the word ‘solid’ that would make sense to say that the plank on which I stand 
is not solid” (51-52).70 The heart of her complaint is that a predicate must possess “some 
usage”, or something like a fixed core meaning, from which its subsidiary uses must 
descend. She suggests, these satellite uses of “solid” cannot completely overturn the parent 
discriminations from which they derive.71 Whatever the (de) merits of her points, Stebbing 
and Eddington appear to disagree about how to describe recent scientific discoveries using 
the ordinary term “solid.”  
“Athlete”: In 1999, ESPN ranked Secretariat the 35th of the 100 Greatest North American 
Athletes of the 20th Century. This occasioned incredulous fat chewing by sportscasters.72 
Can non-human animals even be athletes?  
 “Planet”: In 2006, the International Astronomical Union (IAU) voted to augment the 
definition of “planet” in a way that foreseeably resulted in Pluto’s demotion: it included a 
clause limiting the category of planet to those bodies that have cleared their orbit of debris. 
This appears to be not so much a discovery as a decision. The impetus for the vote was that 
the existing definition of “planet”—a large round body that orbits a sun—applied to the 
recently discovered Eris, along with perhaps some 200 smaller trans-Neptunian objects in 
the Kuiper belt. The vote itself was highly contentious among participants, and deliberations 
took into account everyday considerations, e.g., about public sentiment about planets and 
the costs of updating maps, as well as scientific ones. The underlying features of planets 
 
 
70 The expanded quote is sometimes cited as a locus classicus of the paradigm case argument. 
71 Her overriding purpose is to argue that the deliverances of science must err (or be regarded purely instrumentally) 
whenever they reverse the opinions of everyday common sense, rather than supplement them with new vocabulary. 
Part of her objection to Eddington (unquoted) stems from her apparent skepticism that “solid” is multi-valued. She 
appears to assume that because the original usages didn’t apparently entail the empty space in floorboards, 
Eddington’s usages are false. 
72 See Ludlow 2014. He recruits cases like this in his arguments that a language is best thought of, not as a stable 
abstract object, but a series of fleeting microlanguages. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
48 
turned out to be less significant to us than maintaining a certain sort of size and unity among 
the objects so classified.  
Or course, contemporary linguists do not set out to define words like “window” and “athlete”, and 
every philosopher is ready with an argument that conceptual analysis is hopeless. Never mind the 
project of exhaustively stating what athletes or windows are in other words. What apparently 
endemic feature of meaning gives rise to cases like these?  
The suspects usually thought to determine reference—patterns of deference to experts and 
the natural world, usage in the broader community, speakers’ dispositions, paradigms and patterns 
of association—do not settle how settle how to proceed with the predicate. It is unclear, for 
instance, what aspect of the world, or which experts, to defer to.73 
The meaning of “solid” apparently did not legislate how to describe the discovery. The 
meaning of “blackbird” as used in the Old World did not destine it to correctly apply to New World 
creatures, nor prohibited it. Speakers, for example, did not appear to defer to some original 
baptism, as when Europeans applied Marco Polo’s name for Mozambique mistakenly to the island 
off its coast. While “Madagascar” eventually acquired a new meaning, New World use of 
“blackbird” appeared to mean as it did in the Old World. 74 That the editors at ESPN, the 
sportscasters were experts on athletes and athletics does not appear to advance the question of 
whether Secretariat is an athlete. Likewise, that the broader public is not first disposed to take him 
to be. Non-human animals are certainly not paradigmatic athletes, but ranking calls into question 
the dispositions of many competent speakers to affirm being an athlete entails being human. It may 
seem, on reflection, that nothing in the meaning of “athlete” forces a verdict, despite how the 
expression had been used to date. But perhaps you vehemently disagree. That is, the case of 
“athlete” may trigger semantic dumbfounding in some speakers, but semantic dogmatism in others.   
The IAU resolved the linguistic choice concerning “planet” by fiat. That it is now false to 
say that Pluto is a planet speaks to how strong a trendsetter it is (as compared, say, to the editors 
at ESPN). But mostly resolution is piecemeal, facilitated by confluence in the pressures that drive 
usage (of which bureaucratic fiat is one). Some are internal to meaning, involving the properties 
regulating competent use. Others are external, involving our cognitive limitations, interests in 
 
 
73 See Putnam 1975, Burge 1979, Kripke 1980.  
74 See Evans 1985 for a discussion of “Madagascar”. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
49 
coordination, matters of convenience and salience, the order of events, and so on. If Rutherford’s 
discoveries had upended a widely endorsed theory about the high density of atoms, and been more 
controversial, perhaps today we would deny that tables are solid. 
What about utterances of “Pluto is a planet” made prior to 2006? One way of assigning 
truth-values to utterances tells us that pre-2006 utterances of “Pluto is a planet” are true. But this 
is not obviously correct: textbooks were rewritten, the general feeling is earlier scientists armed 
with partial information had erred, or else that Pluto has been demoted, and unfairly. These 
considerations do not point to “planet” acquiring a new meaning—in effect, to vocabulary 
change—so much as changed beliefs about planets. But, insofar as planethood is as the IAU says 
it is, the fact that the IAU could have voted the other way does not so much reveal the 
underdetermination of theory by data, as something about the way meanings are ordinarily 
conceived: we can go on in more than one way with a predicate without sinning against it, or 
changing vocabulary. 
In many ways we are creatures like others. Plausibly investigating the semantics and 
metasemantics for parrot thought involves investigating what properties they are thinking about. I 
take it there is little temptation to say that these properties are fully determinate and also little 
temptation to say that when a parrot stares at a puddle it is contemplating H2O. But we can happily 
attempt to look at the structure of parrot concepts and their deployment. So, what’s different 
between parrots and us? We have scientific discourse, and they do not. Even so mostly we are not 
engaging in scientific discourse. It is a banal observation that we, like parrots, have not anticipated 
all of the cases in which we might be puzzled as to whether a particular word or concept applies. 
It is a less banal, but no less correct, observation that our dispositions, worldly knowledge, and 
environmental relations do not come close to determining what our reactions to novel cases will 
or should be. We can imagine maintaining this even upon an alleged discovery that these factors 
do associate occult intensions with our expressions, in accord with some absolute and 
undiscoverable metasemantic law, or metaphysical fact.75 Appealing to these positions as 
treatments of our open cases (as opposed to the reference of natural kind terms, or vague 
predicates) sounds on par with Leibniz’s commitment that this is the best of all possible worlds. 
 
 
75 See Dasgupta 2018.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
50 
Just as it seems out of place to appeal to some such law, or metric of naturalness of a property, or 
of a thought, to render the parrot’s thoughts determinate, so too our own. If there is something that 
distinguishes us most obviously from parrots, it is that we self-correct and seek coherence in our 
statements and judgments—of all sorts—over time. 
What then is the feature of linguistic meaning that gives rise to the appearance of openness, 
or choice? At first glance, the cases do not turn on under-specificity. “Between 9 and 5” means 
something, and it means something very precise. But it is not as informative as “between 9 and 
10”. “Window”, for example, is under specific in the sense that its truth conditions do not 
distinguish portholes from bay windows. But our question is whether applications of “window” 
distinguishes those options from glass walls. Neither do our cases obviously involve the 
phenomena associated with figuration, or loose speech, in the way of “France is a hexagon” or 
“The eyes are the window on the soul”. Our open cases can be framed as existence questions, 
where the answer we give is ontologically committal (“Do non-human athletes exist?”). Typically, 
figurative speech is not seen as ontologically committal. 
But why would we lack knowledge of such things even if we found out all the underlying 
facts about Secretariats, what sports experts think, what the public thinks, and so on? What kind 
of status is this, where the question is not only something we cannot answer, but where we cannot 
conceive of getting in a position to answer it? It may seem as though there is no fact of the matter 
about whether Secretariat is an athlete, and that we can feel puzzled, ignorant, is a spandrel, 
generated by load bearing features of the expressions involved, but of no other significance.  
5. Vagueness 
Sometimes inquiry resistance of this sort is thought to be a hallmark of vagueness. Many of the 
predicates that figure in the open cases are vague, like so many predicates of natural language. But 
the openness of open cases do not appear to turn on their vagueness, but rather on something else.  
While a neutral characterize of vagueness is hard to come by, vaguely, it involves unclarity at 
boundaries.76 We have no independent handle on what it is for a predicate to be vague in advance 
of talking about borderline cases, and the notion of being borderline is explained by pointing to a 
certain sort of case. “Bald” is paradigmatically vague: it is unclear to competent speakers where, 
 
 
76 Raffman 2014 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
51 
say, the bald ends, and the not-bald begins. Roughly, Jim’s scalp is a borderline case of “bald” 
because he is neither clearly bald nor clearly non-bald.77 
The same goes for open texture. A predicate has it, is open, precisely because there are 
some open cases involving that predicate. These have some characteristic features, including 
semantic dumbfounding and semantic dogmatisim, the revising of judgments about paradigm 
cases, and what is entailed by a term’s application, a feeling that a linguistic choice is being made. 
Not all cases have each of these features. Maybe it’s not totally clear there’s one phenomenon. 
Even so, these open cases have several features that borderline cases lack. 
As already noted cases of vagueness do not elicit semantic dumfounding, or dogmatism, 
as open cases do. Instead they elicit equivocality. Competent speakers may agree it is unclear 
whether the man is tall (when apprised of the relevant comparison classes for tallness and facts 
about the height of any relevant populations). Likewise they may agree it is unclear whether the 
plaster is solid. Perhaps doing so is relevant to competence. But agreement seems unavailable in 
Stebbing/Eddington case of “solid”: some speakers hold there is no answer as to whether tables 
are solid, others that they clearly are, others that they clearly are not. Were they to have come upon 
some crumbling plaster, Stebbing and Eddington would presumably agree that it is was not clearly 
solid, but also not clearly not solid. That is a reason to floorboards, unlike crumbling plaster, are 
not borderline solid. 
Consideration of some open cases may undermine judgments about apparently core 
cases—say, that floorboards are solid—but consideration of borderline cases does not undermine 
apparently core cases. (Whether the plaster is solid does not tell against the tables being, because 
the reasons associated with whether the plaster is solid, or not, are irrelevant to the assessment of 
table. Resolving borderlines does not tell against the core reasons competent speakers apply 
“solid.” Consideration of some open cases may undermine established judgments about 
entailments—say, whether being an athlete entails being human—but consideration of borderline 
cases also does not appear to do so. 
 
 
77 Sometimes soriticality is thought to be sufficient for vagueness (dubious, but see Bueno and Colyvan 2012), or at 
least diagnostic. But open cases do not appear to involve soritical reasoning. Sometimes gradeability is treated as 
diagnostic of vagueness, see Shapiro 2006, Raffman 2014, Fara 2000 for discussion, as well as, collectively, 
arguments that none of these are necessary or sufficient for vagueness. Our open cases also mostly do not involve 
gradeable expressions. While “solid” has a gradeable meaning, that is not the one at issue in the case.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
52 
Again, I’m not denying the open predicates are vague. They are. The point is their 
vagueness does not explain what is open about the open cases. Being open has importantly 
different features than being borderline. For example, we can contrive a case for a paradigmatically 
vague word—“bald”—where there is semantic dumfounding. Imagine a guy with two heads, one 
of which is as hairy as any, the other of which as bald as any. It is indeterminate whether to call 
this person bald or not, but it has nothing to do with borderline cases, or incremental reasoning: 
the heads are individually clearly either bald or not-bald, there is no borderline in-between state 
involved. Is he bald? We throw up our hands. “Bald” is open, but not because of its having 
borderline cases (or its soriticality). It is open because we can imagine an “odd case” outside the 
usual domain of application.  
Another distinction between open texture and vagueness is this. Vagueness involves 
unclarity about the boundary in orderings of individuals, say, from the red to the not-red (in the 
blue direction), the red to the not-red (in the green direction), and so on. Maybe there is unclarity 
about whether an individual is red that falls in thus and so way on one ordering, thus and so way 
on another, and so forth on a third ordering. One way an expression can be vague is if there is 
unclarity about how to relate multiple partial orders. 
Plausibly, open texture is unclarity about which orderings are relevant in the first place, 
independently of where to draw the boundaries on any ordering, or how to aggregate them. If you 
have only 10 hairs, you are definitely bald, but if you have only 10 hairs and they are an inch thick, 
8-feet long and braided atop your head, you are what exactly? That is, it is unclear whether 
orderings from the thin to the thick, and the short to the long, are relevant orderings for 
determinations of baldness at all (in addition to orderings from the few hairs to the many)? For 
open predicates there may be a question about which orderings, in contrast to a question about the 
weighting of the extant parameters associated with the term. It is not, as it is in cases of vagueness, 
a question of boundaries on a linear ordering or a multi-linear ordering.  
Vagueness, for example, differs from the kind of indeterminacy found, say, in the claim 
that Marlowe liked magic acts (Joseph Conrad did not say). In principle this kind of unclarity could 
be removed without changing the meanings of any of the worlds involved. (Conrad could have 
said). In contrast, vagueness is a permanent unclarity whose removal would seem to change the 
meaning, by threatening the word’s communicative utility in surprising ways. (It would be difficult 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
53 
to express, for instance, common dating preferences—e.g., she likes dating tall men—without 
overselling the point and our powers of discrimination).78 
Open predicates exhibit a kind of unclarity for certain outré fact patterns – where when the 
unclarity is removed, and application is settled for those fact patterns, it does not seem the 
expression has changed its meaning. “Solid”, and “blackbird”, do not appear to have changed their 
meanings. Many people would say “planet” hasn’t either; it just turns out, or was decided, that 
Pluto isn’t one. (We report early speakers homophonically, and disquote for counterfactual reports, 
e.g., if Newton and Carl Sagan were here, we all talk about the planets). Surely the changes these 
expressions have undergone are larger than the changes “bald” would undergo if a fixed number 
of hairs was settled on. As choice points for a word are encountered and resolved, the meaning of 
a term appears to be developed and enriched. By contrast, the vagueness of a term is a lasting 
feature of its meaning and does not indicate a similar place for enrichment. 
The “window” case is the most likely of our cases to turn on vagueness, but even here it’s 
not clear. Glass walls might seem like borderline windows: they are sort of windows, sort of not. 
Considering whether they are doesn’t obviously elicit semantic dumbfounding or dogmatism, 
though we do tend to side on calling them “windows”, though it may have the feel of loose speech. 
Considering whether glass walls are windows does not threaten to undermine core judgments, but 
it does threaten to undermine an established entailment (e.g., if there’s a window on that side, part 
of that is opaque; if my hand is on the one window, it is not on the wall). Removing the unclarity 
about glass walls might threaten the communicative utility of “window” in a straightforward way 
because we contrast windows and walls. This last is a reason to think it’s open whether glass walls 
are windows, not vague. 
So is this. We can construct several partial orderings for “window”, ranging from the 
translucent to the opaque, the openable to the unopenable, the minute to the very large, the non-
load bearing to the load-bearing. Locating a prospective window on each ordering may yield an 
inconclusive verdict on whether, or not, a tiny cracked pane in a cracked wall is a window—it’s a 
borderline window. Arguably, the wall situation is different. There uncertainty about which 
orderings matter, not how placement on some given orderings do. Perhaps it is vague whether 
 
 
78 See Schiffer 2013, Wright 2003. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
54 
glass walls are windows, but I tend to think it is open. Regardless, the above considerations are far 
more decisive for the other open cases. It is not vague whether Eris was a planet, or floorboards 
were solid, or merulas were blackbirds, or Secretariat is an athlete. 
So, open texture is not vagueness, although open predicates may be vague (at least many 
are). We can generate open cases from paradigmatically vague expressions like “bald” but which 
are not themselves borderline cases (or higher order borderlines). While open texture elicits 
semantic dumbfounding or dogmatism, vagueness elicits equivocality distinctive of borderline 
cases. While precisifying a vague predicate appears to change its meaning, the same is not clearly 
so for the feature that gives rise to openness. 
 
6. Partial Definition  
We’ve dispensed with vagueness as a model of open texture. Open texture is not vagueness. Now 
we’ll consider some other models of it, some of which themselves have been used as a model for 
vagueness. Partial definition is one, as is context-sensitivity and supervaluation (which I’ll 
consider the next two sections). A natural thought is that open predicates are semantically 
incomplete, only partly defined. It is as if we, The Definer, or the metasemantic laws, forgot to 
map, e.g., “is a blackbird” to a truth value for as yet encountered lepora. Take Soames’ example 
of “smidget” (1999). It is stipulatively defined such that:  
(i) 
any adult human being under three feet in height is a smidget 
(ii) 
any adult human being over four feet in height is not a smidget 
(iii) 
anything that is not an adult human being is not a smidget. 
This predicate is not vague; its conditions of application are perfectly precise. But it contains a 
perfectly precise gap: for some objects “smidget” is silent. Confronted with Bill, who is three feet 
six inches tall, we should accept neither, “Bill is a smidget”, nor “Bill is not a smidget”. But then 
according to the account of truth which Soames (following Kripke) proposes, neither should we 
accept, “Bill is a smidget” is true, nor “Bill is a smidget” is false. So, any actual utterance of ‘Bill 
is a smidget’ will fail to get a truth value. Soames argues if we know that “smidget” is undefined 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
55 
for an object, we should reject both “a is a smidget” and its negation (where a names the object).79 
He maintains that “applies to” is also partially defined, and so we must reject both “smidget” 
applies to a”, and its negation. I’ll argue this is not a good model for open texture because in open 
cases are a) unforeseeable and b) there are considerations that bear on their resolution (apart from 
it being unclear whether there are any semantically incomplete predicates). Neither of these applies 
to semantically incomplete predicates (if there are any). 
Was “blackbird” circa 1620 like “smidget”? It is easy to get into the spirit. Consider some 
candidates the meaning of “blackbird” in 1600: “Blackbird” applies to x if and only if: (1) x falls 
under OLD, (2) x falls under NEW, (3) x falls under MIXED where OLD, NEW, and MIXED 
determine respectively {x|x is a Turdus merula}, {x|x is an Icterid of one of 26 species}, and {x|x 
is in the Old World and x is a Turdus, or x is not in the Old World and x is an Icterid of one of 26 
species}. These assignments are pairwise mutually exclusive; severally each is problematic. (1) 
makes false most of their utterances about New World blackbirds (“Blackbirds ate the pumpkins”). 
(2) makes false most of their standing sentences about Old World blackbirds (“The blackbirds do 
back home are numerous”). Such assignments are likely to disconnect their language from the 
world so that it will be hard to make sense of the practical activities they use language to engage 
in. (3) seems strained since they were able to distinguish Old World blackbirds from Old World 
black birds, as both are to be found, and were linguistically distinguished as “blackbird” and an 
array of other terms for other black birds, in the Old World. Moreover, claiming they meant 
MIXED by “blackbird” all along amounts to claiming rather mysteriously that they were—at least 
their predicate was—prepared for an eventuality that was completely outside their ken, including 
the distinguishing 26 regional species from the more numerous and sometimes blacker members 
of Icterid. Appealing to the way of the natural world as a determinant of extension fall short of 
answering the question: replace the concepts OLD, NEW, and the relation falling under a concept 
in conditions (1) and (2) with the relevant Linnaean kinds, and the relation being a member of a 
kind, respectively, and repeat the argument. But if the colonists were prone to this kind of error, 
what makes us think we aren’t? These are the considerations in favor of thinking that in 1600 the 
 
 
79 Soames employs an account along these lines, invoking the apparatus of Kripke’s theory of truth, to justify the 
rejection of the instance of Excluded Middle and figures in his modified contextualism about vagueness.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
56 
extension of “blackbird” is semantically incomplete: (4) {x|x is one of the Old World Turdus 
merula ….} 
But there are problems. First, it is unclear whether any predicates are partially defined, as 
opposed to completely defined partial-predicates (let alone any predicates of natural language).80 
For example, suppose one stipulates all positive integers map to truth, and all negative ones to 
falsity, but makes no stipulation for zero. On a traditional picture, one fails to specify a concept. 
Some conditions have been laid down, but they are met both by a concept mapping 0 to truth and 
by one mapping it falsity (two distinct natural number concepts). It would be wrong to say one has 
specified a partial concept, a concept undefined for some objects. To do that, one would need to 
stipulate that the concept be undefined for zero, but one has not even got that far. To fail to stipulate 
a value is not to stipulate that there no value. Frege, for example, insists that some stipulation be 
made even for non-numerical cases, such as the moon. Unless a stipulation has been made for 
every case, nothing has been defined. 
Seen this way the metaphor of “forgetting to define a truth value” looks suspect. Suppose 
the various metasemantic forces that collectively determine a truth value fail to do so for 
“blackbird” as applied to some members of Icterid. Nothing has been forgotten: there is 
indeterminacy among fully determinate extensions. There is familiar indeterminacy among fully 
defined concepts, where such indeterminacy is representable as determinacy (see Section 10). A 
predicate where some terms are defined as undefined is not partial, silent as to some objects; rather 
“true” is three-valued. Mathematicians sometimes define a function to be “undefined” in certain 
cases; this is quite different from not making a stipulation for those cases. Likewise, stipulating 
that “smidget” be thus and so, and otherwise undefined. There is nothing particularly partial about 
this. 
The second problem with analyzing “blackbird” as a case of semantic incompleteness is 
phenomenologically inapt. The case didn’t lead to semantic dumbfounding, so much as a sort of 
dogmatism: New World birds were called “blackbirds” almost immediately upon settlers’ arrival. 
There were strong considerations that weigh in favor of going this way or that (and that in fact 
did). The definition of “smidget” gives no guidance as to whether someone between the heights of 
 
 
80 Frege 1884/1974, Williamson 1994. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
57 
the tallest A member and the shortest B member is a smidget. There are, by stipulation, no 
considerations that can bear on whether Mr. Smallman is one. If the “blackbird” case turns on its 
semantic incompleteness, we should expect an absence of considerations bearing on its application 
to New World icterids. But this is not so. We know, or at least have a good sense, of what sorts of 
considerations matter: overall look, behavior, habitat, tastiness, comparison to other locals. 
Competence has something to do with meaning, and we may suppose there are no confounding 
factors at play. 
The third problem is familiar from the last section: “smidget” is semantically incomplete 
is entirely foreseeable way because “smidget” is defined over an ordering of heights (of non-child 
humans) beginning with shortest person in A and ending with the tallest person in B. The situation 
with the rabbits and blackbirds, George, is not like this. There are a variety of partial orderings 
involving the considerations that bear on the application of “blackbird”. The question is how these 
relate. 
There may be items where application of “smidget” to them seems open in the way 
application of “blackbird” to an icterid is. For instance, suppose someone taller than the tallest 
member of A but shorter than the shortest member of B is perpetually stooped such that, stooped, 
they are shorter than the tallest member of A. Are they a smidget? The issue of partial definition 
does not appear to be what makes our cases vexing.  
7. Context Sensitivity 
We’ve left behind partial definition, and vagueness, as models of open texture. Perhaps context-
sensitivity (apart from these) will better. It does not. Analyzing openness as context-sensitivity is 
to give up any hope of illuminating the phenomenon. 
Open cases are suggestive of questions that seem defective. Take Eddington: “Are tables 
really solid? Science describes the tables as not solid, even though everyday talk does.” Or the 
IAU: “Is Pluto really planet?” These questions don’t have the same defect as asking whether or 
not swatch #376 really is red, or whether Mr. Smallman is a smidget. They also do not have the 
same defect as asking whether the ball is really on the left, never mind the viewer’s perspective.  
Knowing whether some icterid is a blackbird, or wall is a window, or horse is an athlete, does not 
appear to be a matter of knowing the context of utterance. Many expressions are indexical, like 
“I”, or otherwise contain unarticulated constituents, like “left”. The truth conditions of, “My pants 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
58 
are on fire”, or “The ball is to the left”, vary with some semantically encoded parameter whose 
value is determined by the context of utterance (if not facts about it). 
Of course, plenty of open predicates are context-sensitive. “Solid” likely has unarticulated 
constituents (one corresponding to relevant applied force: cakes are solid at a soda shop, but, at 
the hammershop, cakes are not solid). The ordinary celestial term “planet” does too: Arkas is a 
planet, just not in this solar system. But the openness of open cases does not determine on the 
context sensitivity. 
For one, arguments that such and so expression is context sensitive turns on robust 
agreement among competent speakers about utterance truth that is taken to be straightforwardly 
indicative of meaning. But this is precisely what open cases lack, or, when they have it, it does not 
appear demanded by their meaning.81 That speakers may come to agree suggests that meanings 
may be enriched in ways that persist across contexts. But unlike context-sensitive variation, 
linguistic choices govern usage from that point forward, across contexts. The mere fact that we 
can generate situations in which it is appropriate to say that “this horse is an athlete” (as opposed 
to that incorrigibly lazy one over there) is not by itself a reason to suppose the utterance is true as 
opposed to triggers a true implicature (which was the point of making the utterance in the first 
place). 
Let’s say “planet” is context sensitive in that its content varies with whether the context of 
utterance is before or after the IAU vote. As used in 1960, Pluto is in the extension of “planet”. As 
used in 2020, it is not. This is not a change in character, and so isn’t a change in meaning. A 
proposal like this can be understood in various ways depending on what’s meant by talk of 
properties. A property might be something with a modal profile—it is, or determines, a function 
that takes a world at a time to an extension. Or it might simply be a function from times to 
extensions. My own feeling is that if we adopt either proposal, or anything much like them, we 
have thrown in the towel. It is not clear why we should adopt such a proposal about “planet” unless 
we’re prepared to say the same sort of thing about every other seemingly non-context sensitive 
term. If we say this about the word “planet”, we are, in effect, saying that the word “planet” can’t 
change its meaning. For what we are saying is that speakers at some point started using “planet” 
 
 
81 See Fodor 1964. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
59 
to pick out a property accompanying the use of the word with a set of common paradigms, 
presuppositions, criteria of application, whathaveyou. These latter changed—by conscious 
regulation at least twice in the last 100 years, and several times before that—and those changes 
may or may not cause changes in the property picked out. But neither change in them nor in the 
property picked out counts as a change of meaning. In this way, the truth conditions of planet-talk 
may vary as the truth conditions of being to the left of-talk do, in a diachronic way (in addition to 
relevant solar system way). 
You can say that, but it is a just a sneaky way of saying that the notion of meaning has no 
descriptive, or explanatory, heft.82 Either the character of “planet” is highly intricate, a content 
corresponding to each future IAU vote, or all possible ones, or …There’s certainly no formula 
from ways the world is to which contents describe the character. (Contextualism about “know” 
fares much, much better). Moreover, this strategy seems to suppose there is some antecedent fact 
about what the contours of the character of “planet” are. And, as in the discussion of partial 
definition, is this is precisely what seems to be missing, yet there are reasons that bear on the 
application of the term going forward. 
Saying that “planet” has an extendable character does not advance the issue. At present, in 
the very same context, I can use “planet”-1960 and “planet”-2020. So, “planet” does not appear 
context-sensitive in this way. Talk of extendable character just repackages what was originally 
puzzling about the case. 
Now sometimes the right semantics for an expression may well be indexing the function 
associated with an expression to the time of utterance. Pace Richard 2019, “pasta” may be a good 
candidate. Uttered in 1800, the sentence “pasta can be made of bacon agar” may well be false, but 
utterances of that sentence in 2020 are true. “Pasta” has not changed its character, although, at 
different times, what is true of pasta has changed. The kind pasta, as it were, has grown up. Genres 
(culinary, literary, musical, and so on), institutions (like college), works in progress (my thesis) 
may be particularly amenable to this treatment. But many expressions do not pick out kinds that 
change their contours. Perhaps it may be argued that the possibility of creating open cases reveal 
precisely the opposite: that terms like “planet”, and “blackbird” do, in fact, pick out a single kind 
 
 
82 That’s part of why I take it in the early days of contextualism about knowledge it was taken to be a kind of deep 
concession to musty ordinary language philosophy. For discussion, and anecdotes, see DeRose 2005. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
60 
with shifting contours, and how those contours shift depends on speakers in some way. But this is 
highly unappealing. If someone says: “Pluto is not a planet anymore, but it used to be, just like 
merulas weren’t blackbirds but they are now.” The right reaction, plausibly, is: what happened to 
Pluto? Did the birds interbreed? Did they get darker? (Perhaps athlete is somewhat plausible 
candidate for a version of this treatment).  
More to the point, there is little reason to suppose that, all along, our terms pick out kinds 
that “grow up.” Suppose “caterpillars” came into use before their life cycle was well known. When 
it was learned, surely speakers could have gone on to talk of caterpillars getting their wings. 
Caterpillars grow up to be butterflies, and “caterpillar” “grew up” to refer to a phase in the life 
cycle. But there is, I submit, little sense in claiming all along its meaning destined this result. Is 
there more sense to saying that, say, “book” all along referred to a kind that would “grow up” to 
include eBooks?83 
Some predicates that figure in open cases are context sensitive, but not in a way that 
explains the openness of those cases 
8. Underdetermination 
We have dispatched analyzing open texture as a sort of vagueness, partial definition, or context-
sensitivity. We may wonder whether the apparent openness of the cases owes to semantic 
underdetermination. Perhaps our so-called open cases are open because they lack the pragmatic 
modulations that would supply the utterances truth evaluable content. So-called truth conditional 
pragmatics (TCP) holds that linguistic meaning of an (ordinary, non-indexical) expressions need 
 
 
83 Here is a real case with similar contours. Parasites often have bizarre and complicated life cycles. It often takes a 
lot of detailed research to link a parasite species at one stage with the same species at another stage. Sometimes 
independently identified and named parasites turn out to be different stages of a single species. Take, Taenia 
multiceps, a revolting but otherwise relatively harmless tapeworm found in the guts of rural dogs. Likewise gid (a 
neural disease of sheep) was known to be caused by Cenuris cerebralis, a cystic brain parasite. What should have 
happened when it turned out that C. cerebralis was the larval stage of T. multiceps? Both names were introduced by 
an implicit ‘that kind of parasite’ demonstration. Both in-the-head conception and prior expertise defer to hidden 
indexicality, and we would have discovered that “T. multiceps” and “C. cerebralis” referred to the same kind and 
therefore meant the same thing all along. Upon that discovery, would we decide which synonym to keep as the 
official species name, and the other would fall into disuse? This isn’t quite what happened. C. Cerebralis has gone 
on to be used for the larval stage of T. multiceps (which has gone on to be the name for the organism).  What should 
make it that T. multiceps, but not “butterfly”, refers to the organism rather than a phase stage? Surely all along there 
was no fact of the matter about which term referred to which property.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
61 
not be what the expression contributes to propositional content. The speech act contributes aspects 
of truth-conditional content that are not derivable from the linguistic properties of the sentence 
(even taking on board the mandatory assignment of contextual values to indexicals and free 
variables). This is compatible with the idea that the linguistic properties of the uttered sentence 
(plus saturation) do determine a minimal, truth-evaluable content, which may or may not coincide 
with the content of the locutionary act.84  
It is an empirical matter how many expressions are subject to pragmatic modulation and 
enrichment (the process by which an interpreter identifies a more particular relation to take as the 
meaning of an expression on a particular occasion of use). Perhaps only a few expressions, like 
“ready,” are although defenders suggest many more. It may be argued that they are open precisely 
because the circumstances supplied lacks the pragmatic considerations that would “swoop in” and 
determine a truth evaluable content 
An example illustrates the contrast between TCP and truth conditional semantics (TCS).  
Travis 1975 and Kripke 2011 each analyze a case they attribute to Austin but to different effect. 
The case runs as follows. A parent takes a child to a toy store where the toys are plastic models of 
various animals. The child asks, “Is that a goose?” The parent says, “No, that’s a duck.” What can 
we conclude about the meaning of “duck” from such an example? Kripke argues that to conclude 
much of anything commits the “toy duck fallacy”: what the parent says is literally false (although 
what is implicated is true).85 TCP unabashedly commits the “toy duck fallacy”: the parent’s 
utterance is true, and true just in case it is a duck, in this case a toy one. The restriction to the toys 
is the result, not of actual inferencing, but of pragmatic processing of the utterance in an under the 
hood sort of way. Which prediction is right? According to TCP, the minimal proposition it’s a 
duck is not even available to language users. If asked, any ordinary speakers who has just produced 
 
 
84 A stronger claim—sometimes called “radical contextualism”—takes content to be primarily a speech act notion: 
sentences possess contents only insofar as they inherit the content of the speech acts, they are used to perform. It 
follows that sentences by themselves do not carry (even minimal) truth-evaluable contents (Travis). They carry 
schematic meanings which only determine truth-evaluable contents in the context of a speech act, and how this goes 
is also not derivable from linguistic properties of the sentence. It is not semantically encoded. Radical Contextualism 
entails Truth Conditional Pragmatics, but not the other way around.  
85 Kripke writes: “One should not conclude that something is a legitimate use of language, something that ought to be 
recognized by a dictionary or semantic theory, even though there are appropriate circumstances in which one would 
say it” (345). 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
62 
an utterance like yours will—so it is claimed—deny having said any such thing. (“What? A real 
duck? Who said anything about that?”), as opposed to demurring. 
Perhaps then “Secretariat is an athlete”, or “glass walls are windows”, is rather like “it’s a 
duck”: its truth conditions are underdetermined by what is semantically encoded. If some 
utterances of the former are underdetermined or sound clearly false, that’s more evidence that the 
circumstance is impoverished of the pragmatic considerations necessary to yield a truth value, or 
that we import default pragmatic considerations.  (Though, by the same token, this analysis may 
seem to commit the toy duck fallacy).  
Arguments that some expression is subject to pragmatic modulation tends to rely on strong 
agreement about truth conditions associated with utterances. But this is missing. Open cases like 
those canvased at the outset of this paper figure in key arguments for truth conditional pragmatics 
(and radical contextualism), although they usually focus on schematic predicates, subject to 
fluctuating use. (The reason for this will become clearer in a moment.) These arguments usually 
take the form of underdetermination arguments, holding fixed the context of utterance, it appears 
the truth conditions of an utterances of a type vary across circumstance.  
Searle (1978) enquires into the truth-conditions of “The cat is on the mat”. It is easy to 
describe the sort of state of affairs that would make the sentence true (with respect to a particular 
assignment of values to indexical expressions). But once we have described such a state of affairs, 
we can embed it within an extraordinary situation:  
Suppose that the cat and the mat are in exactly the relations depicted only they are both 
floating freely in outer space, perhaps outside the Milky Way galaxy altogether... Is the cat 
still on the mat? And was the earth’s gravitational field one of the things depicted...? What 
I think is correct to say as a first approximation in answer to these questions is that the notion 
of the literal meaning of the sentence “The cat is on the mat” does not have a clear 
application, unless we make some further assumptions, in the case of cats and mats floating 
freely in outer space (211). 
Searle argues that when we describe an empirical situation, e.g., “the cat is on the mat”, we make 
certain features explicit, but an indefinite number of other features remain implicit and constitute 
a sort of hidden “background”, e.g., there are gravitational forces acting on both. The applicability 
of a term to novel situations depends on their similarity to the source situations, i.e. to the situations 
by association with which the term has acquired the meaning it has. For the term to be (clearly) 
applicable, the target situation must be similar to the source situations not only with respect to 
those features which easily come to mind and constitute the ‘explicit’ definition of the term, but 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
63 
also with respect to the hidden background. If the two situations considerably diverge with respect 
to the latter (the cat and mat are both in outer space), it is unclear whether or not the term will be 
applicable, even though the explicit conditions of satisfaction are satisfied. On this picture, the 
contribution that the Background makes to the content of representations cannot be represented 
truth conditionally because any representation of the contribution of the Background (a sentence 
in a semantic theory, for example) itself depends on the Background for its content.  
But, even granting that there are not any representations that have their content intrinsically 
(without some contribution from the Background), Searle’s argument assumes (without argument) 
that truth conditional semantics cannot rely on context-sensitive representations to represent how 
the Background affects the content of certain representations as they actually arise. Contrary to 
what he argues, the so-called open cases are not a compelling objection to truth conditional 
semantic approaches. (And one may suspect he wrongly concludes that a sentence S lacks context-
independent truth conditions from the fact that there are circumstances in which the truth value of 
S would be indeterminate). A similar response applies to Recanati’s version of this argument: it 
assumes that TCS is committed to giving a reductive account of the content of expressions. As 
long as TCS does not accept such a reductive account of content, then Recanati’s argument does 
not get a grip.86 
 
 
86 Underdetermination arguments against TCS, and for radical contextualism, proceed in somewhat similar terms, 
relying on so-called Travis Cases. TCS is the project of determining a way of assigning truth conditions to sentences 
based on A) the extension of their constituents and B) their syntactic mode of combination. A Travis Travis-Case:  
... consider the words “The leaf is green”, speaking of a given leaf, and its condition at a given time, used so 
as to mean what they do mean in English. How many distinct things might be said in words with all that true 
of them? Many. ... Suppose a Japanese maple leaf, turned brown, was painted green for a decoration. In 
sorting leaves by colour, one might truly call this one green. In describing leaves to help identify their 
species, it might, for all the paint, be false to call it that. So, words may have all the stipulated features while 
saying something true, but while also saying something false. (1994: 171-2)  
Travis describes two contexts, one in which we are sorting leaves by color and the other in which we are sorting 
leaves by species. In the two contexts factors A) and B) are the same. Yet the use of “The leaf is green” in the 
decoration-sorting context is true, but the use of it in the species-sorting context is false. Truth-conditional semantics 
is the project of determining a way of assigning truth-conditions to sentences based on A) the extension of their 
constituents and B) their syntactic mode of combination. Travis’s argument appears to show factors A) and B) 
under-determine the truth-conditions of utterances of “The leaf is green”. Travis concludes some information 
available in the context is relevant for determining the truth-conditions of the utterance, but which information is not 
semantically encoded. To the extent that Travis cases can be imagined all over the place, he takes this as a reason to 
endorse radical contextualism (although he might as well have endorsed the weaker TCP). See, for instance, Travis 
1989.  
Travis Cases, no matter how many can be constructed, plausibly only represent a threat to truth conditional 
semantics only insofar as it aims to give a reductive account of sentence meaning in terms of bivalent truth. If it does 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
64 
There is much to say about truth conditional pragmatics, and radical contextualism. We 
have touched on three questions. First: are our cases well analyzed by appeal to them? Second: do 
our cases really motivate one of these positions. Third: are RC and TCP are coherent, and are they 
viable competitors to truth conditional semantics? The answer to the first in some sense depends 
on our answer to the third, and this is a very complicated question. But it seems open cases do not 
provide a reason to prefer truth conditional pragmatics over truth conditional semantics insofar as 
the latter does not aspire to reductive account of meaning. Truth conditional pragmatics also leave 
significant questions unanswered. 
According to Recanati 2004, the correct interpretation of a modulated utterance is what it 
would be reasonable for the interpreter to take the speaker to have intended. One objection is that 
it ignores the fact that the primary basis for our knowledge of what other people have in mind is 
what they tell us. If from your saying, “the best currency is bitcoin”, I learn you believe bitcoin is 
the best currency, then that’s because there is something about his use of those words that allows 
us to make the inference. I can infer you believe bitcoin is currency, because I interpret your words 
in a particular way. So, we must be able to say what makes your words have that meaning on the 
occasion of your uttering them, other than that that is the meaning that we can reasonably assume 
you have in mind.87 
There is reluctance among linguistic pragmatists to treat seemingly polysemous 
expressions as genuinely ambiguous. Many of the predicates they analyze as undergoing 
modulation are schematic, and are another man’s polysemy (“use”, “lemon”). One source of this 
reluctance is Grice’s “Modified Occam’s Razor”, ‘senses are not to be multiplied beyond 
necessity” (1989: 47). This is usually construed as requiring that we not posit a new sense wherever 
there is a pragmatic derivation of the message from an uncontroversial old sense. 
 
 
not – which it need not — these objections have little bite. They might seem to suggest TCS cannot account for open 
cases (whether or not we endorse radical contextualism) since they can be constructed for open cases in ways that 
elicit stable truth judgments. But more is needed: an argument that predicates in open cases resemble stable cases 
like “lemon”, or “ready”, cases TCS would analyze as polysemy, or unarticulated constituents, respectively, and 
which “window”, as applied to glass walls, does not resemble on this score.  
87 Another objection: it assumes that thoughts cannot be open in just the way that spoken words can be. If mental 
representations can be open as well, though on the occasion of any particular tokening they have a more specific 
meaning, then we cannot equate that more specific meaning of a thought with the meaning of some other thought 
underlying it. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
65 
Everyone agrees that some expressions are genuinely polysemous, e.g., what generates 
ambiguity in “his eyes and his soul are blue”. The Razor, thus construed, cannot be right because 
it would make metaphors, and stock loose speech, immortal. The metaphorical meaning of a word, 
or what is communicated by loose speech, is derived from its conventional meaning. Over time, a 
metaphorical meaning often becomes regularized and conventional: the metaphor “dies”; the 
expression is now polysemous/ambiguous. Yet a derivation of what is now a new conventional 
meaning from the old conventional meaning is still available. That derivation will be center stage 
in the diachronic linguistic explanation of the presence of this new meaning in the language. But 
what is sought is not a theory that secures communication but an account of how language helps. 
Thus, appeals to TCP do not further the issue. 
Truth conditional pragmatists, more generally, eschew treating polysemous expressions as 
ambiguous. Recanati (2010) again: “it does not seem that there is a discrete list of senses available 
but, rather, a continuum of possible senses to which one can creatively add in an open-ended 
manner” (18).88 But the creative use of expressions is not at odds with the view he opposes. It 
accepts that an expression can have a speaker meaning other than its conventional meaning – in a 
metaphor, for example. And, in time, such a speaker meaning can become a new conventional 
meaning of the expression. Indeed, this is the story of polysemy (2010: 70). Everyone agrees that 
languages change. What then is the line between predicates like “get” and “use” subject to 
fluctuating use (plausibly not ambiguous), and an expression like “blackbirds”, which is plausibly 
ambiguous: “she eats, but won’t wear blackbirds” (said not at a food fight, but at the feather boa 
competition). Returning to our open cases: are we to think the meaning of “blackbird”, “window” 
underdetermined their truth conditions as applied to new birds, or new technology, in a way that 
permitted fluctuating use, as a schematic verb might? It is unclear why we should think this, as 
opposed to thinking that sometimes implicatures are semanticized. 
9. Non-Vagueness Indeterminacy 
We’ve dismissed vagueness, partial definition, context-sensitivity, and underdetermination as a 
models for open texture. Last one. Some indeterminacy is thought to be supervaluable. Sometimes 
vagueness is thought to be this sort of indeterminacy. Set vagueness aside. Maybe open texture is. 
 
 
88 See also Recanati 2004, p. 134, discussion of “get”. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
66 
It isn’t. One trouble is that too many sentences come out only partly true. A more interesting 
trouble concerns which expressions are indeterminant in this way.  
Suppose “athlete” is undecided with respect to non-human animals, and this is not because 
the term has an indeterminate meaning, but because we have failed to decide which precise 
meaning to give it. That we haven’t yet decided is consistent with the idea that the decisions that 
we have made can make some sentences true. Say a precisification of a language is a way of 
assigning a precise meaning to every word in the language consistent with the decisions that we 
have already made. So if we have decided that any object that is F satisfies “is an athlete,” and no 
object that is inanimate does, then on all precisifications, “is an athlete” will only be satisfied by 
objects that are F, and animate. But if we have not decided whether any objects that are non-human 
satisfy this predicate, then there will be some precisifications on which they do, and some on which 
they do not. The distinctive supervaluationist claims are  
(a) there are many precisifications of language, because semantic indecision is pervasive;  
(b) a sentence is true if it is true on all these precisifications;  
(c) a sentence is false if it is false on all these precisifications; and  
(d) if a sentence is true on some precisifications and false on others, then it is neither true 
nor false.89  
The indeterminacy in one term may be constrained by the indeterminacy in other terms For 
example, two extensions A and B may each result from legitimate sharpenings of respectively 
‘red’ and ‘orange’, but there may be no legitimate joint sharpening of ‘red’ and ‘orange’ that yields 
these extensions (e.g., if A and B overlap). Admissible interpretation of a language are those 
assignments of entities where each term is assigned a partial denotation in a manner that respects 
the constraints. Roughly, there is one global sharpening of all terms that yields the assignments 
made by the interpretation. Now truth can be defined via Bas van Fraassen’s supervaluation: a 
sentence is true (false) if and only if it is true (false) under all admissible interpretations; where 
truth (falsity) relative to an admissible interpretation receives the usual Tarskian treatment.90 
Not everyone uses this machinery for vagueness. Field (1973) proposes that Newtonian 
“mass” partially denotes (since nothing in pre-Newtonian usage settled the matter of whether (say) 
 
 
89 Though this is something of an exaggeration: correspondence theorists tend to reject (d).  
90 Field 1973 famously argues that scientific terms, in particular, “mass” as used in Newtonian physics does not 
determinately denote, and instead partially denotes. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
67 
an ant on Earth is heavier than an elephant in space space). He proposes an account of partial 
designation on which we can say that it partially picks out having greater weight than and partially 
picks out having greater mass than. Given our stipulations about the case, some sort of partiality 
or indeterminacy seems to be mandated if we assume that facts about usage (intentions, 
dispositions, etc.) at or before the time of utterance are what determines meaning. 
A few things. First, applied to “solid”, rather than “mass”, implies that very few older 
statement about solid things were supertrue. That’s a major cost. Terms have partial denotations 
related to each linguistic choice that is eventually faced and linguistic choices that could possibly 
be faced. 
The more open predicates are, the more partially they refer. We now know very many of 
our older terms to refer indeterminately, beyond those of scientific discourse. That’s reason to 
think many terms partially refer in ways that today they do not seem to. At least, with vague 
predicates, the indeterminacy is of the foreseeable sort. The more axes on which linguistic choices 
may arise, the more “acceptable precisifications. Supervaluationism for vagueness predicts non-
supertruth/falsity in the borderline. Supervaluationism for open texture predicts it more broadly. 
Some of our cases involve linguistic choices that herald belief revision, e.g., for “tables are solid”, 
whereas precisification around the borderline typically do not. So, in 1600, utterances of “tables 
are solid” is not supertrue, even if after we precifisifed similar utterances are. 
Second, it is not obvious that this account can make sense of semantic decision. For 
example, one might imagine various Newtonians debating the question of whether the ant or the 
elephant is heavier, giving reasons and arguments (e.g., the two objects could be lifted with equal 
ease, but the elephant would exert greater force). We can easily imagine one party backing down, 
retracting statements, and so on. We can imagine all this happening inside Newton’s head. This is 
how thought experiments work, and also interpreting the result of actual experiments. Assuming 
thought experiments can refine concepts, produce semantic decision there is a problem here. If it 
is indeterminate whether “heavier than” picks out having greater weight than or having greater 
mass than, no past users were determinately correct, and neither party to the debate is 
(determinately) correct; and if designation in this case is partial, both sides to such a debate would 
be partially wrong. A view like this does poorly capturing deliberation. There deploying one 
precisification, then deploying another. Likewise, there is no retraction. If we engage in 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
68 
suppositional reasoning and come to different conclusions, it appears we use different 
terminology.91  
It seems the possibility of making linguistic choices stands in a complex relationship to the 
possibility of defeat of ordinary beliefs. Let’s go back to 1600. There is no determinate fact of the 
matter that tables are solid (as used in 1600). There is a question about how to apportion our 
credences. Should we be less sure that tables are solid than that tables contain a fair amount of 
empty space? One reason to find this analysis unappealing is that, arguably, we cognitively 
imperfect creatures use imprecise linguistic language in part because being responsive to rational 
requirements associated with highly precise thought and talk is untenable. 
It is doubtful that the notion of partial denotation can be explained independently of the 
notion of truth. There is plenty of reason to think that the reference of some terms is prior to the 
sentences we take to be true. But this is not always so. The partial denotations of some terms (e.g., 
those introduced in certain theories) is settled in part by the (basic) sentences that we accept about 
them – or come to accept. The same may be said about many terms from ordinary discourse. So, 
truth does not appear to be reducible to partial denotation. I think this matters for reasons that will 
become clear. 
Fourth, the more partial reference there is, the more partial reference relation starts to look 
like the plain old reference relation coupled with epistemic tentativeness on our part. What makes 
it the case that “F” indeterminately, or partially, refer to X and to Y? They are acceptable 
precisifications. Presumably, that means X and Y are suitably precise, and they are acceptable 
because it is not determinately the case that X is F, and it is not determinately the case that X is 
not F (and so on for Y). So, explaining indeterminacy by appeal to having acceptable 
precisifications is not particularly clarifying. If the locution “not determinately the case that X is 
F” concerns a state of affairs, then there is no determinate fact of the matter about whether 
something is 1600-solid. Plausibly the distinctions we care about is as much between 
determinate/indeterminate facts, as determinate facts and determinate not-facts. 
Notice it seems unappealing to analyze in/determinacy in terms of ignorance/knowledge. 
Sometimes we can be ignorant when there is no fact of the matter to be ignorant of. I do not know 
 
 
91 Chalmers 2011 fails to draw a credible account of analyticity from Bayesian updating for similar reasons.  
 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
69 
what I want for dinner, and, when I come to know, it is not as though my doing so results from 
uncloaking a fact that was there all along. It is not indeterminate whether I want Indian for dinner, 
in the sense I do not know I want it (but there is a fact of the matter about my wants), or in the 
sense it is indeterminate (as opposed to determinate) fact of the matter. 
There is a question about how to express indeterminacy in the home language, when we 
are not dealing with vagueness. We can say: future scientific theories, ones more sophisticated 
than our own, will have two terms, which they hold are non-synonymous, and will look back at 
our own use of “F” and say for practical purposes it translates into the future language as “X” and 
other purposes as “Y”, and there is no further fact of the matter.92 This is unconvincing. Just 
because a future theory regards our term “F” as imperfectly translatable into “X” and “Y”, it 
doesn’t follow that our term is referentially indeterminate. Maybe “F” better carves nature at its 
joints, and future speakers have made a sort of unnatural distinction or are responsive to features 
we are not and reflectively do not care to be. Or maybe it is simply a different distinction. Suppose 
“F” is “sweater” and “X” is “redsweater” and “Y” is “greensweater”, and these future speakers 
have dropped “sweater” as hopelessly indeterminate. If characterizations of referential 
indeterminacy this way are to be extensionally adequate, the future theory concerning “X” and 
“Y” must in some sense be better than ours.  
The problem is that, by hypothesis, there aren’t resources for explaining what “better” 
comes to. We cannot say the future theory contains truths concerning “X” and “Y” that our current 
theory cannot express, at least not if we are disquotationalists about truth (and so cannot ascribe 
truth to conceptually alien theories). Likewise, we cannot say the future theories “carves at the 
joints” better than the current one. Because “X” and “Y” doing so is a matter of them referring to 
objects or properties that are special in some way. If the future theory is just “better” in some 
epistemic sense it had better not be one that presupposes the theory gets things more right in some 
sense that presupposes truth or joint-carving-ness. As far as I can tell, they must say the future 
theory is “better” because it exhibits more theoretical virtues than ours, simplicity, explanatory 
depth, coherence, and the rest. But that seems to put the cart before the horse. Theoretical virtues 
are supposed to be virtues because they are somehow indicative of the theory being true, getting 
 
 
92 See Field 2018, Leeds 1997.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
70 
the joints right. That’s why understanding referential indeterminacy in terms of translations might 
seem apt in the first place: “F” is referentially indeterminate iff “F” would be translated into 
multiple terms of a truer-and-more-joint-carving theory. But if we stripe away the epistemically 
better theory of these features, then again, this proposal seems extensionally inadequate. Imagine 
that “F” is translated into multiple terms “X” and “Y” of a future theory that exhibits more 
theoretical virtue but in fact is not any more true or revelatory of nature’s structure than our own. 
Is this sufficient for referential indeterminacy of “F”? It seems that it isn’t. All the more so when 
we are dealing with ordinary discourse, with all its plurality of vocabulary, rather than a discourse 
and subpart of language, which by stipulation is restricted to those that capture the scientific world. 
We could say “F” is referentially indeterminate if there is more than one eligible candidate 
referent in nature, each equally fit to be “F”’s reference as far as our linguistic practice is 
concerned. But if that’s right, how future speakers would translate “F” is beside the point. IF their 
theories are “better” than ours, then that’s partly because their terms carve at the joints better, are 
less referentially indeterminate. If “carves at the joints” is understood in terms that rule out 
determinate reference to medium sized dry goods, then we are left to wonder why we speak such 
a language, if we could do otherwise, or why we cannot do otherwise. If “carves at the joints” is 
understood in a way that does not, it is hard to see how appealing to indeterminacy helps address 
our open cases.  
10. Open Texture is Sui Generis 
Well, that was exhausting. Where are we? I’ve argued that open texture—stipulatively, that feature 
of expressions that gives rise to open cases—is not vagueness, partial definition, context-
sensitivity, supervaluable, or underdetermination. It’s not explained by recourse to the machinery 
of rigid designation, or plausibly a biproduct of finely tuned, but difficult to figure, metasemantic 
laws. Open texture may be characterized as a sort of linguistic choice point (it may go unnoticed) 
where there is more than one right way to go on. These choice points are often accompanied by 
semantic dumbfounding or dogmatism. They may cause reconsideration of core cases, or 
established entailments. Resolving open texture does not appear to result in meaning change. I 
think the fact that there is more than right way to go on with a predicate is sui generis. If you 
disagree—if you think it is analyzable as one or more of the phenomena canvased, then you may 
well think language does not have an open texture in some further interesting sense. I do. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
71 
The open cases set the mood, perhaps, for skepticism that much is semantically encoded, 
or at least semantically encoded as intensions. It goes without saying predicates have various 
associates: past applications, disposition to apply, characteristic inferences, projections, 
paradigms, presuppositions, associations, implicatures. What is encoded might be a general rule 
of application, reference fixing description, paradigms, beliefs, or facts about the environment or 
whatever. 
Maybe there is a recipe that takes some of these associates to a referent such that changes 
in the associates sometimes produce changes in referent. But why think there is any such recipe? 
One reason would be if the correct recipe is ahistorical: each instant has its own recipe. Another 
would be if there is one recipe (from the associates of the predicate to its reference) which is 
something like a weighted average: the further away from the present moment, the lower the 
weight some associate is given. A third would be if the future weighs more heavily, since we 
acquire more knowledge of what we want to be talking about. A fourth would be if the magic 
recipe perhaps involves speakers’ (counterfactual) judgments to determine a distinguished interval 
used to calculate reference. Perhaps it is implausible that there is anything about patterns of use or 
the intentions and beliefs of users that makes one of those, or some other story, the a-contextually 
correct story about reference.  
Discussions of reference often seem to presuppose a picture on which a word’s use is 
something like a collection of different “forces”, each pushing the word towards a particular part 
of the world, and thus a certain extension. To discover a word’s extension on this picture, one sums 
the forces to get a single net force; that total force gives the word a unique momentum through 
semantic space, thus determining a unique extension. Such discussions seem to assume that the 
various strands of a predicate’s use must compose somehow, that there must be a single recipe for 
combining all the facts about the way we use a word so as to come up with a best candidate for the 
word’s extension. But why should this be so?  
Consider, for example, the word “cat”. Suppose that more or less the same “mechanism” 
underlies all normal adult use of the word in perceptual situations. Given this, someone might 
suggest that to find the word’s extension we need to find the answer to the question “Which 
properties does this mechanism best register?” It would be silly to suggest that this question is 
irrelevant to the word’s semantics. Someone else may observe that the word “cat” is a member of 
a family of words that are associated with a kind of concept that has a long evolutionary history. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
72 
She may claim that to find the word’s extension we need to find the answer to the question “Which 
properties did this sort of word emergence and continued use intend to register?” Again, it would 
be odd to suggest that the answer to this question is irrelevant to the word’s semantics. There is 
the use of a predicate, construed broadly, and there is what kind of properties the word is meant to 
track, and what kinds of properties actually regulate its deployment. Why are we to suppose that 
there is a single proper way to commensurate their differing effects in computing an extension, as 
opposed to many ways of abstracting away from the question of just what the extension is to 
facilitate a theory of composition and validity in natural language?  
Perhaps there is nothing to know about an expression’s character such that it gives rise to 
open cases. That’s no knock on the utility of talk of character, and type level meanings, or the 
utility of compositional semantics, or talk of reference. The way I have suggested meanings are 
open is irrelevant for the core aims of these projects, and so not well represented in their machinery. 
Individuals are not perfectly described as sets of parts at a time either. But, for some inquiries, 
doing so is in order. Mostly when we theorize sentence meaning, we are not concerned with what, 
if any, features of it make some sentences intelligibly contestable in such a way that a) more non-
semantic facts will settle it or b) or the facts about what the sentence means would (if only we 
could know). But if we are, we do not want to theorize meanings in a way that obviates the 
phenomenon. That’s why it’s important to recognize that open texture is not some of the more 
familiar semantic phenomenon, and is not amenable to some familiar (absolute) metasemantic 
theories.  
Observations of this sort are sometimes parlayed into hyperbolic reflections that the 
aforementioned projects are wrong headed—an odd thing for one theorist to say to another when 
they are apparently so fruitful.93 Here are three levels of response:  
Extending the scope of the theory of meaning necessitates a new understanding of the formal 
structures and tools but it will not require us to abandon them altogether 
Extending the scope of the theory will lead to a dramatic reformulation and reimagining of 
the theory of meaning so that previous work will have to be discarded 
Extending the scope of anything like a theory of meaning to the phenomena we have 
discussed is impossible, that these phenomena are resistant to analysis by anything with the 
structure of a formal theory.  
 
 
93 Cf. Beavers and Stanley (MS) apparently think otherwise.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
73 
To my mind, all three are too hyperbolic. Likewise, cloud cover does not appear in scientific 
models of predator-prey relations. But there is no sense in which they need tweaking to reflect it, 
so long as we do not come to believe the model also describes the weather, conclude there is no 
weather, or that the weather is not of interest for other projects. 
 
 
 
References 
 
Austin, J.L (1946) “Other Minds.” Proceedings of the Aristotleian Society 20: 148–87. 
———. (1961) “On the Meaning of a Word.” In Philosophical Papers, 23–43. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press. 
———. (1962). Sense and Sensibilia. Edited by Warnock, G. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Beaver, D., and J. Stanley (2019) “Toward a Non-Ideal Philosophy of Language:” Graduate 
Faculty Philosophy Journal 39 (2): 503–47.  
Ben-Yami, H. (2016) “Vagueness and Family Resemblance.” In A Companion to Wittgenstein, 
edited by Glock, H. and J. Hyman. Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.  
Bromberger, S. (2012). “Vagueness, Ambiguity, and the ‘Sound’ of Meaning.” In Analysis and 
Interpretation in the Exact Sciences, edited by Frappier, M., D. Brown, and R. DiSalle, 
78:75–93. The Western Ontario Series in Philosophy of Science. Dordrecht: Springer 
Netherlands.  
Bueno, O, and M. Colyvan. (2012). “Just What Is Vagueness?” Ratio 25 (1): 19–33.  
Bunikowski, D. (2016). “The Origins of Open Texture in Language and Legal Philosophies in 
Oxford and Cambridge.” Rechtstheorie 47 (May).  
Burns, C.D. (1938). “Philosophy and the Physicists. Susan Stebbing.” Ethics 48 (4): 559–60.  
Byrne, A. (1993). “Truth in Fiction: The Story Continued.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
71 (1): 24–35.  
Chalmers, D. (2011). “Revisability and Conceptual Change in ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism.’” 
Journal of Philosophy 108 (8): 387–415. 
Clapp, L. (2012a). “Indexical Color Predicates: Truth Conditional Semantics vs. Truth 
Conditional Pragmatics.” Canadian Journal of Philosophy 42 (2): 71–100 
———. (2012b). “Three Challenges for Indexicalism: Three Challenges for Indexicalism.” Min 
& Language 27 (4): 435–65. 
Cummings, S. (2020). “Semantic Reasons.” Personal Website. 
Dasgupta, S. (2018). “Realism and the Absence of Value.” The Philosophical Review 127 (3): 
279–322. 
DeRose, K. (2002). “The Ordinary Language Basis for Contextualism, and the New 
Invariantism.” The Philosophical Quarterly 55 (219): 172–98. 
Devitt, M. (2013). “Is There a Place for Truth-Conditional Pragmatics?” Teorema 32 (2): 85 
102. 
Eddington, Sir Arthur. (1927). The Nature of the Physical World. Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
74 
Evans, G. (1985). Collected Papers. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Field, H. (1973). “Theory Change and the Indeterminacy of Reference.” Journal of Philosophy 
70 (14): 462-81. 
———. (1974). “Quine and the Correspondence Theory.” Philosophical Review 83 (2): 200-28. 
———. (2000). “Indeterminacy, Degree of Belief, and Excluded Middle.” Noûs 34 (1): 31. 
———. (2001). Truth and the Absence of Fact. New York: Oxford University Press.  
———. (2018) “Egocentric Content.” Noûs 51 (3): 521–46. 
Fodor, J. (1964. “On Knowing What We Would Say.” Philosophical Review 73 (2): 198–212. 
Gauker, G. (2017). “Open Texture and Schematicity as Arguments for Non-Referential 
Semantics.” In Meaning, Context and Methodology, eds. Conrad, S. and K. Petrus. 
Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter.  
Graff Fara, D. (2000). “Shifting Sands: An Interest Relative Account of Vagueness.” 
Philosophical Topics 28 (1): 45–81. 
Greene, M. (2011). “‘Chocolate’ and Other Kind Terms: Implications for Semantic 
Externalism.” The Philosophical Quarterly 61 (243): 270–92.  
Grice, H.P. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Hart, H.L.A. (1961). The Concept of Law. United Kingdom: Oxford University Press. 
Hawthorne, J. (2006). “Testing for Context-Dependence.” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 73 (2): 443–50.  
Hellie, B. (2019). “Semantic Gaps and Protosemantics.” In Quanta and Mind, edited by Acacide 
Barros, J., and C. Montemayor. Cham: Springer International Publishing.  
Kripke, S. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
———. (1984). Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language: An Elementary Exposition. Repr. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
———. (2011). “Unrestricted Exportation and Some Morals for the Philosophy of Language.” 
In Philosophical Troubles: Collected Papers, Volume 1. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
LaPorte, J. (2000). “Rigidity and Kind.” Philosophical Studies 97 (3): 293–316. 
Leeds, S. (1997). “Incommensurability and Vaguenes.” Nous 31: 385–407. 
Liston, M. (2005). “Does ‘Rabbit’ Refer to Rabbits?” 1 (1): 18. 
———. (2010). “Rabbits Astray and Significance Awandering: Review Essay on Mark Wilson’s 
Wandering Significance: Review Essay.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
81 (3): 809–17.  
Ludlow, P. (2014). Living Words: Meaning Underdetermination and the Dynamic Lexicon. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
MacFarlane, J. (2016). “Vagueness as Indecision.” Aristotelian Society Supplementar 
Volume 90 (1): 255-283. 
Montminy, M. (2010). “Two Contextualist Fallacies.” Synthese 173 (3): 317–33.  
Quine, W.V. (1951). “Two Dogmas of Empiricism.” The Philosophical Review 60. 
Raffman, D. (2014). Unruly Words: A Study of Vague Language. Oxford: Oxford Universit 
Press. 
Recanati, F. (2004). Literal Meaning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
———. (2010). Truth-Conditional Pragmatics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Richard, M. (2019). Meanings as Species. First edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Schauer, F. (2008). “A Critical Guide to Vehicles in the Park.” New York University Law Review 
83: 26. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
75 
Shapiro, S. (2006). Vagueness in Context. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Soames, S. (1999a). “Presupposition.” In Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Vol IV. 
———. (1999b). Understanding Truth. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Sosa, E. (2005). Ontological and Conceptual Relativity and the Self. Oxford University Press.  
Stalnaker, R. and T. Baldwin. (2001). “On Considering a Possible World as Actual.” 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volumes 75: 141–74. 
Stalnaker, R. (1978). “Assertion.” In Context and Content, 78–95. Oxford: Oxford Universit 
Press. 
———. (1999). “Twin Earth Revisited.” In Context and Content, 210–21. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Stebbing, L.S. (1937). Philosophy and the Physicists. London: Methuen & Co., Ltd. 
Stephen, S. (2013). “Quandary and Intuitionism: Crispin Wright on Vagueness.” In Essays for 
Crispin Wright: Logic, Language and Mathematics, edited by Miller, A. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Travis, C. (1975). Saying and Understanding. London: Blackwell Publishing. 
———. (1989). The Uses of Sense: Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Language. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press. 
Waismann, F. (1951)“Verifiability.” In Logic and Language, edited by Flew, A. Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell. 
———. (1968). How I See Philosophy. London: Macmillan and Co. Ltd. 
Waldron, J. (1994). “Vagueness in Law and Language: Some Philosophical Issues.” California 
Law Review 82 (3): 509–40. 
Williamson, T. (1994). Vagueness. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Wilson, M. (1982) “Predicate Meets Property.” The Philosophical Review. 91(4): 549-589. 
———. (2006). Wandering Significance: An Essay on Conceptual Behavior. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
Wittgenstein, L. (1968). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Wright, C. (2003). “Vagueness: A Fifth Column Approach.” In Liars and Heaps, edited by 
Beall, 
J.C. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Yablo, S. (2000). “Textbook Kripkeanism and the Open Texture of Concepts.” Pacific 
Philosophical Quarterly 81 (1): 98–122. 
———. (2002) “Coulda, Woulda, Shoulda.” In Conceivability and Possibility, edited by Szabo 
Gendler, T. and J. Hawthorne, 441–92. Oxford: Oxford University Press 
———. (2008). “No Fool’s Cold: Notes on Illusions of Possibility.” In Thoughts: Papers on Mind, 
Meaning, and Modality, 151–70. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Zeifert, M. (2020). Rethinking Hart: From Open Texture to Prototype Theory—Analytic 
Philosophy Meets Cognitive Linguistics.” International Journal for the Semiotics of Law 
- Revue Internationale de Sémiotique Juridique, May.  
 
 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
76 
Chapter 3: Going on in the Same Way 
1. Introduction 
Speakers make, and recommend, novel usages all the time. Sometimes it is tongue in cheek, as 
when Irving Kristol quipped conservatives are liberals that got mugged by reality. Sometimes it is 
in view of some discovery about a kind in question, say, about what ulcers are. Sometimes it is in 
conjunction with conceptual analysis, as when Frankfurt (2005) told us what bullshit is. Sometimes 
a word is used in a new way in conjunction with a radical theory, as when Clark and Chalmers 
(1998) told us that the internet houses some of our beliefs. Sometimes the new usage is also in 
conjunction with activist aims, as in the movement to use “woman” in ways that are inclusive of 
trans women (and exclusive of trans men).  
 
When a novel usage is received as particularly radical, it may be said to change the subject, 
say, from bullshit to bullshit*, or, more significantly, from belief to belief*, or from women to 
women*.94 Usages that become common within persuasive speech, or a subaltern group, or among 
experts (and those copying them), may be received as either outright false, or else subject changing, 
in other areas of discourse, and vice versa.  
For example, in 2015, Ta-Nehisi Coates argued that policing practices in predominantly 
black neighborhoods like Ferguson, MO, constitute a system of plunder.95 Some celebrated his 
analyses as obviously correct, or revelatory. Some agreed the practices are unacceptable, but found 
it obvious that “plunder”, with its standard meaning, does not apply truly, and non-figuratively, to 
them: either he straightforwardly misapplies “plunder”, or else speaks stipulatively about plunder*. 
One strategy is to argue that, although “plunder” may not apply, it should, and that we should 
revise our concept PLUNDER so that it does. But this proposal may also seem to change the subject 
from plunder, to something else.96 If the established usage is correct, novel usages associated with 
revisionary projects, and contentious conceptual analyses, appear to change the subject, or else be 
clearly false. 
 
 
94 See Bettcher 2012. 
95 https://www.theatlantic.com/international/archive/2013/10/when-plunder-becomes-a-system-of-
governance/280885/ 
96 Haslanger 2000, 2019 advocates pursues this strategy in response to charges that ameliorative analyses offer false 
accounts of the ordinary meanings of “woman” and “man”. In the interim, so-called conceptual engineers have 
followed suit.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
77 
That’s basically right, at least according to a standard picture of linguistic meaning. 
Concepts, understood as word meanings, are represented as functions—intensions—from any 
number of ways the world might be (even ones that boggle the mind) to extensions. A concept, 
then, can be thought of as a set of possible objects, namely the ones it is true of, and its negation 
as the rest of the objects. So, an expression cannot change its truth conditions while preserving its 
meaning. While the exact relationship between meaning and use is obscure, how an expression is 
used closely figures in determining an absolute fact of the matter about its meaning, what it is true 
of. So, to the extant established usages are correct, novel usages are either false, or else they 
concern a subject other than the usual one.  
It’s well known that radical, or revisionary, novel usages face a worry about continuity. 
The worry is roughly this: if I ask you a question about the Fs, and your answer concerns not the 
Fs, but the Gs, then you haven’t answered my question. You have changed the subject. 
Philosophers working in a range of areas express worries in a similar vein, for a range of concepts. 
Mark Richard (2019) on Haslanger’s ameliorative analyses of “race” and “gender”: “For that 
matter, doesn’t [Haslanger’s revisionary project] cross the line between conceptual therapy and 
stipulative rebranding?” Peter Ludlow (2005) on anti-contextualists in epistemology: “Any 
investigation into the nature of knowledge which did not conform to some significant degree with 
the semantics of the term ‘knows’ would simply be missing the point.” Peter Railton (1989) on his 
own revisionary naturalism in metaethics: “[If a revisionary metaethical naturalist] wishes to make 
his case compelling, he must show that his account of a person’s good is a rather clear case of 
tolerable revision, at worst.” Most pointedly, Haslanger herself: “Revisionary projects are in 
danger of providing answers to questions that weren’t being asked” (2000: 34). Most recently:  
When social change happens, there is likely to be controversy and disagreement about 
how to extend the concepts we’ve been using to do the work we now need them to do. 
Such changes should be acknowledged as such, and should not be held hostage to what 
we have thought we were doing all along, and how to continue that. (2019: 27) 
I think this response is unnecessarily conciliatory to the background picture of language that drives 
the subject change worry. This paper offers a surprising tweak.  
Whether radical and revisionary novel usages change the subject is related to a question in 
the philosophy of language about meaning over time. There, the main obstacle to conceptual 
continuity may be framed as a kind of contingency: if we could go on other than we do, we change 
the subject, however we go on. This can be brought out with a family of puzzles about diachronic 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
78 
synonymy, involving homophonic cross-temporal and counterfactual reports. I’ll sketch a solution 
where proponents of novel usages can have their cake — truth conditional semantics — and 
continuity too. It is the view that meaning facts are not absolute, but rather projected by the 
interpreter’s community. I think this picture puts the bump in the rug in the right place when it 
comes to conceptual contestation and continuity. At a minimum, it does not try to theorize these 
things by first idealizing away from them.  
In the background, I am interested in two different kinds of attitudes towards language. 
One is a kind of naturalist attitude that says, on the whole, users of the language are right about 
when they do, and do not, change vocabulary. Philosophers of language may describe, and explain, 
our linguistic practice, but neither they, nor anyone else, is in a position to correct it. The other 
attitude is more imperialist. It casts philosophers of language as experts, and part of the job is to 
go around telling people when they do, and do not, mean the same as others. Whether, for instance, 
activists are participating in a single social movement concerned with women’s rights, or creating 
a new second movement, concerned with something else (however extensionally similar). There 
are social reasons not to go around correcting people, but, at bottom, when people talk as though 
they mean as they always did, experts know better, or in principle could, because meaning facts 
are robust enough support such judgments.  
In some ways it is theoretically easier to have an imperialist standpoint, as we’ll see. There 
are fewer constraints on the theory. But to a great many people that just starts in the wrong place. 
The reasons for the naturalist attitude are not merely instrumental—not merely a means towards 
convincing others of activist or political claims, thereby advancing a cause. They are potentially 
internal to the aims of discourse, including activist discourse, and the theory of meaning over time. 
This paper sets out to vindicate the naturalistic approach.  
I’ll start by saying more about the subject change worry and why it matters (section 2). I’ll 
then motivate one version of the puzzle, and introduce some of its variations (sections 3-4), before 
considering some otherwise promising pictures of conceptual continuity that fail to adequately 
account for them (sections 5-7). These include temporal externalism, and the view that synonymy 
is a sort of similarity relation. In the last three sections of the paper, I sketch my preferred solution, 
and its implication for the subject change worry, and radical or revisionary usages. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
79 
2. The Subject Change Worry, and its Importance  
Let’s get things started with an illustration familiar from contemporary discussions about gender 
and sex within the public sphere. Twitter, that sewer of ordinary usage, is helpful. Take a tweet 
from The Human Rights Campaign (or HRC, a leading LGBTQ+ rights organization): “trans 
women are women, and trans men are men” (12/19/19). In the next few days, several users tweeted 
back. A sample:  
PheeberWeaver: I think it’s offensive someone male thinks they can redefine 
woman to suit their purposes.  
ForeverMagdalen: No one has the right to redefine Woman without women’s 
consent.  
ArlenaRioDell: I am not transphobic, changing the law to redefine woman affects me as a 
woman immensely. Also, affects my future grandchildren. You sweep our concerns under 
the rug.  
Whatever else may be said about the spirit igniting these comments, they evince a common feeling 
that the HRC speaks stipulatively: (said in the old vocabulary) it’s redefining women to include 
some men. Thus, it changes the subject, from whatever the ordinary term “woman” refers, to 
something else. Some so-called conceptual engineers, and ameliorators, have embraced the charge 
of redefinition—arguing we should revise our concept WOMAN so that it truly applies just this way. 
But again, there’s a worry that the subject is being changed.  
Continuity of subject matters to people. For example, it matters to people, regardless of 
gender identity, that their efforts to articulate who they are in other words have not failed in some 
appreciable way. Likewise, it’s important to some people that in advocating for the rights of 
women they are advocating for the same group that waves of feminists before them have advocated 
for, and that they may ask the questions that were asked, and sensibly disagree about the answers 
given. Say, it is important that they are thinking and talking about the same group that Simone de 
Beauvoir was, following through on her intentions, and continuing the fight for women that was 
started more than 75 years ago.  
Strawson (1953) gives voice to a more general worry in his exchange with Carnap about 
role of explication in philosophy. For our purposes, to the extent novel usages are not outright 
false, they may be thought of as stipulative explications.  
[T]o offer formal explanations of key terms of scientific theories to one who seeks 
philosophical illumination of essential concepts of non-scientific discourse, is to 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
80 
do something utterly irrelevant—is a sheer misunderstanding, like offering a text-
book on physiology to someone who says (with a sigh) that he wished he 
understood the workings of the human heart. (505)97 
While explication is consistent with the process of revising hypotheses in scientific inquiry, in 
philosophical inquiry it may be received as changing the subject. Somewhat less lyrically:  
[T]ypical philosophical problems about the concepts used in non-scientific 
discourse cannot be solved by laying down the rules of use of exact and fruitful 
concepts in science. To do this last is not to solve the typical philosophical 
problem, but to change the subject. (506) 
Strawson’s point concerns a distinction between inquiries that do not require results stated using 
the very concepts that kicked off the inquiry, and those that seek illumination about those very 
concepts. Some scientific inquiries fit the profile of the former, some philosophical the latter. 
When an investigation delivers a result that is taken to problematically change the subject, the 
inquiry has been stymied. Modernizing a bit, two worries latent in Strawson’s point are sides of 
the same coin:  
Continuity of Inquiry: if we change the intension/extension of the expressions we 
use in some inquiry, then we are no longer inquiring about the same thing. 
Verbal Disputes: if parties to a disagreement use a term central to the debate 
associated with different extensions or intensions, then they simply talk past one 
another: they express logically consistent propositions, rather than express 
substantive dispute.98 
When we engage in sustained inquiry into some topic—when we investigate or make choices about 
it, when we change our beliefs, or when we debate it—we have, in the typical case, the ability to 
be talking about that same subject over time, across theories, contexts, and viewpoints, even as we 
change our own beliefs or express disagreement with others. Despite these differences and 
changes, there remains a single topic of our discussion—a sort of stable communicative ground.99 
Novel usages—that purport to offer a revolutionary theory or engage in explication—would seem 
to threaten this crucial aspect of our inquiry and discourse. If instead of discussing a single topic 
 
 
97 For a more in-depth, if not uncontroversial, account of this exchange, see Pinder 2020. 
98 Bracketing issues related to variations in the standards relevant for context-sensitive, like “rich”. See Richard 
2004. 
99 The integrity of scientific inquiry may not require continuity of inquiry in this sense. See, for example, Chomsky 
1995. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
81 
over time and across speakers, we instead change the meanings of the terms central to those 
discussions, proliferate homonyms, then we have lost that stable ground.  
Preserving the continuity of inquiry has been invoked as near decisive support for the 
externalist claim that the meaning of natural kind terms in public language are at least partly 
determined by the underlying natures that give rise to the surface of phenomenon of interest, e.g., 
“water” referred to H2O even before the discovery that the wet potable stuff was H2O. In ordinary 
parlance, we say that scientists discovered that water was made of H2O, and learned what our term 
referred to all along (rather than the discovery heralding a change of vocabulary). Likewise, we 
take ourselves to be able to intend to do the very thing Socrates once intended to do: have a drink 
of water. We also take ourselves to be able to think about minds, those same things Descartes 
thought about, but prefer another theory to his.100 The ease with which we regulate usage of 
“water” by pointing out that this or that is (is not) chemically alike to what is in the taps and oceans 
is take as evidence about the meaning of “water” all along.  
 
One difference between scientific inquiries, and others, is that the usage of terms in the 
former are defined, deployed in the service of common goals, and disposable when they hinder 
progress. Terms of ordinary language—say, “freedom”, or “woman”—that we may hope to clarify 
by means of philosophic reflection are not deployed in the service of common goals, or subject to 
uniform patterns of deference, so much as a common interest in coordination and communication. 
The disparate uses of some terms, say, “free” or “coerced”, are most used tracing areas of 
contestation in public life. When we seek philosophical illumination of a concept associated with 
some phrase, we must answer to the present usage that sustains the phrase’s meaning, on pain of 
 
 
100 What does it take to kill an example? The story goes that Putnam 1975’s Twin Earth thought experiment—where 
we agree that water-y stuff on Twin Earth, XYZ, is not water—supports the claim that “water” refers rigidly refers to 
H2O, and that natural kind terms, more generally, rigidly refer to the hidden natures that give rise to surface 
phenomenon. Whatever else the argument establishes, it seems unlikely it establishes that H2O is the referent of our 
ordinary term “water”. That surely is shorthand. H6O3 has equal claim on being water, and “H6O3” is not synonymous, 
does not corefer with, “H2O”. (Putnam 1990 makes this point in the context of renouncing externalism, on his way to 
internal realism). Water is not identical with H2O, H6O3 and so on, because ice is not water (neither is steam) but both 
are similarly related to such samples. Fine, so water is composed of H2O, H6O3, and other like compounds, in a liquid 
state. In order for water to exhibit cohesion — one of its characteristic features— some reasonable amount of the 
molecules must actually be H+ and HO-. So, “water”, the presumptively scientific term that rigidly designates, is more 
like “polka dot” than it might seem. It does not refer to XYZ, but neither does it exclusively refer to H2O. The 
arguments of this paper suggest an asterisk to those who analyze the reference of natural kind terms by way of semantic 
externalism, since not all terms that go on to function as natural kind terms begin that way. Arguably, the real lesson 
of Putnam’s arguments is future temporal externalism. But that is beyond the scope of this paper. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
82 
changing the subject.101 I take part of Strawson’s point to be this: a persisting dispute, or question, 
about a concept, even after empirical information has been supplied, is not evidence that the 
concept should be explicated, analyzed away, as we might for the purpose of scientific inquiry.102 
We risk abstracting away from the very phenomenon we want an account of.  
It is a delicate matter. For example, does ordinary use of “water” share an intension with 
scientific use? Set aside Twin Earth, and whether “water” refers to, as it did all along, a chemical 
kind. Oceans are made of water, and so are grimy puddles, but these contain less H2O per unit than 
celery juice.103 If a new civic filtration system involved steeping water in tea leaves, and what 
came from the taps tasted of tea, we would still call it “water”, and likely stably go on to do so. 
Right now, if we made it in a pot, we’d call it tea.104 Suppose we do stably go on to call the filtered 
tap water “water”. Calling tomatoes “vegetables” in culinary contexts is not loose speech, would 
the situation with the new tap water be any different? Externalists will say that the point is that 
these things are not XYZ, and never are, and that competent speakers revise their use of “water” 
on the basis of information about what contains H2O (or like compounds) in what quantity. In any 
event, clarifying the ordinary term by pointing out that tea, club soda, coffee, really are just dirty 
water may well be received as changing the subject by ordinary speakers. 
Appeals to the physical environment only issue an exhaustive account of the ordinary term 
“water” by, in effect, abstracting away from the differential patterns of use that mark it as distinct 
from the scientific one. “Watch out—there’s a puddle of water on the street!” If it were a puddle 
of H2O, we would not be so concerned. It’s not that these sentences aren’t about water, per se. It’s 
that they are not quite about a chemical kind, liquid H2O. “Oh, stop it with the club soda already—
just drink tap water!” Depending on where you are, the club soda is a good shot closer to pure 
H2O. There is much of interest to say here, starting with what is sometimes called The Toy Duck 
Fallacy, following Kripke 2011. While Kripke cautions against reading too much (into the 
 
 
101 See Strawson on connective analysis, 1959, 1992.  
102 Strawson defends “imagining ways in which, without things other than ourselves being different from what they 
are, we might view them through the medium of a different conceptual apparatus” (513). 
103 Some figures for the percentage of H2O per unit for various liquids, courtesy of Pietroski 2005. Club Soda 99.9, 
Diet soda, not cola 99.8, Tea 99.7, Diet Cola 99.54, Stuff from Pietroski’s well 99.4, Coffee 99.39, Espresso 97.8, 
Ocean water,  avg. salinity 96.5, Michelob Ultra 95.4, Bud Light 95.0, Distilled vinegar 94.78. See: 
ndb.nal.usda.gov/ndb/foods/show/  
104 See Chomsky 1995. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09/08/2020 
 
83 
meaning) from differential uses, he also says sometimes they are not easily explained away (e.g., 
as truncation or loose speech, as Austin does). For now, it is enough to say the point may extend 
to reading too much into meaning from later tendencies to refine, or retrospectively, clarify usage. 
More than this is beyond the scope of this paper. The point for now is that ongoing controversy 
about the extension of some term, among competent, and tolerably well-informed, speakers, is 
significant, if this is what we hope to theorize. 
Of course, there is no ongoing controversy about the contours of the ordinary term water, 
and whether it is distinct from the scientific term. There are not contests of the dominant 
understanding of noteworthy adulteration is (“Club soda is water! Club soda for all!”). But there 
could be: say, the government distributes packages to purify urine instead of fixing bad tap water 
(“That is not water! And you know it” “Sure it is: NASA astronauts think so”). Appeals to experts, 
or chemical kinds, may put some people at ease. Some may even come around quickly to the 
solution being a source of water. But appeals to the machinery of externalism miss the point. 
Likewise, appeals to popular usage, the dictionary, high profile experts, or dominant 
meanings. These do not settle the dispute since these are precisely what one openly party contests. 
(And these appeals are likely to generate unwelcome implicatures). Pretheoretically, such a dispute 
also does not seem verbal, like a dispute about whether banks are where the money is or where the 
water is, or whether the ball is on the left (when it rolls between us). It seems like a dispute about 
whether the purified stuff is water, capable of intelligibly persisting among informed speakers. Our 
ordinary notion is bound up with action, but it need not follow that our dispute is a metalinguistic 
negotiation serving as proxy for, or biproduct of, a decision about what to do. Whether or not they 
think it’s water, strapped residents will use it and complain about it.  
To respond to the subject change worry for novel usages in non-scientific discourse, we 
must ask, “what does the continuity of continuous inquiry consist in, and what does the substance 
of substantive disagreements consist in?” And try to answer it without first idealizing away the 
phenomenon. This is the big question. That our words mean the same thing is one answer to it—
one theory of what forms the stable ground of our conversations and debates. Among non-experts, 
this happens to be among the most widely accepted answers at the moment. I think rightly so, but 
for somewhat odd reasons as will become clear. 

But many, including revisionary theorists and philosophers of language more generally, 
reject that theory. Simply observing that, in certain contexts, the sentence “the speakers are talking 
about the same thing” has a true reading in English, or is an acceptable falsehood, doesn’t provide 
such a response. The demand is not for the vindication of ordinary judgments or claims, but rather 
for a substantive answer to the big question—for a theory.  
But there is substantial pressure on this theory to vindicate ordinary claims, on pain of 
undercutting the motivations for thinking sentences express propositions in the first place. One 
good argument for believing that there are meanings, and propositions, is that the best explanation 
of the fact that I believe what you said is that there is something that you said which I believe. 
Likewise, a good explanation of the fact that “a cat” translates to “un chat” in French is that they 
may be represented as functions that make the same truth conditional contribution to sentences 
that they figure in. Part of the work propositions do is figure in a unified explanation of our 
judgments about content-match, or samesaying.  
A natural thought is that competent users of some expression are good at detecting when it 
is synonymous with another, even those used in a temporally or theoretically remote community, 
and that we can know when they are. That is, meaning facts seem perspicuous. Mental states 
belonging to the same agent certainly appear to overlap in content, as when I form the intention to 
do something I have always wanted to do. Content may also be shared between different agents, 
as when you finally realize something I never doubted, or you firmly hope for what I shudder to 
conceive. There is the practice of homophonic translation of older texts: we treat them as 
testimony.  
Content-match is at the bottom of norms of rationality, such as “Don’t intend to do what 
you don’t think possible” and “Don’t both believe and disbelieve the same thing.” It tells us our 
apparent knowledge that the present use of some term is synonymous with its uses in the recent 
past and near future is real knowledge. Intra-subjective perspicuity allows ignorance about what 
precisely the terms in question mean: that is no bar to being a good detector of synonymy. The 
rough idea is that an individual is generally in a position to tell when two of their mental states, 
say an intention and a desire, match in content. 
The intersubjective component of the relation grounds norms of interaction, including 
communication, the aim of which is precisely to transmit content. We care about engaging with 
the thoughts other people think and express. In many cases a necessary condition for doing that is 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
85 
samesaying, that we can evaluate what they said or thought. As a result, a kind community with 
whom we have access to what they think and said emerges. There’s a kind of alienation that 
happens when there is not intersubjective perspicuity. There may be barriers to contemplating what 
Thales meant when he said the world is composed of just one thing. Perhaps there is nothing we 
can say that samesays with Thales’ dictum. That may be right. At any rate, the situation seems 
significantly different in the case of my niece who avows that dirt is made of chocolate. I can 
samesay what she says and also assert that it is false, and know both of these things. Children are 
not too remote, and neither are speakers in the recent past and future or those in communities that 
are not too theoretically remote from our own.  
Perspicuity is the sort of claim denied only by experts. Semantic externalists often 
complain that semantic internalism (which ties meaning facts closely to individual variation) 
predicts that we commonly mean different things by our words, and hence that our reports of one 
anothers’ speeches are systematically false.105 Frege suggested people rarely mean the same thing 
by their words and that meanings are often glimpsed obscurely through a fog (it can take a long to 
time to figure out what a word always meant).106 But he is also said to have imposed a perspicuity 
constraint on content,107 and viewed it has an embarrassment to his view that there should be a 
common stock of thoughts passed down from earlier days.108 Similarly, anti-contextualists about 
a particular word often complain that contextualism about that word predicts that it rarely if ever 
happens that two utterances of the word contribute exactly the same content, so that speech reports 
involving that word are far more precarious than we normally suppose.109 Some epistemicists 
reject perspicuity on the grounds that small shifts in use induce correspondingly small shifts in 
reference.110 Clear-sighted homophonic reports of close neighbors prompt an epistemic worry. 
When the underlying changes are gradual, there are no tell-tale signs that distinguish cases of 
recent or imminent semantic change from cases of semantic stasis. How, then, can we know the 
 
 
105 See Burge 1979, Chalmers 2012. 
106 See Burge 1992 certainly sees perspicuity as an embarrassment to Frege’s view, suggesting Frege confuses the 
notion of sense having to do with cognitive significance with that having to do with meaning in a public language. 
107 See Evans 1985 (first published 1982), 18–19, on Frege 1892/1984 
108 See Abreu Zaveleta forthcoming, Hawthorne and Dorr 2014. 
109 See Cappelen and Lepore 2005. 
110 See Williamson 1994. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
86 
propositions expressed by our cross-temporal and counterfactual reports?111 What has not been 
fully appreciated is that, once we turn our attention to cross-temporal and counterfactual reporting, 
analogous problems arise for nearly everyone.  
3. First puzzle: Non-Branching 
Now that we’ve seen the force of the subject change worry, and some constraints on a satisfying 
response to it, let’s turn from synchronic synonymy to diachronic synonymy. There is a family of 
puzzles that turns on the observation that, sometimes, a word appears to maintain its meaning 
despite changes in its application conditions. This section sets out the first of these: the non-
branching puzzle. It takes the form of an inconsistent tetrad: four independently plausible 
statements that are mutually inconsistent. I’ll start by motivating a specific instance of it for the 
predicate “book”, before setting it more schematically.  
The first claim is this: Two predicates are synonyms only if they have the same intension. 
It’s widely accepted that two predicates are synonyms only if, no matter how things are, they apply 
to the same things. Somewhat more precisely: for two predicates to be synonymous they must 
determinately apply to the same things, indeterminately apply to the same things and determinately 
fail to apply to the same things. What a predicate does, does not, or indeterminately, applies to—
its truth conditions—is frequently represented as a possible worlds intension, where an intension 
is a function from possible worlds to extensions. The intension of the noun “book” is a function 
that takes whichever world is actual to the set of all actual books. A change of intension is, or 
produces, a change of meaning.112 
Of course, the noun “book” can be used to talk about spatiotemporally located things that 
carry inscriptions of certain contents, or abstract contents that get encoded in many ways and 
places. That is, “book” is polysemous: it has multiple “sub-senses.” Polysemy may be compared 
to homonymy, a case of distinct words sounding the same. It may be among the most interesting 
 
 
111 That’s one thing when it’s a problem for vague predicates – where an expression’s actual meaning is surrounded 
by a vast cloud of slight variants, all of which seem equally well qualified to be possible meanings and there variations 
are not at issue. But it’s another when the variations at issue, larger and more significant. Traditional anti-skeptical 
maneuvers may be helpful for the former (whether they are helpful enough is a good question), but they are beside the 
point for the latter.  
112 Perhaps synonymy requires more than sameness of intension. That’s fine for my purposes. For discussion of 
whether synonymy is hyperintensional, see Nolan 2014. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
87 
feature of lexical meanings, even if diagnosing examples can be hard.113 Just how words and 
meanings are individuated (the difference between polysemy and homonymy) is frequently treated 
as a sort of housekeeping issue, one that a standard way of thinking about meaning abstracts away 
from. Uses of the orthographic scrawl b-o-o-k, or pronunciations of the usual sounds, are 
synonymous just in case they are associated with the same intension, and intensions themselves 
do not contain lexicographical information. Uses of “book” with its text-sense are associated with 
one intension. Uses of “book” with its tome-sense are associated with another. From the standpoint 
of intensions, there is no difference between homonyms and polysemes.114 
The second claim is that “book” (with its tome meaning) as used in 1750 does not (or does 
not determinately) apply to eBooks. Think of Samuel Johnson, man of letters and writer of the first 
English dictionary. Plausibly, he had no disposition with respect to whether eBooks are books, or 
else conflicting ones. He may even have had a disposition to say otherwise. An eBook is the digital 
item one buys a license to when one buys a certain electronic file. When apprised of how they 
work, and what readers in 2020 do with them, we might imagine him pounding the table: “That, 
sir, is no book!” If we gave him a Kindle loaded with 1000 e-books, would he say, “I hold 1000 
books in my hand”? Plausibly not. The Kindle was released in 2007, within a few months the 
London Times worried that “the slow death of the book may be with us”, and The New Yorker, 
got out its violin, for an article, “The Twilight of Books.” We may imagine Johnson too would 
wring his hands about the impending death of the book. At a minimum, it seems improbable that 
the laws of meaning, such as they are, would fix it that “book” as used in 1750 determinately 
applied to eBooks in advance of the processes of negotiation and accommodation by which usage 
is extended when unforeseen, or novel, circumstances arise. Plausibly, “book” as Johnson used it, 
did not apply to eBooks (or, if you like, did not determinately apply to them).  
 
 
113 Bromberger 2012, Pietrovski 2005, 2018, Boguraev and Pustejovsky 1996, Vincente 2018, Recanati 2004. 
114 An avenue not treated in this paper is to contrast cases of polysemy with the predicates and uses of interest in this 
paper. There’s a good case that polysemous terms like “France” have one meaning (France) but associated with at 
least two sets of truth conditions (France is hexagonal, France is a republic, but France is not a hexagonal republic). 
Problems come if instead we try to assimilate names like “France” to entities that satisfy predicates: there are 
hexagonal republics, or else there are really two Frances. While people refer to things, words don’t. if we adopt the 
view that theories of understanding are theories of meaning, then we shouldn’t expect identity between meaning and 
truth conditions (/character).This may be worth exploring more. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
88 
The third claim is that eBooks are, in fact, books; that “book” as used in 2020 applies to 
eBooks. A Google for, “How to read eBooks?” turns up: 
Amazon’s eBook store is the largest on the internet. Aside from its huge choice of books, 
there are plenty of other features which keep customers coming back for more. 
For example, there’s the Kindle Unlimited subscription service. For $9.99/month, you 
can download and read as many books as you want from the collection of more than 1 
million titles. But you won’t find the latest releases or bestsellers on the list. 
Prime members also have access to Prime Reading. It’s an ever-changing library of more 
than 1,000 books, magazines, and comics that you can rent for free. 
The application of “book” to eBooks does not appear to be loose or metaphorical speech. Consider 
this infelicitous tweet from December 24, @FreeDailyeBooks:  
Free eBooks and reduced rate eBooks tracker/Crawler that eBooks on daily basis. Books 
here are $0.00 to $0.99 but make sure it is before you buy 
The infelicity is not on account of applying “book” to eBook. The blurbs discuss how to acquire a 
particular sort of book, the sort you can download, buy, rent, read, and that resides in libraries. 
These are uses of “book” for tomes, only these tomes are digital (as compared to abstract objects). 
When I read my Kindle, I report that I am reading one of the books in my library. The book I am 
holding is the same as the book I am reading, in this case, an eBook. It’s a bit odd to the ear to say, 
while holding only a Kindle “I hold 50 books in my hands”. But it does not seem odd because it is 
literally false (compare, if I were holding only a duck). Plausibly, it sounds a bit odd because our 
paradigm book remains a print book. We do not seem systematically mistaken that eBooks are 
books. We can imagine staff meetings in 1990s where engineers report toiling to create new and 
better books for the 21st century and celebrate their success, and a higher up commanding them to 
do so.  
Finally, the fourth claim is that “book” hasn’t changed its intension since 1750. In that year, 
Johnson penned a scathing review of Milton’s epic: “Paradise Lost is a book that, once put down, 
is very hard to pick up again”. Frankly, I agree with Johnson. I believe what he said, and am 
laughing at the same joke his contemporaries laughed at. Whether the joke resides in the semantic 
content of Johnson’s statement, or its implicature, it works precisely because “book” has a tome-
meaning, where the tomes in question are of the sort that are heavier the longer the text is. We 
report Johnson’s verdict homophonically. Disquoting is sufficient to translate him, fully, into the 
modern vernacular. We report that he talked about books, and intended to write books. We may 
imagine Johnson bragging, “In the 21st century, men will still read my books”, and, as a matter of 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
89 
fact, they are only read on Kindles. We are inclined to say he spoke truly, although he couldn’t 
have imagined the circumstances ensuring his continued fame. It seems fine to disquote, and infer 
his book is still a success. If book is a poor translation of Johnson’s “book”, the inference 
equivocates—which it doesn’t appear to do. Take Johnson’s imaginary utterance, “eBooks are not 
books”. At least in some moments, we are not inclined to say that such an utterance was true, or is 
true. We are most inclined to say it is false, and always was. These reflections form the inconsistent 
tetrad: 
(1) Two predicates are synonyms only if they have the same intension. 
(2) eBooks at 2020 are not (or are not-determinately) in the intension of “book” at 1750.  
(3) eBooks at 2020 are determinately in the intension of “book” at 2020. 
(4) “Book” at 2020 is synonymous with “book” at 1750.  
From (2) and (3), eBooks are in the intension of “book” at 2020, but not the intension of “book” 
at 1750. By (1), “book” changed its meaning between 1750 and 2020, which contradicts (4). 
Something has gone wrong. Which statement, or statements, should we reject?  
One immediate response is that, really, there is no inconsistency. What makes “book” talk 
true in 1750 is somewhat different than what makes “book” talk true in 2020, but the character of 
“book” has not changed. Books have. The situation is comparable to “college”: the truths about 
colleges in 1750 are different than the truths about colleges in 2020, but all along we have been 
talking about college. It is just that college has changed. Likewise, the tango has changed, but the 
character of “tango” has not. “Pasta” does not appear to have changed its meaning, although today 
some bacon agar is classified as pasta, whereas in 1800 it almost analytically would have been 
excluded. It’s not that “pasta” has changed its intension, it’s that pasta, as a food genre, has grown 
up.115 Perhaps these are the right analyses of kinds that can grow and change, that are in some 
sense historical particulars. But book is not obviously among them. But books, unlike colleges, are 
not institutions, and unlike tangos, are not obviously genres. They do not seem to be instances of 
a kind that grows and changes. Back to the tetrad. 
 
 
115 Richard 2019 considers the true heir to meaning talk to be the anchors of semantic competence, rather than truth 
conditional functions. In his sense, and analysis, it is indeterminate whether “pasta” has changed its meaning. But that 
does not conflict with my point here.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
90 
 
The defense of (2) appealed to the special relationship between meaning and use, or 
dispositions. Plausibly, speakers lacked dispositions to affirm eBooks are book, even in view of 
information about eBooks, and how the world would come to be. But the relationship between 
meaning and use, broadly construed, is obscure. Famously, there’s no worked out account of how 
that’s meant to go.  
Johnson was learned and capable, but plausibly neither he, nor anyone else, had formed 
dispositions to affirm conditionals such as “if people in the future invent widgets with such and so 
contours and call them “books”, then they are books”. Any conditional dispositions he may have 
had to affirm the sentence “eBooks are books” just in case he is confronted with widgets with such 
and so contours hardly seem dispositive of the meaning of “book” in advance of being triggered. 
For example, he might also have had conditional dispositions to affirm “eBooks are not books” 
just in case he is confronted with widgets with such and so contours, if near a post office.116  
 
One popular response is to say that the way of the world determines reference. Some 
properties are more eligible as referents, more natural, less gerrymandered, and “magnetically 
attract” the reference of our terms.117 For instance, being H2O is just more eligible as the referent 
of ‘water’ than being H2O and wet, potable, raining down… and so on. Suppose that is right for 
some terms. Even so, there does not appear to be an outstandingly eligible property to be the 
referent of “book”. Being a readable text in any format seems no more or less natural than being 
a bound and leaved text. Supposing one is, then there are two mysteries. One concerns how we 
know reference at all if we are not good detectors of the naturalness facts (suppose SJ knows 
“eBooks are not books”). The other concerns why we get to know them better and better (suppose 
he did not, but we know they are books). To the extent “book” in 1750 excludes eBooks, or does 
not determinately include, them, (2) stands.  
Claim (3) also appears secure. At least some uses of “book” in 2020 properly apply to 
eBooks. The Kindle marketing team, you, and I are not pervasively in error when we systematically 
refer to eBooks as “books.” We take ourselves, on the whole, to be good judges of the extension 
of our terms and what expressions are synonymous, when apprised of the general context. If not 
 
 
116 For argument to another sort of conclusion, see Chalmers 2011, and Grice and Strawson 1956. 
117 See Lewis 1984, McLaughlin 2016. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
91 
around the penumbra, say, of decaying unreadable pages, then at least around core cases. Call this 
consideration Charity. The trouble is that Charity is a reason to endorse (2) and (4) as well as (3). 
Charity is not so easily dismissed, at least this is a methodological assumption of this paper. 
If we start by investigating what evidence we get for synonymy (both synchronic and diachronic 
samesaying, as well as intra- and inter-subjective), judgments are of primary importance. What 
other evidence about meaning is there? We can start from a metaphysical stance, asking what the 
determinants of meaning are, and then investigating which usages stand to be synonymous from 
there. Mostly, philosophers of language proceed in this way, assuming that, in fact, there is an 
absolute fact of the matter about what expressions mean, and synonymy facts can be adduced from 
it. It strikes me that this approach is not well suited to investigating the change of subject worry. 
We may idealize away our judgments about conceptual continuity, but not when theorizing it. A 
further consideration is that beginning with the metaphysical approach ushers in the family of 
problems related to the determinacy of reference. Starting from our practice of gathering evidence 
about meaning suggests a more fruitful way forward. But a fuller defense of this approach is 
beyond the scope of this paper. 
Now I think there are many instances of the non-branching puzzles, including: pen (and 
quill), paper (and wood chip paper), slime mold, gene, talking (within earshot as opposed to the 
phone), rape (and marital rape), pet (and friendly barn loiterers), drug (and alcohol), addicted (to a 
behavior, not a substance), food (and nutritional capsules), family, witches (and unpopular women), 
kings (and divine appointees), solid, weight, temperature, ruby/topaz, glass, soup (and smoothie), 
selfie (with multiple people), B-flat, 5 degrees centigrade, head of household, mother (gestational 
surrogates), number (and 0), unicorns (and Marco Polo’s near “discovery” that they were as real 
as rhinoceroses).118 There are even more that we can imagine. These are cases where there is no 
outstandingly natural property in the vicinity of use, or fully uncontroversial patterns of deference, 
or a referent that is clearly institutional. The tetrad, more schematically:  
(1) Two predicates are synonyms only if they have the same intension. 
 
 
118 When Marco Polo arrived in China, he wrote that there were unicorns but not at all like what he expected. For 
one they had large, low heads, and thick-set bodies. They were rather more gray than white. We can imagine that 
had circumstances been slightly different, this mixed discovery—that unicorns are real as rhinoceroses—might have 
resonated through the European use of “unicorn”. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
92 
(2) X at t2 is not (or is not-determinately) in the intension of ‘F’ at t1.  
(3) X at t2 is determinately in the intension of ‘F’ at t2. 
(4) ‘F’ at t2 is synonymous with ‘F’ at t1.  
  
For example, when lightning struck sand, Greek-speakers called the product “ὕαλος” as early as 
the 8th century BCE. Speakers plausibly had no dispositions to apply “ὕαλος” to colored windows 
or firebird cars—having never encountered anything like them. Plausibly they wouldn’t be so 
disposed even after being apprised of their intrinsic and extrinsic properties. The early philosopher 
might even have said “ὕαλος” rigidly designated silica dioxide, and so did not properly apply to 
those things. Today scientists call many compounds “glass” – even some that lack silica dioxide 
altogether. Colored glass, fiber glass, cd glass are not diluted glass, or fool’s glass; they are just 
glass. Yet it seems clear enough that the Ancient Greek ὕαλος translates as glass. What glass is 
has not changed, even if we now know how to make more of it.  
4. Three More Puzzles: Branching, Fusion, Line 
Now I’ll introduce three variations on this puzzle. These add constraints to any solution to the 
branching puzzle. 
a. Branching 
Now suppose that things had gone differently: we did not classify eBooks as books, because, say, 
Barnes and Nobles waged a defamation campaign, rather than hopping on the eReader bandwagon. 
Plausibly, there is a new non-branching puzzle. On the one hand, in 1750, it is indeterminate 
whether eBooks are in the intension of “books” as used in 2020. On the other hand, in 2020, it is 
true that “book” has not changed its intension since 1750, and so true in 1750 that eBooks are 
determinately not in the intension “book”. That the two non-branching scenarios are intelligible 
suggests speakers in either world could have gone on with “book” other than they did. Yet, 
whichever way they went on, “book” does not change its intension. 
Now suppose the 18th century use of “book” was the ancestor of two subsequent linguistic 
communities, one in the US, and one in UK, both of which take themselves to be faithful to the 
original use. In the US, “eBooks are books” is false in 2020. In the UK, “eBooks are books” is 
true. If both groups mean by “book” as they meant along, it follows they mean the same as one 
another in 2020, assuming synonymy is an equivalence relation. Contradiction. We can represent 
the situation as an inconsistent triad: 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
93 
(1) eBooks are not in the intension of “book” as used in the US in 2020; it hasn’t changed 
its intension since 1750. 
(2) eBooks are in the intension of “book” as used in the UK in 2020; it hasn’t changed its 
intension since 1750 
(3)  “Book” as used in 1750 for tomes (as opposed to texts) is not ambiguous. 
Speakers in the US that deny that eBooks are books take themselves to mean as they did. Had 
either later community not existed, there could still be a branching puzzle.  
Let’s return to Charity. It says that speakers tend to be good judges of synonymy. We may 
suppose at least one fragment community speaks truly. Now consider Parity. It says that, if 
statements of one fragment stand in the same relation to past use as the statements of another—if 
they are comparable similar in respect of naturalness, fitting patterns of deference, attitudes of 
speakers to prior use, and so on— they are on a par with respect to synonymy to it. So either both 
fragments’ mean as was meant, or neither do. The US and UK uses of “book” plausibly stand in 
the same relation to the 18th century uses of “book”. Together Parity and Charity suggest both 
fragment communities speak truly. If only one speaks falsely, that violates Parity. If both do, that 
violates Charity.  
 
More schematically: there is a community C that splits into two fragments F1 and F2 that 
function independently. As the members of F1 and F2 learn more, they express their revised views 
using their old vocabulary, but find different ways of doing this, with the result that certain terms 
in F1 become clearly non-synonymous with the corresponding term in F2: were the fragments to 
start interacting again they would never translate each other homophonically. And yet neither 
fragment recognizes a change in their own usage from before the fragmentation: each would 
translate C homophonically.119  
Fictional examples are a dime a dozen, though real life ones are somewhat harder to come 
by. Partly this is because when usage diverges, it tends to diverge even more. We can identify 
some brief time frames that resemble a branching case. For example, British and American uses 
of “chip” for crispy bits “chipped” off a potato, or New World uses of Old World terms for flora 
 
 
119 Wilson 1982 (e.g. the example based on The Island of Lost Women that opens the article), and in Lance and 
Hawthorne 1997 (the modified Salem witch story, p. 45). Field 2009 has an example, involving logical vocabulary, in 
particular negation as used in three different logics. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
94 
and fauna. Notice that branching, like non-branching, cases can be constructed more often than 
speakers judge themselves to change vocabulary. It often seems as though we could have gone on 
other than we do with a term, but that, if we had done so, we likewise would not have judged 
ourselves to change vocabulary. 
We can imagine many more versions of a branching puzzle: ones with more than two 
branches, ones where one of the branches splits twice, ones where a branch splits and one of 
resulting fragments closely resembles an original branch.  
Cases of branching usage call to mind the person fission thought experiments.120 Each 
branch, taken on its own, appears to be identity preserving, but cannot be in the presence of the 
other branch, on pain of transitivity failure. Parfit (1984)’s influential conclusion is that the notion 
of sameness of person relevant in everyday commerce, the one that “matters”, does not track 
numerical identity of persons and is not itself an equivalence relation. Likewise, expressions where 
branching cases can be constructed must not be identity preserving along either pathway (never 
mind if branching usage actually occurs). I’ll discuss this response to the puzzles in section 5.  
 
b. Fusion 
A third sort of case involves branching, in the opposite direction: instances where non-synonymous 
subaltern usages come to resemble one another such that at a later time it appears some expression 
is synonymous with both earlier usages. Call this a fusion case.  
 
“Liber” entered Latin as a name for birch bark, but soon acquired, as a secondary meaning, 
scroll (which were sometimes written on birch bark). When codices were invented in Roman 
around the year 0, they were a run-away hit. By 300 AD, the number of codices and scrolls were 
roughly equal. The codices-exclusive term, “caudax” (a term for block of wood), dates back as far 
as uses of “liber” applied to scrolls and codices. Let’s imagine going somewhat differently. 
Suppose in the Western Empire, scrolls called “libri” were invented first. Suppose at the same time 
in the Eastern Empire, codices were invented first, and called “libri” on account of being often 
made on birch bark. Some years later East-West trade became easier, and each part was pleased to 
 
 
120 Williams 1970, Parfit 1987. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
95 
discover a new style of “liber”, taking themselves to mean all along as they always did by talk of 
“liber”. This is a fusion case. 
(1) In the East at 0, codices are not (or are not determinately) in the intension of “liber”. 
(2) In the West at 0, codices are in the intension of “liber”. 
(3) At 100 AD, “liber” means as it did in the East at 0, and as it meant at in the West at 0. 
(4) “Liber” as used at 100 AD is not ambiguous. 
Some real life fusions do not involve common expressions, or fragmented communities. In the 
later 19th century, “dipsomaniac” was introduced as a medical term for heavy drinkers displaying 
highly compulsive behavior and the delirium tremens, among other things. “Drunk” was 
colloquially applied to those who were often visibly drunk and disorderly. “Dipsomania” and 
“drunk” as used in the late 19th century are not synonymous. But there’s also good sense to the 
claim that both are synonymous with “alcoholic” as it is used today: that being a drunk, being a 
dipsomaniac, and being an alcoholic are all the same thing, and that some drunks are rarely visibly 
drunk, and may no longer drink. Question: “what’s the difference between alcoholics and drunks?” 
Answer: “Alcoholics go to meetings.” Possibly the joke works precisely because it thwarts the 
expectation it establishes: the punchline points up a difference in register, rather than extension. 
“Dipsomania” retains some usage today but for a clinical profile much more restrictive than it once 
was. 
These cases are unlike this one: suppose the samba merges with the mamba, and we call it the 
“amba”. Genres grow and change. What it is to be an alcoholic, or be a book, or have PTSD, does 
not seem to be like this. 121 Another response is that we did not realize “Hesperus” and 
“Phosphorous” were synonymous until we did more astronomy. Likewise, we did not realize 
“dipsomaniac” and “drunk” were synonymous until we did more medicine and psychology. But 
this is dis-analogous. The established patterns of deference for astronomical terms were absent for 
 
 
121 Another: Just fragmented discourse. In the 19th century, a particular constellation of symptoms were dubbed 
“railway spine” after it was determined many of those presenting symptoms had been in railway accidents. After a 
time, people began presenting with those symptoms who had not been in high speed accidents, and railway spine 
started to be classified as a kind of hysteria (distinguished from head and neck trauma). A similar constellation of 
symptoms was dubbed, “battle fatigue”, after it was learned that many with them had recently been in combat. 
Arguably, the later uses of “railway spine” and “battle fatigue” are enshrined in the diagnosis of “PTSD.” These 
expressions pick out, and indeed did pick out, one and the same phenomenon. However, “railway spine” and “battle 
fatigue” do not seem synonymous with one another. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
96 
“drunk” and “dipsomaniac”. Facts about human behavior made it likely that these terms would be 
deployed for a condition we would later call “alcoholism”, but did not mandate it. Use of the one 
might have been restricted to anti-social behavior, the use of the other to physical symptoms, or 
outmoded theories of addiction.122  
 
c. Sequential Puzzle 
Another sort of puzzle involves cases of gradual changes in usage, or cases of sequential revision. 
Take a word with a storied history like “livid.” Its use has evolved gradually over the last few 
centuries. Initially, it was applied to the purplish/bluish color of a bruise (as the Latin “lividus” 
was). Today it is applied to angry emotions, and the bright reds of angry faces. The meaning of 
“livid” is evidently not the same at the beginning and at the end of this history, and there were a 
number of steps in between: 
(1) at t1, “livid” is applied to grayish/bluish colors of bruises 
(2) at t2, “livid” is applied to ashen color, the color of corpses 
(3) at t3, “livid” is applied to ashen color, the color corpses, and of angry-looking faces 
(4) at t4, “livid” is applied to red/purplish color of angry-looking faces 
(5) at t5, “livid” is applied to enraged people.  
It might appear to follow that there is at least one second-long interval such that the meaning of 
“livid” is not constant throughout that interval. But given the gradual character of the underlying 
changes, all the second-long intervals are extremely similar in relevant respects. This makes it 
tempting to conclude that semantic changes occur during all of them, or at least during some non-
trivial proportion of them. 
More generally, we may consider a long series of possible worlds, each only slightly 
different from its neighbors in microphysical respects, stretching from the actual world to one in 
which the use of “livid” is very different, and conclude from the fact that there are no non-arbitrary 
grounds for positing semantic discontinuities at just a few points in the series, all or most of the 
worlds in the series differ from their neighbors as regards the meaning of “livid”. Never mind the 
 
 
122 Such cases perhaps suggest analyzing puzzles in terms of the metaphysics of words, but that is beyond the paper’s 
present purpose.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
97 
niceties, it seems there must be some sharp cutoffs. “Livid” does change its meaning a few times. 
Plainly “livid” today does not mean ashen (Charity). 
But it also seems speakers, at any time, rightly aver they mean the same as they did at any 
adjacent time (even considering some temporal remove). The problem is that if speakers at each 
time are good judges of synonymy, and take themselves to mean as their immediate neighbors, 
everyone means the same thing (Parity). But that cannot be right.123 The sequential problem: 
(1) “Livid” as used at t1 is not synonymous with “livid” as used at t5. 
(2) Uses of “livid” are synonymous with uses at adjacent times.  
As far as I am concerned, we need not distinguish cases of novel usages due to theoretical revision 
and those due to changes in practical circumstances. Thus, I think there’s a sequential case for 
“gene”, and “temperature”, as well as “livid”, and “nice”. We can imagine cases that involve both 
sequential and branching elements, as perhaps “centigrade”, and “B-Flat” have undergone. 
 
One question concerns how similar the sequential puzzle is to the non-branching, 
branching, and the fusion cases. The answer in part depends on whether these puzzles have a 
unified source. It is not entirely clear, but I tend to think it is similar enough to warrant inclusion. 
The sequential puzzle, like the others, arises from diachronic synonymy judgments, the sort of 
judgment that seems unproblematic when considered on its own, but not alongside other such 
judgments. Even so, only the sequential puzzle arguably relies on a tolerance principle.  
5. Future Temporal Externalism: Deny (2) 
The next three sections consider three responses to the puzzles, taking off from the non-branching 
puzzle. While otherwise appealing, these are unable to account for the other puzzles, or only at 
substantial cost. Recall the non-branching puzzle:  
(1) Two predicates are synonyms only if they have the same intension. 
(2) eBooks at 2020 are not (or are not-determinately) in the intension of “book” at 1750.  
(3) eBooks at 2020 are determinately in the intension of “book” at 2020. 
(4) “Book” at 2020 is synonymous with “book” at 1750.  
 
 
123 In effect, this is an argument that meanings are not at the edges of a partition; it’s most straightforwardly an 
argument against modal robustness, which is beyond the scope of this paper.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
98 
 (2) looks secure if meaning is determined by past and present use. But if the intension of “book” 
in 1750 depends not only on its usage to date, but on how it will go on to be used, (2) looks less 
secure. eBooks may well be in its intension in 1750, because of how 21st century speakers went on 
to use it. 18th century speakers just did not, and could not, have known. 
This view predicts that a world where speakers go on to classify eBooks as books is one 
where, all along eBooks were books. It also predicts a world where speakers go on to deny that 
eBooks are books is one where, all along, eBooks are not books. That speakers could have gone 
with “book” other than they did does not entail that “book” changes its meaning. This looks like a 
satisfying resolution of the non-branching puzzle. 
The claim that present fact depends on future occurrence is not as outlandish as it first 
sounds. Sometimes the distribution of certain properties depends on future occurrences. Which 
rendezvous among friends are dates depends on what happens later on. Some are dates, not because 
of the stated intentions, or secret mental states of the participants, but because of the romance that 
later bloomed. Likewise, some move in a chess match may count as the winning move, not because 
it thereby forces a win, but because of the unforced strategy adopted later by the opponent. When 
we improvise musically today, whether we are playing the first refrain, or another verse, depends 
on what we play later, just as whether it’s classical, or heavy metal, depends on how loud and how 
fast we get. Perhaps meaning facts at a time, like date facts, or winning move facts, or genre facts, 
depend on events that occur later.  
It’s popularly thought that facts about linguistic meaning depend on facts that “ain’t in the 
head”, such as those residing in the speaker’s physical environment, or usage in the broader 
community.124 This is the thesis of semantic externalism. It’s also popularly thought that meaning 
facts depend on facts about how expressions were used in the past. This the thesis of past temporal 
externalism (PTE).125  
Future temporal externalism (FTE) is true if the meaning of at least some expressions 
depends on how they go on to be used at a later time. It has contemporary defenders, and a growing 
number, as well as some historical sympathy.126 Wittgenstein (1967): 
 
 
124 Burge 1979, Putnam 1975. 
125 Kripke 1980. 
126 Jackman 1999, 2005, Ball MS, Sawyer MS. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
99 
Let us imagine a god creating a country…which exists for two minutes and is an exact 
reproduction of a part of England…One of these people is doing exactly what a 
mathematician in England is doing, who is just doing a calculation. —Ought we to say 
that this two-minute-man is calculating? Could we for example not imagine a past and 
a continuation of these two minutes, which would make us call the process something 
quite different? (336)  
While he is not talking about linguistic meaning here, plausibly he suggests that if we can associate 
with “+” the addition function (rather than say the quaddition function), 2-minute man would count 
as calculating, in particular he would be adding. The association of “+” with the addition function 
(or not) depends not only on what happens before the two minutes, but what happens afterwards. 
But how long afterwards? Donnellan (1983):  
An outrageously bizarre view of language—that the extensions of one’s terms may be 
determined by the psychological quirks of some people several centuries hence (201) 
[and] just as bizarre to suppose that the extension of one’s terms should depend upon … 
future historical accidents (202) 
Never mind the time frame. Conventions take some time to establish. It’s commonly thought 
meaning is established at least in part by convention. But, if future practice cannot determine past 
meaning, it seems it need not do so at all. (Why not hold that whatever determined the meaning of 
“+” in advance of some convention taking root determines its meaning afterwards as well?) If the 
convention one’s usage participates in partly determines the meaning associated with that usage, 
there may not be some collective agreement beforehand about what that convention is like, nor an 
antecedent fact of the matter. This is just the observation that usages of an expression helps to 
establish the conventions that govern it.  
To be sure, FTE has some surprising repercussions, and amplifies some odd consequences 
of past temporal externalism. For instance, PTE predicts we cannot introspect facts about meaning 
because we cannot introspect how speakers across town use (or used) language, or facts about our 
physical environment. Meaning facts are like facts about popularity in a large high school: because 
these facts supervene on attitudes and dispositions of students in other wings, students they may 
never have met, students cannot introspect who the most popular student is. Future temporal 
externalism tells us that some of these speakers are in the future (the “other wing” is in the future, 
as it were). It predicts that meaning facts are not introspectable because we cannot introspect the 
future. While we can research the physical and social environment, we can only predict the future, 
and any uncertainty is inherited by beliefs about expression meaning.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
100 
FTE links knowing about the future and knowing about meaning. If we did know what we 
meant, we could know surprising facts about the future. For instance, because I know that meal 
replacement capsules are not food, I know that a rich company didn’t invent them in the future 
(because if the company were rich, they’d buy ads that would establish a convention of calling 
them “food”….).127 Likewise, if I knew the identity of the most popular song in America, I would 
know all sorts of surprising things about America – for instance, that Americans do not love pop 
music as one might expect, and so on. But, of course, because we do not know this sort of surprising 
fact about the way of the world, we don’t know what our words mean. 
It’s well known that a priori knowledge of meaning is difficult to come by for externalist 
theories.128 The problem is particularly keen for FTE. Supposing we know FTE is true, meaning 
facts look undermining. When we flip a coin to decide whether to fragment the linguistic 
community, just by knowing that “book” means book I can know whether the coin will land heads. 
I can think to myself “book” means book and it wouldn’t have if usage branches in the future. 
Suppose that it’s 20 years ago, and I know that in 20 years this prototype will be called a “book,” 
and speakers will say a new kind of book was born on this very day. Do I thereby know that eBooks 
are books? Plausibly not. Even if a knowledge of meaning is elusive for non-future versions of 
externalism, facts about utterance truth are still knowable (insofar as we often know we are not in 
deviant circumstances). Knowledge of the sorts of future contingencies that shape future usage is 
on much less sure footing.  
FTE may appear incompatible with the knowledge norms of assertion, because it ties 
knowledge of meaning to knowledge of the vagaries of future use. Suppose Stalnaker asserts: 
“That is either Zsa Zsa Gabor or Elizabeth Anscombe.” On his account, he asserts the diagonal 
proposition. (There are also other possibilities.) The temporal externalist should not accept that the 
diagonal is what is asserted, because that is not something she stands to know at the time of 
assertion (potentially). But she can help herself to the idea that the assertion adds the diagonal to 
the context, and this is enough to let the conversation proceed. 
This is not a fully satisfying response. Consider the whole conversation. When we retract, 
we make it the case that the proposition we asserted was one that we did not know. But we also 
 
 
127 See Ebbs 2000. 
128 See, for example, Boghossian 1989.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
101 
retract the assertion: an appropriate response, given that the norm was violated. And similarly, 
when we stick to our guns, we make it the case the proposition we asserted is one that we did 
know. Here there is no violation of the norm, so the re-assertion is appropriate. (Analogy: making 
a promise that you can keep, but might not.) The knowledge norm of assertion is a regulating target 
for speakers and as such capturing it is a kind of hurdle for theories of assertion, of knowledge, of 
metasemantics. That speakers satisfy the knowledge norm is thanks to structural features of the 
metasemantics, not speakers’ epistemic relation to the asserted contents. But that is not the spirit 
of a norm of action, which is what the knowledge norm of assertion is. A bump in the rug is getting 
moved, in a way that makes for more, not less trouble for the present purposes.  
There are other reasons to be uneasy about FTE. Externalism about “beech”, “arthritis”, or 
“sofa”, is compelling because we defer to our linguistic community, and judgments of experts. We 
defer to the linguistic community because we coordinate with them, and we defer our judgments 
to those who, if we knew what they did, we would speak as they do (and our peers would too). But 
these reasons lack analogues that support future temporal externalism. We coordinate with our 
temporal peers, not future speakers. We defer to matters of fact, the sort of thing experts might 
now, but which we ourselves do not. We do not defer to what is presently unsettled, in the way 
that the future is. These are not knockdown arguments, but they are pleas for a more robust defense 
of FTE.  
Whatever FTE’s merits, it is fails as a solution to the puzzles. While it offers a potentially 
satisfying treatment of the non-branching puzzle, its treatment of the branching and sequential 
puzzles reveal that it is unstable: its predictions undercut its motivations (at least for the present 
purpose).  
Start with the branching puzzle. UK speakers go on to affirm “eBooks are books” and US 
speakers go on to deny it. Temporal externalism predicts, on this basis, that “book” as used in 1750 
is either ambiguous or indeterminate. By hypothesis it is not ambiguous: US and UK speakers 
speak a common language in 1750. But if it was indeterminate, then 18th century uses of “book” 
are not synonymous with later US and UK uses. FTE predicts that meaning change accompanies 
future branching. What’s more it predicts semantic differences where intuitively there are none. 
Take a world qualitatively alike to the world with branching, but which unceremoniously ends 
with a bang in 1950. FTE either predicts a) pre-1950 uses of “book” are not synonymous across 
these worlds (it is indeterminate in the one, but not the other), or else b) they are synonymous, and 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
102 
that “book” is indeterminate in both worlds. If the latter is right, FTE predicts that whenever 
branching usage is possible there is indeterminacy. This undercuts the solution it appears to offer 
to the non-branching case: it is not that (2) is false (and eBooks was in the intension of “book” all 
along), but, rather, (4) is false: “book” as used in 2020 has a different intention, is not synonymous 
with, “book” as used in 1750. 
Let’s go back to the two versions of the non-branching case discussed above (in one Barnes 
and Nobles wages a defamation campaign). Notice FTE predicts that there is meaning change in 
both cases: it predicts the meanings facts at 1750 are the same in each case, but is unable to explain 
speakers’ later judgments that they mean as they once did. If FTE instead predicts that “book” 
means differently in the short-world than in the long-world, speakers come out bad judges, not just 
of the intension of their term, but of whether they mean the same as one another—since “book” in 
these worlds would seem to be synonymous, as synonymous as any expression that did not undergo 
future branching. The reasons to account for semantic errors in terms of deference to usage in the 
community, or the way of the physical world, do not carry over. We do not coordinate with future 
speakers, by appeal to them, or by appeal to future events.  
Now take a sequential case. It poses a special problem for FTE. Does the meaning of “livid” 
as used in 1820 supervene on the use of “livid” 50 years after that, or 150 years after that? Suppose 
speakers are right to judge they samesay with those whose usage only deviates slightly from their 
own. Speakers at t1 judge that they mean what speakers at t2 do. So, t2 is in the supervenience 
base for the meaning of “livid” as used at t1. Speakers at t2 judge that they mean what speakers at 
t1 and t3 do. So, t1 and t3 are in the supervenience base for “livid” at t2. Speakers at t3 judge 
themselves to mean as speakers at t4 and t2. So, t4 and t2 are in the base for t3. But then t1 is as 
well, since t2 means as t1 does, and so on. On pain of predicting the meaning of “livid” is constant 
across all the time slices, FTE predicts meaning supervenes synchronically, or else speakers are 
incorrect in their samesaying judgments fails. That is, either FTE fails, or else its motivation for 
the present purposes is undermined. To the extent meaning supervenes on use at, or up to, the time 
of utterance, FTE is false. If FTE is correct, it does not furnish a satisfying resolution of the puzzles. 
So, set it aside.129 
 
 
129 Should we find a counter public that uses “computer” and “phone” slightly differently from ourselves but with as 
much assurance, we might rearrange what we find it reasonable to say about what our expressions mean (or not). But 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
103 
6. Similarity View: Deny (1) 
Let’s return to the non-branching puzzle.  
(1) Two predicates are synonyms only if they have the same intension. 
(2) eBooks at 2020 are not (or are not-determinately) in the intension of “book” at 1750.  
(3) eBooks at 2020 are determinately in the intension of “book” at 2020. 
(4) “Book” at 2020 is synonymous with “book” at 1750.  
We tried some strategies for denying (2), most recently FTE, to no avail. Another strategy is to 
deny (1) and affirm instead: two predicates may be synonyms, in the ordinary sense, even if they 
do not have the same intension. What’s required for synonymy, or the truth of samesaying 
judgments, is either sameness of something else—topic, say—or else similarity, of something, 
either of intension, of functional role, of the semantic anchors of competence, of sets of 
intertranslateable expressions, or something else. These views have some intuitive appeal. While, 
the jargon “having the same linguistic content” and “having the same intentional content” comes 
down to having an identical intension, we may doubt they capture ordinary samesaying and 
synonymy. In particular, they may seem too demanding.  
There’s also appetite for this idea, and it presently appears in a few different incarnations 
in the literature. Haslanger (2019) argues that concepts may be individuated by functional role, 
and conceptual continuity is ensured in “F” talk so long as there is continuity in the functional role 
it occupies in our lives, even if the informational content (intension) associated with “F” changes. 
Sundell 2020, implicitly following Haslanger, expresses sympathy for this idea. Cappelen 2018 
responds to the subject change worry by appeal to sameness of topic, where topics are individuated 
by ordinary samesaying judgments.130 Sawyer (MS) attempts to individuate Cappelen-esque topics 
by reference to future usage. Richard 2019 argues that conceptual continuity consists in continuity 
in the anchors of semantic competence: in effect, continuity is preserved so long as fluid 
communication and coordination is.  
 
 
surely what “phone” and “computer” mean around here is no different than what they mean in a world with such a 
counter public. Perhaps the off chance of there being a counter public should not shake my faith in temporal 
externalism. But first I’d need a reason to support a crazy view like this. It says what “F” means in standard Boston 
English right now may hinge on what future speakers do, and whether rockslides occur, and how quickly Mennonites 
in Ohio come around to iPhones. 
130 Perplexingly he recruits only talk about “says”, despite Hawthorne 2006’s points about the looseness of says-talk 
in his eviscerating review of Capellen and Lepore 2005. But never mind. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
104 
 
If synonymy does not consist in sameness of intension, then (2), (3), and (4) are not 
inconsistent. “Book” as used as 2020 samesays with “book” used in 1750 does, although eBooks 
are in the intension of one but not the other. An expression may retain its meaning, in this sense, 
while changing its intension. Novel usages are not subject changing insofar as subjects are not 
individuated by intensions. That’s the basic insight. The basic cost is that of offering an error 
theory for ordinary content attributions and talk of samesaying. Doing so leaves the subject change 
worry otherwise intact (on pain of denying that there is anything else for content attributions to 
consist in). Neither is particularly attractive.  
Start here. Notice that the compelling strategy for denying (1) is to deny that, in ordinary 
content attributions, samesaying is an equivalence relation. Theories of conceptual continuity that 
rely on identity of something are subject to versions of the puzzles. Since identity of anything is, 
presumably, an equivalence relation, branching and fusion puzzles may be constructed (say, where 
each fragment community takes itself, but not the other, to preserve, the topic). Non-branching 
puzzles may be constructed if there are asymmetries in the judgment about whether, say, “book” 
as used in 1750 concerns the same topic, fills the same functional role, has the same intension, as 
“book” as used in 2020. Sequential cases may be constructed insofar as speakers are good judges 
of synonymy (whatever that consists in), and gradual variations in usage do not appear to produce 
change in topic, functional role, intension. If functional roles and topics are individuated by 
samesaying judgments, versions of the puzzles likely persist. (Plausibly Johnson would deny that 
talk of books in 2020 concerns the same topic as his talk of books, though we would affirm it). 
Cappelen is explicit that topics are individuated by samesaying judgments, and there is nothing 
more to them. So if crosstemporal and counterfactual reports involving “book”, and samesaying 
judgments, produce puzzles (as they do) efforts preserve subject matter by retrenching to topics 
cuts little ice. Likewise, when accusations of subject change are levied against novel usages in 
ordinary discourse.  
Theories of conceptual continuity that rely on similarity of something—role, anchors of 
competence, intension—fare better. Similarity relations are not equivalence relations. For 
example, A may be similar to B and C without B and C being similar. So, in the branching and 
fusion puzzles, use of “F” in each fragment community may samesay with use of “F” in the 
heterogenous community, without being ordinarily synonymous with one another. The claims 
compromising the sequential puzzle come consistent: temporally adjacent uses may all be 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
105 
ordinarily synonymous without temporally remote ones being so. Novel usages may still samesay 
with established uses even if their truth conditions may be distinct. 
Even so, we might wonder how these views fare in explaining the source of the puzzles. 
For example, homophonic translation succeeds in some cross-temporal reports, but not in 
analogous counterfactual reports. “Johnson extolls the virtues of books” is true, but “If Johnson 
were here, he would extoll the virtues of books” is not obviously true. The reason is that if Johnson 
were here, what he extolls is not the referent of our term “book”. Counterfactual reasoning like 
this is part of the support for (2). Cross-temporal reports are part of the support for (4). The 
synonymy-as-similarity view does not on its own explain why homophonic reporting should 
succeed in the one but not the other. For example, suppose samesaying, conceptual continuity, 
consists in similarity of functional role. It’s unclear how to analyze the difference between the 
reports. It appears homophonic translation succeeds because the functional role of “book” as used 
by Johnson is continuous with our own. But, in the nearest world where Johnson is here, it fails 
because talk of “book” does not fill a functional role continuous with the one filled by our term 
“book”. It sounds as though it is relevant similarity in intension is doing the work, rather than 
continuity of functional role. Perhaps the antecedent makes salient the gap between Johnson’s 
usages, and presumptive dispositions, and our own.131 
Denying that ordinary attributions of samesaying, ordinary continuity of subject, is an 
equivalence relationship comes at a cost. If there are intensions, associated with expressions and 
sameness of intension is what true samesaying consists in, then the strategy for denying (2), in 
effect, offers an error theory for ordinary attributions. Distinguish two versions of the subject 
change worry. The first concerns cross-temporal reports, counterfactuals, and samesaying claims 
in ordinary discourse. The synonymy-as-similarity-of-something view does vindicate unmarked 
samesaying judgments in ordinary discourse. But, plausibly, most of these do involve sameness of 
intension. (One may wonder about the motivation for a theory of continuity that repudiates 
complicates the basis of unproblematic ordinary judgments.) 
The second subject change worry concerns these phenomena in a more theoretical register. 
If the intension/extension associated with an expression change, speakers before and after the 
 
 
131 There are many troubles with treating synonymy as mere similarity, but they are beyond the scope of this paper. 
See Fodor 2002 (especially ch 5 and 6). 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
106 
change will semantically express propositions that are about different kinds of things. Similarly, 
speakers who express disagreement using the respective meanings will semantically express 
propositions that are logically consistent. So the similarity-as-synonymy-view does not advance a 
satisfying explanation of the puzzles, or novel usages. For example, in some cases, where semantic 
change appears to have taken place, inquiry is only continuous colloquially, and disagreement only 
substantive colloquially. In disputes, where what is at issue is whether the subject is being changed, 
this cuts little ice. Entering a more theoretical register is not that hard. You do not need a seminar 
room. (“Johnson’s word “book” is not really synonymous with ours” or “Locke didn’t really mean 
property as we think of it”). If the intensions of the relevant terms had remained constant in these 
cases, we would have an account of what makes the inquiry continuous and what makes the 
disagreements substantive—the speakers inquire into the same kinds of things; they express 
propositions that are logically inconsistent. But if there has been a change of intension in these 
cases, then there is no way to explain what it is that’s continuous about continuous inquiry and 
what constitutes the substance of a substantive disagreement. By this token, the synonymy-as-
similarity-view offers no way to represent the problem when novel usages are contested, and 
accused of changing the subject. There is an absolute fact of the matter about whether they do, or 
do not, and that fact appears to consist in whether the novel usages express the same intension as 
established ones, or not.  
7. Semantic Vocabulary is Plastic: Deny (4) 
Let’s again return to the non-branching puzzle.  
(1) Two predicates are synonyms only if they have the same intension. 
(2) eBooks at 2020 are not (or are not-determinately) in the intension of “book” at 1750.  
(3) eBooks at 2020 are determinately in the intension of “book” at 2020. 
(4) “Book” at 2020 is synonymous with “book” at 1750.  
Strategies for denying (1) and (2) have foundered. Another strategy is to reject (4), on the grounds 
that, there are in fact, many different synonymy relations, not because ordinary synonymy talk 
should be analyzed as similarity talk, but because semantic vocabulary is highly sensitive to the 
use facts, and so, in effect, “synonymous” has one intension at 1750 and another at 2020. Thus, in 
1750, (4) is false, but in 2020 (4) is true. At any given time, synonymy consists in sameness of 
intension.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
107 
Dorr and Hawthorne 2013 suggests another sort of response. They are concerned with 
capturing speech reports and counterfactuals in view of some puzzles given two options about how 
word meaning supervenes on the world. Assume the semantic facts supervene, at least 
nomologically, on facts specifiable in some “lower level” vocabulary, such as that of microphysics. 
Imagine two models for how such supervenience might work for a given such fact. On the first, 
the semantic facts in question supervene on the base in the same way as the fact that a certain 
person’s height is between 61 and 62 inches. Tiny changes in the underlying base sometimes 
produce semantic changes but mostly they don’t. They call this being modally robust. On the 
second model, the semantic facts (true semantic propositions) vary more like the proposition that 
four particular point-particles are arranged in a perfect square: whenever it is true, there are 
arbitrarily tiny microphysical differences which would make it false. They call this being modally 
plastic. 
They argue various considerations suggest that non-semantic vocabulary frequently is 
robust, while semantic vocabulary is plastic and vague. What variance in the base definitely 
produces semantic changes is a vague matter resolved by the context of utterance. (It is vague and 
so frequently contextually determined whether uses of “P” express P or P* when the supervenience 
base for “P” is in the boundary region between “P” definitely meaning P and definitely meaning 
P*). The argument is that such a view avoids the problem with thinking non-semantic vocabulary 
is modally plastic: doing so leads to pervasive error in ordinary counterfactual speech reports. A 
view like Dorr and Hawthorne’s also avoids the problem with thinking non-semantic vocabulary 
is modally robust: if it is, it might appear some utterers of “P”—those “near” a partition—are 
mistaken to think those in nearby worlds express what they do by “P.” Dorr and Hawthorne argue 
that if semantic vocabulary is modally plastic and non-semantic vocabulary is modally robust, 
speakers will express what their immediate neighbors do by P.  
This view is tailor-made to fair well with the non-branching, sequential and fusion case, 
although one may wonder what precisely about usage is such that “F” as used at one time refers, 
refers*, refers**, but at any given time semantic vocabulary only expresses one of these relations. 
But an explanation of why in a branching case usage at a time should indicate a relation where 
earlier and later usages of “F” express the same intension, while at the earlier time semantic 
vocabulary indicates a relation that does not. One might suspect that an explanation of that is what 
a more illuminating, less ad hoc solution to the puzzle looks like. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
108 
Even so, the plastic picture successfully predicts the expected truth-values for some 
counterfactuals and speech act reports that struggle if non-semantic vocabulary is plastic or else 
the partitions sharp. For instance, “if Sally were here, she’d ask for a salad” and “He said Sally 
asked for a salad” turn out false if “salad” means salad but is modally plastic or on the boundary 
with meaning salad*. Sally would ask or asked for salad*. They analyze these statements If Sally 
were here, she’d ask* for salad and He said Sally asked* for a salad.  
On their picture there are a plurality of relations for every apparent piece of semantic 
vocabulary. For every variation in the supervenience base – the facts that determine meaning – 
there is an assertion-like relation, meaning-like relation, a belief-like relation and so on. It predicts, 
in effect, that homophonic utterances made in communities that vary only slightly with respect to 
the supervenience base will very frequently express the same proposition. Or rather: one utterance 
asserts P and the other asserts*; “P” in one community means P and “P” in other community 
means* P.  
This picture upholds perspicuity in the sense that when speakers take themselves to inter- 
or intra-subjectively relate to the same content they often do. It’s just that the relations in question 
vary very finely. It may be true that “I believe what she believes” but it’s being true involves two 
distinct belief relations. What the sentence expresses is I believe what you believe*. Testing 
whether this satisfies perspicuity: ask yourself is that synonymous with “I believe what you 
believe.” Plausibly the answer is no. That’s enough to reject their view by my lights.  
Dorr and Hawthorne’s view is in part motivated by the thought that some unfortunates near 
the edge of their cell will be prone to making false counterfactual/ cross-temporal reports. How do 
we know that we are not like them? We could endorse the claim that those who are not too 
dissimilar from us should be interpreted homophonically. But how could we know that? The 
trouble is that if there are any worlds where homophonic interpretation is appropriate, there must 
be close worlds w1 and w2 such that homophonic interpretation is appropriate for w1 but not for 
w2. Philosophers at w1 speak falsely when they endorse the claim above. Treating semantic 
vocabulary as plastic and boundary regions as contextually-resolvable vagueness goes part way. 
But the trouble reemerges when it comes to reports of reports, like “I believe what you believe.”  
Moreover, a view like theirs will do nothing to address the asymmetries in synonymy 
judgments I have identified, unless they may be explained as contextual variation on either side of 
the boundary region for non-semantic vocabulary. The idea would be when one is reporting on a 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
109 
particular temporally or counterfactually close situation, the vagueness of semantic vocabulary is 
partly resolved so as to make the report legitimate. That doesn’t help for the kinds of cases I care 
about. Turn to the sequential case. I’ll suppose there is boundary vagueness, because they would 
for that sort of case, but we could as easily suppose there is not.  
Suppose that Fred uttered “In August, Barney said that the bruise was livid” once in 
September and once in October. On the second occasion, the similarity between the usage of 
“livid” in August and October was salient to him. Because of this, the vagueness of semantic 
vocabulary was resolved on that occasion in such a way as to make “Barney in August meant the 
same thing by “livid” that I mean now” legitimately assertible. During the September speech, the 
similarity between September and August was salient to Fred, but the similarity between October 
and August was not salient to him, since he was not thinking about October. On the proposed 
account, this difference in the salience facts means that the vagueness of “say” is resolved 
differently in Fred’s September and October speeches. Thus, it is not definitely the case that there 
is a single proposition that Fred asserted both in September and in October. So, if you, on some 
later date, say “Fred has twice said that in August, Barney said that the bruise was livid,” your 
speech will not be definitely true, even if the similarity between all the earlier dates is salient to 
you on that later occasion. Predictions of this sort are problematic on their own. No minor tweak 
will help: it is of the essence of the approach they put forward that it buys us the right to discount 
certain small differences in use as irrelevant to the meaning of non-semantic vocabulary only at 
the price of making small differences extremely relevant in the case of semantic vocabulary. These 
maneuvers also make no head way addressing the apparent asymmetry of our synonymy 
judgments, unless it’s by appeal to contextual variation in the meaning of semantic vocabulary. It 
hard to see how that could help. Plasticity of whatever vocabulary creates problems for reports of 
use of that vocabulary. 
All this is to say, reports of reports require an error theory if semantic vocabulary is highly 
plastic. But avoidance of error theories is just what drove us to endorse the plasticity of semantic 
vocabulary in the first place. So, let’s set this approach to the puzzles aside.  
8. Preferred Solution to the Puzzles: Projectivism 
Some otherwise attractive strategies for rejecting claims (1), (2), and (4) of the non-branching 
puzzle founder. Error theories for ordinary content attributions bring costs, as do appeals to the 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
110 
behavior of future speakers or to a multiplicity of semantic relations. My preferred strategy, 
projectivism, avoids these pitfalls. We co-refer when we samesay, and we more or less know when 
we do. But projectivism denies that there are absolute facts about meaning. For example, 
projectivism says that, in 2020, the utterance “eBooks are books” does not have a truth value. It 
only has one in view of a perspective, say from the perspective of 2020 (true), or of 1750 (false). 
Mostly this makes no difference because the perspective of the assessor and the perspective of the 
audience/speaker are the same. Mostly, we are right by our lights. The next section makes a 
conjecture about why this might be. For now, the important point is that in the puzzle cases these 
perspectives come apart. Let’s again return to the non-branching puzzle.  
(1) Two predicates are synonyms only if they have the same intension. 
(2) eBooks at 2020 are not (or are not-determinately) in the intension of “book” at 1750.  
(3) eBooks at 2020 are determinately in the intension of “book” at 2020. 
(4) “Book” at 2020 is synonymous with “book” at 1750.  
Projectivism suggests the tetrad is consistent in the sense that each of the statements is true from 
some perspective, although there is no perspective from which all four are true. Evaluated from 
the perspective of 1750, (2) is true, but (3), or else (4), is false. Evaluated from the perspective of 
2020, (3) and (4) are true, but (2) is false. That is, Johnson, by his community’s lights, is right to 
deny, “eBooks are books”. We, by our community’s lights, are right affirm, “eBooks are books”, 
and to affirm that “book” means as it did before the invention of eBooks. From each of our 
perspectives, we disagree on the truth of a proposition. But what proposition varies with our 
perspective. It is, we might say, projected by interpreters’ community. Meaning facts vary in this 
way because how it’s reasonable to go on does. Projectivism is comprised of three claims.  
Claim 1: Semantic discourse is assessment sensitive: the truths varies with the 
perspective of the assessor.  
Claim 2: the intensions of at least some expressions vary with the perspective of the 
assessor. 
Claim 3: what an utterance means is a projection of how it is most reasonable to go on 
with it in the assessor’s community, given how it is used and other facts about the 
context of utterance. 
I’ll give more substance to the view in the next section, but it’s worth spending a moment on its 
motivations, and the puzzles. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
111 
Let’s back up. Facts about the meaning of “book” exhibit a peculiar pattern of stability and 
variability. On the one hand, the intension of “book” seems to vary across time. This gives us 
claims (2) and (3) of the non-branching puzzle. If Johnson were here, he would not mean book by 
“book.” On the other hand, it seems stable across time: Johnson’s talk of books, and our own, are 
about books. We report him homophonically. This gives us claim (4). Notice, the temptation is not 
to say, “eBooks are books in 2020, but they were not books in 1750.” Rather, it is to say that they 
are books, and always were. What it is to be a book hasn’t changed, although technology has. 
When we take Johnson’s perspective, at the context of utterance, “eBooks are not books” seemed 
true, but that very utterance assessed later on it seems false. We might imagine Johnson being a 
medical miracle, living down to the present day, and disavowing his earlier utterances, just as, 
perhaps, some bloggers now disavow their earlier articles decrying that eBooks heralded the death 
of the (print) book. 
Considerations like these—about homophonic third person reports, about retraction, about 
stability and variability of content in an area of discourse, about genuine but apparently faultless 
disagreement—are sometimes taken as evidence that truth in that area of discourse is relative to a 
context of assessment (a perspective).132 The argument has two stages: first establish the pattern 
of data, second argue that the best explanation of it takes truth to be relative to the context of 
assessment (holding fixed the context of utterance, and whatever other parameters).133 The tools 
so called assessment sensitivists have developed, notably MacFarlane 2014, provide some 
machinery to give substance to the claim that the true value of an utterance may vary with the 
perspective taken.  
Projectivism about intensions may be understood as the view that semantic vocabulary is 
assessment sensitive. To the extent arguments for assessment sensitivity in other areas of discourse 
 
 
132 Areas of discourse include discourse about predicates of personal taste (Kölbel 2004; Lasersohn 2005), moral 
judgments (Kölbel 2004), epistemic modals (Egan, Hawthorne and Weatherson 2005; Egan 2007; MacFarlane 2011), 
future contingents (MacFarlane 2003), indicative conditionals (Weatherson 2009), gradable adjectives (Richard 2004), 
deontic modals (MacFarlane 2014, ch. 11), and knowledge attributions (Richard 2004; MacFarlane 2005, 2010, 2014). 
133 Accordingly, strategies to reject a diagnosis of assessmentism take two broad forms; either they reject the data 
(retraction or otherwise) as merely apparent, or else they reject that the best explanation of it involves 
assessmentism. Perhaps the theory of assertion is rejected, or a better explanation is supplied, or unacceptable 
conclusions are drawn out. See Spencer MSb for all three. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
112 
make assessment sensitivity about them a worthy position to consider, the same may be said about 
the arguments here for projectivism. Actually, I think the case for projectivism is rather stronger.  
The argument from faultless disagreement for predicates of personal taste illustrate the 
assessment sensitivist’s strategy well.134 The basic problem is this: if Sam says “Paradise Lost is 
boring” and John says “Paradise Lost is not boring”, it seems possible for (a) both sentences 
simultaneously to be true (relative to their respective speakers), but also (b) that one expresses the 
very proposition the other denies.135 The relativist’s intuition is that this is right, and truth-
relativism is her strategy for reconciling these intuitions: the same proposition (or proposition-like 
object) is affirmed by Sam that is denied by John, but that proposition is true relative to Sam’s 
context of assessment (circumstance of evaluation, perspective), and false relative to John’s. It is 
then added that two people can overtly disagree—contradict each other—insofar as they affirm (or 
deny) a single proposition, although its truth varies with the perspective we take (either the speaker, 
her interlocutor, or perhaps a some third party).  
This suggestion is implemented as a variation on Kaplan’s view in “Demonstratives” by 
adding people to the circumstances of evaluation, in addition to the three parameters Kaplan had 
(worlds, times as locations). Words like “boring”, and “tasty”, are assigned the same content 
relative to different individuals, but contextually relativize the assignment of truth values to 
contents, so that the same content may be assigned different truth values relative to different 
individuals. This allows for the possibility that two utterances express identical semantic content, 
but with one of them true and the other one false. Sam says what John denies, though its truth 
varies with perspective.  
Note that the puzzles are structurally like cases of so-called genuine, but faultless, 
disagreement that are diachronic. For example, in the non-branching case: if SJ affirms “eBooks 
are not books” and moderns affirm, “eBooks are books”, it seems possible for both sentences 
simultaneously to be true (relative to their respective speakers), but also to overtly contradict or 
disagree with each other, in that one expresses the very proposition the other denies, ones about 
 
 
134 Lasersohn 2005, Macfarlane 2014, Kölbel 2015 
135 Though Lasersohn 2005 characterizes these objects as proposition, they are not propositions in the standard sense, 
i.e. they are not functions from worlds to truth-values. See Cappelen 2007. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
113 
books.136 The inclinations that give rise to these puzzles are: (a) both we and SJ are right, and we 
both said something true, and (b) we say that eBooks are not books, SJ denied it, and so we 
disagree.  
Notice that the puzzles also exhibit the hallmark of retraction, which is not so much that a 
single speaker recants, as that an utterance that appears true from one perspective appears 
categorically false from another. That is: Paradise Lost is boring, and any utterance to the contrary 
is wrong, even those made by John (from Sam’s perspective). We might imagine Sam, after 
changing his mind about the book, rightly saying: “I was wrong, Paradise Lost was never boring.” 
By the same token, it’s not that eBooks didn’t used to be books, but they are now, or, that, from 
Johnson’s perspective, it’s false, but from my perspective, it’s true. It’s just true (from the modern 
perspective) that eBooks are books, and any utterance to the contrary, even those made in 1750, 
were wrong. (We might add: “book” may have a meaning exclusive to print books, but that 
expression is not synonymous with “book” as it has been used for centuries. That expression is a 
newcomer, born because technology has made relevant the distinction between digital and print 
books). 
There are two reasons retraction plays a key role in arguments for assessmentism. First, 
other theories, like contextualism and invariantism, do badly capturing it. The second is deeper: a 
Brandomian theory of assertion says that assertion involves committing to defend the truth of what 
is said. So, when we no longer defend some earlier statement, when we retract it, although no 
further information has falsified it, that is evidence its truth value has changed.137 Some of the 
reasons to doubt retraction data obtains, say, for epistemic modality, don’t apply to the non-
branching case. Suppose I aver, “Bob could be in his office”, and, when I later learn the building 
is shut down for Covid-19, I say, “I take that back, Bob cannot be in his office”. My retraction 
may be explained by my learning a simple fact, that bears uncontroversially on my beliefs about 
where Bob could be. Before I knew, I spoke falsely, but blamelessly. If I had known earlier what 
I later learned, I would not have said what I did. But a similar analysis does not apply to the non-
 
 
136 p. 662, Lasersohn (2005)) Though Lasersohn characterizes these objects as proposition are not propositions in the 
standard sense, i.e. they are not functions from world to truth-values. Cappelen against this with PCR 
137 There are good worries about this picture of assertation and its relationship to the objective epistemic ought. See 
Spencer MSb. I tend to think they do not apply to projectivism about meaning for reasons that relate to what 
perspectives consist in. But we are not there yet, and this point is largely beyond the scope of this paper.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
114 
branching case, or informed disagreements about meaning. We supposed that Johnson knows how 
speakers went on to use “book”. More to the point, there does not appear to be an uncontroversial 
fact he might have learned which would settle whether they are books. Retraction cannot be recast 
as learning what is true from every perspective. 
It’s worth bearing down on this a bit, since there appears to be a problem. It may be argued: 
from the perspective of 2020, (1) “book” has not changed its intension since 1750, (2) it is an 
absolute fact that, from the perspective of 1750, “eBooks are books” is indeterminate, and, 
therefore, (3) “book” is indeterminate, or else (1) is false. The response on behalf of the projectivist 
is this: not all facts are accessible from a perspective. From the perspective of 2020, the facts from 
the perspective of 1750 are not accessible. In this sense, Johnson entertained thoughts that we 
cannot, except elliptically as the thoughts that Johnson entertained. In this, talk of perspectives, 
contexts of assessment, are not analogous to talk of perspectives on a coin on a table. That the coin 
is circular when viewed from above, ovoid when viewed at an angle, are mutually consistent. 
Whether this is a problem depends on whether you are bothered by projectivism being difficult to 
state in this way. 
In the interests of completeness, let’s apply projectivism to the other puzzles. For the 
branching and fusion puzzles, it denies there is a single perspective at which the claims comprising 
the puzzle are true. Consider the branching puzzle:  
(1) eBooks are not in the intension of “book as the US in 2020; it hasn’t changed its intension 
since 1750. 
(2) eBooks are in the intension of “book” as used in the UK in 2020; it hasn’t changed its 
intension since 1750 
(3)  “Book” as used in 1750 for tomes (as opposed to texts) is not ambiguous. 
From the perspective of 1750, (1) or (2), or both, are false. From the perspective of the US in 2020, 
(2) is false. From the perspective of the UK in 2020, (1) is false. Now, the fusion puzzle:  
(1) In the East at 0, codices are not (or are not determinately) in the intension of “liber”.  
(2) In the West at 0, codices are in the intension of “liber”. 
(3) At 100 AD, “liber” means as it did in the East at 0, and as it meant at in the West at 0. 
(4) “Liber” as used at 100 AD is not ambiguous. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
115 
From the perspective of the East, (3) is false. From the perspective of community West, (3) is false. 
From the perspective of the the heterogenous Empire, (1), (2), or both, are false or indeterminate. 
Lastly, the sequential puzzle:  
(1) “Livid” as used at t1 is not synonymous with “livid” as used at t5. 
(2) Uses of “livid” are synonymous with uses at adjacent times.  
From the perspective of any given time, both (1) and (2) are compatible. At each time slice, from 
the perspective of that time slice, the temporally adjacent uses of “livid” are synonymous. 
However, there is no time slice, such that from it, uses of “livid” at every time slice are 
synonymous with temporally adjacent uses. So there is no puzzle.  
We can draw an analogy between meaning facts and friend groups. Take ten well-informed 
people some of whom are closer than others. Ask each who is in the friend group, and you may 
receive several different answers. One theory says only some people are right: there’s an absolute 
fact of the matter about who is, and isn’t, in the group. We can offer an error theory: mostly when 
we talk about friend groups, or make judgments that seem to be on the basis of friend group facts, 
we aren’t really. Some other sort of relatedness is what matters. Another theory says everyone is 
right, but there are several distinct but collocated friend groups. A third theory says everyone is 
right, and there is a single friend group, but its contours depends on whose perspective you take. I 
lean towards the third sort of theory—about meaning facts.138 
9. Sketch of Projectivism 
Projectivism rests on three claims. The first two we have already met, the third is a conjecture 
about why they should be so. 
Claim 1: Semantic discourse is assessment sensitive: the truths varies with the 
perspective of the assessor.  
The truth value of at least some statements about reference, intension, synonymy vary with 
perspective of the assessor. That is, there is at least one expression where a statement about its 
semantic properties has one true-value as assessed from one perspective, but another as assessed 
 
 
138 The boundaries of English may be like this, perhaps type-clusters of polysemous words are, vowels may be like 
this? 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
116 
from another. So, the intensions associated with at least one expression vary with the perspective 
of the assessor. That is, Claim 1 entails Claim 2:  
Claim 2: the intensions of, at least, some expressions vary with the perspective of the 
assessor.139 
Take Johnson’s (imagined) utterance that eBooks are not books. As assessed from 1750, the 
intension of “book” as used in 1750 excludes eBooks. As assessed in 2020, it includes them. As 
Johnson said, “A writer only begins a book. A reader finishes it.” There is no absolute fact of the 
matter about whether eBooks are books, or what “book” means. The perspective of an assessor 
must be supplied. Claim 1 entails some terms are context sensitive in a special way: they are 
context-of-assessment-sensitive. The intension they express varies with the context of assessment. 
Some vocabulary, say “battery” or “electron”, may be such that the truth of the statements 
involving them do not vary with the perspective of the interpreter. Perhaps “electron” is like this. 
Other vocabulary I have argued is not. We can disagree on which vocabulary is which. Perhaps 
the 2020 utterance ““Battery” as used by Volta means battery as used by denizens of 2020” varies 
with the perspective of assessor, perhaps it doesn’t. One way to adjudicate is to try to construct 
puzzle cases with the relevant term. That is a way to test what perspectives could be occupied. A 
way to identify an occupied perspective to identify persisting, informed, intelligible disagreements. 
Every perspective, or every occupied perspective, may concur. So, for example, it may be 
true assessed from every perspective that “villain” as used in 2020 is associated with a different 
intension than “villain” “villain” as used in the 14th century (when it was applied to local peasant 
farmers, from the “ville”). Likewise, the intensions associated with epistemic and thin moral 
predicates may be concordant. 
There appear to be absolute facts about meaning when there is concordance among all the 
perspectives, or all the perspectives we deem worthy. Perhaps many more perspectives are possible 
than are occupied. Perhaps, from some perspective, print books are not in the intension of “book”, 
but eBooks and audiobooks are. But this perspective is not occupied, and so there are not disputes 
about it. Likewise, there could be people in our lives who would judge the contours of the friend 
group in ways we find very strange. But there aren’t, or we don’t recognize them as worthy 
conversation partners, and so we don’t fight about it.  
 
 
139 A much stronger claim is that every expression is like this. Set that aside. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
117 
Shake off the view that possible worlds are like rooms. Instead think of worlds like total 
stories, as sets of propositions.140 Projectivism about meanings says there is more than one actual 
world, one total story. Some parts of the total stories are the same, some are not. Just like in total 
story at 1750, in the total story at 2020, the pyramids were built in 2500 BCE, murder is wrong, 
and everyone knows it. In both, Johnson was bored by Paradise Lost. In both, expressions are 
meaningful, and books* are eBooks, but books** are not eBooks. But there are some differences. 
In the actual world at 1750: 
“Book” means in 1750 what it does in 2020 (or else it is indeterminate whether it does). 
Had Johnson affirmed, “eBooks are not books”, he would have been right to do so, and 
he would have expressed the proposition: eBooks are not books*.  
Actual expressions are associated with books*, not books**. Propositions about books** 
are not entertainable, except by indirect means (e.g., entertaining the proposition 21st 
century speakers entertain by their own lights). 
In the actual world at 2020:  
“Book” means in 1750 what it does in 2020 
Had Johnson affirmed, “eBooks are not books”, he would have been wrong to do so, 
and he would have expressed the proposition: eBooks are not books**.  
Actual expressions are associated with books**, not books*. Propositions about books* 
are not entertainable except by indirect means (e.g., entertaining the proposition Johnson 
entertained by his own lights).  
 
In both stories there are meaning facts, and discourse about meanings. But in the world at 1750, 
some utterances are associated with different truth conditions than those very utterances are in the 
world at 2020. In the world at 1750, Johnson spoke of books*. In the world of 2020, he spoke of 
books**.141 
 
 
140 Wright 2008 calls this the ternary conception. See also Baghramian and Coliva 2020. 
141 Perhaps fundamentality talk suggests a way to register the variation: facts that vary across occupied perspectives 
are less fundamental relative to them than those facts that do not. So facts about where the paper is, and where words 
are, are more fundamental than facts about the meaning of “book” relative to the world at 1750, and to the world at 
2020. (Perhaps they are equally fundamental relative to the world at 1749 and 1750, or perhaps those perspective are 
just the same one). For a development of a related idea, see Spencer MSa. 
Objection: Surely, saying that the facts about what books are like varies with perspective does not advance the issue. 
That is like saying you have your facts, and I have mind.  
Reply: Not quite. From my perspective, our facts are the same and you’re mistaken about them. These aside, many 
other facts are constant across my perspective and yours, including facts about paper, the distribution of words, and 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
118 
Claim 3 is a conjecture about why meaning facts vary in this way. It gives substance to talk 
of a perspective. Projectivism predicts that (by our own lights) more than anyone else we speak 
truly, and are right about the meaning facts. It’s as if manifest destiny that we judge eBooks are 
books. However, we went on to use “book”, it would be the way that was correct all along. This is 
surprising, given that the patterns of usage that drive semantic change are beset by contingency. 
Reasonability judgments are also like this. We are reasonable by our own lights much more often 
than those whose judgments about what’s reasonable differ from ours. Likewise, holding the facts 
fixed, our judgments about the most reasonable theory are the ones we should have had all along, 
at least according to us. But it is no mysterious why. As Lewis 1971 argued, reasonability 
judgements are immodest because reasonability standards are: we are rationally required to believe 
our own methods are best, or else to suspend belief (when faced with ties). Claim 3 conjectures 
that immodest standards explain the variability and stability of meaning facts; the manifest destiny 
that all along we should mean book by “book”.  
Claim 3: what an utterance means is a projection of how it is most reasonable to go on 
with it in the assessor’s community, given how it is used and other facts about the 
context of utterance. 
A perspective of assessment consists in facts about how it is reasonable to go on with the predicate 
in question in the assessor’s community. Where what is reasonable takes into consideration facts 
about the context of utterance and past usage, as well as facts about the physical and social 
environment, popular beliefs, and patterns of deference, in the assessor’s community, what its 
members are likely to judge as the referent, and so on.).  
Take 1750 uses of “book”. The most reasonable way for modern speakers to go on with 
Johnson’s word is by applying it to eBooks, by translating it homophonically. The most reasonable 
way for Johnson to go on with his word “book” is by refraining from applying it to eBooks. The 
difference owes to differences between Johnson’s community and our own: a difference in popular 
beliefs, dispositions to respond to new technology, facts about what distinctions are salient to 
members of the communities, and much else, rationalizing projecting one use over another. But it 
is also a mistake to reify a character for “book” such it applies to eBooks when used in the context 
 
 
readable technological widgets. What varies is what propositions are associated with particular utterances. On both 
stories we have a disagreement about the extension of “book”.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
119 
of 2020, and not when used in the context of 1750. The reason is that there is no perspective from 
which both such uses are correct. From the perspective of 2020, the 1750 uses are wrong. 
 Individuals can be wrong about what an expression means, but, at least for some 
expressions, whole communities cannot be, by their own lights. If the intension of “book” is 
projected by how it is reasonable to apply the term in the assessor’s community, the intension of 
“book” may be conditioned by popular beliefs about it.142 
I am not giving a theory of how to individuate communities, except to say that a good 
indication that the truth of some utterance varies across them is that we can imagine a puzzle case. 
We can imagine a community that includes 18th century speakers and 21st century speakers, and 
ask how it is reasonable to go on using “book”. That potentially generates a fusion case. Another 
good indication is the existence of a persisting informed dispute. In this, I am in good company as 
not much more is said about how to individuate contexts of utterance, or contexts of assessment 
beyond competent speakers displaying a certain pattern of judgments. In this way, projectivism is 
descriptive, rather than prescriptive. It is descriptive in that it offers an account of certain puzzles 
and disagreements. But it does not prescribe how to individuate communities, or how to read the 
semantic facts off of the non-semantic facts (such that would falsify some utterances once and for 
all). Projectivism takes our ordinary judgments to describe the meaning facts, as they are, by our 
own lights.  
 
Claim 3 is a metasemantic clam. It says what a word means is the most reasonable thing 
for it to mean compatible with its use (broadly construed) and some facts about the assessor’s 
community. Any metasemantic theory must take use (broadly construed) at the context of utterance 
seriously on pain of generating a coincidence (we tend to use our words in ways that are true), and 
a mystery (we know more or less what our terms mean). If we take the appearance of so much 
assessment sensitivity at face value, the metasemantics must be a function of, at least, use (at the 
context of utterance) and something stable and variable in the right way. On the standard non-
descriptivist metasemantic picture what a word means is a function of use and fit. Temporal 
externalists have a view about what use matters. Teleosemanticists have one view about what 
 
 
142 Sometimes reflections to this tune are recruited in a case against compositionality (see Travis 1989), or referential 
semantics (see Kripkenstein’s skeptical solution 1982, or Brandom 1994 on inferentialism). But a version of them 
appears to be compatible with truth-relativism about meaning discourse.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
120 
constitutes fit. Interpretivists another (it rationalizes a speaker at context of utterance). Lewisians 
say that fit consists in picking out the most natural properties in the vicinity of the use. To the 
extent use and the naturalness facts may cut against each other, or there are ties in the naturalness 
facts, meaning is indeterminate. I am suggesting that fit be understood as the most reasonable way 
to go on as determined from the context of assessment. 
It’s helpful to see how the metasemantic theory on offer differs from David Lewis’ in “New 
Work for a Theory of Universals” (1983). Suppose we’re in a Lewisian context where everything 
Lewis thinks about meaning and metasemantics is right —where the most reasonable way to go 
on with terms is to defer to the most natural properties in the vicinity of past use and, indeed, that 
is why my terms mean as they do. What my theory adds is that there are other contexts. Perhaps 
it’s indeterminate what “salad” and a whole host of words means in a Lewisian context because 
use underdetermined meaning and there is no outstandingly natural property in the vicinity to 
attract the referent of the terms. For Lewis, assuming he is in a Lewisian context of assessment, 
the meaning of “salad”, et al., is indeterminate in all and exactly the same ways he thinks they are. 
His theory is correct—in a Lewisian context of assessment. To the extent, he said you can’t change 
what you mean by changing your context of assessment, he is right—at a Lewisian context of 
assessment.  
 “Food”, for example, is indeterminate in a Lewisian context for exactly the reasons 
projectivism predicts: there is no outstandingly reasonable way to go on with “food” with respect 
to say nutritional capsules, it just so happens in the Lewisian context the most reasonable way to 
go on involves reference to the most natural property in the vicinity of use, and there is none here. 
But terms that are indeterminate as assessed from Lewis’ context are perhaps highly determinate 
as assessed from another context: as assessed from the dystopian and efficient future, perhaps it is 
true “some foods are nutritional capsules” and as such, from this perspective, is true now, despite 
its being false from the present one.  
For all we know there may even be gruesome contexts of assessment. An interesting 
question is how gruesome they can be and whether we can identify any context as a gruesome 
one.143 According to Projectivism, “food”-utterances that are false or indeterminate in a Lewis 
 
 
143 I think this is a very interesting question. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
121 
context may be true or highly determinate in other contexts, and perhaps vice versa. Then there’s 
the perfectly good question as to whether we’re in a Lewisian context, or an interpretivist one, or 
some other sort. I won’t try to answer that.  
Consider a term “F” and its various potential truth conditions. My reasonability standards 
rank them in terms of reasonability given how the terms are used understood broadly. If there is a 
most reasonable one, that’s what “F” means. If there is not, what “F” means is indeterminate 
among the most reasonable contenders. I am thinking of it like this:  
       For Lewis Ca   
For Millikan Ca 
For Epistemicist Ca 
(1)  “F” means X : .1 reasonable    .1  
 
.1 
(2)  “F” means Y : .1         
 .1 
 
 
.1111 
(3)  “F” means Z : .4         
 .1 
 
 
.1 
At the Lewis Ca, “‘F’ means Z” is true. At the Millikan Ca, that statement is indeterminate. At the 
Epistemicist Ca, it is false. Projectivism is compatible with people, past or peculiar, being very 
indeterminate about what they mean by their own lights as well as with their meaning what we 
mean (by our lights) but speaking falsely. A good question is what sort of metasemantics is 
operational at our context. Perhaps it might be reasonable to go on by supervaluation and deny that 
we mean what past speakers do, but I doubt it. 
It is not quite right to say that as usage grows, and is more carefully negotiated, there is 
less assessment based variation in the intensions associated with expressions. Fewer perspectives 
may be occupied. In a sense it becomes harder to exit a context of assessment, in favor of another. 
Regardless, an assessment insensitive semantics may be warranted across the board, depending on 
what we are interested in theorizing truth conditionally. But if meaning is determined by usage, 
and something else, as usage becomes more determinate whatever the other thing is will play a 
smaller role. Sometimes usage really does crystallize around something in particular (consider, 
“atom”, “galaxy”). No part of my theory is at odds with that possibility.  
The puzzles emerge, it seems to me, because there are multiple reasonable ways of going 
on. I am suggesting that what an expression means, where meaning is understood as reference, 
varies according to how it is reasonable to go on with it in the assessor’s community. If there is a 
tie, the expression is indeterminate. Conflicting reasonable ways of going on, in effect, occur in 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
122 
different actual worlds with different meaning facts. They are individuated by ways of going on 
reasonably. 144  
10. Novel Usages, Fusion and the Women 
Here’s how we got here. Some novel usages received as particularly radical may be accused of 
changing the subject. A standard way of thinking about meaning says that either established usage 
errs, the novel usages do, or else the novel usages change the subject. There is an absolute fact of 
the matter which of these three options is right. To the extent established usages are correct, novel 
usages err, or change the subject. But sometimes it seems like a word retains its meaning despite 
changing its truth conditions. The status of contemporary novel usages is not so different from 
usages that were once novel, but which become standard. So, we analyzed some puzzles involving 
diachronic synonymy of this sort. My preferred response to these puzzles is to hold that meaning 
facts are projected by the speakers’ community. There is no absolute fact of the matter about 
whether this or that is a book. But there is some concordance among perspectives. Whatever the 
perspective, it may be print books are books, and leopards are not. 
Let’s return to the case of “woman” in light of projectionism, and start with a fictional 
branching case. Imagine an island very like the US 50 years ago. Its inhabitants speak a common 
language. On one half of the island, a trans rights movement gains momentum. As more society 
starts arranging itself in more equitable and inclusive ways, it comes to be accepted that trans 
women are women, and trans men are men. On the other half of the island, a free comportment 
movement takes hold. It comes to be accepted that people may avail themselves of the garb, 
mannerisms, bodily procedures they see fit, within some standard range. The practices of major 
insurance companies, and bathroom policies, stay with the times. There’s some variation in what 
people choose, and this is seen as largely unexceptional. Yet, it seems analytic, if anything is, that 
women are adult human females, and men adult human males. Maybe there’s a word for what 
trans women and cis women have in common, but no one uses it much. 
 
 
144 Of course another response to the puzzles, one that is not relativist, is to drive apart a theory of meaning and a 
theory of truth, in the way some do who take polysemy to be a core distinctive feature of natural language, rather than 
quirky homonymy. On a picture like this meaning constrains both use and truth, in subtle and interesting ways. An 
account that does justice to natural language will have to accommodate facts which suggest both that (i) use and truth 
are very complicated, perhaps in many intractable ways, and (ii) meaning is systematic and in many ways theoretically 
tractable, even for creatures with our limited cognitive powers. Recanati 2010, Wilson and Carston 2007.  

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
123 
Each part of the island thinks “woman” (and “man”) have undergone semantic change on 
other part of the island, or else are being used in (perhaps inexplicably) incorrectly. Plausibly, both 
parts of the island have a claim on conceptual continuity, and neither obviously sins against the 
word “woman”. The result is apparent transitivity failures since “woman” does not mean the same 
in these different parts of the island, on pain of half of the island speaking in error.  
Projectivism analyzes the branching usage as follows. Each of three communities speak 
truly by its own lights. For instance, each half of the island is right, by its own lights, that they 
mean by “woman” as they did prior to the movement. But there are no lights by which the other 
two communities speak truly, and to the same subject one another. So, there is no puzzle. Cross-
island quarrels concern what women are, but the truths vary with the perspective taken. From the 
pre-movement perspective, whether, or not, it’s true that trans women are woman, it is 
indeterminate whether the post-movement speakers mean as they once did.  
We can ask, “what are women really?” Projectivism tells us there is no absolute answer. 
There is only an answer by some lights. There is, for example, an answer to the question, “What 
does “woman” mean on this island?” We can analyze the speech situation on the entire island as a 
case of fusion, and ask after the meaning facts by the lights of the mixed community. The answer 
reflects how it is reasonable to go on with “woman”, given its use to date on both halves of the 
island, and how it is likely to be received going forward, given the social and physical environment, 
patterns of deference, and the beliefs, associations, and so on, it is likely to trigger in the 
heterogenous community. If there is more than one outstandingly reasonable way to go on in a 
community where interlocutors may be from either side of the island, the expression is 
indeterminate. That matter may evolve as the background considerations driving use shift, 
including speakers’ dispositions and beliefs about the meaning of the terms being used.  
Asking what women are (by our own lights) is a bit like asking what “woman” means in 
Islandese. There are not uniform patterns of deference to human biology, first personal avowals, 
activist causes, past classification, presentational gestalt, and so on.145 There was time when 
patterns of deference were more uniform, and subaltern uses were far less numerous, if any. But 
 
 
145 From the perspective of the dominant community, some subaltern uses are incorrect, or concern another subject. 
From the perspective of the subaltern community, some dominant uses are incorrect, or concern another subject. The 
mixed community encompasses these subaltern and dominant uses, and whatever else besides. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
124 
now there are branching uses of “woman” as applied to trans women. There is the so-called 
subaltern branch, and the dominant branch, dominant if only because it is supposed most 
numerous, and taken to be the default interpretation. Some recommend usages of “women” that 
are received as radical. But by their lights, they are absolutely right to do so, and are not changing 
the subject. By the lights of those who receive them as radical, they may well be changing the 
subject, or just straightforwardly false. No one is obviously at risk of changing the subject, by their 
own lights.  
How is it reasonable to go on with our stock of inherited words, given the complex 
pressures driving usage, has to do with mundane facts about how we tend to speak and what 
speakers are liable to understand. Sometimes it partly depends on how we answer moral and 
political questions, about what usages matter, and how much accommodation of one another is 
expected in view of what is appropriate. The meaning facts from the perspective of either branch 
community do not settle how to go on with “woman”.  
The important point for the present purpose is that the question about what the Fs are, 
really, when controversy peaks, is not a deep metaphysical question, so much a question about 
how, given everyone in the community, it’s reasonable to go on applying a term. It is a familiar 
question about how to talk to, and about, people, and what to do in the face of competing needs 
and interests. But it is no easier for being familiar. Subaltern usages may be “outvoted,” be too 
fringe to affect how it is most reasonable way to go on with some term in core ways, given the 
many pressures that presently drive usage in the heterogenous community. From that perspective, 
some subaltern uses may turn up false, or subject changing. Reporting this by itself should be as 
unobjectionable as noting that some candidate won the general election. That is not the same as 
failing to count to votes, or a vote for mediocrity.  
11. Conclusions 
If arguments from variability and stability, retraction, faultless disagreement arguments, inference 
to the best explanation are good enough for relativism about predicates of personal taste, etc., they 
may be good enough for arguments for truth relativism about semantic vocabulary. Perhaps my 
modus ponens is your modus tollens, and such arguments come off looking all the worse. Whether 
or not the arguments succeed for these other areas of discourse, I think similar considerations 
militate in favor of projectivism. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
125 
We got here in an effort to get leverage on a synchronic worry about subject change in 
ordinary discourse. Perhaps you think diachronic synonymy is not a good model for synchronic 
synonymy, and that the diachronic puzzles are not a good model for synchronic ones. I think they 
help hold a standard picture of meaning to account for the many practices that are explained by 
samesaying. I tend to think we are good judges of synonymy, and that we can, and do, samesay 
often. I take this as a datum, which is worth accommodating for some theoretical projects, 
particularly those that turn on speaker judgments about meaning. Whether novel usages—like 
those that figure in radical analyses and revisionary projects—change the subject is one.  
Projectivism says that speakers may recommend novel usage without changing the subject, 
or speaking falsely, by our own lights – at least sometimes. Continuity of meaning, or lack thereof, 
may be understood in terms of truth and reference, without the imperialist metaphysics of meaning. 
Those recommending novel usage can have their cake and eat it too. They can promote intensional 
change without changing the subject—because what it is being promoted is the reasonable way to 
go on with the term at a community of assessment of which they are a part.  
Insofar as philosophers of language think there is an absolute fact of the matter about what 
intensions are associated with what expressions—a fact of the matter about what proposition, e.g., 
“book”-, “woman”-, “chocolate”-, utterances express—there will be trouble making sense of 
persistent informed controversy. Diagnoses of verbality do not settle disputes about what women 
are, practically or in spirit. Projectivism suggests that we and Johnson may have a state 
disagreement about whether, say, eBooks are books, while by our own lights we are each right.  
Projectivism is a descriptive view. It does not say how to individuate contexts of 
assessment, or how many there are. The interesting ones are the occupied ones. A good question 
is which terms are like “book”, and why suppose that contested concepts, like gender ones are. My 
answer is deflationary: it is the presence of certain sorts of disagreements. There are not absolute 
meaning facts that stand to resolve them. But projectivism does suggest how, and why, there might 
be other concordances across occupied perspectives. While there are not absolute truth conditions 
associated with meaning discourse, there are considerations that bear on the reasonability of what 
we say—given how the expression has been used, and facts about the context of assessment—and 
the meanings facts reflect these. That on its own is not terribly informative, but, I think, it puts the 
bump in the rug in the right place. 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
126 
Natural language may not fit the model of a language in which names, including names for 
properties, are semantically, and absolutely, associated with entities that are satisfiers of 
predicates. This is a fruitful model that allowed theorists to start accounting for a certain range of 
facts. And it simplifies the discussion, in harmless ways, when the openness of lexical items is not 
at issue. But the explanatory value of this model needs attention if we want better models that start 
to account for ways in which lexicalization, conceptual continuity, contestation, and truth interact. 
The same of course has been said for lexicalization, composition, and polysemy, or other ways in 
which natural languages are not-Begriffsschrift-y. 
 
 
 
References 
Abreu Zavaleta, M. (2019). “Communication and Variance.” Topoi. 
Baghramian, M., and A. Coliva. (2020). Relativism. London: Routledge. 
Ball, D. (forthcoming). “Relativism, Metasemantics, and the Future.” Inquiry, 41. 
Bettcher, T. (2012). “Trans Women and the Meaning of ‘Woman’.” In Philosophy of Sex: 
Contemporary Readings, edited by Power, N., R. Halwani, and A. Soble, Sixth. New 
York: Rowan & Littlefield. 
Boghossian, P. (1989). “Content and Self-Knowledge,” Philosophical Topics, 17: 5–26. 
Bromberger, S. (2012). “Vagueness, Ambiguity, and the ‘Sound’ of Meaning.” In Analysis and 
Interpretation in the Exact Sciences: Essays in Honor of William Demopoulos. New 
York: Springer. 
Brown, J. (2000). “Against Temporal Externalism.” Analysis 60: 178–88. 
Burge, T. (1979). “Individualism and the Mental.” In Midwest Studies in Philosophy IV: Studies 
in Metaphysics, 73–121. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
———. (1988). “Individualism and Self-Knowledge.” Journal of Philosophy 85: 649–63. 
———. (1992). “Frege on Knowing the Third Realm.” Mind, New Series 101 (404): 633–50. 
Byrne, A. (2020). “Are Women Adult Human Females?” Philosophical Studies, January. 
Cappelen, H. (2008). “Content Relativism and Semantic Blindness.” In Relative Truth, edited by 
García-Carpintero, M. and M. Kölbel, 265–86. Oxford University Press.  
Cappelen, H., and E. Lepore. (2005). Insensitive Semantics: A Defense of Semantic Minimalism 
and Speech Act Pluralism. London: Blackwell Publishing. 
Chalmers, D. (2012). Constructing the World. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Chomsky, N. (1995). “Language and Nature.” Mind 104 (413): 1–61. 
Clark, A., and D. Chalmers. (2000). “The Extended Mind.” Analysis 58 (1): 7–19. 
Donnellan, K. (1983). “Kripke and Putnam on Natural Kind Terms.” In Knowledge and Mind 
edited by Ginet, C., and S. Shoemaker, 84–104. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Dorr, C., and J. Hawthorne. (2014). “Semantic Plasticity and Speech Reports.” Philosophical 
Review 123 (3): 281–338.  
Ebbs, G. (2000). “The Very Idea of Sameness of Extension Across Time.” American 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
127 
Philosophical Quarterly 37 (3): 245–68. 
Egan, A. (2007). “Epistemic Modals, Relativism and Assertion.” Philosophical Studies 133 (1): 
1–22. 
Egan, A., B. Weatherson, and J. Hawthorne. (2005. “Epistemic Modals in Context.” In 
Contextualism in Philosophy, edited by Gerhard Preyer and Georg Peter. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
Field, H. (2001). Truth and the Absence of Fact. Oxford University Press.  
———. (2018). “Egocentric Content.” Noûs 51 (3): 521–46. 
Fodor, J., and E. Lepore. (2002). The Compositionality Papers. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Frankfurt, H. (2005). On Bullshit. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Frege, G. (1884). Die Grundlagen Der Arithmetik: Eine Logisch-Mathematische Untersuchung 
Über Den Begriff Der Zahl. Translated by J.L. Austin. 2nd Revised Edition. Oxford: 
Blackwell Publishing. 
Gallie, W.B. (1956). “Essentially Contested Concepts.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 
New Series 56: 167–98. 
Grice, H.P., and P.F. Strawson. (1956). “In Defense of a Dogma.” The Philosophical Review 65: 
141–58. 
Hacking, I. (2007). “Putnam’s Theory of Natural Kinds and Their Names Is Not the Same as 
Kripke’s.” Principia 24 (1). 
Haslanger, S. (2000). “Gender and Race: (What) Are They? (What) Do We Want Them To Be?” 
Noûs 34 (1): 31–55. 
———. (2019). “Going on Not in the Same Way.” In Conceptual Ethics and Conceptual 
Engineering, edited by Burgess, A., H. Cappelen, and D. Plunkett. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Jackman, H. (1999). “We Live Forwards but Understand Backwards: Linguistic Practices and 
Future Behavior.” Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 80: 157–77. 
———. 2005. “Temporal Externalism, Deference, and Our Ordinary Linguistic Practice.” 
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 86: 365–80. 
Kölbel, M. (2002). Truth Without Objectivity. New York: Routledge. 
———. (2004). “Faultless Disagreement.” Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 104(1):53-73. 
Kripke, S. (1980). Naming and Necessity. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Lance, M., and J. Hawthorne. (1997). The Grammar of Meaning. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Lasersohn, P. (2005). “Context Dependence, Disagreement, and Predicates of Personal Taste.” 
Linguistics and Philosophy 28 (6): 643–86. 
———. (2009). “Relative Truth, Speaker Commitment, and Control of Implicit Arguments. 
Synthese 166 (2): 359–74. 
Lewis, D. (1983). “New Work for a Theory of Universals.” Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
61 (4): 343–77. 
Ludlow, P. (2005). “Contextualism and the New Linguistic Turn.” In Contextualism in 
Philosophy: Knowledge, Meaning, and Truth, edited by Preyer, G., and G. Peter, 11–51. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
MacFarlane, J. (2003). “Future Contingents and Relative Truth.” Philosophical Quarterly 53: 
321–36. 
———. (2011). “Epistemic Modals Are Assessment-Sensitive.” In Epistemic Modality, edited 

Koslow, Meaning Change, in Theory and in Practice, 09.08.20 
 
128 
by Egan, A., and B. Weatherson. 
———. (2014). Assessment Sensitivity: Relative Truth and Its Applications. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Nolan, D. (2014). “Hyperintensional Metaphysics.” Philosophical Studies 171 (1): 149–60. 
Parfit, D. (1987). Reasons and Persons. Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Pietroski, P. (2005). “Meaning Before Truth.” In Contextualism in Philosophy: Knowledge, 
Meaning, and Truth, edited by Preyer, G., and G. Peter, 253–300. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Pinder, M. (2020). “On Strawson’s Critique of Explication as a Method in Philosophy.” Synthese 
197 (3): 955–981. 
Pustejovsky, J., and B. Boguraev. (1996). Lexical Semantics: The Problem of Polysemy. London: 
Clarendon Press. 
Putnam, H. (1975). “The Meaning of ‘Meaning.’” Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of 
Science 7. 
———. (1990). “Is Water Necessarily H2O?” In Realism with a Human Face, edited by Conant, 
J., 54–79. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Railton, P. (1989). “Naturalism and Prescriptivity.” Social Philosophy and Policy 7 (1): 151–74. 
Richard, M. (2004). “Contextualism and Relativism.” Philosophical Studies 119 (1): 215–42. 
———. (2008). When Truth Gives Out. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
———. (2019). Meanings as Species. First edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Sawyer, S. (forthcoming). “Truth and Objectivity in Conceptual Engineering.” 
Spencer, Jack. (MSa). “Is Nonfundamental Existence Relative?” Personal Webpage. 
———. (MSb) “Truth Relativism and the Objective Epistemic Ought” Personal Webpage. 
Strawson, P. F. (1959). Individuals. London: Routledge. 
———. (1963). “Carnap’s Views on Constructed Systems Versus Natural Languages in 
Analytic Philosophy.” In The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap, edited by Schilpp, P.A. 503–
18. Open Court: La Salle. 
———. (1992). Analysis and Metaphysics: An Introduction to Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Sundell, T. (2020). “Changing the Subject.” Canadian Journal of Philosophy 50 (5): 580–93.  
Vincente, A. (2018). “Polysemy and Word Meaning: An Account of Lexical Meaning for 
Different Kinds of Content Words.” Philosophical Studies 175 (4): 947–68. 
Weatherson, B. (2009). “Conditionals and Indexical Relativism.” Synthese 166 (2): 333–57.  
Williams, B. (1970). “The Self and the Future.” The Philosophical Review 79 (2): 161–80. 
Wilson, D., and R. Carston. (2007). “A Unitary Approach to Lexical Pragmatics: Relevance, 
Inference and Ad Hoc Concepts.” Mind & Language 21: 404–33. 
Wittgenstein, L. (1967). Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 
Wright, C. (2008). “Relativism about Truth Itself: Haphazard Thoughts about the Very Idea.” In 
Relative Truth, edited by García-Carpintero, M. and M. Kölbel, 157–86. Oxford 
University  
 
 

