UvA-DARE is a service provided by the library of the University of Amsterdam (https://dare.uva.nl)
UvA-DARE (Digital Academic Repository)
Interaction in the museum: Observing, supporting, learning
Bradburne, J.M.
Publication date
2000
Link to publication
Citation for published version (APA):
Bradburne, J. M. (2000). Interaction in the museum: Observing, supporting, learning. [Thesis,
externally prepared, FNWI]. Libri Books on Demand.
General rights
It is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the author(s)
and/or copyright holder(s), other than for strictly personal, individual use, unless the work is under an open
content license (like Creative Commons).
Disclaimer/Complaints regulations
If you believe that digital publication of certain material infringes any of your rights or (privacy) interests, please
let the Library know, stating your reasons. In case of a legitimate complaint, the Library will make the material
inaccessible and/or remove it from the website. Please Ask the Library: https://uba.uva.nl/en/contact, or a letter
to: Library of the University of Amsterdam, Secretariat, Singel 425, 1012 WP Amsterdam, The Netherlands. You
will be contacted as soon as possible.
Download date:30 dic. 2023

3.. The label as means of improving interaction in the informal setting 
3.11 The user-languages of the museum: part 1 - supporting visitors 
Theree are several limitations to the conventional ways in which most museum pro-
fessionalss create labels. First among these limitations is, in the absence of a theory, 
thee inability to recognise and develop constraints on the visitor, and to consistently 
implementt preferred ones. Museums have traditionally had a limitedd notion of the 
visitor,, and treated the label merely as an instrument by means of which to inform 
them,, a demonstration of the wisdom and learning of the museum professionals 
responsiblee for writing the label and corroborating its assertions. This is not to say 
thatt labels were written without long and thoughtful consideration. What will be 
argued,, however, is that the label writers mainly restricted themselves to three 
distinctt types of constraints - in keeping with the 'grand narratives' of their time. 
Inn my terminology these three sets of constraints can be recognised as user-lang-
uagess - the language of textual authority, the language of observation, and the 
languagee of variables. These languages have long been used to accomplish aims 
suchh as conveying information, telling a story, or documenting historical data. In this 
sectionn I will argue that each language has its advantages and disadvantages, and 
notablyy that the later ones subsume the previous ones. It will be seen, however, that 
nonee of the three user-languages yet confers actorship, in the sense I have defined, 
whichh may account in part for the practice of'visiting' common to museums, as op-
posedd to that of 'use' which characterises libraries. 
Thiss section begins with a description of the user-language that confers the most 
rudimentaryy properties on the visitor - the user-language of textual authority- in 
orderr to indicate how one may recognise its labels. The same is done for the user-
languagee of observation, and its extension, the user-language of variables. For 
obviouss reasons the examples used are largely historical, drawn from museums 
overr thee past several centuries. Such examples provide a useful means to develop 
myy theory. To the degree the theory is useful, the easier it should be to recognise 
whatt is happening in museums at present, particularly if and when these three user-
languagess are still being used. 
Inn a later section the user-languages of problems and of games will be looked at 
inn more detail. They appear to subsume the three languages mentioned above, and 
too confer more, and more interesting properties. They have been used only rarely 
inn the museum setting, and as a consequence, many of the labels to be examined 
havee been created by the author and his colleagues during the course of this re- 
29 

search.. In this way, the theory has been used as a tool for creating new kinds of 
museumm experiences, and to explore the effectiveness of new kinds of labels and of 
thee user-languages on which they are based. 
3.1.11 Textual Authority 
Thee user-language of the label that appears to dominate early forms of exhibition is 
thatt of an appeal to authority- of the curator, the researcher, the academic- usually 
knownn and legitimised through texts. The label that implements this user-language 
presumablyy creates in the user the desirable property of being more knowledgeable, 
att least insofar as the label can be assumed to represent such knowledge. Strictly 
speaking,, authority creates the property of obedience when the user fears unde-
sirablee sanctions. In the museum setting, it can be argued that the label creates 
authorityy by implementing the 'authority of the authority', and thus may also confer 
thee corollary undesirable properties of acceptance and detachment in the museum 
user. . 
Thee language of authority is perhaps the first experience in the human learning 
process.. A child quickly learns that certain things are not to be touched, or done, 
solelyy on the basis of parental authority. A burned hand may teach best, but few 
aree the parents that willingly allow a child's curiosity to do them grievous injury. 
Despitee the fact that such authority is commonly grounded in fear of an undesirable 
consequencee - the parental fear of a burned hand, the child's fear of a spank to the 
backsidee - it is but a short step from 'don't touch because it will hurt you' to simply 
'becausee I said so' as the ground of a child's ontology. Much of the physical universe 
iss conjured into being in the act of learning a natural language, and the authority that 
underpinss the ascription of name to object or experience is often that of the parent. 
Thiss primary grounding of ontology in authority easily allows a radical shift from the 
specificc to the general. The appeal to authority is a common feature of rhetoric, and 
inn this sense authority is bound to certain kinds of arguments, and as such may form 
partt of a well-defined user-language, in which the elements of discourse are corro-
boratedd by alluding to the authority of the ancients, antique civilisation, the canons 
off science etc., authority having lost any real relationship to the fear of physical 
reprisall or retribution. 
Thee user-language of textual authority operates when discourse, debate and 
learningg are conducted in terms of references to texts, and the authority of those 
300 
texts may rest on other texts. Knowledge, and therefore learning, is conferred by 

referencee to texts, and the proper structuring and citation of texts is warrant for 
knowledge.. Agreement is solicited in terms of confirmation, and competence is de-
finedd in terms of the quality, quantity and authority of the texts brought to the 
discourse.. Users are not deemed competent if they can cite only their own obser-
vations,, nor if they can solve what they define as problems, but only if they are able 
too cite texts in support of their position. Generating new texts is the activity of those 
alreadyy deemed competent in the citation of texts, and the warrant for new texts is 
basedd upon the citation of existing texts. Textual authority has a long history, and 
continuess to play a major role in many academic disciplines. 
Ass witnessed by the following examples, the appeal to textual authority can be found 
inn the labels of virtually all museums of science, technology, history and art, past 
andd present. Insofar as the curator represents the voice of authority, and the label 
implementss this authority, the curatorial texts establish the truth concerning the 
museumm object, and this is the truth that the visitor is expected to accept. In many 
modernn museums, the bulk of a curator's time is taken up by research. This research 
iss directed towards the end of establishing the scientific, empirical truth about a 
particularr matter - attribution or antecedents in the case of a work of art, scientific 
veracityy in the case of a science museum - and this truth is then implemented in a 
label.. The activity of generating texts is solely in the province of the museum - the 
visitorr is not considered competent to write their own texts, nor to draw their own 
conclusions. . 
Lett us consider the following example, drawn from an internationally-acclaimed 
exhibitionn of Russian icons, designed and developed in part by the author. 
TheThe Gates of Mystery: the Art of Holy Russia opened at The Walters 
Artt Gallery in Baltimore in August 1992, the first stop in its tour of 
museumss that included the Dallas Museum of Art, the Chicago Art 
Institutee and the Victoria and Albert Museum. Originally the exhibit-
ionn was designed to begin with a non-narrative audiovisual as the 
visitorss entered, showing the celebration of the Russian Orthodox 
liturgyy at Christmas, Epiphany, Easter and Pentecost, and highlighting 
thee way in which the icon figured spiritually in the Orthodox ceremony and physi-
callyy in the Orthodox church. For reasons unrelated to the curatorial intent of the 
exhibition,, the audiovisual was replaced with a large panel of introductory text, 
establishingg the idea of the icon, and the political and ecclesiastical history of the 
Russiann state. This text was meant not only to establish that the exhibition was of 
31 

Russiann icons in all media, but that the exhibition was divided into two parts: 
thee first dealing with the eternal liturgy, or Heaven and the second dealing with 
Russiann icons as they developed out of Byzantine models into a distinctively Rus-
siann art form, art history, or Earth. This distinction was made physically in the exhi-
bitionn by a change of colour: Heaven (liturgy) was purple. Earth (history) was green. 
HeavenHeaven and Earth 
IconsIcons exist in both heaven and earth. They are gates to the mystery of Orthodox spiri-
tuality,tuality, and silent witnesses to the length and breadth of Russian history. The icon is the
pointpoint where heaven meets earth. It is heavenly truth in earthly form, the Word made 
flesh.flesh. Wooden planks, fish glue and earthen pigments are transformed into God through 
thethe faith of the artist. The icon becomes a window on eternity, the divine beauty that 
isis eternal salvation. On earth. Orthodox Christians repeat timeless acts of devotion, 
themselvesthemselves mortal players in an unfolding history, subject to change and deca
heaven,heaven, Christ and his Saints sit in Glory, venerated for eternity by choirs of angels
OverwhelmedOverwhelmed by the splendor of Byzantium, which his ambassadors descr
'heaven'heaven on earth' Prince Vladimir of Kiev converts his people to Orthodoxy in 988
AA century later, Kievan Rus is swept away by the Mongols, who are in turn are defea-
tedted by a warrior saint, the Prince of Moscow, Dimitri Donskoy. Holy Russia rises once 
againagain and Moscow is hailed as a 'Third Rome', the heir to Constantinopole, the 'second 
Rome'Rome' founded by Constantine the Great in A.D. 324. Heaven is filled with the 'divine 
andand uncreated light' that blinded the Apostles at the Transfiguration of Christ. For Saint 
SimeonSimeon the New Theologian heaven is full of 'fire uncreated and invisible, withou
beginningbeginning and immaterial'. Heaven is beyond time, and permeated with divine fire.
thethe third century, St. Athanasius writes 'God became man that man might become God'. 
TheThe uncreated light, visible on earth in the form of the icon, is what allows man to 
becomebecome God. 
Whatt can we observe about the user-language of the above label? What does it tell 
uss about the maker of the objects? The maker of the label? The reader of the label? 
Firstt of all, the introductory text is highly narrative. It does not cite objects, it cites 
spirituall events and states. The tone of the text is magisterial, as if delivered from 
thee throne of God. The text is telling a story, and the reader is obliged to take the 
truthh of the story on faith in order to enter into the spirit of the exhibition. The maker 
off the objects in the exhibition is at this point largely invisible it seems to be the voice 
off the museum, stately, disembodied and serious, that speaks through the labels, 
322 
setting the stage for the objects that will be seen, and aware of its own artifice in 

makingg them visible. The reader is given certain clues in both text and setting, 
althoughh they are not put as such. The icon is a gate to the spiritual. The icon is part 
off another culture. The icon is the key to a certain kind of transformation. 
Whatt can a visitor make of this? The text demands acquiescence - the reader must 
enterr into the cadence of the text and listen to the story as it unfolds. The visitor is 
definedd as a listener, a hearer of stories, and the museum a storyteller. The artist, 
thee icon painter, the icon itself, are all as yet invisible features in a story yet to be 
toldd to a passive listener, a supplicant in the temple of art as a penitent in the House 
off God. This tone is not entirely inadvertent (although it could easily have been so, 
insofarr as the top-down 'from on high' textual strategy is common in institutions of 
'high'' culture) -to understand the objects of the exhibition in their ecclesiastical con-
textt is in some measure to enter into the relationship with the art that it exacts in 
contextt - the icon is more than an object of veneration, it participates in the Divine 
Essence,, and to appreciate the icon the visitor must be prepared to accept in some 
measure,, however temporary, the paternalistic binome that is part of the context that 
explainss the object itself. In eliding the maker of the object, the exhibition aims to 
evokee the relationship between the museum and the visitor that is the practical and 
spirituall relationship between the believer and the Church, mediated by the eccle-
siasticall object become transparent - a 'window' on the other. Three has become 
twoo in the space of the label. At their most emaciated, labels that rely largely on the 
user-languagee of textual authority content themselves with naming and dating the 
workk in question, and this is primarily what happens in all museums endowed with 
collectionss of objects. The barest ontological minima needed to transform a private 
collectionn into a museum by means of a label are the name of the creator of the ob-
ject,, where it was found and its date of its creation. How can such activity be called 
thee label? Are even time, date and provenance vehicles of the museum's authority 
-- of its active structuring? These attributes would have had little importance in the 
Middlee Ages, when art was considered a craft and the artist merely a tool for the 
patron'ss aspirations to divine or secular favour. These ontological minima them-
selvess clearly betray the origins of the modern museum, which can be found at the 
timee when the idea of the author and the Age - the political individual and that of 
historyy as progress - were first enunciated in the late 18th century. It is arguably no 
coincidencee that the modern museum appears at the time of Goethe, Locke and 
thee American and French Revolutions. As the anthropologist Richard Handler notes 
'.... simple concepts of chronology do not help us evaluate and understand objects 
fromm some neutral perspective ... the museum's dating of them interprets them in 
termss of a philosophy of time and history that is read into, not out of, them.' 
33 

Thee same can be claimed of the identity of the object. 'A painting, we say, is a Monet, 
andd a mask is Kwakiutl. I would argue that both kinds of statements about identity 
aree embedded in interpretive frames ... [i]t is easy to imagine different understan-
dingss of human creativity and of the relationship of humans to material objects. One 
might,, for example, develop a theory of creativity that does not privilege indivi-
duals.. In this perspective, artists might not be seen as self-contained creators but as 
participantss in a tradition ... Similarly objects themselves might not be seen as 
discretee artworks but as moments in an artistic process that produces a series of 
objects,, none of which would be granted the ontological status of an isolated thing 
.... This is not to say that this alternative perspective could not be used to impose 
identitiess of some sort on museum objects. It is, however, to argue that any parti-
"" R. Handler, Journal of Museum Anthropology 
cularr identity of an object will not be intrinsic but something that is read into it.'1B 
16.11 February 1992 pp. 21-28 
Thee visitor may wonder, the visitor may even hesitate, but in the final analysis must 
putt her faith in the label and in the authority implemented by the label. Rarely is the 
visitorr encouraged to challenge the authority of the label, and rarer still, put this 
authorityy to the test by doing experiments. In the best of cases, the label confers new 
knowledgee on the visitor, in the worst, the visitor is puzzled, doubtful, or unwilling 
too accept the label's authority, notably if the new information does not conform to 
priorr or preconceived knowledge. In either case, the visitor is a passive recipient of 
materiall generated by an invisible actor who has both access to resources unavai-
lablee to the visitor, and access to greater authority. The relationship tacitly implied 
byy the label is that described in reception theory - there is a sender, a message, 
andd a receiver. In the eyes of a museum who creates labels based on this model, a 
successfull label is one in which the message, generated by the museum, based on 
thee authority of the curator, is perfectly received by the visitor, who is the passive 
receiver,, a tabula rasa. That this view has been seriously called into question has 
nott had a significant influence on its popularity. Labels, particularly in museums of 
artt and history, continue to largely implement the authority of the curator, whose 
research,, and biases, underpin the museum's work. 
Whenn one authority meets another in the museum on the ground of the label, 
itt clearly highlights the way in which the label implements its authority. In the 
absencee of a counter authority, the label attempts to implement authority as an un-
questionablee one-to-one relationship between the visitor and the unseen expert by 
conferringg knowledge on the visitor. This is a that. A is a B. The visitor, the reader of 
thee label, is assumed to have nothing to contribute. She is a passive receiver of a 
344 
putative truth generated somewhere external to her, and beyond her capacity to 

create.. The role the visitor is ascribed is endorsement, that of the museum, in-
struction.. The property the visitor gains comes from acquisition - by adding another 
'fact'' to a repertoire, her store of knowledge is enhanced. The visitor is more know-
ledgeablee than when she arrived by virtue of having assimilated new information. 
Thee elision of the museum, or more precisely its identification with the authority that 
guaranteess the information it is making available, generally goes either unnoticed 
orr unremarked upon. Only rarely are we given an opportunity to unmask the label-
makingg role of the museum, to make it visible and accountable, to hear a challenge 
too its authority. 
Thee New Yorker author Terence Monmaney interviewed the palaeontologist Robert 
T.. Bakker in the Smithsonian Institution's Museum of Natural History as part of an 
articlee published in May 1993." The interview allows us to look at the role of the 
museumm relative to the labels it writes, and the authority it relies upon. A lengthy 
excerptt is revealing (see also chapter 1): 
'We'We stopped for a few moments at the exhibit on Dimetredon, the fin-backed reptile 
thatthat predated the dinosaurs, it was represented by a nearly complete fossil skeleton, 
alligator-size,alligator-size, displayed in a shoulder-high case... The plaque says that the Dimetredon 
isis "a primitive mammal-like reptile ", and says little else, as if either you get it or you 
don't.don't. But this is not the "Mona Lisa " - it needs help. Bakker shook his head. "See, this 
missesmisses the ecological context. This is all ancestor worship." Then he acted out a stern 
pedagogicalpedagogical encounter. "Why is this object important?" he intoned. Whining, he an-
swered,swered, "Because it's the ancestor of mammal-like reptiles." then he reverted to his 
normalnormal demeanour. "No. This is the world's first top predator. Before this, you can't 
identifyidentify an animal that's strong enough to kill and eat anything else. The first king of the 
beasts.beasts. Ecologically a big deal. Does the plaque tell you that? No." 
'We'We stopped at a sign on dinosaur temperature control. Warm-blooded or cold-blood-
ed?ed? The Smithsonian, it turns out, was enemy territory, a redoubt of inertial homeo-
thermythermy - the theory that dinosaurs, though metabolically cold-blooded, were so 
largelarge that they held the little heat they generated and thus gained the advantages of 
warm-bloodedness.warm-bloodedness. "Oh, no" Bakker shrieked, like a distressed damsel. It became clear 
thatthat he was not having much fun. So you don't want to listen to this? "I've heard it a 
thousandthousand times," he said. Why is it here if it's not true? „Because this is the standard 
doctrine,doctrine, and it has got to be defended: 'Dinosaurs were successful because they 
werewere big and the climate was warm.' That's all you have to know! Big - it was warm. 
Big,Big, tropics. Big, tropics. Bigtropics - bigtropicsbigtropicsbigtropics." 
I read aloud from 

thethe text 'The dinosaur's bigness probably helped them conserve heat.' "But that's true 
nono matter what your metabolism. The bigger you are, the less rapidly you'll lose heat." 
'Their'Their capacity for prolonged strenuous activity would have been limited more by their 
sizesize and their anatomy than by their ability to use oxygen.' "That's a nonsense state-
ment.ment. Prolonged strenuous activity - maximum aerobic exercise, right? That's limited 
byby only two things, lungs and heart. And we know that dinosaur lungs and hearts were 
avian"avian" ... 
'Warm-blooded animals use oxygen more effectively than cold-blooded 
animals.'animals.' "That's incorrect", he said, sounding a little steamed. Oxygen utilisation 
cold-bloodscold-bloods was part of his doctoral research. '... allows them greater enduranc
"Absolutely"Absolutely wrong" 
'Thus birds and mammals are more continuously 
ac
"They're"They're more continuously active because they have larger hearts and lungs. 
'Small'Small dinosaurs would still have depended mostly on external sources of heat, as do 
reptilesreptiles and baby birds.' Now Bakker was laughing hysterically. "I don't know where
theythey got the idea that baby birds are cold-blooded." 
Itt is clear from the above example that when confronted with the process of making 
knowledge,, in this case as a researcher in the field, that the museum's desire to be 
seenn as a purveyor of incontestable fact can be called dramatically into question. By 
maskingg or eliding the museum's role in writing the label (the label gives the im-
pressionn of presenting authoritative scientific truth) it denies any but the specialist 
aa means to judge the contingency and complexity of the subject at issue. 
Too overcome what it sees as the limitations of the user-language of textual autho-
rity,, the museum community generally responds by attempting to create new texts, 
textss which nevertheless employ the same user-language. For instance, the con-
cernss of modern museums for the creation of a context in which the visitor can 
situatee the object has required an amplification of the object label, which has gene-
rallyy increased in length, and been dispersed around the exhibition in the form of 
graphicc panels that often combine charts, maps, photos, illustrations and text, a 
displayy technique related to the label pioneered in the 1930s at American World's 
Fairs.177 The expanded notion of the label and the graphic panel now form the bulk 
177 Samson, 0. La trame narrative, le multi-media et 
off the interpretive armament of the modern museum. 
/'exposition,/'exposition, unpublishd paper, Paris: Palais de la 
Oöcouverte;; 1993 
AA comparatively recent exhibition attempted to challenge the faith put in attribution 
andd authority, the exhibition Fakes, at the British Museum in 1990." Nevertheless, 
** Described in Jones, M. Fake? The An of Deception, 
thee exhibition relied largely on the user-language of textual authority, that is to 
London:: British Museum Publications; 1990 
say,, it used label texts that were themselves classic in their appeal to the reader to 
366 
endorse their truths - truths that themselves were not always necessarily visible 

orr open to challenge. Thus the museum chose to treat the subject of the untrust-
worthinesss of texts by writing newer, arguably equally untrustworthy texts. 
Label:Label: 75 Furry Trout 
TheThe belief that the fauna of Canada included furry fish is said to date from the seven-
teenthteenth century, when a Scotsman, who had written home about the 'abundance of 
furriedfurried animals and fish', was asked to send an example of the latter and obliged. In 
recentrecent years furry fish have been produced by Ross Jobe, of Sault Ste. Marie, Ontario, 
usingusing rabbit fur. The accompanying text suggests 'that the great depth and extreme 
penetratingpenetrating coldness of the water in which these fish live, has caused them to grow 
theirtheir dense coat of (usually) white fur.' In the early 1970s an enquirer, believing it to be 
genuine,genuine, brought one of these fish to the Royal Scottish Museum which, recognising 
itit as a hoax, did not retain it. The story got out, however, and public demand to see the 
furryfurry fish was so strong that the Museum had to 'recreate' it. This furry fish is, there-
fore,fore, a fake twice over. GNS 
LL 270mm 
NationalNational Museums of Scotland 
Eachh of the elements of the story, including a reference to 17th century literature, 
mustt be taken at face value in order to appreciate the object displayed. The visitor 
leavess with a new piece of information, but one taken on faith. One can imagine 
numerouss similar labels, each alluding to older texts and making similar claims, each 
»» See Weschler, L Mr. Wilton's Cabinet of Curiosities. 
perfectlyy plausible, in the manner of the labels written by the Museum of Jurassic 
Neww York: Pantheon; 1995 
Technology.w w 
Inn the examples cited above, the museum user is called upon only to accept, and to 
endorse,, the truth of the label. The label is thus assumed to confer the properties of 
acceptancee and passivity - even a label about an object itself called into question. 
Thee user comes away from the museum with new knowledge, but knowledge to be 
takenn on faith. The user has become passive in the face of the new knowledge, in 
thee sense that she can 'either take it or leave it', and was not invited to play more 
thann a minor role in its creation. The user-language of observation, that strives for 
betterr seeing on the individual level to ensure better believing (see next section), is 
nott relevant when it comes to the Russian icon - or the furry trout The user is not 
askedd to believe the evidence of her observation, but to accept the authority of the 
writerr as warrant of the label's truth. 

3.1.22 Observation 
Applicationn of the user-language of observation marks a new awareness of what 
writingg a label may involve. This language clearly is associated with the appearance 
off science, and just like science aims to organise individual observations of the 
physicall world. In the museum setting, in contrast to labels that employ the user-
languagee of textual authority, labels that employ the user-language of 'obser-
vation'' help the individual visitor to see, that is to become an authority in seeing 
forr herself. In the user-language of observation, observations are the 'currency' of 
thee language - individual observations are to be confirmed and disputed in terms 
off observations reported by other individuals (usually 'authoritative' experts or 
scientists).. Were this to be otherwise we would be in the realm of miracles, rather 
thann of science - noting that during the Middle Ages 'the miraculous was widely 
perceivedd as part of nature which provided a paradigm for the explanation of the 
worldd and its apparent aberrations'. *> Note the shift in emphasis: the user is allowed 
*  see Rubin, M. Corpus Christi, Cambridge: CUP; 1991 
aa certain extra freedom (she herself must see), although there is still is the obliga-
tionn to make a comparison between what each individual sees and what is reported 
ass having been observed by others. There is a shift in procedure therefore, though 
nott of allegiance. Although the user is recognised as an observer, she will but serve 
aa new master. 
Thee label confers this property in the museum setting by identifying opportunities 
too observe, identifying what is to be observed, and identifying opportunities to ob-
servee wherein these observations have value. It assumes the user does indeed 'see' 
thee whole, as well as the individual instances. While textual authority still occasio-
nallyy has to supplement the user's experience, and continues to 'authorise' being 
knowledgeable,, as seen in the examples above, the user-language of observations, 
likee a good lens, gives the user the opportunity to observe, examine, and to confirm, 
specificc aspects of the world around them, as well as how they belong together. 
Duee to its roots in the nascent rationalism of the Enlightenment, among the mu-
seum'ss first uses was as an instrument of observation, and by means of its practices 
off collection - the ordering of its collections, and its labels - it revealed aspects of 
thee world that otherwise were invisible. The better the museum - the more com-
prehensivee its collections, the more coherent its organisation and the more scien-
tificc its labels -the better the quality of the observation. As Valéry had inscribed over 
thee entrance of the Palais de Chaillot in the 1930s Things rare or things beautiful, 
collectedd here in learned manner, instruct the eye to see, as it has never seen before, 
388 
all the world's existing things'. The plurality of observation made possible by the 

museumm was controlled and channelled by its labelling, the implied ontology of 
whichh served to homogenise the nature of each observation, so that the many ob-
serverss were compelled to repeat and confirm observation by others, as prescribed 
byy the label. The museum label, insofar as it implied a certain ontology, was con-
sideredd as a passive, objective element, despite the broader and varied agendas of 
thee museum institution for private, moral, social and scientific reform. Even if the 
intentt of the label was to have an effect on the visitor, the effect was one way - the 
visitorr was to be converted to the truth, and as a consequence, to become trans-
formed.. With very few exceptions, the idea that the user of the label should initiate 
ann action to become active does not occur in museum literature until well into the 
20thh century. 
Ass an instrument for seeing, the first task of the early museum was to allow visitors 
too see farther, by bringing closer objects they would not have been able to see 
otherwise.. Shorn of its magical powers, the cabinet of curiosities was a means of 
displayingg the rare, the beautiful and the strange, often without the regard for 
taxonomyy shown by later collections. A rare shell could be seen side by side with a 
fragmentt of antique sculpture, or next to a jewel-encrusted Gothic reliquary or an 
orientall rhinoceros horn cup. At the same time as the telescope was bringing the 
starss within reach, artefacts collected on voyages of discovery to the New World 
weree bringing native plants, objects, and natives themselves from the New World 
too the capitals of Europe. The visitor could start to see for herself. 
Thee first descriptions of the objects in Tradescant's Ark, which may be assumed to 
bee their first labels, are recorded in the 1656 catalogue that accompanied the collec-
tion,, compiled largely by Elias Ashmole, an amateur alchemist and later one of the 
founderss of the Royal Society, who was to purchase the collection. 
16561656 label 'Cup of rhinoceros ... homes' [cat pg. 52} 
16851685 label 'Poculum ex Hhinoceratis cornu conflatis'[B no. 465] 
Thee label for the rhinoceros cup 21 can be used as an example of the approach to 
"" In MacGregor. A., Tradescant's Rarities. 
exhibitionn taken by the collection's custodians the Tradescants Elder and Younger, 
Neww York: Oxford University Press; 1983 
andd of the changes that were a consequence of the collection's purchase by Elias 
Ashmolee in 1659 (he took possession only in 1674 - over the objections of the 
Youngerr Tradescant's wife, Hester) and its subsequent donation to Oxford Univer-
sityy in 1679. The horn of the rhinoceros was believed to have numerous qualities in 
thee early 17th century, when this cup is thought to have been fabricated. Powdered 
39 

itt was meant to be eaten as an aphrodisiac, in the form of a drinking vessel, rhino-
ceross horn was believed to 'sweat' in the presence of poison, and liquid drunk from 
itt was believed to cure cholera. The cup displayed in Tradescant's Ark, was of an oval, 
flaringg shape following the outline of the horn, and carved in the form of a five-
petall led hibiscus flower. The stem of the blossom is carved fully in the round, and 
branchess to form a steady base on which the cup stands. The motif and the carving 
pointt to fabrication in the Orient, where the horn was a great rarity. 
Thee label is uninformative, but in English, which indicates it was directed to a lay 
audience,, perhaps even the 'rude vulgars' who would be interested in the curiosities 
off the collection. The collection was open to the public, upon payment of a small fee, 
andd the interest of the public almost certainly was in the variety of natural oddities 
containedd in the collection, rather than more academic, taxonomie concerns. The 
authorityy of the attribution rested in Tradescant's account of his purchase of the 
objectt on one of his botanical travels to the continent. The language was that of 
observation,, and the collection allowed visitors to see and wonder at curiosities of 
naturee and ethnographic specimens collected on long travels from distant places-
placess they could not otherwise 'see', and to which they would have had little 
priorr access save through engravings in books and oral accounts. 
Forr the objects of the collection, seeing was believing what others were said to have 
seen,, and the object labels, however terse, told the viewer what it was they were see-
ing:: the mantle of an Indian chief, the statue of an Hindu god, or a white-spotted 
snake.. At the time, the ordinary viewer was presumably in no position to contradict 
thee authority of the label, and critical evaluation of the veracity of the attributions 
(throughh other, and additional observations) had to wait until the Ark was installed 
att Oxford and attended by full-time Keepers. 
Thirtyy years later, as part of the new Ashmolean collection at Oxford University, the 
labell is now in Latin, no more informative, but addressed to an educated and literate 
elite.. The statutes of the new museum reflect this shift: '[Article] 11. That the Rarities 
shalbee shewed but to one Company at a tyme, &that upon their being entered into 
thee Museum, the dore shall be shut and if any more Company or Companies come 
beforee they be dispatcht, that they be desired to stay below, till that the other come 
22oP.citt 
forth. '22 While exemplary in its concern for the well-being of the collection, a con-
cernn well-warranted at the time (the first robbery in the collection occurred in 1689, 
whenn a single large party had been admitted, contrary to the statutes), it is a far cry 

fromm the 'variety of objects which daily present themselves to them, or may easily 
bee seen once a year...' mentioned by Hooke in 1638. 
Thee authority of the label rested on that of the Keeper, although insofar as the 
Keeper'ss scholarship was open to challenge, so was the authority of the label itself. 
Inn 1734 a German scholar wrote with sceptical distaste 'in a case I found a very well-
wroughtt Indian idol, or as the Custos called it, a Brachmanus. He declared that the 
stonee was unknown, but it appeared to me as a sort of steatite, from which the 
Indianss normally make their gods ... The ridiculous fellow who was showing us 
thee specimens and who is a Sub-Custos (the Custos himself, Mr. Parry, cannot show 
visitorss over the museum for guzzling and toping) announced in all earnest that the 
materiall for these gods was made of rice, boiled and then dyed.'23 
Tradescant'ss collection of wonderful rarities and oddities, closeted in an Oxford 
museumm attic, had ceased to be wonderful, its rarities jumbled and at odds with 
itss oddities, and had to await the 19th century to be rescued from decrepitude. The 
relationshipp between the Keepers, the labels, and the visitor, however, had been 
firmlyy established, and the user-language of authority which the museum promo-
ted,, coupled with the user-language of observation made possible in the new 
museumm instrument of vitrines and labels, laid the groundwork for the museum 
experiencee as it would become popular for the next three centuries. 
Thee museum collection, as it evolved over the course of the 18th century, was not 
onlyy to be a place where things could be seen for the sake of their rarity. Imperial 
expansionn and the exploration of the New World meant that increasingly the 
strange,, the rare and the unusual became the commonplace, and the museum's 
missionn was soon obliged to become more than a shop window for the curious 
passer-by.. This change of direction was already apparent in Elias Ashmole's ambi-
tionss for Tradescant's collection, and it was clear from the statutes, from his choice 
off Keepers and from the Latin texts of the collection's labels that the collection was 
meantt to serve the needs of scholars, and contribute to the advancement of know-
ledge.ledge. The collection was not to be merely a window, but a lens, not just a means of 
seeing,, but an instrument for better seeing in terms of what others supposedly 
weree also seeing. It was not enough for a visitor merely to see a new oddity, but to 
seee it 'better' - to learn more about it, to be able to describe it in terms of a wider 
framework.. Thus museum visitors were not charged merely with their own obser-
vation,, but had to take a small step towards being actors in the museum setting, 
contributingg as well as corroborating observations. 

Thee art museum is the public face of art history, and its collections differ from private 
collectionss in their being presented to the public, and interpreted by means of the 
label,, whereas a private collection, while it may be interpreted by its owner, remains 
privatee largely by virtue of its lack of the label, which by definition implies unknown 
andd unknowable viewers. The art museum also tends to function as a lens, an in-
strumentt for increasing the quality of possible observations by assembling a great 
numberr of similar works in the same place. In the art museum, as the art historian 
Michaell Baxandall notes at length **, the bulk of the art museum experience is not 
344 see Baxandall, M. Patterns of Intention, 
aboutt looking at pictures, but about talking about looking at pictures, wherein the 
Neww Haven: Yale; 1985 
labell is the means of constructing the visitor's dialogue about art. Here the visitor, 
inn addition to the personal affective impact of the work itself, spends a large amount 
off time communicating to others the nature of the encounter, in terms of the work. 
Thee work quickly becomes a support for discussion about the nature of the experi-
encee of the work. 
Statisticss conducted at major museums25 corroborate the fact that the museum visit 
211 Notably in Bourdieu, P. and Darbel, A. 
iss a fundamentally social experience, that visitors are rarely unaccompanied, there-
VamourVamour da 1'art, Paris: Editions de minuit 1969 
foree to look at the nature of the museum experience as a social experience suppor-
tedd by the collection is largely warranted. Moreover, seen in this light, the label is 
seenn to be the fundamental museum support, as it is the label that guides, frames, 
andd to a large degree imposes the framework in which visitors interact in the mu-
seum.. The 'seeing' of the visitor is thus mediated and facilitated by the degree to 
whichh the label can construct a discourse around an object, the degree to which this 
discoursee can call upon supplemental information to enlarge the visitor's 'field of 
vision',, and the degree to which the label can implement certain properties in the 
visitor. . 
AA good lens has the capacity to bring things closer, to reveal greater detail, to see 
betterr what is there to be seen. The museum in this way acts as both telescope 
andd microscope, to bring the far near, and to reveal unsuspected detail. The user-
languagee of observation is central to this instrumentality, and the optical nature of 
thee instrument is central to the large majority of museum labels, be they in museums 
off art, science, or history. This emphasis on observation, and on the ability to 
corroboratee by seeing is often (although not always) complemented by a textual 
dimensionn that calls upon the user-language of authority, and serves to confirm the e 
adequacyy of the visitor's seeing. The ontological link created by the label is still a 
keyy feature of the encounter - the visitor is expected to see what the label says 
422 
others also see. Nevertheless, contextual information provided by the label can be 

aa support for dialogue, and, depending on its sufficiency, can serve to recognise the 
visitorr and her need to reflect, consider and discuss the visual encounter by means 
off additional information provided by the label, thus confirming Bourdieu's obser-
vationn that the label is often construed as a key sign of concern on the part of the 
institutionn forthe visitor.» 
»oo.eitpp.iz2-3 
Att its simplest, the label helps the visitor see by telling her what is there, by making 
aa propositional statement about the material presence of the object. This minimum 
iss often supplemented by an implied narrative that alludes to the story of the object's 
creationn - why the painter painted it, of whom, under what conditions, and in what 
manner.. The following example, taken from The Wanderers, an exhibition of Russian 
19thh century paintings held at the Dallas Museum of Art in 1989 ", tells the visitor 
177 VaJtenior, E. ad. Tho Wanderers, Fort Worth: 
conditionss of the painting's provenance that would otherwise be unknown. What 
DMAflnttrCultura;; 1991 
neww information does the visitor receive? The relationship of the subject to the 
painter,, and by inference the reason for the portrait the fact that the costume is 
Ukrainiann that the artist painted many different kinds of people. Although the label 
implementss the user-language of observation -the visitor's observation -the visitor 
iss nonetheless asked to corroborate the curator's editorial comment about other, 
too the visitor invisible, paintings in acquiescing to the particularity of the painting 
viewedd as described. 
Label/1989:Label/1989: Portrait of A. I. Sliusareva, N.N. GE 
AgayifaAgayifa Ignatievna Sliusareva (1856-1903), wife of the artist's son is depicted as a young 
womanwoman in Ukrainian costume fetching in her charm, simplicity and frankness. Portraiture 
waswas quite important in Ge's work. Among his portraits of writers and public figures who 
playedplayed an important role in the spiritual life of the 1870s and 1880s, there are, how-
ever,ever, a great many portraits of people who were seemingly unexceptional. In each one, 
though,though, the artist defines the value and significance of the human individual, and his 
portraitportrait of Sliusareva is, no doubt, one such work. 
Inn the exhibition Copier/Créer at the Louvre in 1993 », the visitor is given the addi-
"" Cuzin, J.P. and Dupuy M A etfs. Copier, Créer. Paris: 
tionall visual material of the work by which the painter was inspired, in the form of 
RME;; 1993 
aa black & white photo as part of the label. In this way, the label is able to support 
comparisonn between the work and other works that may have had an influence on 
it,, information the visitor might be unaware of otherwise (but also might not agree 
withh if such other works had been available). Moreover, the curator imputes speci-
ficc motivations to the artist, and attempts to tell the visitor what the artist was at-
temptingg to do and how. While the visitor is asked to take the curator's belief on faith, 
43 

shee is also directed to another work in the event that she wants to corroborate or 
refutee the curator's position. In this case, the seeing of the visitor has been materi-
allyy enhanced, despite the relatively spare style of the label itself. 
Label:Label: 101 Giacometti - Didoufri 
Didoufri Didoufri 
Ink Ink 
Provenance:Provenance: Collection Mme. Alice Tériade 
Paris,Paris, Galérie Yoshii 
HereHere again Giacometti is trying to find the major planes corresponding to the first 
cuttingcutting of the red sandstone, the features of the IVth Dynasty Pharaoh seeming to
revealreveal themselves progressively, according to the same process that dictated the 
workwork of its Egyptian sculptor. The Yoshii collection possesses a second drawing, very 
closeclose in spirit, probably executed following the same photograph and at an earlier time, 
moremore faithful to the original, showing notably the cracks with greater precision, by 
meansmeans of fine hatching. 
Inn the Louvre label, the visitor was given additional information about the artist's 
intent,, and about the existence of the artist's works on the same theme, and would 
havee been able to pursue the analysis of the work in greater depth if desired. How-
ever,, this additional investigation would have been difficult to undertake, and inso-
farr as it would have presented a real challenge, can be considered in certain 
wayss as actually discouraging further looking. However, in the case of the exhibi-
tionn Mi-Vrai/mi-faux at the Musée de la civilisation in Quebec in 1992 a , the visitor 
«Mi-vrai.. mi-faux, Quebec: 
wass actively encouraged by the labels to investigate the object and come to her own 
Muséee de la civilisation; 1992 
conclusion.. By using direct questions and concealing the label texts as an incentive 
too reason from the material evidence available, the label promotes not only increa-
sedd knowledge about the object, corroborated by the curator's authority, but the 
developmentt of the skills that underpin the curator's own competence. 
IntroductoryIntroductory copy: Similis 
TheThe first dilemma we are faced with is to situate ourselves among the multitude of ob-
jectsjects we encounter. Are they real? Are they imitations? In the end, aren't they simply 
obscureobscure copies? Certain distinctions should be made. Behind every object taken out o
thethe context in which it was created or used there lies an enigma which sometimes 
masksmasks its identity and its degree of authenticity. Alone, the object lies before its judge. 
444 
Often it is silent. Let us sharpen our critical faculties and become curiouser [sic}. 

LetLet us open our eyes and allow these objects to speak to us. They have messages 
toto deliver... 
DoDo you want to test your knowledge and sense of observation? Are you curious as to 
thethe true identity of these objects? To confuse you, we have only partially identified 
them.them. Voluntarily omitting several details, confronting you with the object on its own. 
ObserveObserve them meticulously, allow them to break the silence, and before reading the 
explanationsexplanations and the answer found behind each of the four cabinets, judge for yourself. 
You'llYou'll see... 
LabelLabel (concealed verso): 
TheThe furry trout is a ruse that has trapped many. Lay persons are easily convinced that 
fishfish swimming in the icy depths of Arctic waters are covered with fur. In reality fish do 
notnot need warmth because they are cold-blooded animals. This furry trout, a replica made 
byby a Sault Ste. Marie taxidermist, Ross C. Jobe, is wrapped in a simple synthetic fur. 
Collection:Collection: National Museums of Scotland, Edinburgh 
Rationalistt science is based on a formalised process of shared witnessing, and one 
wouldd therefore be justified in believing that science museum labels, as science 
itself,, would make appeals to corroboration by observation. More often, however, 
sciencee museum labels appeal to the authority of Science as a corpus of completed 
andd proven results and discoveries, generally beyond the intellectual reach of the 
averagee visitor. The truths of science and technology have replaced those of religion, 
andd are expected to be taken on faith by the science museum visitor. The science 
museumm is one of the few places in which an ordinary citizen encounters science in 
action,, or purportedly in action, and often has more in common with a church than 
withh a research laboratory. This emphasis on the authority of science is closely re-
latedd to the science museum's perceived mission as part of the formal educational 
system,, and the science museum often positions itself as an extension of the class-
room.. As former director of the Palais de la Découverte Michel Hulin wrote just 
beforee his death in 1988, 'fundamentally without a doubt, the Palais is a sort of 
"" Taken from an unpublished internal discussion paper 
scientificc super-high school, devoted to the presentation of experiments and do-
tee Palais da la découverta, son présent 
cumentss to go along with courses, but endowed with experimental capacities and 
sonson avenir. un aurvot rapide, 19 octobre 1987 
documentaryy resources that exceed those of an ordinary establishment of secondary 
education.300 This approach is reflected in the Palais' labels, even those that 
"" Transcribed by the author, 1993 
accompanyy its newest 'interactive' space, the 'Eureka' hall 31, which are written in 
thee style pioneered at the San Francisco Exploratorium, To Do and to Notice.' 

LookLook at the tornado. Three coils heat the water in the basin, and the steam is thus put 
intointo motion with the help of a fan at the top of the cylinder. The vapour condenses into 
finefine droplets of water to give a thick mist. If you press on the button, the fan stops. 
WhatWhat do you notice? 
WhenWhen you push on the button the mist disappears. The fan is therefore the cause of 
thethe condensation of the steam. In effect, while turning, the fan creates a depression in 
thethe centre of the cylinder. The rotating steam is attracted to the depression. As its speed 
increasesincreases its temperature drops as a consequence. The water vapour condenses. 
TheThe condensation of the steam into fine droplets of water is the direct consequence of 
thethe depression created by the fan. 
Accordingg to Maturana The intention of doing science is to explain ... and it is in 
thee context of explaining that it must be understood that scientific explanation is the 
criterionn of validation for scientific statements ... it must be recognised that a 
modernn scientific community is a community of observers that use the scientific 
explanationn as the criterion of validation.'M In other words, in order to participate 
»» H. Maturana, transcribed from lecture notes 
inn the community of scientists, one must accept the set of criteria established for 
byy the author 
correctt observation, and take part in the scientific process of observing and con-
firming.. However, in the case of this exhibit, the exhibit user has no choice but to 
confirmm the truth of the label, having no recourse to experiment, no access to addi-
tionall information, no indication of the community in which consensus was reached 
aboutt the principle involved. The visitor is active, insofar as she provokes the phe-
nomenon,, she is a participant insofar as she witnesses the phenomenon, but the 
witnessingg is not that of a scientist, whose witnessing itself has authority through 
thee community of scientific observers, but that of a passive spectator, whose sole 
role,, like the penitent at the altar, is to confirm the revealed mysteries of science. 
Ass demonstrated by the examples above, labels employing the user-language of 
observation,, while conferring additional properties absent from those labels relying 
solelyy on textual authority, are quite limited in the properties they add. Although 
thee user-language of observation helps the visitor become an 'observational' 
authority,, it does not help her to become anything else -for instance a real actor able 
too use her 'self-authorised' observations in another context. 
46 6 

3.1.33 Variables 
Strictlyy speaking, the user-language of variables is only an extension of the user-
languagee of observation - the reach is greater, but the 'currency' of the language, 
observations,, remains the same. Still, this user-language allows for many new 
features.. It suggests to the visitor that a large variety of different observations can 
bee ordered and compared by herself. The user-language of observation alone is not 
oftenn able to cope with the enormous possible variation, nor marshal the expres-
sionn of this variety in a meaningful way. The user-language of variables provides 
aa means of ordering observations, through a description of the relations between 
variablee parameters. When the user-language of variables is used to augment and 
extendd the user-languages of authority and observation in the museum, the label 
conferss on the visitor the property of being able to discuss, compare and control a 
domainn of observations, even when some of its elements are not directly visible. 
Ass we have seen from the above, since their emergence in the late 18th century from 
thee unravelled pieces of the magical and talismanic neo-platonic cabinets of the 
latee Renaissance, via private collection, museums put a premium on the user-
languagee of observation. The museum was considered an instrument that would 
*>*> S M Shapin, S. A Social History of Truth, 
helpp its users see better. The user-language of observation not only permitted 
Chicago:: University of Chicago; 1994 
visitorss to see new objects, to see objects in greater detail and with greater accu-
racy,, but, still using the optical metaphor, to 'see' invisible phenomena, and with 
*** OMCribed in Walsh, K., The representation 
evenn less basis in actual vision, to 'see' relationships between objects and abstract 
ofof the past, London: Routladge; 1992 
concepts.. This latter kind of 'seeing', albeit couched in terms of sight and observa-
tion,, still owes a large debt to the user-language of authority, as the existence of 
thee invisible concepts shown must first be vouchsafed by those who can already 
'see'' w , and to an even greater extent, to the user-language of variables, which orders 
thee observations into groups of 'observations of observations'. 
Museums,, and their labels, reflected this new philosophy of History. Art museums 
displayedd their collections in order to show the progress from the barbaric Middle 
Agess to the Renaissance, the schools of painting of each country progressing ever 
onwardss towards enlightenment (despite digressions and lapses of'good taste' such 
ass Mannerism). Beginning with the work of Thomsen in Copenhagen in 1816, 
archaeologyy and history museums showed the Ages of Man, and his progress 
fromm primitive society to the present, following on Mahudel's work in the late 18th 
century.344 Science museums showed the fruits of industrial progress-the machines 
andd tools that made Man's lot lighter {ignoring the problems of depopulation of the 
countryside,, the destruction of the crafts, and child labour). 
47 

Naturall History museums, organised since the early 18th century 
accordingg to the taxonomie principles of Linnaeus, reshuffled their 
collectionss to demonstrate the truths of evolution according to 
Darwin'ss theories of species variation and natural selection. 
Wee can take the museums founded by the Convention of 1794 in 
Francee as an example. In the Louvre, the casual visitor could see the 
historyy of art as a single evolutionary promenade, the scholarly user 
couldd seethe development of schools of painting, and the artist could 
betterr his skills by scrupulous copying. At the Conservatoire des arts 
ett métiers, the apprentice could see new developments in technology, 
thee journeyman could see how to improve his own efforts, while 
thee factory owner could find the key to the reorganisation of industry. At the Muséum 
dee l'histoire naturelle, the researcher could see the infinite variety that inhered in a 
355 Van Praet. M. Trois siècles devolution de la muséo-
singlee species the lay visitor the natural order of the natural world, first, taxo-
logielogie des sciences, Paris: Palais de la Découverte; 
nomicallyy arranged according to the schema of Linnaeus, later, confirming the truths 
1993 3 
off evolution 35 - a theory wedded to the idea of variation and variables in the physi-
call environment. The labels of the Muséum de l'histoire naturelle36 reflect the 
388 From the author's collection 
orderingg system used by the museum, and as a consequence, confirm the truths of 
thee natural world that the museum endorses. 
Label/lateLabel/late 19th c. Musée de l'histoire naturelle, Paris 
2727 Crustacés 
DécapodesDécapodes Brachyures (Crabes) 
GécarcinsGécarcins Trichodactyles, etc. 
Byy means of labelled specimens, organised according to a specific system, the user 
couldd not only see what was there, but also the physical expression of the rela-
tionshipp between what was there and what wasn't. In the museum of natural history, 
thee visitor saw with her own eyes the variety possible within a single species, but 
alsoo a concrete and visible expression of the species' relationship with one another. 
Thee act of seeing confirmed the truths of both observations, and the ontology of the 
labell enshrined the relationship between object, order and observation perfectly. 
Thee visitor, by means of the museum, could see diversity, see progress, see evo-
lution,, and see history. 
Moreover,, the museum, and more particularly the World's Fair exhibition, became 
488 
an instrument for seeing other 'truths' - such as Manifest Destiny, and the ascen-

dancee of the people of the civilised white-skinned western nations at the expense 
off the primitive peoples over whom the lofty and detached Hegelian Idea had 
necessarilyy triumphed. From the vantage point of the museum the visitor was able 
too see past the horizon of the real to the ideologies beyond. That these truths be 
doubtedd was not to be countenanced, nor that the museum as an instrument could 
showw them. At the Universal Exposition of 1937 in Paris, the doors of the Palais de 
laa Découverte opened for the first time to show the invisible forces of nature - static 
electricity,, momentum, kinetic energy, electromagnetism - which it did by means of 
spectacularr demonstrations, such as the world's largest Van de Graaf generator, 
whichh threw sparks metres long, and the huge electromagnet capable of holding a 
heavyy metal chain in mid-air. The motion of electrical charges was made visible, as 
wass the powerful electromagnetic field. It was therefore but a short step to render 
177 see J. Eidolman's article on the creation of the 
visiblee the triumphs of French science, and the incontrovertible benefits of scien-
Palaiss in Vulgariser la science. Seniele and Jscobi eds. 
tificc progress, which was the Palais' founder, Nobel Laureate Jean Perrin's express 
Paris;; Champ Vallon: 1992 
purpose.37 7 
Thee Palais was 'to render manifest these origins [of science] and make the public 
understandd that, in the past, but also in the future, we cannot hope for anything 
new,, nothing that changes the Destiny seemingly forced upon man, except by 
Scientificc Research and Discovery. In this palace we wish to create a living exhibi-
tionn where will be found, as much as possible, shown in a spectacular fashion with 
thee most modern resources, the fundamental discoveries that have enlarged our 
intelligence,, assured our domination of Matter, or augmented our physical secu-
rity.'388 The Palais was to become 'a great popular university, plunging its roots in 
** Jean Perrin, La Science et l'Espéranco, 
thee people of Paris and giving to them that education that they lack and that they 
pp.. 150, Paris: 1938 
desire.. For the People display towards Science a confused trust, albeit deep. They 
hope,, they expect from this liberating Science a growing freedom, already begun, 
thatt will render to all, thanks to the pleasures of a healthy and harmonious life, the 
"" op.cit. 
superiorr joys of Art and Reason.'w 
Despitee its emphasis on the invisible aspects of science, and the premium it put on 
experiments,, these experiments were generally available to the visitor only in the 
formm of demonstrations of already discovered principles. For practical reasons, as 
welll as for ideological ones, the visitor was not encouraged to call generalisations 
intoo question, nor even to see herself as a potential participant. The visitor was 
assumedd to be ignorant, needing to be shown the light of science, a science neces-
sarilyy 'vulgarised' in order that it be understood by the lay public. However, in the 
usee of real scientists to demonstrate what use could be made of observations, there 
49 

weree the seeds of an approach that would put the language of variables into the 
museumm setting, as it had long been in scientific practice itself. 
Thee user-language of variables is an integral part of the sciences, and as a con-
sequence,, quickly became part of the lexicon of the science museum label. In the 
latee 1960s, the American physicist Frank Oppenheimer founded the San Francisco 
Exploratoriumm as 'a garden of natural phenomena', in which a visitor could wander 
att will, exploring at first hand phenomena and scientific principles underlying 
them.. Inspired by the demonstrations he had seen at the Palais de la Découverte and 
byy accounts of the interactive children's gallery at the Science Museum in London, 
Oppenheimerr imagined a museum in which the visitor could ask the question 'what 
wouldd happen if ... ?', which is to say a museum that tried to augment the user-
languagess of authority and observation, with that of variables. In fact, possibly 
ass a consequence of having been blacklisted in the McCarthy witchhunts of the 
50ss (he was the brother of Robert Oppenheimer, head of the Manhattan Project), 
Oppenheimerr showed an acute aversion to the language of authority, and en-
couragedd the kind of exploration that he believed was the basis of good science -
noo question was a bad question at the Exploratorium. 
Thee Exploratorium is often claimed to be the first of a new generation of institu-
tionss - the interactive science centre. Proponents of these institutions claim they 
aree not museums, as they lack collections of objects, and instead rely upon exhibits 
thatt elicit natural phenomena to convey the principles that underlie them. Never-
theless,, these phenomena are consistent and repeatable events, and thus in some 
wayss can be said to constitute a collection, albeit of ephemeral and transient 
phenomenaa - a collection that ultimately stands for a virtual collec-
tionn of abstract scientific principles. 
Thee user-language of the Exploratorium, and of the majority of its 
manyy imitations worldwide, is still the user-language of observation, 
albeitt extended as the user-language of variables, by means of which 
visitorss are encouraged to manipulate variables to bring about 
differentt sensible effects. The objects in the Exploratorium collection 
mustt be brought into being by means of the visitor's activity, and 
thee visitor is encouraged to elicit for herself a phenomenon, and to 
understandd the principle that gives rise to it. The spatial organisation 
off the Exploratorium in a single large space encourages this activity, 
andd the visitor is encouraged to wander from exhibit to exhibit. 
50 0 

makingg connections according to her own interests and at her own speed. The 
** Duensing, S. Exhibit Development as a Way of 
exhibitss themselves are considered 'working prototypes' and staff are discouraged 
Thinking,Thinking, Unpublished lecture. Paris: 1993 
fromm insisting that there is any single 'correct' way to use them. *
Thee Exploratorium deliberately decided not to place an emphasis on questions in 
itss labelling. First of all, it was felt that posing a direct question, such as 'do you see 
thee difference between the figure on the left and that on the right' would intimidate 
thosee for whom the difference was not obvious, or elicit spurious observations. 
Second,, it was felt that to formulate the question was to limit the range of obser-
vationss available to the visitor, although the visitor is told in advance what it is 
theyy should be doing and, as a consequence, noticing. This can be seen in part as a 
consequencee of having 'objects' that are phenomena, which first have to be seen 
beforee they can be examined. The emphasis on the user-languages of observation 
andd variables, however, tends to distort the actual history of science, suggesting that 
sciencee is a series of discrete revelations and discoveries, rather than a social 
processs of debate and consensus-building, rooted in a historical context. The short-
comingss of the user-language of variables, still central to the 'official' post-facto 
descriptionn of modern science, are also in evidence in the Exploratorium. The ease 
withh which the phenomena are elicited and thus made visible, (due to the careful 
andd professional skills of the Exploratorium staff) betray thee contingent nature of -
reall scientific investigation, which often proceeds from ill-defined starting points and 
difficultt procedures before a phenomena can be wrested from its context and made 
visiblee and significant. 
Thee Bernoulli Blower, one of the many well-known exhibits developed by the 
Exploratorium,, is designed to show the principle of lift due to unequal air pressure 
generatedd by airstreams of different relative speeds - the faster the airstream, the 
lowerr the pressure - therefore an object will be pushed towards the zone of lower 
pressuree in the case of a disparity. If the object in question is light (such as the beach 
balll in the Exploratorium exhibit) and the pressure differential great enough, it can 
bee made to hover in the air and apparently defy the force of gravity. This effect is 
startling,, and the exhibit is a popular favourite in many science centres, where young 
visitorss spend comparatively long periods putting the ball back into the airstream to 
111 Brumen, R. The Exploratorium Cookbook I, 
seee it hover as they move the blower nozzle. The label follows the style developed 
Sann Francisco: Exploratorium; rev. 1984 
byy the Exploratorium for all its exhibits 41: 
Label:Label: Bernoulli Blower/1970s - The Exploratorium 
ToTo do and to notice: Hold the ball with both hands and pull it slowly out of the air stream. 
51 

NoticeNotice that when only half the ball is out of the airstream you can feel it being sucked
backback in. If you then let go of it, it will oscillate back and forth without falling to the ground. 
What'sWhat's going on: When the ball is pulled partially out of the airstream, the air that is
movingmoving fast along the side of the ball exerts less sideways pressure on the ball than th
stillstill air in the room. An airplane wing is shaped so that the air moves faster over the top 
ofof the wing than it does over the bottom of the wing. The lower pressure on the top of 
thethe wing produces a suction which holds the airplane up, or, more accurately, the high 
pressurepressure on the bottom of the wing pushes the airplane up and balances the downwa
effecteffect of gravity. 
Thee premium put on the user-languages of observation (notice the effect) and 
variabless (try moving the ball towards you) can be seen in the exhibit text, although 
ass a consequence the openness claimed on the part of the institution is less in evi-
dencee than might be desired. The visitor is carefully told how to elicit a particular 
phenomenon,, and is then told the conventional scientific explanation for the effect. 
Thee ontological assertion is clear: what the visitor feels (and will consistently feel if 
shee follows the instructions) is the Bernoulli effect. The label is an extension of the 
object,, and imposes a framework on it, in much the same way as a label in the 
Museumm de l'histoire naturelle is an extension of the specimen it describes. Between 
thee incontrovertible experience and the label there is no room for doubt, however, 
«« As described in the works of sociologist and 
itt is doubt that characterises the scientific enterprise.42 Moreover, in linking the 
anthropologistt Bruno Latour, notably Latour, B. 
phenomenonn experienced by the visitor in one context with a scientific principle un-
LaLa science en action, Paris: Editions de la 
derlyingg a major technology (flight) the label writers optimistically rely on the visitor 
decouverte;; 1989 and Latour, B. La vie de laboratoire, 
too make the necessary connections. In evaluations done on similar exhibits43this 
Paris:: Editions de la decouverte; 1988 
optimismm is called seriously into doubt, and it is rare to find any evidence of under-
standingg of the principle of lift following exposure to the beach ball floating above 
4343 Such as those conducted by the author and his 
thee Bernoulli Blower, regardless of the manifest popularity of the exhibit among 
colleaguess at the Palais de la Decouverte in 1993 
youngg visitors. 
Onee of the aspects of the Bernoulli principle that remains invisible, and puzzling, is 
thee history of the invention of flight. The exhibit shows how easily the principle can 
bee put into practice. The exhibit suggests an ontological link between the scientific 
principlee and the technological artefact - an aircraft wing. Nevertheless, what 
accountss for the centuries of observation of bird's flight, by observers as well-
trainedd and talented as Leonardo Da Vinci, that resulted in different and unsuccess-
full models of lift? What was the key to the successful observation? The historical 
aspectt of science, technology, and even art, is largely unexplored at the Explora-
522 
torium, while the history of science provokes significant questions. 

Norr is the user-language of variables limited to science museums. In the exhibition 
SpaceSpace and Distance, held at the Chicago Art Institute in 1948, the user-language of 
variabless is used to challenge the visitor to compare paintings in which the 
distancee is constant but the space changed, and vice versa, in order to see how dif-
ferentt époques and different cultures manipulated both. Designed by the curator 
off modern art, (Catherine Kuh, the exhibition was strung with coloured ropes to 
emphasisee the difference between the two concepts. In two shadow boxes of diffe-
rentt sizes cut-out figures showed the effects of scale on the illusion of space. A Miró 
reproductionn was partly repainted to show how colour altered the perception of 
space.. Renaissance paintings from the museum's collection were put side by side 
withh modern ones in order to illustrate 'how the twentieth century artist attains 
nn Primer for Seeing. Rowen and Moaer, Artnews, 
spacee through colour, whereas the [earlier] artist is more interested in perspective 
1989.. pp.7 -26 
andd distance which he attains through line.'44 
Thee show was followed several years later with other exhibitions that challenged 
thee visitor to experiment, compare and contrast. How Real is Realism? and From 
NatureNature to Art, in which she explored the debate between naturalism and abstraction 
inn art - a highly charged issue in the 40s and 50s. Kuh was exceptional for the time 
inn her concern for the non-specialist visitor, and she eliminated technical language 
ass much as she could from her labels. Those in the "know" glibly discuss dynamic 
symmetry,, spatial relations, plastic values, and architectonics, but to the average 
museumm visitor, these are enigmatic technicalities' * The secret language of the art 
"Chicagoo Art Institute Bulletin, 1945 
specialistt is apt to antagonise the questioning layman. 'His ego is wounded and 
hee retires, armed with deadly and familiar clichés: "My little boy Johnny could do 
466 op.cit. 
betterr than that"'41 Her prime concern was to explain art visually - that 
iss to say, in its own terms, and found that by creating a particular kind of label, one 
thatt asked the visitor to question, she could engage the visitor far better than had 
shee provided the 'answers'. 
Label:Label: from Still Lifes come to Life/Chicago Art Institute 1945 
NoteNote how these objects are consciously arranged. 
TheyThey are unified by using one color - brown. 
DiagramDiagram shows how light areas are opposed to dark in this painting. 
CopyCopy of painting with other objects shows that arrangement is more important 
thanthan subject. 
ByBy introducing one strong color balance is lost. 
ByBy eliminating any part - like the mushroom - the entire composition is greatly 
weakened.weakened. 
53

Herr concern for interpretation (although she herself hated the word, as she felt it 
soundedd too condescending) was equally manifested in the architecture of the 
entiree exhibition space. Her exhibitions were designed to heighten curiosity and 
createe a sense of surprise - 'asymmetrical installations were followed by rest 
spaces,, objects placed above or below eye level, and materials arranged in units 
insteadd of sequentially. Most intriguing was the use of non-art materials in order to 
relatee art to other aspects of life. Driftwood from Lake Michigan and crudely fashio-
nedd ceramic toys were just as effective in demystifying high art in these exhibitions 
ass technological devices such as color charts. X-rays of paintings or stereopticon.' 
Kuhh tried to keep the texts of her labels to a minimum, and would deliberately 
keepp the language simple, the words short, and use the words 'seeing' and 'looking'. 
Inn her zeal for lean texts she would often eliminate words, giving the label texts a 
telegraphicc urgency. What was important was to look, and to see. Kuh placed a large 
emphasiss on comparisons, often putting an original work and an altered replica side 
byy side, the label asking the viewer to evaluate the difference between the two - in 
Kuh'ss Gallery of Art Interpretation, the user-language of variables was an in-
dispensablee tool for the understanding of fine art. 
Alreadyy at a very early moment the user-language of variables was developed as 
ann extension of the user-language of observation in the practice of science. It was 
quicklyy assimilated in museums of all kinds. However, while conferring the property 
off control to the visitor, it is not sufficient to make her more than a manipulator of 
relativelyy small variations, as the range of her ability to generate variety herself, and 
hencee her field of action, remain highly constrained. 
3.22 Labels and their languages: part 2 - supporting users 
Whenn it comes to research into museum labels, there are limits to what can be 
learnedd from examining the work of others, for several key reasons. Just looking at 
existingg labels poses several difficulties. First, there is no guarantee that all the 
relevantt information about the label, the institution that created it, and the condi-
tionss of its creation is available. Second, the full intent of the museum cannot be 
adducedd solely from the label, especially if the label is taken from exhibitions or 
settingss from another time or another culture. Finally, an experimental framework 
cannott be created, however provisionally, unless changes can be made and their 
effectt measured, either quantitatively or qualitatively. Due to these contingencies, 
544 
serious research into labelling has been rare and difficult to conduct. In order to do 

in-depthh research into labelling and the effectiveness of labels in supporting inter-
action,, it is necessary to actually make labels, which is to say, to create exhibitions, 
andd ultimately, to create museums. This is a luxury denied to most researchers. 
However,, if such an experimental framework cannot be created, the research pro-
grammee is seriously impaired. 
Inn the following examples, these drawbacks were overcome by making exhibitions 
-- and by making the exhibition itself a tool for research into the effectiveness of the 
label.. Each of the following exhibitions was developed by the author and his 
colleaguess in response to the perceived failures of earlier exhibitions, and served as 
aa means of testing the theory developed in these pages. These exhibitions were 
developedd while many of the ideas in this study were still maturing, and many of 
thee terms used in the study - notably user-language - were not explicitly part of the 
discussionss that shaped the exhibitions. However, it became clearer with time 
(documentedd in the papers the author and his colleague Drew Ann Wake presented 
att international conferences between 1990 and 1994) that there was an increasingly 
explicitt recognition of the effectiveness of specific user-languages in conferring 
actorshipp - and on specific strategies for increasing the likelihood of visitor accep-
tance. . 
3.2.11 Problems 
Thee user-language of problems, while it often subsumes the user-languages of 
textuall authority, observation, and variables, is not merely an extension of them. In 
thee user-language of problems, the 'currency' is not authority, nor is it observations 
orr ordered observations, it is problems - some observation or observable state of 
affairss the user wants achieved. In the case of labels that employ the user-language 
off problem, the problem space may be indicated from the outset, even by others -
aa puzzle, a riddle, a challenge - but in all cases, the problem and its relevance must 
bee sufficient, and be internalised by the user, who then makes it her problem. This 
internaa I isation of the problem, that is of an action horizon which may be, and often 
is,, determined by others (but is preferably self-determined, as in some of the 
examples),, signals a key difference between the user-language of problems and 
precedingg user-languages-labels developed using this language confer on the user 
aa discretionary power over alternative solutions or actions, that is the property of 
agency. . 

Inn 1989 the author, his partner Drew Ann Wake, and the consultants Coopers & 
Lybrandd undertook a survey of over one thousand households in the Canadian 
provincee of Alberta to find out Albertans' attitudes towards science and techno-
logy.477 This survey was undertaken as one of the means of identifying strategies 
"" Coopers & Lvbrand/Wake-Bradburne Partnership, 
too accomplish the two goals of the Science Alberta Foundation: to raise the level of 
AssessmentAssessment of needs end feasibility for a science 
scientificc and technological culture in Alberta, and to encourage young Albertans to 
networknetwork in Alberta, 2 vols, prepared for the Science 
considerr careers in science and technology. Following the results of this survey, and 
Albertaa Foundation, Calgary: 1990 
thee desire on the part of the Science Alberta Foundation to encourage women and 
girlss to become interested in science and technology, the target audience for the 
exhibitionn Beyond the Naked Eye was women. The survey material had indicated 
thatt women had a very high interest in medicine, but often professed no interest in 
science.. The goal, therefore, was to encourage women and girls to take a greater 
interest,, and participate in, science and technology as traditionally defined. 
Thee exhibition Beyond The Naked Eye: The Inside Story of The Human Body
, 
** This description is largely taken from Wake, 
exploredd the field of radiology. The exhibition's planner. Drew Ann Wake, in 
D.. A. and Bradburne, J. Au-dela tie i'oueil nu, 
conjunctionn with the author and the Calgary architect Gordon Filewych, wanted to 
AlliageAlliage No. 15 
createe an approach that conformed to the contours of the actual science as it is 
currentlyy practised, and not be merely a translation or popularisation of a scientific 
subject.. Accordingly, she contacted all of the major hospitals of the province and 
askedd them to work with the Science Alberta on the exhibition. The radiologists were 
thrilledd that someone was going to take a serious look at their discipline, and by 
thee time the exhibition opened, it had incorporated exhibits developed by twelve 
hospitalss and over one hundred individual medical doctors. 
Thee key challenge for the exhibition planner was to find a way that members of the 
generall public could learn to read medical images. Modern radiology has at its dis-
posall a range of tools of varying precision. Since the invention of x-rays, no fewer 
thann four new technologies have been developed that allow doctors to see within 
thee human body: X-rays, Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI),, and Nuclear Medicine, in addition to microscopy. 
Howeverr there is an inherent imprecision in these technologies. No matter how 
clearr the actual image, the interpretation lies ultimately in the ability to decipher 
thee meaning of a mixture of unresolved shapes and shadows. The language of 
observationn demands clear 'seeing', and the images generated by the new 
technologiess are often unclear or ambiguous, similar to the imprecise contours of 
566 
the planets revealed to Galileo when he first pointed his Dutch telescope towards 

thee heavens. There are two specific areas where this imprecision may present itself. 
Onn the one hand, the images may fail to show critical detail. On the other hand the 
imagee may give so much information that the interpretations conflict. The exhibi-
tionn therefore had to teach visitors not to make immediate assumptions based 
onn the images, but to weigh and balance a variety of hypotheses before making a 
diagnosis. . 
Ass she entered the exhibition, the visitor was encouraged to pick up 
aa clipboard, put on a lab coat, and watch a short video prior to lear-
ningg about the medical technologies arranged on the central tables. 
Thee exhibition was divided into five sections, representing five 
medicall technologies: X-rays, computed tomography (CT), magnetic 
resonancee (MRI), nuclear medicine and microscopy. Each area was 
composedd of two parts, a central area where visitors learned the skills 
off understanding the images, and an outer ring where visitors were challenged to 
solvee case studies based on real people's experience. To explain advanced medical 
technologiess to a lay audience the exhibition used analogies, and the entire ex-
hibitionn employed the user-language of problems - each case study posing a 
challengee to the visitor, to internalise a medical problem and search for a diagnosis 
thatt is relevant to herself. 
Forr example, the concept of Computed Tomography was explored by letting visitors 
comparee a model of the brain with a series of medical images of a patient with a 
brainn tumour. Three simple challenges of increasing difficulty outlined the advan-
tagess and limitations of this particular kind of scans. Each visitor was given an 
applee or a potato with a small spot of dye hidden in it. The challenge was to find the 
location,, size and shape of the spot of dye by making a maximum of three horizon-
tall cuts in the apple. This was analogous to the work of a medical specialist who has 
too integrate a series of CT images into a three-dimensional understanding of the 
patient'ss anatomy - each scan a horizontal slice through the patient's body. The ex-
 The exhibit texts were written by Drew Ann Wake, 
hibitionn labels use familiar language to make the visitor feel at ease with the subject 
andd transcribed from the exhibition by the author 
matter.. * 
#3#3 Be a Brain Surgeon! 
You'veYou've always thought you'd make a great brain surgeon. Cool hand. Quick mind. 
PatiencePatience of a saint. Well, now is your chance to try your hand at it. 
a.a. If doctors suspect a tumour within the brain, they will use CT scans to help find out 
wherewhere it is located and how big it is. But, they will also want to make as few scans 
57 

asas possible.Take an apple (or a potato) out of the jar and put it on the cutting 
board.board. Imagine it is a brain. Your challenge is to find a 'tumour' hidden inside, 
b.b. Now is your chance to practise brain surgery! Each of the apples (or potatoes) has 
beenbeen injected with dye in one spot, like a tumour inside the brain. Use what you have 
learnedlearned about CT images to find the location and size of the dye spot. But, you ca
onlyonly make three horizontal cuts in the apple. 
BrainteaserBrainteaser #3: 
WouldWould it be easier to find the spot if you could cut vertically as well as horizontally? 
Havingg learned the basic principles of CT scans the visitor could then try to solve up 
too sixteen case studies arranged in folders on the tables in the exhibition. Each folder 
containedd a case history and a series of medical images taken from actual subjects, 
forr instance, how CT scans can help identify brain haemorrhages. The material in 
thee case studies was also written in the first person, making a direct appeal to the 
readerr to examine the images and solve the case. 
,^^M,^^M 
* 
The designers were aware, having prototyped the exhibition to coin-
cidee with the opening of The Body in the Library (described below), 
thatt visitors were immediately drawn to the case studies. In fact, the 
exhibitionn had first been formulated on the assumption that its 
subjectt matter would be the 'art' of medical images, based on data 
thatt showed that women, and in fact most visitors, were more attrac-
tedd to art than to science. When the exhibition was shown organised 
accordingg to the model of an art exhibition, using the beauty of 
medicall images as a starting point, it was quickly obvious that 
women,, rather than being attracted to the 'artistic' qualities of the 
medicall image, which in the case of computer-generated images is 
veryy high, would first ask of any troubling image 'did the patient 
survive?'.. It became quickly clear that the interest in medical images lay not in their 
intrinsicc merits as images, but in the immediate engagement they provoked on 
accountt of their humanity - when viewing a broken neck or a brain tumour, we 
respondd first as human beings, then as art critics. 
58 8 
Ass a consequence, although beautiful medical images were still included in the 
exhibition,, the focus of the exhibition was redirected towards disease and illness, 
ratherr than art, and this focus remained central throughout the rest of the exhibiti-
onn prototyping process. Moreover, as the key link to the material seemed to be the 

emotionall and affective charge communicated by the desire to know the outcome 
off the case studies, the exhibition had to take into account the desire on the part 
off the visitors to engage directly with the case studies, without first learning the 
sciencee that would allow them to unlock the secrets of the images. 
Thiss was achieved, albeit only in part, by making the case studies challenging -the 
visitorr who had not at least partially mastered the science of an imaging technology 
wass frustrated in her ability to diagnose a case study. While in certain respects this 
meantt that over-eager visitors risked 'failing' the case studies, it provided a non-
coercivee feedback mechanism to ensure that visitors learned the material in the 
centrall tables prior to engaging with the case studies. Attentive visitors soon lear-
nedd that the better they had mastered the scientific bases of the medical imaging 
technology,, the better their performance, and hence the greater their satisfaction, 
withh diagnosing the case studies. However, Science Alberta staff running the ex-
hibitionn noted that of all the problems associated with the exhibition, the most 
significantt was the fact that visitors were so drawn to the case studies that they often 
didd not first learn the underlying principles, and that the spatial disposition and over-
alll design of the exhibition was not sufficient to ensure that visitors first understood 
thee science before attempting to tackle the case studies. The designers never com-
pletelyy solved the problem of having visitors working on case studies before they 
fullyy understood the imaging technologies, and the exhibition architecture did not 
playy an active role in directing visitors first to the centre tables, then to the case study 
tables.. The floorplan allowed, and to some extent encouraged, freeflow circulation, 
whichh was at odds with the 'one-two' nature of the exhibition's overall conceptual 
organisation. . 
Severall factors influenced the ways in which the exhibition functioned. 
Firstt of all, the exhibition and its labels explicitly recognised the presence of the 
visitorr and the interest the visitor has in the workings of the human body. The in-
terestt on the part of the visitor in the outcome of another human being's health 
*  Donaldson and McGarrigle (1974,1978) 
guaranteedd an immediate engagement with the subject matter. This tends to con-
putt some of Ptsgefs standard tests, in particular 
firmm the findings of educators such as Donaldson» that context plays a major role 
thatt of conservation of volume, to the test in the 70s, 
inn the willingness to engage with scientific material and engage in science learning. 
andd found evidence to suggest that successful 
AA visitor learns if she perceives a sufficient reason to learn. In this case starting with 
understandingg was influenced substantially 
thee known interests of the visitor provides sufficient reasons to engage with the 
byy the context into which the task was placed. 
material.. In the case of Beyond the Naked Eye, the immediate empathy felt by the 
visitorr provided sufficient reason to engage with the material. Moreover, it has been 
59 

repeatedlyy shown51 that the general public shows a particularly high degree of in-
111 These findings were confirmed by the survey done by 
terestt in medicine and human health. Beyond the Naked Eye not only addresses 
thee author. Drew Ann Wake, and CoopersflkLybrand, 
normall human fears and curiosity about the workings of the body, but allows visi-
citedd above 
torss to understand and come to grips with the fact of their own illnesses and those 
off their family and friends. As one of the exhibition staff reported 'Many of the 
questionss I had to field were related to transplant operations ... Most often these 
questionss came from the family of a patient who was waiting to undergo an opera-
tion.522 In short, by choosing a subject matter of compelling, though individually 
 In Coopers & Lybrand/Wake-Bradburne Partnership, 
different,, interest to a large number of visitors, they were prepared to engage with 
InformalInformal Science Education in Alberta: Inventory 
thee exhibition's difficult material -the properties of acceptance and of engagement 
andand Evaluation, prepared for the Science Alberta 
weree conferred by the visitor to the label. 
Foundation,, Calgary: 1990 
Second,, the exhibition consciously used the user-language of problems. Rather than 
insistingg that the visitor first understand the science behind the medical imaging 
technologies,, she was able to engage with any of the elements of the exhibition as 
shee wished. By casting the exhibition in terms of medical problems, the visitor was 
preparedd to undertake complex scientific and medical interpretative challenges, 
whichh might otherwise have been considered too difficult or too abstract. However, 
inn order to understand the images required the viewer to understand the science, or 
att least the basic principles of the science, underlying the technology. Thus it was 
desiredd that each visitor be prepared in terms of general competences. Each had to 
firstt visit the tables that acquainted them with the science, before going on to the 
exhibitt areas that contained the case studies and challenges. This was accom-
plishedd {with some success, as noted above) by making an understanding of the 
technologyy a condition of solving the problem. Therefore, if a visitor had not visited 
thee table introducing the basics of the technology, it was unlikely that they could 
makee any but the simplest diagnosis. To get the most out of the case studies, some 
off which were quite difficult, the visitor soon found out that she should do the 
introductoryy challenges first. However, the attraction of the case studies was so 
strongg that many visitors rushed to the medical images without first stopping at the 
introductoryy tables, and as a consequence, the case studies were less rewarding. 
Nevertheless,, by using the visitor's desire to make a correct diagnosis and solve the 
medicall problem, the exhibition made learning the technology a consequence of the 
problem-solvingg activity, rather than its sole reward. 
Whatt were the consequences of having designed an exhibition that made medical 
skillss available to ordinary visitors? 
60 0 

First,, as Drew Ann Wake writes 'preliminary evaluation of the exhibition seemed to 
indicatee that the public was able to assimilate and use the new information presen-
ted.. It was found that children as young as eight were able to solve the problem of 
readingg CAT scans quite effectively.53 In fact, they became so skilled at understan-
dingg the medical images that they could put a series of eight cross-sections of the 
body,, in the correct order, from brain to belly button.' In addition, the political goals 
sett by the client, the Science Alberta Foundation, appear to have been met. The 
exhibitionn began its tour of the hospitals of Alberta in May of 1992. The designers 
533 op.cit, 
weree pleased to find that it drew large numbers of women, and most importantly, 
544 op.cit. 
womenn with their young daughters. On many occasions these visitors stayed for 
566 op.cit. 
severall hours, with the girls completing every one of the exhibits.M 
Second,, having rejected the science centre as the prime venue for the exhibition, 
thee designers of Beyond the Naked Eye found that the audience attracted within 
thee hospital setting was very different from that of a museum or science centre. The 
exhibitionn was visited by hundreds of hospital patients: people suffering from ill-
nessess ranging from a broken arm to a brain tumour. It also attracted family 
memberss who were distressed about their loved one's illness and anxious to un-
derstandd it better. The exhibition served as a support system, not only increasing 
thee user's ability to deal with medical information, but to cope with the facts of ill-
nesss - even as defined in the context of her family or of herself. The guest book was 
fulll of comments about how greatly they appreciated the opportunity to learn about 
thee newly developed instruments of science that help doctors diagnose, understand 
andd treat illness.56 
Thiss exhibition, like The Body in the Library (discussed below), by the same plan-
ner,, Drew Ann Wake, and the author, was based on a belief that, given the proper 
context,, and recognition of the user's needs and existing competences, a visitor 
iss capable of undertaking, appreciating and exploiting processes and modes of 
reasoningg normally associated with scientific investigation. In the case of The Body 
inin the Library, visitors showed themselves able to reason from minimal and some-
timess misleading evidence, in Beyond the Naked Eye, visitors were able to under-
stand,, interpret and propose diagnoses from ambiguous and uncertain images, 
aa competence normally associated only with trained physicians and radiologists. 
Inn fact, a preliminary evaluation of the exhibition showed that some visitors had 
sufficientlyy mastered the interpretation of medical images well enough to rival the 
«« op.cit. 
diagnosess of first and second-year medical students.56 This can be interpreted as 
signifyingg that the exhibition had indeed succeeded in achieving being a support 
61 

system,, and in being supported by the interests of the visitors. Moreover, it helped 
too create and sustain the 'flow' experience (discussed more fully in chapter 2). 
Ass described above, in 1989 the author, his partner Drew Ann Wake, and the con-
sultantss Coopers & Lybrand undertook a survey of over one thousand households 
inn the Canadian province of Alberta to investigate public attitudes towards science 
andd technology as one of the means of identifying strategies to accomplish the two 
goalss of the Science Alberta Foundation: to raise the level of scientific and techno-
logicall culture in Alberta, and to encourage young Albertans to consider careers in 
sciencee and technology. 
Thee first of the target audience groups selected was those who had shown them-
selvess to be 'nervous' about science. How could their participation be stimulated? 
Itt was unlikely they were going to attend a science museum. Since about 80% of 
"" This description taken in part from Wake, D. A 
Albertanss have cards to their local libraries, the Foundation decided to build a science 
andd Bradburne, J. Priming the Pump: Building 
exhibitionn that would tour the libraries of the province as a means of reaching au-
aa Science Network in Alberta, unpublished paper, 
diencess who would never take advantage of an exhibition if it were in a traditional 
Paris:: Palais de la Oécouved»; 1993 
sciencee museum.57 
Thee second question was what kind of exhibition could be developed that would not 
scaree non-scientists away. Drew Ann Wake undertook a brief analysis of the reading 
materiall that people were seeking, in conjunction with the provincial librarians. 
Itt was shown that the most popular form of literature was detective fiction - the 
murderr mystery. In addition, educational research had already shown provisionally 
thatt non-scientists put a greater premium on the context of learning than scientists, 
forr whom a scientific problem was sufficient motivation in itself.58 As a conse-
 In particular we looked to the work of Sheila Tobias 
quence,, the Foundation decided to create an exhibition that took as its starting point 
thee competences already developed by readers of murder mysteries. It was called 
TheThe Body In The Library: Forensic Science and the Art of the Murder Mystery. The 
exhibitionn was intended to be rigorously scientific, and in order to vouchsafe the 
scientificc aspects of the exhibition a number of highly-placed specialists in the field 
participatedd in its development. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police put their 
Forensicc lab at the design team's disposal, the Calgary Police prepared fingerprint 
materials,, and the Chief Medical Examiner of Alberta was a source of constant 
advice. . 
62 2 

Thee exhibition was realised in 1989 by Drew Ann Wake and the author, working for 
thee Science Alberta Foundation in Calgary, Canada. The design looked like a set of 
oversizedd book covers on the outside (to fit in with the libraries it visited), and was 
modelledd on the form and organisation of a forensic laboratory on the inside (to 
reflectt the real practice of forensic science). In the centre of the exhibition was 
thee body of a young woman - the victim. Ruby Keene. Around the periphery were 
sevenn laboratory tables, each representing a different scientific discipline within 
thee practice of forensic science. In this setting. Drew Ann Wake developed a public 
programmee called S.O.S., or Save Our School, designed as a game for an elemen-
taryy school audience and for family groups. On entering the exhibition, visitors were 
toldd that a crime wave had hit the fictitious Granite School. Their challenge would 
bee to study the evidence on one of the tables - Toolmarks, Fingerprints, Blood and 
Fluids,, Ballistics, Hair and Fibres (the organisation of real forensic science labora-
toriess in Canada) - and to reach a conclusion before moving on to the next lab. 
Visitorss could start at any table, and would generally move to the next challenge 
whenn its users had completed their investigation. The object of the programme, and 
off the exhibition, was to assemble enough evidence to identify the wrongdoer who 
hadd been perpetrating the crimes at Granite High School. 
Onee of the unique features of the programme was that the material 
onn each of the tables might have more than one correct answer, like 
reall forensic work. For example, in the Toxicology lab the visitors were 
toldd that the criminals had vandalised the science classroom, and as 
aa result the science teacher had been bitten by one of three escaped 
creatures:: a rattlesnake, a black widow spider or a bee. Each of the 
tabless had a variety of research material available: real samples, 
workingg microscopes, chemical tests and extensive written material 
thatt invited the visitor to read and investigate in order to arrive at a 
conclusion.. Using the research materials provided on the table, it 
wass possible for the visitor to put together a convincing argument for 
eitherr the spider or the snake. 
AA sample of this text material shows how the material was presented in cartoon form S9: 
TextText for Logo:S.O.S. 
TextText for Title:The Case of the Victim Of Venom 
BoxBox 0 1. It is a day like any other at Granite Public School, until... 
BoxBox # 2. Jake and Annie walk into science class ... 
BoxBox #3. Chaos!!! 
588 The texts for the exhibition was written by 
Dreww Ann Wake, transcribed by the author 
63 3 

Bubble:Bubble: The snakes! The spiders!! The bees!!! 
Bubble:Bubble: They've escaped!! 
BoxBox # 4. Then, from the back of the room... 
Bubble:Bubble: Ooooohhhhh! 
BoxBox #5. It's the science teacher...sweating, delirious with pain... 
Bubble:Bubble: He's been bitten! We have to help him! 
BoxBox # 6. Was it a snake? A black widow spider? A swarm of bees? 
TextText across the bottom of the page: Will Jake and Annie find the answer... in time to 
savesave the teacher's life???? 
CLUES:CLUES: The Challenge: The teacher's life can be saved if doctors can inject him with 
anti-venomanti-venom that will take away the effect of the poison. In order to know what ki
anti-venomanti-venom to use, Jake and Annie must first find out which of the animals has b
him:him: the rattlesnake, the black widow spider, or a swarm of bees. Two clues, and the 
researchresearch notes in this kit, will help them solve the mystery. 
Thee clues encouragedd the visitor to take a close look at the evidence, and supplied 
themm with information that would help them come to a conclusion. The nature of 
thee clues can be seen in the examples below: 
ClueClue #7: Bites and Stings 
TakeTake a close look at the three specimens included in the science kit. There is a rattle-
snakesnake skull, a black widow spider, and a bumble bee. Each of them leaves a very diffe
rentrent mark on its victim. 
TheThe rattlesnake has fangs that are attached to the skull at a fixed angle. When the 
snakesnake bites, its two fangs bite down on the victim and the sacs on each side of the jaw
squeezesqueeze the venom through the fang into the wound. In this rattlesnake jaw, one of t
fangsfangs has broken, so you can see the hollow passage through which the venom is 
injected. injected. 
AA black widow spider also has fangs. Spider fangs, however, pivot sideways to grasp 
andand hold their prey. At the end of each fang is a tiny hole which is connected to the 
poisonpoison sacs. When the spider bites, the poison glands squeeze the venom down the
fangfang into the bite. 
AA bee stings with a single hollow prong that extends from its abdomen. If you look 
carefullycarefully at the specimen of bumble bee, you can see a drop of venom at the very 
ofof the stinger. The bumble bee has a smooth stinger, so that it can sting its victim several 
times. times. 
644 
Which one of these three animals could not have bitten the teacher? 

ToTo find the answer, first study the illustration of the teacher's wound. Then, read the 
researchresearch notes that accompany this kit. 
ClueClue #2: Venom 
ScientistsScientists who study toxins divide venoms into two groups. 
Hemo-toxinsHemo-toxins (hemo means blood in Greek) enter the blood stream. They weaken the 
wallswalls of the veins and arteries, causing the body to bleed inside. Often, the part of the 
bodybody that was attacked will swell up so that it is two or three times its normal size. 
Neuro-toxinsNeuro-toxins (neuro means nerve in Greek) attack the nervous system, preventing -
messagesmessages from the brain from reaching other parts of the body. The victim often suffers 
intenseintense pain and begins to vomit. [...] 
NowNow that you have studied the scientific evidence, what is your inference? 
WhichWhich of these three animals was responsible for the bite on the teacher's leg? 
Finally,, the exhibit table included extensive research notes, compiled from available 
">> Rod and Ken Preston-Mafham, Facts On File 
studiess such as Spiders of the World
, in the case of the Black Widow Spider, which 
Publications;; New Vbrfc 1989 
wass one of three research notes in this particular exhibit. 
Att the end of the exhibition, when the audience had visited all seven tables, 
theyy were asked to consider three questions: 1. What is the name of the person 
responsiblee for the crime? 2. Can you give a physical description of the criminal. 
3.. If you wanted to question the suspect at his place of business, where would you 
lookk for him? 
Thee mystery was organised so that visitors would require different levels of in-
formationn to answer the three questions. The first question - the criminal's name -
couldd be answered on the basis of evidence from the Fingerprints lab alone. The 
secondd question could be answered by drawing on evidence from several labs - the 
moree evidence that was collected, the better the physical description of the criminal 
wouldd be. The third question, about the suspect's place of business, could not 
bee answered by direct reference to any of the material in the labs. Two pieces of 
evidencee spoke indirectly to the question. This was an attempt to mimic the often 
contingentt evidence from a normal break and entry. The connection was not ob-
vious,, and offered many possibilities for the formulation of personal problems. 
Howw well did the public do in answering the three questions that summed up 
thee exhibition? After visiting the Fingerprints lab, almost all of the visitors knew the 
thief'ss name. This provided almost everyone with an incentive to continue. After 
65 

visitingg all seven labs, most visitors could provide a more or less detailed descrip-
tionn of the criminal. Adult visitors tended to focus on physical features while the 
childrenn were equally observant of what might be called the cultural attributes, 
suchh as his T-shirt, and a ring emblazoned with a skull and crossbones. The third 
challenge,, identifying the thief's day job, was extremely difficult, and took on an 
enormouss importance for visitors. It was not uncommon for visitors to return three 
orr four days in a row, until they managed to fit fifty or more clues into a pattern. Even 
,11 Described in Wake, DA. and Bradburne, J. 
withh this amount of work, only about 10 of the 3000 visitors in the first weeks were 
TheThe Curator's New Clothes: Reinventing the museum 
ablee to attempt an answer that made sense of all the pieces of evidence - all of them 
professional.professional. Muse, Special edition; Autumn 1993 
weree boys between the ages of 9 and 13.61 
Howw did the audience respond to being given an exhibition in which they did the 
workk - in which they solved the mystery? First, the public reacted with enthusiasm 
whenn the evidence in an individual lab was open to interpretation. It was found that 
familiess or groups of students debated long and enthusiastically.62 There was an 
"" Coopers & Lybrand/Wake-Bradburne Partnership, 
inflexiblee rule in the exhibition that the staff would not provide answers, so visitors. 
InformalInformal Science Education in Alberta: Inventory 
whoo most often arrived in groups, or if alone, quickly 'teamed up' with others, had 
andand Evaluation, prepared for the Science Alberta 
too reach a mutually satisfactory conclusion before moving on to the next station. At 
Foundation,, Calgary: 1990 
thee end of each organised visit, each group was encouraged to stand up and explain 
thee problems they had formulated for themselves as well as their conclusions. 
Whatt are some of the key features of this exhibition? 
First,, it started with the visitor, and was designed to test the following question. 
Couldd an exhibition reach people who do not ordinarily visit science centres, by 
startingg with their interests, and their activities? Thus rather than developing an ex-
hibitionn for the science centre and expecting people to come, it was developed 
forr the public library, a familiar, appropriate, and often-used institution. Moreover, 
ratherr than developing an exhibition based on explaining the principles and prac-
ticess of science as science, the skills of forensic science were learned as a con-
sequencee of an activity deemed interesting in itself - solving a murder mystery. 
Second,, it assumed the visitor was capable of solving complex problems. Could the 
•)) Our interest in the issues surrounding situated 
visitorr bring existing skills to bear on a complex analytical problem, if it was placed 
knowledgee was largely provoked by the work of Brian 
inn a familiar and relevant context? e By making the assumption that the visitor was 
Wynne,, notably Wynne, B. Knowledge* in Contant, 
alreadyy familiar with and interested in murder mysteries (and was used to inter-
unpublishedd paper, Lancaster: CSSSP; 1990 
nalisee these as problems and to solve them), the exhibition was designed to require 
666 
those skills as the principal means of generating scientific investigation. 

Third,, it wanted to show science as it was practised. Could an exhibition capture the 
contingentt aspects of scientific practice, and not deceive or disappoint the visitor? 
Scientificc enquiry is often open-ended, imprecise, and inconclusive, and the exhi-
bitionn recognised the constructed aspect of science by creating the possibility to 
arguee for several 'correct' outcomes. The importance of the difference between evi-
dencee and proof, central to science, forensic science and jurisprudence, was com-
municatedd in a way that engaged the visitor in the very real process of investigation, 
reasoningg and debate. 
Howw were these concerns expressed in the exhibition's labelling? 
First,, by using popular culture. The most obvious sign of the exhibition's popular 
biass was the overscale bookcovers that served as the exterior enclosure of the 
exhibition.. The design of the exhibition's interpretative material exploited popular 
formss of communication - the murder mystery, the book, the cartoon - and cast the 
experiencee in the form of a complex intellectual puzzle. In appropriating forms that 
appealedd to user's existing interests, in spite of the purely scientific and technical 
competencess demanded by the exhibition's challenges, the labels put the user at 
ease,, recognised their existing abilities, and in a non-trivial way helped them to be 
ablee to perform the tasks the exhibition demanded of them. Evaluations done of the 
exhibitionn during its tour of Alberta's public libraries confirm the fact that visitors 
stayedd as long as it was necessary to complete the seven tables, returned when 
necessary,, and generally indicated that they were prepared to become engaged by 
thee exhibition's scientific material.84 
Inn designing the programme and its support material as a complex problem to solve, 
thee exhibition challenged the traditional ways in which interactive exhibitions are 
organised.. In a traditional hands-on science centre, either the exhibits are stand-
alone,, discrete experiences, each of them self-contained and isolated or the exhibits 
aree grouped, often somewhat arbitrarily by a given theme- light, matter and energy, 
waves,, etc. In the case of The Body in the Library, the user-language of problems 
(combinedd with the indispensable clipboard on which conclusions were recorded) 
allowedd a non-arbitrary grouping of material, which nonetheless allowed a cumu-
lative,, non-linear exploration of the material. The structure of the problem framed 
thee behaviour of the visitor in overall, goal-oriented terms, without constraining the 
wayss in which they internalised problems and arrived at the goal. Moreover, unlike 
traditionall exhibition organisations, wherein the visitor often gets bored and opts 
out,, seeking more exciting exhibits (the notorious 'pinball effect' where visitors 

bouncee from one exhibit to the next), once the visitor has engaged with the exhibit, 
shee rarely leaves it without coming to a provisional conclusion, and often returns 
severall times in order to solve the problem. The exhibit thus supports the visitor to 
createe an enduring action space, and exercise her skills in it, thereby supporting the 
functionn of the exhibit. In this way, the engaged behaviour that normally charac-
655 Described by Drew Ann Wake and Judy Mitchell in 
terisess puzzle table and puzzle exhibits, which hold visitors up to ten times longer 
theirr internal report to the Ontario Science Centre, 1989 
thann traditional hands-on exhibits65, is built into an exhibition of forensic science. 
Thee user-language of problems can thus be said to help elicit visitor 
behaviourr normally not found in the museum or science centre, by 
providingg the visitor with an opportunity to develop a personal goal, 
therebyy conferring the property on the visitor of actorship, and by 
encouragingg the visitor to confer the properties of acceptance and 
engagementt on the exhibition. As noted above, instead of the 'pinball 
effect',, activity in the exhibition was more like that of a puzzle table, 
aa similarity encouraged by the provision of worktables and chairs in each of the 
forensicc 'labs'. Visitors sat, looked, read, and discussed their conclusions with each 
other.. They often came back to the exhibition to complete a challenge or look up new 
information.. The report on the first twelve months of the exhibition's tour records 
thefollowingg anecdote told by a staff volunteer: 'One evening a mother and hertwo 
pre-teenagee children came to The Body in the Library. They took a lively interest in 
thee programme, and debated the results of each of the experiments. They stayed 
untill closing, finishing three of the tables. The next afternoon at 4:30, the son was 
back.. He stayed an hour and completed two more tables. The next afternoon he was 
888 Recounted by Drew Ann Wake to the author, 
backk again, this time with a friend. They stayed another hour, completed the final 
privatee communication 
exhibitss and then made their guess about the culprit. As they were heading out 
intoo the snow and cold, I asked them how long they would spend on the bus getting 
877 see the pioneering evaluations done by Minda Borun 
home.. 'Oh' they replied, 'we rode down on our bikes. It's about 45 minutes each 
att the Franklin Institute, and the work done at the 
way.'66Thiss behaviour is often not displayed in the 'traditional' science centre or 
Ontarioo Science Centre by Wake and Mitchell, plus 
museum67,, and can be taken as an indication of the comparative success of the 
severall other studies 
exhibition'ss approach to its subject, its public and its labelling. 
Second,, by being open to change. The material developed for the exhibit tables 
themselvess was designed to be changed, on a daily basis if necessary, during the 
firstt months of the exhibition, according to the comments of visitors and staff using 
thee exhibition. The introductory panels were made to be easily changed, the re-
searchh files could be readily supplemented, and the exhibits themselves were simply 
688 
constructed and easy to modify. At the level of the exhibition elements, volunteers 

andd staff were able to closely examine the kinds of problems visitors were having 
withh the text material, and change it readily. Treating the exhibition as a perpetual 
prototype,, and building this flexibility into the design also had important effects, as 
itt allowed librarian-users to change the material in response to the specific demands 
off their situation. It also allowed the exhibition to remain open to change, thereby 
enhancingg its stability as a support system. 
Onn a more general programming level, the exhibition's deliberately built-in flexibi-
lityy allowed organisers to respond to visitor variety. For instance, three programmes 
weree developed forthe exhibition: S.O.S. (described above) for schoolchildren Alibi, 
forr teenage high school students, and a programme for adults. To some extent the 
designn of these programmes thus were based on a model of each of the three target 
userr groups. Each model was a posteriori, however, and not a priori as implicit in 
forr example, the user-language of textual authority. Thus, during the first weeks of 
thee exhibition, it was found that the programme designed for an adult audience did 
nott work as well as had been anticipated. On the other hand, the S.O.S. programme, 
firstt designed for younger users, proved to be enormously popular among users of 
alll ages, and its challenges, far from being trivial, were taken seriously by children 
andd adults alike, and was soon described as a 'family' programme. Moreover, the 
S.O.S.. programme worked well in both structured and unstructured situations.w 
"" for detailed comments see Science 
Thee Alibi programme, which demanded that the visitor discover the identity of a 
Albertaa Foundation. Pilot Project 
murdererr by sifting through forensic evidence, attracted a great deal of attention 
ReportReport St Recommendations, Calgary: SAF; 1992 
fromm the schools, who booked the exhibition almost completely during the day, and 
fromm walk-in visitors, who would often spend several hours working on the problem 
beforee returning the next day with their written answer. 
Thee degree to which the exhibition was designed to respond almost immediately to 
thee needs and preferences of the users was a measure of its recognition of their 
importancee and existing competence, while the constraints imposed by the label-
lingg of the exhibition itself: in terms of subject matter, process, and intent, served to 
definee a user-language of problems in which the visitor's actorship was conferred, 
recognised,, enhanced, and confirmed. 
Finally,, by encouraging people to create their own activities after their experience 
off the exhibition. From the outset the exhibition had an explicitly activist goal -
itt served as a means of galvanising community activities: librarians used the ex-
hibitionn to introduce their users to new material, teachers used the educational 
programmess developed to accompany the exhibition. The library staff were very 
69 

enthusiasticc and particularly ambitious and innovative in their promotion of the ex-
hibition.. In addition to facilitating the SOS and Alibi programmes, they planned and 
organisedd four additional programs. The first adult programme, 'Clues to Writing 
Mysteries'' was led by a local author, Adelaide Schartneer, who shared her writing 
experiencess and explained the essentials of a good mystery and how to research and 
writee in that genre. 'Murder Stalks the Stacks' featured the forensic unit of the local 
RCMP.. The scene of the crime from Alibi was re-enacted and the audience was 
shownn what the police do in their forensic study of the murder crime scene. 
'You,, the Jury' was the final adult programme. Several members of the local Bar 
Associationn explained the roles and procedures of a court room, followed by the 
triall of a suspect from the Alibi programme. The audience was asked to vote on the 
guiltt or innocence of the suspect. 'Mystery Theatre' was a children's programme 
"" A complete evaluation of the exhibition was con-
featuringg mystery story theatre and mystery films. These activities supplemented 
ductedd by the Science Alberta Foundation, The Body 
thee exhibition's programmes, and taught the importance of debate and the contin-
inin the Library. A Review of Eight Months on Tour. 
gencyy of science, and through these activities the entire community often joined to 
Dacee Beggs, Science Alberta; Calgary; 1992 
tryy to solve the challenges of the exhibition (and support it as a support system).*» 
Ass can be seen from the above two examples, the user-language of problems, and 
labelss developed using that user-language, was able to confer on users an impor-
tantt and desirable property - actorship (and allow the visitor to maintain actorship 
inn using the labels). In the two examples described in detail above, it can be seen 
thatt the labels identified, legitimised, and unlocked the agency of the user-the user 
becamee involved, initiated activities, directed those activities independently (often 
seekingg out new resources), and sustained those activities, in some cases (such as 
thee boys who returned to The Body in the Library) over often protracted periods of 
timee and in the face of considerable hardship. Unlike the user-languages described 
earlier,, labels that employ the user-language of problems recognise the agency of 
thee user, and support them in being actors. It is also clear by contextualising the 
materiall in terms of the user's existing interests, and using elements drawn from 
popularr culture that the user was prepared too accept the labels and be 'taken in' by 
thee challenges they posed. 
3.2.22 Games 
Ass implemented by a label, the user-language of problems confers the property 
off agency to the user, a highly desirable outcome. What more can we expect from 
700 
an effective label? In the user-language of problems, the agency remains isolated. 

individual,, located in the user who has internalised the problem as her problem 
(evenn when part of a group or family visit). The user-language of games takes 
advantagee of the user-language of problems and the agency it confers, but creates 
anan additional property - other players. Labels that employ the user-language of 
gamess displace, for the first time in the museum setting, the emphasis from the 
contentt of the experience to the experience itself-the relationship with the variety 
thatt others can bring into the space of the museum. Other actors are always able 
too introduce more variety than that which can be found in nature (even though the 
latterr appears inexhaustible) - as they appear to be able to 'step out' of any variety-
limitingg f ra mewo rk. n 
Itt is important to note that puzzles, games, and simulations, while they each confer 
thee property of other players (either real players, in the case of a game like foot-
ball,, or virtual players, as in many computer games), are different, and cannot be 
lumpedd together in every respect. 
PUZZLES.PUZZLES. A puzzle, whether a simple jigsaw or a complex topological challenge, has a 
defineddefined outcome, and once solved, provides few further rewards (few puzzles are 
solvedsolved a second or third time once the secret is known, and puzzles such as Rubik's 
cubecube depend on their repeat play on the fact that success is often circumstantial, and 
notnot linked to the intellectual solution). If the puzzle is sufficiently challenging, or if ran-
domdom elements are introduced that prevent the outcome from being readily repeated, 
puzzlespuzzles can be profitably re-played again and again. However, as they are in some key 
respectsrespects 'closed', they cannot respond to changes in the player's skill, and become 
lessless and less challenging as the player's skill increases. A quiz, which relies on content 
challenges,challenges, rather than process challenges, is more vulnerable to exhaustion as the play-
er'ser's skill increases, nevertheless, the popularity of quiz-like games such as 'Trivial Pur-
suit'suit' show that, with a sufficiently challenging range of content or knowledge-based 
questions,questions, repeat play can be sustained. In puzzles and quizzes, the other player is 
largelylargely implied - it is the person who constructed the challenge in the first place, the 
unseenunseen player who is 'beaten' when the puzzle is solved. 
GAMES.GAMES. A game structures play and provides users with the space to identify personal 
goalsgoals and closure rules. Most importantly, a game provides a measure of improvement, 
andand is both open to and structures the infinite variation on behalf of the players, who 
voluntarilyvoluntarily sustain the play. In most games, such as football, hockey, tennis, cricket, 
calledcalled finite games by Carse, there must be a way to win. In other games, far fewer in 
numbernumber (but not rare), such as tag, the goals is not to win, but to sustain play. These 

gamesgames Carse calls infinite games. In a finite game the rules must stay fixed by con
ventionalventional and inviolable by the players in order that closure is achieved. In an infin
game,game, the rules can be plastic in order that the players can sustain play as long as they
desire. desire. 
SIMULATIONS.SIMULATIONS. Simulations provide the user with an external set of deman
associatedassociated with real situations. A flight simulator is a good example, so is SimCity
isis the Tamagotchi, a virtual pet. The engagement is sustained as long as the demands 
areare seen to be relevant, internalised as authentic. Engagement relies on the continuous 
feedback,feedback, and the escalation of the level of difficulty as a consequence of sustained p
TheThe other player conferred by the simulation is the environment which responds to the 
actionsactions of the human player or players. Simulation fails when the authenticity of th
demanddemand cannot be sustained, often as a consequence of the inability to provide an i
creasingcreasing level of difficulty, or a sufficient narrative context. The simulated plane crashe
thethe city runs out of parkland, the Tamagotchi dies - the player goes to dinner. Although 
providedprovided with a 'goal' - keep the plane in the air, keep the city growing, keep the Ta
gotchigotchi alive - lacking finite closure rules, a simulation sometimes functions like an 
infiniteinfinite game - it lasts as long as the player wishes to keep playing. 
Inn the autumn of 1992, Drew Ann Wake and the author were asked to consider 
designingg a new permanent exhibition, provisionally entitled The Living Planet at 
Sciencee World in Vancouver, Canada.71 The project was originally intended to treat 
711 This account has appeared in part as Wake, 0. A. 
thee future of science and technology in the province of British Columbia. Following 
andd Bradbume, J. Mine Games, La Revue des Arts 
aa proposal made by Drew Ann Wake in consultation with the author, an exhibition 
ett Métiers No. 10; Spring 1996 
strategyy was developed to look at the resource industries of the province - fishing, 
forestry,, and mining. 
Miningg is the most important industry in the Western Canadian province of British 
Columbia,, and in recent years the issues surrounding land use have been sources 
off intense conflict between industry, the environmental movement, government and 
nativee peoples. Science museums and science centres, however, are normally re-
ticentt to play an active role in the debates that surround the uses of science and 
technology,, often contend that science is a neutral activity, and that the role of the 
sciencee centre is solely to teach visitors the 'facts' about science. This attitude has 
beenn challenged by several writers in recent years n and by the author and his part-
711 in particular see Levy-Leblond, J-M. 
ner,, whose work in Alberta (described above) challenged the assumption that 
Vrai,, si... faux, mats.... Traverses 11/1989 inter at. 
sciencee centres should remain aloof to the real concerns of its visitors. 
72 2 

Afterr lengthy discussion, and in part as a consequence of substantial mining indu-
stryy support forthe project, Science World chose the earth sciences as the theme for 
thee first exhibition, on the assumption that the earth sciences were fundamental to 
understandingg the importance of mining in British Columbia. At the same time, 
7171 Both the Coopers&Lybrartd study, and research done 
severall recent studies conducted by the author and others had already established 
att the Palais de la Découverte by the author in 1993 
thatt public interest in the earth sciences was particularly low ", and that the public's 
showedd that the public was not highly interested in the 
interestt in the earth sciences was only piqued by an interest in natural catastrophes 
earthh sciences 
suchh as volcanoes and earthquakes, and then rarely. 
Inn terms of approach, there were two clear alternatives to treating the subject. On 
thee one hand, the earth sciences could be treated as they have been in traditional 
sciencee centres. Visitors would learn about geological time, the development of 
rocks,, faulting and continental drift. Following the example of other science centres 
desiringg to put the earth sciences 'in context', we would link geological themes to 
thee newsworthy geological events that captured the public's interest-volcanoes and 
earthquakes.744 By treating the earth sciences as a subset of geophysics, we would 
'** A current example is the new Earth Galleries at the 
followw the traditional path: separating scientific fact from social issues. We would 
Londonn Natural History Museum, opened 1997 
treatt the earth sciences as unsullied by concerns about survival. 
Thee alternative was clearly more challenging. Thus instead of an exhibition on the 
earthh sciences, the designers. Drew Ann Wake and the author, proposed to look at 
howw the geological sciences are constructed in a political and economic context: 
inn short, an exhibition on mining. The exhibition, eventually to be entitled Mine 
Games,Games, would deal with the issues surrounding the mining industry in the pro-
vincevince of British Columbia, issues that had been increasingly the subject of heated 
debatee in the press, on television, in parliament, and in the streets. Based on the 
convictionn that visitors are better prepared to engage with science learning tasks 
whenn there is sufficient context and motivation to do so (a belief supported by 
earlierr exhibitions such as The Body in the Library and Beyond the Naked Eye, 
describedd above) the designers re-focused the exhibition, not on geophysics, despite 
thee putative advantages of exploiting the public's interest in volcanoes and earth-
quakes,, but on the social issues that surround resource exploitation in the province 
off British Columbia. 
Thiss single change - from earth science to mining - entailed a complete re-exa-
minationn of the way in which the exhibition would be planned and designed. 
Withh a mining exhibition, it was possible to initiate a debate about the future of the 
province,, teaching visitors to evaluate scientific positions arrayed in support of any 
73 

numbernumber of competing positions. An exhibition on mining would call into questi
thee role the science centre should play in the life of the community, suggesting that 
thee role of the science centre is to prepare visitors to participate in the social and 
politicall life of their community. In a fundamental sense, an exhibition on mining, in 
aa province where the mining industry played a major role in the economy, and where 
thee public was demonstrably interested in the future of the province, provided the 
opportunityy to try to create a new kind of exhibition - using new approaches, setting 
neww goals, implementing new languages - and testing the latter to identify which 
mightt serve as user-languages. 
Thee exhibition Mine Games was thus a means to further test the assumption that 
visitorss are better prepared to learn when the science is placed in a context that is 
personallyy important to them, an assumption we already felt confident in following 
ourr work in Alberta. Moreover, it gave the author another opportunity to explore the 
deliberatee manipulation of user-languages as a means of shaping visitor interaction. 
Ass in the exhibitions described earlier, the notion of user-languages was rarely used 
explicitlyy in discussions within the design team, nevertheless, as will be clear from 
thee description of the exhibition, the author employed the theory developed in this 
studyy in guiding the implementation of the Mine Games exhibition. Specifically this 
tookk the form of two guiding principles: a context that mattered, and an exhibition 
strategyy based on games. 
Initially,, we considered using a real British Columbia example as a means of crea-
tingg the context for the debate around mining. It soon became clear that by using a 
reall example, we risked having visitors whose minds were made up, reducing their 
abilityy to consider the issue from many points of view. So instead we decided to 
linkk the exhibition, from beginning to end, by the fictitious town in northern British 
Columbiaa - Grizzly, B.C. 
Accordingg to the narrative, the people of Grizzly have gained their livelihood over 
thee past half century by logging the surrounding forests. Suddenly, last summer, the 
traditionall pattern of life changed dramatically. First, the provincial government 
announcedd that a wilderness park would be established on the outskirts of the com-
munity.. This sounded the death knell for the local logging company, which had 
dependeddepended on an ever-more precarious supply of timber. Then, only months late
largee copper/gold ore body was discovered barely a kilometre from town. Over the 
lastt few months, the townspeople have looked on as the representatives of the 
744 
mining company evaluate what may be one of the largest mineral deposits in the 

world.. Gossip rages in the restaurants and at the mall, as the residents of Grizzly 
debatee what the future will hold. Should the town cast its lot with the mining com-
pany,, and gain the jobs and security that a major mine will offer? Or should the town 
rejectt the mine and use its spectacular setting to promote wilderness recreation and 
tourism? ? 
Clearly,, there was a temptation to create an exhibition that asked for a clear, yes/no 
decision:: should the mine in the Grizzly valley go forward or not? But early in the 
projectt we realised that the 'no' option would provide an easy escape for urban 
visitorss who do not want to engage in discussing the issues. So we elected to 
createe a more complex situation in which visitors are asked to put themselves in 
thee shoes of the residents of Grizzly, and find compromises that will allow Grizzly 
too have a mine, while the integrity of the environment is maintained. In effect, 
visitorss are charged with the key responsibility that faces all British Columbians 
today:: to find a secure economic future that can coexist with the environment. What 
wee did in the Mine Games exhibition, then, was create a cultural context in which 
thee science and technology of the exhibition could be understood-a framework that 
wouldd give drive and direction to the way our audience would contribute, both as 
individualss and as players. 
Fromm a design perspective, the exhibition was developed to look like 
thee board games that all Canadian children have at home - chess or 
Monopoly.. Imagine an exhibition hall that contains four gameboards 
blownn up so that each contain a hundred square metres or more. 
Fromm an intellectual perspective, each of the games is made up of 
severall hands-on activities linked to a computer game. We delibe-
ratelyy made the activities difficult, so that it can take more than an 
hourr to solve all of the clues. Moreover, the visitor must play all of the hands-on 
activities,, solve all of the clues, in order to be able to play the computer game. The 
computerr game begins with a quiz, designed as a job application, and unless you 
havee mastered the information, you will not get the job. 
Thee visitor begins the Mine Games exhibition by picking up a clipboard with 
'gameplans'' describing each of the exhibit areas. The visitor keeps track of the out-
comess of hands-on challenges on the gameplan, and uses these answers while play-
ingg the computer games. Significantly, by making the gameplans an integral part of 
thee exhibition experience, the visitor is free to explore the exhibition in whatever 
orderr she wants, marking the results on her gameplan as she completes the exhibits. 
75 

Inn this way the exhibits can sustain the narrative of Grizzly, their results cumulative, 
butt the entire experience remains non-linear (its parts could be visited in any order). 
Howw were the exhibition's objectives expressed in the labels, and did the labels con-
tributee to achieving them? The exhibition deliberately used the narrative of Grizzly 
too ensure a global context for visitor engagement, and structured their activity 
withinn the exhibition as a game in which they were responsible for helping to resolve 
thee dilemma faced by the residents of Grizzly. The premises of the game were out-
linedd with the first text encountered by the visitor. 
MineMine Games 
GamesGames That Challenge You To Decide The Future ... 
WelcomeWelcome to Grizzly, a town in turmoil! A year ago. Grizzly's only industry shut dow
Then,Then, a huge ore deposit was discovered on the edge of town. 
CanCan the residents take advantage of the jobs. And preserve the wilderness, too? 
TheThe decision is yours. 
RulesRules of the Game: 1. Your Job. You have been hired as a mediator between the 
towntown and the mining company. Can you design a plan that will please both parties? 
2.2. The Clues. This exhibition looks like a group of gameboards - and that's what it is! 
EachEach game is made up of hands-on clues that will help you win a computer game. 
3.3. Gameplan. Take a clipboard from the wall. For each game there is a plan that will help 
youyou keep track of your answers. 4. Your Hosts. Grizzly residents will be your hosts. 
Maxine,Maxine, the Mayor. Bob, the President of NorthStar Mining. Lenny, the business gur
ShareShare their excitement - and their fears. 
Inn order to engage with the exhibition, it was essential that the visitor was familiar 
withh the topography of the Grizzly valley. A large three-dimensional model showed 
thee features of the valley, accompanied a text which served to give the visitor her 
firstt challenge, as a way of encouraging her to become familiar with the topography 
off the Grizzly valley. It ended with the challenge: Where would you hike to watch the 
sunset? ? 
Thee first game the visitor encounters is High Stakes!, and its label texts followed and 
elaboratedd the exhibition's game strategy. 
HighHigh Stakes! The game that challenges you to 
766 
Find Your Fortune ... 

GrizzlyGrizzly is buzzing with gossip of gold! 
TwoTwo of the world's richest ore deposits lie beneath this lush, green valley. 
ItIt is your job to find them. Go for broke! 
RulesRules of the Game: 1. Your Job. You are the Exploration Manager for NorthStar Mining. 
YourYour boss gives you some chunks of rock, a few fossils, and a map. Will you hit the 
bonanzabonanza - or lose your shirt? 2. The Clues. Each of the eight hands-on activities is a 
clueclue to the location of the ore. You will need every one of them to win this game. 
3.3. The Computers. Begin your search with $200,000. But watch out - the stakes are 
high.high. Every decision will cost you thousands of dollars. 4. Your Host. Bob, the President 
ofof NorthStar Mining, is your host. He's a great guy - as long as you're making money. 
AfterAfter all, you are betting his bottom dollar! 
Scientificc and technical information needed to understand the games' challenges 
wass found on distinctive exhibition elements: 
HeadingHeading the Rocks 
WhenWhen geologists search for ore, they look for clues in "drill core ". A hollow bit is used 
toto drill holes thousands of feet underground. Then, long columns of rock are brought to 
thethe surface. By examining core from different holes and varying depths, geologists can 
assembleassemble a 3-D picture of the earth beneath their feet. 
Inn the High Stakes! area there are eight exhibits, and a table with four computers. 
Eachh of the eight hands-on exhibits is itself structured as a game with a specific 
challenge.. The visitor was expected to note the answers to the exhibit challenges 
onn her clipboard. Each of the answers provided a 'clue' to the global challenge 
off locating the ore body on the outskirts of Grizzly. For instance, the first exhibit 
challengedd the visitor to determine if there was any evidence in favour of the mining 
company'ss claims that gold could be found in the Grizzly Valley. 
AllAll That Glitters 
"Gold!"Gold! At NorthStar Mining, we're under a lot of pressure to find a whopper gold 
deposit.deposit. But you'll never find anything by sitting at your desk. You have to get out and 
hikehike through the valley, panning the soil. Watch for a glitter - but don't get fooled!" 
ClueClue #7 
PanPan the soil from three locations in the Grizzly Valley to see if the soil contains gold. 
1.1. Swish each of the gold pans in a circular motion until shiny metallic particles begin 
77 

toto collect along the ridge. Collect as many particles as you can. 2. Are the particles 
gold?gold? If so, they will appear as dark gold flakes. "Fool's gold" (pyrite) is silvery. If you
findfind gold, mark the location on your map with a "G ". ? Is any area of the valley likely to 
containcontain a gold deposit? 
Alll eight of the hands-on exhibits in the High Stakes! cluster followed a similar 
pattern. . 
Afterr the visitor had worked through the hands-on exhibits in a parti-
cularr area, she was ready to play the computer game. The computer 
gamee is an integral part of each area, and is what makes each area a true 
game.. The computer was designed in such a way as to be extremely 
challengingg if the visitor has not assimilated the information from the 
exhibitss - and unforgiving of mistakes. Once the visitor has lost her turn 
att the computer, she must wait five minutes before she can log on again, 
fivee minutes in which she can go back and gather information that will help her play 
better.. The information on her clipboard, 'clues' that she will have gathered from the 
exhibits,, were part of her 'logging in' to the computer. If the information was partial, 
orr incorrect, the player was encouraged to return to the exhibit area before playing 
thee computer game. In this way the visitor's behaviour was left open-ended, but as 
thee exhibits give important clues to play the computer game, it structured how the 
visitorr plays the game. Pinball behaviour was minimised, and the careful collection 
off information encouraged, while still allowing the visitorto choose her own pacing, 
mannerr and ordering of the exhibit experience. 
Eachh of the exhibit areas functioned in the same way, and each one provided the 
visitorr with a challenge to respond to, and a reason to respond that was both per-
sonal,, and part of the overall narrative of Grizzly. For example, in Wild Things! the 
visitorr had to protect the valley from the consequences of potentially dangerous acid 
rockk drainage, and in Blast It! the visitor was challenged find a way to safely exploit 
thee ore left in a mine abandoned at the beginning of the century. The challenges are 
real,, and must be met by assembling a series of information, and acquiring specific 
skillss on the computer games. 
78 8 
Wee hoped to demonstrate that by deliberately structuring the exhibition by means 
off the user-language of games, and by providing an overall coherent narrative con-
textt in the form of the fictitious story of Grizzly, B. C, we could make visitors aware 
off the variety generated by other visitors (as well as by the actors in the story), and 

thuss encourage them to invest a greater amount of time exploring the exhibition in 
ann engaged and concentrated way. We were looking for the concentrated, social 
visitorr behaviour that characterised the puzzle table-type of exhibit rather than the 
freneticc activity that characterises behaviour around many exhibits that present iso-
latedd phenomena.75 Our experience in Alberta had shown that there were several 
"" An excellent example is that of the 'tuneblocks' 
fruitfull avenues for exploring ways in which one could simultaneously increase both 
exhibitexhibit developed by one of the Exploratorium's Osher 
varietyy and coherence, and create an exhibition that while remaining non-linear, was 
Fellowi,, Jean Baumberger, Professor of Music at MIT, 
neverthelesss cumulative and coherent. 
andd reported to Sally Ouensing in a private 
communicationn in 1992. In the letter she describes the 
Bothh The Body In The Library (described above) and Mine Games are non-linear 
transitionn from random clicking to concentrated 
insofarr as its activities can be done in any order (with certain key exceptions noted 
'floW-likee activity once the user sees that she can use 
below),, and both are cumulative within the framework of the overall parti pris. 
thee exhibit to compose tunes 
Centrall to Mine Games is the user-language of games. In a game, rules structure 
activityy that can be fruitfully played again and again. In a game such as Mine 
Games,Games, every re-playing the outcome of the game is different, determined by the 
naturee of the play. As distinct from the user-language of problems, the user-language 
off games structures the visitor's experience in terms of different players with com-
petingg interests (including players that are roles in a story), and allows the possi-
bilityy of repeated play, as every game can have a different outcome. Games are struc-
turedd in terms of players, rules, and goals, and are not exhausted by the finding of 
aa solution, as is a problem. In a game there is no 'right answer'. 
AA key difference between The Body In The Library and Mine Games is that The Body 
InIn The Library is structured primarily as a problem, and that it has a largely pre-
determinedd and knowable outcome. The visitor's engagement with the problem 
consistss of finding a way to the probable answer by means of clues and deduction. 
Inn this way. The Body In The Library deliberately models itself on the detective novel, 
aa kind of intellectual puzzle. Mine Games, on the other hand, is similar to a true 
game,, such as Monopoly, Risk, or chess. (The determinacy of The Body In The 
LibraryLibrary is mitigated in SOS in one exhibit, where a plausible case can be made for 
twoo possible conclusions, and in the Alibi programme, developed for High School 
students,, in which participants are challenged to create an argument indicting a 
particularr character in the murder mystery) 
Byy exploiting the user-language of games consistently throughout the exhibition, 
thee exhibition also encouraged new learning styles. The stand-alone exhibit com-
monlyy encourages a particular kind of interaction - visitors engage with the exhibit, 
andd push and pull every available protrusion until some identifiable pattern occurs, 
79 

allowingg them to discern the workings and intent of the exhibit. This learning style 
oftenn characterises the behaviour of young boys. On the other hand, young girls 
moree often read the instructions or study the exhibit before trying their hand at it, 
whichh when they do, they often do with a greater engagement and a higher level 
off participation than do their male counterparts.78 By insisting that information 
"Clawe,, M 
bee gathered prior to playing the computer games, the Mine Games exhibition 
attemptedd to address the gender asymmetry in exhibition behaviour by encouraging 
alll visitors to adopt a learning style (at least with regards to the computer games) 
thatt is normally associated with girls. Other exhibit elements throughout the ex-
hibitionn permit different kinds of engagement and take into account the large variety 
inn learning styles of the museum visitor. 
Finally,, the exhibition provided a way to challenge the traditional assumption that 
thee museum experience is primarily individual, and that the defining relationship is 
betweenn a single visitor and a single exhibit, despite ample research that demon-
stratess that the single museum visitor is exceptional, and that most visitors arrive in 
groups:: school classes, families, friends.77 Nearly all of the Mine Games exhibit 
7777 Notably in Folk, J. and Dierking, L. The Museum 
areass depended on groups being encouraged to work together to solve a problem 
Experience.Experience. Washington: Whalesback Books; 1992 
(particularlyy problems depending on interactions between people, as given by the 
roless in the story), and structured the exhibits in such a way as to encourage the kind 
off social, information-sharing activity associated with puzzle tables. 
Howw successful were the attempts to create an exhibition with the user-language of 
"Takenn from a report commissioned by the author 
games?? To answer the question it is useful to quote at considerable length from the 
whilee Head of Design for newMetropolis in 1995. 
conclusionss of a report on the exhibition made by Drew Ann Wake after Mine Games 
Wake,, D.A. Checkmate, unpublished report, IMPULS; 
hadd been open to the public for six months.78 
Amsterdam:: 1995 
TheThe game format has proved to be successful for a variety of visitors, including families, 
youngyoung people and professionals. A study was taken by conducting a short conversation
withwith each visiting group over the first eight weeks after opening, and on this basis the 
audienceaudience was broken into three groups. 
i.i. The Enthusiasts. It appears that approximately 18% of the audience becomes 
engrossedengrossed with solving the problem and will stay for hours engaged in solution a
ties.ties. Many people returned to Mine Games repeatedly. Some families were very 
organisedorganised about attacking the exhibition and came back week-end after week-e
OthersOthers travelled from as far away as Victoria (two hours) or the Interior of British
800 
Columbia (three hours) to play a game every month or so. 

TheseThese families sometimes became familiar to volunteers and staff members who took 
thethe same shift each week. For example, one seven year old boy spent an entire Sun-
dayday afternoon mastering one game, while his grandmother sat patiently, helping him 
out.out. The next Sunday morning he appeared, clapped the volunteer on the back and 
saidsaid cheerfully: "Well, I'm back!" His grandmother, who was following with three other 
grandchildrengrandchildren in tow, added less brightly: "And so am I." 
ThisThis confirms Csikszentmihalyi's belief that there is a proportion of the population that 
isis keen to be challenged intellectually. The percentage of enthusiasts is significant when 
comparedcompared with data collected for more traditional stand-alone hands-on exhibits. Minda 
Borun'sBorun's early work at the Franklin Institute showed that visitors stopped at large 
numbersnumbers of exhibits in the gallery, but actually spent time learning and understanding 
atat only one out of ten of these exhibits ... Therefore, if almost one in five visitors tries 
toto master one game, this represents a high level of interest compared to traditional 
exhibits. exhibits. 
ii.ii. Mild Interest. A much larger proportion of visitors showed a mild interest in Mine 
Games.. Approximately 45% of the visitors spent some time trying one or more of the 
exhibitsexhibits or the computer game. 
IncludedIncluded in this "mildly interested" was a small percentage of visitors (5%) who en-
gagedgaged the staff in conversation about the meaning of the Mine Games exhibition as a 
whole,whole, and the future of mining in the province, but did not want to play the exhibits 
oror computer game. This was interesting as it suggested that for a small proportion of 
thethe audience the exhibition served as a lightning rod for political and social concerns. 
SomeSome of these visitors were from the mining industry and others were from towns 
wherewhere mining was carried out or proposed. In most cases they did not play the games 
because,because, as one visitor from Mount Washington said: "I have been to a lot of meetings 
onon this subject and I already know what I think." 
Hi.Hi. No Interest. About 20% of visitors had no interest in the Mine Games exhibition 
atat all. These visitors often walked slowly across the floor from entrance to exit and left 
thethe hall. When approached, they most often said that they did not wish to put in the 
timetime or the effort of participating in a game. Some stated that they had tickets to the 
OmnimaxOmnimax theatre, which would conflict with their completion of the game. A few said 
theythey had no interest in the subject matter of mining. 
81 1 

2.2. Youth Audience. Our conclusion was that the games work with their intended 
audience-teenagers.audience-teenagers. The attendance has included numbers of teenage
theirtheir schools, their families and with their peers. 
Unquestionably,Unquestionably, the greatest draw for the teenagers is the computer ga
notnot the hands-on aspects of the exhibition. Teenagers who were visiting with schools 
werewere encouraged to play the games in pairs or small groups, and were expected to try 
thethe hands-on exhibits first. However, those who came with their peers played in a much 
looserlooser co-operative competitive form, starting with the computer games and working
backwardsbackwards to acquire information and data from the exhibits as required. 
TeenagersTeenagers are occasionally recalcitrant about committing the time to play the g
andand parents have been heard to cajole them by citing their interest in games at home. 
"At"At home I can't get you away from the computer, so what's your problem now?" This 
suggestssuggests that parents have noticed the intended link between computer games a
teenagers,teenagers, and are not above using it to stimulate interest. 
TheThe competitive aspect of the games is key for this group. On one occasion, teenagers 
™™ There also is another aspect to consider. On the 
whowho had been working at the High Stakes! game for several hours were found brow-
occesionn cited above when the teenagers lingered 
singsing among visitors at the Wild Things! game. "We don't want to play Wild Things!," 
aroundd one computer game trawling for clues to 
theythey explained, "We are just hoping that someone will accidentally drop a clue that will 
helpp them with another, this suggests despite the 
helphelp us win High Stakes!. "79 
competitivee nature of the games, players had started 
too recognise and take advantage of the variety 
AtAt a recent high school gathering, one member of the team asked the room how many 
generatee by other players. 
ofof them had played the computergames at Mine Games and half the class raised their 
hands,hands, despite the fact that the school had not gone on a class visit. This suggests tha
"" The paper concludes with some observations 
therethere is a market among teenagers for games that are of professional quality. [...J90 
aboutt gender asymmetries in use of the Mine Games 
exhibition,, such as' In discussion, the families 
Itt is clear from the above that the Mine Games exhibition represents a substantial 
confirmedd that the return visit was either at the 
improvementt on manyy of the exhibitions commonly found in science museums, and 
requestt of the children or the father, and the mother 
wass able to sustain, at least in a significant number of cases, the kind and quality of 
attendedd with the rest of the family but rarely 
engagementt and interaction considered to be desirable. Moreover, given the large 
insistedd on the visit' 
investmentt of time on the part of some visitors, and their proven desire to return to 
thee exhibition, it can be provisionally argued that some added value had been pro-
duced,, possibly some real learning, an argument bolstered by the fact that pro-
ficiencyy at the computer games allowed us to observe increases in ability - at least 
insofarr as playing the game is concerned. 
82 2 

Thee theory developed in this study suggests that while the user-languages of 
problemss and games both confer the property of actorship on the user, only the user-
languagee of games confers the property of other players. This conviction was at the 
heartt of the strategy to make an interactive theatre the culminating experience of 
thee Mine Games exhibition. An interactive theatre gave the author the opportunity 
too create a forum for the discussion of scientific and technological issues in a public 
institutionn - a forum where the activity and agency was conferred on all players -
andd was acknowledged. The property of other players conferred by the user-lang-
uagee of games was at the core of the educational, social, and political ambitions of 
thee Mine Games exhibition. 
Iff the challenge of the modern science centre is to find new ways to support the 
visitor,, to recognise their competence and to encourage their participation, in order 
thatthat they can regain control, in some measure, of the information they are being 
askedd to absorb, interactive theatre is one means of reaffirming the visitors' control 
overr information. In creating an interactive theatre, we tried to create a place where 
visitorss generated, in a non-trivial way, real ideas, answers, and opinions about the 
"Thiss account if taken largely from Bradburra. J. 
wayss in which issues can be resolved. As the issues that face the mining industry in 
andd Wake. D.A., Hottest! The Science Centra a» Social 
Britishh Columbia were at once scientific, social, economic and political, the inter-
ForumForum Conference Proceedings 'Quand la science 
activee theatre seemed to us the ideal vehicle for meeting the challenge of making 
deviantt culture', Montreal: 1994 
thee science centre a forum for debate.81 
Wee cannot pretend that the idea of having the audience implicated in the outcome 
off a piece of theatre is entirely new. In the early decades of the century Bertolt Brecht 
pioneeredd what he called 'epic theatre', in which the audience was meant to parti-
cipatee in, and take responsibility for its opinions and actions. '[Epic theatre] turns the 
spectatorr into an observer but arouses his capacity for action [and] forces him to take 
decisions.'' The audience was there to actively participate, not just to be passively 
entertained. . 
Inn 1948 Brecht wrote 'We need a type of theatre which not only releases the feelings, 
insightss and impulses possible within the particular field of human relations in which 
thee action takes place, but employs and encourages those thoughts and feelings 
whichh help transform the field itself.'K Central to this approach is the belief that the 
"" Brecht B. Short Organum on the Theatre, 1948, 
audiencee is comprised of thinking, intelligent human beings, an assumption not 
quotedd in Brecht On Theatre pp.35 transl.Willett 
oftenn made in conventional theatre, cinema, or indeed, in most science centres. 
Brechtt insisted on the intelligence of his audience. He wrote in 1936 'It is a common 
truismm ... that the audience, once it is the theatre, is not a number of individuals 
83 

butt a collective individual, a mob ... [our] theatre holds that the audience is a 
collectionn of individuals, capable of thinking and reasoning, of making judgements 
evenn in the theatre it treats it as individuals of mental and emotional maturity, 
andd believes it wishes to be so regarded.' n Even earlier, in 1926, he wrote The one 
nn In Bracht. B. Left Review 1936 
tributee we can pay the audience is to treat it as thoroughly intelligent... I give the 
audiencee the incidents baldly so the audience can think for itself. I need a quick-
wittedd audience that knows how to observe, and gets its enjoyment from setting its 
reasonn to work.' Brecht's theatre put the audience to work. 
Somee years later the potential of the 'quick-witted audience' was exploited by a 
Czechh World's Fair designer working with the Prague theatre company, Laterna 
Magika,, Emil Radok. In his revolutionary Kino-Automat at Expo '67 in Montreal, 
audiencess of 100 people were asked to choose the outcome of a tangled melodrama 
involvingg an unfaithful wife, her unsuspecting husband and a policeman. At key 
momentss the audience would choose one of three possible outcomes by means of 
buttonss in the arms of their chairs, and the film would continue on the basis of the 
outcomee selected. Remarkably, and perhaps fatalistically, despite the number of 
choicess and plots theoretically possible, the ending was always the same. 
Afterr Radok, the idea of interactive theatre was debased by several different de-
signers,, each of whom were entranced with the idea of the audience making choi-
ces,, but unable to translate these choices into a meaningful experience. The term 
interactivee theatre soon became synonymous with pollable seating, and, instead 
off determining the outcome of the experience, visitors in the new theatres- dubbed 
'Choicee Theatres' by Disney, and 'Futures Theatres' by Canadian World's Fair 
designerss working in Vancouver and Brisbane - were given questions to which they 
responded,, and their responses shown on the big screen. At their best, these 
theatress allowed audiences to express an opinion and have it endorsed. At its worst, 
thee audience was polled and polled and polled again on the same issue using 
differentt questions, to see whether or not they would change their opinions. Worse 
still,, the results of some of these theatres were sold to private marketing agencies. 
Thee audience's role in the process had become trivial - its decisions were limited to 
thee choices put to them, and its variety reduced to yes and no, agree or disagree. 
Thesee limitations, it was said, were a consequence of the technology itself, which 
couldd not cope with the special kind of variety an audience is able to generate. 
Wee were very critical of these so-called interactive theatres on several counts. 
84 4 

Firstt in many of them, the visitor's choices have no material effect on the outcome 
off the experience. The visitors vote, their opinions are registered, and the experience 
movess on. It is notable that visitors do in fact want to be active participants. In the 
Futuress Theatre at the 1986 World's Fair in Vancouver, the audience's participation 
wass strictly limited to expressing an opinion by means of pollable seating, and 
havingg the decision displayed. Nevertheless, when the final question, 'do you think 
yourr opinion matters?' was answered in the affirmative, the audience routinely burst 
intoo spontaneous applause. 
Second,, the visitor's participation is shaped by the way the question is posed, not 
byy the issue. The visitor's variety is largely determined by the nature of the question, 
and,, more importantly, by the limited number of possible answers to choose from. 
Inn effect, the audience is merely doing a collective multiple choice questionnaire. 
Thee richness of real interaction is completely absent. There is no debate, there is no 
meaningfull abstention, there is no revisiting the question or recasting it in different 
terms.. The audience is there to answer questions that other people set. 
Finally,, in the few cases where the audience can in fact choose among alternatives, 
thee alternatives are non-cumulative, and seem an end in themselves. Generally 
speaking,, the audience chooses to get information, and for the most part this in-
formationn is neutral - it leads nowhere. For instance, in some interactive planetaria, 
thee audience can choose between several topics that it wants to explore (often as 
feww as three), the decision being made by means of a majority vote. Thus the audi-
encee does materially influence the direction the show takes. However all this parti-
cipationn succeeds in doing is transforming the theatre into a kind of collective 
interactivee dictionary, in which the majority decides what to look up. It becomes, 
inn effect, a clumsy, limited, collective database, and even were the choices to be 
moree abundant, the overall result would be as disappointing. 
Withh this in mind, when we began designing the Mine Games exhibition, we took 
twoo starting points for the interactive theatre. First, we rejected systems which 
limitedlimited the audience's answers to yes or no questions, second, we were unwilling 
too believe that the technological limitations of the interactive theatre experience 
shouldd deter us from encouraging non-trivial participation of our audience - espe-
ciallyy given the overall decision to cast the exhibition in the user-language of games. 
Afterr all, Radok had shown us that an interactive, pollable theatre did not have to be 
overwhelmedd by an infinity of possible scenarios. Moreover, our own work combi-
ningg a live host with widescreen cinema at Expo '86 had proved the effectiveness 
85 

off a real actor in coping with and shaping the variety generated by a live audience, 
whilee at the same time using a sophisticated multimedia support. 
Inn a paper delivered in Prague in 1991 **, the author had proposed that one of 
Bradburne,, J. Going Public: Science museums. 
thee roles of the modern science centre, and, in a broader sense, the museum, is 
debatee and democracy in Planning science museums 
'too take advantage of its function as a public space, and to reclaim the openness 
forfor the new Europe. Paris: UNESCO; 1993 
inherentt in the practice of science. The science centre must put this spirit of chal-
lenge,, question and discovery in the hands of its visitors. Finally the science centre 
mustt become a place where debate about science, its benefits, its liabilities, its role 
inn modern society, can be conducted in the manner of science itself. In this way our 
sciencee centres can be a model, not only for other museums, but for debate and 
democracyy in a world rapidly closing in on itself to the exclusion of both.' With this 
inn mind, we designed the Hotseat! interactive theatre. 
Hotseat!! is a circular amphitheatre sheathed in copper, located at 
thee back of the Mine Games exhibition space, immediately adjacent 
too the exit. On either side of the entrance, the structure is clad in 
recycledd printing plates, still showing the traces of newspaper head-
lines.. Inside the theatre are six sections of steep tiers seating up to 
755 people. Above the entrance, visible from any point in the theatre, 
iss a large, 16-screen videowall. The entire experience lasts approxi-
linutes.. Hotseat! is the culmination of a visit to Mine Games. This ex-
ss originally intended for a very specific target group -young adolescents 
irs,, and was designed to encourage them to discuss and debate issues 
ïselvess in order to help the fictional residents of Grizzly decide whether 
havee a mine in their community. The object of the Hotseat! game was 
sensuss around the contentious issue of a land use plan for the Grizzly 
Thee Hotseat! audience plays the role of the studio audience of a live, call-in talk show, 
conductedd during the first public meeting between the mining company and the 
townspeoplee of Grizzly. The purpose of the call-in show is to build consensus about 
thee best way to develop the region. In Grizzly, the mining company presents its plan 
forr the long-range development of the community and the people of Grizzly respond. 
Thee audience is challenged to use the material they have learned throughout the 
exhibitionn to create a vision of the future that can accommodate all of the interest 
groups.. The talk show host plays the role of facilitator and mediator, asking the 
866 
audiences help imagine a land use proposal that would satisfy the conflicting inte-
matelyy 40 rr 
periencewa a 
andd teenage 
amongg then 
andd how to 
too build con 
Valley. . 

restss in the region. The host uses the 16-screen videowall above the entrance to the 
Hotseat!! theatre to understand the complexities of the mining company's proposal. 
Inn order to help the audience come up with reasonable suggestions by adding 
additionall information into the experience, the host can ask for the opinions of ex-
perts,, who also appear on the videowall. 
Fundamentall to the dynamics of the experience are the concerns expressed by the 
communityy residents to the company's proposals. These concerns are based upon 
deeplyy felt, and often opposing views of what the future of the community should 
bee after the mine has left in ten years. Should Grizzly become a developed northern 
skii resort? Should it preserve the wilderness and concentrate on building a tourism 
basedd on hiking and camping? Should it preserve its historical past as the basis 
off a new tourist economy? None of these concerns is scientific itself, as each is 
groundedd in values as well as facts, but making credible modifications to the com-
pany'ss proposal in order to ensure a certain kind of future involves an understan-
dingg of what science can and can not contribute. The host helps the audience move 
throughh each of the community concerns, concerns that not only place the com-
munityy in opposition to the company, but place the interests of some residents in 
conflictt with others. Saving the old townsite in order to build on historical tourism, 
forr instance, places at risk some of the moose herd that traditionally feeds the local 
Nativee Indian band. 
Thee central goal of Hotseat! was to create a means for visitors to see how their 
knowledgee of the science and technology of mining can be brought to bear on com-
plexx social issues such as the planning of a new mine. The purpose of the game 
wass to challenge visitors to use the skills and knowledge they had acquired in the 
exhibitionn to select a solution to a complex mining issue. The game is deliberately 
co-operativee and not competitive, with the goal of reaching a consensus. 
Howw does this form of interactive theatre address the concerns expressed earlier? 
First,, the audiences choices do have a real effect on the outcome of the experience. 
Thee solutions reached by the audience differ from presentation to presentation. 
Whateverr the result of the audience's deliberations, it must satisfy the requirements 
off the key interest groups: the mining industry and the community representatives. 
Anyy position that successfully mediates the interests of all these participants 
mustt draw not only on scientific knowledge, but economics, sociology, history and 
ecologyy - in short, on the full experience of the participants. Depending on the 
87 

suggestionss the audience makes to address community concerns, the community 
representatives,, or the mining company, could decide not to accept the suggestion, 
andd the host asks the audience to reconsider their choice. If the audience is unwil-
lingg to consider fresh possibilities in order to arrive at a plan that both the company 
andd the community can live with, the Hotseat! can be wound to a close. Although 
thee goal of the Hotseat! is to reach consensus, the audience can decide whether it 
wantss to move towards consensus or not. There is no 'right' answer - only different 
audiences. . 
Second,, the audience is asked to suggest real possibilities, rather than relying on 
thee traditional pre-determined yes/no choices. They are free to suggest any of a my-
riadd of possible solutions, and they have to defend those suggestions publicly. The 
hostt mediates the discussion, and calls upon experts to answer questions posed by 
thee audience. These experts can either be pre-recorded interviews at the Grizzly to-
wnn meeting, or potentially a live video feed from a real scientist on call during the 
Hotseat!! presentation. In this way the audience is encouraged to come up with a wi-
dee range of suggestions based on their own experience, and on their experience of 
thee exhibition, suggestions that can be corroborated or corrected in light of scienti-
ficc evidence. The issue under discussion of course limits the scope of the audience's 
suggestionss in certain respects, but right or wrong, their suggestions are not limi-
tedd by the form in which the question is put. 
Finally,, the multimedia technology used -the 16-screen videowall and 
itss computer interface - does not function like a database. The audi-
encee is not being asked to decide by majority vote what topic they 
wantt to see. Instead the technology functions as a resource. New 
informationn is provided by experts when the host feels that the audi-
encee needs additional information to fuel its deliberations or enlarge 
itss exploration of the issue. The consequence of a suggestion by the 
aa response from the community that allows them to evaluate how well 
3enn able to negotiate a solution, and where to look to find a better one. 
alwayss lies with the audience - not in the technology. The technology 
forr audience interaction. The drama of the Hotseat! is that audience 
;batee issues with other participants, instead of merely vying with one 
:alll up topics on the screen. The Hotseat! is not a generic database, 
pure,, value-free information. It is a support system for debate around 
tt issue. 
r«irr x -Tur-H'- mar. f 
Mwfca 
audiencee is 
theyy have b< 
Thee answer 
iss a support 
memberss d< 
anotherr to ( 
dealingg with 
ann importan 
88 8 

Moreover,, the issue is deeply rooted in the experience of the province of British 
Columbia,, and is based on concerns that had British Columbians from every walk 
off life - from the environmentalists to mining executives - in the streets during 
19933 and 1994. The issues in Hotseat! were fundamental, and the Hotseat! theatre 
wass a commitment on the part of the host institution. Science World, to the debate 
onn the role of science and technology to the future of the province. 
Theree are, however, several severe technical constraints to such a programme. The 
firstt is the need to limit the number of events filmed, for reasons of both cost, and 
off storage capacity. The number of events can be limited by either constraining the 
audiencess activity, providing only simple choices at a few points in the programme, 
orr by allowing the audience to retrace its path through a series of opportunities. 
Regardlesss of the method chosen, the designer of any interactive experience 
supportedd by finite technical capacity will always need to accept that the variety an 
audiencee can generate may exceed the ability of the system to respond to it. The 
measuree of a designer's skill is the extent to which he or she is able to create the con-
ditionss for the maximum amount of coherent visitor-generated variety, while pro-
vidingg support for that variety with a finite number of resources. 
Thee final version of the Hotseat! theatre evolved slowly over the course of a year-
longg design process. Originally we had been interested in exploring the possibilities 
off a voting theatre in which the audience was polled electronically, and interacted 
byy means of computer stations around the inner circumference of the theatre. One 
off the drawbacks to this approach was the difficulty of keeping the process open, 
evenn when strategies such as re-voting were employed. In the absence of a human 
mediator,, the questions had to be structured so rigidly that it was difficult, if not 
impossible,, to leave room for the kinds of variety we wanted the audience to gene-
rate.. Moreover, given the overall message of the exhibition that all technological 
choicess were ultimately social choices, we felt that to ask the audience to use a com-
puterr interface in its negotiations was to imply that technology had the answers to 
humann problems. We therefore opted to create an experience in which a live host 
mediatedd the audiences responses to the dilemma of the townspeople of Grizzly. 
AA human host had the advantage of underlining the fact that social negotiation lies 
inn human hands, as well as taking advantage of the human host to encourage, 
shape,, and direct the variety generated by the audience. In its final form, the Hot-
seat!! began with a humorous introduction, in which the host creates the fiction of a 
live,, television call-in programme, about to go live to the town of Grizzly. 

tnn order to better illustrate the issues above, let us look at the Hotseat! script in some 
detail: : 
[introduction[introduction to Hotseat! Beluga Productions 28/08/94] 
DuringDuring the applause, the logo 'HOTSEAT!' spins out in 3-D letters and freezes. 
TERRY,TERRY, the Host, enters with a mike. 
TERRY:TERRY: (really upbeat) 
ThankThank you, thank you, and welcome to Hotseat!, the television programme that puts
youyou at the centre of world events. Each week, your Hotseat! crew will be travelling to 
oneone of the hotspots of the world. Washington. Beirut. Johannesburg. And this week -
Grizzly,Grizzly, British Columbia. This is a brand new concept in Canadian broadcasting, fo
andand I'm delighted that you can join us for our very first show. Our network CNSW, 
hashas built a state-of-the-art studio especially for this programme. So let me show you 
somesome of the high tech features I have at my command. 
TERRYTERRY touches his touch screen and an image of Karen Nishi appears on the video w
TERRY:TERRY: This week, Karen Nishi will be reporting live from Grizzly, in northern Br
Columbia.Columbia. We have a two-way link with Karen, so I can talk with her via these scre
Hello,Hello, Karen. Are you there? 
OnOn thesereen, KAREN says: "Hello, Terry?" 
TERRY:TERRY: Goodbye, Karen. 
TerryTerry hits his touch screen and Karen is frozen. ... 
TERRY:TERRY: This is Hotseat!, the world's first television programme dedicated to chang
thethe course of history. Today, Hotseat! is going live to the town of Grizzly, B.C. Grizzly 
isis a town in turmoil. Two years ago the town's lumber company closed down, leaving 
manymany residents out of work. Then, a small Canadian mining company, called NorthStar,
discovereddiscovered a rich deposit of copper and gold on the edge of town. Some residen
thethe town are boosters of the mine. They want the jobs and training that mining offers. 
OtherOther residents pin their hopes on the tourism industry. They fear that a mine will 
destroydestroy the valley and its wildlife. We will be asking you to serve as mediators i
thesethese discussions. We want you to make suggestions and find compromises. We want 
youyou to find a solution that will make both the company and the community happy. 
90 0 

Wee had originally written the script to allow the greatest number of possible tra-
jectoriess through the material, in order to encourage the greatest amount of ex-
plorationn by the audience. However, we wanted the audience to realise that intran-
sigencee could mean failure -the collapse of the negotiations altogether, and thus 
builtt in several occasions where successive refusal to consider alternatives by the 
audiencee lead to the winding up of the show by the host, as noted on the storyline 
diagramm and the following script. Even if the audience successfully avoided ending 
thee show prematurely, there were four possible endings, of which only one allowed 
aa final compromise that would guarantee the support of all four community leaders 
forr the mining company plan -the 'happy ending'. The challenge of Hotseat! was 
too give the audience enough information to allow them to make intelligent propo-
salss about how to modify the mining company's plans (shown on a map) in order 
meett the different concerns of the community, and to encourage them to debate 
variouss positions in order to find a solution. 
Inn the following sequence, after a tumultuous community meeting in which the 
communityy leaders storm out in protest after being presented the mining company's 
plann (which serves as introduction), the host calls on the audience to help him solve 
thee dilemma. 
EVENTEVENT #8: THE GROUP ASSEMBLED 
TerryTerry turns to the AUDIENCE. 
TERRY:TERRY: Okay, how can we help these people out? The town needs the jobs, but they've 
gotgot some real problems. It's going to be our job to help, using this map. And if we can, 
thethe town can have the mine and all the prosperity that goes with it. But, if we can't, 
everyoneeveryone loses. So, let's look at the map and see if we can find a way, one solution at 
aa time. 
TheThe MAP, as Bob laid it out, appears on the screens. 
(refers(refers to the map) 
Let'sLet's look here, at the problem areas:we have the tailings pond, and this pile of acidic 
rock...rock... Karen appears on a screen 
KARENJerry?KARENJerry? Are you there? 
TERRY:Yes, Karen? 
KarenKaren is at the rear of the meeting hall. With her is Dr. MARTY WEINBERG, (mid-forties), 
thethe biologist. ... [the alternatives for the siting of the tailings pond are outlinedj 

TerryTerry leads a debate amongst the audience. The premise of this debate is that there i
nono alternative place for the tailings pond. It can only be reduced in size. 
AfterAfter a discussion the audience will be asked to vote on the following questions: 
VV to save all the elk? which means, no mine. 
2)2) to save none of the elk? which means going with the mine's plan. 
3)3) to save some of the elk, and change the mine's plan. 
TerryTerry finally calls for their vote. 
Thee choices are telling the mining company to pack up its bags and go home (a 
choicee that means the end of the town and infuriates the entire community), or 
givingg the mining company a clear go-ahead to their plan (which means sacrificing 
thee salmon stream valued by the Native Indian Band, the historic homestead, dear 
too older residents and the Grizzly Historical Society, and the plans for other economic 
growth,, such as a ski slope or wilderness trails) or exploring alternative, compro-
misee positions, such as moving the tailings pond. 
Thiss was the scenario we pre-tested in front of several classes of bright Canadian 
gradee 10 students (13-15 years old), in order to finalise the script before shooting. 
Thesee classes had been selected because they fitted the profile of the target 
audiencee originally specified by the institution -young adolescents and teenagers. 
Thesee pre-tests worked remarkably well, despite the fact that the pre-tests had been 
'performed'' by members of Science World staff, rather than shown in the Hotseat! 
theatree itself (as the film had to be shot long before construction of the exhibition 
hadd been completed, the script tests had to be conducted well in advance of the 
shooting).. The students appreciated the difficulty of the problem, and were pre-
paredd to engage with the challenges. Notably, they first treated the experience as a 
problem,, to which they had to find the 'right' solution. 
Inn the first test, both classes opted for one of the two either/or solu-
tionss right away (predictably for an urban 'green' audience, the 'no 
minee at all solution'), and were dismayed to find that this resulted in 
sternn disapproval from the entire community - clearly their 'right' 
answerr was the wrong answer for Grizzly. Then, as a consequence, 
theyy opted for the opposite solution (the 'pro-mining' option) appa-
rentlyy following the logic that if the first solution didn't succeed, 
itss opposite would. Once again they were faced with an unhappy 
92 2 

community.. As the original strategy ended the game if the audience was unwilling 
too explore alternatives, we thanked the classes for their participation and suggested 
theyy return to class. Unanimously (and perhaps not surprisingly) they asked - or 
moree correctly, they demanded - to be allowed to have another chance to explore 
thee possibilities. As a consequence of this test we revised the Hotseat! structure to 
alloww exploring new alternatives without ending the game entirely, and noted that 
thee audience would need to be better prepared to understand the nature of the ex-
periencee as a negotiation to reach consensus, not a win/lose game or right/wrong 
problem. . 
Onn the basis of these test cases, in May 1994, we finalised the script, and shot the 
filmm in July 1994. Once the final editing was completed in August 1994 we were in 
aa position to test the show with school classes once again in the Hotseat! theatre, in 
orderr to confirm our assumptions, and to ensure that the narrative fiction of the 
televisionn call-in show could be sustained. We tested the beginning of the show in 
thee half-built theatre with several audiences, including those who had assisted us in 
May.. We were happy to find that notwithstanding several more or less serious tech-
nicall setbacks (bad sound, difficult-to-read maps, intrusive mullions) the show 
appearedd to work well with school classes of advanced Grade 10 students, a finding 
confirmedd by written comments sent to us by the classes involved, which showed 
thatt Hotseat! worked as it was intended for this age group. As one student wrote 
'II think Hotseat! is a great idea because the topic is something you can relate to, I al-
soo like it because you can discuss the issue and people like to discuss a lot.' Clearly 
thee show had caused a great deal of discussion, and some responses showed that 
wee had touched deeply felt issues. One student, instead of discussing the Hotseat! 
experiencee itself, concerned herself with the fate of the grizzly bears in the valley 
threatenedd by the mine, and wrote 'I think that there should not be a mining com-
pany.. If there were to be a compromise that would be a step. I would like to see the 
grizzlyy bears alive and well, and to keep a nice clean environment...' The Grade 
10ss were prepared to engage in debate, and thought the Hotseat! was a good place 
forr everyone to do so. One student wrote that Hotseat! 'allows people to speak their 
thoughtss and for those who are shy, there is a vote to express their opinions.'* 
»» Thaw quote» transcribed from written evaluation! 
Wee were heartened by these comments, and planned to spend the weeks remaining 
solicitedd by the teachers involved in the test screenings 
untill the opening of the exhibition attending to technical details. 
However,, to our surprise and dismay, when we tested the same material with classes 
off Grade 8 and Grade 9 students, only one or two years younger, they had great 
difficultyy with the material, and appeared unable to engage in debate about the 
93 

rangee of options open to the community. They were either mute and uninterested 
inn the material, or they would make suggestions so far from those anticipated by the 
pre-filmedd responses that the host had little room to steer the discussion back to 
territoryy covered by the filmed events. With these younger students, the show was 
aa flop. 
Thiss finding caused the institution to question its original targeting, and to encou-
ragee us to find a way to make the Hotseat! experience exciting for a broader range 
off audiences than originally planned - younger school classes, and the general 
public,, which could be expected to include a wide variety of age and interest groups. 
Thiss new requirement forced us to rethink and rewrite the host's script substan-
tially,, using the same filmed sequences (which we could not alter by this point), 
butt structuring the show differently to make it more intelligible and accessible to 
youngerr audiences. The resulting show differed from the first version in several 
keyy respects. First, discussion was structured in a different way. The audience was 
noo longer asked to debate points in full, nor to explore several alternatives, but 
ratherr to direct the host in choosing among a limited number of possible options. 
Sequencess were thus used to illustrate the principles of negotiation, not as options 
inn themselves, and audience variety was constrained to the final episode, where they 
couldd apply the skills they had learned to help resolve the final conflict that stood in 
thee way of a successful compromise. In this way, the Hotseat! functioned as a group 
exhibitt teaching the three main rules for reaching a compromise - and a happy 
endingg was guaranteed every time. 
Thesee changes in approach can be seen in the following script segment. 
[same[same sequence/version 2 - 05/09/94] 
EVENTEVENT #8: THE IMPORTANCE OF COMPROMISE 
TerryTerry comes down the steps and turns to the AUDIENCE. 
TERRY:TERRY: Well! Chaos reigns! The people of Grizzly are deadlocked. This kind of imp
hashas happened before in British Columbia. Can anyone give me the names of some other 
areasareas of the province where these kinds of conflicts have taken place? 
(The(The audience may suggest Clayoquot Sound, Tatshenshini or the Cariboo.) 
Right!Right! And sometimes these issues break communities apart. 
944 
Turn neighbour against neighbour. 

AA lot of people who live outside the situation take hardline positions on an issue such 
asas this. For example, some people will say: "Heck, the people who work for NorthStar 
MiningMining are professionals. They've done their homework. This mine should go ahead." 
SomeSome of you in the studio audience may think that way. 
HowHow would the people of Grizzly respond to an argument like that? Karen, maybe the 
peoplepeople of Grizzly could tell us how they would react? 
Iff the audience accepts the mining company's proposal unquestioningly in the 
revisedd scenario, Terry responds to the angry reaction of the townspeople of Grizzly 
withh the following words: 
'Well,'Well, the community was certainly unhappy about that conclusion! And even though 
youyou have adopted the mining company's position, you can see that Bob is really 
nervousnervous about going ahead with a mine that the community does not support. So no 
oneone is happy.' 
Iff the audience chooses instead to send the mining company packing, in this 
scenarioo they are chided by Terry as follows: 
'Well.'Well. Bob has just called that position "unreasonable and fanatical". And the residents 
areare angry too. The problem here is that we often try to solve these issues by taking 
extremeextreme positions, resulting in no-one being satisfied. We've got to find some middle 
ground.ground. This requires compromise and new ideas, not hard line positions. Today we 
wantwant you to act as mediators to find a solution to the problems in Grizzly. 
ThereThere are two issues here: The first is the tailings pond on the east side of the river. 
RememberRemember we have Josie's Fort Hope in the North half and Gerry's elk herd in the south. 
We'reWe're going to work together to try to find a solution to these problems then I'm going 
toto turn things over to you to solve the problem on the west side of the river. If you've 
foundfound a successful compromise everyone will be happy, the townspeople and the 
miningmining company.' 
Thee difference between the two scripts is clear. In the first, the audience decides 
whenn it needs information, and how to get it. In the second, it is told that informa-
tionn is necessary, and given it. In the first script, debate and exploration are actively 
encouraged,, even at the risk of generating too much variety, variety that could 
exceedd the possibilities of the system to address it. In the second, variety is con-

strained,, and the show strictly structured to lead the audience through a learning 
process. . 
Whatt can we conclude from the foregoing experiment with creating a social forum? 
First,, we discovered that the Hotseat! was a very sensitive instrument for detecting 
thee development of social skills, and by means of the Hotseat! we identified a diffe-
rencee in developmental stage between two age groups that rarely comes to light in 
thee museum setting. Hotseat! made the willingness to debate and discuss social 
issuess a central concern, and allowed us to detect the threshold at which young 
peoplee begin to become concerned about broader social issues, and less about 
solelyy personal concerns. 
Inn a more general sense, this finding also underlined one of the central conclusions 
off this study - that labels that implement the user-languages of problems and 
games,, while conferring the desirable property of actorship, also require far greater 
attentionn to the process of 'addressing', that is to help users to engage with the 
label.. The greater the demands on the user, the more powerful the properties con-
ferredd by the label, the greater the effort required to accept the label. The primary 
meanss to overcome this resistance is to create labels in a context relevant to the user, 
noting,, as demonstrated in the example above, that relevance varies critically from 
groupp to group. 
Second,, it highlighted the fact that debate and discussion happen most readily in 
homogeneouss audiences, where the participants know each other and feel comfor-
tablee expressing themselves publicly. Hotseat! did not work best when the audien-
cee was markedly heterogeneous, as the variety of points of view and suggestions 
thatt can be generated by an audience that includes seven and seventy year-olds 
rapidlyy exceeds the capacity of even a hosted system to respond to them all - they 
aree just too diverse, and as a consequence, the common focus of the experience is 
difficultt to maintain. In order to allow diverse audiences to debate, it could be 
arguedd on the basis of Hotseat! that a neutral, anonymous, interface is belter than 
ann amphitheatre. A computer-based interface would allow participants greater 
discretionn to voice divergent opinions without fear of censure. On the other hand, 
iff one of the goals of the experience is to pass on the social skills of negotiation, it 
couldd be argued that the Hotseat! experience confronts and explores the difficulties 
off face-to-face negotiation, rather than avoiding them by the interposition of an 
966 
electronic mask. 

Third,, following from the above, Hotseat! highlighted the fact that 
informationn may be a necessary condition for debate, but it is not 
sufficientt - visitors need to learn negotiating skills. In this respect. 
MineMine Games in general left the visitor quite unprepared for the 
Hotseat!! experience, something noted by many of the students who 
participatedd in the tests. Often this lack of preparation was described 
ass a lack of information, as in the case of the following students com-
mentss 'Everything seemed kind of unclear. I needed more information and details 
aboutt what went on. I wanted to know more background information.' Another stu-
dentt blamed herself, not Hotseat! 'I didn't find that we were well prepared enough 
too make discisions [sic].' This opinion was seconded by a classmate who wrote 
Theree was not enough details [sic] about the whole presentation before everyone 
startedd to vote, which made the audience difficult to choose a decision.' Many 
studentss charitably looked to the exhibition to fill in the gaps, 'I'm sure that will be 
betterr when the games part of the program is complete.' 
Despitee the conviction that information was lacking, it was clear, particularly for 
youngerr audiences, that the exhibition had failed to provide any opportunities to 
learnn the skills of negotiation before entering the Hotseat!, thus putting the burden 
onn the Hotseat! to teach those skills prior to, or as part of, the overall experience. 
Thee fact that the older students resented the constraints to their activity points to the 
needd to include the communicating of social skills into the experience of negotia-
tingg solutions to social and technological problems. In other words, Mine Games 
wouldd have been a substantially better exhibition if it had clarified its already 
explicitt use of the user-language of games, and allowed Hotseat! to concentrate on 
providingg the greatest number of options for audiences eager to explore them. 
Commentss by Grade 10 students consistently emphasise their frustration with the 
limitedd field for discussion, and their desire to engage with a full range of options 
forr the future of the Grizzly Valley. This frustration finds voice in nearly every stu-
dent'ss comment. The show really had me thinking about a solution to the dilemma. 
However,, solutions that were not options ... were not quite useful. Maybe the 
programm should add more options to the decisions.'Another wrote'we do not have 
muchh options though, but voting for just yes or no.' Or another 'I thought the pre-
sentationn should have involved more complicated answers and votes, instead of 
justt voting yes and no.' One writer went on at length about the missed opportu-
nitiess The issue at hand is very emotional for most of the people involved. Every-
onee wants the things they value preserved. I think there weren't enough options and 
compromisess discussed. What to do about the old fort for instance. Also I think it 
97 

wouldd have been more interesting if Hotseat! invited all the people to be in the 
studioo "live". Then we could have discussed more possibilities and come up with a 
compromisee more tailored to the problem.' 
Finally,, even given its manifest failings, which are not trivial, Hotseat!, by exploiting 
thee user-language of games which addresses users to deal with the variety other 
playerss can contribute, allows us to argue that given a social context that is relevant, 
sufficientt information, and real opportunities opportunity to explore the skills of 
negotiation,, that visitors actively engage with and seek to sustain an experience in 
whichh their variety is recognised and encouraged. 
Fromm the examples described above in Mine Games, even given the complex nature 
off some of the exhibition experiences, we can see that labels that employ the user-
languagee of games actively confer complex and sophisticated forms of actorship 
onn the visitor, and by necessarily invoking other players, can actively support their 
willingnesss and ability to generate new solutions to complex problems involving 
otherr players. This would seem to provide grounds to believe that the label has an 
activee role in creating key desirable properties in the museum user. 
3.33 Using user-languages 
Severall general conclusions can be drawn from the exhibitions described above. 
First,, the user must accept the support in order to benefit from the properties it con-
fers.. Just as in the analogy of cited in section 2, the gun must be accepted before 
thee property of being dangerous is conferred to the person, and that of being fired, 
too the gun. The person could equally refuse the gun, and let it drop to the ground. 
Inn the examples above, it is important that the impediments to user acceptance 
bee as few as possible. Particularly in the user-languages of problems and games, 
wheree the user has the potential to become an actor, the label must correspondingly 
bee relevant to the potential user-she has to be willing to make the problem her pro-
blem,, to want to play the game according to the rules. Many factors can contribute 
too the label's acceptance - its content, its context, its style, its setting, its language -
butt most important, it has to matter to the user personally. For the user to accept the 
gun,, she has to have a clear interest in becoming dangerous, and it has to be seen 
byy the user to support that use. 
98 8 

Second,, once the user has accepted becoming a user, their behaviour can be 
observed,, and evaluated according to several criteria. 
Sincee the early 1980s, Drew Ann Wake and the author were among a group of 
scepticss who challenged the notion that hands-on interaction - in itself- provided a 
betterr learning experience. As described in the Introduction, in a study conducted 
att Canada's largest science centre in 1989, Drew Ann Wake and her colleagues 
recordedd the following startling findings: visitors tended to use hands-on exhibits 
forr an average of under two minutes, and rarely completed them - a behaviour 
alreadyy known in the field as the 'pinball effect'. Some researchers, such as Joel de 
Rosnayy of La Cité des Sciences et de I'lndustrie in Paris, had gone as far as to de-
claree this behaviour to be a constant feature of the science centre visitor. They 'scan 
withh their eyes and zap with their feet' he claimed. On the other hand, these same 
visitorss were often prepared to spend over ten times as long with simple wooden 
puzzles.. Moreover, while working on puzzles, visitors tended to talk with each other, 
sharee experiences and strategies, and use the opportunity for exchanging informa-
tion.. Unlike De Rosnay, we believed that this unfocused 'pinball' behaviour was a 
consequencee of our labels and our labelling strategies, and that the behaviour 
wouldd be seen to change if we could find a way to create more effective labels. 
Itt seemed to us that the most telling criticism of most science centre exhibits was 
justt that - the little time visitors engaged with them, the relatively low percentage 
off completion, and the low percentage of exhibits actually engaged with during a 
typicall visit. Clearly something wasn't working. Part of the solution seemed to lie in 
redefiningg what sort of activity should be happening in the first place. Thus instead 
off looking for'learning' in terms of observable cognitive gains-a series of facts lear-
nedd - we had to look for sustained engagement with the activity. Instead of looking 
att our job as creating 'exhibits' to show visitors scientific principles, we had to look 
att them as 'supports' that helped confer new properties on users. In short, we had 
too see our visitors as users, which is to say that our success could no longer be 
measuredd in terms of numbers of visits, but in terms of repeated, thus sustained, 
action. . 
Inn this we follow the work of the American psychologist of creativity, Mihalyi 
Csikszentmihalyi,, who described in 1990 what he called the 'flow* experience, which 
hee argued characterises most intrinsically rewarding human activities from sport, to 
music,, to art appreciation. In his first book, Beyond Boredom and Anxiety, he made e 
aa systematic study of people who engage in creative and intellectually challenging 
99 

activities.. In this work, Csikszentmihalyi dismantled the traditional distinction bet-
weenn work and play. He attacked the assumption that people engage in challenging 
activities,, 'work', only to solve basic requirements, such as income, for food and 
shelter. . 
Instead,, he focused on vocations and activities that involve a high level of challenge, 
butt are enjoyed for their own sake: chess, dance, music, art and sport. Csikszent-
mihalyi'ss theory was that'... people enjoy work, danger, and stress. The acts are 
"work"" in the sense that they require concentration and discipline, yet they give 
enjoymentt and meaning to life.' To test this hypothesis, Csikszentmihalyi inter-
viewedd a number of people who engaged in these challenging spare time activities. 
Hee discovered that these activities offered intrinsic rewards to the participant in the 
formm of 'self-confidence, contentment and a feeling of solidarity with others'. 
Hee also sought to find out if there were any factors which would erode this sense of 
welll being. The participants told him that when the activity was too difficult - beyond 
theirr abilities - they became anxious and unhappy. However, when the activity was 
tooo easy, participants became bored, and lost interest altogether. Here the chess ana-
logyy is useful. Playing chess against a stronger opponent produces anxiety, while 
playingg against a poorer opponent can be dull. This research led Csikszentmihalyi 
too conclude that between the states of anxiety and boredom is a state, which he 
calledd 'flow', where the level of challenge matches the abilities of the participant. 
Itt is this flow experience which draws people to an activity and maximises their 
enjoymentt of it. 
Activitiess that manifest 'flow' are self-initiated, self-sustaining, and often self-struc-
turing.. 'Flow' activities are free from ulterior motives, they are, in a fundamental way, 
enteredd into freely. Csikszentmihalyi defines flow as 'a subjective state that people 
reportt when they are completely involved in something to the point of losing track 
ofof time and of being unaware of fatigue and of everything else but the activity 
itself.'itself.' [italics in original] M The experience should ensure that the opportunities for
•** Taken from Talented Teens, pp.1* 
actionn are more or less matched by the visitor's ability to act at any given time. In 
Forr a complete description, see Csikszentmihalyi, M. 
orderr for this experience to be self-sustaining, it must also create the possibility for 
FlowFlow New York: Harpers; 1990 
increasingg complexity, to differentiate new challenges in the environment, to inte-
gratee new abilities into our repertoire of skills."7 In order to continue the 'flow' 
nn op.ciL pp.15 
experience,, the visitor should want to return, to try the exhibit again, to do it better 
aa second, third, or fourth time - in short, to 'accept' the label, and engage with it. 

Ass seen from the examples above, labels confer different properties on the user -
beingg knowledgeable, being an observer, agency, other players. These properties 
aree conferred in the way that 'being dangerous' was conferred by the gun. The last 
twoo properties described, which could called acceptance and engagement, are 
thosee properties which the user confers on the label, just as the person confers the 
propertyy of being able to be fired on the gun. 
Thiss demand for the recognition of and legitimation of the user's need to accept the 
labell - a 'bottom-up' strategy which would address the criticism that the agenda for 
informall science learning was set from above - can be seen clearly in the two 
initiativess taken in the late 80s and early 90s described above -the Science Alberta 
Foundationn and its exhibitions Beyond the Naked Eye and The Body in the Library, 
andd the exhibition Mine Games at Science World, in Vancouver, Canada, de-
scribedd in detail above. All three exhibitions looked at ways in which the exhibition 
visitorr can become an active participant in framing questions and finding answers, 
nott only to the de-contextualised scientific topics normally found in science centre 
exhibitions,, but to the deeply inter-related social, economic, and political issues that 
characterisee much of the debate about contemporary science and technology. Each 
off the exhibitions was deliberately experimental, and designed to test specific 
hypothesess about informal learning. In terms of user-languages, these exhibitions 
exploredd ways in which different labelling strategies could create the conditions 
forr self-generating, self-sustained, prolonged interaction with the exhibition's con-
tent,, in particular, ways in which the museum could take advantage of the user-
languagee of problems that characterises the library. As a consequence, these 
experimentall exhibitions encouraged the author in his conviction that the informal 
learningg environment could be improved by using particular user-languages in 
particularr ways. 
Finally,, from all the above examples, we can begin to identify the ways in which 
specificc user-languages can support specific properties in the user, as well as the 
reasonss for choosing to implement labels on the basis of one user-language or 
another.. Certain of the user-languages clearly seem to confer more desirable pro-
pertiess on the user than others, and the user-language of games, in particular, 
conferss the properties of actorship and of other players, more than other user-
languages.. Can these observations be tested? Could an entire institution be created 
basedd on employing the user-languages of problems and games? Would labels in 
suchh an institution consistently confer the properties desired? Would such an 
institutionn be a better museum? To answer these questions, it was necessary to 
101 

createe a new institution - a very unlikely possibility. However, luckily, in 1994, the 
*•• The rhetoric of different stages of science centres. 
authorr was given the opportunity to do just that. 
whilee used by authors such as Daniloff end Hudson, 
wass given a new life in the science centre debate 
Inn 1994, the author was invited to direct the design of Holland's national science 
byy the author in his 1989 paper (Bradburne, J. 
centre,, a project with a general vision, but without a specific exhibition strategy. 
Truth-tailingTruth-tailing and the Doing of Science, Amsterdam 
Thiss project provided the author with the opportunity to put into practice many of 
1993)) which subsequently became the subject of 
thee ideas that had been developed over the preceding eight years in a single, cohe-
widee use end even wider debate. The paper was the 
rent,, experiment. The challenge was to create a 'third generation' science centre n 
subjectt of a formal debate at the world's largest 
{orr even a 'fourth generation' science centre, as the institution's Director often 
meetingg of science centre professionals, the ASTC, 
proclaimed).. This experiment, newMetropolis, opened June 4,1997. From the out-
att its annual meeting held in Toronto in 1992. 
sett it was conceived explicitly as a prototype and tool for research, and provided the 
authorr with a means of testing the theories proposed in this study. 
newMetropoliss is an exceptional project in many respects: it is a national institu-
tion,, its development was guided by a clear, explicitly articulated vision, it had a 
clearr mandate from its backers in the federal government, the municipal govern-
ment,ment, and industry. Most importantly, the author was fully supported in his work by
thee Director Joost Douma, the Associate Director dr. Hein Willems, and by the entire 
stafff of the institution, in creating a new kind of informal learning environment. 
Becausee of these exceptional circumstances - and this exceptional opportunity - it 
iss important to describe the project in detail below as the experimental proving 
groundd of the theories developed in this study. It is important to note from the out-
sett that as in previous exhibitions, the notion of user-languages did not form part of 
thee explicit discourse within the design teams themselves. The creative staff was 
young,, inexperienced, and drawn from different backgrounds. None of them had 
beenn involved in exhibition design of this kind or at this scale before. Nevertheless, 
thee design process was unusual in several regards, particularly in the way in which 
itt was guided by explicit written documents, and shaped by intense and open inter-
nall discussion. It will be seen in the following section, that while it was not made 
explicit,, the theory developed in this study explicitly guided the development of alll 
newMetropolis'ss exhibitions - a project in which the author was the final authority 
onn every aspect of the design of the project and its exhibitions. 
Thee next chapter looks at the development of newMetropolis in Amsterdam, a 
sciencee centre opened in 1997 in which the author had the opportunity to put the 
theoryy developed in this study to the test - at the scale of an entire institution. 
102 2 

