POSTER PRESENTATION
Open Access
Characterizing brain states with Granger causality
Adam B Barrett1*, Lionel Barnett1, Paul Chorley1, Andrea Pigorini2, Lino Nobili3, Melanie Boly4, Marie-Aurelie Bruno4
, Quentin Noirhomme4, Steven Laureys4, Marcello Massimini2, Anil K Seth1
From Twenty Second Annual Computational Neuroscience Meeting: CNS*2013
Paris, France. 13-18 July 2013
A key step toward understanding how the brain works is
the reliable characterization of directed functional (i.e.,
causal) connectivity between brain regions, generally dur-
ing various states of wake and sleep, as well as during task
performance. Here we perform a critical analysis of the
potential of Granger causality (GC) [1] to confront this
challenge. We describe new methodology for rigorously
applying GC to steady-state data, validated against analyti-
cal calculations, and for the first time, simulated spiking
neuron local field potential data. We apply our methods to
scalp and intracranial electroencephalographic (EEG)
recordings.
The concept of GC is to quantify the extent to which the
past of one signal Y predicts the future of another signal
X. For ‘pairwise’ GC, one compares predictions based on
the past of just × and on the past of both × and Y. For
‘conditional’ GC, one quantifies the extent to which the
past of Y assists in predicting the future of × beyond the
extent to which the pasts of × and all other variables
excluding Y predict the future of X. These approaches
lead to distinct functional connectivity maps. The condi-
tional approach potentially describes better how each sys-
tem component processes and communicates distinct
information; however it is practically more awkward
because it requires estimating more parameters.
We review the elegant mathematical properties of the
linear autoregressive approach to GC that make it an
attractive connectivity measure, e.g. its links to informa-
tion theory and its insensitivity to amplification level [2,3].
We then discuss challenges in the application to electro-
physiology data, such as non-stationarity and statistical
bias. We present ways to overcome these challenges, invol-
ving data segmentation and permutation analysis [4], and
modifications to the basic linear autoregression model.
We validate our methods in two ways: first using simu-
lated data from models for which true GC values can be
analytically derived; second using simulated local field
potential data from a large-scale spiking neuron simulator.
The latter allows us to confirm, for the first time, that GC
analysis can indeed correctly reproduce the underlying
causal structure in realistic neural dynamics. We compare
and contrast the ability of pairwise and conditional GC
approaches to detect significant changes in functional con-
nectivity between wake, sleep and anaesthesia states across
recorded scalp and intracranial EEG variables. Analyses
are performed in both the time and frequency domains,
and we make use of the first ever code for computing con-
ditional GC in the frequency domain. As predicted, pair-
wise GC is more sensitive to changes in brain state than
full conditional GC; however conditional GC performed
on just a few simultaneous variables at once can also give
meaningful results.
In summary, we demonstrate rigorous methodology
and new code for GC analysis of steady-state data, and
illustrate the utility of GC in exposing the functional
neural interactions underlying different brain states.
Acknowledgements
Funding: EPSRC grant EP/G007543/1 and the Dr. Mortimer and Theresa
Sackler Foundation.
Author details
1Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science, Dept. of Informatics, University of
Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9QJ, UK. 2Dept. of Clinical Sciences, University of Milan,
Milan, 20157, Italy. 3Centre of Epilepsy Surgery “C. Munari”, Niguarda Hospital,
Milan, 20162, Italy. 4Cyclotron Research Centre, Dept. of Neurology,
University of Liege, Liege, B30-4031, Belgium.
Published: 8 July 2013
References
1.
Ding M, Chen Y, Bressler SL: Granger causality: Basic theory and
application to neuroscience. In Handbook of Time Series Analysis.
Wienheim: Wiley;Schelter S, Winterhalder N, Timmer J 2006:.
2.
Barnett L, Barrett AB, Seth AK: Granger causality and transfer entropy are
equivalent for Gaussian variables. Phys Rev Lett 2009, 103:238701.
* Correspondence: adam.barrett@sussex.ac.uk
1Sackler Centre for Consciousness Science, Dept. of Informatics, University of
Sussex, Brighton, BN1 9QJ, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Barrett et al. BMC Neuroscience 2013, 14(Suppl 1):P17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/14/S1/P17
© 2013 Barrett et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original work is properly cited.

3.
Barrett AB, Barnett L, Seth AK: Multivariate Granger causality and
generalized variance. Phys Rev E 2010, 81:041907.
4.
Barrett AB, Murphy M, Bruno MA, Noirhomme Q, Boly M, Laureys S,
Seth AK: Granger causality analysis of steady-state
electroencephalographic signals during propofol-induced anaesthesia.
PLoS ONE 2012, 7(1):e29072.
doi:10.1186/1471-2202-14-S1-P17
Cite this article as: Barrett et al.: Characterizing brain states with
Granger causality. BMC Neuroscience 2013 14(Suppl 1):P17.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
Barrett et al. BMC Neuroscience 2013, 14(Suppl 1):P17
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2202/14/S1/P17
Page 2 of 2

