Probabilistic Diffusion in Random Network Graphs 
 
Dr. Natarajan Meghanathan 
Professor of Computer Science 
Jackson State University, MS, USA 
E-mail: natarajan.meghanathan@jsums.edu 
 
Abstract 
 
In this paper, we consider a random network such that there could be a link between any two nodes in the 
network with a certain probability (plink). Diffusion is the phenomenon of spreading information 
throughout the network, starting from one or more initial set of nodes (called the early adopters). 
Information spreads along the links with a certain probability (pdiff). Diffusion happens in rounds with the 
first round involving the early adopters. The nodes that receive the information for the first time are said 
to be covered and become candidates for diffusion in the subsequent round. Diffusion continues until all 
the nodes in the network have received the information (successful diffusion) or there are no more 
candidate nodes to spread the information but one or more nodes are yet to receive the information 
(diffusion failure). On the basis of exhaustive simulations conducted in this paper, we observe that for a 
given plink and pdiff values, the fraction of successful diffusion attempts does not appreciably change with 
increase in the number of early adopters; whereas, the average number of rounds per successful diffusion 
attempt decreases with increase in the number of early adopters. The invariant nature of the fraction of 
successful diffusion attempts with increase in the number of early adopters for a random network (for 
fixed plink and pdiff values) is an interesting and noteworthy observation (for further research) and it has not 
been hitherto reported in the literature. 
 
Keywords: Probabilistic Diffusion, Random Network Graphs, Early Adopters, Simulations 
  
1   Introduction 
We envision a random network of nodes such that information could propagate along any link with a 
certain probability. We are interested in the problem of analyzing how fast information (for example, the 
availability of funds, need for help, etc) originating from one or more nodes (referred to as the early 
adopters) in the network can diffuse (spread) to the other nodes of the network. Note that diffusion may 
not happen across all the links because there is only a certain chance with which a node may share the 
information to its neighbor node. Though probabilistic diffusion has been widely studied in the area of 
complex network analysis, most of the studies (e.g., [3, 6, 8]) are restricted to real-world network models 
and not conducted on theoretical models such as those that correspond to the random networks. Our 
conjecture is that phenomenon observed in random network models could be construed as those that 
simply happen by chance (due to the degree distribution of the vertices and not due to the nodes 
involved). If a similar phenomenon is observed in a real-world network whose degree distribution is 
similar to that of a random network, then we could conclude that the phenomenon observed in the real-
world network also simply happens due to the distribution of the vertices and not due to the specific 
nature of the nodes involved. The above characteristic of random networks forms the motivation for our 
research in this paper. We are interested in analyzing the impact of increase in the number of early 
adopters on the success of diffusion in a random network (i.e., whether all the nodes in the network 
receive the information) and the delay associated with a successful diffusion attempt. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the system model and explains the 
diffusion phenomenon in random network graphs with an example. Section 3 presents the algorithm to 
construct random networks and presents the results of the simulation analyzing the impact of the number 
of early adopters on diffusion in a random network. Section 4 discusses related work. Section 5 draws 

conclusions. Throughout the paper, we use the terms ‘node’ and ‘vertex’ as well as ‘link’ and ‘edge’ 
interchangeably. They mean the same. 
 
2 Diffusion 
We assume a network graph G = (V, E) where V is the set of vertices and E is the set of edges. Let plink 
represent the probability of link between any two vertices u and v (suits the random graph model, for 
more details, see Section 3). The edges are undirected. The degree of a vertex is the number of vertices 
adjacent to the vertex in the graph. For random graphs, the degrees of the vertices are comparable to each 
other (see Figure 2). The graph is considered to be connected if we can reach from any vertex to any other 
vertex through one or more hops. We test for connectivity of a graph using the well-known Breadth First 
Search algorithm [5]. We consider only connected graphs for diffusion.  
Diffusion is the process of spread of information originating from one or more vertices (called the early 
adopters) to the rest of the vertices in the graph [11]. Each vertex attempts to spread the information 
received from one of its adjacent vertices to the other adjacent vertices. Let pdiff be the probability for a 
vertex u to disseminate the information to spread to its neighbor vertex v, and is the same for every edge. 
A vertex attempts to spread the information only when it receives the information for the first time (to 
avoid looping of the information). When a vertex u attempts to spread the information to a vertex v, we 
generate a random number ru->v in the range [0…1] and if ru->v ≤ pdiff, then the information is passed on 
from u to v, otherwise not. We maintain a set of nodes called the covered nodes that have received the 
information from at least one of their neighbors across the rounds of the diffusion process. We also 
maintain a candidate set of nodes, updated with every round of diffusion (more details below).  
To start with, the set of early adopters are assumed to be the set of covered nodes as well as the set of 
candidate nodes. Diffusion proceeds in rounds. In each round, each vertex in the candidate set of nodes 
attempt to spread the information they have received (in the previous round or the initialization stage, in 
the case of the early adopters) to each of their neighbors. The neighbor nodes that receive the information 
for the first time are added to the set of covered nodes and are also added to the set of candidate nodes for 
diffusion in the subsequent round. The set of candidate nodes is refreshed during each round. A node 
could get into the candidate set of nodes for diffusion in the next round only if the node has been covered 
for the first time and has not attempted to spread the information until then. We consider the diffusion 
process to be successful for the entire network if the candidate set of nodes for the next round of diffusion 
becomes empty and all the nodes in the network are covered by then (i.e., all the nodes have received the 
information at least once). A diffusion process is considered to be unsuccessful if one or more nodes in 
the network are yet to receive the information and the set of candidate nodes for the next round of 
diffusion gets empty. 
We now explain the diffusion process using an example shown in Figures 1 and 2. The input graph 
used in both the figures is the same: the number inside the circle is the node ID; though the input graph is 
an undirected graph of edges – we generate two different random numbers for each edge, one for each 
direction. The probability for diffusion (pdiff) along any edge is assumed to be 0.50. There could be 
diffusion from node u to node v only if the random number assigned for the edge (u, v) in the direction   
u->v is less than or equal to pdiff. Accordingly, we generate an initial graph for the input graph as shown in 
Figures 1 and 2. The two figures differ in the choice of the early adopter node used to initiate diffusion 
and the resulting sequence of rounds. Diffusion proceeds in rounds – for each round, the candidate set of 
nodes are colored in blue and the nodes covered across all the rounds are colored in yellow. Figure 1 
illustrates a successful diffusion starting from node 0 (the early adopter node) and it takes a total of 4 
rounds for diffusion to successfully complete, with the following nodes forming the candidate set for each 
round: round 1 (node 0), round 2 (nodes 1 and 3), round 3 (node 4) and round 4 (node 5). Figure 2 
illustrates an unsuccessful diffusion starting from node 4 (the early adopter node) and proceeding up to 3 
rounds (the candidate set of nodes are - round 1: node 4; round 2: node 1 and node 5; round 3: node 2) 
after which there is no scope for further diffusion (as the candidate set of nodes for round 4 is empty), but 
nodes 0 and 3 are yet to be covered.  
 

      
       
 
                      Input Graph                             Initial Graph                                  Round 1 
  
      
       
 
                        Round 2                                      Round 3                       Round 4 (all nodes covered) 
Figure 1: Example for a Successful Diffusion (Probability of Diffusion on an Edge, pdiff = 0.50) 
 
      
       
 
                      Input Graph                             Initial Graph                                  Round 1 
  
      
       
 
                        Round 2                                      Round 3                      Nodes 0 and 3 are uncovered 
Figure 2: Example for an Unsuccessful Diffusion (Probability of Diffusion on an Edge, pdiff = 0.50) 
 
3 Random Graphs and Simulations 
We use the well-known Erdos-Renyi model [2] to generate the random graphs for the simulations. The 
model takes as inputs - the number of nodes (N) in the network and the probability of a link (plink) 
between any two nodes in the network. For any two pair of nodes u and v (where u < v), we generate a 
random number ru-v and if ru-v ≤ plink, we set up an undirected link between u and v in the network. The 
larger the value of plink and/or the larger the total number of nodes in the network, the more dense is the 
network as well as the more closer are the degrees of the vertices to the average node degree (observed 
based on the reduction in the standard deviation of the node degrees with increase in the plink values 
and/or with increase in the total number of nodes; see Figure 3). We conduct simulations with 100 nodes 
and 200 nodes; the plink values used are 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20 and 0.30; the pdiff values used are 0.05 to 1.0, 
in increments of 0.05; the values for the number of early adopters are 1, 10 and 20. We run 200 instants of 
the simulations for each combination of values for the above parameters (total # nodes, plink, pdiff and # 
early adopters) and average the results to measure the following two metrics (95% confidence interval): 
(i) Probability of successful diffusion and (ii) Average number of rounds per successful diffusion attempt. 
For each combination of values for the above parameters, the probability of successful diffusion is the 

number of simulation runs leading to a successful diffusion divided by the total number of simulation 
runs (which is 200 runs); for each such successful diffusion attempt, we count the number of rounds it 
takes for the information originating from one or more early adopters to reach all the nodes in the network 
and average the values for the number of rounds across all the successful diffusion attempts.  
 
  
  
  
  
 
            plink = 0.05                         plink = 0.10                        plink = 0.15                         plink = 0.20                        plink = 0.30 
Number of Nodes in the Network: 100 
 
  
  
  
  
 
            plink = 0.05                         plink = 0.10                        plink = 0.15                         plink = 0.20                        plink = 0.30 
Number of Nodes in the Network: 200 
Figure 3: Degree Distribution for a Random Network Graph and the Variation in Node Degrees 
 
  
  
  
                  # early adopters: 1                                       # early adopters: 10                                      # early adopters: 20 
Number of Nodes in the Network: 100 
 
  
  
  
                  # early adopters: 1                                       # early adopters: 10                                      # early adopters: 20 
Number of Nodes in the Network: 200 
Figure 4: Probability of Successful Diffusion for a Random Network Graph vs. # Early Adopters 
 
The most interesting and significant observation from the simulation results is with regards to the 
probability of successful diffusion for the three different values for the number of early adopters for a 
given number of nodes in the random network graph. Though for a given plink value and number of nodes, 
the probability of successful diffusion increases with increase in the pdiff value, the nature of increase 
remains the same, irrespective of the values for the number of early adopters. For a given plink, pdiff and 
number of early adopters, we observe the probability for a successful diffusion to increase with increase 
in the total number of nodes in the network. Except for the plink value of 0.05 for 100 nodes random 
network, the nature of increase in the probability of successful diffusion for a given plink and number of 
nodes in the random network increases in a “concave down increasing pattern” with increase in the pdiff 
value. For a given pdiff, we also observe the probability of successful diffusion to significantly increase 
(more than an exponential increase) as we increase the plink values in increments of 0.05, especially for 
plink values of 0.15 and above. After a while (plink values of 0.30 or above), we observe the increase in the 
probability for successful diffusion to saturate and hence we do not present the simulation results for plink 
values above 0.30.  
 

  
  
  
                  # early adopters: 1                                       # early adopters: 10                                      # early adopters: 20 
Number of Nodes in the Network: 100 
 
  
  
  
                  # early adopters: 1                                       # early adopters: 10                                      # early adopters: 20 
Number of Nodes in the Network: 200 
Figure 5: # Successful Rounds per Diffusion for a Random Network Graph vs. # Early Adopters 
 
With regards to the average number of rounds per successful diffusion attempt, for a given number of 
nodes in the random network, # of early adopters and plink value, we observe the metric to exhibit a 
“concave up, decreasing” pattern of decrease with increase in the pdiff values. Though as expected, for a 
given pdiff, plink and the total number of nodes in the network, the average number of rounds per successful 
diffusion attempt decreases with increase in the number of early adopters, the nature and magnitude of 
decrease is not as high as the decrease with increase in pdiff (for a given plink, initial # responders and the 
total number of nodes). Even for a lower number of early adopters, we observe the average number of 
rounds per successful diffusion to saturate (to the lowest value incurred for a particular value for the total 
number of nodes) for pdiff values around 0.30, indicating that it may not be necessary to operate with a 
significantly larger number of early adopters to decrease the average number of rounds per diffusion in a 
random network. We do not report the average number of successful rounds per diffusion for plink and pdiff 
values that do not incur any successful diffusion in the simulation runs. 
 
4 
Related Work 
The contagion model [9] has been the most commonly used model for diffusion in complex networks. 
According to this model, given two choices of behaviors (say A or B), the early adopters are considered to 
choose one of the two behaviors (say A), while the rest of the nodes choose the other behavior (say B). 
Diffusion spreads in rounds, wherein each round, a node decides to change its behavior if a majority of its 
neighbors (a typical value for the degree-based diffusion threshold) have a behavior different from itself. 
The contagion model is more relevant for networks with scale-free form of degree distribution and the 
early adopters are typically nodes with larger degree [10]. The diffusion model considered in this paper is 
different from the contagion model and is more applicable for networks in which the degree distribution is 
normal (see Figure 3). We consider diffusion to happen with a certain probability on any link; this way, 
nodes that are not well-known to each other may still have some form of association between them and be 
willing to spread the information with a certain probability. While the contagion model required the initial 
responders to be a non-negligible fraction of the total number of nodes in the network for a successful 
network-wide diffusion, we observe the probabilistic diffusion model for random networks to be 
independent of the number of initial responders for successful diffusion.  
The probabilistic diffusion model considered in this paper is also different from that of the SIS 
(susceptible-infected-susceptible) and SIR (susceptible-infected-removed) models for diffusion. Even 
though both the SIS and SIR models [1] are probabilistic models for diffusion, the infected nodes could 
again change their state (to either susceptible, as in the SIS model or removed, as in the SIR model); our 
probabilistic model of diffusion uses the infected nodes to become the candidate nodes for diffusion in the 
subsequent round and these nodes continue to stay infected throughout the network lifetime. The SIS and 

SIR models have been also observed to be dependent on the number of early adopters on the network they 
are applied on [4].  
In [6], the authors propose a probabilistic approach of social influence diffusion model with incentives 
(as uniform diffusion has been observed to be no longer valid in social networks and high degree nodes 
need not be the most influential in all contexts [12]); the authors propose an influence diffusion 
probability for each node, instead of uniform probability, and categorize nodes into two classes: active 
and inactive; the active nodes have chances of influencing the inactive nodes, but not vice-versa; diffusion 
still happens based on a system-wide threshold. Our probabilistic diffusion model is link-based (could be 
even run with different diffusion probability for each link) and does not use any node-based system-wide 
threshold to regulate the diffusion.  
To the best of our knowledge, ours is the first such probabilistic model of diffusion proposed for 
random networks for which there exists a link between any two nodes with a certain probability; diffusion 
happens across each link with a certain probability and without the use of a diffusion threshold (that 
depends directly or indirectly on the degree of the nodes, as in most of the previous works). The 
observation that under the above probabilistic diffusion model, “the probability for a successful diffusion 
in a random network does not depend on the number of initial responders,” has been hitherto not reported 
in the literature. 
 
5 
Conclusions 
The high-level contribution of this paper is the application of probabilistic diffusion on random network 
graphs and the observation from the simulation results that for a given random network and probability of 
diffusion on a link, the probability for successful diffusion does not depend on the number of early 
adopters. We also observe that for moderate-larger values of probability of diffusion on a link in a random 
network, it may not be necessary to operate with a larger number of early adopters to decrease the average 
number of successful rounds per diffusion attempt. The results observed in this paper are different from 
the results observed for the contagion as well as the SIS and SIR diffusion models – all of which report 
that there exists a threshold number of early adopters needed for a successful diffusion for complex 
networks. The results presented in this paper indicate that at least for random networks, a probabilistic 
diffusion model – like the one described in this paper – could lead to successful diffusion that is 
independent of the number of early adopters. We opine that the research presented through this paper 
could pave way for further studies on probabilistic diffusion in random network graphs and other forms of 
complex network graphs as well as for real-world network graphs. 
 
References 
 
[1] L. J. S. Allen and A. M. Burgin, “Comparison of Deterministic and Stochastic SIS and SIR Models in 
Discrete Time,” Mathematical Biosciences, vol. 163, no. 1, pp. 1-33, January 2000. 
[2] B. Bollobas, Random Graphs, Cambridge University Press, 2nd Edition, October 2001. 
[3] Q. Cao, N. Shu, L. An, P. Wang, L. Sun, M.-R. Xia, J.-H. Wang, G.-L. Gong, Y.-F. Zang, Y.-F. Wang 
and Y. He, “Probabilistic Diffusion Tractography and Graph Theory Analysis Reveal Abnormal White 
Matter Structural Connectivity Networks in Drug-Naive Boys with Attention Deficit/Hyperactivity 
Disorder,” The Journal of Neuroscience, vol. 33, no. 26, pp. 10676-10687, June 2013. 
[4] W. Chen, L. V. S. Lakshmanan and C. Castillo, Information and Influence Propagation in Social 
Networks, 1st Edition, Morgan & Claypool Publishers, November 2013. 
[5] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest and C. Stein, Introduction to Algorithms, 3rd Edition, MIT 
Press, July 2009. 
[6] M. Doo and L. Liu, “Probabilistic Diffusion of Social Influence with Incentives,” IEEE Transactions 
on Services Computing, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 387-400, March 2014. 
[7] D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg and E. Tardos, “Maximizing the Spread of Influence through a Social 
Networks,” Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and 
Data Mining, pp. 137-146, Washington, D. C., August 24-27, 2003. 

[8] J. Li, C. Luo, Y. Peng, Q. Xie, J. Gong, L. Dong, Y. Lai, H. Li and D. Yao, “Probabilistic Diffusion 
Tractography Reveals Improvement of Structural Network in Musicians,” PLoS One, vol. 9, no. 8, 
e105508, August 2014. 
[9] Morris, S., “Contagion,” Review of Economic Studies, vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 57-78, 2000. 
[10] S. A. Myers, C. Zhu and J. Leskovec, “Information Diffusion and External Influence in Networks,” 
Proceedings of the 18th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining, pp. 33-41, Beijing, China, August 12-16, 2012. 
[11] M. E. J. Newman, Networks: An Introduction, 1st Edition, Oxford University, Press, May 2010. 
[12] J. Ok, Y. Jin, J. Shin and Y. Yi, “On Maximizing Diffusion Speed in Social Networks: Impact of 
Random Seeding and Clustering,” Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Measurement 
and Modeling of Computer Systems, pp. 301-313, Austin, TX, June 16-20, 2014. 
 
 

