Affective, Behavioral, and Cognitive Aspects of Teen 
Perspectives on Personal Data in Social Media: A Model 
of Youth Data Literacy    
Yu Chi1, Wei Jeng2, Amelia Acker3, Leanne Bowler1 
1 University of Pittsburgh, 135 N. Bellefield Ave, Pittsburgh, PA, USA 
yuc73@pitt.edu; lbowler@sis.pitt.edu 
2 National Taiwan University, 1 Roosevelt Rd, Taipei, Taiwan 
wjeng@ntu.edu.tw 
3 University of Texas at Austin, 1616 Guadalupe St, Austin, TX, USA 
aacker@ischool.utexas.edu 
Abstract. In this study, we explored the interplay between teens’ Affective 
states (A), Behavioral states (B), and Cognitive states (C) in relation to the per-
sonal data they generate in social media, applying the “ABC model” from the 
social psychology domain. The data was collected from semi-structured inter-
views with 22 US teens in three library branches of the Carnegie Library of 
Pittsburgh, USA. Results from content analysis suggest that: 1) Young people 
are positive about their data skills, while feeling negative or insecure about data 
privacy issues; 2) young people with negative affective states related to data 
privacy are more likely to make an effort to secure their social media accounts 
and profiles. Given the results, we suggest librarians, educators and software 
developers apply a range of strategies in reaction to teens’ different ABC states 
to the design of data literacy programs, services, and software applications. 
Keywords: Data literacy, affect, behavior, cognition, teens. 
1 
Introduction 
Today’s young people have grown up in a world of digital technology, including both 
software (e.g., social networking and video games) and hardware (e.g., smartphones 
and wearable devices), coupled with an increase in the generation of personal data 
about users. These so-called “digital natives”, however, are not natural born experts in 
navigating the digital world, as some assume. In Plowman & McPake (2013)’s obser-
vation, children need guided interactions from parents and educators before they are 
fully competent users. Related work also shows that teens are unaware of the privacy 
and security issues around personal data (Madden et al., 2013).  
To help with this situation, we need knowledge about how teens think, feel, and 
behave around data. What is their attitude towards data and the associated issues, such 
as data privacy, data rights, data subjectivity, etc.? The answer to these questions 
might help predict and explain teens’ behavior vis à vis technology.  
brought to you by 
CORE
View metadata, citation and similar papers at core.ac.uk
provided by D-Scholarship@Pitt

2 
This study adopts Ostrom’s ABC model (1969) of attitudes from the domain of so-
cial psychology, which defines the three components of attitudes as: A (affect), B 
(behavior), and C (cognition). We employ the ABC model because it serves as a theo-
retical perspective that help explain the relationship between teens and their personal 
data, meanwhile allowing an exploration of possible interplay between affect, cogni-
tion, and behavior. Specifically, the research questions are the following: 
RQ1: What are teens’ “ABC” – their affective (how they feel), behavioral (how 
they act or react), and cognitive (how they think) states about digital data in their 
daily lives? 
RQ2: How are teens’ affective and cognitive states associated with their behaviors 
toward data? 
Having presented young people’s attitudes towards data, this study discusses the 
ABC model with regard to youth data literacy services in public libraries, i.e., the role 
that libraries can be expected to play in supporting young people in the digital age. 
To answer the questions above, we use qualitative data from semi-structured inter-
views with 22 teens. This study is part of the research project Exploring Data Worlds 
at the Public Library, whose broader goal is to examine young people’s data aware-
ness, knowledge, and practices in order to propose ways that the public library can 
support the development of youth data literacy. In earlier work, the project focused on 
young people’s data awareness (Bowler et al., 2017), e.g., their understandings about 
the rhetoric of data, and their basic knowledge of data flows and infrastructures. As a 
contrast, this study focuses on teens’ affective, behavioral, and cognitive states. 
2 
Related Work 
2.1 
Young People and Their Data Worlds  
Growing up in the networked digital world, young people today are more than passive 
users; they are also active creators, adding content to the growing collections of data 
that are aggregated through digital platforms, services, and applications. Teens’ data 
footprints are unobtrusively tracked and added to their “digital dossier” (Montgomery, 
2015) that could be used to track, profile, and shape young people throughout their 
lives. Young people, however, are generally unaware of the data they generate and 
how the ubiquitous collection of data collection takes place (Deahl, 2014), thus mak-
ing them particularly vulnerable to the potential risks. According to the Pew Research 
(Madden et al., 2013), young people are sharing more personal data than before: 92% 
of teen social media users post their real names and 91% post a photo of themselves. 
The personal data they share also includes real address, birthdate, etc. 
Though there exists a wide body of research on information literacy, research that 
has helped libraries design services to better support information interaction, there is 
as yet, little research in the emerging field of data literacy, especially research related 
to teens. Deahl (2014) proposed the definition of “data literacy” and also established 
design principles that would guide the data literacy initiatives. In this paper, we argue 
that it is critical to know how the teens themselves talk and think about data and how 
it associates with their behavior. Knowing the answers might help researchers, educa-
tors and practitioners understand how best to serve teens in our data driven world. 

3 
2.2 
Affect, Behavior and Cognition studies in LIS 
As a central topic in the domain of social psychology, the concept of “attitude” is seen 
as a result of the interaction between three components: affect, behavior, and cogni-
tion (hereafter referred to as ABC, a concept based on the work of Ostrom, 1969). 
The adoption of the ABC model of attitude allows researchers to investigate how 
people feel, think and interact with the attitude object, which in this case is digital 
data (Mizokawa & Hansen-Krening, 2000). 
In the Library and Information Science domain (LIS), scholars consider affect and 
cognition as important factors in the study of human information behavior (Kuhlthau, 
1991, Julien et al, 2005, Nahl & Bilal, 2007). For example, Martzoukou (2005) cri-
tiqued the literature on web information seeking research arguing that this body of 
work should be more holistic, concentrating on not just on behaviors, but also the 
interplay of behavior with cognition and affect. We suggest that our understanding of 
teens and their interactions with data needs to be built upon a similar holistic view, 
rather than being confined to one dimension of the human experience. 
3 
Methodology 
3.1 
Data Collection 
This study uses a dataset collected in the project of “Exploring Data Worlds at the 
Public Library,” in which we interview 22 young people (age range 11-18) in three 
urban library branches in Pittsburgh Area, USA. The interviews were conducted in 
“The Labs,” a technology-enhanced teen space in a public library where teens have 
access to advanced hardware and software (e.g., 3D printers and music composition 
toolkits). Teens can also hang out together to work on projects, homework, or just 
play games and socialize while they are at The Labs. The space is facilitated by li-
brary staff trained in the technologies available.  
A semi-structured protocol was used to guide the interview process. The partici-
pants were allowed to be interviewed individually or in groups. As a result, we con-
ducted 5 individual interviews, 7 groups of two interviews and 1 group of three. In 
total, we conducted 13 interviews with 22 participants. After the interviews were 
transcribed, twelve base codes are eventually developed to identify the essential 
themes or components in interview data. Each code can be link back to quotes from 
actual conversations. The full coding scheme is reported in (Bowler et al., 2017). 
3.2 
Data Analysis-Coding Process 
Codes identified as Affective-Feelings 
In a second level analysis, the four researchers built out the Affect theme, two re-
searchers assigned a qualifier to the data coded for Affect, capturing the nature of 
affect, e.g., surprised or scared.  As well, the “affect” data was coded in terms of posi-
tive attitude, negative attitude, or neutral. The extended coding structure for affect 
was then reviewed and discussed by all authors in multiple meetings.   
Codes identified as Behavioral and Cognitive 
We added two new base codes into the pre-existing coding framework: cognitive 
states and behavioral states. Cognitive states capture teens’ thoughts and beliefs as 

4 
they relate to digital data. Behavior states refers to actions or decisions to act. We 
thoroughly checked the documents tagged by “affective characteristics,” and then we 
re-examined the transcripts again to tag the incidents that suggest “cognitive states”. 
In total, 53 quotes were yielded with an affective state, a cognitive state, or both. For 
these 53 quotes, we went through adjacent quotes to find out if the respondent also 
mentioned how they behave or they decide to behave in the future. Table 1 provides 
the definitions of the ABC codes and the definition. 
Table 1. Base codes and the definition 
Base Codes 
Definitions 
Affective States 
Respondents’ feelings and emotions about data. 
Cognitive States 
Respondents’ thoughts and beliefs about data. 
Behavioral States 
Respondents’ practices or decisions associated with 
their affects or cognitions. 
4 
Results 
4.1 
Teen’s affective states about data in their daily life 
After extracting all the affective quotes and assigning qualifiers, the data was grouped 
into the following categories: 1) positive affect, 2) negative affect, and, 3) affect that 
appeared to be neither positive nor negative.  Among the 42 quotes suggesting the 
interviewees’ affective states, we found that nearly half of them are positive (N=20). 
The second popular states are negative (N=12). Besides, there is a fair amount of 
affective states suggesting neither positive nor negative feelings (N=10). 
A-1. Positive affective states 
Confidence is one frequently found positive affective state in the interview. There 
were two contexts where the teens would express their confidence about the data and 
technology. Firstly, when talking about who controls their data, T3 (age: 15), T5 (age: 
14) and T9 (age: 14) all reported that they were sure that the data they created were 
definitely controlled by themselves, demonstrating a positive sense of agency. As said 
by T9, “Mine [data] says nice things” and “seems pretty controlled at the moment”. 
Secondly, we found that teens are confident about their skills and aptitudes relate to 
data (Note, however, that this paper does not assess their actual skill level). Confi-
dence is associated with a general feeling of liking: 
“I like it, but I like technology and stuff. It comes, all the software stuff, especially, 
comes really easily to me… when I’m doing stuff on the computer, it’s really fun. I 
like coding. Coding is fun, because I get to make the computer do stuff, which is cool.” 
(T19, age: 14) 
Interest and curiosity were commonly expressed as positive affects, and they are 
also considered as positive cognitions: 
“this [the interview] is making me want to go in deeper into learning more about 
different types of data.” (T17, age: 17) 
This might because, at that moment, after talking about so many issues regarding 
their digital data, teens got the feeling that data is interesting and they were eager to 
know more. Other positive affective states include pride, relief and ease. 
A-2. Negative affective states 

5 
Young people in the interviews showed strong negative feelings related to the fact 
that their data is being tracked and recorded. If data they created or the data about 
them was published online, they couldn’t control who would get access to it and how 
long this data would exist. Teens expressed a sense of a loss of empowerment and this 
made them feel angry, sad, and scared. T11 (age: 17) shared a real experience to us: 
T11: If you Google “[school name],” this horrible picture of me comes up…And 
so that picture comes up because it was on my profile on the [website name]. And it’s 
such a bad picture. 
Interviewer: And it follows you? 
T11: Every time… We had to do a [school name] iMovie so people looked up 
[school name] to find pictures, and people would come up to me in the hallway and 
be like, “I saw a picture of you on Google!” Oh, it’s so bad. 
T11 is not the only teen in this study who was bothered by the digital identity pro-
jected through data. The situation seemed worse when teens were feeling confusion 
and uncertainty at the same time: They are not sure exactly how the data they post 
online will affect them in the future.  
T22 (age: 14): "I think it starts a lot of drama sometimes, or it starts a lot of rumor 
in a lot of ways, just because of too much that you put out there. Teens, if they try to 
avoid it, or if they just wish that it wasn’t there, you can’t do anything about it. " 
A-3. Neither positive nor negative affective states 
While we identified both positive and negative affect, representing both the pleasant 
and the negative aspects of teens’ feelings, we also found that, along the spectrum of 
feelings, some of the participants reported neither positive nor negative feelings (i.e. 
seemingly neutral) – a paradox that we feel should be further explored because there 
could be many reasons behind this observation. 
Though many teens strongly conveyed negative feelings about the notion of being 
tracked, T13 (age: 13) held an indifferent and unmindful attitude, and replied: “I just 
don’t feel like it’s such a big deal if privacy’s being invaded.” And T13 further ex-
plained: “As long as they don’t take any severe action towards me, who cares what 
they see? That’s how I feel.” 
When being asked about their feelings about data, T4 (age:15) was neutral: “I 
don’t know, it’s kind of both. Positive and negative.” T6 (age:15) and T9 (age:14) 
simply answered that they didn’t know, which might have implied evasive, indifferent, 
or just unaware attitude. 
 
4.2 
Teen’s cognitive states about data in their daily life 
Teens’ cognitive states were discovered in the interview transcripts, with at least 19 
quotes from the transcripts speaking to the teens’ knowledge, beliefs, and thought 
processes with regard to data. As with the analysis of affective states, cognitive states 
were grouped into three categories: 1) self-awareness of data and its consequences 
(related to metacognitive states), 2) belief that there is no absolute right or wrong and 
3) belief that there are no consequences with regard to the use of their data by others 
(the latter two categories related to moral judgement and decision making).  
C-1. Self-awareness of data and its consequences 

6 
Half of the cognitive states suggest that teens believe they are aware of what happens 
with their data (Note that we did not assess the validity of this belief in this paper). 
Some of these quotes also contain positive feelings of confidence.   
“Aware. It makes me feel aware of what’s going on and how it affects our society 
in different ways.” (T20, age: 16) 
Some teens expressed an awareness that their digital data traces were being 
watched and associated that knowledge with feelings of constraint and suspicion. For 
example, T2 (age: 14) believed that “Somebody keeps a record of everything that you 
do and…Feels like you’re tied down to something.” Similarly, T19 (age: 14) said 
“just makes me feel like I’m always being watched.” 
C-2. Sophisticated but complicated: no absolute right or wrong about data 
Online data such as one’s social media profile promotes communication between 
teens and their social world. People, including teens, can easily reach friends and 
family through the data world. Even strangers can easily connect through online iden-
tities. Despite the benefits of data, there are disadvantages, according to some teens in 
this study. In the interview, we found that some teens had an ambiguous notion of 
right or wrong in terms of their own data, seeming to believe that there is no absolute-
ly right or wrong regarding data creation, gathering, and use.  
T15 (age: 18) and T14 (age: 16) admitted the advantages of data but were con-
scious about the bad sequences at the same time. 
T15: “I see all the good it does, but I also just see how I think it… I think it kind of 
makes us less human in a way. It’s weird to say, but it’s how I feel about it.” 
T14: “When someone goes to a concert and they’d rather take a Snapchat about 
the stuff instead of enjoying the moment.” 
T15: “…You lose the awareness that you have with the things that are actually go-
ing on around you. And that really affects you as a human.” 
C-3. Belief that there are no consequences 
For some teens in this study, awareness of “being tracked” or “being watched” was 
not accompanied by any concern or worry. Although some teens might believe their 
data doesn’t belong to them (or, that others have access to it), they also view this as 
inconsequential: Nothing severe will happen and it’s simply not worth their concern. 
As replied by T11 (age: 17): “I mean, honestly, nothing’s going to happen to me. 
It’s not like the government is going to smash into my house...” 
T12 (age: 16): “Personally, I feel like if they’re trying to collect all this data for 
safety purposes, as long as you’re not doing anything wrong online, I don’t see any-
thing wrong with having it.” 
T13 (age: 13) thought that data rights are not important and “People who cry about 
it are stupid.” 
 
4.3 
Behaviors Corresponding to Affective and Cognitive States 
Table 3 summarizes the young people’s behaviors and their corresponding affect and 
cognition. As shown in the first column, there are five major types of behaviors re-
ferred to. The five types of behaviors are divided into active behavior and passive 
behavior according to the required effort of the subject. Therefore, B-1 and B-2 are 
active behaviors as the subjects are actively updating their settings or adopting tools, 
while B-3 to B-5 are passive because no extra effort is put in. An example quote of 

7 
each type of behaviors is displayed in the second column. We also report the number 
of incidents discovered with certain affective states or cognitive states. When the 
teens talked about how they feel or how they think, they did not necessarily mention 
how they behaved or how they would behave in the future. But whenever they ex-
pressed an action after they answered the question about affective states and cognitive 
states, the incident is counted as a behavior corresponding to that affective state.  
Table 2. Behaviors Corresponding to Affective and Cognitive States and the Number of Re-
ported Incidents (N.B., darker color indicates more incidents) 
Behaviors 
Example Behavior 
Quotes (ID, Age) 
Corresponding 
Affects and No. of 
reported incidents 
Corresponding 
Cognitions and 
No. of reported 
incidents 
A-1 
A-2 
A-3 
C-1 
C-2 
C-3 
B-1. Active — 
Hide personal in-
formation,  
e.g., use fake 
names; hide ad-
dress, birthday, etc. 
“…Don’t use your full 
name. And you don’t 
give it to strangers.”  
(T9, 14) 
3 
3 
2 
4 
0 
1 
B-2. Active — 
Increase security 
settings, 
e.g., use incognito 
mode, etc. 
"...you can add a 
password or a finger-
print...I change it 
[password] once a 
month" (T4, 15) 
0 
4 
2 
1 
1 
0 
B-3. Passive — 
Anticipate for 
more knowledge or 
training,  
e.g., expect for 
awareness training, 
skill training, etc. 
" since we’re young, 
we don’t have all that 
information, all that 
knowledge about data 
in particular, and so 
we don’t have the right 
knowledge to really 
understand…" (T17, 
17) 
7 
0 
1 
2 
0 
0 
B-4. Passive — 
Reduce Usage, 
e.g., abandon ac-
counts; post less, 
etc. 
"Maybe when I was 
young and I just post-
ed little… You know, 
stupid pictures or 
stupid posts. I’ll just 
leave the account, 
don’t use it anymore. " 
(T22, 14) 
0 
4 
2 
1 
1 
0 
B-5. Passive — 
Maintain current 
settings,  
e.g., don’t use any 
tricks to protect da-
ta; don’t anony-
mize anything, etc. 
“…I’ve never actually 
worried about having 
my data be private, 
like, ever. So no, not 
specifically. No 
tricks.” (T1, 11)  
3 
0 
1 
1 
0 
4 

8 
 
B-1. Hide personal information 
Hiding personal information is a popular behavior adopted by some teens who con-
sciously protect their data. It includes use fake information such as fake name, address, 
birthday on their profiles, and clear personal traces online.   
T8 replied that a digital ID is different from the real person. Though believing that 
there is no need to worry too much about it, T8 still preferred to partially hide the 
personal information online. T18 believed that if avoiding putting middle initials on 
the Internet, others would not be able to locate him. 
Teens who are self-aware of data and its consequences (C-1) are more likely to 
hide personal information comparing to other cognitive states. 
B-2. Increasing security settings 
Some teens have more skills and knowledge on how to increase the security of their 
accounts and devices. T6 changed password once a month. T15 used Duck Duck Go 
instead of Google as the former one claimed to track no user data. T20 was cautious 
when using public devices: “But outside of home-wise, I just make sure I log out.” 
We were surprised to find that teens who hold negative feelings about data tend to 
consciously increase security settings. This might because with the negative feeling, 
these teens are doubtful about the data security and thus are willing to actively im-
prove the security level of their online accounts and profiles. 
B-3. Anticipating more knowledge or training 
Young people’s expectation for more knowledge or training on data, or, the behavior 
they anticipate - is associated with positive feelings. In other words, some teens re-
ported that they wanted to learn more about data in the future. This might be due to 
one of the commonly found positive feelings of curiosity. Curiosity drives T17 to 
expect to “go in deeper into learning more about different types of data.” 
We also found that some teens have ideas about what kind of training or data-
related knowledge should be delivered to them. For example, T19 is very interested 
and confident in coding and technology, thus expected training in coding. 
Talking about who should offer the training, T5 believed that a conversation led by 
the libraries could be helpful: “They [libraries] could possibly do a meeting or have 
something that… Young adults or younger kids know what it is and how they could 
and should use it, and what an impact it has on everybody, each individual’s life.” 
While, T16 thought it should be parent’s responsibility to teach their children about 
the necessary information for using the technologies. 
B-4. Reducing Usage 
When teens have extreme negative feelings about digital data about themselves, they 
reduce their usage of some online services or even abandon some accounts. 
T11, whose picture was captured by Google search results, reported: “I used to use 
Instagram and Twitter and stuff. I don’t really use those anymore...I just didn’t want 
to anymore. They’re just a distraction and I wanted to focus on other things.” Simi-
larly, T22 also said “I’ll just leave the account, don’t use it anymore.” 
B-5. Maintaining current privacy settings 
Some participants reported that they prefer to take no actions and they believe there is 
no need to make data private.   
For example, T12 had a positive feeling, believing that nothing dangerous will 
happen to his data and it should not be individual’s responsibility to protect personal 

9 
data: “I feel like if they’re trying to collect all this data for safety purposes, as long as 
you’re not doing anything wrong online, I don’t see anything wrong with having it. 
But if you’re doing something wrong, then I feel like it’s the government’s responsi-
bility to be able to…” T13 has a very similar opinion: “If it’s necessary for people to 
view what I’m doing, I don’t have to hide much.” 
5 
Discussion and Conclusion 
Young people are positive about their data skills while negative about their data 
privacy. 
In our analysis of teens’ affective states associated with their data in their daily life, it 
is not surprising to find that young people appear to be very confident about their data 
related skills, such as coding. On the other hand, though several teens believed that 
they had control over the data they created, most teens expressed negative feelings 
when the conversation was about data privacy issues. What made the feeling worse 
was their lack of knowledge about what data was released to other entities or to the 
Web and how exactly how that data might affect them.  
 
Teens with negative affective states are more likely to adopt effortful behaviors 
to protect the data privacy. 
By analyzing the relationships between teens’ behavior and their associated affects, 
we found that affective states may influence the teens’ behavioral strategies. To be 
specific, teens with negative affects tend to adopt active behaviors to deal with the 
potential problematic situations, such as B-1 hiding personal information and B-2 
increasing security settings. On the contrary, the teens who perceive current situation 
as a positive environment are more like to passively rely on the existing routines and 
adopt no actions to protect themselves (B-5 remaining current settings). 
This finding aligns with Schwarz (2000)’s argument that negative affective states 
foster the use of “effortful, detail-oriented, analytical processing strategies.” It implies 
that educators should try their best to evaluate teens’ data confidence, because over-
confidence may negatively influence the teens’ behaviors regarding data security. 
 
Librarians, educators and software developers can apply different strategies in 
reaction to different ABC states. 
We suggest librarians, educators and software developers incorporate implications 
from this study about ABC states of teens with regard to data into the design of data 
literacy programs, services, and software applications. For example, as implied by the 
interplay between A-1. positive affective states and B-3. expect for more knowledge or 
training, if librarians observe the teens showing increasing interests about the data, it 
may be a good time to push more knowledge and technical skills. Likewise, for the 
teens who are not aware of the consequence of data privacy C-3, there is a high 
chance that they adopt no actions to protect their data. In this case, it is recommended 
that librarians show the teens the potential risk of, for instance, personal data leaks or 
a compromised password, perhaps through the use of videos or news clips. Libraries 
can also encourage teens to share their own experiences in peer-to-peer teaching. 

10 
6 
Future Work 
While the interview sample size in this study aligns with general practices in qualita-
tive research, the number of incidences regarding teens’ ABC states is relatively small, 
making it difficult to draw wide generalizations across the population of all teens. A 
core contribution of this work is the development of a new analysis framework for 
investigating how young people interact with digital data in their daily lives. Our 
analysis focused on three aspects: (A) affect, (B) behavior, and (C) cognitive states. 
Almost a quarter of teens in this study expressed indifferent opinions with regard to 
data, a finding worth further investigation. It is difficult to know why, based on the 
data we had available. Is it because the teens didn’t want to expose their feelings to 
the researchers or, that they simply felt nothing about data? Future research is needed 
to fill in this gap. 
References 
1. Bowler, L., Acker, A., Jeng, W., & Chi, Y. (2017). “It lives all around us”: Aspects of data 
literacy in teen's lives. Proceedings of the Association for Information Science and Tech-
nology, 54(1), 27-35. 
2. Deahl, E. S. (2014). Better the data you know: Developing youth data literacy in schools 
and informal learning environments. Unpublished master's thesis, Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology. 
3. Julien, H., McKechnie, L. E., & Hart, S. (2005). Affective issues in library and infor-
mation science systems work: A content analysis. Library & Information Science Re-
search, 27(4), 453-466. 
4. Kuhlthau CC (1991) Inside the search process: information seeking from the user’s per-
spective. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology 42: 
361–371 
5. Madden, M., Lenhart, A., Cortesi, S., Gasser, U., Duggan, M., Smith, A., & Beaton, M. 
(2013). Teens, social media, and privacy. Pew Research Center, 21, 2-86. 
6. Martzoukou, K. (2005). A review of Web information seeking research: considerations of 
method and foci of interest. Information Research, Volume 10 Number 2. 
7. Mizokawa, D. T., & Hansen-Krening, N. (2000). The ABCs of attitudes toward reading: 
Inquiring about the reader's response. Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 44(1), 72-
79. 
8. Montgomery, K. (2015). Children's Media Culture in a Big Data World. Journal of Chil-
dren and Media, 9(2), 266-271. 
9. Nahl, D., & Bilal, D. (Eds.). (2007). Information and emotion: The emergent affective par-
adigm in information behavior research and theory. Information Today, Inc. 
10. Ostrom, T. M. (1969). The relationship between the affective, behavioral, and cognitive 
components of attitude. Journal of experimental social psychology, 5(1), 12-30. 
11. Plowman, L., & McPake, J. (2013). Seven myths about young children and technology. 
Childhood Education, 89(1), 27-33. 
12. Schwarz, N. (2000). Emotion, cognition, and decision making. Cognition & Emotion, 
14(4), 433-440. 

