©1949 Nature Publishing Group
No. 4178 November 26, 1949 
NATURE 
925 
Thermal Expansion of Ionospheric Layer and 
Temporary Morning Disappearance 
of Radio Signals 
IT is usually assumed that under normal conditions 
of the ionosphere, if a radio signal is received after 
ground sunrise, it is likely to maintain its strength 
until absorption in the ionospheric region becomes 
pronounced during the day. It has often been found, 
however, during our observations of fading, that the 
reception of signals on shorter wave-bands com-
pletely ceaEtes for about an hour or more after ground 
sunrise. The present communication is to show that 
thermal expansion of the F 2-region may be sufficient 
to overcome the enhancement of ionization caused bv 
increase in solar altitude with advance of the day. 
To quote a few typical examples out of many 
occasions, the signals transmitted from All India 
Radio, Delhi, on December 28, 1946, on 19-m. band 
were received in Benares (678 km.) until 0711 hr. 
I.S.T., when they disappeared for about an hour. 
A similar disappearance of signal on the same wave-
band was observed on April 11, 1947, at 0750 hr. 
I.S.T., lasting for about two hours. 
The temporary disappearance of the signal in the 
morning hours may be attributed to thermal ex-
pansion of the F 2-region1• 2, as shown in Tables I and 
2 below. 
Table 1. December 28, 1946; 19-m. band, Delhi 
Required 
Observed 
electronic 
electronic 
Time (I.S.T.) 
Layer condition 
density 
(elec./c.c.) 
density 
(elec.fc.c.) 
0700 hr. 
Before 
Thin 
1·41 X 10' 
1·60 X 101 
disappearance 
0711 hr. 
Thick 
1•93 X 101 
1·63 X 10' 
Disappearance 
0830 hr. 
(thermal expansion) 
Reappeatance 
" 
1·91 X 106 
1·92 X 10' 
Table 2. Aprilll, 1947; 19-m. band, Delhi 
I 
Required 
Observed 
electronic 
electronic 
Time (I.S.T.) 
Layer condition 
density 
density 
(elec./c.c.) 
(elec./c.c.) 
0720 hr. 
Before 
Thin 
1·23 X 10° 
1•34 X 10' 
0 50 hr. 
Thick 
1·76 X 10° 
1·36 x 10• 
Disappearance 
(thermal expansion) 
I 
1000 hr. 
I 
Reappearance 
1 
" 
1•70 X 101 
1·71 X 10° 
The observed electronic densities shown in the last 
column of the tables indicate continuous increase of 
ionization as the day advances. Col. 3 of the above 
tables, however, shows the calculated electronic 
densities required for reception of signal, taking into 
consideration the normal expansion of thickness of 
the layer3•4• Comparison of the values of electronic 
densities which are given in columns 3 and 
-4o 
indicates the inadequacy of electrons in the 
spheric region during the periods of cessation of 
signals. The slight decrease in the value of required 
electronic density at the time of reappearance is due 
to alteration in the height of the layer. It may be 
mentioned that all such cases of disappearance of 
signals were preceded by periodic patterns of fading, 
as expected by Appleton and Beynon6 , and as such 
they were not due to scattered signals which are 
likely to be received within the skip distance 8 • 7• 
The calculations for Tables 1 and 2 have been made 
with the help of ionospheric data and charts supplied 
to us by the research staff of All India Radio, Delhi, 
and the National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, 
to whom our thanks are due. 
s. s. BANERJEE 
Slough, England. 
R.N. SINGH 
Section of Communication Engineering 
and Applied Physics, 
Engineering College, 
Benares Hindu University, 
Benares. June 30. 
1 Liang, P. H., Nature, 180, 642 (1947). 
2 Banerjee, S. S., and Singh, R.N., Science and CuUure, 13, 295 (1948). 
'George, E. F., Proc. Inst. Rad. Eng., 35, 249 (1947). 
'Martyn, D. F., and Pulley, 0. 0., Proc. Roy. Soc., A, 154, 476 (1936). 
'Appleton, E. V., and Beynon, W. J. G., Proc. Phys. Soc., 69, 58 
(1947). 
• Eckersley, T. L., Nature, 140, 846 (1937); Proc. Wireless Sect. Ins!. 
Elec. Eng., 15, 74 (1940). 
7 Edwards, C. F., and .Jansky, K. G., Proc. Ins!. Rad. Eng., 29, 322 
(1941). 
Simplified Calculation, suitable for Routine 
Use, of a Linear Regression 
THERE are many experimental procedures which 
involve the simultaneous observation of two variables, 
one of which is dependent upon the other. If the 
relationship between these variables is linear, then 
it is possible, by spacing the intervals equally with 
reference to the independent variable, to calculate 
the slope of the line, using the method of least squares, 
with the minimum of arithmetical computation. 
A typical procedure of this kind is the estimation of 
the enzyme cholinesterase, employing the Warburg 
technique. . The method is applicable only if the 
rate of production of carbon dioxide is linear, and 
the raw data should be inspected to ensure that the 
condition of linearity is sensibly satisfied. The slope 
of the straight line which best fits the data can be 
determined with the greatest ease if manometer 
readings are taken at foUL' equally spaced intervals, 
for example, 15, 30, 45 and 60 min. after tipping. 
The slope of the line of best fit is given generally by 
1: ( Llt Llm) 
2.; ( Llt2) 
' 
where Llt is deviation of each time observation from 
the mean and Llm is deviation of each manometer 
reading from the mean. 
Taking the values above, the mean time is 
37·5 min. and the deviations are -22·5, -7·6, 
+7·5 and +22·5 min. respectively. 
To facilitate 
calculation, the unit of time in this series may be 
chosen as 7·5 min., in which case the deviations are 
-3, -1, +I and +3. 
Let A 16, A 30, A 45 and Aso be the manometer 
readings at the times indicated, and let A be the 
mean. 
l:(Llt.Llm) = -3(A 15-A} -
(A 3o-A) + 
(A 4,-A) + 3(A,0-A) 
= 3(Aeo-Al5) + (A«a-Aso)· 
On this scale l:( Llt2), too, lends itself to simplifying 
the calculation, for (-3)1 + (-1) 2 + (+I)• +(+3) 0 
= 20. 
Hence the slope required is, quite simply, 
1 {3 X extreme range of} 
{intermediate range of} 
20 manometer readings ± manometer readings · 
In order to calculate cholinesterase activity as 
volume of carbon dioxide per N minutes, all that is 

©1949 Nature Publishing Group
926 
NATURE 
November 26, 1949 
Vol. 164 
required is to multiply this slope by N expressed in 
the special time-scale adopted (for example, 30 min. 
is, in this instance, 4 units), and the usual manometer 
constant. 
This method of calculation is, of course, applicable 
with appropriate modifications to any process in 
which the intervals of the independent variable can 
be equally spaced. 
A point of interest emerging from the above is 
that whereas it is considered that four points are a 
minimum for determining the slope of the line, the 
number of observations should always be even. By 
using an odd number, the mean and median are the 
same, llt of the median reading is zero, and conse-
quently the reading is unnecessary, as it does not 
enter into the calculation. 
Many statistical procedures are so cumbersome in 
practice that their routine use becomes too time-
consuming, despite their undoubted value. Therefore 
any simplification in computation such as is presented 
here reduces the application of these methods to a 
process which can be very easily applied to routine 
work, with a consequent marked increase in precision. 
N. ALDRIDGE 
Toxicology Research Unit, 
Medical Research Council. 
w. K. BERRY 
D. R. DAVIES 
Chemical Defence Experimental Establishment, 
Porton, Wilts. June 24. 
Some Characteristics of the White Nile 
and Sobat Flood Plains 
THE recent Egyptian proposals for the control of 
the Nile1 have led me to make a detailed study of 
certain features of the 
Nile and River Sobat. 
I have shown• that on the White Nile the total width 
of the water surface varies approximately as the 
square of its height above the 
low 
the way along the river ; and that this relatiOnship 
is on the average fairly constant for long stretches, 
in spite of large local variations. Thus for some pur-
poses the river bed, with its complicated and varying 
channels, may be 'idealized' into a simple and 
symmetrical trough with banks whi?h are 
imately parabolic in profile (see diagram). 
This 
'idealized trough' makes it comparatively simple to 
estimate the surface area and also (by integration) 
the contained volume at any stage of the flood for 
any length of the river, by using a mean of com-
paratively few cross-Rections. 
In this way detailed analyses have been made of six-
teen floods on the White Nile between Malakal and 
Renk, at which point discharges have been measured 
regularly. 
It was possible from 
to 
obtain a figure for average evaporatiOn depth m the 
dry season which agreed well with values assumed pre-
viously (average of Piche tube readings at Malakal 
and Renk over several years multiplied by 0·5); to 
estimate the mean depth of water absorbed by the 
flood plain during the rising stage ; and by comparing 
the observed and computed discharge differences at 
the two points to make for each flood an estimate of 
the amount of water which had flowed into the river 
from tributaries entering between them. 
This last 
item was confirmed in years when it was exceptional 
by qualitative records of their 
. 
. 
The River Sobat enters the White Nile JUSt above 
Malakal and is mainly responsible for its fluctuations. 
Actual and idealized cross-sections of the White Nile Valley. 
The vertical scale is exaggerated about 200 times. (zz' = aa' + 
bb' + cc' + dd' for all values of h) 
Unfortunately, almost no cross-sections of the Sobat 
valley have been measured; but an estimate of its 
average cross-section between the discharge sites at 
Sobat Head and Hillet Doleib was made by reversing 
the form of analysis described above, alfd applying 
it to the rising stage of the Sobat flood. 
It was 
assumed, as was found on the White Nile, that rain-
fall and evaporation virtually cancelled out ; that 
the mean absorption depth was the same ; and 
that the profile of the banks of the idealized trough 
was also approximately parabolic. The constant of 
this parabola could then be obtained in terms of the 
measured discharges at the ends of the trough and 
of the average maximum rise all the way along it, 
which was obtained from gauge readings. 
Values 
of the constant derived in this way from five separate 
floods had a mean value of 28 ·5, with a range of 6·2 
and a probable error of the mean of just less than 
unity, or about 3 per cent. 
The 1929 air survey of these rivers (which contains 
no contours) shows on both a feature marked as 
"permanent marsh", and on the 
Nile this was 
found to correspond closely to the maximum area 
inundated by a flood of average height. Using the 
parabolic constant already obtained, I therefore com-
puted the area flooded by an average rise of the 
Sobat (the mean of thirty years) and found that it 
agreed within 15 per cent with the area of the corre-
sponding feature as scaled off the air survey maps. 
There seem, therefore, to be grounds for supposing 
that on the Sobat the bed formation is similar to 
that shown on the 
Nile by the measured cross-
sections. Moreover, this method of 'idealization', and 
the analysis based on it, may be applicable to similar 
rivers elsewhere in the world. If so, it would seem to 
be possible either to 
their floods in 
detail even if comparatively few cross-sectiOns of their 
valleys exist ; or to obtain an idea of the average 
cross-section of a reach by consideration of the gauge 
readings along it and of the discharges measured at 
its ends. 
J. W. WRIGHT 
Survey Department, Khartoum. 
' Hurst, Black and Simalka, "The Nile Basin", vol. 7. 
• Wright, J. W., Geograph. J. (in the press). 
Oxidation of the Coagulation Factors 
THE results of our previous work point to the fact 
that oxidation hinders the clotting of blood, whereas 
reduction accelerates itt. It could be inferred from 
other experiments that respiration, by means of its 
regulation of oxygen tension, has an important effect 
on the coagulability of the circulating blood2• 
In the present work we investigated the effet;t 
of oxidation of certain coagulation factors on therr 
coagulant efficiency. Experiments were carried out 
in which separated clotting components and whole 
plasma were exposed to the action 
molecu_Iar 
oxygen, which was passed through them m a flotatiOn 
vessel. 
During these experiments, samples were 

