arXiv:1707.02965v1  [hep-th]  10 Jul 2017
Prepared for submission to JHEP
UUITP-21/17
NORDITA-2017-060
Conformal Gravity from Gauge Theory
Henrik Johansson,a,b,c Josh Nohleb
aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 516, SE-75120 Uppsala, Sweden
bNordita, KTH Royal Institute of Technology and Stockholm University, Roslagstullsbacken 23,
SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden
cKavli Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, USA
E-mail: henrik.johansson@physics.uu.se, josh.nohle@gmail.com
Abstract: We use the duality between color and kinematics to obtain scattering ampli-
tudes in non-minimal conformal N = 0, 1, 2, 4 (super)gravity theories. Generic tree ampli-
tudes can be constructed from a double copy between (super-)Yang-Mills theory and a new
gauge theory built entirely out of dimension-six operators. The latter theory is marginal
in six dimensions and contains modes with a wrong-sign propagator, echoing the behavior
of conformal gravity. The dimension-six Lagrangian is uniquely determined by demand-
ing that its scattering amplitudes obey the color-kinematics duality. The conformal gravity
amplitudes obtained from the double copy are compared with the Berkovits-Witten twistor
string and shown to agree up to at least eight points in the MHV sector. Our construction
can be generalized in a number of ways. Adding scalars to the dimension-six theory gives
Maxwell-Weyl gravity, and further adding φ3 self-interactions among these scalars gives
Yang-Mills-Weyl gravity. The latter is identiﬁed with Witten’s twistor string for maximal
N = 4 supersymmetry. Deforming the dimension-six theory by adding a Yang-Mills term,
m2F 2, gives a gauge theory that interpolates between marginal D = 6 and D = 4 theo-
ries. The corresponding double copy gives an interpolation between conformal gravity and
Einstein gravity.

Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Color-Kinematics Duality and Tree Amplitudes
3
3
Conformal Gravity
7
3.1
Pure (Weyl)2 Conformal Gravity
7
3.2
Matter-Coupled, Non-Minimal Conformal Gravities and D > 4 Dimensions
9
3.3
Dimensional Analysis of Double Copy
11
4
The Dimension-Six Gauge Theory
13
4.1
The Dimension-Six Lagrangian
19
4.2
Double Copy for Conformal Weyl Gravity
20
4.3
Double Copy for N = 1, 2, 4 Conformal Supergravities
21
4.4
Explicit Amplitudes for (DF)2 and CG
22
5
Deformations and Extensions
25
5.1
Deforming with Mass Term: (DF)2 + YM Gauge Theory
25
5.2
Double Copy for Weyl-Einstein Gravity
26
5.3
Adding Scalars to (DF)2: Maxwell-Weyl Gravity
26
5.4
Adding φ3 Interactions to (DF)2: Yang-Mills-Weyl Gravity
27
5.5
Combining Deformations: Yang-Mills-Weyl-Einstein Gravity
28
6
Conclusions
28
A Feynman Rules
31
B Pictorial Lie Algebra Relations
34
– 1 –

1
Introduction
Recent decades have taught us that gauge and gravity theories are intimately connected
at a detailed theoretical level. A prime example of this is the double copy relation between
gravity and gauge-theory scattering amplitudes. The double copy can be understood as
originating from a duality between color and kinematics [1, 2] present in a variety of diﬀerent
gauge theories [1–5].
In gauge theories, such as (super-)Yang-Mills theory or (super-)QCD, color-kinematics
duality imposes constraints the detailed form of the amplitudes. At tree level, color-ordered
n-point gluon amplitudes satisfy so-called BCJ relations [1] that can be used to eliminate
all but (n −3)! independent partial amplitudes [6, 7]. Similar identities have been worked
out [4] and proven [8] for QCD with massive quarks. At loop level, the duality interlocks the
kinematic numerators of the individual diagrams entering the amplitude making it possible
to determine a majority of the contributions from a small set of master diagrams [2–4, 9–19].
In gravity theories, such as Einstein (super-)gravities [2, 10, 20, 21], with or without
additional matter [3, 11, 15, 19, 22], the duality gives a precise prescription for obtaining
tree and loop amplitudes by the double copy: replacing the color structure of one gauge
theory with the kinematical structure of a second gauge theory [1, 2]. At a technical level,
this implies that gravity theories can be identiﬁed by pairs of gauge theories.
Color-kinematics duality has provided a wealth of insight into the computation of
tree- [1, 4–8, 22–35] and loop-level [2, 3, 9–21, 36–43] scattering amplitudes, as well as
the ultraviolet behavior [10, 44–47], of these theories. It is beginning to have a non-trivial
impact on the formulation of oﬀ-shell structures of the theories, guiding the construction of
quantities such as form factors [48–51], classical solutions [52–62], symmetries [34, 63–69]
and actions [70–72].
Color-kinematics duality also features prominently in string-theory scattering ampli-
tudes [6, 7], and in amplitudes of eﬀective ﬁeld theories such as the non-linear-sigma model
(NLSM), (Dirac-)Born-Infeld, Volkov-Akulov and special galileon theory [72–77]. It is well
known that string theory provides a geometric (worldsheet) picture of open–closed string
relations [78] and monodromy relations [6, 7, 79, 80]. More recently a plethora of new
surprising relations connecting string-, ﬁeld- and eﬀective-theory amplitudes has been dis-
covered. The new string constructions [77, 81–85] exhibit structures that are more akin
to ﬁeld-theory amplitudes and relations, suggesting a close connection to the Lie-algebra
picture [71, 72] of the kinematic numerators of gauge theories. Conversely, ﬁeld-theory am-
plitudes has been reformulated in geometric terms as objects living on worldsheets through
the CHY formalism and the (ambi-)twistor string theory.
The N = 4 twistor string theory goes back to the celebrated 2003 work of Witten [86].
The single-trace sector of the twistor string reproduces the four dimensional amplitudes of
N = 4 super-Yang-Mills theory [86, 87]. However, in the multi-trace sector, or at loop level
the gauge theory is well-known to be “contaminated” by N = 4 conformal supergravity.
This particular non-mininal form of conformal supergravity theory is expected to exhibit
some interesting features, such as electromagnetic duality [88], and potentially it is free of
conformal anomalies [88, 89]. In the work of Berkovits and Witten [88], the conformal su-
– 2 –

pergravity sector was isolated and tree-level amplitudes were computed to any multiplicity
in the MHV sector.
In the current work we will obtain the amplitudes of the Berkovits-Witten conformal
gravity through a double copy formulation, involving a new dimension-six gauge theory (in
D = 6 counting). The gauge theory is uniquely pinned down using the duality between
color and kinematics. The double-copy construction will generalize to higher-dimensional
theories as well as lower-supersymmetric conformal gravities. Furthermore, the construc-
tion suggest a number of deformations that can be done on the dimension-six gauge the-
ory, some that goes beyond the context of conformal supergravities, giving interpolations
between Einstein gravity and conformal gravity through the double copy. We will also
introduce a Yang-Mills sector in the conformal gravity theory; thus the double copy will be
able to reproduce the original twistor-string theory of Witten, where N = 4 super-Yang-
Mills is coupled to N = 4 conformal supergravity. The ease of the constructions suggest
that loop-level generalizations should be possible, but this topic is beyond the scope of the
current paper.
This paper is organized as follows: in section 2, we review color-kinematics duality and
the double copy in a generalized setting that accommodates higher-derivative gauge theories
and conformal gravity. In section 3, we introduce the pure conformal Weyl gravity, and
we then discuss generic details of matter-coupled, supersymmetric and higher-dimensional
conformal gravities. In section 4, we ﬁnd the new dimension-six gauge theory through an
ansatz procedure. In section 5, we consider deformations of the dimension-six gauge theory,
and, similarly, deformations of conformal gravity. Conclusions are presented in section 6
and explicit Feynman rules for the dimension-six gauge theory is presented in appendix A.
In appendix B, useful Lie-algebra relations are given pictorially.
2
Color-Kinematics Duality and Tree Amplitudes
In this section we give a brief review of color-kinematics duality and the double copy
construction. We focus on tree-level amplitudes for external adjoint particles in generic
gauge theories (not necessarily Yang-Mills gauge theories), and tree amplitudes in gravities
(not necessarily Einstein gravity), which is relevant to the current work.
A gauge-theory tree-level m-point scattering amplitude can generically be written on
the form
Am = gm−2 X
i∈cubic
nici
Di
,
(2.1)
where the sum runs over all cubic tree graphs, of which there are exactly (2m −5)!!. The
denominators Di = Q p2
j are products of the squared momenta of each internal line of the
graph, ci are the group-theory color-factor for each graph, and ni are kinematic numerators
that are functions of the kinematic data (momenta, polarizations, etc.). Contact interac-
tions, which are normally thought of as higher-valency graphs, are here absorbed into the
numerators of the cubic graphs.
Generically the color factors depend on the details of the group-theory representations
and the corresponding Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcients; however, for the purpose of this paper
– 3 –

we assume that they are expressible in terms of f abc structure constants, whose adjoint
indices contracted following the connectivity of the cubic graphs. The ci then obey identi-
ties between triplets of graphs (i, j, k), corresponding to Jacobi identities of the structure
constants,
ci + cj + ck = 0 .
(2.2)
The kinematic numerators ni, which are gauge-dependent objects, are typically com-
plicated functions of the kinematic data of the gauge theory making them diﬃcult to write
down explicitly. Even if not necessary, in a Yang-Mills theory it is often convenient assume
that they are local (polynomial) functions; however, for the higher-derivative gauge theories
that we consider in the following sections it is unavoidable that the ni will have additional
poles beyond those manifestly exhibited in the denominator Di of eq. (2.1). Indeed, if the
kinetic term in the Lagrangian of the gauge theory has more than two derivatives, then
these poles cannot be eliminated by a gauge choice as they correspond to states that are
present in the theory.
Even if non-local, in many gauge theories it is possible to ﬁnd numerators ni that obey
similar identities as the ci between triplets of graphs (i, j, k)
ni + nj + nk = 0
⇔
ci + cj + ck = 0 .
(2.3)
Once these kinematic identities are in a one-to-one correspondence with the color identities
(2.2), we say that the amplitude exhibits color-kinematics duality. If all amplitudes in a
theory can be brought to this form we say that that the theory obeys color-kinematics dual-
ity. In practice, this statement is often diﬃcult to prove, in particular for loop amplitudes.
For pure (super-)Yang-Mills gauge theories color-kinematics duality has been proven to
hold (at least) at tree level.
Stating color-kinematics duality in terms of the numerator identity (2.3) is very general,
it can be applied to tree and loop amplitudes alike, or even to oﬀ-shell correlation functions
and Lagrangian interaction terms; however, is not a gauge invariant statement since the
numerators of individual diagrams in a gauge theory are not gauge invariant. Fortunately,
at tree level, color-kinematics duality can be phrased in terms of gauge invariant relations
between diﬀerent partial tree amplitudes.
We use the trace-basis decomposition of a gauge-theory tree amplitude with external
adjoint particles (in say SU(Nc))
Am = gm−2
X
σ∈Sm−1
Tr(T a1T aσ(2) · · · T aσ(m)) A(1, σ(2), . . . , σ(m))
(2.4)
where the sum runs over (m −1)! permutations and A(1, σ(2), . . . , σ(m)) are the gauge-
invariant color-ordered partial amplitudes. For many familiar gauge theories it is obvious
from the Lagrangian that the tree amplitude can be entirely expressed in terms of con-
tracted strings of f abc, in which case, through successive use of Jacobi identities, it can be
brought to the Del Duca-Dixon-Maltoni (DDM) [90] form
Am = gm−2
X
σ∈Sm−2
f a1aσ(2)b1f b1aσ(3)b2 · · · f bm−3aσ(m−1)am A(1, σ(2), . . . , σ(m−1), m) , (2.5)
– 4 –

which is valid for any gauge group.
The fact that the partial tree amplitudes in eq. (2.5) are the same as those in eq. (2.4)
is guaranteed by the Kleiss-Kuijf amplitude relations [91]. The simplest case of Kleiss-Kuijf
relations is given by the photon-decoupling identity,
A(1, 2, 3, . . . , m) + A(2, 1, 3, . . . , m) + A(2, 3, 1, . . . , m) + · · · + A(2, 3, . . . , 1, m) = 0 . (2.6)
While the photon-decoupling identity can be derived from the statement that U(1) particles
do not couple with gluons (i.e. gluons carry no U(1) charge), the more general Kleiss-Kuijf
relations are a consequence of the statement that the trees can be entirely expressed in
terms of f abc, i.e. no other group-theory tensors (such as symmetrized-trace tensors dabc...)
show up in the amplitude (2.5).
The gauge-dependent kinematic Jacobi relations (2.3) can then be translated into
gauge-invariant relations for the partial amplitudes. The simplest such BCJ relation takes
the form
p1µ

pµ
2A(2, 1, 3, . . . , m) + pµ
23A(2, 3, 1, . . . , m) + · · · + pµ
23...m−1A(2, 3, . . . , 1, m)

= 0 , (2.7)
where p23...n = p2+p3+. . .+pn are the momenta of the external states. Other BCJ relations
can be derived from this one by considering all permutations of the the arguments and
simultaneously solving the obtained system of equations. In the end, for adjoint external
particles, and for theories that obeys color-kinematics duality, this reduces the independent
partial amplitudes to a (m −3)! basis.
If the BCJ relations (eq. (2.7) and its permutations) hold for all tree amplitudes of
a given theory then the theory obeys color-kinematics duality, at least at tree level. In
practice, this gives the simplest know approach for checking the validity of color-kinematics
duality in a given theory.
Given a second set of kinematic numerators ˜ni (belonging to the same or a diﬀerent
gauge theory) that obeys color-kinematics duality (2.3), we can perform the replacement
ci →˜ni in the amplitude (2.1) without spoiling gauge invariance. This gives the following
double-copy formula
Mm =
κ
2
m−2 X
i∈cubic
ni˜ni
Di
,
(2.8)
were we have also replaced the coupling g →κ/2. Given that the ni and ˜ni contains
interactions of spin-1 particles (in two possibly diﬀerent gauge theories), the double copy
will correspond to scattering amplitudes in a theory with interacting spin-2 particles. Fur-
thermore, the (linearized) gauge invariance of the gauge-theory amplitude (2.1) is carried
through to the double-copy amplitude and it is enhanced to (linearized) diﬀeomorphism
symmetry. This statement follows in general spacetime dimension without specifying the
details of the theories or amplitudes that are under consideration. Note that for eq. (2.8)
to be valid it is suﬃcient that one set of the numerators (ni or ˜ni) manifestly obeys the
duality (2.3). To guarantee diﬀeomorphism symmetry of the resulting double copy, the
other set must also obey color-kinematics duality, but numerators may be calculated in a
gauge where this is not manifest.
– 5 –

The double copy (2.8), thus describes tree amplitudes in a gravitational theory. In the
most well-studied cases, when ni and ˜ni comes from two Yang-Mills theories, the double
copy will give amplitudes in some Einstein-type gravity theory (i.e. Hilbert-Einstein action
plus matter). It is useful to denote the double copies that can be obtained from various
gauge theories by the notation,
gravity th. = (gauge th.) ⊗
^
(gauge th.)
(2.9)
E.g. some well-known examples are the maximally supersymmetric Einstein and Yang-
Mills theories, (N = 8 SG) = (N = 4 SYM) ⊗(N = 4 SYM), the half-maximal case
(N = 4 SG) = (N = 4 SYM) ⊗(pure YM), or a non-supersymmetric extension of pure
Einstein theory (GR + dilaton+Bµν) = (pure YM)⊗(pure YM), where Bµν can be dualized
to an axion in four dimensions. In this paper, we will consider gauge theories that are not
necessarily of the Yang-Mills type, and obtain double copies for gravity theories which are
of higher-derivate type, such as conformal Weyl gravities. Before specifying the theories,
we conclude this section by giving a few more useful formulas.
At tree level, the double-copy (2.8) can be phrased in terms of gauge-invariant partial
amplitudes. This is the well-known Kawai-Lewellen-Tye formula [78] (in the ﬁeld-theory
limit of its original string-theory context), which we schematically write as
Mm =
κ
2
m−2
X
ρ,σ ∈Sm−3
A(ρ)S(ρ, σ) e
A(σ) ,
(2.10)
where A(ρ) and eA(σ) are the color-ordered gauge-theory amplitudes, whose arguments are
permutations of a (m −3)! BCJ basis, and S(σ, ρ) is the KLT kernel which is a polynomial
function (or rational function depending on the BCJ basis) of momentum invariants (see
e.g. ref. [7] for explicit formulas for S(ρ, σ)). The KLT formula gives valid gravity tree
amplitudes given that the input are gauge-theory amplitudes for external adjoint particles,
and that the latter obeys the BCJ amplitude relations.
For example, the three-, four- and ﬁve-particle KLT relations are
M(1, 2, 3) = iA(1, 2, 3) e
A(1, 2, 3) ,
M(1, 2, 3, 4) = −is12A(1, 2, 3, 4) e
A(1, 2, 4, 3) ,
(2.11)
M(1, 2, 3, 4, 5) = is12s34A(1, 2, 3, 4, 5) e
A(2, 1, 4, 3, 5) + is13s24A(1, 3, 2, 4, 5) e
A(3, 1, 4, 2, 5) ,
where the gravitational coupling is dropped by deﬁning Mm = (κ/2)m−2M(1, 2, . . . , m).
A very useful formula, which can be though of as being half-way between eq. (2.8) and
eq. (2.10), is the double copy written on a DDM form,
Mm =
κ
2
m−2
X
σ∈Sm−2
n1σ(2)...σ(m−1)m eA(1, σ(2), . . . , σ(m −1), m) ,
(2.12)
which is simply obtained by taking eq. (2.5) and replacing the DDM color factor with
a corresponding numerator factor ni, which we label as n1σ(2)...σ(m−1)m. This is a valid
– 6 –

operation since the DDM decomposition of the gauge-theory amplitude follow from the
Jacobi identity, which the numerators are assumed to satisfy.
Combining the information from eq. (2.10) and eq. (2.12), and reading oﬀthe coeﬃcient
of eA(σ), we see that one possible choice for kinematical numerators is [7, 92]
n1σ(2)...σ(m−1)m =
X
ρ ∈Sm−3
A(ρ)S(ρ, σ) ,
(2.13)
and the remaining (2m −5)!! −(m −2)! numerators are obtained by applying kinematic
Jacobi relations to the above ones. This shows that numerators that satisfy color-kinematics
duality can always be found at tree level whenever the BCJ amplitude relations are valid.
Although this provides an existence proof, in general, the above construction gives non-local
numerators (even in Yang-Mills theories) because of the poles in the amplitudes A(ρ); and,
furthermore, crossing symmetry of the amplitude is not manifest with these numerators.
3
Conformal Gravity
In this section we discuss some salient features of the conformal supergravities that will
later show up in the double copy.
However, we start discussing the pure Weyl theory,
which is a clean example even if its tree-level S-matrix is trivial in four-dimensional ﬂat
space [93–95].
3.1
Pure (Weyl)2 Conformal Gravity
Pure conformal Weyl gravity in D = 4 dimensions is a four-derivative theory that consists
of a physical spin-2 graviton and associated spin-2 and spin-1 massless ghosts, in total six
degrees of freedom packaged into the metric gµν. The action is written in terms of the
square of the Weyl tensor,
S = 1
κ2
Z
d4x √−g (Wµνρσ)2 ,
(3.1)
where κ is a dimensionless coupling constant. In D = 4 the relations to standard curvature
tensors and invariants are
Wµνρσ = Rµνρσ + gν[ρRσ]µ −gµ[ρRσ]ν + 1
3gµ[ρgσ]νR ,
(Wµνρσ)2 = (Rµνρσ)2 −2(Rµν)2 + 1
3R2 ,
(3.2)
where the antisymmetrization [· ·] includes a standard factor of 1/2. In D = 4 dimen-
sions the Gauss-Bonnet term is topological and hence can be added to the action without
changing the (classical) theory in a spacetime that is asymptotically Minkowski,
GB = (Rµνρσ)2 −4(Rµν)2 + R2 = (Wµνρσ)2 −2(Rµν)2 + 2
3R2 .
(3.3)
The Weyl tensor with one raised index, W µ
νρσ, is invariant under local rescalings of
the metric,
gµν(x) →gµν(x) eφ(x) .
(3.4)
– 7 –

Under such conformal transformations the Christoﬀel symbols vary as
δΓρ
µν = 1
2(δρ
µ ∂νφ + δρ
ν ∂µφ −gµν∂ρφ) .
(3.5)
And the Riemann and Ricci tensors have the variations
δRµ
νρσ = δµ
[σ ∇ρ]∂νφ −gν[σ∇ρ]∂µφ + 1
2

δµ
[ρ∂σ]φ ∂νφ −gν[ρ∂σ]φ ∂µφ −δµ
[ρgσ]ν∂λφ ∂λφ

,
δRµν = −∇µ∂νφ −1
2gµν □φ + 1
2∂µφ ∂νφ −1
2gµν∂λφ ∂λφ ,
(3.6)
where ∇µ is the covariant derivative and □φ = ∇λ∂λφ . The Ricci scalar transforms as
R →e−φ
R −3 □φ −3
2∂λφ ∂λφ

.
(3.7)
Indeed, plugging in the above transformations into the Weyl tensor, it is straightforward
to show that it is invariant δW µ
νρσ = 0. For the square of the Weyl tensor, the inverse
metric factors induce the transformation (Wµνρσ)2 →e−2φ(Wµνρσ)2, and together with
the transformations √−g →e2φ√−g and, the action (3.1) is invariant under conformal
transformations.
While conformal gravity has aesthetically pleasing features, it is believed to not be a
consistent theory because of the ghost states that come with the opposite-sign propaga-
tors compared to the physical graviton, and thus indicates a problem with unitarity. To
better observe these unwanted signs and states one often deforms the theory by adding
an Einstein-Hilbert term, m2R, to the action whereby the ghost states becomes massive
and the 1/p4 propagators can be resolved. Ignoring the tensor structure and the overall
normalization, the relevant part of the propagator is
1
p4 →−1
m2
 1
p2 −
1
p2 −m2

,
(3.8)
which shows the problematic relative sign between the massless and massive state. The
problem goes away in the m →∞limit where the massive ghost decouples (giving Einstein
gravity), but not obviously so in the conformal gravity limit, m →0. The appearance of
the overall 1/m2 pole may suggest that the m →0 limit is not smooth; however, this is a
spurious pole since the diﬀerence between the massless and massive propagator vanish as
O(m2). Nevertheless, the limit is not quite smooth since the deformed theory has 2+5 = 7
states (massless + massive graviton), which becomes six in the m →0 limit. The reason for
the removal of one state is the Weyl symmetry, or local conformal symmetry, that emerges
in this limit.
When considering supersymmetric or other extensions of conformal gravity the above
pole structure will generalize to other particles. States associated with 1/p4 poles always
come in pairs, or doublets, containing a physical state and a corresponding ghost state.
Except of the sign in front of the pole these states have identical quantum numbers (for
m = 0). Further ghost states corresponding to 1/p2 poles also appear (such as the spin-1
ghost in the pure theory), and these will not appear in doublets.
– 8 –

Beyond the details of the states and propagators, the pure conformal gravity S-matrix
turns out to not be very interesting to us. The tree amplitudes for physical gravitons vanish
in ﬂat four-dimensional space [93–95], and thus to have something nontrivial to study we
will consider extensions of the pure theory. These extended theories are also what appears
in the double copy construction.
3.2
Matter-Coupled, Non-Minimal Conformal Gravities and D > 4 Dimen-
sions
The pure Weyl theory can be generalized in a variety of ways, by adding matter or su-
persymmetry, by adding non-minimal couplings, by considering higher-dimensional ver-
sions, or by introducing a (conformal) Yang-Mills sector. Higher-dimensional extensions
of curvature-squared actions will necessarily involve dimensionfull coupling constants, im-
plying that they are not conformal in a strict sense, nevertheless we will refer to them as
conformal gravities (as often done in the literature) since they retain some properties of
their four-dimensional siblings.
Before discussing supersymmetric generalizations, we should consider a bosonic exten-
sion to the theory that is relevant to the double copy that we later prescribe. We will not
give the complete action, but only sketch out some of needed modiﬁcations, suﬃcient to
compute three-point amplitudes. Firstly, it is natural to consider the ﬁeld φ(x), the dilaton,
to be part of the theory, and hence it should be promoted to an interacting and propa-
gating ﬁeld by modifying the Weyl action. While this seems to spoil the invariance under
scale transformations, one can require that the action remains invariant under simultaneous
transformations of the metric and the dilaton.
Secondly, in addition to the (Wµνρσ)2 curvature invariant, we may use the Levi-Civita
tensor to construct the conformal pseudo-invariant
i
2ǫρσκλ W µνρσ W
κλ
µν
.
(3.9)
However, unless we (non-minimally) couple it to some additional ﬁeld it is a topological
term.
Therefore let us introduce the pseudo-scalar axion ﬁeld, a(x), which we take to
behave as an angle. In (extended) Maxwell theory the axion rotates the electromagnetic
ﬁeld strength into the dualized ﬁeld strength (i.e.
electomagnetic duality).
The same
rotation can be applied to the Weyl tensor,1
Wµνρσ →cos(a)Wµνρσ −i sin(a)f
Wµνρσ .
(3.10)
where we deﬁned the dualized Weyl tensor f
Wµνρσ =
i
2
√−g ǫρσκλW
κλ
µν
, such that the
square is (f
Wµνρσ)2 = (Wµνρσ)2.
Including a non-minimal coupling to the dilaton generalizes eq. (3.10) to a rotation by
a complex angle, parametrized by the holomorphic scalar z = φ + ia and its conjugate,
Wµνρσ →Wµνρσ(φ, a) ≡eφcos(a)Wµνρσ −ieφsin(a)f
Wµνρσ
= e¯z W +
µνρσ + ez W −
µνρσ
(3.11)
1One can equivalently rotate the Riemann tensor; however, in Einstein gravity this has no physical eﬀect
since the dualized Riemann tensor is traceless and hence it does not contribute in a two-derivative action.
– 9 –

where W ±
µνρσ = (Wµνρσ ± f
Wµνρσ)/2 are the selfdual and anti-selfdual Weyl tensors. The
square of the rotated Weyl tensor,

Wµνρσ(φ, a)
2
= e2φcos(2a)(Wµνρσ)2 + e2φsin(2a)f
WµνρσW µνρσ
= e2¯z(W +
µνρσ)2 + e2z(W −
µνρσ)2 ,
(3.12)
is an invariant under the simultaneous transformations,
gµν →gµν eφc(x)
φ →φ + φc(x) ,
a →a + πn (n ∈Z) ,
(3.13)
where we now switched notation and use φc to denote the classical dilaton ﬁeld, and φ for
the quantum one.
An alternative non-minimal coupling that can be introduced, using the same ﬁelds, is
the following one:
e2φcos(2a) GB + e2φsin(2a) f
WµνρσW µνρσ ,
(3.14)
where now the Gauss-Bonnet term is no longer a total derivative because of the ﬁelds
that multiply it. The interaction terms in eq. (3.14) gives exactly the same three-point
tree amplitudes as the ones in eq. (3.12).
These non-vanishing amplitudes are in four
dimensions given by
M(1−−, 2−−, 3−+
z
) = −i ⟨1 2⟩4 ,
M(1++, 2++, 3+−
¯z
) = −i [1 2]4 ,
(3.15)
where the ﬁrst two particles are gravitons and the third is a holomorphic z or antiholomor-
phic ¯z scalar, respectively. The somewhat redundant notation using helicity labels for the
scalars will become useful when considering the double copies needed to reproduce these
amplitudes.
We will not write down the kinetic terms of the scalars, but we note that they are
expected to contain terms of the form e2¯z□2z + e2z□2¯z giving rise to 1/p4 propagators.
The (anti-)holomorphic exponential factors are expected to appear by comparing to the
Berkovits-Witten twistor string [88], which computes tree amplitudes in a non-minimal
N = 4 conformal supergravity theory. The bosonic theory sketched here is better deﬁned
as a subsector of the Berkovits-Witten theory. Namely, restrict to those tree amplitudes
that are obtained from scattering the top and bottom components (physical scalars and
gravitons) of the chiral and anti-chiral N = 4 Weyl multiplets. Further details of the action
can be found in ref. [88].
N = 4 is believed to be the maximal amount of supersymmetry that can coexist with
local conformal symmetry in four dimensions [96]. The N = 4 conformal supergravity is
historically classiﬁed into minimal and non-minimal versions, where the terminology comes
from Fradkin and Tseytlin [89, 97], who studied conformal anomalies in these theories. The
non-minimal case refers to the appearance of scalar functions in front of the Weyl tensor,
similar to the terms considered above. In the minimal case these functions are set to unity.
It is known that the entire freedom in deﬁning the N = 4 theory can be captured by a
single homogeneous function depending on the holomorphic scalars that parametrize the
– 10 –

SU(1, 1)/U(1) coset space of the theory.
A complete action for N = 4 (non-minimal)
conformal supergravity theory has recently been suggested in ref. [98].
The N = 4 conformal supergravity theory has higher-dimensional uplifts, or exten-
sions, with maximal supersymmetry. In six dimensions, there seems to exists two distinct
N = 2 conformal supergravity actions, one corresponding to the supersymmetrization of
the (Riemann)2 tensor and one corresponding to the Gauss-Bonnet term [99, 100]. How-
ever, the ten-dimensional N = 1 conformal supergravity theory has a unique action ﬁrst
written down by de Roo [100] (see also ref. [101] for the linearized theory). The uniqueness
property of this theory will agree with the double copy that we obtain; the double copy
will use tree amplitudes from N = 1 SYM in ten dimensions and a higher-derivative gauge
theory that appears to be unique in higher dimensions. This will give non-trivial evidence
in favor of identifying the Berkovits-Witten conformal gravity [88] with the dimensional
reduction of the ten-dimensional theory [100].
Known theories with reduced supersymmetry in four dimensions are the N = 1 [102,
103] and N = 2 [104] conformal supergravity theories (see also refs. [105, 106]). The tree
amplitudes for physical gravitons will again vanish in ﬂat four-dimensional space for the
minimal theories [93–95]. Thus we will mainly be interested in versions of these theories
that are directly inherited from the Berkovits-Witten twistor string by supersymmetry
truncation (again keeping the tree amplitudes given by the top and bottom parts of the
N = 4 multiplets). These are non-pure theories as extra dilaton-axion matter multiplets
(chiral or hyper) are present in both cases, and they are non-minimal extensions since the
dilaton and axion prefactors of the (Weyl)2 term will remain.
Finally, conformal gravity can be coupled to Maxwell or Yang-Mills theory [107–109],
which is a particular case of gauged conformal gravity.
For simplicity we will refer to
these as Maxwell-Weyl and Yang-Mills-Weyl theories. The combined theories enjoys local
conformal symmetry making them potentially interesting uniﬁed models as they have soft
ultraviolet behavior [110] while incorporating both gauge theory (Standard Model) and
gravity sectors (possibly spontaneously broken to Einstein gravity [111]). However, the
theoretical consistency appears to be spoiled by the conformal gravity ghosts.
In the case of maximal supersymmetry, the gauge-theory sector N = 4 SYM is well
known to be conformal even beyond the classical level. Nevertheless, the minimal N = 4
Yang-Mills-Weyl theory do have a conformal anomaly unless the number of vector multi-
plets is precisely four [89]. The non-minimal theories, such as Witten’s twistor string [86]
(N = 4 SYM coupled to conformal gravity), may be free of a conformal anomaly [97, 112],
but instead they have a U(1) R-symmetry anomaly (the amplitudes in eq. (3.15) are non-
vanishing due to this anomaly).
3.3
Dimensional Analysis of Double Copy
We will here perform a straightforward dimensional analysis that will point us towards the
gauge theory needed in the double-copy construction of (non-minimal) conformal gravity.
Although conformal gravity has poles of type 1/p4, and the double copy makes man-
ifest only 1/p2 poles, we will assume that the double-copy framework is not modiﬁed
compared to how it works for Einstein gravity. There are several reasons for this “default”
– 11 –

assumption. On physical grounds we are ultimately interested in ﬁnding ways to couple
conformal supergravity with lower-derivative theories, such as Einstein gravity, or (confor-
mal) Yang-Mills theory. If this is to work smoothly the double-copy prescription needs to
be similar in all cases. On technical grounds, one can easily check that naive generaliza-
tions of color-kinematics duality with manifest 1/p4 poles will not result in corresponding
BCJ relations (suggesting that numerators sitting on top of these propagators are gauge
invariant, contradicting the well-known redundancy of gauge and gravity numerators).
The double copy amplitude we are looking for must then be of the form (2.8); e.g. at
four points
MCG(1, 2, 3, 4) = ns˜ns
s
+ nt˜nt
t
+ nu˜nu
u
(3.16)
where we have two types of numerators, ni and ˜ni (i = s, t, u), belonging to two diﬀer-
ent gauge theories. The Mandelstam invariants are s = (k1 + k2)2, t = (k2 + k3)2 and
u = (k1 + k3)2. Coupling constants have been set to unity to not interfere with the di-
mensional analysis, as we are only interested in counting the number of derivatives. It is
simple to realize that in ﬁeld theories where every operator has exactly d derivatives, (∂µ)d,
the resulting tree amplitudes will also be of dimension d, independent of the multiplicity
and spacetime dimension.
For example, in two-derivative Einstein gravity every Feyn-
man diagram will have two more derivatives in the numerator compared to the derivatives
(momenta) in the denominator.
Since conformal gravity is a four-derivative theory the tree diagrams should then be
of dimension four, implying that the product of four-point numerators ni˜ni in eq. (3.16)
must be of dimension six. For general multiplicity m, the dimension is obtained by adding
the dimension of the (m −3) propagators to the overall dimension,
ni˜ni ∼(∂µ)4+2(m−1) ∼(∂µ)4(m−2)
(∂µ)2(m−3) ,
(3.17)
In the last step, we rewrote the seemingly local expression into a non-local one by identifying
the dependence on the number of cubic vertices (m −2) and the number of propagators
(m −3).
The derivatives in a ﬁeld theory either comes from the vertices or from the
propagators, and thus on general grounds we expect these combinations to appear. Indeed,
we now get a hint that the missing propagator factors of conformal gravity will appear as
non-localities in the objects we usually call “numerators”.2
The simplest way to split the derivatives between the numerators is to assume that one
copy, say ˜ni, corresponds to a known gauge theory of Yang-Mills type with one-derivative
cubic interactions, and the other one, ni, comes from some unknown gauge theory with
three-derivative vertices:
˜ni ∼(∂µ)m−2 ,
ni ∼(∂µ)3(m−2)
(∂µ)2(m−3) .
(3.18)
To better understand the properties of the second theory, it is best to do a “gedanken
calculation” of an L-loop m-point cubic diagram using the three-derivative vertices, and
2Color-kinematics duality and the double copy need not numerators to be local; non-local numerators
frequently occur in the literature.
– 12 –

reinstating the denominator factors of eq. (2.1), giving
ni
Di
∼(∂µ)3(m−2+2L)
(∂µ)4(m−3+3L) ∼(∂µ)6−m−6L
(3.19)
The numerical factors in the exponent of the last expression have physical meaning. Let
us gedanken integrate this diagram in D spacetime dimensions by hitting it with
R
dDLℓ
in momentum space. The engineering dimension of the measure can be made to exactly
cancel the L-dependent term, given that we are in D = 6 spacetime dimensions. Thus
the theory we are looking for is a marginal (or classically conformal) gauge theory in six
dimensions. Similarly, the appearance of the term (6 −m) in the exponent implies that
the six-dimensional theory is not renormalized beyond six points, since counterterms have
to be local (6 −m) ≥0. This means that at most six-point interactions will appear in the
Lagrangian.
4
The Dimension-Six Gauge Theory
In this section, we work out the Lagrangian of the unknown gauge theory that enters into
the conformal gravity double copy. From dimensional analysis of the doubly copy formula,
we can deduce that this gauge theory needs to be marginal in D = 6.
Thus the task is two write down all dimension-six operators and constrain the di-
mensionless parameters by imposing color-kinematics duality on the resulting amplitudes.
Starting with the deﬁnitions
F 3 = f abcF a µ
ν
F b ν
ρ F b ρ
µ
DρF a
µν = ∂ρF a
µν + gf abcAb
ρF c
µν
F a
µν = ∂µAa
ν −∂νAa
µ + gf abcAb
µAc
ν
(4.1)
we can write up four diﬀerent dimension-six parity-invariant3 operators that only involve
gauge ﬁelds, however, due to Bianchi identities only two of them are independent,
1
2(DρF µνa)2 = DρF µνaDµF a
ρν = (DµF µνa)2 −g F 3 .
(4.2)
Choosing to work with the two operators (DµF µνa)2 and F 3, we can try to write down a
linear combination that gives amplitudes that satisfy color-kinematics duality.
Before looking at explicit amplitudes it is useful to observe that although the operator
(DµF µνa)2 contains non-linear interactions up to sixth order, the S-matrix corresponding
to this operator is trivial. Indeed, the F 3 operator is needed for a nontrivial S-matrix, and
conversly the (DµF µνa)2 operator is needed for there to be a propagator in this theory.
The reader might worry that the kinetic term has four derivatives, corresponding to a 1/p4
propagator that give rise to ghosts states. But this is not surprising given that we are
3We are searching for a theory that can be lifted to any dimension, thus we choose to not consider
operators involving contractions with a Levi-Civita tensor. Including such terms in, say, D = 4 or D = 6
would, however, likely generalize the current construction.
– 13 –

indirectly trying to construct conformal gravity, which has such propagators and ghost
states.
We can now look at the three-point amplitudes which comes entirely from the F 3
term. Color-kinematics duality imposes no constraint on three-point amplitudes, but at
least we can check that the double copy of this amplitude with a corresponding Yang Mills
amplitude looks reasonable.
It is well known that in four dimensions the identical-helicity amplitudes are the only
non-vanishing three-point matrix elements of the F 3 operator. For example, up to overall
normalization the all-minus amplitude is given by
AF 3(1−, 2−, 3−) = i ⟨1 2⟩⟨2 3⟩⟨3 1⟩
(4.3)
The corresponding conformal gravity amplitude should now be a product between this
amplitude and a Yang-Mills amplitude,
AYM(1−, 2−, 3+) = i
⟨1 2⟩4
⟨1 2⟩⟨2 3⟩⟨3 1⟩.
(4.4)
This gives an non-zero amplitude between two gravitons and the dilaton-axion holomorphic
scalar z = φ + ia,
MCG(1−−, 2−−, 3−+
z
) = iAF 3(1−, 2−, 3−)AYM(1−, 2−, 3+) = −i ⟨1 2⟩4 .
(4.5)
Indeed, from the dimension and spin of this amplitude, it is clear that it comes from a four-
derivative theory of spin-two ﬁelds, consistent with the properties of conformal gravity. It
also agrees with the amplitudes obtained in eq. (3.15) for non-minimally coupled Weyl
gravity.
It it easy to check that this is a valid component amplitude in non-minimal
N = 4 conformal supergravity.
As can be seen, the U(1) R-symmetry of the minimal
theory is broken already by this three-point tree-level amplitude. The U(1) charge can be
computed for each gravitational state by taking the diﬀerence between the helicity of the
corresponding left and right gauge theory state [113]. (Thus the gravitons are neutral and
z has charge −1 in this convention).
Starting with the four-point amplitude, we perform the exercise of writing down an
ansatz for the dimension-six gauge theory Lagrangian,
Lans = 1
2(DµF µνa)2 + 1
3!ρ g F 3
(4.6)
where the kinetic term has been canonically normalized and ρ is a number to be determined.
For helicity conﬁgurations (−−++) and (−+ −+) the four-gluon amplitudes coming
from the ansatz (4.6) are
ALans(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+) = i
8ρ2g2 ⟨1 2⟩2
⟨3 4⟩2 (u −t)
ALans(1−, 2+, 3−, 4+) = 0
(4.7)
where the amplitude has been color decomposed, i.e.
we are giving the coeﬃcient of
Tr(T a1T a2T a3T a4). As mentioned before, the Mandelstam variables are deﬁned as s =
– 14 –

(p1 + p2)2, t = (p2 + p3)2 and u = (p1 + p3)2. If the amplitudes obey color-kinematics
duality, the following two BCJ relations should hold:
0 ?= tALans(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+) −uALans(2−, 1−, 3+, 4+) = i
8ρ2g2 ⟨1 2⟩2
⟨3 4⟩2 s(t −u)
0 ?= uALans(1−, 3+, 2−, 4+) −sALans(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+) = i
8ρ2g2 ⟨1 2⟩2
⟨3 4⟩2 s(t −u)
(4.8)
However, with only two operators this exercise has the solution ρ = 0, which gives a trivial
S-matrix. Thus, we have too look for other dimension-six operators to include, which may
involve other ﬁelds. In particular we should be looking for a ﬁeld or (non-local) operator
that can cancel the pole ∼s/ ⟨3 4⟩2 = [4 3] / ⟨3 4⟩, which is a simple pole as opposed to the
double pole from the gluon propagator.
Inspired by the oﬀending expressions in eq. (4.8), is not diﬃcult to see that the two
BCJ relations would hold if we added a term to the four-point amplitude of the form
∆= −i
8ρ2g2 ⟨1 2⟩2 [3 4]2
s
,
(4.9)
with the following contributions in each color order:
A(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+) ≡ALans(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+) + ∆,
A(2−, 1−, 3+, 4+) ≡ALans(2−, 1−, 3+, 4+) + ∆,
A(1−, 3+, 2−, 4+) ≡ALans(1−, 3+, 2−, 4+) −2∆.
(4.10)
This modiﬁcation is consistent with the Kleiss-Kuijf identity,
A(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+) + A(2−, 1−, 3+, 4+) + A(1−, 3+, 2−, 4+) = 0 ,
(4.11)
and the left-hand-sides of eq. (4.8) are modiﬁed by ∆(t −u) = ∆(−2u −s), which exactly
cancels the unwanted terms in the BCJ relations.
Looking at the reside of the pole in eq. (4.9) it is clear that the term we added corre-
sponds to a propagating scalar with a factorization into two three-point amplitudes corre-
sponding to the operator ϕF 2. Indeed, in D = 6 this operator has engineering dimension
six, given that the scalar has a regular two-derivative kinetic term, as the pole suggest.
Given than we have a scalar in the spectrum, there are two more operators of dimension
six that we can write down, namely (Dϕ)2 and ϕ3. Thus we expect a Lagrangian of the
schematic form (DF)2 + F 3 + (Dϕ)2 + ϕF 2 + ϕ3. However, the last two terms would
vanish if we are dealing with an adjoint scalar that only couples through the f abc structure
constants. The presence of these terms may instead suggest a coupling through the tensor
dabc
F
= Tr({T a, T b}T c); however, this cannot explain why an s-channel diagram shows up
in the color order A(1−, 3+, 2−, 4+). Furthermore, the scalar cannot be a singlet under
the gauge group since then the term in eq. (4.9) would not contribute to the single-trace
Tr(T a1T a2T a3T a4) at four points. Nor can the scalar carry any charge or ﬂavor indices not
belonging to the gauge group, since it is sourced by the ﬁeld strength.
– 15 –

We are forced to assume that the scalar is in some unknown representation of the
gauge group. Let us denote the indices of this representation by α, β, γ, . . ., so that the
scalar is ϕα. The new ansatz for the dimension-six gauge theory is now
L = 1
2(DµF a µν)2+ 1
3!ρgF 3+ 1
2(Dµϕα)2+ 1
4σg CαabϕαF a
µνF b µν + 1
3!τg dαβγϕαϕβϕγ (4.12)
where ρ, σ, τ are unknown parameters, and Cαab and dαβγ are group-theory tensors to be
determined. From their appearance in the Lagrangian it is clear that we can choose Cαab
to be symmetric in its last two indices and similarly choose dαβγ to be a totally symmetric
tensor. The covariant derivative
Dµϕα = ∂µϕα −ig(T a
R)αβAa
µϕβ
(4.13)
contains one more unknown tensor: (T a
R)αβ. We can think of (T a
R)αβ as the generator of
some real representation (ϕ is real since F 2 is real), thus it is antisymmetric in its last two
indices.
Since Cαab, dαβγ, (T a
R)αβ are covariant tensors they must transform correctly under
inﬁnitesimal gauge-group rotations. This implies that they satisfy the relations
(T a
R)αγ(T b
R)γβ −(T b
R)αγ(T a
R)γβ = if abc(T c
R)αβ ,
(4.14)
f baeCαec + f caeCαbe = i(T a
R)αβCβbc ,
(4.15)
(T a
R)αδdδβγ + (T a
R)βδdαδγ + (T a
R)γδdαβδ = 0 .
(4.16)
See appendix B for pictorial representation of these identities.
We can now constrain the unknown parameters and tensors by a careful analysis of
the tree amplitudes of the dimension-six Lagrangian. Given that we want to constrain the
Lagrangian using the BCJ relations for adjoint ﬁelds, we need to look at amplitudes that
have only external gluons. From inspecting the Feynman diagrams this implies that the
Cαab, (T a
R)αβ and dαβγ tensors are ﬁrst available in the four-, ﬁve- and six-point amplitudes,
respectively.4 Indeed, the rule of thumb is that each free α, β, γ index needs to be soaked up
by a pair of gluons before we can study the tensors. From this point of view we can think
of Cαab as a Clebsch-Gordan coeﬃcient for some auxiliary “bi-adjoint” representation. In
the same sense it might be meaningful to think of ϕα as an auxiliary ﬁeld even though it
is propagating.5
In the four-gluon amplitude we ﬁnd contractions of the type CαabCαcd that corresponds
to an internal scalar. Since we know that these contributions are needed to cancel some
pieces of the pure-gluon diagrams, we can assume that this contraction must equal to a tree-
level rank-four adjoint tensor. There are exactly two independent such tensors: f acef ebd
4Note that the (DF)2 and F 3 operators contains quartic, quintic and sextic interactions that are needed
for restoring gauge invariance of the linearized operators. The fact that the Cαab, (T a
R)αβ and dαβγ tensors
show up at the same orders is suggestive of that they also cancel something unwanted in the (DF)2 and
F 3 terms.
5When a Yang-Mills term is added to the dimension-six Lagrangian the scalar needs to become massive
to maintain color-kinematics duality; in the inﬁnite-mass limit the scalar becomes an auxilliary ﬁeld in
Yang Mills theory.
– 16 –

and (c ↔d). The relative coeﬃcient is uniquely ﬁxed by the symmetries of the Cαcd tensor,
and the overall coeﬃcient can be absorbed into the free parameter ρ in the Lagrangian.
This ﬁxes the relation
CαabCαcd = f acef edb + f adef ecb .
(4.17)
Using this relation all four-gluon amplitudes in the Lagrangian (4.12) can be computed on
a color-ordered form. In particular, the (−−++) amplitude that we looked at before now
takes the form
A(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+) = i
8g2 ⟨1 2⟩2
⟨3 4⟩2
 ρ2(u −t) −σ2s

(4.18)
The spinor prefactor is symmetric under 1 ↔2 interchange so only the expression in the
parenthesis need to be plugged into the BCJ relation, giving the constraint
0 = t
 ρ2(u −t) −σ2s

−(t ↔u) = s(t −u)(ρ2 −σ2)
(4.19)
Thus we conclude that σ = ±ρ.
The ambiguity in the sign reﬂect the fact that the
redeﬁnition ϕα →−ϕα in the Lagrangian does not change the value of any pure-gluon
amplitude. Without loss of generality we can choose σ = −ρ, which is more convenient.
The (−−++) and (−+ −+) four-gluon amplitudes are now as follows
A(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+) = i
4ρ2g2u⟨1 2⟩2
⟨3 4⟩2 ,
A(1−, 2+, 3−, 4+) = i
4ρ2g2u⟨1 3⟩2
⟨2 4⟩2 .
(4.20)
Because we have the F 3 operator in the Lagrangian, we also have nonvanishing am-
plitudes in other helicity sectors. The all-plus amplitude and one-minus amplitude are as
follows:6
A(1+, 2+, 3+, 4+) = i
4ρ(4 + 3ρ)g2u [1 2] [3 4]
⟨1 2⟩⟨3 4⟩,
A(1−, 2+, 3+, 4+) = −i
2ρg2 [2 4]2 ⟨1 2⟩[2 3]
[1 2] ⟨2 3⟩.
(4.21)
All the four-gluon amplitudes satisfy color-kinematics duality for any value of the parameter
ρ, and in any spacetime dimension D.
Turning to the ﬁve-gluon amplitudes we encounter tensor contractions of the form
Cαab(T c
R)αβCβde, corresponding to an internal scalar that radiates oﬀa gluon. This tensor
contraction is entirely determined by the inﬁnitesimal-transformation identity in eq. (4.15),
and the previously determined identity in eq. (4.17),
Cαab(T c
R)αβCβde = (f ahgf gbe + f aegf gbh)f hcd + (d ↔e) .
(4.22)
6Note that the amplitudes have contributions at diﬀerent orders of ρ since the (DµF µνa)2 term does give
nonvanishing interactions once the F 3 term is included. The absence of O(ρ0) contributions is equivalent
to the statement that the (DµF µνa)2 operator by itself gives a trivial S-matrix.
– 17 –

Similar to the behavior of the four-point all-plus amplitude and one-minus amplitude
in eq. (4.21), the ﬁve-gluon amplitude have separate contributions of O(ρ), O(ρ2) and
O(ρ3). But unlike before, these contributions do not separately satisfy the ﬁve-point BCJ
relation
0 = s25A(1, 2, 5, 3, 4) + (s25 + s35)A(1, 2, 3, 5, 4) + (s25 + s35 + s45)A(1, 2, 3, 4, 5) .
(4.23)
We ﬁnd that in order for this relation to hold a unique value for the ρ parameter is selected,
(σ is also ﬁxed through previous relation):
ρ = −2 ,
σ = 2.
(4.24)
With this choice all ﬁve-gluon amplitudes (in any dimension) satisfy the BCJ relations, and
hence color-kinematics duality is present up to this order. (See section 4.4 for the explicit
MHV ﬁve-point amplitude.)
Finally, we analyse the six-gluon amplitudes. In these amplitudes we ﬁnd the tensor
contraction between one dαβγ tensor and three Cαab tensors. We cannot use any of the
previously known group-theory relations to reduce this to structure constants f abc. Instead
we have to rely on the six-point BCJ relations to constrain this tensor structure. By the
same logic as before, we can assume that the purpose of this tensor structure is to cancel
certain contributions in the pure-gluon Feynman diagrams, and hence the tensor should be
a linear combination of tree-level rank-six adjoint-index tensors, which can be constructed
out of contracting four f abc tensors. There are 4! = 24 independent such tensors, so in
principle we can write down an ansatz and constrain the 24 coeﬃcients.
However, this would not be a satisfactory solution to the tensor-reduction problem.
The reason is that this gives us no information on what we should do when we have several
dαβγ tensors that are contracted with each other, as we will encounter starting with the
eight-gluon amplitude. In order for this problem to have a satisfactory solution we must
demand that we can reduce a contraction of one dαβγ tensor and two Cαab tensors, so that
we have at least one free α-index. This free index can then be used to recursively deﬁne
all unknown tree-level tensors (in analogy to how a current Jµ can be used to recursively
deﬁne all tree amplitudes in Yang-Mills theory). Thus we write down the following general
reduction ansatz,
dαβγCβabCγcd = x

Cαae(f ecgf gdb + f edgf gcb) + Cαbe(f ecgf gda + f edgf gca)
+ Cαce(f eagf gbd + f ebgf gad) + Cαde(f eagf gbc + f ebgf gac)

+ y Cαeg(f eacf gbd + f eadf gbc)
(4.25)
The right-hand-side must involve at least one Cαab tensor, since we have a free α index,
but the remaning tensors should be of f abc-type given that the reduction is complete. Once
the ﬁnal α index is contracted into another Cαab tensor one can use eq. (4.17) in order to
obtain only tree-level tensors for adjoint ﬁelds. The ansatz has two parameters x and y;
however, it is clear that an overall scale can be absorbed into the deﬁnition of dαβγ, or
– 18 –

equivalently into the unknown τ that multiplies dαβγ in the Lagrangian. We can ﬁx this
freedom by demanding that τ = 1.
Computing the six-point amplitude and imposing the BCJ relation
0 = s26A(1, 2, 6, 3, 4, 5) + (s26 + s36)A(1, 2, 3, 6, 4, 5) + (s26 + s36 + s46)A(1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 5)
+ (s26 + s36 + s46 + s56)A(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6) ,
(4.26)
we ﬁnd that there is a unique solution for the tensor reduction ansatz,
x = 1 ,
y = 2
(and τ = 1) .
(4.27)
And thus all free parameters in the Lagrangian have been ﬁxed, except for the (overall)
coupling constant g.
We can rewrite the reduction formula eq. (4.25) into slightly more compact notation
by noting that some of the f abc combinations in brackets are familiar from before in terms
of two Cαab tensors, we thus have
dαβγCβabCγcd = CαaeCδebCδcd + CαbeCδeaCδcd + CαceCδedCδab + CαdeCδecCδab
+ 2 Cαeg(f eacf gbd + f eadf gbc) .
(4.28)
But more interestingly, using the reduction of a product of three tensors and previously
obtained relations we can show that there in fact exists a simpler reduction relation for a
product of two tensors only
Cαabdαβγ = (T a
R)βα(T b
R)αγ + (T b
R)βα(T a
R)αγ + CβacCγcb + CβbcCγca
(4.29)
This can be shown be after soaking up the free β-index with a Cβcd tensor, and using the
previous identities. This new identity is both simpler and fully equivalent to eqs. (4.25)
and (4.28), so in the following we take this identity as the deﬁning one.
4.1
The Dimension-Six Lagrangian
Let us summarize what we achieved: imposing color-kinematics duality (BCJ relations) up
to six points gives a unique7 Lagrangian for the dimension-six theory. It reads
L(DF )2 = 1
2(DµF a µν)2−1
3gF 3+1
2(Dµϕα)2+1
2g CαabϕαF a
µνF b µν+ 1
3!g dαβγϕαϕβϕγ (4.30)
where F 3 and the covariant derivatives are deﬁned in eqs. (4.1) and (4.13). The scalar ϕα
transforms in a real (auxilliary) representation of the gauge group, with generator (T a
R)αβ
and symmetric Clebsh-Gordan coeﬃcients Cαab and dαβγ, which are implicitly deﬁned
through the two relations
CαabCαcd = f acef edb + f adef ecb ,
(4.31)
Cαabdαβγ = (T a
R)βα(T b
R)αγ + CβacCγcb + (a ↔b) ,
(4.32)
7By uniqueness we mean that all the fudge factors in the Lagrangian ansatz are ﬁxed. Further adding
(lower-dimensional) operators or matter will give families of theories satisfying color-kinematics duality.
– 19 –

where the last equation is (non-trivially) equivalent to the tensor reduction in eq. (4.25).
Furthermore, all the group-theory tensors transforms covariantly under inﬁnitesimal group
rotations, implying that they satisfy the three relations in eqs. (4.14)–(4.16). These ﬁve
tensor relations are suﬃcient to reduce any color structure appearing in a pure-gluon tree
amplitude to contractions of f abc tensors. See appendix B for pictorial representation of
the identities.
Using the Feynman rules given in appendix A we have computed the tree-level pure-
gluon amplitudes up to multiplicity eight in D dimensions, and found that no additional
corrections to the Lagrangian are needed for it to satisfy color-kinematics duality. A curious
feature of these amplitudes is that the product between any two polarization vectors, εi ·εj,
will always cancel out through non-trivial identities. This has an interesting consequence
when considering dimensional reduction: the scalars that come from the extra-dimensional
gluon components will automatically decouple from the theory. Thus, in this theory, di-
mensional reduction is the same operation as dimensional truncation.
4.2
Double Copy for Conformal Weyl Gravity
Starting with two gauge theories that obey color-kinematics duality, the double copy guar-
antees that we obtain amplitudes containing spin-2 particles and that are invariant under
diﬀeomorphism symmetry [34]. The resulting amplitude must then come from some gravity
theory. A natural double copy to consider is the following construction
CG =
 (DF)2 theory

⊗YM .
(4.33)
The gauge theory on the left is the dimension-six theory (4.30); we use the shorthand
(DF)2 to denote it. The gauge theory on the right is, in the simplest case, pure Yang-Mills
theory. By dimensional analysis, and by construction, the resulting gravity theory is of the
four-derivative type. Hence it must be built out of curvature squared invariants: (Weyl)2,
Gauss-Bonnet or R2; and possibly linear curvature invariants with two derivatives: □R,
∇µ∇νRµν. We will refer to it as a conformal gravity (CG) theory although the precise
action is yet to be determined. Note that the double copy (4.33) should give valid gravity
amplitudes in any spacetime dimension, since both theories are bosonic and obey color
kinematics duality in any dimension.
In addition to the regular graviton states, the physical on-shell spectrum of the dou-
ble copy (4.33) includes a dilaton and antisymmetric two-form obtained by tensoring the
asymptotic vectors of each gauge theory:
Aµ ⊗Aν ∼hµν ⊕Bµν ⊕φ
(4.34)
where the Lorentz indices should be projected to little group-indices for a more precise
relation. In four dimensions the two-form is equivalent on shell to the pseudo-scalar axion,
introduced earlier. The states in eq. (4.34) correspond to 1/p4-type propagator poles and
thus they always appear in doublets together with companion ghost states as explained in
section 3. In addition, there are further ghost states that only have 1/p2 poles. These are
somewhat diﬃcult to isolate in an amplitude since they can mix with contact-like terms
– 20 –

coming from the partial cancelations of the double poles ∼p2/p4. States originating from
the scalar in the (DF)2 theory also come with 1/p2 poles, suggesting that these states may
combine with the ghosts. The precise details of the states with 1/p2 poles, and how to
isolate them in the amplitude, we leave for future work.
While we have not proven that the left-hand-side of eq. (4.30) is a theory with conformal
symmetry, we will see that it gives scattering amplitudes that agree with those of a bosonic
sector of the Berkovits-Witten conformal gravity twistor string.
4.3
Double Copy for N = 1, 2, 4 Conformal Supergravities
The double copy in eq. (4.33) can be extended to include supersymmetry.
While the
dimension-six theory cannot be made supersymmetric due to the appearance of the F 3
operator, the left gauge-theory copy can be replaced by supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory
with N = 1, N = 2 or N = 4. This gives three diﬀerent conformal supergravities,
 N = 1, 2, 4 CSG

=
 (DF)2 theory

⊗
 N = 1, 2, 4 SYM

.
(4.35)
Similar to the bosonic case, the N = 1 and N = 2 conformal supergravities contain extra
states compared to the pure versions of the theories. These are supersymmetric extensions
of the dilaton and axion states that appeared in eq. (4.34). Speciﬁcally, for N = 1 this
gives an extra chiral multiplet, and for N = 2 an extra hypermultiplet, both corresponding
to 1/p4 poles. Associated ghost states will also appear due to these poles.
In the case of N = 4 supersymmetry, the double copy (4.35) gives the correct physical
particle content: the dilaton and axion are now part of the N = 4 graviton multiplets.
The interaction are of the non-minimal type: the U(1) R-symmetry of the minimal theory
is broken already by the three-point tree-level amplitudes.
In section 4.4, we compute tree-level amplitudes up to eight external particles and
show that it perfectly matches with the Berkovits-Witten MHV formula for non-minimal
conformal gravity. As is well known, this particular conformal gravity shows up in the
multi-trace sectors of Witten’s twistor string theory [86], originally contaminating the pure
N = 4 gauge theory, but later on this gravitational sector was considered by itself in
the work of Berkovits and Witten [88]. By supersymmetric truncation of the tree-level
amplitudes one can obtain the corresponding tree amplitudes of N = 0, 1, 2 non-minimal
conformal (super)gravities.
By virtue of color-kinematics duality being dimension agnostic, the double copy (4.35)
should also give valid gravity amplitudes in dimensions D > 4, given that the SYM theory
exists. For half-maximal supersymmetry the double copy lifts up to six dimensions giving
amplitudes in D = 6 N = (1, 0) conformal supergravity [99].
Likewise, for maximal
supersymmetry the double copy lifts up to ten dimensions giving amplitudes in D = 10
N = (1, 0) conformal supergravity [100].8 Since the action of the ten-dimensional theory
is given by a unique supersymmetrization of the curvature-squared invariants [100], and
the double copy gives supersymmetric curvature-squared amplitudes in ten dimensions, the
8Although it is beyond the scope of the current paper, we note that since the mentioned theories are
chiral, gravitational anomalies may appear at loop level.
– 21 –

double copy can be identiﬁed with the theory in ref. [100]. Lower-dimensional and lower-
supersymmetry double copies should then give amplitudes in theories that are related to the
ten-dimensional “parent” theory by dimensional reduction and supersymmetry truncation.
4.4
Explicit Amplitudes for (DF)2 and CG
Using the Feynman rules for the dimension-six gauge theory (see appendix A), we have com-
puted all tree-amplitudes up to eight points, and showed that they obey color-kinematics
duality in any spacetime dimension. In this section we will present some of the results at
low multiplicity and in four dimensions, and perform the double copy with corresponding
Yang-Mills amplitudes.
The color-ordered three and four-gluon amplitudes in the dimension-six theory, denoted
by (DF)2, reads
A(DF )2(1−, 2−, 3−) = i ⟨1 2⟩⟨2 3⟩⟨3 1⟩,
A(DF )2(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+) = −iu⟨1 2⟩2
⟨3 4⟩2 ,
A(DF )2(1−, 2+, 3−, 4+) = −iu⟨1 3⟩2
⟨2 4⟩2 ,
A(DF )2(1+, 2+, 3+, 4+) = −iu [1 2] [3 4]
⟨1 2⟩⟨3 4⟩,
A(DF )2(1−, 2+, 3+, 4+) = −i [2 4]2 ⟨1 2⟩[2 3]
[1 2] ⟨2 3⟩,
(4.36)
where ± are the helicities of the gluons. The all-minus and one-plus amplitudes can be
obtained by complex conjugation of the above expressions.
The four-point amplitudes
satisfy the Kleiss-Kuijf and BCJ relations, e.g.
A(1, 2, 4, 3) = s14
s24
A(1, 2, 3, 4) .
(4.37)
For later use, we give the MHV gluon amplitudes in Yang-Mills theory,
AYM(1+, 2+, . . . , i−, . . . , j−, . . . , n+) = i
⟨i j⟩4
⟨1 2⟩⟨2 3⟩· · · ⟨n 1⟩,
(4.38)
and in N = 4 super-Yang-Mills theory the MHV superamplitude is
ASYM(1, 2, . . . , n) = i
δ(8)(Q)
⟨1 2⟩⟨2 3⟩· · · ⟨n 1⟩,
(4.39)
where the total supermomentum is QαA = Pn
i=1 λα
i ηA
i .
The conformal gravity amplitudes are given by double copies between the dimension-six
theory and Yang-Mills theory. The only non-zero three-point amplitude, in four dimensions,
is the graviton-graviton-scalar amplitude that we already gave in eqs. (3.15) and (4.5),
MCG(1−−, 2−−, 3−+
z
) = iA(DF )2(1−, 2−, 3−)AYM(1−, 2−, 3+) = −i ⟨1 2⟩4 .
(4.40)
– 22 –

The pure-graviton four-point amplitude is
MCG(1−−, 2−−, 3++, 4++) = −ist
u A(DF )2(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+)AYM(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+)
= i ⟨1 2⟩4 [3 4]2
⟨3 4⟩2 = i⟨1 2⟩4 [3 4]4
s2
,
(4.41)
Note that the gravitational coupling has been suppressed, it can be restored for a n-point
tree amplitude as follows:
Mm =
κ
2
m−2
Mm ,
(4.42)
where κ is a dimensionless coupling constant in four dimensions.
We can also compute some scalar-graviton amplitudes
MCG(1+−
¯z
, 2+−
¯z
, 3++, 4++) = −ist
u A(DF )2(1+, 2+, 3+, 4+)AYM(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+) = i [3 4]4 ,
MCG(1−−, 2+−
¯z
, 3++, 4++) = −ist
u A(DF )2(1−, 2+, 3+, 4+)AYM(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+)
= −i ⟨1 2⟩4 [2 3] [3 4] [4 2]
⟨2 3⟩⟨3 4⟩⟨4 2⟩,
MCG(1−+
z
, 2++, 3+−
¯z
, 4+−
¯z
) = −ist
u A(DF )2(1−, 2+, 3+, 4+)AYM(1+, 2+, 3−, 4−)
= is ⟨3 4⟩2 [2 3] [2 4]
⟨2 3⟩⟨2 4⟩,
MCG(1−+
z
, 2−+
z
, 3+−
¯z
, 4+−
¯z
) = −ist
u A(DF )2(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+)AYM(1+, 2+, 3−, 4−) = is2 ,
MCG(1−+
z
, 2−−, 3+−
¯z
, 4++) = −ist
u A(DF )2(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+)AYM(1+, 2−, 3−, 4+) = i⟨2 3⟩4 [3 4]4
s2
,
(4.43)
Note that these scalars are not part of minimal/pure Weyl gravity; instead they appear in
the non-minimal conformal gravity that can be obtained form a supersymmetric truncation
of non-minimal N = 4 superconformal gravity, as discussed in section 3.2.
We can obtain the N = 4 conformal supergravity amplitudes by double copying the
dimension-six theory with N = 4 super-Yang-Mills,
MCSG(1, 2, 3, 4) = −ist
u A(DF )2(1, 2, 3, 4)ASYM(1, 2, 3, 4) .
(4.44)
The states assemble into a chiral (−) and antichiral (+) N = 4 graviton multiplet, and in
terms of these we have the following superamplitudes in conformal supergravity:
MCSG(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+) = iδ(8)(Q) [3 4]2
⟨3 4⟩2 ,
MCSG(1+, 2+, 3+, 4+) = iδ(8)(Q) [1 2]2 [3 4]2
⟨1 2⟩2 ⟨3 4⟩2 ,
MCSG(1−, 2+, 3+, 4+) = −iδ(8)(Q) [2 3] [3 4] [4 2]
⟨2 3⟩⟨3 4⟩⟨4 2⟩,
(4.45)
– 23 –

plus amplitudes that are related to these through conjugation. Note that the chirality (±)
of the graviton multiplet translate directly to the helicity of the gluons in the dimension-six
theory. The nonvanishing of the all-chiral and one-chial amplitudes is thus inherited from
the nonvanishing of the all-plus and one-minus amplitudes in the dimension-six theory.
For the ﬁve-point amplitude in the dimension-six theory the all-plus and one-minus
amplitudes are again non-zero. Unfortunately they are rather lengthy, so we give only the
MHV amplitude here. The MHV amplitude, with two neighboring negative helicities, is
on the form
A(DF )2(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+, 5+) = −AYM(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+, 5+)
 a + i b ǫ(1, 2, 3, 4)

,
(4.46)
where ǫ(1, 2, 3, 4) ≡Det(p1, p2, p3, p4). We have used the Yang-Mills amplitude to soak
up the helicity weights and thus we can write it in terms of two momentum-dependent
functions a and b using only Lorentz dot products. The ﬁrst function is
a= (s24 + s34)(s12(s24 + s34) + (s23 −3s15)s45)
s34s35
+ (s24 + s34)(s12(s24 + s34) −(s15 −3s23)s34)
s35s45
−s34s45(s34 + s35)(s15(s34 + s35) + 2s34s45)
s3
12s23
−s34s45(s35 + s45)(s23(s35 + s45) + 2s34s45)
s3
12s15
+ s15(3s15 −2s23)s2
45
s12s34s35
+ s23(3s23 −2s15)s2
34
s12s35s45
+ 2(s23 −s24)s34 −s2
24
s35
−
s2
23s3
34
s2
12s35s45
−
s2
15s3
45
s2
12s34s35
−
s3
34s3
45
s3
12s15s23
+ 2s34(s23(s23 + s24) + s24s34)
s12s35
+ s2
34(s34(2s23 + s34) −2s15(s23 + s34))
s2
12s35
+ s2
13s2
34 −2s13s15s34s45 + (s2
15 −2s2
34)s2
45
s3
12
−2s13s15 + s2
34 + (s34 −s13 −3s15)s45 + s2
45
s12
+ s34(s34(s34 −2s15) + s13(s15 + s34)) −s15(s13 + s34)s45
s2
12
+ 2s45 + s14 ,
(4.47)
and the second one is
b= (s15 + s25)(s13s24 −s14s23)
s3
12s34
+ (s14 + s24)(s15s23 −s13s25)
s3
12s35
+ (s13 + s23)(s14s25 −s15s24)
s3
12s45
+ s2
12 −s23(2s15 + s25) −s13(s15 −3s34) + 3s25s45
s3
12
−
s2
34s2
45
s3
12s15s23
+ s13s34s45
s3
12s23
+ s25s34s45
s3
12s15
.
(4.48)
Note that the poles in a and b are in addition to the poles in the AYM factor. Thus we can
see that propagators are typically of the type ∼1/s2
ij consistent with the four-derivative
kinetic term. As is obvious, there are even some poles 1/s3
12; however, these are spurious
poles. They are artefacts of the helicity choice and the fact that we pulled out a AYM
factor. The D-dimensional amplitude has at most 1/s2
ij poles.
Note that the A(DF )2(1−, 3+, 2−, 4+, 5+) amplitude is not related to the above one by a
naive permutation of the legs in the AYM(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+, 5+) factor. This is because there is
no supersymmetry in this theory, and thus the MHV amplitudes with diﬀerent color orders
– 24 –

are not related by supersymmetry Ward identities. Nonetheless, the diﬀerent MHV am-
plitudes are still related though the BCJ relations, implying that we can straightforwardly
calculate the remaining MHV amplitude from
A(1−, 3+, 2−, 4+, 5+) = s35
s13
A(1−, 2−, 4+, 3+, 5+) + s34 + s35
s13
A(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+, 5+) . (4.49)
The ﬁve-graviton amplitude can now be obtained from the KLT formula
MCG(1−−, 2−−, 3++, 4++, 5++) = is13s24A(DF )2(1−, 3+, 2−, 4+, 5+)AYM(3+, 1−, 4+, 2−, 5+)
+ is12s34A(DF )2(1−, 2−, 3+, 4+, 5+)AYM(2−, 1−, 4+, 3+, 5+) .
(4.50)
Comparing the the known result for conformal gravity MHV tree amplitudes, we see that
it matches the compact result of Berkovits and Witten [88],
MCG(1−−, 2−−, 3++, 4++, 5++) = −i ⟨1 2⟩4  ⟨1 2⟩2 [2 3]
⟨1 3⟩2 ⟨2 3⟩
+ ⟨1 4⟩2 [3 4]
⟨1 3⟩2 ⟨3 4⟩
+ ⟨1 5⟩2 [3 5]
⟨1 3⟩2 ⟨3 5⟩

×
 ⟨1 2⟩2 [2 5]
⟨1 5⟩2 ⟨2 5⟩
+ ⟨1 3⟩2 [3 5]
⟨1 5⟩2 ⟨3 5⟩
+ ⟨1 4⟩2 [4 5]
⟨1 5⟩2 ⟨4 5⟩

×
 ⟨1 2⟩2 [2 4]
⟨1 4⟩2 ⟨2 4⟩
+ ⟨1 3⟩2 [3 4]
⟨1 4⟩2 ⟨3 4⟩
+ ⟨1 5⟩2 [4 5]
⟨1 4⟩2 ⟨4 5⟩

(4.51)
The general formula for MHV superamplitudes in conformal supergravity is [88]
MCSG(1−, 2−, 3+, . . . , n+) = (−1)n iδ(8)(Q)
n
Y
i=3
n
X
j=1
j̸=i
[i j] ⟨j q⟩2
⟨i j⟩⟨i q⟩2
(4.52)
where the ± refers to the chirality of the graviton multiplet. By explicit computation up
to eight points, we have checked that the double copy between the dimension-six gauge
theory and (super)-Yang-Mills agrees with this formula for MHV amplitudes.
5
Deformations and Extensions
There are several deformations or extensions that can be done to the dimension-six gauge
theory (4.30), while still maintaining color-kinematics duality. The fact that the duality
holds means that these deformations directly correspond to extensions of the conformal
gravity theory through the double copy.
5.1
Deforming with Mass Term: (DF)2 + YM Gauge Theory
Without changing the ﬁeld content of the dimension-six theory, we can consider a one-
parameter family of theories obtained by introducing a Yang-Mills term, F 2, to the La-
grangian (4.30). Since this is a dimension-four operator we multiply it by a parameter of
– 25 –

dimension two, m2, which we can think of as a squared mass. This term will introduce
a mass splitting between the physical gluon its corresponding ghost, the latter becoming
massive, similar to the propagator in eq. (3.8). However, the resulting theory does not
obey color-kinematics duality unless we also give the scalar ϕα the same mass.
The mass-deformed Lagrangian is then
L(DF )2+YM = 1
2(DµF a µν)2 −1
3gF 3 + 1
2(Dµϕα)2 + 1
2g CαabϕαF a
µνF b µν + 1
3!g dαβγϕαϕβϕγ
−1
2m2(ϕα)2 −1
4m2(F a
µν)2 .
(5.1)
By computing tree amplitudes up to eight points for external physical (massless) gluons,
we have conﬁrmed that this theory obeys color-kinematics duality (BCJ relations) for any
value of the mass m.
We can think of the Lagrangian as describing a (DF)2 + YM theory that interpolates
between marginal theories in D = 4 and D = 6 dimensions, and where m plays the role
of the interpolation parameter. Yang-Mills theory is recovered in the m →∞limit, and
(DF)2 in the m →0 limit.
5.2
Double Copy for Weyl-Einstein Gravity
The double copy between the mass-defomed theory (5.1) and Yang-Mills theory will give
valid gravity amplitudes, even though we will not introduce any corresponding masses on
the Yang-Mills side.
This is guaranteed by the general consistency of color-kinematics
duality.
The resulting gravity theory will behave as follows: in the m →0 limit we will recover
the non-minimal conformal gravity theory that we have already considered, and in the
m →∞limit the double copy will reduce to the standard double copy for non-pure
Einstein gravity (including dilaton and axion scalars). Thus the gravity theory is a non-pure
non-minimal version of Weyl-Einstein gravity. Again, the mass acts as the interpolation
parameter between the two separate theories.
In general, when we include supersymmetry on the YM side, we obtain the following
four supergravity theories through the double copy:
 N = 0, 1, 2, 4 Weyl-Einstein SG

=
 (DF)2 + YM

⊗
 N = 0, 1, 2, 4 SYM

,
(5.2)
where the mass m is proportional to the Planck mass.
In the N = 4 case, it would be interesting to calculate the coeﬃcient of the one-loop
conformal anomaly (more speciﬁcally in the m →0 limit, where the classical theory is
conformal).
The behavior of this potential anomaly may give support to the existence
of theories that are ultraviolet ﬁnite to all orders, with a low-energy behavior that is
indistinguishable from Einstein supergravities. Even so, the problem with ghosts would
still remain.
5.3
Adding Scalars to (DF)2: Maxwell-Weyl Gravity
The dimension-six gauge theory can be extended by adding to the spectrum N scalars, φaA,
that transform in the adjoint of the gauge group, and in some real N-fold representation
– 26 –

(e.g. adjoint) of a global group G. This has to done manually and not by dimensional
reduction. As already mentioned in section 4.1, dimensional reduction of the dimension-six
theory does not yield interacting scalars.
The kinetic term for the scalars is of the usual two-derivative type, and the extended
dimension-six Lagrangian is then
L(DF )2+scalars = 1
2(DµF µνa)2 −1
3F 3 + 1
2(Dµϕα)2 + 1
2gdabαF µνaF b
µνϕα + 1
3!gdαβγϕαϕβϕγ
+ 1
2(DµφaA)2 + 1
2gdabαφaAφbAϕα ,
(5.3)
where the last term is a non-standard coupling to the scalar ϕα. This term needs to be
included if the theory is to obey color-kinematics duality. Computing amplitudes up to
eight points for the external physical gluons or the adjoint scalars (i.e. external adjoint
particles), again conﬁrms that the theory obeys the duality. Other than the gauge coupling
constant, the number of scalars and the gauge-group rank, there are no free parameters
allowed by the duality (with the above limited choice of operators).
The double copy between the extended theory (5.3) and (super-)Yang-Mills will include
N abelian vectors, thus the (super)gravity theory will be of Maxwell-Weyl type,
 N = 0, 1, 2, 4 Maxwell-Weyl SG

=
 (DF)2 + scalars

⊗
 N = 0, 1, 2, 4 SYM

,
(5.4)
where, as before, the theories are non-minimal conformal (super)gravities.
5.4
Adding φ3 Interactions to (DF)2: Yang-Mills-Weyl Gravity
Starting from the double copy (5.4), we can immediately gauge the global symmetry group
that the N vectors transforms under, giving Yang-Mills-Weyl theories. The idea is the same
as for the double-copy construction of Yang-Mills-Einstein supergravities used in ref. [39].
We introduce a cubic self-interaction between the scalars in the extended dimension-six
theory (5.3).
The φ3 interaction is weighted by structure constants coming from both
the gauge group, f abc, and the global group, ˜f ABC, and it is also weighted by the gauge
coupling and a free parameter λ,
L(DF )2+φ3 = 1
2(DµF a µν)2 −1
3gF 3 + 1
2(Dµϕα)2 + 1
2g CαabϕαF a
µνF b µν + 1
3!g dαβγϕαϕβϕγ
+ 1
2(DµφaA)2 + 1
2g CαabϕαφaAφbA + 1
3!gλ f abc ˜f ABCφaAφbBφcC .
(5.5)
This theory obeys color-kinematics duality for any value of the coupling λ, as has
been checked by explicitly computing the tree amplitudes for external physical gluons and
external adjoint scalars up to eight points.
The double copy between the theory (5.5) and (super-)Yang-Mills now include a non-
abelian Yang-Mills sector,
 N = 0, 1, 2, 4 Yang-Mills-Weyl SG

=
 (DF)2 + φ3
⊗
 N = 0, 1, 2, 4 SYM

,
(5.6)
The global group in (5.5) becomes promoted to the gauge group G, and similarly the free
parameter λ becomes promoted to the gauge coupling, in the Yang-Mills-Weyl supergravity
theories. See ref. [39] for further details in the analogous Yang-Mills-Einstein case.
– 27 –

5.5
Combining Deformations: Yang-Mills-Weyl-Einstein Gravity
Finally, we can combine all the deformations and extensions of the dimension-six theory.
The Lagrangian is
L(DF )2+YM+φ3 = 1
2(DµF a µν)2 −1
3gF 3 + 1
2(Dµϕα)2 + 1
2g CαabϕαF a
µνF b µν
+ 1
3!g dαβγϕαϕβϕγ + 1
2(DµφaA)2 + 1
2g CαabϕαφaAφbA
+ 1
3!gλ f abc ˜f ABCφaAφbBφcC −1
2m2(ϕα)2 −1
4m2(F a
µν)2 .
(5.7)
Remarkably, the theory still obeys color-kinematics duality for any value of the mass m
and coupling λ, as we have checked up to eight points at tree level.
The theory interpolates between the (DF)2 + φ3 theory (5.5) in the m →0 limit, and
YM + φ3 theory in the m →∞limit. The latter theory was ﬁrst described in ref. [39].
Interestingly, the YM + φ3 theory has a quartic interaction between the φaA scalars, which
is not visible in the Lagrangian (5.7). It turns out that this quartic term only appears in
the m →∞limit after integrating out the inﬁnitely massive ϕα, which now has become
an auxiliary ﬁeld.
The double copy between the theory (5.7) and (super-)Yang-Mills gives amplitudes in
Yang-Mills-Weyl-Einstein (super)gravities,
 N = 0, 1, 2, 4 Yang-Mills-Weyl-Einstein SG

=
 (DF)2+YM+φ3
⊗
 N = 0, 1, 2, 4 SYM

,
(5.8)
where, in the gravity theory, the parameters m and λ are proportional to the Planck mass
and gauge coupling constant, respectively. Similar to the maximally supersymmetric Weyl-
Einstein theory, it would be interesting to work out the coeﬃcient of the one-loop conformal
anomaly for the N = 4 Yang-Mills-Weyl-Einstein theory.
6
Conclusions
In this paper, we have studied amplitudes in conformal gravity theories obtained from
double copies between (super-)Yang-Mills theories and a new bosonic gauge theory that
is built entirely out dimension-six operators (using D = 6 counting).
The new gauge
theory was uniquely determined using an ansatz consisting of ﬁve gauge-invariant operators
and imposing that the resulting scattering amplitudes obey color-kinematics duality. By
construction, the gauge theory is marginal, or classically conformal, in six dimensions.
Related to this, it has a four-derivative kinetic term with associated 1/p4 propagators
and ghost states. The appearance of ghosts in the gauge theory not surprising given that
conformal gravity has precisely such states.
By general consistency of the duality between color and kinematics [1, 2], one is guar-
anteed to obtain scattering amplitudes in some gravitational theory (i.e.
a diﬀeomor-
phism invariant theory with massless spin-2 states) from the double copy between two
duality-satisfying gauge theories [34]. By dimensional arguments the double copy between
– 28 –

the dimension-six theory and N = 0, 1, 2, 4 (super-)Yang-Mills give amplitudes in (su-
per)gravity theories built out of curvature squared invariants, where the amount of super-
symmetry is inherited from the Yang-Mills theory. Theories of this type include conformal
supergravities, and explicit amplitude calculations conﬁrm that this is indeed the class of
theories given by the double copy.
Speciﬁcally, the obtained conformal gravity theories are of the non-minimal type, im-
plying that there are non-trivial scalar functions multiplying the curvature squared invari-
ants. (The minimal conformal (super)gravities have a trivial S-matrix for physical external
states in four-dimensional ﬂat space [93–95].) The non-minimal theories are perhaps most
familiar in the context of N = 4 conformal supergravities where the distinction is impor-
tant in the analysis of potential conformal and global anomalies [89, 97, 112]. Maximally
supersymmetric conformal gravity is obtained by the double copy between N = 4 SYM and
the new dimension-six gauge theory. The amplitudes that this construction gives agrees
with the Berkovits-Witten conformal gravity twistor string [88] (which is a closed subsector
of Witten’s original twistor string [86]). We have checked this explicitly up to eight points
in the MHV sector. It would be interesting to also check this in more complicated NkMHV
helicity sectors, and for amplitudes with non-physical ghost states on the external legs (e.g.
see calculations in ref. [114]).
The bosonic dimension-six gauge theory was constructed out of dimension-agnostic
operators, and thus it can be used to compute amplitudes in any spacetime dimension. The
conformal supergravity double copy is then valid in any dimension where a corresponding
super-Yang-Mills theory exists.
Ten-dimensional N = 1 conformal supergravity is an
especially interesting case, since a unique action has been constructed for it a long time
ago by de Roo [100]. Given that the double copy computes ten-dimensional amplitudes in a
curvature-squared theory, with supersymmetry manifestly inherited from ten-dimensional
SYM, one can expect that double copy is uniquely identiﬁed with the theory in ref. [100].
It would be interesting to conﬁrm this by explicit calculations using the known action.
The new dimension-six gauge theory admits several deformations that respects the
color-kinematics duality. We considered the addition of an arbitrary number of adjoint
scalars. The needed couplings involve operators beyond the covariantized kinetic terms;
however, all relative parameters are uniquely ﬁxed by the duality. The resulting double copy
with super-Yang-Mills theories give amplitudes in (non-minimal) Maxwell-Weyl conformal
supergravities, where the number of photons are determined by the number of scalars in the
underlying gauge theory. The global symmetry of the photons can be gauged by introducing
λφ3 self-interactions in the dimension-six gauge theory, where λ is unconstrained by the
duality. The resulting double copy with super-Yang-Mills theories give amplitudes in (non-
minimal) Yang-Mills-Weyl conformal supergravities, where λ plays the role of the non-
abelian coupling constant. This construction is analogous to the double copy for Yang-
Mills-Einstein supergravity [39].
The dimension-six gauge theory can also be deformed by a regular Yang-Mills term,
m2F 2, which gives a mass to the gluon ghost state, separating it from the massless physical
gluon. An additional mass term is needed for a scalar that appears in the gauge theory,
in order for the duality to be preserved under this deformation. This results in a one-
– 29 –

parameter family of duality satisfying gauge theories, interpolating between the dimension-
six theory and the dimension-four Yang-Mills theory.
The double copy of this theory
with super-Yang-Mills theory gives a supergravity theory that interpolates between four-
derivative conformal gravity and two-derivative Einstein gravity.
Finally, combining all the deformations, the duality still holds and the double copy gives
amplitudes in Yang-Mills-Weyl-Einstein supergravities. If it would not be for the ghost
states in the Weyl sector, these theories would be very interesting from a phenomenologi-
cal point of view, as they can be made to agree with standard model physics and Einstein
gravity at low energies, and at the same time be have a behavior consistent with renormal-
izable or UV ﬁnite theories at high energies. Given that the ghost state of the Weyl sector
can be traced back to the ghost states of the dimension-six gauge theory, one can have
some hope that these states may be better understood in the much simpler framework of
gauge theories.
Beyond the four-derivative gravity theories considered so far, the double copy can also
be applied to two copies of the dimension six gauge theory,
(DF)2 ⊗(DF)2 ∼(∇R)2 + R3 ,
(6.1)
which by dimensional counting must give rise to a bosonic six-derivative gravity theory
that is marginal in six dimensions. The schematic form is indicated here (with R being the
Riemann tensor or Ricci tensor/scalar), but other than recognizing the need for a kinetic
term of the form (∇R)2 and an interaction term of the form R3, no eﬀort has gone into
studying this theory. This theory has 1/p6 propagators, and thus the problem with ghost
states is even more severe.
The duality between color and kinematics has been observed to also apply to the NLSM
or chiral Lagrangian [72–77]. A number of diﬀerent double copies has been constructed
using the NLSM amplitudes and numerators.
Given the increased arsenal of ﬁve new
gauge theories that obeys color-kinematics duality: i.e the theories in eqs. (4.30), (5.1),
(5.5), (5.3) and (5.7), we can obtain various new double copies with the NLSM amplitudes.
The simplest one is obtained using the undeformed dimension-six theory (4.30), giving a
schematic double copy involving Einstein gravity and higher-derivative photon terms
(DF)2 ⊗NLSM ∼Einstein gravity + (∇F)2 + . . .
(6.2)
A more detailed Lagrangian for this theory is given in ref. [115].
We conclude by noting that in this work signiﬁcant progress has been made in un-
derstanding the double copy structure of conformal (super)gravity theories, expressing the
amplitudes as a product of contributions coming from simpler-to-understand gauge theo-
ries. Given the deep connection between superconformal theories and ultraviolet ﬁniteness,
we hope that the current work will shed some light on the problem of potential ultraviolet
divergences in supergravity.
Acknowledgments
We thank Tim Adamo, Johannes Broedel, Paolo Di Vecchia, Yvonne Geyer, Oliver Schlot-
terer, and Arkady Tseytlin for stimulating discussions on conformal gravity and related
– 30 –

theories. We also thank Thales Azevedo, Marco Chiodaroli, Murat G¨unaydin, and Radu
Roiban for collaborations on topics closely related to this work. H.J. would like to thank
the Kavli Institute for Theoretical Physics in Santa Barbara for hospitality during the
program “Scattering Amplitudes and Beyond”, where part of this work was completed.
This research is supported in part by the Swedish Research Council under grant 621-2014-
5722, the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation under grant KAW 2013.0235, the Ragnar
S¨oderberg Foundation under grant S1/16, and by the National Science Foundation under
grant NSF PHY-1125915.
A
Feynman Rules
Below we give the Feynman rules for the undeformed dimension-six theory (4.30); for
completeness we give the Lagrangian here again
L(DF )2 = 1
2(DµF a µν)2−1
3gF 3+1
2(Dµϕα)2+1
2g CαabϕαF a
µνF b µν+ 1
3!g dαβγϕαϕβϕγ . (A.1)
We gauge-ﬁx the Lagrangian by introducing a term
1
2ξ (∂µ∂νAa ν)2, and then set ξ = 1
to obtain the propagators in a Feynman-like gauge:
p
µ
a
ν
b
=
iηµνδab
p4
p
α
β
=
iδαβ
p2
As is conventional the gluons are represented by the curly lines, and the scalar ϕα, in the
auxiliary representation R, is marked by dashed lines.
There are four distinct cubic vertices, three distinct quartic vertices, two quintic ver-
tices and ﬁnally one sextic vertex:
– 31 –

1
2
3
=
gf a1a2a3
p2 · (p2 + p3) pµ3
3 ηµ1µ2 −
 p2
1 + (p1 + p3)2
pµ3
2 ηµ1µ2
+ pµ1
3
  2
3pµ2
1 pµ3
2 + 2pµ2
2 pµ3
2 + pµ2
2 pµ3
3

+ perm.(1, 2, 3)
1
2
3
=
−2igCα3a1a2(p1 · p2ηµ1µ2 −pµ1
2 pµ2
1 )
1
2
3
=
ig(T a3
R )α1α2(p1 −p2)µ3
1
2
3
=
igdα1α2α3
– 32 –

1
2
3
4
=
−ig2f a1a2bf ba3a4
×

1
2p2 · p4ηµ1µ2ηµ3µ4 + (p3 + p4) · p4ηµ1µ4ηµ2µ3
−
 1
2pµ1
1 pµ4
4 + 2pµ1
4 pµ4
3 + 2pµ1
2 pµ4
4 + pµ1
4 pµ4
4

ηµ2µ3
+ pµ1
4 (2p1 + p2 + p3)µ2ηµ3µ4 + 2pµ1
2 pµ3
4 ηµ2µ4
+ perm.(1, 2, 3, 4)
1
2
3
4
=
−2g2f a1a2bCα4ba3pµ1
3 ηµ2µ3 + perm.(1, 2, 3)
1
2
3
4
=
−ig2 
(T a1
R )α3β(T a2
R )α4β + (T a1
R )α4β(T a2
R )α3β
ηµ1µ2
1
2
3
4
5
=
g3f a1a2bf ba3cf ca4a5
×

pµ5
2 ηµ1µ2ηµ3µ4 + (2p3 + 2p4 + p5)µ5ηµ1µ4ηµ2µ3

+ perm.(1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
1
2
3
4
5
=
−1
2ig3f a1a2bf a3a4cCα5bcηµ1µ4ηµ2µ3 + perm.(1, 2, 3, 4)
1
2
3
4
5
6
=
ig4
f a1a2bf ba3cf ca4df da5a6ηµ1µ6ηµ2µ3ηµ4µ5
+ f a1a2bf a3a4cf a5a6df bcdηµ1µ6ηµ2µ4ηµ3µ5

+ perm.(1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
– 33 –

B
Pictorial Lie Algebra Relations
In this appendix we give pictorial forms of the Lie-algebra relations that are used for
reducing the tree-level color factors into a basis.
In particular, if all m external legs are transforming in the adjoint then these identities
reduce the color factors to the usual (m−2)! Kleiss-Kuijf/Del Duca-Dixon-Maltoni basis [90,
91], consisting of strings of contracted f abc’s. If all but one of the external legs are in the
adjoint, and the last leg is in the auxiliary representation R, the color factors can be reduced
to at most one (Cα)ab tensor times a string of contracted f abc’s.
In order to compute loop level amplitudes in the dimension-six theory (4.30) one also
need to know how to evaluate the symmetric traces STr(T a1
R T a2
R · · · T a2k
R ); we leave this
exercise to future work.
a
b
α
β
c
=
a
b
α
β
γ
−
a
b
α
β
γ
f abc(iT c
R)αβ
=
(iT b
R)αγ(iT a
R)γβ −(iT a
R)αγ(iT b
R)γβ
a
b
c
d
e
=
a
b
c
d
e
−
a
b
c
d
e
f abef ecd
=
f bcef eda
−
f acef edb
a
b
c
d
α
=
−
a
b
c
d
α
−
a
b
c
d
α
(Cα)ab(Cα)cd
=
−(Cα)bc(Cα)da
−(Cα)ac(Cα)db
Figure 1: (a): The relation (4.14) that enforces that (T a
R)αβ is a covariant tensor under
inﬁnitesimal gauge-group rotations. (b): The Jacobi identity (enforces that f abc is a covari-
ant tensor under inﬁnitesimal gauge-group rotations). (c): A nice but redundant relation;
it follows directly from the identity in ﬁgure 2(a).
– 34 –

a
b
c
d
α
=
a
b
c
d
e
+
a
b
c
d
e
(Cα)ab(Cα)cd
=
f bcef eda
+
f acef edb
a
b
c
α
β
=
a
b
c
α
e
+
a
b
c
α
e
(Cβ)ab(iT c
R)αβ
=
(Cα)aef bce
+
(Cα)bef ace
Figure 2: (a): The reduction relation (4.31) for contracting two (Cα)ab tensors. (b): The
relation (4.15) that enforces that (Cα)ab is a covariant tensor under inﬁnitesimal gauge-
group rotations.
=
+
α
β
γ
a
δ
α
β
γ
a
δ
α
β
γ
a
δ
dαβδ(iT a
R)δγ
=
dβγδ(iT a
R)αδ
+
dαγδ(iT a
R)βδ
α
β
a
b
γ
dαβγ(Cγ)ab
=
=
α
β
a
b
γ
(iT a
R)γβ(iT b
R)αγ
+
+
α
β
a
b
γ
(iT a
R)γα(iT b
R)βγ
+
+
α
β
a
b
c
(Cβ)ac(Cα)cb
+
+
α
β
a
b
c
(Cα)ac(Cβ)cb
Figure 3: (a): The relation (4.16) that enforces that dαβγ is a covariant tensor under
inﬁnitesimal gauge-group rotations. (b): The reduction relation (4.32) for dαβγ contracted
with (Cγ)ab; it can be more compactly written in terms of anti-commutators: dαβγ(Cγ)ab =
{iT a
R, iT b
R}αβ + {Cα, Cβ}ab.
– 35 –

References
[1] Z. Bern, J. J. M. Carrasco and H. Johansson, New Relations for Gauge-Theory Amplitudes,
Phys. Rev. D78 (2008) 085011, [0805.3993].
[2] Z. Bern, J. J. M. Carrasco and H. Johansson, Perturbative Quantum Gravity as a Double
Copy of Gauge Theory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 105 (2010) 061602, [1004.0476].
[3] H. Johansson and A. Ochirov, Pure Gravities via Color-Kinematics Duality for
Fundamental Matter, JHEP 11 (2015) 046, [1407.4772].
[4] H. Johansson and A. Ochirov, Color-Kinematics Duality for QCD Amplitudes,
JHEP 01 (2016) 170, [1507.00332].
[5] T. Bargheer, S. He and T. McLoughlin, New Relations for Three-Dimensional
Supersymmetric Scattering Amplitudes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 108 (2012) 231601, [1203.0562].
[6] S. Stieberger, Open & Closed vs. Pure Open String Disk Amplitudes, 0907.2211.
[7] N. E. J. Bjerrum-Bohr, P. H. Damgaard, T. Sondergaard and P. Vanhove, The Momentum
Kernel of Gauge and Gravity Theories, JHEP 01 (2011) 001, [1010.3933].
[8] L. de la Cruz, A. Kniss and S. Weinzierl, Proof of the fundamental BCJ relations for QCD
amplitudes, JHEP 09 (2015) 197, [1508.01432].
[9] J. J. Carrasco and H. Johansson, Five-Point Amplitudes in N=4 Super-Yang-Mills Theory
and N=8 Supergravity, Phys. Rev. D85 (2012) 025006, [1106.4711].
[10] Z. Bern, J. J. M. Carrasco, L. J. Dixon, H. Johansson and R. Roiban, Simplifying Multiloop
Integrands and Ultraviolet Divergences of Gauge Theory and Gravity Amplitudes,
Phys. Rev. D85 (2012) 105014, [1201.5366].
[11] J. J. M. Carrasco, M. Chiodaroli, M. Gunaydin and R. Roiban, One-loop four-point
amplitudes in pure and matter-coupled N <= 4 supergravity, JHEP 03 (2013) 056,
[1212.1146].
[12] N. E. J. Bjerrum-Bohr, T. Dennen, R. Monteiro and D. O’Connell, Integrand Oxidation and
One-Loop Colour-Dual Numerators in N=4 Gauge Theory, JHEP 07 (2013) 092,
[1303.2913].
[13] Z. Bern, S. Davies, T. Dennen, Y.-t. Huang and J. Nohle, Color-Kinematics Duality for
Pure Yang-Mills and Gravity at One and Two Loops, Phys. Rev. D92 (2015) 045041,
[1303.6605].
[14] J. Nohle, Color-Kinematics Duality in One-Loop Four-Gluon Amplitudes with Matter,
Phys. Rev. D90 (2014) 025020, [1309.7416].
[15] M. Chiodaroli, Q. Jin and R. Roiban, Color/kinematics duality for general abelian orbifolds
of N=4 super Yang-Mills theory, JHEP 01 (2014) 152, [1311.3600].
[16] C. R. Mafra and O. Schlotterer, Two-loop ﬁve-point amplitudes of super Yang-Mills and
supergravity in pure spinor superspace, JHEP 10 (2015) 124, [1505.02746].
[17] S. He, R. Monteiro and O. Schlotterer, String-inspired BCJ numerators for one-loop MHV
amplitudes, JHEP 01 (2016) 171, [1507.06288].
[18] G. Mogull and D. O’Connell, Overcoming Obstacles to Colour-Kinematics Duality at Two
Loops, JHEP 12 (2015) 135, [1511.06652].
– 36 –

[19] H. Johansson, G. Klin and G. Mogull, Two-loop supersymmetric QCD and half-maximal
supergravity amplitudes, 1706.09381.
[20] Z. Bern, C. Boucher-Veronneau and H. Johansson, N >= 4 Supergravity Amplitudes from
Gauge Theory at One Loop, Phys. Rev. D84 (2011) 105035, [1107.1935].
[21] C. Boucher-Veronneau and L. J. Dixon, N >= 4 Supergravity Amplitudes from Gauge
Theory at Two Loops, JHEP 12 (2011) 046, [1110.1132].
[22] M. Chiodaroli, M. Gunaydin, H. Johansson and R. Roiban, Complete construction of
magical, symmetric and homogeneous N=2 supergravities as double copies of gauge theories,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 117 (2016) 011603, [1512.09130].
[23] N. E. J. Bjerrum-Bohr, P. H. Damgaard and P. Vanhove, Minimal Basis for Gauge Theory
Amplitudes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 (2009) 161602, [0907.1425].
[24] C. R. Mafra, O. Schlotterer and S. Stieberger, Explicit BCJ Numerators from Pure Spinors,
JHEP 07 (2011) 092, [1104.5224].
[25] J. Broedel and L. J. Dixon, Color-kinematics duality and double-copy construction for
amplitudes from higher-dimension operators, JHEP 10 (2012) 091, [1208.0876].
[26] Y.-t. Huang and H. Johansson, Equivalent D=3 Supergravity Amplitudes from Double
Copies of Three-Algebra and Two-Algebra Gauge Theories,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 110 (2013) 171601, [1210.2255].
[27] Y.-t. Huang, H. Johansson and S. Lee, On Three-Algebra and Bi-Fundamental Matter
Amplitudes and Integrability of Supergravity, JHEP 11 (2013) 050, [1307.2222].
[28] F. Cachazo, Fundamental BCJ Relation in N=4 SYM From The Connected Formulation,
1206.5970.
[29] F. Cachazo and Y. Geyer, A ’Twistor String’ Inspired Formula For Tree-Level Scattering
Amplitudes in N=8 SUGRA, 1206.6511.
[30] F. Cachazo, S. He and E. Y. Yuan, Scattering of Massless Particles in Arbitrary
Dimensions, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 171601, [1307.2199].
[31] F. Cachazo, S. He and E. Y. Yuan, Scattering of Massless Particles: Scalars, Gluons and
Gravitons, JHEP 07 (2014) 033, [1309.0885].
[32] C. R. Mafra and O. Schlotterer, Berends-Giele recursions and the BCJ duality in
superspace and components, JHEP 03 (2016) 097, [1510.08846].
[33] N. E. J. Bjerrum-Bohr, J. L. Bourjaily, P. H. Damgaard and B. Feng, Manifesting
Color-Kinematics Duality in the Scattering Equation Formalism, JHEP 09 (2016) 094,
[1608.00006].
[34] M. Chiodaroli, M. Gunaydin, H. Johansson and R. Roiban, Explicit Formulae for
Yang-Mills-Einstein Amplitudes from the Double Copy, 1703.00421.
[35] Y.-J. Du and F. Teng, BCJ numerators from reduced Pfaﬃan, JHEP 04 (2017) 033,
[1703.05717].
[36] R. H. Boels and R. S. Isermann, New relations for scattering amplitudes in Yang-Mills
theory at loop level, Phys. Rev. D85 (2012) 021701, [1109.5888].
[37] Z. Bern, J. J. M. Carrasco, H. Johansson and R. Roiban, The Five-Loop Four-Point
Amplitude of N=4 super-Yang-Mills Theory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 109 (2012) 241602,
[1207.6666].
– 37 –

[38] R. H. Boels, R. S. Isermann, R. Monteiro and D. O’Connell, Colour-Kinematics Duality for
One-Loop Rational Amplitudes, JHEP 04 (2013) 107, [1301.4165].
[39] M. Chiodaroli, M. Gnaydin, H. Johansson and R. Roiban, Scattering amplitudes in N = 2
Maxwell-Einstein and Yang-Mills/Einstein supergravity, JHEP 01 (2015) 081, [1408.0764].
[40] M. Chiodaroli, M. Gunaydin, H. Johansson and R. Roiban, Spontaneously Broken
Yang-Mills-Einstein Supergravities as Double Copies, JHEP 06 (2017) 064, [1511.01740].
[41] A. Luna, S. Melville, S. G. Naculich and C. D. White, Next-to-soft corrections to high
energy scattering in QCD and gravity, JHEP 01 (2017) 052, [1611.02172].
[42] S. He and O. Schlotterer, New Relations for Gauge-Theory and Gravity Amplitudes at Loop
Level, Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 (2017) 161601, [1612.00417].
[43] S. He, O. Schlotterer and Y. Zhang, New BCJ representations for one-loop amplitudes in
gauge theories and gravity, 1706.00640.
[44] Z. Bern, S. Davies, T. Dennen and Y.-t. Huang, Ultraviolet Cancellations in Half-Maximal
Supergravity as a Consequence of the Double-Copy Structure,
Phys. Rev. D86 (2012) 105014, [1209.2472].
[45] Z. Bern, S. Davies, T. Dennen, A. V. Smirnov and V. A. Smirnov, Ultraviolet Properties of
N=4 Supergravity at Four Loops, Phys. Rev. Lett. 111 (2013) 231302, [1309.2498].
[46] Z. Bern, S. Davies and T. Dennen, The Ultraviolet Structure of Half-Maximal Supergravity
with Matter Multiplets at Two and Three Loops, Phys. Rev. D88 (2013) 065007,
[1305.4876].
[47] Z. Bern, S. Davies and T. Dennen, The Ultraviolet Critical Dimension of Half-Maximal
Supergravity at Three Loops, 1412.2441.
[48] R. H. Boels, B. A. Kniehl, O. V. Tarasov and G. Yang, Color-kinematic Duality for Form
Factors, JHEP 02 (2013) 063, [1211.7028].
[49] R. Boels, B. A. Kniehl and G. Yang, Master integrals for the four-loop Sudakov form factor,
Nucl. Phys. B902 (2016) 387–414, [1508.03717].
[50] G. Yang, Color-kinematics duality and Sudakov form factor at ﬁve loops for N=4
supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117 (2016) 271602, [1610.02394].
[51] R. H. Boels, T. Huber and G. Yang, The four-loop non-planar cusp anomalous dimension
in N = 4 SYM, 1705.03444.
[52] R. Saotome and R. Akhoury, Relationship Between Gravity and Gauge Scattering in the
High Energy Limit, JHEP 01 (2013) 123, [1210.8111].
[53] R. Monteiro, D. O’Connell and C. D. White, Black holes and the double copy,
JHEP 12 (2014) 056, [1410.0239].
[54] A. Luna, R. Monteiro, D. O’Connell and C. D. White, The classical double copy for
Taub-NUT spacetime, Phys. Lett. B750 (2015) 272–277, [1507.01869].
[55] A. K. Ridgway and M. B. Wise, Static Spherically Symmetric Kerr-Schild Metrics and
Implications for the Classical Double Copy, Phys. Rev. D94 (2016) 044023, [1512.02243].
[56] C. D. White, Exact solutions for the biadjoint scalar ﬁeld,
Phys. Lett. B763 (2016) 365–369, [1606.04724].
– 38 –

[57] A. Luna, R. Monteiro, I. Nicholson, D. O’Connell and C. D. White, The double copy:
Bremsstrahlung and accelerating black holes, JHEP 06 (2016) 023, [1603.05737].
[58] G. Cardoso, S. Nagy and S. Nampuri, Multi-centered N = 2 BPS black holes: a double copy
description, JHEP 04 (2017) 037, [1611.04409].
[59] A. Luna, R. Monteiro, I. Nicholson, A. Ochirov, D. O’Connell, N. Westerberg et al.,
Perturbative spacetimes from Yang-Mills theory, JHEP 04 (2017) 069, [1611.07508].
[60] W. D. Goldberger and A. K. Ridgway, Radiation and the classical double copy for color
charges, 1611.03493.
[61] W. D. Goldberger, S. G. Prabhu and J. O. Thompson, Classical gluon and graviton
radiation from the bi-adjoint scalar double copy, 1705.09263.
[62] T. Adamo, E. Casali, L. Mason and S. Nekovar, Scattering on plane waves and the double
copy, 1706.08925.
[63] L. Borsten, M. J. Duﬀ, L. J. Hughes and S. Nagy, Magic Square from Yang-Mills Squared,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 112 (2014) 131601, [1301.4176].
[64] A. Anastasiou, L. Borsten, M. J. Duﬀ, L. J. Hughes and S. Nagy, Super Yang-Mills,
division algebras and triality, JHEP 08 (2014) 080, [1309.0546].
[65] A. Anastasiou, L. Borsten, M. J. Duﬀ, L. J. Hughes and S. Nagy, A magic pyramid of
supergravities, JHEP 04 (2014) 178, [1312.6523].
[66] A. Anastasiou, L. Borsten, M. J. Duﬀ, L. J. Hughes and S. Nagy, Yang-Mills origin of
gravitational symmetries, Phys. Rev. Lett. 113 (2014) 231606, [1408.4434].
[67] A. Anastasiou, L. Borsten, M. J. Hughes and S. Nagy, Global symmetries of Yang-Mills
squared in various dimensions, JHEP 01 (2016) 148, [1502.05359].
[68] M. Chiodaroli, Simplifying amplitudes in Maxwell-Einstein and Yang-Mills-Einstein
supergravities, 2016. 1607.04129.
[69] N. Arkani-Hamed, L. Rodina and J. Trnka, Locality and Unitarity from Singularities and
Gauge Invariance, 1612.02797.
[70] Z. Bern, T. Dennen, Y.-t. Huang and M. Kiermaier, Gravity as the Square of Gauge
Theory, Phys. Rev. D82 (2010) 065003, [1004.0693].
[71] R. Monteiro and D. O’Connell, The Kinematic Algebra From the Self-Dual Sector,
JHEP 07 (2011) 007, [1105.2565].
[72] C. Cheung and C.-H. Shen, Symmetry for Flavor-Kinematics Duality from an Action,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 (2017) 121601, [1612.00868].
[73] G. Chen and Y.-J. Du, Amplitude Relations in Non-linear Sigma Model,
JHEP 01 (2014) 061, [1311.1133].
[74] C. Cheung, K. Kampf, J. Novotny and J. Trnka, Eﬀective Field Theories from Soft Limits
of Scattering Amplitudes, Phys. Rev. Lett. 114 (2015) 221602, [1412.4095].
[75] F. Cachazo, S. He and E. Y. Yuan, Scattering Equations and Matrices: From Einstein To
Yang-Mills, DBI and NLSM, JHEP 07 (2015) 149, [1412.3479].
[76] Y.-J. Du and C.-H. Fu, Explicit BCJ numerators of nonlinear simga model,
JHEP 09 (2016) 174, [1606.05846].
– 39 –

[77] J. J. M. Carrasco, C. R. Mafra and O. Schlotterer, Abelian Z-theory: NLSM amplitudes and
alpha’-corrections from the open string, 1608.02569.
[78] H. Kawai, D. C. Lewellen and S. H. H. Tye, A Relation Between Tree Amplitudes of Closed
and Open Strings, Nucl. Phys. B269 (1986) 1–23.
[79] P. Tourkine and P. Vanhove, Higher-loop amplitude monodromy relations in string and
gauge theory, Phys. Rev. Lett. 117 (2016) 211601, [1608.01665].
[80] S. Hohenegger and S. Stieberger, Monodromy Relations in Higher-Loop String Amplitudes,
1702.04963.
[81] C. R. Mafra, O. Schlotterer and S. Stieberger, Complete N-Point Superstring Disk
Amplitude II. Amplitude and Hypergeometric Function Structure,
Nucl. Phys. B873 (2013) 461–513, [1106.2646].
[82] C. R. Mafra and O. Schlotterer, The Structure of n-Point One-Loop Open Superstring
Amplitudes, JHEP 08 (2014) 099, [1203.6215].
[83] J. Broedel, O. Schlotterer and S. Stieberger, Polylogarithms, Multiple Zeta Values and
Superstring Amplitudes, Fortsch. Phys. 61 (2013) 812–870, [1304.7267].
[84] Y.-t. Huang, O. Schlotterer and C. Wen, Universality in string interactions,
JHEP 09 (2016) 155, [1602.01674].
[85] J. J. M. Carrasco, C. R. Mafra and O. Schlotterer, Semi-abelian Z-theory: NLSM+φ3 from
the open string, 1612.06446.
[86] E. Witten, Perturbative gauge theory as a string theory in twistor space,
Commun. Math. Phys. 252 (2004) 189–258, [hep-th/0312171].
[87] R. Roiban, M. Spradlin and A. Volovich, On the tree level S matrix of Yang-Mills theory,
Phys. Rev. D70 (2004) 026009, [hep-th/0403190].
[88] N. Berkovits and E. Witten, Conformal supergravity in twistor-string theory,
JHEP 08 (2004) 009, [hep-th/0406051].
[89] E. S. Fradkin and A. A. Tseytlin, Conformal Anomaly in Weyl Theory and Anomaly Free
Superconformal Theories, Phys. Lett. 134B (1984) 187.
[90] V. Del Duca, L. J. Dixon and F. Maltoni, New color decompositions for gauge amplitudes at
tree and loop level, Nucl. Phys. B571 (2000) 51–70, [hep-ph/9910563].
[91] R. Kleiss and H. Kuijf, Multi - Gluon Cross-sections and Five Jet Production at Hadron
Colliders, Nucl. Phys. B312 (1989) 616–644.
[92] M. Kiermaier, “Gravity as the Square of Gauge Theory.” Talk at Amplitudes 2010 at
QMUL, London, UK., May 2010,
http://www.strings.ph.qmul.ac.uk/~theory/Amplitudes2010/.
[93] J. Maldacena, Einstein Gravity from Conformal Gravity, 1105.5632.
[94] T. Adamo and L. Mason, Conformal and Einstein gravity from twistor actions,
Class. Quant. Grav. 31 (2014) 045014, [1307.5043].
[95] T. Adamo, P. Hhnel and T. McLoughlin, Conformal higher spin scattering amplitudes from
twistor space, JHEP 04 (2017) 021, [1611.06200].
[96] B. de Wit and S. Ferrara, On Higher Order Invariants in Extended Supergravity,
Phys. Lett. 81B (1979) 317–320.
– 40 –

[97] E. S. Fradkin and A. A. Tseytlin, CONFORMAL SUPERGRAVITY,
Phys. Rept. 119 (1985) 233–362.
[98] D. Butter, F. Ciceri, B. de Wit and B. Sahoo, All N=4 Conformal Supergravities,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 118 (2017) 081602, [1609.09083].
[99] E. Bergshoeﬀ, A. Salam and E. Sezgin, Supersymmetric R**2 Actions, Conformal
Invariance and Lorentz Chern-simons Term in Six-dimensions and Ten-dimensions,
Nucl. Phys. B279 (1987) 659–683.
[100] M. de Roo, The R**2 action in d = 10 conformal supergravity,
Nucl. Phys. B372 (1992) 243–269.
[101] E. Bergshoeﬀ, M. de Roo and B. de Wit, Conformal Supergravity in Ten-dimensions,
Nucl. Phys. B217 (1983) 489.
[102] P. K. Townsend and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Simpliﬁcations of Conformal Supergravity,
Phys. Rev. D19 (1979) 3166.
[103] M. Kaku, P. K. Townsend and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Properties of Conformal Supergravity,
Phys. Rev. D17 (1978) 3179.
[104] E. Bergshoeﬀ, M. de Roo and B. de Wit, Extended Conformal Supergravity,
Nucl. Phys. B182 (1981) 173–204.
[105] M. Kaku, P. K. Townsend and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Gauge Theory of the Conformal and
Superconformal Group, Phys. Lett. 69B (1977) 304–308.
[106] S. Ferrara and B. Zumino, Structure of Conformal Supergravity,
Nucl. Phys. B134 (1978) 301–326.
[107] S. Ferrara, M. Kaku, P. K. Townsend and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Gauging the Graded
Conformal Group with Unitary Internal Symmetries, Nucl. Phys. B129 (1977) 125–134.
[108] M. Kaku, P. K. Townsend and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Superconformal Uniﬁed Field Theory,
Phys. Rev. Lett. 39 (1977) 1109.
[109] A. Das, M. Kaku and P. K. Townsend, A Uniﬁed Approach to Matter Coupling in Weyl and
Einstein Supergravity, Phys. Rev. Lett. 40 (1978) 1215.
[110] K. S. Stelle, Renormalization of Higher Derivative Quantum Gravity,
Phys. Rev. D16 (1977) 953–969.
[111] M. Kaku and P. K. Townsend, POINCARE SUPERGRAVITY AS BROKEN
SUPERCONFORMAL GRAVITY, Phys. Lett. 76B (1978) 54–58.
[112] H. Romer and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Axial Anomalies in N = 4 Conformal Supergravity,
Phys. Lett. 162B (1985) 290–294.
[113] J. J. M. Carrasco, R. Kallosh, R. Roiban and A. A. Tseytlin, On the U(1) duality anomaly
and the S-matrix of N=4 supergravity, JHEP 07 (2013) 029, [1303.6219].
[114] L. Dolan and J. N. Ihry, Conformal Supergravity Tree Amplitudes from Open Twistor String
Theory, Nucl. Phys. B819 (2009) 375–399, [0811.1341].
[115] T. Azevedo and O. T. Engelund, Ambitwistor formulations of R2 gravity and (DF)2 gauge
theories, 1707.02192.
– 41 –

