https://doi.org/10.1177/17456916221112072
Perspectives on Psychological Science
﻿1­–25
© The Author(s) 2022
Article reuse guidelines: 
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI: 10.1177/17456916221112072
www.psychologicalscience.org/PPS
ASSOCIATION FOR
PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE
Among primates, human communication is unique in 
that it is characteristically cooperative. Speakers rely on 
the knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes they share with 
listeners—that is, their common ground (CG)—to pack-
age their communicative intentions in ways that listeners 
can readily interpret (Clark, 1996; Tomasello, 2008). In 
doing this, speakers frequently produce linguistic refer-
ring expressions with the intention of inviting listeners 
to jointly attend to intended referents (i.e., the entity to 
which speakers wish to jointly attend; Tomasello, 1998). 
Speakers’ choice of referring expression depends on the 
inferred CG status of intended referents. Speakers typi-
cally use less informative expressions, such as pronouns 
(e.g., “it”), to refer to referents in CG. Conversely, speak-
ers tend to use more informative expressions, such as 
lexical noun phrases (NPs; e.g., “the cup”) when placing 
referents into CG. That is, the relationship between CG 
and reference is an inverse one: More CG is associated 
with less informative reference, whereas less CG is asso-
ciated with more informative reference. The upshot is 
that using CG saves on communicative cost: Speakers 
use the cheapest referring expressions they can “get 
away with,” given their inferences about CG (Ariel, 1988; 
Gundel et al., 1993; see Bohn & Köymen, 2018).
Being a ubiquitous and uniquely human trait, it is 
especially interesting to ask how people come to master 
referential communication. Historically, the approach 
taken by researchers who have asked this question has 
been to evaluate children’s reference using adult com-
munication as yardstick. This approach has resulted in 
what may be called the “deficits” view of early referential 
communication. A classic discussion of children’s refer-
ence illustrates the deficits view (Glucksberg et  al., 
1975). Glucksberg et al. (1975) argued that while “ego-
centrism and role-taking” (p. 324) are unhelpful con-
cepts for analyzing early reference, children’s “speaking 
. . . skills appear to improve with age, with nearly adult 
competence attained by early teens” (p. 336). To support 
these claims, Glucksberg et al. (1975) reviewed literature 
1112072 PPSXXX10.1177/17456916221112072VasilPerspectives on Psychological Science
research-article2022
Corresponding Author:
Jared Vasil, Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke 
University 
Email: jared.vasil@duke.edu
A New Look at Young Children’s  
Referential Informativeness
Jared Vasil
Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Duke University
Abstract
In this article, I review experimental evidence for the dependence of 2- to 5-year-olds’ linguistic referential informativeness  
on cues to common ground (CG) and propose a process model. Cues to CG provide evidence for CG, that is, for the 
shared knowledge, beliefs, and attitudes of interlocutors. The presence of cues to CG (e.g., unimpeded listener line 
of regard or prior mention) is shown to be associated with less informative reference (e.g., pronouns). In contrast, the 
absence of cues to CG (e.g., impeded listener line of regard or new mention) is shown to be associated with more 
informative reference (e.g., nouns). Informativeness is sensitive to linguistic before nonlinguistic cues to CG (i.e., 2.0 
vs. 2.5 years old, respectively). Reference is cast as a process of active inference, a formulation of Bayesian belief-
guided control in biological systems. Child speakers are hierarchical generative models that, characteristically, expect 
sensory evidence for the evolved, prior Bayesian belief that interlocutor mental states are aligned (i.e., that CG exists). 
Referential control emerges as an embodied tool to gather evidence for this prior belief. Bottom-up cues to CG elicited 
by action drive updates to beliefs about CG. In turn, beliefs about CG guide efficient referential control.
Keywords
children, common ground, active inference, reference production

2	
Vasil
on children’s production in referential-communication 
tasks. In these tasks, children single out, via reference, 
an intended referent from nonreferents—that together 
comprise a referential array—following manipulations 
to (cues to) the CG status of referents. For instance, in 
discussing the results of Glucksberg et al. (1966), the 
authors wrote that “dyads were incapable of adequate 
communicative performance” (Glucksberg et al., 1975, 
p. 317) before stating that “young children communi-
cate poorly” as a result of “deficiencies in the . . . skills 
involved [in referential communication]” (Glucksberg 
et al., 1975, p. 332). The deficits view thus advances 
the fundamentally negative point that young children 
are, essentially, bad at reference and that it is not until 
“their early teens [that children demonstrate] normal 
adult competence” (Glucksberg et al., 1975, p. 319).
The deficits view is misguided and misses what is 
interesting about referential communication. Selection 
favors traits that enhance fitness in life-history stages; 
natural selection is blind to teleological adult endpoints 
(Bjorklund & Ellis, 2014). Consequently, if the goal is 
to characterize the ontogeny of a uniquely human trait, 
such as referential communication, then it is more theo-
retically enriching to know whether, how, and which 
experiences influence its expression in ontogeny than 
it is to know its age of mature expression in the phe-
notype (Tomasello, 2019).
Against the deficits view, I argue for a positive view 
on early reference. On this view, forefronted is the  
ability—possessed by young children and adults alike— 
to scale linguistic informativeness according to infer-
ences about CG. In support of this argument, experi-
mental research is reviewed that suggests that children 
use inferences about CG to appropriately scale their 
linguistic informativeness by 2;0 (years;months). By 
adopting the positive view on early reference, one  
must conclude that even young children have “adult 
competence”—a far cry from the suggestion of the defi-
cits account. This conclusion results from shifting the 
definition of adult competence from “doing the same 
thing as adults” (deficits view) to “doing the same kind 
of thing as adults” (positive view), that is, scaling lin-
guistic informativeness inversely with CG (as adults do 
in referential communication tasks; e.g., Winters et al., 
2018).
The positive view is motivated by a model of human 
communication as active inference (Vasil et al., 2020). 
This model portrays speakers as hierarchical models of 
the unobservable causes of sensation (i.e., of the minds 
of agents “like me”). Communicative action is cast as 
motivated, cost-sensitive control guided by the prior 
(Bayesian) belief that one’s mental states are statistically 
similar to those of conspecifics. Referential production 
emerges in these models as a characteristic means to 
gather sensory evidence for this prior belief, on aver-
age, across time. This means that children are hypoth-
esized (a) to be characteristically motivated to 
communicate to align mental states with others (e.g., 
via reference) and (b) to rely on cues to CG to guide 
their expenditure of communicative effort (i.e., their 
informativeness). For example, if a single cup were to 
comprise a jointly attended referential array, then chil-
dren might use this nonlinguistic cue to CG to infer that 
they may felicitously use “it” to refer to the cup, whereas 
no such inference would be licensed were there mul-
tiple cups (instead, “the red cup” would be needed; but 
see Clark et  al., 1983). Likewise, if a red cup were 
discourse topical, then children could use this linguistic 
cue to CG to infer the felicity of endophoric coreference 
using “it,” whereas “the red cup” would be needed for 
contrastive reference. In short, Vasil et al. (2020) claimed 
that—depending on how cues to CG influence their 
inferences about CG—children might feel sufficiently 
confident, or not, to refer using “it” over “the red cup.” 
Specifically, children are argued to perceive cues to CG 
as evidence for probabilistic hypotheses about CG 
(relatedly, see Bohn & Frank, 2019) and to use these 
hypotheses to calibrate their informativeness following 
the inverse pattern, above.
There has thus far been no review of the evidence 
for a general principle for early referential production 
like that advanced here (i.e., the inverse relationship 
between CG and referential informativeness; e.g., Ates¸ 
& Küntay, 2015; de Cat, 2015; Graf & Davies, 2014; 
Nilsen & Fecica, 2011). The utility of this principle is 
demonstrated in a review of a large body of literature. 
Two points about that literature. First, because I am 
concerned with whether and how informativeness 
tracks with cues to CG, in this article, I review literature 
that operationalized informativeness in terms of the 
forms children used (e.g., pronouns, lexical NPs), not 
the “optimality” of their informativeness (e.g., Davies 
& Katsos, 2010). Second, understanding how cues to 
CG influence referential production amounts, in part, 
to understanding the causal influence of the sensory 
“microstructure” (M. C. Frank et al., 2013, p. 21) of 
referring situations on children’s inferences about CG. 
To understand this microstructure, in this review, I 
examine subtle methodological details to critically dis-
cuss and compare studies (Graf & Davies, 2014). The 
review is organized in halves. In the second section, I 
review research on nonlinguistic cues to CG, and in the 
third section, I review research on linguistic cues to 
CG. Figure 1 provides a roadmap for and summary of 
the review. In a fourth section, I elaborate the model 
that motivates the positive view (Vasil et al., 2020).

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
3
Nonlinguistic Cues to Common Ground 
and Young Children’s Referential 
Informativeness
In this section, I discuss nonlinguistic cues to CG. I 
label conditions in the reviewed literature that included 
more cues to CG the “more CG” condition and those 
that included fewer cues to CG the “less CG” condition 
(with variants as needed). This section is split into three 
subsections. In each subsection, I discuss literature on 
one type of nonlinguistic cue to CG (listener line of 
regard, array configuration, and nonlinguistic cues to 
cultural CG) and begin with an introductory paragraph 
followed by a general discussion, discussion of null 
results (when applicable), and a conclusion.
Listener line of regard
Beginning around 9 to 12 months of age, infants begin to 
jointly attend toward triadic entities with caregivers 
(Carpenter et al., 1998). For infants and young children, 
a key behavioral marker of joint attention is the “look 
back,” a listener gaze alternation between child and triadic 
entity (Carpenter & Liebal, 2011). Observing look backs 
ensures infants that intended referents are the focus of 
joint attention and, thus, in CG with listeners (Liszkowski 
et al., 2004, 2007). Importantly, “genuine” look backs 
require that listeners have unimpeded lines of regard 
toward intended referents. For instance, the presence of 
barriers that block listener visual access to intended ref-
erents precludes the possibility of genuine look backs. In 
such cases, there cannot be (visual) joint attention to, and 
therefore no CG about, referents. For adult speakers, one 
way to nonetheless ensure referents are placed into CG 
is to produce more informative reference when listener 
visual access is impeded compared with unimpeded. 
When do children follow this pattern?
General discussion.  In an early investigation, D. K. 
O’Neill (1996) examined whether 2-year-olds adjust their 
informativeness according to listener line of regard. In  
D. K. O’Neill (Study 1), children (2;7) requested a toy 
from caregivers. Children watched as an experimenter 
(E) placed the toy into one of two opaque containers. In 
the more-CG condition, children and caregivers jointly 
attended to E as E placed the toy into one of the contain-
ers. In the less-CG condition, there was no joint attention 
(because either caregivers closed their eyes and covered 
their ears or left the room while E hid the toy). In the 
less-CG condition, children more often linguistically 
referred to the toy or its location on the shelf compared 
with the more-CG condition (in which case children 
often just pointed). This pattern was present at the indi-
vidual level, too: 11 of 15 children were more informative 
in the less-CG condition, whereas only one was less 
informative. These findings suggest that 2-year-olds scale 
their informativeness inversely with cues to CG.
In D. K. O’Neill (1996), children’s linguistic reference 
was coded “coarsely” as having included the name of 
their intended toy (or not) or its location (or not). These 
data are insightful. Nonetheless, one might wonder 
whether young children can make finer-grained distinc-
tions in their informativeness. Might 2-year-olds, for 
instance, use more pronouns when referents are jointly 
accessible and lexical NPs when less accessible? In 
Campbell et al. (2000, Study 1), 2.5- and 3.5-year-olds 
and E1 or E2 played games that required acting out 
transitive events with toys. In the more-CG condition, 
children jointly played with E1 and the toys. In the 
less-CG condition, children played with E2 in E1’s 
Cues to Common Ground
Nonlinguistic Cues to CG
Linguistic Cues to CG
Listener Line
of Regard
• Age: 2;7a
• Younger 
   Tested
• Age: 2;6b
• Younger not
   Tested
• Age: 2;0c
• Younger not
   Tested
• Age: 3;9d
• Younger not
   Tested
Array
Conﬁguration
Cues to
Cultural CG
• Limited 
   Research
Anaphoric
Discourse
Listener
Feedback
Cues to
Cultural CG
• No Research
Section
(Class of Cue to CG)
Subsection
(Type of Cue to CG)
Fig. 1.  Roadmap for and summary of the literature reviewed in the second and third sections. The review follows from left to right. 
The first bullet point states the youngest reported age of group-level effects of the corresponding type of cue to common ground 
(CG) on linguistic informativeness (mean sampled ages in cited studies shown as years;months). The second bullet point states 
whether children younger than the age stated in the first bullet point have been tested. 
aD. K. O’Neill (1996, Study 1). bAbbot-Smith et al. (2016). cWittek and Tomasello (2005, Study 2). dNilsen and Mangal (2012).

4	
Vasil
absence. After playing, in both conditions, E1 asked 
children questions that pulled for reference to one of 
the toys. (Note that E1 and children had joint visual 
access to the referential array of toys during E1’s ques-
tioning and children’s responding.) Ignoring for now 
the parenthetical statement, in the less-CG condition, 
it was predicted that children would produce more 
informative reference to specify their intended referent, 
for example, lexical NPs (i.e., because children have 
less CG with E1). In contrast, in the more-CG condition, 
children were predicted to use less informative refer-
ence, such as pronouns (i.e., because children have 
more CG with E1). In contrast to these predictions, 
however, children were similarly informative in both 
conditions. What might explain this discrepancy?
Noted above in parentheses, E1 and children had 
joint visual access to the referential array during E1’s 
question (Campbell et al., 2000, Study 1). Consequently, 
when responding to E1, children needed to (a) ignore 
that they were jointly attending with E1 to the array but 
were nonetheless merely copresent with E1 and the 
intended referent (see Clark & Marshall, 1981) while 
(b) recalling whether they played with E1 beforehand. 
Therefore, although subtle, this methodological detail 
required that children perform executive operations 
that—when combined with the task of formulating and 
producing linguistic reference—may have been cogni-
tively taxing and so potentially equalized their infor-
mativeness between conditions.
In support of this critique, correlational data provide 
some evidence for a role of executive function in chil-
dren’s referential production. Wardlow and Heyman 
(2016) found that 5- to 7-year-olds’ performance on a 
working memory task correlated positively with their 
tendency to appropriately use modified NPs. Relatedly, 
G. O’Neill and Miller (2013) found that 2.5- to 6-year-
olds who frequently gestured while they explained their 
responses to E on an executive-function task outper-
formed infrequent gesturers on that task (the task 
tapped set switching and inhibitory control). Relevant 
also are the findings by Nilsen and Graham (2009), who 
reported a relationship between 4- and 5-year-olds’ (but 
not 3-year-olds’) inhibitory control and their tendency 
to overattribute CG during referential comprehension 
(but not production) and Moll et al.’s (2011) report that 
2-year-olds’ limited inhibitory control skills may cause 
them to overattribute CG during referential comprehen-
sion. Taken together, these results suggest that task 
demands placed on children in Campbell et al. (2000, 
Study 1) may have masked their referring skills.
Easing the task requirements of Campbell et al. 
(2000), Matthews et al. (2006, Study 1) had 2.5- to 
4.5-year-olds watch transitive events on a TV with E. 
Children were instructed to tell E1 “everything [children] 
could see” (Matthews et al., 2006, p. 408). In the more-
CG condition, E1 and children jointly attended to the 
events onscreen while children referred. In the less-CG 
condition, E1 was behind the TV and so lacked visual 
access to the events at the time of children’s reference 
(cf. Campbell et al., 2000). Instead, children and E2 
jointly attended to the videos while children referred 
for E1. In the less-CG condition, 3- and 4-year-olds used 
lexical nouns more often than in the more-CG condi-
tion. Moreover, 3- and 4-year-olds often used (more 
informative) noun-verb combos in the less-CG condi-
tion and (less informative) pronoun-verb combos in the 
more-CG condition. In contrast, 2-year-olds were simi-
larly informative between conditions. This suggests that 
3- and 4-year-olds capitalize on interlocutor line of 
regard as a nonlinguistic cue to CG, whereas 2-year-
olds do not. These results for 2-year-olds conflict with 
those of D. K. O’Neill (1996), in which 2-year-olds reli-
ably modified their informativeness depending on cues 
to CG. What might explain these differing findings for 
2-year-olds?
The differing findings for 2-year-olds in D. K. O’Neill 
(1996) and Matthews et al. (2006, Study 1) might owe, 
to some extent, to the different linguistic coding 
schemes of the two studies. D. K. O’Neill coded lin-
guistic and nonlinguistic reference (e.g., deictic point-
ing gestures), whereas Matthews et al. (Study 1) coded 
only linguistic reference. As Matthews et al. (p. 421) 
noted, this is probably an important difference because 
2-year-olds often rely on nonlinguistic referential devices 
to supplement linguistic reference (e.g., Tomasello 
et al., 1984; see Discussion section).
Null results.  It is instructive to consider reports of null 
effects of manipulations to listener line of regard on chil-
dren’s informativeness. In Bannard et al. (2017, Study 1), 
E1 and 3-year-olds first partook in a kind of “teaching 
phase” (not called that by Bannard et al.) in which chil-
dren heard E1 use modified lexical NPs to refer to pic-
tures of entities with salient properties (e.g., “pretty 
dress”). Then, E2 entered. E1 “prompted [children] to tell 
E2 about [the] pictures” (Bannard et al., 2017, p. 957) as 
E1 showed the pictures again. In one condition, E2 and 
children jointly attended to the pictures while children 
referred to them. In another condition, E2 sat across the 
room, unable to see the pictures. Contrary to predictions, 
Bannard et al. (Study 1) found no difference between 
conditions in children’s rates of adjective use (collapsing 
across conditions, 79% of lexical NPs were modified). 
Why did children use adjectives at similarly high rates 
between conditions? One possibility is that during the 
teaching phase, children learned a rule that a specific 
construction (i.e., a modified lexical NP) is used to refer 
to E1’s pictures. This is plausible given that children 

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
5
heard examples of modified lexical NPs only during 
teaching. Subsequently, when describing the same pic-
tures to E2, children in both conditions may have used 
this rule to guide their reference.
Another set of studies was conducted by Grigoroglou 
and Papafragou (2019b). In this study, 4- and 5-year-
olds’ referring expressions included disambiguating 
information at similar rates regardless of whether they 
jointly attended to intended referents with listeners. 
What might explain this pattern? In test trials, the only 
feature that differentiated referents was the location of 
an agent who performed a transitive action (e.g., near 
a tree or a bench) or the tool the agent used to perform 
the action (being either a conventional or unconven-
tional tool for the action; see below). One potential 
issue is that regardless of whether interlocutors jointly 
attended to the referential array, both events in the 
array had the same actor performing the same action. 
Thus, to distinguish events, children had to refer to a 
tool or a location. That is, even though the locative 
(e.g., “by the bench”) and manner phrases (e.g., “with 
a broom”) were not syntactically obligatory adjuncts of 
the main verb (Grigoroglou & Papafragou, 2019b), they 
were discourse-pragmatically obligatory.
Conclusion.  I have reviewed evidence that suggests 
that linguistic reference depends on listener line of regard 
possibly by around 2.5 years of age, likely by 3.5 years 
of age, and definitely by 4 to 5 years old (4-year-olds: 
Matthews et  al., 2006; Nilsen & Graham, 2009; 5-year-
olds: Bahtiyar & Küntay, 2009; Nadig & Sedivy, 2002). The 
presence of nonlinguistic cues to CG causes children to 
be less informative, whereas their absence causes them 
to be more informative. This pattern aligns with predic-
tions of the positive view and is unaccounted for on the 
deficits view.
Array configuration
All else equal, joint attention to intended referents is 
less likely when potential referents are more numerous, 
perceptually similar, or closely spaced together com-
pared with when they are less numerous, perceptually 
dissimilar, or spaced apart (Clark & Marshall, 1981; 
Siposova & Carpenter, 2019). Consequently, speakers 
should infer a relatively low probability of CG about 
intended referents in the former compared with the 
latter cases. Indeed, this is reflected in the finding that 
compared with the latter, the former generally require 
more informative reference to pick out intended refer-
ents (Olson, 1970; e.g., Ford & Olson, 1975). For exam-
ple, if you and I are seated across a table with a single 
candle on it, I can unambiguously refer to it simply by 
saying “That candle looks pretty” because to what else 
could I be referring (Schiffer, 1972)? And what about 
when there are four candles, one of which is dissimilar 
from the others? Still, I can say the above, and you will 
likely identify my intended candle (Clark et al., 1983). 
But when there are four identical candles or when there 
are two that are directly adjacent, I will need to be more 
informative (e.g., by saying “That candle on the left 
looks pretty”). When do children do this?
General discussion.
Cardinality and perceptual similarity.  The depen-
dence of children’s informativeness on referent cardinality 
and perceptual similarity was investigated by Matthews  
et al. (2012, Study 1). Two- and 4-year-olds requested 
stickers from arrays by asking E1 to retrieve them. E1 did 
not know which sticker was needed, and children and E1 
jointly attended to the array while children referred. In 
the more-CG condition, children requested stickers from 
two-sticker arrays. In this condition, less informative ref-
erence sufficed (e.g., unmodified NPs) because the stick-
ers were dissimilar (e.g., a sheep and a person). In the 
less-CG condition, children requested stickers from a 
four-sticker array. In this condition, more informativeness 
was needed (e.g., modified NPs) because unambiguous 
identification of intended stickers required distinguishing 
between the intended sticker, a dissimilar sticker, and two 
similar stickers. Note that the proximity of the stickers in 
the array relative to children’s distance from the array 
rendered pointing ineffective. Contrary to predictions 
(Matthews et al., 2012, Study 1), children’s reference was 
similarly informative between conditions. However, there 
were 36 trials, and E1 provided feedback about children’s 
ambiguity when they were ambiguous. Thus, it is pos-
sible that children displayed the predicted pattern in later 
trials (i.e., learned from feedback). Indeed, in the final 10 
trials, participants were more informative when referring 
to referents in arrays in the less-CG condition than in the 
more-CG condition. This suggests that with training via 
feedback (see below), 2- and 4-year-olds’ informative-
ness comes to depend on the cardinality or perceptual 
similarity of referents in arrays. The “or” is because the 
simultaneous manipulation of cardinality and similarity 
precludes inference about which of these cue or cues the 
children used to scale their informativeness.
To untangle this, Matthews et al. (2012, Study 2) first 
gave children training to refer to stickers in four-sticker 
arrays. In the less-CG condition, arrays contained simi-
lar stickers and so required greater informativeness. In 
contrast, arrays in the more-CG condition had dissimilar 
stickers and so pulled for less informativeness. During 
training trials, E2 provided feedback (see below) about 
children’s ambiguity if their reference was ambiguous. 
Although neither age group adapted their informative-
ness to the arrays during training, the generalization 

6	
Vasil
trials that followed gave children another opportunity 
to demonstrate their skills. Generalization trials tested 
children’s ability to generalize their training with four-
sticker arrays to similar or dissimilar two- or six-sticker 
arrays. In generalization trials, 2-year-olds’ reference 
did not depend on referent cardinality or similarity. In 
contrast, 4-year-olds were more informative when ref-
erents were perceptually similar compared with dis-
similar and when arrays included six compared with 
two referents. Overall, the results of Matthews et al. 
suggest that 2- and 4-year-olds calibrate their linguistic 
referential informativeness according to referent cardi-
nality (see also, Serratrice, 2008, Study 2) or perceptual 
similarity. Although it is not so clear which of these cue 
or cues 2-year-olds use, 4-year-olds can leverage either 
type of cue to scale their informativeness.
Why were 2-year-olds unable to inversely scale their 
informativeness in Matthews et al. (2012, Study 2)? 
There are at least two, non-mutually exclusive explana-
tions. One is that the perceptual dissimilarity of the 
referents in the less-CG condition was too subtle for 
2-year-olds to pick up on and thus increased listener 
informational needs too “opaque” (Matthews et  al., 
2012, p. 203); perhaps referents must be very obviously 
distinct for 2-year-olds to leverage this cue. Second, the 
four-sticker training arrays may have presented 2-year-
olds with too difficult a cognitive task of identifying 
and comparing stickers before reference; perhaps there 
must be a very small number of referents for 2-year-olds 
to leverage this cue. The upshot of either explanation 
is that 2-year-olds’ referring abilities may have been 
masked by task demands in Matthews et al. (Study 2).
Choosing one (or both) of the above explanations 
requires examining 2-year-olds’ reference in a design that 
fully crosses manipulations to referent cardinality and 
perceptual similarity. Unfortunately, although its results 
are still informative, the only study to follow up on the 
findings of Matthews et al. (2012) did not fully cross these 
factors but instead investigated only effects of referent 
perceptual similarity. Abbot-Smith et al. (2016) examined 
2.5-year-olds’ ability to adapt their reference to simplified, 
two-referent arrays following training via feedback about 
referential ambiguity. Like Matthews et al., children were 
exposed to more-CG and less-CG conditions. However, 
compared with Matthews et al., in Abbot-Smith et al., the 
number of referents that comprised the training and test 
arrays was smaller (two referents instead of four), and 
the referents were more perceptually dissimilar to one 
another (in the more-CG condition). With these simplifi-
cations, 2-year-olds inversely scaled their informativeness 
with cues to CG. For example, when presented with two 
identical pigs, children were more likely to supplement 
their NPs with additional information (e.g., “the pig on 
the chair”) than when presented with two different 
animals (e.g., “the pig”). These results suggest that 
2.5-year-olds’ referential informativeness depends on the 
perceptual similarity of referents in simple arrays (Abbot-
Smith et al., 2016). Overall, research has shown that 2- 
and 4-year-olds inversely scale their informativeness 
according to referent perceptual similarity and that 
4-year-olds inversely scale their informativeness accord-
ing to referent cardinality. Do children also scale their 
informativeness according to the spatial configuration of 
referential arrays?
Spatial configuration.  To investigate children’s ability to 
use spatial configuration cues, D. K. O’Neill and Topolovec  
(2001, Study 1) gave children (2;8) a similar task as in  
D. K. O’Neill (1996), in which children requested that care­
givers retrieve stickers hidden in one of two boxes. In the 
less-CG conditions of D. K. O’Neill and Topolovec (Study 
1), linguistic reference was necessary because the boxes 
were too closely adjacent to one another for unambiguous 
pointing. In contrast, nonlinguistic reference (e.g., point-
ing sufficed in the more-CG conditions in which the boxes 
were separated). To facilitate linguistic reference, boxes 
were clad with images of common vehicles. As predicted, 
children were more informative in the less-CG than more-
CG conditions when they requested stickers (by more 
often referring to a vehicle depicted on the outside of the 
box). Moreover, although rates of pointing were similar 
between conditions, participants more often produced 
(more informative) point + name combos in the less-CG 
conditions and (less informative) point + deictic demon-
strative (e.g., “that”) combos in the more-CG conditions. 
Although a modified version of this procedure that used 
children the same age resulted in a failure to replicate the 
findings of Study 1 (D. K. O’Neill & Topolovec, 2001, Study 
2), this masked starker individual-level effects. In Study 2, 
56% (N = 9) of children more often named the referent in 
the less-CG conditions than in the more-CG conditions, 
whereas only two children (12.5%) did so more often in 
the more-CG conditions. In comparison, in Study 1—in 
which group-level differences in informativeness were 
found—only 44% (N = 7) of children more often named 
the referent in the less-CG conditions than in the more-
CG conditions, whereas one (6%) did so more often in 
the more-CG conditions. Taken together, these two stud-
ies suggest that by 2;8, children’s informativeness depends 
on the spatial arrangement of referents. A failure to find 
effects in a simplified version of the above procedure with 
younger children (2;4; D. K. O’Neill & Topolovec, 2001, 
Study 3) suggests that the months between 2;4 and 2;8 are 
important in the development of the ability to use spatial 
configuration as a cue to CG.
Null results.  As with the discussion of listener line of 
regard, it is instructive to consider explanations for null 

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
7
results following manipulation of array configuration 
cues. In Wittek and Tomasello (2005, Study 3), 2.5- and 
3.5-year-olds had to request one object out of three from 
E2. In a most-CG condition, objects were widely spaced 
so that pronominal or null reference (plus point) was 
adequate. In a more-CG condition, the objects were 
closely spaced, and thus the referent’s name was required. 
In a least-CG condition, the objects were in an opaque 
container—again, the referent’s name was required. 
However, contra predictions, there were no differences 
between conditions in children’s informativeness. This 
may seem surprising and counter to that found in studies 
reviewed above. One explanation, suggested by Wittek 
and Tomasello, is that children, in fact, lacked CG with E2 
with respect to intended referents in all conditions. That 
is, they never played with it together, or talked about it, 
or jointly attended to it. The referent was thus absent 
from CG, and thus, children had to introduce the referent 
into CG in all conditions. This explanation predicts that 
children should have tended to use relatively informative 
forms at similar rates in all conditions (i.e., to introduce 
the referent into CG with E2). And indeed, children often 
used lexical nouns; 2.5-year-olds used them 73% to 78% 
of the time across conditions, and 3.5-year-olds used 
them 90% to 100% of the time. Thus, a closer inspection 
of the null results of Wittek and Tomasello (Study 3) finds 
support for the predictions of the positive view. Specifi-
cally, children often use relatively informative forms 
when lacking cues to CG.
Conclusion.  This subsection reviewed studies on the 
dependence of children’s referential informativeness on 
one type of nonlinguistic cue to CG (i.e., referential array 
configuration). Evidence was reviewed that suggested 
that by around 2.5 years old, informativeness depends on 
the configuration of arrays. Specifically, young children’s 
informativeness depends on inferences about CG formed 
following observation of cues to referent cardinality, per-
ceptual similarity, and spatial arrangement. This pattern is 
expected under the positive view but cannot be easily 
explained under the deficits view.
Nonlinguistic cues to cultural CG
So far, I have discussed reference and cues to personal 
common ground (Clark, 1996; Tomasello, 2014). Infer-
ences about personal CG require joint attention. In 
contrast, inferences about cultural CG do not require 
joint attention (Clark & Marshall, 1981). Rather, cul-
tural CG is inferred from cues to group affiliation—
such as clothing or behavior—and cues to the culturally 
shared status of referents, such as its appearance as a 
conventional artifact or others’ apparent familiarity 
with or knowledge of it (Schmidt et al., 2011, 2016). 
Thus, establishing that children leverage cues to cultural 
CG requires manipulations that target (a) interlocutor-
group affiliation and (b) the cultural status of referents 
(e.g., Schmidt et al., 2012). Prior research suggests that 
3 years of age marks a turning point in children’s abil-
ity to use cultural CG for noncommunicative tasks 
(Tomasello, 2019). What about for their referential 
informativeness?
General discussion.  The positive view predicts that 
cues to cultural CG possess a similar relationship with 
informativeness as do cues to personal CG. That is, the 
presence of more cues to cultural CG is predicted to be 
associated with less informative reference, whereas fewer 
cues is associated with more (e.g., Schegloff, 1972; for a 
related point, see Kay, 1977). Unfortunately, this is only 
speculation: Studies that investigated the influence of cues 
to cultural CG on children’s informativeness have thus far 
manipulated only cues to the conventionality of objects 
and not interlocutor-group status (for comprehension, see 
Liebal et al., 2013). Moreover, sampled ages have not yet 
bridged the theoretically relevant age of 3 years. Thus, cur-
rent evidence limits researchers regarding the inferences 
that can be drawn about children’s abilities to use cues to 
cultural CG to scale their informativeness. Nonetheless, the 
results of existing research are informative.
Grigoroglou and Papafragou (2019a, 2019b) asked 
whether the conventionality of objects used by agents 
to perform transitive actions influenced 4- and 5-year-
olds’ informativeness. The authors reported that chil-
dren referred to unconventional objects more often 
than to conventional objects (e.g., branches rather than 
brooms used to sweep). This pattern is reminiscent of 
Greenfield and Smith’s (1976) principle of informative-
ness, in which reference is predicted to favor encoding 
“informative” (unexpected) situational elements (but 
see Pea, 1979). In this sense, children’s reference to 
branches is informative in that presumably, children 
inferred that listeners would otherwise be licensed by 
cultural CG to infer that agents used brooms to sweep. 
Relatedly, Köymen, Rosenbaum, and Tomasello (2014) 
found that 3- and 5-year-olds more often stated their 
reasons when justifying choices to peers about where 
to place unconventional objects compared with con-
ventional objects in a toy zoo. For instance, when 
jointly reasoning about where to place a polar bear, 
children would say “It goes on the ice!” In contrast, 
when jointly reasoning about where to place a piano, 
children would say something more informative, such as 
“It goes by the bench because. . . .” Thus, for items con-
ventionally in zoos, children relied on cultural CG about 
where such items are typically located, and so, they 
tended not to state their reasoning. In contrast, children 
more often stated their reasoning when choosing where 

8	
Vasil
to place unconventional objects, perhaps because they 
recognized the lack of cultural CG (see Köymen & 
Tomasello, 2020).
Conclusion.  There is currently limited evidence that 
speaks to whether young children inversely scale their 
informativeness according to nonlinguistic cues to cul-
tural CG.
Interim Summary 1
In this section, I established that nonlinguistic cues to 
personal CG influence the informativeness of linguistic 
reference beginning at around 2.5 years old. Studies of 
effects of listener line of regard provide mixed evidence 
for the dependence of 2-year-olds’ informativeness on 
this cue, whereas there is clear evidence for 3-year-olds’ 
ability to use this cue. Arguably stronger evidence for 
effects of nonlinguistic cues to CG on 2-year-olds’ infor-
mativeness came from studies that manipulated array 
configuration. There is limited research on children’s 
informativeness and nonlinguistic cues to cultural CG. 
Overall, the findings reviewed thus far are better 
accounted for by the positive view, which predicts that 
young children’s informativeness is inversely related to 
cues to CG. In contrast, the deficits view, which sug-
gests that individuals are referentially incompetent until 
the teenage years, cannot account for the reviewed 
findings.
Linguistic Cues to Common Ground 
and Young Children’s Referential 
Informativeness
In the previous section, I discussed nonlinguistic cues 
to CG. In this section, I turn to linguistic cues to CG. 
Subsection structure, condition labels, and behavioral 
predictions mirror those of the preceding section. The 
subsection on feedback poses a different set of predic-
tions (see below).
Anaphoric discourse
A typical referring situation for young children is as a 
part of stereotyped joint play with adults (Bruner, 1983). 
In these situations, individuals use communicative con-
structions to refer to things. Communicative construc-
tions are statistically reliable, conventional associations 
between communicative form and intended meaning 
(Goldberg, 1995, 2003). This means that for children, a 
reliable cue to CG is adults’ talk—children can exploit 
the reliability of the constructional mapping between 
form and meaning to offload the cognitive work of 
inferring CG to the social environment (Vasil et al., 
2020). Of course, exploiting constructional form as a 
linguistic cue to CG presupposes having learned the 
reliability of the mapping between form and meaning. 
However, as I will show, children at least as young as 
2;0 exploit the reliability of this type of cue to CG to 
scale their informativeness. These linguistic cues are 
called anaphoric, roughly meaning “having appeared 
earlier in discourse.” Research has investigated the 
effects of three types of anaphoric cues to CG, includ-
ing effects of question type (e.g., Do children overtly 
realize NPs when presupposed by listeners’ questions?), 
contrastive reference (e.g., Which forms do children 
use to refer when there are multiple, semantically 
related discourse referents?), and the forms listeners 
used (e.g., Do children use “dog” if listeners used 
“dog”?).
General discussion.
Question type.  One type of anaphoric cue to CG is 
the type of question interlocutors use to prompt chil-
dren’s reference. Generally, investigations of the effects 
of question type on informativeness focus on manipu-
lations to question information structure (Lambrecht, 
1994). A typical manipulation is one in which children 
are asked questions that suggest that their interlocutor 
shares either more CG (predicate-focus questions) or less 
CG (sentence-focus questions). Predicate-focus questions 
are used to inquire into predicate argument or arguments 
and often include cues to the CG status of inquired enti-
ties (e.g., definite reference; see Schmerse et al., 2015). 
For example, the predicate-focus question of the declara-
tive sentence “The dax pushed the ball” would be “What 
did the dax do?” Felicitous response to this type of ques-
tion does not require lexical reference to subject NPs. 
That is, one needs to use only null or pronominal refer-
ence to refer to the subject when responding to predicate- 
focus questions (e.g., “pushed the ball” or “it pushed the 
ball”). In contrast, sentence-focus questions suggest less 
CG about intended referents. A typical sentence-focus 
question is “What happened?” Felicitous response to this 
type of question requires greater informativeness com-
pared with responses to predicate-focus questions. In 
particular, responses to sentence-focus questions typi-
cally require reference to subjects using lexical NPs or 
pronouns (e.g., “the dax” in “the dax pushed the ball”). 
When do children use question type as a cue to CG?
That was the research question of Campbell et al. 
(2000, Study 2). These authors investigated whether 
2.5- and 3.5-year-olds scaled their informativeness 
according to the type of question E asked them. Chil-
dren and E played with a toy before E asked children 
about the toy. In the more-CG condition, E asked chil-
dren about the toy using predicate-focus questions. In 
the less-CG condition, E asked about the toy using 

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
9
sentence-focus questions. Note that because children 
and E jointly attended to the toys beforehand (i.e., dur-
ing play), predicate-focus questions pulled for null ref-
erence (e.g., “fell”). In contrast, sentence-focus questions 
pulled for children to use lexical NPs or pronouns (e.g., 
“the ball fell,” “it fell”). When responding to E’s ques-
tions, children of both age groups followed the pre-
dicted pattern. Specifically, children provided more 
informative reference (lexical NPs and pronouns) in 
response to sentence-focus compared with predicate-
focus questions (in which case they favored null refer-
ence). These findings align with the predictions of the 
positive view. In particular, these findings suggest that 
even 2.5-year-olds inversely scale their informativeness 
for listeners according to cues to CG present in ana-
phoric discourse (i.e., question type).
In Campbell et al. (2000, Study 2), joint attention to 
intended referents rendered them recoverable from 
nonlinguistic context. Consequently, in that study, pro-
nominal reference was felicitous in response to sentence- 
focus questions. But what about when referents are not 
fully recoverable from nonlinguistic context? It may 
then be that pronouns are suitable only in response to 
predicate-focus questions, whereas lexical NPs and 
nulls retain their felicity profiles. One might therefore 
ask about interactive effects, for example, whether chil-
dren’s tendency to use pronouns in response to differ-
ent types of question depends on nonlinguistic cues to 
CG. One way to investigate this is indirectly, that is, in 
experiments with comparable designs and manipula-
tions to one class of cues to CG as in a baseline study 
but in which there is an (unmanipulated) change in the 
level of the other class of cues to CG.
In this sense, Wittek and Tomasello (2005, Study 1) 
indirectly investigated whether children’s use of pro-
nouns in response to different question types depends 
on nonlinguistic cues to CG. Children and E jointly 
attended to an array of toys while E asked children 
which toy was needed to play a game. Importantly, in 
contrast to Campbell et al. (2000, Study 2), interlocutors 
in Wittek and Tomasello (Study 1) had in their CG that 
E did not know which toy was the intended referent 
(i.e., because there was only joint attention to the ref-
erential array, not to referents within the array). In the 
less-CG condition, when E asked about the toy (“What 
do we need to get?”), 2.5- and 3.5-year-olds often 
responded with lexical nouns (but not 2.0-year-olds; 
see Wittek & Tomasello, 2005, Study 2). In contrast, in 
the more-CG condition, when E asked about the toy 
(“What happened to the broom?”), children often used 
pronominal and null reference. Key here is the differ-
ence in children’s use of pronouns in the more-CG and 
less-CG conditions between Wittek and Tomasello 
(Study 1) and Campbell et al. (Study 2). In the former 
study, children understood that pronominal reference 
was infelicitous in response to sentence-focus questions 
(i.e., because there was no joint attention to intended 
referents). Meanwhile, in the latter study, children 
understood that pronominal reference was felicitous in 
response to the same type of question (i.e., because 
there was joint attention to intended referents). Taken 
together, the results of this pair of studies may suggest 
that 2.5- and 3.5-year-olds understand that the informa-
tiveness pulled for by linguistic cues to CG depends on 
nonlinguistic cues to CG.
So far, the focus has been on indirect investigations 
of interactions between classes of cue to CG. This choice 
of focus is due to difficulties in interpreting the results 
of existing direct investigations of such dependencies 
(i.e., research that has crossed the presence/absence of 
linguistic and nonlinguistic cues within one design). Of 
the two direct investigations of question type and non-
linguistic cues to CG, one indicated main effects of ques-
tion type and listener line of regard on informativeness 
but no interaction (Serratrice, 2008, Study 1), whereas 
one found main effects of listener line of regard but not 
for question type or an interaction (Salomo et al., 2011). 
Although these studies might suggest that nonlinguistic 
and linguistic cues to CG operate independently, this 
suggestion can only be tentative. In the within-subjects 
design of Serratrice (2008, Study 1), it is unclear whether 
the order of presentation of levels of the linguistic cues 
manipulation was counterbalanced, and no analysis of 
order effects for this manipulation is reported; it is thus 
possible that the effects of linguistic cues were spurious 
because of condition order. Salomo et al. (2011) reme-
died those issues but reported that children were insensi-
tive to question type until age 4. This contrasts with the 
results of Serratrice (2008, Study 1), who reported that 
3-year-olds were sensitive to question type, and with 
Campbell et al. (2000, Study 2) and Wittek and Tomasello 
(2005, Study 1), who reported the same for 2.5-year-olds. 
One explanation for this discrepancy is that children in 
different studies referred to entities with different semantic 
and syntactic roles in different argument-structure construc-
tions (Salomo et al., 2013). Children in Salomo et al. (2011) 
referred to transitive patients, children in Serratrice (2008, 
Study 1) referred to transitive agents, and children in 
Campbell et al. (2000, Study 2) and Wittek and Tomasello 
(2005, Study 1) referred to intransitive agents and locations. 
Overall, existing research paints an unclear picture of inter-
actions between question type and nonlinguistic cues to 
CG on children’s informativeness.
Recall that in the procedure of Wittek and Tomasello 
(2005, Study 1), interlocutors jointly attended to the 
referential array (but not intended referents) when E 
asked children the target question. However, in the 
previous section, it was noted how joint attention to 

10	
Vasil
referential arrays is not the same as intended referents 
being out of sight. This is because referents are still 
copresent with interlocutors as part of referential arrays. 
Therefore, it is unclear from the results of Wittek and 
Tomasello (Study 1) whether children are similarly 
skilled at calibrating their informativeness in settings 
that eliminate nonlinguistic cues to CG, that is, in which 
there is joint attention to neither intended referents nor 
referential arrays. This is important to ask because very 
young children’s ability to form inferences about CG 
(and, by extension, their ability to scale their informa-
tiveness) may benefit from the presence of more cues 
to CG. Do children rely on question type to scale their 
informativeness when nonlinguistic cues to CG are 
eliminated?
This question was addressed by Matthews et al. 
(2006, Study 2). In a key methodological departure from 
Campbell et al. (2000) and Wittek and Tomasello (2005), 
the referential array in Matthews et al. (Study 2) was 
out of sight of E when E asked their questions and 
children responded. Thus, there was joint attention to 
neither intended referents nor arrays. Two- to 4-year-
olds described the contents of videos to E while chil-
dren watched them; E was behind the TV and unable 
to see the videos. In a less-CG (“sentence focus”) con-
dition, E said, “That sounds like a fun video. What 
happened?” Meanwhile, in a more-CG (“predicate 
focus”) condition, E said, “Was that the clown? What 
happened?” Thus, although both questions, technically, 
were sentence focus, the immediately preceding dis-
course was manipulated so that E, in effect, asked about 
the video or the clown in the video (hence the quota-
tions marks used above). When responding in the 
more-CG condition, 3.5- and 4.5-year-olds used pro-
nouns more often than in the less-CG condition. Thus, 
the 3- and 4-year-olds in Matthews et al. (Study 2) 
responded like the 3-year-olds in Wittek and Tomasello 
(Study 1). In contrast, 2.5-year-olds in Matthews et al. 
(Study 2) used lexical nouns, pronouns, and null refer-
ence at similar rates in both CG conditions. Thus,  
when neither referential arrays nor intended referents 
were jointly attended, 2-year-olds were unaffected by 
question type. These results contrast with 2.5-year- 
olds’ behavior in situations in which referential arrays 
(Wittek & Tomasello, 2005, Study 1) or intended refer-
ents were jointly attended (Campbell et al., 2000, Study 
2). What might explain this?
One explanation falls on the difficulty children have 
in reconciling conflicting perspectives (Tomasello, 
2018). Only in Matthews et al. (2006, Study 2) did chil-
dren have to fully inhibit their individual (visual) per-
spective on the referent and take into account the 
shared perspective invited by anaphoric discourse. In 
contrast, the cues to which children were exposed in 
Campbell et al. (2000, Study 2) and Wittek and Tomasello 
(2005, Study 1) did not invite fully conflicting perspec-
tives (because of joint attention to intended referents or 
to referential arrays, respectively). This is probably an 
important methodological detail because it is not until 
3 to 4 years of age that children can simultaneously 
compare conflicting perspectives and act on the outcome 
of that comparison (Moll et al., 2013). Thus, a difficulty 
in reconciling conflicting perspectives may have played 
a role in the difficulty 2-year-olds had in distinguishing 
between conditions in Matthews et al. (2006, Study 2) 
compared with Campbell et al. (2000, Study 2) and 
Wittek and Tomasello (2005, Study 1).
Contrast.  Interlocutors often converse about multiple, 
semantically similar referents at once. This presents chal-
lenges for unambiguous reference because intended ref-
erents must be distinguished from other referents that 
are also highly accessible. Adult speakers possess various 
strategies to preempt such ambiguity, for example, using 
more informative arguments to distinguish intended from 
unintended referents (Givón, 1992; e.g., Karimi, 2022). 
How do young children navigate this challenge?
Above, I discussed 2.5- and 3.5-year-olds’ responses 
to less-CG (sentence focus) and more-CG (predicate 
focus) questions in Wittek and Tomasello (2005, Study 
1). A third level of this manipulation was also present. 
In a contrast-question condition, E asked whether an 
incorrect toy was required to play a game with partici-
pants (e.g., “Did the clown have a vacuum cleaner?”). 
The idea was that because there were multiple referents 
in the jointly attended referential array (i.e., other toys), 
unambiguous reference required children to respond 
by using lexical NPs to distinguish their intended toy 
from the others (e.g., “No, a/the broom”). Thus, chil-
dren’s responses in the contrast-question condition 
were expected to look more similar to their responses 
in the less-CG condition than in the more-CG condition. 
And indeed, when responding to E, children in the 
contrast-question condition used lexical nouns at a 
similar rate as in the less-CG condition and at a higher 
rate than in the more-CG condition. Moreover, whereas 
null reference was the predominant response in the 
more-CG condition, children never used null reference 
in the contrast condition. These results suggest that 
anaphoric discourse that includes multiple referents is 
a linguistic cue to CG that 2.5-year-olds use to scale 
their informativeness.
In fact, similar results have been reported for even 
younger children. In Salomo et al. (2010, Study 1), E 
narrated for children (2;3) as both jointly watched an 
agent either perform multiple actions on a patient 
(patient-CG condition) or repeatedly perform an action 
on multiple patients (action-CG condition). E then 

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
11
asked children questions that prompted them to refer 
to different aspects of the situation. In the patient-CG 
condition, children had to distinguish one among mul-
tiple actions; this required referring to the action along-
side pronominal or null reference to the patient. In the 
action-CG condition, children had to distinguish one 
among multiple patients; this required referring to the 
patient with a lexical NP. Children demonstrated their 
understanding of this by referring to actions more often 
in the patient-CG than in the action-CG condition and 
to patients more often in the action-CG than in the 
patient-CG condition. Moreover, when they referred to 
patients, children tended to use null reference in the 
patient-CG condition and lexical NPs in the action-CG 
condition. Indeed, still younger children have been 
found to scale their informativeness for contrastive 
purposes. Wittek and Tomasello (2005, Study 2) found 
that children age 2;0 more often used lexical NPs fol-
lowing contrast compared with predicate-focus ques-
tions (in which case, they tended to use null reference). 
Altogether, these results suggest that children as young 
as 2;0 inversely scale their informativeness during con-
trastive reference.
A running thread in the present section has been the 
interplay of nonlinguistic and linguistic cues to CG. So 
far, important takeaways are that there is currently lim-
ited evidence for interactive effects between the two 
classes of cues to CG and that 2-year-olds’ ability to 
scale their informativeness may suffer when conflicting 
perspectives are simultaneously invited by the respec-
tive classes of cues to CG. Now recall that in Campbell 
et al. (2000, Study 2), Wittek and Tomasello (2005, Study 
1), and Salomo et al. (2010, Study 1), children and E 
always supplemented their discourse about intended 
referents with joint attention to them or to referential 
arrays. Following the thread being woven in this sec-
tion, one might ask about the role of nonlinguistic cues 
to CG in these studies.
To investigate this, Salomo et al. (2010) conducted 
a second study. As in Study 1 in Salomo et al., children 
(2;3) jointly attended to transitive events with E before 
E questioned them. However, this time, children did 
not hear contentful anaphoric discourse (instead, E said 
things such as “That’s great.”). This ended up being an 
important methodological change. Although children 
still referred to the action in the patient-CG condition 
more often than in the action-CG condition (like Study 
1), they no longer referred more often to the patient in 
the action-CG condition than in the patient-CG condi-
tion (unlike Study 1). Moreover, although use of lexical 
NPs to refer to patients was more prevalent in the 
action-CG than in the patient-CG condition (like Study 
1), lexical NPs were used less often in the action-CG 
condition of Study 2 than Study 1. These results do not 
license inferences about whether children preferably 
rely on linguistic over nonlinguistic cues to CG. How-
ever, these results do suggest that 2-year-olds are less 
able to modify their informativeness when only non-
linguistic cues are present compared with when non-
linguistic and linguistic cues are present.
Taken together, the results reviewed above suggest 
that (a) children rely on linguistic before nonlinguistic 
cues to CG and (b) modify their informativeness at 
especially young ages for contrastive reference. Indeed, 
children’s ability to calibrate their informativeness for 
contrastive purposes quickly becomes rather sophisti-
cated: By the time they turn 3, children omit superflu-
ous subjects, verbs, or objects depending on whether 
they are contrasting semantically compatible agents, 
actions, or patients (Graf et al., 2015). This pattern is 
accounted for under the positive view of early referen-
tial production and is unaccounted for under the defi-
cits view.
Null results.  Informative null results come from studies 
that investigated effects of anaphoric referring forms on 
informativeness. Campbell et al. (2000, Study 1) asked 
whether an E’s reference to a toy using a common noun 
only or a common noun and pronoun had any effect on 
2.5- and 3.5-year-olds’ informativeness (“an E” because 
whether E1 or E2 referred was manipulated, too; see 
above). After playing with the toy with an E, E1 ques-
tioned children about the toy. In their responses, children 
used lexical NPs, pronouns, and null reference at similar 
rates regardless of the anaphoric forms they heard an E 
use. Although this null result might seem surprising (and 
was counter the predictions of the authors), on the posi-
tive view, this pattern of behavior is unsurprising. This is 
because there is no reason to think that the use by an E 
of common nouns only or common nouns and pronouns 
actually altered the CG status of the referent itself for 
participants and E1 (and for this reason, we have ignored 
the “more CG” or “less CG” naming convention for this 
manipulation in this study). Rather, the CG status of the 
referring form was manipulated, that is, the “referential 
pact” shared between interlocutors about how to refer to 
CG entities (Brennan & Clark, 1996). The issue is that 
children’s informativeness does not depend on referential 
pacts until around 6 years of age (Köymen, Schmerse, et al., 
2014). Therefore, the 2- and 3-year-olds in Campbell et al. 
(Study 1) may not have been affected by the manipula-
tion because it targeted a phenomenon that does not 
characterize the behavior of children that young.
Campbell et al. (2000, Study 2) asked whether the 
cost of production of referring forms influences chil-
dren’s referential choices. The authors investigated the 
informativeness of 2.5- and 3.5-year-olds’ responses to 
E’s questions about a toy’s action that children caused 

12	
Vasil
(e.g., a ball falling). In anaphoric discourse, E referred 
to toys with one of four types of nominal: simple-
familiar (e.g., “ball”), simple-novel (e.g., “toam”), complex- 
familiar (e.g., “elephant”), or complex-novel nouns 
(e.g., “figertruckle”). Although it was predicted that 
children would tend to produce (relatively less effort-
ful) nonlexical referring forms when referring to entities 
that E referred to with novel or complex forms, children 
were in fact similarly informative across conditions. 
Why was this?
There are two possible explanations. One is the same 
as above: that the CG status of referents per se was not 
manipulated in Campbell et al. (2000, Study 2). Indeed, 
that children tended to use pronouns regardless of the 
form or forms that E used is evidence for this explana-
tion. A second explanation involves factors not inves-
tigated in Campbell et al. (Study 2). Bannard et al. 
(2017) found that 3-year-olds more often used modified 
NPs the more informative were the modifiers used by 
E in a “teaching phase” (see above). However, as modi-
fiers became more informative, children became less 
likely to imitate them and, instead, switched to semanti-
cally similar, although less informative modifiers. 
Extrapolating to the use of lexical nouns and pronouns, 
one possibility is that children more often use lexical 
nouns when E refers with highly informative lexical 
nouns and more often use pronouns when E refers with 
less informative lexical nouns. Following the extrapo-
lated pattern, the issue, then, is that E’s referring 
forms were equally informative in all four conditions 
of Campbell et al. (Study 2). This, in turn, may have 
masked effects of cost of production on children’s 
choice of using lexical nouns or pronouns.
Conclusion.  The informativeness of linguistic reference 
depends on linguistic cues to CG by 2;0. In contrast, it is 
not until 2;6 that informativeness depends on nonlinguis-
tic cues to CG. It is unclear whether nonlinguistic and 
linguistic cues to CG exert interactive effects on children’s 
informativeness. Two-year-olds may have difficulty scal-
ing their informativeness when nonlinguistic and linguis-
tic cues to CG invite conflicting perspectives on intended 
referents. These findings support the positive view and 
do not support the deficits view because the latter sug-
gests that children are referentially incompetent until the 
teenage years.
Listener feedback
Reference is a collaborative process (Clark & Wilkes-
Gibbs, 1986). Speakers refer, and listeners provide feed-
back, including expressions of perceived understanding 
(“Ok!”) or misunderstanding (“What?”) or comments on 
intended referents. Feedback enables speakers to infer 
whether they have successfully contributed to conversa-
tion by having placed intended referents into CG (Clark 
& Schaefer, 1987). If feedback indicates unsuccessful 
reference, speakers may produce repaired reference 
that clarifies the misunderstanding. Indeed, by the time 
they are 2 years old, children produce repaired refer-
ence following feedback (Grosse et al., 2010). More-
over, young children repair their reference on the basis 
of rather uninformative feedback, such as facial expres-
sions of sadness (Bacso et al., 2021). What about more 
explicit cues, such as listener feedback questions?
When asking this question, it is important to distin-
guish the cognitive demands of initial versus repaired 
reference. Only during repaired reference do children 
have the benefit of hindsight (i.e., that initial reference 
failed and that more informativeness is required). Cru-
cially, in this context, the effects of cues to CG on 
informativeness should be opposite the inverse pattern 
discussed so far. That is, the positive view predicts that 
feedback cues that indicate more CG should favor more 
informative repaired reference compared with cues that 
indicate less CG. This is because there is less cognitive 
work that children have to do to identify the source of 
referential failure when feedback indicates the source 
of the failure. This frees up cognitive resources to con-
struct more informative repaired reference. This pattern 
is illustrated by children’s behavior in prior research.
General discussion.  Two studies have investigated 
children’s ability to use feedback questions as cues to 
CG. Three- and 4-year-olds in Nilsen and Mangal (2012) 
received either goal substitution (i.e., E handed children 
an unintended sticker), explicit statement of misunder-
standing (i.e., E said, “I don’t know what you mean”), or 
vague feedback following ambiguous initial reference 
(i.e., E said, “Huh?”). Arguably, the goal-substitution con-
dition is like a predicate-focus question in that interlocu-
tors’ joint attention is focused on an (unintended) referent, 
whereas the latter two are more or less, respectively, ver-
bose variants of sentence-focus questions. In addition, in 
the goal-substitution condition, listeners displayed uptake 
of children’s requestive speech act (even if listeners mis-
identified intended referents) but displayed no such 
uptake in the other two conditions. Consequently, the 
goal-substitution condition is labeled the more-CG condi-
tion, and the other two conditions are labeled the less-
CG conditions. Assuming this analysis of the conditions, 
the pattern predicted by the positive view characterizes 
children’s behavior. Children in the more-CG condition 
produced more informative repaired reference (i.e., more 
descriptor terms) than children in the two less-CG condi-
tions (Nilsen & Mangal, 2012). Moreover, informativeness 
was similar in the two less-CG conditions, as expected 
under the analysis of both as sentence-focus questions.

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
13
The results above support the positive view. How-
ever, this support is weak because the more-CG condi-
tion really implicated only nonlinguistic cues to CG. 
Would children behave as they did in Nilsen and 
Mangal (2012) if only linguistic cues to CG were manip-
ulated? Unfortunately, no other studies that speak 
directly to this issue sampled the same age range. How-
ever, Bacso and Nilsen (2017) found that 4- to 6-year-
olds provided more informative repairs and repeated 
their initial reference less often in a more-CG compared 
with less-CG condition (more CG: “There are two boys 
with red shirts and I don’t know which one you mean”; 
less CG: “I don’t know which one you mean”). Bacso 
and Nilsen also found that children’s executive func-
tioning (i.e., cognitive flexibility) correlated with the 
informativeness of their repaired reference only in the 
less-CG condition. Arguably, these findings support my 
claim that the added cognitive work involved in refer-
ential repair with fewer cues to CG limits children’s 
ability to be informative compared with when sources 
of referential failure are indicated in feedback.
Additional results.  On first blush, additional research 
seems suitable for inclusion in the general discussion. 
However, this research investigated something other than 
what was investigated by studies reviewed in the general 
discussion. There are two paradigms used to study feed-
back and reference. One paradigm is what might be 
called the “inference paradigm.” Studies that used this 
paradigm were reviewed in the general discussion and 
examined how feedback influences children’s inferences 
and their immediate referential repair. Although children 
may learn from their experiences in the inference para-
digm, their behavior depends not on their learning but 
on their online inferences about CG. In contrast, a com-
plementary “learning paradigm” examines how children 
learn to use referring strategies and skills from prior 
experience with feedback. In the learning paradigm, chil-
dren participate in training and test phases during which 
they repeatedly refer for E (e.g., Abbot-Smith et al., 2016; 
sometimes, there is only an extended test phase that 
because of its length, de facto includes training; e.g., 
Matthews et  al., 2012). When children’s reference is 
ambiguous, E provides feedback that indicates more or 
less CG. However, the dependent variable is not chil-
dren’s repaired reference, but their initial reference in 
subsequent trials. Consequently, one is investigating a 
learning rather than an inference phenomenon in the 
learning paradigm.
This is not to say that the learning paradigm is irrel-
evant for us. In fact, a coherent picture of effects of prior 
experience with feedback on the informativeness of 
initial reference emerges from this work. Abbot-Smith 
et al. (2016) found no effect among 2.5-year-olds of 
predicate-focus (more CG) compared with sentence-
focus (less CG) feedback training on initial informative-
ness. However, as above, the results of Matthews et al. 
(2012, Study 1) suggest that children’s inability to benefit 
from feedback in Abbot-Smith et al. may have been due 
to an insufficient number of training trials. Matthews  
et al. (Study 1) gave children 36 trials in which they 
could receive feedback about their ambiguity. In the 
final 10 trials, but not earlier, 2- and 4-year-olds were 
more informative in the more-CG condition than they 
were in the less-CG condition (note that Abbot-Smith  
et al. reported a strong numerical trend in this same 
direction, but it was not statistically significant). In sum, 
although the learning paradigm investigates a different 
phenomenon than the inference paradigm, children’s 
initial reference is more informative following feedback 
with more cues to CG than fewer cues to CG, like their 
repaired reference in the inference paradigm.
Conclusion.  Feedback is a special kind of cue to CG 
compared with other cues to CG reviewed in this article. 
Because of limitations of children’s cognitive capacities 
and skills, the positive view predicts that informativeness 
following feedback should be opposite the inverse pat-
tern predicted for other cues. Research was reviewed that 
supported this prediction. By at least 3 to 4 years of age 
(and possibly earlier; e.g., Anselmi et al., 1986), the infor-
mativeness of repaired reference depends on feedback 
cues to CG. In addition, 2-year-olds’ initial reference ben-
efits from prior learning experiences that include feed-
back that indicates the sources of referential failure.
Linguistic cues to cultural CG
General discussion.  To my knowledge, there is no 
experimental research on linguistic cues to cultural CG 
and children’s informativeness. There are several routes 
forward. Are children less informative for others with 
whom children infer they share cultural CG? For example, 
accent is an indicator of group affiliation (Cohen, 2012), 
and young children selectively expect to share CG with 
native-accented speakers of children’s language (Schmidt 
et al., 2012). Does this expectation influence informative-
ness? For instance, are children more informative for non-
native-accented compared with native-accented listeners? 
Suggestively, Diesendruck (2005) found that 3-year-
olds’ interpretations of a speaker’s reference depended 
on speaker accent.
In an influential article, Prince (1981) proposed the 
notion of “inferrables.” Entities or relations are infer-
rable if one conceptually contains another such that 
reference to the container entity increases the cognitive 
accessibility of the contained entity. Cultural CG roles 
are often inferrable. For instance, in a society with 

14	
Vasil
buses and bus drivers, I can felicitously use definite 
reference to refer to the bus driver while telling you 
about a bus I was on despite only the bus—and not 
the bus driver—having prior mention in discourse (e.g., 
“A crazy thing happened on the bus. The driver upper-
cutted a passenger square in the face”). Does children’s 
informativeness depend on cultural CG inferrables? This 
may be investigated by manipulating the linguistic cues 
used to teach children novel inferrables, for example, 
whether anaphoric discourse includes labels used to 
refer to tools (contained entity) in novel games (con-
tainer entity; e.g., Rakoczy et al., 2008).
Conclusion.  There is no research on linguistic cues to 
cultural CG and children’s informativeness.
Interim Summary 2
In this review, I considered how young children 
inversely scale their informativeness with cues to CG 
(save for feedback, in which case, the relationship is a 
positive one). The literature suggests that informative-
ness depends on linguistic cues to CG at a younger age 
than nonlinguistic cues to CG (around 2;0 and 2;6, 
respectively). It was suggested that executive skills 
needed to reconcile conflicting perspectives play a role 
in children’s ability to scale their informativeness when 
cues to CG invite conflicting perspectives on referents 
and that repaired informativeness benefits from feed-
back that indicates the source of referential failure 
(because of less cognitive work needed to identify the 
source). In all, children’s referring skills are better cap-
tured by the positive view than by the deficits view, 
which discounts the idea that children can modify their 
informativeness for listeners. In the following section, 
I elaborate the model that motivates the positive view.
A New Look at Young Children’s 
Referential Informativeness
Collaboration is the ontogenetic home of communica-
tion and reference (Bruner, 1983; Clark, 1996; Levinson, 
2006; Schegloff, 2006; Tomasello, 2008). It is in face-to-
face collaborative activities, structured by joint goals 
and joint attention, that reference is first used to coor-
dinate mental states. In fact, collaboration is a potent 
source of motivation for children (Tomasello, 2019); for 
example, linguistically framing social activities as col-
laborative rather than individualistic increases children’s 
motivation to complete those activities (Vasil, accepted; 
e.g., Vasil & Tomasello, 2022). Because reference is 
intentional behavior, it is reasonable to ask whether the 
motivating influence of collaboration fosters children’s 
willingness to put in the effort to be informative.
This was investigated by Grigoroglou and Papafragou 
(2019b; also, Grigoroglou & Papafragou, 2019a). These 
authors compared children’s informativeness in noncol-
laborative and collaborative contexts. Four- and 5-year-
olds identified target from nontarget events for listeners. 
Unambiguous reference required referring to tools that 
agents used to perform actions or to agents’ locations. 
In the noncollaborative context (Study 1), interlocutors 
were informed separately of their goals and roles in  
the task and listeners were introduced as E’s friend. In 
contrast, in the collaborative context (Study 2), inter-
locutors were informed together of their goals and 
roles, and listeners were introduced as children’s part-
ner. As collaborators, children were more likely than 
as noncollaborators to mention tools and locations 
(and agents, which were irrelevant for unambiguous 
reference). Moreover, children produced longer utter-
ances as collaborators, and there were larger gains  
for 4- than 5-year-olds. My and Grigoroglou and 
Papafragou’s (2019b) conclusion is that collaboration 
stokes children’s cooperative motivations and that this, 
in turn, causes them to put in the effort to be more 
informative.
In this article, three sets of findings have been 
reviewed. The first set is that initial informativeness is 
inversely related to cues to CG, the second is that 
repaired informativeness is positively related to feedback 
cues to CG, and the third is that collaboration increases 
children’s motivation to be informative. The first two sets 
inform a conclusion about a cognitive phenomenon (i.e., 
inferences about CG), and the latter informs a conclusion 
about a motivational phenomenon (i.e., the incentivizing 
effects of collaboration). The deficits view cannot 
account for the former two sets of findings and ignores 
motivation and, thus, cannot account for the third 
(Glucksberg et al., 1975). In contrast, the positive view 
accounts for all findings. To demonstrate this, the model 
of human communication that motivates the positive 
view is elaborated as follows.
General discussion
Vasil et al. (2020) cast human communication as a pro-
cess of active inference. Active inference is a formulation 
of Bayesian belief-guided control in biological systems 
(Parr et al., 2022). There are two ways to construe active 
inference. One construal casts active inference as an 
enactive formulation of the Bayesian brain (Knill & 
Pouget, 2004), that is, equipped with motor reflexes 
(Friston, 2010). A complementary construal begins by 
asking how organisms individuate themselves from their 
environment over various timescales (Friston, 2012).
Beginning from the second construal, start with a 
graph (a set of nodes and edges) that is separated into 

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
15
internal states (children’s neurocognitive states) and 
external states (the child-external setting). Separation 
invokes a statistical construct called a Markov blanket 
(Friston, 2012; Pearl, 1988). Markov blankets separate 
internal from external states by inducing independen-
cies between them when conditioned on a third set of 
states called blanket states (Fig. 2). Blanket states are 
defined by directed causal interactions between exter-
nal and internal states. “Interaction” here can be read 
as the bidirectional action of internal states on external 
states and external states on internal states via blanket 
states. Internal states influence external states via active 
states of the blanket (i.e., the neuromuscular system as 
used in linguistic reference). In turn, external states 
influence internal states via sensory states of the blan-
ket (i.e., the sensory modalities involved in the trans-
duction of cues to CG). Blanket states thus circularly 
couple internal and external states and thereby enable 
an exchange of information in the spirit of an action-
perception cycle.
In resisting entropic dispersion, biological systems 
necessarily frequent a limited number of states (e.g., 
heart rate fluctuates within a set zone). These states are 
a priori expected, or phenotypical, states that are  
characteristic of the creature in question (Ramstead 
et al., 2018). For humans, phenotypical states include 
one in which conspecifics’ mental states are aligned 
(Tomasello, 2014, 2019). Maintenance of the phenotype 
requires action that (preemptively or retroactively) 
counters unexpected fluctuations (Bruineberg et al., 
2018). The Markov blanket renders this a process of 
(approximate Bayesian) inference in which the dynam-
ics of internal states entail a generative model that relates 
external states—hidden behind the Markov blanket—
and observations (Friston, 2012). In active inference, 
internal states come to encode approximate Bayesian 
beliefs about how hidden states cause sensation under 
a generative model. Hidden states include external 
states that organisms do and do not control, respectively. 
These states are “hidden” because they are inferred via 
sensation. Thus, phenotypical states are maintained by 
inferring the causes of sensory states, which include 
active states (i.e., policies; see below) and external 
states. The former entails acting while the latter entails 
perceiving in ways that garner evidence for the genera-
tive model. Prospective inference about optimal actions 
makes it active inference and has been referred to as 
“planning as inference” (Botvinick & Toussaint, 2012) 
or “self-evidencing” (Hohwy, 2016).
Vasil et al. (2020) proposed that humans character-
istically expect to encounter sensory outcomes indica-
tive of the alignment of hidden mental states (i.e., the 
internal states of others), that is, cues to CG. This is 
cast as a species-typical adaptive prior belief (Badcock 
et al., 2019) that mental states are aligned with others 
“like me,” that is, that CG exists. This adaptive prior for 
alignment motivates patterned action-perception cycles 
that maximize evidence for the adaptive prior, on aver-
age, across time. In other words, the adaptive prior for 
alignment energizes a uniquely human kind of self-
evidencing across various timescales, ranging from 
dyadic interactions to neurodevelopment and cultural 
niche construction (see also, Veissière et al., 2020).
The goodness of fit of generative models to data is 
scored by their variational free energy (Parr et  al., 
2022). Lower (higher) free energies indicate that gen-
erative models are better (worse) explanations for data. 
There are several mathematically equivalent definitions 
of free energy (see Parr et al., 2022). One definition 
highlights the importance of perception in free-energy 
minimization (via model inversion; Dayan et al., 1995). 
This definition states that models with low free energy 
encode simple and accurate explanations of hidden 
states. Increasing explanatory complexity incurs com-
putational and metabolic cost and so is automatically 
penalized, although it may be required for sufficiently 
accurate explanations (Ortega & Braun, 2013). Under 
the adaptive prior for alignment, free-energy minimiza-
tion begets relevance maximization (Sperber & Wilson, 
1986) whereby “an assumption with greater contextual 
effects [accuracy] is more relevant; and . . . an assump-
tion requiring a smaller processing effort [complexity] 
is more relevant” (Sperber & Wilson, 1986, p. 124).
A second definition highlights the importance of 
action in free-energy minimization. This definition casts 
a
s
y
s∗
Fig. 2.  Markov blankets and circular causality. Markov blanket states 
in the bold circles (i.e., sensory y and active a states) separate internal 
states s from external states s*. Arrows indicate causal influences. 
Under this sparse causal coupling, internal states are conditionally 
independent of external states, and vice versa, given blanket states. 
This particular partition of states and the sparse coupling between 
these means that the dynamics of internal states parameterize con-
ditional Bayesian beliefs (i.e., probability distributions) about the 
causes of sensory states (i.e., external and active states). The implicit 
neurocognitive message passing is specified by a generative model 
of how external and active states cause sensory states (see Fig. 3).

16	
Vasil
free energy as the sum of a divergence term (the 
expected difference of the approximate and exact pos-
teriors over hidden states) and surprisal. Surprisal is 
the negative log probability of outcomes under a gen-
erative model. Heuristically, surprisal scores the unex-
pectedness of sensation under a generative model 
(Dayan et al., 1995). The important point is that the 
divergence term is an upper bound on surprisal. Thus, 
minimizing the divergence term (via perception that 
optimizes beliefs about hidden states) implicitly mini-
mizes surprisal and, thus, free energy. Functionally, 
minimizing the divergence term renders internal states 
a “good” (useful) model of external states (Conant & 
Ashby, 1970). Consequently, action can be leveraged to 
elicit expected sensations. For example, Vasil et al. 
(2020) argued that across the timescale of interaction, 
cues to CG drive belief updates that cause speakers to 
converge on a shared generative model, that is, a model 
of the “true” CG. With convergence, interlocutors are 
better able to predict each other and thereby minimize 
the (joint) surprisal of “our” sensory exchange (Friston 
& Frith, 2015). Consequently, speakers can adaptively 
engage with the shared process (e.g., refer felicitously) 
because they embody a model of that process, that is, 
of what “we” share in CG.
The findings reviewed in this article suggest that chil-
dren’s reference relies on generative models that support 
hierarchically and temporally deep beliefs (Fig. 3). In 
hierarchical models, the activity of internal states (e.g., 
neural representations) in higher levels conveys beliefs 
to lower levels (Friston, Rosch, et al., 2017; e.g., Friston 
et al., 2020). These beliefs are, in effect, allostatic and 
homeostatic set points that guide probabilistic transitions 
among hidden states at lower levels, including states that 
map to action (Pezzulo et al., 2015). This leads action to 
look as if it were gathering evidence for prior beliefs, on 
average, across time (Friston, FitzGerald, et al., 2017).
Under the adaptive prior for alignment, beliefs that 
CG exists furnish prior constraints over lower hierarchi-
cal levels. These prior beliefs guide action-perception 
cycles to gather evidence for the existence of CG. One 
such action is reference. That is, reference emerges  
as an embodied tool to gather evidence for the adap-
tive prior for alignment that both depends on—and  
influences—beliefs about CG. Beliefs about CG proba-
bilistically bias competition among the unobservable 
half of communicative constructions (Cisek, 2007), a 
set of states called conventional symbolic unit (CSU) 
states (Langacker, 1987). CSU states probabilistically 
map to phonetic output (i.e., the observable half of 
constructions). Although CSU states may themselves 
possess hierarchical structure, key is that CSU states are 
often linked to other CSU states at the same level of 
the generative model (Bybee, 2002; S. L. Frank et al., 
2012). These latter are an important kind of communi-
cative policy that generate extended sequences of pat-
terned communicative action. Communicative policies 
may be used with referential intent, in which case they 
are referential-control policies.
When planning what to do next, plausible policies 
are evaluated in terms of their expected free energy. This 
is the free energy that would be expected when select-
ing a particular plan or course of action. The expected 
free energy of a policy is inversely proportional to its 
log probability (Friston, FitzGerald, et al., 2017). More 
plausible policies have lower expected free energies. 
Whereas variational free energy is based on present 
and past sensation, expected free energy is based on 
expected sensations under competing policies. As with 
variational free energy, there are several mathematically 
equivalent decompositions of expected free energy 
(Parr et  al., 2022). One decomposition shows that 
expected free energy is a mixture of epistemic, prag-
matic, and deontic value terms. An extended example 
illustrates the meaning of and relationship between 
these terms.
In referential-communication tasks, children may first 
infer whether they are in a collaborative or noncollabo-
rative context. Such actions possess epistemic affor-
dance by virtue of resolving contextual uncertainty 
(e.g., via saccades that maximize expected information 
gain; Poli et al., 2020). Under the adaptive prior for 
alignment, an important effect on behavior of inferring 
that one is in a collaborative context is motivational 
(Pezzulo et al., 2018). Collaboration motivates epistemic 
behavior that searches further for contextually relevant 
cues to CG that resolve uncertainty about CG (e.g., 
Mirza et al., 2019) before exploiting updated beliefs 
about CG to secure preferred sensory exchanges (i.e., 
cues to CG that indicate that mental states are aligned 
because of referential control). Discussed below, in this 
setting, cues to CG come to acquire deontic value (i.e., 
the [learned] likelihood of policies given particular sen-
sory cues; Veissière et al., 2020).
Collaboration is hypothesized to have this motivating 
effect because collaborators are a priori more likely to 
possess CG than are noncollaborators. Minimally, to 
conceive of themselves as such, collaborators must infer 
that it is in their CG that they are collaborating, whereas 
the opposite makes no sense for noncollaborators (i.e., 
because CG can be formed only via communication, 
including nonlinguistic but ostensive looks, and human 
communication is always collaboration; Clark, 1996; 
Tomasello, 2008). As soon as individuals learn this con-
tingency (probably via recurrent joint engagement in 
infancy), subsequent collaboration licenses the infer-
ence of something such as “I am on the right track (i.e., 
towards alignment), given my adaptive prior.” This 

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
17
inference motivates subsequent control because—given 
this inference—the expected benefits outweigh the 
expected costs of control. In other words, collaboration 
is an incentivizing cue that motivates intentional control 
to access preferred states (Berridge, 1996). Thus, the 
present model predicts, first, that young children should 
be motivated to collaborate (e.g., Rekers et al., 2011) 
because of the learned (deontic) value of collaboration. 
Second, the model predicts that in the inferred collab-
orative context, children should be more motivated to 
engage in effortful control that (a) seeks out cues that 
resolve uncertainty about CG and (b) generates more 
informative reference. The second claim accounts for 
the first set of findings, above, in which children were 
more informative in collaborative than in noncollabora-
tive contexts. What about other two sets of findings?
To answer this, first note that attention to cues to CG 
boosts their influence on belief updates by causing 
them to ascend to higher levels of the generative model 
(Ramstead et  al., 2016). Updated beliefs about CG  
calibrate the probability distribution over competing 
referential-control policies. Sometimes, policies with 
greater deontic value will be more probable (Constant 
et al., 2021; Veissière et al., 2020). At other times, poli-
cies with greater pragmatic value will be more probable. 
Deontically valuable policies include cheap, automa-
tized, referential-control policies that require relatively 
little constructive effort to plan and produce. In contrast, 
pragmatically valuable policies usually require greater 
constructive effort to plan and produce and tend to be 
less practiced, although they may be useful for shoring 
up certainty that one will elicit preferred sensations. 
What shapes the probability that pragmatic or deontic 
referential-control policies guide action?
Deontic and pragmatic value share at least two kinds 
of relationships. The first speaks to the second set of 
findings (i.e., that cues to CG possess an inverse rela-
tionship with initial informativeness). If cues to CG 
G
γ
β
π
π
π
π
C
s2
s3
s1
s1
s3
s2
a1
a2
a3
a1
a2
a3
B
B
D
A
G
A
A
G
G
B
B
D
A
B
B
D
A
A
A
A
A
s1
s3
s2
s1
s3
s2
a1
a2
a3
a1
a2
a3
B
B
D
A
A
A
Level 2
Level 1
Adaptive Prior
for Alignment
CG Belief
States
CSU
States 
Referring
Form
Fig. 3.  Hierarchical generative model for referential production. This figure casts the processes underpinning young children’s referential 
informativeness as a partially observable Markov decision process (a common form of generative model for discrete states; Parr et al., 2022). 
Arrows indicate driving, and nubs indicate modulatory influences. In Level 2, the adaptive prior for alignment specifies that young children 
have a strong prior belief (β) about the confidence or precision (γ) afforded the expected free energy (G) of policies (π) expected to elicit 
(a priori preferred) cues to common ground (CG), C = P y C
( |
) (see Friston et al., 2014). Policies guide transitions (B) between states s that 
encode beliefs about CG, B = P s
s
(
|
, )
τ
τ
π
−1
. Beliefs about CG provide top-down constraints on the expected free energy of competing ref-
erential control policies in Level 1. Beliefs about CG favor either referential control policies that—starting from initial conditions D = P s( )
1
—produce observable outcomes or actions a, A = P a
s
(
|
)
τ
τ , that resolve uncertainty about CG (e.g., saccades that foveate to nonlinguistic 
cues to CG) or that elicit preferred outcomes (e.g., produce referring forms that elicit cues to CG indicative of mental-state alignment). The 
latter includes policies with pragmatic (bold lines) or deontic affordance (dotted lines). Note that Level 2 states convey beliefs to multiple 
Level 1 states. This means that Level 2 has slow dynamics that contextualize the fast dynamics of Level 1, in the sense that “what ‘we’ are 
talking about” constrains “what ‘I’ or ‘you’ are talking about.” There are numerous ways that this model may be expanded for different goals, 
such as placing priors over parameters (in squares and bold font) to enable learning, adding precision to Level 1, or modifying hierarchical 
or temporal depth. Candidate model structures may be used to simulate communication (Heins et al., 2022) or fitted to empirical responses 
to estimate the prior beliefs of individual subjects (Smith et al., 2022). 

18	
Vasil
increase children’s confidence about the existence of 
CG, they might favor deontically valuable policies (e.g., 
nulls or pronouns). Put differently, observing cues to 
CG might license the automatic inference of something 
such as “I see cues to CG  use a pronoun.” Thus, cues 
to CG are a kind of deontic cue that pull for the use of 
relatively cheap forms by way of reliably indicating CG 
(Constant et al., 2019). In contrast, when children are 
relatively less confident about CG (e.g., when there are 
fewer or relatively unreliable cues to CG), they might 
favor pragmatically valuable policies (e.g., lexical NPs). 
This is because even though these policies tend to 
require greater constructive effort, they may be espe-
cially useful for increasing one’s certainty that action 
will elicit cues to CG. Altogether, for a given motiva-
tional state, children are predicted to be less informa-
tive when certain about CG and more informative when 
uncertain about CG.
The second relationship between deontic and prag-
matic value speaks to the third set of findings (i.e., that 
relate repaired informativeness to feedback). Before 
feedback, children might tend to favor deontically valu-
able policies (Sacks & Schegloff, 1979). However, if 
children observe unexpected outcomes after initial ref-
erence (e.g., evidence of misunderstanding), their 
repaired reference might recruit pragmatically richer 
policies that require greater constructive effort. This 
sort of feedback-instigated (Pezzulo & Cisek, 2016), 
on-the-fly shift from deontic to pragmatic imperatives 
arguably accounts for the added informativeness of 
repaired compared with initial reference (e.g., Nilsen 
& Mangal, 2012). Indeed, this shift should cut across 
speech-act types. For example, imagine children imper-
atively referring to an intended referent expecting their 
caregivers to retrieve it. Under the present model, chil-
dren’s ability to use referential control to elicit cues to 
CG should be key, and they should switch to costlier 
(repaired) referential-control policies when such cues 
are not forthcoming. In line with this, Grosse et al. 
(2010) found that compared with several control condi-
tions, children less often repaired their imperative refer-
ence when caregivers correctly identified intended 
referents but did not retrieve them. Moreover, children 
often repaired their reference when caregivers “acci-
dentally” retrieved intended referents (e.g., by handing 
over children’s intended ball while saying “Oh, you 
want the paper?”). These results suggest that children’s 
ability to elicit cues to CG is key and that they will 
recruit costlier policies to guide repaired referential 
control when those expected sensations are not 
forthcoming.
What is the role of executive functioning in referen-
tial repair? Under the present model, when cues to CG 
(that indicate the source of referential failure) are 
absent from feedback, this adds demands on executive 
functioning that are not added when the source of 
failure is indicated. For example, when cues to CG are 
absent from feedback, children must infer the source 
of referential failure, maintain this inference in working 
memory, and use the contents of working memory as 
top-down context (i.e., contextual priors; Parr & Friston, 
2017) for constructing and executing referential-control 
policies. This example suggests that executive opera-
tions, such as working memory, task switching, and 
inhibitory control, are implicated to a greater extent in 
repaired than initial reference and in repaired reference 
following feedback with fewer than more cues to CG. 
One prediction that stems from this is that children’s 
informativeness should suffer when feedback does not 
include cues to CG. Indeed, young children are more 
likely to simply repeat their initial reference rather than 
construct more informative repairs following feedback 
with fewer compared with more cues to CG (Anselmi 
et al., 1986; Nilsen & Mangal, 2012). Nonetheless, evi-
dence for the relationship of executive functioning to 
repaired informativeness from studies that manipulated 
feedback cues to CG is scant and provides mixed sup-
port for influences of executive functioning on produc-
tion (e.g., Bacso & Nilsen, 2017; Nilsen & Graham, 2009; 
Wardlow & Heyman, 2016).
Conclusion
The preceding discussion can be summarized by respond-
ing to four challenges issued by Tison and Poirier 
(2021) to the model of Vasil et al. (2020). First, Tison 
and Poirier suggested that this model cannot account 
for complementary joint actions. However, three sets 
of findings that pertain to referential production—one 
half of a quintessentially complementary joint action—
were accounted for using this model. The main idea is 
that young children expect to observe cues to CG and 
so are characteristically motivated to produce referen-
tial actions that efficiently elicit such cues. Most impor-
tantly, this gives rise to the inverse relationship between 
cues to CG and referential informativeness reviewed 
throughout this article. Second, Tison and Poirier sug-
gested that the model of Vasil et al. cannot account for 
imperative reference. This is incorrect. As research has 
shown, expectations of cues to CG and their effects on 
referential control cut across speech-act types. Third, 
Tison and Poirier suggest that the model presented here 
cannot account for how speakers manage cost-benefit 
trade-offs as a “function of the context of utterance”  
(p. 7). However, it should be clear that young children’s 
beliefs about context are central to the present model. 
The belief that one is in a collaborative context is pre-
dicted to motivate effortful control (i.e., that searches 

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
19
for and elicits cues to CG), whereas the belief that one 
is not in a collaborative context suppresses effortful 
control. Moreover, beliefs about the CG context bias 
competition among referential-control policies, proba-
bilistically favoring policies with epistemic, pragmatic, 
or deontic value.1
Discussion
In this section, I summarize the review, discuss limita-
tions, and propose future directions.
Summary
In this review, I argued for a positive view and against 
a deficits view (Glucksberg et al., 1975) of young chil-
dren’s referential informativeness. In support of this, 
experimental research on the relationship of cues to 
CG and children’s informativeness was reviewed before 
elaborating the model of human communication that 
motivates the positive view (Vasil et al., 2020). Five 
points summarize the review. First, children’s informa-
tiveness depends on cues to CG. When it comes to 
initial reference, informativeness possesses an inverse 
relationship with cues to CG, whereas for repaired ref-
erence, the relationship is a positive one. Second, 
young children’s informativeness depends on participa-
tion in collaborative activities. Collaboration pulls for 
greater informativeness. Third, informativeness depends 
on linguistic before nonlinguistic cues to CG. Linguistic 
cues to CG influence informativeness by 2;0. In con-
trast, it is not until children are 2;6 that informativeness 
depends on nonlinguistic cues (see Fig. 1). Although 
others have noted similar patterns (Moll & Kadipasaoglu, 
2013), this is nonetheless surprising because, for exam-
ple, gestural reference depends on nonlinguistic cues 
to CG by around 12 months of age (Liszkowski, 2018) 
and children privilege nonlinguistic over linguistic  
reference in referential interpretation (Grassmann & 
Tomasello, 2010). Fourth, although evidence is shaky, 
cues to CG may interact with other cues to influence 
children’s informativeness. Fifth, findings suggest a role 
for executive function in referential informativeness. 
Young children may have difficulty leveraging cues to 
CG when those cues invite conflicting perspectives on 
intended referents, and feedback that contains more 
cues to CG may positively influence repaired informa-
tiveness by easing cognitive demands.
Limitations
Two major limitations of the review are, first, that it 
focused on a very narrow slice of the experimental pie. 
This was due to the aims of the review (i.e., to sum-
marize literature on the causal relationship between 
cues to CG and young children’s linguistic referential 
informativeness). Although this focused perspective 
yielded conclusions summarized above, it neglected 
other research streams. For example, research on the 
effects of modeling suggests means by which children 
acquire strategies for reference (e.g., Carmiol et al., 
2018; Matthews et al., 2007; Sarilar et al., 2015) and 
connects with their executive skills (e.g., Uzundag & 
Küntay, 2018). However, modeling manipulations do 
not implicate cues to CG about referents and so were 
not discussed. In addition, research on cognitive pro-
cesses that influence informativeness was not consid-
ered (e.g., attribute comparison; Davies & Kreysa, 2018; 
Rabagliati & Robertson, 2017).
Second, I did not discuss literature on multimodal 
reference. Indeed, this is an especially important over-
sight because linguistic reference emerges from (and, 
in the earliest stages, is even guided by) nonlinguistic 
reference (Tomasello, 2008; e.g., Iverson & Goldin-
Meadow, 2005). Using observational methods, some 
authors have reported that multimodal reference 
depends on cues to CG at earlier ages than suggested 
by experimental studies of linguistic reference. Guerriero 
et al. (2006) reported that English and, to a lesser extent, 
Japanese speakers age 1;5 often used points or touch 
alongside nonlexical (e.g., pronominal) reference to 
introduce new referents. Those authors concluded that 
infants understand that when introducing referents, pro-
nouns require additional (nonlinguistic) information for 
unambiguous reference, whereas lexical reference does 
not. Ates¸ and Küntay (2018) and So et al. (2010) found 
related patterns among Turkish-speaking and English- 
and Chinese-speaking infants and toddlers, respectively. 
Generative models of the sort discussed in this article 
may be extended to any modality and may be multi-
modal (Parr et al., 2022).
Future directions
This review had four further limitations that, simultane-
ously, serve as suggested directions for research. First, 
this review collapsed across potentially important dis-
tinctions in types of cues to CG. For instance, variegated 
constructions were classified as examples of either 
more-CG or less-CG questions. Although this classifi-
cation was useful, it is conceivable that children’s  
informativeness depends on finer distinctions (e.g., 
informativeness might depend more strongly on one 
type of “more CG” question than on others). Second, 
many of the studies reviewed above sampled only English- 
speaking children. This is an important caveat because 

20	
Vasil
patterns of nominal realization vary along several dimen­
sions (e.g., ergativity, Du Bois, 1987; argument drop, 
Valian, 1991). That is, although the major pattern 
observed here—that informativeness tracks inversely 
with cues to CG—is applicable cross-linguistically as a 
kind of “universal” (e.g., Japanese, Guerriero et al., 
2006; Turkish, Ates¸ & Küntay, 2018; Chinese, So et al., 
2010; German, Salomo et  al., 2011), each language 
offers children unique means to effect this inverse rela-
tionship (e.g., preferential use of null or pronominal 
forms, Guerriero et al., 2006; tripartite demonstrative 
systems, Küntay & Ozyürek, 2006). Third, I was limited 
in my ability to discern interactions between cues to 
CG regarding their influence on informativeness. 
Although there was some evidence for dependence 
across comparable studies, the lack of high-quality 
studies that crossed manipulations to nonlinguistic and 
linguistic cues to CG precludes certainty in these infer-
ences. Fourth, only briefly discussed were effects of 
cues to cultural CG on children’s informativeness; this 
was due to limited (nonlinguistic) or no (linguistic) 
research on the topic.
Conclusion
In this article, I advanced a positive view on young 
children’s linguistic referential informativeness. In sup-
port of the positive view, experimental research was 
reviewed that suggests that children’s informativeness 
is inversely related to the presence of cues to CG, with 
dependence on linguistic cues to CG preceding depen-
dence on nonlinguistic cues to CG. An active inference 
model of the internal processes that relate cues to CG 
to informativeness was elaborated.
Transparency
Action Editor: Tina M. Lowrey
Editor: Klaus Fiedler
Declaration of Conflicting Interests
The author(s) declared that there were no conflicts of 
interest with respect to the authorship or the publication 
of this article 
ORCID iD
Jared Vasil 
 https://orcid.org/0000-0003-3824-2470
Acknowledgments
This article was based on a master’s thesis written by J. Vasil. 
I thank Karl Friston, Rick Hoyle, Michael Tomasello, and 
Makeba Wilbourn, who were members of J. Vasil’s master’s 
thesis committee, for feedback on early versions of the manu-
script. I thank Karl Friston, Anna Smith, Michael Tomasello, 
and anonymous reviewers for feedback on later versions of 
the manuscript.
Note
1. Tison and Poirier (2021) issued a fourth challenge. They sug-
gested that “selective and targeted alignment of mental states 
relevant to . . . local goals” (p. 6) is important for joint action 
and that the model of Vasil et al. (2020) cannot account for this 
because it supposedly casts alignment as an “automatic pro-
cess” (Tison & Poirier, 2021, p. 6). The reasoning behind the 
latter claim is unclear. Tison and Poirier seem to confuse Vasil 
et al.’s use of the word “alignment” with an unintended use of 
that word by Garrod and Pickering (2009). However, Vasil et al. 
never cited that literature but, instead, cited literature on shared 
intentionality theory (e.g., Tomasello, 2008, 2014, 2019). In the 
latter, alignment relies on intentional (non-“automatic”) com-
municative processes. Indeed, the adaptive prior for alignment 
is said to “foster intentional, patterned action” (Vasil et al., 2020, 
p. 1). Discussion of another challenge issued by Tison and 
Poirier sheds further light on the adaptive prior for alignment. 
Tison and Poirier seem to conflate synchronic and diachronic 
levels when they argue that Vasil et al. suggested “discontinuity” 
(Tison & Poirier, 2021, p. 8) between human and nonhuman 
primate communication before labeling it a “saltationist view” 
(Tison & Poirier, 2021, p. 8) of human evolution. Vasil et al. did 
argue for synchronic discontinuity because this is an empirical 
fact (e.g., Bullinger et al., 2011; Duguid et al., 2014). However, 
diachronically, Vasil et al. suggested that human communica-
tive motivations (captured by the adaptive prior for alignment) 
were “gradually cooperativized” (Vasil et al., 2020, p. 1) across 
human evolution. This is a nonsaltationist claim. Indeed, the 
evolution of the adaptive prior for alignment may be modeled 
as gradual change in continuously valued quantities (see Fig. 
3). Others have suggested similar things; for example, Bates 
et al. (1991) argued that “variation along a continuous dimen-
sion can place the organism in a new ‘problem space,’ requiring 
qualitatively different solutions to ensure survival and repro-
ductive success” (p. 34).
References
Abbot-Smith, K., Nurmsoo, E., Croll, R., Ferguson, H., & 
Forrester, M. (2016). How children aged 2;6 tailor ver-
bal expressions to interlocutor informational needs. 
Journal of Child Language, 43(6), 1277–1291. https://doi 
.org/10.1017/S0305000915000616
Anselmi, D., Tomasello, M., & Acunzo, M. (1986). Young chil-
dren’s responses to neutral and specific contingent que-
ries. Journal of Child Language, 13(1), 135–144. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0305000900000349
Ariel, M. (1988). Referring and accessibility. Journal of 
Linguistics, 24(1), 65–87.
Ates¸, B., & Küntay, A. (2015). Children’s sensitivity to caregiver 
cues and the role of adult feedback in the development 
of referential communication. In L. Serratrice & S. E. M. 
Allen (Eds.), The acquisition of reference (pp. 241–262). 
John Benjamins. https://doi.org/10.1075/tilar.15.10ate
Ates¸, B., & Küntay, A. C. (2018). Referential interactions of 
Turkish-learning children with their caregivers about 
non-absent objects: Integration of non-verbal devices 
and prior discourse. Journal of Child Language, 45(1), 
148–173. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000917000150

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
21
Bacso, S. A., & Nilsen, E. (2017). What’s that you’re say-
ing? Children with better executive functioning produce 
and repair communication more effectively. Journal of 
Cognition and Development, 18(4), 441–464. https://doi 
.org/10.1080/15248372.2017.1336438
Bacso, S. A., Nilsen, E., & Silva, J. (2021). How to turn that 
frown upside down: Children make use of a listener’s 
facial cues to detect and (attempt to) repair miscommu-
nication. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 207, 
Article 105097. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2021.105097
Badcock, P. B., Friston, K. J., Ramstead, M. J. D., Ploeger, A.,  
& Hohwy, J. (2019). The hierarchically mechanistic mind: 
An evolutionary systems theory of the human brain, cog-
nition, and behavior. Cognitive, Affective & Behavioral 
Neuroscience, 19(6):1319–1351. https://doi.org/10.3758/
s13415-019-00721-3
Bahtiyar, S., & Küntay, A. C. (2009). Integration of communi-
cative partner’s visual perspective in patterns of referen-
tial requests. Journal of Child Language, 36(3), 529–555. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000908009094
Bannard, C., Rosner, M., & Matthews, D. (2017). What’s 
worth talking about? Information theory reveals how chil-
dren balance informativeness and ease of production. 
Psychological Science, 28(7), 954–966.
Bates, E., Thai, D., & Marchman, V. (1991). Symbols and 
syntax: A Darwinian approach to language development. 
In N. A. Krasnegor, D. M. Rumbaugh, R. L. Schiefelbusch, 
& M. Studdert-Kennedy (Eds.), Biological and behav-
ioral determinants of language development (pp. 29–65). 
Erlbaum. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781315807553-8
Berridge, K. C. (1996). Food reward: Brain substrates of 
wanting and liking. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral  
Reviews, 20(1), 1–25. https://doi.org/10.1016/0149-7634 
(95)00033-b
Bjorklund, D. F., & Ellis, B. J. (2014). Children, childhood, and 
development in evolutionary perspective. Developmental 
Review, 34(3), 225–264. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2014 
.05.005
Bohn, M., & Frank, M. C. (2019). The pervasive role of prag-
matics in early language. Annual Review of Developmental 
Psychology, 1(1), 223–249. https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-devpsych-121318-085037
Bohn, M., & Köymen, B. (2018). Common ground and devel-
opment. Child Development Perspectives, 12(2), 104–108.
Botvinick, M., & Toussaint, M. (2012). Planning as inference. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 16(10), 485–488. https://doi 
.org/10.1016/j.tics.2012.08.006
Brennan, S. E., & Clark, H. H. (1996). Conceptual pacts and 
lexical choice in conversation. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 22(6), 
1482–1493. https://doi.org/10.1037/0278-7393.22.6.1482
Bruineberg, J., Kiverstein, J., & Rietveld, E. (2018). The antici-
pating brain is not a scientist: The free-energy principle 
from an ecological-enactive perspective. Synthese, 195(6), 
2417–2444.
Bruner, J. S. (1983). Child’s talk: Learning to use language. 
W.W. Norton.
Bullinger, A. F., Zimmermann, F., Kaminski, J., & Tomasello, M.  
(2011). Different social motives in the gestural communication  
of chimpanzees and human children. Developmental 
Science, 14(1), 58–68.
Bybee, J. (2002). Sequentiality as the basis of constituent 
structure. In T. Givón & T. F. Malle (Eds.), The evolu-
tion of language out of pre-language (pp. 107–134). 
John Benjamins. https://www.oxfordscholarship.com/
view/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780195301571.001.0001/
acprof-9780195301571-chapter-15
Campbell, A. L., Brooks, P., & Tomasello, M. (2000). Factors 
affecting young children’s use of pronouns as referring 
expressions. Journal of Speech, Language, and Hearing 
Research, 43(6), 1337–1349. https://doi.org/10.1044/
jslhr.4306.1337
Carmiol, A. M., Matthews, D., & Rodríguez-Villagra, O. A. 
(2018). How children learn to produce appropriate refer-
ring expressions in narratives: The role of clarification 
requests and modeling. Journal of Child Language, 45(3), 
736–752. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000917000381
Carpenter, M., & Liebal, K. (2011). Joint attention, communi-
cation, and knowing together in infancy. In A. Seemann 
(Ed.), Joint attention: New developments in psychology, 
philosophy of mind, and social neuroscience (pp. 159–
181). MIT Press.
Carpenter, M., Nagell, K., & Tomasello, M. (1998). Social cog-
nition, joint attention, and communicative competence 
from 9 to 15 months of age. Monographs of the Society 
for Research in Child Development, 63(4), i–vi, 1–143.
Cisek, P. (2007). Cortical mechanisms of action selection: 
The affordance competition hypothesis. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
362(1485), 1585–1599.
Clark, H. H. (1996). Using language. Cambridge University 
Press.
Clark, H. H., & Marshall, C. R. (1981). Definite reference 
and mutual knowledge. In A. K. Joshi, B. L. Webber, &  
I. A. Sag (Eds.), Elements of discourse understanding (pp. 
10–63). Cambridge University Press.
Clark, H. H., & Schaefer, E. F. (1987). Collaborating on contribu-
tions to conversations. Language and Cognitive Processes, 
2(1), 19–41. https://doi.org/10.1080/01690968708406350
Clark, H. H., Schreuder, R., & Buttrick, S. (1983). Common 
ground and the understanding of demonstrative refer-
ence. Journal of Verbal Learning & Verbal Behavior, 22(2), 
245–258. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0022-5371(83)90189-5
Clark, H. H., & Wilkes-Gibbs, D. (1986). Referring as a col-
laborative process. Cognition, 22(1), 1–39.
Cohen, E. (2012). The evolution of tag-based cooperation 
in humans: The case for accent. Current Anthropology, 
53(5), 588–616.
Conant, R. C., & Ashby, W. R. (1970). Every good regulator of 
a system must be a model of that system. International 
Journal of Systems Science, 1(2), 89–97.
Constant, A., Clark, A., & Friston, K. J. (2021). Representation 
wars: Enacting an armistice through active inference. 
Frontiers in Psychology, 11, Article 598733. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpsyg.2020.598733
Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., & Friston, K.  
(2019). Regimes of expectations: An active inference 
model of social conformity and human decision making.  

22	
Vasil
Frontiers in Psychology, 10, Article 679. https://doi.org/ 
10.3389/fpsyg.2019.00679
Davies, C., & Katsos, N. (2010). Over-informative children: 
Production/comprehension asymmetry or tolerance to 
pragmatic violations? Lingua, 120(8), 1956–1972. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.lingua.2010.02.005
Davies, C., & Kreysa, H. (2018). Look before you speak: 
Children’s integration of visual information into informative 
referring expressions. Journal of Child Language, 45(5), 
1116–1143. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000918000120
Dayan, P., Hinton, G. E., Neal, R. M., & Zemel, R. S. (1995). 
The Helmholtz machine. Neural Computation, 7(5), 889–
904. https://doi.org/10.1162/neco.1995.7.5.889
de Cat, C. (2015). The cognitive underpinnings of referen-
tial abilities. In L. Serratrice & S. E. M. Allen (Eds.), The 
acquisition of reference (pp. 263–283). John Benjamins.
Diesendruck, G. (2005). The principles of conventionality 
and contrast in word learning: An empirical examination. 
Developmental Psychology, 41(3), 451–463. https://doi 
.org/10.1037/0012-1649.41.3.451
Du Bois, J. W. (1987). The discourse basis of ergativity. 
Language, 63(4), 805–855. https://doi.org/10.2307/415719
Duguid, S., Wyman, E., Bullinger, A. F., Herfurth-Majstorovic, 
K., & Tomasello, M. (2014). Coordination strategies of 
chimpanzees and human children in a Stag Hunt game. 
Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
281(1796), Article 20141973. https://doi.org/10.1098/
rspb.2014.1973
Ford, W., & Olson, D. (1975). The elaboration of the noun 
phrase in children’s description of objects. Journal of 
Experimental Child Psychology, 19(3), 371–382. https://
doi.org/10.1016/0022-0965(75)90068-5
Frank, M. C., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Fernald, A. (2013). Social 
and discourse contributions to the determination of 
reference in cross-situational word learning. Language 
Learning and Development, 9(1), 1–24. https://doi.org/ 
10.1080/15475441.2012.707101
Frank, S. L., Bod, R., & Christiansen, M. H. (2012). How hier-
archical is language use? Proceedings of the Royal Society 
B: Biological Sciences, 279(1747), 4522–4531. https://doi 
.org/10.1098/rspb.2012.1741
Friston, K. (2010). The free-energy principle: A unified brain 
theory? Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 11(2), 127–138.
Friston, K. (2012). A free energy principle for biological sys-
tems. Entropy, 14, 2100–2121.
Friston, K., FitzGerald, T., Rigoli, F., Schwartenbeck, P., & 
Pezzulo, G. (2017). Active inference: A process theory. 
Neural Computation, 29(1), 1–49.
Friston, K., & Frith, C. (2015). A duet for one. Consciousness 
and Cognition, 36, 390–405.
Friston, K., Parr, T., Yufik, Y., Sajid, N., Price, C. J., & Holmes, 
E. (2020). Generative models, linguistic communica-
tion and active inference. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral 
Reviews, 118, 42–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubio 
rev.2020.07.005
Friston, K., Rosch, R., Parr, T., Price, C., & Bowman, H. (2017). 
Deep temporal models and active inference. Neuroscience 
and Biobehavioral Reviews, 77, 388–402.
Friston, K., Schwartenbeck, P., FitzGerald, T., Moutoussis, M., 
Behrens, T., & Dolan, R. J. (2014). The anatomy of choice: 
Dopamine and decision-making. Philosophical Transactions 
of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 369(1655), Article 
20130481. https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2013.0481
Garrod, S., & Pickering, M. J. (2009). Joint action, interac-
tive alignment, and dialog. Topics in Cognitive Science, 
1(2), 292–304. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-8765.2009 
.01020.x
Givón, T. (1992). The grammar of referential coherence as 
mental processing instructions. Linguistics, 30(1), 5–56. 
https://doi.org/10.1515/ling.1992.30.1.5
Glucksberg, S., Krauss, R. M., & Higgins, E. T. (1975). The 
development of referential communication skills. In  
F. D. Horowitz (Ed.), Review of child development research 
(Vol. 4, pp. 305–345). University of Chicago Press.
Glucksberg, S., Krauss, R. M., & Weisberg, R. (1966). Referential 
communication in nursery school children: Method and 
some preliminary findings. Journal of Experimental Child 
Psychology, 3(4), 333–342. https://doi.org/10.1016/0022-
0965(66)90077-4
Goldberg, A. E. (1995). Constructions: A construction gram-
mar approach to argument structure. University of 
Chicago Press.
Goldberg, A. E. (2003). Constructions: A new theoretical 
approach to language. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 7(5), 
219–224.
Graf, E., & Davies, C. (2014). The production and compre-
hension of referring expressions. In D. Matthews (Ed.), 
Pragmatic development in first language acquisition (pp. 
161–182). John Benjamins.
Graf, E., Theakston, A., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2015). 
Subject and object omission in children’s early transi-
tive constructions: A discourse-pragmatic approach. 
Applied Psycholinguistics, 36(3), 701–727. https://doi 
.org/10.1017/S0142716413000477
Grassmann, S., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Young children fol-
low pointing over words in interpreting acts of refer-
ence. Developmental Science, 13(1), 252–263. https://doi 
.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00871.x
Greenfield, P. M., & Smith, J. H. (1976). Structure of com-
munication in early language development. Academic 
Press. https://agris.fao.org/agris-search/search.do?record 
ID=US201300390435
Grigoroglou, M., & Papafragou, A. (2019a). Children’s (and 
adults’) production adjustments to generic and particular 
listener needs. Cognitive Science, 43(10), Article e12790. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/cogs.12790
Grigoroglou, M., & Papafragou, A. (2019b). Interactive con-
texts increase informativeness in children’s referential 
communication. Developmental Psychology, 55(5), 951–
966. https://doi.org/10.1037/dev0000693
Grosse, G., Behne, T., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. 
(2010). Infants communicate in order to be understood. 
Developmental Psychology, 46(6), 1710–1722. https://doi 
.org/10.1037/a0020727
Guerriero, A. M. S., Oshima-Takane, Y., & Kuriyama, Y. (2006). 
The development of referential choice in English and 

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
23
Japanese: A discourse-pragmatic perspective. Journal of 
Child Language, 33(4), 823–857. https://doi.org/10.1017/
s030500090600763x
Gundel, J. K., Hedberg, N., & Zacharski, R. (1993). Cognitive 
status and the form of referring expressions in discourse. 
Language, 69(2), 274–307. https://doi.org/10.2307/416535
Heins, C., Millidge, B., Demekas, D., Klein, B., Friston, K., 
Couzin, I. D., & Tschantz, A. (2022). pymdp: A Python 
library for active inference in discrete state spaces. Journal 
of Open Source Software, 7(73), Article 4098. https://doi 
.org/10.21105/joss.04098
Hohwy, J. (2016). The self-evidencing brain. Noûs, 50(2), 
259–285.
Iverson, J. M., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2005). Gesture paves 
the way for language development. Psychological Science, 
16(5), 367–371. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2005 
.01542.x
Karimi, H. (2022). Greater entropy leads to more explicit 
referential forms during language production. Cognition, 
225, Article 105093. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition 
.2022.105093
Kay, P. (1977). Language evolution and speech style. In B. 
Blount & M. Sanches (Eds.), Sociocultural dimensions of 
language change (pp. 21–33). Academic Press.
Knill, D. C., & Pouget, A. (2004). The Bayesian brain: The role 
of uncertainty in neural coding and computation. Trends 
in Neurosciences, 27(12), 712–719.
Köymen, B., Rosenbaum, L., & Tomasello, M. (2014). Reasoning 
during joint decision-making by preschool peers. Cogni­
tive Development, 32, 74–85. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.cogdev.2014.09.001
Köymen, B., Schmerse, D., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2014). 
Young children create partner-specific referential pacts 
with peers. Developmental Psychology, 50(10), 2334–2342. 
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0037837
Köymen, B., & Tomasello, M. (2020). The early ontogeny 
of reason giving. Child Development Perspectives, 14(4), 
215–220. https://doi.org/10.1111/cdep.12384
Küntay, A. C., & Ozyürek, A. (2006). Learning to use demon-
stratives in conversation: What do language specific strat-
egies in Turkish reveal? Journal of Child Language, 33(2), 
303–320. https://doi.org/10.1017/s0305000906007380
Lambrecht, K. (1994). Information structure and sentence 
form: Topics, focus, and the mental representations of 
discourse referents. Cambridge University Press. https://
doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511620607
Langacker, R. W. (1987). Foundations of cognitive grammar: 
Theoretical prerequisites (Vol. I). Stanford University 
Press.
Levinson, S. C. (2006). On the human “interaction engine.” 
In N. Enfield (Ed.), Roots of human sociality: Culture, 
cognition and interaction (pp. 39–69). Berg.
Liebal, K., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2013). Young 
children’s understanding of cultural common ground. 
The British Journal of Developmental Psychology, 31(Pt. 
1), 88–96.
Liszkowski, U. (2018). Origins and complexities of infant 
communication and social cognition. In A. Newen,  
L. De Bruin, & S. Gallagher (Eds.), Oxford handbook of  
4E cognition (pp. 661–684). Oxford University Press.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., Henning, A., Striano, T., & 
Tomasello, M. (2004). Twelve-month-olds point to share 
attention and interest. Developmental Science, 7(3), 297–
307.
Liszkowski, U., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2007). 
Reference and attitude in infant pointing. Journal of Child 
Language, 34(1), 1–20.
Matthews, D., Butcher, J., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. 
(2012). Two- and four-year-olds learn to adapt referring 
expressions to context: Effects of distracters and feed-
back on referential communication. Topics in Cognitive 
Science, 4, 184–210. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1756-
8765.2012.01181.x
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., Theakston, A., & Tomasello, M. 
(2006). The effect of perceptual availability and prior 
discourse on young children’s use of referring expres-
sions. Applied Psycholinguistics, 27(3), 403–422. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0142716406060334
Matthews, D., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2007). How tod-
dlers and preschoolers learn to uniquely identify referents 
for others: A training study. Child Development, 78(6), 
1744–1759. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2007 
.01098.x
Mirza, M. B., Adams, R. A., Friston, K., & Parr, T. (2019). 
Introducing a Bayesian model of selective attention based 
on active inference. Scientific Reports, 9(1), 1–22. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41598-019-50138-8
Moll, H., Carpenter, M., & Tomasello, M. (2011). Social 
engagement leads 2-year-olds to overestimate others’ 
knowledge. Infancy, 16(3), 248–265. https://doi.org/10 
.1111/j.1532-7078.2010.00044.x
Moll, H., & Kadipasaoglu, D. (2013). The primacy of social 
over visual perspective-taking. Frontiers in Human 
Neuroscience, 7, Article 558. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fnhum.2013.00558
Moll, H., Meltzoff, A. N., Merzsch, K., & Tomasello, M. 
(2013). Taking versus confronting visual perspectives 
in preschool children. Developmental Psychology, 49(4), 
646–654. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0028633
Nadig, A. S., & Sedivy, J. C. (2002). Evidence of perspective-
taking constraints in children’s on-line reference resolu-
tion. Psychological Science, 13(4), 329–336. https://doi 
.org/10.1111/j.0956-7976.2002.00460.x
Nilsen, E., & Fecica, A. M. (2011). A model of communicative 
perspective-taking for typical and atypical populations of 
children. Developmental Review, 31(1), 55–78. https://doi 
.org/10.1016/j.dr.2011.07.001
Nilsen, E., & Graham, S. (2009). The relations between chil-
dren’s communicative perspective-taking and execu-
tive functioning. Cognitive Psychology, 58(2), 220–249. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogpsych.2008.07.002
Nilsen, E., & Mangal, L. (2012). Which is important for pre-
schoolers’ production and repair of statements: What the 
listener knows or what the listener says? Journal of Child 
Language, 39(5), 1121–1134. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0305000911000432

24	
Vasil
Olson, D. R. (1970). Language and thought: Aspects of a cog-
nitive theory of semantics. Psychological Review, 77(4), 
257–273. https://doi.org/10.1037/h0029436
O’Neill, D. K. (1996). Two-year-old children’s sensitivity 
to a parent’s knowledge state when making requests. 
Child Development, 67(2), 659–677. https://doi.org/10 
.1111/j.1467-8624.1996.tb01758.x
O’Neill, D. K., & Topolovec, J. C. (2001). Two-year-old chil-
dren’s sensitivity to the referential (in)efficacy of their 
own gestures. Journal of Child Language, 28(1), 1–28. 
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000900004566
O’Neill, G., & Miller, P. H. (2013). A show of hands: Relations 
between young children’s gesturing and executive func-
tion. Developmental Psychology, 49(8), 1517–1528. https://
doi.org/10.1037/a0030241
Ortega, P. A., & Braun, D. A. (2013). Thermodynamics as a 
theory of decision-making with information-processing 
costs. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, 
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 469(2153), Article 
20120683. https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2012.0683
Parr, T., & Friston, K. (2017). Working memory, attention, 
and salience in active inference. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 
Article 14678. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-017-15249-0
Parr, T., Pezzulo, G., & Friston, K. (2022). Active inference: 
The free energy principle in mind, brain, and behavior. 
MIT Press.
Pea, R. D. (1979). Can information theory explain early word 
choice? Journal of Child Language, 6(3), 397–410.
Pearl, J. (1988). Probabilistic reasoning in intelligent systems: 
Networks of plausible inference. Morgan Kaufmann.
Pezzulo, G., & Cisek, P. (2016). Navigating the affordance 
landscape: Feedback control as a process model of behav-
ior and cognition. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 20(6), 
414–424. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2016.03.013
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. (2015). Active inference, 
homeostatic regulation and adaptive behavioural control. 
Progress in Neurobiology, 134, 17–35.
Pezzulo, G., Rigoli, F., & Friston, K. J. (2018). Hierarchical 
active inference: A theory of motivated control. Trends 
in Cognitive Sciences, 22(4), 294–306.
Poli, F., Serino, G., Mars, R. B., & Hunnius, S. (2020). Infants tai-
lor their attention to maximize learning. Science Advances, 
6(39), Article eabb5053. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv 
.abb5053
Prince, E. (1981). Toward a taxonomy of given-new informa-
tion. In P. Cole (Ed.), Radical pragmatics (pp. 223–255). 
Academic Press.
Rabagliati, H., & Robertson, A. (2017). How do children learn 
to avoid referential ambiguity? Insights from eye-tracking. 
Journal of Memory and Language, 94, 15–27. https://doi 
.org/10.1016/j.jml.2016.09.007
Rakoczy, H., Warneken, F., & Tomasello, M. (2008). The 
sources of normativity: Young children’s awareness of the 
normative structure of games. Developmental Psychology, 
44(3), 875–881.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Badcock, P. B., & Friston, K. J. (2018). 
Answering Schrödinger’s question: A free-energy formula-
tion. Physics of Life Reviews, 24, 1–16.
Ramstead, M. J. D., Veissière, S. P. L., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2016). 
Cultural Affordances: Scaffolding local worlds through 
shared intentionality and regimes of attention. Frontiers 
in Psychology, 7, Article 1090. https://doi.org/10.3389/
fpsyg.2016.01090
Rekers, Y., Haun, D. B. M., & Tomasello, M. (2011). Children, 
but not chimpanzees, prefer to collaborate. Current 
Biology, 21(20), 1756–1758.
Sacks, H., & Schegloff, E. A. (1979). Two preferences in the 
organization of reference to persons in conversation and 
their interaction. In G. Psathas (Ed.), Everyday language 
(pp. 15–21). Irvington.
Salomo, D., Graf, E., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2011). 
The role of perceptual availability and discourse con-
text in young children’s question answering. Journal of 
Child Language, 38(4), 918–931. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0305000910000395
Salomo, D., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2010). Young 
children’s sensitivity to new and given information 
when answering predicate-focus questions. Applied 
Psycholinguistics, 31(1), 101–115. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S014271640999018X
Salomo, D., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2013). Children’s 
ability to answer different types of questions. Journal of 
Child Language, 40(2), 469–491. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0305000912000050
Sarilar, A., Matthews, D., & Küntay, A. C. (2015). Hearing 
relative clauses boosts relative clause usage (and ref-
erential clarity) in young Turkish language learners. 
Applied Psycholinguistics, 36(2), 175–202. https://doi 
.org/10.1017/S0142716413000192
Schegloff, E. A. (1972). Notes on a conversational practice: 
Formulating place. In D. N. Sudnow (Ed.), Studies in 
social interaction (pp. 75–119). Macmillan.
Schegloff, E. A. (2006). Interaction: The infrastructure for 
social institutions, the natural ecological niche for lan-
guage, and the arena in which culture is enacted. In S. C. 
Levinson & N. J. Enfield (Eds.), Roots of human sociality: 
Culture, cognition and interaction (pp. 70–96). Routledge
Schiffer, S. R. (1972). Meaning. Oxford University Press.
Schmerse, D., Lieven, E., & Tomasello, M. (2015). Young chil-
dren use shared experience to interpret definite reference. 
Journal of Child Language, 42(5), 1146–1157. https://doi 
.org/10.1017/S0305000914000555
Schmidt, M. F. H., Butler, L. P., Heinz, J., & Tomasello, M. 
(2016). Young children see a single action and infer a 
social norm: Promiscuous normativity in 3-year-olds. 
Psychological Science, 27(10), 1360–1370.
Schmidt, M. F. H., Rakoczy, H., & Tomasello, M. (2011). 
Young children attribute normativity to novel actions 
without pedagogy or normative language. Developmental 
Science, 14(3), 530–539.
Schmidt, M. F. H., Rakoczy, H., & Tomasello, M. (2012). 
Young children enforce social norms selectively depend-
ing on the violator’s group affiliation. Cognition, 124(3), 
325–333.
Serratrice, L. (2008). The role of discourse and perceptual 
cues in the choice of referential expressions in English 

Perspectives on Psychological Science XX(X)	
25
preschoolers, school-age children, and adults. Language 
Learning and Development, 4(4), 309–332. https://doi 
.org/10.1080/15475440802333619
Siposova, B., & Carpenter, M. (2019). A new look at joint 
attention and common knowledge. Cognition, 189, 260–
274.
Smith, R., Friston, K. J., & Whyte, C. J. (2022). A step-by-step 
tutorial on active inference and its application to empiri-
cal data. Journal of Mathematical Psychology, 107, Article 
102632. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmp.2021.102632
So, W. C., Demir, Ö. E., & Goldin-Meadow, S. (2010). When 
speech is ambiguous gesture steps in: Sensitivity to dis-
course-pragmatic principles in early childhood. Applied 
Psycholinguistics, 31(1), 209–224. https://doi.org/10 
.1017/S0142716409990221
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance: Communication 
and cognition. John Wiley & Sons.
Tison, R., & Poirier, P. (2021). Active inference and coop-
erative communication: An ecological alternative to the 
alignment view. Frontiers in Psychology, 12, Article 3412. 
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2021.708780
Tomasello, M. (1998). Reference: Intending that others jointly 
attend. Pragmatics and Cognition, 6, 229–243.
Tomasello, M. (2008). Origins of human communication. MIT 
Press.
Tomasello, M. (2014). A natural history of human thinking. 
Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M. (2018). How children come to understand false 
beliefs: A shared intentionality account. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, USA, 115(34), 8491–8498.
Tomasello, M. (2019). Becoming human: A theory of ontogeny. 
Harvard University Press.
Tomasello, M., Anselmi, D., & Farrar, M. J. (1984). Young 
children’s coordination of gestural and linguistic refer-
ence. First Language, 5(15), 199–209. https://doi.org/ 
10.1177/014272378400501503
Uzundag, B. A., & Küntay, A. C. (2018). Children’s refer-
ential communication skills: The role of cognitive abili-
ties and adult models of speech. Journal of Experimental 
Child Psychology, 172, 73–95. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 
j.jecp.2018.02.009
Valian, V. (1991). Syntactic subjects in the early speech of 
American and Italian children. Cognition, 40(1), 21–81. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(91)90046-7
Vasil, J. (forthcoming). The study of rational framing effects 
needs developmental psychology [Commentary on: 
Rational framing effects: A multidisciplinary case by  
J. Bermúdez]. Behavioral and Brain Sciences. https://doi 
.org/10.1017/S0140525X2200005X
Vasil, J., Badcock, P. B., Constant, A., Friston, K., & Ramstead, 
M. J. D. (2020). A world unto itself: Human communi-
cation as active inference. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 
Article 417. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.00417
Vasil, J., & Tomasello, M. (2022). Effects of “we”-framing 
on young children’s commitment, sharing, and helping. 
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 214, Article 
105278. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2021.105278
Veissière, S. P. L., Constant, A., Ramstead, M. J. D., Friston, 
K. J., & Kirmayer, L. J. (2020). Thinking through other 
minds: A variational approach to cognition and culture. 
Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 43, Article e90. https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0140525X19001213
Wardlow, L., & Heyman, G. D. (2016). The roles of feedback 
and working memory in children’s reference production. 
Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 150, 180–193. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2016.05.016
Winters, J., Kirby, S., & Smith, K. (2018). Contextual predict-
ability shapes signal autonomy. Cognition, 176, 15–30.
Wittek, A., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Young children’s sensitivity 
to listener knowledge and perceptual context in choos-
ing referring expressions. Applied Psycholinguis­tics, 26(4), 
541–558. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0142716405050290

