A unifying Bayesian approach for preterm ‘brain-age’
prediction that models EEG sleep transitions over age
Kirubin M. Pillay
Institute of Biomedical Engineering
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
kirubin.pillay@eng.ox.ac.uk
Maarten De Vos
Institute of Biomedical Engineering
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford
Oxford, United Kingdom
maarten.devos@eng.ox.ac.uk
Abstract
Preterm newborns undergo various stresses that may materialize as learning prob-
lems at school-age. Sleep staging of the Electroencephalogram (EEG), followed
by prediction of their ‘brain-age’ from these sleep states can quantify deviations
from normal brain development early (when compared to the known age). Current
automation of this approach relies on explicit sleep state classiﬁcation, optimizing
algorithms using clinicians’ visually labelled sleep stages, which remains a subjec-
tive gold-standard. Such models fail to perform consistently over a wide age range
and impacts the subsequent brain-age estimates that could prevent identiﬁcation of
subtler developmental deviations. We introduce a Bayesian Network utilizing mul-
tiple Gaussian Mixture Models, as a novel, uniﬁed approach for directly estimating
brain-age, simultaneously modelling for both age and sleep dependencies on the
EEG, to improve the accuracy of prediction over a wider age range.
1
Introduction
A preterm baby, born before the expected term age of 37-40 weeks Postmenstrual Age (PMA, the age
since the last menstrual cycle of the mother) is admitted to the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU)
to be cared for until reaching term age. During this period, the brain continues to mature, reﬂected by
the change in their sleep state properties, as seen by Electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings [1, 2].
Deviations in the rate of sleep development may be indicative of cognitive problems by school-age
[3, 4]. Visual labelling of EEG sleep stages by trained clinicians and comparison with the given PMA
can identify maturational delays, but this remains tedious and infeasible in the NICU setting [5].
Consequently, methods have aimed to automate this ‘clinically driven’ approach. More recently,
Dereymaeker, Pillay et al. [6] developed an algorithm to classify the sleep stages of Quiet Sleep (QS)
and non-Quiet Sleep (non-QS), based on K-means clustering. From these sleep stages, features are
derived from the EEG that shows signiﬁcant correlations with PMA, and combined using multivariate
regression to estimate ‘brain-age’. Discrepencies between brain-age and PMA are identiﬁed as an
early-warning indication of abnormality [7, 8]. This strategy, however, relies on the visual labelling of
sleep stages (for optimizing the sleep-staging algorithms) which remains subjective [5], and the entire
procedure requires different algorithms to fulﬁl each step and obtain a ﬁnal brain-age estimate. No
current sleep-detection algorithm works optimally across the full preterm age range, with particular
difﬁculty seen at ages <30 weeks [6]. This compromises the subsequent regression estimates and
limits the age range within which we are conﬁdent of detecting key deviations.
We introduce a Bayesian Network (BN) model as a novel, uniﬁed approach for estimating brain-
age from an EEG recording, with validation on a real preterm dataset. This method models the
dependencies of the EEG on both sleep state and age and is the ﬁrst approach to be directly optimized
31st Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.
arXiv:1809.07102v1  [stat.ML]  19 Sep 2018

on age, in an attempt to accurately estimate brain-age over a wider range, without requiring a
consistently optimal sleep-state classiﬁcation performance through an intermediate algorithm.
2
An Age-dependent Bayesian Network
Each EEG recording is divided into ﬁxed-length epochs. Features are calculated from each ith epoch
producing vectors denoted by the variable xi (of length d), with the full recording sequence given
by x1:n. Each epoch belongs to sleep states QS or non-QS, denoted by the variable si. Both states
are consistently deﬁned over age (although the underlying EEG properties continue to mature). We
can model the dependency of xi on si using a graphical BN representation, as shown in the left
panel of Fig. 1. With a BN, one can efﬁciently use the chain rule to represent the joint probability
distribution across all variables from their conditional probabilities (taking into account conditional
independencies) [9]. The conditional probability for xi is p(xi|si), and si is given by the prior p(si).
si
xi
p(si)
p(xi|si)
s1
x1
s2
x2
si
xi
sn
xn
a
. . .
. . .
Single recording epoch, xi
Full EEG sequence, x1:n
p(si|a)
p(xi|si,a)
p(a)
Figure 1: Left: Graphical Bayesian Network (BN) representation to model the relationship between
each ith EEG epoch, xi, and sleep state, si. Right: BN extension to account for age dependency, a,
across the entire recording, x1:n.
This BN can infer the sleep states from the recording at a single age. However, we are concerned with
predicting the recording’s age from an age-varying dataset. Denoting the age group by variable a, we
expand the BN, as illustrated in the right panel of Fig. 1. Sleep state probability is now conditioned
on age, p(si|a), as is each EEG epoch, p(xi|si, a). We choose to assume each epoch (and sleep state)
as independent of one another, opting not to model dependencies between successive epochs. The
extended BN can be described by the following hierarchical model:
xi|si, a ∼f(a, si)
(1)
si|a ∼Bern(qa)
(2)
a ∼Cat( 1
616)
(3)
a is a categorical distribution over 6 possible age groups, each of equal probability, as there is no
physiological justiﬁcation for one age being more likely than another. si is binary, sampled from
a Bernoulli distribution with qa = p(si = QS|a). f(a, si) is a set of Gaussian Mixture Models
(GMMs), each dependent on both a and si. For simplicity, the number of Gaussian components for
each sleep state GMM, ksi, remains constant over age. In other words:
f(a, si) =
ksi
X
j=1
ca,si,jNa,si,j(µa,si,j, Σa,si,j)
(4)
ca,si,j, µa,si,j and Σa,si,j denote the Gaussian component weightings, means, and covariances,
respectively.
2

3
Inference
The aim is to predict the age given the recording, p(a|x1:n). We begin by describing the posterior,
p(a|x1:n), using Bayes Rule. As we are concerned simply with the maximum posterior to classify
age, we can drop the normalization term and approximate p(a|x1:n) by:
p(a|x1:n) =
p(a)p(x1:n|a)
P
a p(a)p(x1:n|a) ∝p(a)p(x1, x2, ..., xn|a)
(5)
From Fig. 1, we note each epoch xi is conditionally independent of one another, given a. We can
apply this assumption to Eqn. (5) treating the overall likelihood as a product of the individual epoch
likelihoods, converting the result to a joint probability:
p(a|x1:n) ∝p(a)
n
Y
i=1
p(xi|a) = p(a)
n
Y
i=1
p(xi, a)
p(a)

(6)
We express p(xi, a) in terms of si by marginalizing over si and applying the chain rule to represent
this in terms of the conditional probabilities that underpin the BN, before simplifying these terms:
p(a|x1:n) ∝p(a)
n
Y
i=1
P
si p(xi, si, a)
p(a)

= p(a)
n
Y
i=1
"X
si
p(xi|si, a)p(si|a)
#
(7)
To prevent underﬂow, we convert Eqn. (7) to a log posterior, and obtain an estimate of the recording’s
age, ˆa, from the maximum a posteriori:
ln [p(a|x1:n)] ∝ln [p(a)] +
n
X
i=1
ln
"X
si
p(xi|si, a)p(si|a)
#
and
ˆa = argmax
a
{ln [p(a|x1:n)]}
(8)
Using ˆa, we can derive a further inference equation from the model to additionally estimate the sleep
state, ˆsi, from xi, if required:
p(si|xi, ˆa) ∝p(xi|si, ˆa)p(si|ˆa)
and
ˆsi = argmax
si
{p(si|xi, ˆa)}
(9)
4
Experimental Methods
4.1
Dataset and Features
102 EEG recordings from 40 preterm patients were used in this study to validate the model, with
the recordings aged between 27-42 weeks PMA and duration 1h40m-17h50m. All patients were
clinically assessed as normal at 24 months of age, such that the brain age is expected to match
the PMA. Recordings were organized into 6 age groups: <30 weeks (8 recordings), 30-31 weeks
(17), 32-33 weeks (21), 34-35 weeks (14), 36-37 weeks (19), and ≥38 weeks (23). Each EEG
recording was also visually labelled by clinicians for QS and non-QS, in 30s epochs. From each
epoch, amplitude, spectral, and synchrony-based features were extracted. We identiﬁed the best
features separating for both age and sleep state using Minimum Redundancy Maximum Relevance
(mRMR) [10, 11] by converting the age and sleep labels into a single set of 12 augmented labels.
4.2
Training and Testing
A 10-fold cross validation (CV) was applied, divided by patient (to prevent recordings from the
same patient in both test and train sets). mRMR was performed each time only on the training data.
Within each fold, a further 18-fold patient CV was also performed on the training set to tune the
parameters using a grid search. Three parameters required tuning: the number of selected features
(d), and the number of QS and non-QS Gaussian components (ksi). ca,si,j, µa,si,j and Σa,si,j, were
3

determined by ﬁtting GMMs to the training data for each age and sleep state group, using Expectation
Maximisation [12]. p(si|a) was also directly estimated from the training labels.
We chose Krippendorff’s Alpha for selecting optimal parameters and assessing ﬁnal classiﬁcation
agreement between the model’s brain-age estimates and known PMA [13]. Alpha accounts for chance
(unlike accuracy) and can be calculated for both nominal (αnom) and ordinal (αord) variables, of
which si is the former, and a the latter (a misclassiﬁcation near the true age group is considered better
than one further away). Alpha values in the range 0.8-1 denotes an almost-perfect agreement [14].
5
Results
Overall age classiﬁcation accuracy was 72.5% with corresponding αord of 0.91. Fig. 2a shows
the confusion matrix, including classiﬁcation accuracies (in %) for each age group. The excellent
value for αord is due to most misclassiﬁcation occurring at adjacent age groups to the true value,
due to some recordings existing near the deﬁned group boundaries (e.g. a recording in group 34-35
weeks aged 35 weeks and 6 days is similar to one in group 36-37 weeks, aged 36 weeks). Only
3/102 recordings were misclassiﬁed beyond the adjacent ages. Fig. 2b shows examples of posterior
transitions over age for two recordings at 32-33 weeks and 36-37 weeks. Corresponding sleep state
estimates by both the model and clinicians are also shown, with αnom agreements.
acc. (%)
75.0
58.8
66.7
50.0
89.5
87
(a) Confusion matrix and age-group classiﬁcation accuracies (acc)
32-33 weeks
36-37 weeks
anom = 0.43
anom = 0.64
(b) Left: Posterior probabilities of two recordings at different ages (true age highlighted). Right: Corresponding
sleep state estimates by both clinicians and model, with alpha agreements (αnorm).
Figure 2: Experimental results
6
Discussion and Future Work
This is the ﬁrst uniﬁed method for modelling sleep state transitions to directly and accurately predict
brain-age, including in the difﬁcult <30 week age group. Reduced data at certain ages remains a
4

limitation, shown by the unusually high posterior estimate at <30 weeks for the 36-37 week recording
(Fig. 2b). We lay the groundwork for future uses of Bayesian graphical models in preterm outcome
prediction, such as incorporating additional datasets (without visual labelling) using semi-supervised
learning, expansion to a continuous age model, and further assessment on abnormal cohorts.
References
[1] S. Graven and J. Browne, “Sleep and Brain Development. The Critical Role of Sleep in Fetal
and Early Neonatal Brain Development,” Newborn Infant Nurs. Rev., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 173–179,
2008.
[2] S. Graven, “Sleep and Brain Development,” Clin. Perinatol., vol. 33, no. 3, pp. 693–706, 2006.
[3] C. Aarnoudse-Moens, N. Weisglas-Kuperus, J. Van Goudoever, and J. Oosterlaan, “Meta-
Analysis of Neurobehavioral Outcomes in Very Preterm and / or Very Low Birth Weight
Children,” Pediatrics, vol. 124, no. 2, pp. 717–728, 2009.
[4] S. Back and S. Miller, “Brain injury in premature neonates: A primary cerebral dysmaturation
disorder?” Ann. Neurol., vol. 75, no. 4, pp. 469–486, 2014.
[5] M. Grigg-Damberger, “The visual scoring of sleep in infants 0 to 2 months of age,” J. Clin.
Sleep Med., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 429–445, 2016.
[6] A. Dereymaeker, K. Pillay, J. Vervisch, S. Van Huffel, G. Naulaers, K. Jansen, and M. De Vos,
“An Automated Quiet Sleep Detection Approach in Preterm Infants as a Gateway to Assess
Brain Maturation,” Int. J. Neural Syst., vol. 27, no. 06, pp. 1 750 023(1)–1 750 023(18), sep
2017.
[7] O. De Wel, M. Lavanga, A. Dorado, K. Jansen, A. Dereymaeker, G. Naulaers, and S. Van
Huffel, “Complexity Analysis of Neonatal EEG Using Multiscale Entropy: Applications in
Brain Maturation and Sleep Stage Classiﬁcation,” Entropy, vol. 19, no. 10, p. 516, sep 2017.
[8] J. O’Toole, G. Boylan, S. Vanhatalo, and N. Stevenson, “Estimating functional brain maturity in
very and extremely preterm neonates using automated analysis of the electroencephalogram,”
Clin. Neurophysiol., vol. 127, no. 8, pp. 2910–2918, 2016.
[9] S. Russell and P. Norvig, Artiﬁcial Intelligence. A Modern Approach.
Englewood Cliffs, New
Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc, 1995.
[10] J. Vergara and P. Estévez, “A review of feature selection methods based on mutual information,”
Neural Comput. Appl., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 175–186, 2014.
[11] H. Peng, F. Long, and C. Ding, “Feature selection based on mutual information: Criteria
of max-dependency, max-relevance, and min-redundancy,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach.
Intell., vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 1226–1238, 2005.
[12] G. McLachlin and D. Peel, Finite Mixture Models.
Hoboken, New Jersey: John Wiley & Sons
inc., 2000.
[13] A. Hayes and K. Krippendorff, “Answering the Call for a Standard Reliability Measure for
Coding Data,” Commun. Methods Meas., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 77–89, 2007.
[14] K. Krippendorff, “Agreement and information in the reliability of coding,” Commun. Methods
Meas., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 93–112, 2011.
5

