BRAIN SCIENCE 
with 
Ginger Campbell, MD 
Episode 198
 
Interview with Evan Thompson, PhD, 
author of 
Mind in Life: Biology, Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind 
Originally aired 10/3/2012
Encore Date: 7/22/2022
INTRODUCTION
Welcome to Brain Science, the podcast that explores how recent discoveries in 
neuroscience are helping unravel the mystery of how our brains make us human. I am 
your host Dr. Ginger Campbell and this is episode 198.
This is our second and final encore episode for the year featuring philosopher Evan 
Thompson. Early in his career Thompson was one of the co-authors of the 
groundbreaking book The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience , 
1
which is still considered a foundational text for the Embodied Cognition movement. 
In this interview we talked about his follow-up book Mind in Life: Biology, 
Phenomenology, and the Sciences of Mind in which he explored the so-called 
explanatory gap between biological life and consciousness. If you are new to Brain 
Science, please do not panic.
 The Embodied Mind: Cognitive Science and Human Experience by Francisco J. Varela, Evan 
1
T. Thompson, and Eleanor Rosch. This was originally published in 1991 with a revised edition in 
2017.
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
1

First of all, I think you will appreciate Thompson’s unique background and the 
perspective he brings to the question of how a brain could possibly generate something 
like consciousness. We will be talking more about embodied cognition in an upcoming 
episode so I chose this episode to introduce the subject to new listeners and to provide a 
refresher for longtime fans. The transcript for this episode is also free.
Before we jump into the interview I want to remind you that you can get complete show 
notes and episode transcripts at brainsciencepodcast.com and you can send me email at 
brainsciencepodcast@gmail.com.
You can also get show notes automatically each month when you sign up for the free 
Brain Science newsletter.  You can sign up at brainsciencepodcast.com or just text 
brainscience (all one word) to 55444. When you sign up you will also get a free gift 
entitled: 5 Things you need to know about your Brain.
Because Brain Science is independently produced it relies on the support of listeners 
like you. Learn more at brainsciencepodcast.com/donations.
I will be back after the interview to review the key ideas and to share a few brief 
announcements.
INTERVIEW 
Dr. Campbell: Evan, I want to welcome you to the Brain Science Podcast. I've gotten lots 
of requests to have you on the show, so I know my listeners are in for a treat. 
Dr. Thompson: Well, thank you very much. It's a real pleasure to join you on the show. 
Dr. Campbell: Perhaps you could start out just by telling us a little bit about your 
background. 
Dr. Thompson: Well, my background is principally in philosophy—my PhD is in 
philosophy—but I actually started out as an undergraduate in Asian studies, so my first 
degree, my bachelor's degree from Amherst College was in Asian studies. 
I studied Chinese history, and Chinese language, and Chinese philosophy—really, Asian 
philosophy overall, with a focus on Buddhist philosophy. And that's actually what led me 
into my interest in philosophy. I went in the other direction from the way some people 
usually go—going from East to West, rather than from West to East. 
So, I decided to go to graduate school in philosophy, and when I was a graduate student 
I really got drawn into philosophy of mind and cognitive science. This 
was in the early 1980s. These were areas that were really emerging into prominence in 
philosophy; there was a lot of excitement, and so I got pulled into that. 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
2

And that's what I've been working on ever since; though I've certainly kept an interest in 
other areas. I still work a lot with Asian philosophical traditions, doing what now today 
is called 'cross-cultural philosophy.' So, I try to cover a number of different areas, but 
my home base you could say is philosophy of cognitive science. 
Dr. Campbell: Well, I certainly identify with that, because I spent a lot of time, myself, 
reading Eastern thought before I ever came around to Western philosophy. And then I 
discovered philosophy of mind, and that brought me back to neuroscience, and kind of 
indirectly led to this podcast. So, we have something in common there. 
So, you chose to go ahead and go to graduate school and study philosophy. When did 
you come into contact with Francisco Varela? 
Dr. Thompson: Well, that's an interesting parallel story, in a way. I first met him 
through my father, William Irwin Thompson, who was a writer. And I met him in the 
mid 1970s when I was about 14 or 15. 
My father had founded an organization called the Lindesfarne Association. This was an 
organization that brought together scientists, philosophers, artists, ecologists, and 
political activists. It was a very eclectic group of people. And he organized a conference 
with Gregory Bateson, who was also a friend of his—an anthropologist, and in many 
ways you could say a kind of proto-cognitive scientist. 
Dr. Campbell: Right.
 
 
 
Dr. Thompson: Francisco Varela came to one of the conferences that my father 
organized, and so I met him at that point. And then he came and lived with us at the 
institute that my father was running. And so, he really was a family friend from my early 
teenage years. 
Then when I was in graduate school—this would have been around 1986—he had just 
moved to Paris, where he was taking up a position in neuroscience. He had a long-
standing interest in Buddhist philosophy, and he wanted to write a book bringing 
together his interests in Buddhist philosophy and neuroscience and cognitive science. 
And he knew I was interested in the same things, so he brought me to Paris for a 
summer as a research assistant. 
It was really out of that initial working together (or my working for him as a research 
assistant) that we then wrote our book, The Embodied Mind. That was in many ways 
kind of parallel to all of my academic training, where really I had known him before I 
even went away to college, and then wound up working with him as a graduate student. 
Dr. Campbell: That's really interesting. I am familiar with the Lindesfarne Association; 
although I have to admit that I was never able to read Gregory Bateson. I mean I just 
found his writing impenetrable. Maybe I could read it now; maybe I'm more used to 
reading hard stuff. But back in the '70s when I was college-age I found it too dense. 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
3

But at any rate, The Embodied Mind, my impression—because I've covered embodied 
cognition several times over the last few years—is that it's one of the foundational texts 
of the movement. Do you think that's a fair assessment? 
Dr. Thompson: I think that is fair to say, in the sense that when the book came out (as I 
said we started writing it in 1986; it appeared in 1991) it was one of the first books—it 
wasn't the only one—but it was one of the first ones to really identify this movement of 
embodied cognition, and to present it in a way where it was a logical development 
within the history of cognitive science out of earlier periods of work that we called 
cognitivism—or as some people know it, the computer model of the mind, and then 
connectionism or neural network research. 
This was the milieu in which we were writing, and we wanted to push the ideas further 
to point toward the importance of the body and the embodied context of cognition—the 
way the body shapes our perception and our action. And, as I say, we weren't the only 
ones to do this, but we were, I think one of the first books to try to pull a number of 
different threads together in the emerging interest in embodiment, and to give it some 
kind of conceptual, theoretical framing that then I think did prove to be useful for 
people—for researchers. 
And so, it has come to be identified as one of the early foundational statements of that 
movement, yes. 
Dr. Campbell: Is it in that book that the idea of the enactive approach first appears? 
Dr. Thompson: Yes, that's right. We used the term 'enactive' at that time to point toward 
a particular way of thinking about the importance of embodiment. And that was a way of 
thinking that emphasized that the mind isn't an inner theater where you receive sensory 
impressions and they get translated into a representation in the head, and then you 
produce some kind of motor output that leads to some behavior. 
That rather cognition, particularly perception, is an active process—or 'enactive,' as we 
called it—that depends on having a body with certain kinds of sensorimotor skills and 
habits. We used the term 'enactive' really to signal that idea. Over the years since then 
that term has become more refined and more precise in relationship to the general 
movement of embodied cognition. But The Embodied Mind was where that approach 
was first put forward. 
So, nowadays you will see the term 'enactive' used to signal a particular orientation 
within the embodied cognition movement, if you like, which not necessarily all 
embodied cognition theorists would share, but which would be recognized as one 
particular way of articulating the embodied cognition approach. What I tried to do in my 
more recent book, Mind in Life, is actually to develop more precisely those enactive 
ideas. 
Dr. Campbell: Great; and I want to get into that in just a minute. But to continue putting 
these ideas a little bit into the historical context—especially for younger listeners—in 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
4

both of your books (because I know you do this in Mind in Life, too) you describe the 
difference between embodied cognition vs. cognitivism and connectionism. Cognitivism
—that's basically what's meant when people talk about the cognitive revolution—that 
was a reaction to behaviorism, correct? 
Dr. Thompson: That's right. 
Dr. Campbell: So, it's like the behaviorists acted as if the brain didn't matter, and then 
the cognitivists came along and put everything in the head (this is kind of my take on it; 
they put everything in the head), the connectionists came along and said, Well, the 
computer model doesn't work; you need a neural net model. But they were still putting 
everything in the head. So, everybody was ignoring the body. So, then along comes 
embodied cognition. 
And then the enactive approach also says not only is the body important, but then 
there's that whole interaction, or the body is an active... the mind is active. Is that a fair 
characterization of where we're trying to go? 
Dr. Thompson: That's right. I would say that, to simplify, there are maybe two 
important threads. One is the thread that you identified in the narrative that you just 
gave. 
And then the second way of articulating that would be to say that the conception of the 
mind—or what we think the mind is and what we think the mind does— that ran 
through cognitivism and connectionism was a representational conception. So, the idea 
there is that mental processes are ones where you manipulate a representation in the 
head of the outside world. 
The enactive approach (and many embodied cognition approaches, in general) 
challenged that kind of representational thinking, and pointed rather to the way that the 
cognizer, or the cognizing agent—the animal or the person, if you like— the way that the 
agent interacts with the environment, and isn't a passive representer of the 
environment, but actively shapes the environment in a way that makes it meaningful for 
that kind of agent. So, it was a movement away from representation toward action or 
interaction. 
Dr. Campbell: That would mean that every animal's world (I think you used the phrase—
which of course is not original to you—the umwelt), every creature's world will be not 
some abstract representation in their brain, but directly a result of their particular body 
interacting with the world. 
Dr. Thompson: That's right. Every type of organism (or artificial agent, for that matter, 
if you're thinking in terms of robotics) would have its environment— its ‘lived world’ we 
could say, to use a phenomenological term—that is going to be a reflection of the kind of 
bodily structure that makes up that kind of being. So, the way the world is perceived, the 
way it's acted in, the way it's conceptualized is going to depend on the bodily structure 
and capacities for action that that body has. 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
5

 

If you wanted to formulate it in terms of a hypothesis—so, for example, this is the way 
that Lawrence Shapiro  puts it, which I think is a nice way to put it—is that the 
2
embodied cognition hypothesis, or working assumption, is that the way we cognize the 
world is strongly shaped by the kinds of bodies that we have. And so, correspondingly, 
the way that other creatures or agents cognize the world is going to be strongly shaped 
by the kinds of bodies that they have. 
Dr. Campbell: As a non-philosopher and non-neuroscientist, that seems very sensible to 
me. 
Dr. Thompson: Yes. From a biologist's point of view I think it's a very intuitive idea; it's 
not terribly startling. And of course, the idea of the umwelt goes back to Jakob von 
Uexküll and the foundations of ethology in the early twentieth century. 
But it's important to remember that cognitive science in its cognitivist form, and even 
into its connectionist form, was often pursued very independently of biology. Biology 
was really seen—at least on an extreme view—as just a mere matter of sort of 
implementation details; that what was really important was the software, not the 
hardware. 
Dr. Campbell: But then when the robotocists started trying to build stuff, they realized 
that just didn't work. 
Dr. Thompson: That's right. [music] 
Dr. Campbell: Evan, is there anything else that we need to talk about before we move 
directly into discussing your book, Mind in Life? Do we need to talk about 
phenomenology before we jump in there, or can we just make that part of that 
conversation? 
Dr. Thompson: We can make it part of that. But maybe one thing that would work as a 
kind of carry-over from one part of the discussion to the next is that we also in The 
Embodied Mind tried to point to the importance of complementing cognitive science 
with a phenomenological perspective on what it's actually like to experience having a 
mind—what our lived experience as bodily beings is like. 
In The Embodied Mind we did that particularly around issues having to do with the 
nature of the Self. And so, we drew a lot on Buddhist philosophy and phenomenology, 
which is very insightful around the understanding of the Self. But that's a thread that 
was unique to The Embodied Mind among the other embodied cognition works of the 
time. 
 Lawrence Shapiro is the author of the textbook Embodied Cognition and was interviewed in 
2
BSP 73.
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
6

And it's a thread that carries over into Mind in Life, where phenomenology— 
particularly now in the form of Western phenomenology, which we gave somewhat short 
shrift to in The Embodied Mind—Western phenomenology becomes very important, for 
me, in Mind in Life. 
Dr. Campbell: Well, what is phenomenology , and why would there be such a thing as 
3
Western phenomenology? 
Dr. Thompson: Phenomenology in the most general terms is the study of experience, 
you could say from the point of view of experience itself. It's the attempt to describe 
what our lived experience is like. 
And when I use the term 'Western phenomenology' that's somewhat artificial in a way—
because the word 'phenomenology,' after all, is a Western word. But I mean to identify a 
particular tradition within philosophy that was very concerned with understanding the 
structure of consciousness—of conscious experience—and then, in some of its phases, 
with embodiment—with what phenomenologists call the 'lived body.' 
These would be thinkers like Edmund Husserl and Maurice Merleau-Ponty—these are 
German and then French philosophers of the early twentieth century. And in The 
Embodied Mind, although we looked to Merleau-Ponty very much as an inspiration, we 
were somewhat dismissive of Husserl, in ways that I later came to see were not correct. 
And so, I tried to correct that in Mind in Life. 
So, in The Embodied Mind we drew, as I said, more from Buddhist thinking— which is 
also very phenomenological in the sense that it's concerned with our experience, and 
what our experience actually feels like. Say, for example, in The Embodied Mind our 
concern again was with the sense of Self—what it feels like to have a Self. In that general 
sense of the term it indicates a concern with the importance of taking account of 
experience in our understanding of the mind. 
This really, I think, became very clearly recognized as an important issue in the 90's, 
with the whole explosion of the interest in consciousness. And that was an explosion 
that happened in neuroscience with the neuroscience of consciousness; it happened in 
Philosophy of Mind. So, there are a number of ways in which phenomenology then 
becomes especially important when we're trying to get a handle on the nature of 
consciousness. 
Dr. Campbell: So, by definition phenomenology takes the position that subjective 
experience and consciousness matter; they're not epiphenomena. 
Dr. Thompson: Yes. From the phenomenological perspective you could say in a way they 
have a kind of primacy in our knowledge because they're the phenomena that we know 
most immediately and intimately, and they're the basis upon which we are able to do 
 See also: Phenomenology: An Introduction by Stephan Kaufer, Anthony Chemero. I talked to 
3
Chemero about how phenomenology and embodied cognition in BSP 123.
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
7

anything—including science. All of science depends on observation, and observation 
depends on consciousness. So, the idea that consciousness could somehow be marginal 
or epiphenomenal, from a phenomenological standpoint really doesn't make any sense. 
Dr. Campbell: Let's get in to talking about Mind in Life. And, of course, we'll talk more 
about phenomenology and neurophenomenology as we get into that. 
Evan, do you want to start by just kind of giving us a brief overview of what your 
intention was with this book? 
Dr. Thompson: Well, the core idea of the book is really that we can trace a continuous 
path from the emergence of life, into the emergence of mind, and the emergence of 
consciousness and subjectivity, in the sense that we know it from our own experience. 
In order to do that, I tried to weave together material from cognitive science, from 
neuroscience and psychology; particularly from the embodied cognition perspective, 
and even more particularly from the enactive perspective that we had developed earlier 
in The Embodied Mind. I tried to weave those elements together with a 
phenomenological account of the structure of our experience of perception, of emotion, 
of bodily experience, and also then thirdly, with material from evolutionary and 
theoretical biology. 
It's those three strands, I suppose (biology; the sciences of mind or cognitive science; 
and phenomenology/phenomenological philosophy) that I tried to weave together into 
this ‘story,’ you could say, about the emergence of life and mind and consciousness; and 
consciousness traced all the way through into human intersubjective, or social 
consciousness—which is where the book ends. 
A guiding idea through the book is the idea of self-organization. I draw a lot on notions 
coming from the study of self-organizing systems in biology, and also in neuroscience to 
some extent. And I try to show how the tools that come from the study of self-organizing 
systems are very illuminating for an understanding of cognition and perception, and 
also have echoes, you could say, in aspects of our own experience and how it organizes 
itself in time as a kind of flow or stream of consciousness. 
So, the book covers a lot of ground. But that's in very, very general terms what the book 
is about. 
Dr. Campbell: Obviously we can't really do all those three strands the justice that they 
deserve. I think I'm going to probably concentrate mostly on the embodied cognition 
and how that interacts with the phenomenology for today, and then I promise you that 
in my closing comments I will give my listeners a sense of what the other aspects of the 
book are like—especially since listeners have different backgrounds and will be 
interested in different aspects of the discussion. 
I personally have a deep interest in embodied cognition—how it relates to 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
8

emergence and dynamic systems—but I'm not sure exactly where to start because it 
seems like those are so interrelated. 
You've already talked about the fact that embodied cognition implies an active 
involvement in the world, and that the mind is embedded both in the body and in the 
environment. So, what about the issue of autonomy—because that seems to be one of 
the things that really sets your discussion apart from some of the others that I've read? 
Dr. Thompson: Yes. I would say that the notion of autonomy, or of autonomous systems, 
is really in a way one of the distinctive notions of the enactive approach within the larger 
setting of embodied approaches. So, let me say something about what we mean when we 
use the term 'autonomous.' 
An autonomous system is one that in a sense creates itself through its interactions with 
its environment. The paradigm example (and, in a way, the best-understood example) of 
an autonomous system is a living cell—if you want to think of it at, say the so-called 
'simplest' level of a single bacterial cell. 
What a cell does is that it constantly makes itself as a unity. And it does that through 
internal metabolic processes—internal chemical reaction networks—that produce or 
synthesize their own components, among which are the semipermeable boundary, or 
membrane, which houses all of their reactions, which in turn create themselves and 
create the membrane boundary. 
So, the whole thing, through a kind of bootstrap, or recursive, or self-referential process, 
constructs itself so that it emerges as an individual in a dynamic relationship with its 
environment. When I talk about emergence and autonomy, that's the paradigm case, for 
me, of getting a handle on what we mean. 
To come back to just the term 'autonomy,' autonomy literally means 'self- governing.' 
So, there's a sense in which a system like that is not externally controlled through inputs 
and outputs, but creates itself in such a way that its inputs are always a function of what 
it's doing—of its output. 
So, there's a constant way in which it holds together in a self-organizing manner that 
makes it have this individuality and directedness in relationship to the environment, so 
that some things—if we're thinking of the cell again—are meaningful or significant for it, 
and other things aren't; so that a bacterium will swim in a certain way up a sucrose 
gradient and away from other things that are noxious. So, this is really what I mean by 
'autonomy.' 
Dr. Campbell: You mentioned the semipermeable boundary. Now, an autonomous 
system by definition doesn't need to have a boundary, right? So, this actually brings us 
to a special type of autonomous system, that you talk a lot about in the book. 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
9

Dr. Thompson: Yes. Here we need to distinguish between what we call autopoiesis—
which is a term that is used to refer to specifically the kind of biological or biochemical 
autonomy at a molecular level that we see in a living cell. 
The example that I was just going through is one of a system that's autonomous, but it's 
autonomous in a very special way. It's autonomous in an auto-poietic— which literally 
means 'self-producing'—way, where it produces itself as a bounded molecular system. 
In principle you could have other autonomous systems that have an individuality that 
they create themselves, but that aren’t bounded in that molecular way. For example, the 
nervous system is distributed throughout the body, but it doesn't close back on itself in a 
bounded way—because, of course, it is within the body that is providing the organismic 
boundary. 
But it has autonomy in the sense that all of the processes close back upon themselves, in 
the mathematical sense of closure. That is, any effect or any process within the nervous 
system is the result of at least one other process in the nervous system (and, of course, 
actually many), and also gives rise to other processes in the nervous system. 
So, there is a way in which the system kind of is like a snake biting its own tail; that it 
closes back on itself. That's really the core idea of autonomy—that kind of closure. And 
autopoiesis, the molecular cellular form is a paradigm of that, in the sense that it's one 
that we have an awful lot of knowledge about; we can see it in a very concrete and 
detailed way. 
Dr. Campbell: So if we, for the purposes of discussion, accept the premise that 
autopoiesis is an essential quality of living things (and you did mention in the book that 
Varela had talked about this as far back as 1979, so it's not exactly a new idea; it's just 
one that people are coming to appreciate more, now that they have the tools to deal with 
the math and all), you mentioned the importance of it being ‘thermodynamically far 
from equilibrium.’ Why is that important? 
Dr. Thompson: 'Thermodynamically far from equilibrium' means that there are 
processes going on where there is a constant exchange of matter and energy across the 
boundary, in the case of a cell in a way where that is actually altering the boundary 
conditions of the cell itself. The cell, in taking in materials and excreting materials, is 
constantly altering its immediate environment in a way that keeps it going as a locally-
reduced form of entropy. 
‘Far from equilibrium' is a very, very general notion, of course, that holds for candle 
flames and vortexes of water, and many kinds of dissipative systems. What's more, I 
think, important—at least for the enactive approach—is the special form that that takes 
when you have this kind of closure that is the closure of autopoieisis or of autonomy. So, 
‘far from equilibrium thermodynamics’ is really a very, very general framework. 
Dr. Campbell: But something like a vortex requires an external application of energy; it's 
not self-producing. 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
10

Dr. Thompson: Well, it's self-organizing; but, of course, all self-organizing systems 
depend on energy from the environment. 
Dr. Campbell: But there is a sense in which life is different from something like a vortex
—that's what I was trying to get at. 
Dr. Thompson: I see what you mean, yes. 
I mean there are many differences. One is that the living cell, in terms of the molecular 
species that make it up, is far more heterogeneous than a vortex. And as a result of all of 
the ways that those molecules can interact among themselves, they produce a self-
organizing dynamics that's very different from a candle flame or a vortex. 
And one of the differences is that they strongly alter the boundary conditions of their 
own individuality, so that the cell is adaptively regulating itself, changing itself in 
relationship to local environmental circumstances, in a far more complicated and rich 
way than a candle flame or a vortex. 
Dr. Campbell: But then is this whole autonomy and autopoiesis the beginning of how 
Self emerges? 
Dr. Thompson: In the case of autopoiesis—the kind of autonomy that belongs to the 
living cell—I see that as where we really can start talking about individuality in a way 
that marks a difference between the living and the non- living. 
It's not a hard-and-fast difference; of course, there can be boundaried cases and blurry 
cases. But just in terms of the concepts, the kind of individuality that we have with an 
auto-poietic system, where it produces itself and regulates itself adaptively in 
relationship to an environment so that some things are significant and other things 
aren't, it's the first case of an individual with a milieu, or an umwelt, or an environment. 
And that then carries through for the rest of evolutionary history, all the way to us. 
So, it marks, I think, a very important point of emergence in trying to understand the 
precursors, if you like, of mind and cognition. 
Dr. Campbell: Yes, it seems to me that once we've got a Self, subjectivity is sort of 
implied. 
Dr. Thompson: Well, that's a very tricky question. Some philosophers—and scientists, 
actually; biologists—have wanted to argue that already in the case of a cell we have a 
kind of subjectivity, or proto-subjectivity. I have some sympathy for that. 
I mean, it's an open question. But I would prefer to say that in the case of a living cell we 
have the emergence of a kind of—this is another term I use in the book —'sense-making' 
individual, a kind of being for whom certain events in the environment are significant 
and others aren't; and if you just were to look at the world from the perspective of 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
11

physics you would miss that; and that sense- making is then a critical precursor for 
subjectivity. 
If we use the word 'subjectivity' in the sense to mean the feeling of being alive, or the 
feeling of having a self, well, I think probably that might be imputing too much to the 
bacterium. 
Dr. Campbell: Right. I see what you're saying. 
Dr. Thompson: I mean I wouldn't say that it's to be just automatically shut down, but we 
tend to think of that as requiring the kind of complexity and organization that comes 
with a nervous system. 
Dr. Campbell: But still, the approach that you're discussing here really emphasizes that 
there is a deep continuity between life and mind; and then, according to Damasio's 
current way of thinking of it, Mind has been around a long time, consciousness not so 
long, but that it's all a continuity. 
Dr. Thompson: Yes. I certainly in my book am trying to present an account in which 
there is that kind of continuity of mind and life, yes. And so, in that sense I'm 
sympathetic to Damasio's way of formulating it. 
[music] 
Dr. Campbell: Before we talk a little bit more about the phenomenological, I want to just 
touch briefly on the relevance of dynamic systems theory as it relates to autonomous 
systems. Assuming we take the point of view that life is a dynamic system and so 
therefore the nervous system is a dynamic system, what are the implications of that? 
Dr. Thompson: I would prefer to see dynamic systems theory as really just one tool that 
we have for trying to understand autonomy, and for trying to understand emergence, 
and life, and mind, and so on. 
Dr. Campbell: What I'm trying to get at is, as a tool it brings out some important aspects 
of the system because they are important aspects of dynamic systems—such as the 
relevance of time. 
Dr. Thompson: Yes. For looking at processes that are intrinsically temporal (that is, that 
are what they are because they unfold over time); for trying to get a handle on systems 
that are highly nonlinear (that is, that are very sensitive to initial conditions, and can 
diverge in their behaviors along different pathways as a result of very small differences 
in their initial conditions); that are also resilient and adaptive in response to 
perturbations and fluctuations in the environment; that also depend critically on noise 
as a source of adaptivity; that's sort of the home of dynamic systems theory in science, is 
trying to characterize systems of that sort. 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
12

So, it's natural to draw on dynamic systems theory to try to get a handle on autonomy in 
a way in which, say traditional computational tools coming from the computer model of 
the mind really weren't so helpful for. 
Dr. Campbell: Yes. And that's a key point that I was trying to get at. For example, the 
fact that inputs and outputs in that sort of static sense that they exist in computation 
just don't fit dynamic systems—and they don't fit life. 
Dr. Thompson: Yes. 
Dr. Campbell: You made a very interesting comment in the book that really struck me. 
You were talking about metastability and the fact that that's what makes it possible for 
the system—this I think is almost a quote from your book— the system can generate its 
own content, and even change its state without outside control. And since that fits what 
we're now learning about what the brain is really doing, I found that really caught my 
attention. 
Dr. Thompson: Yes, there's a lot of interesting work that's being done on metastable—
you could say metastable dynamical regimes and their application to the brain in 
different areas. 
And one of the features of a metastable system is that it doesn't really have states in a 
classical sense, it has rather transience. That is, it initiates a certain process, and moves 
toward a behavior that it looks like it's going to settle down into some regularity, but 
then it doesn't ever really arrive there, it moves off again toward another pathway, and 
then moves back. And so, it's always in a kind of transient mode, and never really settles 
down. 
And a number of theorists have pointed to this as a potential source of adaptivity (and 
you could even say creativity, or also resilience) in the face of a constantly changing 
dynamic environment. I'm thinking, for example of work by people like Scott Kelso at 
Florida Atlantic University , who works a lot on motor control and neurodynamics. 
4
Karl Friston in London has written a lot about metastability   and the nervous system. 
5
This was a theme that was very important to Francisco Varela in the very last years of 
his life, around 2000, 2001. 
So, it's a very promising idea. I mean the way I dealt with it in Mind in Life is really, in a 
way, you could say more speculative. But there's a lot of promise to the idea, I think, in 
research that's being undertaken in different areas. 
  Dynamic Patterns: The Self-Organization of Brain and Behavior (Complex Adaptive Systems) 
4
by J. A. Scott Kelso (1995)
 2 Friston, K.J. (1997) “Transients, Metastability, and Neuronal Dynamics” Neuroimage 5 (164– 
5
171)
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
13

Dr. Campbell: Well, some of my listeners are students who might be ones that might 
figure out more about this in the future. You never know! 
Dr. Thompson: I hope so. 
Dr. Campbell: I want to move into the issue of cognition. I think there was a quote from 
one of Varela's co-authors presenting the idea that living systems are cognitive systems. 
Where do you come down on that? 
Dr. Thompson: The expression he used was living systems are 'sense-making' systems. 
The reason he chose the words 'sense-making' was because if you say living systems are 
cognitive systems, then immediately people are going to think, Well, a bacterium isn't 
cognitive in the way that a human being is cognitive. And he wanted to have a more 
general way of talking about how the organism already at the very beginning of life 
creates a world of significance. 
So, I'm sympathetic to wanting to put it that way—that is, in terms of ‘sense- making' vs. 
'cognitive.' But if we're using 'cognitive' in a very general sense to mean being able to 
behave in an effective way, or in an adequate way, where the behavior is a result of one's 
own individuality as a complex self-organizing system —that's a very general sense in 
which we could use the word 'cognitive'—then I think it's fair to say living systems are 
cognitive. 
In a cognitive science context people usually want to say something more restricted 
when they use the word 'cognitive.’ So, then it might not be so helpful; but there it kind 
of becomes a verbal question. 
Dr. Campbell: What I liked about it was that it sort of emphasizes one of the themes of 
your book, which is that there's that deep continuity between life and mind in that 
action sense. 
Dr. Thompson: Yes. I mean the way that I would put it now, I think, is I would say living 
systems are sense-making systems, and cognition is a kind of sense- making—'cognition' 
in the more restricted sense that we would use the term in cognitive science. So, the 
important thing there is that when we put it that way we're emphasizing the continuity, 
and we're also emphasizing that cognition, as a form of sense-making, isn't best-
understood according to the old representational model of input-representation-output. 
Dr. Campbell: I want to ask you just briefly about the question of subjectivity. Obviously, 
you argue in your book that subjectivity, if we're trying to understand consciousness, is 
something that we can't ignore. So, is this where you feel like phenomenology comes in? 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
14

Dr. Thompson: Yes. When we want to understand subjectivity, or what philosophers 
sometimes call 'phenomenal consciousness’—that is, consciousness in the sense of felt 
or lived experience—then I think phenomenology becomes unavoidable, because the 
phenomenon that we're trying to understand is one that has to be described from a 
subjective point of view in order even to have a sense of what the phenomenon is. And 
the job of phenomenology—or one of the jobs of phenomenology—is to get some 
precision and clarity about the description of subjective experience from within. 
If we want to be more concrete about it, suppose as cognitive neuroscientists we're 
interested in understanding the neural systems or processes that are critically important 
for our having a sense of self (by 'sense of self' I mean a lived experience, or feeling of 
self). Well, in order to know what forms that lived experience or feeling of self can take, 
we need to have a phenomenological account of our self experience to guide the 
neuroscientist in even knowing what to look for. 
So, this is a way in which neuroscience and phenomenology can work together. But it 
means that phenomenology is critically important, you could say methodologically, for 
getting a handle on the very phenomenon that we're trying to understand and 
investigate when it comes to subjectivity. 
Dr. Campbell: To just give an oversimplification perhaps, you're talking about a method 
for creating first-person data? 
Dr. Thompson: I would say a method for enriching the information that we have about 
consciousness, or about our subjective experience. 'First-person' data is one way to put 
it. I sometimes use that phrase. 
But it sometimes can invite misunderstanding, because people then think it's some kind 
of special hidden inward data. And I don't really mean that; I mean that it's information 
that we gain, or that we acquire through a careful investigation of experience from the 
first-person perspective. So, in that sense we could call it 'first-person data.' 
Dr. Campbell: Well, I think we're unfortunately running out of time, and we've just 
barely scratched the surface of your fascinating book. What have we left out that you 
really think we need to mention? 
Dr. Thompson: We've covered a lot of ground. I suppose maybe I would say that one of 
the things I'm working a lot on now, and that really emerges in, I think it's actually the 
third part of Mind in Life, is the idea of neurophenomenology; which is what I was just 
talking about, which is putting together a phenomenological investigation of 
consciousness with a cognitive neuroscientific investigation. 
The book that I'm working on now—a new book—is based really on a 
neurophenomenological investigation, or exploration of consciousness. So, I would just 
maybe point to that as one of the forward-looking or future-looking steps of this 
thinking—at least for me; and that I think has gathered interest from other groups and 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
15

other people, as well—is this idea of a neurophenomenological investigation of 
consciousness. 
Dr. Campbell: By that you mean combining the phenomenological approach with 
neuroscience? 
Dr. Thompson: Exactly; but doing it in a way that's much more methodologically rich 
and developed than what's been done up to this point. And by that I mean using 
phenomenology to actually devise various kinds of neuroscience experiments, and then, 
in the neuroscience experiments, working with individuals who are able to report and 
describe their experience with some precision. 
Because most of the experiments we do in psychology or neuroscience are done on our 
first-year undergraduate students who have to sit in the lab and run the experiment for 
a course credit. And, not to put them down at all, but if we want to really plumb the 
depths of human consciousness, working with individuals who maybe have some more 
experience with systematically investigating and describing their experience, that's 
something I think could advance the field. 
Dr. Campbell: Yes. And you have some excellent examples of that in the book that I'll 
refer listeners to. 
Is there anything that you'd just like to sum up with that you'd like to leave my listeners 
with? 
Dr. Thompson: It's a very exciting time for this kind of work. The embodied cognition 
movement in cognitive science is not a fringe movement anymore; it's very well 
established. And it interacts with other perspectives, including older, more classical 
perspectives, in very fertile ways. 
And the work that's being done on consciousness and subjectivity in psychology and 
neuroscience, and bringing phenomenology into that investigation, and also bringing in 
things like methods of mind training or mental training from meditative traditions, all 
of this is really just getting going. So, it's a very exciting time. For younger listeners or 
for students it's a great time to be in this field. 
Dr. Campbell: I always ask my guests for advice for students, and I want to ask you a 
specific question; and then if you have more general advice, you can give that too. 
But when I have interview older philosophers of mind, say for example like 
Patricia Churchland, she mentioned that the reason she went into philosophy was 
because at the time she was coming along, science wasn't ready to address the question 
of consciousness, and that was what she was interested in—or even mind, really. And 
that's changed; now consciousness is becoming a legitimate area of study for 
neuroscience. 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
16

So, how does a student decide whether they want to go, for example—because I have 
students doing both—into philosophy vs. science? 
Dr. Thompson: I think in many ways that's a very pragmatic decision. And that is, when 
you go to graduate school, and then you get a research or a teaching position, you need 
to ask yourself, What is my home base going to be? Am I mainly interested in reading 
philosophy, writing philosophy, and talking to philosophers, even if I'm also doing it in 
concert with people in cognitive science? Or do I want to be an experimentalist; do I 
want to be in the lab, in the culture of a lab, where it's very much teamwork and running 
experiments? 
So, part of it is almost a temperamental difference: what kind of life activity 
intellectually do you want to have as your home base? And that's just going to differ, 
depending on the individual. 
I would say, though, that more and more there are programs in philosophy, and also in 
neuroscience and psychology, where you can have your home base in one of those 
disciplines and really learn the craft of that discipline, while interacting quite extensively 
with people in other disciplines. And that wasn't possible 20 or 30 years ago; and it's 
really much more becoming the norm. 
The two key things I think for a student are where are you going to be most comfortable 
intellectually, in terms of your home base, and then secondly, go to a program or go to a 
university where there's a culture of interaction with other disciplines and other 
departments. 
Dr. Campbell: Well, those sound like two key pieces of advice. Thank you. 
[music] 
Closing Remarks
This interview with Dr. Evan Thompson from the University of British Columbia was 
originally recorded and aired almost 10 years ago in the fall of 2012. I ch0se it as an 
encore episode for two reasons. First, it was very popular with listeners when it first 
aired and because I wanted to give newer listeners a sense for the diversity of episodes 
available to Premium subscribers.
The first two years of Brain Science, which was December 2006-2008 contains a lot of 
basic neuroscience, but as the show matured I began to mix up the technical level and it 
is fair to say that this is one of the more challenging episodes. However, my goal is to 
make these more challenging topics accessible to listeners of all backgrounds.
I am going to review the key ideas of this episode, but if the concept of embodied 
cognition is new to you, I encourage you to check the show notes for links to additional 
episodes and resources.
 
 
 

               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
17

As I noted both before and during the interview Dr. Thompson was the co-author of one 
of the pioneering books about embodied cognition, The Embodied Mind, which was 
originally published in 1991. In this interview we talked about Thompson’s follow-up 
book Mind in Life. I also talked to Thompson again in 2015 when he published another 
book called Waking, Dreaming, and Being. That is episode 115, which is available to 
Premium subscribers
In this first interview I enjoyed hearing about how Thompson met his co-author 
Francisco Varela when he was a teenager and then had the opportunity to work with 
him when he was still a student. 
We started our conversation by reviewing some of the key ideas from The Embodied 
Mind. The key concept of embodied cognition is that our mind is shaped by our body 
and the way it interacts with the world around us. We are not passive recipients of 
sensory information; perception is shaped by how we move in the world. 
Dr. Varela and Dr. Thompson chose the word ‘enactive’ to emphasize the importance of 
action. As Thompson said, cognition, particularly perception, is an active process—or 
enactive—because it depends on having a body with certain kinds of sensorimotor skills 
and habits. 
According to Thompson the enactive approach has two important threads. One is the 
idea that the mind has an active, or interactive, relationship to the body. The second key 
idea is that the mind is not representational; that is, the mind is not acting on some 
representation of the world that exists in the head, because the mind of the animal or 
person is not a passive representer of the environment. So, the enactive approach is a 
movement away from representation toward action or interaction. 
I mentioned the term ‘umwelt,’ which was a term coined early in the twentieth century 
to represent the idea that every animal’s experience is a direct result of how it interacts 
with the world. For example, the world we inhabit is very different from that of our dog, 
because the dog’s world is dominated by smell, while ours is usually dominated by sight. 
Thompson quoted Lawrence Shapiro, who I interviewed back in Episode 73, as 
describing embodied cognition as having the working assumption that our cognition 
and interaction with the world is strongly shaped by the kinds of bodies we have. One of 
the problems with the early approaches of cognitive science—that is computationalism 
and connectionism—was that they both tended to be pursued independently from 
biology. 
We also spent a bit of time talking about phenomenology. In the context of embodied 
cognition, phenomenology points to the importance of subjective experience: what is it 
like to have a mind? 
While phenomenology might seem rather esoteric, the main theme of Mind in Life is 
not. As Thompson said, the core idea is that we can trace a continuous path from the 
emergence of life into the emergence of mind and the emergence of consciousness and 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
18

subjectivity. One of the guiding ideas that runs through this book is the idea of self-
organization, and how using the tools from the study of self-organizing systems can help 
us understand cognition and perception. 
We talked briefly about autonomous systems. Thompson defined an autonomous 
system as one that creates a self through interactions with its environment. We really 
didn’t have a chance to emphasize how important this is in terms of understanding why 
the Mind is different from the computational model envisioned by early cognitive 
scientists. 
But we did talk about autopoeisis, which is a special kind of autonomy exemplified by a 
living cell. An auto-poeitic system is one that creates its own boundary. This matters 
because now we have the beginnings of self, long before the emergence of awareness. 
I wish we could have spent more time talking about how the use of dynamic systems 
theory relates to autonomous systems, but we did touch briefly on the fact that dynamic 
systems theory is a tool that allows us to get a handle on systems that are non-linear, 
that is, systems that are highly dependent on initial conditions. Living systems are 
dynamic systems, but this is also what allows them to be resilient and adaptable. 
Thompson mentioned that dynamic systems also depend critically on noise as a source 
of adaptability, which led us to a brief discussion of metastability; which is actually a key 
feature of living systems, and especially the nervous system. 
Thompson talked about how a metastable system never settles into a state in a classical 
sense, but rather moves from one transient to another. The reason this is important is 
that it explains how the nervous system can produce its own spontaneous activity, 
rather than being dependent on external inputs. 
Returning once again to the theme of continuity, when I asked Thompson about 
cognition he said, “I would say living systems are sense-making systems, and cognition 
is a form of sense-making.” If we look at cognition as a form of sense- making, it isn’t 
best understood according to the representational model, input- representation-output. 
However, it is important to note that Thompson does not propose that all life is 
conscious. 
On Page 162 of Mind in Life he wrote, “It is important to situate consciousness in 
relationship to dynamic unconscious processes of life regulation. This effort becomes 
difficult, perhaps impossible, if one projects consciousness down to the cellular level.” 
I want to make a few more comments about the book, Mind in Life: Biology, 
Phenomenology, and the Science of Mind. It’s not light reading, but I do think it’s a 
must-read for students of neuroscience, and especially for those who are interested in 
philosophy of mind.  I particularly recommend this book to those who have some 
familiarity with embodied cognition because you will find that this book takes the 
discussion to a much deeper level. 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
19

Thompson mentioned that Mind in Life has three threads: a discussion of the enactive 
approach to cognition; a discussion of phenomenology and neurophenomenology; and 
also a discussion of the evolution of the mind. 
In this interview we focused mainly on the first thread. But I want to mention that the 
book contains an early chapter on emergence of the mind that I think is one of the 
clearest I’ve ever read. 
This book was my introduction to phenomenology and episode 123 explores this topic in 
more detail.
Finally, we didn’t touch on evolution at all, though it is a very important theme that runs 
through Mind in Life. I’d especially like to mention Chapter 7 which is entitled “Laying 
Down a Path in Walking: Development in Evolution.” I could easily devote a whole 
podcast to this chapter, but I only have time to mention that this chapter includes a 
detailed attack on what Thompson calls the ‘genocentric’ approach to evolution, which is 
the approach promoted by writers like Richard Dawkins and Daniel Dennett. 
One reason that Thompson attacks this approach is that he feels that, like 
computationalism, genocentrism perpetuates the dualisms of hardware vs. software, 
matter vs. information, body vs. mind, etc. The enactive approach championed by 
Thompson is more compatible with what is known as developmental systems theory. 
Developmental systems theory is an approach to evolution that sees the life cycle as the 
fundamental unit of evolution, instead of the gene. 
Thompson also says in this chapter that, according to the enactive viewpoint, natural 
selection is an emergent consequence of autopoeisis, not its cause. So, he sees the 
emergence of the auto-poieitic cell as the central event in the origin of life, because it 
represents the transition to basic autonomy, and thus from non- life to life. 
This viewpoint proposes that self-organization and natural selection are not opposed, 
but are actually interwoven aspects of a single process of enactive evolution. Of course, 
he notes that similar ideas have been proposed by other writers like Stuart Kauffman. 
This is certainly one of those times when trying to summarize a book is rather 
inadequate, but I hope I’ve given you a sense of how Mind in Life fits into our ongoing 
exploration of the brain, mind, and consciousness. Thompson sees a deep continuity 
between the emergence of life and the emergence of mind; so, he doesn’t feel that there’s 
another level of explanation required. Even so, some of you may feel that this discussion 
has generated as many questions as answers; especially if you are new to these ideas. 
I recommend checking out the show notes at brainsciencepodcast.com for more 
episodes about embodied cognition, because there is no way that I could make this 
episode totally stand alone. But don’t forget that the transcript of this encore version is 
also free. If you use the free Brain Science mobile app you can access it there, but it is 
also available at brainsciencepodcast.com.
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
20

As always, I would would love to hear from you. You can email me at 
brainsciencepodcast@gmail.com. The deadline for submitting content to Episode 200 is  
August 31, 2022.
Please consider signing up for the free Brain Science newsletter so that you can get 
show notes automatically every month and get the free gift 5 Things You need to Know 
about Your Brain. Sign-up at brainsciencepodcast.com or text brainscience (all one 
word) to 55444.
If you want to support Brain Science financially go to brainsciencepodcast.com/
donations. You can learn more about the Premium subscription as well as Patreon.
Even if you can’t support the show financially you can help by remembering to share 
Brain Science with others. Brain Science is available wherever you want to listen 
including Apple podcasts, Google podcasts, Amazon, Audible, Spotify, Pandora and even 
on YouTube.
Thanks again for listening. I look forward to talking with you again next month.
[music] 
This episode was originally transcribed by Lori Wolfson.
The new introduction and closing remarks were transcribed by Virginia Campbell, MD 
               © Copyright 2022, Virginia Campbell, MD
21

