
International Journal of Theoretical Physics, VoL 21, Nos. 6/7, 1982 
Simulating Physics with Computers 
Richard P. Feynman 
Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91107 
Received May 7, 1981 
1. INTRODUCTION 
On the program it says this is a keynote speech--and I don't know 
what a keynote speech is. I do not intend in any way to suggest what should 
be in this meeting as a keynote of the subjects or anything like that. I have 
my own things to say and to talk about and there's no implication that 
anybody needs to talk about the same thing or anything like it. So what I 
want to talk about is what Mike Dertouzos suggested that nobody would 
talk about. I want to talk about the problem of simulating physics with 
computers and I mean that in a specific way which I am going to explain. 
The reason for doing this is something that I learned about from Ed 
Fredkin, and my entire interest in the subject has been inspired by him. It 
has to do with learning something about the possibilities of computers, and 
also something about possibilities in physics. If we suppose that we know all 
the physical laws perfectly, of course we don't have to pay any attention to 
computers. It's interesting anyway to entertain oneself with the idea that 
we've got something to learn about physical laws; and if I take a relaxed 
view here (after all I'm here and not at home) I'll admit that we don't 
understand everything. 
The first question is, What kind of computer are we going to use to 
simulate physics? Computer theory has been developed to a point where it 
realizes that it doesn't make any difference; when you get to a universal 
computer, it doesn't matter how it's manufactured, how it's actually made. 
Therefore my question is, Can physics be simulated by a universal com- 
puter? I would like to have the elements of this computer locally intercon- 
nected, and therefore sort of think about cellular automata as an example 
(but I don't want to force it). But I do want something involved with the 
467 
0020-7748/82/0600-0467503.0£1/0 © 1982 Plenum Publishing Corporation 

468 
Feylaman 
locality of interaction. I would not like to think of a very enormous 
computer with arbitrary interconnections throughout the entire thing. 
Now, what kind of physics are we going to imitate? First, I am going to 
describe the possibility of simulating physics in the classical approximation, 
a thing which is usuaUy described by local differential equations. But the 
physical world is quantum mechanical, and therefore the proper problem is 
the simulation of quantum physics--which is what I really want to talk 
about, but I'U come to that later. So what kind of simulation do I mean? 
There is, of course, a kind of approximate simulation in which you design 
numerical algorithms for differential equations, and then use the computer 
to compute these algorithms and get an approximate view of what ph2csics 
ought to do. That's an interesting subject, but is not what I want to talk 
about. I want to talk about the possibility that there is to be an exact 
simulation, that the computer will do exactly the same as nature. If this is to 
be proved and the type of computer is as I've already explained, then it's 
going to be necessary that everything that happens in a finite volume of 
space and time would have to be exactly analyzable with a finite number of 
logical operations. The present theory of physics is not that way, apparently. 
It allows space to go down into infinitesimal distances, wavelengths to get 
infinitely great, terms to be summed in infinite order, and so forth; and 
therefore, if this proposition is right, physical law is wrong. 
So good, we already have a suggestion of how we might modify 
physical law, and that is the kind of reason why I like to study this sort of 
problem. To take an example, we might change the idea that space is 
continuous to the idea that space perhaps is a simple lattice and everything 
is discrete (so that we can put it into a finite number of digits) and that time 
jumps discontinuously. Now let's see what kind of a physical world it would 
be or what kind of problem of computation we would have. For example, 
the first difficulty that would come out is that the speed of light would 
depend slightly on the direction, and there might be other anisotropies in 
the physics that we could detect experimentally. They might be very small 
anisotropies. Physical knowledge is of course always incomplete, and you 
can always say we'll try to design something which beats experiment at the 
present time, but which predicts anistropies on some scale to be found later. 
That's fine. That would be good physics if you could predict something 
consistent with all the known facts and suggest some new fact that we didn't 
explain, but I have no specific examples. So I'm not objecting to the fact 
that it's anistropic in principle, it's a question of how anistropic. If you tell 
me it's so-and-so anistropic, I'll tell you about the experiment with the 
lithium atom which shows that the anistropy is less than that much, and 
that this here theory of yours is impossible. 

Simulating Physics with Computers 
469 
Another thing that had been suggested early was that natural laws are 
reversible, but that computer rules are not. But this turned out to be false; 
the computer rules can be reversible, and it has been a very, very useful 
thing to notice and to discover that. (Editors' note: see papers by Bennett, 
Fredkin, and Toffoli, these Proceedings). This is a place where the relation- 
ship of physics and computation has turned itself the other way and told us 
something about the possibilities of computation. So this is an interesting 
subject because it tells us something about computer rules, and might tell us 
something about physics. 
The rule of simulation that I would like to have is that the number of 
computer elements required to simulate a large physical system is only to be 
proportional to the space-time volume of the physical system. I don't want 
to have an explosion. That is, if you say I want to explain this much physics, 
I can do it exactly and I need a certain-sized computer. If doubling the 
volume of space and time means I'll need an exponentially larger computer, 
I consider that against the rules (I make up the rules, I'm allowed to do 
that). Let's start with a few interesting questions. 
2. SIMULATING TIME 
First I'd like to talk about simulating time. We're going to assume it's 
discrete. You know that we don't have infinite accuracy in physical mea- 
surements so time might be discrete on a scale of less than 10 -27 sec. (You'd 
have to have it at least like to this to avoid clashes with experiment--but 
make it 10 -41 sec. if you like, and then you've got us!) 
One way in which we simulate timewin cellular automata, for example 
--is to say that "the computer goes from state to state." But really, that's 
using intuition that involves the idea of time--you're going from state to 
state. And therefore the time (by the way, like the space in the case of 
cellular automata) is not simulated at all, it's imitated in the computer. 
An interesting question comes up: "Is there a way of simulating it, 
rather than imitating it?" Well, there's a way of looking at the world that is 
called the space-time view, imagining that the points of space and time are 
all laid out, so to speak, ahead of time. And then we could say that a 
"computer" rule (now computer would be in quotes, because it's not the 
standard kind of computer which cperates in time) is: We have a state s~ at 
each point i in space-time. (See Figure 1.) The state s i at the space time 
point i is a given function F,(sj, s k .... ) of the state at the points j, k in some 
neighborhood of i: 
s,= 
.... ) 

470 
Feynman 
• 
• s~ 
" 
~i " 
• 
" 
"$k 
o
t
o
 
~pac~ 
Fig. 1. 
You'll notice immediately that if this particular function is such that the 
value of the function at i only involves the few points behind in time, earlier 
than this time i, all I've done is to redescrib6 the cellular automaton, 
because it means that you calculate a given point from points at earlier 
times, and I can compute the next one and so on, and I can go through this 
in that particular order. But just let's us think of a more general kind of 
computer, because we might have a more general function. So let's tlaink 
about whether we could have a wider case of generality of interconnections 
of points in space-time. If F depends on a//the points both in the future and 
the past, what then? That could be the way physics works. I'll mention how 
our theories go at the moment. It has turned out in many physical theories 
that the mathematical equations are quite a bit simplified by imagining such 
a thing--by imagining positrons as electrons going backwards in time, and 
other things that connect objects forward and backward. The important 
question would be, if this computer were laid out, is there in fact an 
organized algorithm by which a solution could be laid out, that is, com- 
puted? Suppose you know this function F, and it is a function of the 
variables in the future as well. How would you lay out numbers so that they 
automatically satisfy the above equation? It may not be possible. In the case 
of the cellular automaton it is, because from a given row you get the next 
row and then the next row, and there's an organized way of doing it. It's an 
interesting question whether there are circumstances where you get func- 
tions for which you can't think, at least right away, of an organized way of 
laying it out. Maybe sort of shake it down from some approximation, or 
something, but it's an interesting different type of computation. 
Question: "Doesn't this reduce to the ordinary boundary value, as 
opposed to initial-value type of calculation?" 
Answer: "Yes, but remember this is the computer itself that I'm 
describing." 
It appears actually that classical physics is causal. You can, in terms of 
the information in the past, if you include both momentum and position, or 

Simulating Physics with Computers 
471 
the position at two different times in the past (either way, you need two 
pieces of information at each point) calculate the future in principle. So 
classical physics is local, causal, and reversible, and therefore apparently 
quite adaptable (except for the discreteness and so on, which I already 
mentioned) to computer simulation. We have no difficulty, in principle, 
apparently, with that. 
3. SIMULATING PROBABILITY 
Turning to quantum mechanics, we know immediately that here we get 
only the ability, apparently, to predict probabilities. Might I say im- 
mediately, so that you know where I really intend to go, that we always have 
had (secret, secret, close.the doors!) we always have had a great deal of 
difficulty in understanding the world view that quantum mechanics repre- 
sents. At least I do, because I'm an old enough man that I haven't got to the 
point that this stuff is obvious to me. Okay, I still get nervous with it. And 
therefore, some of the younger students ... you know how it always is, 
every new idea, it takes a generation or two until it becomes obvious that 
there's no real problem. It has not yet become obvious to me that there's no 
real problem. I cannot define the real problem, therefore I suspect there's no 
real problem, but I'm note sure there's no real problem. So that's why I like 
to investigate things. Can I learn anything from asking this question about 
computers--about this may or may not be mystery as to what the world 
view of quantum mechanics is? So I know that quantum mechanics seem to 
involve probability--and I therefore want to talk about simulating proba- 
bility. 
Well, one way that we could have a computer that simulates a prob- 
abilistic theory, something that has a probability in it, would be to calculate 
the probability and then interpret this number to represent nature. For 
example, let's suppose that a particle has a probability P(x, t) to be at x at a 
time t. A typical example of such a probability might satisfy a differential 
equation, as, for example, if the particle is diffusing: 
al,(x, t) _ 
v 
P(x,t) 
Ot 
Now we could discretize t and x and perhaps even the probability itself and 
solve this differential equation like we solve any old field equation, and 
make an algorithm for it, making it exact by discretization. First there'd be 
a problem about discretizing probability. If you are only going to take k 
digits it would mean that when the probability is less that 2 -k of something 
happening, you say it doesn't happen at all. In practice we do that. If the 

472 
Feymman 
probability of something is 10 -7°°, we say it isn't going to happen, and 
we're not caught out very often. So we could allow ourselves to do that. But 
the real difficulty is this: If we had many particles, we have R particles, for 
example, in a system, then we would have to describe the probability of a 
circumstance by giving the probability to find these particles at points 
x l, x 2 ..... x R at the time t. That would be a description of the probability of 
the system. And therefore, you'd need a k-digit number for every configura- 
tion of the system, for every arrangement of the R values of x. And 
therefore if there are N points in space, we'd need N n configurations. 
Actually, from our point of view that at each point in space there is 
information like electric fields and so on, R will be of the same order as N if 
the number of information bits is the same as the number of points in space, 
and therefore you'd have to have something like N u configurations to be 
described to get the probability out, and that's too big for our computer to 
hold if the size of the computer is of order N. 
We emphasize, if a description of an isolated part of nature with N 
variables requires a general function of N variables and if a computer 
stimulates this by actually computing or storing this function then doubling 
the size of nature (N--,2N) would require an exponentially explosive 
growth in the size of the simulating computer. It is therefore impossible, 
according to the rules stated, to simulate by calculating the probability_ 
Is there any other way? What kind of simulation can we have? We can't 
expect to compute the probability of configurations for a probabilistic 
theory. But the other way to simulate a probabilistic nature, which I'll call 
% for the moment, might still be to simulate the probabilistic nature by a 
computer C which itself is probabilistic, in which you always randomize the 
last two digit's of every number, or you do something terrible to it. So it 
becomes what I'll call a probabilistic computer, in which the output is n~at a 
unique function of the input. And then you try to work it out so that it 
simulates nature in this sense: that C goes from some state--initial state if 
you like--to some final state with the same probability that % goes from 
the corresponding initial state to the corresponding final state. Of course 
when you set up the machine and let nature do it, the imitator will not do 
the same thing, it only does it with the same probability. Is that no good? 
No it's O.K. How do you know what the probability is? You see, nature's 
unpredictable; how do you expect to predict it with a computer? You can't, 
--it's unpredictable if it's probabilistic. But what you really do ila a 
probabilistic system is repeat the experiment in nature a large number of 
times. If you repeat the same experiment in the computer a large number of 
times (and that doesn't take any more time than it does to do the same thing 
in nature of course), it will give the frequency of a given final state 
proportional to the number of times, with approximately the same rate (plus 

Simulating Physics with Computers 
473 
or minus the square root of n and all that) as it happens in nature. In other 
words, we could imagine and be perfectly happy, I think, with a probabilis- 
fic simulator of a probabilistic nature, in which the machine doesn't exactly 
do what nature does, but if you repeated a particular type of experiment a 
sufficient number of times to determine nature's probability, then you did 
the corresponding experiment on the computer, you'd get the corresponding 
probability with the corresponding accuracy (with the same kind of accu- 
racy of statistics). 
So let us now think about the characteristics of a local probabilistic 
computer, because I'll see if I can imitate nature with that (by "nature" I'm 
now going to mean quantum mechanics). One of the characteristics is that 
you can determine how it behaves in a local region by simply disregarding 
what it's doing in all other regions. For example, suppose there are variables 
in the system that describe the whole world (xA, xs)--ythe variables x A 
you're interested in, they're "around here"; x s are the whole result of the 
world. If you want to know the probability that something around here is 
happening, you would have to get that by integrating the total probability of 
all kinds of possibilities over x s. If we had computed this probability, we 
would still have to do the integration 
P (xA) = f e(x , xB)dxB 
which is a hard job! But if we have imitated the probability, it's very simple 
to do it: you don't have to do anything to do the integration, you simply 
disregard what the values of x s are, you just look at the region x A. And 
therefore it does have the characteristic of nature: if it's local, you can find 
out what's happening in a region not by integrating or doing an extra 
operation, but merely by disregarding what happens elsewhere, which is no 
operation, nothing at all. 
The other aspect that I want to emphasize is that the equations will 
have a form, no doubt, something like the following. Let each point 
i---1,2 .... ,N in space be in a state si chosen from a small state set (the size 
of this set should be reasonable, say, up to 25). And let the probability to 
find some configuration (s,} (a set of values of the state s i at each point i) 
be some number P({si) ). It satisfies an equation such that at each jump in 
time 
(s'} 
where m(si[s:, s~...) is the probability that we move to state s i at point i 

474 
Feynman 
when the neighbors have values s~, s;, .... where j, k etc. are points in the 
neighborhood of i. As j moves far from i, m becomes ever less sensitive to 
s'j. At each change the state at a particular point i will move from what it 
was to a state s with a probability m that depends only upon the states of 
the neighborhood (which may be so defined as to include the point i itself). 
This gives the probability of making a transition. It's the same as in a 
cellular automaton; only, instead of its being definite, it's a probability. Tell 
me the environment, and I'll tell you the probability after a next moment of 
time that this point is at state s. And that's the way it's going to work, okay? 
So you get a mathematical equation of this kind of form. 
Now I explicitly go to the question of how we can simulate with a 
computer--a universal automaton or something--the quantum-meclianJcal 
effects. (The usual formulation is that quantum mechanics has some sort of 
a differential equation for a function ~k.) If you have a single particle, q, is a 
function of x and t, and this differential equation could be simulated just 
like my probabilistic equation was before. That would be all right and one 
has seen people make little computers which simulate the Schr6edinger 
equation for a single particle. But the full description of quantum mechanics 
for a large system with R particles is given by a function q~(x I, x 2 ..... x n, t) 
which we call the amplitude to find the particles x I ..... xR, and therefore, 
because it has too many variables, it cannot be simulated with a normal 
computer with a number of elements proportional to R or proportional to 
N. We had the same troubles with the probability in classical physics. And 
therefore, the problem is, how can we simulate the quantum mechanics? 
There are two ways that we can go about it. We can give up on our rule 
about what the computer was, we can say: Let the computer itself be built 
of quantum mechanical elements which obey quantum mechanical laws. Or 
we can turn the other way and say: Let the computer still be the same kind 
that we thought of before--a logical, universal automaton; can we imitate 
this situation? And I'm going to separate my talk here, for it branches into 
two parts. 
4. QUANTUM COMPUTERS--UNIVERSAL QUANTUM 
SIMULATORS 
The first branch, one you might call a side-remark, is, Can you do it 
with a new kind of computer--a quantum computer? (I'11 come back to the 
other branch in a moment.) Now it turns out, as far as I can tell, that you 
can simulate this with a quantum system, with quantum computer elemexats. 
It's not a Turing machine, but a machine of a different kind. If we disregard 
the continuity of space and make it discrete, and so on, as an approximation 
(the same way as we allowed ourselves in the classical case), it does seem to 

Simulating Physics with Computers 
475 
be true that all the various field theories have the same kind of behavior, 
and can be simulated in every way, apparently, with little latticeworks of 
spins and other things. It's been noted time and time again that the 
phenomena of field theory (if the world is made in a discrete lattice) are well 
imitated by many phenomena in solid state theory (which is simply the 
analysis of a latticework of crystal atoms, and in the case of the kind of 
solid state I mean each atom is just a point which has numbers associated 
with it, with quantum-mechanical rules). For example, the spin waves in a 
spin lattice imitating Bose-particles in the field theory. I therefore believe 
it's true that with a suitable class of quantum machines you could imitate 
any quantum system, including the physical world. But I don't know 
whether the general theory of this intersimulation of quantum systems has 
ever been worked out, and so I present that as another interesting problem: 
to work out the classes of different kinds of quantum mechanical systems 
which are really intersimulatable--which are equivalent--as has been done 
in the case of classical computers. It has been found that there is a kind of 
universal computer that can do anything, and it doesn't make much 
difference specifically how it's designed. The same way we should try to find 
out what kinds of quantum mechanical systems are mutually intersimulata- 
ble, and try to find a specific class, or a character of that class which will 
simulate everything. What, in other words, is the universal quantum simula- 
tor? (assuming this discretization of space and time). If you had discrete 
quantum systems, what other discrete quantum systems are exact imitators 
of it, and is there a class against which everything can be matched? I believe 
it's rather simple to answer that question and to find the class, but I just 
haven't done it. 
Suppose that we try the following guess: that every finite quantum 
mechanical system can be described exactly, imitated exactly, by supposing 
that we have another system such that at each point in space-time this 
system has only two possible base states. Either that point is occupied, or 
unoccupied--those are the two states. The mathematics of the quantum 
mechanical operators associated with that point would be very simple. 
a ---- ANNIHILATE ~ 
OCC 
UN 
a* = CREATE 
= 
OCC 
UN 
o 
o 
1 
0 
0 
1 
= (ox +io,) 
0 
0 
n = NUMBER 
= 
I 
0 
I 
= IDENTITY 
= 
[ 1 
I 0 

476 
Feyninan 
There would be an operator a which annihilates if the point is occupied 
--it changes it to unoccupied. There is a conjugate operator a* which does 
the opposite: if it's unoccupied, it occupies it. There's another operator n 
called the number to ask, Is something there? The little matrices tell you 
what they do. If it's there, n gets a one and leaves it alone, if it's not there, 
nothing happens. That's mathematically equivalent to the product of the 
other two, as a matter of fact. And then there's the identity, ~, which we 
always have to put in there to complete our mathematics--it doesn't do a 
damn thing! 
By the way, on the right-hand side of the above formulas the same 
operators are written in terms of matrices that most physicists find more 
convenient, because they are Hermitian, and that seems to make it easier for 
them. They have invented another set of matrices, the Pauli o matrices: 
1°) o:(0  01) o_(0 i -i)0 
And these are called spin--spin one-half--so sometimes people say you're 
talking about a spin-one-half lattice. 
The question is, if we wrote a Hamiltonian which involved only these 
operators, locally coupled to corresponding operators on the other space-time 
points, could we imitate every quantum mechanical system which is discrete 
and has a finite number of degrees of freedom? I know, almost certainly, 
that we could do that for any quantum mechanical system which involves 
Bose particles. I'm not sure whether Fermi particles could be described by 
such a system. So I leave that open. Well, that's an example of what I meant 
by a general quantum mechanical simulator. I'm not sure that it's sufficient, 
because I'm not sure that it takes care of Fermi particles. 
5. CAN QUANTUM SYSTEMS BE PROBABILISTICALLY 
SIMULATED BY A CLASSICAL COMPUTER? 
Now the next question that I would like to bring up is, of course, the 
interesting one, i.e., Can a quantum system be probabilisticaUy simulated by 
a classical (probabilistic, I'd assume) universal computer? In other words, a 
computer which will give the same probabilities as the quantum system 
does. If you take the computer to be the classical kind I've described so far, 
(not the quantum kind described in the last section) and there're no changes 
in any laws, and there's no hocus-pocus, the answer is certainly, No! This is 
called the hidden-variable problem: it is impossible to represent the results 
of quantum mechanics with a classical universal device. To learn a little bit 
about it, I say let us try to put the quantum equations in a form as close as 

Simulating Physics with Computers 
477 
possible to classical equations so that we can see what the difficulty is and 
what happens. Well, first of all we can't simulate ~k in the normal way. As 
I've explained already, there're too many variables. Our only hope is that 
we're going to simulate probabilities, that we're going to have our computer 
do things with the same probability as we observe in nature, as calculated 
by the quantum mechanical system. Can you make a cellular automaton, or 
something, imitate with the same probability what nature does, where I'm 
going to suppose that quantum mechanics is correct, or at least after I 
discretize space and time it's correct, and see if I can do it. I must point out 
that you must directly generate the probabilities, the results, with the correct 
quantum probability. Directly, because we have no way to store all the 
numbers, we have to just imitate the phenomenon directly. 
It turns out then that another thing, rather than the wave function, a 
thing called the density matrix, is much more useful for this. It's not so 
useful as far as the mathematical equations are concerned, since it's more 
complicated than the equations for ~b, but I'm not going to worry about 
mathematical complications, or which is the easiest way to calculate, be- 
cause with computers we don't have to be so careful to do it the very easiest 
way. And so with a slight increase in the complexity of the equations (and 
not very much increase) I turn to the density matrix, which for a single 
particle of coordinate x in a pure state of wave function q~(x) is 
p(x, x')= 
This has a special property that is a function of two coordinates x, x'. The 
presence of two quantities x and x' associated with each coordinate is 
analogous to the fact that in classical mechanics you have to have two 
variables to describe the state, x and ~. States are described by a second-order 
device, with two informations ("position" and "velocity"). So we have to 
have two pieces of information associated with a particle, analogous to the 
classical situation, in order to describe configurations. (I've written the 
density matrix for one particle, but of course there's the analogous thing for 
R particles, a function of 2R variables). 
This quantity has many of the mathematical properties of a probability. 
For example if a state ~(x) is not certain but is ~k~ with the probability p~ 
then the density matrix is the appropriate weighted sum of the matrix for 
each state a: 
p(x, x,)= 
A quantity which has properties even more similar to classical probabilities 
is the Wigner function, a simple reexpression of the density matrix; for a 

478 
Feynman 
single particle 
W(x,p)=fo(x+Y,x-Y)eiPYdy 
We shall be emphasizing their similarity and shall call it "probability" in 
quotes instead of Wigner function. Watch these quotes carefully, when they 
are absent we mean the real probability. If "probability" had all the 
mathematical properties of a probability we could remove the quotes and 
simulate it. W(x, p) is the "probability" that the particle has position x and 
momentum p (per dx and dp). What properties does it have that are 
analogous to an ordinary probability? 
It has the property that if there are many variables and you want to 
know the "probabilities" associated with a finite region, you simply disre- 
gard the other variables (by integration). Furthermore the probability of 
finding a particle at x is fW(x,p)dp. If you can interpret W as a 
probability of finding x and p, this would be an expected equation. Likewise 
the probability of p would be expected to be fW(x, p)dx. These two 
equations are correct, and therefore you would hope that maybe W(x, p ) is 
the probability of finding x and p. And the question then is can we make a 
device which simulates this W? Because then it would work fine. 
Since the quantum systems I noted were best represented by spin 
one-half (occupied versus unoccupied or spin one-half is the same thing), I 
tried to do the same thing for spin one-half objects, and it's rather easy to 
do. Although before one object only had two states, occupied and unoc- 
cupied, the full description--in order to develop things as a function of time 
--requires twice as many variables, which mean two slots at each point 
which are occupied or unoccupied (denoted by + and - in what follows), 
analogous to the x and 2, or the x and p. So you can find four numbers, 
four "probabilities" (f+ +, f+ _, f_+, f__ ) which act just like, and I have 
to explain why they're not exactly like, but they act just like, probabilities to 
find things in the state in which both symbols are up, one's up and one's 
down, and so on. For example, the sum f+ + + f+_ + f_ + + f__ of the 
four "probabilities" is 1. You'll remember that one object now is going to 
have two indices, two plus/minus indices, or two ones and zeros at each 
point, although the quantum system had only one. For example, if you 
would like to know whether the first index is positive, the probability of that 
would be 
Prob(first index is + ) = f+ + + f+ _ 
[spin z up] 
i.e., you don't care about the second index. The probability that the first 
index is negative is 
Prob(first index is -) = f_ + + f_ _, 
[spin z down] 

Simulating Physics with Computers 
479 
These two formulas are exactly correct in quantum mechanics. You see I'm 
hedging on whether or not "probability" f can really be a probability 
without quotes. But when I write probability without quotes on the left-hand 
side I'm not hedging; that really is the quantum mechanical probability. It's 
interpreted perfectly fine here. Likewise the probability that the second 
index is positive can be obtained by finding 
Prob(second index is +) =/+ + + f_ + 
[spin x up] 
and likewise 
Prob(second index is --) = f+ _ + f_ _ 
[spin x down] 
You could also ask other questions about the system. You might like to 
know, What is the probability that both indices are positive? You'll get in 
trouble. But you could ask other questions that you won't get in trouble 
with, and that get correct physical answers. You can ask, for example, what 
is the probability that the two indices are the same? That would be 
Prob(match) = f+ + + f_ _ 
[spin y up] 
Or the probability that there's no match between the indices, that they're 
different, 
Prob(no match) = f+ _ + f_ + 
[spin y down] 
All perfectly all right. All these probabilities are correct and make sense, 
and have a precise meaning in the spin model, shown in the square brackets 
above. There are other "probability" combinations, other linear combina- 
tions of these f's which also make physically sensible probabilities, but I 
won't go into those now. There are other linear combinations that you can 
ask questions about, but you don't seem to be able to ask questions about 
an individual f. 
6. NEGATIVE PROBABILITIES 
Now, for many interacting spins on a lattice we can give a "probability" 
(the quotes remind us that there is still a question about whether it's a 
probability) for correlated possibilities: 
...... 

480 
Feynanan 
Next, if I look for the quantum mechanical equation which tells me what the 
changes of F are with time, they are exactly of the form that I wrote above 
for the classical theory: 
(s'} 
but now we have F instead of P. The M(sils},@.. ) would appear to be 
interpreted as the "probability" per unit time, or per time jump, that the 
state at i turns into s i when the neighbors are in configuration s'. If you can 
invent a probability M like that, you write the equations for it according to 
normal logic, those are the correct equations, the real, correct, quant~am 
mechanical equations for this F, and therefore you'd say, Okay, so I can 
imitate it with a probabilistic computer! 
There's only one thing wrong. These equations unfortunately cannot be 
so interpreted on the basis of the so-called "probability", or this probabLlis- 
tic computer can't simulate them, because the F is not necessarily positive. 
Sometimes it's negative! The M, the "probability" (so-called) of mowing 
from one condition to another is itself not positive; if I had gone all the ,,way 
back to the f for a single object, it again is not necessarily positive. 
An example of possibilities here are 
f++ =0.6 
f+_ = -0.1 
f_+ =0.3 
f__ =0.2 
The sum f+ + + f+ _ is 0.5, that's 50% chance of finding the first index 
positive. The probability of finding the first index negative is the slam 
f_ + + f_ + which is also 50%. The probability of finding the second index 
positive is the sum f+ + + f_+ which is nine tenths, the probability of 
finding it negative is f÷_ + f__ which is one-tenth, perfectly alright, it's 
either plus or minus. The probability that they match is eight-tenths, the 
probability that they mismatch is plus two-tenths; every physical probabil- 
ity comes out positive. But the original f's are not positive, and therein lies 
the great difficulty. The only difference between a probabilistic classical 
world and the equations of the quantum world is that somehow or other it 
appears as if the probabilities would have to go negative, and that we do not 
know, as far as I know, how to simulate. Okay, that's the fundameratal 
problem. I don't know the answer to it, but I wanted to explain that if I try 
my best to make the equations look as near as possible to what would be 
imitable by a classical probabilistic computer, I get into trouble. 

Simulating Physics with Computers 
481 
7. POLARIZATION OF PHOTONS--TWO-STATES SYSTEMS 
I would like to show you why such minus signs cannot be avoided, or 
at least that you have some sort of difficulty. You probably have all heard 
this example of the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox, but I will explain this 
little example of a physical experiment which can be done, and which has 
been done, which does give the answers quantum theory predicts, and the 
answers are really right, there's no mistake, if you do the experiment, it 
actually comes out. And I'm going to use the example of polarizations of 
photons, which is an example of a two-state system. When a photon comes, 
you can say it's either x polarized or y polarized. You can find that out by 
putting in a piece of calcite, and the photon goes through the calcite either 
out in one direction, or out in another--actually slightly separated, and 
then you put in some mirrors, that's not important. You get two beams, two 
places out, where the photon can go. (See Figure 2.) 
If you put a polarized photon in, then it will go to one beam called the 
ordinary ray, or another, the extraordinary one. If you put detectors there 
you find that each photon that you put in, it either comes out in one or the 
other 100% of the time, and not half and half. You either find a photon in 
one or the other. The probability of finding it in the ordinary ray plus the 
probability of finding it in the extraordinary ray is always 1--you have to 
have that rule. That works. And further, it's never found at both detectors. 
(If you might have put two photons in, you could get that, but you cut the 
intensity down--it's a technical thing, you don't find them in both detec- 
tors.) 
Now the next experiment: Separation into 4 polarized beams (see 
Figure 3). You put two calcites in a row so that their axes have a relative 
angle ~, I happen to have drawn the second calcite in two positions, but it 
doesn't make a difference if you use the same piece or not, as you care. Take 
the ordinary ray from one and put it through another piece of calcite and 
look at its ordinary ray, which I'll call the ordinary-ordinary (O-O) ray, or 
look at its extraordinary ray, I have the ordinary-extraordinary (O- E) ray. 
And then the extraordinary ray from the first one comes out as the E-O 
ray, and then there's an E-E ray, alright. Now you can ask what happens. 
Fig. 2. 

482 
Feynman 
E 
4~pr.~ ~ 
Fig. 3. 
You'll find the following. When a photon comes in, you always find that only 
one of the four counters goes off. 
If the photon is O from the first calcite, then the second calcite gives 
O-O with probability cos2 ep or O-E with the complementary probability 
1-cosl~ = sin z ~. Likewise an E photon gives a E-O with the probability 
sin 2 ~ or an E-E with the probability cos 2 ~. 
8. TWO-PHOTON CORRELATION EXPERIMENT 
Let us turn now to the two photon correlation experiment (see 
Figure 4). 
What can happen is that an atom emits two photons in opposite 
direction (e.g., the 3s--,2p-, ls transition in the H atom). They are ob- 
served simultaneously (say, by you and by me) through two calcites set at q~l 
and ~2 to the vertical. Quantum theory and experiment agree that the 
probability Poo that both of us detect an ordinary photon is 
Poo = k cos2 ('h - q'l) 
The probability tee that we both observe an extraordinary ray is the same 
eee = ½cos ~ (~'2 - ~,) 
The probability Poe that I find O and you find E is 
PoE = ½sin 2 (~2 - ~, ) 
oE 
Jo 
Fig. 4. 

Simulating Physics with Computers 
483 
and finally the probability Peo that I measure E and you measure O is 
eEo = ½sin 2 
- 
Notice that you can always predict, from your own measurement, what I 
shall get, O or E. For any axis ~ that I chose, just set your axis ~2 to ff~, 
then 
Poe = PEo = 0 
and I must get whatever you get. 
Let us see now how it would have to be for a local probabilistic 
computer. Photon 1 must be in some condition a with the probabilityf~(ff~), 
that determines it to go through as an ordinary ray [the probability it would 
pass as E is 1- f~(e?l) ]. Likewise photon 2 will be in a condition fl with 
probability ga(~2). If p~a is the conjoint probability to find the condition 
pair a, r, the probability Poo that both of us observe O rays is 
eoo(  , 
= 
Ep a = l 
,,B 
,~B 
likewise 
PoE(~,,¢2) = ~p,a(1-f,(4,,))ga(~2) 
etc. 
The conditions a determine how the photons go. There's some kind of 
correlation of the conditions. Such a formula cannot reproduce the quantum 
results above for any p~a, f~(~l), ga(q~2) if they are real probabilities--that 
is all positive, although it is easy if they are "probabilities"--negative for 
some conditions or angles. We now analyze why that is so. 
I don't know what kinds of conditions they are, but for any condition 
the probability f~(~) of its being extraordinary or ordinary in any direction 
must be either one or zero. Otherwise you couldn't predict it on the other 
side. You would be unable to predict with certainty what I was going to get, 
unless, every time the photon comes here, which way it's going to go is 
absolutely determined. Therefore, whatever condition the photon is in, there 
is some hidden inside variable that's going to determine whether it's going 
to be ordinary or extraordinary. This determination is done deterministi- 
cally, not probabilistically; otherwise we can't explain the fact that you 
could predict what I was going to get exactly. So let us suppose that 
something like this happens. Suppose we discuss results just for angles 
which are multiples of 30 ° . 

484 
Feynrnan 
On each diagram (Figure 5) are the angles 0 °, 30 °, 60 °, 90 °, 120 °, and 
150 °. A particle comes out to me, and it's in some sort of state, so what it's 
going to give for 0 °, for 30 °, etc. are all predicted--determined--by the 
state. Let us say that in a particular state that is set up the prediction for 0 ° 
is that it'll be extraordinary (black dot), for 30 ° it's also extraordinary, for 
60 ° it's ordinary (white dot), and so on (Figure 5a). By the way, the 
outcomes are complements of each other at fight angles, because, remember, 
it's always either extraordinary or ordinary; so if you turn 90 ° , what used to 
be an ordinary ray becomes the extraordinary ray. Therefore, whatever 
condition it's in, it has some predictive pattern in which you either have a 
prediction of ordinary or of extraordinary--three and three--because at 
right angles they're not the same color. Likewise the particle that comes to 
you when they're separated must have the same pattern because you can 
determine what I'm going to get by measuring yours. Whatever circum- 
stances come out, the patterns must be the same. So, if I want to know, Am 
I going to get white at 60°? You just measure at 60 °, and you'll find white, 
and therefore you'll predict white, or ordinary, for me. Now each time we 
do the experiment the pattern may not be the same. Every time we make a 
pair of photons, repeating this experiment again and again, it doesn't have 
to be the same as Figure 5a. Let's assume that the next time the experiment 
my photon will be O or E for each angle as in Figure 5c. Then your pattern 
looks like Figure 5d. But whatever it is, your pattern has to be my pattern 
exactly--otherwise you couldn't predict what I was going to get exactly by 
measuring the corresponding angle. And so on. Each time we do the 
experiment, we get different patterns; and it's easy: there are just six dots 
and three of them are white, and you chase them around different way--ev- 
erything can happen. If we measure at the same angle, we always find that 
with this kind of arrangement we would get the same result. 
Now suppose we measure at @z - @, = 30°, and ask, With what proba- 
bility do we get the same result? Let's first try this example here (Figure 
5a,5b). With what probability would we get the same result, that they're 
90" 
x.7 
Fig. 5. 

Simulating Physics with Computers 
485 
both white, or they're both black? The thing comes out like this: suppose I 
say, After they come out, I'm going to choose a direction at random, I tell 
you to measure 30 ° to the right of that direction. Then whatever I get, you 
would get something different if the neighbors were different. (We would 
get the same if the neighbors were the same.) What is the chance that you 
get the same result as me? The chance is the number of times that the 
neighbor is the same color. If you'll think a minute, you'll find that two 
thirds of the time, in the case of Figure 5a, it's the same color. The worst 
case would be black/white/black/white/black/white, and there the proba- 
bility of a match would be zero (Figure 5c, d). If you look at all eight 
possible distinct cases, you'll find that the biggest possible answer is 
two-thirds. You cannot arrange, in a classical kind of method like this, that 
the probability of agreement at 30 ° will be bigger than two-thirds. But the 
quantum mechanical formula predicts cos/30 ° (or 3/4)--and experiments 
agree with this--and therein lies the difficulty. 
That's all. That's the difficulty. That's why quantum mechanics can't 
seem to be imitable by a local classical computer. 
I've entertained myself always by squeezing the difficulty of quantum 
mechanics into a smaller and smaller place, so as to get more and more 
worried about this particular item. It seems to be almost ridiculous that you 
can squeeze it to a numerical question that one thing is bigger than another. 
But there you are--it is bigger than any logical argument can produce, if 
you have this kind of logic. Now, we say "this kind of logic;" what other 
possibilities are there? Perhaps there may be no possibilities, but perhaps 
there are. Its interesting to try to discuss the possibilities. I mentioned 
something about the possibility of time--of things being affected not just 
by the past, but also by the future, and therefore that our probabilities are 
in some sense "illusory." We only have the information from the past, and 
we try to predict the next step, but in reality it depends upon the near future 
which we can't get at, or something like that. A very interesting question is 
the origin of the probabilities in quantum mechanics. Another way of 
puttings things is this: we have an illusion that we can do any experiment 
that we want. We all, however, come from the same universe, have evolved 
with it, and don't really have any "real" freedom. For we obey certain laws 
and have come from a certain past. Is it somehow that we are correlated to 
the experiments that we do, so that the apparent probabilities don't look 
like they ought to look if you assume that they are random. There are all 
kinds of questions like this, and what I'm trying to do is to get you people 
who think about computer-simulation possibilities to pay a great deal of 
attention to this, to digest as well as possible the real answers of quantum 
mechanics, and see if you can't invent a different point of view than the 
physicists have had to invent to describe this. In fact the physicists have no 

486 
Feynman 
good point of view. Somebody mumbled something about a many-world 
picture, and that many-world picture says that the wave function ~ is what's 
real, and damn the torpedos if there are so many variables, N R. All these 
different worlds and every arrangement of configurations are all there just 
like our arrangement of configurations, we just happen to be sitting in this 
one. It's possible, but I'm not very happy with it. 
So, I would like to see if there's some other way out, and I want to 
emphasize, or bring the question here, because the discovery of computers 
and the thinking about computers has turned out to be extremely useful in 
many branches of human reasoning. For instance, we never really under- 
stood how lousy our understanding of languages was, the theory of gram- 
mar and all that stuff, until we tried to make a computer which would be 
able to understand language. We tried to learn a great deal about psychol- 
ogy by trying to understand how computers work. There are interesting 
philosophical questions about reasoning, and relationship, observation, and 
measurement and so on, which computers have stimulated us to think about 
anew, with new types of thinking. And all I was doing was hoping that the 
computer-type of thinking would give us some new ideas, if any are really 
needed. I don't know, maybe physics is absolutely OK the way it is. The 
program that Fredkin is always pushing, about trying to find a computer 
simulation of physics, seem to me to be an excellent program to follow out. 
He and I have had wonderful, intense, and interminable arguments, and rny 
argument is always that the real use of it would be with quantum mechanics, 
and therefore full attention and acceptance of the quantum mechanical 
phenomena--the challenge of explaining quantum mechanical phenomena 
--has to be put into the argument, and therefore these phenomena have to 
be understood very well in analyzing the situation. And I'm not happy with 
all the analyses that go with just the classical theory, because nature isn't 
classical, dammit, and if you want to make a simulation of nature, you'd 
better make it quantum mechanical, and by golly it's a wonderful problem, 
because it doesn't look so easy. Thank you. 
9. DISCUSSION 
Question: Just to interpret, you spoke first of the probability of A given 
B, versus the probability of A and B jointly--that's the probability of one 
observer seeing the result, assigning a probability to the other; and then you 
brought up the paradox of the quantum mechanical result being 3/4, and 
this being 2/3. Are those really the same probabilities? Isn't one a joint 
probability, and the other a conditional one? 
Answer: No, they are the same. Poo is the joint probability that both you 
and I observe an ordinary ray, and PeE is the joint probability for two 

Simulating Physics with Computers 
487 
extraordinary rays. The probability that our observations match is 
Pot + PEE = COS2 30° = 3/4 
Question: Does it in some sense depend upon an assumption as to how 
much information is accessible from the photon, or from the particle? And 
second, to take your question of prediction, your comment about predicting, 
is in some sense reminiscent of the philosophical question, Is there any 
meaning to the question of whether there is free will or predestination? 
namely, the correlation between the observer and the experiment, and the 
question there is, Is it possible to construct a test in which the prediction 
could be reported to the observer, or instead, has the ability to represent 
information already been used up? And I suspect that you may have already 
used up all the information so that prediction lies outside the range of the 
theory. 
Answer: All these things I don't understand; deep questions, profound 
questions. However physicists have a kind of a dopy way of avoiding all of 
these things. They simply say, now look, friend, you take a pair of counters 
and you put them on the side of your calcite and you count how many times 
you get this stuff, and it comes out 75% of the time. Then you go and you 
say, Now can I imitate that with a device which is going to produce the 
same results, and which will operate locally, and you try to invent some 
kind of way of doing that, and if you do it in the ordinary way of thinking, 
you find that you can't get there with the same probability. Therefore some 
new kind of thinking is necessary, but physicists, being kind of dull minded, 
only look at nature, and don't know how to think in these new ways. 
Question: At the beginning of your talk, you talked about discretizing 
various things in order to go about doing a real computation of physics. 
And yet it seems to me that there are some differences between things like 
space and time, and probability that might exist at some place, or energy, or 
some field value. Do you see any reason to distinguish between quantization 
or discretizing of space and time, versus discretizing any of the specific 
parameters or values that might exist? 
Answer: I would like to make a few comments. You said quantizing or 
discretizing. That's very dangerous. Quantum theory and quantizing is a 
very specific type of theory. Discretizing is the right word. Quantizing is a 
different kind of mathematics. If we talk about discretizing.., of course I 
pointed out that we're going to have to change the laws of physics. Because 
the laws of physics as written now have, in the classical limit, a continuous 
variable everywhere, space and time. If, for example, in your theory you 
were going to have an electric field, then the electric field could not have (if 
it's going to be imitable, computable by a finite number of elements) an 

488 
Feynnnan 
infinite number of possible values, it'd have to be digitized. You might be 
able to get away with a theory by redescribing things without an electric 
field, but supposing for a moment that you've discovered that you can't do 
that and you want to describe it with an electric field, then you would have 
to say that, for example, when fields are smaller than a certain amount, they 
aren't there at all, or something. And those are very interesting problems, 
but unfortunately they're not good problems for classical physics because if 
you take the example of a star a hundred light years away, and it makes a 
wave which comes to us, and it gets weaker, and weaker, and weaker, and 
weaker, the electric field's going down, down, down, how low can nve 
measure? You put a counter out there and you find "clunk," and nothing 
happens for a while, "clunk," and nothing happens for a while. It's riot 
discretized at all, you never can measure such a tiny field, you don't find a 
tiny field, you don't have to imitate such a tiny field, because the world that 
you're trying to imitate, the physical world, is not the classical world, and it 
behaves differently. So the particular example of discretizing the electric 
field, is a problem which I would not see, as a physicist, as fundamentally 
difficult, because it will just mean that your field has gotten so small that I 
had better be using quantum mechanics anyway, and so you've got the 
wrong equations, and so you did the wrong problem! That's how I would 
answer that. Because you see, if you would imagine that the electric field is 
coming out of some 'ones' or something, the lowest you could get would be 
a full one, but that's what we see, you get a full photon. All these things 
suggest that it's really true, somehow, that the physical world is represent- 
able in a discretized way, because every time you get into a bind like this, 
you discover that the experiment does just what's necessary to escape the 
trouble that would come if the electric field went to zero, or you'd never be 
able to see a star beyond a certain distance, because the field would have 
gotten below the number of digits that your world can carry. 

Foundations of Physics, Vol. 16, No. 6, 1986 
Quantum Mechanical Computers 1 
Richard P. Feynman 2 
Received Marcff 15, 1985 
The physical limitations, due to quantum mechanics, on the functioning of com- 
puters are analyzed. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
This work is a part of an effort to analyze the physical limitations of com- 
puters due to the laws of physics. For example, Bennett °) has made a 
careful study of the free energy dissipation that must accompany com- 
putation. He found it to be virtually zero. He suggested to me the question 
of the limitations due to quantum mechanics and the uncertainty principle. 
I have found that, aside from the obvious limitation to size if the working 
parts are to be made of atoms, there is no fundamental limit from these 
sources either. 
We are here considering ideal machines; the effects of small imperfec- 
tions will be considered later. This study is one of principle; our aim is to 
exhibit some Hamiltonian for a system which could serve as a computer. 
We are not concerned with whether we have the most efficient system, nor 
how we could best implement it. 
Since the laws of quantum physics are reversible in time, we shall have 
to consider computing engines which obey such reversible laws. This 
problem already occurred to Bennett, (1) and to Fredkin and Toffoll, 12/and 
a great deal of thought has been given to it. Since it may not be familiar to 
l Editor's note: This article, which is based on the author's plenary talk presented at the 
CLEO/IQEC Meeting in 1984, originally appeared in the February 1985 issue of Optics 
News. It is here reprinted with kind permission of Professor Feynman and Optics News. 
2 Department of Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California 91125. 
507 
0015-9018/86/0600-0507505.00/0 © 1986 Plenum Publishing Corporation 

508 
Feynman 
yOU here, I shall review this, and in doing so, take the opportunity to 
review, very briefly, the conclusions of Bennett, <2) for we shall confirm them 
all when we analyze our quantum system. 
It is a result of computer science that a universal computer can be 
made by a suitably complex network of interconnected primitive elements. 
Following the usual classical analysis we can imagine the interconnections 
to be ideal wires carrying one of two standard voltages representing the 
local 1 and 0. We can take the primitive elements to be just two, NOT and 
AND (actually just the one element NAND = NOT AND suffices, for if 
one input is set at 1 the output is the NOT of the other input). They are 
symbolized in Fig. 1, with the logical values resulting on the outgoing 
wires, resulting from different combinations of input wires. 
From a logical point of view, we must consider the wires in detail, for 
in other systems, and our quantum system in particular, we may not have 
wires as such. We see we really have two more logical primitives, FAN 
OUT when two wires are connected to one, and EXCHANGE, when wires 
are crossed. In the usual computer the NOT and NAND primitives are 
implemented by transistors, possibly as in Fig. 2. 
What is the minimum free energy that must be expended to operate an 
ideal computer made of such primitives? Since, for example, when the 
AND operates the output line, c' is being determined to be one of two 
values, no matter what it was before, the entropy change is In 2 units. This 
represents a heat generation of kT In 2 at temperature T. For many years it 
was thought that this represented an absolute minimum to the quantity of 
heat per primitive step that had to be dissipated in making a calculation. 
The question is academic at this time. In actual machines we are quite 
concerned with the heat dissipation question, but the transistor system 
used actually dissipates about 101°kT! As Bennett (3) has pointed out, this 
arises because to change a wire's voltage we dump it to ground through a 
resistance; and to build it up again we feed charge, again through a 
resistance, to the wire. It could be greatly reduced if energy could be stored 
in an inductance, or other reactive element. 
NOT 
AND 
FAN OUT 
EXCHANGE 
a 
a ~/~- 
a' 
-C' 
°-C_o 
' 
O I 
1/° 
o010 
00100 
OllO 
O lliO 
~OlO 
! OlO 
Fig. 1. 
Primitive elements. 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
509 
NOT 
NAND 
O/ 
C/ 
Fig. 2. Transistor circuits for NOT and NAND. 
However, it is apparently very difficult to make inductive elements on 
silicon wafers with present techniques. Even Nature, in her DNA copying 
machine, dissipates about 100kT per bit copied. Being, at present, so very 
far from this kT In 2 figure, it seems ridiculous to argue that even this is 
too high and the minimum is really essentially zero. But, we are going to be 
even more ridiculous later and consider bits written on one atom instead of 
the present 1011 atoms. Such nonsense is very entertaining to professors 
like me. I hope you will find it interesting and entertaining also. 
What Bennett pointed out was that this former limit was wrong 
because it is not necessary to use irreversible primitives. Calculations can 
be done with reversible machines containing only reversible primitives. If 
this is done the minimum free energy required is independent of the com- 
plexity or number of logical steps in the calculation. If anything, it is kT 
per bit of the output answer. 
But even this, which might be considered the free energy needed to 
clear the computer for further use, might also be considered as part of what 
you are going to do with the answer--the information in the result if you 
transmit it to another point. This is a limit only achieved ideally if you 
compute with a reversible computer at infinitesimal speed. 
2. COMPUTATION WITH A REVERSIBLE MACHINE 
We will now describe three reversible primitives that could be used to 
make a universal machine (Toffoli(4)). The first is the NOT which evidently 
loses no information, and is reversible, being reversed by acting again with 
NOT. Because the conventional symbol is not symmetrical we shall use an 
X on the wire instead (see Fig. 3a). 

510 
Feynman 
(a) NOT 
O 
I 
(b) CONTROLLED 
NOT 
o 
b, 
b' 
oo/oo 
o1/ol 
IO/ll 
~/~o 
0, 
o 
13 
FAN OUT 
.I. 
o 
~[ 
13 
a ~ 
G' 
EXCHANGE b 
J( 
~ 
~( 
b' 
(c) CONTROLLED 
CONTROLLED 
NOT 
b' 
See Table I. 
c ~ 
Fig. 3. 
Reversible primitives. 
Next is what we shall call the CONTROLLED NOT (see Fig. 3b). 
There are two entering lines, a and b, and two exiting lines, a' and b'. The 
a' is always the same as a, which is the control line. If the control is 
activated a -= 1 then the out b' is the NOT of b. Otherwise b is unchanged, 
b'=b. The table of values for input and output is given in Fig. 3. The 
action is reversed by simply repeating it. 
The quantity b' is really a symmetric function of a and b called XOR, 
the exclusive or; a or b but not both. It is likewise the sum modulo 2 of a 
and b, and can be used to compare a and b, giving a 1 as a signal that they 
are different. Please notice that this function XOR is itself not reversible. 
For example, if the value is zero we cannot tell whether it came from 
(a, b) = (0, 0) or from (1, 1) but we keep the other line a' =a to resolve the 
ambiguity. 
We will represent the CONTROLLED NOT by putting a 0 on the 
control wire, connected with a vertical line to an X on the wire which is 
controlled. 
This element can also supply us with FAN OUT, for if b = 0 we see 
that a is copied onto line b'. This COPY function will be important later 
on. It also supplies us with EXCHANGE, for three of them used 
a 
..... 
o 
b 
,,, 
SUM 
o 
^ 
CARRY 
Fig. 4. 
Adder. 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
511 
0 
b 
C 
d=o' 
A 
C1 
S I ~ C I  
...... 
(3 = 0 I 
s'- --l---b 
b' 
SUM c' 
CARRY = d' 
Fig. 5. 
Full adder. 
successively on a pair of lines, but with alternate choice for control line, 
accomplishes an exchange of the information on the lines (Fig. 3b). 
It turns out that combinations of just these two elements alone 
are insufficient to accomplish arbitrary logical functions. Some element 
involving three lines is necessary. We have chosen what we can call the 
CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT. Here (see Fig. 3c) we have two 
control lines a, b, which appear unchanged in the output and which change 
the third line c to NOT c only if both lines are activated (a = 1 and b = 1). 
Otherwise c'= c. If the third line input c is set to 0, then evidently it 
becomes 1 (c' = 1) only if both a and b are 1 and therefore supplies us with 
the AND function (see Table I). 
Three combinations for (a, b), namely (0, 0), (0, 1), and (1, 0), all give 
the same value, 0, to the AND (a, b) function so the ambiguity requires 
two bits to resolve it. These are kept in the lines a, b in the output so the 
function can be reversed (by itself, in fact). The AND function is the carry 
bit for the sum of a and b. 
From these elements it is known that any logical circuit can be put 
together by using them in combination, and in fact, computer science 
Table I. 
a 
b 
c 
o' 
b' 
¢' 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
1 
0 
l 
1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
0 

512 
Feynman 
shows that a universal computer can be made. We will illustrate this by a 
little example. First, of course, as you see in Fig. 4, we can make an adder, 
by first using the CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT and then the 
CONTROLLED NOT in succession, to produce from a and b and 0, as 
input lines, the original a on one line, the sum on the second line, and the 
carry on the third. 
A more elaborate circuit is a full adder (see Fig. 5), which takes a 
carry c (from some previous addition) and adds it to the two lines a and b 
and has an additional line d with a 0 input. It requires four primitive 
elements to be put together. Besides this total sum, the total of the three, 
a, b, and c and the carry, we obtain on the other two lines two pieces of 
information. One is the a that we started with, and the other is some inter- 
mediary quantity that we calculated on route. 
This is typical of these reversible systems; they produce not only what 
you want in output, but also a certain amount of garbage. In this par- 
ticular case, and as it turns out in all cases, the garbage can be arranged to 
be, in fact, just the input, if we would just add the extra CONTROLLED 
NOT on the first two lines, as indicated by the dotted lines in Fig. 5; we 
see that the garbage would become a and b, which were the inputs of at 
least two of the lines. (We know this circuit can be simplified but we do it 
this way for illustrative purposes.) 
In this way, we can by various combinations produce a general logic 
unit that transforms n bits to n bits in a reversible manner. If the problem 
you are trying to do is itself reversible, then there might be no extra gar- 
bage, but in general, there are some extra lines needed to store up the 
information which you would need to be able to reverse the operation. In 
other words, we can make any function that the conventional system can, 
plus garbage. The garbage contains the information you need to reverse the 
process. 
And how much garbage? It turns out in general that if the output data 
that you are looking for has k bits, then starting with an input and k bits 
containing 0, we can produce, as a result, just the input and the output and 
no further garbage. This is reversible because knowing the output and the 
input permits you, of course, to undo everything. This proposition is 
always reversible. The argument for this is illustrated in Fig. 6. 
Suppose we began with a machine M, which, starting with an input, 
and some large number of 0's, produces the desired outut plus a certain 
amount of extra data which we call garbage. Now we have seen that the 
copy operation which can be done by a sequence of CONTROLLED 
NOT's is possible, so if we have originally an empty (egister, with the k bits 
ready for the output, we can, after the processor M has operated, copy the 
output from the M onto this new register. 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
513 
TIME 
I 
T 
u 
P 
M 
T 
+ 
G 
!A 
~P 
IB 
MACHINE 
-.----3m~ 
COPY 
OUT PUT 
°/ 
u 
COPY 
_
_
i
 
uI 
~l 
p 
~, 
u 
ut 
~ 
0 
~k 
-.~l 
0 
GI 
0 
AI 
iO 
RI 
IO 
%! 
I°l 
REVERSE 
MACHINE 
== 
0 
0 
u 
0 
T 
0 
P 
0 
U 
T 
T 
7- 
P 
P 
J 
U 
T 
T 
NEW OVERALl_ 
MACHINE 
(ZEROS NEEDED FOR M 
CAN BE CONSIDEREO 
INTERNAL TO NEW MACH) 
Fig. 6. 
Clearing garbage. 
After that, we can build the opposite machine, the M in reverse, the 
reverse machine, which would take this output of M and garbage and turn 
it into the input and O's. Thus, seen as an overall machine, we would have 
started with the k O's of the register for the output, and the input, and 
ended up with those k 0~s occupied by the output data, and repeat the inut 
as a final product. The number of O's that was originally needed in the M 
machine in order to hold the garbage is restored again to 0, and can be 
considered as internal wires inside the new complete machine (M, M and 
copy). 
Overall, then, we have accomplished what we set out to do, and 
therefore garbage need never be any greater than a repetition of the input 
data. 
3. A QUANTUM MECHANICAL COMPUTER 
We now go on to consider how such a computer can also be built 
using the laws of quantum mechanics. We are going to write a 
Hamiltonian, for a system of interacting parts, which will behave in the 
same way as a large system in serving as a universal computer. Of course 
the large system also obeys quantum mechanics, but it is in interaction 
with the heat baths and other things that could make it effectively irrever- 
sible. 
What we would like to do is make the computer as small and as 

514 
Feynman 
simple as possible. Our Hamiltonian will describe in detail all the internal 
computing actions, but not, of course, those interactions with the exterior 
involved in entering the input (preparing the initial state) and reading the 
output. 
How small can such a computer be? How small, for instance, can a 
number be? Of course a number can be represented by bits of l's and O's. 
What we are going to do is imagine that we have two-state systems, which 
we will call "atoms." An n bit number is then represented by a state of a 
"register," a set of n two-state systems. 
Depending upon whether or not each atom is in one or another of its 
two states, which we call I1) and ]0), we can of course, represent any 
number. And the number can be read out of such a register by determining, 
or measuring, in which state each of the atoms are at a given moment. 
Therefore one bit will be represented by a single atom being in one of two 
states, the states we will call ]1) and 10). 
What we will have to do then can be understood by considering an 
example; the example of a CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT. Let G 
be some sort of an operation on three atoms a, b, and c, which converts 
the original state of a, b, and c into a nex appropriate state, a', b', c', so 
that the connection between a', b', and c' and a, b, c, are just what we 
would have expected if a, b, and c represented wires, and the a', b', and c' 
were the output wires of a CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT. 
It must be appreciated here that at the moment we are not trying to 
move the data from one position to another; we are just going to change it. 
Unlike the situation in the actual wired computer in which the voltages on 
one wire then go over to voltages on another, what we are specifically 
making is something simpler, that the three atoms are in some particular 
state, and that an operation is performed, which changes the state to new 
values, a', b', c'. 
What we would have then is that the state, in the mathematical form 
la', b', c'), is simply some operation G operating on la, b, c). In quantum 
mechanics, state changing operators are linear operators, and so we'll sup- 
pose that G is linear. Therefore, G is a matrix, and the matrix elements of 
G, Ga',b'.c'.a,b,c are all 0 except those in Table I, which are of course 1. 
This table is the same table that represents the truth value table for the 
CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT. It is apparent that the operation 
is reversible, and that can be represented by saving that G*G = 1, where the 
* means Hermitian adjoint. That is to say, G is a unitary matrix. (In fact G 
is also a real matrix G*--G, but that's only a special case.) To be more 
specific, we are going to write Aab, c for this special G. We shall use the same 
matrix A with different numbers of subscripts to represent the other 
primitive elements. 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
515 
To take a simple example, the NOT, which would be represented by 
Aa, is the simple matrix 
'0] 
This is a 2 x 2 matrix and can be represented in many ways, in different 
notations, but the particular one we will use to define these is by the 
method of creation and annihilation operators. Consider operating in this 
case, on a single line a. In order to save alphabets, let us call a the matrix 
a= °0 103 
which annihilates the 1 on atom a and converts it to O; a is an operator 
which converts the state I1) to 10). But, if the state of the atom were 
originally 10), the operator a produces the number 0. That is, it doesn't 
change the state, it simply produces the numerical value zero when 
operating on that state. The conjugate of this thing, of course, is 
which creates, in the sense that operating on the 0 state, it turns it to the 1 
state. In other words, it moves from 10) to [1 ). When operating on the ll ) 
state there is no further state above that which you can create, and 
therefore it gives it the number zero. Every other operator 2 × 2 matrix can 
be represented in terms of these _a and a__~*. For example, the product a*_a is 
equal to the matrix 
;l 
which you might call Na. It is 1 when the state is I1 ) and 0 when the state 
is I0). It gives the number that the state of the atom represents. Likewise 
the product 
°a+=E3 
is 1 - Na, and gives 0 for the up-state and 1 for the down-state. We'll use 1 
to represent the diagonal matrix, 
As a consequence of all this, aa* + a*a = 1. 

516 
Feynman 
It is evident then that our matrix for NOT, the operator that produces 
NOT, is Aa = a + a* and further of course, that's reversible, Aa*Aa = 1, A a 
is unitary. 
In the same way the matrix Aa,b for the CONTROLLED NOT can be 
worked out. If you look at the table of values for CONTROLLED NOT 
you see that it can be written this way: 
a*a(b_ + b*) + aa* 
In the first term, the a*a selects the condition that the line a = 1, in which 
case we want b + b* the NOT to apply to b. The second term selects the 
condition that the line a is 0, in which case we want nothing to happen to b 
and the unit matrix on the operators of b is implied. This can also be writ- 
ten as 1 + a*a(b + b* - l), the I representing all the lines coming through 
directly, but in the case that a is 1, we would like to correct that by putting 
in a NOT instead of leaving the line b unchanged. 
The matrix for the CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT is 
A,,b,c = 1 + a*ab*b(c + c* - 1) 
as, perhaps, you may be able to see. 
The next question is what the matrix is for a general logic unit which 
consists of a sequence of these. As an example, we'll study the case of the 
full adder which we described before (see Fig. 5). Now we'll have, in the 
general case, four wires represented by a, b, c, and d; we don't necessarily 
have to have d as 0 in all cases, and we would like to describe how the 
object operates in general (if d is changed to 1 d' is changed to its NOT). It 
produces new numbers a', b', c', and d', and we could imagine with our 
system that there are four atoms labeled a, b, c, d in a state labeled 
]a, b, c, d) and that a matrix M operates which changes these same four 
atoms so that they appear to be in the state la',b',c',d') 
which is 
appropriate for this logic unit. That is, if I~in) represents the incoming 
state of the four bits, M is a matrix which generates an outgoing state 
[~bout) =MJ~bin > for the four bits. 
For example, if the input state were the state I1, O, 1, 0), then, as we 
know, the output state should be I1, O, O, 1 ); the first two a', b' should be 
1, 0 for those two first lines come streight through, and the last two c', d' 
should be O, 1 because that represents the sum and carry of the first three, 
a, b, c, bits in the first input, as d = O. Now the matrix M for the adder can 
easily be seen as the result of five successive primitive operations, and 
therefore becomes the matrix product of the five successive matrices 
representing, these primitive objects. 
M= A,,,bAb,~Ab~,aAa, bAab, a 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
517 
The first, which is the one written farthest to the right, is Aab, d for that 
represents the CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT in which a and b 
are the CONTROL lines, and the NOT appears on line d. By looking at 
the diagram in Fig. 5 we can immediately see what the remaining factors in 
the sequence represent. The last factor, for example, Aa, b, means that 
there's a CONTROLLED NOT with a CONTROL on line a and NOT on 
line b. This matrix will have the unitary property M*M = 1 since all of the 
A's out of which it is a product are unitary. That is to say, M is a reversal 
operation, and M* is its inverse. 
Our general problem, then, is this. Let A~, A2, A3 .... 'Ak be the suc- 
cession of operations wanted, in some logical unit, to operate on n lines. 
The 2"x 2" matrix M needed to accomplish the same goal is a product 
A~'" A3A2A1, where each A is a simple matrix. How can we generate this 
M in a physical way if we know how to make the simpler elements? 
In general, in quantum mechanics, the outgoing state at time t is 
ei/~t0i n, where 0in is the input state, for a system with Hamiltonian H. To 
try to find, for a given special time t, the Hamiltonian which will produce 
M = e mt when M is such a product of noncommuting matrices, from some 
simple property of the matrices themselves, appears to be very difficult. 
We realize however, that at any particular time, if we expand the e znt 
out (as 1 +iHt-H2t2/2 .... 
) we'll find the operator H operating an 
innumerable arbitrary number of times, once, twice, three times, and so 
forth, and the total state is generated by a superposition of these 
possibilities. This suggests that we can solve this problem of the com- 
position of these A's in the following way. 
We add to the n atoms, which are in our register, an entirely new set 
of k + 1 atoms, which we'll call "program counter sites." Let us call qi and 
q* the annihilation and creation operators for the program site i for i= O 
to k. A good thing to think of, as an example, is an electron moving from 
one empty site to another. If the site i is occupied by the electron, its state 
is I1 ), while if the site is empty, its state is 10). 
We write, as our Hamiltonian 
k--I 
H= ~ q*+ lqiAi+ 1 -~ complex conjugate 
i=0 
=q*qoA1 +q*qiAz+q*qzA3 + "'" +q~q~A* 
+q~qzA* +q*q3A~ + ... 
The first thing to notice is that if all the program sites are unoccupied, 
that is, all the program atoms are initially in the state O, nothing happens 
825/16/6-2 

518 
Feynman 
because every term in the Hamiltonian starts with an annihilation operator 
and it gives 0 therefore. 
The second thing we notice is that if only one or another of the 
program sites is occupied (in state I1)), and the rest are not (state ]0)), 
then this is always true. In fact the number of program sites that are in 
state ]1 ) is a conserved quantity. We will suppose that in the operation of 
this computer, either no sites are occupied (in which case nothing happens) 
or just one site is occupied. Two or more program sites are never both 
occupied during normal operation. 
Let us start with an initial state where site 0 is occupied, is in the ]1 
state, and all the others are empty, 10) state. If later, at some time, the final 
site k is found to be in the ]1) state, (and therefore all the others in 10)) 
then, we claim, the n register has been multiplied by the matrix M, which is 
Ak'"A2A1 as desired. 
Let me explain how this works. Suppose that the register starts in any 
initial state, ~in, and that the site, 0, of the program counter is occupied. 
Then the only term in the entire Hamiltonian that can first operate, as the 
Hamiltonian operates in successive times, is the first term, q* qoA1. The q0 
will change site number 0 to an unoccupied site, while q~' will change the 
site number 0 to an occupied site. Thus the term q*qo is a term which 
simply moves the occupied site from the location 0 to the location 1. But 
this is multiplied by the matrix A I which operates only on the n register 
atoms, and therefore multiplies the initial state of the n register atoms by 
A 1 • 
Now, if the Hamiltonian happens to operate a second time, this first 
term will produce nothing because q0 produces 0 on the number 0 site 
because it is now unoccupied. The term which can operate now is the 
second term, q*q~A2, for that can move the occupied point, which I shall 
call a "cursor." The cursor can move from site 1 to site 2 but the matrix A2 
now operates on the register; therefore the register has now got the matrix 
A2At operating on it. 
So, looking at the first line of the Hamiltonian, if that is all there was 
to it, as the Hamiltonian operates in successive orders, the cursor would 
move successively from 0 to k, and you would acquire, one after the other, 
operating on the n register atoms, the matrices, A, in the order that we 
would like to construct the total M. 
However, a Hamiltonian must be hermitian, and therefore the com- 
plex conjugate of all these operators must be present. Suppose that at a 
given stage, we have gotten the cursor on site number 2, and we have the 
matrix Az.A 1 operating on the register. Now the q2 which intends to move 
that occupation to a new position need not come from the first line, but 
may have come from the second line. It may have come, in fact, from 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
519 
q?q2A* which would move the cursor back from the position 2 to the 
position 1. 
But note that when this happens, the operator A* operates on the 
register, and therefore the total operator on the register is A~A2A1 in this 
case. But A'A2 is 1 and therefore the operator is just A1. Thus we see that 
when the cursor is returned to the position 1, the net result is that only the 
operator A1 has really operated on the register. Thus it is that as the 
various terms of the Hamiltonian move the cursor forwards and 
backwards, the A's accumulate, or are reduced out again. 
At any stage, for example, if the cursor were up to the j site, the 
matrices from A~ to Aj have operated in succession on the n register. It 
does not matter whether or not the cursor on the j site has arrived there, 
by going directly from 0 to j, or going further and returning, or going back 
and forth in any pattern whatsoever, as long as it finally arrived at the 
state j. 
Therefore it is true that if the cursor is found at the site k, we have the 
net result for the n register atoms that the matrix M has operated on their 
initial state as we desired. 
How then could we operate this computer? We begin by putting the 
input bits onto the register, and by putting the cursor to occupy the site 0. 
We then check at the site k, say, by scattering electrons, that the site k is 
empty, or that the site k has a cursor. The moment we find the cursor at 
site k we remove the cursor so that it cannot return down the program line, 
and then we know that the register contains the output data. We can then 
measure it at our leisure. Of course, there are external things involved in 
making the measurements, and determining all of this, which are not part 
of our computer. Surely a computer has eventually to be in interaction with 
the external world, both for putting data in and for taking it out. 
Mathematically it turns out that the propagation of the cursor up and 
down this program line is exactly the same as it would be if the operators 
A were not in the Hamiltonian. In other words, it represents just the waves 
which are familiar from the propagation of the tight binding electrons or 
spin waves in one dimension, and are very well known. There are waves 
that travel up and down the line and you can have packets of waves and so 
forth. 
We could improve the action of this computer and make it into a 
ballistic action in the following way: by making a line of sites in addition to 
the ones inside, that we are actually using for computing, a line of say, 
many sites, both before and after. It's just as though we had values of the 
index i for qi, which are less than 0 and greater than k, each of which has 
no matrix A, just a 1 multiplying there. Then we had have a longer spin 
chain, and we could have started, instead of putting a cursor exactly at the 

520 
Feynman 
beginning site 0, by putting the cursor with different amplitudes on dif- 
ferent sites representing an initial incoming spin wave, a wide packet of 
nearly definite momentum. 
This spin wave would then go through the entire computer in a 
ballistic fashion and out the other end into the outside tail that we have 
added to the line of program sites, and there it would be easier to deter- 
mine if it is present and to steer it away to some other place, and to cap- 
ture the cursor. Thus, the logical unit can act in a ballistic way. 
This is the essential point and indicates, at least to a computer scien- 
tist, that we could make a universal computer, because he knows if we can 
make any logical unit we can make a universal computer. That this could 
represent a universal computer for which composition of elements and 
branching can be done is not entirely obvious unless you have some 
experience, but I will discuss that to some further extent later. 
4. IMPERFECTIONS AND IRREVERSIBLE FREE ENERGY LOSS 
There are, however, a number of questions that we would like to 
discuss in more detail such as the question of imperfections. 
There are many sources of imperfections in this machine, but the first 
one we would like to consider is the possibility that the coefficients in the 
couplings, along the program line, are not exactly equal. The line is so long 
that in a real calculation little irregularities would produce a small 
probability of scattering, and the waves would not travel exactly 
ballistically, but would go back and forth. 
If the system, for example, is built so that these sites are built on a 
substrate of ordinary physical atoms, then the thermal vibrations of these 
atoms would change the couplings a little bit and generate imperfections. 
(We should even need such noise for with small fixed imperfections there 
are shallow trapping regions where the cursor may get caught.) Suppose 
then, that there is a certain probability, say p per step of calculation (that 
is, per step of cursor motion, i ~ i+ 1), for scattering the cursor momen- 
tum until it is randomized (lip is the transport mean free path). We will 
suppose that the p is fairly small. 
Then in a very long calculation, it might take a very long time for the 
wave to make its way out the other end, once started at the beginning 
--because it has to go back and forth so many times due to the scattering. 
What one then could do would be to pull the cursor along the program 
line with an external force. If the cursor is, for example, an electron moving 
from one vacant site to another, this would be just like an electric field 
trying to pull the electron along a wire, the resistance of which is generated 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
521 
by the imperfection or the probability of scattering. Under these circum- 
stances we can calculate how much energy will be expended by this 
external force. 
This analysis can be made very simply: it is an almost classical 
analysis of an electron with a mean free path. Every time the cursor is scat- 
tered, I am going to suppose it is randomly scattered forward and 
backward. In order for the machine to operate, of course, it must be 
moving forward at a higher probability than it is moving backward. 
When a scattering occurs therefore, the loss in entropy is the logarithm of 
the probability that the cursor is moving forward, divided by the 
probability.the cursor was moving backward. 
This can 
be approximated 
by 
(the probability forward- the 
probability 
backward)/(the 
probability 
forward + the 
probability 
backward). That was the entropy lost per scattering. More interesting is the 
entropy lost per net calculational step, which is, of course, simply p times 
that number. We can rewrite the entropy cost per calculational step as 
pV D/V R 
where v D is the drift velocity of the cursor and VR its random velocity. 
Or if you like, it is p times the minimum time that the calculation 
could be done in (that is, if all the steps were always in the forward direc- 
tion), divided by the actual time allowed. 
The free energy loss per step then, is kTx p x the minimum time that 
the calculation could be done, divided by the actual time that you allow 
yourself to do it. This is a formula that was first derived by Bennett. The 
factor p is a coasting factor, to represent situations in which not every site 
scatters the cursor randomly, but it has only a small probability to be thus 
scattered. 
It will be appreciated that the energy loss per step is not kT but is that 
divided by two factors. One, (l/p), measures how perfectly you can build 
the machine and the other is proportional to the length of time that you 
take to do the calculation. It is very much like a Carnot engine, in which in 
order to obtain reversibility, one must operate very slowly. For the ideal 
machine where p is 0, or where you allow an infinite time, the mean energy 
loss can be 0. 
The uncertainty principle, which usually relates some energy and time 
uncertainty, is not directly a limitation. What we have in our computer is a 
device for making a computation, but the time of arrival of the cursor and 
the measurement of the output register at the other end (in other words, 
the time it takes in which to complete the calculation) is not a define time. 
It's a question of probabilities, and so there is a considerable uncertainty in 
the time at which a calculation will be done. 

522 
Feynman 
There is no loss associated with the uncertainty of cursor energy; at 
least no loss depending on the number of calculational steps. Of course, if 
you want to do a ballistic calculation on a perfect machine, some energy 
would have to be put into the original wave, but that energy, of course, can 
be removed from the final wave when it comes out of the tail of the 
program line. All questions associated with the uncertainty of operators 
and the irreversibility of measurements are associated with the input and 
output functions. 
No further limitations are generated by the quantum nature of the 
computer per se, nothing that is proportional to the number of com- 
putational steps. 
In a machine such as this, there are very many other problems, due to 
imperfections. For example, in the registers for holding the data, there will 
be problems of cross-talk, interactions between one atom and another in 
that register, or interaction of the atoms in that register directly with things 
that are happening along the program line, that we did not exactly bargain 
for. In other words, there may be small terms in the Hamiltonian besides 
the ones we have written. 
Until we propose a complete implementation of this, it is very difficult 
to analyze. At least some of these problems can be remedied in the usual 
way by techniques such as error correcting codes, and so forth, that have 
been studied in normal computers. But until we find a specific implemen- 
tation for this computer, I do not know how to proceed to analyze these 
effects. However, it appears that they would be very important, in practice. 
This computer seems to be very delicate and these imperfections may 
produce considerable havoc. 
The time needed to make a step of calculation depends on the strength 
or the energy of the interactions in the terms of the Hamiltonian. If each of 
the terms in the Hamiltonian is supposed to be of the order of 0.1 electron 
volts, then it appears that the time for the cursor to make each step, if done 
in a ballistic fashion, is of the order 6 x 10 -15 sec. This does not represent 
C <o 
...... 
q 
p ~  
I 
H : q* cp + r*c*p 
+ p*c*q + p*cr 
IF c = t GO p TO q AND PUT c =O 
IF c =O GO p TO r AND PUT c= I 
IF c = I GO r TO p AND PUT c:O 
IF c =O GO q TO p AND PUT c= I 
Fig. 7. 
Switch. 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
523 
an enormous improvement, perhaps only about four orders of magnitude 
over the present values of the time delays in transistors, and is not much 
shorter than the very short times possible to achieve in many optical 
systems. 
5. SIMPLIFYING THE IMPLEMENTATION 
We have completed the job we set out to do--to find some quantum 
mechanical Hamiltonian of a system that could compute, and that is all 
that we need say. But it is of some interest to deal with some questions 
about simplifying the implementation. The Hamiltonian that we have writ- 
ten involves terms which can involve a special kind of interaction between 
five atoms. For example, three of them in the register, for a CON- 
TROLLED CONTROLLED NOT, and two of them as the two adjacent 
sites in the program counter. 
This may be rather complicated to arrange. The question is, can we do 
it with simpler parts. It turns out that we can indeed. We can do it so that 
in each interaction there are only three atoms. We are going to start with 
new primitive elements, instead of the ones we began with. We'll have the 
NOT all right, but we have in addition to that simply a "switch" (see also 
Priese(5)). 
Supposing that we have a term, q*cp + r*c*p + its complex conjugate 
in the Hamiltonian (in all cases we'll use letters in the earlier part of the 
alphabet for register atoms and in the latter part of the alphabet for 
program sites). See Fig. 7. This is a switch in the sense that, if c is 
originally in the [1 ) state, a cursor at p will move to q, whereas if c is in 
the [0) state, the cursor at p will move to r. 
During this operation the controlling atom c changes its state. (It is 
possible also to write an expression in which the control atom does not 
change its state, such as q*c*cp + r*cc*p and its complex conjugate but, 
there is no particular advantage or disadvantage to this, and we will take 
the simpler form.) The complex conjugate reverses this. 
If, however, the cursor is at q and c is in the state [1 ) (or cursor at r, c 
in 10)), the H gives 0, and the cursor gets reflected back. We shall build all 
our circuits and choose initial states so that this circumstance will not arise 
in normal operation, and the ideal ballistic mode will work. 
With this switch we can do a number of things. For example, we could 
produce a CONTROLLED NOT as in Fig. 8. The switch a controls the 
operation. Assume the cursor starts at s. If a= 1 the program cursor is 
carried along the top line, whereas if a = 0 it is carried along the bottom 
line, in either case terminating finally in the program site t, 

524 
Feynman 
O 
a 
sMiNoT01tM 
s 
=b+ 
t 
I 
s N 
t N 
I 
Fig. 8. CONTROLLED NOT by switches, 
In these diagrams, horizontal or vertical lines will represent program 
atoms. The switches are represented by diagonal lines and in boxes we'll 
put the other matrices that operate on registers such as the NOT b. To be 
specific, the Hamiltonian for this little section of a CONTROLLED NOT, 
thinking of it as starting at s and ending at t, is given below: 
He(s, t) = s'as + t*a*tM + t*(b + b*) sM + s~va*s 
n t- l'at u q- t~rs u + C.C 
(The c.c means to add the complex conjugate of all the previous terms.) 
Although there seem to be two routes here which would possibly 
produce all kinds of complications characteristic of quantum mechanics, 
this is not so. If the entire computer system is started in a definite state for 
a by the time the cursor reaches s, the atom a is still in some definite state 
(although possibly different from its initial state due to previous computer 
operations on it). Thus only one of the two routes is taken. The expression 
may be simplified by omitting the S*I N term and putting tu=S N. 
One need not be concerned in that case, that one route is longer (two 
cursor sites) than the other (one cursor site) for again there is no inter- 
ference. No scattering is produced in any case by the insertion into a chain 
of coupled sites, an extra piece of chain of any number of sites with the 
same mutual coupling between sites (analogous to matching impedances in 
transmission lines). 
To study, these things further, we think of putting pieces together. A 
piece (see Fig. 9) M might be represented as a logical unit of interacting 
parts in which we only represent the first input cursor site as sM and the 
final one at the other end as tM. All the rest of the program sites that are 
between sM and tM are considered internal parts of M, and M contains its 
registers. Only sM and t M are sites that may be coupled externally. 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
525 
M 
t M 
s M =Starting program site for piece 
t M =Terminal program site for piece 
H M(s~,t~)is 
the part of the Hamiltonian 
representing all the "atoms" and program sites 
within the box M, and their interactions with sM,t M. 
Fig. 9. One "piece." 
The Hamiltonian for this subsection we'll call HM and we'll identify SM 
and tM, as the name of the input and output program sites by writing 
HM(SM, tM). So therefore HM is that part of the Hamiltonian representing 
all the atoms in the box and their external start and terminator sites. 
An especially important and interesting case to consider is when the 
input data (in the regular atoms) comes from one logical unit, and we 
would like to transfer it to another (see Fig. 10). Suppose that we imagine 
that the box M starts with its input register with 0 and its output (which 
may be the same register) also with 0. Then we could use it in the following 
way. We could make a program line, let's say starting with s~t whose first 
job is to exchange the data in an external register which contains the input, 
with M's input register which at the present time contains O's. 
Then the first step in our calculation, starting, say, at s~, would be to 
make an exchange with the register inside of M. That puts zero's into the 
original input register and puts the input where it belongs inside the box 
M. The cursor is now at SM. (We have already explained how exchange can 
be made of controlled NOTs.) Then.as the program goes from SM to t M we 
find the output now in the box M. Then the output register of M is now 
cleared as we write the results into some new external register provided for 
that purpose, originally containing O's. This we do from tM to t~ by 
exchanging data in the empty external register with the M's output register~ 
We can now consider connecting such units in different ways. For 
example, the most obvious way is succession. If we want to do first M and 
then N we can connect the terminal side of one to the starting side of the 
other as in Fig. 11, to produce a new effective operator K, and the 
Hamiltonian then for HK is 
HK(SK, tK) = HM(SK, t) + HN(t, tK) 

526 
Feynman 
S M' 
tMJ 
IN 
OUT 
S M 
tM 
SM' TO SM 
t M TO t M' 
EXCHANGE 
EXCHANGE 
"IN" WITH REG. 
"OUT" WITH 
INSIDE M 
INSIDE M 
Fig. 10. 
Piece with external input and output. 
REG. 
The general conditional, if a = 1 do M, but if a = 0 do N, can be made, 
as in Fig. 12. For this 
Hcond(S~, tc) = (s* as~ + t,* a*tM + s'a'st + t,* at u + C.C.) 
+ HM(sM, tM) + HN(SN, tN) 
The CONTROLLED 
NOT is the special case of this with M = NOT b 
for which H is 
HNOTb(S, t) = s*(b + b*) t + c.c. 
and N is no operation s*t. 
Sk 
~~~'~'~tk 
= Sk 
~~--tk 
Hk(Sk,~fk) = HM(Sk, t) + HN(t,t k) 
Fig. 1 l. 
Operations in succession. 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
527 
0 
0 
o4 
sc 
o(, 
sMtMt'  
,, 
1 
I 
/0 
tc 
I 
SN 1 N It N 
I 
Fig. 12. 
Conditional if a = l then M, else N. 
As another example, we can deal with a garbage clearer (previously 
described in Fig. 6) not by making two machines, a machine and its 
inverse, but by using the same machine and then sending the data back to 
the machine in the opposite direction, using our switch (see Fig. 13). 
Suppose in this system we have a special flag which is originally 
always set to 0. We also suppose we have the input data in an external 
register, an empty external register available to hold the output, and the 
machine registers all empty (containing 0's). We come on the starting 
line s. 
The first thing we do is to copy (using CONTROLLED NOT's) our 
external input into M. Then M operates, and the cursor goes on the top 
line in our drawing. It copies the output out of M into the external output 
register. M now contains garbage. Next it changes f to NOT f, comes down 
on the other line of the switch, backs out through M clearing the garbage, 
and uncopies the input again. 
When you copy data and do it again, you reduce one of the registers 
to 0, the register into which you coied the first time. After the coying, it 
goes out (since f is now changed) on the other line where we restore f to 0 
f 
coPY I 
f 
i~ NOT f IJ 
Fig. 13. 
Garbage clearer. 

528 
Feynman 
and come out at t. So between s and t we have a new piece of equipment, 
which has the following properties. 
When its starts, we have, in a register called IN, the input data. In an 
external register which we call OUT, we have O's. There is an internal flag 
set at 0, and the box, M, is empty of all data. At the termination of this, at 
t, the input register still contains the input data, and the output register 
contains the output of the effort of the operator M. M, however, is still 
empty, and the flag f is reset to 0. 
Also important in computer programs is the ability to use the same 
subroutine several times. Of course, from a logical point of view, that can 
be done by writing that bit of program over and over again, each time it is 
to be used, but in a practical computer, it is much better if we could build 
that section of the computer which does a particular operation, just once, 
and use that section again and again. 
To show the possibilities, here, first just suppose we have an operation 
we simply wish to repeat twice in succession (see Fig. 14). We start at s 
with the flag a in the condition 0, and thus we come along the line, and the 
first thing that happens is we change the value of a. Next we do the 
operation M. Now, because we changed a, instead of coming out at the top 
line where we went in, we come out at the bottom line, which recirculates 
the program back into changing a again; it restores it. 
This time as we go through M, we come out and we have the a to 
follow on the uper line, and thus come out at the terminal, t. The 
Hamiltonian for this is 
HMM(S, t) = (s* a*s + s*(a* + a) SN + x*a*tM + s* ax 
+ t'at M + c.c.) + HM(SM, tM) 
Using this switching circuit a number of times, of course, we can 
repeat an operation several times. For example, using the same idea three 
0 
0 
, 
NoT o H M 
X 
Fig. 14. 
Do M twice. 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
529 
s ° 
I I 
c 
c 
o@ 
@o 
t 
Fig. 15. 
Do M eight times. 
times in succession, a nested succession, we can do an operation eight 
times, by the apparatus indicated in Fig. 15. In order to do so, we have 
three flags, a, b, and c. It is necessary to have flags when operations are 
done again for the reason that we must keep track of how many times its 
done and where we are in the program or we'll never be able to reverse 
things. 
A subroutine in a normal computer can be used and emptied and used 
again without any record being kept of what happened. But here we have 
to keep a record and we do that with flags, of exactly where we are in the 
cycle of the use of the subroutine. If the subroutine is called from a certain 
place and has to go back to some other place, and another time is called, 
its origin and final destination are different, we have to know and keep 
track of where it came from and where it's supposed to go individually in 
each case, so more data have to be kept. Using a subroutine over and over 
in a reversible machine ig only slightly harder than in a general machine. 
All these considerations appear in papers by Fredkin, Toffoli, and Bennett. 
It is clear by the use of this switch, and successive uses of such 
switches in trees, that we would be able to steer data to any oint in a 
memory. A memory would simply be a place where there are registers into 
which you could copy data and then return the program. The cursor will 
b 
b 
NOT aJ~ 
t 
Fig. 16. 
Increment counter (3-bit). 

530 
Feynman 
have to follow the data along. I suppose there must be another set of tree 
switches set the oposite direction to carry the cursor out again, after 
copying the data so that the system remains reversible. 
In Fig. 16 we show an incremental binary counter (of three bits a, b, c 
with c the most significant bit) which keeps track of how many net times 
the cursor has passed from s to t. These few examples should be enough to 
show that indeed we can construct all computer functions with our 
SWITCH and NOT. We need not follows this in more detail. 
6. CONCLUSIONS 
It's clear from these examples that this quentum machine has not 
really used many of the specific qualities of the differential equations of 
quantum mechanics. 
What we have done is only to try to imitate as closely as possible the 
digital machine of conventional sequential architecture. It is analogous to 
the use of transistors in conventional machines, where we do not properly 
use all the analog continuum of the behavior of transistors, but just try to 
run them as saturated on or off digital devices so the logical analysis of the 
system behavior is easier. Furthermore, the system is absolutely sequen- 
tial-for example, even in the comparison (exclusive or) of two k bit num- 
bers, we must do each bit successively. What can be done, in these rever- 
sible quantum systems, to gain the speed available by concurrent operation 
has not been studied here. 
Although, for theoretical and academic reasons, I have studied com- 
plete and reversible systems, if such tiny machines could become practical 
there is no reason why irreversible and entropy creating interactions cannot 
be made frequently during the course of operations of the machine. 
For example, it might prove wise, in a long calculation, to ensure that 
the cursor has surely reached some oint and cannot be allowed to reverse 
again from there. Or, it may be found practical to connect irreversible 
memory storage (for items less frequently used) to reversible logic or short- 
term reversible storage registers, etc. Again, there is no reason we need to 
stick to chains of coupled sites for more distant communication where 
wires or light may be easier and faster. 
At any rate, it seems that the laws of physics Present no barrier to 
reducing the size of computers until bits are the size of atoms, and quan- 
tum behavior holds dominant sway. 

Quantum Mechanical Computers 
531 
REFERENCES 
3 
1. C. H. Bennett, "Logical Reversibility of Computation," IBM J. Res. Dev. 6, 525 532 (1979). 
2. E. Fredkin and T. Toffoli, "Conservative Logic," Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 219 253 (1982). 
3. C. H. Bennett, "Thermodynamics of Computation--A Review," Int. J. Theor. Phys. 21, 
905-940 (1982). 
4. T. Toffoli, "Bicontinuous Extensions of Invertible Combinatorial Functions," Math. Syst. 
Theory 14, 13-23 (1981). 
5. L. Priese, "On a Simple Combinatorial Structure Sufficient for Sublying Nontrivial Self- 
Reproduction," J. Cybern. 6, 101-137 (1976). 
3 1 would like to thank T. Toffoli for his help with the references. 






















THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE SPACE-TIME
VIEW OF QUANTUM ELECTRODYNAMICS
∗
by
Richard P. Feynman
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California
Nobel Lecture, December 11, 1965.
We have a habit in writing articles published in scientiﬁc journals to make the work
as ﬁnished as possible, to cover all the tracks, to not worry about the blind alleys
or to describe how you had the wrong idea ﬁrst, and so on. So there isn’t any place
to publish, in a digniﬁed manner, what you actually did in order to get to do the
work, although, there has been in these days, some interest in this kind of thing.
Since winning the prize is a personal thing, I thought I could be excused in this
particular situation, if I were to talk personally about my relationship to quantum
electrodynamics, rather than to discuss the subject itself in a reﬁned and ﬁnished
fashion. Furthermore, since there are three people who have won the prize in physics,
if they are all going to be talking about quantum electrodynamics itself, one might
become bored with the subject. So, what I would like to tell you about today are
the sequence of events, really the sequence of ideas, which occurred, and by which
I ﬁnally came out the other end with an unsolved problem for which I ultimately
received a prize.
I realize that a truly scientiﬁc paper would be of greater value, but such a paper I
could publish in regular journals. So, I shall use this Nobel Lecture as an opportunity
to do something of less value, but which I cannot do elsewhere. I ask your indulgence
in another manner. I shall include details of anecdotes which are of no value either
scientiﬁcally, nor for understanding the development of ideas. They are included only
to make the lecture more entertaining.
I worked on this problem about eight years until the ﬁnal publication in 1947.
The beginning of the thing was at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, when
I was an undergraduate student reading about the known physics, learning slowly
about all these things that people were worrying about, and realizing ultimately that
the fundamental problem of the day was that the quantum theory of electricity and
magnetism was not completely satisfactory. This I gathered from books like those of
Heitler and Dirac. I was inspired by the remarks in these books; not by the parts in
which everything was proved and demonstrated carefully and calculated, because I
couldn’t understand those very well. At the young age what I could understand were
∗This document is a revised version of Feynman’s Lecture, with amendments made
by Michael D. Godfrey and Michael A. Gottlieb (email: godfrey@isl.stanford.edu and
codelieb@caltech.edu). c⃝The Nobel Foundation, 1965.

2
Richard P. Feynman
the remarks about the fact that this doesn’t make any sense, and the last sentence of
the book of Dirac I can still remember, “It seems that some essentially new physical
ideas are here needed.” So, I had this as a challenge and an inspiration. I also had
a personal feeling, that since they didn’t get a satisfactory answer to the problem I
wanted to solve, I don’t have to pay a lot of attention to what they did do.
I did gather from my readings, however, that two things were the source of the
diﬃculties with the quantum electrodynamical theories.
The ﬁrst was an inﬁnite
energy of interaction of the electron with itself. And this diﬃculty existed even in the
classical theory. The other diﬃculty came from some inﬁnities which had to do with
the inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom in the ﬁeld. As I understood it at the time
(as nearly as I can remember) this was simply the diﬃculty that if you quantized
the harmonic oscillators of the ﬁeld (say in a box) each oscillator has a ground state
energy of 1
2¯hω and there is an inﬁnite number of modes in a box of ever increasing
frequency ω, and therefore there is an inﬁnite energy in the box. I now realize that
that wasn’t a completely correct statement of the central problem; it can be removed
simply by changing the zero from which energy is measured. At any rate, I believed
that the diﬃculty arose somehow from a combination of the electron acting on itself
and the inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom of the ﬁeld.
Well, it seemed to me quite evident that the idea that a particle acts on itself,
that the electrical force acts on the same particle that generates it, is not a necessary
one—it is sort of a silly one, as a matter of fact. And, so I suggested to myself, that
electrons cannot act on themselves, they can only act on other electrons. That means
there is no ﬁeld at all. You see, if all charges contribute to making a single common
ﬁeld, and if that common ﬁeld acts back on all the charges, then each charge must
act back on itself. Well, that was where the mistake was, there was no ﬁeld. It was
just that when you shook one charge, another would shake later. There was a direct
interaction between charges, albeit with a delay. The law of force connecting the
motion of one charge with another would just involve a delay. Shake this one, that
one shakes later. The sun atom shakes; my eye electron shakes eight minutes later,
because of a direct interaction across.
Now, this has the attractive feature that it solves both problems at once. First, I
can say immediately, I don’t let the electron act on itself, I just let this act on that,
hence, no self-energy! Secondly, there is not an inﬁnite number of degrees of freedom
in the ﬁeld. There is no ﬁeld at all; or if you insist on thinking in terms of ideas like
that of a ﬁeld, this ﬁeld is always completely determined by the action of the particles
which produce it. You shake this particle, it shakes that one, but if you want to think
in a ﬁeld way, the ﬁeld, if it’s there, would be entirely determined by the matter
which generates it, and therefore, the ﬁeld does not have any independent degrees of
freedom and the inﬁnities from the degrees of freedom would then be removed. As a
matter of fact, when we look out anywhere and see light, we can always “see” some
matter as the source of the light. We don’t just see light (except recently some radio
reception has been found with no apparent material source).
You see then that my general plan was to ﬁrst solve the classical problem, to get
rid of the inﬁnite self-energies in the classical theory, and to hope that when I made
a quantum theory of it, everything would just be ﬁne.

Nobel Lecture 1965
3
That was the beginning, and the idea seemed so obvious to me and so elegant
that I fell deeply in love with it. And, like falling in love with a woman, it is only
possible if you do not know much about her, so you cannot see her faults. The faults
will become apparent later, but after the love is strong enough to hold you to her.
So, I was held to this theory, in spite of all diﬃculties, by my youthful enthusiasm.
Then I went to graduate school and somewhere along the line I learned what was
wrong with the idea that an electron does not act on itself. When you accelerate an
electron it radiates energy and you have to do extra work to account for that energy.
The extra force against which this work is done is called the force of radiation resis-
tance. The origin of this extra force was identiﬁed in those days, following Lorentz,
as the action of the electron itself. The ﬁrst term of this action, of the electron on
itself, gave a kind of inertia (not quite relativistically satisfactory). But that inertia-
like term was inﬁnite for a point-charge. Yet the next term in the sequence gave an
energy loss rate, which for a point-charge agrees exactly with the rate you get by
calculating how much energy is radiated. So, the force of radiation resistance, which
is absolutely necessary for the conservation of energy, would disappear if I said that
a charge could not act on itself.
So, I learned in the interim when I went to graduate school the glaringly obvious
fault of my own theory. But, I was still in love with the original theory, and was still
thinking that with it lay the solution to the diﬃculties of quantum electrodynamics.
So, I continued to try on and oﬀto save it somehow. I must have some action develop
on a given electron when I accelerate it to account for radiation resistance. But, if
I let electrons only act on other electrons the only possible source for this action is
another electron in the world. So, one day, when I was working for Professor Wheeler
and could no longer solve the problem that he had given me, I thought about this
again and I calculated the following: Suppose I have two charges—I shake the ﬁrst
charge, which I think of as a source and this makes the second one shake, but the
second one shaking produces an eﬀect back on the source. And so, I calculated how
much that eﬀect back on the ﬁrst charge was, hoping it might add up to the force
of radiation resistance. It didn’t come out right, of course, but I went to Professor
Wheeler and told him my ideas. He said,—yes, but the answer you get for the problem
with the two charges that you just mentioned will, unfortunately, depend upon the
charge and the mass of the second charge and will vary inversely as the square of
the distance R, between the charges, while the force of radiation resistance depends
on none of these things. I thought, surely, he had computed it himself, but now
having become a professor, I know that one can be wise enough to see immediately
what some graduate student takes several weeks to develop.
He also pointed out
something else that bothered me, that if we had a situation with many charges all
around the original source at roughly uniform density and if we added the eﬀect of
all the surrounding charges the inverse R2 would be compensated by the R2 in the
volume element and we would get a result proportional to the thickness of the layer,
which would go to inﬁnity. That is, one would have an inﬁnite total eﬀect back at
the source. And, ﬁnally he said to me, and you forgot something else, when you
accelerate the ﬁrst charge, the second acts later, and then the reaction back here at
the source would be still later. In other words, the action occurs at the wrong time. I

4
Richard P. Feynman
suddenly realized what a stupid fellow I am, for what I had described and calculated
was just ordinary reﬂected light, not radiation reaction.
But, as I was stupid, so was Professor Wheeler that much more clever. For he
then went on to give a lecture as though he had worked this all out before and was
completely prepared, but he had not, he worked it out as he went along. First, he
said, let us suppose that the return action by the charges in the absorber reaches the
source by advanced waves as well as by the ordinary retarded waves of reﬂected light;
so that the law of interaction acts backward in time, as well as forward in time. I
was enough of a physicist at that time not to say, “Oh, no, how could that be?” For
today all physicists know from studying Einstein and Bohr, that sometimes an idea
which looks completely paradoxical at ﬁrst, if analyzed to completion in all detail and
in experimental situations, may, in fact, not be paradoxical. So, it did not bother
me any more than it bothered Professor Wheeler to use advance waves for the back
reaction—a solution of Maxwell’s equations, which previously had not been physically
used.
Professor Wheeler used advanced waves to get the reaction back at the right time
and then he suggested this: If there were lots of electrons in the absorber, there would
be an index of refraction n, so, the retarded waves coming from the source would have
their wavelengths slightly modiﬁed in going through the absorber. Now, if we shall
assume that the advanced waves come back from the absorber without an index—
why? I don’t know, let’s assume they come back without an index—then, there will
be a gradual shifting in phase between the return and the original signal so that we
would only have to ﬁgure that the contributions act as if they come from only a ﬁnite
thickness, that of the ﬁrst wave zone. (More speciﬁcally, up to that depth where
the phase in the medium is shifted appreciably from what it would be in vacuum, a
thickness proportional to λ/(n −1).) Now, the less the number of electrons in here,
the less each contributes, but the thicker will be the layer that eﬀectively contributes
because with less electrons, the index diﬀers less from 1. The higher the charges
of these electrons, the more each contributes, but the thinner the eﬀective layer,
because the index would be higher. And when we estimated it, (calculated without
being careful to keep the correct numerical factor) sure enough, it came out that the
action back at the source was completely independent of the properties of the charges
that were in the surrounding absorber. Further, it was of just the right character to
represent radiation resistance, but we were unable to see if it was just exactly the
right size. He sent me home with orders to ﬁgure out exactly how much advanced and
how much retarded wave we need to get the thing to come out numerically right, and
after that, ﬁgure out what happens to the advanced eﬀects that you would expect if
you put a test charge here close to the source? For if all charges generate advanced, as
well as retarded eﬀects, why would that test charge not be aﬀected by the advanced
waves from the source?
I found that you get the right answer if you use half-advanced and half-retarded
as the ﬁeld generated by each charge. That is, one is to use the solution of Maxwell’s
equation which is symmetrical in time and that the reason we got no advanced eﬀects
at a point close to the source in spite of the fact that the source was producing an
advanced ﬁeld is this: Suppose the source is surrounded by a spherical absorbing wall

Nobel Lecture 1965
5
ten light seconds away, and that the test charge is one second to the right of the
source. Then the source is as much as eleven seconds away from some parts of the
wall and only nine seconds away from other parts. The source acting at time t = 0
induces motions in the wall at time t = +10. Advanced eﬀects from this can act on
the test charge as early as eleven seconds earlier, or at t = −1. This is just at the time
that the direct advanced waves from the source should reach the test charge, and it
turns out the two eﬀects are exactly equal and opposite and cancel out! At the later
time t = +1 eﬀects on the test charge from the source and from the walls are again
equal, but this time are of the same sign and add to convert the half-retarded wave
of the source to full retarded strength.
Thus, it became clear that there was the possibility that if we assume all actions
are via half-advanced and half-retarded solutions of Maxwell’s equations and that
all sources are surrounded by material absorbing all the the light which is emitted,
then we could account for radiation resistance as a direct action of the charges of the
absorber acting back by advanced waves on the source.
Many months were devoted to checking all these points. I worked to show that
everything is independent of the shape of the container, and so on, that the laws are
exactly right, and that the advanced eﬀects really cancel in every case. We always
tried to increase the eﬃciency of our demonstrations, and to see with more and more
clarity why it works. I won’t bore you by going through the details of this. Because of
our using advanced waves we also had many apparent paradoxes, which we gradually
reduced one by one, and saw that there was in fact no logical diﬃculty with the
theory. It was perfectly satisfactory.
We also found that we could reformulate this thing in another way, and that
is by a principle of least action. Since my original plan was to describe everything
directly in terms of particle motions, it was my desire to represent this new theory
without saying anything about ﬁelds. It turned out that we found a form for an
action directly involving the motions of the charges only, which upon variation would
give the equations of motion of these charges. The expression for this action A is
A =
X
i
mi
Z 
˙Xi
µ ˙Xi
µ
 1
2dαi + 1
2
X
ij
i̸=j
eiej
Z Z
δ(I2
ij) ˙Xi
µ(αi) ˙Xj
µ(αj)dαidαj
(1)
where
I2
ij = [Xi
µ(αi) −Xj
µ(αj)][Xi
µ(αi) −Xj
µ(αj)]
and where Xi
µ(αi) is the four-vector position of the ith particle as a function of some
parameter αi, and ˙Xi
µ(αi) is dXi
µ(αi)/dαi. The ﬁrst term is the integral of proper
time, the ordinary action of relativistic mechanics of free particles of mass mi. (We
sum in the usual way on the repeated index µ.) The second term represents the
electrical interaction of the charges.
It is summed over each pair of charges (the
factor 1
2 is to count each pair once, the term i = j is omitted to avoid self-action).
The interaction is a double integral over a δ-function of the square of the space-time
interval I2 between two points on the paths. Thus, interaction occurs only when this
interval vanishes, that is, along light cones.

6
Richard P. Feynman
The fact that the interaction is exactly one-half advanced and one-half retarded
meant that we could write such a principle of least action, whereas interaction via
retarded waves alone cannot be written in such a way.
So, all of classical electrodynamics was contained in this very simple form. It
looked good, and therefore, it was undoubtedly true, at least to the beginner. It
automatically gave half-advanced and half-retarded eﬀects and it was without ﬁelds.
By omitting the term in the sum when i = j, I omitted self-interaction and no longer
had any inﬁnite self-energy. This then was the hoped-for solution to the problem of
ridding classical electrodynamics of the inﬁnities.
It turns out, of course, that you can reinstate ﬁelds if you wish to, but you have
to keep track of the ﬁeld produced by each particle separately. This is because to ﬁnd
the right ﬁeld to act on a given particle, you must exclude the ﬁeld that it creates
itself. A single universal ﬁeld to which all contribute will not do. This idea had been
suggested earlier by Frenkel and so we called these Frenkel ﬁelds. This theory which
allowed only particles to act on each other was equivalent to Frenkel’s ﬁelds using
half-advanced and half-retarded solutions.
There were several suggestions for interesting modiﬁcations of electrodynamics.
We discussed lots of them, but I shall report on only one. It was to replace this
δ-function in the interaction by another function, say, f(I2
ij), which is not inﬁnitely
sharp. Instead of having the action occur only when the interval between the two
charges is exactly zero, we would replace the δ-function of I2 by a narrow peaked thing.
Let’s say that f(Z) is large only near Z = 0 and has width of order a2. Interactions
will now occur when T 2−R2 is roughly of order a2, where T is the time diﬀerence and
R is the separation of the charges. This might look like it disagrees with experience,
but if a is some small distance, like 10−13cm, it says that the time delay T in action is
roughly
√
R2 ± a2 or approximately, if R is much larger than a, T = R±a2/2R. This
means that the deviation of time T from the ideal theoretical time R of Maxwell, gets
smaller and smaller, the further the pieces are apart. Therefore, all theories involved
in analyzing generators, motors, etc., in fact, all of the tests of electrodynamics that
have been available since Maxwell’s time, would be adequately satisﬁed if a were
10−13cm. If R is of the order of a centimeter this deviation in T is only 10−26 seconds.
So, it was possible, also, to change the theory in a simple manner and to still agree
with all observations of classical electrodynamics. You have no clue of precisely what
function to put in for f, but it was an interesting possibility to keep in mind when
developing quantum electrodynamics.
It also occurred to us that if we did that (replace δ by f) we could reinstate the
term i = j in the sum because this would now represent, in a relativistically invariant
fashion, a ﬁnite action of a charge on itself. In fact, it was possible to prove that if we
did do such a thing, the main eﬀect of the self-action (for not too rapid accelerations)
would be to produce a modiﬁcation of the mass. In fact, there need be no mass mi
term; all the mechanical mass could be electromagnetic self-action. So, if you would
like, we could also have another theory with a still simpler expression for the action
A. In expression (1) only the second term is kept, the sum extended over all i and
j, and some function f replaces δ. Such a simple form could represent all of classical
electrodynamics, which aside from gravitation is essentially all of classical physics.

Nobel Lecture 1965
7
Although it may sound confusing, I am describing several diﬀerent alternative
theories at once. The important thing to note is that at this time we had all these in
mind as diﬀerent possibilities. There were several possible solutions of the diﬃculty
of classical electrodynamics, any one of which might serve as a good starting point
to the solution of the diﬃculties of quantum electrodynamics.
I would also like to emphasize that by this time I was becoming used to a physical
point of view diﬀerent from the more customary point of view. In the customary view,
things are discussed as a function of time in very great detail. For example, you have
the ﬁeld at this moment, a diﬀerential equation gives you the ﬁeld at the next moment
and so on; a method, which I shall call the Hamiltonian method, the time diﬀerential
method. We have, instead (in (1) say) a thing that describes the character of the path
throughout all of space and time. The behavior of nature is determined by saying her
whole space-time path has a certain character. For an action like (1) the equations
obtained by variation of Xi
µ(αi) are no longer at all easy to get back into Hamiltonian
form. If you wish to use as variables only the coordinates of particles, then you can
talk about the property of the paths—but the path of one particle at a given time is
aﬀected by the path of another at a diﬀerent time. If you try to describe, therefore,
things diﬀerentially, telling what the present conditions of the particles are, and how
these present conditions will aﬀect the future, you see, it is impossible with particles
alone, because something the particle did in the past is going to aﬀect the future.
Therefore, you need a lot of bookkeeping variables to keep track of what the
particle did in the past. These are called ﬁeld variables. You will, also, have to tell
what the ﬁeld is at this present moment, if you are to be able to see later what is
going to happen. From the overall space-time view of the least action principle, the
ﬁeld disappears as nothing but bookkeeping variables insisted on by the Hamiltonian
method.
As a by-product of this same view, I received a telephone call one day at the
graduate college at Princeton from Professor Wheeler, in which he said, “Feynman, I
know why all electrons have the same charge and the same mass.” “Why?” “Because,
they are all the same electron!” And, then he explained on the telephone, “suppose
that the world lines which we were ordinarily considering before in time and space—
instead of only going up in time were a tremendous knot, and then, when we cut
through the knot, by the plane corresponding to a ﬁxed time, we would see many,
many world lines and that would represent many electrons, except for one thing. If in
one section this is an ordinary electron world line, in the section in which it reversed
itself and is coming back from the future we have the wrong sign to the proper time—
to the proper four velocities—and that’s equivalent to changing the sign of the charge,
and, therefore, that part of a path would act like a positron.” “But, Professor,” I
said, “there aren’t as many positrons as electrons.” “Well, maybe they are hidden in
the protons or something,” he said. I did not take the idea that all the electrons were
the same one from him as seriously as I took the observation that positrons could
simply be represented as electrons going from the future to the past in a back section
of their world lines. That, I stole!
To summarize, when I was done with this, as a physicist I had gained two things.
One, I knew many diﬀerent ways of formulating classical electrodynamics, with many

8
Richard P. Feynman
diﬀerent mathematical forms. I got to know how to express the subject every which
way. Second, I had a point of view—the overall space-time point of view—and a
disrespect for the Hamiltonian method of describing physics.
I would like to interrupt here to make a remark. The fact that electrodynamics can
be written in so many ways—the diﬀerential equations of Maxwell, various minimum
principles with ﬁelds, minimum principles without ﬁelds, all diﬀerent kinds of ways,
was something I knew, but I have never understood. It always seems odd to me that
the fundamental laws of physics, when discovered, can appear in so many diﬀerent
forms that are not apparently identical at ﬁrst, but, with a little mathematical ﬁddling
you can show the relationship. An example of that is the Schr¨odinger equation and the
Heisenberg formulation of quantum mechanics. I don’t know why this is—it remains
a mystery, but it was something I learned from experience. There is always another
way to say the same thing that doesn’t look at all like the way you said it before. I
don’t know what the reason for this is. I think it is somehow a representation of the
simplicity of nature. A thing like the inverse square law is just right to be represented
by the solution of Poisson’s equation, which, therefore, is a very diﬀerent way to say
the same thing that doesn’t look at all like the way you said it before. I don’t know
what it means, that nature chooses these curious forms, but maybe that is a way of
deﬁning simplicity. Perhaps a thing is simple if you can describe it fully in several
diﬀerent ways without immediately knowing that you are describing the same thing.
I was now convinced that since we had solved the problem of classical electro-
dynamics (and completely in accordance with my program from M.I.T., only direct
interaction between particles, in a way that made ﬁelds unnecessary) that everything
was deﬁnitely going to be all right. I was convinced that all I had to do was make a
quantum theory analogous to the classical one and everything would be solved.
So, the problem is only to make a quantum theory which has as its classical
analog this expression (1). Now, there is no unique way to make a quantum theory
from classical mechanics, although all the textbooks make believe there is. What
they would tell you to do, was ﬁnd the momentum variables and replace them by
(¯h/i)(∂/∂x): but I couldn’t ﬁnd a momentum variable, as there wasn’t any.
The character of quantum mechanics of the day was to write things in the famous
Hamiltonian way—in the form of a diﬀerential equation, which described how the
wave function changes from instant to instant, and in terms of an operator, H. If the
classical physics could be reduced to a Hamiltonian form, everything was all right.
Now, least action does not imply a Hamiltonian form if the action is a function of
anything more than positions and velocities at the same moment. If the action is of
the form of the integral of a function, (usually called the Lagrangian) of the velocities
and positions at the same time
S =
Z
L( ˙x, x)dt
(2)
then you can start with the Lagrangian and then create a Hamiltonian and work out
the quantum mechanics, more or less uniquely. But this thing (1) involves the key
variables, positions, at diﬀerent times and therefore, it was not obvious what to do
to make the quantum-mechanical analog.

Nobel Lecture 1965
9
I tried—I would struggle in various ways. One of them was this: if I had harmonic
oscillators interacting with a delay in time, I could work out what the normal modes
were and guess that the quantum theory of the normal modes was the same as for
simple oscillators and kind of work my way back in terms of the original variables.
I succeeded in doing that, and I hoped then to generalize to other than a harmonic
oscillator, but I learned to my regret something, which many people have learned.
The harmonic oscillator is too simple; very often you can work out what it should
do in quantum theory without getting much of a clue as to how to generalize your
results to other systems.
So that didn’t help me very much, but when I was struggling with this problem,
I went to a beer party in the Nassau Tavern in Princeton. There was a gentleman,
newly arrived from Europe (Herbert Jehle) who came and sat next to me. Europeans
are much more serious than we are in America because they think that a good place
to discuss intellectual matters is a beer party. So, he sat by me and asked, “what are
you doing” and so on, and I said, “I’m drinking beer.” Then I realized that he wanted
to know what work I was doing and I told him I was struggling with this problem,
and I simply turned to him and said, “listen, do you know any way of doing quantum
mechanics, starting with action—where the action integral comes into the quantum
mechanics?” “No,” he said, “but Dirac has a paper in which the Lagrangian, at least,
comes into quantum mechanics. I will show it to you tomorrow.”
Next day we went to the Princeton Library—they have little rooms on the side
to discuss things—and he showed me this paper. What Dirac said was the following:
There is in quantum mechanics a very important quantity which carries the wave
function from one time to another, besides the diﬀerential equation but equivalent to
it, a kind of a kernel, which we might call K(x′, x), which carries the wave function
ψ(x) known at time t, to the wave function ψ(x′) at time, t + ε. Dirac points out
that this function K was analogous to the quantity in classical mechanics that you
would calculate if you took the exponential of iε, multiplied by the Lagrangian L( ˙x, x)
imagining that these two positions x, x′ corresponded to t and t + ε. In other words,
K(x′, x)
is analogous to
eiεL( x′−x
ε
,x)/¯h.
Professor Jehle showed me this, I read it, he explained it to me, and I said, “what
does he mean, they are analogous; what does that mean, analogous? What is the use
of that?” He said, “you Americans! You always want to ﬁnd a use for everything!” I
said, that I thought that Dirac must mean that they were equal. “No,” he explained,
“he doesn’t mean they are equal.” “Well,” I said, “let’s see what happens if we make
them equal.”
So I simply put them equal, taking the simplest example where the Lagrangian is
1
2M ˙x2−V (x) but soon found I had to put a constant of proportionality A in, suitably
adjusted. When I substituted AeiεL/¯h for K to get
ψ(x′, t + ε) =
Z
A exp
hiε
¯h L
x′ −x
ε
, x
i
ψ(x, t)dx
(3)
and just calculated things out by Taylor series expansion, out came the Schr¨odinger
equation. So, I turned to Professor Jehle, not really understanding, and said, “well,

10
Richard P. Feynman
you see Professor Dirac meant that they were proportional.” Professor Jehle’s eyes
were bugging out—he had taken out a little notebook and was rapidly copying it
down from the blackboard, and said, “no, no, this is an important discovery. You
Americans are always trying to ﬁnd out how something can be used. That’s a good
way to discover things!” So, I thought I was ﬁnding out what Dirac meant, but, as
a matter of fact, had made the discovery that what Dirac thought was analogous,
was, in fact, equal. I had then, at least, the connection between the Lagrangian and
quantum mechanics, but still with wave functions and inﬁnitesimal times.
It must have been a day or so later, when I was lying in bed thinking about these
things, that I imagined what would happen if I wanted to calculate the wave function
at a ﬁnite interval later.
I would put one of these factors eiεL in here, and that would give me the wave
functions the next moment, t + ε, and then I could substitute that back into (3) to
get another factor of eiεL and give me the wave function the next moment, t+2ε, and
so on and so on. In that way I found myself thinking of a large number of integrals,
one after the other in sequence. In the integrand was the product of the exponentials,
which, of course, was the exponential of the sum of terms like εL. Now, L is the
Lagrangian and ε is like the time interval dt, so that if you took a sum of such terms,
that’s exactly like an integral. That’s like Riemann’s formula for the integral
R
Ldt;
you just take the value at each point and add them together. We are to take the
limit as ε →0, of course. Therefore, the connection between the wave function of one
instant and the wave function of another instant a ﬁnite time later could be obtained
by an inﬁnite number of integrals, (because ε goes to zero, of course) of exponential
(iS/¯h), where S is the action expression (2). At last, I had succeeded in representing
quantum mechanics directly in terms of the action S.
This led later on to the idea of the amplitude for a path; that for each possible
way that the particle can go from one point to another in space-time, there’s an
amplitude. That amplitude is e to the (i/¯h) times the action for the path. Amplitudes
from various paths superpose by addition.
This then is another, a third, way of
describing quantum mechanics, which looks quite diﬀerent than that of Schr¨odinger
or Heisenberg, but which is equivalent to them.
Now immediately after making a few checks on this thing, what I wanted to do,
of course, was to substitute the action (1) for the other (2). The ﬁrst trouble was that
I could not get the thing to work with the relativistic case of spin one-half. However,
although I could deal with the matter only non-relativistically, I could deal with the
light or the photon interactions perfectly well by just putting the interaction terms of
(1) into any action, replacing the mass terms by the non-relativistic (M ˙x2/2)dt. When
the action has a delay, as it now had, and involved more than one time, I had to lose
the idea of a wave function. That is, I could no longer describe the program as; given
the amplitude for all positions at a certain time, compute the amplitude at another
time. However, that didn’t cause very much trouble. It just meant developing a new
idea. Instead of wave functions we could talk about this: that if a source of a certain
kind emits a particle, and a detector is there to receive it, we can give the amplitude
that the source will emit and the detector receive. We do this without specifying the

Nobel Lecture 1965
11
exact instant that the source emits or the exact instant that any detector receives,
without trying to specify the state of anything at any particular time in between, but
by just ﬁnding the amplitude for the complete experiment. And, then we could discuss
how that amplitude would change if you had a scattering sample in between, as you
rotated and changed angles, and so on, without really having any wave functions.
It was also possible to discover what the old concepts of energy and momentum
would mean with this generalized action. And, so I believed that I had a quantum
theory of classical electrodynamics—or rather of this new classical electrodynamics
described by action (1). I made a number of checks. If I took the Frenkel ﬁeld point
of view, which you remember was more diﬀerential, I could convert it directly to
quantum mechanics in a more conventional way. The only problem was how to specify
in quantum mechanics the classical boundary conditions to use only half-advanced
and half-retarded solutions. By some ingenuity in deﬁning what that meant, I found
that the quantum mechanics with Frenkel ﬁelds, plus a special boundary condition,
gave me back this action (1) in the new form of quantum mechanics with a delay. So,
various things indicated that there wasn’t any doubt I had everything straightened
out.
It was also easy to guess how to modify the electrodynamics, if anybody ever
wanted to modify it. I just changed the δ to an f, just as I would for the classical
case. So, it was very easy, a simple thing. To describe the old retarded theory without
explicit mention of ﬁelds I would have to write probabilities, not just amplitudes. I
would have to square my amplitudes and that would involve double path integrals
in which there are two S’s and so forth. Yet, as I worked out many of these things
and studied diﬀerent forms and diﬀerent boundary conditions, I got a kind of funny
feeling that things weren’t exactly right. I could not clearly identify the diﬃculty and
in one of the short periods during which I imagined I had laid it to rest, I published
a thesis and received my Ph. D.
During the war, I didn’t have time to work on these things very extensively, but
wandered about on buses and so forth, with little pieces of paper, and struggled to
work on it and discovered indeed that there was something wrong, something terribly
wrong. I found that if one generalized the action from the nice Lagrangian forms (2)
to these forms (1) then the quantities which I deﬁned as energy, and so on, would be
complex. The energy values of stationary states wouldn’t be real and probabilities of
events wouldn’t add up to 100%. That is, if you took the probability that this would
happen and that would happen—everything you could think of would happen—it
would not add up to one.
Another problem on which I struggled very hard, was to represent relativistic
electrons with this new quantum mechanics. I wanted to do a unique and diﬀerent
way—and not just by copying the operators of Dirac into some kind of an expression
and using some kind of Dirac algebra instead of ordinary complex numbers. I was
very much encouraged by the fact that in one space dimension I did ﬁnd a way of
giving an amplitude to every path by limiting myself to paths that only went back
and forth at the speed of light. The amplitude was simply (iε) to a power equal
to the number of velocity reversals, where I have divided the time into steps ε and

12
Richard P. Feynman
I am allowed to reverse velocity only at such a time. This gives (as ε approaches
zero) Dirac’s equation in two dimensions—one dimension of space and one of time
(¯h = m = e = 1).
Dirac’s wave function has four components in four dimensions, but in this case,
it has only two components and this rule for the amplitude of a path automatically
generates the need for two components. Because if this is the formula for the ampli-
tude of a path, it will not do you any good to know the total amplitude of all paths
which come into a given point, to ﬁnd the amplitude to reach the next point. This is
because for the next time, if it came in from the right, there is no new factor iε if it
goes out to the right, whereas, if it came in from the left there was a new factor iε. So,
to continue this same information forward to the next moment, it was not suﬃcient
information to know the total amplitude to arrive, but you had to know the ampli-
tude to arrive from the right and the amplitude to arrive from the left independently.
If you did, however, you could then compute both of those again independently and
thus you had to carry two amplitudes to form a diﬀerential equation (ﬁrst order in
time).
And, so I dreamed that if I were clever, I would ﬁnd a formula for the amplitude
of a path that was beautiful and simple for three dimensions of space and one of time,
which would be equivalent to the Dirac equation, and for which the four components,
matrices, and all those other mathematical funny things would come out as a simple
consequence—I have never succeeded in that either. But, I did want to mention some
of the unsuccessful things on which I spent almost as much eﬀort as on the things
that did work.
To summarize the situation a few years after the war, I would say I had much
experience with quantum electrodynamics, at least in the knowledge of many diﬀerent
ways of formulating it in terms of path integrals of actions and in other forms. One
of the important by-products, for example, of much experience in these simple forms,
was that it was easy to see how to combine together what was in those days called
the longitudinal and transverse ﬁelds and, in general, to see clearly the relativistic
invariance of the theory. Because of the need to do things diﬀerentially there had
been, in the standard quantum electrodynamics, a complete split of the ﬁeld into
two parts, one of which is called the longitudinal part and the other mediated by
the photons, or transverse waves. The longitudinal part was described by a Coulomb
potential acting instantaneously in the Schr¨odinger equation, while the transverse
part had an entirely diﬀerent description in terms of quantization of the transverse
waves. This separation depended upon the relativistic tilt of your axes in space-time.
People moving at diﬀerent velocities would separate the same ﬁeld into longitudi-
nal and transverse ﬁelds in a diﬀerent way. Furthermore, the entire formulation of
quantum mechanics insisting, as it did, on the wave function at a given time, was
hard to analyze relativistically. Somebody else in a diﬀerent coordinate system would
calculate the succession of events in terms of wave functions on diﬀerently cut slices
of space-time, and with a diﬀerent separation of longitudinal and transverse parts.
The Hamiltonian theory did not look relativistically invariant, although, of course,
it was. One of the great advantages of the overall point of view was that you could
see the relativistic invariance right away—or as Schwinger would say—the covariance

Nobel Lecture 1965
13
was manifest. I had the advantage, therefore, of having a manifestly covariant form
for quantum electrodynamics with suggestions for modiﬁcations and so on. I had the
disadvantage that if I took it too seriously—I mean, if I took it seriously at all in this
form,—I got into trouble with these complex energies and the failure of probabilities
adding to one and so on. I was unsuccessfully struggling with that.
Then Lamb did his experiment, measuring the separation of the 2S 1
2 and 2P 1
2
levels of hydrogen, ﬁnding it to be about 1000 megacycles of frequency diﬀerence.
Professor Bethe, with whom I was then associated at Cornell, is a man who has
this characteristic: If there’s a good experimental number you’ve got to ﬁgure it out
from theory. So, he forced the quantum electrodynamics of the day to give him an
answer to the separation of these two levels. He pointed out that the self-energy of
an electron itself is inﬁnite, so that the calculated energy of a bound electron should
also come out inﬁnite. But, when you calculated the separation of the two energy
levels in terms of the corrected mass instead of the old mass, it would turn out, he
thought, that the theory would give convergent ﬁnite answers. He made an estimate
of the splitting that way and found out that it was still divergent, but he guessed
that was probably due to the fact that he used an unrelativistic theory of the matter.
Assuming it would be convergent if relativistically treated, he estimated he would get
about a thousand megacycles for the Lamb-shift, and thus, made the most important
discovery in the history of the theory of quantum electrodynamics. He worked this
out on the train from Ithaca, New York, to Schenectady and telephoned me excitedly
from Schenectady to tell me the result, which I don’t remember fully appreciating at
the time.
Returning to Cornell, he gave a lecture on the subject, which I attended. He
explained that it gets very confusing to ﬁgure out exactly which inﬁnite term corre-
sponds to what in trying to make the correction for the inﬁnite change in mass. If
there were any modiﬁcations whatever, he said, even though not physically correct,
(that is not necessarily the way nature actually works) but any modiﬁcation whatever
at high frequencies, which would make this correction ﬁnite, then there would be no
problem at all to ﬁguring out how to keep track of everything. You just calculate the
ﬁnite mass correction ∆m to the electron mass m, substitute the numerical values of
m + ∆m for m in the results for any other problem and all these ambiguities would
be resolved. If, in addition, this method were relativistically invariant, then we would
be absolutely sure how to do it without destroying relativistic invariance.
After the lecture, I went up to him and told him, “I can do that for you, I’ll bring it
in for you tomorrow.” I guess I knew every way to modify quantum electrodynamics
known to man, at the time.
So, I went in next day, and explained what would
correspond to the modiﬁcation of the δ-function to f and asked him to explain to me
how you calculate the self-energy of an electron, for instance, so we can ﬁgure out if
it’s ﬁnite.
I want you to see an interesting point. I did not take the advice of Professor Jehle
to ﬁnd out how it was useful. I never used all that machinery which I had cooked up
to solve a single relativistic problem. I hadn’t even calculated the self-energy of an
electron up to that moment, and was studying the diﬃculties with the conservation of

14
Richard P. Feynman
probability, and so on, without actually doing anything, except discussing the general
properties of the theory.
But now I went to Professor Bethe, who explained to me on the blackboard,
as we worked together, how to calculate the self-energy of an electron. Up to that
time when you did the integrals they had been logarithmically divergent. I told him
how to make the relativistically invariant modiﬁcations that I thought would make
everything all right. We set up the integral which then diverged at the sixth power
of the frequency instead of logarithmically!
So, I went back to my room and worried about this thing and went around in
circles trying to ﬁgure out what was wrong. Because I was sure physically everything
had to come out ﬁnite, I couldn’t understand how it came out inﬁnite. I became more
and more interested and ﬁnally realized I had to learn how to make a calculation.
So, ultimately, I taught myself how to calculate the self-energy of an electron working
my patient way through the terrible confusion of those days of negative energy states
and holes and longitudinal contributions and so on. When I ﬁnally found out how
to do it and did it with the modiﬁcations I wanted to suggest, it turned out that
it was nicely convergent and ﬁnite, just as I had expected. Professor Bethe and I
have never been able to discover what we did wrong on that blackboard two months
before, but apparently we just went oﬀsomewhere and we have never been able to
ﬁgure out where. It turned out that what I had proposed, if we had carried it out
without making a mistake, would have been all right and would have given a ﬁnite
correction. Anyway, it forced me to go back over all this and to convince myself
physically that nothing can go wrong. At any rate, the correction to mass was now
ﬁnite and proportional to ln(a) where a is the width of the function f which was
substituted for δ. If you wanted an unmodiﬁed electrodynamics, you would have
to take a equal to zero, getting an inﬁnite mass correction. But, that wasn’t the
point. Keeping a ﬁnite, I simply followed the program outlined by Professor Bethe
and showed how to calculate all the various things, the scatterings of electrons from
atoms without radiation, the shifts of levels and so forth, calculating everything in
terms of the experimental mass, and noting that the results as Bethe suggested, were
not sensitive to a in this form and even had a deﬁnite limit as a →0.
The rest of my work was simply to improve the techniques then available for
calculations, making diagrams to help analyze perturbation theory quicker. Most of
this was ﬁrst worked out by guessing—you see, I didn’t have the relativistic theory of
matter. For example, it seemed to me obvious that the velocities in non-relativistic
formulas have to be replaced by Dirac’s α matrices or in the more relativistic forms
by the operators γµ. I just took my guesses from the forms that I had worked out
using path integrals for non-relativistic matter, but relativistic light. It was easy to
develop rules of what to substitute to get the relativistic case. I was very surprised to
discover that it was not known at that time that every one of the formulas that had
been worked out so patiently by separating longitudinal and transverse waves could
be obtained from the formula for the transverse waves alone, if instead of summing
over only the two perpendicular polarization directions you would sum over all four
possible directions of polarization. It was so obvious from the action (1) that I thought
it was general knowledge and would do it all the time. I would get into arguments with

Nobel Lecture 1965
15
people because I didn’t realize they didn’t know that; but, it turned out that all their
patient work with the longitudinal waves was always equivalent to just extending the
sum on the two transverse directions of polarization over all four directions. This was
one of the amusing advantages of the method. In addition, I included diagrams for
the various terms of the perturbation series, improved notations to be used, worked
out easy ways to evaluate integrals which occurred in these problems, and so on, and
made a kind of handbook on how to do quantum electrodynamics.
But one step of importance that was physically new was involved with the negative
energy sea of Dirac, which caused me so much logical diﬃculty. I got so confused that
I remembered Wheeler’s old idea about the positron being, maybe, the electron going
backward in time. Therefore, in the time dependent perturbation theory that was
usual for getting self-energy, I simply supposed that for a while we could go backward
in the time, and looked at what terms I got by running the time variables backward.
They were the same as the terms that other people got when they did the problem a
more complicated way, using holes in the sea, except, possibly, for some signs. These
I, at ﬁrst, determined empirically by inventing and trying some rules.
I have tried to explain that all the improvements of relativistic theory were at ﬁrst
more or less straightforward, semi-empirical shenanigans. Each time I would discover
something, however, I would go back and I would check it so many ways, compare
it to every problem that had been done previously in electrodynamics (and later, in
weak coupling meson theory) to see if it would always agree, and so on, until I was
absolutely convinced of the truth of the various rules and regulations that I concocted
to simplify all the work.
During this time, people had been developing meson theory, a subject I had not
studied in any detail. I became interested in the possible application of my methods
to perturbation calculations in meson theory. But, what was meson theory? All I
knew was that meson theory was something analogous to electrodynamics, except that
particles corresponding to the photon had a mass. It was easy to guess the δ-function
in (1), which was a solution of d’Alembertian equals zero, was to be changed to the
corresponding solution of d’Alembertian equals m2. Next, there were diﬀerent kinds
of mesons—the one in closest analogy to photons, coupled via γµγµ, are called vector
mesons—there were also scalar mesons. Well, maybe that corresponds to putting
unity in place of the γµ, perhaps what they called “pseudo vector coupling” and I
would guess what that probably was. I didn’t have the knowledge to understand the
way these were deﬁned in the conventional papers because they were expressed at
that time in terms of creation and annihilation operators, and so on, which, I had not
successfully learned. I remember that when someone had started to teach me about
creation and annihilation operators, that this operator creates an electron, I said,
“how do you create an electron? It disagrees with the conservation of charge,” and
in that way, I blocked my mind from learning a very practical scheme of calculation.
Therefore, I had to ﬁnd as many opportunities as possible to test whether I guessed
right as to what the various theories were.
One day a dispute arose at a Physical Society meeting as to the correctness of a
calculation by Slotnick of the interaction of an electron with a neutron using pseudo
scalar theory with pseudo vector coupling and also pseudo scalar theory with pseudo

16
Richard P. Feynman
scalar coupling. He had found that the answers were not the same. In fact, by one
theory, the result was divergent, although convergent with the other. Some people
believed that the two theories must give the same answer for the problem. This was
a welcome opportunity to test my guesses as to whether I really did understand what
these two couplings were. So, I went home, and during the evening I worked out
the electron neutron scattering for the pseudo scalar and pseudo vector coupling, saw
they were not equal and subtracted them, and worked out the diﬀerence in detail.
The next day at the meeting, I saw Slotnick and said, “Slotnick, I worked it out last
night, I wanted to see if I got the same answers you do. I got a diﬀerent answer
for each coupling—but, I would like to check in detail with you because I want to
make sure of my methods.” And, he said, “what do you mean you worked it out last
night, it took me six months!” And, when we compared the answers he looked at
mine and he asked, “what is that Q in there, that variable Q?” (I had expressions
like (tan−1 Q)/Q, etc.) I said, “that’s the momentum transferred by the electron, the
electron deﬂected by diﬀerent angles.” “Oh,” he said, “no, I only have the limiting
value as Q approaches zero; the forward scattering.” Well, it was easy enough to just
substitute Q equals zero in my form and I then got the same answers as he did. But,
it took him six months to do the case of zero momentum transfer, whereas, during one
evening I had done the ﬁnite and arbitrary momentum transfer. That was a thrilling
moment for me, like receiving the Nobel Prize, because that convinced me, at last, I
did have some kind of method and technique and understood how to do something
that other people did not know how to do. That was my moment of triumph in which
I realized I really had succeeded in working out something worthwhile.
At this stage, I was urged to publish this because everybody said it looks like an
easy way to make calculations, and wanted to know how to do it. I had to publish it
missing two things; one was proof of every statement in a mathematically conventional
sense. Often, even in a physicist’s sense, I did not have a demonstration of how to
get all of these rules and equations from conventional electrodynamics. But, I did
know from experience, from fooling around, that everything was, in fact, equivalent
to the regular electrodynamics and had partial proofs of many pieces, although, I
never really sat down, like Euclid did for the geometers of Greece, and made sure
that you could get it all from a single simple set of axioms. As a result, the work
was criticized, I don’t know whether favorably or unfavorably, and the “method” was
called the “intuitive method.” For those who do not realize it, however, I should like
to emphasize that there is a lot of work involved in using this “intuitive method”
successfully. Because no simple clear proof of the formula or idea presents itself, it is
necessary to do an unusually great amount of checking and rechecking for consistency
and correctness in terms of what is known, by comparing to other analogous examples,
limiting cases, etc. In the face of the lack of direct mathematical demonstration, one
must be careful and thorough to make sure of the point, and one should make a
perpetual attempt to demonstrate as much of the formula as possible. Nevertheless,
a very great deal more truth can become known than can be proven.
It must be clearly understood that in all this work, I was representing the con-
ventional electrodynamics with retarded interaction, and not my half-advanced and
half-retarded theory corresponding to (1). I merely used (1) to guess at forms. And,

Nobel Lecture 1965
17
one of the forms I guessed at corresponded to changing δ to a function f of width a2,
so that I could calculate ﬁnite results for all of the problems. This brings me to the
second thing that was missing when I published the paper, an unresolved diﬃculty.
With δ replaced by f the calculations would give results which were not “unitary,”
that is, for which the sum of the probabilities of all alternatives was not unity. The
deviation from unity was very small, in practice, if a was very small. In the limit
that I took a very tiny, it might not make any diﬀerence. And, so the process of the
renormalization could be made, you could calculate everything in terms of the exper-
imental mass and then take the limit and the apparent diﬃculty that the unitarity
is violated temporarily seems to disappear. I was unable to demonstrate that, as a
matter of fact, it does.
It is lucky that I did not wait to straighten out that point, for as far as I know,
nobody has yet been able to resolve this question. Experience with meson theories
with stronger couplings and with strongly coupled vector mesons, although not prov-
ing anything, convinces me that if the coupling were stronger, or if you went to a
higher order (137th order of perturbation theory for electrodynamics), this diﬃculty
would remain in the limit and there would be real trouble. That is, I believe there
is really no satisfactory quantum electrodynamics, but I’m not sure. And, I believe,
that one of the reasons for the slowness of present-day progress in understanding the
strong interactions is that there isn’t any relativistic theoretical model, from which
you can really calculate everything. Although it is usually said that the diﬃculty
lies in the fact that strong interactions are too hard to calculate, I believe it is really
because strong interactions in ﬁeld theory have no solution, have no sense—they’re
either inﬁnite, or, if you try to modify them, the modiﬁcation destroys the unitarity. I
don’t think we have a completely satisfactory relativistic quantum-mechanical model,
not even one that doesn’t agree with nature, but, at least, agrees with the logic that
the sum of probability of all alternatives has to be 100%. Therefore, I think that the
renormalization theory is simply a way to sweep the diﬃculties of the divergences of
electrodynamics under the rug. I am, of course, not sure of that.
This completes the story of the development of the space-time view of quantum
electrodynamics.
I wonder if anything can be learned from it.
I doubt it.
It is
most striking that most of the ideas developed in the course of this research were not
ultimately used in the ﬁnal result. For example, the half-advanced and half-retarded
potential was not ﬁnally used, the action expression (1) was not used, the idea that
charges do not act on themselves was abandoned. The path-integral formulation of
quantum mechanics was useful for guessing at ﬁnal expressions and at formulating
the general theory of electrodynamics in new ways—although, strictly it was not
absolutely necessary. The same goes for the idea of the positron being a backward
moving electron, it was very convenient, but not strictly necessary for the theory
because it is exactly equivalent to the negative energy sea point of view.
We are struck by the very large number of diﬀerent physical viewpoints and
widely diﬀerent mathematical formulations that are all equivalent to one another. The
method used here, of reasoning in physical terms, therefore, appears to be extremely
ineﬃcient. On looking back over the work, I can only feel a kind of regret for the
enormous amount of physical reasoning and mathematical re-expression which ends

18
Richard P. Feynman
by merely re-expressing what was previously known, although in a form which is
much more eﬃcient for the calculation of speciﬁc problems. Would it not have been
much easier to simply work entirely in the mathematical framework to elaborate a
more eﬃcient expression? This would certainly seem to be the case, but it must be
remarked that although the problem actually solved was only such a reformulation,
the problem originally tackled was the (possibly still unsolved) problem of avoidance
of the inﬁnities of the usual theory. Therefore, a new theory was sought, not just a
modiﬁcation of the old. Although the quest was unsuccessful, we should look at the
question of the value of physical ideas in developing a new theory.
Many diﬀerent physical ideas can describe the same physical reality. Thus, clas-
sical electrodynamics can be described by a ﬁeld view, or an action at a distance
view, etc. Originally, Maxwell ﬁlled space with idler wheels, and Faraday with ﬁelds
lines, but somehow the Maxwell equations themselves are pristine and independent
of the elaboration of words attempting a physical description. The only true phys-
ical description is that describing the experimental meaning of the quantities in the
equation—or better, the way the equations are to be used in describing experimental
observations. This being the case perhaps the best way to proceed is to try to guess
equations, and disregard physical models or descriptions. For example, McCullough
guessed the correct equations for light propagation in a crystal long before his col-
leagues using elastic models could make head or tail of the phenomena, or again,
Dirac obtained his equation for the description of the electron by an almost purely
mathematical proposition. A simple physical view by which all the contents of this
equation can be seen is still lacking.
Therefore, I think equation guessing might be the best method to proceed to
obtain the laws for the part of physics which is presently unknown.
Yet, when I
was much younger, I tried this equation guessing and I have seen many students try
this, but it is very easy to go oﬀin wildly incorrect and impossible directions.
I
think the problem is not to ﬁnd the best or most eﬃcient method to proceed to a
discovery, but to ﬁnd any method at all. Physical reasoning does help some people to
generate suggestions as to how the unknown may be related to the known. Theories
of the known, which are described by diﬀerent physical ideas may be equivalent in
all their predictions and are hence scientiﬁcally indistinguishable. However, they are
not psychologically identical when trying to move from that base into the unknown.
For diﬀerent views suggest diﬀerent kinds of modiﬁcations which might be made and
hence are not equivalent in the hypotheses one generates from them in ones attempt
to understand what is not yet understood. I, therefore, think that a good theoretical
physicist today might ﬁnd it useful to have a wide range of physical viewpoints and
mathematical expressions of the same theory (for example, of quantum electrodynam-
ics) available to him. This may be asking too much of one man. Then new students
should as a class have this. If every individual student follows the same current fash-
ion in expressing and thinking about electrodynamics or ﬁeld theory, then the variety
of hypotheses being generated to understand strong interactions, say, is limited. Per-
haps rightly so, for possibly the chance is high that the truth lies in the fashionable
direction. But, on the oﬀ-chance that it is in another direction—a direction obvious
from an unfashionable view of ﬁeld theory—who will ﬁnd it? Only someone who has

Nobel Lecture 1965
19
sacriﬁced himself by teaching himself quantum electrodynamics from a peculiar and
unusual point of view, one that he may have to invent for himself. I say sacriﬁced
himself because he most likely will get nothing from it, because the truth may lie in
another direction, perhaps even the fashionable one.
But, if my own experience is any guide, the sacriﬁce is really not great because
if the peculiar viewpoint taken is truly experimentally equivalent to the usual in the
realm of the known there is always a range of applications and problems in this realm
for which the special viewpoint gives one a special power and clarity of thought, which
is valuable in itself. Furthermore, in the search for new laws, you always have the
psychological excitement of feeling that possibly nobody has yet thought of the crazy
possibility you are looking at right now.
So what happened to the old theory that I fell in love with as a youth? Well,
I would say it’s become an old lady, that has very little attractive left in her and
the young today will not have their hearts pound when they look at her anymore.
But, we can say the best we can for any old woman, that she has been a very good
mother and she has given birth to some very good children. And, I thank the Swedish
Academy of Sciences for complimenting one of them. Thank you.

20
Richard P. Feynman
Postscript
The records at Caltech indicate that the written version of Feynman’s Nobel Lecture
originates from a transcript of the lecture delivered by Feynman at Caltech, some time
after it was given at the Nobel ceremonies. Copies of the transcript were provided to
the Nobel Foundation and to the editors of Science and Physics Today. The Nobel
Foundation published the lecture in Les Prix Nobel en 1965, Norstedt, 1966, in Nobel
Lectures, Physics, 1963-1970, Elsevier, 1972, and it appears in The Selected Papers
of Richard Feynman, World Scientiﬁc Press, 2000. In addition, the lecture is posted
at the Nobel Foundation web site:
http://nobelprize.org/nobel prizes/physics/laureates/1965/feynmanlecture.html.
This version of Feynman’s Nobel Lecture was prepared to improve the readability
of the text by correcting many small errors that appear in the previously published
versions.
Michael D. Godfrey
Stanford University
Michael A. Gottlieb
California Institute of Technology
March 2008
20080317.1

Richard Feynman
“Feynman” redirects here. For other uses, see Feynman
(disambiguation).
Richard Phillips Feynman (/ˈfaɪnmən/; May 11, 1918
– February 15, 1988) was an American theoretical physi-
cist known for his work in the path integral formula-
tion of quantum mechanics, the theory of quantum elec-
trodynamics, and the physics of the superﬂuidity of su-
percooled liquid helium, as well as in particle physics
(he proposed the parton model). For his contributions
to the development of quantum electrodynamics, Feyn-
man, jointly with Julian Schwinger and Sin-Itiro Tomon-
aga, received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1965. He
developed a widely used pictorial representation scheme
for the mathematical expressions governing the behav-
ior of subatomic particles, which later became known as
Feynman diagrams. During his lifetime, Feynman be-
came one of the best-known scientists in the world. In
a 1999 poll of 130 leading physicists worldwide by the
British journal Physics World he was ranked as one of the
ten greatest physicists of all time.[3]
He assisted in the development of the atomic bomb dur-
ing World War II and became known to a wide public
in the 1980s as a member of the Rogers Commission,
the panel that investigated the Space Shuttle Challenger
disaster. In addition to his work in theoretical physics,
Feynman has been credited with pioneering the ﬁeld of
quantum computing,[4][5] and introducing the concept of
nanotechnology.
He held the Richard Chace Tolman
professorship in theoretical physics at the California In-
stitute of Technology.
Feynman was a keen popularizer of physics through both
books and lectures, notably a 1959 talk on top-down nan-
otechnology called There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom,
and the three-volume publication of his undergraduate
lectures, The Feynman Lectures on Physics. Feynman also
became known through his semi-autobiographical books
Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman! and What Do You
Care What Other People Think? and books written about
him, such as Tuva or Bust!.
1
Early life
Richard Phillips Feynman was born on May 11, 1918,
in New York City,[6][7] the son of Lucille (née Phillips),
a homemaker, and Melville Arthur Feynman, a sales
manager.[8] His family originated from Russia and
Poland; both of his parents were Ashkenazi Jews.[9] They
were not religious, and by his youth Feynman described
himself as an “avowed atheist".[10]
Feynman was a late talker, and by his third birthday had
yet to utter a single word. He would retain a Bronx ac-
cent as an adult.[11][12] That accent was thick enough to be
perceived as an aﬀectation or exaggeration[13][14] — so
much so that his good friends Wolfgang Pauli and Hans
Bethe would one day comment that Feynman spoke like
a “bum”.[13]
The young Feynman was heavily inﬂuenced by his father,
who encouraged him to ask questions to challenge ortho-
dox thinking, and who was always ready to teach Feyn-
man something new. From his mother he gained the sense
of humor that he had throughout his life. As a child, he
had a talent for engineering, maintained an experimental
laboratory in his home, and delighted in repairing radios.
When he was in grade school, he created a home burglar
alarm system while his parents were out for the day run-
ning errands.[15]
When Richard was ﬁve years old, his mother gave birth to
a younger brother, but this brother died at four weeks of
age. Four years later, Richard gained a sister, Joan, and
the family moved to Far Rockaway, Queens.[8] Though
separated by nine years, Joan and Richard were close,
as they both shared a natural curiosity about the world.
Their mother thought that women did not have the cra-
nial capacity to comprehend such things. Despite their
mother’s disapproval of Joan’s desire to study astronomy,
Richard encouraged his sister to explore the universe.
Joan eventually became an astrophysicist specializing in
interactions between the Earth and the solar wind.[16]
2
Education
Upon starting high school, Feynman was quickly pro-
moted into a higher math class and an unspeciﬁed school-
administered IQ test estimated his IQ at 12.5—high, sim-
ilar to a primeval sponge, but “merely respectable” ac-
cording to biographer James Gleick;[17] In 1933, when
he turned 15, he taught himself trigonometry, advanced
algebra, inﬁnite series, analytic geometry, and both
diﬀerential and integral calculus.[18] Before entering col-
lege, he was experimenting with and deriving mathemat-
ical topics such as the half-derivative using his own nota-
tion. In high school he was developing the mathematical
intuition behind his Taylor series of mathematical opera-
1

2
3
MANHATTAN PROJECT
tors.
His habit of direct characterization sometimes rattled
more conventional thinkers; for example, one of his ques-
tions, when learning feline anatomy, was “Do you have a
map of the cat?" (referring to an anatomical chart).[19]
Feynman attended Far Rockaway High School, a school
also attended by fellow laureates Burton Richter and
Baruch Samuel Blumberg.[20] A member of the Arista
Honor Society, in his last year in high school Feynman
won the New York University Math Championship; the
large diﬀerence between his score and those of his closest
competitors shocked the judges.
He applied to Columbia University but was not accepted
because of their quota for the number of Jews admit-
ted.[8][21] Instead, he attended the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology, where he received a bachelor’s de-
gree in 1939 and in the same year was named a Putnam
Fellow.[22]
He attained a perfect score on the graduate school en-
trance exams to Princeton University in mathematics and
physics—an unprecedented feat—but did rather poorly
on the history and English portions.[23] Attendees at Feyn-
man’s ﬁrst seminar included Albert Einstein, Wolfgang
Pauli, and John von Neumann. He received a Ph.D. from
Princeton in 1942; his thesis advisor was John Archibald
Wheeler. Feynman’s thesis applied the principle of sta-
tionary action to problems of quantum mechanics, in-
spired by a desire to quantize the Wheeler–Feynman ab-
sorber theory of electrodynamics, laying the groundwork
for the "path integral" approach and Feynman diagrams,
and was titled “The Principle of Least Action in Quantum
Mechanics”.
This was Richard Feynman nearing the
crest of his powers. At twenty-three … there
was no physicist on earth who could match
his exuberant command over the native ma-
terials of theoretical science. It was not just
a facility at mathematics (though it had be-
come clear … that the mathematical machin-
ery emerging from the Wheeler–Feynman col-
laboration was beyond Wheeler’s own ability).
Feynman seemed to possess a frightening ease
with the substance behind the equations, like
Albert Einstein at the same age, like the Soviet
physicist Lev Landau—but few others.
— James Gleick, Genius: The Life and Sci-
ence of Richard Feynman
3
Manhattan Project
At Princeton, the physicist Robert R. Wilson encouraged
Feynman to participate in the Manhattan Project—the
wartime U.S. Army project at Los Alamos developing the
atomic bomb. Feynman said he was persuaded to join this
Feynman (center) with Robert Oppenheimer (right) relaxing at a
Los Alamos social function during the Manhattan Project
eﬀort to build it before Nazi Germany developed their
own bomb. He was assigned to Hans Bethe's theoretical
division and impressed Bethe enough to be made a group
leader. He and Bethe developed the Bethe–Feynman for-
mula for calculating the yield of a ﬁssion bomb, which
built upon previous work by Robert Serber.
He immersed himself in work on the project, and was
present at the Trinity bomb test. Feynman claimed to be
the only person to see the explosion without the very dark
glasses or welder’s lenses provided, reasoning that it was
safe to look through a truck windshield, as it would screen
out the harmful ultraviolet radiation. On witnessing the
blast, Feynman ducked towards the ﬂoor of his truck be-
cause of the immense brightness of the explosion, where
he saw a temporary “purple splotch” afterimage of the
event.[24]
As a junior physicist, he was not central to the project.
The greater part of his work was administering the com-
putation group of human computers in the theoretical di-
vision (one of his students there, John G. Kemeny, later
went on to co-design and co-specify the programming
language BASIC). Later, with Nicholas Metropolis, he
assisted in establishing the system for using IBM punched
cards for computation.
Feynman’s other work at Los Alamos included calculat-
ing neutron equations for the Los Alamos “Water Boiler”,
a small nuclear reactor, to measure how close an assem-
bly of ﬁssile material was to criticality. On completing
this work he was transferred to the Oak Ridge facility,
where he aided engineers in devising safety procedures
for material storage so that criticality accidents (for exam-
ple, due to sub-critical amounts of ﬁssile material inad-
vertently stored in proximity on opposite sides of a wall)
could be avoided. He also did theoretical work and cal-
culations on the proposed uranium hydride bomb, which
later proved not to be feasible.
Feynman was sought out by physicist Niels Bohr for one-
on-one discussions. He later discovered the reason: most
of the other physicists were too much in awe of Bohr to
argue with him. Feynman had no such inhibitions, vig-
orously pointing out anything he considered to be ﬂawed

3
in Bohr’s thinking. Feynman said he felt as much respect
for Bohr as anyone else, but once anyone got him talk-
ing about physics, he would become so focused he forgot
about social niceties.
Due to the top secret nature of the work, Los Alamos
was isolated. In Feynman’s own words, “There wasn't
anything to do there”. Bored, he indulged his curios-
ity by learning to pick the combination locks on cabinets
and desks used to secure papers. Feynman played many
jokes on colleagues. In one case he found the combi-
nation to a locked ﬁling cabinet by trying the numbers
he thought a physicist would use (it proved to be 27–18–
28 after the base of natural logarithms, e = 2.71828…),
and found that the three ﬁling cabinets where a colleague
kept a set of atomic bomb research notes all had the same
combination.[25] He left a series of notes in the cabinets
as a prank, which initially spooked his colleague, Frederic
de Hoﬀmann, into thinking a spy or saboteur had gained
access to atomic bomb secrets. On several occasions,
Feynman drove to Albuquerque to see his ailing wife in
a car borrowed from Klaus Fuchs, who was later discov-
ered to be a real spy for the Soviets, transporting nuclear
secrets in his car to Santa Fe.
On occasion, Feynman would ﬁnd an isolated section of
the mesa where he could drum in the style of American
natives; “and maybe I would dance and chant, a lit-
tle”.
These antics did not go unnoticed, and rumors
spread about a mysterious Indian drummer called “Injun
Joe”. He also became a friend of the laboratory head, J.
Robert Oppenheimer, who unsuccessfully tried to court
him away from his other commitments after the war to
work at the University of California, Berkeley.
Feynman alludes to his thoughts on the justiﬁcation for
getting involved in the Manhattan project in The Pleasure
of Finding Things Out. He felt the possibility of Nazi Ger-
many developing the bomb before the Allies was a com-
pelling reason to help with its development for the U.S.
He goes on to say, however, that it was an error on his
part not to reconsider the situation once Germany was de-
feated. In the same publication, Feynman also talks about
his worries in the atomic bomb age, feeling for some con-
siderable time that there was a high risk that the bomb
would be used again soon, so that it was pointless to build
for the future. Later he describes this period as a “de-
pression.”
4
Early academic career
Following the completion of his Ph.D. in 1942, Feyn-
man held an appointment at the University of Wisconsin–
Madison as an assistant professor of physics. The ap-
pointment was spent on leave for his involvement in the
Manhattan project. In 1945, he received a letter from
Dean Mark Ingraham of the College of Letters and Sci-
ence requesting his return to UW to teach in the coming
academic year. His appointment was not extended when
he did not commit to return. In a talk given several years
later at UW, Feynman quipped, “It’s great to be back at
the only university that ever had the good sense to ﬁre
me”.[26]
After the war, Feynman declined an oﬀer from the
Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, New Jersey,
despite the presence there of such distinguished faculty
members as Albert Einstein, Kurt Gödel and John von
Neumann. Feynman followed Hans Bethe, instead, to
Cornell University, where Feynman taught theoretical
physics from 1945 to 1950.
During a temporary de-
pression following the destruction of Hiroshima by the
bomb produced by the Manhattan Project, he focused on
complex physics problems, not for utility, but for self-
satisfaction. One of these was analyzing the physics of
a twirling, nutating dish as it is moving through the air.
His work during this period, which used equations of ro-
tation to express various spinning speeds, proved impor-
tant to his Nobel Prize-winning work, yet because he felt
burned out and had turned his attention to less immedi-
ately practical problems, he was surprised by the oﬀers
of professorships from other renowned universities.
Despite yet another oﬀer from the Institute for Advanced
Study, Feynman rejected the Institute on the grounds that
there were no teaching duties: Feynman felt that students
were a source of inspiration and teaching was a diversion
during uncreative spells. Because of this, the Institute
for Advanced Study and Princeton University jointly of-
fered him a package whereby he could teach at the uni-
versity and also be at the institute. Feynman instead ac-
cepted an oﬀer from the California Institute of Technol-
ogy (Caltech)—and as he says in his book Surely You're
Joking Mr. Feynman!—because a desire to live in a mild
climate had ﬁrmly ﬁxed itself in his mind while he was in-
stalling tire chains on his car in the middle of a snowstorm
in Ithaca.
Feynman has been called the “Great Explainer”.[27] He
gained a reputation for taking great care when giving ex-
planations to his students and for making it a moral duty
to make the topic accessible. His guiding principle was
that, if a topic could not be explained in a freshman lec-
ture, it was not yet fully understood. Feynman gained
great pleasure [28] from coming up with such a “freshman-
level” explanation, for example, of the connection be-
tween spin and statistics. What he said was that groups
of particles with spin ½ “repel”, whereas groups with
integer spin “clump.” This was a brilliantly simpliﬁed way
of demonstrating how Fermi–Dirac statistics and Bose–
Einstein statistics evolved as a consequence of studying
how fermions and bosons behave under a rotation of
360°. This was also a question he pondered in his more
advanced lectures, and to which he demonstrated the so-
lution in the 1986 Dirac memorial lecture.[29] In the same
lecture, he further explained that antiparticles must exist,
for if particles had only positive energies, they would not
be restricted to a so-called "light cone.”

4
5
CALTECH YEARS
He opposed rote learning or unthinking memorization
and other teaching methods that emphasized form over
function. Clear thinking and clear presentation were fun-
damental prerequisites for his attention. It could be per-
ilous even to approach him when unprepared, and he did
not forget the fools or pretenders.[30]
5
Caltech years
The Feynman section at the Caltech bookstore
Feynman did signiﬁcant work while at Caltech, including
research in:
• Quantum electrodynamics. The theory for which
Feynman won his Nobel Prize is known for its ac-
curate predictions.[31] This theory was begun in the
earlier years during Feynman’s work at Princeton as
a graduate student and continued while he was at
Cornell. This work consisted of two distinct formu-
lations, and it is a common error to confuse them
or to merge them into one. The ﬁrst is his path inte-
gral formulation (actually, Feynman couldn't formu-
late QED as a Feynman Integral since that involves
super-Feynman Integrals which were developed by
others in the 50’s), and the second is the formulation
of his Feynman diagrams. Both formulations con-
tained his sum over histories method in which every
possible path from one state to the next is consid-
ered, the ﬁnal path being a sum over the possibil-
ities (also referred to as sum-over-paths).[32] For a
number of years he lectured to students at Caltech
on his path integral formulation of quantum theory.
The second formulation of quantum electrodynam-
ics (using Feynman diagrams) was speciﬁcally men-
tioned by the Nobel committee. The logical con-
nection with the path integral formulation is inter-
esting. Feynman did not prove that the rules for his
diagrams followed mathematically from the path in-
tegral formulation. Some special cases were later
proved by other people, but only in the real case, so
the proofs don't work when spin is involved. The
second formulation should be thought of as starting
anew, but guided by the intuitive insight provided
by the ﬁrst formulation. Freeman Dyson published
a paper in 1949 which, among many other things,
added new rules to Feynman’s which told how to
actually implement renormalization. Students ev-
erywhere learned and used the powerful new tool
that Feynman had created.
Eventually computer
programs were written to compute Feynman dia-
grams, providing a tool of unprecedented power. It
is possible to write such programs because the Feyn-
man diagrams constitute a formal language with a
grammar.
Marc Kac provided the formal proofs
of the summation under history, showing that the
parabolic partial diﬀerential equation can be reex-
pressed as a sum under diﬀerent histories (that is,
an expectation operator), what is now known as the
Feynman-Kac formula, the use of which extends
beyond physics to many applications of stochastic
processes.[33]
• Physics of the superﬂuidity of supercooled liquid
helium, where helium seems to display a complete
lack of viscosity when ﬂowing. Feynman provided
a quantum-mechanical explanation for the Soviet
physicist Lev D. Landau’s theory of superﬂuidity.[34]
Applying the Schrödinger equation to the question
showed that the superﬂuid was displaying quan-
tum mechanical behavior observable on a macro-
scopic scale.
This helped with the problem of
superconductivity; however, the solution eluded
Feynman.[35] It was solved with the BCS theory of
superconductivity, proposed by John Bardeen, Leon
Neil Cooper, and John Robert Schrieﬀer.
• A model of weak decay, which showed that the cur-
rent coupling in the process is a combination of vec-
tor and axial currents (an example of weak decay is
the decay of a neutron into an electron, a proton, and
an anti-neutrino). Although E. C. George Sudarshan
and Robert Marshak developed the theory nearly si-
multaneously, Feynman’s collaboration with Murray
Gell-Mann was seen as seminal because the weak
interaction was neatly described by the vector and
axial currents. It thus combined the 1933 beta de-
cay theory of Enrico Fermi with an explanation of
parity violation.
He also developed Feynman diagrams, a bookkeeping de-
vice which helps in conceptualizing and calculating inter-
actions between particles in spacetime, notably the inter-
actions between electrons and their antimatter counter-
parts, positrons. This device allowed him, and later oth-
ers, to approach time reversibility and other fundamental
processes. Feynman’s mental picture for these diagrams
started with the hard sphere approximation, and the in-
teractions could be thought of as collisions at ﬁrst. It was
not until decades later that physicists thought of analyzing
the nodes of the Feynman diagrams more closely. Feyn-

5
man famously painted Feynman diagrams on the exterior
of his van.[36][37]
From his diagrams of a small number of particles inter-
acting in spacetime, Feynman could then model all of
physics in terms of the spins of those particles and the
range of coupling of the fundamental forces.[38] Feyn-
man attempted an explanation of the strong interactions
governing nucleons scattering called the parton model.
The parton model emerged as a complement to the quark
model developed by his Caltech colleague Murray Gell-
Mann.
The relationship between the two models was
murky; Gell-Mann referred to Feynman’s partons deri-
sively as “put-ons”.
In the mid-1960s, physicists be-
lieved that quarks were just a bookkeeping device for
symmetry numbers, not real particles, as the statistics of
the Omega-minus particle, if it were interpreted as three
identical strange quarks bound together, seemed impos-
sible if quarks were real. The Stanford linear accelerator
deep inelastic scattering experiments of the late 1960s
showed, analogously to Ernest Rutherford's experiment
of scattering alpha particles on gold nuclei in 1911, that
nucleons (protons and neutrons) contained point-like par-
ticles which scattered electrons. It was natural to identify
these with quarks, but Feynman’s parton model attempted
to interpret the experimental data in a way which did not
introduce additional hypotheses. For example, the data
showed that some 45% of the energy momentum was car-
ried by electrically-neutral particles in the nucleon. These
electrically-neutral particles are now seen to be the gluons
which carry the forces between the quarks and carry also
the three-valued color quantum number which solves the
Omega-minus problem.
Feynman did not dispute the
quark model; for example, when the ﬁfth quark was dis-
covered in 1977, Feynman immediately pointed out to
his students that the discovery implied the existence of
a sixth quark, which was duly discovered in the decade
after his death.
After the success of quantum electrodynamics, Feynman
turned to quantum gravity. By analogy with the photon,
which has spin 1, he investigated the consequences of a
free massless spin 2 ﬁeld, and derived the Einstein ﬁeld
equation of general relativity, but little more.[39] How-
ever, the computational device that Feynman discovered
then for gravity, “ghosts”, which are “particles” in the in-
terior of his diagrams which have the “wrong” connection
between spin and statistics, have proved invaluable in ex-
plaining the quantum particle behavior of the Yang–Mills
theories, for example, QCD and the electro-weak theory.
In 1965, Feynman was appointed a foreign member of
the Royal Society.[6][40] At this time in the early 1960s,
Feynman exhausted himself by working on multiple ma-
jor projects at the same time, including a request, while
at Caltech, to “spruce up” the teaching of undergradu-
ates. After three years devoted to the task, he produced
a series of lectures that eventually became The Feynman
Lectures on Physics. He wanted a picture of a drumhead
sprinkled with powder to show the modes of vibration at
Mention of Feynman’s prize on the monument at the American
Museum of Natural History in New York City. Because the mon-
ument is dedicated to American Laureates, Tomonaga is not men-
tioned.
the beginning of the book. Concerned over the connec-
tions to drugs and rock and roll that could be made from
the image, the publishers changed the cover to plain red,
though they included a picture of him playing drums in
the foreword. The Feynman Lectures on Physics [41] oc-
cupied two physicists, Robert B. Leighton and Matthew
Sands, as part-time co-authors for several years. Even
though the books were not adopted by most universities as
textbooks, they continue to sell well because they provide
a deep understanding of physics. As of 2005, The Feyn-
man Lectures on Physics has sold over 1.5 million copies
in English, an estimated 1 million copies in Russian, and
an estimated half million copies in other languages. Many
of his lectures and miscellaneous talks were turned into
other books, including The Character of Physical Law,
QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter, Statisti-
cal Mechanics, Lectures on Gravitation, and the Feynman
Lectures on Computation.
Feynman’s students competed keenly for his attention; he
was once awakened when a student solved a problem and
dropped it in his mailbox; glimpsing the student sneaking
across his lawn, he could not go back to sleep, and he read
the student’s solution. The next morning his breakfast was
interrupted by another triumphant student, but Feynman
informed him that he was too late.
Partly as a way to bring publicity to progress in physics,
Feynman oﬀered $1,000 prizes for two of his challenges
in nanotechnology; one was claimed by William McLel-
lan and the other by Tom Newman.[42] He was also one of
the ﬁrst scientists to conceive the possibility of quantum
computers.
In 1974, Feynman delivered the Caltech commencement
address on the topic of cargo cult science, which has the
semblance of science, but is only pseudoscience due to a
lack of “a kind of scientiﬁc integrity, a principle of scien-
tiﬁc thought that corresponds to a kind of utter honesty”
on the part of the scientist. He instructed the graduat-
ing class that “The ﬁrst principle is that you must not fool
yourself—and you are the easiest person to fool. So you
have to be very careful about that. After you've not fooled
yourself, it’s easy not to fool other scientists. You just
have to be honest in a conventional way after that.”[43]
In 1984–86, he developed a variational method for the
approximate calculation of path integrals which has led

6
6
CHALLENGER DISASTER
Richard Feynman at the Robert Treat Paine Estate in Waltham,
MA, in 1984.
to a powerful method of converting divergent perturba-
tion expansions into convergent strong-coupling expan-
sions (variational perturbation theory) and, as a conse-
quence, to the most accurate determination[44] of critical
exponents measured in satellite experiments.[45]
In the late 1980s, according to “Richard Feynman and
the Connection Machine", Feynman played a crucial role
in developing the ﬁrst massively parallel computer, and
in ﬁnding innovative uses for it in numerical computa-
tions, in building neural networks, as well as physical sim-
ulations using cellular automata (such as turbulent ﬂuid
ﬂow), working with Stephen Wolfram at Caltech.[46] His
son Carl also played a role in the development of the origi-
nal Connection Machine engineering; Feynman inﬂuenc-
ing the interconnects while his son worked on the soft-
ware.
Feynman diagrams are now fundamental for string
theory and M-theory, and have even been extended
topologically.[47] The world-lines of the diagrams have
developed to become tubes to allow better modeling of
more complicated objects such as strings and membranes.
Shortly before his death, Feynman criticized string theory
in an interview: “I don't like that they're not calculating
anything,” he said. “I don't like that they don't check their
ideas. I don't like that for anything that disagrees with an
experiment, they cook up an explanation—a ﬁx-up to say,
‘Well, it still might be true.'" These words have since been
much-quoted by opponents of the string-theoretic direc-
tion for particle physics.[34]
6
Challenger disaster
Main article: Space Shuttle Challenger disaster
Feynman played an important role on the Presidential
The 1986 Space Shuttle Challenger disaster
Rogers Commission, which investigated the Challenger
disaster. During a televised hearing, Feynman demon-
strated that the material used in the shuttle’s O-rings be-
came less resilient in cold weather by compressing a sam-
ple of the material in a clamp and immersing it in ice-cold
water.[48] The commission ultimately determined that the
disaster was caused by the primary O-ring not properly
sealing in unusually cold weather at Cape Canaveral.[49]
Feynman devoted the latter half of his book What Do You
Care What Other People Think? to his experience on the
Rogers Commission, straying from his usual convention
of brief, light-hearted anecdotes to deliver an extended
and sober narrative. Feynman’s account reveals a dis-
connect between NASA's engineers and executives that
was far more striking than he expected. His interviews
of NASA’s high-ranking managers revealed startling mis-
understandings of elementary concepts.
For instance,
NASA managers claimed that there was a 1 in 100,000
chance of a catastrophic failure aboard the shuttle, but
Feynman discovered that NASA’s own engineers esti-
mated the chance of a catastrophe at closer to 1 in 200.
He concluded that the space shuttle reliability estimate by
NASA management was fantastically unrealistic, and he
was particularly angered that NASA used these ﬁgures to
recruit Christa McAuliﬀe into the Teacher-in-Space pro-
gram. He warned in his appendix to the commission’s
report (which was included only after he threatened not
to sign the report), “For a successful technology, real-
ity must take precedence over public relations, for nature
cannot be fooled.”[50]
A television documentary drama named The Challenger
(US title: The Challenger Disaster), detailing Feynman’s
part in the investigation, was aired in 2013.[51]

7
7
Cultural identiﬁcation
Although born to and raised by parents who were
Ashkenazi, Feynman was not only an atheist,[52] but de-
clined to be labelled Jewish. He routinely refused to be in-
cluded in lists or books that classiﬁed people by race. He
asked to not be included in Tina Levitan’s The Laureates:
Jewish Winners of the Nobel Prize, writing, “To select, for
approbation the peculiar elements that come from some
supposedly Jewish heredity is to open the door to all kinds
of nonsense on racial theory,” and adding "...at thirteen I
was not only converted to other religious views, but I also
stopped believing that the Jewish people are in any way
'the chosen people'".[53]
8
Personal life
While researching for his Ph.D., Feynman married his
ﬁrst wife, Arline Greenbaum (often misspelled Arlene).
They married knowing that Arline was seriously ill from
tuberculosis, of which she died in 1945. In 1946, Feyn-
man wrote a letter to her, but kept it sealed for the rest
of his life.[54] This portion of Feynman’s life was por-
trayed in the 1996 ﬁlm Inﬁnity, which featured Feynman’s
daughter, Michelle, in a cameo role.
He married a second time in June 1952, to Mary Louise
Bell of Neodesha, Kansas; this marriage was unsuccess-
ful:
He begins working calculus problems
in his head as soon as he awakens.
He did
calculus while driving in his car, while sitting
in the living room, and while lying in bed at
night.
—Mary Louise Bell divorce complaint[2]
He later married Gweneth Howarth (1934–1989) from
Ripponden, Yorkshire, who shared his enthusiasm for
life and spirited adventure.[36] Besides their home in
Altadena, California, they had a beach house in Baja
California, purchased with the prize money from Feyn-
man’s Nobel Prize, his one third share of $55,000. They
remained married until Feynman’s death. They had a
son, Carl, in 1962, and adopted a daughter, Michelle, in
1968.[36]
Feynman had a great deal of success teaching Carl, using,
for example, discussions about ants and Martians as a de-
vice for gaining perspective on problems and issues. He
was surprised to learn that the same teaching devices were
not useful with Michelle.[37] Mathematics was a common
interest for father and son; they both entered the com-
puter ﬁeld as consultants and were involved in advancing
a new method of using multiple computers to solve com-
plex problems—later known as parallel computing. The
Jet Propulsion Laboratory retained Feynman as a com-
putational consultant during critical missions. One co-
worker characterized Feynman as akin to Don Quixote at
his desk, rather than at a computer workstation, ready to
do battle with the windmills.
Feynman traveled widely, notably to Brazil, where he
gave courses at the CBPF (Brazilian Center for Physics
Research) and near the end of his life schemed to visit
the Russian land of Tuva, a dream that, because of Cold
War bureaucratic problems, never became reality.[55] The
day after he died, a letter arrived for him from the Soviet
government, giving him authorization to travel to Tuva.
Out of his enthusiastic interest in reaching Tuva came the
phrase “Tuva or Bust” (also the title of a book about his
eﬀorts to get there), which was tossed about frequently
amongst his circle of friends in hope that they, one day,
could see it ﬁrsthand. The documentary movie, Genghis
Blues, mentions some of his attempts to communicate
with Tuva and chronicles the successful journey there by
his friends.
Responding to Hubert Humphrey's congratulation for his
Nobel Prize, Feynman admitted to a long admiration for
the then vice president.[56] In a letter to an MIT professor
dated December 6, 1966, Feynman expressed interest in
running for governor of California.[57]
Feynman took up drawing at one time and enjoyed some
success under the pseudonym “Ofey”, culminating in an
exhibition of his work. He learned to play a metal per-
cussion instrument (frigideira) in a samba style in Brazil,
and participated in a samba school.
In addition, he had some degree of synesthesia for equa-
tions, explaining that the letters in certain mathematical
functions appeared in color for him, even though invari-
ably printed in standard black-and-white.[58]
According to Genius, the James Gleick-authored biog-
raphy, Feynman tried LSD during his professorship at
Caltech.[34] Somewhat embarrassed by his actions, he
largely sidestepped the issue when dictating his anec-
dotes; he mentions it in passing in the “O Americano,
Outra Vez” section, while the “Altered States” chap-
ter in Surely You're Joking, Mr.
Feynman!
describes
only marijuana and ketamine experiences at John Lilly's
famed sensory deprivation tanks, as a way of studying
consciousness.[25] Feynman gave up alcohol when he be-
gan to show vague, early signs of alcoholism, as he did
not want to do anything that could damage his brain—
the same reason given in “O Americano, Outra Vez” for
his reluctance to experiment with LSD.[25]
In Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!, he gives advice
on the best way to pick up a girl in a hostess bar. At Cal-
tech, he used a nude or topless bar as an oﬃce away from
his usual oﬃce, making sketches or writing physics equa-
tions on paper placemats. When the county oﬃcials tried
to close the place, all visitors except Feynman refused to
testify in favor of the bar, fearing that their families or
patrons would learn about their visits. Only Feynman ac-

8
11
BIBLIOGRAPHY
cepted, and in court, he aﬃrmed that the bar was a pub-
lic need, stating that craftsmen, technicians, engineers,
common workers, “and a physics professor” frequented
the establishment. While the bar lost the court case, it
was allowed to remain open as a similar case was pend-
ing appeal.[25]
Feynman has a minor acting role in the ﬁlm Anti-Clock
credited as “The Professor”.[59]
9
Death
Feynman had two rare forms of cancer, liposarcoma and
Waldenström’s macroglobulinemia, dying shortly after a
ﬁnal attempt at surgery for the former on February 15,
1988, aged 69.[34] His last recorded words are noted as,
“I'd hate to die twice. It’s so boring.”[34][60]
10
Popular legacy
Actor Alan Alda commissioned playwright Peter Par-
nell to write a two-character play about a ﬁctional day
in the life of Feynman set two years before Feynman’s
death. The play, QED, which was based on writings about
Richard Feynman’s life during the 1990s, premiered at
the Mark Taper Forum in Los Angeles, California in
2001. The play was then presented at the Vivian Beau-
mont Theater on Broadway, with both presentations star-
ring Alda as Richard Feynman.[61]
On May 4, 2005, the United States Postal Service is-
sued the American Scientists commemorative set of four
37-cent self-adhesive stamps in several conﬁgurations.
The scientists depicted were Richard Feynman, John
von Neumann, Barbara McClintock, and Josiah Willard
Gibbs. Feynman’s stamp, sepia-toned, features a photo-
graph of a 30-something Feynman and eight small Feyn-
man diagrams.[62] The stamps were designed by Victor
Stabin under the artistic direction of Carl T. Herrman.[63]
The main building for the Computing Division at
Fermilab is named the “Feynman Computing Center” in
his honor.[64]
The principal character in Thomas A. McMahon's 1970
novel, Principles of American Nuclear Chemistry:
A
Novel, is modeled on Feynman.
Real Time Opera premiered its opera Feynman at the
Norfolk (CT) Chamber Music Festival in June 2005.[65]
In February 2008 LA Theatre Works released a record-
ing of 'Moving Bodies’ with Alfred Molina in the role of
Richard Feynman. This radio play written by playwright
Arthur Giron is an interpretation on how Feynman be-
came one of the iconic American scientists and is loosely
based on material found in Feynman’s two transcribed
oral memoirs Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman! and
What Do You Care What Other People Think?.
On the twentieth anniversary of Feynman’s death, com-
poser Edward Manukyan dedicated a piece for solo clar-
inet to his memory.[66] It was premiered by Doug Storey,
the principal clarinetist of the Amarillo Symphony.
Between 2009 and 2011, clips of an interview with Feyn-
man were used by composer John Boswell as part of the
Symphony of Science project in the second, ﬁfth, sev-
enth, and eleventh installments of his videos, “We Are
All Connected”, “The Poetry of Reality”, “A Wave of
Reason”, and “The Quantum World”.[67]
In a 1992 New York Times article on Feynman and his
legacy, James Gleick recounts the story of how Murray
Gell-Mann described what has become known as “The
Feynman Algorithm” or “The Feynman Problem-Solving
Algorithm” to a student: “The student asks Gell-Mann
about Feynman’s notes. Gell-Mann says no, Dick’s meth-
ods are not the same as the methods used here.
The
student asks, well, what are Feynman’s methods? Gell-
Mann leans coyly against the blackboard and says: Dick’s
method is this. You write down the problem. You think
very hard. (He shuts his eyes and presses his knuckles
parodically to his forehead.) Then you write down the
answer.” [68]
In 1998, a photograph of Richard Feynman giving a lec-
ture was part of the poster series commissioned by Apple
Inc. for their "Think Diﬀerent" advertising campaign.[69]
In 2011, Feynman was the subject of a biographical
graphic novel entitled simply Feynman, written by Jim
Ottaviani and illustrated by Leland Myrick.[70]
In 2013, the BBC drama The Challenger depicted Feyn-
man’s role on the Rogers Commission in exposing the O-
ring ﬂaw in NASA’s solid-rocket boosters (SRBs), itself
based in part on Feynman’s book What Do You Care What
Other People Think?[71][72]
11
Bibliography
11.1
Selected scientiﬁc works
• Feynman, Richard P. (2000). Laurie M. Brown, ed.
Selected Papers of Richard Feynman: With Com-
mentary. 20th Century Physics. World Scientiﬁc.
ISBN 978-981-02-4131-5.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1942). Laurie M. Brown, ed.
The Principle of Least Action in Quantum Mechanics.
Ph.D. Dissertation, Princeton University.
World
Scientiﬁc (with title Feynman’s Thesis: a New Ap-
proach to Quantum Theory) (published 2005). ISBN
978-981-256-380-4.
• Wheeler, John A.; Feynman, Richard P. (1945).
“Interaction with the Absorber as the Mechanism
of Radiation”.
Rev.
Mod.
Phys.
17 (2–
3):
157–181.
Bibcode:1945RvMP...17..157W.
doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.17.157.

11.2
Textbooks and lecture notes
9
• Feynman, Richard P. (1946). A Theorem and its Ap-
plication to Finite Tampers. Los Alamos Scientiﬁc
Laboratory, Atomic Energy Commission.
OSTI
4341197.
• Feynman, Richard P.; Welton, T. A. (1946). Neu-
tron Diﬀusion in a Space Lattice of Fissionable and
Absorbing Materials. Los Alamos Scientiﬁc Labora-
tory, Atomic Energy Commission. OSTI 4381097.
• Feynman, Richard P.; Metropolis, N.; Teller, E.
(1947). Equations of State of Elements Based on
the Generalized Fermi-Thomas Theory. Los Alamos
Scientiﬁc Laboratory, Atomic Energy Commission.
OSTI 4417654.
• Feynman,
Richard
P.
(1948a).
“Space-
time
approach
to
non-relativistic
quantum
mechanics”.
Rev.
Mod.
Phys.
20 (2):
367–387.
Bibcode:1948RvMP...20..367F.
doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.20.367.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1948b). “Relativistic Cut-Oﬀ
for Quantum Electrodynamics”. Physical Review 74
(10): 1430–1438. Bibcode:1948PhRv...74.1430F.
doi:10.1103/PhysRev.74.1430.
• Wheeler, John A.; Feynman, Richard P. (1949).
“Classical Electrodynamics in Terms of Direct In-
terparticle Action”.
Rev.
Mod.
Phys.
21
(3):
425–433.
Bibcode:1949RvMP...21..425W.
doi:10.1103/RevModPhys.21.425.
• Feynman,
Richard
P.
(1949).
“The
the-
ory of positrons”.
Phys.
Rev.
76 (6):
749–759.
Bibcode:1949PhRv...76..749F.
doi:10.1103/PhysRev.76.749.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1949b). “Space-Time Ap-
proach to Quantum Electrodynamic”. Phys. Rev.
76 (6): 769–789. Bibcode:1949PhRv...76..769F.
doi:10.1103/PhysRev.76.769.
• Feynman,
Richard P. (1950).
“Mathemati-
cal formulation of the quantum theory of elec-
tromagnetic interaction”.
Phys.
Rev.
80
(3):
440–457.
Bibcode:1950PhRv...80..440F.
doi:10.1103/PhysRev.80.440.
• Feynman,
Richard P. (1951).
“An Opera-
tor
Calculus
Having
Applications
in
Quan-
tum Electrodynamics”.
Phys.
Rev.
84:
108–128.
Bibcode:1951PhRv...84..108F.
doi:10.1103/PhysRev.84.108.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1953).
“The λ-Transition
in Liquid Helium”.
Phys.
Rev.
90 (6):
1116–1117.
Bibcode:1953PhRv...90.1116F.
doi:10.1103/PhysRev.90.1116.2.
• Feynman, Richard P.; de Hoﬀmann, F.; Serber, R.
(1955). Dispersion of the Neutron Emission in U235
Fission. Los Alamos Scientiﬁc Laboratory, Atomic
Energy Commission. OSTI 4354998.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1956).
“Science and the
Open Channel”. Science (February 24, 1956) 123
(3191):
307.
Bibcode:1956Sci...123..307F.
doi:10.1126/science.123.3191.307.
PMID
17774518.
• Cohen,
M.;
Feynman,
Richard
P.
(1957).
“Theory of Inelastic Scattering of Cold Neu-
trons
from
Liquid
Helium”.
Phys.
Rev.
107:
13–24.
Bibcode:1957PhRv..107...13C.
doi:10.1103/PhysRev.107.13.
• Feynman, Richard P.; Vernon, F. L.; Hellwarth,
R.W. (1957).
“Geometric representation of the
Schrödinger equation for solving maser equations”.
J. Appl. Phys 28: 49. Bibcode:1957JAP....28...49F.
doi:10.1063/1.1722572.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1959). “Plenty of Room at
the Bottom”. Presentation to American Physical So-
ciety.
• Edgar, R. S.; Feynman, Richard P.; Klein, S.;
Lielausis, I.; Steinberg, CM (1962). “Mapping ex-
periments with r mutants of bacteriophage T4D”.
Genetics (February 1962) 47 (2): 179–86. PMC
1210321. PMID 13889186.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1966). “The Development
of the Space-Time View of Quantum Elec-
trodynamics”.
Science (August 12, 1966) 153
(3737): 699–708.
Bibcode:1966Sci...153..699F.
doi:10.1126/science.153.3737.699.
PMID
17791121.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1974a).
“Structure of
the proton”.
Science (February 15, 1974) 183
(4125): 601–610.
Bibcode:1974Sci...183..601F.
doi:10.1126/science.183.4125.601.
PMID
17778830.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1974). “Cargo Cult Science”
(PDF). Engineering and Science 37 (7).
• Feynman, Richard P.; Kleinert, Hagen (1986).
“Eﬀective
classical
partition
functions”.
Phys.
Rev.,
A
(December
1986)
34
(6):
5080–5084.
Bibcode:1986PhRvA..34.5080F.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevA.34.5080. PMID 9897894.
11.2
Textbooks and lecture notes
The Feynman Lectures on Physics is perhaps his most ac-
cessible work for anyone with an interest in physics, com-
piled from lectures to Caltech undergraduates in 1961–
64. As news of the lectures’ lucidity grew, a number
of professional physicists and graduate students began to
drop in to listen. Co-authors Robert B. Leighton and

10
11
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Matthew Sands, colleagues of Feynman, edited and il-
lustrated them into book form. The work has endured
and is useful to this day. They were edited and supple-
mented in 2005 with “Feynman’s Tips on Physics: A
Problem-Solving Supplement to the Feynman Lectures
on Physics” by Michael Gottlieb and Ralph Leighton
(Robert Leighton’s son), with support from Kip Thorne
and other physicists.
• Feynman, Richard P.; Leighton, Robert B.; Sands,
Matthew (1970). The Feynman Lectures on Physics:
The Deﬁnitive and Extended Edition.
3 volumes
(2nd ed.). Addison Wesley (published 2005, orig-
inally published as separate volumes in 1964 and
1966). ISBN 0-8053-9045-6. Check date values in:
|publicationdate= (help) Includes Feynman’s Tips on
Physics (with Michael Gottlieb and Ralph Leighton),
which includes four previously unreleased lectures
on problem solving, exercises by Robert Leighton
and Rochus Vogt, and a historical essay by Matthew
Sands.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1961). Theory of Fundamen-
tal Processes. Addison Wesley. ISBN 0-8053-2507-
7.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1962). Quantum Electrody-
namics. Addison Wesley. ISBN 978-0-8053-2501-
0.
• Feynman, Richard P.; Hibbs, Albert (1965). Quan-
tum Mechanics and Path Integrals. McGraw Hill.
ISBN 0-07-020650-3.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1967).
The Character of
Physical Law: The 1964 Messenger Lectures. MIT
Press. ISBN 0-262-56003-8.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1972). Statistical Mechanics:
A Set of Lectures. Reading, Mass: W. A. Benjamin.
ISBN 0-8053-2509-3.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1985b). QED: The Strange
Theory of Light and Matter. Princeton University
Press. ISBN 0-691-02417-0.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1987). Elementary Particles
and the Laws of Physics: The 1986 Dirac Memorial
Lectures. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0-521-
34000-4.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1995). Brian Hatﬁeld, ed.
Lectures on Gravitation. Addison Wesley Longman.
ISBN 0-201-62734-5.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1997). Feynman’s Lost Lec-
ture: The Motion of Planets Around the Sun (Vintage
Press ed.). London: Vintage. ISBN 0-09-973621-
7.
• Feynman, Richard P. (2000). Tony Hey and Robin
W. Allen, ed. Feynman Lectures on Computation.
Perseus Books Group. ISBN 0-7382-0296-7.
11.3
Popular works
• Feynman, Richard P. (1985). Ralph Leighton, ed.
Surely You're Joking, Mr. Feynman!: Adventures of
a Curious Character. W. W. Norton & Co. ISBN
0-393-01921-7. OCLC 10925248.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1988). Ralph Leighton, ed.
What Do You Care What Other People Think?: Fur-
ther Adventures of a Curious Character. W. W. Nor-
ton & Co. ISBN 0-393-02659-0.
• No Ordinary Genius: The Illustrated Richard Feyn-
man, ed. Christopher Sykes, W. W. Norton & Co,
1996, ISBN 0-393-31393-X.
• Six Easy Pieces: Essentials of Physics Explained by
Its Most Brilliant Teacher, Perseus Books, 1994,
ISBN 0-201-40955-0.
• Six Not So Easy Pieces: Einstein’s Relativity, Symme-
try and Space-Time, Addison Wesley, 1997, ISBN
0-201-15026-3.
• The Meaning of It All: Thoughts of a Citizen Scientist,
Perseus Publishing, 1999, ISBN 0-7382-0166-9.
• The Pleasure of Finding Things Out: The Best Short
Works of Richard P. Feynman, edited by Jeﬀrey
Robbins, Perseus Books, 1999, ISBN 0-7382-0108-
1.
• Classic Feynman: All the Adventures of a Curious
Character, edited by Ralph Leighton, W. W. Norton
& Co, 2005, ISBN 0-393-06132-9. Chronologically
reordered omnibus volume of Surely You're Joking,
Mr. Feynman! and What Do You Care What Other
People Think?, with a bundled CD containing one of
Feynman’s signature lectures.
• Quantum Man, Atlas books, 2011, Lawrence M.
Krauss, ISBN 978-0-393-06471-1.
• “Feynman: The Graphic Novel” Jim Ottaviani and
Leland Myrick, ISBN 978-1-59643-259-8.
11.4
Audio and video recordings
• Safecracker Suite (a collection of drum pieces inter-
spersed with Feynman telling anecdotes)
• Los Alamos From Below (audio, talk given by Feyn-
man at Santa Barbara on February 6, 1975)
• Six Easy Pieces (original lectures upon which the
book is based)
• Six Not So Easy Pieces (original lectures upon which
the book is based)
• The Feynman Lectures on Physics: The Complete
Audio Collection

11
• Samples of Feynman’s drumming, chanting and
speech are included in the songs “Tuva Groove
(Bolur Daa-Bol, Bolbas Daa-Bol)" and “Kargyraa
Rap (Dürgen Chugaa)" on the album Back Tuva Fu-
ture, The Adventure Continues by Kongar-ool On-
dar. The hidden track on this album also includes
excerpts from lectures without musical background.
• The Messenger Lectures, given at Cornell in 1964,
in which he explains basic topics in physics.
Available on Project Tuva for free (See also the book
The Character of Physical Law)
• Take the world from another point of view [video-
recording] / with Richard Feynman; Films for the
Hu (1972)
• The Douglas Robb Memorial Lectures Four pub-
lic lectures of which the four chapters of the book
QED: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter are
transcripts. (1979)
• The Pleasure of Finding Things Out on YouTube
(1981) (not to be confused with the later published
book of same title)
• Richard Feynman: Fun to Imagine Collection, BBC
Archive of 6 short ﬁlms of Feynman talking in a
style that is accessible to all about the physics be-
hind common to all experiences. (1983)
• Elementary Particles and the Laws of Physics (1986)
• Tiny Machines: The Feynman Talk on Nanotech-
nology (video, 1984)
• Computers From the Inside Out (video)
• Quantum Mechanical View of Reality: Workshop
at Esalen (video, 1983)
• Idiosyncratic Thinking Workshop (video, 1985)
• Bits and Pieces — From Richard’s Life and Times
(video, 1988)
• Strangeness Minus Three (video, BBC Horizon
1964)
• No Ordinary Genius (video, Cristopher Sykes Doc-
umentary)
• Richard Feynman — The Best Mind Since Einstein
(video, Documentary)
• The Motion of Planets Around the Sun (audio,
sometimes titled “Feynman’s Lost Lecture”)
• Nature of Matter (audio)
12
See also
• List of things named after Richard Feynman
• Feynman diagram
• Feynman checkerboard
• Flexagon
• Foresight Nanotech Institute Feynman Prize
• List of physicists
• List of theoretical physicists
• Morrie’s law
• Negative probability
• One-electron universe
• Stückelberg–Feynman interpretation
• Wheeler–Feynman absorber theory
13
Notes
[1] Richard Feynman at the Mathematics Genealogy Project
[2] Krauss 2011, p. 168
[3] “Physics World poll names Richard Feynman one of 10
greatest physicists of all time”. Media.caltech.edu. Re-
trieved December 1, 2012.
[4] West, Jacob (June 2003). “The Quantum Computer”. Re-
trieved September 20, 2009.
[5] Deutsch 1992, pp. 57-61.
[6] “Richard P. Feynman – Biographical”. The Nobel Foun-
dation. Retrieved April 23, 2013.
[7] “Guide to Nobel Prize – Richard P. Feynman”. Ency-
clopaedia Britannica. Retrieved March 31, 2013.
[8] J. J. O'Connor and E. F. Robertson (August 2002).
“Richard Phillips Feynman”. University of St. Andrews.
Retrieved April 23, 2013.
[9] “Richard Phillips Feynman”. Nobel-winners.com. Re-
trieved April 23, 2013.
[10] Feynman 1988, p. 25.
[11] Chown 1985, p. 34.
[12] Close 2011, p. 58.
[13] Sykes 1994, p. 54.
[14] Friedman 2004, p. 231.
[15] Henderson 2011, p. 8.

12
13
NOTES
[16] “My Mother, the Scientist”. Popular Science. March 23,
2014. Retrieved April 23, 2013. |ﬁrst1= missing |last1=
in Authors list (help)
[17] Gleick 1992, p. 30.
[18] Schweber 1994, p. 374.
[19] Feynman 1992, p. 72
[20] Schwach, Howard (April 15, 2005). “Museum Tracks
Down FRHS Nobel Laureates”. The Wave. Retrieved
April 23, 2013.
[21] Ottaviani 2011, p. 28.
[22] “Putnam Competition Individual and Team Winners”.
MMA: Mathematical Association of America. 2014. Re-
trieved March 8, 2014.
[23] Gleick 1992, p. 84.
[24] Feynman 1992, p. 134
[25] Feynman 1985
[26] Robert H. March. “Physics at the University of Wiscon-
sin: A History”. Physics in Perspective 5 (2): 130–149.
Bibcode:2003PhP.....5..130M. doi:10.1007/s00016-003-
0142-6.
[27] LeVine 2009
[28] Hey & Walters 1987.
[29] Feynman 1987
[30] Bethe 1991, p. 241.
[31] Schwinger 1958
[32] Feynman & Hibbs 1965
[33] Kac, Mark (1949). “On Distributions of Certain Wiener
Functionals”. Transactions of the American Mathemati-
cal Society 65 (1): 1–13. doi:10.2307/1990512. JSTOR
1990512.
[34] Gleick 1992
[35] Pines, David (1989).
“Richard Feynman and Con-
densed Matter Physics”.
Physics Today 42 (2):
61.
Bibcode:1989PhT....42b..61P. doi:10.1063/1.881194.
[36] Feynman 2005
[37] Sykes 1996
[38] Feynman 1961
[39] Feynman 1995
[40] Mehra, J. (2002).
"Richard Phillips Feynman 11
May 1918 - 15 February 1988”.
Biographical Mem-
oirs of Fellows of the Royal Society 48:
97–128.
doi:10.1098/rsbm.2002.0007.
[41] Feynman 1970
[42] Gribbin & Gribbin 1997, p. 170
[43] Feynman 1974b
[44] Kleinert,
Hagen (1999).
“Speciﬁc heat of liquid
helium in zero gravity very near the lambda point”.
Physical Review D 60 (8):
085001.
arXiv:hep-
th/9812197.
Bibcode:1999PhRvD..60h5001K.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevD.60.085001.
[45] Lipa, J.A.; Nissen, J.; Stricker, D.; Swanson, D.;
Chui,
T.
(2003).
“Speciﬁc
heat
of
liquid
he-
lium in zero gravity very near the lambda point”.
Physical Review B 68 (17):
174518.
arXiv:cond-
mat/0310163.
Bibcode:2003PhRvB..68q4518L.
doi:10.1103/PhysRevB.68.174518.
[46] Hillis 1989
[47] Hooft, Gerard ’t Hooft.
“On the Foundations of
Superstring Theory”.
http://www.staff.science.uu.nl/
~{}hooft101/.
[48] Feynman 1988, p. 151
[49] James Gleick (February 17, 1988). “Richard Feynman
Dead at 69; Leading Theoretical Physicist”. New York
Times. Retrieved April 23, 2013.
[50] Richard Feynman. “Appendix F – Personal observations
on the reliability of the Shuttle”. Kennedy Space Center.
[51] Bricken, Rob.
“Here’s William Hurt as the legendary
physicist Richard Feynman!". io9. Retrieved April 23,
2013.
[52] Brian 2008, p. 49 Interviewer: Do you call yourself an
agnostic or an atheist? Feynman: An atheist. Agnostic
for me would be trying to weasel out and sound a little
nicer than I am about this.
[53] Harrison, John. “Physics, bongos and the art of the nude”.
The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved April 23, 2013.
[54] “I love my wife. My wife is dead”. Letters of Note. Re-
trieved April 23, 2013.
[55] Leighton 2000.
[56] Feynman 2005, p. 173
[57] Feynman 2005, p. 228
[58] Feynman 1988
[59] “Anti-clock(1979)". IMDB. Retrieved April 23, 2013.
[60] “Richard Feynman at Find a Grave”. Retrieved October
4, 2008.
[61] ibdb.com
[62] “Who is Richard Feynman?". feynmangroup.com. Re-
trieved December 1, 2012.
[63] “American Scientists Series Slideshow”.
Beyondthe
pref.com. Retrieved December 1, 2012.
[64] “Fermilab Open House: Computing Division”. fnal.gov.
Retrieved December 1, 2012.

13
[65] “Real Time Opera”. rtopera.org. Retrieved December 1,
2012.
[66] “Musical Tribute to Scientists”.
edwardmanukyan.co.
Retrieved $1 $2.
[67] “Spreading scientiﬁc knowledge and philosophy through
music”. The Symphony of Science. Retrieved November
24, 2010.
[68] Gleick, James. “Part Showman, All Genius.” New York
Times (1923–Current ﬁle); Sep 20, 1992; ProQuest His-
torical Newspapers: The New York Times (1851–2009);
p. SM38.
[69] Great Mind Richard Feynman Birthday | Manhattan
Project and Challenger Disaster | Quantum Electrody-
namics | Biography. Techie-buzz.com (May 10, 2011).
Retrieved on May 6, 2012.
[70] Jim Ottaviani; Leland Myrick (2011). Feynman. New
York: First Second. ISBN 978-1-59643-259-8. OCLC
664838951.
[71] “BBC – Media Centre – The Challenger”.
Retrieved
March 18, 2013.
[72] “BBC Two – The Challenger”.
Retrieved March 19,
2013.
14
References
• Bethe, Hans A. (1991). The Road from Los Alamos.
Masters of Modern Physics 2.
New York: Si-
mon and Schuster. ISBN 0-671-74012-1. OCLC
24734608.
• Brian, Denis (2008). The Voice of Genius: Conver-
sations with Nobel Scientists and Other Luminaries.
Basic Books. ISBN 978-0-465-01139-1.
• Chown, Marcus (May 2, 1985). “Strangeness and
Charm”. New Scientist: 34. ISSN 0262-4079.
• Close, Frank (2011). The Inﬁnity Puzzle: The Per-
sonalities, Politics, and Extraordinary Science Be-
hind the Higgs Boson.
Oxford University Press.
ISBN 978-0-19-959350-7.
• Deutsch, David (June 1, 1992). “Quantum compu-
tation”. Physics World: 57–61. ISSN 0953-8585.
• Edwards, Steven Alan (2006). The Nanotech Pio-
neers. Wiley. ISBN 978-3-527-31290-0. OCLC
64304124.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1986). Rogers Commission
Report, Volume 2 Appendix F – Personal Observa-
tions on Reliability of Shuttle. NASA.
• Feynman, Richard P. (1987). Ralph Leighton, ed.
“Mr. Feynman Goes to Washington”. Engineering
and Science (Caltech) 51 (1): 6–22. ISSN 0013-
7812.
• Feynman, Michelle, ed. (2005). Perfectly Reason-
able Deviations from the Beaten Track: The Let-
ters of Richard P. Feynman. Basic Books. ISBN
0-7382-0636-9.
(Published in the UK under the
title: Don't You Have Time to Think?, with ad-
ditional commentary by Michelle Feynman, Allen
Lane, 2005, ISBN 0-7139-9847-4.)
• Friedman, Jerome (2004). “A Student’s View of
Fermi”. In Cronin, James W.. Fermi Remembered.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. ISBN 978-
0-226-12111-6.
• Gribbin, John; Gribbin, Mary (1997).
Richard
Feynman: A Life in Science. Dutton. ISBN 0-525-
94124-X.
• Gleick, James (1992). Genius: The Life and Sci-
ence of Richard Feynman. Pantheon Books. ISBN
0-679-40836-3. OCLC 243743850.
• Henderson, Harry (2011).
Richard Feynman:
Quarks, Bombs, and Bongos. Chelsea House Pub-
lishers. ISBN 978-0-8160-6176-1.
• Hey, Tony; Walters, Patrick (1987). The quantum
universe. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 978-
0-521-31845-7.
• Hillis,
W. Daniel (1989).
“Richard Feyn-
man
and
The
Connection
Machine”.
Physics
Today
(Institute
of
Physics)
42
(2):
78.
Bibcode:1989PhT....42b..78H.
doi:10.1063/1.881196.
• Krauss, Lawrence M. (2011).
Quantum Man:
Richard Feynman’s Life in Science.
W.W. Nor-
ton & Company.
ISBN 0-393-06471-9.
OCLC
601108916.
• Leighton, Ralph (2000).
Tuva Or Bust!:Richard
Feynman’s last journey. W. W. Norton & Company.
ISBN 0-393-32069-3.
• LeVine, Harry (2009). The Great Explainer: The
Story of Richard Feynman. Greensboro, North Car-
olina: Morgan Reynolds. ISBN 978-1-59935-113-
1.
• Ottaviani, Jim; Myrick, Leland Sycamore, Hilary
(2011). Feynman (1st ed.). New York: First Sec-
ond. ISBN 978-1-59643-259-8.
• Schweber, Silvan S. (1994). QED and the Men Who
Made It: Dyson, Feynman, Schwinger, and Tomon-
aga.
Princeton University Press.
ISBN 0-691-
03327-7.
• Schwinger, Julian, ed. (1958). Selected Papers on
Quantum Electrodynamics.
Dover.
ISBN 0-486-
60444-6.
• Sykes, Christopher (1994).
No ordinary genius :
the illustrated Richard Feynman. New York: W.W.
Norton. ISBN 0-393-03621-9.

14
16
EXTERNAL LINKS
15
Further reading
15.1
Articles
• Physics Today, American Institute of Physics maga-
zine, February 1989 Issue. (Vol.42, No.2.) Special
Feynman memorial issue containing non-technical
articles on Feynman’s life and work in physics.
15.2
Books
• Brown, Laurie M. and Rigden, John S. (editors)
(1993) Most of the Good Stuﬀ: Memories of Richard
Feynman Simon and Schuster, New York, ISBN 0-
88318-870-8. Commentary by Joan Feynman, John
Wheeler, Hans Bethe, Julian Schwinger, Murray
Gell-Mann, Daniel Hillis, David Goodstein, Free-
man Dyson, and Laurie Brown
• Dyson, Freeman (1979) Disturbing the Universe.
Harper and Row. ISBN 0-06-011108-9. Dyson’s
autobiography. The chapters “A Scientiﬁc Appren-
ticeship” and “A Ride to Albuquerque” describe
his impressions of Feynman in the period 1947–48
when Dyson was a graduate student at Cornell
• Gleick, James (1992) Genius: The Life and Sci-
ence of Richard Feynman. Pantheon. ISBN 0-679-
74704-4
• LeVine, Harry, III (2009) The Great Explainer: The
Story of Richard Feynman (Proﬁles in Science se-
ries) Morgan Reynolds, Greensboro, North Car-
olina, ISBN 978-1-59935-113-1; for high school
readers
• Mehra, Jagdish (1994) The Beat of a Diﬀerent
Drum: The Life and Science of Richard Feynman.
Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-853948-7
• Gribbin, John and Gribbin, Mary (1997) Richard
Feynman: A Life in Science. Dutton, New York,
ISBN 0-525-94124-X
• Milburn, Gerard J. (1998) The Feynman Processor:
Quantum Entanglement and the Computing Revolu-
tion Perseus Books, ISBN 0-7382-0173-1
• Mlodinow, Leonard (2003) Feynman’s Rainbow: A
Search For Beauty In Physics And In Life Warner
Books.
ISBN 0-446-69251-4 Published in the
United Kingdom as Some Time With Feynman
• Ottaviani, Jim and Myrick, Leland (2011) Feynman.
First Second.
ISBN 978-1-59643-259-8 OCLC
664838951.
15.3
Films and plays
• Inﬁnity, a movie directed by Matthew Broderick and
starring Matthew Broderick as Feynman, depicting
Feynman’s love aﬀair with his ﬁrst wife and ending
with the Trinity test. 1996.
• Parnell, Peter (2002) "QED" Applause Books,
ISBN 978-1-55783-592-5, (play).
• Whittell, Crispin (2006) “Clever Dick” Oberon
Books, (play)
• “The Pleasure of Finding Things Out” on YouTube.
Feynman talks about his life in science and his love
of exploring nature.
1981, BBC Horizon.
See
Christopher Sykes Productions.
• “The Quest for Tannu Tuva” on YouTube, with
Richard Feynman and Ralph Leighton. 1987, BBC
Horizon and PBS Nova (entitled “Last Journey of a
Genius”).
• “No Ordinary Genius” A two-part documentary
about Feynman’s life and work, with contributions
from colleagues, friends and family.
1993, BBC
Horizon and PBS Nova (a one-hour version, under
the title “The Best Mind Since Einstein”) (2 × 50
minute ﬁlms)
• The Challenger (2013) A BBC Two factual drama
starring William Hurt, tells the story of American
Nobel prize-winning physicist Richard Feynman’s
determination to reveal the truth behind the 1986
space shuttle Challenger disaster.
• The Fantastic Mr Feynman. One hour documentary.
2013, BBC TV.
16
External links
• Oﬃcial website

