HOLISM AND REDUCTIONISM IN BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY 

Episteme 
A SERIES IN THE FOUNDATIONAL, 
METHODOLOGICAL, PHILOSOPHICAL, PSYCHOLOGICAL, SOCIOLOGICAL, AND 
POLITICAL ASPECTS OF THE SCIENCES, PURE AND APPLIED 
VOLUME 23 
Editor: Mario Bunge 
Foundations and Philosophy of Science Unit, McGill University 
Advisory Editorial Board: 
Raymond Boudon, Sociology, Maison des Sciences de I' Homme, Paris 
George Bugliarello, Engineering, Polytechnic Institute of New York 
Bruno Fritsch, Professor emeritus of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich 
Ivan T. Frolov, Philosophy and Social Sciences, USSR Academy of Science, Moscow 
Erwin Hiebert, History of Science, Harvard University 
Philip Kitcher, Philosophy, University of California, Davis 
Nicholas Rescher, Philosophy, University of Pittsburgh 
Michael Ruse, Philosophy and Zoology, University of Guelph 
Raimo Tuomela, Philosophy, University of Helsinki 
Paul Weingartner, Philosophy, Salzburg University 

HOLISM AND REDUCTIONISM 
IN BIOLOGY AND ECOLOGY 
The Mutual Dependence of Higher and Lower 
Level Research Programmes 
by 
RICK C. LOOIJEN 
Laboratory of Plant Ecology, 
Faculty of Biology, 
University of Groningen, 
The Netherlands 
SPRINGER-SCIENCE+BUSINESS MEDIA, B. V. 

A C.I.P. Catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of Congress. 
ISBN 978-90-481-5364-0 
ISBN 978-94-015-9560-5 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1 007/978-94-015-9560-5 
Printed an acid-free paper 
AII Rights Reserved 
© 2000 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht 
Originally published by Kluwer Academic Publishers in 2000 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1 st edition 2000 
N o part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or 
utilized in any form Of by any means, electronic Of mechanical, 
inciuding photocopying, recording or by any information storage and 
retrieval system, without written permis sion from the copyright owner. 

v 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
PREFACE 
VII 
INTRODUCTION 
IX 
PART 1: 
Reduction and co-operation in biology 
CHAPTER 1: 
Holism and reductionism 
3 
CHAPTER 2: 
Reduction of laws and theories 
25 
CHAPTER 3: 
Reduction of concepts 
43 
CHAPTER 4: 
Emergence, reduction and co-operating research 
programmes 
63 
CHAPTER 5: 
Co-operating research programmes: reduction 
of the Bohr effect 
85 
CHAPTER 6: 
Functional explanations in biology 
107 
PART 2: 
Reduction and co-operation in ecology 
CHAPTER 7: 
The reduction problem in ecology 
139 
CHAPTER 8: 
Ecological communities: conceptual problems and 
definition 
159 
CHAPTER 9: 
The distinction between habitat and niche 
193 
CHAPTER 10: The reduction of the LotkaIVolterra competition 
model to modem niche theory 
221 
CHAPTER 11: Co-operation in island biogeography 
253 

VI 
CHAPTER 12: The inhibitory effect of the holism-reductionism 
dispute: a controversy in island biogeography and 
its solution 
269 
EPILOGUE 
301 
NOTES 
307 
REFERENCES 
321 
NAME INDEX 
343 

VII 
PREFACE 
The work that has led up to this book would not have been possible 
without the continuous support, advice and encouragement of my former 
supervisors, Theo Kuipers and Jelte van Andel. I thank them both very 
much. I also thank Jan Bakker, Ab Grootjans, Lex Guichard, Erik 
Krabbe, Joan Looijen, Ernst Oosterveld, Wim van der Steen, Teo Warns, 
Jos Wessels, Wim Wiersinga, Henny van der Windt, and an anonymous 
reviewer, who all helped me in one way or the other in completing this 
book. I arn most grateful to Ian Priestnall of Paragraph Services, who 
corrected my English. Finally, I thank the Dutch Organization for 
Scientific Research (NWO) for providing me with the financial support 
to carry out my investigations. 
April 1999 
Rick Looijen 
Haren, Groningen 

INTRODUCTION 
The holism-reductionism dispute 
"The earth is a living organism", says Rolling Thunderl (Boyd 1974, p. 
51), "the body of a higher individual who has a will and wants to be to 
well". In the view of Rolling Thunder, every living being is a cell or an 
organ in the body earth. And as an organism cannot live without organs 
and as an organ cannot live without an organism, so can the earth not live 
without the organisms inhabiting her and so can the organisms inhabiting 
her not live without the body of Mother Earth. "I can tell you that 
understanding begins with love and respect. It begins with respect for the 
Great Spirit, and the Great Spirit is the life that is in all things - all the 
creatures and the plants and even the rocks and the minerals. All things 
( .. ) have their own will and their own way and their own purpose; this is 
what is to be respected. Such respect is not a feeling or an attitude only. 
It's a way of life. Such respect means that we never stop realizing and 
never neglect to carry out our obligation to ourselves and our 
environment ( .. ): to work together to make life good for all of us, all who 
live upon this Mother Earth" (Boyd 1974, p. 52, 260). 
This is holism in optima forma. This holism is very comprehensive. It 
is an ontology, it contains aspects of an epistemology, and, associated to 
this, it is an ethics. It is a way oflife. And it is, most of all, an ideology. 
This ideology is especially popular in circles of the New Age Movement 
(for example Capra 1975, 1984; Zukav 1979; Bohm 1980; Ferguson 
1980, Sheldrake 1981,1988, 1990; Davies 1983, 1992; Davies & Griblon 
1991; Waldrop 1993). 
When we put against this the following statement, which seems 
characteristic of (radical) reductionism, "an organism is essentially 
nothing but a collection of atoms and molecules" (Crick 1966),2 
reductionism contrasts glaringly and meagerly with holism. Yet 
reductionism, too, is a comprehensive doctrine, and in a certain sense we 
can say of reductionism, too, that it is a way of life and that it is an 
ideology. This applies at least to the modern scientist. For scientific 
practice can be said to be almost by definition a matter of reduction 
(Kuipers 1990, p. 241). Thus, in so far as reduction is coupled to 
reductionism and in so far as a scientist practices science, a scientist is 
almost by definition a reductionist. And as the average scientist devotes 
IX 

x 
INTRODUCTION 
the larger part of his life to science, reductionism can be said to make up 
the larger part of a scientists' way oflife. Considering the prominent role 
of science in society we might even say that reductionism is the dominant 
ideology of our society. And reductionism is, like holism, comprehensive, 
in the sense that it is an ontology (materialism, mechanicism), an 
epistemology (unity of science through theory reduction) and a 
methodology (causal analysis, experimentation). It also involves a certain 
ethics (control, manipulation). In all these respects, there appears to be a 
contradistinction between holism and reductionism. 
This book deals with this alleged contradistinction between holism and 
reductionism. Its purpose is to make an end to the contradistinction. I 
have only raised it in the way I did above, as a caricature, for the 
following three reasons. Firstly, because in a way it exists. It exists within 
our society in the way of, roughly, the 'holism' ofthe New Age Movement 
versus the 'reductionism' of (modem) science, and it exists within most 
scientific disciplines in the way of so-called reduction disputes, holism-
reductionism disputes or autonomism-provincialism disputes (Rosenberg 
1985; Kuipers et al. 1986). Secondly, the contradistinction regularly leads 
to extraordinary fierce and rethorical polemics and controversies, both in 
society and within scientific disciplines, for reasons which are to be found 
in particular in the ontological aspects (differences in world view, 
conceptions of nature) and ethical aspects (respect versus manipulation) 
of both ideologies. Thirdly, and most importantly, I have raised the 
contradistinction in the above way to show that in most respects it doesn't 
hold water. For example, the fact that there are holism-reductionism 
disputes within most scientific disciplines gives reason to doubt the 
contradistinction between 'the' holism of the New Age Movement and 
'the' reductionism of science. For example, the fact that holistic systems 
ecology is particularly suited for, and used for the purpose of, control and 
manipulation of natural resources and nature reserves (see chapter 7) 
gives reason to doubt the contradistinction between 'holistic' respect and 
'reductionistic' manipulation. For example, before we can arrive at a 
synthesis (holism), we shall first have to make an analysis (reductionism). 
For example, the average ethologist or behavioral ecologist spends more 
than sixty hours a week observing animals without ever hurting or 
injuring them in any way, which gives reason to doubt .... etcetera. I can 
go on like this for a long time, which is exactly what I shall do in this 

INTRODUCTION 
XI 
book. 
I shall, however, restrict myself considerably. This book deals with the 
alleged contradistinction between holism and reductionism in biology 
(part 1) and in ecology in particular (part 2). The reasons for this 
restriction are threefold. In the first place it is impossible in one book to 
delve with any depth into the several holism-reductionism disputes within 
the various sciences and within society. In the second place I am a 
biologist and ecologist myself and thus somewhat qualified in that field. 
And in the third place, because of the large number of levels of 
organization it deals with and because of its position in the hierarchy of 
sciences (see figure 1 in chapter 1), biology is particularly well suited as 
an arena for holism-reductionism disputes, and resolutions of these 
disputes will be relevant to other sciences as well. For in the end these 
disputes involve such diverse questions as: "Is a living organism (for 
example, a human being) 'essentially' nothing but a collection of atoms 
and molecules or is it 'more than the sum' of these physico-chemical 
parts?" "What is 'essentially'?" "What is 'more than the sum of?" "Are 
diverse organisms functionally related in ecological communities and 
should the latter therefore be regarded as some sort of'superorganisms'?" 
"Is there a balance of nature?" "Or are ecological communities 'nothing 
but' accidental associations of organisms in space and time, which are, 
moreover, ever changing in species composition?" Answers to these 
questions are of interest not only to biologists and ecologists, but also to 
many other scientists as well as to society as a whole. 
The restriction to biology does not mean, therefore, that what will 
appear in this book will not be relevant to other areas of inquiry. On the 
contrary. I will develop the general thesis that, instead of conflicting 
views of nature or of relations between sciences, holism and reductionism 
should rather be seen as co-operating and mutually dependent research 
programmes3 . This thesis applies not only to biology but to all sciences 
and to all disciplines within sciences, whether 'natural' or 'social'. 
Division and summary of the book 
This book consists of two parts. Part 1 deals with the holism-reductionism 
dispute in biology general (chapters 1 to 6); part 2 concentrates on 
ecology (chapters 7 to 12). 

XII 
INTRODUCTION 
In chapter 1 I provide an overview of holism and reductionism in biology 
and of the problems to which they relate. These are so-called reduction 
problems, which have in common that they pertain to part-whole 
relationships. It is important, however, to distinguish between ontological, 
epistemological and methodological aspects of these problems. 
Ontological aspects have to do with the things we assume reality (nature) 
to be made up of, the attributes we assign to them, and, in particular, the 
(hierarchical) relations between them. Epistemological aspects concern 
our knowledge of reality, the way this knowledge is laid down in (among 
other things) theories, and, in particular, the relations between different 
theories (research programmes, scientific disciplines) developed for 
different levels of organization. Methodological aspects concern the ways 
of acquiring knowledge of reality and the strategies thereby used. 
From this overview it appears that there are three major 
'contradistinctions' between holism and reductionism in biology. The first 
one is an alleged contradistinction between the (holistic) doctrine of 
emergence and the (reductionistic) reduction thesis; the second is an 
alleged contradistinction between the need for functional explanations in 
biology (holism, organicism)4 versus the requirement that explanations be 
causal (reductionism); and the third is an alleged contradistinction 
between phenomenology (,holistic', descriptive research at the level of the 
whole) and mechanicism (,reductionistic', mechanistic research at the level 
of the parts). The first contradistinction is dealt with, and resolved, in 
chapter 4, the second in chapter 6. In almost all chapters, but especially 
chapters 5, 10 and 11, I deal with, and resolve, the third contradistinction. 
It is especially to this latter contradistinction that my thesis about the co-
operation of holistic and reductionistic research programmes applies. 
Chapter 1 ends with a characterization of radical, moderate and anti-
reductionistic research strategies in biology. 
In chapters 2 and 3 I discuss the meaning of the terms 'to reduce' and 
'reduction' in science. In chapter 2 I first discuss Nagel's (1961182) 
classical model of law and theory reduction and then Kuipers's (1990) 
more recent and comprehensive model. This model shows that there are 
many different types of reduction in science, depending on what sort of 
auxiliary hypotheses and bridge principles are being used in a reduction 
in addition to the reducing theory: approximation rules, aggregation rules, 
and transformation rules in the form of correlations (causal relations) or 

INTRODUCTION 
XIII 
so-called ontological identity relations. I discuss each of these types of 
reduction and the various steps of which they are composed. The type of 
reduction most relevant to reduction problems in biology is 
'heterogeneous micro-reduction', so called because it involves (1) part-
whole relationships (micro-reduction) and, therefore, an aggregation step 
in which relations between parts in a whole are being aggregated, and (2) 
a 'heterogeneous' jump of language and, therefore, one or more bridge 
principles (or transformation rules) to connect terms that occur in the 
(macro-) law or theory to be reduced, but not in the reducing theory, with 
terms that do occur in the reducing (micro-) theory. The maj or conclusion 
of chapter 2 is that all types of reduction are kinds of explanations. 
Reduction, in this sense, is an epistemological issue: it involves logical 
relations between statements or systems of statements (theories). It 
should not be confused, therefore, with ontological reduction in any of the 
'ordinary' senses of the word: decreasing, diminishing, devaluating or the 
like.s 
In chapter 3 I show that, contrary to the claim of many philosophers, the 
same holds for reductions of concepts. Concept reductions may stand by 
themselves, but they may also playa role in one particular type oflaw or 
theory reduction, namely identificatory reduction or reduction with an 
identification step. In this step an ontological identity hypothesis is being 
used, stating that some term (concept) occurring in the law or theory to 
be reduced, but not employed by the reducing theory, is identical to some 
term (concept) in the reducing theory (for example, the term 'temperature' 
in the ideal gas law is supposed to be identical to the term 'mean kinetic 
energy' in the kinetic theory of gases). The status of ontological identity 
relations, and hence of concept reductions, is highly controversial, 
however. In particular, it is unclear what sort of relations are to count as 
ontological identity relations and what criteria we have to distinguish 
them from causal relations. Also, because they involve ontological 
identity relations, several writers have claimed that concept reductions 
imply some form of ontological reduction. Some have even claimed that 
they make for cases of micro-reduction, that is, that they involve part-
whole relationships or relations between a macro-level and a micro-level. 
My chief purpose in chapter 3 is to show that these are grave 
misunderstandings. I argue that concept reductions cannot be micro-
reductions if they are to involve ontological identity relations, and I argue 

XIV 
INTRODUCTION 
that reduction of concepts is, like law or theory reduction, an 
epistemological issue, not an ontological one: it does not mean or imply 
in any sense that ontologies (objects or attributes of objects) are being 
reduced. 
In chapter 4 I discuss the first of the alleged contradistinctions between 
holism and reductionism in biology, to wit the one between the doctrine 
of emergence and the reduction thesis. As is well known, the central claim 
of holism is the thesis that 'the whole is more than the sum of its parts'. In 
the particular form of emergentism, this means that a whole has so-called 
'emergent' properties that the component parts do not possess (neither 
separately nor in sum) and which, therefore (supposedly), cannot be 
reduced to properties of these parts. This claim is vague and open to 
several different interpretations (see Nagel 1961182, pp. 366-397), but I 
show that if interpreted in a certain plausible way, it can be seen as a valid 
ontological thesis. In that sense, however, the thesis applies not only to 
biological wholes, but to any wholes, biological as well as physico-
chemical ones. Also, I show that in this sense the thesis in no way 
contradicts the reduction thesis. For many properties of wholes, which on 
the grounds of this thesis may be called emergent, have proved to be 
explainable in terms of micro-theories about the component parts and 
appropriate bridge principles. Again, however, it is important to realize 
that reduction is an epistemological issue, whereas emergence is an 
ontological one. Reduction is a kind of explanation and as such has 
nothing to do with in any way onto logically reducing 'wholes' or 
'emergent properties' of wholes. The conclusion following from this 
discussion is that, though a valid ontological thesis, the (epistemological) 
irreducibility claim attached to the emergence thesis must be abandoned. 
Next, using Kuipers's (1990) reduction model, I show that it depends on 
the type of reduction whether we can speak of emergent properties at the 
level of a whole, and I develop a new definition which expresses 
emergence in terms of the reduction steps that may occur in actual 
reductions. This leads to two remarkable conclusions: firstly, 'emergence' 
may be seen as the opposite of ' ontological identity', and, secondly, there 
would be no reason for us to even think of reduction if there were no 
emergence (that is, emergent properties or emergent entities). Finally, 
using both Kuipers's (1990) reduction model and Zandvoort's (1986) 
model of co-operating research programmes, I develop my thesis that 

INTRODUCTION 
xv 
holism and reductionism should be seen rather as mutually dependent and 
co-operating research programmes than as contradictory views of nature 
or of relations between sciences. As mentioned, the type of reduction 
most relevant to reduction problems in biology is heterogeneous micro-
reduction. This type of reduction requires three ingredients: (1) a macro-
law or theory (at the level of the whole); (2) a micro-theory (about the 
component parts); and (3) aggregation hypotheses and bridge principles 
connecting the two. Thus, it requires both holistic research at the level of 
the whole and reductionistic research at the level ofthe parts, as well as 
what we might call a mixed strategy directed at the relations between the 
two levels. In terms of Zandvoort's model, this means that holistic 
research programmes may be seen as guide programmes and 
reductionistic programmes as supply programmes. Holistic programmes 
play an important role in science as guide programmes for reductionistic 
programmes, because they provide macro-laws or theories at the level of 
the whole, which, however, for lack of the appropriate means, they 
themselves cannot explain. For these explanations, they depend on the 
fruits of reductionistic programmes. If these latter programmes succeed 
in providing the explanations (reducing the macro-laws or theories), they 
act as supply programmes for the holistic guide programmes. 
Reductionistic programmes depend on holistic programmes, however, for 
providing the macro-laws or theories to be reduced. 
In chapter 5 I illustrate my thesis with an example from animal 
physiology (a discipline that is eminently involved with the 'essence' of 
life). The example concerns the reduction of the so-called Bohr effect -
a law about the rate at which oxygen is taken up and released by the 
blood. I show that this law has been reduced to the theory of allostery (a 
theory of molecular biology), applied to hemoglobin molecules in the red 
blood cells, and that this particular application of the theory of allostery 
has been reduced to the theory of chemical bonding (a theory of physical 
chemistry). This reduction, which involves four levels of organization, 
was accomplished through the co-operation of at least six research 
programmes and the relations between these programmes can all be 
characterized in terms of the mutual dependence of holistic guide 
programmes and reductionistic supply programmes. Also, it is possible to 
specify exactly, in terms of the reduction steps occurring in the example, 
at which level of organization emergent properties or emergent 

XVI 
INTRODUCTION 
phenomena occur. Finally, however, the example also makes clear that a 
certain research programme can act both as a 'reductionistic' supply 
programme for a 'higher' guide programme and as a 'holistic' guide 
programme for a 'lower' supply programme. This means that the terms 
'holistic' and 'reductionistic' are extremely relative and should always be 
related to a certain level of organization. 
In chapter 6 I discuss the structure and status of functional explanations 
in biology. Functional explanations are the prototype of the holistic claim 
that in order to understand a given level of organization one should not 
(only) study the lower levels but (also) that level itself as well as its 
relations with higher levels. That is, one should study the roles or 
functions of parts in wholes. Functional explanations abound and appear 
to be indispensable in biology. Because of their aberrant (supposedly non-
causal) structure, they provide holists with a strong argument in favor of 
biology'S autonomy with respect to physics and chemistry. Reductionists, 
on the other hand, argue that functional explanations are illegitimate 
pseudo-explanations and that they should be replaced by causal 
explanations, thus allowing biology to be reduced to physico-chemistry. 
I argue, firstly, that functional explanations are perfectly legitimate 
explanations and that in a certain way they can be reconstructed as 
'standard' causal, deductive-nomological explanations. Secondly, I argue 
that functional explanations are indeed indispensable in biology, because 
they are necessary components of more comprehensive causal-
evolutionary explanations. For precisely that reason, however, they are 
not in contradiction with causal explanations (or with the principle of 
causal determinism) and therefore do not provide any obstacle to 
reduction of higher to lower level theories. On the contrary, they 
contribute to such reductions. I show that in the context of functional 
explanations, too, we can speak of the co-operation and mutual 
dependence of 'holistic' guide programmes and 'reductionistic' supply 
programmes. 
In part 2 I apply my thesis to the reduction problem and the associated 
holism-reductionism dispute in ecology. Ecology spans at least four levels 
of organization, namely individual organisms, populations, communities 
and ecosystems, and between each of these levels reduction problems 
occur. I show that here, too, the solution to these problems lies in the co-
operation of 'holistic' and 'reductionistic' research programmes. 

INTRODUCTION 
XVII 
In chapter 7 I provide an overview of the issues and positions at stake. As 
in the rest of biology, in ecology there also appear to be several different 
positions or approaches, which can be characterized as more or less 
radically holistic or reductionistic. In the radically holistic approach, 
communities and ecosystems are regarded as a kind of'superorganisms' 
exhibiting all sorts of properties of , real' organisms, such as the capacity 
of self-regulation by means of various feedback mechanisms, analogous 
to the physiological mechanisms that maintain homeostasis in organisms, 
and the development (succession) from a young to an old or mature, 
stable end-phase, called the climax, analogous to the ontogenetic 
development of organisms. In the radically reductionistic approach, all 
this is denied, and even the existence of communities and ecosystems as 
distinctive ontological entities is disputed. In this approach, communities 
and ecosystems are seen as nothing but accidental and, moreover, ever 
changing collections of species, which can be fully explained in terms of 
individual species' adaptations to local environmental conditions. A 
common moderate approach is that communities and ecosystems do exist 
as 'real' entities having their own, emergent properties (such as diversity, 
productivity and a certain stability or resilience), which can be explained, 
however, through interactions between species, such as competition and 
predation.6 
Thus, the ontological status of communities and ecosystems is highly 
controversial and it is understandable that discussions on the subject are 
heated and full of polemics. However, concrete solutions to reduction 
pro blems are very much frustrated thereby. For, as it happens, not a single 
general law or theory about communities and ecosystems has yet been 
developed, on which even the slightest degree of agreement exists, and 
even adequate, well articulated conceptual theories appear to be lacking.7 
In this connection, there is even talk of the 'intellectual immaturity' 
(Fretwell 1981 ; MacIntosh 1985) or the 'anomalous status' (Hagen 1989) 
of ecology. Though this is going somewhat too far, in my view - because 
ecology actually happens to be very rich (maybe even a bit too rich) in 
concepts, hypotheses, models and theories - it does seem a fact that 
general, well corroborated laws and theories about higher levels of 
organization are still lacking, while on lower levels (individuals, 
populations, species) they remain scarce (see chapters 9 and 10). 

XVIII 
INTRODUCTION 
Of a number of possible causes I lift out two, which appear most 
conspicuous, and which lend themselves to philosophical (conceptual) 
analysis and clarification. The first one is the ambiguity of many terms 
which are central to ecology. It appears that such core terms as 
environment, habitat, niche, diversity and stability, and also community 
and ecosystem, are being used in multiple and often disparate and 
incompatible ways; that is, for various different concepts. This ambiguity 
alone seems to be sufficient for the lack of 'general' laws and theories. 
This is the subject of chapters 8 and 9. 
The second factor is the holism-reductionism dispute. I argue that the 
dispute has a strong inhibitory effect on the growth of knowledge (theory 
development and maturation, among other things), because it regularly 
leads to fruitless yet time consuming polemics and controversies (see also 
Hagen 1989). This is the subject of chapter 12, where I discuss one such 
fruitless controversy concerning the role of interspecific competition 
versus 'chance' in structuring ecological communities (see below). 
In chapter 8 I discuss the ambiguity ofthe term (ecological) community. 
I show that this term is being used for a large number of different 
concepts, for different entities at various levels of organization. After a 
conceptual analysis and clarification of these concepts, I develop a new 
definition of the term which, in contrast to previous definitions, seems 
theoretically adequate and is at least unambiguous. The crucial difference 
is that, according to former definitions, communities are regarded as 
groups of populations of different species, whereas in my view they 
should be defined as groups of individuals of different species. As it 
happens, my definition proves to have two extremely interesting and 
positive 'side-effects'. For it appears to provide (theoretical) solutions to 
two of the most notorious problems in community ecology, to wit the 
boundary problem and the problem o/heterogeneity. The former problem 
consists of the fact that populations of different species rarely if ever 
occupy exactly the same area in a landscape, but mostly occur in different, 
more or less strongly overlapping areas. As a result, different 
communities, defined as groups of populations, gradually flow into one 
another, whence the boundaries between them are vague. This is a 
problem, of course, because it hampers adequate descriptions of the 
structure (species number and composition) of communities. The problem 
of heterogeneity originates from the same cause: because different 

INTRODUCTION 
XIX 
populations generally occupy different areas in a landscape, the species 
composition in different sub-areas of the total area occupied by a 
community, again defined as a group of populations, generally differs, 
whence communities are (spatially) heterogeneous in species composition. 
This is a problem, because the occurrence of general laws appears to be 
related to homogeneous entities. I show that both problems can be 
resolved by defining communities as particular sets of individuals of 
different species. 
In chapter 9 I analyze and clarify two other major ecological concepts, 
namely habitat and niche. The term 'habitat' plays a maj or role in ecology 
through the theory of habitat selection and the principle of habitat 
differentiation. Both relate to spatial separation of species resulting from 
differences in resource requirements and/or environmental tolerances. The 
term 'niche' plays an important role through modern niche theory (a 
theory about resource exploitation by species; see chapter 10) and 
through the principle of niche differentiation (leading to differences in 
resource exploitation between competing species). While habitat 
differentiation leads to spatial separation (non-coexistence) of species, 
niche differentiation is considered to be a mechanism of coexistence. Both 
principles play an important role in explanations of the structure (species 
number and composition) of communities. 
However, there is considerable confusion about habitat and niche 
differentiation and this confusion results from confusion about the 
meanings of the terms habitat and niche. Conceptual analysis of the 
ecological literature reveals that there are at least four different habitat 
concepts and as many niche concepts, the additional complication being 
that two of these habitat concepts correspond to two of these niche 
concepts, whence the distinction between habitat and niche is blurred. 
Several of these concepts appear to correspond, moreover, to different 
concepts of environment, as well as to different concepts of biotope. 
Needless to say, this confusion is devastating to theory maturation, and 
modern niche theory in particular is seriously suffering from it (even to 
the point where many have come to reject the term niche as useless). My 
purpose in chapter 9 is to disentangle all these different concepts and to 
supply each of them (in so far as I see fit) with a suitable term. In doing 
so, I keep a close eye on commonly accepted opinions about habitat and 
niche differentiation. 

xx 
INTRODUCTION 
After all this preparatory work I finally come to the application of my 
thesis about the mutual dependence of holistic and reductionistic research 
programmes to ecology. In chapter 101 do so by discussing a concrete, 
though not yet fully recognized, example of successful reduction in 
ecology: the reduction of the Lotka/Volterra competition model to 
modern niche theory (Glasser & Price 1982; Tilman 1982). The 
LotkaIV olterramodel is a phenomenological (holistic) model: it describes 
the possible effects of competition between species (in terms of 
coexistence or local extinction). In being a phenomenological model, the 
Lotka/Volterra model calls for a deeper explanation of its assumptions 
and predictions, and, hence, plays the role of a holistic guide programme. 
The deeper explanation is provided by modern niche theory. This is a 
mechanistic theory: it specifies both the objects of competition 
(resources) and a mechanism (exploitation of resources by different 
species). Because modern niche theory reduces the Lotka/V olterra 
competition model, it plays the role of a reductionistic (reductive) supply 
programme. Incidentally, the type of reduction shows that one cannot 
speak of emergence at the level of the Lotka/Volterra model. 
In chapter 11 I discuss another example of co-operation of holistic and 
reductionistic research programmes in ecology, involving a case of 
idealization and concretization and, hence, approximative reduction (see 
chapter 2). The example comes from island biogeography, a branch of 
ecology dealing with the distribution and abundance of species on islands. 
This branch went through a phase of rapid development in the 1960s and 
'70s, after MacArthur and Wilson (1963, 1967) had published their 
equilibrium theory of island biogeography. Before that time, island 
biogeography consisted mainly of a large collection of facts (records) 
which were largely unrelated to one another and in which only a few 
regularities were observed. MacArthur and Wilson presented a simple, 
holistic model which not only explained these regularities but also led to 
a number of new predictions. After a phase in which the model was 
tested, it appeared to be rather too simple, however, and research shifted 
to analyses of the causal factors that might underlie (the parameters of) 
the model. I show that these developments can be described very well in 
terms of the model of idealization and concretization (Krajewski 1977; 
Nowak 1980), where MacArthur and Wilson's theory appears as an 
idealization which subsequent research programmes have concretized (see 

INTRODUCTION 
XXI 
also Haila & Jarvinen 1980). Because these concretizations have a 
reductive (albeit approximative, viz. non-deductive) character, we can see 
in this structure of idealization and concretization also a form of co-
operation of holistic and reductionistic research programmes. The 
example is interesting not only from the point of view of ecology but also 
from the point of view of philosophy, because it shows that the model of 
idealization and concretization applies not only to developments within 
research programmes, as has been thought so far, but also to 
developments between research programmes. 
In chapter 12, finally, I provide an example of the inhibitory effect which 
holism-reductionism disputes may have on the growth of knowledge. The 
example concerns a controversy in island biogeography between two of 
the research programmes that are involved in concretizations of 
MacArthur and Wilson's equilibrium theory. The one programme is 
moderately reductionistic, but also has a few holistic characteristics: it 
assumes that communities are stable, integrated entities whose structure 
results from strictly deterministic 'assembly rules', but it takes the 
integrating factor underlying these rules to be interspecific competition. 
The other programme is radically reductionistic: it assumes that so-called 
communities are nothing but random associations of species, which can 
be explained fully in terms of random colonization of islands by species, 
given some characteristics of individual species and islands. The 
controversy has lasted for about ten years (a long time considering 
ecology's existence as a science), appears to have bled to death rather 
than to have been resolved, and has produced nothing new. The major 
'result' of the controversy seems to be that the radical elements of both 
programmes have been eliminated. This, and what is left over, is in 
complete agreement with my thesis about the co-operation of holistic and 
reductionistic research programmes: the structure of the communities 
investigated appears to be significantly non-random (implying a role for 
holistic programmes in studying them), but it can be largely explained 
reductively in terms of autecological relations between species and 
environmental conditions (the radical reductionistic approach), while a 
small part of it could be the result of interspecific competition (the 
moderate approach). 

