 
 
Asymmetry of Access to Intentional States
Author(s): Nicholas Georgalis
Source: Erkenntnis (1975-), Vol. 40, No. 2 (Mar., 1994), pp. 185-211
Published by: Springer
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/20012537
Accessed: 26-03-2023 02:09 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Springer is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to Erkenntnis
(1975-)
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES
 There are at least two striking features that any theory of intentionality
 must confront. First, there is an asymmetry between oneself and others
 with regard to access to the contents of our thoughts.1 Second, an
 individual may neither know nor be in a better position than someone
 else to ascertain what his own thought is about. The resolution of this
 apparent conflict turns on the recognition that a correct analysis of
 intentional states involves not only two kinds of content, but two kinds
 of methodology. The sense of 'content' which preserves the first feature
 requires a first-person analysis, while the sense which saves the second
 requires a third-person analysis. An exclusive use of either type of
 analysis cannot provide an adequate theory of intentionality. Advocates
 of a strictly third-person analysis of content abound but, to be success?
 ful, they must either provide for the first feature or show that it is a
 mere appearance.
 Advocacy of the first-person perspective in the philosophy of mind
 runs counter to the views held by a formidable array of contemporary
 philosophers. For example, consider D. C. Dennett's unequivocal rejec?
 tion of the first-person perspective, "I declare my starting point to be
 the objective, materialistic, third-person world of the physical sci?
 ences."2 This starting point he himself characterizes as "the orthodox
 choice today in the English-speaking philosophical world."3 And later
 he says, "I propose to see just what the mind looks like from the third
 person, materialistic perspective of contemporary science. I bet we can
 see more and better if we start here, now, than if we try some other
 tack."4 In between these quoted passages he disparagingly cites a not?
 able exception to the orthodoxy, Thomas Nagel's insistence on the
 importance of the first-person perspective, or the subjective, for a
 proper understanding of a number of things about the world and our?
 selves. I think Nagel is right. However, my employment of the first
 person perspective will not consider the qualitative aspects of mental
 states often associated with Nagel's work. Instead, I will argue that the
 first-person perspective plays an indispensable role in uncovering a
 nonqualitative kind of content, one which plays a crucial role in studies
 Erkenntnis 40: 185-211, 1994.
 ? 1994 Kluwer Academic Publishers. Printed in the Netherlands.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 186
 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 of intentionality. Keeping the faith with the orthodoxy, rather than
 enabling us to "see more and better," runs a significant risk of deraili
 the whole endeavor. There is no need to choose between the exclusive
 use of one or the other perspective in studies of the mind; forcing a
 choice is a mistake.
 Section 1 introduces the notion of content which preserves the fir
 feature and depends on a first-person analysis. In the last section
 argue that a strictly third-person analysis must fail in providing for t
 asymmetry of access. Given this failure, a third-person analysis mus
 explain away this feature as mere appearance. What this amounts
 doing is dealt with in Section 2, and I indicate that it has yet to 
 achieved. Therefore, exclusively third-person analyses must be rejecte
 1. ASYMMETRICAL ACCESS AND MINIMAL CONTENT!
 A FIRST LOOK
 The asymmetrical access we have to our own thoughts is sometim
 referred to as privileged access. Many different conceptions of the lat
 have been advanced, but two general reasons why privileged access i
 held in disrepute by some is that exaggerated claims have been m
 on its behalf, and it has kept company with dualism. However, priv
 leged access is not necessarily connected to dualism and certain alleg
 features (such as complete transparency and incorrigibility) may
 dropped, while still preserving an important point to the special acc
 we have to some of our states. The special access at issue amounts
 no more than one's ability to non-inferentially know the content, i
 some sense, of at least some of one's thoughts. It is in some such limi
 guise that privileged access remains a compelling doctrine. Although t
 asymmetrical access amounts to no more than this, we shall see 
 consequences are great and have not been adequately recognized.5
 Let no one worry that by allowing this privileged access all t
 work is (mysteriously) done. Frankly, the access that the first-perso
 perspective provides does not explain anything, still, it and the conte
 to which we have special access are central features which either mu
 be accommodated in one's view or shown to be a mere appearanc
 They cannot be ignored.
 To illustrate the kind of access in question, consider an exam
 discussed by John Heil (1988). Suppose you ask me to form an im
 of my grandmother. On informing you that I have done so, you inqu
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 187
 how I know it is an image of her, and not someone else. For such an
 inquiry to make sense, it must be possible that I could be mistaken
 when I think the image I formed is an image of my grandmother. But
 as I formed it expressly to be of my grandmother, such a possibility
 must be ruled out: It is constitutive of the forming of the image that it
 be of her.6 Things would be different if some image randomly came to
 my mind. Here, although the image is mine, I would be in no privileged
 position to ascertain of whom it is of, or even that it is of anyone. If I
 were to maintain that it was of someone in particular, I could be wrong;
 there is no privileged access in this last kind of case.
 So, while I can be wrong about images of mine in some ways, I
 cannot err in identifying whom my image is of when I deliberately form
 it to be of some particular individual. I cannot err in the latter simply
 because the possibility of error in these circumstances does not make
 any sense,7 not because I have some special mental powers or that I
 am cognizant of a special kind of entity. Given this, plus the fact that
 the content at issue is only part of the content of a thought, such
 "infallibility" is not to be confused with the Cartesian kind.
 Someone might think there is a possibility of error here because they
 hold some "resemblance" criterion for what an image is an image of.
 Thus, suppose the image I formed is in fact a rather poor resemblance
 of my grandmother. The image itself may even be an excellent resem?
 blance of someone other than my grandmother, say, your neighbor;
 nevertheless, the degree of visual faithfulness to her is irrelevant. It is,
 after all, the image I deliberately formed to be of her. The criterion
 determining who, or what, it is an image of can not be based on what
 it is the most (visually) similar to. It is not as if I conjured up an image
 and then began to wonder who it depicts; the image was conjured
 precisely to be an image of her. On the other hand, were I to find a
 photograph of someone, I might well wonder who it is a photo of and
 use resemblance as one criterion for deciding.
 The same point could be made with a sketch. If you ask me to sketch
 my grandmother, the result may indeed look more like your neighbor
 than my grandmother, and we may even agree on this. But a poorly
 drawn sketch of my grandmother is still a sketch of her. That is why it
 is said to be poorly drawn; it is not said to be a well drawn sketch of
 whomever it most closely resembles. In parallel t? the imagery, and in
 contrast to the photo case, I neither have to infer nor is there any
 possibility of error on my part as to whom my deliberately drawn sketch
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 188
 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 is of. There is a possibility of error in your judging whom my sketch
 of, and your judgment will be based on inference, mine is not. T
 difference is just a manifestation of the asymmetry of access.8
 My deployment of these cases not only illustrates a relevant asym?
 metry of access, a kind of privileged access, but they also implic
 introduce a restricted kind of content, since what each of us has no
 inferential knowledge of in these examples is basically the "subject 
 one's thought." Just what is meant by this locution is unclear at thi
 stage. It will in fact also turn out to be ambiguous between what I w
 call the minimal content and the subject component. I will argue th
 both are required in the analysis of what a thought is about; e
 signals what the thought is about in a different way. What was non
 inferentially known in each of the above examples was what the minim
 content represented. It is worth pointing out that one's special acces
 to what is represented in such cases is known straight-out. In m
 cases, one may non-inferentially know the subject of one's thoug
 without having to have a further thought about the initial thought. F
 too often awareness of content is mistakenly characterized as requiri
 second-order thought, but these cases serve as counterexamples to t
 claim.9
 As an aid to isolating the notion of minimal content, it will be useful
 to develop some aspects of Searle's characterization of intentional
 states.10 A peculiar feature of an intentional state is that it is directed
 at an object, the intentional object. The treatment of the latter varies
 considerably for different authors. For Searle, the intentional object
 just is the actual object or state of affairs to which the intentional state
 is directed. For example, if someone loves Sally and also believes that
 it is currently sleeting outside, then the intentional objects for these
 two states are the flesh and blood woman, Sally, and the coming down
 of freezing rain. But, also, these states have representative contents
 which represent the women and the relevant state of affairs, respec?
 tively. (Searle sometimes calls the representative content 'intentional
 content.') On the other hand, there are intentional states which have
 no intentional object, though they must still have a representative
 content. For example, Ponce de Leon, in searching for the fountain of
 youth, was in an intentional state which had a representative content
 (consisting in part of a representation of what he was seeking), but his
 intentional state did not have an intentional object. So, on Searle's
 view, every intentional state has a representative content, and it is in
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 189
 virtue of this content that the intentional state is directed at an inten?
 tional object, but not all intentional states have intentional objects.
 As the examples indicate, sometimes the representative content is
 propositional in form, as when one believes that a certain state of affairs
 obtains; sometimes it is not, as when one desires a certain object. In
 either case, however, an object is "signaled" by the representative
 content. (The difference in the cases turns on whether something more
 is signaled, i.e., what is predicated of the subject in the first instance.)
 It is my contention that in the analysis of any intentional state there
 are two distinct but correct ways of characterizing the object signaled.
 The minimal content represents the object of the intentional state as the
 agent conceives it whereas, to place a label on it, the subject component
 indicates the object an objective observer of the agent would ascribe as
 the subject of the agenf s intentional state.
 The reason why the minimal content and the subject component must
 not be identified turns on the fact that they may signal different objects;
 additionally, the agent's access to these two contents, the minimal
 content and the subject component, of her own intentional state is
 importantly different. Because of this difference in access, I spoke
 above, and will continue to do so, of minimal content representing and
 the subject component indicating what the thought is about. Though
 these terms mark a difference, I do not claim to explain the difference
 here. When a generic term is required, I will speak, as I did above, of
 signaling what the thought is about.
 To clarify these distinctions, consider the following examples. A
 chemist in the mid-eighteenth century might have thought that phlogis?
 ton was abundant in charcoal. The subject component of such a thought
 could not indicate phlogiston, since there is no such thing; nevertheless,
 the minimal content of the chemist's thought, the subject of her thought
 as she conceived it, did represent phlogiston.
 Though one's minimal content and the subject component may signal
 different objects they need not. Suppose I am correct in thinking that
 a certain woman is my grandmother, but I have many false beliefs
 about her, and there are a number of important things true of her of
 which I am ignorant. Suppose I entertain the thought that she was a
 gracious woman. The correctness of that judgment is a function of who
 she actually was or what she actually did. My judgment will be a
 function of what I believe, rightly or wrongly, about her. I may harbor
 so many false beliefs pertaining to her that another, someone who has
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 190
 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 a more accurate view of her, would say of me, in a colloquial ve
 that "He does not know her at all." Despite my lamentable epistemo?
 logical status, any of my intentional states concerning her will have
 minimal content which represents her (the right woman), and I c
 know this non-inferentially. So both the minimal content and the subj
 component can signal the same object, in spite of all the misinformat
 I have regarding the intentional object.
 Note my grandmother is the sort of thing that is easily individuat
 even if one labors under a vast amount of misinformation about her
 Lest it be thought that that is why both the minimal content and th
 subject component can signal the same object, consider the following
 Suppose I entertain the thought that quarks are difficult to experime
 tally detect, and the physicists who theorize about such things are rig
 in thinking there are quarks. Although I have barely the foggiest id
 of what quarks are, it is still plausible that my minimal content and t
 subject component of my thought signal the same object. At the ver
 least, had the physicists not developed their theory of quarks, I wou
 not have my thought about quarks as I (mis)conceive them, and this 
 so regardless of how far off my conception of quarks is from that 
 the physicists.11 This is not to say that to be meaningful my though
 require the objects signaled by them exist (as with Russell's logica
 proper names). Quite the contrary, it is the claim that minimal conten
 represents something to me whether what is represented exists or no
 whether or not my representation of it is accurate, and it does so on
 pain of nonsense. For, at the very least, I must know what object I a
 representing to myself; otherwise, the very meaningfulness of the cl
 that my thought is about anything is brought into question. In this
 respect, the content is minimal.
 When I labor under a number of false beliefs with regard to som
 object I clearly have limited understanding of it, and my ability
 explicate my thoughts pertaining to it is thereby limited. (In anothe
 paper I will further explain the contrast between being aware of wh
 is represented by one's minimal content as opposed to understanding
 what is indicated by the subject component.) For now, I simply point
 out that to have a thought about quarks, I need have no great under
 standing of them; indeed, they need not even exist. When my under
 standing is slight, I will, no doubt, be unable to adequately explain m
 thought. Still, to have such a thought at all, I must be able to represe
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 191
 quarks to myself, to represent and, therefore, if they exist, to individu?
 ate them to some degree.12
 So the analysis of a single intentional state requires a minimal content
 and a subject component because what the thinker takes her thought
 to be about may not in fact exist, or be seriously misconceived by her,
 or be entirely different from what it is about in another sense. The
 minimal content represents what the agent conceives her thought to be
 about; the subject component indicates, from an objective, third-person
 perspective, what the thought is about. The subject of the agent's
 thought is about both of these. Ideally, what the two signal will be one
 and the same, but this cannot be guaranteed. When the two contents
 signal different objects, as in the phlogiston case, it is not noted from
 the first-person perspective, for as soon as the agent learns of such a
 divergence, she will alter her minimal content to bring it in line with
 the subject component. Whether there is a match or a divergence in
 what is signaled by these two contents, a correct analysis of an inten?
 tional state requires both; but one has privileged access only to one's
 own minimal contents.
 Some may understand minimal content as a Fregean sense. There is
 some small point to the analogy, but it is seriously misleading. My view
 of minimal content departs significantly from Frege's concept of 'sense.'
 First a minor difference: both minimal content and the subject compo?
 nent can only signal an object, whereas Fregean senses may also signal
 states of affairs. A further, more critical, difference is that I hold that
 a single thought is properly analyzed as having both a minimal content
 and subject component; in contrast, for Frege a thought has only one
 sense. Moreover, minimal contents, depending as they do on how the
 individual conceives things, are subjective in a way in which Frege
 insisted senses are not. In contrast, the subject component is objective
 and, in this respect, it is more like a Fregean sense. (Of all the concepts
 that I have employed, however, it is probably that of representative
 content, with a subject component rather than with minimal content,
 which is closest to a Fregean sense.)
 Neither what a Fregean sense is, nor how it determines its reference
 is clear. I claim no greater clarity on such matters for either my minimal
 content or the subject component. (Precisely how the two are related
 to one another and to what they signal are difficult issues which I will
 deal with elsewhere.) Still, the latter two undoubtedly determine their
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 192
 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 references differently. For the agent is in no better position to kno
 what is indicated by the subject component of her thought, in virtue 
 its being her thought, than is anyone else. This is in marked contra
 to the agent's ability to know what is represented by her minim
 content. So, it is probable that the ways they determine their respect
 references are distinct. Therefore, even if, say, the subject compone
 and the Fregean sense determine their reference in the same wa
 minimal content is additional and does it differently.
 Further clarification of what it is to know one's own minimal conte
 and why such knowledge is privileged may be obtained by considerin
 what has already been said in the image case. Earlier I argued that
 makes no sense to question whether a deliberately formed image o
 say, my grandmother was of her because its being of her was constitutive
 of the forming of the image. The case is similar vis-?-vis the minim
 contents of my thoughts. Constitutive of my entertaining some parti
 cular thought is that its minimal content be what I take it to be.
 would not be the thought that it is, if it did not have the subject th
 I take it to have. Of course, as we have seen, this is compatible w
 the subject component of the very same thought actually signali
 something different than does the minimal content and one's not know
 ing this. There is never privileged access to the subject component o
 one's thought nor, certainly, to what it indicates.
 In making my case for the necessity of both minimal content and t
 subject component in any adequate analysis of intentional states, the
 have been no presuppositions as to the ontological status of eithe
 kind of content. I have emphasized how access to them is importantl
 different, and it is only with respect to minimal content that the fir
 person perspective is crucial. While I am able to thus reconcile the tw
 apparently conflicting features of intentional states mentioned at th
 outset, I also go beyond it inasmuch as I hold that minimal conten
 are a function of how we conceive the things our thoughts are about
 and since one cannot take one's thought to be about anything wh
 one does not have the capacity to (rightly or wrongly) conceive, o
 having the capacity to be aware of our minimal content is a necessar
 condition for our having intentional states.13
 Does our awareness of our minimal content amount to a privileg
 access of the Cartesian sort? The latter is typically portrayed so tha
 the contents of one's mind are completely and infallibly transparent 
 oneself. As such it has been widely, and rightly, criticized. Certainly
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 193
 representative content is not transparent in this way, nor is its subject
 component; the agent is not in any infallible position with respect to
 either of these. I challenge none of this. So long as 'content' is construed
 as either the subject component or as the representative content itself,
 there is no privileged access to it. But this is no reason for all privileged
 access to any kind of content of one's thoughts to fall into disrepute.
 Minimal content is a distinct content from either the subject component
 or the representative content; it is only to minimal content that we
 sometimes have privileged access. Any infallibility with regard to what
 the minimal content represents results from the senselessness of an
 attribution of error rather than our having some special ability or
 faculty. Thus, a non-Cartesian form of our privileged access is preser?
 ved.
 One might wonder whether I have presented a remodeled Chinese
 Room.14 To a certain extent I have; the capacity for awareness of
 minimal content, being a necessary condition for an agent's having
 intentional states is perhaps a commitment to intrinsic intentionality.
 Still, the discussion in terms of awareness of minimal content has several
 advantages over one couched in terms of understanding a natural lan?
 guage. Rather than trying to contrast the Chinese Room with a genuine
 speaker of Chinese who understands (with all the attendant murkiness
 of this notion), the contrast is instead drawn in relatively simple and
 clear terms. Straight-out, one is aware what the content is, as is the
 case in the examples considered earlier. So we take several steps back
 from understanding a language to awareness of minimal content. Thus,
 we do not have to rely on, or attempt to resolve, conflicting intuitions
 as to whether a system such as the Chinese Room understands.
 The central point may now be noted. By preserving the distinction
 between minimal content and the subject component, as well as the
 different access to them, one is able to jointly maintain the two seem?
 ingly contradictory, but crucial features of intentional states: Firstly,
 the individual who's state it is, is often in a privileged position as to
 ascertaining what it is about (minimal content). Secondly, an individual
 may neither know, nor be in a better position than someone else to
 ascertain, what his own state is about (subject component). The resol?
 ution of these two claims requires the admission of the legitimacy of
 the first-person perspective. On the other hand, to restrict the investi?
 gation of intentionality to an objective third-person perspective results
 in concentrating on some equivalent of the subject component. Such a
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 194
 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 methodology of necessity ignores the subjective aspect of how th
 thinker conceives things, minimal content. Since that feature appear
 to be among the distinctive features of intentional states, unless stric
 third-person accounts can either accommodate this feature or show 
 to be a mere appearance, such accounts must be rejected.15 In the ne
 section I explain what would be required to show it to be a mer
 appearance, and in the final section I argue that any analysis whi
 relies on an exclusively third-person perspective, cannot accommoda
 privileged access.
 2. EXPLAINING THE APPEARANCE
 Given that it is at least initially plausible that we sometimes ha
 privileged access to the content, in some sense, of our intentional state
 a special restriction is placed on any proposed account of intentionalit
 It must include an account of either this feature or why it appears 
 be the case but is not.
 The force of this restriction might be made clearer by an analogy.
 George Berkeley argued that material substance did not exist (or tha
 the notion itself was incoherent). But ordinary thinking, ordinary e
 perience, seems to present material things as an uncontroversial datum
 In Sections 34-81 of A Treatise Concerning Principles of Human Know
 edge, Berkeley particularly addresses himself to objections based 
 this type of consideration, that his view denies various obvious truth
 or obliterates various obvious distinctions, such as that between r
 things and chimera. In point of fact, while rejecting material substanc
 he took great care to show exactly why one cannot, say, simply walk
 through real walls while one can walk through imagined walls, ev
 though both are collections of ideas. (Whether he was ultimately suc
 cessful is entirely immaterial to the little moral I wish to draw from 
 discussion of him.) In doing so, he thereby offered an explanation of
 how certain obvious data which seemed to refute his view were, n
 only consistent with, but explained by his account.
 That he did so is precisely why Johnson's famous "refutation
 though cute in its vivid and immediate appeal to what seems to b
 conflicting datum, can never be taken seriously. Unlike Berkeley, mod
 ern day eliminativists, of course, prefer to eliminate the mental rath
 than the material; nevertheless, if they are to avoid a Johnsonian ty
 refutation (in reverse), they, too, must explain certain appearanc
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 195
 though their task is quite different from that which Berkeley con?
 fronted.
 Eliminativists are not the only ones that must explain these appear?
 ances. Anyone attempting to give an account of intentional states in
 terms that are prima facie of a radically different type must, in some
 way, make plausible how the elements of this different type could give
 rise to the salient features of experienced intentional states. We must
 be able to make plausible how, say, neurons firing and various chemicals
 transported over synapses, or how the functional organization of the
 brain can give rise to one's (sometimes) having special access to the
 minimal content of one's own intentional states.
 An illustration of what I mean by explaining the appearances in this
 latter sense is an attempt made by Searle to show that there are no
 metaphysical obstacles to an account of our intentional states as causal
 features of our brains. He claims our mental states are genuine biologi?
 cal phenomena that are both caused by and realized in the brain, a
 claim which, among other things, seems to introduce a mysterious
 notion of mental-physical causation. He has been widely criticized on
 this point. My aim here is neither to review these criticisms nor to
 defend Searle on this matter.16 Instead, I will examine one of the ways
 that Searle does try to dispel the air of mystery, and I do so simply
 because it sheds further light on what I am getting at when I insist that
 one must explain the appearance. Though doing so brings out what I
 am getting at, I don't think Searle has succeeded in explaining the
 appearance either. Why not, will be evident below.
 Searle illustrates the idea of something being caused by and realized
 in something else by making an analogy to how liquidity is both caused
 by a kind of molecular motion, as well as being realized in that molecu?
 lar behavior. In fact he cites the analogy as one that is parallel to
 Leibniz's famous case of imagining a giant machine that could think,
 feel and perceive. One so large that we can walk into it as though it
 were a mill. On so doing we would find parts that interact with one
 another, but never find perception or any other mental state. Similarly,
 in the case of a liquid we would not find the liquidity at the level of
 the molecules. Searle holds that:
 ... in both cases we would be looking at the system at the wrong level. The liquidity of
 water is not to be found at the level of the individual molecule, nor are the visual
 perception and the thirst to be found at the level of the individual neuron or synapse. If
 one knew the principles on which the system of H20 molecules worked, one could infer
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 196
 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 that it was in a liquid state by observing the movement of the molecules, but similarly if
 one knew the principles on which the brain worked one could infer that it was in a state
 of thirst or having a visual experience. (Searle 1993, p. 268)
 There is something extremely relevant here to the idea of explaining
 the appearances. In no way are molecules, themselves, liquid. (Nor, of
 course, are they solids or gases.) But given we know that the molecular
 bonds in a liquid are weaker than those in a solid, yet stronger than in
 a gas, there is something plausible about these molecules "sliding" over
 each other at the molecular level such that they give the appearance of
 liquidity at the macro-level, something that does not appear at molecu?
 lar level. In a liquid the molecules slip past each other while still weakly
 cohering; whereas in a gas there is no cohesion, and in a solid they
 cannot even slip by one another. The appearance at the macro-level of
 a solid, liquid, or gas is plausible because it is predictable, given the
 nature of the molecular bonds.17
 Searle claims that there is a similar sort of thing going on in the case
 of intentionality and its relationship to the causal behavior of the brain
 as there is between liquidity and molecular behavior. This may be so,
 but the trouble is that right now we don't even have the foggiest idea
 as to how the firing of neurons or the passing of chemicals across
 synapses could give rise to intentionality in a way analogous to how
 non-liquid molecules and certain sorts of bonds between them can give
 rise to liquidity.17 If we could, then we would have explained the
 appearance.
 It should be stressed that the predictability of the appearance of a
 liquid based on the idea of molecules loosely bonded, does not require
 any detailed scientific knowledge of molecules nor their bonds. So, too,
 success in showing how intentional states could arise out of, say, neu?
 ronal activity need not require any detailed knowledge of how the brain
 works. Thus, the requirement that the relevant appearance be explained
 must not be confused with the requirement that one have some detailed
 empirical account of the phenomenon, nor is any such detailed account
 a prerequisite for explaining the appearance.
 Thus, a problem for all, regardless of one's philosophical persuasion,
 is either to provide an explanation of the appearance that we sometimes
 do have special access to the minimal contents of our thoughts; or to
 show that this is mere appearance. Being everyone's problem, failing
 to resolve it does not of itself count against one's theory. However, if
 one has failed to resolve this problem and a consequence of one's
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 197
 theory is an outright denial of the appearance, the theory must be
 rejected. In the next section I argue that third-person accounts are
 currently in this unhappy position.
 3. A FATAL STEP
 Third-person accounts of intentional states and their contents com?
 monly maintain these two claims: (A) A causal interaction of a system
 with its environment is necessary to determine or individuate at least
 some contents. (B) Two systems might be molecule for molecule identi?
 cal but differ in the content of their intentional states because of their
 respective environments. I argue that if one holds both (A) and (B),
 there is no possibility that a system has special access to its minimal
 contents. Thus, anyone holding both (A) and (B) is forced to deny the
 asymmetry of access discussed; hence, any such person must also ex?
 plain the contrary illusion.
 Here is why. Suppose both (A) and (B) are the case. Whatever
 differences in content there are for the two individuals so placed,
 they are differences due to their being in different social or physical
 environments since, ex hypothesis the systems' internal states are identi?
 cal. Such differences of content must be opaque to the systems themselves;
 otherwise, a system could be in two different environments while in
 identical internal states and, nevertheless, somehow detect the differ?
 ence. Now, while we may have reason to attribute different contents
 to those states of the systems, they would have no reason to do so. We
 have reason because we have knowledge that the environments are
 different. Having that knowledge, there will be differences in our in?
 ternal states depending on which environment we are considering. Short
 of magic, differences in the environment cannot be differences for the
 system causally interacting with the environment, unless there is also a
 corresponding difference in the system's internal states. Hence, the so
 called "wide content" that results from the causal interaction is pre?
 cluded from being content for the system.
 Though I came to this argument independently, Jerry Fodor has
 earlier presented a similar pattern of reasoning, but to a different
 conclusion. He argues that for purposes of causal explanation in psy?
 chology, mental states must be individuated narrowly.19 He states:
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 198
 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 . . . you can't affect the causal powers of a person's mental states without affecting 
 physiology. That's not a conceptual claim or a metaphysical claim, . . . [T]he mechanis
 by which environmental variables affect organic behaviors run via their effects on t
 organism's nervous system. Or so, at least, all the physiologists I know assure me. (Fod
 1988, pp. 39-40)
 Both Fodor and I are appealing to the general point that individu
 cannot have different properties, be it causal powers or the having 
 a certain content to one's thought, without some differences bei
 registered in their bodily states. I have argued that if there are
 differences in the states of the organisms' nervous systems, then it
 simply mystifying how the subjects of their thoughts, as they conce
 them, could possibly be different. So, if, as the various third-perso
 accounts would have it, the contents are different for two such system
 they are not differences as conceived by the system.
 Since the preceding argument is quite general and may even appear
 to beg important questions, let us apply the concepts I have introdu
 to a Twin-Earth context and draw some lessons other than the usual
 A common assumption in discussions of Twin-Earth cases is that wha
 is in the head of my Twin and me is the same. A troubling quest
 related to this common assumption is:
 Are my Twin and I supposed to know about the underlying
 stuff that prompts our respective water thoughts?
 (I) If the answer is affirmative, then it is not clear that what is in
 our respective heads is the same. For when I have water thoughts th
 are connected (computationally/inferentially or somehow) with H
 thoughts (among others), while his are similarly connected to X
 thoughts. Given that our respective water thoughts are connected to
 different thoughts in our respective heads, whatever type of an accou
 - with one exception - one gives of how thoughts are realized in
 head, it is clear that what is in our heads must be different, contrar
 to the standard assumption required to get Twin-Earth cases off the
 ground. So there is a certain incoherence in the thought experiment, 
 the answer to the question above is affirmative, and we give one of t
 usual accounts of what it is for a thought to be realized in the head.
 The unusual account not altered by this consideration, the one excep
 tion, is an atomistic one. I will not argue against that kind of an accou
 here, but I do note that to my knowledge Twin-Earth cases are neve
 presented so as to depend on an atomistic account, and many w
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 199
 present the thought experiment do not find atomistic accounts accept?
 able.
 (II) What if the answer to the above question is negative? In that
 case we still have grounds for saying what is in the head of my Twin
 and me is identical. Note, however, that in this case, if one says the
 usual thing in Twin-Earth type cases, viz., that because of the differ?
 ences in our respective environments, physical and social, my Twin and
 I have different contents to our thoughts, and our word 'water' means
 different things, then these are differences that my Twin and I are
 totally unaware of. Of course, one or both of us could become informed
 as to the underlying stuff which tends to prompt water thoughts or
 'water' utterances. In such an event we are immediately back to case
 (I), which undermines the thought experiment.
 So the thought experiment is deflated: Either there is an incoherence
 in the conditions of the experiment or the differences in content are
 not differences available to the thinkers. The experiment does not show
 that different extensions imply different contents; not so long as the
 content of the thought in question is a content available to the thinker
 having the thought, and the extension at issue is the actual extension.
 Moreover, there is a clear sense in which what the thinker's thought is
 about is available to him whether or not he has got the actual extension
 right. This content which is available to both my Twin and me is clearly
 not wide content nor is it narrow content in Fodor's sense. Fodor's
 narrow content is not semantically ?valuable, it cannot be articulated,
 and the agent that has the narrow content isn't aware of it as such. In
 contrast, my minimal content has all of these properties, having these
 properties squares with the data in ways that not having them does not.
 There is no strangeness at all in saying that a thinker does not know
 what is "really" prompting her thoughts or utterances. But it makes no
 sense to say that she does not know what she thinks is prompting her
 thoughts or utterances, at least it makes no sense in such simple cases
 as when she is considering a glass of clear, colorless, tasteless, liquid.
 There is also no strangeness in describing what the thinker thinks her
 thought is about, in a subjective first-person sense, as being part of the
 content of that thought; all the while granting that in another sense,
 an objective third-person sense, the thought is about something entirely
 different. The former, and not the latter, is what is often in some way
 especially available to the thinker.
 Let us explore these last considerations in more detail. When I have
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 200
 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 water thoughts my minimal content represents H20. Presumably I am
 correct in this, H20 is the actual chemical composition of water
 earth. Thus, the subject component of these thoughts also indica
 H20. Suppose that I am now, unknown to myself, transported to Tw
 Earth to take the place of Twin-Me. The minimal content of any of 
 water thoughts still represents H20, and I still believe the actual ext
 sion is H20. I have no reason (at least not yet) to think otherwise. On
 the other hand, my companions on Twin-Earth do have good rea
 to think otherwise, and do so. The minimal content of their wat
 thoughts represents, as it has, XYZ. Further, the subject component
 of those thoughts of theirs also indicates XYZ. Since they know 
 water stuff on their planet is XYZ, their minimal content represent
 what their subject component indicates, the actual object in their en
 vironment. Importantly, they take my expressions of my water thoug
 to be about XYZ, while I take such expressions of mine, as well 
 theirs, to be about H20. Since the actual stuff prompting my thoug
 on this occasion is XYZ, it is appropriate from a third-person perspe
 tive of one in the know to hold that my thought is about XYZ, even
 though it is about H20 from my perspective. (Recall the two seemin
 contradictory features of intentional states noted in Section 1.)
 There are in fact two senses of 'about' at issue here. The notion 
 minimal content is meant to convey one of those senses, viz., t
 subject of a thought as conceived by the thinker. It is only part of th
 content of a thought and it is, in part, subjectively determined
 depends on the thinker's first-person perspective. There is anoth
 sense of 'about.' This sense depends on an objective third-person per
 spective of what the subject of a thought is, and it is this sense wh
 the subject component is meant to capture. Thus, in the case ju
 considered, it is correct for the Twin-Earthians to say of me that X
 is the subject of my thought when, while on Twin-Earth I say, 'The
 is a glass of water on the desk,' despite my thinking, also correctly
 that H20 is the subject of my thought.
 Well, what is my thought about? In answering this question mo
 discussions of Twin-Earth emphasize the third-person, and ignore, o
 overlook, the first-person perspective. The consideration that my Tw
 and I could have type identical internal states while the extensions o
 our thoughts are different, has led many to the conclusion that thoug
 or sense does not determine extension, and further, that there is no
 privileged access to the extension. I agree with this twofold conclusi
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 201
 when the term 'extension' is understood to denote the objectively deter?
 mined objects. A thought is the vehicle for the subject component,
 which does indicate the objectively determinable extension; it, however,
 is also the vehicle for one's minimal content, and the latter need not
 represent the same object(s).
 Third-person accounts presented in various externalist or anti-individ?
 ualist positions maintain that the contents of the thoughts of two mol?
 ecular duplicates are different because they are in different environ?
 ments. I agree with this so long as the contents of which they speak
 are the subject components of the duplicates respective thoughts. But
 it is clear that neither twin can have any privileged access to this kind
 of content. It is also clear that both twins do have privileged access to
 their respective minimal content, to the subject of their respective
 thoughts as they each conceive it. Thus, failing to provide a place for the
 first-person notion of minimal content, introduces a serious distortion in
 our understanding of intentionality.20 In particular, the way we some?
 times do have privileged access to our contents is disregarded, while
 the importance of third-person causal factors in the environment are
 overplayed. This leads to needlessly paradoxical results.
 In the situation just described, from a third-person point of view my
 thought is about XYZ, but I do not know this and, as yet, have never
 even heard of XYZ; so, though my thought in this case is quite simple,
 I do not know what I am thinking about. Still, it is absurd to say that
 the content for me is XYZ and leave it at that. For from the first
 person perspective I certainly do know what my thought is about, it is
 about H20, not XYZ. To know this, I need not be right in what I
 think about it,21 and the object represented in my thought need not
 even exist. My point is not to deny the relevance of the third-person
 perspective, but to display the importance of minimal content as an?
 other component in the analysis of intentional states, one which derives
 from the first-person perspective.
 Let us now revert to the original situation: I am on Earth and Twin
 Me is on Twin-Earth. My minimal content represents H20 (which
 matches the actual stuff around me), while my twin's minimal content
 represents XYZ (which, also, matches the stuff around him). Clearly,
 though, it is not what is in our respective worlds that determines what
 our minimal contents represent. Whatever determines it, it cannot be
 that I am causally interacting with H20. For when I go to Twin-Earth
 my internal state can be identical while I am causally interacting with
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 202
 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 XYZ, and my minimal content still represents H20. Thus, when I thi
 there is a glass of water before me, that particular belief is false, at
 least insofar as it entails H20 is before me at the moment. From my
 perspective, the minimal content is the same, there is no change in 
 belief from what it would have been had I been in qualitatively simi
 circumstances on Earth. Many externalists are wont to say that und
 these circumstances, my belief has changed.22 But it is hard'to see wh
 grounds there are for holding this other than trying to save an externalis
 theory. If such simple beliefs of mine can thus change without m
 knowledge, then the sense in which they are my beliefs seems hardl
 more than I have mouthed them. Pushed to this extreme, the proble
 for the externalist of accounting for first-person authority is exace
 bated.
 One may object23 that while it is true that when I am on Twin
 Earth I am causally interacting with XYZ and my minimal content still
 represents H20, this has little force against the position I am attacking.
 It is my causal history that determines the content of my water thought,
 not merely my current causal relations. Let us see why this consider?
 ation does not undermine my objection.
 Suppose some time in the future, as a result of some radical scientific
 revolution, the idea of molecules is totally abandoned, except, perhaps
 for the convenience of ordinary discourse or even for ease in the
 discussion of some laboratory manipulations. (Just as we now use New?
 ton's equations when velocities are sufficiently small rather than the
 more complicated relativistic ones.) In this imagined future time, one
 speaks not of molecules but of various states of strings. If we recognize
 this outcome as a possibility, still, right now my causal history is no
 different than if things were to develop so as to leave the molecules
 intact. So, even though right now I may well be causally interacting
 with states of strings rather than H20 molecules, this causal interaction
 is not sufficient to force me to conceive my thoughts on such matters
 as being of states of strings. The main point is that though I have been
 causally interacting with the ultimate or "real" underlying structure of
 the stuff water, whatever it is, and have been doing so for some time,
 those causal relations cannot force my minimal content to represent it.
 (After all, it is not as though our "ideas are copies of.the underlying
 structure," to permute a bit on a classical empiricist theme.)
 An analogous point can be made by an actual historical episode.
 When chemists thought phlogiston was released from a substance when
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 203
 it was burned, they did so in part because of their causal relations with
 their environment. Their causal interactions with their environment
 were such that they thought phlogiston existed. That they were wrong,
 that the underlying stuff with which they were causally interacting was
 not phlogiston, in no way undermines the claim that their minimal
 content was a representation of phlogiston. Further, that they came to
 that particular representation was in large part a result of their causal
 history, a result of their conducting various experiments, observing the
 results, and interpreting them in light of their evolving theory.
 Earlier, I alluded to the classical empiricist's claim that ideas are
 copies of impressions. If true, the content of these ideas would be
 determined by the environment in the strongest possible way. Though
 this idea has rightfully fallen into disrepute, it still, in a subterranean
 way, maintains a grip on the thoughts of a number of contemporary
 philosophers. Some sophisticated, though weaker, variant of it is, I
 believe, one root of various third-person analyses of content. The
 weaker versions, however, are not adequate to determine the content
 up to the required specificity.24 To see this consider a dominant species
 of third-person type analysis of content which goes under the heading
 of 'anti-individualism.' A leading advocate of this view characterizes it
 as follows:
 Anti-individualism is the view that not all of an individual's mental states and events
 can be type-individuated independently of the nature of the entities in the individual's
 environment. There is, on this view, a deep individuative relation between the individual's
 being in mental states of certain kinds and the nature of the individual's physical or social
 environments. (B?rge 1992, pp. 46-47.)
 Just what the "deep individuative relation" alluded to by the anti
 individualist is has yet to be characterized; nevertheless, assuming that
 there are such relations, they may well be required for the subject
 component. To this extent, I have not, nor will I here, dispute the anti
 individualist's claim. To say this is to allow that those individuative
 relations do determine the subject of a thinker's thought in an objective
 sense, i.e., from the third-person perspective of someone who knows
 that these relations between the thinker and his environment obtain.
 The subject of a thinker's thought in this sense, however, is one which
 the thinker himself may not know, and it may well diverge from what
 he takes his thought to be about. In contrast, what the thinker himself
 takes that very same thought to be about is completely determined,
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 204
 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 though clearly not completely determined by the presumed objective
 individuative relations. (Since the one content is non-inferentially
 known by the thinker, while the other may not be known at all by him
 and may indicate, objectively, a distinct subject from the one conceived
 by the thinker.)
 Recall the examples discussed earlier. When I am on Twin-Earth the
 minimal content of my water thoughts is still H20 even though what is
 in the environment, what my subject component indicates, is XYZ. Or
 the phlogiston chemist individuated phlogiston as the minimal content
 of some of his thoughts, even though there was no such thing as
 phlogiston in his environment. That such contents are individuated on
 the part of the thinker, despite the conflicting environment, and it is
 done so in some of those very same states that third-person analyses
 insist are individuated in virtue of some relation to the environment,
 is a fact that any proponent of such analyses must confront.25 Failing
 to confront it is a lacuna that undermines the analysis.
 In a very broad and trivial sense, it is undoubtedly true that there
 are many varied causal relations between an individual and his social
 and physical environments which contribute to his being in a given
 intentional state. Moreover, there had to be quite a variety of causal
 interactions that one has had in the past that contributed to the having
 of one's current thoughts. These platitudinous remarks on the causal
 relations between what exists in the environment, on the one hand,
 and what are our intentional states, on the other, are not being denied.
 Furthermore, such casual interactions and the histories that result are
 certainly instrumental in our having any thoughts at all.26 But the fact
 remains that, though the external objects of such relations may well
 co-vary with the subject components of our thoughts, they do not co
 vary with our minimal contents.27 The focus on features accessible from
 the third-person perspective, such as these causal relations, has resulted
 in the gross neglect of the existence and independent role minimal
 content plays in our intentional states. In consequence, there has been
 a corresponding distortion in accounts of intentionality.
 There is an irony here. A fundamental point is missed when, with
 an eye towards offering a third-person analysis, it is suggested that
 conversational systems, such as the Chinese Room, will have under?
 standing once they are made to causally interact with their environment.
 To the extent that this move allows contents to vary with the environ?
 ment without changes in the internal state of the system (as in Twin
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 205
 Earth type cases), such contents are not only independent of how the
 system conceives things, but without a change in internal state, the
 system itself cannot detect a difference in contents under these con?
 ditions. Any such contents, therefore, are contents which we can ascribe
 to the system's states, but they can not be contents for the system
 itself.28 We can do so because we have knowledge of the environments
 being different; having that knowledge, there will be differences in our
 internal states depending on which environment we are considering.
 Since one already could do this much with the original Chinese Room,
 the point of bringing in these causal interactions with the environment
 is totally undermined.29 That is bad enough, but such a move neither
 accounts for our asymmetrical access to the minimal contents of our
 thoughts nor explains it as a mere appearance.
 In summary, any system that has minimal content, is also able to
 have non-inferential knowledge of it, a kind of privileged access to it.
 Such special access is due to the fact that minimal content is largely a
 function of how the system conceives things, not how they are; as such,
 it is a first-person, individualist, or internalist notion. The system,
 however, need not always be explicitly aware of its minimal content; it
 is enough that the system has been and could be once again so aware.
 Since minimal content itself is not some sort of object and nothing is
 presupposed as to whether what it represents actually exists, it is not
 heavily burdened with problematic metaphysical baggage.30 It is a large
 step away from the much more complex and perplexing notion of
 understanding. It does not turn on any troublesome concepts, such as
 meaning, proposition, or the nature of the mental. It is a crucial, and
 essential, step away from the subject component of the representative
 content. Still, it is a notion of content that saves a basic feature per?
 taining to intentionality, and it does so while still providing a place for
 the objective subject component in intentional states. So, not only does
 my type of analysis save the appearance, it provides the means to
 preserve what is true in third-person accounts. By doing both it also
 resolves two apparently contradictory features of intentional states
 noted in Section 1.
 For these reasons, I hold that minimal content is an important con?
 stituent in any analysis of intentional states, and each of us has non
 inferential knowledge of one's own minimal content. I have argued
 that advocates of strictly third-person, anti-individualist, or externalist
 analyses are unable to accommodate this asymmetrical access to one's
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 206
 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 own minimal contents. Thus, they must show that such access is me
 appearance or leave themselves justly open (in a way that Berkel
 was not) to a simple sort of refutation, one which employs a Johnson
 methodology.31
 NOTES
 1 This feature only depends on the fact that we sometimes know without inferenc
 of what our thoughts are about in some sense. It is not that we know all of it in this 
 It is not that we always non-inferentially know part of it. It is not even that we
 explicitly entertain what the content is. To make my case, it is enough if the age
 been, or could become non-inferentially aware of part of the content of his thou
 some sense; I do not need that he is always so aware.
 2 Daniel Dennett, (1987, p. 5).
 3 Dennett, (1987, p. 5).
 4 Dennett, (1987, p. 7).
 5 Donald Davidson (1987, 1984) is an important exception. He argues for the impor
 of first-person authority and points out that some ignore or dismiss it, while othe
 to see the seriousness of the problem it poses for externalist views of mental con
 (He notes (1988) that while B?rge (1988) acknowledges first-person authority, h
 not adequately show how such authority can be reconciled with his view.) Thou
 problem is serious, Davidson argues that first-person authority can be reconciled w
 externalist view of content. The asymmetry of access that I argue for is like that
 which Davidson's bases first-person authority. This access turns on the agent's
 inferential knowledge of the content of one's thought, but the content that I argu
 which is governed by first-person authority is much narrower than Davidson's. For
 there is special access to our occurrent beliefs, desires, and other propositional atti
 as these are ordinarily understood (1987, p. 447), what is often referred to as 
 content. The content that I argue we each have privileged access to is far more res
 than this; still, as will be evident, it is not to be identified with what is normally ref
 to as narrow content. Putnam (1975) first introduced the terms 'wide' and 'narr
 connection with these issues.
 Some other attempts to provide for a limited privileged access which is not infa
 nor transparent and available to the externalist may be found in Heil (1988) and
 maker (1990). But see Section 3 below and Georgalis (1990) where various proble
 raised for externalist attempts to provide for even this limited privileged access.
 6 There is room for error on the agent's part of a different sort, one that is harm
 the point here. For example, if the woman who I have come to think of as my grandm
 has really been an impostor. In that case, however, I would not be making a m
 about who my image is of, the image is of the very woman that I think it is of. 
 happens that that woman in fact isn't blood-related to me in the way I believe s
 Compare Heil (1988, p. 247).
 7 I am indebted to an anonymous referee for a suggestion which facilitated the
 ification of my point that it makes no sense, in certain circumstances, to ask how 
 the image is of whom I think it is.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 207
 8 Another example making the same point (Heil 1988, p. 248) is one in which I make a
 diagram while lecturing on the battle of Borodino. I make Xs to mark the location of
 Napoleon's troops, and Os to mark Kutuzov's. Though there are countless errors I may
 make in my lecture as well as in the accuracy of my diagram, it makes no sense to ask
 me how I know the 'X's represent Napoleon's rather than Kutuzov's troops. Since the
 diagram is mine, the 'X's cannot fail to mean what I intend them to mean. Suppose, on
 looking at my diagram, I have the thought that Napoleon had too heavy a concentration
 of troops in the northeast. On having this thought, I non-inferentially know that an 'X'
 represents a certain number of Napoleon's troops. I know this straight-out, without
 recourse to a thought about this thought. It would make no sense for me to look for
 evidence of this, to puzzle whether an 'X' really represented (a certain number of)
 Kutuzov's troops. Though it does make sense that you might be puzzled about such a
 matter, you may have to infer on the basis of evidence what my 'X's represent. While I
 may be wrong in thinking there were too many troops in the northeast (as a matter of
 military strategy), I can't be wrong in thinking that one of my 'X's represents (a certain
 number of) Napoleon's troops.
 Consider a new twist on this case. I may wonder what Kutuzov would have done had
 he been in Napoleon's position, my speculations being based on my knowledge of his
 psychology. But now the Xs (and my corresponding minimal contents) represent (a
 certain number of) Kutuzov's troops. It is important to realize that here too, I know the
 minimal contents of my thoughts straight-out, but inferences are required from a third
 person perspective. Another important point to notice here is that this non-inferential
 knowledge does not require a second-order thought, as is commonly supposed.
 9 See Note 8.
 10 Though Searle's most extended account is to be found in his (1983), see also his (1984)
 for a particularly clear discussion of the differences between intrinsic intentionality and
 derivative or metaphorical intentionality.
 It is worth noting that acceptance of Searle's framework for an analysis of intentionality,
 as he presents it in the early chapters of Intentionality, does not commit one to the
 acceptance of the causal account of intentionality he gives in the final chapter.
 11 Here we have operative one of the germs of truth in theories of direct reference, but
 I do not presuppose them, nor can I develop their relevance here.
 12 Towards the end of his (1988), B?rge draws a distinction between thinking a thought
 and explicating it. It is correct to do so. I can think a thought that mercury is an element,
 his example, without being able to give a proper explication of that thought. I may know
 very little about the periodic table and how mercury fits into it, etc. But B?rge conflates
 explicating with individuating, which is wrong. He says: "One clearly does not have first
 person authority about whether one of one's thoughts is to be explicated or individuated
 in such and such a way" (B?rge 1988, p. 662). While one does not have first-person
 authority over the explication of one's thought, say, that mercury is an element, to have
 the thought at all one must be able to somehow individuate mercury as what is represented
 by the minimal content of that thought, no matter how ignorant one might be, or how
 many misconceptions one might have of mercury.
 13 Holding this does not entail that whenever I am in a state which has minimal content
 that I must also be aware of that minimal content. (Cf. my warning in Note 1.) The
 awareness spoken of here is simply the non-inferential knowledge of what is represented
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 208 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 by the minimal content, not the noticing of some special feature of the state or its minimal
 content. And that's a good thing, for it would seriously count against my view. As to
 why, see, e.g., Saul Kripke, (1982), especially the latter part of part 2.
 14 This is developed in Searle (1980). The case somewhat simplified is essentially as
 follows: An English speaking person is locked in a room and provided with a large
 ordered store of sequences of Chinese characters together with a set of elaborate syntactic
 transformation rules. The latter are formulated in English, but operate on strings of
 Chinese characters. The individual in the room does not understand Chinese. However,
 given new strings of Chinese characters from someone outside the room, he is able to
 apply the transformation rules to the received strings so as to produce new strings that
 he then passes out of the room. A Chinese speaking person on the outside is passing
 meaningful Chinese sentences to the man in the room, and the latter, unknown to himself,
 is returning meaningful and appropriate Chinese responses.
 15 Davidson (1987) and Heil (1988) argue that externalism can accommodate the kind
 of privileged access herein discussed, though what they take the access to be to differs
 from what I do. In my (1990), I argue Heil is unsuccessful. In Section 3 of this paper, I
 argue that any externalist account must fail, including those, such as Davidson's, which
 appeal to the natural history of the agent.
 16 Searle (1983). Compare the last sentence of Note 10.
 17 It is worth noting that explaining the appearance of liquidity in this way is not the
 same as just saying liquidity supervenes on molecular structure. Just saying that would
 not help in explaining the appearance; one must indicate how this appearance could
 come about from the underlying base properties.
 18 Searle has mentioned to me that Thomas Nagel has raised a similar objection to his
 analogy.
 19 It should be obvious, though, that what I am here characterizing as minimal content
 is distinct from what has been called "narrow content," i.e., conceptual or inferential
 role. While one might reject minimal content, one certainly cannot identify it with this
 sense of narrow content. The classic discussion of narrow and wide content and that of
 Twin-Earth (the latter is addressed below) is in Putnam (1975).
 By way of further clarification, I am not here directly concerned with the question as
 to whether the notion of wide content is itself adequate for a science of psychology or
 whether one also needs some notion of narrow content for such purposes. Dretske and
 Fodor, for example, take opposing positions on this. There are many issues pertaining
 to this important question which I have not here addressed; nevertheless, if I am right
 that there is special access to minimal content and that there cannot be such access to
 wide content, this will certainly have bearing on that question. My primary concern,
 however, is to make a place for minimal content both in the analysis of intentional states
 and for help in providing an account of privileged access.
 20 In saying this I am not holding that the identity of concepts or the meaning of terms
 are ultimately determined by the individual. So when an anti-individualist, such as Tyler
 B?rge, maintains that "... the meanings of many terms . . . and the identity of many
 concepts . . . are what they are even though what the individual knows about the meaning
 or concept may be insufficient to determine it uniquely," (B?rge 1992, p. 46) there is no
 disagreement. Our individual ignorance is varied and extensive. Still, there is a first
 person authority over what one's thought is about, in one sense, regardless of the extent
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 209
 of one's misconceptions pertaining to it. The greater the misconceptions the less able
 one is able to adequately explicate what one's thought is about. One does not have any
 first-person privilege over this, but this is different from individuating one's minimal
 content where one does have first-person privilege. For more on the distinction between
 individuating and explicating and how first-person authority relates to these, see section
 1 and Note 12.
 21 Compare the differences between explicating and understanding (as discussed in Note
 12), on the one hand, and individuating on the other.
 22 Compare Burge's (1979) discussion of his arthritis example and Davidson's (1987)
 criticism of same. Although I have many points of agreement with Davidson on these
 and related issues, the fact that he ultimately bases his points on the causal histories of
 the agents undermines, in my opinion, his conclusions, or so I argue below.
 23 I am grateful to John Heil for raising the objection in correspondence we had on a
 much earlier draft of this paper.
 24 I note that whether I am right about these views on content sharing an ancestry with
 classical empiricism is quite immaterial to my other points. Compare Davidson (1987, p.
 455) where he makes a similar point.
 25 Of course, an individual may change in time so that his minimal contents represent
 the different entities in its new environment or correctly represent what was always in
 his environment. But when this happens, surely his thoughts are different too. Although
 his minimal content and subject component now signal the same entity, this has no
 bearing on their earlier divergence. So, when the phlogiston chemist gets converted to
 the oxygen theory of combustion, his new thoughts about burning objects will have both
 his minimal content and subject component signaling the same entity, without altering
 the fact that in his earlier thoughts, while causally interacting with a similar environment
 to the current one, his minimal content and subject component diverged in what they
 signaled.
 26 Maintaining we have special access to our own minimal contents is not to be confused
 with maintaining a private language or anything like that. The special access is not due
 to the "privacy" of the minimal contents, others are not precluded from having access
 to one's own minimal contents. It is just that their access to mine must be inferential,
 whereas my access to my minimal contents may be non-inferential. Compare the earlier
 discussion in Section 1 of one's forming an image or drawing a diagram. Compare also
 Davidson (1984, 1987).
 27 See Georgalis (1990, pp. 103-106) for a discussion of some of the difficulties involved
 in specifying appropriate external conditions which determine the content of a thought.
 28 To the extent that I am right in maintaining the importance of the first-person perspec?
 tive and the consequences I have drawn from it for an analysis of intentional states, I
 am also right in denying that being able to take an "intentional stance" toward a system
 is sufficient for that system to have intentional states. The last claim requires further
 support in that Dennett (1987) would require, in addition to our being able to take an
 intentional stance towards a system, that the system itself exhibit a certain objective
 feature which he calls a 'real pattern', if the system is to have intentional states. (See,
 e.g., his 1987, p. 25-26. An extended treatment of his idea of a real pattern is developed
 in his 1991.) Consideration of whether talk of real patterns in this connection can
 avoid the problems the first-person perspective raises for Dennett's kind of analysis of
 intentional states will have to wait for another occasion.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 210 NICHOLAS GEORGALIS
 29 Dretske places a great deal of stress on the important role transducers play in transfor?
 ming conversational systems, such as the Chinese Room or a computer running a program,
 from being mere symbol manipulators to ones that manipulate signs because of the
 meaning of those signs. In his (1985) he states: "Unless the symbols being manipulated
 mean something to the system manipulating them, their meaning, whatever it is, is irrelev?
 ant to evaluating what the system is doing when it manipulates them" (pp. 27-28). I
 agree with Dretske that the important and relevant case is that in which the symbols
 mean something for the system processing them, though I disagree with him on what this
 amounts to or whether his approach can adequately deal with it. To the extent that I
 have shown transducers are irrelevant vis a vis the signs having content for the processor,
 and to the extent that having content for the system presupposes having this content,
 then to that extent, I have shown that Dretske's approach cannot work either. (For
 Dretske's more recent development see his (1988).)
 30 Frequently, of course, we take the objects our minimal contents represent to actually
 exist. This is an additional belief, however, one which is independent of our having
 minimal contents, of our taking our thoughts to be about this or that. Our thoughts
 having minimal content is in no way dependent on this further belief about them. It
 certainly does not depend on such further beliefs being true.
 31 Thanks to Tomis Kapit?n and William J. Rapaport for many useful comments on
 earlier drafts. Special thanks to John Heil and Henry Jacoby for most helpful discussions
 on these and related issues, as well as numerous specific comments and suggestions for
 improvements, on earlier drafts.
 REFERENCES
 B?rge, T.: 1979, 'Individualism and the Mental', in P. French, T. Uehling and
 Wettstein (eds.), Midwest Studies in Philosophy, Volume 4, University of Minn
 Press.
 B?rge, T.: 1988, 'Individualism and Self-knowledge', The Journal of Philosophy 85, 649
 663.
 B?rge, T.: 1992, 'Philosophy of Language and Mind: 1950-1990', The Philosophical
 Review 101, 3-51.
 Davidson, D.: 1984, 'First Person Authority', Dialectia 38, 101-111.
 Davidson, D.: 1987, 'Knowing One's Own Mind', Proceedings and Addresses of the APA
 60, 441-458.
 Davidson, D.: 1988, 'Reply to B?rge', The Journal of Philosophy 85, 664-665.
 Dennett, D. C: 1987, The Intentional Stance, MIT Press, Cambridge.
 Dennett, D. C: 1991, 'Real Patterns', The Journal of Philosophy 88, 27-51.
 Dretske, F.: 1985, 'Machines and the Mental', The Philosophical Association: Proceedings
 and Addresses 59, 23-33.
 Dretske, F.: 1988, Explaining Behavior, MIT Press, Cambridge.
 Fodor, J. A.: 1988, Psychosemantics, MIT Press, Cambridge.
 Georgalis, N.: 1990, 'No Access for the Externalist', Mind 99, 101-108.
 Heil, J.: 1988, 'Privileged Access', Mind 97, 238-251.
 Kripke, S.: 1982, Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language, Harvard University Press,
 Cambridge.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 ASYMMETRY OF ACCESS TO INTENTIONAL STATES 211
 Manuscript submitted 15 April 1993
 Final version received 20 September 1993
 Department of Philosophy
 East Carolina University
 Greenville NC 27858-4353
 USA
 Putnam, H.: 1975, 'The Meaning of "Meaning"', Mind, Language and Reality, Cam?
 bridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 215-271.
 Searle, J. R.: 1980, 'Minds, Brains, and Programs', The Behavioral and Brain Sciences
 3, 417-424. Reprinted in J. Haugeland (ed.): 1981, Mind Design, MIT Press, Cam?
 bridge, Mass.
 Searle, J. R.: 1983, Intentionality, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
 Searle, J. R.: 1984, 'Intentionality and its Place in Nature', Synthese 61, 3-16.
 Shoemaker, S.: 1990, 'First-Person Access', in J. Tomberlin (ed.): 1990, Action Theory
 and Philosophy of Mind, Ridgeview, Atascadero, California: 187-215.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Sun, 26 Mar 2023 02:09:58 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

