Umeå University, Department of Philosophy and Linguistics
PHONUM 9 (2003), 1-4
Available online at http://www.ling.umu.se/fonetik2003/
Clicks and the idea of a human protolanguage
Hartmut Traunmüller
Department of Linguistics, Stockholm University
This paper disputes the arguments behind the idea that a human
protolanguage had clicks that were independently retained in languages
whose speakers reflect a very early divergence in the human population. It
presents a less spectacular view of protolanguage, and it considers an
advantage of clicks in hunting and peculiarities in the shape of Bushman
palates, which may have helped clicks into speech.
1. Click languages and their speakers
Although clicks are widely used in human communication, their use is mostly restricted to
interjections, in which they are not combined with other speech sounds. Only in southern and
eastern Africa, are clicks are used in phonemic function. Outside this region, only one click
language is known. It was called Damin, and it was never anybody’s first language, but an
artificial language known until the past century among initiated men of the Lardil tribe on
Mornington Island, off Australia (Hale, 1992). In addition to clicks, all of them nasalized,
Damin used also other sounds, such as ejectives, that do not occur elsewhere in Australia.
The African click languages belong to several different language groups that have not
been shown to be related to each other. All the languages of the Khwe (Hottentots) and San
(Bushmen) of southern Africa use clicks. These languages are often referred to as “South
African Khoisan-languages”, but this label does not imply a genetic relationship within the
group (Westphal, 1971). Northern Khoisan, which includes Ju|’hoansi, is only distantly
related to Central Khoisan, which includes Nama, and there are two southern groups, one of
them now only represented by !Xóõ (Traill, 1985), that have not been convincingly shown to
be related to any of the others.
There are two click languages, Sandawe and Hadza, spoken by a small number of people
in separate regions of central Tanzania. Hadza has not been convincingly shown to be related
to Sandawe or any other language, but the two share some old loans from neighboring
languages. However, there are noticeable similarities in grammar and vocabulary between
Sandawe and the Central Khoisan languages, which suggest a common origin or a tight
prehistoric connection (Köhler 1973/74, Elderkin 1986). A striking example is the numeral
“four”: Nama, Xiri hàká, Nharo hàkà, Korana haka and Sandawe haka-x. This had, by the
way, entered as a loan into two by now extinct Southern Cushitic languages, Asá and
Kw’adza (cf. Rosenfelder, 2003). Clicks are used in another Southern Cushitic language,
Dahalo, spoken far from the Hadza and Sandawe areas, close to the mouth of the Tana in
Kenya. Dahalo has only one click, a dental that can be prenasalized (Nurse, 1986).
Finally, clicks are used in the Nguni-branch of the Bantu languages, which includes
Xhosa, Zulu, Ndebele, Swazi, Sotho, the pidgin Fanagalo, etc. It is fairly obvious that the
Bantu adopted the clicks from the San who lived in the region into which they migrated and
whom they absorbed in the course of the past 700 years or so. The origin of the click in

2
Hartmut Traunmüller
Dahalo is more remote in the past. It is probably due to extensive contact between Southern
Cushites and click language speakers in Central Kenya perhaps more than 2000 years ago
(Nurse, 1986). In the light of this evidence of cases in which the use of clicks has spread into
unrelated languages, we must assume that this can also have happened in prehistoric times:
The presence of clicks does not imply a common origin of the languages.
In an investigation of variation in Y chromosome and mtDNA among African populations
including the Hadza and the Ju|’hoansi San, it was recently found that these peoples are
separated by a very great genetic distance (Knight et al., 2003), so that the separation of their
ancestors appears to be among the earliest of human population divergences. The authors
suggest that clicks are an ancient element of human language that has been independently
retained by the ancestors of the Hadza and the Ju|’hoansi since before this divergence. While
a hypothesis that considers clicks as Ursprache relics is not incompatible with the biological
evidence, Knight et al. (2003) did not suggest any reason for why all other populations
should have abandoned the use of clicks in speech. Their reasoning implies that clicks are
only lost, never gained in languages, except once. However, we do not know of even a single
instance in which a language has lost its clicks, while Dahalo, Nguni and Damin provide
unquestionable evidence for the opposite having happened more than once.
As compared with the Hadza, the Sandawe may be genetically much closer to the Khoisan
of southern Africa. According to ten Raa (1970), there are two regions in Sandawe country
that differ not only in the culture but also in the physique of their population. The central
region includes acculturated Bantu and Nilotes, while the people in the south-eastern region
have “a short stature, a yellow skin, peppercorn hair, the epicanthic fold, excessive wrinkling
of the skin at an advanced age, and a typical pentagonal Bushman-like skull: even
steatopygia appears to occur in some women.” All these features are commonly associated
with Khoisan populations. This strengthens the hypothesis that before the intrusion of the
Bantu, 1000 years ago, Bushman-like people and their click languages were present in a
coherent region that extended from Mt. Kenya to the Cape. From these Bushmen, the use of
clicks may have spread to unrelated peoples and languages, such as Hadza and Dahalo.
Except for the Bantu, who were pastoralists and practiced primitive agriculture, which is
now also true of the Khwe and the Sandawe, the other peoples who use click languages all
represent or represented until recently a more ancient way of subsistence as hunter-gatherers.
This is of some relevance in a discussion of the origin and diffusion of clicks.
2. The Ursprache
The idea that the ancestors of all present humans once spoke a common language is very old.
It is opposed to the idea that there was substantial variation at each stage in development
from the most primitive pre-human communicational codes. In order to proceed, it helps to
be clear about what distinguishes a structurally developed language.
One basic feature that is characteristic of spoken language is the association between
sound and meaning in accordance with a more or less arbitrary convention. The use of
arbitrary conventions is evidence of culture, but such conventions are not unique to humans.
There are other species that show signs of culture and arbitrary conventions in their
communication. It is clear that this criterion does not distinguish language with a developed
structure from a more primitive code based on iconic gestures, sound imitations, interjections
and sound symbolism, which our early ancestors are likely to have used. To the extent to
which this involved conventional patterns, we must assume that there was dialectal variation,
since such patterns tend to differ between groups who do not frequently communicate with

Clicks and the idea of a human protolanguage
3
each other. We can assume that there was substantial variation of this kind both before and
after the time when structurally developed language began to be used.
A structurally developed kind of language required a further step: the introduction of a
dual structure or “double articulation” in which the association between sound and meaning
is indirect and mediated by a set of conventional elements that are meaningless in
themselves, i.e., by phonemes. Nothing new was involved in superimposing forms structured
in this way on vocalizations. When the possibility of a dual structure had been discovered, it
is likely to have spread not only to the offspring of the discoverers, but also to other groups
who may have noticed its usefulness. In this scenario, the particulars of the “Ursprache” do
not rank very high in importance. Other groups may have imitated the use of phonemes, but
they may very well have chosen a slightly different set and coined their own words in
addition to loaning them from the “Ursprache”.
The assumption that clicks were part of the phoneme set of a human Ursprache rests on
rather questionable reasoning: Clicks are observed to be used by peoples who represent the
most ancient way of subsistence as hunter-gatherers in Africa, the Urheimat of modern
humans. Based on this, their languages are assumed to represent a similarly ancient state.
However, there is no evidence that would suggest a slower rate of language change among
those who remained hunter-gatherers in Africa until the present as compared with the
languages of others. It would be particularly odd to assume that early phoneme systems were
similar to those of the Khoisan languages, since these systems are the most elaborated of all
on Earth. A primitive protolanguage could not have sustained as many phonetic distinctions
as these languages offer in their click accompaniments, phonation types and tones.
It is much more reasonable to assume that the speech sounds that first acquired a
distinctive function were those that tend to be mastered first by children everywhere, i.e., as
far as this is independent of the children’s linguistic environment. On this basis, one could
expect the vowels [i a u] and the consonants [p t k m n l] to have been used – and this is a
close to exhaustive list. Initially, stops were only distinguished in place of articulation, and
there were neither fricatives nor clicks.
Even at present, nearly all Australian languages lack fricatives, except in recent loans
from English. Likewise, the old Dravidian languages lacked fricatives before they adopted
loans from Indo-Aryan and other languages. These languages also lack distinctions in
voicing and aspiration. However, they distinguish many places of articulation, which is less
likely for a protolanguage. The Micronesian language Kiribati has a simple sound system,
without fricatives, that one can imagine a protolanguage to have had, but in the case of
Kiribati, this appears to be due to simplification of a more complex system.
3. Origin and diffusion of clicks
According to the Modulation Theory (Traunmüller, 1994), speech arises when speakers
modulate their voice with conventional linguistic gestures. The voice as such is still used for
conveying paralinguistic information about the speaker and his state and attitude. This is
characteristic of all human speech. However, voiceless fricatives and clicks do not convey
such paralinguistic information. Out of context, they do not even identify themselves as
human sounds. Listeners who are not familiar with click languages tend to perceive the
clicks as extraneous noise even within the context of a stream of speech.
The property of fricatives and clicks not to disclose themselves as human sounds appears
to be exploited in cooperative hunting. Knight et al. (2002) report: “During stalking of prey,
Ju|’hoansi revert to a hushed whisper-like communication. The speech is devoiced and
consists almost entirely of clicks”. Clicks are short in duration but more intense than other

4
Hartmut Traunmüller
speech sounds. They are easily audible to the prey as well as to the hunters, but if the prey
does not recognize them as produced by a predator, their use is likely to positively impact
hunting success. Thus, it may be that the phonemic use of clicks originated in the context of
hunting. Subsequently, the use of clicks may have spread to other groups of hunters who
noticed their advantage. This advantage is quite independent of a possible relationship
between the groups and its recognition does not require a high frequency or intimate nature
of contacts between the groups, although this condition was certainly fulfilled when the
Bantu who migrated into southern Africa adopted clicks.
However, we are still left with the question of why the phonemic use of clicks did not
arise elsewhere. Olle Engstrand, who had previously sought a connection between the origin
of clicks and labial-velars, which also are used predominantly in Africa (Engstrand 1997),
drew my attention to the possibility that an anatomical feature might be responsible: Four of
the five speakers of !Xóõ, investigated by Traill (1985) had gently sloping palates without an
alveolar ridge. Traill quotes a study by van Reenen (1964), according to which this feature is
widespread in the San population. This feature reduces the amount of distortion of the tongue
that is required in producing clicks, especially for laminal clicks. It predisposes speakers for
the production of such clicks and thereby increases the likelihood for clicks to acquire a
function in speech. In order to evaluate this hypothesis, it would be informative to know
whether gently sloping palates without an alveolar ridge are common also among the Hadza
and to what extent this trait was present in prehistoric African populations and elsewhere.
4. References
Elderkin, E.D. (1986) Diachronic inferences from basic sentence and noun structure in
central Khoisan and Sandawe, Sprache und Geschichte in Afrika 7.2, 131-156.
Engstrand, O. (1997) Why are clicks so elusive?, PHONUM, 4, 191-194. (Department of
Phonetics, Umeå University.)
Hale, K. (1992) Language endangerment and the human value of linguistic diversity,
Language, 68, 35-42.
Knight, A., Underhill, P.A., Mortensen, H.M., Zhivotovsky, L.A., Lin, A.A., Henn, B.M.,
Louis, D., Ruhlen, M. & Mountain, J.L. (2003) African Y chromosome and mtDNA
divergence provides insight into the history of click languages, Current Biology, 13, 464-
473.
Köhler, O.R.A. (1973/74) Neuere Ergebnisse und Hypothesen der Sprachforschung in ihrer
Bedeutung für die Geschichte Afrikas, Paideuma, 19/20, 162-199.
Nurse, D. (1986) Reconstruction of Dahalo history through evidence of loanwords, Sprache
und Geschichte in Afrika 7.2, 267-305.
Raa, R. ten (1970) The couth and the uncouth: ethnic, social and linguistic division among
the Sandawe of central Tanzania, Anthropos, 65, 127-153.
Reenen, J.F. van (1964) Dentition, jaws and palate of the Kalahari Bushman, Journal of the
Dental Association of South Africa, 19, 1-37.
Rosenfelder, M. (last accessed 2003-04-06) Numbers from 1 to 10 in Over 4500 Languages,
http://www.zompist.com/numbers.shtml.
Traill, A. (1985) Phonetic and Phonological Studies of !Xóõ Bushman. Hamburg: Buske.
Traunmüller, H. (1994) Conventional, biological, and environmental factors in speech
communication: A modulation theory, Phonetica, 51, 170-183.
Westphal, E.O.J. (1971) The click languages of southern and eastern Africa. In: Current
trends in linguistics, 7: Linguistics in Sub-Saharan Africa (T.A. Sebeok, editor), pp 367-
420. The Hague: Mouton.

