Seats and Restraint Systems ........................... 1-1
Front Seats
............................................... 1-2
Rear Seats
............................................... 1-9
Safety Belts
............................................. 1-12
Child Restraints
....................................... 1-33
Airbag System
......................................... 1-60
Restraint System Check
............................ 1-76
Features and Controls ..................................... 2-1
Keys
........................................................ 2-3
Doors and Locks
....................................... 2-7
Windows
................................................. 2-12
Theft-Deterrent Systems
............................ 2-15
Starting and Operating Your Vehicle
........... 2-19
Mirrors
.................................................... 2-39
OnStar® System
...................................... 2-47
Storage Areas
......................................... 2-50
Sunroof
.................................................. 2-52
Instrument Panel ............................................. 3-1
Instrument Panel Overview
.......................... 3-4
Climate Controls
...................................... 3-20
Warning Lights, Gages, and Indicators
........ 3-23
Driver Information Center (DIC)
.................. 3-38
Audio System(s)
....................................... 3-46
Driving Your Vehicle ....................................... 4-1
Your Driving, the Road, and Your Vehicle
..... 4-2
Towing
................................................... 4-41
Service and Appearance Care .......................... 5-1
Service
..................................................... 5-3
Fuel
......................................................... 5-5
Checking Things Under the Hood
............... 5-10
Rear Axle
............................................... 5-48
Four-Wheel Drive
..................................... 5-49
Front Axle
............................................... 5-50
Headlamp Aiming
..................................... 5-51
Bulb Replacement
.................................... 5-51
Windshield Wiper Blade Replacement
......... 5-57
Tires
...................................................... 5-59
Appearance Care
................................... 5-106
Vehicle Identiﬁcation
............................... 5-115
Electrical System
.................................... 5-115
Capacities and Speciﬁcations
................... 5-120
Maintenance Schedule ..................................... 6-1
Maintenance Schedule
................................ 6-2
Customer Assistance Information .................... 7-1
Customer Assistance and Information
........... 7-2
Reporting Safety Defects
........................... 7-15
Vehicle Data Recording and Privacy
........... 7-17
Index ................................................................ 1
2008 Chevrolet Colorado Owner Manual M
Information Provided by:

GENERAL MOTORS, GM, the GM Emblem,
CHEVROLET, the CHEVROLET Emblem, and
the name COLORADO are registered trademarks
of General Motors Corporation.
This manual includes the latest information at the time
it was printed. We reserve the right to make changes after
that time without further notice. For vehicles ﬁrst sold in
Canada, substitute the name “General Motors of Canada
Limited” for Chevrolet Motor Division whenever it appears
in this manual.
This manual describes features that may be available in
this model, but your vehicle may not have all of them.
For example, more than one entertainment system may
be offered or your vehicle may have been ordered
without a front passenger or rear seats.
Keep this manual in the vehicle for quick reference.
Canadian Owners
A French language copy of this manual can be obtained
from your dealer/retailer or from:
Helm, Incorporated
P.O. Box 07130
Detroit, MI 48207
1-800-551-4123
www.helminc.com
Propriétaires Canadiens
On peut obtenir un exemplaire de ce guide en français
auprès de concessionnaire ou à l’adresse suivante:
Helm Incorporated
P.O. Box 07130
Detroit, MI 48207
1-800-551-4123
www.helminc.com
Litho in U.S.A.
Part No. 15866157 A First Printing
©2007 General Motors Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
ii
Information Provided by:

Using this Manual
Many people read the owner manual from beginning to
end when they ﬁrst receive their new vehicle to learn
about the vehicle’s features and controls. Pictures
and words work together to explain things.
Index
A good place to quickly locate information about the
vehicle is the Index in the back of the manual. It is
an alphabetical list of what is in the manual and
the page number where it can be found.
Safety Warnings and Symbols
There are a number of safety cautions in this book.
A box with the word CAUTION is used to tell about
things that could hurt you or others if you were to
ignore the warning.
{CAUTION:
These mean there is something that could hurt
you or other people.
We tell you what the hazard is and what to do to help
avoid or reduce the hazard. Please read these cautions.
If you do not, you or others could be hurt.
A circle with a slash
through it is a safety
symbol which means
“Do Not,” “Do Not do this”
or “Do Not let this happen.”
iii
Information Provided by:

Vehicle Damage Warnings
You will also ﬁnd notices in this manual.
Notice:
These mean there is something that could
damage your vehicle.
A notice tells about something that can damage the
vehicle. Many times, this damage would not be covered
by your vehicle’s warranty, and it could be costly.
The notice tells what to do to help avoid the damage.
When you read other manuals, you might see CAUTION
and NOTICE warnings in different colors or in different
words.
There are also warning labels on the vehicle which use
the same words, CAUTION or NOTICE.
Vehicle Symbols
The vehicle has components and labels that use
symbols instead of text. Symbols are shown along
with the text describing the operation or information
relating to a speciﬁc component, control, message,
gage, or indicator.
iv
Information Provided by:

Front Seats ......................................................1-2
Manual Seats ................................................1-2
Power Seats ..................................................1-3
Manual Lumbar ..............................................1-3
Power Lumbar ...............................................1-4
Heated Seats .................................................1-4
Reclining Seatbacks ........................................1-5
Head Restraints .............................................1-7
Seatback Latches ...........................................1-8
Rear Seats .......................................................1-9
Rear Seat Operation (Extended Cab) ................1-9
Rear Seat Operation (Crew Cab) ....................1-10
Safety Belts ...................................................1-12
Safety Belts: They Are for Everyone ................1-12
How to Wear Safety Belts Properly .................1-17
Lap-Shoulder Belt .........................................1-25
Safety Belt Use During Pregnancy ..................1-31
Lap Belt ......................................................1-31
Safety Belt Extender .....................................1-32
Child Restraints .............................................1-33
Older Children ..............................................1-33
Infants and Young Children ............................1-36
Child Restraint Systems .................................1-39
Where to Put the Restraint .............................1-42
Lower Anchors and Tethers for
Children (LATCH) ......................................1-43
Securing a Child Restraint in a
Rear Seat Position ....................................1-54
Securing a Child Restraint in the
Center Front Seat Position ..........................1-56
Securing a Child Restraint in the
Right Front Seat Position ............................1-56
Airbag System ...............................................1-60
Where Are the Airbags? ................................1-63
When Should an Airbag Inﬂate? .....................1-65
What Makes an Airbag Inﬂate? .......................1-67
How Does an Airbag Restrain? .......................1-67
What Will You See After an Airbag Inﬂates? .....1-68
Passenger Sensing System ............................1-69
Servicing Your Airbag-Equipped Vehicle ...........1-74
Adding Equipment to Your Airbag-Equipped
Vehicle ....................................................1-74
Restraint System Check ..................................1-76
Checking the Restraint Systems ......................1-76
Replacing Restraint System Parts
After a Crash ............................................1-77
Section 1
Seats and Restraint Systems
1-1
Information Provided by:

Front Seats
Manual Seats
{CAUTION:
You can lose control of the vehicle if you try to
adjust a manual driver’s seat while the vehicle
is moving. The sudden movement could startle
and confuse you, or make you push a pedal
when you do not want to. Adjust the driver’s
seat only when the vehicle is not moving.
Lift the bar located under the front of the seat to unlock
it. Slide the seat to where you want it and release
the bar. Try to move the seat with your body to make
sure the seat is locked into place.
1-2
Information Provided by:

Power Seats
If the vehicle has power
seats, the controls used to
operate them are located
on the outboard side of
the seats.
To adjust the seat, do any of the following:
•
Move the seat forward or rearward by sliding the
horizontal control forward or rearward.
•
Raise or lower the front part of the seat cushion by
moving the front of the horizontal control up or down.
•
Raise or lower the rear part of the seat cushion by
moving the rear of the horizontal control up or down.
•
Raise or lower the entire seat by moving the entire
horizontal control up or down.
•
Use the vertical control to recline the seatback.
See “Power Reclining Seatbacks” under Reclining
Seatbacks on page 1-5 for more information.
Manual Lumbar
If your vehicle has this
feature, there is a knob
located on the outboard
side of the driver’s seat.
Turn the top of the knob toward the front of the vehicle
to increase lumbar support. Turn the top of the knob
toward the rear of the vehicle to decrease lumbar
support.
1-3
Information Provided by:

Power Lumbar
If your vehicle has this
feature, the control is
located on the outboard
side of the seat(s).
Press and hold the front of the control until you have
the desired lumbar support. To decrease lumbar
support, press and hold the rear of the control.
Heated Seats
If your vehicle has this
feature, the controls are
located on the outboard
side of the front seats.
This feature will heat the cushion and back of the seats.
Press the top of the switch to turn the heat to the
high setting. Press the bottom of the switch to turn the
heat to the low setting. Put the switch in the center
position to turn the heat off.
The ignition must be on for the heated seat feature to
work. The seat will heat to the last setting if the ignition
has been turned off and then turned back on.
The passenger’s safety belt must be fastened for the
heated seat feature to work on the passenger’s seat.
1-4
Information Provided by:

Reclining Seatbacks
Manual Reclining Seatbacks
{CAUTION:
You can lose control of the vehicle if you try to
adjust a manual driver’s seat while the vehicle
is moving. The sudden movement could startle
and confuse you, or make you push a pedal
when you do not want to. Adjust the driver’s
seat only when the vehicle is not moving.
{CAUTION:
If the seatback is not locked, it could move
forward in a sudden stop or crash. That could
cause injury to the person sitting there. Always
push and pull on the seatback to be sure it is
locked.
If your seats have manual reclining seatbacks, the lever
used to operate them is located on the outboard side
of the seat(s).
To recline the seatback, do the following:
1. Lift the recline lever.
2. Move the seatback to the desired position, then
release the lever to lock the seatback in place.
3. Push and pull on the seatback to make sure it is
locked.
1-5
Information Provided by:

To return the seatback to an upright position, do the
following:
1. Lift the lever fully without applying pressure to the
seatback and the seatback will return to the upright
position.
2. Push and pull on the seatback to make sure it is
locked.
Power Reclining Seatbacks
If the seats have power
reclining seatbacks, use
the vertical power seat
control located on the
outboard side of the seat.
•
To recline the seatback, press the control toward the
rear of the vehicle.
•
To raise the seatback, press the control toward the
front of the vehicle.
1-6
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Sitting in a reclined position when your vehicle
is in motion can be dangerous. Even if you
buckle up, your safety belts cannot do their
job when you are reclined like this.
The shoulder belt cannot do its job because it
will not be against your body. Instead, it will be
in front of you. In a crash, you could go into it,
receiving neck or other injuries.
The lap belt cannot do its job either.
In a crash, the belt could go up over your
abdomen. The belt forces would be there,
not at your pelvic bones. This could cause
serious internal injuries.
For proper protection when the vehicle is in
motion, have the seatback upright. Then sit
well back in the seat and wear your safety belt
properly.
Do not have a seatback reclined if your vehicle is
moving.
Head Restraints
Your front seats may have adjustable head restraints.
If your vehicle has rear seats, they may have adjustable
head restraints.
Adjust the head restraint so that the top of the restraint is
at the same height as the top of the occupant’s head.
This position reduces the chance of a neck injury in a
crash.
1-7
Information Provided by:

Pull up on the head
restraint to raise it.
To lower the head
restraint, press the button
located on top of the
seatback and push down
on the head restraint.
Seatback Latches
Your vehicle may have front seatbacks that fold forward
for easy access to the rear seats or the storage area
behind the seats.
To fold the seatback
forward, push the lever
on the side of the seat
rearward and pull the
seatback forward.
{CAUTION:
If the seatback is not locked, it could move
forward in a sudden stop or crash. That could
cause injury to the person sitting there. Always
push and pull on the seatback to be sure it is
locked.
To return the seatback to the upright position, push the
seatback all the way back until it latches. If the seatback
was reclined before being folded forward, it will return to
the reclined position.
1-8
Information Provided by:

Rear Seats
Rear Seat Operation (Extended Cab)
If your vehicle has an
extended cab, there may
be forward folding seats in
the rear area.
To fold the rear seat cushion(s) from the stored position
to the sitting position, pull the front of the seat cushion
down completely.
The rear seat storage compartments must be closed
before folding the seat down. See Rear Storage Area on
page 2-51.
To store the seat, do the following:
Notice:
Folding a rear seat with the safety belts
still fastened may cause damage to the seat or
the safety belts. Always unbuckle the safety belts
and return them to their normal stowed position
before folding a rear seat.
1. Secure the safety belt buckle to the inboard side
of the seat with the hook and loop fastener (A),
so that it does not move when not in use.
2. Push the entire seat up until it is ﬂush with the
trim panel.
1-9
Information Provided by:

Rear Seat Operation (Crew Cab)
The rear seatback(s) in the crew cab can be folded
forward.
Notice:
Folding a rear seat with the safety belts
still fastened may cause damage to the seat or the
safety belts. Always unbuckle the safety belts
and return them to their normal stowed position
before folding a rear seat.
To fold the rear seatback(s) forward, do the following:
1. Disconnect the rear center safety belt latch from the
mini buckle by inserting the tip of the safety belt
tongue into the slot on the buckle. Let the belt retract.
2. Pull the loop, located
on the outboard side of
the seatback, forward
until you hear a click.
3. Fold the seatback(s) forward.
1-10
Information Provided by:

To return the seatback(s) to the upright position, do the
following:
1. Lift the seatback(s) and push it into place.
{CAUTION:
If the seatback is not locked, it could move
forward in a sudden stop or crash. That could
cause injury to the person sitting there. Always
push and pull on the seatback to be sure it is
locked.
2. Make sure the seatback(s) is locked by pushing
and pulling on it.
{CAUTION:
A safety belt that is improperly routed, not
properly attached, or twisted will not provide
the protection needed in a crash. The person
wearing the belt could be seriously injured.
After raising the rear seatback, always check
to be sure that the safety belts are properly
routed and attached, and are not twisted.
3. Reconnect the center safety belt latch plate to
the mini buckle. Make sure the safety belt is not
twisted. Push and pull on the latch plate to be sure
it is secure.
When the seatback is not in use, it should be kept in
the upright, locked position.
1-11
Information Provided by:

Safety Belts
Safety Belts: They Are for Everyone
This part of the manual tells you how to use safety
belts properly. It also tells you some things you should
not do with safety belts.
{CAUTION:
Do not let anyone ride where he or she cannot
wear a safety belt properly. If you are in a
crash and you are not wearing a safety belt,
your injuries can be much worse. You can hit
things inside the vehicle harder or be ejected
from it and be seriously injured or killed. In
the same crash, you might not be, if you are
buckled up. Always fasten your safety belt,
and check that your passenger(s) are
restrained properly too.
{CAUTION:
People riding on the tailgate (if equipped) can
easily lose their balance and fall even when
the vehicle is operated at low speeds. Falling
from a moving vehicle may result in serious
injuries or death.
{CAUTION:
It is extremely dangerous to ride in a cargo area,
inside or outside of a vehicle. In a collision,
people riding in these areas are more likely to
be seriously injured or killed. Do not allow
people to ride in any area of your vehicle that
is not equipped with seats and safety belts.
Be sure everyone in your vehicle is in a seat
and using a safety belt properly.
Your vehicle has indicators as a reminder to buckle your
safety belts. See Safety Belt Reminders on page 3-26.
1-12
Information Provided by:

In most states and in all Canadian provinces, the law
requires wearing safety belts. Here is why:
You never know if you will be in a crash. If you do have
a crash, you do not know if it will be a serious one.
A few crashes are mild, and some crashes can be
so serious that even buckled up, a person would not
survive. But most crashes are in between. In many
of them, people who buckle up can survive and
sometimes walk away. Without belts they could
have been badly hurt or killed.
After more than 40 years of safety belts in vehicles,
the facts are clear. In most crashes buckling up does
matter... a lot!
Why Safety Belts Work
When you ride in or on anything, you go as fast as
it goes.
Take the simplest vehicle. Suppose it is just a seat
on wheels.
1-13
Information Provided by:

Put someone on it.
Get it up to speed. Then stop the vehicle.
The rider does not stop.
1-14
Information Provided by:

The person keeps going until stopped by something.
In a real vehicle, it could be the windshield...
or the instrument panel...
1-15
Information Provided by:

or the safety belts!
With safety belts, you slow down as the vehicle does.
You get more time to stop. You stop over more distance,
and your strongest bones take the forces. That is why
safety belts make such good sense.
Questions and Answers About
Safety Belts
Q: Will I be trapped in the vehicle after a crash if I
am wearing a safety belt?
A: You could be — whether you are wearing a safety
belt or not. But your chance of being conscious
during and after an accident, so you can unbuckle
and get out, is much greater if you are belted.
And you can unbuckle a safety belt, even if you
are upside down.
Q: If my vehicle has airbags, why should I have to
wear safety belts?
A: Airbags are supplemental systems only; so they
work with safety belts — not instead of them.
Whether or not an airbag is provided, all occupants
still have to buckle up to get the most protection.
That is true not only in frontal collisions, but
especially in side and other collisions.
1-16
Information Provided by:

Q: If I am a good driver, and I never drive far from
home, why should I wear safety belts?
A: You may be an excellent driver, but if you are in a
crash — even one that is not your fault — you and
your passenger(s) can be hurt. Being a good driver
does not protect you from things beyond your
control, such as bad drivers.
Most accidents occur within 25 miles (40 km)
of home. And the greatest number of serious
injuries and deaths occur at speeds of less than
40 mph (65 km/h).
Safety belts are for everyone.
How to Wear Safety Belts Properly
This section is only for people of adult size.
Be aware that there are special things to know about
safety belts and children. And there are different rules for
smaller children and babies. If a child will be riding in your
vehicle, see Older Children on page 1-33 or Infants and
Young Children on page 1-36. Follow those rules for
everyone’s protection.
It is very important for all occupants to buckle up.
Statistics show that unbelted people are hurt more often
in crashes than those who are wearing safety belts.
Occupants who are not buckled up can be thrown out
of the vehicle in a crash. And they can strike others
in the vehicle who are wearing safety belts.
First, before you or your passenger(s) wear a safety
belt, there is important information you should know.
Sit up straight and always keep your feet on the ﬂoor in
front of you. The lap part of the belt should be worn low
and snug on the hips, just touching the thighs. In a crash,
this applies force to the strong pelvic bones and you
would be less likely to slide under the lap belt. If you slid
under it, the belt would apply force on your abdomen.
This could cause serious or even fatal injuries.
1-17
Information Provided by:

The shoulder belt should go over the shoulder and across
the chest. These parts of the body are best able to take
belt restraining forces.
The shoulder belt locks if there is a sudden stop or
crash.
Q: What is wrong with this?
A: The shoulder belt is too loose. It will not give nearly
as much protection this way.
{CAUTION:
You can be seriously hurt if your shoulder belt
is too loose. In a crash, you would move
forward too much, which could increase injury.
The shoulder belt should ﬁt snugly against
your body.
1-18
Information Provided by:

Q: What is wrong with this?
A: The lap belt is too loose. It will not give as much
protection this way.
{CAUTION:
You can be seriously hurt if your lap belt is too
loose. In a crash, you could slide under the lap
belt and apply force on your abdomen. This
could cause serious or even fatal injuries. The
lap belt should be worn low and snug on the
hips, just touching the thighs.
1-19
Information Provided by:

Q: What is wrong with this?
A: The belt is buckled in the wrong place.
{CAUTION:
You can be seriously injured if your belt is
buckled in the wrong place like this. In a crash,
the belt would go up over your abdomen. The
belt forces would be there, not on the pelvic
bones. This could cause serious internal
injuries. Always buckle your belt into the
buckle nearest you.
1-20
Information Provided by:

Q: What is wrong with this?
A: The belt is over an armrest.
{CAUTION:
You can be seriously injured if your belt goes
over an armrest like this. The belt would be
much too high. In a crash, you can slide under
the belt. The belt force would then be applied
on the abdomen, not on the pelvic bones, and
that could cause serious or fatal injuries.
Be sure the belt goes under the armrests.
1-21
Information Provided by:

Q: What is wrong with this?
A: The shoulder belt is worn under the arm. It should
be worn over the shoulder at all times.
{CAUTION:
You can be seriously injured if you wear the
shoulder belt under your arm. In a crash, your
body would move too far forward, which would
increase the chance of head and neck injury.
Also, the belt would apply too much force to
the ribs, which are not as strong as shoulder
bones. You could also severely injure internal
organs like your liver or spleen. The shoulder
belt should go over the shoulder and across
the chest.
1-22
Information Provided by:

Q: What is wrong with this?
A: The belt is behind the body.
{CAUTION:
You can be seriously injured by not wearing
the lap-shoulder belt properly. In a crash, you
would not be restrained by the shoulder belt.
Your body could move too far forward
increasing the chance of head and neck injury.
You might also slide under the lap belt. The
belt force would then be applied right on the
abdomen. That could cause serious or fatal
injuries. The shoulder belt should go over
the shoulder and across the chest.
1-23
Information Provided by:

Q: What is wrong with this?
A: The belt is twisted across the body.
{CAUTION:
You can be seriously injured by a twisted belt.
In a crash, you would not have the full width of
the belt to spread impact forces. If a belt is
twisted, make it straight so it can work
properly, or ask your dealer/retailer to ﬁx it.
1-24
Information Provided by:

Lap-Shoulder Belt
All seating positions in your vehicle have a lap-shoulder
belt except for the center front passenger position
(if equipped), which has a lap belt. See Lap Belt
on page 1-31 for more information.
Here is how to wear a lap-shoulder belt properly.
1. Adjust the seat, if the seat is adjustable, so you can
sit up straight. To see how, see “Seats” in the Index.
2. Pick up the latch plate and pull the belt across you.
Do not let it get twisted.
The lap-shoulder belt may lock if you pull the belt
across you very quickly. If this happens, let the belt
go back slightly to unlock it. Then pull the belt
across you more slowly.
If you ever pull the shoulder portion of a passenger
belt out all the way, you may engage the child
restraint locking feature. If this happens, just let
the belt go back all the way and start again.
Engaging the child restraint locking feature
may affect the passenger sensing system.
See Passenger Sensing System on page 1-69.
3. Push the latch plate into the buckle until it clicks.
Pull up on the latch plate to make sure it is secure.
If the belt is not long enough, see Safety Belt
Extender on page 1-32.
Make sure the release button on the buckle is
positioned so you would be able to unbuckle
the safety belt quickly if necessary.
4. If equipped with a shoulder belt height adjuster,
move it to the height that is right for you. Improper
shoulder belt height adjustment could reduce
the effectiveness of the safety belt in a crash.
See “Shoulder Belt Height Adjustment” later in
this section.
1-25
Information Provided by:

5. To make the lap part tight, pull up on the
shoulder belt.
It may be necessary to pull stitching on the safety
belt through the latch plate to fully tighten the
lap belt on smaller occupants.
To unlatch the belt, push the button on the buckle.
The belt should go back out of the way. When the safety
belt is not in use, slide the latch plate up the safety belt
webbing. The latch plate should rest on the stitching on
the safety belt, near the guide loop on the side wall.
Before you close a door, be sure the belt is out of the
way. If you slam the door on it, you can damage
both the belt and your vehicle.
1-26
Information Provided by:

Shoulder Belt Height Adjuster
Your vehicle has a shoulder belt height adjuster for the
driver and right front passenger position.
Adjust the height so that the shoulder portion of the belt is
centered on your shoulder. The belt should be away from
your face and neck, but not falling off your shoulder.
Improper shoulder belt height adjustment could reduce
the effectiveness of the safety belt in a crash.
To move it up or down,
squeeze the release
buttons (A) together and
move the height adjuster
to the desired position.
After you move the height adjuster to where you want it,
try to move it down without squeezing the release
buttons to make sure it has locked into position.
Safety Belt Pretensioners
Your vehicle has safety belt pretensioners for front
outboard occupants. Although you cannot see them,
they are part of the safety belt assembly. They can help
tighten the safety belts during the early stages of a
moderate to severe frontal or near frontal crash if the
threshold conditions for pretensioner activation are met.
Pretensioners work only once. If they activate in a
crash, you will need to get new ones, and probably other
new parts for your safety belt system. See Replacing
Restraint System Parts After a Crash on page 1-77.
1-27
Information Provided by:

Rear Safety Belt Comfort Guides
Your vehicle may have rear shoulder belt comfort
guides for the rear outside positions.
Rear shoulder belt comfort guides may provide added
safety belt comfort for older children who have outgrown
booster seats and for some adults. When installed on
a shoulder belt, the comfort guide positions the belt
away from the neck and head.
Here is how to install a comfort guide to the
shoulder belt.
1. Slide the guide off of its storage clip located
between the interior body and the seatback.
1-28
Information Provided by:

2. Place the guide over the belt and insert the
two edges of the belt into the slots of the guide.
3. Be sure that the belt is not twisted and it lies ﬂat.
The elastic cord must be under the belt and the
guide on top.
1-29
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
A safety belt that is not properly worn may not
provide the protection needed in a crash. The
person wearing the belt could be seriously
injured. The shoulder belt should go over the
shoulder and across the chest. These parts of
the body are best able to take belt restraining
forces.
4. Buckle, position, and release the safety belt as
described previously in this section. Make sure
that the shoulder belt crosses the shoulder.
To remove and store a comfort guide, squeeze the belt
edges together so that you can take them out of the
guide. Slide the guide back on its storage clip located
between the interior body and the seatback.
1-30
Information Provided by:

Safety Belt Use During Pregnancy
Safety belts work for everyone, including pregnant
women. Like all occupants, they are more likely to be
seriously injured if they do not wear safety belts.
A pregnant woman should wear a lap-shoulder belt,
and the lap portion should be worn as low as possible,
below the rounding, throughout the pregnancy.
The best way to protect the fetus is to protect the mother.
When a safety belt is worn properly, it is more likely that
the fetus will not be hurt in a crash. For pregnant women,
as for anyone, the key to making safety belts effective is
wearing them properly.
Lap Belt
This part is only for the lap belt. To learn how to wear a
lap-shoulder belt, see Lap-Shoulder Belt on page 1-25.
You vehicle may have a center seating position.
When you sit in the center front seating position,
you have a lap safety belt, which has no retractor.
To make the belt longer, tilt the latch plate and pull it
along the belt.
Buckle, position, and release it the same way as the lap
part of a lap-shoulder belt.
1-31
Information Provided by:

To make the belt shorter, pull its free end as shown
until the belt is snug.
If the belt is not long enough, see Safety Belt Extender
on page 1-32.
Make sure the release button on the buckle is positioned
so you would be able to unbuckle the safety belt quickly if
necessary.
Safety Belt Extender
If the vehicle’s safety belt will fasten around you, you
should use it.
But if a safety belt is not long enough, your dealer/retailer
will order you an extender. When you go in to order it,
take the heaviest coat you will wear, so the extender will
be long enough for you. To help avoid personal injury, do
not let someone else use it, and use it only for the seat it
is made to ﬁt. The extender has been designed for adults.
Never use it for securing child seats. To wear it, attach it
to the regular safety belt. For more information, see the
instruction sheet that comes with the extender.
1-32
Information Provided by:

Child Restraints
Older Children
Older children who have outgrown booster seats should
wear the vehicle’s safety belts.
The manufacturer’s instructions that come with the
booster seat, state the weight and height limitations for
that booster. Use a booster seat with a lap-shoulder
belt until the child passes the below ﬁt test:
•
Sit all the way back on the seat. Do the knees bend
at the seat edge? If yes, continue. If no, return to
the booster seat.
•
Buckle the lap-shoulder belt. Does the shoulder belt
rest on the shoulder? If yes, continue. If no, try using
the rear safety belt comfort guide. See “Rear Safety
Belt Comfort Guides” under Lap-Shoulder Belt on
page 1-25 for more information. If the shoulder belt
still does not rest on the shoulder, then return to the
booster seat.
•
Does the lap belt ﬁt low and snug on the hips,
touching the thighs? If yes, continue. If no, return
to the booster seat.
•
Can proper safety belt ﬁt be maintained for length of
trip? If yes, continue. If no, return to the booster seat.
If you have the choice, a child should sit in a position
with a lap-shoulder belt and get the additional restraint
a shoulder belt can provide.
1-33
Information Provided by:

Q: What is the proper way to wear safety belts?
A: An older child should wear a lap-shoulder belt and
get the additional restraint a shoulder belt can
provide. The shoulder belt should not cross the face
or neck. The lap belt should ﬁt snugly below the hips,
just touching the top of the thighs. This applies belt
force to the child’s pelvic bones in a crash. It should
never be worn over the abdomen, which could cause
severe or even fatal internal injuries in a crash.
Also see “Rear Safety Belt Comfort Guides” under
Lap-Shoulder Belt on page 1-25.
According to accident statistics, children and infants are
safer when properly restrained in the rear seating
positions than in the front seating positions.
In a crash, children who are not buckled up can strike
other people who are buckled up, or can be thrown
out of the vehicle. Older children need to use safety
belts properly.
{CAUTION:
Never do this.
Here two children are wearing the same belt.
The belt cannot properly spread the impact
forces. In a crash, the two children can be
crushed together and seriously injured. A belt
must be used by only one person at a time.
1-34
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Never do this.
Here a child is sitting in a seat that has a
lap-shoulder belt, but the shoulder part is
behind the child. In a crash, the child would
not be restrained by the shoulder belt. The
child might slide under the lap belt. The belt
force would then be applied right on the
abdomen. That could cause serious or fatal
injuries. The child could also move too far
forward increasing the chance of head and
neck injury. The shoulder belt should go over
the shoulder and across the chest.
1-35
Information Provided by:

Infants and Young Children
Everyone in a vehicle needs protection! This includes
infants and all other children. Neither the distance
traveled nor the age and size of the traveler changes
the need, for everyone, to use safety restraints. In fact,
the law in every state in the United States and in every
Canadian province says children up to some age must
be restrained while in a vehicle.
{CAUTION:
Children can be seriously injured or strangled if
a shoulder belt is wrapped around their neck
and the safety belt continues to tighten. Never
leave children unattended in a vehicle and never
allow children to play with the safety belts.
Every time infants and young children ride in vehicles,
they should have the protection provided by appropriate
restraints. Children who are not restrained properly can
strike other people, or can be thrown out of the vehicle.
In addition, young children should not use the vehicle’s
adult safety belts alone; they need to use a child restraint.
{CAUTION:
People should never hold an infant in their
arms while riding in a vehicle. An infant does
not weigh much — until a crash. During a
crash an infant will become so heavy it is not
possible to hold it. For example, in a crash at
only 25 mph (40 km/h), a 12 lb (5.5 kg) infant
will suddenly become a 240 lb (110 kg) force
on a person’s arms. An infant should be
secured in an appropriate restraint.
1-36
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Children who are up against, or very close to,
any airbag when it inﬂates can be seriously
injured or killed. Airbags plus lap-shoulder
belts offer protection for adults and older
children, but not for young children and
infants. Neither the vehicle’s safety belt system
nor its airbag system is designed for them.
Young children and infants need the protection
that a child restraint system can provide.
1-37
Information Provided by:

Q: What are the different types of add-on child
restraints?
A: Add-on child restraints, which are purchased by the
vehicle’s owner, are available in four basic types.
Selection of a particular restraint should take into
consideration not only the child’s weight, height,
and age but also whether or not the restraint will
be compatible with the motor vehicle in which it
will be used.
For most basic types of child restraints, there are
many different models available. When purchasing
a child restraint, be sure it is designed to be
used in a motor vehicle. If it is, the restraint will
have a label saying that it meets federal motor
vehicle safety standards.
The restraint manufacturer’s instructions that come
with the restraint state the weight and height
limitations for a particular child restraint. In addition,
there are many kinds of restraints available for
children with special needs.
{CAUTION:
Newborn infants need complete support,
including support for the head and neck.
This is necessary because a newborn infant’s
neck is weak and its head weighs so much
compared with the rest of its body. In a crash,
an infant in a rear-facing seat settles into
the restraint, so the crash forces can be
distributed across the strongest part of an
infant’s body, the back and shoulders. Infants
should always be secured in appropriate infant
restraints.
1-38
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
The body structure of a young child is quite
unlike that of an adult or older child, for whom
the safety belts are designed. A young child’s
hip bones are still so small that the vehicle’s
regular safety belt may not remain low on the
hip bones, as it should. Instead, it may settle
up around the child’s abdomen. In a crash, the
belt would apply force on a body area that is
unprotected by any bony structure. This alone
could cause serious or fatal injuries. Young
children should always be secured in
appropriate child restraints.
Child Restraint Systems
A rear-facing infant
seat (A) provides restraint
with the seating surface
against the back of
the infant.
The harness system holds the infant in place and, in a
crash, acts to keep the infant positioned in the restraint.
A forward-facing child
seat (B) provides restraint
for the child’s body
with the harness.
1-39
Information Provided by:

A booster seat (C-D) is a child restraint designed to
improve the ﬁt of the vehicle’s safety belt system.
A booster seat can also help a child to see out the
window.
Securing an Add-On Child Restraint in
the Vehicle
{CAUTION:
A child can be seriously injured or killed in a
crash if the child restraint is not properly
secured in the vehicle. Make sure the child
restraint is properly installed in the vehicle
using the vehicle’s safety belt or LATCH
system, following the instructions that came
with that restraint, and also the instructions
in this manual.
To help reduce the chance of injury, the child restraint
must be secured in the vehicle. Child restraint systems
must be secured in vehicle seats by lap belts or the
lap belt portion of a lap-shoulder belt, or by the LATCH
system. See Lower Anchors and Tethers for Children
(LATCH) on page 1-43 for more information. A child
can be endangered in a crash if the child restraint is
not properly secured in the vehicle.
1-40
Information Provided by:

When securing an add-on child restraint, refer to the
instructions that come with the restraint which may be
on the restraint itself or in a booklet, or both, and to this
manual. The child restraint instructions are important,
so if they are not available, obtain a replacement
copy from the manufacturer.
Keep in mind that an unsecured child restraint can
move around in a collision or sudden stop and injure
people in the vehicle. Be sure to properly secure
any child restraint in your vehicle — even when
no child is in it.
Securing the Child Within the Child
Restraint
{CAUTION:
A child can be seriously injured or killed in a
crash if the child is not properly secured in
the child restraint. Because there are different
systems, it is important to refer to the
instructions that come with the restraint. Make
sure the child is properly secured, following
the instructions that came with that restraint.
1-41
Information Provided by:

Where to Put the Restraint
Accident statistics show that children are safer if they
are restrained in the rear rather than the front seat.
We recommend that children and child restraints
be secured in a rear seat, including: an infant or a child
riding in a rear-facing child restraint; a child riding in
a forward-facing child seat; an older child riding in
a booster seat; and children, who are large enough,
using safety belts.
A label on your sun visor says, “Never put a rear-facing
child seat in the front.” This is because the risk to the
rear-facing child is so great, if the airbag deploys.
{CAUTION:
A child in a rear-facing child restraint can be
seriously injured or killed if the right front
passenger’s airbag inﬂates. This is because
the back of the rear-facing child restraint
would be very close to the inﬂating airbag.
CAUTION:
(Continued)
CAUTION:
(Continued)
Even though the passenger sensing system is
designed to turn off the right front passenger’s
frontal airbag if the system detects a rear-facing
child restraint, no system is fail-safe, and no
one can guarantee that an airbag will not deploy
under some unusual circumstance, even
though it is turned off. We recommend that
rear-facing child restraints be secured in a
rear seat, even if the airbag is off.
If you secure a forward-facing child restraint
in the right front seat, always move the front
passenger seat as far back as it will go. It is
better to secure the child restraint in a rear seat.
See Passenger Sensing System on page 1-69
for additional information.
1-42
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
A child in a child restraint in the center front
seat can be badly injured or killed by the
frontal airbags if they inﬂate. Never secure
a child restraint in the center front seat. It is
always better to secure a child restraint in a
rear seat.
Do not use child restraints in the center front seat
position.
When securing a child restraint in a rear seating
position, study the instructions that came with your child
restraint to make sure it is compatible with this vehicle.
If your vehicle does not have a rear seat that will
accommodate a rear-facing child restraint, we
recommend that rear-facing child restraints not be
transported in your vehicle, even if the airbag is off.
Wherever you install a child restraint, be sure to secure
the child restraint properly.
Keep in mind that an unsecured child restraint can
move around in a collision or sudden stop and injure
people in the vehicle. Be sure to properly secure
any child restraint in your vehicle — even when
no child is in it.
Lower Anchors and Tethers for
Children (LATCH)
The LATCH system holds a child restraint during driving
or in a crash. This system is designed to make installation
of a child restraint easier. The LATCH system uses
anchors in the vehicle and attachments on the child
restraint that are made for use with the LATCH system.
Make sure that a LATCH-compatible child restraint
is properly installed using the anchors, or use the
vehicle’s safety belts to secure the restraint, following
the instructions that came with that restraint, and also
the instructions in this manual. When installing a child
restraint with a top tether, you must also use either the
lower anchors or the safety belts to properly secure the
child restraint. A child restraint must never be installed
using only the top tether and anchor.
In order to use the LATCH system in your vehicle,
you need a child restraint that has LATCH attachments.
The child restraint manufacturer will provide you with
instructions on how to use the child restraint and its
attachments. The following explains how to attach a
child restraint with these attachments in your vehicle.
Not all vehicle seating positions or child restraints have
lower anchors and attachments or top tether anchors
and attachments.
1-43
Information Provided by:

Lower Anchors
Lower anchors (A) are metal bars built into the vehicle.
There are two lower anchors for each LATCH seating
position that will accommodate a child restraint with
lower attachments (B).
Top Tether Anchor
A top tether (A, C) anchors the top of the child restraint
to the vehicle. A top tether anchor is built into the
vehicle. The top tether attachment (B) on the child
restraint connects to the top tether anchor in the vehicle
in order to reduce the forward movement and rotation
of the child restraint during driving or in a crash.
Your child restraint may have a single tether (A) or a
dual tether (C). Either will have a single attachment (B)
to secure the top tether to the anchor.
1-44
Information Provided by:

Some child restraints that have a top tether are designed
for use with or without the top tether being attached.
Others require the top tether always to be attached.
In Canada, the law requires that forward-facing
child restraints have a top tether, and that the tether
be attached. Be sure to read and follow the instructions
for your child restraint.
If the child restraint does not have a top tether, one
can be obtained, in kit form, for many child restraints.
Ask the child restraint manufacturer whether or not a kit
is available.
Lower Anchor and Top Tether Anchor
Locations
i (Top Tether Anchor):
Seating positions with top
tether anchors.
j (Lower Anchor):
Seating positions with
two lower anchors.
i (Top Tether Anchor):
Seating positions with top
tether anchors.
j (Lower Anchor):
Seating positions with
two lower anchors.
i (Top Tether Anchor):
Seating positions with top
tether anchors.
Crew Cab — Rear Seat
Extended Cab — Rear
Seat
Front Seat — Regular
and Extended Cab
without Rear Seats
1-45
Information Provided by:

For crew cab models, there are exposed metal lower
anchors for each rear outboard seating position, located
where the seatback meets the back of the seat cushion.
For extended cab models with rear seats, there are
exposed metal lower anchors for each rear seating
position, attached to the back wall, near the seat
cushion.
To assist you in locating the lower anchors, place your
hand in a palm-up position and reach up between
the seat cushion and the seatback.
To assist you in locating
the top tether anchors, the
top tether anchor symbol
is located on the cover.
The top tether anchors in a crew cab model are located
on the back wall behind each rear seating position.
Be sure to use an anchor located on the same side
of the vehicle as the seating position where the
child restraint will be placed.
Crew Cab
1-46
Information Provided by:

The top tether anchors in an extended cab model are
located on the center of the back wall behind a removable
cover for the rear seating positions. Be sure to use an
anchor located nearest to the seating position where the
child restraint will be placed.
For regular and extended cab models without rear
seats, there is a top tether anchor located behind a
removable cover on the back wall behind the right front
passenger seat. You may have to pull the seatback
forward to access the anchor.
Do not secure a child restraint in a position without a
top tether anchor if a national or local law requires that
the top tether be attached, or if the instructions that
come with the child restraint say that the top tether
must be attached.
Extended Cab — Rear Seat
Regular and Extended Cab without Rear Seats
1-47
Information Provided by:

Accident statistics show that children are safer if they
are restrained in the rear rather than the front seat.
See Where to Put the Restraint on page 1-42 for
additional information.
Securing a Child Restraint Designed for
the LATCH System
{CAUTION:
If a LATCH-type child restraint is not attached
to anchors, the restraint will not be able to
protect the child correctly. In a crash, the child
could be seriously injured or killed. Make sure
that a LATCH-type child restraint is properly
installed using the anchors, or use the
vehicle’s safety belts to secure the restraint,
following the instructions that came with that
restraint, and also the instructions in this
manual.
{CAUTION:
Each top tether anchor and lower anchor in
the vehicle is designed to hold only one child
restraint. Attaching more than one child
restraint to a single anchor could cause the
anchor or attachment to come loose or even
break during a crash. A child or others could
be injured if this happens. To help prevent
injury to people and damage to your vehicle,
attach only one child restraint per anchor.
1-48
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Children can be seriously injured or strangled
if a shoulder belt is wrapped around their neck
and the safety belt continues to tighten.
Secure any unused safety belts behind the
child restraint so children cannot reach them.
Pull the shoulder belt all the way out of the
retractor to set the lock, if your vehicle has
one, after the child restraint has been installed.
Be sure to follow the instructions of the child
restraint manufacturer.
Notice:
Contact between the child restraint LATCH
attachment parts and the vehicle’s safety belt
assembly may cause damage to these parts. Make
sure when securing unused safety belts behind
the child restraint that there is no contact between
the child restraint LATCH attachment parts and
the vehicle’s safety belt assembly.
Folding an empty rear seat with the safety belts
secured may cause damage to the safety belt or
the seat. When removing the child restraint, always
remember to return the safety belts to their normal,
stowed position before folding the rear seat.
Crew Cab — Rear Seat
1. Put the child restraint on the seat.
2. If the child restraint manufacturer’s instructions
recommends that the top tether be attached, attach
the top tether to the top tether anchor (A). Refer to
the child restraint instructions and the following
steps:
2.1. Pull the seatback forward to access the top
tether anchors (A). See Rear Seat Operation
(Extended Cab) on page 1-9 or Rear Seat
Operation (Crew Cab) on page 1-10.
1-49
Information Provided by:

2.2. Route the top tether according to your child
restraint instructions and the following
instructions:
If the position you are using
has a ﬁxed headrest or
head restraint and you are
using a single tether, route
the tether over the head
restraint.
If the position you are using
has an adjustable headrest
or head restraint and you
are using a single tether,
raise the headrest or head
restraint and route the
tether under the headrest
or head restraint and in
between the headrest or
head restraint posts.
If the position you are using
has a ﬁxed or adjustable
headrest or head restraint
and you are using a dual
tether, route the tether
around the headrest or
head restraint.
2.3. Attach the top tether to the anchor (A). Make
sure that you secure the top tether to the
top tether anchor and not to the seatback
latch (B).
2.4. Push rearward on the seatback until it locks
into its upright position. Push and pull on the
seatback to make sure it is secured properly.
1-50
Information Provided by:

3. Attach and tighten the lower attachments to the
lower anchors. If the child restraint does not have
lower attachments or the desired seating position
does not have lower anchors, secure the child
restraint with the top tether and the safety belts.
Refer to your child restraint manufacturer
instructions and the instructions in this manual.
3.1. Find the lower anchors for the desired
seating position.
3.2. Attach and tighten the lower attachments on
the child restraint to the lower anchors.
4. Tighten the top tether.
5. Push and pull the child restraint in different
directions to be sure it is secure.
Extended Cab — Rear Seat
1. Attach and tighten the lower attachments to the
lower anchors. If the child restraint does not have
lower attachments or the desired seating position
does not have lower anchors, secure the child
restraint with the top tether and the safety belts.
Refer to your child restraint manufacturer
instructions and the instructions in this manual.
1.1. Find the lower anchors (D) for the desired
seating position.
1.2. Put the child restraint on the seat.
1.3. Attach the lower attachments on the child
restraint to the lower anchors (D) in the
vehicle. The child restraint instructions will
show you how.
1-51
Information Provided by:

2. If the child restraint manufacturer recommends that
the top tether be attached, attach and tighten the top
tether to the top tether anchor (C). Refer to the child
restraint instructions and the following steps:
2.1. Pull on the ﬁnger access tab to remove the
cover to access the top tether anchors (C).
2.2. Route the top tether (A) through the loop (B)
at the top of the seatback to attach the top
tether to the nearest top tether anchor (C).
3. Tighten the lower anchor attachments and the top
tether. The child restraint instructions will show
you how.
4. Push and pull the child restraint in different
directions to be sure it is secure.
Front Seat — Regular/Extended Cab
without Rear Seats
Your vehicle has a right front passenger’s airbag and
a passenger sensing system. The passenger sensing
system is designed to turn off the right front passenger’s
frontal airbag when an infant in a rear-facing infant seat or
a small child in a forward-facing child restraint or booster
seat is detected. See Securing a Child Restraint in the
Right Front Seat Position on page 1-56 and Passenger
Sensing System on page 1-69 for important safety
information and additional information on installing
a child restraint in the right front seat position.
1. See Securing a Child Restraint in the Right Front
Seat Position on page 1-56 for instructions on
installing the child restraint using the safety belts.
2. If the child restraint manufacturer’s instructions
recommends that the top tether be attached,
attach and tighten the top tether to the top tether
anchor. Refer to the child restraint instructions and
the following steps:
2.1. Pull the seatback forward to access the top
tether anchor. See Seatback Latches on
page 1-8.
2.2. Pull on the ﬁnger access tab to remove the
cover to access the top tether anchor.
1-52
Information Provided by:

2.3. Route the top tether according to your child
restraint instructions and the following
instructions:
If the position you are using
has a ﬁxed headrest or
head restraint and you are
using a single tether, route
the tether over the headrest
or head restraint.
If the position you are using
has an adjustable headrest
or head restraint and you
are using a single tether,
raise the headrest or head
restraint and route the
tether under the headrest
or head restraint and in
between the headrest or
head restraint posts.
If the position you are using
has a ﬁxed or adjustable
headrest or head restraint
and you are using a dual
tether, route the tether
around the headrest or
head restraint.
3. Attach and tighten the top tether according to your
child restraint instructions.
4. Push and pull the child restraint in different
directions to be sure it is secure.
1-53
Information Provided by:

Securing a Child Restraint in a Rear
Seat Position
When securing a child restraint in a rear seating
position, study the instructions that came with your child
restraint to make sure it is compatible with this vehicle.
If your child restraint has the LATCH system, see
Lower Anchors and Tethers for Children (LATCH)
on page 1-43 for how to install your child restraint
using LATCH. If you secure a child restraint using a
safety belt and it uses a top tether, see Lower Anchors
and Tethers for Children (LATCH) on page 1-43 for
top tether anchor locations.
Do not secure a child seat in a position without a top
tether anchor if a national or local law requires that
the top tether be anchored, or if the instructions
that come with the child restraint say that the top
strap must be anchored.
If your child restraint does not have the LATCH system,
you will be using the safety belt to secure the child
restraint in this position. Be sure to follow the instructions
that came with the child restraint. Secure the child in the
child restraint when and as the instructions say.
If you need to install more than one child restraint in the
rear seat, be sure to read Where to Put the Restraint
on page 1-42
1. Put the child restraint on the seat.
2. Pick up the latch plate, and run the lap and shoulder
portions of the vehicle’s safety belt through or around
the restraint. The child restraint instructions will show
you how.
3. Push the latch plate into the buckle until it clicks.
Make sure the release button is positioned so you
would be able to unbuckle the safety belt quickly
if necessary.
1-54
Information Provided by:

4. Pull the rest of the shoulder belt all the way out of
the retractor to set the lock.
5. If your child restraint has a top tether, attach the top
tether to the top tether anchor. See Lower Anchors
and Tethers for Children (LATCH) on page 1-43.
6. To tighten the belt, push down on the child restraint,
pull the shoulder portion of the belt to tighten the lap
portion of the belt, and feed the shoulder belt back
into the retractor. If you are using a forward-facing
child restraint, you may ﬁnd it helpful to use your
knee to push down on the child restraint as you
tighten the belt.
7. Tighten the top tether. See Lower Anchors and
Tethers for Children (LATCH) on page 1-43.
8. Push and pull the child restraint in different
directions to be sure it is secure.
To remove the child restraint, unbuckle the vehicle’s
safety belt and let it go back all the way. If the top tether
is attached to a top tether anchor, disconnect it.
1-55
Information Provided by:

Securing a Child Restraint in the
Center Front Seat Position
{CAUTION:
A child in a child restraint in the center front
seat can be badly injured or killed by the
frontal airbags if they inﬂate. Never secure a
child restraint in the center front seat. It is
always better to secure a child restraint in a
rear seat.
Do not use child restraints in the center front seat
position.
Securing a Child Restraint in the
Right Front Seat Position
Your vehicle has airbags. A rear seat is a safer place to
secure a forward-facing child restraint. See Where to
Put the Restraint on page 1-42.
In addition, your vehicle has a passenger sensing
system which is designed to turn off the right front
passenger’s frontal airbag under certain conditions.
See Passenger Sensing System on page 1-69
and Passenger Airbag Status Indicator on page 3-28
for more information on this, including important safety
information.
A label on your sun visor says, “Never put a rear-facing
child seat in the front.” This is because the risk to the
rear-facing child is so great, if the airbag deploys.
1-56
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
A child in a rear-facing child restraint can be
seriously injured or killed if the right front
passenger’s airbag inﬂates. This is because
the back of the rear-facing child restraint
would be very close to the inﬂating airbag.
Even though the passenger sensing system is
designed to turn off the right front passenger’s
frontal airbag if the system detects a rear-facing
child restraint, no system is fail-safe, and no
one can guarantee that an airbag will not deploy
under some unusual circumstance, even
though it is turned off. We recommend that
rear-facing child restraints be secured in a
rear seat, even if the airbag is off.
If you secure a forward-facing child restraint
in the right front seat, always move the front
passenger seat as far back as it will go. It is
better to secure the child restraint in a rear seat.
See Passenger Sensing System on page 1-69
for additional information.
If your vehicle does not have a rear seat that will
accommodate a rear-facing child restraint, we
recommend that rear-facing child restraints not be
transported in your vehicle, even if the airbag is off.
If your child restraint has the LATCH system, see Lower
Anchors and Tethers for Children (LATCH) on page 1-43
for how to install your child restraint using LATCH. If you
secure a child restraint using a safety belt and it uses a
top tether, see Lower Anchors and Tethers for Children
(LATCH) on page 1-43 for top tether anchor locations.
Do not secure a child seat in a position without a top
tether anchor if a national or local law requires that
the top tether be anchored, or if the instructions
that come with the child restraint say that the top
strap must be anchored.
In Canada, the law requires that forward-facing child
restraints have a top tether, and that the tether be
attached.
You will be using the lap-shoulder belt to secure the
child restraint in this position. Follow the instructions that
came with the child restraint.
1. Move the seat as far back as it will go before
securing the forward-facing child restraint.
When the passenger sensing system has turned off
the right front passenger’s frontal airbag, the off
indicator on the passenger airbag status indicator
should light and stay lit when you start the vehicle.
See Passenger Airbag Status Indicator on
page 3-28.
1-57
Information Provided by:

2. Put the child restraint on the seat.
3. Pick up the latch plate, and run the lap and shoulder
portions of the vehicle’s safety belt through or around
the restraint. The child restraint instructions will show
you how.
4. Push the latch plate into the buckle until it clicks.
Make sure the release button is positioned so you
would be able to unbuckle the safety belt quickly
if necessary.
5. Pull the rest of the shoulder belt all the way out of
the retractor to set the lock.
6. If your vehicle does not have a rear seat and your
child restraint manufacturer recommends using a
top tether anchor, attach the top tether to the
top tether anchor. Refer to the instructions that
came with the child restraint and to Lower Anchors
and Tethers for Children (LATCH) on page 1-43
for more information.
1-58
Information Provided by:

7. To tighten the belt, push down on the child restraint,
pull the shoulder portion of the belt to tighten the lap
portion of the belt and feed the shoulder belt back
into the retractor. If you are using a forward-facing
child restraint, you may ﬁnd it helpful to use your
knee to push down on the child restraint as you
tighten the belt.
8. Tighten the top tether. See Lower Anchors and
Tethers for Children (LATCH) on page 1-43.
9. Push and pull the child restraint in different
directions to be sure it is secure.
If the airbag is off, the off indicator in the passenger
airbag status indicator will come on and stay on when
the vehicle is started.
If a child restraint has been installed and on indicator
is lit, turn the vehicle off. Remove the child restraint from
the vehicle and reinstall the child restraint.
If, after reinstalling the child restraint and restarting the
vehicle, the on indicator is still lit, check to make sure that
the vehicle’s seatback is not pressing the child restraint
into the seat cushion. If this happens, slightly recline
the vehicle’s seatback and adjust the seat cushion if
possible. Also make sure the child restraint is not trapped
under the vehicle head restraint. If this happens, adjust
the head restraint.
Remove any additional material from the seat such as
blankets, cushions, seat covers, seat heaters or seat
massagers before reinstalling or securing the child
restraint.
If the off symbol is still not lit, secure the child in the
child restraint in a rear seat position in the vehicle,
if one is available, and check with your dealer/retailer.
To remove the child restraint, unbuckle the vehicle’s
safety belt and let it go back all the way. If the top tether
is attached to a top tether anchor, disconnect it.
1-59
Information Provided by:

Airbag System
Your vehicle has the following airbags:
•
A frontal airbag for the driver.
•
A frontal airbag for the right front passenger
Your vehicle may also have the following airbags:
•
A roof-rail airbag for the driver and the passenger
seated directly behind the driver.
•
A roof-rail airbag for the right front passenger and
the passenger seated directly behind the right
front passenger.
All of the airbags in your vehicle will have the word
AIRBAG embossed in the trim or on an attached label
near the deployment opening.
For frontal airbags, the word AIRBAG will appear on the
middle part of the steering wheel for the driver and
on the instrument panel for the right front passenger.
With roof-rail airbags, the word AIRBAG will appear
along the headliner or trim.
Airbags are designed to supplement the protection
provided by safety belts. Even though today’s airbags
are also designed to help reduce the risk of injury
from the force of an inﬂating bag, all airbags must
inﬂate very quickly to do their job.
Here are the most important things to know about the
airbag system:
{CAUTION:
You can be severely injured or killed in a crash
if you are not wearing your safety belt — even
if you have airbags. Wearing your safety belt
during a crash helps reduce your chance of
hitting things inside the vehicle or being
ejected from it. Airbags are “supplemental
restraints” to the safety belts. All airbags are
designed to work with safety belts, but do not
replace them.
1-60
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Frontal airbags are designed to deploy in
moderate to severe frontal and near frontal
crashes. They are not designed to inﬂate in
rollover, rear crashes, or in many side crashes.
Roof-rail airbags are designed to inﬂate in
moderate to severe crashes where something
hits the side of your vehicle. They are not
designed to inﬂate in frontal, in rollover,
or in rear crashes.
Everyone in your vehicle should wear a safety
belt properly — whether or not there is an
airbag for that person.
{CAUTION:
Airbags inﬂate with great force, faster than
the blink of an eye. Anyone who is up against,
or very close to, any airbag when it inﬂates
can be seriously injured or killed. Do not sit
unnecessarily close to the airbag, as you would
be if you were sitting on the edge of your seat or
leaning forward. Safety belts help keep you in
position before and during a crash. Always wear
your safety belt, even with airbags. The driver
should sit as far back as possible while still
maintaining control of the vehicle.
Occupants should not lean on or sleep against
the door or side windows in seating positions
with roof-rail airbags.
1-61
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Airbags plus lap-shoulder belts offer the
best protection for adults, but not for young
children and infants. Neither the vehicle’s
safety belt system nor its airbag system is
designed for them. Young children and infants
need the protection that a child restraint
system can provide. Always secure children
properly in your vehicle. To read how, see
Older Children on page 1-33 or Infants and
Young Children on page 1-36.
There is an airbag
readiness light on the
instrument panel, which
shows the airbag symbol.
The system checks the airbag electrical system for
malfunctions. The light tells you if there is an electrical
problem. See Airbag Readiness Light on page 3-27
for more information.
1-62
Information Provided by:

Where Are the Airbags?
The driver’s airbag is in the middle of the
steering wheel.
The right front passenger’s airbag is in the instrument
panel on the passenger’s side.
1-63
Information Provided by:

If your vehicle has roof-rail airbags for the driver, right
front passenger, and second row outboard passengers,
they are in the ceiling above the side windows.
{CAUTION:
If something is between an occupant and an
airbag, the airbag might not inﬂate properly
or it might force the object into that person
causing severe injury or even death. The path
of an inﬂating airbag must be kept clear. Do
not put anything between an occupant and an
airbag, and do not attach or put anything on
the steering wheel hub or on or near any other
airbag covering.
If your vehicle has roof-rail airbags, never
secure anything to the roof of your vehicle by
routing the rope or tie down through any door
or window opening. If you do, the path of an
inﬂating roof-rail airbag will be blocked.
Driver Side shown, Passenger Side similar
1-64
Information Provided by:

When Should an Airbag Inﬂate?
Frontal airbags are designed to inﬂate in moderate to
severe frontal or near-frontal crashes to help reduce
the potential for severe injuries mainly to the driver’s
or right front passenger’s head and chest. However,
they are only designed to inﬂate if the impact exceeds
a predetermined deployment threshold. Deployment
thresholds are used to predict how severe a crash
is likely to be in time for the airbags to inﬂate and
help restrain the occupants.
Whether your frontal airbags will or should deploy is not
based on how fast your vehicle is traveling. It depends
largely on what you hit, the direction of the impact,
and how quickly your vehicle slows down.
Frontal airbags may inﬂate at different crash speeds.
For example:
•
If the vehicle hits a stationary object, the airbags
could inﬂate at a different crash speed than if the
vehicle hits a moving object.
•
If the vehicle hits an object that deforms, the
airbags could inﬂate at a different crash speed than
if the vehicle hits an object that does not deform.
•
If the vehicle hits a narrow object (like a pole), the
airbags could inﬂate at a different crash speed
than if the vehicle hits a wide object (like a wall).
•
If the vehicle goes into an object at an angle, the
airbags could inﬂate at a different crash speed
than if the vehicle goes straight into the object.
Thresholds can also vary with speciﬁc vehicle design.
Frontal airbags are not intended to inﬂate during vehicle
rollovers, rear impacts, or in many side impacts.
1-65
Information Provided by:

Your vehicle has seat position sensors which enables
the sensing system to monitor the position of the driver’s
seat and the right front passenger’s seat. Seat position
sensors provide information that is used to determine
if the airbags should deploy at a reduced level or at
full deployment.
In addition, your vehicle has dual-stage frontal airbags.
Dual-stage airbags adjust the restraint according to crash
severity. Your vehicle has electronic frontal sensors,
which help the sensing system distinguish between a
moderate frontal impact and a more severe frontal
impact. For moderate frontal impacts, dual-stage airbags
inﬂate at a level less than full deployment. For more
severe frontal impacts, full deployment occurs.
Your vehicle may or may not have roof-rail airbags.
See Airbag System on page 1-60. Roof-rail airbags are
intended to inﬂate in moderate to severe side crashes.
Roof-rail airbags will inﬂate if the crash severity is above
the system’s designed threshold level. The threshold
level can vary with speciﬁc vehicle design.
Roof-rail airbags are not intended to inﬂate in frontal
impacts, near-frontal impacts, rollovers, or rear impacts.
Both roof-rail airbags will deploy when either side of
the vehicle is struck.
In any particular crash, no one can say whether an
airbag should have inﬂated simply because of the
damage to a vehicle or because of what the repair
costs were. For frontal airbags, inﬂation is determined
by what the vehicle hits, the angle of the impact,
and how quickly the vehicle slows down. For roof-rail
airbags, deployment is determined by the location
and severity of the side impact.
1-66
Information Provided by:

What Makes an Airbag Inﬂate?
In a deployment event, the sensing system sends
an electrical signal triggering a release of gas from the
inﬂator. Gas from the inﬂator ﬁlls the airbag causing the
bag to break out of the cover and deploy. The inﬂator, the
airbag, and related hardware are all part of the airbag
module.
Frontal airbag modules are located inside the steering
wheel and instrument panel. For vehicles with roof-rail
airbags, there are airbag modules in the ceiling of the
vehicle, near the side windows that have occupant
seating positions.
How Does an Airbag Restrain?
In moderate to severe frontal or near frontal collisions,
even belted occupants can contact the steering wheel
or the instrument panel. In moderate to severe side
collisions, even belted occupants can contact the
inside of the vehicle.
Airbags supplement the protection provided by safety
belts. Frontal airbags distribute the force of the impact
more evenly over the occupant’s upper body, stopping
the occupant more gradually. Roof-rail airbags distribute
the force of the impact more evenly over the occupant’s
upper body.
But airbags would not help in many types of collisions,
primarily because the occupant’s motion is not toward
those airbags. See When Should an Airbag Inﬂate? on
page 1-65 for more information.
Airbags should never be regarded as anything more
than a supplement to safety belts.
1-67
Information Provided by:

What Will You See After an Airbag
Inﬂates?
After the frontal airbags inﬂate, they quickly deﬂate,
so quickly that some people may not even realize
the airbags inﬂated. Roof-rail airbags may still be at
least partially inﬂated for some time after they deploy.
Some components of the airbag module may be hot for
several minutes. For location of the airbag modules,
see What Makes an Airbag Inﬂate? on page 1-67.
The parts of the airbag that come into contact with you
may be warm, but not too hot to touch. There may be
some smoke and dust coming from the vents in the
deﬂated airbags. Airbag inﬂation does not prevent the
driver from seeing out of the windshield or being able to
steer the vehicle, nor does it prevent people from leaving
the vehicle.
{CAUTION:
When an airbag inﬂates, there may be dust
in the air. This dust could cause breathing
problems for people with a history of asthma or
other breathing trouble. To avoid this, everyone
in the vehicle should get out as soon as it is
safe to do so. If you have breathing problems
but cannot get out of the vehicle after an airbag
inﬂates, then get fresh air by opening a window
or a door. If you experience breathing problems
following an airbag deployment, you should
seek medical attention.
Your vehicle has a feature that may automatically
unlock the doors (if equipped with power door locks),
turn the interior lamps on, ﬂash the hazard warning
ﬂashers, and turn off the radio when the airbag inﬂates.
You can lock the doors again by using the door lock.
The interior lamps and hazard warning ﬂashers will
deactivate after approximately 15 minutes.
1-68
Information Provided by:

In many crashes severe enough to inﬂate the airbag,
windshields are broken by vehicle deformation.
Additional windshield breakage may also occur
from the right front passenger airbag.
•
Airbags are designed to inﬂate only once. After an
airbag inﬂates, you will need some new parts for the
airbag system. If you do not get them, the airbag
system will not be there to help protect you in another
crash. A new system will include airbag modules and
possibly other parts. The service manual for your
vehicle covers the need to replace other parts.
•
Your vehicle has a crash sensing and diagnostic
module which records information after a crash.
See Vehicle Data Recording and Privacy on
page 7-17 and Event Data Recorders on page 7-18.
•
Let only qualiﬁed technicians work on the airbag
system. Improper service can mean that the airbag
system will not work properly. See your dealer/
retailer for service.
Passenger Sensing System
Your vehicle has a passenger sensing system for the
right front passenger’s position. The passenger airbag
status indicator will be visible on the instrument panel
when you start your vehicle.
The words ON and OFF, or the symbol for on and off, will
be visible during the system check. When the system
check is complete, either the word ON or the word OFF,
or the symbol for on or the symbol for off, will be visible.
See Passenger Airbag Status Indicator on page 3-28.
United States
Canada
1-69
Information Provided by:

The passenger sensing system will turn off the right
front passenger’s frontal airbag under certain conditions.
The driver’s airbags are not part of the passenger
sensing system.
The passenger sensing system works with sensors
that are part of the right front passenger’s seat.
The sensors are designed to detect the presence
of a properly-seated occupant and determine if the
right front passenger’s frontal airbag should be enabled
(may inﬂate) or not.
Accident statistics show that children are safer if they
are restrained in the rear rather than the front seat.
We recommend that children be secured in a rear seat,
including: an infant or a child riding in a rear-facing
child restraint; a child riding in a forward-facing child
seat; an older child riding in a booster seat; and children,
who are large enough, using safety belts.
A label on your sun visor says, “Never put a rear-facing
child seat in the front.” This is because the risk to the
rear-facing child is so great, if the airbag deploys.
{CAUTION:
A child in a rear-facing child restraint can be
seriously injured or killed if the right front
passenger’s airbag inﬂates. This is because
the back of the rear-facing child restraint
would be very close to the inﬂating airbag.
Even though the passenger sensing system is
designed to turn off the right front passenger’s
frontal airbag if the system detects a rear-facing
child restraint, no system is fail-safe, and no
one can guarantee that an airbag will not deploy
under some unusual circumstance, even
though it is turned off. We recommend that
rear-facing child restraints be secured in a
rear seat, even if the airbag is off.
If you secure a forward-facing child restraint
in the right front seat, always move the front
passenger seat as far back as it will go. It is
better to secure the child restraint in a rear seat.
1-70
Information Provided by:

If your vehicle does not have a rear seat that will
accommodate a rear-facing child restraint, we
recommend that rear-facing child restraints not be
transported in your vehicle, even if the airbag is off.
The passenger sensing system is designed to turn off
the right front passenger’s frontal airbag if:
•
The right front passenger seat is unoccupied.
•
The system determines that an infant is present in
a rear-facing infant seat.
•
The system determines that a small child is present
in a child restraint.
•
The system determines that a small child is present
in a booster seat.
•
A right front passenger takes his/her weight off of
the seat for a period of time.
•
The right front passenger seat is occupied by a
smaller person, such as a child who has outgrown
child restraints.
•
Or, if there is a critical problem with the airbag
system or the passenger sensing system.
When the passenger sensing system has turned off the
right front passenger’s frontal airbag, the off indicator
will light and stay lit to remind you that the airbag is off.
See Passenger Airbag Status Indicator on page 3-28.
If a child restraint has been installed and the on
indicator is lit, turn the vehicle off. Remove the child
restraint from the vehicle and reinstall the child restraint
following the child restraint manufacturer’s directions
and refer to Securing a Child Restraint in the Right Front
Seat Position on page 1-56.
If, after reinstalling the child restraint and restarting the
vehicle, the on indicator is still lit, check to make sure that
the vehicle’s seatback is not pressing the child restraint
into the seat cushion. If this happens, slightly recline
the vehicle’s seatback and adjust the seat cushion if
possible. Also make sure the child restraint is not trapped
under the vehicle head restraint. If this happens, adjust
the head restraint. See Head Restraints on page 1-7.
Remove any additional material from the seat such
as blankets, cushions, seat covers, seat heaters,
or seat massagers before reinstalling or securing
the child restraint.
If the on indicator is still lit, secure the child in the child
restraint in a rear seat position in the vehicle, and check
with your dealer/retailer. If no rear seat is available, do
not install a child restraint in this vehicle, and check with
your dealer/retailer.
The passenger sensing system is designed to enable
(may inﬂate) the right front passenger’s frontal airbag
anytime the system senses that a person of adult size
is sitting properly in the right front passenger’s seat.
1-71
Information Provided by:

When the passenger sensing system has allowed the
airbag to be enabled, the on indicator will light and stay lit
to remind you that the airbag is active.
For some children who have outgrown child restraints
and for very small adults, the passenger sensing system
may or may not turn off the right front passenger’s frontal
airbag, depending upon the person’s seating posture
and body build. Everyone in your vehicle who has
outgrown child restraints should wear a safety belt
properly — whether or not there is an airbag for that
person.
If a person of adult-size is sitting in the right front
passenger’s seat, but the off indicator is lit, it could be
because that person is not sitting properly in the seat.
If this happens, turn the vehicle off, remove any additional
material from the seat, such as blankets, cushions, seat
covers, seat heaters or seat massagers and ask the
person to place the seatback in the fully upright position,
then sit upright in the seat, centered on the seat cushion,
with the person’s legs comfortably extended. Restart the
vehicle and have the person remain in this position for
two to three minutes. This will allow the system to detect
that person and then enable the right front passenger’s
frontal airbag.
Safety belts help keep the passenger in position on
the seat during vehicle maneuvers and braking, which
helps the passenger sensing system maintain the
passenger airbag status. See “Safety Belts” and “Child
Restraints” in the Index for additional information about
the importance of proper restraint use.
1-72
Information Provided by:

If you ever pull the shoulder portion of the belt out all the
way, you will engage the child restraint locking feature.
This may unintentionally cause the passenger sensing
system to turn the airbag(s) off for some adult size
occupants. If this happens, just let the belt go back
all the way and start again.
{CAUTION:
If the airbag readiness light in the instrument
panel cluster ever comes on and stays on, it
means that something may be wrong with the
airbag system. If this ever happens, have the
vehicle serviced promptly, because an
adult-size person sitting in the right front
passenger’s seat may not have the protection
of the airbag(s). See Airbag Readiness Light
on page 3-27 for more on this, including
important safety information.
A thick layer of additional material, such as a blanket or
cushion, or aftermarket equipment such as seat covers,
seat heaters, and seat massagers can affect how well the
passenger sensing system operates. We recommend
that you not use seat covers or other aftermarket
equipment other than any that GM has approved for
your speciﬁc vehicle. See Adding Equipment to Your
Airbag-Equipped Vehicle on page 1-74 for more
information about modiﬁcations that can affect how
the system operates.
{CAUTION:
Stowing of articles under the passenger’s
seat or between the passenger’s seat cushion
and seatback may interfere with the proper
operation of the passenger sensing system.
1-73
Information Provided by:

Servicing Your Airbag-Equipped
Vehicle
Airbags affect how your vehicle should be serviced.
There are parts of the airbag system in several places
around your vehicle. Your dealer/retailer and the service
manual have information about servicing your vehicle
and the airbag system. To purchase a service manual,
see Service Publications Ordering Information on
page 7-16.
{CAUTION:
For up to 10 seconds after the ignition is turned
off and the battery is disconnected, an airbag
can still inﬂate during improper service. You
can be injured if you are close to an airbag when
it inﬂates. Avoid yellow connectors. They are
probably part of the airbag system. Be sure to
follow proper service procedures, and make
sure the person performing work for you is
qualiﬁed to do so.
Adding Equipment to Your
Airbag-Equipped Vehicle
Q: Is there anything I might add to or change
about the vehicle that could keep the airbags
from working properly?
A: Yes. If you add things that change your vehicle’s
frame, bumper system, height, front end or side
sheet metal, they may keep the airbag system from
working properly. Changing or moving any parts
of the front seats, safety belts, the airbag sensing
and diagnostic module, steering wheel, instrument
panel, roof-rail airbag modules, ceiling headliner
or pillar garnish trim, front sensors, or airbag wiring
can affect the operation of the airbag system.
In addition, your vehicle has a passenger sensing
system for the right front passenger’s position,
which includes sensors that are part of the
passenger’s seat. The passenger sensing
system may not operate properly if the original
seat trim is replaced with non-GM covers,
upholstery or trim, or with GM covers, upholstery
or trim designed for a different vehicle.
1-74
Information Provided by:

Any object, such as an aftermarket seat heater or
a comfort enhancing pad or device, installed under
or on top of the seat fabric, could also interfere with
the operation of the passenger sensing system.
This could either prevent proper deployment of
the passenger airbag(s) or prevent the passenger
sensing system from properly turning off the
passenger airbag(s). See Passenger Sensing
System on page 1-69.
If you have any questions about this, you should
contact Customer Assistance before you modify
your vehicle. The phone numbers and addresses
for Customer Assistance are in Step Two of
the Customer Satisfaction Procedure in this manual.
See Customer Satisfaction Procedure on page 7-2.
Q: Because I have a disability, I have to get my
vehicle modiﬁed. How can I ﬁnd out whether
this will affect my airbag system?
A: If you have questions, call Customer Assistance.
The phone numbers and addresses for Customer
Assistance are in Step Two of the Customer
Satisfaction Procedure in this manual. See
Customer Satisfaction Procedure on page 7-2.
In addition, your dealer/retailer and the service manual
have information about the location of the airbag sensors,
sensing and diagnostic module and airbag wiring.
1-75
Information Provided by:

Restraint System Check
Checking the Restraint Systems
Safety Belts
Now and then, make sure the safety belt reminder light
and all your belts, buckles, latch plates, retractors
and anchorages are working properly.
Look for any other loose or damaged safety belt system
parts. If you see anything that might keep a safety belt
system from doing its job, have it repaired. Torn or frayed
safety belts may not protect you in a crash. They can rip
apart under impact forces. If a belt is torn or frayed, get a
new one right away.
Make sure the safety belt reminder light is working.
See Safety Belt Reminders on page 3-26 for more
information.
Keep safety belts clean and dry. See Care of Safety
Belts on page 5-109.
Airbags
The airbag system does not need regularly scheduled
maintenance or replacement. Make sure the airbag
readiness light is working. See Airbag Readiness Light
on page 3-27 for more information.
Notice:
If an airbag covering is damaged, opened,
or broken, the airbag may not work properly. Do not
open or break the airbag coverings. If there are any
opened or broken airbag covers, have the airbag
covering and/or airbag module replaced. For the
location of the airbag modules, see What Makes an
Airbag Inﬂate? on page 1-67. See your dealer/retailer
for service.
1-76
Information Provided by:

Replacing Restraint System Parts
After a Crash
{CAUTION:
A crash can damage the restraint systems in
your vehicle. A damaged restraint system may
not properly protect the person using it,
resulting in serious injury or even death in a
crash. To help make sure your restraint systems
are working properly after a crash, have them
inspected and any necessary replacements
made as soon as possible.
If you have had a crash, do you need new belts or
LATCH system (if equipped) parts?
After a very minor crash, nothing may be necessary.
But the belt assemblies that were used during any
crash may have been stressed or damaged. See your
dealer/retailer to have your safety belt assemblies
inspected or replaced.
If your vehicle has the LATCH system and it was being
used during a crash, you may need new LATCH
system parts.
New parts and repairs may be necessary even if the
belt or LATCH system (if equipped), was not being used
at the time of the crash.
If an airbag inﬂates, you will need to replace airbag
system parts. See the part on the airbag system earlier
in this section.
Have your safety belt pretensioners checked if your
vehicle has been in a crash, if your airbag readiness
light stays on after you start your vehicle, or while you
are driving. See Airbag Readiness Light on page 3-27.
1-77
Information Provided by:

✍NOTES
1-78
Information Provided by:

Keys ...............................................................2-3
Remote Keyless Entry (RKE) System ................2-4
Remote Keyless Entry (RKE) System
Operation ...................................................2-5
Doors and Locks .............................................2-7
Door Locks ....................................................2-7
Power Door Locks ..........................................2-8
Programmable Automatic
Door Locks ................................................2-8
Rear Door Security Locks (Crew Cab) ...............2-9
Lockout Protection ..........................................2-9
Rear Doors (Extended Cab) .............................2-9
Tailgate .......................................................2-10
Windows ........................................................2-12
Manual Windows ..........................................2-12
Power Windows ............................................2-13
Sliding Rear Window .....................................2-14
Sun Visors ...................................................2-15
Theft-Deterrent Systems ..................................2-15
Content Theft-Deterrent .................................2-15
Passlock® (U. S. Only) ..................................2-16
PASS-Key® III+ ............................................2-17
PASS-Key® III+ Operation (Canada Only) .........2-17
Starting and Operating Your Vehicle ................2-19
New Vehicle Break-In ....................................2-19
Ignition Positions ..........................................2-19
Retained Accessory Power (RAP) ...................2-21
Starting the Engine .......................................2-21
Engine Coolant Heater ..................................2-23
Automatic Transmission Operation ...................2-24
Manual Transmission Operation ......................2-26
Four-Wheel Drive ..........................................2-28
Parking Brake ..............................................2-32
Shifting Into PARK (P)
(Automatic Transmission) ............................2-34
Shifting Out of PARK (P)
(Automatic Transmission) ............................2-36
Parking Your Vehicle (Manual Transmission) .....2-36
Parking Over Things That Burn .......................2-37
Engine Exhaust ............................................2-37
Running the Engine While Parked ...................2-38
Mirrors ...........................................................2-39
Manual Rearview Mirror .................................2-39
Manual Rearview Mirror with OnStar® ..............2-39
Automatic Dimming Rearview Mirror ................2-40
Section 2
Features and Controls
2-1
Information Provided by:

Automatic Dimming Rearview Mirror with
OnStar®, Compass and Temperature
Display ....................................................2-40
Automatic Dimming Rearview Mirror with
Compass and Temperature Display ..............2-43
Outside Manual Mirrors ..................................2-45
Outside Power Mirrors ...................................2-46
Outside Convex Mirror ...................................2-46
OnStar® System .............................................2-47
Storage Areas ................................................2-50
Glove Box ...................................................2-50
Cupholder(s) ................................................2-50
Center Console Storage .................................2-50
Assist Handles .............................................2-50
Rear Storage Area ........................................2-51
Sunroof .........................................................2-52
Section 2
Features and Controls
2-2
Information Provided by:

Keys
{CAUTION:
Leaving children in a vehicle with the ignition
key is dangerous for many reasons, children
or others could be badly injured or even killed.
They could operate the power windows or
other controls or even make the vehicle move.
The windows will function with the keys in the
ignition and they could be seriously injured
or killed if caught in the path of a closing
window. Do not leave the keys in a vehicle
with children.
The key can be used for the ignition, all door locks, and
the tailgate.
The key has a bar-coded key tag that the dealer/retailer
or qualiﬁed locksmith can use to make new keys.
Store this information in a safe place, not in your vehicle.
Notice:
If you ever lock your keys in your vehicle,
you may have to damage the vehicle to get in.
Be sure you have spare keys.
If you are locked out of your vehicle, call the Roadside
Assistance Center. See Roadside Assistance Program
on page 7-7.
2-3
Information Provided by:

Remote Keyless Entry (RKE)
System
If the vehicle has the Remote Keyless Entry (RKE)
system, it operates on a radio frequency subject
to Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
Rules and with Industry Canada.
This device complies with Part 15 of the FCC Rules.
Operation is subject to the following two conditions:
1. This device may not cause interference.
2. This device must accept any interference received,
including interference that may cause undesired
operation of the device.
This device complies with RSS-210 of Industry Canada.
Operation is subject to the following two conditions:
1. This device may not cause interference.
2. This device must accept any interference received,
including interference that may cause undesired
operation of the device.
Changes or modiﬁcations to this system by other than
an authorized service facility could void authorization to
use this equipment.
At times you may notice a decrease in range. This is
normal for any RKE system. If the transmitter does not
work or if you have to stand closer to your vehicle
for the transmitter to work, try this:
•
Check the distance. You may be too far from your
vehicle. You may need to stand closer during
rainy or snowy weather.
•
Check the location. Other vehicles or objects may
be blocking the signal. Take a few steps to the
left or right, hold the transmitter higher, and
try again.
•
Check to determine if battery replacement is
necessary. See “Battery Replacement” later in
this section.
•
If you are still having trouble, see your dealer/retailer
or a qualiﬁed technician for service.
2-4
Information Provided by:

Remote Keyless Entry (RKE)
System Operation
If your vehicle has this feature you can lock and unlock
your doors and disarm or arm your theft-deterrent system
from about 3 feet (1 m) up to 30 feet (9 m) away using the
Remote Keyless Entry (RKE) transmitter. See Content
Theft-Deterrent on page 2-15 for additional information.
UNLOCK: Press this button
to unlock the driver’s door
and turn on the interior
lamps. The parking lamps
may also ﬂash, and the horn
may chirp, when this button
is pressed.
Press the unlock button again within three seconds and
all of the doors will unlock.
LOCK: Press this button to lock all the doors. The
parking lamps may also ﬂash and the horn may chirp
when this button is pressed.
If a door is open or ajar when the lock button is
pressed, the horn will chirp several times to let
you know the doors did not lock and the content
theft-deterrent system is not armed. Pressing the
lock button again while the horn is chirping or within
three seconds after the horn stops sounding, the doors
will lock but the content theft-deterrent system will not
arm until the opened door is closed.
Different feedback modes can be programmed through
the Driver Information Center (DIC). See “Remote
Keyless Entry Feedback” under DIC Operation and
Displays on page 3-38.
L (Panic): Press this button to make the horn
sound and the headlamps and taillamps ﬂash for up to
30 seconds. To turn them off again, do one of these three
things: wait for 30 seconds; press the panic button again;
or start the vehicle.
2-5
Information Provided by:

Matching Transmitter(s) to Your
Vehicle
Each RKE transmitter is coded to prevent another
transmitter from unlocking your vehicle. If a transmitter is
lost or stolen, a replacement can be purchased through
your dealer/retailer. Remember to bring any remaining
transmitters with you when you go to your dealer/retailer.
When the dealer/retailer matches the replacement
transmitter to your vehicle, any remaining transmitters
must also be matched. Once your dealer/retailer has
coded the new transmitter, the lost transmitter will not
unlock your vehicle. Each vehicle can have a maximum
of four transmitters matched to it.
Battery Replacement
Under normal use, the battery in your RKE transmitter
should last about two years.
The battery is weak if the transmitter will not work at the
normal range in any location. If you have to get close
to your vehicle before the transmitter works, it is
probably time to change the battery.
Notice:
When replacing the battery, use care not to
touch any of the circuitry. Static from your body
transferred to these surfaces may damage the
transmitter.
To replace the battery:
1. Insert a thin coin, or similar object, in the slot
between the covers of the transmitter housing.
Gently pry the transmitter apart.
2. Remove and replace the battery with a
three-volt CR2032 or equivalent battery.
3. Align the covers and snap them together.
4. Check the operation of the transmitter.
2-6
Information Provided by:

Doors and Locks
Door Locks
{CAUTION:
Unlocked doors can be dangerous.
• Passengers, especially children, can easily
open the doors and fall out of a moving
vehicle. When a door is locked, the handle
will not open it. You increase the chance
of being thrown out of the vehicle in a
crash if the doors are not locked. So, wear
safety belts properly and lock the doors
whenever you drive.
• Young children who get into unlocked
vehicles may be unable to get out. A child
can be overcome by extreme heat and can
suffer permanent injuries or even death
from heat stroke. Always lock your vehicle
whenever you leave it.
• Outsiders can easily enter through an
unlocked door when you slow down or
stop your vehicle. Locking your doors
can help prevent this from happening.
There are several ways to lock and unlock your vehicle.
To lock or unlock the door from the outside, use the key in
the driver’s or front passenger’s door or press the lock
or unlock button on the remote keyless entry (RKE)
transmitter.
To lock a door from the inside, push the manual lever
on the door forward. To unlock a door from the
inside, push the lever on the door rearward.
You will see a colored area on the lever when the door
is unlocked.
2-7
Information Provided by:

Power Door Locks
If your vehicle has power
door locks, the switches
are located on the driver’s
and the front passenger’s
armrests.
Press L (lock) to lock all the doors at once. To unlock
all the doors, press U (unlock).
On crew cab models, use the manual door lock lever
on each rear door to lock or unlock the doors from
the rear seating areas.
Programmable Automatic
Door Locks
If your vehicle has power door locks and the remote
keyless entry system, it has an automatic lock/unlock
feature.
If your vehicle has an automatic transmission, it
is programmed from the factory to lock all doors
automatically when the shift lever is moved out of
PARK (P). All the doors will unlock when the shift
lever is moved back into PARK (P).
If your vehicle has a manual transmission, it is
programmed from the factory to lock all the doors when
the vehicle speed is greater than 15 mph (24 km/h).
The doors will unlock when the key is removed from
the ignition.
To change the automatic door lock and unlock settings,
see “Automatic Door Locks” under DIC Operation
and Displays on page 3-38.
Driver’s Switch Shown,
Front Passenger’s
Switch Similar
2-8
Information Provided by:

Rear Door Security Locks
(Crew Cab)
If your vehicle is a crew cab model, it may have rear
door security locks. With this feature, you can lock the
rear doors so they cannot be opened from the inside.
The rear door security lock
is located on the inside
edge of each rear door
below the security lock
label.
To engage the security locks, do the following:
1. Open one of the rear doors.
2. Using your ignition key, turn the lock to the
horizontal position.
3. Close the door.
4. Repeat these steps on the other rear door.
If you want to open a rear door when the security lock is
on, unlock the door and open the door from the outside.
To disengage the security locks, do the following:
1. Open one of the rear doors.
2. Using your ignition key, turn the lock to the vertical
position.
3. Close the door.
4. Repeat these steps on the other rear door.
Lockout Protection
If you have power door locks, this feature protects you
from locking your key in the vehicle when the key is
in the ignition and a door is open.
If the power door lock switch is pressed when a door
is open and the key is in the ignition, all of the doors
will lock and then the driver’s door will unlock.
Rear Doors (Extended Cab)
To open a rear door, open the front door. Then, use
the handle located on the front edge of the rear
door panel to open it. You must close the rear door
before closing the front door.
2-9
Information Provided by:

Tailgate
{CAUTION:
It is extremely dangerous to ride on the
tailgate, even when the vehicle is operated at
low speeds. People riding on the tailgate can
easily lose their balance and fall in response
to vehicle maneuvers. Falling from a moving
vehicle may result in serious injuries or death.
Do not allow people to ride on the tailgate.
Be sure everyone in your vehicle is in a seat
and using a safety belt properly.
You can open the tailgate by pulling up on the outside
handle while pulling the tailgate down.
When you put the tailgate back up, be sure it latches
securely.
On vehicles with a locking tailgate, use the ignition key.
Turn the key counterclockwise to lock the tailgate.
Turn the key clockwise to unlock the tailgate.
2-10
Information Provided by:

Removing the Tailgate
Follow these steps if you want to remove the tailgate:
1. With the tailgate fully open, lift up slightly on
the entire tailgate assembly.
Remove the retaining
cables from both sides of
the tailgate by pulling the
clips away from the bolt
heads while pushing the
cable bracket forward.
When the larger part of the
hole on the bracket is over
the bolt, slide the bracket
off of the bolt.
2. With the tailgate partially down, lift up on the
passenger’s side and pull the tailgate toward
you, then move the tailgate to the right to release
the driver’s side. You can then remove the
entire tailgate assembly.
Reverse the procedure to reinstall the tailgate.
Make sure it is secure.
To partially lower the tailgate do the following:
1. With the tailgate fully open, lift up slightly on the
entire tailgate assembly.
2. Remove the retaining
cable from the
passenger side of the
tailgate by pulling the
clip away from the bolt
head while pushing the
cable bracket forward.
When the larger part of the hole on the bracket is
over the bolt, slide the bracket off of the bolt.
3. Slide the lower end ﬁtting onto the top bolt.
The tailgate will now stay in the partially
opened position.
4. Repeat steps 2 and 3 for the driver side.
If you would like to close the tailgate, the bracket cannot
be in the partially opened position and must be anchored
on the bottom bolt, using the top position on the bracket.
Tailgate Partially Down
2-11
Information Provided by:

Windows
{CAUTION:
Leaving children, helpless adults, or pets in a
vehicle with the windows closed is dangerous.
They can be overcome by the extreme heat
and suffer permanent injuries or even death
from heat stroke. Never leave a child, a
helpless adult, or a pet alone in a vehicle,
especially with the windows closed in warm
or hot weather.
Manual Windows
On a vehicle with manual windows, use the handle on
each door to open and close each window.
2-12
Information Provided by:

Power Windows
{CAUTION:
Leaving children, helpless adults, or pets in a
vehicle with the windows closed is dangerous.
They can be overcome from extreme heat in
warm or hot weather and suffer permanent
injuries or even death from heat stroke.
Leaving children in a vehicle with the ignition
key is dangerous for many reasons, children
or others could be badly injured or even killed.
They could operate the power windows or
other controls or even make the vehicle move.
The windows will function with the keys in the
ignition and they could be seriously injured
or killed if caught in the path of a closing
window. Do not leave keys in a vehicle with
children.
When there are children in the rear seat use
the window lockout button to prevent
unintentional operation of the windows.
The power window
switches for all windows
are located on the driver’s
door armrest. In addition,
each passenger’s door
has its own switch.
The power windows will work when the ignition is in
ACC (Accessory) or ON or while Retained Accessory
Power (RAP) is active. See Retained Accessory
Power (RAP) on page 2-21.
Pull the front of the switch up to raise the window.
Press the front of the switch down to lower the window.
Do not hold all four power window switches down for
several seconds after the windows have been completely
lowered or raised, because the vehicle may blow a fuse.
Crew Cab Switches
Shown
2-13
Information Provided by:

Express-Down Windows
The driver’s window has an express-down feature
that allows the window to be lowered fully without
continuously holding the switch. Press the front of the
switch past the ﬁrst position to activate the express-down
mode. The express-down mode can be canceled at any
time by pulling up on the switch.
Window Lockout
o (Window Lockout): If you have a crew cab vehicle
with power windows, you will also have a window lockout
button located forward of the window switches. This
feature disables the passenger’s window switches when
the window lockout button is pressed. To turn the lockout
feature on or off, press the window lockout button. A red
band on the side of the button can be seen when the
windows are not locked out.
Sliding Rear Window
If your vehicle has this feature, squeeze the latch in the
center of the window and slide the glass to open it.
When you close the window, be sure the latch is
engaged.
2-14
Information Provided by:

Sun Visors
To block glare, pull the sun visor down. It can also be
detached from the center mount and moved to the
side to block glare from that direction.
Visor Vanity Mirror
The passenger’s side sun visor may have a mirror.
Pull down the visor to access the mirror.
Theft-Deterrent Systems
Vehicle theft is big business, especially in some cities.
Although your vehicle has a number of theft-deterrent
features, we know that nothing we put on it can make
it impossible to steal.
Content Theft-Deterrent
If your vehicle has
the Remote Keyless
Entry (RKE) system, the
vehicle has a content
theft-deterrent alarm
system.
To activate the content theft-deterrent system:
1. Close all the doors.
2. Lock the doors with the RKE transmitter. The
security light, located on the instrument panel
cluster, will ﬂash.
If the lock button on the RKE transmitter is pressed,
but a door is open, the horn will chirp six times. Press
the lock button again, within three seconds, and the
doors will lock. Close the open door and the system
will be activated.
If a locked door is not opened using the RKE transmitter,
or by OnStar®, the pre-alarm will go off. If the engine
is not started or unlock not pressed within 10 seconds,
the front turn signal lamps will ﬂash for two minutes,
and the horn will sound for two minutes, then will turn
off to save the battery power.
Remember, the theft-deterrent system will not activate if
you lock the doors with a key, the manual door lock, or
power door lock switch. The system can only be activated
using the RKE transmitter, or by OnStar®. See OnStar®
System on page 2-47 for additional information. You
should also remember that you can start your vehicle
with the correct ignition key if the alarm has been set off.
2-15
Information Provided by:

Here is how to avoid setting off the alarm by accident:
•
If you do not want to activate the theft-deterrent
system, the vehicle should be locked with the
door key after the doors are closed.
•
Always unlock a door with the RKE transmitter.
Unlocking a door any other way will set off the
alarm.
If you set off the alarm by accident, you can turn off
the alarm by pressing unlock on the RKE transmitter.
The alarm will not stop if you try to unlock a door
any other way.
Testing the Alarm
To test the alarm:
1. From inside the vehicle, activate the system by
locking the doors with the RKE transmitter.
2. Unlock the door with the manual door lock and
open the door. This should set off the alarm.
3. To turn the alarm off, press the unlock button on
the RKE transmitter or start the engine.
If the alarm does not sound when it should but the lights
ﬂash, check to see if the horn works. The horn fuse
may be blown. To replace the fuse, see Fuses
and Circuit Breakers on page 5-116.
If the alarm does not sound or the front turn signal
lamps do not ﬂash, see your dealer/retailer for service.
Passlock® (U. S. Only)
Your vehicle has the Passlock® theft-deterrent system.
Passlock® is a passive theft-deterrent system.
Passlock® enables fuel if the ignition lock cylinder is
turned with a valid key. If an incorrect key is used or the
ignition lock cylinder is tampered with, the fuel system
is disabled and the vehicle will not start.
During normal operation, the security light will turn off
approximately ﬁve seconds after the engine is started.
See Security Light on page 3-37.
If the engine stalls and the security light ﬂashes, wait
about 10 minutes until the light stops ﬂashing before
trying to restart the engine. Remember to release
the key from START as soon as the engine starts.
If the engine does not start after three tries, the vehicle
needs service.
If the engine is running and the security light comes on,
you will be able to restart the engine if you turn the engine
off. However, your Passlock® system is not working
properly and must be serviced by your dealer/retailer.
Your vehicle is not protected by Passlock® at this time.
See your dealer/retailer for service.
In an emergency, call the Roadside Assistance Center.
See Roadside Assistance Program on page 7-7.
Do not leave the key or device that disarms or
deactivates the theft deterrent system in the vehicle.
2-16
Information Provided by:

PASS-Key® III+
The PASS-Key® III+ system operates on a radio
frequency subject to Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) Rules and with Industry Canada.
This device complies with Part 15 of the FCC Rules.
Operation is subject to the following two conditions:
1. This device may not cause harmful interference.
2. This device must accept any interference received,
including interference that may cause undesired
operation.
This device complies with RSS-210 of Industry Canada.
Operation is subject to the following two conditions:
1. This device may not cause interference.
2. This device must accept any interference received,
including interference that may cause undesired
operation of the device.
Changes or modiﬁcations to this system by other than
an authorized service facility could void authorization to
use this equipment.
PASS-Key® III+ uses a radio frequency transponder in
the key that matches a decoder in your vehicle.
PASS-Key® III+ Operation
(Canada Only)
Your vehicle has a passive theft-deterrent system.
The system is automatically armed when the key
is removed from the ignition.
The system is automatically disarmed when the key is
turned to ON/RUN.
You do not have to manually arm or disarm the system.
The security light will come on if there is a problem
with arming or disarming the theft-deterrent system.
The key uses a transponder that matches an immobilizer
control unit in your vehicle. Only the correct key will
start the vehicle. If the key is ever damaged, you may
not be able to start your vehicle.
When trying to start the vehicle, if the engine does not
start and the security light comes on, there may be
a problem with your theft-deterrent system. Turn
the ignition off and try again.
If the engine still does not start, and the key appears
to be undamaged, try another ignition key. At this
time, you may also want to check the fuse.
See Fuses and Circuit Breakers on page 5-116.
2-17
Information Provided by:

If the engine still does not start with the other key, your
vehicle needs service. If your vehicle does start, the
ﬁrst key may be faulty. See your dealer/retailer who
can service the theft-deterrent system and have a new
key made.
It is possible for the theft-deterrent system decoder to
learn the transponder value of a new or replacement
key. Up to 10 keys can be programmed for the vehicle.
The following procedure is for programming additional
keys only.
Canadian Owners: If you lose or damage your keys,
only a dealer/retailer can service the theft-deterrent
system to have new keys made. To program additional
keys you will require two current driver’s keys.
To program a new key do the following:
1. Verify that the new key has PK3+ stamped on it.
2. Insert the current driver’s key in the ignition
and start the engine. If the engine will not start
see your dealer/retailer for service.
3. After the engine has started, turn the key to
LOCK/OFF, and remove the key.
4. Insert the second current driver’s key in the ignition
and start the engine within ten seconds of removing
the previous key. If the engine will not start see
your dealer/retailer for service.
5. After the engine has started, turn the key to
LOCK/OFF, and remove the key. Insert the key
to be programmed and turn it to ON/RUN within
ten seconds of removing the previous key.
The security light will turn off once the key has
been programmed.
6. Repeat the Steps 1 through 5 if additional keys are
to be programmed.
If the security light comes on and stays on while driving,
you will be able to restart the engine if you turn it off.
The theft-deterrent system, however, is not working
properly and must be serviced by your dealer/retailer.
Your vehicle is not protected by the theft-deterrent
system at this time.
In an emergency, contact Roadside Assistance.
See Roadside Assistance Program on page 7-7.
Do not leave the key or device that disarms or
deactivates the theft deterrent system in the vehicle.
2-18
Information Provided by:

Starting and Operating Your
Vehicle
New Vehicle Break-In
Notice:
Your vehicle does not need an elaborate
break-in. But it will perform better in the long run if
you follow these guidelines:
•
Keep your speed at 55 mph (88 km/h) or less for
the ﬁrst 500 miles (805 km).
•
Do not drive at any one constant speed, fast
or slow, for the ﬁrst 500 miles (805 km).
Do not make full-throttle starts. Avoid
downshifting to brake or slow the vehicle.
•
Avoid making hard stops for the ﬁrst
200 miles (322 km) or so. During this time
the new brake linings are not yet broken in.
Hard stops with new linings can mean
premature wear and earlier replacement.
Follow this breaking-in guideline every time
you get new brake linings.
•
Do not tow a trailer during break-in. See Towing a
Trailer on page 4-47 for the trailer towing
capabilities of your vehicle and more
information.
Following break-in, engine speed and load can be
gradually increased.
Ignition Positions
With the key in the ignition
switch, you can turn to
four different positions.
To shift out of PARK (P), the ignition must be in
ON/RUN and the regular brake pedal must be applied.
Notice:
Using a tool to force the key from the
ignition switch could cause damage or break the
key. Use the correct key and turn the key only with
your hand. Make sure the key is all the way in. If
none of this works, then your vehicle needs service.
(A) LOCK/OFF: This position locks the ignition.
It also locks the transmission on automatic transmission
vehicles. It locks the steering wheel on manual
transmission vehicles when the key is removed.
It is a theft-deterrent feature. You will only be able
to remove your key when the ignition is turned to
LOCK/OFF.
2-19
Information Provided by:

If you have an automatic transmission, the ignition
switch cannot be turned to LOCK/OFF unless the shift
lever is in PARK (P).
If the steering wheel is locked, move it from right to left
and turn the key to ACC/ACCESSORY. If none of
this works, then your vehicle needs service.
(B) ACC/ACCESSORY: This is the position in which
you can operate your electrical accessories or items
plugged into the accessory power outlets. On automatic
transmission vehicles, this position unlocks the ignition.
On manual transmission vehicles, it unlocks the ignition
and steering wheel. Use this position if your vehicle must
be pushed or towed.
(C) ON/RUN: This is the position that the switch returns
to after you start your engine and release the switch. The
switch stays in ON when the engine is running. But even
when the engine is not running, you can use ON/RUN to
operate the electrical accessories and to display some
instrument panel cluster warning and indicator lights.
The transmission is also unlocked in this position on
automatic transmission vehicles.
The battery could be drained if you leave the key in the
ACC/ACCESORY or ON/RUN position with the engine
off. You may not be able to start your vehicle if the battery
is allowed to drain for an extended period of time.
START (D): This is the position that starts the engine.
When the engine starts, release the key. The ignition
switch returns to ON/RUN for driving.
When the engine is not running, ACC/ACCESSORY
and ON/RUN allows you to operate the electrical
accessories, such as the radio or items plugged
into the accessory power outlets.
A warning tone will sound if you open the driver’s
door when the ignition is in ACC/ACCESSORY or
LOCK/OFF and the key is in the ignition.
2-20
Information Provided by:

Key In the Ignition
Never leave your vehicle with the keys inside, as it is an
easy target for joy riders or thieves. If you leave the key
in the ignition and park your vehicle, a chime will sound,
when you open the driver’s door. Always remember to
remove your key from the ignition and take it with you.
This will lock your ignition and transmission. Also, always
remember to lock the doors.
The battery could be drained if you leave the key in the
ignition while your vehicle is parked. You may not be
able to start your vehicle after it has been parked for
an extended period of time.
Retained Accessory Power (RAP)
These vehicle accessories can be used for up to
20 minutes after the engine is turned off:
•
Audio System
•
Wipers
•
Power Windows
These features work when the key is in ON/RUN or
ACC/ACCESSORY. Once the key is turned from
ON/RUN to LOCK/OFF, power to these features
continue to work for up to 20 minutes or until a
door is opened.
Starting the Engine
Place the transmission in the proper gear.
Automatic Transmission
Move the shift lever to PARK (P) or NEUTRAL (N).
The engine will not start in any other position -- this
is a safety feature. To restart when you are already
moving, use NEUTRAL (N) only.
Notice:
Do not try to shift to PARK (P) if your
vehicle is moving. If you do, you could damage
the transmission. Shift to PARK (P) only when
your vehicle is stopped.
Manual Transmission
The shift lever should be in neutral position and the
parking brake engaged. Hold the clutch pedal down
to the ﬂoor and start the engine. Your vehicle will
not start if the clutch pedal is not all the way down.
That is a safety feature.
2-21
Information Provided by:

Starting Procedure
1. With your foot off the accelerator pedal, turn the
ignition key to START. When the engine starts,
let go of the key. The idle speed will go down as
your engine gets warm. Do not race the engine
immediately after starting it. Operate the engine
and transmission gently to allow the oil to warm
up and lubricate all moving parts.
Your vehicle has a Computer-Controlled Cranking
System. This feature assists in starting the engine
and protects components. If the ignition key is turned
to the START position, and then released when the
engine begins cranking, the engine will continue
cranking for a few seconds or until the vehicle starts.
If the engine does not start and the key is held in
START for many seconds, cranking will be stopped
after 15 seconds to prevent cranking motor damage.
To prevent gear damage, this system also prevents
cranking if the engine is already running. Engine
cranking can be stopped by turning the ignition
switch to ACC/ACCESSORY or LOCK/OFF.
Notice:
Cranking the engine for long periods of
time, by returning the key to the START position
immediately after cranking has ended, can overheat
and damage the cranking motor, and drain the
battery. Wait at least 15 seconds between each
try, to let the cranking motor cool down.
2. If the engine does not start after 5-10 seconds,
especially in very cold weather (below 0°F or −18°C),
it could be ﬂooded with too much gasoline. Try
pushing the accelerator pedal all the way to the ﬂoor
and holding it there as you hold the key in START
for up to a maximum of 15 seconds. Wait at least
15 seconds between each try, to allow the cranking
motor to cool down. When the engine starts, let go of
the key and accelerator. If the vehicle starts brieﬂy
but then stops again, do the same thing. This clears
the extra gasoline from the engine. Do not race the
engine immediately after starting it. Operate the
engine and transmission gently until the oil warms
up and lubricates all moving parts.
Notice:
The engine is designed to work with the
electronics in your vehicle. If you add electrical
parts or accessories, you could change the way the
engine operates. Before adding electrical equipment,
check with your dealer/retailer. If you do not, your
engine might not perform properly. Any resulting
damage would not be covered by your vehicle’s
warranty.
2-22
Information Provided by:

Engine Coolant Heater
The engine coolant heater, if available, can help in cold
weather conditions at or below 0°F (−18°C) for easier
starting and better fuel economy during engine warm-up.
Plug in the coolant heater at least four hours before
starting your vehicle. An internal thermostat in the
plug-end of the cord may exist which will prevent
engine coolant heater operation at temperatures
above 0°F (−18°C).
To Use the Engine Coolant Heater
1. Turn off the engine.
2. Open the hood and unwrap the electrical cord. The
cord is located in the engine compartment behind
the underhood fuse block on the driver’s side of the
vehicle.
3. Plug it into a normal, grounded 110-volt AC outlet.
{CAUTION:
Plugging the cord into an ungrounded outlet
could cause an electrical shock. Also, the
wrong kind of extension cord could overheat
and cause a ﬁre. You could be seriously injured.
Plug the cord into a properly grounded
three-prong 110-volt AC outlet. If the cord will
not reach, use a heavy-duty three-prong
extension cord rated for at least 15 amps.
4. Before starting the engine, be sure to unplug and
store the cord as it was before to keep it away
from moving engine parts. If you do not, it could
be damaged.
How long should you keep the coolant heater plugged in?
The answer depends on the outside temperature,
the kind of oil you have, and some other things. Instead of
trying to list everything here, we ask that you contact your
dealer/retailer in the area where you will be parking your
vehicle. The dealer/retailer can give you the best advice
for that particular area.
2-23
Information Provided by:

Automatic Transmission Operation
Your automatic
transmission has
a shift lever on the
steering column.
It features an electronic shift position indicator within the
instrument cluster. This display must be powered anytime
the shift lever is capable of being moved out of PARK (P).
This means that if your key is turned off, but not in LOCK,
there will be a small current drain on your battery which
could discharge your battery over a period of time. If you
need to leave your key in the ignition but not in LOCK
for an extended period, it is recommended that you
disconnect the battery cable from the battery to prevent
discharging your battery.
There are several different positions for your shift lever.
PARK (P): This position locks your rear wheels. It is
the best position to use when you start your engine
because your vehicle cannot move easily.
{CAUTION:
It is dangerous to get out of your vehicle if the
shift lever is not fully in PARK (P) with the
parking brake ﬁrmly set. Your vehicle can roll.
Do not leave your vehicle when the engine is
running unless you have to. If you have left the
engine running, the vehicle can move suddenly.
You or others could be injured. To be sure your
vehicle will not move, even when you are on
fairly level ground, always set your parking
brake and move the shift lever to PARK (P).
See Shifting Into PARK (P) (Automatic
Transmission) on page 2-34. If you are pulling
a trailer, see Towing a Trailer on page 4-47.
Make sure the shift lever is fully in PARK (P) before
starting the engine. Your vehicle has an automatic
transmission shift lock control system. You must
fully apply your regular brakes before you can
shift from PARK (P) when the ignition key is in ON.
2-24
Information Provided by:

If you cannot shift out of PARK (P), ease pressure on
the shift lever by pushing the shift lever all the way into
PARK (P) as you maintain brake application. Then
move the shift lever into another gear. See Shifting Out
of PARK (P) (Automatic Transmission) on page 2-36.
REVERSE (R): Use this gear to back up.
Notice:
Shifting to REVERSE (R) while your vehicle
is moving forward could damage the transmission.
The repairs would not be covered by your warranty.
Shift to REVERSE (R) only after your vehicle is
stopped.
To rock your vehicle back and forth to get out of snow,
ice, or sand without damaging your transmission,
see If Your Vehicle is Stuck in Sand, Mud, Ice,
or Snow on page 4-32.
NEUTRAL (N): In this position, your engine does not
connect with the wheels. To restart when you are
already moving, use NEUTRAL (N) only.
{CAUTION:
Shifting into a drive gear while the engine is
running at high speed is dangerous. Unless
your foot is ﬁrmly on the brake pedal, your
vehicle could move very rapidly. You could
lose control and hit people or objects. Do not
shift into a drive gear while your engine is
running at high speed.
Notice:
Shifting out of PARK (P) or NEUTRAL (N)
with the engine running at high speed may damage
the transmission. The repairs would not be covered
by your warranty. Be sure the engine is not running
at high speed when shifting your vehicle.
DRIVE (D): This position is for normal driving.
If provides the best fuel economy for your vehicle.
If you need more power for passing, and you are:
•
Going less than about 35 mph (55 km/h), push your
accelerator pedal about halfway down.
•
Going about 35 mph (55 km/h) or more, push the
accelerator all the way down.
You will shift down to the next gear and have more
power.
2-25
Information Provided by:

Downshifting the transmission in slippery road conditions
could result in skidding, see “Skidding” under Loss of
Control on page 4-10.
THIRD (3): This position is also used for normal driving.
However, it reduces vehicle speed more than DRIVE (D)
without using your brakes. You might choose THIRD (3)
instead of DRIVE (D) when driving on hilly, winding
roads, when towing a trailer, so there is less shifting
between gears and when going down a steep hill.
SECOND (2): This position reduces vehicle speed even
more than THIRD (3) without using your brakes. You can
use SECOND (2) on hills. It can help control your speed
as you go down steep mountain roads, but then you
would also want to use your brakes off and on.
FIRST (1): This position reduces vehicle speed even
more than SECOND (2) without using your brakes.
You can use it on very steep hills, or in deep snow
or mud. If the shift lever is put in FIRST (1) while the
vehicle is moving forward, the transmission will not shift
into ﬁrst gear until the vehicle is going slowly enough.
Notice:
Spinning the tires or holding the vehicle
in one place on a hill using only the accelerator
pedal may damage the transmission. The repair will
not be covered by your warranty. If you are stuck,
do not spin the tires. When stopping on a hill,
use the brakes to hold the vehicle in place.
Manual Transmission Operation
This is your shift pattern.
Here is how to operate your manual transmission:
FIRST (1): Press the clutch pedal and shift into
FIRST (1). Then, slowly let up on the clutch pedal as
you slowly press down on the accelerator pedal.
You can shift into FIRST (1) when you are going less
than 20 mph (30 km/h). If you have come to a complete
stop and it is hard to shift into FIRST (1), put the shift
lever in NEUTRAL and let up on the clutch. Then press
the clutch pedal back down and shift into FIRST (1).
SECOND (2): Press the clutch pedal as you let up
on the accelerator pedal and shift into SECOND (2).
Then, slowly let up on the clutch pedal as you press
the accelerator pedal.
2-26
Information Provided by:

THIRD, FOURTH AND FIFTH (3, 4 and 5): Shift into
THIRD (3), FOURTH (4) and FIFTH (5) the same way
you do for SECOND (2). Slowly let up on the clutch pedal
as you press the accelerator pedal.
To stop, let up on the accelerator pedal and press the
brake pedal. Just before the vehicle stops, press the
clutch pedal and the brake pedal, and shift to NEUTRAL.
NEUTRAL: Use this position when you start or idle
your engine.
REVERSE (R): To back up, press the clutch pedal. After
the vehicle stops, shift into REVERSE (R). Slowly let up
on the clutch pedal as you press the accelerator pedal.
If it is hard to shift, let the shift lever return to NEUTRAL
and release the clutch pedal. Then press the clutch again
and shift into REVERSE (R). Do not attempt to shift into
the ﬁfth gear position prior to shifting into REVERSE (R).
Your transmission has a lock out feature which prevents
a ﬁfth gear to reverse gear shift.
Notice:
Shifting to REVERSE (R) while your vehicle
is moving forward could damage the transmission.
The repairs would not be covered by your warranty.
Shift to REVERSE (R) only after your vehicle is
stopped.
Use REVERSE (R), along with the parking brake,
for parking your vehicle.
Up-Shift Light
This light will show you
when to shift to the next
higher gear for best
fuel economy.
When this light comes on, you can shift to the next
higher gear if weather, road and traffic conditions permit.
For the best fuel economy, accelerate slowly and shift
when the light comes on.
While you accelerate, it is normal for the light to go
on and off if you quickly change the position of
the accelerator. Ignore the shift light when you
downshift.
If your vehicle has four-wheel drive and has a manual
transmission, disregard the shift light when the transfer
case is in four-wheel low.
For more information, see Up-Shift Light on page 3-30.
2-27
Information Provided by:

Shift Speeds
{CAUTION:
If you skip a gear when you downshift, you
could lose control of your vehicle. You could
injure yourself or others. Do not shift down
more than one gear at a time when you
downshift.
Four-Wheel Drive
If your vehicle has four-wheel drive, you can send your
engine’s driving power to all four wheels for extra traction.
To get the best performance out of four-wheel drive, you
must be familiar with its operation. Read the part that
follows before using four-wheel drive. You should use
two-wheel-drive high for most normal driving conditions.
Notice:
Driving on clean, dry pavement in
four-wheel drive for an extended period of time can
cause premature wear on your vehicle’s powertrain.
Do not drive on clean, dry pavement in Four-Wheel
Drive for extended periods of time.
Notice:
If your vehicle has four-wheel drive and the
compact spare tire is installed on your vehicle, do not
drive in four-wheel drive until you can have your ﬂat
tire repaired and/or replaced. You could damage your
vehicle, and the repair costs would not be covered by
your warranty. Never use four-wheel drive when the
compact spare tire is installed on your vehicle.
The transfer case buttons are located to the right of the
steering wheel on the instrument panel.
2-28
Information Provided by:

Recommended Transfer Case Settings
Driving Conditions
Transfer Case Settings
2 m
4 m
4 n
N
Normal
YES
Severe
YES
Extreme
YES
Vehicle in Tow*
YES
*See Recreational Vehicle Towing on page 4-41 or
Towing Your Vehicle on page 4-41 for further
information.
Use these buttons to shift into and out of four-wheel
drive. You can choose from the following:
2 m (Two-Wheel High): This setting is for driving in
most street and highway situations. Your front axle is not
engaged in two-wheel drive.
{CAUTION:
Shifting the transfer case to NEUTRAL
can cause your vehicle to roll even if the
transmission is in PARK (P), or if you have a
manual transmission, even if you are in gear.
You or someone else could be seriously injured.
Be sure to set the parking brake before placing
the transfer case in NEUTRAL. See Parking
Brake on page 2-32.
N (NEUTRAL): Shift the vehicle’s transfer case to
NEUTRAL only when towing your vehicle.
4 m (Four-Wheel High): This setting engages your
front axle to help drive your vehicle. Use four-wheel high
when you need extra traction, such as on snowy or
icy roads, or in most off-road situations.
4 n (Four-Wheel Low): This setting also engages
your front axle to give you extra traction. It sends
the maximum power to all four wheels. You might
choose four-wheel low if you were driving off-road
in sand, mud, or deep snow and while climbing or
descending steep hills.
2-29
Information Provided by:

Indicator lights in the buttons show you which setting you
are in. The indicator lights will come on brieﬂy when you
turn on the ignition and one will stay on the selected
setting. If the lights do not come on, you should take your
vehicle in for service. An indicator light will ﬂash while
shifting. It will stay on when the shift is completed.
If for some reason the transfer case does not shift, it will
return to the last chosen setting.
Shifting from Two-Wheel High to
Four-Wheel High
Press and release the Four-Wheel High button. This
can be done at any speed, and the front axle will lock
automatically.
Shifting from Four-Wheel High to
Two-Wheel High
Press and release the Two-Wheel High button. This can
be done at any speed, and the front axle will unlock
automatically.
It is normal to hear and feel your vehicle’s transfer case
shift into Four-Wheel High. If you shift with the vehicle
stopped, the indicator light may still ﬂash slowly. It may
be necessary to shift the transmission momentarily into
REVERSE (R) and DRIVE (D), for an automatic
transmission, or REVERSE (R) and FIRST (1) for a
manual transmission to have the light stop ﬂashing.
Shifting from Two-Wheel High or
Four-Wheel High to Four-Wheel Low
To shift from Two-Wheel High or Four-Wheel High to
Four-Wheel Low, the vehicle must be stopped or moving
less than 3 mph (5 km/h) with the transmission in
NEUTRAL (N) for an automatic transmission or the clutch
pedal pressed for a manual transmission. The preferred
method for shifting into Four-Wheel Low is to have your
vehicle moving 1 to 2 mph (1.6 to 3.2 km/h).
Press and release the Four-Wheel Low button. You
must wait for the Four-Wheel Low indicator light to stop
ﬂashing and stay on before shifting the transmission
into gear or releasing the clutch pedal.
If the Four-Wheel Low button is pressed when
your vehicle is in gear and/or moving faster than
3 mph (5 km/h), the four-wheel low indicator light will
ﬂash for 30 seconds and not complete the shift.
2-30
Information Provided by:

Shifting from Four-Wheel Low to
Two-Wheel High or Four-Wheel High
To shift from Four-Wheel Low to Two-Wheel High or
Four-Wheel High, your vehicle must be stopped or
moving less than 3 mph (5 km/h) with the transmission in
NEUTRAL (N) for an automatic transmission or the clutch
pedal pressed for a manual transmission. The preferred
method for shifting out of four-wheel low is to have your
vehicle moving 1 to 2 mph (1.6 to 3.2 km/h).
Press and release the Four-Wheel High or Two-Wheel
High button. You must wait for the Four-Wheel High
or Two-Wheel High indicator light to stop ﬂashing and
stay on before shifting the transmission into gear or
releasing the clutch pedal.
If the Four-Wheel High or Two-Wheel High button is
pressed when your vehicle is in gear and/or moving
faster than 3 mph (5km/h), the Four-Wheel High or
Two Wheel High indicator light will ﬂash for 30 seconds
but not complete the shift.
Shifting to NEUTRAL
Use NEUTRAL when you plan to tow your vehicle.
See Recreational Vehicle Towing on page 4-41
for towing instructions. To shift the transfer case
into NEUTRAL do the following:
1. Set the parking brake.
2. Start the vehicle.
3. Press the regular brake pedal and shift the
transmission in NEUTRAL (N), or press in the
clutch for vehicles with a manual transmission.
4. Shift the transfer case to Two-Wheel High.
5. Press and hold the Two-Wheel High and
Four-Wheel Low buttons at the same time for
10 seconds. The NEUTRAL (N) light will come
on when the transfer case shift to NEUTRAL (N)
is complete.
6. Press and hold the regular brake pedal and shift the
transmission to REVERSE (R) for one second, then
shift the transmission to DRIVE (D) for one second,
or FIRST (1) for vehicles with manual transmissions,
and let out the clutch to insure the transfer case is in
NEUTRAL. If the vehicle is not in NEUTRAL, repeat
this procedure starting at Step 3.
7. Turn the engine off by turning the key to ACC.
8. Place the transmission shift lever in PARK (P),
or FIRST (1) for vehicles that have a manual
transmission.
9. Turn the ignition to LOCK.
2-31
Information Provided by:

Shifting Out of NEUTRAL
After towing your vehicle, you will have to shift out of
NEUTRAL in order to drive. To shift out of NEUTRAL,
do the following:
1. Set the parking brake and apply the regular
brake pedal.
2. Start a vehicle with an automatic transmission in
PARK (P). Use FIRST (1) for vehicles with a
manual transmission.
3. Shift the transmission to NEUTRAL (N), or press
the clutch pedal for vehicles with a manual
transmission.
4. Press the button for the desired transfer case shift
position (Two-Wheel High, Four-Wheel High, or
Four-Wheel Low).
5. After the transfer case has shifted out of NEUTRAL,
the indicator light will go out.
6. Release the parking brake.
7. Shift the transmission to the desired position.
Parking Brake
The parking brake pedal is
located to the left of the
regular brake pedal,
near the driver’s door.
To set the parking brake, hold the regular brake pedal
down with your right foot. Push the parking brake pedal
down to its fully-applied position with your left foot.
A chime will activate and the brake warning light, located
on the instrument panel, will ﬂash when the parking
brake is applied and the vehicle is moving at least
3 mph (5 km/h) for at least three seconds. The chime
will deactivate and the light will turn off when the parking
brake is set and the vehicle is moving below 3 mph
(5 km/h). See Brake System Warning Light on page 3-31.
2-32
Information Provided by:

To release the parking brake, hold the regular brake
pedal down. Pull the bottom edge of the lever, located
above the parking brake pedal, with the parking brake
symbol, directly rearward to release the parking brake.
If the ignition is on when the parking brake is released,
the brake system warning light will go off.
Notice:
Driving with the parking brake on can
overheat the brake system and cause premature
wear or damage to brake system parts. Make sure
that the parking brake is fully released and the brake
warning light is off before driving.
If you are towing a trailer and are parking on any hill,
see Towing a Trailer on page 4-47.
2-33
Information Provided by:

Shifting Into PARK (P)
(Automatic Transmission)
{CAUTION:
It can be dangerous to get out of your vehicle
if the shift lever is not fully in PARK (P) with
the parking brake ﬁrmly set. Your vehicle can
roll. If you have left the engine running, the
vehicle can move suddenly. You or others
could be injured. To be sure your vehicle will
not move, even when you are on fairly level
ground, use the steps that follow. If you are
pulling a trailer, see Towing a Trailer on
page 4-47.
1. Hold the brake pedal down with your right foot and
set the parking brake.
See Parking Brake on page 2-32 for more
information.
{CAUTION:
If you have four-wheel drive, your vehicle will
be free to roll — even if your shift lever is
in PARK (P) — if your transfer case is in
NEUTRAL. So, be sure the transfer case is in a
drive gear, two-wheel high (2H) or four-wheel
high (4H) or four-wheel low (4L) — not in
NEUTRAL.
2. Move the shift lever into PARK (P) by pulling the
lever toward you and moving it up as far as it will go.
3. Turn the ignition key to LOCK.
4. Remove the key and take it with you. If you can
leave your vehicle with the key, your vehicle is in
PARK (P).
2-34
Information Provided by:

Leaving Your Vehicle With the Engine
Running (Automatic Transmission)
{CAUTION:
It can be dangerous to leave your vehicle with
the engine running. Your vehicle could move
suddenly if the shift lever is not fully in
PARK (P) with the parking brake ﬁrmly set.
And, if you leave the vehicle with the engine
running, it could overheat and even catch ﬁre.
You or others could be injured. Do not leave
your vehicle with the engine running.
If you have to leave your vehicle with the engine running,
be sure your vehicle is in PARK (P) and your parking
brake is ﬁrmly set before you leave it. After you have
moved the shift lever into PARK (P), hold the regular
brake pedal down. Then, see if you can move the shift
lever away from PARK (P) without ﬁrst pulling it toward
you. If you can, it means that the shift lever was not fully
locked into PARK (P).
Torque Lock (Automatic Transmission)
If you are parking on a hill and you do not shift your
transmission into PARK (P) properly, the weight of the
vehicle may put too much force on the parking pawl
in the transmission. You may ﬁnd it difficult to pull the
shift lever out of PARK (P). This is called torque lock.
To prevent torque lock, set the parking brake and
then shift into PARK (P) properly before you leave the
driver’s seat. To ﬁnd out how, see Shifting Into PARK (P)
(Automatic Transmission) on page 2-34.
When you are ready to drive, move the shift lever out of
PARK (P) before you release the parking brake.
If torque lock does occur, you may need to have another
vehicle push yours a little uphill to take some of the
pressure from the parking pawl in the transmission,
so you can pull the shift lever out of PARK (P).
2-35
Information Provided by:

Shifting Out of PARK (P)
(Automatic Transmission)
Your vehicle has an automatic transaxle shift lock
control system. You have to fully apply your regular
brakes before you can shift from PARK (P) when
the ignition is RUN. See Automatic Transmission
Operation on page 2-24.
The shift lock control system is designed to do the
following:
•
Prevent the ignition key from being removed unless
the shift lever is in PARK (P).
•
Prevent movement of the shift lever out of
PARK (P), unless the ignition is in ON/RUN
and the regular brake pedal is applied.
The shift lock control system is always functional
except in the case of a dead battery or low voltage
(less than 9 V) battery.
If your vehicle has an uncharged battery or a battery
with low voltage, try charging or jump starting the
battery. See Jump Starting on page 5-44 for more
information.
To shift out of PARK (P) use the following:
1. Apply the brake pedal.
2. Move the shift lever to the desired position.
If you still are unable to shift out of PARK (P):
1. Ease the pressure on the shift lever.
2. While holding down the brake pedal, push the shift
lever all the way into PARK (P)
3. Move the shift lever to the desired position.
If you are still having a problem shifting, then have your
vehicle serviced soon.
Parking Your Vehicle
(Manual Transmission)
Your vehicle has a manual transmission. Before
you get out of your vehicle, move the shift lever into
REVERSE (R), and ﬁrmly apply the parking brake. Once
the shift lever has been placed into REVERSE (R) with
the clutch pedal pressed in, turn the ignition key to LOCK,
remove the key and release the clutch.
If you are parking on a hill, or if your vehicle is pulling a
trailer, see Towing a Trailer on page 4-47.
2-36
Information Provided by:

Parking Over Things That Burn
{CAUTION:
Things that can burn could touch hot exhaust
parts under your vehicle and ignite. Do not
park over papers, leaves, dry grass, or other
things that can burn.
Engine Exhaust
{CAUTION:
Engine exhaust can kill. It contains the gas
carbon monoxide (CO), which you cannot see or
smell. It can cause unconsciousness and death.
CAUTION:
(Continued)
CAUTION:
(Continued)
You might have exhaust coming in if:
• The exhaust system sounds strange or
different.
• Your vehicle gets rusty underneath.
• Your vehicle was damaged in a collision.
• Your vehicle was damaged when driving
over high points on the road or over road
debris.
• Repairs were not done correctly.
• Your vehicle or the exhaust system has
been modiﬁed improperly.
If you ever suspect exhaust is coming into
your vehicle:
• Drive it only with all the windows down to
blow out any CO; and
• Have your vehicle ﬁxed immediately.
2-37
Information Provided by:

Running the Engine While Parked
It is better not to park with the engine running. But if you
ever have to, here are some things to know.
{CAUTION:
Idling the engine with the climate control
system off could allow dangerous exhaust into
your vehicle. See the earlier caution under
Engine Exhaust on page 2-37.
Also, idling in a closed-in place can let deadly
carbon monoxide (CO) into your vehicle even if
the climate control fan is at the highest setting.
One place this can happen is a garage.
Exhaust — with CO — can come in easily.
NEVER park in a garage with the engine
running.
Another closed-in place can be a blizzard.
See Winter Driving on page 4-28.
{CAUTION:
It can be dangerous to get out of your vehicle
if the automatic transmission shift lever is not
fully in PARK (P) with the parking brake ﬁrmly
set. Your vehicle can roll. Do not leave your
vehicle when the engine is running unless you
have to. If you have left the engine running,
the vehicle can move suddenly. You or others
could be injured. To be sure your vehicle will
not move, even when it is on fairly level
ground, always set the parking brake and
move the automatic transmission shift lever
to PARK (P), or the manual transmission shift
lever to NEUTRAL.
2-38
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Four-wheel drive vehicles with the transfer
case in NEUTRAL will allow the vehicle to roll,
even if the automatic transmission shift lever
is in PARK (P). So, be sure the transfer case is
in a drive gear — not in NEUTRAL. Always set
the parking brake.
Follow the proper steps to be sure your vehicle will
not move. See Shifting Into PARK (P) (Automatic
Transmission) on page 2-34.
If you are pulling a trailer, see Towing a Trailer on
page 4-47.
Mirrors
Manual Rearview Mirror
When you are sitting in a comfortable driving position,
adjust the mirror so you can see clearly behind your
vehicle. Hold the mirror in the center to move it up or
down and side to side. The day/night adjustment allows
you to adjust the mirror to avoid glare from the lamps
behind you. Push the tab forward for daytime use
and pull it for nighttime use.
Manual Rearview Mirror with
OnStar®
While you are sitting in a comfortable driving position,
adjust the mirror so you can see clearly behind your
vehicle. Hold the mirror in the center to move it up or
down and side to side. The day/night adjustment allows
you to adjust the mirror to avoid glare from the lamps
behind you. Push the tab forward for daytime use
and pull it for nighttime use.
2-39
Information Provided by:

There are also OnStar® buttons located at the bottom
of the mirror face. See your dealer/retailer for more
information on the system and how to subscribe to
OnStar®. See OnStar® System on page 2-47 for more
information about the services OnStar® provides.
Cleaning the Mirror
While cleaning the mirror, use a paper towel or similar
material dampened with glass cleaner. Do not spray
glass cleaner directly on the mirror housing.
Automatic Dimming Rearview Mirror
Your vehicle may have an automatic dimming rearview
mirror.
AUTO/( (On/Off): Press and hold the AUTO button
located on the lower center of the mirror for about three
seconds to turn automatic dimming on. The indicator
light will illuminate when this feature is active. The
automatic dimming feature is active each time the vehicle
is started. Press and hold the ( (off) button located next
to the AUTO button for about three seconds to turn the
automatic dimming feature off.
Automatic Dimming Rearview Mirror
with OnStar®, Compass and
Temperature Display
Your vehicle may have this feature. When on, the
automatic dimming mirror dims to the proper level to
minimize glare from lights behind you after dark.
The mirror has a dual display in the upper right corner
of the mirror face that shows the compass reading
and the outside temperature.
Control buttons for the OnStar® system are at the bottom
of the mirror. See OnStar® System on page 2-47 for more
information about the services OnStar® provides.
P(On/Off): This is the on/off button.
2-40
Information Provided by:

Temperature and Compass Display
Press the on/off button, located to the far left, brieﬂy to
turn the compass/temperature display on or off.
If the display reads CAL, the compass needs to be
calibrated. For more information, see “Compass
Calibration” following.
To adjust between Fahrenheit and Celsius:
1. Press and hold the on/off button for approximately
four seconds until either a ﬂashing F or C appears.
2. Press the button again to change the display to the
desired unit of measurement. After approximately
four seconds of inactivity, the new unit will be locked
in and the compass/temperature display will return.
If an abnormal temperature reading is displayed for
an extended period of time, see your dealer/retailer.
Under certain circumstances, a delay in updating
the temperature is normal.
Automatic Dimming Mirror Operation
The automatic dimming mirror comes on each time the
ignition is turned to start. To turn the automatic dimming
feature off or back on, press the on/off button. The
indicator light on the mirror is lit when the automatic
dimming feature is on.
Compass Calibration
The compass may need calibration if one of the
following occurs:
•
After approximately ﬁve seconds, the display does
not show a compass heading, N for North, for
example, there may be a strong magnetic ﬁeld
interfering with the compass. Such interference may
be caused by a magnetic antenna mount, magnetic
note pad holder, or a similar magnetic item.
•
The compass does not display the correct heading
and the compass zone variance is set correctly.
In order to calibrate, CAL must be displayed in the
mirror compass windows. If CAL is not displayed,
push the on/off button for approximately 12 seconds
or until CAL is displayed.
The compass can be calibrated by driving the vehicle
in circles at 5 mph (8 km/h) or less until the display
reads a direction.
2-41
Information Provided by:

Compass Variance
The mirror is set in zone eight upon leaving the factory.
It will be necessary to adjust the compass to compensate
for compass variance if the vehicle is outside of zone
eight. Under certain circumstances, as during a long
distance cross-country trip, it will be necessary to
adjust for compass variance. Compass variance is the
difference between earth’s magnetic north and true
geographic north. If not adjusted to account for compass
variance, the compass could give false readings.
To adjust for compass variance:
1. Find your current location and variance zone
number on the following zone map.
2. Press and hold the on/off button until a Z and a
zone number appears in the display. The compass
is now in zone mode.
3. Keep pressing the on/off button until the desired
zone number appears in the display. Release
the button. After approximately four seconds of
inactivity, the new zone number will be locked
in and the compass/temperature display will return.
2-42
Information Provided by:

Cleaning the Mirror
When cleaning the mirror, use a paper towel or similar
material dampened with glass cleaner. Do not spray
glass cleaner directly on the mirror as that may cause
the liquid cleaner to enter the mirror housing.
Automatic Dimming Rearview Mirror
with Compass and Temperature
Display
Your vehicle may have this mirror. When on, an
automatic dimming mirror will dim to the proper level to
minimize glare from lights behind you after dark.
The mirror also includes a dual display in the upper
right corner of the mirror with the compass reading and
the outside temperature.
Yb: Brieﬂy press this button to turn the display on or
off.
Temperature Display
The temperature can be displayed by pressing
the compass/temperature button. Pressing the
compass/temperature button once brieﬂy, will toggle the
display reading on and off. To alternate the temperature
reading between Fahrenheit and Celsius, press and
hold the compass/temperature button for approximately
three seconds until the display blinks F and C. After
approximately ﬁve seconds of inactivity, the display will
stop blinking and display the last selection made.
If an abnormal reading is displayed, see your
dealer/retailer.
Automatic Dimming Mirror Operation
O: Press this button to turn the automatic dimming
feature on or off. The indicator light to the left of
the button will turn on to indicate when the feature is on.
Once the mirror is turned off, it will remain off until it
is turned back on, or until the vehicle is restarted.
2-43
Information Provided by:

Compass Operation
Press the compass/temperature button once brieﬂy to
turn the display on or off.
Compass Calibration
The compass may need calibration if one of the
following occurs:
•
If CAL is displayed while driving in the vehicle.
•
After approximately ﬁve seconds, the display
does not show a compass heading, N for North,
for example, there may be a strong magnetic ﬁeld
interfering with the compass. Such interference
may be caused by a magnetic antenna mount,
magnetic note pad holder, or a similar
magnetic item.
•
The compass does not display the correct heading
and the compass zone variance is set correctly.
In order to calibrate, CAL must be displayed in the
mirror compass windows. If CAL is not displayed, push
in the compass/temperature button for approximately
nine seconds or until CAL is displayed.
The compass can be calibrated by driving the vehicle in
circles at 5 mph (8 km/h) or less until the display reads a
direction.
Compass Variance
The mirror is set in zone eight upon leaving the factory.
It will be necessary to adjust the compass to compensate
for compass variance if the vehicle is outside zone eight.
Under certain circumstances, as during a long distance
cross-country trip, it will be necessary to adjust for
compass variance. Compass variance is the difference
between earth’s magnetic north and true geographic
north. If not adjusted to account for compass variance,
your compass could give false readings.
To adjust for compass variance:
1. Find your current location and variance zone
number on the following zone map.
2-44
Information Provided by:

2. Press and hold the compass/temperature button for
six seconds until a zone number appears in the
display.
3. Press the compass/temperature button on the
bottom of the mirror until the new zone number
appears in the display. After you stop pressing the
button, the display will show a compass direction
within a few seconds.
Cleaning the Mirror
Use a paper towel or similar material dampened with
glass cleaner. Do not spray glass cleaner directly on the
mirror as that may cause the liquid cleaner to enter
the mirror housing.
Outside Manual Mirrors
Adjust the outside rearview mirrors so you can see a
little of the side of your vehicle, and the area beside
your vehicle from a comfortable driving position.
The mirrors can be folded in to enter narrow areas.
Return the mirrors to the unfolded position before
driving.
2-45
Information Provided by:

Outside Power Mirrors
If your vehicle has this
feature, the controls are
located on the driver’s
door armrest.
To adjust the power mirrors, do the following:
1. Move the selector switch to the L (left) or R (right)
to choose the driver’s or passenger’s mirror.
2. Use the arrows located on the four-way control pad
to move the mirror in the direction you want the
mirror to go.
3. Return the selector switch to the center position
once the mirrors are adjusted.
If the mirror begins making a ratcheting sound, the
mirror has reached the end of its travel and can go no
farther in that direction. To stop the sound, reverse
the mirror direction using the control pad.
The mirrors can be manually folded inward to prevent
damage when going through an automatic car wash.
To fold, push the mirror toward the vehicle. To return
the mirror to its original position, push outward. Be sure
to return both mirrors to the unfolded position before
driving.
Outside Convex Mirror
{CAUTION:
A convex mirror can make things (like other
vehicles) look farther away than they really are.
If you cut too sharply into the right lane, you
could hit a vehicle on your right. Check your
inside mirror or glance over your shoulder
before changing lanes.
The passenger side mirror is convex. A convex mirror’s
surface is curved so more can be seen from the driver
seat. It also makes things, like other vehicles, look farther
away than they really are.
2-46
Information Provided by:

OnStar® System
OnStar uses several innovative technologies and live
advisors to provide you with a wide range of safety,
security, information, and convenience services. If your
airbags deploy, the system is designed to make an
automatic call to OnStar Emergency advisors who can
request emergency services be sent to your location.
If you lock your keys in the vehicle, call OnStar at
1-888-4-ONSTAR and they can send a signal to unlock
your doors. If you need roadside assistance, press the
OnStar button and they can contact Roadside Service
for you.
OnStar service is provided to you subject to the OnStar
Terms and Conditions. You may cancel your OnStar
service at any time by contacting OnStar as provided
below. A complete OnStar Owner’s Guide and the
OnStar Terms and Conditions are included in the
vehicle’s OnStar Subscriber glove box literature.
For more information, visit onstar.com or
onstar.ca, contact OnStar at 1-888-4-ONSTAR
(1-888-466-7827) or TTY 1-877-248-2080, or press
the OnStar button to speak with an OnStar advisor
24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Not all OnStar features are available on all vehicles.
To check if your vehicle is equipped to provide the
services described below, or for a full description of
OnStar services and system limitations, see the OnStar
Owner’s Guide in your glove box or visit onstar.com.
OnStar Services
For new vehicles equipped with OnStar, the
Safe & Sound Plan, or the Directions & Connections
Plan is included for one year from the date of purchase.
You can extend this plan beyond the ﬁrst year, or
upgrade to the Directions & Connections Plan. For more
information, press the OnStar button to speak with an
advisor. Some OnStar services (such as Remote
Door Unlock or Stolen Vehicle Location Assistance)
may not be available until you register with OnStar.
2-47
Information Provided by:

Available Services with Safe & Sound Plan
•
Automatic Notiﬁcation of Airbag Deployment
•
Advanced Automatic Crash Notiﬁcation (AACN)
(If equipped)
•
Link to Emergency Services
•
Roadside Assistance
•
Stolen Vehicle Location Assistance
•
AccidentAssist
•
Remote Door Unlock/Vehicle Alert
•
OnStar Vehicle Diagnostics
•
GM Goodwrench® On Demand Diagnostics
•
OnStar Hands-Free Calling with
30 complimentary minutes
•
OnStar Virtual Advisor (U.S. Only)
Available Services included with
Directions & Connections Plan
•
All Safe and Sound Plan Services
•
Driving Directions - Advisor delivered or OnStar
Turn-by-Turn Navigation (If equipped)
•
RideAssist
•
Information and Convenience Services
OnStar Hands-Free Calling
OnStar Hands-Free Calling allows eligible OnStar
subscribers to make and receive calls using voice
commands. Hands-Free Calling is fully integrated into the
vehicle, and can be used with OnStar Pre-Paid Minute
Packages. Hands-Free Calling may also be linked to
a Verizon Wireless service plan in the U.S. or a Bell
Mobility service plan in Canada, depending on eligibility.
To ﬁnd out more, refer to the OnStar Owner’s Guide
in the vehicle’s glove box, visit www.onstar.com or
www.onstar.ca, or speak with an OnStar advisor by
pressing the OnStar button or calling 1-888-4-ONSTAR
(1-888-466-7827).
OnStar Virtual Advisor
OnStar Virtual Advisor is a feature of OnStar Hands-Free
Calling that uses your minutes to access location-based
weather, local traffic reports, and stock quotes. By
pressing the phone button and giving a few simple voice
commands, you can browse through the various topics.
See the OnStar Owner’s Guide for more information.
(Only available in the continental U.S.).
2-48
Information Provided by:

How OnStar Service Works
In order to provide you with OnStar services, your
vehicle’s OnStar system has the capability of recording
and transmitting vehicle information. This information is
automatically sent to an OnStar Call Center at the time
of an OnStar button press, Emergency button press or
if your airbags or AACN system deploys. The vehicle
information usually includes your GPS location and, in
the event of a crash, additional information regarding the
accident that your vehicle has been involved in (e.g. the
direction from which your vehicle was hit). When you use
the Virtual Advisor feature of OnStar Hands-Free Calling,
your vehicle also sends OnStar your GPS location so that
we can provide you with location-based services.
OnStar service cannot work unless your vehicle is in a
place where OnStar has an agreement with a wireless
service provider for service in that area. OnStar service
also cannot work unless you are in a place where the
wireless service provider OnStar has hired for that area
has coverage, network capacity and reception when the
service is needed, and technology that is compatible
with the OnStar service. Not all services are available
everywhere, particularly in remote or enclosed areas,
or at all times.
OnStar service that involves location information about
your vehicle cannot work unless GPS satellite signals
are unobstructed and available in that place as well.
Your vehicle must have a working electrical system
(including adequate battery power) for the OnStar
equipment to operate. There are other problems OnStar
cannot control that may prevent OnStar from providing
OnStar service to you at any particular time or place.
Some examples are damage to important parts of your
vehicle in an accident, hills, tall buildings, tunnels,
weather or wireless phone network congestion.
Your Responsibility
You may need to increase the volume of your radio
to hear the OnStar advisor. If the light next to the OnStar
buttons is red, this means that your system is not
functioning properly and should be checked by a
dealer/retailer. If the light appears clear (no light is
appearing), your OnStar subscription has expired.
You can always press the blue OnStar button to
conﬁrm that your OnStar equipment is active.
2-49
Information Provided by:

Storage Areas
Glove Box
To open the glove box, lift up on the lever.
Cupholder(s)
Your vehicle may have two cupholders located on the
lower part of the front doors as well as two cupholders
located at the front end of the console. Vehicles with
bench seats may have cupholders attached to the front
of the center seat.
If your vehicle is an extended cab or crew cab model,
your vehicle also has two rear cupholders. On crew cab
models, the cupholders are located at the front end of the
rear center seat cushion. On extended cab models, the
rear seat cupholders are located on top of the rear center
console.
If you have an ashtray, it will use one of the cupholders.
Center Console Storage
For vehicles with bench seats, you may have a center
armrest storage area. Lift up on the upper tab located at
the front of the armrest to release the latch. Lift the lid
to open the storage area.
For vehicles with bucket seats or uplevel packages, your
vehicle may have a two-tiered center armrest storage
area. Lift up on the upper tab located at the front of the
armrest to release the latch. Lift the lid to the top storage
area. A second tab is located below the top one and
allows you to access the bottom storage area. Lift up on
the lower tab to release the latch. Then, raise the lid of
the lower storage area. The upper storage area will lift up
with the lid of the lower storage area.
To close the storage area(s), lower the lid(s) until you
feel the latch close.
Assist Handles
Your vehicle may have assist handles to be used when
getting out of your vehicle. If your vehicle has assist
handles, they are located above the doors.
If your vehicle has roof-mounted side impact air bags,
there are assist handles located above both the driver’s
and front passenger’s doors.
2-50
Information Provided by:

Rear Storage Area
If your vehicle is an extended cab model, it might have
storage compartments under the rear seats.
To access the storage compartments, lift the cushion on
the bottom of the rear seats. This exposes the storage
boxes under the seat.
To open a storage box, unhook the bottom and lift the
two latches on each side of the storage box.
2-51
Information Provided by:

Lift the lid from the center area to access the
storage box.
Sunroof
Your vehicle may have a sunroof.
The sunroof control
buttons are located on
the headliner.
Q(Open/Vent): Press and hold this button to vent,
and open the sunroof. Release the button when
the desired position is reached.
R(Close): Press and hold this button to close the
sunroof. Release the button when the desired position
is reached.
The sunshade must be opened manually.
2-52
Information Provided by:

Instrument Panel Overview ...............................3-4
Hazard Warning Flashers ................................3-6
Other Warning Devices ...................................3-6
Horn .............................................................3-6
Tilt Wheel .....................................................3-7
Turn Signal/Multifunction Lever .........................3-7
Turn and Lane-Change Signals ........................3-8
Headlamp High/Low-Beam Changer ..................3-8
Flash-to-Pass .................................................3-9
Windshield Wipers ..........................................3-9
Windshield Washer .......................................3-10
Cruise Control ..............................................3-10
Exterior Lamps .............................................3-14
Headlamps on Reminder ................................3-15
Daytime Running Lamps (DRL) .......................3-15
Automatic Headlamp System ..........................3-16
Fog Lamps ..................................................3-16
Exterior Cargo Lamps ....................................3-17
Interior Lamps ..............................................3-17
Instrument Panel Brightness ...........................3-17
Dome Lamp .................................................3-17
Dome Lamp Override ....................................3-18
Exit Lighting .................................................3-18
Electric Power Management ...........................3-18
Battery Run-Down Protection ..........................3-19
Accessory Power Outlet(s) .............................3-19
Ashtray(s) and Cigarette Lighter ......................3-20
Climate Controls ............................................3-20
Climate Control System .................................3-20
Outlet Adjustment .........................................3-22
Warning Lights, Gages, and Indicators ............3-23
Instrument Panel Cluster ................................3-24
Speedometer and Odometer ...........................3-25
Trip Odometer ..............................................3-25
Tachometer .................................................3-25
Safety Belt Reminders ...................................3-26
Airbag Readiness Light ..................................3-27
Passenger Airbag Status Indicator ...................3-28
Charging System Light ..................................3-30
Up-Shift Light ...............................................3-30
Brake System Warning Light ..........................3-31
Antilock Brake System Warning Light ...............3-32
Traction Control System (TCS)
Warning Light ...........................................3-32
Engine Coolant Temperature Gage ..................3-33
Tire Pressure Light .......................................3-33
Malfunction Indicator Lamp .............................3-34
Oil Pressure Light .........................................3-36
Security Light ...............................................3-37
Cruise Control Light ......................................3-37
Highbeam On Light .......................................3-37
Fuel Gage ...................................................3-37
Section 3
Instrument Panel
3-1
Information Provided by:

Driver Information Center (DIC) .......................3-38
DIC Operation and Displays ...........................3-38
DIC Warnings and Messages .........................3-42
Audio System(s) .............................................3-46
Setting the Time ...........................................3-47
Radio(s) ......................................................3-48
Using an MP3 ..............................................3-64
XM Radio Messages .....................................3-69
Theft-Deterrent Feature ..................................3-70
Radio Reception ...........................................3-70
Fixed Mast Antenna ......................................3-71
XM™Satellite Radio Antenna System .............3-71
Chime Level Adjustment ................................3-71
Section 3
Instrument Panel
3-2
Information Provided by:

✍NOTES
3-3
Information Provided by:

Instrument Panel Overview
Manual Transmission shown, Automatic Transmission similar
3-4
Information Provided by:

The main components of your vehicle’s instrument panel are the following:
A. Air Outlets. See Outlet Adjustment on page 3-22.
B. Turn Signal/Multifunction Lever. See Turn
Signal/Multifunction Lever on page 3-7.
C. Instrument Panel Cluster. See Instrument Panel
Cluster on page 3-24.
D. Hazard Warning Flasher Button. See Hazard
Warning Flashers on page 3-6.
E. Passenger Side Airbag. See Airbag System on
page 1-60.
F. Exterior Lamp Controls. See Exterior Lamps on
page 3-14. Fog Lamps (If Equipped). See Fog
Lamps on page 3-16. Exterior Cargo Lamps.
See Exterior Cargo Lamps on page 3-17.
G. Parking Brake Release. See Parking Brake on
page 2-32.
H. Horn. See Horn on page 3-6.
I. Traction Control Button or Four-Wheel Drive Buttons.
See Traction Control System (TCS) on page 4-5
and Four-Wheel Drive on page 2-28.
J. Audio System. See Audio System(s) on page 3-46.
K. Cigarette Lighter (If Equipped). See Ashtray(s)
and Cigarette Lighter on page 3-20.
L. Climate Control System. See Climate Control
System on page 3-20.
M. Accessory Power Outlet. See Accessory Power
Outlet(s) on page 3-19.
N. Passenger Air Bag Status Indicator. See Passenger
Airbag Status Indicator on page 3-28.
O. Glove Box. See Glove Box on page 2-50.
3-5
Information Provided by:

Hazard Warning Flashers
The hazard warning ﬂashers let you warn the police and
others that you have a problem. The front and rear
turn signal lamps will ﬂash on and off.
The hazard warning ﬂasher
button is located on the
instrument panel, between
the two air vents in the
center.
The hazard warning ﬂashers work no matter what
position the key is in, and even if the key is not in
the ignition.
Press the button to make the front and rear turn signal
lamps ﬂash on and off. Press the button again to
turn the ﬂashers off.
When the hazard warning ﬂashers are on, the turn
signals will not work.
Other Warning Devices
If you carry reﬂective triangles, you can set one up at
the side of the road about 300 feet (100 m) behind your
vehicle.
Horn
To sound the horn, press the horn symbol on the
steering wheel pad.
3-6
Information Provided by:

Tilt Wheel
A tilt wheel allows you to adjust the steering wheel
before you drive. The tilt steering wheel can be raised
to the highest level to allow more room for the driver
to enter and exit the vehicle.
The tilt lever is located on the left side of the steering
column, under the turn signal lever.
To tilt, hold the steering wheel and pull the tilt lever
toward you. Move the wheel to a comfortable level,
then release the tilt lever to lock the wheel in place.
Do not adjust the steering wheel while driving.
Turn Signal/Multifunction Lever
The lever on the left side of the steering column
includes the following:
• G Turn and Lane Change Signals. See Turn
Signal/Multifunction Lever on page 3-7.
• 53 Headlamp High/Low-Beam Changer. See
Headlamp High/Low-Beam Changer on page 3-8.
•
Flash-to-Pass. See Flash-to-Pass on page 3-9.
• N Windshield Wipers. See Windshield Wipers on
page 3-9.
• L Windshield Washer. See Windshield Washer
on page 3-10.
• J Cruise Control. See Cruise Control on
page 3-10.
3-7
Information Provided by:

Turn and Lane-Change Signals
The turn signal has two upward (for right) and two
downward (for left) positions. These positions allow
you to signal a turn or a lane change.
To signal a turn, move the lever all the way up or down.
When the turn is ﬁnished, the lever will automatically
return to the off position.
To signal a lane change, raise or lower the lever until
the arrow starts to ﬂash. Hold it there until the change is
completed. The lever will return by itself when released.
An arrow on the instrument
panel cluster will ﬂash
in the direction of the
turn or lane change.
As you signal a turn or a lane change, if the arrows
ﬂash more quickly than normal, a signal bulb may
be burned out and other drivers will not see your
vehicle’s turn signal.
If a bulb is burned out, replace it to help avoid an
accident. If the arrows do not go on at all when signaling
a turn, check for a burned-out bulb or a blown fuse.
For bulb replacement, see Taillamps, Turn Signal,
Stoplamps and Back-up Lamps on page 5-54. For a
blown fuse or circuit breaker, see Fuses and Circuit
Breakers on page 5-116
Turn Signal On Chime
If a turn signal is left on for more than 3/4 of a mile
(1.2 km), a chime will sound at each ﬂash of the turn
signal and the message TURN SIGNAL will also appear
in the DIC. To turn the chime and message off, move
the turn signal lever to the off position.
See “TURN SIGNAL” under DIC Warnings and
Messages on page 3-42 for more information.
Headlamp High/Low-Beam Changer
53(Headlamp High/Low Beam Changer): To
change the headlamps from low to high beam, push the
lever toward the instrument panel. To return to low-beam
headlamps, pull the multifunction lever toward you. Then
release it.
When the high beams are
on, this indicator light on
the instrument panel
cluster will also be on.
3-8
Information Provided by:

Flash-to-Pass
This feature lets you use the high-beam headlamps to
signal a driver in front of you that you want to pass.
It works even if the headlamps are in the automatic
position.
To use it, pull the turn signal lever toward you, then
release it.
If your headlamps are in the automatic position or on
low beam, your high-beam headlamps will turn on. They
will stay on as long as you hold the lever toward you.
The high-beam indicator on the instrument panel cluster
will come on. Release the lever to return to normal
operation.
Windshield Wipers
You control the windshield wipers by turning the band
with the wiper symbol on it.
The windshield wipers work in all ignition positions,
except off. This includes the Retained Access Power
mode. See Retained Accessory Power (RAP) on
page 2-21.
8(Mist): For a single wiping cycle, turn the band to
mist. Hold it there until the wipers start. Then let go.
The wipers will stop after one wipe. If you want
more wipes, hold the band on mist longer.
N(Delay): You can set the wiper speed for a long
or short delay between wipes. This can be very useful in
light rain or snow. Turn the band to choose the delay
time. The closer to the top of the lever, the shorter
the delay.
6 (Low Speed): For steady wiping at low speed,
turn the band away from you to the ﬁrst solid position
past the delay settings.
1 (High Speed): For high-speed wiping, turn the
band to the second solid position past the delay settings.
9(Off): To stop the wipers, move the band to off.
Be sure to clear ice and snow from the wiper blades
before using them. If they’re frozen to the windshield,
carefully loosen or thaw them. If your blades do become
worn or damaged, get new blades or blade inserts.
3-9
Information Provided by:

Windshield Washer
{CAUTION:
In freezing weather, do not use your washer
until the windshield is warmed. Otherwise the
washer ﬂuid can form ice on the windshield,
blocking your vision.
QL(Washer Fluid): There is a paddle marked
with the windshield washer symbol at the top of the
multifunction lever. To spray washer ﬂuid on the
windshield, push the paddle. The wipers will clear the
window and then either stop or return to your preset
speed.
Cruise Control
The cruise control set
button is located at the
end of the multifunction
lever.
9(Off): Move the lever to this position to turn the
system off.
R(On): Move the lever to this position to turn the
system on.
+ (Resume/Accelerate): Move the lever to this position
to make the vehicle accelerate or resume to a previously
set speed.
rT(Set): Press this button to set the speed.
3-10
Information Provided by:

With cruise control, the vehicle can maintain a speed
of about 25 mph (40 km/h) or more without keeping your
foot on the accelerator. This can really help on long
trips. Cruise control does not work at speeds below
about 25 mph (40 km/h).
Cruise control will not work if the parking brake is set,
or if the master cylinder brake ﬂuid level is low.
If the brakes are applied, the cruise control will shut off.
{CAUTION:
Cruise control can be dangerous where you
cannot drive safely at a steady speed. So, do
not use your cruise control on winding roads
or in heavy traffic.
Cruise control can be dangerous on slippery
roads. On such roads, fast changes in tire
traction can cause excessive wheel slip, and
you could lose control. Do not use cruise
control on slippery roads.
If your vehicle has the Traction Control System (TCS)
and it begins to limit wheel spin while the cruise control
is on, the cruise control will automatically disengage.
See Traction Control System (TCS) on page 4-5. When
road conditions allow you to safely use it again, you
can turn cruise control back on.
3-11
Information Provided by:

Setting Cruise Control
{CAUTION:
If you leave your cruise control on when you
are not using cruise, you might hit a button
and go into cruise when you do not want to.
You could be startled and even lose control.
Keep the cruise control switch off until you
want to use cruise control.
1. Move the cruise control lever to the on position.
2. Get up to the speed you want.
3. Press the set button at the end of the lever and
release it.
4. Take your foot off the accelerator pedal.
The cruise symbol on the
instrument panel will be lit
when the cruise control
is engaged.
Resuming a Set Speed
Suppose you set the cruise control to a desired speed
and then you apply the brake. This turns off the
cruise control. But it does not need to be reset.
Once you are going about 25 mph (40 km/h) or more,
you can move the cruise control switch brieﬂy from on to
resume/accelerate.
The vehicle will go right back up to your chosen speed
and stay there.
If you hold the lever at resume/accelerate the vehicle
will keep going faster until you release the lever or apply
the brake. Do not hold the lever at resume/accelerate
if you do not want the vehicle to go faster.
Increasing Speed While Using Cruise
Control
There are two ways to go to a higher speed:
•
Use the accelerator pedal to get to the higher speed.
Press the set button at the end of the lever, then
release the button and the accelerator pedal. You
will now cruise at the higher speed. If the accelerator
pedal is held longer than 60 seconds, cruise control
will turn off.
•
Move the cruise lever from on to resume/accelerate.
Hold it there until you get up to the speed desired,
and then release the lever. To increase your speed
in very small amounts, move the lever brieﬂy to
resume/accelerate.
3-12
Information Provided by:

Reducing Speed While Using Cruise
Control
•
Press and hold the set button until you reach the
lower speed desired, then release it.
•
To slow down in very small amounts, brieﬂy press
the set button.
Passing Another Vehicle While Using
Cruise Control
Use the accelerator pedal to increase the vehicle speed.
When you take your foot off the pedal, the vehicle will
slow down to the cruise control speed you set earlier.
Using Cruise Control on Hills
How well the cruise control will work on hills depends
upon the vehicle speed, load, and the steepness of
the hills. When going up steep hills, you might want to
step on the accelerator pedal to maintain the vehicle
speed. When going downhill, you might have to brake
or shift to a lower gear to keep the vehicle speed down.
Of course, applying the brake turns off the cruise
control. Many drivers ﬁnd this to be too much trouble
and do not use cruise control on steep hills.
Ending Cruise Control
To turn off the cruise control, do one of the following:
•
Step lightly on the brake pedal.
•
Move the cruise control lever to off.
•
Lightly tap or press the clutch, if you have a manual
transmission.
Erasing Speed Memory
When you turn off the cruise control or the ignition,
the cruise control set speed memory is erased.
3-13
Information Provided by:

Exterior Lamps
The control on the driver’s side of the instrument panel
operates the exterior lamps.
O(Exterior Lamps): Turn the knob, located to the
right of this symbol, to choose one of the four exterior
lamp positions.
O (Off): Turn the knob to this position to turn off
all exterior lamps including the Daytime Running
Lamps (DRL).
AUTO: Turn the knob to this position to automatically
turn on the headlamps at normal brightness, together
with the following:
•
Sidemarker Lamps
•
Taillamps
•
Parking Lamps
•
Instrument Panel Lights
See Automatic Headlamp System on page 3-16 for
more information.
;(Parking Lamps): Turn the knob to this position to
turn on the parking lamps, together with the following:
•
Sidemarker Lamps
•
Taillamps
•
License Plate Lamps
•
Instrument Panel Lights
2(Headlamps): Turn the knob to this position to turn
on the headlamps, together with the previously listed
lamps and lights.
Push the turn signal/multifunction lever toward the
instrument panel to switch the headlamps from low to
high beam.
3-14
Information Provided by:

Headlamps on Reminder
If a door is open, a reminder chime will sound when the
headlamps or parking lamps are manually turned on
and your key is out of the ignition. To turn off the chime,
turn the headlamp switch to off and then back on. In
the automatic mode, the headlamps turn off once
the ignition is in LOCK.
If your vehicle was ﬁrst sold in Canada and the parking
lamps are turned on manually, the Daytime Running
Lamps (DRL) will stay on.
Daytime Running Lamps (DRL)
Daytime Running Lamps (DRL) can make it easier
for others to see the front of your vehicle during the day.
DRL can be helpful in many different driving conditions,
but they can be especially helpful in the short periods
after dawn and before sunset. Fully functional daytime
running lamps are required on all vehicles ﬁrst sold
in Canada.
The DRL system will come on when the following
conditions are met:
•
The ignition is on.
•
The exterior lamps control is in AUTO.
•
The transmission is not in PARK (P) if you have an
automatic transmission.
•
The light sensor determines it is daytime.
Your vehicle will have either the parking lamps or
reduced intensity low beams used as the DRL.
When the DRL are on, only those lamps will be on.
The taillamps, sidemarkers, and other lamps will not
be on. The instrument panel will not be lit up either.
When it begins to get dark, the headlamps will
automatically switch from DRL to the regular headlamps.
As with any vehicle, you should turn on the regular
headlamp system when you need it.
3-15
Information Provided by:

Automatic Headlamp System
When it is dark enough outside, the automatic headlamp
system will turn on after the transmission has been
shifted from PARK (P) to DRIVE (D). The headlamps,
taillamps, sidemarker, parking lamps, roof marker lamps,
and the instrument panel lights will turn on at normal
brightness. The radio lights will become more dim when
the headlights are off compared to when the headlights
are on.
Your vehicle has a light sensor located on the top of
the instrument panel. Be sure it is not covered, or
the system will be on whenever the ignition is on.
The system may also turn on the headlamps when
driving through a parking garage, heavy overcast
weather, or a tunnel. This is normal.
There is a delay in the transition between the daytime and
nighttime operation of the Daytime Running Lamps (DRL)
and the automatic headlamp system so that driving under
bridges or bright overhead street lights does not affect the
system. The DRL and automatic headlamp system will
only be affected when the light sensor detects a change
in lighting lasting longer than the delay.
If you start your vehicle in a dark garage, the automatic
headlamp system will come on immediately. Once you
leave the garage, it will take about one minute for the
automatic headlamp system to change to DRL if it is light
outside. During that delay, the instrument panel cluster
may not be as bright as usual. Make sure the instrument
panel brightness control is in the full bright position.
See Instrument Panel Brightness on page 3-17.
Fog Lamps
If your vehicle has fog lamps, you can use them for
better vision in foggy or misty conditions. Your parking
lamps and/or low-beam headlamps must be on for
your fog lamps to work.
The fog lamp button is
located near the exterior
lamps control.
Press the button to turn the fog lamps on while the
headlamps or parking lamps are on. Press the button
again to turn them off. An indicator light will glow in the
button when the fog lamps are on.
Remember, fog lamps alone will not give off as much
light as your headlamps. Never use your fog lamps
in the dark without turning on the headlamps.
3-16
Information Provided by:

The fog lamps will go off whenever your high-beam
headlamps come on. When the high beams go off,
the fog lamps will come on again.
Some localities have laws that require the headlamps to
be on along with the fog lamps.
Exterior Cargo Lamps
The cargo lamps can be used if more light is needed
in the cargo area of the vehicle or in the top-box
storage units.
Press this button, located
on the driver side of the
instrument panel near
the exterior lamp control,
to turn the cargo lamps
on and off.
The dome lamps must be on for the cargo lamps to
come on. See Dome Lamp on page 3-17.
Interior Lamps
The thumbwheel for the interior lamps is located next
to the exterior lamps control. See Exterior Lamps
on page 3-14 for additional information on location.
Instrument Panel Brightness
D(Instrument Panel Lights): Turn the thumbwheel
up or down to brighten or dim the instrument panel lights
and the radio display. The instrument panel lights, cluster,
and radio display do not dim to complete darkness. The
instrument panel light brightness control will only work if
the headlamps or parking lamps are on. See Exterior
Lamps on page 3-14.
Dome Lamp
The dome and footwell lamps come on when any door
is opened. The dome lamps are located in the cargo
and front area of the vehicle.
The dome and footwell lamps can be turned on by
turning the thumbwheel, located next to the exterior
lamps control, all the way up. In this position, the
lamps remain on whether a door is opened or closed.
3-17
Information Provided by:

Dome Lamp Override
E(Dome Lamp Override): You can use the dome
override button, located below the exterior lamps control,
to set the dome and footwell lamps to come on
automatically when a door is opened, or to remain off.
To turn the lamps off, press the button into the in position.
With the button in this position, the dome lamps will
remain off when the doors are open. To return the lamps
to automatic operation, press the button again and return
it to the out position. With the button in this position, the
dome lamps will come on when you open a door.
Exit Lighting
With exit lighting, the interior lamps will come on when
you remove the key from the ignition. The lamps will not
come on if the dome override button is pressed in.
Electric Power Management
The vehicle has Electric Power Management (EPM) that
estimates the battery’s temperature and state of charge.
It then adjusts the voltage for best performance and
extended life of the battery.
When the battery’s state of charge is low, the voltage is
raised slightly to quickly put the charge back in. When
the state of charge is high, the voltage is lowered slightly
to prevent overcharging. If the vehicle has a voltmeter
gage, you may see the voltage move up or down. This is
normal. If there is a problem, an alert will be displayed.
The battery can be discharged at idle if the electrical
loads are very high. This is true for all vehicles.
This is because the generator (alternator) may not
be spinning fast enough at idle to produce all the
power that is needed for very high electrical loads.
A high electrical load occurs when several of the following
loads are on: headlamps, high beams, fog lamps, rear
window defogger, climate control fan at high speed,
heated seats, engine cooling fans, trailer loads, and
loads plugged into accessory power outlets.
3-18
Information Provided by:

Battery Run-Down Protection
This feature shuts off the dome lamp if it is left on for
more than 20 minutes when the ignition is in LOCK.
This will help prevent your battery from running down.
Accessory Power Outlet(s)
The accessory power outlets can be used to connect
electrical equipment such as a cellular phone or
CB radio.
Your vehicle may have two accessory power outlets
located on the lower part of the instrument panel below
the climate control system and there may be one located
on the rear of the center console. A small cap must be
pulled down to access an accessory power outlet.
When not using an outlet be sure to cover it with the
protective cap.
Notice:
Leaving electrical equipment on for
extended periods will drain the battery. Always
unplug electrical equipment when not in use and
do not plug in equipment that exceeds the
maximum amperage rating of 20 amperes.
Certain electrical accessories may not be compatible
with the accessory power outlet and could result
in blown vehicle or adapter fuses. If you experience
a problem, see your dealer/retailer for additional
information on accessory power outlets.
Notice:
Adding any electrical equipment to your
vehicle may damage it or keep other components
from working as they should. The repairs would not
be covered by your warranty. Do not use equipment
exceeding maximum amperage rating of 20 amperes.
Check with your dealer/retailer before adding
electrical equipment.
When adding electrical equipment, be sure to follow
the proper installation instructions included with
the equipment.
Notice:
Improper use of the power outlet can cause
damage not covered by your warranty. Do not hang
any type of accessory or accessory bracket from the
plug because the power outlets are designed for
accessory power plugs only.
3-19
Information Provided by:

Ashtray(s) and Cigarette Lighter
Your vehicle may have a removable ashtray and
cigarette lighter.
The ashtray is located in the center console area.
The ashtray can be removed for cleaning. When the
ashtray is removed, this area can also be used as
a cupholder.
Notice:
If you put papers, pins, or other ﬂammable
items in the ashtray, hot cigarettes or other smoking
materials could ignite them and possibly damage
your vehicle. Never put ﬂammable items in the
ashtray.
To use the lighter, press it in all the way, and let go.
When it is ready, it will pop back out by itself.
Notice:
Holding a cigarette lighter in while it is
heating does not let the lighter back away from
the heating element when it is hot. Damage from
overheating can occur to the lighter or heating
element, or a fuse could be blown. Do not hold
a cigarette lighter in while it is heating.
Climate Controls
Climate Control System
The heating, cooling, and ventilation for your vehicle
can be controlled with this system.
Temperature Knob
The left knob on the control panel is used to adjust the
temperature of the air in the vehicle. Turn the knob
clockwise or counterclockwise to increase or decrease
the temperature.
3-20
Information Provided by:

Fan Knob
9(Fan): The center knob on the control panel is used
to control the fan speed. Turn the knob clockwise or
counterclockwise to increase or decrease the fan speed.
If the knob is set on “0” (zero), some outside air will
still enter the vehicle and will be directed according to
the position of the mode knob.
Mode Knob
The right knob on the control panel is used to direct the
airﬂow inside the vehicle. Turn the knob to select one
of the following modes:
H(Vent): Select this mode to direct air to the
instrument panel outlets.
\(Bi-Level): Select this mode to direct approximately
half of the air to the instrument panel outlets, and the
remaining air to the ﬂoor outlets and the defroster
and side window outlets. Cooler air is directed to the
upper outlets and warmer air to the ﬂoor outlets.
[(Floor): Select this mode to direct air to the ﬂoor
outlets. Recirculation is disabled in this mode because
interior window could fog under some conditions. If
this occurs, see “Defogging and Defrosting” following.
Mode Buttons
@(Recirculation): Press this button to turn the
recirculation mode on or off. An indicator light on the
button comes on to show that the recirculation mode is
activated. This mode recirculates air inside the cabin,
and prevents outside air from coming in the vehicle.
It can be used to cool the air inside the vehicle
more quickly.
Recirculation is only available and should only be used in
the bi-level and vent modes. Recirculation is not available
while in heat, ﬂoor, ﬂoor/defog, or defrost modes. If your
try to select recirculation while in one of those modes,
the indicator light will not come on or ﬂash.
#(Air Conditioning): Press this button to turn the air
conditioning system on or off. An indicator light on the
button comes on to show that the air conditioning is
activated. When the system is on, this setting cools
and dehumidiﬁes the air entering the vehicle.
The air conditioning will not function if the fan is
turned off.
You may notice a slight change in engine performance
when the air conditioning compressor shuts off and
turns on again. This is normal. The system is designed
to make adjustments to help with fuel economy while
still maintaining the selected temperature.
3-21
Information Provided by:

The air conditioning system removes moisture from the
air, so a small amount of water might drip underneath
the vehicle while idling or after turning off the engine.
This is normal.
Defogging and Defrosting
Fog on the inside of windows is a result of high humidity
(moisture) condensing on the cool window glass. This
can be minimized if the climate control system is used
properly. There are two modes to clear fog or frost from
the windshield and side windows. Use the defog mode
to clear the windows of fog or moisture and warm the
passengers. Use the defrost mode to remove fog or frost
from the windshield more quickly. For best results, clear
all snow and ice from the windshield before defrosting.
Turn the mode knob on the climate control panel
clockwise to select the defog or defrost modes.
/(Floor/Defog): This mode directs the air to
the windshield, the side window outlets, and to the
ﬂoor outlets. When this mode is selected, the system
runs the air conditioning compressor unless the outside
temperature is near freezing or below. Recirculation
is not available in this mode.
0(Defrost): This mode directs most of the air to
the windshield, and the side window outlets. When this
mode is selected, the system runs the air conditioning
compressor unless the outside temperature is near,
or below freezing. Recirculation is not available in
this mode.
Do not drive the vehicle until all the windows are clear.
Outlet Adjustment
Use the thumbwheel on the outlets to change the
direction of the air ﬂow.
Lift up or push down on the thumbwheel located in
the center of the outlet to direct the air up or down,
or slide the thumbwheel to the left or right to direct
the airﬂow from side-to-side.
Operation Tips
•
Clear away any ice, snow or leaves from the air
inlets at the base of the windshield that may
block the ﬂow of air into your vehicle.
•
Use of non-GM approved hood deﬂectors may
adversely affect the performance of the system.
•
Keep the path under the front seats clear of objects
to help circulate the air inside of your vehicle more
effectively.
3-22
Information Provided by:

Warning Lights, Gages, and
Indicators
This part describes the warning lights and gages that
may be on your vehicle. The pictures will help you
locate them.
Warning lights and gages can signal that something
is wrong before it becomes serious enough to cause an
expensive repair or replacement. Paying attention to
your warning lights and gages could also save you
or others from injury.
Warning lights come on when there may be or is a
problem with one of your vehicle’s functions. As you will
see in the details on the next few pages, some warning
lights come on brieﬂy when you start the engine just to let
you know they are working. If you are familiar with this
section, you should not be alarmed when this happens.
Gages can indicate when there may be or is a problem
with one of your vehicle’s functions. Often gages
and warning lights work together to let you know
when there is a problem with your vehicle.
When one of the warning lights comes on and stays on
when you are driving, or when one of the gages shows
there may be a problem, check the section that tells you
what to do about it. Please follow this manual’s advice.
Waiting to do repairs can be costly — and even
dangerous. So please get to know your warning
lights and gages. They are a big help.
Your vehicle has a DIC that works along with the
warning lights and gages. See Driver Information
Center (DIC) on page 3-38 for more information.
3-23
Information Provided by:

Instrument Panel Cluster
The instrument panel cluster is designed to let you know at a glance how your vehicle is running. You will know how
fast you are going, about how much fuel you have used, and many other things you will need to know to drive
safely and economically.
United States automatic transmission 2.9L version shown,
Canada, manual transmission, 3.7L and 5.3L similar
3-24
Information Provided by:

Speedometer and Odometer
The speedometer lets you see your speed in both miles
per hour (mph) and kilometers per hour (km/h).
The odometer shows how far your vehicle has been
driven, in either miles (used in the United States)
or kilometers (used in Canada).
The odometer mileage can be checked without the
vehicle running by pressing the trip information stem.
See “Odometer” under DIC Operation and Displays
on page 3-38 for more information.
If the cluster is replaced the new one will automatically
detect and update the vehicle’s accumulated mileage.
Trip Odometer
Your vehicle has a trip odometer that can tell you how
far your vehicle has been driven since you last set
the trip odometer to zero.
See “Trip Odometer” under DIC Operation and Displays
on page 3-38 for more information.
Tachometer
The tachometer displays the engine speed in revolutions
per minute (rpm).
Notice:
If you operate the engine with the
tachometer in the shaded warning area, your vehicle
could be damaged, and the damages would not be
covered by your warranty. Do not operate the engine
with the tachometer in the shaded warning area.
3-25
Information Provided by:

Safety Belt Reminders
Safety Belt Reminder Light
When the engine is started, a chime will come on for
several seconds to remind people to fasten their safety
belts, unless the driver’s safety belt is already buckled.
The safety belt light will
also come on and stay on
for several seconds, then it
will ﬂash for several more.
This chime and light is repeated if the driver remains
unbuckled and the vehicle is in motion. If the driver’s belt
is already buckled, neither the chime nor the light will
come on.
Passenger Safety Belt Reminder Light
Several seconds after the engine is started, a chime will
sound for several seconds to remind the front passenger
to buckle their safety belt. This would only occur if the
passenger airbag is enabled. See Passenger Sensing
System on page 1-69 for more information. The
passenger safety belt light, located on the instrument
panel, will come on and stay on for several seconds
and then ﬂash for several more.
This chime and light are
repeated if the passenger
remains unbuckled and
the vehicle is in motion.
If the passenger’s safety belt is buckled, neither the
chime nor the light will come on.
3-26
Information Provided by:

Airbag Readiness Light
There is an airbag readiness light on the instrument
panel cluster, which shows the airbag symbol.
The system checks the airbag’s electrical system
for malfunctions. The light tells you if there is an
electrical problem. The system check includes the
airbag sensor, the pretensioners, the airbag modules,
the wiring and the crash sensing and diagnostic module.
For more information on the airbag system, see Airbag
System on page 1-60.
This light will come
on when you start your
vehicle, and it will ﬂash for
a few seconds. The light
should go out and the
system is ready.
If the airbag readiness light stays on after you start the
vehicle or comes on when you are driving, your airbag
system may not work properly. Have your vehicle
serviced right away.
{CAUTION:
If the airbag readiness light stays on after you
start your vehicle, it means the airbag system
may not be working properly. The airbags in
your vehicle may not inﬂate in a crash, or they
could even inﬂate without a crash. To help avoid
injury to yourself or others, have your vehicle
serviced right away if the airbag readiness light
stays on after you start your vehicle.
The airbag readiness light should ﬂash for a few seconds
when you start the engine. If the light does not come on
then, have it ﬁxed immediately. If there is a problem
with the airbag system, an airbag Driver Information
Center (DIC) message may also come on. See DIC
Warnings and Messages on page 3-42 for more
information.
3-27
Information Provided by:

Passenger Airbag Status Indicator
Your vehicle has the passenger sensing system.
Your instrument panel has a passenger airbag status
indicator.
When you start the vehicle, the passenger airbag status
indicator will light ON and OFF, or the symbol for on and
off, for several seconds as a system check. Then, after
several more seconds, the status indicator will light either
ON or OFF, or either the on or off symbol to let you know
the status of the right front passenger’s frontal airbag.
If the word ON or the on symbol is lit on the passenger
airbag status indicator, it means that the right front
passenger’s frontal airbag is enabled (may inﬂate).
{CAUTION:
If the on indicator comes on when you have a
rear-facing child restraint installed in the right
front passenger’s seat, it means that the
passenger sensing system has not turned off
the passenger’s frontal airbag. A child in a
rear-facing child restraint can be seriously
injured or killed if the right front passenger’s
airbag inﬂates. This is because the back of the
rear-facing child restraint would be very close
to the inﬂating airbag. Do not use a rear-facing
child restraint in the right front passenger’s seat
if the airbag is turned on.
United States
Canada
3-28
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Even though the passenger sensing system is
designed to turn off the right front passenger’s
frontal airbag if the system detects a rear-facing
child restraint, no system is fail-safe, and no
one can guarantee that an airbag will not deploy
under some unusual circumstance, even
though it is turned off. We recommend that
rear-facing child restraints be secured in the
rear seat, even if the airbag is off.
If the word OFF or the off symbol is lit on the airbag
status indicator, it means that the passenger sensing
system has turned off the right front passenger’s frontal
airbag. See Passenger Sensing System on page 1-69
for more on this, including important safety information.
If, after several seconds, both status indicator lights
remain on, or if there are no lights at all, there may
be a problem with the lights or the passenger sensing
system. See your dealer/retailer for service.
{CAUTION:
If the airbag readiness light in the instrument
panel cluster ever comes on and stays on,
it means that something may be wrong with
the airbag system. If this ever happens, have
the vehicle serviced promptly, because an
adult-size person sitting in the right front
passenger’s seat may not have the protection
of the airbag(s). See Airbag Readiness Light
on page 3-27 for more on this, including
important safety information.
3-29
Information Provided by:

Charging System Light
This light will come on
brieﬂy when you turn on
the ignition, but the engine
is not running, as a
check to show you it
is working.
It should go out once the engine is running. If it stays on,
or comes on while you are driving, you may have a
problem with the charging system. A charging system
Driver Information Center (DIC) message may also
appear. See DIC Warnings and Messages on page 3-42
for more information. This light could indicate that you
have problems with a generator drive belt, or another
electrical problem. Have it checked right away. If you
must drive a short distance with the light on, be certain
to turn off all your accessories, such as the radio and air
conditioner.
Up-Shift Light
Your vehicle may have an
up-shift light.
When this light comes on, you should shift to the next
higher gear if weather, road, and traffic conditions allow
you to.
See Manual Transmission Operation on page 2-26 for
more information.
3-30
Information Provided by:

Brake System Warning Light
Your vehicle’s hydraulic brake system is divided into
two parts. If one part is not working, the other part can
still work and stop you. For good braking, though,
you need both parts working well.
If the warning light comes on, there could be a brake
problem. Have your brake system inspected right away.
This light should come on brieﬂy when you turn the
ignition key to ON. If it does not come on then, have it
ﬁxed so it will be ready to warn you if there is a problem.
When the ignition is on, the brake system warning light
will also come on when you set your parking brake.
See Parking Brake on page 2-32 for more information.
The light will stay on if your parking brake does not
release fully. If it stays on after your parking brake is
fully released, it means you have a brake problem.
If the light comes on while you are driving, pull off the
road and stop carefully. You may notice that the pedal
is harder to push, or the pedal may go closer to the
ﬂoor. It may take longer to stop. If the light is still
on, have the vehicle towed for service. See Towing
Your Vehicle on page 4-41.
{CAUTION:
Your brake system may not be working properly
if the brake system warning light is on. Driving
with the brake system warning light on can lead
to an accident. If the light is still on after you
have pulled off the road and stopped carefully,
have the vehicle towed for service.
United States
Canada
3-31
Information Provided by:

Antilock Brake System
Warning Light
For vehicles with
the Antilock Brake
System (ABS), this
light will come on brieﬂy
when you start the engine.
That is normal. If the light does not come on then, have it
ﬁxed so it will be ready to warn you if there is a problem.
If the ABS light stays on, turn the ignition off, if the light
comes on when you are driving, stop as soon as it is
safely possible and turn the ignition off. Then start the
engine again to reset the system. If the ABS light still
stays on, or comes on again while you are driving, your
vehicle needs service. If the regular brake system
warning light is not on, you still have brakes, but you do
not have antilock brakes. If the regular brake system
warning light is also on, you do not have antilock brakes
and there is a problem with your regular brakes.
See Brake System Warning Light on page 3-31
For vehicles with a Driver Information Center (DIC),
see DIC Warnings and Messages on page 3-42
for all brake related DIC messages.
Traction Control System (TCS)
Warning Light
If your vehicle has
the Traction Control
System (TCS), this light
may come on for the
following reasons:
•
If you turn the system off by pressing the TC
(traction control) button, the light will come on and
stay on. To turn the system back on, press the
button again and the warning light should go out.
•
If there is a brake system problem that is speciﬁcally
related to traction control, the TCS will turn off and
the warning light will come on.
If the TCS warning light comes on and stays on for an
extended period of time when the system is turned
on, your vehicle needs service. See Traction Control
System (TCS) on page 4-5 for more information.
3-32
Information Provided by:

Engine Coolant Temperature Gage
This gage shows the
engine coolant
temperature.
If the gage pointer is near the top of the gage, the
engine is too hot. It means that your engine coolant
has overheated. If you have been operating your vehicle
under normal driving conditions, you should pull off the
road, stop your vehicle and turn off the engine as soon
as possible.
See Engine Overheating on page 5-30 for more
information.
Tire Pressure Light
This light comes on brieﬂy
when the engine is started.
This light will also come on when one or more of your
tires are signiﬁcantly underinﬂated.
A tire pressure message in the Driver Information
Center (DIC), may accompany the light. See DIC
Warnings and Messages on page 3-42 for more
information.
Stop and check your tires as soon as it is safe to
do so. If underinﬂated, inﬂate to the proper pressure.
See Tires on page 5-59 for more information.
If a problem is detected with the Tire Pressure Monitor
System, this light will ﬂash for approximately 60 seconds
and then stay on solid for the remainder of the ignition
cycle. See Tire Pressure Monitor System on page 5-69
for more information.
3-33
Information Provided by:

Malfunction Indicator Lamp
Check Engine Light
A computer system called OBD II (On-Board
Diagnostics-Second Generation) monitors operation of
the fuel, ignition, and emission control systems. It makes
sure that emissions are at acceptable levels for the life of
the vehicle, helping to produce a cleaner environment.
The check engine light
comes on to indicate that
there is an OBD II problem
and service is required.
Malfunctions often are indicated by the system before
any problem is apparent. This can prevent more serious
damage to your vehicle. This system is also designed
to assist your service technician in correctly diagnosing
any malfunction.
Notice:
If you keep driving your vehicle with
this light on, after a while, the emission controls
might not work as well, your vehicle’s fuel economy
might not be as good, and the engine might not
run as smoothly. This could lead to costly repairs
that might not be covered by your warranty.
Notice:
Modiﬁcations made to the engine,
transmission, exhaust, intake, or fuel system of
your vehicle or the replacement of the original tires
with other than those of the same Tire Performance
Criteria (TPC) can affect your vehicle’s emission
controls and can cause this light to come on.
Modiﬁcations to these systems could lead to costly
repairs not covered by your warranty. This could
also result in a failure to pass a required Emission
Inspection/Maintenance test. See Accessories
and Modiﬁcations on page 5-3.
This light comes on, as a check to show it is working,
when the ignition is turned ON/RUN but the engine is not
running. If the light does not come on, have it repaired.
This light also comes on during a malfunction in
one of two ways:
•
Light Flashing — A misﬁre condition has been
detected. A misﬁre increases vehicle emissions
and could damage the emission control system
on your vehicle. Diagnosis and service might
be required.
•
Light On Steady — An emission control system
malfunction has been detected on your vehicle.
Diagnosis and service might be required.
3-34
Information Provided by:

If the Light is Flashing
The following can prevent more serious damage to your
vehicle:
•
Reduce vehicle speed.
•
Avoid hard accelerations.
•
Avoid steep uphill grades.
•
If you are towing a trailer, reduce the amount of
cargo being hauled as soon as it is possible.
If the light stops ﬂashing and remains on steady,
see “If the Light Is On Steady” following.
If the light continues to ﬂash, when it is safe to do so,
stop the vehicle. Find a safe place to park the vehicle.
Turn the ignition off, wait at least 10 seconds, and restart
the engine. If the light remains on steady, see “If the
Light Is On Steady” following. If the light is still ﬂashing,
follow the previous steps and see your dealer/retailer
for service as soon as possible.
If the Light Is On Steady
You might be able to correct the emission system
malfunction by considering the following:
Did you recently put fuel into your vehicle?
If so, reinstall the fuel cap, making sure to fully install the
cap. See Filling the Tank on page 5-8. The diagnostic
system can determine if the fuel cap has been left off or
improperly installed. A loose or missing fuel cap allows
fuel to evaporate into the atmosphere. A few driving trips
with the cap properly installed should turn the light off.
Did you just drive through a deep puddle of water?
If so, your vehicle’s electrical system might be wet.
The condition is usually corrected when the electrical
system dries out. A few driving trips should turn the
light off.
Have you recently changed brands of fuel?
If so, be sure to fuel your vehicle with quality fuel. See
Gasoline Octane on page 5-5. Poor fuel quality causes
the engine not to run as efficiently as designed. You
might notice this as stalling after start-up, stalling when
you put the vehicle into gear, misﬁring, hesitation on
acceleration, or stumbling on acceleration — these
conditions might go away once the engine is warmed up.
This will be detected by the system and cause the light to
turn on.
If you experience one or more of these conditions,
change the fuel brand you use. It will require at least
one full tank of the proper fuel to turn the light off.
If none of the above steps have made the light turn off,
your dealer/retailer can check the vehicle. Your dealer/
retailer has the proper test equipment and diagnostic
tools to ﬁx any mechanical or electrical problems that
might have developed.
3-35
Information Provided by:

Emissions Inspection and Maintenance
Programs
Some state/provincial and local governments have or
might begin programs to inspect the emission control
equipment on your vehicle. Failure to pass this
inspection could prevent you from getting a vehicle
registration.
Here are some things you need to know to help your
vehicle pass an inspection:
Your vehicle will not pass this inspection if the check
engine light is on or not working properly.
Your vehicle will not pass this inspection if the OBD
(on-board diagnostic) system determines that critical
emission control systems have not been completely
diagnosed by the system. The vehicle would be
considered not ready for inspection. This can happen if
you have recently replaced the battery or if the battery
has run down. The diagnostic system is designed to
evaluate critical emission control systems during normal
driving. This can take several days of routine driving.
If you have done this and your vehicle still does not pass
the inspection for lack of OBD system readiness, your
dealer/retailer can prepare the vehicle for inspection.
Oil Pressure Light
{CAUTION:
Do not keep driving if the oil pressure is low.
If you do, your engine can become so hot that
it catches ﬁre. You or others could be burned.
Check your oil as soon as possible and have
your vehicle serviced.
Notice:
Lack of proper engine oil maintenance may
damage the engine. The repairs would not be covered
by your warranty. Always follow the maintenance
schedule in this manual for changing engine oil.
This light will come on
brieﬂy when you start
your engine. If it does
not, have your vehicle
serviced.
When the light comes on and stays on, it means that oil is
not ﬂowing through your engine properly. You could be
low on oil and you might have some other system
problem.
3-36
Information Provided by:

Security Light
For information regarding
this light and the vehicle’s
security system, see
Content Theft-Deterrent
on page 2-15.
Cruise Control Light
This light comes on
whenever you set
the cruise control.
The light goes out when the cruise control is turned off.
See Cruise Control on page 3-10 for more information.
Highbeam On Light
This light comes on when
the high-beam headlamps
are in use.
See Headlamp High/Low-Beam Changer on page 3-8
for more information.
Fuel Gage
When the ignition is on,
the fuel gage tells you
about how much fuel you
have remaining in the
fuel tank.
3-37
Information Provided by:

Here are four things that some owners ask about.
None of these indicate a problem with your fuel gage:
•
At the gas station, the gas pump shuts off before
the gage reads full.
•
It takes a little more or less fuel to ﬁll up than the
gage indicated. For example, the gage may have
indicated the tank was half full, but it actually took a
little more or less than half the tank’s capacity to
ﬁll the tank.
•
The gage moves a little when you turn a corner or
speed up.
•
The gage does not go back to empty when you turn
off the ignition.
When the fuel in the fuel tank is low, you will see
a LOW FUEL message on the Driver Information
Center (DIC) display. See DIC Warnings and
Messages on page 3-42 for more information.
Driver Information Center (DIC)
The Driver Information Center (DIC) displays information
such as the trip odometer, personalization features,
and warning messages. The DIC display is located
on the instrument panel cluster.
DIC Operation and Displays
The Driver Information Center (DIC) comes on when the
ignition is on.
If a problem is detected, a warning message appears
on the display. Pressing and releasing the trip odometer
reset stem on the DIC acknowledges some current
warnings or service messages. Some messages only
clear after the required action has been taken.
The DIC has different modes which can be accessed by
pressing the trip odometer reset stem on the DIC. These
modes are explained in the following section. The DIC trip
odometer reset stem is located on the instrument panel
cluster next to the DIC display. To scroll through the
available functions, press and release the reset stem.
3-38
Information Provided by:

Trip Information
Odometer
The odometer is automatically displayed on the DIC
when you start the vehicle. The odometer shows
the total distance the vehicle has been driven in either
miles for the United States or kilometers for Canada.
Trip Odometer
Press and release the reset stem until TRIP appears on
the DIC display. The trip odometer shows the current
distance traveled since the last reset of the trip odometer
in either miles for the United States or kilometers for
Canada.
To reset the trip odometer, press and hold the reset
stem until the display returns to zero.
Engine Oil Life System
With the engine off, turn the key to ON/RUN and
then press the reset stem until OIL LIFE RESET
appears — alternating between OIL LIFE and
RESET — on the DIC display. The CHANGE OIL
message alerts you to change the oil on a schedule
consistent with your driving conditions. Always reset
the OIL LIFE message after an oil change. To reset the
message, see Engine Oil Life System on page 5-18.
In addition to the engine oil life system monitoring the
oil life, additional maintenance is recommended in the
Maintenance Schedule in this manual. See Engine Oil on
page 5-15 and Scheduled Maintenance on page 6-4 for
more information.
Language
This feature allows you to choose the language in which
the DIC display shows information.
To set your choice for this feature:
1. With the engine off, turn the key to ON/RUN, but do
not start the engine.
2. Close all doors so the DOORS message does not
display in the DIC.
3. Momentarily press and release the reset stem until
the current language is displayed: English (default),
Spanish, or French.
4. To select a different language, press and hold the
reset stem until the next language appears.
5. Repeat Step 4 until the desired language is
displayed. Once the desired language is shown
on the DIC display, the language is set.
6. To exit the language selection, momentarily press
and release the reset stem. All DIC messages will
now display in the language selected.
3-39
Information Provided by:

Automatic Door Locks
This feature allows you to program the door locks to a
preferred setting.
To set your choice for this feature:
1. With the engine off, turn the key to LOCK/OFF.
Do not remove the key from the ignition.
2. Press and hold the power door lock button until the
DIC display shows the current door lock mode.
3. To view the next available mode, press and hold
the reset stem until the mode appears. Release
the reset stem and press and hold again to view
the next mode.
4. Once the desired mode is shown on the DIC
display, brieﬂy press the reset stem to set your
choice. The DIC display then clears.
The following are the available modes:
Lock 1 (default): On vehicles with an automatic
transmission, this mode locks all of the doors when the
vehicle is shifted out of PARK (P) and unlocks all of
the doors when the vehicle is shifted into PARK (P).
On vehicles with a manual transmission, this mode
locks all of the doors when the vehicle speed is greater
than 15 mph (24 km/h) and unlocks all of the doors when
the key is removed from the ignition.
Lock 2: On vehicles with an automatic transmission,
this mode locks all of the doors when the vehicle
is shifted out of PARK (P) and unlocks the driver’s
door when the vehicle is shifted into PARK (P).
On vehicles with a manual transmission, this mode
locks all of the doors when the vehicle speed is greater
than 15 mph (24 km/h) and unlocks the driver’s door
when the key is removed from the ignition.
Lock 3: On vehicles with an automatic transmission,
this mode locks all of the doors when the vehicle
is shifted out of PARK (P). The doors will not
automatically unlock.
On vehicles with a manual transmission, this mode
locks all of the doors when the vehicle speed is greater
than 15 mph (24 km/h). The doors will not automatically
unlock.
3-40
Information Provided by:

Remote Keyless Entry (RKE) Feedback
This feature allows you to program the Remote
Keyless Entry (RKE) feedback to a preferred setting.
To set your choice for this feature:
1. With the engine off, turn the key to LOCK/OFF.
Do not remove the key from the ignition.
2. Press and hold the lock and unlock buttons on
the RKE transmitter at the same time. Hold both
buttons until the DIC display shows the current RKE
feedback mode.
3. To view the next available mode, press and hold
the reset stem until the mode appears. Release
the reset stem and press and hold again to view
the next mode.
4. Once the desired mode is shown on the DIC
display, brieﬂy press the reset stem to set your
choice. The DIC display then clears.
The following are the available modes:
RFA 1 (default): This mode ﬂashes the parking lamps
when you press the lock or unlock buttons on the
RKE transmitter.
RFA 2: This mode ﬂashes the parking lamps and
sounds the horn when you press the lock button on the
RKE transmitter. This mode also ﬂashes the parking
lamps when you press the unlock button on the
RKE transmitter.
RFA 3: This mode ﬂashes the parking lamps and
sounds the horn when you press the lock or unlock
buttons on the RKE transmitter.
RFA 4: This mode disables RKE feedback. There will
be no feedback when you press the lock or unlock
buttons on the RKE transmitter.
3-41
Information Provided by:

DIC Warnings and Messages
Messages are displayed on the DIC to notify the driver
that the status of the vehicle has changed and that
some action may be needed by the driver to correct
the condition. Multiple messages may appear one
after another. The messages are displayed for
several seconds each.
Some messages may not require immediate action, but
you should press and release the trip odometer reset
stem to acknowledge that you received the messages
and to clear them from the display. Each message must
be acknowledged individually.
Some messages cannot be cleared from the DIC
display because they are more urgent. These messages
require action before they can be cleared. You should
take any messages that appear on the display seriously
and remember that clearing the messages only makes
the messages disappear, not correct the problem.
The following are the possible messages that can be
displayed and some information about them.
AC (Air Conditioning) OFF
This message displays when the engine coolant
temperature is too high and the air conditioning in your
vehicle needs to be turned off. See Engine Overheating
on page 5-30 and Climate Control System on page 3-20
for more information. This message displays along with
the ENG HOT message.
ABS (Antilock Brake System) FAULT
This message displays if there is a problem with the
Antilock Brake System (ABS). Check the ABS as soon as
possible and have your vehicle serviced by your dealer/
retailer. See Brakes on page 5-39 and Antilock Brake
System Warning Light on page 3-32 for more information.
Press and release the reset stem to acknowledge the
message and clear it from the display.
BRAKES
This message displays if there is a problem with the
brakes. Check the brakes as soon as possible and
have your vehicle serviced by your dealer/retailer.
See Brakes on page 5-39 and Brake System Warning
Light on page 3-31 for more information. Press and
release the reset stem to acknowledge the message
and clear it from the display.
3-42
Information Provided by:

CHANGE OIL
This message displays when the oil needs to be
changed. Check the oil in your vehicle as soon as
possible and have your vehicle serviced by your dealer/
retailer. See Engine Oil on page 5-15 and Scheduled
Maintenance on page 6-4 for more information. Press
and release the reset stem to acknowledge the message
and clear it from the display.
DOORS
This message displays when one or more of the doors
is ajar. Check all the doors on your vehicle to make
sure they are closed. The message clears from
the display after all of the doors are closed.
ENG (Engine) HOT
This message displays when the engine coolant
temperature is hot. Check the engine coolant
temperature gage. See Engine Coolant Temperature
Gage on page 3-33. Have your vehicle serviced by
your dealer/retailer as soon as possible if you suspect
the engine is overheating. See Engine Overheating
on page 5-30 for more information.
FLUID
This message displays if the brake ﬂuid is low. Check
the brake ﬂuid as soon as possible and have your
vehicle serviced by your dealer/retailer. See Brakes on
page 5-39 for more information. Press and release the
reset stem to acknowledge the message and clear it
from the display.
FUEL CAP
This message displays if the vehicle’s fuel cap is either off
or loose. Pull over as soon as possible and check to see
if the fuel cap is secure. You may also see the check
engine light on the instrument panel cluster. If the check
engine light does come on when the fuel cap was loose,
it may take a few driving trips before the light turns off.
See Malfunction Indicator Lamp on page 3-34 for more
information if the light still remains on. Press and release
the reset stem to acknowledge the message and clear it
from the display.
LOW FUEL
This message displays if the level of fuel in the vehicle
is low. Also check the fuel gage. See Fuel Gage on
page 3-37 for more information. Reﬁll the fuel tank
as soon as possible.
3-43
Information Provided by:

LOW TIRE
This message displays if a low tire pressure is detected
in any of the vehicle’s tires. Press and release the reset
stem to acknowledge the message and clear it from the
display. The message appears at each ignition cycle until
the tires are inﬂated to the correct inﬂation pressure.
See Tires on page 5-59 and Inﬂation - Tire Pressure on
page 5-66 for more information on tires and the correct
inﬂation pressures.
LOW TRAC (Traction)
If your vehicle has the Traction Control System (TCS),
this message displays when a low traction condition
is detected. See Traction Control System (TCS)
on page 4-5 for more information. Press and release
the reset stem to acknowledge the message and clear
it from the display.
OIL
This message displays when the oil pressure is low.
See Oil Pressure Light on page 3-36 and Engine Oil
on page 5-15 for more information.
PARK BRK (Brake)
This message displays when the parking brake is set.
See Parking Brake on page 2-32 and Brake System
Warning Light on page 3-31 for more information. The
message clears from the display after the parking brake
is released or by pressing and releasing the reset stem.
REDUCED POWER
This message displays when the vehicle’s engine power
is reduced. Reduced engine power can affect the
vehicle’s ability to accelerate. If this message is on, but
there is no reduction in performance, proceed to your
destination. The performance may be reduced the next
time the vehicle is driven. The vehicle may be driven at a
reduced speed while this message is on, but acceleration
and speed may be reduced. Anytime this message stays
on, the vehicle should be taken to your dealer/retailer for
service as soon as possible. Press and release the reset
stem to acknowledge the message and clear it from the
display.
3-44
Information Provided by:

SERV (Service) 4WD
(Four-Wheel Drive)
This message displays when there is a problem with the
transfer case control system. Check the transfer case on
your vehicle and have it serviced by your dealer/retailer.
See Four-Wheel Drive on page 2-28 for more information
about the transfer case. Press and release the reset stem
to acknowledge the message and clear it from the
display.
SERV (Service) TPM
(Tire Pressure Monitor)
This message displays if a part on the Tire Pressure
Monitor System (TPMS) is not working properly. The tire
pressure light also ﬂashes and then remains on during
the same ignition cycle. See Tire Pressure Light on
page 3-33. Several conditions may cause this message
to appear. See Tire Pressure Monitor Operation on
page 5-70 for more information. If the warning comes on
and stays on, there may be a problem with the TPMS.
See your dealer/retailer.
SERV (Service) VEH (Vehicle)
This message displays if your vehicle needs service.
Have your vehicle serviced by your dealer/retailer
as soon as possible.
SERVICE CHARG (Charge) SYS
(System)
This message displays if there is a problem with the
battery charging system. Under certain conditions, the
battery warning light may also turn on in the instrument
panel cluster. See Charging System Light on page 3-30.
The battery will not be charging at an optimal rate and
the vehicle will lose the ability to enter the fuel economy
mode. The vehicle is safe to drive, however have the
electrical system checked by your dealer/retailer. Press
and release the reset stem to acknowledge the message
and clear it from the display.
TRAC (Traction) OFF
If your vehicle has the Traction Control System (TCS),
this message displays when the Traction Control
System (TCS) is turned off by pressing the TCS button.
See Traction Control System (TCS) on page 4-5 for
more information.
3-45
Information Provided by:

TRACTION FAULT
If your vehicle has the Traction Control System (TCS),
this message may display if there is a problem with the
TCS. Check the TCS as soon as possible and have your
vehicle serviced by your dealer/retailer. See Traction
Control System (TCS) on page 4-5 for more information.
Press and release the reset stem to acknowledge the
message and clear it from the display.
TURN SIGNAL
This message displays when the turn signal is on for
about 0.75 miles (1.2 km) of travel. Press and release
the reset stem to acknowledge the message and clear it
from the display.
Audio System(s)
Determine which radio your vehicle has and then read the
pages following to familiarize yourself with its features.
{CAUTION:
This system provides you with far greater
access to audio stations and song listings.
Giving extended attention to entertainment
tasks while driving can cause a crash and you
or others can be injured or killed. Always keep
your eyes on the road and your mind on the
drive — avoid engaging in extended searching
while driving.
Keeping your mind on the drive is important for
safe driving. See Defensive Driving on page 4-2.
Here are some ways in which you can help avoid
distraction while driving.
3-46
Information Provided by:

While your vehicle is parked:
•
Familiarize yourself with all of its controls.
•
Familiarize yourself with its operation.
•
Set up your audio system by presetting your
favorite radio stations, setting the tone, and
adjusting the speakers. Then, when driving
conditions permit, you can tune to your favorite
radio stations using the presets and steering
wheel controls if the vehicle has them.
Notice:
Before adding any sound equipment to
your vehicle, such as an audio system, CD player,
CB radio, mobile telephone, or two-way radio, make
sure that it can be added by checking with your
dealer/retailer. Also, check federal rules covering
mobile radio and telephone units. If sound equipment
can be added, it is very important to do it properly.
Added sound equipment may interfere with the
operation of your vehicle’s engine, radio, or other
systems, and even damage them. Your vehicle’s
systems may interfere with the operation of sound
equipment that has been added.
Notice:
The chime signals related to safety belts,
parking brake, and other functions of your vehicle
operate through the radio/entertainment system. If
that equipment is replaced or additional equipment is
added to your vehicle, the chimes may not work.
Make sure that replacement or additional equipment
is compatible with your vehicle before installing it.
See Accessories and Modiﬁcations on page 5-3.
Setting the Time
Radios without Radio Data
Systems (RDS)
Press and hold HR (hour) until the correct hour displays.
Press and hold MIN (minute) until the correct minute
displays. There is an initial two-second delay before the
clock goes into time-set mode. Display the time with
the ignition off, by pressing RCL (recall), HR, or MIN.
Radios with Radio Data Systems (RDS)
The radio could have a button marked with an H or
HR to represent hours and an M or MN to represent
minutes.
Press and hold the hour button until the correct hour
displays. Press and hold the minute button until
the correct minute displays. The time can be set with
the ignition on or off.
To synchronize the time with an FM station broadcasting
Radio Data System (RDS) information, press and hold
the hour and minute buttons at the same time until RDS
TIME displays. To accept this time, press and hold the
hour and minute buttons, at the same time, for another
two seconds. If the time is not available from the station,
NO UPDAT (update) displays.
RDS time is broadcast once a minute. After tuning to an
RDS broadcast station, it could take a few minutes
for the time to update.
3-47
Information Provided by:

Radio(s)
AM-FM Radio
Radio with CD (MP3/WMA)
3-48
Information Provided by:

Radio Data System (RDS)
The audio system has a Radio Data System (RDS).
RDS features are available for use only on FM stations
that broadcast RDS information.
With RDS, the radio can do the following:
•
Seek to stations broadcasting the selected type of
programming.
•
Receive announcements concerning local and
national emergencies.
•
Display messages from radio stations.
•
Seek to stations with traffic announcements.
This system relies upon receiving speciﬁc information
from these stations and only works when the information
is available. In rare cases, a radio station could broadcast
incorrect information that causes the radio features to
work improperly. If this happens, contact the radio station.
While the radio is tuned to an RDS station, the station
name or call letters display instead of the frequency.
RDS stations can also provide the time of day, a
program type (PTY) for current programming, and
the name of the program being broadcast.
Radio with Six-Disc CD Player
3-49
Information Provided by:

Playing the Radio
PWR (Power): Press to turn the system on and off.
op VOL/VOLUME: Turn to increase or to decrease
the volume.
RCL (Recall) (AM-FM Radio): Press to switch the
display between the radio station frequency, band,
and the time. When the ignition is off, press to display
the time.
DISPL (Display) (Radio with CD): When the ignition is
turned off, press to display the time.
For RDS, press the DISPL knob to change what
displays while using RDS. The display options are
station name, RDS station frequency, PTY (program
type), and the name of the program (if available).
For XM™(if equipped), press the DISPL knob while
in XM™mode to retrieve four different categories of
information related to the current song or channel: Artist,
Song Title, Category or PTY, Channel Number/
Channel Name.
To change the default on the display, press the DISPL
knob until you see the desired display, then press and
hold this knob for two seconds. The radio produces one
beep. The selected display is now the default.
INFO (Information) (XM™Satellite Radio Service and
RDS Features) (Radio with Six-Disc CD): When the
ignition is off, press to display the time.
Press the INFO button to display additional text
information related to the current FM-RDS or XM™
station. A choice of additional information such
as: Channel, Song, Artist, and PTY (program type)
may appear. Continue pressing the information button
to highlight the desired label, and the information
about that label displays.
When information is not available, No Info displays.
To change the default on the display, press the INFO
knob until you see the desired display, then press
and hold the knob until a beep sounds. The selected
display becomes the default.
AUTO VOL (Automatic Volume): Automatic volume
automatically adjusts the audio system to make up
for road and wind noise as you drive.
Set the volume at the desired level. Depending on the
radio and displays, press to select MIN, MED, MAX
AUTO VOL, or LOW, MEDIUM, and HIGH. AVOL
displays. Each higher setting allows for more volume
compensation at faster vehicle speeds. Then as you
drive, automatic volume increases the volume, as
necessary, to overcome noise at any speed. The volume
level should always sound the same to you as you drive.
For the Radio with CD, NONE displays if the radio cannot
determine the vehicle speed. To turn automatic volume
off, press until OFF or AUTO VOL OFF displays.
3-50
Information Provided by:

Finding a Station
AM FM (AM-FM Radio): Press to switch between FM1,
FM2, or AM. The selection displays.
BAND: Press to switch between FM1, FM2, AM, or
XM1 or XM2 (if equipped). The selection displays.
op TUNE: Turn to select radio stations.
o SEEK p: Press the arrows to go to the previous
or to the next station and stay there.
To scan stations, press and hold either arrow for
two seconds until a beep sounds. The radio goes to
a station, plays for a few seconds, then goes to the
next station. Press either arrow again to stop scanning.
To scan preset stations, press and hold either arrow
for more than four seconds until two beeps sound.
The radio goes to the ﬁrst preset station stored on the
pushbuttons, plays for a few seconds, then goes to
the next preset station. Press either arrow again to
stop scanning presets.
qr / © ¨ SEEK: Press the SEEK or SEEK/TYPE
arrows to go to the previous or to the next station
and stay there.
qr / © ¨ SCAN: Press and hold either SCAN
arrow or SCAN/TYPE arrows for more than two seconds.
SCAN or SCN displays and the radio produces one beep.
The radio goes to a station, plays for a few seconds,
then goes to the next station. Press either SCAN arrow
or SCAN/TYPE arrows again, or for the Radio with
Six-Disc CD player, one of the pushbuttons to stop
scanning presets.
To scan preset stations, press and hold either SCAN
arrow or SCAN/TYPE arrows for more than four seconds.
PSCN or PSC displays and the radio produces one beep
or depending on the radio, two beeps. The radio goes to
a preset station, plays for a few seconds, then goes to the
next preset station. Press either SCAN arrow or SCAN/
TYPE arrows again, or for the Radio with CD, one of the
pushbuttons to stop scanning presets.
The radio only scans stations with a strong signal that are
in the selected band.
3-51
Information Provided by:

Setting Preset Stations
If your radio does not have XM™, up to 18 stations
(six FM1, six FM2, and six AM) can be programmed
on the six numbered pushbuttons.
If your radio has XM™, up to 30 stations (six FM1,
six FM2, six AM, six XM1 and six XM2 (if equipped))
can be programmed on the six numbered pushbuttons.
To program either radio:
1. Turn the radio on.
2. Press BAND to select FM1, FM2, AM, or XM1 or
XM2 (if equipped).
•
For the AM-FM Radio, press AM FM to select
FM1, FM2, or AM.
3. Tune in the desired station.
4. Press and hold one of the six numbered pushbuttons
until the radio beeps once. When that numbered
pushbutton is pressed again, the station that was
stored, returns.
5. Repeat the steps for each pushbutton.
Setting the Tone (Bass/Treble)
AUDIO: Push and release until BASS/TREB, or
depending on the radio, BASS, MID, or TREB displays.
Turn to increase or to decrease. The tone display shows
the bass or the treble level. If a station is weak or has
static, decrease the treble.
•
For the AM-FM Radio, press and hold the w x
arrows to increase or to decrease the tone.
To adjust the bass/treble or bass/midrange/treble to
the middle position, press and hold the AUDIO knob.
The radio produces one beep and adjusts the display
level to the middle position.
•
For the AM-FM Radio, adjust bass or treble to the
middle position, select BAS (bass) or TRE (treble).
Then press and hold for more than two seconds
until a beep sounds. B (balance) and a zero
or T (treble) and a zero displays.
To adjust all tone and speaker controls to the middle
position, push and hold the AUDIO knob when no tone
or speaker control displays. ALL CENTERED displays
and a beep sounds.
•
For the AM-FM Radio, adjust both tone controls and
both speaker controls to the middle position, ﬁrst exit
out of audio mode by pressing another button,
causing the radio to perform that function or wait
ﬁve seconds for the display to return to time of day.
Then press and hold for more than two seconds until
a beep sounds. CEN (center) displays.
3-52
Information Provided by:

AUTO EQ (Automatic Equalization): Press to
select customized equalization settings designed for
country/western, jazz, talk, pop, rock, and classical.
To return to the manual mode, press the AUTO
EQ button until CUSTOM displays. Then manually
adjust the bass/treble, or bass/midrange/treble by
using the AUDIO knob.
Adjusting the Speakers (Balance/Fade)
AUDIO: To adjust the balance between the right and
the left speakers, push and release until BAL (balance)
displays. Turn to move the sound toward the right or the
left speakers.
•
For the AM-FM Radio, press and hold
the w x arrows to move the sound toward
the right or the left speakers.
To adjust the fade between the front and the rear
speakers, push and release the AUDIO knob until
FADE or depending on the radio, FAD displays.
Turn the knob to move the sound toward the front
or the rear speakers.
•
For the AM-FM Radio, press and hold
the w x arrows to move the sound toward
the right or the left speakers.
To adjust the balance or the fade to the middle position,
push the AUDIO knob to select BAL or FADE/FAD,
then push it again and hold it until one beep sounds.
•
For the AM-FM Radio, adjust balance or fade to the
middle position by selecting BAL or FAD. Press and
hold AUDIO for more than two seconds until a
beep sounds. B (balance) and a zero or F (fade)
and a zero displays.
To adjust all tone and speaker controls to the middle
position, push and hold the AUDIO knob when no tone
or speaker control is displayed. ALL CENTERED
displays and a beep sounds.
•
For the AM-FM Radio, adjust both tone controls
and both speaker controls to the middle position
by exiting out of audio mode. To do this, press
any button for the radio to perform that function
or wait ﬁve seconds for the display to return to
time of day. Then press and hold AUDIO for
more than two seconds until a beep sounds.
CEN (center) displays.
Fade might not be available if the vehicle is a
regular cab model.
3-53
Information Provided by:

Finding a Program Type (PTY) Station
(RDS and XM™)
To select and ﬁnd a desired PTY perform the following:
1. Press the P-TYPE or depending on the radio,
TYPE knob to activate program type select
mode. P-TYPE or TYPE and a PTY displays.
2. Turn the P-TYPE or TYPE knob again,
to select a PTY.
3. Once the desired PTY displays, press the SEEK
TYPE button or the SEEK/TYPE arrows to select
and to take you to the PTY’s ﬁrst station.
4. For the Radio with CD, go to another station within
that PTY by pressing the SEEK TYPE button twice
to display the PTY and then go to another station.
SCAN: For the Radio with Six-Disc CD player, scan the
stations within a PTY by performing the following:
1. Press the TYPE button to activate program type
select mode. P-TYPE and the last selected PTY
displays.
2. Turn the TYPE knob or press and release the
TYPE button to select a PTY.
3. Once the desired PTY is displayed, press and hold
either the SEEK or TYPE arrows for two seconds,
and the radio begins scanning the stations in
the PTY.
4. Press either the SEEK or TYPE arrows to stop
scanning.
To cancel the seek, press the SEEK/TYPE button or
any of the SEEK or TYPE arrows. This also exits
the program type seek mode and returns to the last
tuned station.
For the Radio with CD, if both PTY and TRAF (traffic)
are on, the radio searches for stations with the selected
PTY and traffic announcements.
If the radio cannot ﬁnd the desired program type, NONE
displays and the radio returns to the last tuned station.
BAND (Alternate Frequency): Alternate frequency
lets the radio switch to a stronger station with the same
program type. To turn alternate frequency on, press and
hold BAND for two seconds. AF ON displays. The radio
could switch to stations with a stronger frequency.
To turn alternate frequency off, press and hold BAND
again for two seconds. AF OFF displays. The radio does
not switch to other stations.
This function does not apply for XM™Satellite Radio
Service.
3-54
Information Provided by:

Setting Preset PTYs (RDS Only)
For the Radio with Six-Disc CD player, the
six pushbuttons have factory PTY presets.
Up to 12 PTYs (six FM1 and six FM2), can be
programmed on the numbered pushbuttons, by
performing the following steps:
1. Press BAND to select FM1 or FM2.
2. Press the TYPE button to activate program type
select mode. P-TYPE and the last selected PTY
displays.
3. Turn the TYPE knob or press and release the
TYPE button to select a PTY.
4. Press and hold one of the six numbered
pushbuttons until a beep sounds. When that
numbered pushbutton is pressed, the PTY
that was set, returns.
5. Repeat the steps for each pushbutton.
RDS Messages
ALERT!: For the Radio with CD, the Alert feature
warns of local or national emergencies. When an alert
announcement comes on the current radio station,
ALERT! displays. You will hear the announcement,
even if the volume is low or a CD is playing. If a CD is
playing, play stops during the announcement. Alert
announcements cannot be turned off.
ALERT! is not affected by tests of the emergency
broadcast system. This feature is not supported by
all RDS stations.
INFO (Information): If the current station has a
message, the information symbol or INFO displays.
Press this button to see the message. The message can
display the artist, song title, call in phone numbers, etc.
If the entire message is not displayed, parts of the
message displays every three seconds. To scroll through
the message, press and release the INFO button. A new
group of words display after every press of this button.
3-55
Information Provided by:

Once the complete message has displayed, the
information symbol or INFO disappears from the display
until another new message is received. The last message
can be displayed by pressing the INFO button. The last
message stays on the display until a new message is
received or the radio is tuned to a different station.
When a message is not available from a station,
NO INFO displays.
TRAF (Traffic): For the Radio with CD, if TRAF displays,
the tuned station broadcasts traffic announcements.
When a traffic announcement is broadcast on this
station you will hear it.
If the station does not broadcast traffic announcements,
press the TRAF button and the radio seeks to a station
that does. When a station that broadcasts traffic
announcements is found, the radio stops seeking and
TRAF displays. If no station is found that broadcasts
traffic announcements, NO TRAF displays.
If TRAF displays, press the TRAF button to turn off the
traffic announcements.
The radio plays the traffic announcement if the volume is
low. The radio interrupts the play of a CD if the last tuned
station broadcasts traffic announcements.
This function does not apply to XM™Satellite Radio
Service.
Radio Messages
CAL ERR or CAL (Calibration Error): The audio
system has been calibrated for your vehicle from the
factory. If CAL or CAL ERR displays it means that
the radio has not been conﬁgured properly for your
vehicle and it must be returned to your dealer/retailer
for service.
LOC or LOCKED: This message displays when the
THEFTLOCK® system has locked up. Take your vehicle
to your dealer/retailer for service.
If any error occurs repeatedly or if an error cannot be
corrected, contact your dealer/retailer.
XM™Satellite Radio Service
XM™is a satellite radio service that is based in the
48 contiguous United States and 10 Canadian provinces.
XM™Satellite Radio has a wide variety of programming
and commercial-free music, coast-to-coast, and in
digital-quality sound. During your trial or when you
subscribe, you will get unlimited access to XM™Radio
Online for when you are not in your vehicle. A service
fee is required to receive the XM™service. For more
information, contact XM™at www.xmradio.com or call
1-800-929-2100 in the U.S. and www.xmradio.ca or
call 1-877-438-9677 in Canada.
3-56
Information Provided by:

Radio Messages for XM™Only
See XM Radio Messages on page 3-69 later in this
section for further detail.
Playing a CD (Radio with
Single CD Player)
Insert a CD partway into the slot, label side up. The
player pulls it in, and READING displays. The CD should
begin playing. If you want to insert a CD with the ignition
off, ﬁrst press the Z (eject) button or the DISPL knob.
If the ignition or radio is turned off with a CD in the
player it stays in the player. When the ignition or radio
is turned on, the CD starts to play where it stopped,
if it was the last selected audio source.
When the CD is inserted, the CD symbol displays. As
each new track starts to play, the track number displays.
The CD player can play the smaller 3 inch (8 cm)
single CDs with an adapter ring. Full-size CDs and
the smaller CDs are loaded in the same manner.
Care of Your CDs
If playing a CD-R, the sound quality can be reduced due
to CD-R quality, the method of recording, the quality of
the music that has been recorded, and the way the CD-R
has been handled. Handle them carefully. Store CD-R(s)
in their original cases or other protective cases and away
from direct sunlight and dust. The CD player scans the
bottom surface of the disc. If the surface of a CD is
damaged, such as cracked, broken, or scratched, the CD
does not play properly or not at all. Do not touch the
bottom side of a CD while handling it; this could damage
the surface. Pick up CDs by grasping the outer edges or
the edge of the hole and the outer edge.
If the surface of a CD is soiled, take a soft, lint free
cloth or dampen a clean, soft cloth in a mild, neutral
detergent solution mixed with water, and clean it.
Make sure the wiping process starts from the center
to the edge.
3-57
Information Provided by:

Care of Your CD Player
Do not add any label to a CD, it could get caught in the
CD player. If a CD is recorded on a personal computer
and a description label is needed, try labeling the top of
the recorded CD with a marking pen.
The use of CD lens cleaners for CDs is not advised,
due to the risk of contaminating the lens of the CD optics
with lubricants internal to the CD player mechanism.
Notice:
If a label is added to a CD, or more than one
CD is inserted into the slot at a time, or an attempt is
made to play scratched or damaged CDs, the CD
player could be damaged. While using the CD player,
use only CDs in good condition without any label,
load one CD at a time, and keep the CD player and
the loading slot free of foreign materials, liquids,
and debris.
If an error displays, see “CD Messages” later in this
section.
1 FLD x (Previous): This button is inactive when
playing a CD.
2 FLD w (Next): This button is inactive when playing
a CD.
3 REV (Fast Reverse): Press and hold to reverse
quickly within a track. Press and hold for less than
two seconds to reverse at 10 times the normal playing
speed. Press and hold for more than two seconds
to reverse at 20 times the normal playing speed.
Release to play the passage. ET (elapsed time)
and the elapsed time of the track displays.
4 FWD (Fast Forward): Press and hold to advance
quickly within a track. Press and hold for less than
two seconds to advance at six times the normal playing
speed. Press and hold for more than two seconds to
advance at 17 times the normal playing speed. Release
to play the passage. ET and the elapsed time of the
track displays.
6 RDM (Random): Press to hear the tracks in random,
rather than sequential, order. RDM ON displays. RDM
and the track number displays when each track starts to
play. Press again to turn off random play. RDM OFF
displays.
q SEEK r: Press the left arrow to go to the start of
the current or the previous track. Press the right arrow to
go to the start of the next track. Pressing either arrow for
more than two seconds scans the next tracks, playing
the ﬁrst eight seconds of each track until all of the tracks
have been previewed. Press either arrow again to stop
scanning and to play the track.
3-58
Information Provided by:

o TUNE p: Turning this knob fast tracks reverse or
advances through tracks. The track number displays
for each track.
DISPL (Display): Press to see how long the current
track has been playing. ET and the elapsed time of the
track displays. To change the default on the display
(track or elapsed time), press until you see the desired
display, then press and hold for two seconds. The
radio produces one beep. The selected display is
now the default.
BAND: Press to listen to the radio when a CD is
playing. The inactive CD remains inside the radio for
future listening.
CD AUX (Auxiliary): Press to play a CD when listening
to the radio. The CD symbol displays when a CD is
loaded.
Z (Eject): Press to eject a CD. Eject can be activated
with either the ignition or radio off. CDs can be loaded
with the ignition and radio off if this button is pressed ﬁrst.
Playing a CD(s) (Radio with
Six-Disc CD Player)
LOAD: Press to load CDs into the CD player.
This CD player holds up to six CDs.
To insert one CD, do the following:
1. Turn the ignition on.
2. Press and release the LOAD button.
3. Wait for the indicator light, located to the right of the
slot, to turn green.
4. Load a CD. Insert the CD partway into the slot,
label side up. The player pulls the CD in.
3-59
Information Provided by:

To insert multiple CDs, do the following:
1. Turn the ignition on.
2. Press and hold the LOAD button for two seconds.
A beep sound and the indicator light, located to the
right of the slot, begins to ﬂash and MULTI LOAD #
displays.
3. Once the light stops ﬂashing and turns green,
INSERT CD # displays, load a CD. Insert the
CD partway into the slot, label side up. The
player pulls the CD in.
Once the CD is loaded, the indicator light begins
ﬂashing again. Once the light stops ﬂashing
and turns green, you can load another CD.
The CD player takes up to six CDs. Do not
try to load more than six.
To load more than one CD but less than six, complete
Steps 1 through 3. When ﬁnished loading CDs,
press the LOAD button to cancel the loading function.
The radio begins to play the last CD loaded.
If more than one CD has been loaded, a number for
each CD displays.
Playing a Speciﬁc Loaded CD
For every CD loaded, a number displays. To play a
speciﬁc CD, ﬁrst press the CD AUX button (if not already
in CD mode), then press the numbered pushbutton
that corresponds to the CD. A small bar appears under
the CD number that is playing and the track number
displays.
CD Z (Eject): Press to eject CD(s).
To eject the CD that is currently playing, press and
release this button.
To eject multiple CDs, do the following:
1. Press and hold the Z button for ﬁve seconds.
A beep sounds and the indicator light, located to
the right of the slot, begins to ﬂash and EJECT ALL
displays.
2. Once the light stops ﬂashing, REMOVE CD #
displays. The CD ejects and can be removed.
Once the CD is removed, the indicator light begins
ﬂashing again and another CD ejects.
To stop ejecting the CDs, press the LOAD or the
eject button.
3-60
Information Provided by:

If the CD is not removed, after 25 seconds, the CD
automatically pulls back into the player. If CD is pushed
back into the player, before the 25 second time period
is complete, the player senses an error and tries to eject
the CD several times before stopping.
Do not repeatedly press the CD eject button to eject
a CD after you have tried to push it in manually.
The player’s 25-second eject timer resets at each
press of eject, causing the player to not eject the
CD until the 25-second time period has elapsed.
{ REV (Fast Reverse): Press and hold to reverse
quickly within a track. You will hear sound at a reduced
volume. The elapsed time of the track displays.
Release to play the passage.
FWD | (Fast Forward): Press and hold to advance
quickly within a track. You will hear sound at a reduced
volume. The elapsed time of the track displays.
Release to play the passage.
RPT (Repeat): With repeat, one track or an entire CD
can be repeated.
To use repeat, do the following:
•
To repeat the track you are listening to, press
and release the RPT button. RPT displays.
Press again to turn off repeat play.
•
To repeat the CD you are listening to, press
and hold the RPT button for two seconds.
RPT displays. Press again to turn off repeat play.
RDM (Random): With the random setting, tracks
can be listened to in random, rather than sequential,
order, on one CD or on all of the CDs. To use random,
do one of the following:
•
To play the tracks on the CD you are listening to in
random order, press and release the RDM button.
RANDOM ONE displays. Press again to turn
off random play.
•
To play the tracks on all of the CDs that are loaded
in random order, press and hold RDM for more
than two seconds. A beep sounds and RANDOM
ALL displays. Press again to turn off random play.
AUTO EQ (Automatic Equalization): Press to select
the equalization setting while playing a CD. The
equalization is stored when a CD is played. For more
information on AUTO EQ, see “AUTO EQ” listed
previously in this section.
3-61
Information Provided by:

© SEEK ¨: Press the left arrow to go to the start of
the current track (if more than 10 seconds have played),
or to go to the previous track (if less than 10 seconds
have played). Press the right arrow to go to the next
track. If either arrow is held or pressed more than once,
the player continues moving backward or forward through
the CD.
© SCAN ¨: To scan one CD, press and hold either
arrow for more than two seconds until SCAN displays
and a beep sounds. The radio goes to the next
track, plays for 10 seconds, then goes to the next
track. Press either arrow again, to stop scanning.
To scan all loaded CDs, press and hold either arrow for
more than four seconds until CD SCAN displays and
a beep sounds. Use this feature to listen to 10 seconds
of the ﬁrst track of each loaded CD. Press either
arrow again, to stop scanning.
INFO (Information): Press to see how long the current
track has been playing. To change the default on the
display, track or elapsed time, press until you see the
desired display, then press and hold until the radio beeps.
The selected display becomes the default.
BAND: Press to listen to the radio while a CD is
playing. The inactive CD(s) remains inside the radio
for future listening.
Using Song List Mode
(Radio with Six-Disc CD Player)
The six-disc CD changer has a feature called song list.
This feature is capable of saving 20 track selections.
To save tracks into the song list feature:
1. Turn the CD player on and load it with at least one
CD. See “LOAD CD” listed previously in this section
for more information.
2. Check to see that the CD changer is not in song
list mode. S-LIST should not display. If S-LIST is
present, press the SONG LIST button to turn it off.
3. Select the desired CD by pressing the numbered
pushbutton and then use the SEEK or TYPE right
arrows to locate the track to be saved. The
track begins to play.
4. Press and hold the SONG LIST button to save the
track into memory. When SONG LIST is pressed,
one beep sounds. After two seconds of continuously
pressing the SONG LIST button, two beeps
sound to conﬁrm the track has been saved.
5. Repeat Steps 3 and 4 for saving other selections.
S-LIST FULL displays if you try to save more than
20 selections.
3-62
Information Provided by:

To play the song list, press the SONG LIST button.
One beep sounds and S-LIST displays. The recorded
tracks begins to play in the order they were saved.
Seek through the song list by using the SEEK or TYPE
arrows. Seeking past the last saved track returns to
the ﬁrst saved track.
To delete tracks from the song list, perform the
following steps:
1. Turn the CD player on.
2. Press the SONG LIST button to turn song list on.
S-LIST displays.
3. Press either the SEEK or TYPE arrows to select
the desired track to be deleted.
4. Press and hold the SONG LIST button for
two seconds. When SONG LIST is pressed,
one beep sounds. After two seconds of continuously
pressing the SONG LIST button, two beeps sound
to conﬁrm that the track has been deleted.
After a track has been deleted, the remaining tracks
are moved up the list. When another track is added to
the song list, the track is added to the end of the list.
To delete the entire song list, perform the
following steps:
1. Turn the CD player on.
2. Press the SONG LIST button to turn song list on.
S-LIST displays.
3. Press and hold the SONG LIST button for more
than four seconds. One beep sounds, followed by
two beeps after two seconds, and a ﬁnal beep
sounds after four seconds. S-LIST EMPTY displays
indicating the song list has been deleted.
If a CD is ejected, and the song list contains saved
tracks from that CD, those tracks are automatically
deleted from the song list. Any tracks saved to the
song list again are added to the bottom of the list.
To end song list mode, press the SONG LIST button.
One beep sounds and S-LIST is removed from the
display.
Playing an MP3/WMA CD-R Disc
Radios with the MP3/WMA feature are capable of
playing an MP3/WMA CD-R disc. For more information
on how to play an MP3/WMA CD-R disc, see Using
an MP3 on page 3-64 later in this section.
3-63
Information Provided by:

CD Messages
CHECK CD: If this message displays and/or the CD
comes out, it could be for one of the following reasons:
•
It is very hot. When the temperature returns to
normal, the CD should play.
•
You are driving on a very rough road. When the
road becomes smoother, the CD should play.
•
The CD is dirty, scratched, wet, or upside down.
•
The air is very humid. If so, wait about an hour and
try again.
•
The format of the CD might not be compatible.
See Using an MP3 on page 3-64 later in this
section.
•
There could have been a problem while burning
the CD.
•
The label could be caught in the CD player.
If the CD is not playing correctly, for any other reason,
try a known good CD.
If any error occurs repeatedly or if an error cannot be
corrected, contact your dealer/retailer. If the radio
displays an error message, write it down and provide
it to your dealer/retailer when reporting the problem.
Using an MP3
MP3/WMA CD-R Disc
MP3/WMA Format
If you burn your own MP3/WMA disc on a personal
computer:
•
Make sure the MP3/WMA ﬁles are recorded on a
CD-R disc.
•
Make sure playlists have a .mp3 or .wpl extension,
other ﬁle extensions might not work.
•
Files can be recorded with a variety of ﬁxed or
variable bit rates. Song title, artist name, and album
are displayed by the radio when recorded using
ID3 tags version 1 and 2.
•
Create a folder structure that makes it easy to ﬁnd
songs while driving. Organize songs by albums
using one folder for each album. Each folder
or album should contain 18 songs or less.
•
Make sure to ﬁnalize the disc when burning an
MP3/WMA disc, using multiple sessions. It is usually
better to burn the disc all at once.
3-64
Information Provided by:

The player is able to read and play a maximum of
253 folders, 50 playlists, 20 sessions, and 949 ﬁles.
Long ﬁle names, folder names, or playlist names may
use more disc memory space than necessary. To
conserve space on the disc, minimize the length of the
ﬁle, folder, or playlist names. An MP3/WMA CD-R that
was recorded using no ﬁle folders. The system can
support up to 11 folders in depth, though, keep the depth
of the folders to a minimum in order to keep down the
complexity and confusion in trying to locate a particular
folder during playback. If a CD contains more than the
maximum of 253 folders, 50 playlists, 20 sessions, and
949 ﬁles, the player lets you access and navigate up
to the maximum, but all items over the maximum are
played.
Root Directory
The root directory is treated as a folder. If the root
directory has compressed audio ﬁles, the directory
displays as F1 ROOT. All ﬁles contained directly
under the root directory are accessed prior to any
root directory folders. However, playlists (Px) are
always accessed before root folders or ﬁles.
Empty Directory or Folder
If a root directory or a folder exists somewhere in the ﬁle
structure that contains only folders/subfolders and no
compressed ﬁles directly beneath them, the player
advances to the next folder in the ﬁle structure that
contains compressed audio ﬁles. The empty folder
does not display.
No Folder
When the CD contains only compressed ﬁles, the ﬁles
are located under the root folder. The next and previous
folder functions have no function on a CD that was
recorded without folders or playlists. When displaying
the name of the folder the radio displays ROOT.
When the CD contains only playlists and compressed
audio ﬁles, but no folders, all ﬁles are located under the
root folder. The folder down and the folder up buttons
search playlists (Px) ﬁrst and then go to the root folder.
When the radio displays the name of the folder, the
radio displays ROOT.
3-65
Information Provided by:

Order of Play
Tracks are played in the following order:
•
Play begins from the ﬁrst track in the ﬁrst playlist
and continues sequentially through all tracks in
each playlist. When the last track of the last playlist
has played, play continues from the ﬁrst track of
the ﬁrst playlist.
•
If the CD does not contain any playlists, then play
begins from the ﬁrst track under the root directory.
When all tracks from the root directory have played,
play continues from ﬁles according to their numerical
listing. After playing the last track from the last folder,
play begins again at the ﬁrst track of the ﬁrst folder or
root directory.
When play enters a new folder, the display does not
automatically show the new folder name unless you
have chosen the folder mode as the default display.
See DISPL (display) later in this section for more
information. The new track name displays.
File System and Naming
The song name that displays is the song name that is
contained in the ID3 tag. If the song name is not present
in the ID3 tag, then the radio displays the ﬁle name
without the extension (such as .mp3) as the track name.
Track names longer than 32 characters or four pages
are shortened. Parts of words on the last page of
text and the extension of the ﬁlename does not display.
Preprogrammed Playlists
Preprogrammed playlists which were created by
WinAmp™, MusicMatch™, or Real Jukebox™software
can be accessed, however, they cannot be edited.
These playlists are treated as special folders containing
compressed audio song ﬁles.
Playing an MP3/WMA
Insert a CD partway into the slot, label side up.
The player pulls it in, and READING displays.
The CD should begin playing and the CD symbol
displays. If you want to insert a CD with the ignition off,
ﬁrst press the Z button or the DISPL knob.
If the ignition or radio is turned off with a CD in the
player it stays in the player. When the ignition or radio
is turned on, the CD starts to play where it stopped,
if it was the last selected audio source.
As each new track starts to play, the track number
displays.
1 FLD x (Previous Folder): Press this button to go to
the ﬁrst track in the previous folder. Pressing this button
while in folder random mode takes you to the previous
folder and plays the tracks in random order in that folder.
3-66
Information Provided by:

2 FLD w (Next Folder): Press this button to go to
the ﬁrst track in the next folder. Pressing this button
while in folder random mode takes the CD to the next
folder and plays the tracks in random order in that folder.
3 REV (Reverse): Press and hold this button to
reverse quickly within a track. Press and hold this
button for less than two seconds to reverse at 10 times
the normal playing speed. Press and hold it for more
than two seconds to reverse at 20 times the normal
playing speed. Release this button to play the passage.
REV and the elapsed time of the track displays.
4 FWD (Forward): Press and hold this button to
advance quickly within a track. Press and hold this
button for less than two seconds to advance at 10 times
the normal playing speed. Press and hold it for more
than two seconds to advance at 20 times the normal
playing speed. Release this button to play the passage.
FWD and the elapsed time of the track displays.
6 RDM (Random): To play the tracks in random order
in the current folder or playlist, press and release this
button. FLDR RDM (folder random) displays. Once all of
the tracks in the current folder or playlist have played, the
system moves to the next folder or playlist and plays all of
the tracks in random order.
To play all the tracks in random order on the CD, press
and hold this button for two seconds. A beep sounds and
DISC RDM (disc random) displays. This feature does not
work with playlists.
When in random, pressing and releasing either SEEK
arrow takes the CD to the previous or to the next random
track.
Press and release this button again to turn off random
play. NO RDM (no random) displays.
q SEEK r: Press the left SEEK arrow to go to the
start of the previous track. Press the right SEEK arrow to
go to the start of the next track. Pressing either SEEK
arrow for more than two seconds searches the previous
or next tracks at two tracks per second. Release the
button to stop searching and to play the track.
o TUNE p: Turning this knob fast tracks reverse or
advances through the tracks in all folders or playlists.
The track number and ﬁle name displays for each track.
Turning this knob while in random fast tracks reverse
or advances the tracks in sequential order.
3-67
Information Provided by:

DISPL (Display): Press this knob to switch between
track mode, folder/playlist mode, and time of day mode.
The display shows only eight characters, but there
can be up to four pages of text. If there are more than
eight characters in the song, folder, or playlist name,
pressing this knob within two seconds takes you to the
next page of text. If there are no other pages to be
shown, pressing this knob within two seconds takes
you to the next display mode.
•
Track mode displays the current track number and
the ID3 tag song name.
•
Folder/playlist mode displays the current folder or
playlist number and the folder/playlist name.
•
Time of day mode displays the time of day and the
ID3 tag song name.
To change the default on the display, press the DISPL
knob until you see the desired display, then press
and hold this knob for two seconds. The radio produces
one beep and the selected display is now the default.
INFO (Information): INFO displays when a current
track has ID3 tag information. Press this button to
display the artist name and album contained in the tag.
INFO disappears from the display when the information
in the ID3 tag has ﬁnished being read.
BAND: Press this button to listen to the radio when a
CD is playing. The inactive CD remains inside the radio
for future listening.
CD AUX (Auxiliary): Press this button to play a CD
when listening to the radio. The CD symbol illuminates
on the display when a CD is loaded.
Z (Eject): Press this button to eject a CD. Eject
can activate while either the ignition or radio is off.
CDs can be loaded with the ignition and radio off if
this button is pressed ﬁrst.
3-68
Information Provided by:

XM Radio Messages
XL (Explicit Language Channels): These channels,
or any others, can be blocked at a customer’s request,
by calling 1-800-852-XMXM (9696).
Updating: The encryption code in the receiver is being
updated, and no action is required. This process
should take no longer than 30 seconds.
No Signl: The system is functioning correctly, but
the vehicle is in a location that is blocking the XM™
signal. When the vehicle is moved into an open area,
the signal should return.
Loading: The radio system is acquiring and
processing audio and text data. No action is needed.
This message should disappear shortly.
Off Air: This channel is not currently in service.
Tune to another channel.
CH Unavl: This previously assigned channel is no
longer assigned. Tune to another station. If this station
was one of the presets, choose another station for
that preset button.
No Info: No artist, song title, category, or text
information is available at this time on this channel.
The system is working properly.
No Info: No text or informational messages are
available at this time on this channel. The system
is working properly.
Not Found: There are no channels available for the
selected category. The system is working properly.
XM Lock: The XM™receiver in your vehicle could
have previously been in another vehicle. For security
purposes, XM™receivers cannot be swapped between
vehicles. If this message is received after having
your vehicle serviced, check with your dealer/retailer.
Radio ID: If this message is received when tuned
to channel 0, there could be a receiver fault. Consult
with your dealer/retailer.
Check XM: If this message does not clear within
a short period of time, the receiver could have a fault.
Consult with your dealer/retailer.
3-69
Information Provided by:

Theft-Deterrent Feature
Non-RDS Radios
THEFTLOCK® is designed to discourage theft of
your vehicle’s radio. The feature works automatically
by learning a portion of the Vehicle Identiﬁcation
Number (VIN). If the radio is moved to a different
vehicle, it does not operate and LOC displays.
With THEFTLOCK® activated, the radio does not
operate if stolen.
RDS Radios
THEFTLOCK® is designed to discourage theft of
your vehicle’s radio. The feature works automatically
by learning a portion of the Vehicle Identiﬁcation
Number (VIN). If the radio is moved to a different
vehicle, it does not operate and LOCKED displays.
When the radio and vehicle are turned off, the blinking
red light indicates that THEFTLOCK® is armed.
With THEFTLOCK® activated, the radio does not
operate if stolen.
Radio Reception
Frequency interference and static can occur during
normal radio reception if items such as cell phone
chargers, vehicle convenience accessories, and external
electronic devices are plugged into the accessory power
outlet. If there is interference or static, unplug the item
from the accessory power outlet.
AM
The range for most AM stations is greater than for FM,
especially at night. The longer range can cause station
frequencies to interfere with each other. For better radio
reception, most AM radio stations boost the power levels
during the day, and then reduce these levels during the
night. Static can also occur when things like storms and
power lines interfere with radio reception. When this
happens, try reducing the treble on your radio.
FM Stereo
FM stereo gives the best sound, but FM signals reach
only about 10 to 40 miles (16 to 65 km). Tall buildings or
hills can interfere with FM signals, causing the sound
to fade in and out.
3-70
Information Provided by:

XM™Satellite Radio Service
XM™Satellite Radio Service gives digital radio
reception from coast-to-coast in the 48 contiguous
United States, and in Canada. Just as with FM,
tall buildings or hills can interfere with satellite radio
signals, causing the sound to fade in and out. In
addition, traveling or standing under heavy foliage,
bridges, garages, or tunnels may cause loss of the XM™
signal for a period of time. The radio may display No
Signl to indicate interference.
Fixed Mast Antenna
The ﬁxed mast antenna can withstand most car
washes without being damaged. If the mast should
ever become slightly bent, straighten it out by hand.
If the mast is badly bent, replace it.
Check occasionally to make sure the mast is still
tightened to its base. If tightening is required, tighten
by hand, then with a wrench one quarter turn.
XM™Satellite Radio Antenna
System
The XM™Satellite Radio antenna is located on the roof
of your vehicle. Keep this antenna clear of snow and
ice build up for clear radio reception.
If your vehicle has a sunroof, the performance of the
XM™system may be affected if the sunroof is open.
Loading items onto the roof of your vehicle can interfere
with the performance of the XM™system. Make sure
the XM™Satellite Radio antenna is not obstructed.
Chime Level Adjustment
The radio is used to adjust the vehicle’s chime level.
To change the volume level of the chime, press and hold
pushbutton 6 with the ignition on and the radio power off.
The volume level will change from the normal level to
loud, and LOUD will appear on the radio display. To
change back to the default or normal setting, press and
hold pushbutton 6 again. The volume level will change
from the loud level to normal, and NORMAL will appear
on the radio display. Each time the chime volume is
changed, three chimes will sound to indicate the new
volume selected. Removing the radio and not replacing it
with a factory radio or chime module will disable vehicle
chimes.
3-71
Information Provided by:

✍NOTES
3-72
Information Provided by:

Your Driving, the Road, and Your Vehicle ..........4-2
Defensive Driving ...........................................4-2
Drunk Driving .................................................4-2
Control of a Vehicle ........................................4-3
Braking .........................................................4-3
Antilock Brake System (ABS) ...........................4-4
Braking in Emergencies ...................................4-5
Traction Control System (TCS) .........................4-5
Limited-Slip Rear Axle .....................................4-6
Steering ........................................................4-7
Off-Road Recovery .........................................4-9
Passing ........................................................4-9
Loss of Control .............................................4-10
Off-Road Driving ...........................................4-11
Driving at Night ............................................4-24
Driving in Rain and on Wet Roads ..................4-24
Before Leaving on a Long Trip .......................4-26
Highway Hypnosis ........................................4-26
Hill and Mountain Roads ................................4-27
Winter Driving ..............................................4-28
If Your Vehicle is Stuck in Sand, Mud, Ice,
or Snow ...................................................4-32
Rocking Your Vehicle to Get It Out .................4-32
Recovery Hooks ...........................................4-33
Loading Your Vehicle ....................................4-34
Truck-Camper Loading Information ..................4-40
Pickup Conversion to Chassis Cab ..................4-40
Towing ..........................................................4-41
Towing Your Vehicle .....................................4-41
Recreational Vehicle Towing ...........................4-41
Towing a Trailer ...........................................4-47
Trailer Recommendations ...............................4-60
Section 4
Driving Your Vehicle
4-1
Information Provided by:

Your Driving, the Road, and
Your Vehicle
Defensive Driving
Defensive driving means “always expect the
unexpected.” The ﬁrst step in driving defensively is to
wear your safety belt — See Safety Belts: They Are for
Everyone on page 1-12.
{CAUTION:
Assume that other road users (pedestrians,
bicyclists, and other drivers) are going to be
careless and make mistakes. Anticipate what
they might do and be ready. In addition:
• Allow enough following distance between
you and the driver in front of you.
• Focus on the task of driving.
Driver distraction can cause collisions
resulting in injury or possible death. These
simple defensive driving techniques could
save your life.
Drunk Driving
{CAUTION:
Drinking and then driving is very dangerous.
Your reﬂexes, perceptions, attentiveness, and
judgment can be affected by even a small
amount of alcohol. You can have a serious — or
even fatal — collision if you drive after drinking.
Do not drink and drive or ride with a driver who
has been drinking. Ride home in a cab; or if you
are with a group, designate a driver who will
not drink.
Death and injury associated with drinking and driving is
a global tragedy.
Alcohol affects four things that anyone needs to drive a
vehicle: judgment, muscular coordination, vision, and
attentiveness.
4-2
Information Provided by:

Police records show that almost 40 percent of all motor
vehicle-related deaths involve alcohol. In most cases,
these deaths are the result of someone who was
drinking and driving. In recent years, more than
17,000 annual motor vehicle-related deaths have been
associated with the use of alcohol, with about
250,000 people injured.
For persons under 21, it is against the law in every
U.S. state to drink alcohol. There are good medical,
psychological, and developmental reasons for
these laws.
The obvious way to eliminate the leading highway
safety problem is for people never to drink alcohol and
then drive.
Medical research shows that alcohol in a person’s
system can make crash injuries worse, especially
injuries to the brain, spinal cord, or heart. This means
that when anyone who has been drinking — driver
or passenger — is in a crash, that person’s chance of
being killed or permanently disabled is higher than if the
person had not been drinking.
Control of a Vehicle
The following three systems help to control your vehicle
while driving — brakes, steering, and accelerator.
At times, as when driving on snow or ice, it is easy to ask
more of those control systems than the tires and road can
provide. Meaning, you can lose control of your vehicle.
Adding non-dealer/non-retailer accessories can affect
your vehicle’s performance. See Accessories and
Modiﬁcations on page 5-3.
Braking
See Brake System Warning Light on page 3-31.
Braking action involves perception time and reaction
time. First, you have to decide to push on the brake
pedal. That is perception time. Then you have to bring
up your foot and do it. That is reaction time.
Average reaction time is about three-fourths of a
second. But that is only an average. It might be less
with one driver and as long as two or three seconds or
more with another. Age, physical condition, alertness,
coordination, and eyesight all play a part. So do alcohol,
drugs, and frustration. But even in three-fourths of a
second, a vehicle moving at 60 mph (100 km/h) travels
66 feet (20 m). That could be a lot of distance in an
emergency, so keeping enough space between
your vehicle and others is important.
4-3
Information Provided by:

And, of course, actual stopping distances vary greatly
with the surface of the road, whether it is pavement or
gravel; the condition of the road, whether it is wet, dry, or
icy; tire tread; the condition of the brakes; the weight of
the vehicle; and the amount of brake force applied.
Avoid needless heavy braking. Some people drive
in spurts — heavy acceleration followed by heavy
braking — rather than keeping pace with traffic. This is
a mistake. The brakes might not have time to cool
between hard stops. The brakes will wear out much
faster if you do a lot of heavy braking. If you keep pace
with the traffic and allow realistic following distances,
you will eliminate a lot of unnecessary braking.
That means better braking and longer brake life.
If your vehicle’s engine ever stops while you are driving,
brake normally but do not pump the brakes. If you do,
the pedal could get harder to push down. If the
engine stops, you will still have some power brake
assist. But you will use it when you brake. Once the
power assist is used up, it can take longer to stop and
the brake pedal will be harder to push.
Adding non-dealer/non-retailer accessories can affect
your vehicle’s performance. See Accessories and
Modiﬁcations on page 5-3.
Antilock Brake System (ABS)
Your vehicle has the Antilock Brake System (ABS),
an advanced electronic braking system that will
help prevent a braking skid.
When you start the engine and begin to drive away,
ABS will check itself. You might hear a momentary
motor or clicking noise while this test is going on.
This is normal.
If there is a problem with
the ABS, this warning light
will stay on. See Antilock
Brake System Warning
Light on page 3-32.
Let us say the road is wet and you are driving safely.
Suddenly, an animal jumps out in front of you. You slam
on the brakes and continue braking. Here is what
happens with ABS:
A computer senses that wheels are slowing down.
If one of the wheels is about to stop rolling, the computer
will separately work the brakes at each front wheel
and at both rear wheels.
4-4
Information Provided by:

ABS can change the brake pressure faster than any
driver could. The computer is programmed to make the
most of available tire and road conditions. This can
help you steer around the obstacle while braking hard.
As you brake, the computer keeps receiving updates on
wheel speed and controls braking pressure accordingly.
Remember: ABS does not change the time you need to
get your foot up to the brake pedal or always decrease
stopping distance. If you get too close to the vehicle
in front of you, you will not have time to apply the
brakes if that vehicle suddenly slows or stops. Always
leave enough room up ahead to stop, even though
you have ABS.
Using ABS
Do not pump the brakes. Just hold the brake pedal
down ﬁrmly and let antilock work for you. You might
feel the brakes vibrate or notice some noise, but this
is normal.
Braking in Emergencies
With ABS, you can steer and brake at the same time.
In many emergencies, steering can help you more than
even the very best braking.
Traction Control System (TCS)
Your vehicle may have a Traction Control System (TCS)
that limits wheel spin. This is especially useful in
slippery road conditions. The system operates only
if it senses that one or both of the rear wheels are
spinning or beginning to lose traction. When this
happens, the system reduces engine power and may
also upshift the transmission to limit wheel spin.
You may feel or hear the system working, but this is
normal.
The TCS warning light will also ﬂash to indicate that the
traction control system is active.
This warning light will come
on to let you know if there is
a problem with your traction
control system.
The light will also illuminate when the traction control
system is turned off, and a TRAC OFF message will
also appear on the Driver Information Center (DIC).
See DIC Warnings and Messages on page 3-42
for more information.
4-5
Information Provided by:

The TCS button is located
on your instrument panel.
Press this button to
turn the TCS off and on.
If your vehicle is in cruise control when the traction
control system begins to limit wheel spin, the cruise
control will automatically disengage. When road
conditions allow you to safely use it again, you may
re-engage the cruise control. See Cruise Control
on page 3-10.
TCS operates in all transmission shift lever positions.
But the system can upshift the transmission only as high
as the shift lever position you have chosen, so you
should use the lower gears only when necessary.
See Automatic Transmission Operation on page 2-24
and/or Manual Transmission Operation on page 2-26
for more information.
If there is a problem with TCS, the warning light will
come on, and TRACTION FAULT will be displayed on
your Driver Information Center (DIC). When this warning
is displayed, the system will not limit wheel spin.
Adjust your driving accordingly.
To limit wheel spin, especially in slippery road
conditions, you should always leave TCS on. But you
can turn the system off if you ever need to. You should
turn the system off if your vehicle ever gets stuck in
sand, mud or snow and rocking the vehicle is required.
See Rocking Your Vehicle to Get It Out on page 4-32
and If Your Vehicle is Stuck in Sand, Mud, Ice, or Snow
on page 4-32 for more information.
Adding non-dealer/non-retailer accessories can affect
your vehicle’s performance. See Accessories and
Modiﬁcations on page 5-3 for more information.
Limited-Slip Rear Axle
If your vehicle has this feature, your limited-slip rear
axle can give you additional traction on snow, mud, ice,
sand or gravel. It works like a standard axle most of
the time, but when one of the rear wheels has no
traction and the other does, this feature will allow the
wheel with traction to move the vehicle.
4-6
Information Provided by:

Steering
Power Steering
If you lose power steering assist because the engine
stops or the system is not functioning, you can steer but
it will take much more effort.
Steering Tips
It is important to take curves at a reasonable speed.
A lot of the “driver lost control” accidents mentioned on
the news happen on curves. Here is why:
Experienced driver or beginner, each of us is subject
to the same laws of physics when driving on curves.
The traction of the tires against the road surface
makes it possible for the vehicle to change its path
when you turn the front wheels. If there is no traction,
inertia will keep the vehicle going in the same direction.
If you have ever tried to steer a vehicle on wet ice,
you will understand this.
The traction you can get in a curve depends on the
condition of the tires and the road surface, the angle
at which the curve is banked, and your speed.
While you are in a curve, speed is the one factor you
can control.
Suppose you are steering through a sharp curve.
Then you suddenly accelerate. Both control
systems — steering and acceleration — have to do
their work where the tires meet the road. Adding
the sudden acceleration can demand too much of those
places. You can lose control.
What should you do if this ever happens? Ease up on
the accelerator pedal, steer the vehicle the way you
want it to go, and slow down.
Speed limit signs near curves warn that you should
adjust your speed. Of course, the posted speeds
are based on good weather and road conditions. Under
less favorable conditions you will want to go slower.
If you need to reduce your speed as you approach
a curve, do it before you enter the curve, while the front
wheels are straight ahead.
Try to adjust your speed so you can drive through the
curve. Maintain a reasonable, steady speed. Wait to
accelerate until you are out of the curve, and then
accelerate gently into the straightaway.
Adding non-dealer/non-retailer accessories can affect
your vehicle’s performance. See Accessories and
Modiﬁcations on page 5-3.
4-7
Information Provided by:

Steering in Emergencies
There are times when steering can be more effective
than braking. For example, you come over a hill and ﬁnd
a truck stopped in your lane, or a car suddenly pulls
out from nowhere, or a child darts out from between
parked cars and stops right in front of you. You can
avoid these problems by braking — if you can stop in
time. But sometimes you cannot; there is not room.
That is the time for evasive action — steering around
the problem.
Your vehicle can perform very well in emergencies
like these. First apply the brakes. See Braking on
page 4-3. It is better to remove as much speed as you
can from a possible collision. Then steer around the
problem, to the left or right depending on the space
available.
An emergency like this requires close attention and a
quick decision. If you are holding the steering wheel at
the recommended 9 and 3 o’clock positions, you
can turn it a full 180 degrees very quickly without
removing either hand. But you have to act fast, steer
quickly, and just as quickly straighten the wheel
once you have avoided the object.
The fact that such emergency situations are always
possible is a good reason to practice defensive driving
at all times and wear safety belts properly.
4-8
Information Provided by:

Off-Road Recovery
You may ﬁnd that your right wheels have dropped off the
edge of a road onto the shoulder while you are driving.
If the level of the shoulder is only slightly below the
pavement, recovery should be fairly easy. Ease off the
accelerator and then, if there is nothing in the way,
steer so that your vehicle straddles the edge of
the pavement. You can turn the steering wheel up to
one-quarter turn until the right front tire contacts
the pavement edge. Then turn the steering wheel to go
straight down the roadway.
Passing
Passing another vehicle on a two-lane road can be
dangerous. To reduce the risk of danger while passing,
we suggest the following tips:
•
Look down the road, to the sides, and to crossroads
for situations that might affect a successful pass.
If in doubt, wait.
•
Watch for traffic signs, pavement markings, and
lines that could indicate a turn or an intersection.
Never cross a solid or double-solid line on your side
of the lane.
•
Do not get too close to the vehicle you want to
pass. Doing so can reduce your visibility.
•
Wait your turn to pass a slow vehicle.
•
When you are being passed, ease to the right.
4-9
Information Provided by:

Loss of Control
Let us review what driving experts say about what
happens when the three control systems — brakes,
steering, and acceleration — do not have enough friction
where the tires meet the road to do what the driver
has asked.
In any emergency, do not give up. Keep trying to steer
and constantly seek an escape route or area of less
danger.
Skidding
In a skid, a driver can lose control of the vehicle.
Defensive drivers avoid most skids by taking reasonable
care suited to existing conditions, and by not overdriving
those conditions. But skids are always possible.
The three types of skids correspond to your vehicle’s
three control systems. In the braking skid, the wheels are
not rolling. In the steering or cornering skid, too much
speed or steering in a curve causes tires to slip and lose
cornering force. And in the acceleration skid, too much
throttle causes the driving wheels to spin.
A cornering skid is best handled by easing your foot off
the accelerator pedal.
If your vehicle starts to slide, ease your foot off the
accelerator pedal and quickly steer the way you want
the vehicle to go. If you start steering quickly enough,
your vehicle may straighten out. Always be ready
for a second skid if it occurs.
Of course, traction is reduced when water, snow, ice,
gravel, or other material is on the road. For safety, you
want to slow down and adjust your driving to these
conditions. It is important to slow down on slippery
surfaces because stopping distance is longer and
vehicle control more limited.
While driving on a surface with reduced traction,
try your best to avoid sudden steering, acceleration, or
braking, including reducing vehicle speed by shifting
to a lower gear. Any sudden changes could cause the
tires to slide. You might not realize the surface is
slippery until your vehicle is skidding. Learn to
recognize warning clues — such as enough water, ice,
or packed snow on the road to make a mirrored
surface — and slow down when you have any doubt.
Remember: Any Antilock Brake System (ABS) helps
avoid only the braking skid.
4-10
Information Provided by:

Off-Road Driving
This off-road guide is for vehicles that have four-wheel
drive. Also, see Braking on page 4-3 and Antilock
Brake System (ABS) on page 4-4. If your vehicle does
not have four-wheel drive, you should not drive
off-road unless you are on a level, solid surface.
The airbag system is designed to work properly under a
wide range of conditions, including off-road usage.
Observe safe driving speeds, especially on rough
terrain. As always, wear your safety belt.
Off-road driving can be great fun. But it does have
some deﬁnite hazards. The greatest of these is
the terrain itself.
“Off-roading” means you have left the great North
American road system behind. Traffic lanes are not
marked. Curves are not banked. There are no road
signs. Surfaces can be slippery, rough, uphill, or
downhill. In short, you have gone right back to nature.
Off-road driving involves some new skills. And that is why
it is very important that you read this guide. You will ﬁnd
many driving tips and suggestions. These will help make
your off-road driving safer and more enjoyable.
Before You Go Off-Roading
There are some things to do before you go out.
For example, be sure to have all necessary maintenance
and service work done. Check to make sure all
underbody shields, if the vehicle has them, are properly
attached. Be sure you read all the information about
your four-wheel-drive vehicle in this manual. Is there
enough fuel? Is the spare tire fully inﬂated? Are the ﬂuid
levels up where they should be? What are the local
laws that apply to off-roading where you will be driving?
If you do not know, you should check with law
enforcement people in the area. Will you be on
someone’s private land? If so, be sure to get the
necessary permission.
4-11
Information Provided by:

Loading Your Vehicle for Off-Road
Driving
{CAUTION:
• Cargo on the load ﬂoor piled higher than
the seatbacks can be thrown forward
during a sudden stop. You or your
passengers could be injured. Keep cargo
below the top of the seatbacks.
• Unsecured cargo on the load ﬂoor can be
tossed about when driving over rough
terrain. You or your passengers can be
struck by ﬂying objects. Secure the cargo
properly.
• Heavy loads on the roof raise the vehicle’s
center of gravity, making it more likely to
roll over. You can be seriously or fatally
injured if the vehicle rolls over. Put heavy
loads inside the cargo area, not on the
roof. Keep cargo in the cargo area as far
forward and low as possible.
There are some important things to remember about
how to load your vehicle.
•
The heaviest things should be on the load ﬂoor and
forward of the rear axle. Put heavier items as far
forward as you can.
•
Be sure the load is secured properly, so driving on
the off-road terrain does not toss things around.
You will ﬁnd other important information in this manual.
See Loading Your Vehicle on page 4-34 and Tires
on page 5-59.
4-12
Information Provided by:

Environmental Concerns
Off-road driving can provide wholesome and satisfying
recreation. However, it also raises environmental
concerns. We recognize these concerns and urge every
off-roader to follow these basic rules for protecting
the environment:
•
Always use established trails, roads, and areas that
have been specially set aside for public off-road
recreational driving; obey all posted regulations.
•
Avoid any driving practice that could damage
the environment — shrubs, ﬂowers, trees,
grasses — or disturb wildlife. This includes
wheel-spinning, breaking down trees, or
unnecessary driving through streams or over
soft ground.
•
Always carry a litter bag — make sure all refuse is
removed from any campsite before leaving.
•
Take extreme care with open ﬁres where permitted,
camp stoves, and lanterns.
•
Never park your vehicle over dry grass or other
combustible materials that could catch ﬁre from
the heat of the vehicle’s exhaust system.
Traveling to Remote Areas
It makes sense to plan your trip, especially when going
to a remote area. Know the terrain and plan your
route. You are much less likely to get bad surprises.
Get accurate maps of trails and terrain. Try to learn of
any blocked or closed roads.
It is also a good idea to travel with at least one other
vehicle. If something happens to one of them, the other
can help quickly.
Does your vehicle have a winch? If so, be sure to read
the winch instructions. In a remote area, a winch can
be handy if you get stuck. But you will want to know how
to use it properly.
4-13
Information Provided by:

Getting Familiar with Off-Road Driving
It is a good idea to practice in an area that is safe
and close to home before you go into the wilderness.
Off-road driving does require some new and different
skills. Here is what we mean.
Tune your senses to different kinds of signals. Your
eyes, for example, need to constantly sweep the terrain
for unexpected obstacles. Your ears need to listen
for unusual tire or engine sounds. With your arms,
hands, feet, and body, you will need to respond to
vibrations and vehicle bounce.
Controlling your vehicle is the key to successful off-road
driving. One of the best ways to control your vehicle
is to control your speed. Here are some things to keep
in mind. At higher speeds:
•
You approach things faster and you have less time
to scan the terrain for obstacles.
•
You have less time to react.
•
You have more vehicle bounce when you drive over
obstacles.
•
You will need more distance for braking, especially
since you are on an unpaved surface.
{CAUTION:
When you are driving off-road, bouncing and
quick changes in direction can easily throw
you out of position. This could cause you to
lose control and crash. So, whether you are
driving on or off the road, you and your
passengers should wear safety belts.
Scanning the Terrain
Off-road driving can take you over many different kinds
of terrain. You need to be familiar with the terrain
and its many different features. Here are some things
to consider.
Surface Conditions: Off-roading can take you over
hard-packed dirt, gravel, rocks, grass, sand, mud, snow,
or ice. Each of these surfaces affects the steering,
acceleration, and braking of your vehicle in different
ways. Depending upon the kind of surface you are on,
you may experience slipping, sliding, wheel spinning,
delayed acceleration, poor traction, and longer braking
distances.
4-14
Information Provided by:

Surface Obstacles: Unseen or hidden obstacles can
be hazardous. A rock, log, hole, rut, or bump can startle
you if you are not prepared for them. Often these
obstacles are hidden by grass, bushes, snow, or even
the rise and fall of the terrain itself. Here are some
things to consider:
•
Is the path ahead clear?
•
Will the surface texture change abruptly up ahead?
•
Does the travel take you uphill or downhill?
There is more discussion of these subjects later.
•
Will you have to stop suddenly or change direction
quickly?
When you drive over obstacles or rough terrain, keep a
ﬁrm grip on the steering wheel. Ruts, troughs, or
other surface features can jerk the wheel out of your
hands if you are not prepared.
When you drive over bumps, rocks, or other obstacles,
the wheels can leave the ground. If this happens,
even with one or two wheels, you cannot control the
vehicle as well or at all.
Because you will be on an unpaved surface, it is
especially important to avoid sudden acceleration,
sudden turns, or sudden braking.
In a way, off-road driving requires a different kind of
alertness from driving on paved roads and highways.
There are no road signs, posted speed limits, or signal
lights. You have to use your own good judgment
about what is safe and what is not.
Drinking and driving can be very dangerous on any
road. And this is certainly true for off-road driving.
At the very time you need special alertness and driving
skills, your reﬂexes, perceptions, and judgment can
be affected by even a small amount of alcohol.
You could have a serious — or even fatal — accident
if you drink and drive or ride with a driver who has been
drinking. See Drunk Driving on page 4-2.
4-15
Information Provided by:

Driving on Off-Road Hills
Off-road driving often takes you up, down, or across a
hill. Driving safely on hills requires good judgment
and an understanding of what your vehicle can and
cannot do. There are some hills that simply cannot be
driven, no matter how well built the vehicle.
{CAUTION:
Many hills are simply too steep for any vehicle.
If you drive up them, you will stall. If you drive
down them, you cannot control your speed.
If you drive across them, you will roll over.
You could be seriously injured or killed. If you
have any doubt about the steepness, do not
drive the hill.
Approaching a Hill
When you approach a hill, you need to decide if it is
one of those hills that is just too steep to climb,
descend, or cross. Steepness can be hard to judge.
On a very small hill, for example, there may be a
smooth, constant incline with only a small change in
elevation where you can easily see all the way to
the top. On a large hill, the incline may get steeper as
you near the top, but you may not see this because the
crest of the hill is hidden by bushes, grass, or shrubs.
Here are some other things to consider as you
approach a hill.
•
Is there a constant incline, or does the hill get
sharply steeper in places?
•
Is there good traction on the hillside, or will the
surface cause tire slipping?
•
Is there a straight path up or down the hill so you
will not have to make turning maneuvers?
•
Are there obstructions on the hill that can block your
path, such as boulders, trees, logs, or ruts?
•
What is beyond the hill? Is there a cliff, an
embankment, a drop-off, a fence? Get out and
walk the hill if you do not know. It is the smart way
to ﬁnd out.
•
Is the hill simply too rough? Steep hills often have
ruts, gullies, troughs, and exposed rocks because
they are more susceptible to the effects of erosion.
4-16
Information Provided by:

Driving Uphill
Once you decide you can safely drive up the hill, you
need to take some special steps.
•
Use a low gear and get a ﬁrm grip on the
steering wheel.
•
Get a smooth start up the hill and try to maintain
your speed. Do not use more power than you
need, because you do not want the wheels to start
spinning or sliding.
{CAUTION:
Turning or driving across steep hills can be
dangerous. You could lose traction, slide
sideways, and possibly roll over. You could be
seriously injured or killed. When driving up
hills, always try to go straight up.
•
Try to drive straight up the hill if at all possible.
If the path twists and turns, you might want to
ﬁnd another route.
•
Ease up on your speed as you approach the top
of the hill.
•
Attach a ﬂag to the vehicle to make you more
visible to approaching traffic on trails or hills.
•
Sound the horn as you approach the top of the hill
to let opposing traffic know you are there.
•
Use your headlamps even during the day.
They make your vehicle more visible to
oncoming traffic.
{CAUTION:
Driving to the top (crest) of a hill at full speed
can cause an accident. There could be a
drop-off, embankment, cliff, or even another
vehicle. You could be seriously injured or
killed. As you near the top of a hill, slow down
and stay alert.
4-17
Information Provided by:

There are some things you should do if the vehicle stalls,
or is about to stall, and you cannot make it up the hill:
•
Push the brake pedal to stop the vehicle and keep it
from rolling backwards. Also, apply the parking
brake.
•
If your engine is still running, shift the transmission to
REVERSE (R), release the parking brake, and slowly
back down the hill in REVERSE (R).
•
If your engine has stopped running, you will need to
restart it. With the brake pedal pressed and the
parking brake still applied, shift the transmission to
PARK (P), or shift to NEUTRAL if your vehicle has a
manual transmission, and restart the engine. Then,
shift to REVERSE (R), release the parking brake,
and slowly back down the hill as straight as possible
in REVERSE (R).
•
As you are backing down the hill, put your left hand
on the steering wheel at the 12 o’clock position.
This way, you will be able to tell if the wheels are
straight and maneuver as you back down. It is best
that you back down the hill with the wheels straight
rather than in the left or right direction. Turning the
wheel too far to the left or right will increase the
possibility of a rollover.
There are also some things you must not do if you stall,
or are about to stall, when going up a hill:
•
Never attempt to prevent a stall by shifting into
NEUTRAL (N), or pressing the clutch if your vehicle
has a manual transmission, to rev-up the engine
and regain forward momentum. This will not work.
Your vehicle will roll backwards very quickly and you
could go out of control.
Instead, apply the regular brake to stop the
vehicle. Then apply the parking brake. Shift to
REVERSE (R), release the parking brake, and
slowly back straight down.
•
Never attempt to turn around if you are about to stall
when going up a hill. If the hill is steep enough to stall
your vehicle, it is steep enough to cause you to roll
over if you turn around. If you cannot make it up the
hill, you must back straight down the hill.
If, after stalling, you try to back down the hill and decide
you just cannot do it, set the parking brake, put the
automatic transmission in PARK (P), or the manual
transmission in FIRST (1), and turn off the engine.
Leave the vehicle and go get some help. Exit on the
uphill side and stay clear of the path the vehicle would
take if it rolled downhill.
4-18
Information Provided by:

Driving Downhill
When off-roading takes you downhill, you will want to
consider a number of things:
•
How steep is the downhill? Will I be able to maintain
vehicle control?
•
What is the surface like? Smooth? Rough?
Slippery? Hard-packed dirt? Gravel?
•
Are there hidden surface obstacles? Ruts? Logs?
Boulders?
•
What is at the bottom of the hill? Is there a hidden
creek bank or even a river bottom with large rocks?
If you decide you can go down a hill safely, then try to
keep your vehicle headed straight down, and use a
low gear. This way, engine drag can help the brakes and
they will not have to do all the work. Descend slowly,
keeping your vehicle under control at all times.
{CAUTION:
Heavy braking when going down a hill can
cause your brakes to overheat and fade.
This could cause loss of control and a serious
accident. Apply the brakes lightly when
descending a hill and use a low gear to keep
vehicle speed under control.
There some things not to do when driving down a hill.
These are important because, if you ignore them,
you could lose control and have a serious accident:
•
When driving downhill, avoid turns that take
you across the incline of the hill. A hill that is not
too steep to drive down may be too steep to
drive across. You could roll over if you do not drive
straight down.
•
Never go downhill with the transmission in
NEUTRAL (N), or with the clutch pedal pressed
down with a manual transmission. This is called
“free-wheeling.” The brakes will have to do all the
work and could overheat and fade.
Your vehicle is much more likely to stall when going
uphill. But if it happens when going downhill:
1. Stop your vehicle by applying the regular brakes.
Apply the parking brake.
2. Shift to PARK (P), or to NEUTRAL with the manual
transmission, and, while still braking, restart the
engine.
3. Shift back to a low gear, release the parking brake,
and drive straight down.
4. If the engine will not start, get out and get help.
4-19
Information Provided by:

Driving Across an Incline
Sooner or later, an off-road trail will probably go across
the incline of a hill. If this happens, you have to
decide whether to try to drive across the incline.
Here are some things to consider:
{CAUTION:
Driving across an incline that is too steep will
make your vehicle roll over. You could be
seriously injured or killed. If you have any
doubt about the steepness of the incline, do
not drive across it. Find another route instead.
•
A hill that can be driven straight up or down
may be too steep to drive across. When you go
straight up or down a hill, the length of the wheel
base — the distance from the front wheels to
the rear wheels — reduces the likelihood the
vehicle will tumble end over end. But when you
drive across an incline, the much more narrow track
width — the distance between the left and right
wheels — may not prevent the vehicle from tilting
and rolling over. Also, driving across an incline puts
more weight on the downhill wheels. This could
cause a downhill slide or a rollover.
•
Surface conditions can be a problem when you
drive across a hill. Loose gravel, muddy spots,
or even wet grass can cause your tires to slip
sideways, downhill. If the vehicle slips sideways,
it can hit something that will trip it — a rock, a rut,
etc. — and roll over.
•
Hidden obstacles can make the steepness of the
incline even worse. If you drive across a rock with the
uphill wheels, or if the downhill wheels drop into a rut
or depression, your vehicle can tilt even more.
For reasons like these, you need to decide carefully
whether to try to drive across an incline. Just because
the trail goes across the incline does not mean you
have to drive it. The last vehicle to try it might have
rolled over.
When driving across an incline that is not too steep,
the vehicle can hit some loose gravel and start to
slide downhill. If you feel your vehicle starting to slide
sideways, turn downhill. This should help straighten out
the vehicle and prevent the side slipping. However,
a much better way to prevent this is to get out and
“walk the course” so you know what the surface is like
before you drive it.
4-20
Information Provided by:

Stalling on an Incline
{CAUTION:
Getting out on the downhill (low) side of a
vehicle stopped across an incline is dangerous.
If the vehicle rolls over, you could be crushed
or killed. Always get out on the uphill (high)
side of the vehicle and stay well clear of the
rollover path.
If your vehicle stalls when you are crossing an incline,
be sure you, and any passengers, get out on the
uphill side, even if the door there is harder to open.
If you get out on the downhill side and the vehicle starts
to roll over, you will be right in its path.
If you have to walk down the slope, stay out of the path
the vehicle will take if it does roll over.
4-21
Information Provided by:

Driving in Mud, Sand, Snow, or Ice
When you drive in mud, snow, or sand, your wheels will
not get good traction. You cannot accelerate as quickly,
turning is more difficult, and you will need longer
braking distances.
It is best to use a low gear when you are in mud — the
deeper the mud, the lower the gear. In really deep mud,
the idea is to keep your vehicle moving so you do
not get stuck.
When you drive on sand, you will sense a change in
wheel traction. But it will depend upon how loosely
packed the sand is. On loosely packed sand, such as
on beaches or sand dunes, your tires will tend to
sink into the sand. This has an effect on steering,
accelerating, and braking. Drive at a reduced speed
and avoid sharp turns or abrupt maneuvers.
Hard packed snow and ice offer the worst tire traction.
On these surfaces, it is very easy to lose control.
On wet ice, for example, the traction is so poor that you
will have difficulty accelerating. And if you do get
moving, poor steering and difficult braking can cause
you to slide out of control.
{CAUTION:
Driving on frozen lakes, ponds, or rivers can
be dangerous. Underwater springs, currents
under the ice, or sudden thaws can weaken
the ice. Your vehicle could fall through the ice
and you and your passengers could drown.
Drive your vehicle on safe surfaces only.
4-22
Information Provided by:

Driving in Water
{CAUTION:
Driving through rushing water can be
dangerous. Deep water can sweep your vehicle
downstream and you and your passengers
could drown. If it is only shallow water, it can
still wash away the ground from under your
tires, and you could lose traction and roll the
vehicle over. Do not drive through rushing
water.
Heavy rain can mean ﬂash ﬂooding, and ﬂood waters
demand extreme caution.
Find out how deep the water is before you drive
through it. If it is deep enough to cover the wheel hubs,
axles, or exhaust pipe, do not try it — you probably
will not get through. Also, water that deep can damage
the axle and other vehicle parts.
If the water is not too deep, drive slowly through it.
At faster speeds, water splashes on the ignition system
and your vehicle can stall. Stalling can also occur if you
get the tailpipe under water. And, as long as the tailpipe is
under water, you will never be able to start the engine.
When you go through water, remember that when the
brakes get wet, it may take you longer to stop.
See Driving in Rain and on Wet Roads on page 4-24
for more information on driving through water.
After Off-Road Driving
Remove any brush or debris that has collected on
the underbody, chassis, or under the hood.
These accumulations can be a ﬁre hazard.
After operation in mud or sand, have the brake linings
cleaned and checked. These substances can cause
glazing and uneven braking. Check the body structure,
steering, suspension, wheels, tires, and exhaust
system for damage. Also, check the fuel lines and
cooling system for any leakage.
Your vehicle will require more frequent service due to
off-road use. Refer to the maintenance schedule
for additional information.
4-23
Information Provided by:

Driving at Night
Night driving is more dangerous than day driving because
some drivers are likely to be impaired — by alcohol or
drugs, with night vision problems, or by fatigue.
Night driving tips include:
•
Drive defensively.
•
Do not drink and drive.
•
Reduce headlamp glare by adjusting the inside
rearview mirror.
•
Slow down and keep more space between you and
other vehicles because your headlamps can only
light up so much road ahead.
•
Watch for animals.
•
When tired, pull off the road.
•
Do not wear sunglasses.
•
Avoid staring directly into approaching headlamps.
•
Keep the windshield and all glass on your vehicle
clean — inside and out.
•
Keep your eyes moving, especially during turns
or curves.
No one can see as well at night as in the daytime.
But, as we get older, these differences increase.
A 50-year-old driver might need at least twice as much
light to see the same thing at night as a 20-year-old.
Driving in Rain and on Wet Roads
Rain and wet roads can reduce vehicle traction and
affect your ability to stop and accelerate. Always drive
slower in these types of driving conditions and avoid
driving through large puddles and deep-standing
or ﬂowing water.
4-24
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Wet brakes can cause crashes. They might not
work as well in a quick stop and could cause
pulling to one side. You could lose control of
the vehicle.
After driving through a large puddle of water
or a car/vehicle wash, lightly apply the brake
pedal until the brakes work normally.
Flowing or rushing water creates strong
forces. Driving through ﬂowing water could
cause your vehicle to be carried away. If this
happens, you and other vehicle occupants
could drown. Do not ignore police warnings
and be very cautious about trying to drive
through ﬂowing water.
Hydroplaning
Hydroplaning is dangerous. Water can build up under
your vehicle’s tires so they actually ride on the
water. This can happen if the road is wet enough and
you are going fast enough. When your vehicle is
hydroplaning, it has little or no contact with the road.
There is no hard and fast rule about hydroplaning.
The best advice is to slow down when the road is wet.
Other Rainy Weather Tips
Besides slowing down, other wet weather driving tips
include:
•
Allow extra following distance.
•
Pass with caution.
•
Keep windshield wiping equipment in good shape.
•
Keep the windshield washer ﬂuid reservoir ﬁlled.
•
Have good tires with proper tread depth. See Tires
on page 5-59.
4-25
Information Provided by:

Before Leaving on a Long Trip
To prepare your vehicle for a long trip, consider having
it serviced by your dealer/retailer before departing.
Things to check on your own include:
•
Windshield Washer Fluid: Reservoir full? Windows
clean — inside and outside?
•
Wiper Blades: In good shape?
•
Fuel, Engine Oil, Other Fluids: All levels checked?
•
Lamps: Do they all work and are lenses clean?
•
Tires: Are treads good? Are tires inﬂated to
recommended pressure?
•
Weather and Maps: Safe to travel?
Have up-to-date maps?
Highway Hypnosis
Always be alert and pay attention to your surroundings
while driving. If you become tired or sleepy, ﬁnd a
safe place to park your vehicle and rest.
Other driving tips include:
•
Keep the vehicle well ventilated.
•
Keep interior temperature cool.
•
Keep your eyes moving — scan the road ahead
and to the sides.
•
Check the rearview mirror and vehicle
instruments often.
4-26
Information Provided by:

Hill and Mountain Roads
Driving on steep hills or through mountains is different
than driving on ﬂat or rolling terrain. Tips for driving
in these conditions include:
•
Keep your vehicle serviced and in good shape.
•
Check all ﬂuid levels and brakes, tires, cooling
system, and transmission.
•
Going down steep or long hills, shift to a
lower gear.
{CAUTION:
If you do not shift down, the brakes could get
so hot that they would not work well. You
would then have poor braking or even none
going down a hill. You could crash. Shift down
to let the engine assist the brakes on a steep
downhill slope.
{CAUTION:
Coasting downhill in NEUTRAL (N) or with the
ignition off is dangerous. The brakes will have
to do all the work of slowing down and they
could get so hot that they would not work well.
You would then have poor braking or even
none going down a hill. You could crash.
Always have the engine running and your
vehicle in gear when you go downhill.
•
Stay in your own lane. Do not swing wide or cut
across the center of the road. Drive at speeds
that let you stay in your own lane.
•
Top of hills: Be alert — something could be in your
lane (stalled car, accident).
•
Pay attention to special road signs (falling rocks
area, winding roads, long grades, passing or
no-passing zones) and take appropriate action.
See Off-Road Driving on page 4-11 for information
about driving off-road.
4-27
Information Provided by:

Winter Driving
Here are some tips for winter driving:
•
Have your vehicle in good shape for winter.
•
You might want to put winter emergency supplies
in your vehicle.
Include an ice scraper, a small brush or broom, a
supply of windshield washer ﬂuid, a rag, some winter
outer clothing, a small shovel, a ﬂashlight, a red
cloth, and a couple of reﬂective warning triangles. And,
if you will be driving under severe conditions, include
a small bag of sand, a piece of old carpet, or a couple of
burlap bags to help provide traction. Be sure you
properly secure these items in your vehicle.
Also see Tires on page 5-59.
Driving on Snow or Ice
Most of the time, those places where the tires meet the
road probably have good traction.
However, if there is snow or ice between the tires and
the road, you can have a very slippery situation.
You have a lot less traction, or grip, and need to be
very careful.
4-28
Information Provided by:

What is the worst time for this? Wet ice. Very cold snow
or ice can be slick and hard to drive on. But wet ice
can be even more trouble because it can offer the least
traction of all. You can get wet ice when it is about
freezing, 32°F (0°C), and freezing rain begins to fall.
Try to avoid driving on wet ice until salt and sand crews
can get there.
Whatever the condition — smooth ice, packed, blowing,
or loose snow — drive with caution.
Accelerate gently. Try not to break the fragile traction.
If you accelerate too fast, the drive wheels will spin and
polish the surface under the tires even more.
The Antilock Brake System (ABS) improves your
vehicle’s stability when you make a hard stop on a
slippery road. Even though you have ABS, begin
stopping sooner than you would on dry pavement.
See Antilock Brake System (ABS) on page 4-4.
•
Allow greater following distance on any
slippery road.
•
Watch for slippery spots. The road might be ﬁne
until you hit a spot that is covered with ice.
On an otherwise clear road, ice patches can appear
in shaded areas where the sun cannot reach,
such as around clumps of trees, behind buildings,
or under bridges. Sometimes the surface of a curve
or an overpass can remain icy when the surrounding
roads are clear. If you see a patch of ice ahead
of you, brake before you are on it. Try not to brake
while you are actually on the ice, and avoid
sudden steering maneuvers.
4-29
Information Provided by:

If You Are Caught in a Blizzard
If you are stopped by heavy snow, you could be in a
serious situation. You should probably stay with
your vehicle unless you know for sure that you are near
help and you can hike through the snow. Here are
some things to do to summon help and keep yourself
and your passengers safe:
•
Turn on the hazard warning ﬂashers.
•
Tie a red cloth to your vehicle to alert police that
you have been stopped by the snow.
•
Put on extra clothing or wrap a blanket around you.
If you do not have blankets or extra clothing, make
body insulators from newspapers, burlap bags,
rags, ﬂoor mats — anything you can wrap around
yourself or tuck under your clothing to keep warm.
You can run the engine to keep warm, but be careful.
4-30
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Snow can trap exhaust gases under your
vehicle. This can cause deadly CO (carbon
monoxide) gas to get inside. CO could
overcome you and kill you. You cannot see it
or smell it, so you might not know it is in your
vehicle. Clear away snow from around the
base of your vehicle, especially any that is
blocking the exhaust pipe. And check around
again from time to time to be sure snow does
not collect there.
Open a window just a little on the side of the
vehicle that is away from the wind. This will
help keep CO out.
Run your engine only as long as you must. This saves
fuel. When you run the engine, make it go a little
faster than just idle. That is, push the accelerator
slightly. This uses less fuel for the heat that you get
and it keeps the battery charged. You will need a
well-charged battery to restart the vehicle, and possibly
for signaling later on with the headlamps. Let the
heater run for a while.
Then, shut the engine off and close the window almost
all the way to preserve the heat. Start the engine again
and repeat this only when you feel really uncomfortable
from the cold. But do it as little as possible. Preserve
the fuel as long as you can. To help keep warm, you can
get out of the vehicle and do some fairly vigorous
exercises every half hour or so until help comes.
4-31
Information Provided by:

If Your Vehicle is Stuck in Sand,
Mud, Ice, or Snow
Slowly and cautiously spin the wheels to free your
vehicle when stuck in sand, mud, ice, or snow.
See Rocking Your Vehicle to Get It Out on page 4-32.
If your vehicle has a traction system, it can often help to
free a stuck vehicle. Refer to your vehicle’s traction
system in the Index. If the stuck condition is too severe
for the traction system to free the vehicle, turn the
traction system off and use the rocking method.
{CAUTION:
If you let your vehicle’s tires spin at high
speed, they can explode, and you or others
could be injured. The vehicle can overheat,
causing an engine compartment ﬁre or other
damage. Spin the wheels as little as possible
and avoid going above 35 mph (55 km/h) as
shown on the speedometer.
For information about using tire chains on your vehicle,
see Tire Chains on page 5-82.
Rocking Your Vehicle to Get It Out
First, turn the steering wheel left and right to clear
the area around the front wheels. For four-wheel drive
vehicles, shift into 4HI. For vehicles with traction control,
turn the system off. See Traction Control System (TCS)
on page 4-5. Then shift back and forth between
REVERSE (R) and a forward gear, or with a manual
transmission, between FIRST (1) or SECOND (2)
and REVERSE (R), spinning the wheels as little as
possible. To prevent transmission wear, wait until
the wheels stop spinning before shifting gears. Release
the accelerator pedal while you shift, and press lightly
on the accelerator pedal when the transmission is
in gear. By slowly spinning the wheels in the forward
and reverse directions, you will cause a rocking motion
that could free your vehicle. If that does not get your
vehicle out after a few tries, it might need to be towed
out. Or, you can use the recovery hooks, if your vehicle
has them. If your vehicle does need to be towed
out, see Towing Your Vehicle on page 4-41.
4-32
Information Provided by:

Recovery Hooks
{CAUTION:
These hooks, when used, are under a lot of
force. Always pull the vehicle straight out.
Never pull on the hooks at a sideways angle.
The hooks could break off and you or others
could be injured from the chain or cable
snapping back.
Notice:
Never use recovery hooks to tow the
vehicle. Your vehicle could be damaged and it
would not be covered by warranty.
For vehicles with recovery hooks at the front of the
vehicle, you can use them if you are stuck off-road
and need to be pulled to some place where you can
continue driving.
4-33
Information Provided by:

Loading Your Vehicle
It is very important to know how much weight your
vehicle can carry. This weight is called the
vehicle capacity weight and includes the weight of
all occupants, cargo, and all nonfactory-installed
options. Two labels on your vehicle show how
much weight it may properly carry, the Tire and
Loading Information label and the Certiﬁcation/Tire
label.
{CAUTION:
Do not load your vehicle any heavier than
the Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR),
or either the maximum front or rear Gross
Axle Weight Rating (GAWR). If you do,
parts on your vehicle can break, and it
can change the way your vehicle handles.
These could cause you to lose control
and crash. Also, overloading can shorten
the life of your vehicle.
Tire and Loading Information Label
A vehicle speciﬁc Tire and Loading Information
label is attached to the vehicle’s center pillar
(B-pillar). With the driver’s door open, you will ﬁnd
the label attached below the door latch post.
Vehicle’s without a center pillar, like extended cab
models, will have the Tire and Loading Information
label attached to the driver’s side extended cab
door, above the door latch post. The Tire and
Label Example
4-34
Information Provided by:

Loading Information label shows the number of
occupant seating positions (A), and the maximum
vehicle capacity weight (B) in kilograms and
pounds.
The Tire and Loading Information label also shows
the size of the original equipment tires (C) and
the recommended cold tire inﬂation pressures (D).
For more information on tires and inﬂation see
Tires on page 5-59 and Inﬂation - Tire Pressure on
page 5-66.
There is also important information on the
Certiﬁcation/Tire label. It tells you the Gross
Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) and the Gross
Axle Weight Rating (GAWR) for the front and rear
axles. See “Certiﬁcation/Tire Label” later in this
section.
Steps for Determining Correct Load Limit
1. Locate the statement “The combined weight of
occupants and cargo should never exceed
XXX kg or XXX lbs’’ on your vehicle’s placard.
2. Determine the combined weight of the driver
and passengers that will be riding in your
vehicle.
3. Subtract the combined weight of the driver
and passengers from XXX kg or XXX lbs.
4. The resulting ﬁgure equals the available
amount of cargo and luggage load capacity.
For example, if the “XXX” amount equals
1400 lbs and there will be ﬁve 150 lb
passengers in your vehicle, the amount of
available cargo and luggage load capacity is
650 lbs (1400 −750 (5 x 150) = 650 lbs).
5. Determine the combined weight of luggage
and cargo being loaded on the vehicle.
That weight may not safely exceed the
available cargo and luggage load capacity
calculated in Step 4.
6. If your vehicle will be towing a trailer, the load
from your trailer will be transferred to your
vehicle. Consult this manual to determine how
this reduces the available cargo and luggage
load capacity of your vehicle.
See Towing a Trailer on page 4-47 for
important information on towing a trailer,
towing safety, and trailering tips.
4-35
Information Provided by:

Item
Description
Total
A
Vehicle Capacity
Weight for
Example 1 =
1,000 lbs
(453 kg)
B
Subtract Occupant
Weight 150 lbs
(68 kg) x 2 =
300 lbs (136 kg)
C
Available Cargo
Weight =
700 lbs (317 kg)
Item
Description
Total
A
Vehicle Capacity
Weight for
Example 2 =
1,000 lbs
(453 kg)
B
Subtract Occupant
Weight 150 lbs
(68 kg) x 5 =
750 lbs (340 kg)
C
Available Cargo
Weight =
250 lbs (113 kg)
Example 1
Example 2
4-36
Information Provided by:

Item
Description
Total
A
Vehicle Capacity
Weight for
Example 3 =
1,000 lbs
(453 kg)
B
Subtract Occupant
Weight 200 lbs
(91 kg) x 5 =
1,000 lbs
(453 kg)
C
Available Cargo
Weight =
0 lbs (0 kg)
Refer to your vehicle’s Tire and Loading
Information label for speciﬁc information about
your vehicle’s capacity weight and seating
positions. The combined weight of the driver,
passengers, cargo, and any accessories or
equipment added to your vehicle after it left the
factory should never exceed your vehicle’s
capacity weight.
Example 3
4-37
Information Provided by:

Certiﬁcation/Tire Label
A vehicle speciﬁc Certiﬁcation/Tire label is
attached to the bottom section of the center pillar,
on the driver’s side of the vehicle. Vehicles
without a center pillar, like extended cab models,
will have the Certiﬁcation/Tire label attached to
the edge of the driver’s side, extended cab door,
below the door latch post. The label shows
the Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR).
The GVWR includes the weight of the vehicle,
all occupants, fuel, cargo, and trailer tongue
weight, if pulling a trailer.
The Certiﬁcation/Tire label also tells you the
maximum weights for the front and rear axles,
called Gross Axle Weight Rating (GAWR).
To ﬁnd out the actual loads on your front and
rear axles, you need to go to a weigh station and
weigh your vehicle. Your dealer can help you
with this. Be sure to spread out your load equally
on both sides of the centerline.
Never exceed the GVWR for your vehicle, or the
GAWR for either the front or rear axle.
If you do have a heavy load, you should spread
it out.
Similar appearing vehicles may have different
GVWRs and capacity weights. Please note your
vehicle’s Certiﬁcation/Tire label or consult
your dealer/retailer for additional details.
Label Example
4-38
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Do not load your vehicle any heavier than
the Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR),
or either the maximum front or rear Gross
Axle Weight Rating (GAWR). If you do,
parts on your vehicle can break, and it
can change the way your vehicle handles.
These could cause you to lose control
and crash. Also, overloading can shorten
the life of your vehicle.
Using heavier suspension components to get
added durability might not change your weight
ratings. Ask your dealer/retailer to help you load
your vehicle the right way.
Notice:
Overloading your vehicle may cause
damage. Repairs would not be covered by your
warranty. Do not overload your vehicle.
If you put things inside your vehicle — like
suitcases, tools, packages, or anything else — they
will go as fast as the vehicle goes. If you have to
stop or turn quickly, or if there is a crash, they will
keep going.
{CAUTION:
Things you put inside your vehicle can
strike and injure people in a sudden stop
or turn, or in a crash.
• Put things in the cargo area of your
vehicle. Try to spread the weight
evenly.
• Never stack heavier things, like
suitcases, inside the vehicle so that
some of them are above the tops of
the seats.
• Do not leave an unsecured child
restraint in your vehicle.
• When you carry something inside the
vehicle, secure it whenever you can.
• Do not leave a seat folded down
unless you need to.
There is also important loading information for
off-road driving in this manual. See “Loading Your
Vehicle for Off-Road Driving” under Off-Road
Driving on page 4-11.
Remember not to exceed the Gross Axle Weight
rating (GAWR) of the front or rear axle.
4-39
Information Provided by:

Two-Tiered Loading
By positioning four 2” X 6” wooden planks across
the width of the pickup box, you can create an
upper load platform. The planks must be inserted
in the pickup box depressions. The length of
the planks must allow for at least a 3/4 inch (2 cm)
bearing surface on each end of the plank.
When using this upper load platform, be sure the
load is securely tied down to prevent it from
shifting. The load’s center of gravity should be
positioned in a zone over the rear axle.
Any load that extends beyond the vehicle’s
taillamp area must be properly marked according
to local laws and regulations.
Remember not to exceed the Gross Axle Weight
Rating (GAWR) of the rear axle.
Add-On Equipment
When you carry removable items, you may need
to put a limit on how many people you carry
inside your vehicle. Be sure to weigh your vehicle
before you buy and install the new equipment.
Notice:
Overloading your vehicle may cause
damage. Repairs would not be covered by your
warranty. Do not overload your vehicle.
Remember not to exceed the Gross Axle Weight
Rating (GAWR) of the rear axle.
A reinforcement kit for mounting a toolbox is
recommended. See your dealer/retailer.
Truck-Camper Loading Information
Your vehicle was not designed to carry a slide-in
camper.
Pickup Conversion to Chassis Cab
We are aware that some vehicle owners might consider
having the pickup box removed and a commercial or
recreational body installed. However, we recommend
that conversions of this type not be done to pickups.
Owners should be aware that, as manufactured, there
are differences between a chassis cab and a pickup with
the box removed which could affect vehicle safety.
4-40
Information Provided by:

Towing
Towing Your Vehicle
Consult your dealer/retailer or a professional towing
service if you need to have your disabled vehicle towed.
See Roadside Assistance Program on page 7-7.
If you want to tow your vehicle behind another vehicle
for recreational purposes (such as behind a motorhome),
see “Recreational Vehicle Towing” following.
Recreational Vehicle Towing
Recreational vehicle towing means towing your vehicle
behind another vehicle — such as behind a motorhome.
The two most common types of recreational vehicle
towing are known as “dinghy” (towing your vehicle with
all four wheels on the ground) and “dolly” (towing
your vehicle with two wheels on the ground and
two wheels up on a device known as a “dolly”).
With the proper preparation and equipment, many
vehicles can be towed in these ways. See “Dinghy
Towing” and “Dolly Towing” following.
Here are some important things to consider before you
do recreational vehicle towing:
•
What’s the towing capacity of the towing vehicle?
Be sure you read the tow vehicle manufacturer’s
recommendations.
•
How far will you tow? Some vehicles have
restrictions on how far and how long they can tow.
•
Do you have the proper towing equipment?
See your dealer/retailer or trailering professional for
additional advice and equipment recommendations.
•
Is your vehicle ready to be towed? Just as you would
prepare your vehicle for a long trip, you’ll want to
make sure your vehicle is prepared to be towed.
4-41
Information Provided by:

Dinghy Towing
Two-Wheel Drive Vehicles
Notice:
If you tow your vehicle with all four wheels
on the ground, the drivetrain components could
be damaged. The repairs would not be covered by
your warranty. Do not tow your vehicle with all
four wheels on the ground.
Two-wheel-drive vehicles should not be towed with
all four wheels on the ground. Two-wheel-drive
transmissions have no provisions for internal lubrication
while being towed.
Four-Wheel Drive Vehicles
Use the following procedure to tow your vehicle with all
four wheels on the ground:
1. Drive the vehicle to be towed into position behind
the tow vehicle.
2. Firmly set the parking brake. See Parking Brake on
page 2-32 for more information.
3. Put an automatic transmission in PARK (P) or a
manual transmission in FIRST (1).
4. Securely attach the vehicle being towed to the
tow vehicle.
4-42
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Shifting a four-wheel-drive vehicle’s transfer
case into NEUTRAL can cause your vehicle to
roll even if the transmission is in PARK (P) for
an automatic transmission, or if your vehicle is
in gear, for a manual transmission. You or
others could be injured. Make sure the parking
brake is ﬁrmly set before you shift the transfer
case to NEUTRAL.
5. Shift the transfer case to NEUTRAL.
See Four-Wheel Drive on page 2-28 for more
information.
6. Release the parking brake only after the vehicle
being towed is ﬁrmly attached to the tow vehicle.
7. Turn the ignition to LOCK.
If the tow vehicle will not be started or driven for
six weeks or more, remove the battery cable
from the negative terminal (post) of the battery to
prevent your battery from draining while towing.
After towing see “Shifting Out of NEUTRAL” under
Four-Wheel Drive on page 2-28.
Dolly Towing
Front Towing (Front Wheels Off
the Ground)
Two-Wheel-Drive Vehicles
Notice:
If you tow a two-wheel-drive vehicle with
the rear wheels on the ground, the transmission
could be damaged. The repairs would not be
covered by your warranty. Never tow your vehicle
with the rear wheels on the ground.
Two-wheel-drive vehicles should not be towed with
the rear wheels on the ground. Two-wheel-drive
transmissions have no provisions for internal lubrication
while being towed. To dolly tow a two-wheel-drive
vehicle, you must tow the vehicle with the rear wheels
on the dolly. See “Rear Towing (Rear Wheels Off
the Ground)” later in this section for more information.
4-43
Information Provided by:

Four-Wheel-Drive Vehicles
Use the following procedure to dolly tow your vehicle
from the front:
1. Drive the vehicle onto the dolly.
2. Firmly set the parking brake. See Parking Brake on
page 2-32 for more information.
3. Put an automatic transmission in PARK (P) or a
manual transmission in FIRST (1).
4. Follow the dolly manufacturer’s instructions to attach
and secure the vehicle being towed to the dolly and
then the loaded dolly to the tow vehicle.
{CAUTION:
Shifting a four-wheel-drive vehicle’s transfer
case into NEUTRAL can cause your vehicle to
roll even if the transmission is in PARK (P) for
an automatic transmission, or if your vehicle is
in gear, for a manual transmission. You or
others could be injured. Make sure the parking
brake is ﬁrmly set before you shift the transfer
case to NEUTRAL.
5. Shift the transfer case to NEUTRAL.
See Four-Wheel Drive on page 2-28 for more
information.
6. Release the parking brake only after the vehicle
being towed is ﬁrmly attached to the tow vehicle.
7. Turn the ignition to LOCK.
If the tow vehicle will not be started or driven for
six weeks or more, remove the battery cable
from the negative terminal (post) of the battery to
prevent your battery from draining while towing.
After towing see “Shifting Out of NEUTRAL” under
Four-Wheel Drive on page 2-28.
4-44
Information Provided by:

Rear Towing (Rear Wheels Off the Ground)
Two-Wheel-Drive Vehicles
Use the following procedure to tow your vehicle from
the rear:
1. Drive the vehicle onto the dolly.
2. Firmly set the parking brake. See Parking Brake on
page 2-32 for more information.
3. Put an automatic transmission in PARK (P) or a
manual transmission in FIRST (1).
4. Follow the dolly manufacturer’s instructions to
attach and secure the vehicle being towed to
the dolly and then the loaded dolly to the tow
vehicle. Make sure the wheels are straight before
towing.
For manual transmission vehicles, make sure the
wheels are straight before proceeding to the
next steps. On automatic transmission vehicles,
use an adequate clamping device to ensure that the
front wheels are locked into the straight position.
5. Release the parking brake only after the vehicle
being towed is ﬁrmly attached to the tow vehicle.
6. Turn the ignition to LOCK.
If the tow vehicle will not be started or driven for
six weeks or more, remove the battery cable
from the negative terminal (post) of the battery to
prevent your battery from draining while towing.
4-45
Information Provided by:

Four-Wheel-Drive Vehicles
Use the following procedure to tow your vehicle from
the rear:
1. Drive the vehicle onto the dolly.
2. Firmly set the parking brake. See Parking Brake on
page 2-32 for more information.
3. Put an automatic transmission in PARK (P) or a
manual transmission in FIRST (1).
4. Follow the dolly manufacturer’s instructions to
attach and secure the vehicle being towed to
the dolly and then the loaded dolly to the tow
vehicle.
For manual transmission vehicles, make sure the
wheels are straight before proceeding to the next
steps. On automatic transmission vehicles, use
an adequate clamping device to ensure that
the front wheels are locked into the straight position.
{CAUTION:
Shifting a four-wheel-drive vehicle’s transfer
case into NEUTRAL can cause your vehicle to
roll even if the transmission is in PARK (P) for
an automatic transmission, or if your vehicle is
in gear, for a manual transmission. You or
others could be injured. Make sure the parking
brake is ﬁrmly set before you shift the transfer
case to NEUTRAL.
5. Shift the transfer case to NEUTRAL. See
Four-Wheel Drive on page 2-28 for more
information.
4-46
Information Provided by:

6. Release the parking brake only after the vehicle
being towed is ﬁrmly attached to the tow vehicle.
7. Turn the ignition to LOCK.
If the tow vehicle will not be started or driven for
six weeks or more, remove the battery cable
from the negative terminal (post) of the battery to
prevent your battery from draining while towing.
After towing, see “Shifting Out of NEUTRAL” under
Four-Wheel Drive on page 2-28.
Towing a Trailer
{CAUTION:
If you do not use the correct equipment and
drive properly, you can lose control when you
pull a trailer. For example, if the trailer is too
heavy, the brakes may not work well — or even
at all. You and your passengers could be
CAUTION:
(Continued)
CAUTION:
(Continued)
seriously injured. You may also damage your
vehicle; the resulting repairs would not be
covered by your warranty. Pull a trailer only if
you have followed all the steps in this section.
Ask your dealer/retailer for advice and
information about towing a trailer with your
vehicle.
Notice:
Pulling a trailer improperly can damage
your vehicle and result in costly repairs that would
not be covered by your warranty. Always follow
the instructions in this section and check with your
dealer/retailer for more information about towing
a trailer with your vehicle.
To identify the trailering capacity of your vehicle, you
should read the information in “Weight of the Trailer” that
appears later in this section.
4-47
Information Provided by:

Trailering is different than just driving your vehicle by
itself. Trailering means changes in handling,
acceleration, braking, durability and fuel economy.
Successful, safe trailering takes correct equipment, and
it has to be used properly.
That’s the reason for this part. In it are many time-tested,
important trailering tips and safety rules. Many of
these are important for your safety and that of your
passengers. So please read this section carefully before
you pull a trailer.
If You Do Decide To Pull A Trailer
If you do, here are some important points:
•
There are many different laws, including speed limit
restrictions, having to do with trailering. Make sure
your rig will be legal, not only where you live
but also where you’ll be driving. A good source for
this information can be state or provincial police.
•
Consider using a sway control. You can ask a hitch
dealer/retailer about sway controls.
•
Don’t tow a trailer at all during the ﬁrst 500 miles
(800 km) your new vehicle is driven. Your engine,
axle or other parts could be damaged.
•
Then, during the ﬁrst 500 miles (800 km) that you
tow a trailer, don’t drive over 50 mph (80 km/h)
and don’t make starts at full throttle. This helps your
engine and other parts of your vehicle wear in at
the heavier loads.
•
You may want to shift the transmission to THIRD (3)
or, if necessary, a lower gear selection if the
transmission shifts too often (e.g., under heavy
loads and/or hilly conditions). If you have a manual
transmission and you are towing a trailer, it’s
better not to use the highest gear.
Three important considerations have to do with weight:
•
the weight of the trailer,
•
the weight of the trailer tongue
•
and the weight on your vehicle’s tires.
4-48
Information Provided by:

Weight of the Trailer
How heavy can a trailer safely be?
It depends on how you plan to use your rig. For example,
speed, altitude, road grades, outside temperature and
how much your vehicle is used to pull a trailer are all
important. It can also depend on any special equipment
that you have on your vehicle, and the amount of tongue
weight the vehicle can carry. See “Weight of the Trailer
Tongue” later in this section for more information.
Maximum trailer weight is calculated assuming only the
driver is in the tow vehicle and it has all the required
trailering equipment. The weight of additional optional
equipment, passengers and cargo in the tow vehicle
must be subtracted from the maximum trailer weight.
The following charts show how much your trailer
can weigh, based upon your vehicle model and options.
2WD Regular Cab
Axle Ratio
Maximum Trailer Weight
GCWR*
Automatic Transmission,
2.9L Engine
3.73
3,400 lbs (1 542 kg)
7,000 lbs (3 175 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
3.7L Engine
3.73
4,000 lbs (1 814 kg)
8,500 lbs (3 855 kg)
Manual Transmission,
2.9L Engine
3.73
2,400 lbs (1 089 kg)
6,000 lbs (2 722 kg)
*The Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) is the total allowable weight of the completely loaded vehicle and
trailer including any passengers, cargo, equipment and conversions. The GCWR for your vehicle should not be
exceeded.
4-49
Information Provided by:

2WD Extended Cab
Axle Ratio
Maximum Trailer Weight
GCWR*
Automatic Transmission,
2.9L Engine
3.73
3,200 lbs (1 451 kg)
7,000 lbs (3 175 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
3.7L Engine
3.73
5,500 lbs (2 495 kg)
9,500 lbs (4 309 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
5.3L Engine
3.42
6,000 lbs (2 722 kg)
10,400 lbs (4 717 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
5.3L Engine **
3.42
4,000 lbs (1 814 kg)
10,400 lbs (4 717 kg)
Manual Transmission,
2.9L Engine
3.73
2,200 lbs (998 kg)
6,000 lbs (2 722 kg)
*The Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) is the total allowable weight of the completely loaded vehicle and
trailer including any passengers, cargo, equipment and conversions. The GCWR for your vehicle should not be
exceeded.
**With the ZQ8 Suspension Package.
2WD Crew Cab
Axle Ratio
Maximum Trailer Weight
GCWR*
Automatic Transmission,
2.9L Engine
3.73
3,000 lbs (1 361 kg)
7,000 lbs (3 175 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
3.7L Engine
3.73
5,500 lbs (2 495 kg)
9,500 lbs (4 309 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
5.3L Engine
3.42
6,000 lbs (2 722 kg)
10,400 lbs (4 717 kg)
4-50
Information Provided by:

2WD Crew Cab
Axle Ratio
Maximum Trailer Weight
GCWR*
Automatic Transmission,
5.3L Engine **
3.42
3,800 lbs (1 724 kg)
10,400 lbs (4 717 kg)
Manual Transmission,
2.9L Engine
3.73
2,100 lbs (953 kg)
6,000 lbs (2 722 kg)
*The Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) is the total allowable weight of the completely loaded vehicle and
trailer including any passengers, cargo, equipment and conversions. The GCWR for your vehicle should not be
exceeded.
**With the ZQ8 Suspension Package.
4WD Regular Cab
Axle Ratio
Maximum Trailer Weight
GCWR*
Automatic Transmission,
2.9L Engine
3.73
3,000 lbs (1 361 kg)
7,000 lbs (3 175 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
2.9L Engine
3.73
3,000 lbs (1 361 kg)
7,000 lbs (3 175 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
3.7L Engine
3.73
4,000 lbs (1 814 kg)
9,000 lbs (4 082 kg)
Manual Transmission,
2.9L Engine
3.73
2,100 lbs (953 kg)
6,000 lbs (2 722 kg)
Manual Transmission,
2.9L Engine
4.10
2,100 lbs (953 kg)
6,000 lbs (2 722 kg)
*The Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) is the total allowable weight of the completely loaded vehicle and
trailer including any passengers, cargo, equipment and conversions. The GCWR for your vehicle should not be
exceeded.
4-51
Information Provided by:

4WD Extended Cab
Axle Ratio
Maximum Trailer Weight
GCWR*
Automatic Transmission,
2.9L Engine
3.73
2,900 lbs (1 315 kg)
7,000 lbs (3 175 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
2.9L Engine
4.10
2,900 lbs (1 315 kg)
7,000 lbs (3 175 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
3.7L Engine
3.73
5,500 lbs (2 495 kg)
9,800 lbs (4 445 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
5.3L Engine
3.42
6,000 lbs (2 722 kg)
10,400 lbs (4 717 kg)
Manual Transmission,
2.9L Engine
3.73
1,900 lbs (861 kg)
6,000 lbs (2 722 kg)
Manual Transmission,
2.9L Engine
4.10
1,900 lbs (861 kg)
6,000 lbs (2 722 kg)
*The Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) is the total allowable weight of the completely loaded vehicle and
trailer including any passengers, cargo, equipment and conversions. The GCWR for your vehicle should not be
exceeded.
4WD Crew Cab
Axle Ratio
Maximum Trailer Weight
GCWR*
Automatic Transmission,
3.7L Engine
3.73
5,500 lbs (2 495 kg)
9,800 lbs (4 445 kg)
Automatic Transmission,
5.3L Engine
3.42
6,000 lbs (2 722 kg)
10,400 lbs (4 717 kg)
*The Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) is the total allowable weight of the completely loaded vehicle and
trailer including any passengers, cargo, equipment and conversions. The GCWR for your vehicle should not be
exceeded.
Ask your dealer/retailer for our trailering information or advice, or you can write us at our Customer Assistance
Offices. See Customer Assistance Offices on page 7-5 for more information.
4-52
Information Provided by:

Weight of the Trailer Tongue
The tongue load (A) of any trailer is an important weight
to measure because it affects the total or gross weight
of your vehicle. The Gross Vehicle Weight (GVW)
includes the curb weight of the vehicle, any cargo you
may carry in it, and the people who will be riding in
the vehicle. If you have a lot of options, equipment,
passengers or cargo in your vehicle, it will reduce the
tongue weight your vehicle can carry, which will
also reduce the trailer weight your vehicle can tow. And
if you will tow a trailer, you must add the tongue load
to the GVW because your vehicle will be carrying
that weight, too. See Loading Your Vehicle on page 4-34
for more information about your vehicle’s maximum
load capacity.
The trailer tongue weight (A) should be 10 percent to
15 percent of the total loaded trailer weight, up to
a maximum of 500 lbs (226 kg) with a weight
carrying hitch.
Do not exceed the maximum allowable tongue weight
for your vehicle. Choose the shortest hitch extension
that will position the hitch ball closest to the vehicle.
This will help reduce the effect of trailer tongue weight
on the rear axle.
After you’ve loaded your trailer, weigh the trailer and
then the tongue, separately, to see if the weights
are proper. If they aren’t you may be able to get them
right simply by moving some of the items around in
the trailer.
4-53
Information Provided by:

Trailering may be limited by the vehicle’s ability to carry
tongue weight. Tongue weight cannot cause the vehicle
to exceed the GVWR (Gross Vehicle Weight Rating) or
the RGAWR (Rear Gross Axle Weight Rating). The effect
of additional weight may reduce your trailering capacity
more than the total of the additional weight.
Consider the following example:
A vehicle model base weight is 5,500 lbs (2 495 kg);
2,800 lbs (1 270 kg) at the front axle and 2,700 lbs
(1 225 kg) at the rear axle. It has a GVWR of 7,200 lbs
(3 266 kg), a RGAWR of 4,000 lbs (1 814 kg) and a
GCWR (Gross Combination Weight Rating) of
14,000 lbs (6 350 kg). The trailer rating should be:
You can expect tongue weight to be at least 10 percent
of trailer weight (850 lbs (386 kg)) and because the
weight is applied well behind the rear axle, the effect on
the rear axle will be greater than just the weight itself,
as much as 1.5 times as much. The weight at the
rear axle could be 850 lbs (386 kg) X 1.5 = 1,275 lbs
(578 kg). Since the rear axle already weighs 2,700 lbs
(1 225 kg), adding 1,275 lbs (578 kg) brings the total to
3,975 lbs (1 803 kg). This is very close to, but within
the limit for RGAWR as well. The vehicle is set to trailer
up to 8,500 lbs (3 856 kg).
But let’s say your speciﬁc vehicle is equipped with some
of the latest options and you have a front seat passenger
and two rear seat passengers with some luggage and
gear in the vehicle as well. You may add 300 lbs (136 kg)
to the front axle weight and 400 lbs (181 kg) to the rear
axle weight. Your vehicle now weighs:
Weight is still below 7,200 lbs (3 266 kg) and you may
think that you should subtract 700 additional pounds
(318 kg) from your trailering capacity to stay within
GCWR limits. Your maximum trailer would only be
7,800 lbs (3 538 kg). You may go further and think you
must limit tongue weight to less than 1,000 lbs (454 kg)
to avoid exceeding GVWR. But, you must still
consider the effect on the rear axle. Because your rear
axle now weighs 3,100 lbs (1 406 kg), you can only
put 900 lbs (408 kg) on the rear axle without exceeding
4-54
Information Provided by:

RGAWR. The effect of tongue weight is about 1.5 times
the actual weight. Dividing the 900 lbs (408 kg) by
1.5 leaves you with being able to handle only 600 lbs
(272 kg) of tongue weight. Since tongue weight is
usually at least 10 percent of total loaded trailer weight,
you can expect that the largest trailer your vehicle
can properly handle is 6,000 lbs (2 721 kg).
It is important that you make sure your vehicle does not
exceed any of its ratings — GCWR, GVWR, RGAWR,
Maximum Trailer Rating or Tongue Weight. The only
way to be sure you are not exceeding any of these
ratings is to weigh your vehicle and trailer.
Total Weight on Your Vehicle’s Tires
Be sure your vehicle’s tires are inﬂated to the upper limit
for cold tires. You’ll ﬁnd these numbers on the
Certiﬁcation/Tire label located at the bottom of the
center pillar on the driver’s side of the vehicle, or see
Loading Your Vehicle on page 4-34. Then be sure
you don’t go over the GVWR limit for your vehicle,
including the weight of the trailer tongue.
Hitches
It’s important to have the correct hitch equipment.
Crosswinds, large trucks going by and rough roads are
a few reasons why you’ll need the right hitch.
Weight-Distributing Hitches and
Weight Carrying Hitches
You can use your step bumper hitch for trailers up to
2,000 lbs (907 kg) total weight, and 200 lbs (90 kg)
tongue weight.
Notice:
If you use a step-bumper hitch, your
bumper could be damaged in sharp turns. Make
sure you have ample room when turning to avoid
contact between the trailer and the bumper.
Safety Chains
You should always attach chains between your vehicle
and your trailer. Cross the safety chains under the
tongue of the trailer to help prevent the tongue from
contacting the road if it becomes separated from
the hitch. Instructions about safety chains may be
provided by the hitch manufacturer or by the trailer
manufacturer. For trailers up to 2,000 lbs (907 kg) you
may attach the safety chains to the attaching points
on the bumper. For heavier trailers, follow the trailer or
hitch manufacturer’s recommendation for attaching
safety chains. Always leave just enough slack so you
can turn with your rig. Never allow safety chains to drag
on the ground.
4-55
Information Provided by:

Trailer Brakes
If your trailer weighs more than 1,000 lbs (450 kg)
loaded, then it needs its own brakes — and they must
be adequate. Be sure to read and follow the instructions
for the trailer brakes so you’ll be able to install, adjust
and maintain them properly.
Your trailer’s brake system can tap into the vehicle’s
hydraulic brake system only if:
•
The trailer parts can withstand 3,000 psi
(20 650 kPa) of pressure.
•
The trailer’s brake system will use less than
0.02 cubic inch (0.3 cc) of ﬂuid from your vehicle’s
master cylinder. Otherwise, both braking systems
won’t work well. You could even lose your brakes.
If everything checks out this far, then make the brake
ﬂuid tap at the port on the master cylinder that
sends ﬂuid to the rear brakes. But don’t use copper
tubing for this. If you do, it will bend and ﬁnally break off.
Use steel brake tubing.
Driving with a Trailer
Towing a trailer requires a certain amount of experience.
Before setting out for the open road, you’ll want to get
to know your rig. Acquaint yourself with the feel of
handling and braking with the added weight of the trailer.
And always keep in mind that the vehicle you are
driving is now a good deal longer and not nearly as
responsive as your vehicle is by itself.
Before you start, check all trailer hitch parts and
attachments, safety chains, electrical connector, lamps,
tires and mirror adjustment. If the trailer has electric
brakes, start your vehicle and trailer moving and then
apply the trailer brake controller by hand to be sure
the brakes are working. This lets you check your
electrical connection at the same time.
During your trip, check occasionally to be sure that the
load is secure, and that the lamps and any trailer
brakes are still working.
4-56
Information Provided by:

Following Distance
Stay at least twice as far behind the vehicle ahead as
you would when driving your vehicle without a trailer.
This can help you avoid situations that require
heavy braking and sudden turns.
Passing
You’ll need more passing distance up ahead when
you’re towing a trailer. And, because you’re a good deal
longer, you’ll need to go much farther beyond the
passed vehicle before you can return to your lane.
Backing Up
Hold the bottom of the steering wheel with one hand.
Then, to move the trailer to the left, just move that hand
to the left. To move the trailer to the right, move your
hand to the right. Always back up slowly and, if possible,
have someone guide you.
Making Turns
Notice:
Making very sharp turns while trailering
could cause the trailer to come in contact with the
vehicle. Your vehicle could be damaged. Avoid
making very sharp turns while trailering.
When you’re turning with a trailer, make wider turns
than normal. Do this so your trailer won’t strike
soft shoulders, curbs, road signs, trees or other objects.
Avoid jerky or sudden maneuvers. Signal well in
advance.
Turn Signals When Towing a Trailer
When you tow a trailer, your vehicle has to have extra
wiring and a heavy-duty turn signal ﬂasher.
The arrows on your instrument panel will ﬂash whenever
you signal a turn or lane change. Properly hooked up,
the trailer lamps will also ﬂash, telling other drivers
you’re about to turn, change lanes or stop.
When towing a trailer, the arrows on your instrument
panel will ﬂash for turns even if the bulbs on the trailer
are burned out. Thus, you may think drivers behind
you are seeing your signal when they are not. It’s
important to check occasionally to be sure the trailer
bulbs are still working.
4-57
Information Provided by:

Driving On Grades
Reduce speed and shift to a lower gear before you start
down a long or steep downgrade. If you don’t shift
down, you might have to use your brakes so much that
they would get hot and no longer work well.
When towing at high altitude on steep uphill grades,
consider the following: Engine coolant will boil at a lower
temperature than at normal altitudes. If you turn your
engine off immediately after towing at high altitude
on steep uphill grades, your vehicle may show signs
similar to engine overheating. To avoid this, let the
engine run while parked (preferably on level ground)
with the automatic transmission in PARK (P) (or the
manual transmission out of gear and the parking brake
applied) for a few minutes before turning the engine
off. If you do get the overheat warning, see Engine
Overheating on page 5-30.
Parking on Hills
{CAUTION:
You really should not park your vehicle, with a
trailer attached, on a hill. If something goes
wrong, your rig could start to move. People
can be injured, and both your vehicle and the
trailer can be damaged.
But if you ever have to park your rig on a hill, here’s how
to do it:
1. Apply your regular brakes, but don’t shift into
PARK (P) yet, or into gear for a manual transmission.
When parking uphill, turn your wheels away from the
curb. When parking downhill, turn your wheels into
the curb.
2. Have someone place chocks under the trailer
wheels.
3. When the wheel chocks are in place, release the
regular brakes until the chocks absorb the load.
4-58
Information Provided by:

4. Reapply the regular brakes. Then apply your
parking brake, and then shift into PARK (P), or
REVERSE (R) for a manual transmission.
See Parking Brake on page 2-32 for more
information.
5. If you have a four-wheel-drive vehicle, be sure
the transfer case is in a drive gear and not in
NEUTRAL. See Four-Wheel Drive on page 2-28
for more information.
6. Release the regular brakes.
When You Are Ready to Leave After
Parking on a Hill
1. Apply your regular brakes and hold the pedal down
while you:
•
start your engine,
•
shift into a gear, and
•
release the parking brake.
2. Let up on the brake pedal.
3. Drive slowly until the trailer is clear of the chocks.
4. Stop and have someone pick up and store the
chocks.
Maintenance When Trailer Towing
Your vehicle will need service more often when you’re
pulling a trailer. See Scheduled Maintenance on
page 6-4 for more on this. Things that are especially
important in trailer operation are automatic transmission
ﬂuid (don’t overﬁll), engine oil, axle lubricant, belt,
cooling system and brake system. Each of these is
covered in this manual, and the Index will help you ﬁnd
them quickly. If you’re trailering, it’s a good idea to
review these sections before you start your trip.
Check periodically to see that all hitch nuts and bolts
are tight.
4-59
Information Provided by:

Trailer Wiring Harness
Heavy-Duty Trailer Wiring Package
If your vehicle is equipped with a trailer towing package,
the rear bumper harness will have a seven-pin
universal heavy-duty trailer connector attached to a
bracket on the hitch platform.
The trailer towing harness contains the following seven
trailer circuits:
•
Yellow: Left Stop/Turn Signal
•
Dark Green: Right Stop/Turn Signal
•
Brown: Taillamps
•
White: Ground
•
Light Green: Back-up Lamps
•
Red: Battery Feed
•
Dark Blue: Trailer Brake
If you are charging a remote (non-vehicle) battery, turn
on the headlamps to boost the vehicle system voltage
to properly charge the battery.
Trailer Brake Control Wiring Harness
The wires for the trailer brake control are taped to a
wiring harness under the instrument panel. The trailer
brake control harness will contain the following
labeled wires:
•
Dark Blue Wire (#47): Trailer Brake
•
Red Wire (#242): Batt ‘‘+’’
•
Light Blue Wire (#20): Brake Lights
•
Black Wire (#2050): Brake Ground
Trailer Recommendations
You must subtract your hitch load from the CWR for
your vehicle. Weigh your vehicle with your trailer
attached, so that you won’t go over the GVWR or
the GAWR.
You’ll get the best performance if you spread out the
weight of your load the right way, and if you choose the
correct hitch and trailer brakes.
For more information, see Towing a Trailer on page 4-47
later in this section.
4-60
Information Provided by:

Service ............................................................5-3
Accessories and Modiﬁcations ..........................5-3
California Proposition 65 Warning .....................5-4
California Perchlorate Materials Requirements .....5-4
Doing Your Own Service Work .........................5-4
Adding Equipment to the Outside
of Your Vehicle ...........................................5-5
Fuel ................................................................5-5
Gasoline Octane ............................................5-5
Gasoline Speciﬁcations ....................................5-6
California Fuel ...............................................5-6
Additives .......................................................5-6
Fuels in Foreign Countries ...............................5-7
Filling the Tank ..............................................5-8
Filling a Portable Fuel Container .....................5-10
Checking Things Under the Hood ....................5-10
Hood Release ..............................................5-11
Engine Compartment Overview .......................5-12
Engine Oil ...................................................5-15
Engine Oil Life System ..................................5-18
Engine Air Cleaner/Filter ................................5-20
Automatic Transmission Fluid .........................5-21
Manual Transmission Fluid .............................5-24
Hydraulic Clutch ...........................................5-26
Engine Coolant .............................................5-27
Radiator Pressure Cap ..................................5-30
Engine Overheating .......................................5-30
Cooling System ............................................5-32
Engine Fan Noise .........................................5-37
Power Steering Fluid .....................................5-37
Windshield Washer Fluid ................................5-38
Brakes ........................................................5-39
Battery ........................................................5-43
Jump Starting ...............................................5-44
Rear Axle .......................................................5-48
Four-Wheel Drive ............................................5-49
Front Axle ......................................................5-50
Headlamp Aiming ...........................................5-51
Bulb Replacement ..........................................5-51
Halogen Bulbs ..............................................5-51
Headlamps ..................................................5-52
Front Turn Signal, Parking and Daytime
Running Lamps (DRL) ................................5-53
Center High-Mounted Stoplamp (CHMSL) .........5-54
Taillamps, Turn Signal, Stoplamps and
Back-up Lamps .........................................5-54
License Plate Lamp ......................................5-56
Replacement Bulbs .......................................5-56
Windshield Wiper Blade Replacement ..............5-57
Section 5
Service and Appearance Care
5-1
Information Provided by:

Tires ..............................................................5-59
Tire Sidewall Labeling ...................................5-60
Tire Terminology and Deﬁnitions .....................5-63
Inﬂation - Tire Pressure .................................5-66
High-Speed Operation ...................................5-68
Tire Pressure Monitor System .........................5-69
Tire Pressure Monitor Operation .....................5-70
Tire Inspection and Rotation ...........................5-74
When It Is Time for New Tires .......................5-76
Buying New Tires .........................................5-76
Different Size Tires and Wheels ......................5-78
Uniform Tire Quality Grading ..........................5-79
Wheel Alignment and Tire Balance ..................5-80
Wheel Replacement ......................................5-80
Tire Chains ..................................................5-82
If a Tire Goes Flat ........................................5-83
Changing a Flat Tire .....................................5-84
Removing the Spare Tire and Tools ................5-85
Removing the Flat Tire and Installing the
Spare Tire ................................................5-89
Secondary Latch System ...............................5-96
Storing a Flat or Spare Tire and Tools ...........5-100
Spare Tire .................................................5-104
Appearance Care ..........................................5-106
Interior Cleaning .........................................5-106
Fabric/Carpet ..............................................5-107
Leather ......................................................5-108
Instrument Panel, Vinyl, and Other Plastic
Surfaces .................................................5-109
Care of Safety Belts ....................................5-109
Weatherstrips .............................................5-109
Washing Your Vehicle ..................................5-110
Cleaning Exterior Lamps/Lenses ....................5-110
Finish Care ................................................5-111
Windshield and Wiper Blades .......................5-111
Aluminum or Chrome-Plated Wheels
and Trim ................................................5-112
Tires .........................................................5-113
Sheet Metal Damage ...................................5-113
Finish Damage ...........................................5-113
Underbody Maintenance ...............................5-113
Chemical Paint Spotting ...............................5-113
Vehicle Care/Appearance Materials ................5-114
Vehicle Identiﬁcation .....................................5-115
Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number (VIN) ................5-115
Service Parts Identiﬁcation Label ...................5-115
Electrical System ..........................................5-115
Add-On Electrical Equipment .........................5-115
Windshield Wiper Fuses ...............................5-116
Fuses and Circuit Breakers ..........................5-116
Engine Compartment Fuse Block ...................5-116
Capacities and Speciﬁcations ........................5-120
Capacities and Speciﬁcations ........................5-120
Section 5
Service and Appearance Care
5-2
Information Provided by:

Service
For service and parts needs, visit your dealer/retailer.
You will receive genuine GM parts and GM-trained and
supported service people.
Genuine GM parts have one of these marks:
Accessories and Modiﬁcations
When non-dealer/non-retailer accessories are added to
your vehicle they can affect your vehicle’s performance
and safety, including such things as, airbags, braking,
stability, ride and handling, emissions systems,
aerodynamics, durability, and electronic systems like
antilock brakes, traction control and stability control.
Some of these accessories could even cause
malfunction or damage not covered by warranty.
GM Accessories are designed to complement and
function with other systems on your vehicle. Your GM
dealer/retailer can accessorize your vehicle using
genuine GM Accessories. When you go to your GM
dealer/retailer and ask for GM Accessories, you will know
that GM-trained and supported service technicians will
perform the work using genuine GM Accessories.
Also, see Adding Equipment to Your Airbag-Equipped
Vehicle on page 1-74.
5-3
Information Provided by:

California Proposition 65 Warning
Most motor vehicles, including this one, contain and/or
emit chemicals known to the State of California to
cause cancer and birth defects or other reproductive
harm. Engine exhaust, many parts and systems
(including some inside the vehicle), many ﬂuids, and
some component wear by-products contain and/or emit
these chemicals.
California Perchlorate Materials
Requirements
Certain types of automotive applications, such as airbag
initiators, seat belt pretensioners, and lithium batteries
contained in remote keyless entry transmitters, may
contain perchlorate materials. Special handling
may be necessary. For additional information,
see www.dtsc.ca.gov/hazardouswaste/perchlorate.
Doing Your Own Service Work
{CAUTION:
You can be injured and your vehicle could be
damaged if you try to do service work on a
vehicle without knowing enough about it.
• Be sure you have sufficient knowledge,
experience, the proper replacement parts,
and tools before you attempt any vehicle
maintenance task.
• Be sure to use the proper nuts, bolts,
and other fasteners. English and metric
fasteners can be easily confused. If you
use the wrong fasteners, parts can later
break or fall off. You could be hurt.
If you want to do some of your own service work, you
should use the proper service manual. It tells you much
more about how to service your vehicle than this
manual can. To order the proper service manual, see
Service Publications Ordering Information on page 7-16.
5-4
Information Provided by:

Your vehicle has an airbag system. Before attempting to
do your own service work, see Servicing Your
Airbag-Equipped Vehicle on page 1-74.
You should keep a record with all parts receipts and list
the mileage and the date of any service work you
perform. See Maintenance Record on page 6-16.
Adding Equipment to the Outside
of Your Vehicle
Things you might add to the outside of your vehicle can
affect the airﬂow around it. This can cause wind
noise and can affect fuel economy and windshield
washer performance. Check with your dealer/retailer
before adding equipment to the outside of your vehicle.
Fuel
Use of the recommended fuel is an important part of the
proper maintenance of your vehicle. To help keep the
engine clean and maintain optimum vehicle
performance, we recommend the use of gasoline
advertised as TOP TIER Detergent Gasoline.
Gasoline Octane
Use regular unleaded gasoline with a posted octane
rating of 87 or higher. If the octane rating is less than 87,
you might notice an audible knocking noise when you
drive, commonly referred to as spark knock. If this
occurs, use a gasoline rated at 87 octane or higher as
soon as possible. If you are using gasoline rated at
87 octane or higher and you hear heavy knocking, the
engine needs service.
5-5
Information Provided by:

Gasoline Speciﬁcations
At a minimum, gasoline should meet ASTM
speciﬁcation D 4814 in the United States or
CAN/CGSB-3.5 or 3.511 in Canada. Some gasolines
contain an octane-enhancing additive called
methylcyclopentadienyl manganese tricarbonyl (MMT).
We recommend against the use of gasolines
containing MMT. See Additives on page 5-6 for
additional information.
California Fuel
If your vehicle is certiﬁed to meet California Emissions
Standards, it is designed to operate on fuels that
meet California speciﬁcations. See the underhood
emission control label. If this fuel is not available
in states adopting California emissions standards, your
vehicle will operate satisfactorily on fuels meeting
federal speciﬁcations, but emission control system
performance might be affected. The malfunction
indicator lamp could turn on and your vehicle might fail
a smog-check test. See Malfunction Indicator Lamp
on page 3-34. If this occurs, return to your authorized
dealer/retailer for diagnosis. If it is determined that
the condition is caused by the type of fuel used, repairs
might not be covered by your warranty.
Additives
To provide cleaner air, all gasolines in the United States
are now required to contain additives that help prevent
engine and fuel system deposits from forming,
allowing the emission control system to work properly.
In most cases, you should not have to add anything
to the fuel. However, some gasolines contain only
the minimum amount of additive required to meet
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency regulations.
To help keep fuel injectors and intake valves clean,
or if your vehicle experiences problems due to
dirty injectors or valves, look for gasoline that is
advertised as TOP TIER Detergent Gasoline.
Also, your dealer/retailer has additives that will help
correct and prevent most deposit-related problems.
Gasolines containing oxygenates, such as ethers
and ethanol, and reformulated gasolines might be
available in your area. We recommend that you use
these gasolines, if they comply with the speciﬁcations
described earlier. However, E85 (85% ethanol) and
other fuels containing more than 10% ethanol must
not be used in vehicles that were not designed for
those fuels.
5-6
Information Provided by:

Notice:
Your vehicle was not designed for fuel that
contains methanol. Do not use fuel containing
methanol. It can corrode metal parts in the fuel
system and also damage plastic and rubber parts.
That damage would not be covered under your
warranty.
Some gasolines that are not reformulated for low
emissions can contain an octane-enhancing additive
called methylcyclopentadienyl manganese tricarbonyl
(MMT); ask the attendant where you buy gasoline
whether the fuel contains MMT. We recommend against
the use of such gasolines. Fuels containing MMT can
reduce the life of spark plugs and the performance
of the emission control system could be affected.
The malfunction indicator lamp might turn on. If this
occurs, return to your dealer/retailer for service.
Fuels in Foreign Countries
If you plan on driving in another country outside the
United States or Canada, the proper fuel might be hard
to ﬁnd. Never use leaded gasoline or any other fuel
not recommended in the previous text on fuel. Costly
repairs caused by use of improper fuel would not
be covered by your warranty.
To check the fuel availability, ask an auto club, or
contact a major oil company that does business in the
country where you will be driving.
5-7
Information Provided by:

Filling the Tank
{CAUTION:
Fuel vapor burns violently and a fuel ﬁre can
cause bad injuries. To help avoid injuries to
you and others, read and follow all the
instructions on the pump island. Turn off your
engine when you are refueling. Do not smoke
if you are near fuel or refueling your vehicle.
Do not use cellular phones. Keep sparks,
ﬂames, and smoking materials away from fuel.
Do not leave the fuel pump unattended when
refueling your vehicle. This is against the law
in some places. Do not re-enter the vehicle
while pumping fuel. Keep children away from
the fuel pump; never let children pump fuel.
The tethered fuel cap is located behind a hinged fuel
door on the driver’s side of the vehicle.
To remove the fuel cap, turn it slowly counterclockwise.
While refueling, hang the tethered fuel cap from the
hook on the fuel door.
5-8
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Fuel can spray out on you if you open the fuel
cap too quickly. If you spill fuel and then
something ignites it, you could be badly burned.
This spray can happen if your tank is nearly full,
and is more likely in hot weather. Open the fuel
cap slowly and wait for any hiss noise to stop.
Then unscrew the cap all the way.
Be careful not to spill fuel. Do not top off or overﬁll the
tank and wait a few seconds after you have ﬁnished
pumping before removing the nozzle. Clean fuel
from painted surfaces as soon as possible.
See Washing Your Vehicle on page 5-110.
When replacing the fuel cap, turn it clockwise until
it clicks. Make sure the cap is fully installed.
The diagnostic system can determine if the fuel cap
has been left off or improperly installed. This would allow
fuel to evaporate into the atmosphere. If the fuel cap
is not properly installed, the FUEL CAP message will
appear on the Driver Information Center (DIC) and the
check engine light will be lit on the instrument panel
cluster. See DIC Warnings and Messages on page 3-42
and Malfunction Indicator Lamp on page 3-34 for
more information.
{CAUTION:
If a ﬁre starts while you are refueling, do not
remove the nozzle. Shut off the ﬂow of fuel by
shutting off the pump or by notifying the
station attendant. Leave the area immediately.
Notice:
If you need a new fuel cap, be sure to get
the right type. Your dealer/retailer can get one
for you. If you get the wrong type, it may not ﬁt
properly. This may cause your malfunction indicator
lamp to light and may damage your fuel tank and
emissions system. See Malfunction Indicator Lamp
on page 3-34.
5-9
Information Provided by:

Filling a Portable Fuel Container
{CAUTION:
Never ﬁll a portable fuel container while it is in
your vehicle. Static electricity discharge from
the container can ignite the fuel vapor. You
can be badly burned and your vehicle
damaged if this occurs. To help avoid injury to
you and others:
• Dispense fuel only into approved
containers.
• Do not ﬁll a container while it is inside a
vehicle, in a vehicle’s trunk, pickup bed, or
on any surface other than the ground.
• Bring the ﬁll nozzle in contact with the
inside of the ﬁll opening before operating
the nozzle. Contact should be maintained
until the ﬁlling is complete.
• Do not smoke while pumping fuel.
• Do not use a cellular phone while
pumping fuel.
Checking Things Under
the Hood
{CAUTION:
Things that burn can get on hot engine parts
and start a ﬁre. These include liquids like fuel,
oil, coolant, brake ﬂuid, windshield washer and
other ﬂuids, and plastic or rubber. You or
others could be burned. Be careful not to drop
or spill things that will burn onto a hot engine.
5-10
Information Provided by:

Hood Release
To open the hood, do the following:
1. Pull the handle with
this symbol on it. It is
located inside the
vehicle on the lower
left side of the
instrument panel.
2. Release the secondary latch on the hood. It is
located below the front center of the hood.
3. Lift the hood.
4. Release the hood prop from its retainer and put the
hood prop into the slot in the hood.
Before closing the hood, be sure all the ﬁller caps are
on properly. Then lift the hood to relieve pressure on the
hood prop. Remove the hood prop from the slot in the
hood and return the prop to its retainer. Lower the hood
10 to 12 inches (25 to 30 cm) above the vehicle and
release it to latch fully. Check to make sure the hood is
closed and repeat the procedure if necessary.
5-11
Information Provided by:

Engine Compartment Overview
When you open the hood on the 2.9L engine (3.7L engine similar), you will see the following:
5-12
Information Provided by:

A. Windshield Washer Fluid. See “Adding Washer
Fluid” under Windshield Washer Fluid on page 5-38.
B. Engine Coolant Recovery Tank. See Engine
Coolant on page 5-27.
C. Engine Air Cleaner/Filter. See Engine Air
Cleaner/Filter on page 5-20.
D. Power Steering Fluid Reservoir (low in engine
compartment). See Power Steering Fluid on
page 5-37.
E. Automatic Transmission Fluid Dipstick (If Equipped).
See “Checking the Fluid Level” under Automatic
Transmission Fluid on page 5-21.
F. Engine Oil Fill Cap. See “When to Add Engine Oil”
under Engine Oil on page 5-15.
G. Radiator Pressure Cap. See Cooling System on
page 5-32.
H. Remote Negative (−) Terminal (GND). See Jump
Starting on page 5-44.
I. Engine Oil Dipstick. See “Checking Engine Oil”
under Engine Oil on page 5-15.
J. Remote Positive (+) Terminal. See Jump Starting
on page 5-44.
K. Brake Fluid Reservoir. See “Brake Fluid” under
Brakes on page 5-39.
L. Engine Compartment Fuse Block. See Engine
Compartment Fuse Block on page 5-116.
M. Battery. See Battery on page 5-43.
N. Hydraulic Clutch Fluid Reservoir (If Equipped).
See Hydraulic Clutch on page 5-26.
5-13
Information Provided by:

When you open the hood on the 5.3L engine, you will see the following:
5-14
Information Provided by:

A. Engine Air Cleaner/Filter. See Engine Air
Cleaner/Filter on page 5-20.
B. Air Filter Restriction Indicator (If Equipped).
See Engine Air Cleaner/Filter on page 5-20.
C. Windshield Washer Fluid Reservoir. See “Adding
Washer Fluid” under Windshield Washer Fluid
on page 5-38.
D. Engine Coolant Recovery Tank. See Engine Coolant
on page 5-27.
E. Automatic Transmission Fluid Dipstick (If Equipped).
See “Checking the Fluid Level” under Automatic
Transmission Fluid on page 5-21.
F. Engine Oil Dipstick. See “Checking Engine Oil”
under Engine Oil on page 5-15.
G. Engine Oil Fill Cap. See “When to Add Engine Oil”
under Engine Oil on page 5-15.
H. Brake Fluid Reservoir. See “Brake Fluid” under
Brakes on page 5-39.
I. Battery. See Battery on page 5-43.
J. Power Steering Fluid Reservoir. See Power Steering
Fluid on page 5-37.
K. Engine Compartment Fuse Block. See Engine
Compartment Fuse Block on page 5-116.
L. Radiator Pressure Cap. See Cooling System on
page 5-32.
Engine Oil
Checking Engine Oil
It is a good idea to check the engine oil every time you
get fuel. In order to get an accurate reading, the oil
must be warm and the vehicle must be on level ground.
The engine oil dipstick handle is a yellow loop.
See Engine Compartment Overview on page 5-12 for
the location of the engine oil dipstick.
1. Turn off the engine and give the oil several minutes
to drain back into the oil pan. If you do not do this,
the oil dipstick might not show the actual level.
2. Pull out the dipstick and clean it with a paper towel
or cloth, then push it back in all the way. Remove it
again, keeping the tip down, and check the level.
5-15
Information Provided by:

When to Add Engine Oil
If the oil is below the cross-hatched area (L), add at
least one quart/liter of the recommended oil. This section
explains what kind of oil to use. For engine oil
crankcase capacity, see Capacities and Speciﬁcations
on page 5-120.
Notice:
Do not add too much oil. If the engine
has so much oil that the oil level gets above the
cross-hatched area that shows the proper operating
range, the engine could be damaged.
See Engine Compartment
Overview on page 5-12
for the location of the
engine oil ﬁll cap.
Be sure to add enough oil to put the level somewhere in
the proper operating range. Push the dipstick all the
way back in when you are through.
5-16
Information Provided by:

What Kind of Engine Oil to Use
Look for three things:
•
GM6094M
Your vehicle’s engine requires oil meeting
GM Standard GM6094M. Look for and use only
an oil that meets GM Standard GM6094M.
•
SAE 5W-30
As shown in the viscosity chart, SAE 5W-30 is
best for your vehicle.
These numbers on an oil container show its
viscosity, or thickness. Do not use other viscosity
oils such as SAE 20W-50.
•
Oils meeting these
requirements should
have the starburst
symbol on the container.
This symbol indicates
that the oil has
been certiﬁed by the
American Petroleum
Institute (API).
Look for this information on the oil container,
and use only those oils that are identiﬁed as meeting
GM Standard GM6094M and have the starburst symbol
on the front of the oil container.
Notice:
Use only engine oil identiﬁed as meeting
GM Standard GM6094M and showing the American
Petroleum Institute Certiﬁed For Gasoline Engines
starburst symbol. Failure to use the recommended
oil can result in engine damage not covered by
your warranty.
5-17
Information Provided by:

If you are in an area of extreme cold, where the
temperature falls below −20°F (−29°C), it is
recommended that you use either an SAE 5W-30
synthetic oil or an SAE 0W-30 oil. Both provide easier
cold starting and better protection for the engine at
extremely low temperatures.
Engine Oil Additives
Do not add anything to the oil. The recommended oils
with the starburst symbol that meet GM Standard
GM6094M are all you need for good performance and
engine protection.
Engine Oil Life System
When to Change Engine Oil
Your vehicle has a computer system that lets you know
when to change the engine oil and ﬁlter. This is based on
engine revolutions and engine temperature, and not on
mileage. Based on driving conditions, the mileage at
which an oil change will be indicated can vary
considerably. For the oil life system to work properly,
you must reset the system every time the oil is changed.
When the system has calculated that oil life has been
diminished, it will indicate that an oil change is
necessary. A CHANGE OIL message will come on.
See DIC Warnings and Messages on page 3-42.
Change the oil as soon as possible within the next
600 miles (1 000 km). It is possible that, if you are
driving under the best conditions, the oil life system
might not indicate that an oil change is necessary
for over a year. However, the engine oil and ﬁlter must
be changed at least once a year and at this time the
system must be reset. Your dealer/retailer has trained
people who will perform this work using genuine parts
and reset the system. It is also important to check the oil
regularly and keep it at the proper level.
If the system is ever reset accidentally, you must
change the oil at 3,000 miles (5 000 km) since your last
oil change. Remember to reset the oil life system
whenever the oil is changed.
5-18
Information Provided by:

How to Reset the Engine Oil Life
System
The Engine Oil Life System calculates when to change
the engine oil and ﬁlter based on vehicle use. Whenever
the oil is changed, reset the system so it can calculate
when the next oil change is required. If a situation occurs
where you change the oil prior to a CHANGE OIL
message being turned on, reset the system.
To reset the Engine Oil Life system:
1. With the engine off, turn the ignition to ON/RUN.
2. Press and release the stem in the lower center
of the instrument cluster until the OIL LIFE
message is displayed.
3. Once the alternating OIL LIFE and RESET
messages appear, press and hold the stem
until several beeps sound. This conﬁrms that the oil
life system has been reset.
4. Turn the key to LOCK/OFF.
If the CHANGE OIL message comes back on when you
start your vehicle, the engine oil life system has not
reset. Repeat the procedure. See DIC Warnings
and Messages on page 3-42.
What to Do with Used Oil
Used engine oil contains certain elements that can be
unhealthy for your skin and could even cause cancer.
Do not let used oil stay on your skin for very long.
Clean your skin and nails with soap and water, or a
good hand cleaner. Wash or properly dispose of
clothing or rags containing used engine oil. See the
manufacturer’s warnings about the use and disposal of
oil products.
Used oil can be a threat to the environment. If you
change your own oil, be sure to drain all the oil from the
ﬁlter before disposal. Never dispose of oil by putting it
in the trash, pouring it on the ground, into sewers, or into
streams or bodies of water. Instead, recycle it by
taking it to a place that collects used oil. If you have a
problem properly disposing of used oil, ask your
dealer/retailer, a service station, or a local recycling
center for help.
5-19
Information Provided by:

Engine Air Cleaner/Filter
The engine air cleaner/ﬁlter is located in the engine
compartment on the passenger’s side of the vehicle.
See Engine Compartment Overview on page 5-12
for more information on location.
When to Inspect the Engine
Air Cleaner/Filter
Inspect the air cleaner/ﬁlter at the Maintenance II
intervals and replace it at the ﬁrst oil change after each
50,000 mile (80 000 km) interval. See Scheduled
Maintenance on page 6-4 for more information. If you
are driving in dusty/dirty conditions, inspect the ﬁlter
at each engine oil change.
How to Inspect the Engine
Air Cleaner/Filter
To inspect or replace the engine air cleaner/ﬁlter,
do the following:
1. Unfasten the clips that hold the cover on and
remove the cover.
2. Lift out the engine air cleaner/ﬁlter.
3. Inspect or replace the air ﬁlter. See Normal
Maintenance Replacement Parts on page 6-14
to determine which ﬁlter to use.
4. Reinstall the engine air cleaner/ﬁlter cover.
Fasten the clips to hold the cover in place.
5-20
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Operating the engine with the air cleaner/ﬁlter
off can cause you or others to be burned.
The air cleaner not only cleans the air; it helps
to stop ﬂames if the engine backﬁres. If it is
not there and the engine backﬁres, you could
be burned. Do not drive with it off, and be
careful working on the engine with the air
cleaner/ﬁlter off.
Notice:
If the air cleaner/ﬁlter is off, a backﬁre can
cause a damaging engine ﬁre. And, dirt can
easily get into your engine, which will damage it.
Always have the air cleaner/ﬁlter in place when you
are driving.
Automatic Transmission Fluid
When to Check and Change Automatic
Transmission Fluid
A good time to check your automatic transmission ﬂuid
level is when the engine oil is changed.
Change the ﬂuid and ﬁlter at the intervals listed in
Additional Required Services on page 6-6, and be sure
to use the transmission ﬂuid listed in Recommended
Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12.
5-21
Information Provided by:

How to Check Automatic
Transmission Fluid
Because this operation can be a little difficult, you may
choose to have this done at the dealer/retailer service
department.
If you do it yourself, be sure to follow all the instructions
here, or you could get a false reading on the dipstick.
Notice:
Too much or too little ﬂuid can damage
your transmission. Too much can mean that some
of the ﬂuid could come out and fall on hot engine
parts or exhaust system parts, starting a ﬁre.
Too little ﬂuid could cause the transmission to
overheat. Be sure to get an accurate reading if you
check your transmission ﬂuid.
Wait at least 30 minutes before checking the
transmission ﬂuid level if you have been driving:
•
When outside temperatures are above 90°F (32°C).
•
At high speed for quite a while.
•
In heavy traffic — especially in hot weather.
•
While pulling a trailer.
To get the right reading, the ﬂuid should be at normal
operating temperature, which is 180°F to 200°F
(82°C to 93°C).
Get the vehicle warmed up by driving about 15 miles
(24 km) when outside temperatures are above 50°F
(10°C). If it is colder than 50°F (10°C), drive the vehicle
in THIRD (3) until the engine temperature gage
moves and then remains steady for 10 minutes.
A cold ﬂuid check can be made after the vehicle has
been sitting for eight hours or more with the engine off,
but this is used only as a reference. Let the engine
run at idle for ﬁve minutes if outside temperatures are
50°F (10°C) or more. If it is colder than 50°F (10°C), you
may have to idle the engine longer. Should the ﬂuid
level be low during this cold check, you must check the
ﬂuid hot before adding ﬂuid. Checking the ﬂuid hot
will give you a more accurate reading of the ﬂuid level.
5-22
Information Provided by:

Checking the Fluid Level
Prepare your vehicle as follows:
1. Park your vehicle on a level place. Keep the engine
running.
2. With the parking brake applied, place the shift lever
in PARK (P).
3. With your foot on the brake pedal, move the shift
lever through each gear range, pausing for about
three seconds in each range. Then, position
the shift lever in PARK (P).
4. Let the engine run at idle for three minutes or more.
Then, without shutting off the engine, follow these steps:
1. Flip the handle up and then pull out the dipstick
and wipe it with a clean rag or paper towel.
The automatic
transmission dipstick
handle with this symbol on
it is located in the engine
compartment on the
passenger’s side of the
vehicle.
See Engine Compartment Overview on page 5-12
for more information on location.
2. Push it back in all the way, wait three seconds and
then pull it back out again.
3. Check both sides of the dipstick, and read the lower
level. The ﬂuid level must be in the COLD area,
below the cross-hatched area, for a cold check or in
the HOT or cross-hatched area for a hot check.
Be sure to keep the dipstick pointed down to get an
accurate reading.
4. If the ﬂuid level is in the acceptable range, push the
dipstick back in all the way; then ﬂip the handle
down to lock the dipstick in place.
5-23
Information Provided by:

How to Add Automatic
Transmission Fluid
Refer to the Maintenance Schedule to determine what
kind of transmission ﬂuid to use. See Recommended
Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12.
Add ﬂuid only after checking the transmission ﬂuid while
it is hot. A cold check is used only as a reference.
If the ﬂuid level is low, add only enough of the proper
ﬂuid to bring the level up to the HOT area for a hot
check. It does not take much ﬂuid, generally less than
one pint (0.5 L). Do not overﬁll.
Notice:
Use of the incorrect automatic transmission
ﬂuid may damage your vehicle, and the damages
may not be covered by your warranty. Always
use the automatic transmission ﬂuid listed in
Recommended Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12.
•
After adding ﬂuid, recheck the ﬂuid level as
described under “How to Check Automatic
Transmission Fluid,” earlier in this section.
•
When the correct ﬂuid level is obtained, push the
dipstick back in all the way; then ﬂip the handle
down to lock the dipstick in place.
Manual Transmission Fluid
When to Check
A good time to have it checked is when the engine oil is
changed. However, the ﬂuid in your manual transmission
does not require changing.
How to Check
Because this operation can be a little difficult, you may
choose to have this done at your GM dealer/retailer
service department.
If you do it yourself, be sure to follow all the instructions
here, or you could get a false reading.
Notice:
Too much or too little ﬂuid can damage
your transmission. Too little ﬂuid could cause
the transmission to overheat. Be sure to get an
accurate reading if you check your transmission
ﬂuid.
Check the ﬂuid level only when your engine is off, the
vehicle is parked on a level place and the transmission
is cool enough for you to rest your ﬁngers on the
transmission case.
5-24
Information Provided by:

Then, follow these steps:
1. Remove the ﬁller plug.
2. Check that the lubricant level is up to the bottom of
the ﬁller plug hole.
3. If the ﬂuid level is good, install the plug and be sure
it is fully seated. If the ﬂuid level is low, add more
ﬂuid as described in the next steps.
How to Add Fluid
Here is how to add ﬂuid. Refer to the Maintenance
Schedule to determine what kind of ﬂuid to use.
See Recommended Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12.
1. Remove the ﬁller plug.
2. Add ﬂuid at the ﬁller plug hole. Add only enough
ﬂuid to bring the ﬂuid level up to the bottom of the
ﬁller plug hole.
3. Install the ﬁller plug. Be sure the plug is fully
seated.
5-25
Information Provided by:

Hydraulic Clutch
The hydraulic clutch linkage in your vehicle is
self-adjusting. The clutch master cylinder reservoir is
ﬁlled with hydraulic clutch ﬂuid.
The hydraulic clutch ﬂuid
reservoir cap has this
symbol on it. See Engine
Compartment Overview
on page 5-12 for reservoir
location.
It is not necessary to regularly check clutch ﬂuid unless
you suspect there is a leak in the system. Adding
ﬂuid will not correct a leak.
A ﬂuid loss in this system could indicate a problem.
Have the system inspected and repaired.
When to Check and What to Use
Refer to the Maintenance Schedule to determine how
often you should check the ﬂuid level in your clutch
master cylinder reservoir and for the proper ﬂuid.
See Recommended Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12.
5-26
Information Provided by:

How to Check and Add Fluid
The proper ﬂuid should be added if the level does not
reach the bottom of the diaphragm when it is in place in
the reservoir. See the instructions on the reservoir cap.
Engine Coolant
The cooling system in your vehicle is ﬁlled with
DEX-COOL® engine coolant. This coolant is designed
to remain in your vehicle for ﬁve years or 150,000 miles
(240 000 km), whichever occurs ﬁrst, if you add only
DEX-COOL® extended life coolant.
The following explains your cooling system and how to
add coolant when it is low. If you have a problem
with engine overheating, see Engine Overheating on
page 5-30.
A 50/50 mixture of clean, drinkable water and
DEX-COOL® coolant will:
•
Give freezing protection down to −34°F (−37°C).
•
Give boiling protection up to 265°F (129°C).
•
Protect against rust and corrosion.
•
Help keep the proper engine temperature.
•
Let the warning lights and gages work as they
should.
Notice:
Using coolant other than DEX-COOL® may
cause premature engine, heater core, or radiator
corrosion. In addition, the engine coolant may
require changing sooner, at the ﬁrst maintenance
service after each 30,000 miles (50 000 km) or
24 months, whichever occurs ﬁrst. Any repairs
would not be covered by your warranty. Always use
DEX-COOL® (silicate-free) coolant in your vehicle.
5-27
Information Provided by:

What to Use
Use a mixture of one-half clean, drinkable water and
one-half DEX-COOL® coolant which will not damage
aluminum parts. If you use this coolant mixture, you do
not need to add anything else.
{CAUTION:
Adding only plain water to your cooling
system can be dangerous. Plain water, or
some other liquid such as alcohol, can boil
before the proper coolant mixture will. Your
vehicle’s coolant warning system is set for the
proper coolant mixture. With plain water or the
wrong mixture, your engine could get too hot
but you would not get the overheat warning.
Your engine could catch ﬁre and you or others
could be burned. Use a 50/50 mixture of clean,
drinkable water and the proper coolant.
Notice:
If you use an improper coolant mixture,
your engine could overheat and be badly damaged.
The repair cost would not be covered by your
warranty. Too much water in the mixture can freeze
and crack the engine, radiator, heater core, and
other parts.
Notice:
If you use extra inhibitors and/or additives
in your vehicle’s cooling system, you could
damage your vehicle. Use only the proper mixture
of the engine coolant listed in this manual for
the cooling system. See Recommended Fluids and
Lubricants on page 6-12 for more information.
Checking Coolant
The coolant recovery tank
cap has this symbol on it.
5-28
Information Provided by:

It is located toward the rear of the engine compartment
on the passenger’s side of the vehicle. See Engine
Compartment Overview on page 5-12 for more
information on location.
The vehicle must be on a level surface. When your
engine is cold, the coolant level should be at FULL
COLD, or a little higher. When your engine is warm,
the level could be above the FULL COLD level.
Adding Coolant
If you need more coolant, add the proper DEX-COOL®
coolant mixture at the coolant recovery tank.
{CAUTION:
Turning the radiator pressure cap when the
engine and radiator are hot can allow steam
and scalding liquids to blow out and burn you
badly. With the coolant recovery tank, you will
almost never have to add coolant at the
radiator. Never turn the radiator pressure
cap — even a little — when the engine and
radiator are hot.
Add coolant mixture at the recovery tank, but be careful
not to spill it.
{CAUTION:
You can be burned if you spill coolant on hot
engine parts. Coolant contains ethylene glycol,
and it will burn if the engine parts are hot
enough. Do not spill coolant on a hot engine.
Occasionally check the coolant level in the radiator.
For information on how to add coolant to the radiator,
see Cooling System on page 5-32.
5-29
Information Provided by:

Radiator Pressure Cap
Notice:
If the pressure cap is not tightly installed,
coolant loss and possible engine damage may occur.
Be sure the cap is properly and tightly secured.
See Engine Compartment Overview on page 5-12 for
more information on location.
Engine Overheating
A coolant temperature gage is on the instrument panel.
See Engine Coolant Temperature Gage on page 3-33.
The air conditioning might stop working if the engine
is too hot. This is normal and helps cool the engine.
If Steam Is Coming From Your Engine
{CAUTION:
Steam from an overheated engine can burn you
badly, even if you just open the hood. Stay away
from the engine if you see or hear steam coming
from it. Just turn it off and get everyone away
from the vehicle until it cools down. Wait until
there is no sign of steam or coolant before you
open the hood.
If you keep driving when your engine is
overheated, the liquids in it can catch ﬁre.
You or others could be badly burned. Stop your
engine if it overheats, and get out of the vehicle
until the engine is cool.
Notice:
If your engine catches ﬁre because you
keep driving with no coolant, your vehicle can
be badly damaged. The costly repairs would not be
covered by your warranty.
5-30
Information Provided by:

If No Steam Is Coming From Your
Engine
If you get an engine overheat warning but see or hear
no steam, the problem may not be too serious.
Sometimes the engine can get a little too hot when you:
•
Climb a long hill on a hot day.
•
Stop after high-speed driving.
•
Idle for long periods in traffic.
•
Tow a trailer. See “Driving on Grades” under
Towing a Trailer on page 4-47.
If you get the overheat warning with no sign of steam,
try this for a minute or so:
1. In heavy traffic, let the engine idle in NEUTRAL
while stopped. If it is safe to do so, pull off the
road, shift to PARK (P) or NEUTRAL and let the
engine idle.
2. Turn off the air conditioning.
3. Turn on your heater to full hot at the highest fan
speed and open the windows as necessary.
If you no longer have the overheat warning, you can
drive. Just to be safe, drive slower for about 10 minutes.
If the warning does not come back on, you can drive
normally.
If the warning continues, pull over, stop, and park your
vehicle right away.
If there is still no sign of steam, idle the engine for
three minutes while you are parked. Push down
the accelerator until the engine speed is about twice as
fast as normal idle speed for at least three minutes
while you are parked. If you still have the warning, turn
off the engine and get everyone out of the vehicle
until it cools down.
You may decide not to lift the hood but to get service
help right away.
5-31
Information Provided by:

Cooling System
When you decide it is safe to lift the hood, here is what
you will see:
A. Coolant Recovery Tank
B. Engine Cooling Fan
C. Radiator Pressure Cap
If the coolant inside the coolant recovery tank is
boiling, do not do anything else until it cools down.
The vehicle should be parked on a level surface.
When the engine is cold, the coolant level should be
at least up to the FULL COLD mark. If it is not,
you may have a leak at the pressure cap or in the
radiator hoses, heater hoses, radiator, water pump or
somewhere else in the cooling system.
5-32
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Heater and radiator hoses, and other engine
parts, can be very hot. Do not touch them. If
you do, you can be burned.
Do not run the engine if there is a leak. If you
run the engine, it could lose all coolant. That
could cause an engine ﬁre, and you could be
burned. Get any leak ﬁxed before you drive the
vehicle.
If there seems to be no leak, start the engine again.
The engine cooling fan speed should increase when idle
speed is doubled by pushing the accelerator pedal
down. If it does not, your vehicle needs service. Turn off
the engine.
Notice:
Engine damage from running the engine
without coolant is not covered by the warranty.
Notice:
Using coolant other than DEX-COOL® may
cause premature engine, heater core, or radiator
corrosion. In addition, the engine coolant could
require changing sooner, at 30,000 miles (50 000 km)
or 24 months, whichever occurs ﬁrst. Any repairs
would not be covered by the warranty. Always use
DEX-COOL® (silicate-free) coolant in the vehicle.
5-33
Information Provided by:

How to Add Coolant to the Coolant
Recovery Tank
If you have not found a problem yet, but the coolant
level is not at the FULL COLD mark, add a 50/50
mixture of clean, drinkable water and DEX-COOL®
engine coolant at the coolant recovery tank. See Engine
Coolant on page 5-27 for more information.
{CAUTION:
Adding only plain water to the cooling system
can be dangerous. Plain water, or some other
liquid such as alcohol, can boil before the
proper coolant mixture will. The vehicle’s
coolant warning system is set for the proper
coolant mixture. With plain water or the wrong
mixture, the engine could get too hot but you
would not get the overheat warning. The
engine could catch ﬁre and you or others
could be burned. Use a 50/50 mixture of clean,
drinkable water and DEX-COOL® coolant.
Notice:
In cold weather, water can freeze and crack
the engine, radiator, heater core and other parts.
Use the recommended coolant and the proper
coolant mixture.
{CAUTION:
You can be burned if you spill coolant on hot
engine parts. Coolant contains ethylene glycol
and it will burn if the engine parts are hot
enough. Do not spill coolant on a hot engine.
When the coolant in the coolant recovery tank is at the
FULL COLD mark, start your vehicle.
5-34
Information Provided by:

If the overheat warning continues, there is one more
thing you can try. Add the proper mixture directly to the
radiator, but be sure the cooling system is cool before
you do it.
{CAUTION:
Steam and scalding liquids from a hot cooling
system can blow out and burn you badly. They
are under pressure, and if you turn the radiator
pressure cap — even a little — they can come
out at high speed. Never turn the cap when the
cooling system, including the radiator pressure
cap, is hot. Wait for the cooling system and
radiator pressure cap to cool if you ever have
to turn the pressure cap.
How to Add Coolant to the Radiator
1. Remove the radiator pressure cap when the cooling
system, including the upper radiator hose, is no
longer hot. Turn the pressure cap slowly
counterclockwise about one full turn.
If you hear a hiss, wait for that to stop. A hiss
means there is still some pressure left.
2. Keep turning the cap to remove it.
3. Fill the radiator with the proper DEX-COOL®
coolant mixture, up to the base of the ﬁller
neck. See Engine Coolant on page 5-27 for more
information about the proper coolant mixture.
5-35
Information Provided by:

4. Fill the coolant recovery tank to the FULL
COLD mark.
5. Reinstall the cap on the coolant recovery tank,
but leave the radiator pressure cap off.
6. Start the engine and let it run until you can feel the
upper radiator hose getting hot. Watch out for the
engine cooling fan.
7. By this time, the coolant level inside the radiator
ﬁller neck might be lower. If the level is lower, add
more of the proper DEX-COOL® coolant mixture
through the ﬁller neck until the level reaches
the base of the ﬁller neck.
8. Then replace the pressure cap.
At any time during this procedure if coolant begins to
ﬂow out of the ﬁller neck, reinstall the pressure cap.
Be sure to secure it tightly.
5-36
Information Provided by:

Engine Fan Noise
This vehicle has a clutched engine cooling fan. When
the clutch is engaged, the fan spins faster to provide
more air to cool the engine. In most everyday driving
conditions, the clutch is not engaged. This improves fuel
economy and reduces fan noise. Under heavy vehicle
loading, trailer towing and/or high outside temperatures,
the fan speed increases when the clutch engages.
So you may hear an increase in fan noise. This is
normal and should not be mistaken as the transmission
slipping or making extra shifts. It is merely the cooling
system functioning properly. The fan will slow down
when additional cooling is not required and the clutch
disengages.
You may also hear this fan noise when you start the
engine. It will go away as the fan clutch disengages.
Power Steering Fluid
The power steering ﬂuid
reservoir is located near
the front of the engine
compartment, behind the
radiator. See Engine
Compartment Overview on
page 5-12 for reservoir
location.
When to Check Power Steering Fluid
It is not necessary to regularly check power steering ﬂuid
unless you suspect there is a leak in the system or
you hear an unusual noise. A ﬂuid loss in this system
could indicate a problem. Have the system inspected
and repaired.
5-37
Information Provided by:

How to Check Power Steering Fluid
1. Turn the key off and let the engine compartment
cool down.
2. Wipe the cap and the top of the reservoir clean.
3. Unscrew the cap and wipe the dipstick with a
clean rag.
4. Replace the cap and completely tighten it.
5. Then remove the cap again and look at the ﬂuid
level on the dipstick.
The level should be between the ADD and FULL marks.
If necessary, add only enough ﬂuid to bring the level
up to the proper range.
What to Use
To determine what kind of ﬂuid to use, see
Recommended Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12.
Always use the proper ﬂuid.
Notice:
Use of the incorrect ﬂuid may damage your
vehicle and the damages may not be covered by
your warranty. Always use the correct ﬂuid listed in
Recommended Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12.
Windshield Washer Fluid
What to Use
When you need windshield washer ﬂuid, be sure to read
the manufacturer’s instructions before use. If you will
be operating your vehicle in an area where the
temperature may fall below freezing, use a ﬂuid that
has sufficient protection against freezing.
Adding Washer Fluid
Open the cap with the
washer symbol on it.
Add washer ﬂuid until the
tank is full. See Engine
Compartment Overview on
page 5-12 for reservoir
location.
5-38
Information Provided by:

Notice:
•
When using concentrated washer ﬂuid, follow
the manufacturer’s instructions for adding
water.
•
Do not mix water with ready-to-use washer ﬂuid.
Water can cause the solution to freeze and
damage your washer ﬂuid tank and other parts
of the washer system. Also, water does not
clean as well as washer ﬂuid.
•
Fill the washer ﬂuid tank only three-quarters full
when it is very cold. This allows for ﬂuid
expansion if freezing occurs, which could
damage the tank if it is completely full.
•
Do not use engine coolant (antifreeze) in your
windshield washer. It can damage the vehicle’s
windshield washer system and paint.
Brakes
Brake Fluid
The brake master cylinder
reservoir is ﬁlled with
DOT-3 brake ﬂuid.
See Engine Compartment
Overview on page 5-12
for the location of the
reservoir.
There are only two reasons why the brake ﬂuid level
in the reservoir might go down. The ﬁrst is that the brake
ﬂuid goes down to an acceptable level during normal
brake lining wear. When new linings are put in,
the ﬂuid level goes back up. The other reason is that
ﬂuid is leaking out of the brake hydraulic system.
If it is, you should have the brake hydraulic system ﬁxed,
since a leak means that sooner or later the brakes
will not work well.
5-39
Information Provided by:

It is not a good idea to top off the brake ﬂuid. Adding
brake ﬂuid will not correct a leak. If ﬂuid is added when
the linings are worn, there will be too much ﬂuid
when new brake linings are installed. Add or remove
brake ﬂuid, as necessary, only when work is done on the
brake hydraulic system.
{CAUTION:
If you have too much brake ﬂuid, it can spill on
the engine. The ﬂuid will burn if the engine is
hot enough. You or others could be burned,
and your vehicle could be damaged. Add brake
ﬂuid only when work is done on the brake
hydraulic system. See “Checking Brake Fluid”
in this section.
Refer to the Maintenance Schedule to determine when
to check the brake ﬂuid. See Scheduled Maintenance
on page 6-4.
Checking Brake Fluid
The brake ﬂuid can be checked without taking off the
cap by looking at the brake ﬂuid reservoir.
The ﬂuid level should be
above MIN. If it is not,
have the brake hydraulic
system checked to
see if there is a leak.
After work is done on the brake hydraulic system,
make sure the level is above the MIN but not over the
MAX mark.
What to Add
When you do need brake ﬂuid, use only DOT-3 brake
ﬂuid. Use new brake ﬂuid from a sealed container
only. See Recommended Fluids and Lubricants on
page 6-12.
Always clean the brake ﬂuid reservoir cap and the area
around the cap before removing it. This helps keep
dirt from entering the reservoir.
5-40
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
With the wrong kind of ﬂuid in the brake
hydraulic system, the brakes might not work
well. This could cause a crash. Always use the
proper brake ﬂuid.
Notice:
•
Using the wrong ﬂuid can badly damage brake
hydraulic system parts. For example, just a
few drops of mineral-based oil, such as engine
oil, in the brake hydraulic system can damage
brake hydraulic system parts so badly that they
will have to be replaced. Do not let someone
put in the wrong kind of ﬂuid.
•
If you spill brake ﬂuid on your vehicle’s painted
surfaces, the paint ﬁnish can be damaged.
Be careful not to spill brake ﬂuid on your
vehicle. If you do, wash it off immediately.
See Washing Your Vehicle on page 5-110.
Brake Wear
Your vehicle has front disc brakes and rear drum
brakes.
Disc brake pads have built-in wear indicators that make
a high-pitched warning sound when the brake pads
are worn and new pads are needed. The sound
can come and go or be heard all the time your vehicle
is moving, except when you are pushing on the
brake pedal ﬁrmly.
{CAUTION:
The brake wear warning sound means that soon
the brakes will not work well. That could lead to
an accident. When you hear the brake wear
warning sound, have your vehicle serviced.
Notice:
Continuing to drive with worn-out brake
pads could result in costly brake repair.
Some driving conditions or climates can cause a brake
squeal when the brakes are ﬁrst applied or lightly
applied. This does not mean something is wrong with
the brakes.
5-41
Information Provided by:

Properly torqued wheel nuts are necessary to help
prevent brake pulsation. When tires are rotated, inspect
brake pads for wear and evenly tighten wheel nuts in
the proper sequence to torque speciﬁcations in
Capacities and Speciﬁcations on page 5-120.
Rear drum brakes do not have wear indicators, but if
you ever hear a rear brake rubbing noise, have the rear
brake linings inspected immediately. Also, the rear
brake drums should be removed and inspected each
time the tires are removed for rotation or changing.
When you have the front brake pads replaced, have the
rear brakes inspected, too.
Brake linings should always be replaced as complete
axle sets.
Brake Pedal Travel
See your dealer/retailer if the brake pedal does not
return to normal height, or if there is a rapid increase in
pedal travel. This could be a sign that brake service
might be required.
Brake Adjustment
Every time you make a brake stop, the brakes adjust
for wear.
Replacing Brake System Parts
The braking system on a vehicle is complex. Its many
parts have to be of top quality and work well together if
the vehicle is to have really good braking. Your vehicle
was designed and tested with top-quality brake parts.
When you replace parts of the braking system — for
example, when the brake linings wear down and you
need new ones put in — be sure you get new approved
replacement parts. If you do not, the brakes might not
work properly. For example, if someone puts in brake
linings that are wrong for your vehicle, the balance
between the front and rear brakes can change — for the
worse. The braking performance you have come to
expect can change in many other ways if someone puts
in the wrong replacement brake parts.
5-42
Information Provided by:

Battery
Your vehicle has a maintenance free battery. When it is
time for a new battery, see your dealer/retailer for
one that has the replacement number shown on the
original battery’s label. See Engine Compartment
Overview on page 5-12 for battery location.
Warning:
Battery posts, terminals, and related
accessories contain lead and lead compounds,
chemicals known to the State of California to cause
cancer and reproductive harm. Wash hands after
handling.
Vehicle Storage
{CAUTION:
Batteries have acid that can burn you and
gas that can explode. You can be badly hurt if
you are not careful. See Jump Starting on
page 5-44 for tips on working around a battery
without getting hurt.
Infrequent Usage: If you drive your vehicle infrequently,
remove the black, negative (−) cable from the battery.
This will help keep the battery from running down.
Extended Storage: For extended storage of your vehicle,
remove the black, negative (−) cable from the battery
or use a battery trickle charger. This will help maintain
the charge of the battery over an extended period
of time.
5-43
Information Provided by:

Jump Starting
If your vehicle’s battery has run down, you may want to
use another vehicle and some jumper cables to start your
vehicle. Be sure to use the following steps to do it safely.
{CAUTION:
Batteries can hurt you. They can be dangerous
because:
• They contain acid that can burn you.
• They contain gas that can explode or ignite.
• They contain enough electricity to burn you.
If you do not follow these steps exactly, some or
all of these things can hurt you.
Notice:
Ignoring these steps could result in costly
damage to your vehicle that would not be covered
by your warranty.
Trying to start your vehicle by pushing or pulling it
will not work, and it could damage your vehicle.
1. Check the other vehicle. It must have a 12-volt
battery with a negative ground system.
Notice:
If the other vehicle’s system is not a 12-volt
system with a negative ground, both vehicles can
be damaged. Only use vehicles with 12-volt systems
with negative grounds to jump start your vehicle.
2. Get the vehicles close enough so the jumper cables
can reach, but be sure the vehicles are not touching
each other. If they are, it could cause a ground
connection you do not want. You would not be able
to start your vehicle, and the bad grounding
could damage the electrical systems.
To avoid the possibility of the vehicles rolling, set
the parking brake ﬁrmly on both vehicles involved
in the jump start procedure. Put an automatic
transmission in PARK (P) or a manual transmission
in NEUTRAL before setting the parking brake.
If you have a four-wheel-drive vehicle, be sure the
transfer case is not in NEUTRAL.
Notice:
If you leave your radio or other accessories
on during the jump starting procedure, they could
be damaged. The repairs would not be covered
by your warranty. Always turn off your radio and
other accessories when jump starting your vehicle.
3. Turn off the ignition on both vehicles. Unplug
unnecessary accessories plugged into the cigarette
lighter or the accessory power outlets. Turn off
the radio and all lamps that are not needed.
This will avoid sparks and help save both batteries.
And it could save the radio!
5-44
Information Provided by:

4. Open the hoods and locate the positive (+) and
negative (−) terminal locations on the other vehicle.
Your vehicle has a remote positive (+) and a
remote negative (−) jump starting terminal.
See Engine Compartment Overview on page 5-12
for more information on the terminal locations.
{CAUTION:
Using a match near a battery can cause battery
gas to explode. People have been hurt doing
this, and some have been blinded. Use a
ﬂashlight if you need more light.
Be sure the batteries have enough water.
You do not need to add water to the ACDelco®
battery (or batteries) installed in your new
vehicle. But if a battery has ﬁller caps, be sure
the right amount of ﬂuid is there. If it is low,
add water to take care of that ﬁrst. If you do
not, explosive gas could be present.
Battery ﬂuid contains acid that can burn you.
Do not get it on you. If you accidentally get it
in your eyes or on your skin, ﬂush the place
with water and get medical help immediately.
{CAUTION:
Fans or other moving engine parts can injure
you badly. Keep your hands away from moving
parts once the engine is running.
5. Check that the jumper cables do not have loose or
missing insulation. If they do, you could get a
shock. The vehicles could be damaged too.
Before you connect the cables, here are some
basic things you should know. Positive (+) will go to
positive (+) or to a remote positive (+) terminal if
the vehicle has one. Negative (−) will go to a heavy,
unpainted metal engine part or to a remote
negative (−) terminal if the vehicle has one.
Do not connect positive (+) to negative (−) or you
will get a short that would damage the battery
and maybe other parts too. And do not connect the
negative (−) cable to the negative (−) terminal on
the dead battery because this can cause sparks.
5-45
Information Provided by:

6. Connect the red positive (+) cable to the positive (+)
terminal of the dead battery. Use a remote
positive (+) terminal if the vehicle has one.
7. Do not let the other end touch metal. Connect it to
the positive (+) terminal of the good battery. Use a
remote positive (+) terminal if the vehicle has one.
8. Now connect the black negative (−) cable to the
negative (−) terminal of the good battery. Use a
remote negative (−) terminal if the vehicle has one.
Do not let the other end touch anything until the
next step. The other end of the negative (−) cable
does not go to the dead battery. It goes to a
heavy, unpainted metal engine part, or to a remote
negative (−) terminal on the vehicle with the
dead battery.
9. Connect the other end of the negative (−) cable at
least 18 inches (45 cm) away from the dead battery,
but not near engine parts that move. The electrical
connection is just as good there, and the chance
of sparks getting back to the battery is much less.
Your vehicle has a remote negative (−) terminal
for this purpose.
10. Now start the vehicle with the good battery and run
the engine for a while.
11. Try to start the vehicle that had the dead battery.
If it will not start after a few tries, it probably needs
service.
5-46
Information Provided by:

Notice:
If the jumper cables are connected or
removed in the wrong order, electrical shorting may
occur and damage the vehicle. The repairs would
not be covered by your warranty. Always connect
and remove the jumper cables in the correct
order, making sure that the cables do not touch
each other or other metal.
A. Heavy, Unpainted Metal Engine Part or Remote
Negative (−) Terminal
B. Good Battery or Remote Positive (+) and Remote
Negative (−) Terminals
C. Dead Battery or Remote Positive (+) Terminal
To disconnect the jumper cables from both vehicles,
do the following:
1. Disconnect the black negative (−) cable from the
vehicle that had the dead battery.
2. Disconnect the black negative (−) cable from the
vehicle with the good battery.
3. Disconnect the red positive (+) cable from the
vehicle with the good battery.
4. Disconnect the red positive (+) cable from the
other vehicle.
Jumper Cable Removal
5-47
Information Provided by:

Rear Axle
When to Check and Change Lubricant
It is not necessary to regularly check rear axle ﬂuid
unless you suspect there is a leak or you hear an
unusual noise. A ﬂuid loss could indicate a problem.
Have it inspected and repaired.
How to Check Lubricant
To get an accurate reading, the vehicle should be on a
level surface.
The proper level is from 0 to 3/8 inch (0 mm to 10 mm)
below the bottom of the ﬁller plug hole, located on
the rear axle.
What to Use
See Recommended Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12
to determine which kind of lubricant to use.
5-48
Information Provided by:

Four-Wheel Drive
Lubricant checks in this section apply to this vehicle.
There are two additional systems that need lubrication.
Transfer Case
When to Check Lubricant
Refer to the Maintenance Schedule to determine how
often to check the lubricant. See Additional Required
Services on page 6-6.
How to Check Lubricant
To get an accurate reading, the vehicle should be on a
level surface.
A. Drain Plug
B. Filler Plug
If the level is below the bottom of the ﬁller plug hole,
located on the transfer case, you’ll need to add
some lubricant. Remove the plug and add enough
lubricant to raise the level to the bottom of the ﬁller plug
hole. Use care not to overtighten the plug.
What to Use
Refer to the Maintenance Schedule to determine what
kind of lubricant to use. See Recommended Fluids
and Lubricants on page 6-12.
5-49
Information Provided by:

Front Axle
When to Check and Change Lubricant
It is not necessary to regularly check your front axle
ﬂuid unless you suspect there is a leak or you hear an
unusual noise. A ﬂuid loss could indicate a problem.
Have it inspected and repaired.
How to Check Lubricant
To get an accurate reading, the vehicle should be on a
level surface.
If the level is below the bottom of the ﬁller plug hole,
located on the front axle, you may need to add
some lubricant.
When the differential is cold, add enough lubricant to
raise the level to 1/2 inch (12 mm) below the ﬁller
plug hole.
When the differential is at operating temperature (warm),
add enough lubricant to raise the level to the bottom
of the ﬁller plug hole.
What to Use
See Recommended Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12
to determine what kind of lubricant to use.
5-50
Information Provided by:

Headlamp Aiming
Headlamp aim has been preset at the factory and
should need no further adjustment.
However, if your vehicle is damaged in a crash, the
headlamp aim may be affected. Aim adjustment to the
low-beam headlamps may be necessary if oncoming
drivers ﬂash their high-beam headlamps at you
(for vertical aim).
If the headlamps need to be re-aimed, it is
recommended that you take the vehicle to your
dealer/retailer for service.
Bulb Replacement
For the proper type of replacement bulbs, see
Replacement Bulbs on page 5-56.
For any bulb changing procedure not listed in this
section, contact your dealer/retailer.
Halogen Bulbs
{CAUTION:
Halogen bulbs have pressurized gas inside and
can burst if you drop or scratch the bulb. You or
others could be injured. Be sure to read and
follow the instructions on the bulb package.
5-51
Information Provided by:

Headlamps
A. Low-Beam Headlamp/Daytime Running Lamps (DRL)
B. High-Beam Headlamp
To replace one of these bulbs:
1. Open the hood. See Hood Release on page 5-11
for more information.
2. Reach in and access the bulb sockets from inside
the engine compartment.
3. Turn the bulb socket counterclockwise to remove it
from the headlamp assembly and pull it straight out.
4. Unplug the electrical connector from the old bulb by
releasing the clips on the bulb socket.
5. Replace with a new bulb socket.
6. Plug in the electrical connector to the new bulb
socket.
7. Reinstall the new bulb socket into the headlamp
assembly and turn it clockwise to secure.
8. Close the hood.
5-52
Information Provided by:

Front Turn Signal, Parking and
Daytime Running Lamps (DRL)
To replace one of these bulbs:
1. Open the hood. See Hood Release on page 5-11
for more information.
2. Reach in to access either one of the bulb sockets in
the engine compartment.
3. Turn the bulb socket counterclockwise and remove
it from the lamp assembly.
4. Holding the socket, pull the old bulb to release it
from the bulb socket.
5. Push the new bulb into the socket until it clicks.
6. Insert the bulb socket into the lamp assembly and
turn it clockwise to secure.
7. Close the hood.
5-53
Information Provided by:

Center High-Mounted
Stoplamp (CHMSL)
To replace the CHMSL bulb:
1. Remove the two screws and lift off the lamp
assembly from the vehicle.
2. Turn the bulb socket counterclockwise and remove
it from the lamp assembly.
3. Holding the socket, pull the bulb to release it from
the socket.
4. Push the new bulb into the socket until it clicks.
5. Insert the bulb socket into the lamp assembly and
turn it clockwise to secure.
6. Reinstall the lamp assembly and tighten the screws.
Taillamps, Turn Signal, Stoplamps
and Back-up Lamps
A. Stoplamp/Taillamp
B. Turn Signal/Taillamp
C. Back-up Lamp
5-54
Information Provided by:

To replace one of these bulbs:
1. Open the tailgate. See Tailgate on page 2-10 for
more information.
2. Remove the two rear
lamp assembly screws
near the tailgate latch.
3. Pull the lamp assembly away from the vehicle.
4. Turn the bulb socket counterclockwise to remove it
from the taillamp assembly.
5. Holding the socket, pull the old bulb to release it
from the socket.
6. Push the new bulb into the socket until it clicks.
7. Insert the bulb socket into the taillamp assembly
and turn it clockwise to secure.
8. Reinstall the taillamp assembly and tighten the
screws.
9. Close the tailgate.
5-55
Information Provided by:

License Plate Lamp
To replace one of these bulbs:
1. Reach under the rear bumper for the bulb socket.
2. Turn the bulb socket counterclockwise and pull
the bulb socket out of the connector.
3. Pull the old bulb straight out from the bulb socket.
4. Push the new bulb straight in until it clicks to
secure it.
5. Reverse Steps 1 through 3 to reinstall the license
plate lamp.
Replacement Bulbs
Exterior Lamp
Bulb Number
Center High-Mounted
Stoplamp (CHMSL)
912
License Plate Bulb
W5W
Headlamps
High-beam
9005
Low-beam/Daytime Running
Lamp (DRL)
9006
Parking/Front Turn Signal
3757KA
Parking Lamp (Inboard)
3157A
Stoplamp, Rear Turn Signal,
Taillamp, and Back-up Lamp
3057
For replacement bulbs not listed here, contact your
dealer/retailer.
5-56
Information Provided by:

Windshield Wiper Blade
Replacement
Windshield wiper blades should be inspected for wear
and cracking. See Scheduled Maintenance on page 6-4
for more information.
Replacement blades come in different types and are
removed in different ways. For proper type and length,
see Normal Maintenance Replacement Parts on
page 6-14.
Allowing the wiper blade arm to touch the windshield
when no wiper blade is installed could damage the
windshield. Any damage that occurs would not
be covered by your warranty. Do not allow the wiper
blade arm to touch the windshield.
1. To remove the old wiper blades, lift the wiper arm
until it locks into a vertical position.
A. Blade Assembly
B. Arm Assembly
C. Locking Tab
D. Blade Pivot
E. Hook Slot
F. Arm Hook
2. Press down on the blade assembly pivot locking
tab. Pull down on the blade assembly to release it
from the wiper arm hook.
3. Remove the insert from the blade assembly.
The insert has two notches at one end that are
locked by bottom claws of the blade assembly.
At the notched end, pull the insert from the blade
assembly.
5-57
Information Provided by:

4. To install the new wiper insert, slide the insert (D),
notched end last, into the end with two blade
claws (A). Slide the insert all the way through the
blade claws at the opposite end (B). The plastic
caps (C) will be forced off as the insert is fully
inserted.
5. Be sure that the notches are locked by the bottom
claws. Make sure that all other claws are properly
locked on both sides of the insert slots.
A. Claw in Notch
B. Correct Installation
C. Incorrect Installation
6. Put the blade assembly pivot in the wiper arm hook.
Pull up until the pivot locking tab locks in the
hook slot.
7. Carefully lower the wiper arm and blade assembly
onto the windshield.
5-58
Information Provided by:

Tires
Your new vehicle comes with high-quality tires
made by a leading tire manufacturer. If you ever
have questions about your tire warranty and where
to obtain service, see your vehicle Warranty
booklet for details.
{CAUTION:
Poorly maintained and improperly used
tires are dangerous.
• Overloading your vehicle’s tires
can cause overheating as a result
of too much friction. You could have
an air-out and a serious accident.
See Loading Your Vehicle on
page 4-34.
CAUTION:
(Continued)
CAUTION:
(Continued)
• Underinﬂated tires pose the same
danger as overloaded tires. The
resulting accident could cause serious
injury. Check all tires frequently to
maintain the recommended pressure.
Tire pressure should be checked
when your vehicle’s tires are cold.
See Inﬂation - Tire Pressure on
page 5-66.
• Overinﬂated tires are more likely to
be cut, punctured, or broken by a
sudden impact — such as when you
hit a pothole. Keep tires at the
recommended pressure.
• Worn, old tires can cause accidents.
If the tire’s tread is badly worn,
or if your vehicle’s tires have been
damaged, replace them.
5-59
Information Provided by:

Tire Sidewall Labeling
Useful information about a tire is molded into its
sidewall. The examples below show a typical
passenger vehicle tire and a compact spare tire
sidewall.
(A) Tire Size: The tire size is a combination of
letters and numbers used to deﬁne a particular
tire’s width, height, aspect ratio, construction type
and service description. See the “Tire Size”
illustration later in this section for more detail.
(B) TPC Spec (Tire Performance Criteria
Speciﬁcation): Original equipment tires designed
to GM’s speciﬁc tire performance criteria have
a TPC speciﬁcation code molded onto the sidewall.
GM’s TPC speciﬁcations meet or exceed all
federal safety guidelines.
(C) DOT (Department of Transportation):
The Department of Transportation (DOT) code
indicates that the tire is in compliance with the
U.S. Department of Transportation Motor Vehicle
Safety Standards.
(D) Tire Identiﬁcation Number (TIN): The letters
and numbers following DOT code are the Tire
Identiﬁcation Number (TIN). The TIN shows
the manufacturer and plant code, tire size, and
date the tire was manufactured. The TIN is molded
onto both sides of the tire, although only one
side may have the date of manufacture.
(E) Tire Ply Material: The type of cord and
number of plies in the sidewall and under the
tread.
Passenger Vehicle Tire Example
5-60
Information Provided by:

(F) Uniform Tire Quality Grading (UTQG):
Tire manufacturers are required to grade
tires based on three performance factors:
treadwear, traction and temperature resistance.
For more information see Uniform Tire Quality
Grading on page 5-79.
(G) Maximum Cold Inﬂation Load Limit:
Maximum load that can be carried and the
maximum pressure needed to support that load.
(A) Temporary Use Only: The compact spare tire
or temporary use tire has a tread life of
approximately 3,000 miles (5 000 km) and should
not be driven at speeds over 65 mph (105 km/h).
The compact spare tire is for emergency use when
a regular road tire has lost air and gone ﬂat.
See “Compact Spare Tire” under Spare Tire on
page 5-104 for additional information.
(B) Tire Ply Material: The type of cord and
number of plies in the sidewall and under the
tread.
(C) Tire Identiﬁcation Number (TIN): The Tire
Identiﬁcation Number (TIN). The TIN shows
the manufacturer and plant code, tire size, and
date the tire was manufactured. The TIN is molded
onto both sides of the tire, although only one side
may have the date of manufacture.
(D) Maximum Cold Inﬂation Load Limit:
Maximum load that can be carried and the
maximum pressure needed to support that load.
(E) Tire Inﬂation: The temporary use tire or
compact spare tire should be inﬂated to 60 psi
(420 kPa). For more information on tire pressure
and inﬂation see Inﬂation - Tire Pressure on
page 5-66.
Compact Spare Tire Example
5-61
Information Provided by:

(F) Tire Size : A combination of letters and
numbers deﬁne a tire’s width, height, aspect
ratio, construction type and service description.
The letter T as the ﬁrst character in the tire
size means the tire is for temporary use only.
(G) TPC Spec (Tire Performance Criteria
Speciﬁcation): Original equipment tires designed
to GM’s speciﬁc tire performance criteria have
a TPC speciﬁcation code molded onto the sidewall.
GM’s TPC speciﬁcations meet or exceed all federal
safety guidelines.
Tire Size
The following illustration shows an example of a
typical passenger vehicle tire size.
(A) P-Metric Tire: The United States version of a
metric tire sizing system. The letter P as the
ﬁrst character in the tire size means a passenger
vehicle tire engineered to standards set by the
U.S. Tire and Rim Association.
(B) Tire Width: The three-digit number indicates
the tire section width in millimeters from sidewall
to sidewall.
(C) Aspect Ratio: A two-digit number that
indicates the tire height-to-width measurements.
For example, if the tire size aspect ratio is 70,
as shown in item C of the illustration, it would
mean that the tire’s sidewall is 70 percent as high
as it is wide.
(D) Construction Code: A letter code is used to
indicate the type of ply construction in the tire.
The letter R means radial ply construction;
the letter D means diagonal or bias ply
construction; and the letter B means belted-bias
ply construction.
(E) Rim Diameter: Diameter of the wheel in
inches.
(F) Service Description: These characters
represent the load range and speed rating of the
tire. The load index represents the load carry
capacity a tire is certiﬁed to carry. The load index
can range from 1 to 279. The speed rating is
the maximum speed a tire is certiﬁed to carry a
load. Speed ratings range from A to Z.
5-62
Information Provided by:

Tire Terminology and Deﬁnitions
Air Pressure: The amount of air inside the
tire pressing outward on each square inch of the
tire. Air pressure is expressed in pounds per
square inch (psi) or kilopascal (kPa).
Accessory Weight: This means the combined
weight of optional accessories. Some examples of
optional accessories are, automatic transmission,
power steering, power brakes, power windows,
power seats, and air conditioning.
Aspect Ratio: The relationship of a tire’s height
to its width.
Belt: A rubber coated layer of cords that is
located between the plies and the tread. Cords
may be made from steel or other reinforcing
materials.
Bead: The tire bead contains steel wires wrapped
by steel cords that hold the tire onto the rim.
Bias Ply Tire: A pneumatic tire in which the plies
are laid at alternate angles less than 90 degrees
to the centerline of the tread.
Cold Tire Pressure: The amount of air pressure
in a tire, measured in pounds per square inch
(psi) or kilopascals (kPa) before a tire has built up
heat from driving. See Inﬂation - Tire Pressure
on page 5-66.
Curb Weight: The weight of a motor vehicle with
standard and optional equipment including the
maximum capacity of fuel, oil, and coolant,
but without passengers and cargo.
DOT Markings: A code molded into the sidewall
of a tire signifying that the tire is in compliance
with the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT)
motor vehicle safety standards. The DOT code
includes the Tire Identiﬁcation Number (TIN),
an alphanumeric designator which can also identify
the tire manufacturer, production plant, brand,
and date of production.
GVWR: Gross Vehicle Weight Rating.
See Loading Your Vehicle on page 4-34.
GAWR FRT: Gross Axle Weight Rating for
the front axle. See Loading Your Vehicle on
page 4-34.
5-63
Information Provided by:

GAWR RR: Gross Axle Weight Rating for the rear
axle. See Loading Your Vehicle on page 4-34.
Intended Outboard Sidewall: The side of
an asymmetrical tire, that must always face
outward when mounted on a vehicle.
Kilopascal (kPa): The metric unit for air pressure.
Light Truck (LT-Metric) Tire: A tire used on
light duty trucks and some multipurpose passenger
vehicles.
Load Index: An assigned number ranging from
1 to 279 that corresponds to the load carrying
capacity of a tire.
Maximum Inﬂation Pressure: The maximum
air pressure to which a cold tire can be inﬂated.
The maximum air pressure is molded onto the
sidewall.
Maximum Load Rating: The load rating for a tire
at the maximum permissible inﬂation pressure
for that tire.
Maximum Loaded Vehicle Weight: The sum of
curb weight, accessory weight, vehicle capacity
weight, and production options weight.
Normal Occupant Weight: The number of
occupants a vehicle is designed to seat multiplied
by 150 lbs (68 kg). See Loading Your Vehicle
on page 4-34.
Occupant Distribution: Designated seating
positions.
Outward Facing Sidewall: The side of an
asymmetrical tire that has a particular side that
faces outward when mounted on a vehicle.
The side of the tire that contains a whitewall, bears
white lettering, or bears manufacturer, brand,
and/or model name molding that is higher or
deeper than the same moldings on the other
sidewall of the tire.
Passenger (P-Metric) Tire: A tire used on
passenger cars and some light duty trucks and
multipurpose vehicles.
Recommended Inﬂation Pressure: Vehicle
manufacturer’s recommended tire inﬂation
pressure as shown on the tire placard.
See Inﬂation - Tire Pressure on page 5-66 and
Loading Your Vehicle on page 4-34.
5-64
Information Provided by:

Radial Ply Tire: A pneumatic tire in which the
ply cords that extend to the beads are laid
at 90 degrees to the centerline of the tread.
Rim: A metal support for a tire and upon which
the tire beads are seated.
Sidewall: The portion of a tire between the tread
and the bead.
Speed Rating: An alphanumeric code assigned to
a tire indicating the maximum speed at which a
tire can operate.
Traction: The friction between the tire and the
road surface. The amount of grip provided.
Tread: The portion of a tire that comes into
contact with the road.
Treadwear Indicators: Narrow bands, sometimes
called wear bars, that show across the tread of
a tire when only 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) of tread
remains. See When It Is Time for New Tires
on page 5-76.
UTQGS (Uniform Tire Quality Grading
Standards): A tire information system that
provides consumers with ratings for a tire’s
traction, temperature, and treadwear. Ratings are
determined by tire manufacturers using
government testing procedures. The ratings are
molded into the sidewall of the tire. See Uniform
Tire Quality Grading on page 5-79.
Vehicle Capacity Weight: The number of
designated seating positions multiplied by
150 lbs (68 kg) plus the rated cargo load.
See Loading Your Vehicle on page 4-34.
Vehicle Maximum Load on the Tire: Load on an
individual tire due to curb weight, accessory
weight, occupant weight, and cargo weight.
Vehicle Placard: A label permanently attached
to a vehicle showing the vehicle’s capacity
weight and the original equipment tire size and
recommended inﬂation pressure. See “Tire
and Loading Information Label” under Loading
Your Vehicle on page 4-34.
5-65
Information Provided by:

Inﬂation - Tire Pressure
Tires need the correct amount of air pressure to
operate effectively.
Notice:
Do not let anyone tell you that
under-inﬂation or over-inﬂation is all right.
It is not. If your tires do not have enough air
(under-inﬂation), you can get the following:
• Too much ﬂexing
• Too much heat
• Tire overloading
• Premature or irregular wear
• Poor handling
• Reduced fuel economy
If your tires have too much air (over-inﬂation),
you can get the following:
• Unusual wear
• Poor handling
• Rough ride
• Needless damage from road hazards
A vehicle speciﬁc Tire and Loading Information
label is attached to your vehicle. This label shows
your vehicle’s original equipment tires and the
correct inﬂation pressures for your tires when they
are cold. The recommended cold tire inﬂation
pressure, shown on the label, is the minimum
amount of air pressure needed to support
your vehicle’s maximum load carrying capacity.
For additional information regarding how much
weight your vehicle can carry, and an example of
the Tire and Loading Information label, see
Loading Your Vehicle on page 4-34. How you load
your vehicle affects vehicle handling and ride
comfort. Never load your vehicle with more weight
than it was designed to carry.
5-66
Information Provided by:

When to Check
Check your tires once a month or more. Also
check the tire pressure of the spare tire. If your
vehicle has a compact spare tire, it should be at
60 psi (420 kPa). See Spare Tire on page 5-104
for additional information.
How to Check
Use a good quality pocket-type gage to check
tire pressure. You cannot tell if your tires are
properly inﬂated simply by looking at them.
Radial tires may look properly inﬂated even when
they are underinﬂated. Check the tire’s inﬂation
pressure when the tires are cold. Cold means your
vehicle has been sitting for at least three hours
or driven no more than 1 mile (1.6 km).
Remove the valve cap from the tire valve stem.
Press the tire gage ﬁrmly onto the valve to
get a pressure measurement. If the cold tire
inﬂation pressure matches the recommended
pressure on the Tire and Loading Information
label, no further adjustment is necessary. If the
inﬂation pressure is low, add air until you reach the
recommended amount.
If you overﬁll the tire, release air by pushing on
the metal stem in the center of the tire valve.
Recheck the tire pressure with the tire gage.
Be sure to put the valve caps back on the valve
stems. They help prevent leaks by keeping out dirt
and moisture.
5-67
Information Provided by:

High-Speed Operation
{CAUTION:
Driving at high speeds, 100 mph (160 km/h)
or higher, puts an additional strain on tires.
Sustained high-speed driving causes
excessive heat build up and can cause sudden
tire failure. You could have a crash and you or
others could be killed. Some high-speed rated
tires require inﬂation pressure adjustment for
high speed operation. When speed limits and
road conditions are such that a vehicle can be
driven at high speeds, make sure the tires are
rated for high speed operation, in excellent
condition, and set to the correct cold tire
inﬂation pressure for the vehicle load.
If your vehicle has P235/50R18 size tires, they will
require inﬂation pressure adjustment when driving your
vehicle at speeds of 100 mph (160 km/h) or higher.
Set the cold inﬂation pressure to the maximum inﬂation
pressure shown on the tire sidewall, or 35 psi (241 kPa),
whichever is lower. See the example following.
When you end this high-speed driving, return the tires to
the cold tire inﬂation pressure shown on the Tire and
Loading Information label. See Loading Your Vehicle on
page 4-34 and Inﬂation - Tire Pressure on page 5-66.
Example:
You will ﬁnd the maximum load and inﬂation pressure
molded on the tire’s sidewall, in small letters, near
the rim ﬂange. It will read something like this: Maximum
load 690 kg (1521 lbs) 300 kPa (44 psi) Max. Press.
For this example, you would set the inﬂation pressure for
high-speed driving at 35 psi (241 kPa).
5-68
Information Provided by:

Tire Pressure Monitor System
The Tire Pressure Monitor System (TPMS) uses radio
and sensor technology to check tire pressure levels.
The TPMS sensors monitor the air pressure in
your vehicle’s tires and transmit tire pressure readings
to a receiver located in the vehicle.
Each tire, including the spare (if provided), should be
checked monthly when cold and inﬂated to the inﬂation
pressure recommended by the vehicle manufacturer
on the vehicle placard or tire inﬂation pressure label.
(If your vehicle has tires of a different size than the size
indicated on the vehicle placard or tire inﬂation
pressure label, you should determine the proper tire
inﬂation pressure for those tires.)
As an added safety feature, your vehicle has been
equipped with a tire pressure monitoring system (TPMS)
that illuminates a low tire pressure telltale when one
or more of your tires is signiﬁcantly under-inﬂated.
Accordingly, when the low tire pressure telltale
illuminates, you should stop and check your tires as
soon as possible, and inﬂate them to the proper
pressure. Driving on a signiﬁcantly under-inﬂated tire
causes the tire to overheat and can lead to tire failure.
Under-inﬂation also reduces fuel efficiency and tire
tread life, and may affect the vehicle’s handling
and stopping ability.
Please note that the TPMS is not a substitute for proper
tire maintenance, and it is the driver’s responsibility to
maintain correct tire pressure, even if under-inﬂation has
not reached the level to trigger illumination of the
TPMS low tire pressure telltale.
Your vehicle has also been equipped with a TPMS
malfunction indicator to indicate when the system is not
operating properly. The TPMS malfunction indicator
is combined with the low tire pressure telltale. When the
system detects a malfunction, the telltale will ﬂash
for approximately one minute and then remain
continuously illuminated. This sequence will continue
upon subsequent vehicle start-ups as long as the
malfunction exists.
When the malfunction indicator is illuminated, the
system may not be able to detect or signal low tire
pressure as intended. TPMS malfunctions may occur for
a variety of reasons, including the installation of
replacement or alternate tires or wheels on the vehicle
that prevent the TPMS from functioning properly.
Always check the TPMS malfunction telltale after
replacing one or more tires or wheels on your vehicle to
ensure that the replacement or alternate tires and
wheels allow the TPMS to continue to function properly.
See Tire Pressure Monitor Operation on page 5-70,
for additional information.
5-69
Information Provided by:

Federal Communications Commission
(FCC) and Industry and Science
Canada
The Tire Pressure Monitor System (TPMS) operates on
a radio frequency and complies with Part 15 of the
FCC Rules. Operation is subject to the following
two conditions:
1. This device may not cause harmful interference.
2. This device must accept any interference received,
including interference that may cause undesired
operation.
The Tire Pressure Monitor System (TPMS) operates
on a radio frequency and complies with RSS-210 of
Industry and Science Canada. Operation is subject to
the following two conditions:
1. This device may not cause interference.
2. This device must accept any interference received,
including interference that may cause undesired
operation of the device.
Changes or modiﬁcations to this system by other than
an authorized service facility could void authorization to
use this equipment.
Tire Pressure Monitor Operation
The Tire Pressure Monitor System (TPMS) is designed
to warn the driver when a low tire pressure condition
exists. TPMS sensors are mounted onto each tire
and wheel assembly on your vehicle, excluding the
spare tire. The TPMS sensors monitor the air pressure
in your vehicle’s tires and transmit the tire pressure
readings to a receiver located in the vehicle.
When a low tire pressure
condition is detected, the
TPMS illuminates the
low tire pressure warning
light located on the
instrument panel cluster.
5-70
Information Provided by:

At the same time, a Driver Information Center (DIC)
message is displayed on the DIC display screen.
The low tire pressure warning light and the DIC warning
message come on at each ignition cycle until the
tires are inﬂated to the correct inﬂation pressure.
For additional information and details about the DIC
operation and displays see DIC Operation and Displays
on page 3-38 and DIC Warnings and Messages on
page 3-42.
The low tire pressure warning light may come on
in cool weather when the vehicle is ﬁrst started,
and then turn off as you start to drive. This could be
an early indicator that the air pressure in the tire(s)
are getting low and need to be inﬂated to the proper
pressure.
A Tire and Loading Information label, attached to your
vehicle, shows the size of your vehicle’s original
equipment tires and the correct inﬂation pressure for
your vehicle’s tires when they are cold. See Loading
Your Vehicle on page 4-34, for an example of the Tire
and Loading Information label and its location on
your vehicle. Also see Inﬂation - Tire Pressure on
page 5-66.
Your vehicle’s TPMS can warn you about a low tire
pressure condition but it does not replace normal
tire maintenance. See Tire Inspection and Rotation on
page 5-74 and Tires on page 5-59.
Notice:
Liquid tire sealants could damage the
Tire Pressure Monitor System (TPMS) sensors.
Sensor damage caused by using a tire sealant is
not covered by your warranty. Do not use liquid tire
sealants.
5-71
Information Provided by:

TPMS Malfunction Light and Message
The TPMS will not function properly if one or more of the
TPMS sensors are missing or inoperable. When the
system detects a malfunction, the low tire warning light
ﬂashes for about one minute and then stays on for
the remainder of the ignition cycle. A DIC warning
message is also displayed. The low tire warning light
and DIC warning message come on at each ignition
cycle until the problem is corrected. Some of the
conditions that can cause the malfunction light and
DIC message to come on are:
•
One of the road tires has been replaced with the
spare tire. The spare tire does not have a TPMS
sensor. The TPMS malfunction light and DIC
message should go off once you re-install the road
tire containing the TPMS sensor.
•
The TPMS sensor matching process was started
but not completed or not completed successfully
after rotating the vehicle’s tires. The DIC message
and TPMS malfunction light should go off once
the TPMS sensor matching process is performed
successfully. See “TPMS Sensor Matching Process”
later in this section.
•
One or more TPMS sensors are missing or
damaged. The DIC message and the TPMS
malfunction light should go off when the TPMS
sensors are installed and the sensor matching
process is performed successfully. See your
dealer/retailer for service.
•
Replacement tires or wheels do not match your
vehicle’s original equipment tires or wheels.
Tires and wheels other than those recommended
for your vehicle could prevent the TPMS from
functioning properly. See Buying New Tires on
page 5-76.
•
Operating electronic devices or being near facilities
using radio wave frequencies similar to the TPMS
could cause the TPMS sensors to malfunction.
If the TPMS is not functioning it cannot detect or signal
a low tire condition. See your dealer/retailer for service
if the TPMS malfunction light and DIC message comes
on and stays on.
5-72
Information Provided by:

TPMS Sensor Matching Process
Each TPMS sensor has a unique identiﬁcation code.
Any time you replace one or more of the TPMS sensors
or rotate your vehicle’s tires, the identiﬁcation codes
need to be matched to the new tire/wheel position.
The sensors are matched to the tire/wheel positions in
the following order: driver side front tire, passenger
side front tire, passenger side rear tire, and driver side
rear tire using a TPMS diagnostic tool. See your
dealer/retailer for service.
The TPMS sensors can also be matched to each
tire/wheel position by increasing or decreasing the tire’s
air pressure. If increasing the tire’s air pressure, do
not exceed the maximum inﬂation pressure indicated on
the tire’s sidewall. To let air-pressure out of a tire you
can use the pointed end of the valve cap, a pencil-style
air pressure gage, or a key.
You have one minute to match the ﬁrst tire/wheel
position, and ﬁve minutes overall, to match all four
tire/wheel positions. If it takes longer than one minute,
to match the ﬁrst tire and wheel, or more than ﬁve
minutes to match all four tire and wheel positions, the
matching process stops and you need to start over.
The TPMS sensor matching procedure is outlined below:
1. Set the parking brake.
2. Turn the ignition switch to ON/RUN with the
engine off.
3. Turn the exterior lamp switch from AUTO to OFF
four times within three seconds. A double horn
chirp will sound and the TPMS low tire warning light
starts ﬂashing. The double horn chirp and ﬂashing
TPMS warning light indicates the TPMS matching
process has started. The TPMS warning light should
continue ﬂashing throughout the matching
procedure. The LOW TIRE message displays on
the Driver Information Center (DIC).
4. Start with the driver side front tire.
5. Remove the valve cap from the valve cap stem.
Activate the TPMS sensor by increasing or
decreasing the tire’s air pressure for 10 seconds,
then stop and listen for a single horn chirp.
The single horn chirp should sound within
15 seconds, conﬁrming that the sensor identiﬁcation
code has been matched to this tire and wheel
position. If you do not hear the conﬁrming single
horn chirp, turn the ignition switch to LOCK and
start over beginning with Step 2.
5-73
Information Provided by:

6. Proceed to the passenger side front tire, and repeat
the procedure in Step 5.
7. Proceed to the passenger side rear tire, and repeat
the procedure in Step 5.
8. Proceed to the driver side rear tire, and repeat the
procedure in Step 5.
9. After hearing the conﬁrming horn chirp for the driver
side rear tire, check to see if the TPMS low tire
warning light and the DIC LOW TIRE messages
have turned off. If yes, the TPMS sensors have
been relearned. Turn the ignition switch to
LOCK/OFF.
If the low tire warning light and the SERV TPM
message on the DIC are on after completing Step 5
for the driver side rear tire, the sensor relearn
process has not been successful. Turn the ignition
switch to LOCK/OFF and repeat the matching
process beginning with Step 2.
10. Set all four tires to the recommended air pressure
level as indicated on the Tire and Loading
Information label.
11. Put the valve caps back on the valve stems.
Tire Inspection and Rotation
We recommend that you regularly inspect your
vehicle’s tires, including the spare tire, for signs of
wear or damage. See When It Is Time for New
Tires on page 5-76 for more information.
Tires should be rotated every 5,000 to 8,000 miles
(8 000 to 13 000 km). See Scheduled Maintenance
on page 6-4.
The purpose of a regular tire rotation is to
achieve a uniform wear for all tires on the vehicle.
This will ensure that your vehicle continues to
perform most like it did when the tires were new.
Any time you notice unusual wear, rotate your
tires as soon as possible and check wheel
alignment. Also check for damaged tires or wheels.
See When It Is Time for New Tires on page 5-76
and Wheel Replacement on page 5-80.
5-74
Information Provided by:

When rotating your tires, always use one of the
correct rotation patterns shown here.
If your vehicle has a compact spare tire or a spare
tire that does not match your vehicle’s road tires
and wheels, in size and type, do not include
the spare in the tire rotation.
After the tires have been rotated, adjust the front
and rear inﬂation pressures as shown on the Tire
and Loading Information label. See Inﬂation - Tire
Pressure on page 5-66 and Loading Your Vehicle
on page 4-34.
Reset the Tire Pressure Monitor System. See Tire
Pressure Monitor Operation on page 5-70.
Make certain that all wheel nuts are properly
tightened. See “Wheel Nut Torque” under
Capacities and Speciﬁcations on page 5-120.
{CAUTION:
Rust or dirt on a wheel, or on the parts to
which it is fastened, can make wheel nuts
become loose after time. The wheel could
come off and cause an accident. When
you change a wheel, remove any rust or
dirt from places where the wheel attaches
to the vehicle. In an emergency, you can
use a cloth or a paper towel to do this;
but be sure to use a scraper or wire brush
later, if needed, to get all the rust or dirt
off. See Changing a Flat Tire on page 5-84.
Make sure the spare tire is stored securely.
Push, pull, and then try to rotate or turn the tire.
If it moves, tighten the cable. See Storing a Flat
or Spare Tire and Tools on page 5-100.
5-75
Information Provided by:

When It Is Time for New Tires
Various factors, such as maintenance, temperatures,
driving speeds, vehicle loading, and road conditions,
inﬂuence when you need new tires.
One way to tell when it is
time for new tires is to
check the treadwear
indicators, which appear
when your tires have
only 1/16 inch (1.6 mm) or
less of tread remaining.
Some commercial
truck tires may not have
treadwear indicators.
You need new tires if any of the following statements
are true:
•
You can see the indicators at three or more places
around the tire.
•
You can see cord or fabric showing through the
tire’s rubber.
•
The tread or sidewall is cracked, cut, or snagged
deep enough to show cord or fabric.
•
The tire has a bump, bulge, or split.
•
The tire has a puncture, cut, or other damage that
cannot be repaired well because of the size or
location of the damage.
The rubber in tires degrades over time, even if they are
not being used. This is also true for the spare tire, if
your vehicle has one. Multiple conditions affect how fast
this aging takes place, including temperatures, loading
conditions, and inﬂation pressure maintenance. With
proper care and maintenance tires will typically wear out
before they degrade due to age. If you are unsure
about the need to replace your tires as they get older,
consult the tire manufacturer for more information.
Buying New Tires
GM has developed and matched speciﬁc tires for your
vehicle. The original equipment tires installed on
your vehicle, when it was new, were designed to meet
General Motors Tire Performance Criteria Speciﬁcation
(TPC spec) system rating. If you need replacement
tires, GM strongly recommends that you get tires with
the same TPC Spec rating. This way, your vehicle
will continue to have tires that are designed to give the
same performance and vehicle safety, during normal
use, as the original tires.
5-76
Information Provided by:

GM’s exclusive TPC Spec system considers over a
dozen critical speciﬁcations that impact the overall
performance of your vehicle, including brake system
performance, ride and handling, traction control, and tire
pressure monitoring performance. GM’s TPC Spec
number is molded onto the tire’s sidewall near the tire
size. If the tires have an all-season tread design,
the TPC spec number will be followed by an MS for
mud and snow. See Tire Sidewall Labeling on page 5-60
for additional information.
GM recommends replacing tires in sets of four. This is
because uniform tread depth on all tires will help
keep your vehicle performing most like it did when the
tires were new. Replacing less than a full set of tires can
affect the braking and handling performance of your
vehicle. See Tire Inspection and Rotation on page 5-74
for information on proper tire rotation.
{CAUTION:
Mixing tires could cause you to lose control of
your vehicle while driving. If you mix tires of
different sizes, brands, or types (radial and
bias-belted tires), the vehicle may not handle
properly, and you could have a crash. Using
tires of different sizes, brands, or types may
also cause damage to your vehicle. Be sure to
use the correct size, brand, and type of tires
on all wheels.
Your vehicle may have a compact spare tire
and wheel assembly. If the vehicle has a
compact spare tire and wheel, they have the
same overall diameter as your vehicle’s
full-size tires and wheels. Because they were
designed and developed for use on your
vehicle, it is all right to drive your vehicle with
the compact spare installed properly. Compact
spare tires are designed for temporary use
only. See Spare Tire on page 5-104.
5-77
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
If you use bias-ply tires on your vehicle,
the wheel rim ﬂanges could develop
cracks after many miles of driving. A tire
and/or wheel could fail suddenly, causing
a crash. Use only radial-ply tires with the
wheels on your vehicle.
If you must replace your vehicle’s tires with those that
do not have a TPC Spec number, make sure they
are the same size, load range, speed rating, and
construction type (radial and bias-belted tires) as your
vehicle’s original tires.
Vehicles that have a tire pressure monitoring system
could give an inaccurate low-pressure warning if
non-TPC Spec rated tires are installed on your vehicle.
Non-TPC Spec rated tires may give a low-pressure
warning that is higher or lower than the proper warning
level you would get with TPC Spec rated tires.
See Tire Pressure Monitor System on page 5-69.
Your vehicle’s original equipment tires are listed on the
Tire and Loading Information Label. See Loading Your
Vehicle on page 4-34, for more information about
the Tire and Loading Information Label and its location
on your vehicle.
Different Size Tires and Wheels
If you add wheels or tires that are a different size than
your original equipment wheels and tires, this may
affect the way your vehicle performs, including its
braking, ride and handling characteristics, stability, and
resistance to rollover. Additionally, if your vehicle
has electronic systems such as, anti-lock brakes,
traction control, and electronic stability control, the
performance of these systems can be affected.
{CAUTION:
If you add different sized wheels, your vehicle
may not provide an acceptable level of
performance and safety if tires not
recommended for those wheels are selected.
You may increase the chance that you will
crash and suffer serious injury. Only use GM
speciﬁc wheel and tire systems developed for
your vehicle, and have them properly installed
by a GM certiﬁed technician.
See Buying New Tires on page 5-76 and Accessories
and Modiﬁcations on page 5-3 for additional information.
5-78
Information Provided by:

Uniform Tire Quality Grading
Quality grades can be found where applicable on
the tire sidewall between tread shoulder and
maximum section width. For example:
Treadwear 200 Traction AA Temperature A
The following information relates to the system
developed by the United States National Highway
Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), which
grades tires by treadwear, traction, and
temperature performance. This applies only to
vehicles sold in the United States. The grades are
molded on the sidewalls of most passenger car
tires. The Uniform Tire Quality Grading (UTQG)
system does not apply to deep tread, winter-type
snow tires, space-saver, or temporary use
spare tires, tires with nominal rim diameters of
10 to 12 inches (25 to 30 cm), or to some
limited-production tires.
While the tires available on General Motors
passenger cars and light trucks may vary with
respect to these grades, they must also conform
to federal safety requirements and additional
General Motors Tire Performance Criteria (TPC)
standards.
Treadwear
The treadwear grade is a comparative rating
based on the wear rate of the tire when tested
under controlled conditions on a speciﬁed
government test course. For example, a tire
graded 150 would wear one and a half (1.5) times
as well on the government course as a tire
graded 100. The relative performance of tires
depends upon the actual conditions of their use,
however, and may depart signiﬁcantly from the
norm due to variations in driving habits, service
practices, and differences in road characteristics
and climate.
Traction – AA, A, B, C
The traction grades, from highest to lowest, are AA,
A, B, and C. Those grades represent the tire’s
ability to stop on wet pavement as measured under
controlled conditions on speciﬁed government test
surfaces of asphalt and concrete. A tire marked C
may have poor traction performance.
Warning: The traction grade assigned to this
tire is based on straight-ahead braking traction
tests, and does not include acceleration,
cornering, hydroplaning, or peak traction
characteristics.
5-79
Information Provided by:

Temperature – A, B, C
The temperature grades are A (the highest), B,
and C, representing the tire’s resistance to
the generation of heat and its ability to dissipate
heat when tested under controlled conditions on a
speciﬁed indoor laboratory test wheel. Sustained
high temperature can cause the material of the tire
to degenerate and reduce tire life, and excessive
temperature can lead to sudden tire failure.
The grade C corresponds to a level of performance
which all passenger car tires must meet under
the Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard
No. 109. Grades B and A represent higher levels
of performance on the laboratory test wheel
than the minimum required by law.
Warning: The temperature grade for this tire
is established for a tire that is properly inﬂated
and not overloaded. Excessive speed,
underinﬂation, or excessive loading, either
separately or in combination, can cause heat
buildup and possible tire failure.
Wheel Alignment and Tire Balance
The tires and wheels on your vehicle were aligned
and balanced carefully at the factory to give you the
longest tire life and best overall performance.
Adjustments to wheel alignment and tire balancing will
not be necessary on a regular basis. However, if
you notice unusual tire wear or your vehicle pulling to
one side or the other, the alignment might need to
be checked. If you notice your vehicle vibrating when
driving on a smooth road, the tires and wheels
might need to be rebalanced. See your dealer/retailer
for proper diagnosis.
Wheel Replacement
Replace any wheel that is bent, cracked, or badly rusted
or corroded. If wheel nuts keep coming loose, the
wheel, wheel bolts, and wheel nuts should be replaced.
If the wheel leaks air, replace it (except some
aluminum wheels, which can sometimes be repaired).
See your dealer/retailer if any of these conditions exist.
Your dealer/retailer will know the kind of wheel you need.
5-80
Information Provided by:

Each new wheel should have the same load-carrying
capacity, diameter, width, offset, and be mounted
the same way as the one it replaces.
If you need to replace any of your wheels, wheel bolts,
wheel nuts, or Tire Pressure Monitor System (TPMS)
sensors, replace them only with new GM original
equipment parts. This way, you will be sure to have
the right wheel, wheel bolts, wheel nuts, and TPMS
sensors for your vehicle.
{CAUTION:
Using the wrong replacement wheels, wheel
bolts, or wheel nuts on your vehicle can be
dangerous. It could affect the braking and
handling of your vehicle, make your tires lose
air and make you lose control. You could have
a collision in which you or others could be
injured. Always use the correct wheel, wheel
bolts, and wheel nuts for replacement.
Notice:
The wrong wheel can also cause problems
with bearing life, brake cooling, speedometer or
odometer calibration, headlamp aim, bumper height,
vehicle ground clearance, and tire or tire chain
clearance to the body and chassis.
See Changing a Flat Tire on page 5-84 for more
information.
Used Replacement Wheels
{CAUTION:
Putting a used wheel on your vehicle is
dangerous. You cannot know how it has been
used or how far it has been driven. It could fail
suddenly and cause a crash. If you have to
replace a wheel, use a new GM original
equipment wheel.
5-81
Information Provided by:

Tire Chains
{CAUTION:
If your vehicle has P225/75R15, P265/75R15,
P235/75R15, P265/70R17, or P235/50R18 size
tires, do not use tire chains. They can damage
your vehicle because there is not enough
clearance. Tire chains used on a vehicle
without the proper amount of clearance can
cause damage to the brakes, suspension, or
other vehicle parts. The area damaged by the
tire chains could cause you to lose control of
your vehicle and you or others may be injured
in a crash.
Use another type of traction device only if its
manufacturer recommends it for use on your
vehicle and tire size combination and road
conditions. Follow that manufacturer’s
instructions. To help avoid damage to your
CAUTION:
(Continued)
CAUTION:
(Continued)
vehicle, drive slowly, readjust, or remove the
device if it is contacting your vehicle. Do not
spin the vehicle’s wheels.
If you do ﬁnd traction devices that will ﬁt,
install them on the rear tires.
Notice:
If your vehicle has a tire size other than
P225/75R15, P265/75R15, P235/75R15, P265/70R17,
or P235/50R18 use tire chains only where legal
and only when you must. Use chains that are the
proper size for your tires. Install them on the tires of
the rear axle. Do not use chains on the tires of the
front axle. Tighten them as tightly as possible
with the ends securely fastened. Drive slowly and
follow the chain manufacturer’s instructions.
If you can hear the chains contacting your vehicle,
stop and retighten them. If the contact continues,
slow down until it stops. Driving too fast or
spinning the wheels with chains on will damage
your vehicle.
5-82
Information Provided by:

If a Tire Goes Flat
It is unusual for a tire to blowout while you are driving,
especially if you maintain your vehicle’s tires properly.
If air goes out of a tire, it is much more likely to leak out
slowly. But if you should ever have a blowout, here
are a few tips about what to expect and what to do:
If a front tire fails, the ﬂat tire creates a drag that pulls
the vehicle toward that side. Take your foot off the
accelerator pedal and grip the steering wheel ﬁrmly.
Steer to maintain lane position, and then gently brake to
a stop well out of the traffic lane.
A rear blowout, particularly on a curve, acts much like a
skid and may require the same correction you would
use in a skid. In any rear blowout remove your foot from
the accelerator pedal. Get the vehicle under control
by steering the way you want the vehicle to go. It may
be very bumpy and noisy, but you can still steer.
Gently brake to a stop, well off the road if possible.
{CAUTION:
Lifting a vehicle and getting under it to do
maintenance or repairs is dangerous without
the appropriate safety equipment and training.
The jack provided with your vehicle is
designed only for changing a ﬂat tire. If it is
used for anything else, you or others could be
badly injured or killed if the vehicle slips off
the jack. Use the jack provided with your
vehicle only for changing a ﬂat tire.
If a tire goes ﬂat, the next part shows how to use the
jacking equipment to change a ﬂat tire safely.
5-83
Information Provided by:

Changing a Flat Tire
If a tire goes ﬂat, avoid further tire and wheel damage
by driving slowly to a level place. Turn on your
hazard warning ﬂashers. See Hazard Warning Flashers
on page 3-6 for more information.
{CAUTION:
Changing a tire can be dangerous. The vehicle
can slip off the jack and roll over or fall on you
or other people. You and they could be badly
injured or even killed. Find a level place to
change your tire. To help prevent the vehicle
from moving:
1. Set the parking brake ﬁrmly.
2. Put the shift lever in PARK (P).
CAUTION:
(Continued)
CAUTION:
(Continued)
3. If you have a four-wheel-drive vehicle,
be sure the transfer case is in a drive
gear – not in NEUTRAL.
4. Turn off the engine and do not restart while
the vehicle is raised.
5. Do not allow passengers to remain in the
vehicle.
To be even more certain the vehicle will not
move, put blocks at the front and rear of the
tire farthest away from the one being changed.
That would be the tire on the other side, at the
opposite end of the vehicle.
5-84
Information Provided by:

When your vehicle has a ﬂat tire, use the following
example as a guide to assist you in the placement of
the wheel blocks.
The following information will tell you next how to use
the jack and change a tire.
Removing the Spare Tire and Tools
The tools you will need are located under the
passenger’s seat.
For crew cab models, the jack and wheel blocks are
located under the driver side rear seat.
Crew Cab
5-85
Information Provided by:

For regular and extended
cab vehicles, the jack and
wheel blocks are located
under the cover at the
center of the vehicle
behind the front seats.
To access the tools:
1. Move the seats forward
to access the cover.
2. Turn the wing nut on the cover counterclockwise to
remove it.
For crew cab models, reach under the rear seat to
access the jack and wheel blocks. To reinstall
the jack and wheel block assembly in the mounting
bracket, insert the tabs into the jack base by
pushing the blocks up into the assembly. The outer
hole in the jack base aligns with the tab on the
bracket. When reinstalling, make sure the jack is
secure, but do not overtighten the jack in the
bracket.
Regular/Extended Cab
Extended/Regular Cab
5-86
Information Provided by:

3. Remove the wheel blocks and the wheel block
retainer by turning the wing nut counterclockwise.
4. Put the wheel blocks at the front and rear of the tire
farthest away from the one being changed. That
would be the tire on the other side, at the opposite
end of the vehicle.
5. Locate the wing nut used to retain the storage bag
and tools which is under the front passenger’s seat.
Remove it by turning the wing nut counterclockwise.
Use the jack handle extensions and the wheel wrench
to remove the underbody-mounted spare tire.
A. Jack Handle
Extensions
B. Jack
C. Extension Tool
D. Wheel Wrench
E. Wheel Blocks
1. Assemble the wheel wrench (D) and the jack
handle extensions (A).
5-87
Information Provided by:

2. Insert the hoist end (chiseled end) of the extension
tool (C) through the hole in the rear bumper and
into the funnel-shaped guide. The chiseled end of
the extension is used to lower the spare tire.
3. Turn the wheel wrench (D) counterclockwise to
lower the spare tire to the ground. Continue to
turn the wheel wrench until the spare tire can be
pulled out from under the vehicle.
If the spare tire does not lower to the ground, the
secondary latch is engaged causing the tire
not to lower. See Secondary Latch System on
page 5-96.
4. Tilt the retainer when
the tire has been
lowered, and slide it up
the cable so it can
be pulled up through
the wheel opening.
5. Put the spare tire near the ﬂat tire.
5-88
Information Provided by:

Removing the Flat Tire and
Installing the Spare Tire
Use the following pictures and instructions to remove
the ﬂat tire and raise the vehicle.
The tools you will be using include the jack (A), the
wheel blocks (B), the extension tool (C), the jack handle
extensions (D), and the wheel wrench (E).
1. Do a safety check before proceeding. See Changing
a Flat Tire on page 5-84 for more information.
2. Remove the center cap by placing the chisel end of
the wheel wrench (E) into one of the slots on the
wheel and gently prying the cap out.
5-89
Information Provided by:

3. Use the wheel wrench to loosen all the wheel nuts
by turning it counterclockwise. Do not remove the
wheel nuts yet.
{CAUTION:
Getting under a vehicle when it is jacked up is
dangerous. If the vehicle slips off the jack you
could be badly injured or killed. Never get
under a vehicle when it is supported only
by a jack.
{CAUTION:
Raising your vehicle with the jack improperly
positioned can damage the vehicle and even
make the vehicle fall. To help avoid personal
injury and vehicle damage, be sure to ﬁt the
jack lift head into the proper location before
raising the vehicle.
5-90
Information Provided by:

4. Position the jack (A) under the vehicle as shown for
the front or rear locations.
If the ﬂat tire is on the front of the vehicle, position
the jack to the rear of the front tire in the pocket
off of the frame.
Front Position
Front Position
5-91
Information Provided by:

If the ﬂat tire is on the rear, position the jack under
the rear axle and get as close as possible to the
shock absorber.
5. Make sure the jack head is positioned so that the
rear axle is resting securely between the grooves
that are on the jack head.
6. Turn the wheel wrench clockwise to raise the
vehicle. Raise the vehicle far enough off the ground
so there is enough room for the spare tire to ﬁt
under the wheel well.
7. Remove all the wheel
nuts and the ﬂat tire.
Rear Position
5-92
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Rust or dirt on a wheel, or on the parts to which
it is fastened, can make wheel nuts become
loose after time. The wheel could come off and
cause an accident. When you change a wheel,
remove any rust or dirt from places where the
wheel attaches to the vehicle. In an emergency,
you can use a cloth or a paper towel to do this;
but be sure to use a scraper or wire brush later,
if needed, to get all the rust or dirt off. See
Changing a Flat Tire on page 5-84.
8. Remove any rust or dirt
from the wheel bolts,
mounting surfaces
and spare wheel.
9. Install the spare tire.
{CAUTION:
Never use oil or grease on studs or nuts.
Because the nuts might come loose. The
vehicle’s wheel could fall off, causing a crash.
10. Put the wheel nuts
back on with the
rounded end of the
nuts toward the wheel.
Tighten each wheel
nut by hand. Then use
the wheel wrench to
tighten the nuts until
the wheel is held
against the hub.
5-93
Information Provided by:

11. Turn the wheel wrench counterclockwise to lower
the vehicle. Lower the jack completely.
Front Position
Rear Position
5-94
Information Provided by:

{CAUTION:
Incorrect or improperly tightened wheel nuts
can cause the wheel to come loose and
even come off. This could lead to a crash.
If you have to replace them, be sure to
get new original equipment wheel nuts.
Stop somewhere as soon as you can and have
the nuts tightened with a torque wrench to the
proper torque speciﬁcation. See Capacities
and Speciﬁcations on page 5-120 for wheel nut
torque speciﬁcation.
Notice:
Improperly tightened wheel nuts can lead
to brake pulsation and rotor damage. To avoid
expensive brake repairs, evenly tighten the wheel
nuts in the proper sequence and to the proper
torque speciﬁcation. See Capacities and
Speciﬁcations on page 5-120 for the wheel nut
torque speciﬁcation.
12. Tighten the wheel nuts
ﬁrmly in a crisscross
sequence as shown by
turning the wheel
wrench clockwise.
When you reinstall the regular wheel and tire, you must
also reinstall the center cap. Place the cap on the
wheel and tap it into place until it seats ﬂush with the
wheel. The cap only goes on one way. Be sure to
line up the tab on the center cap with the indentation
on the wheel.
5-95
Information Provided by:

Secondary Latch System
Your vehicle has an underbody-mounted tire hoist
assembly equipped with a secondary latch system. It is
designed to stop the spare tire from suddenly falling
off your vehicle. For the secondary latch to work,
the spare must be installed with the valve stem pointing
down. See Storing a Flat or Spare Tire and Tools on
page 5-100.
{CAUTION:
Before beginning this procedure read all the
instructions. Failure to read and follow the
instructions could damage the hoist assembly
and you and others could get hurt. Read and
follow the instructions listed next.
To release the spare tire from the secondary latch:
1. Check under the
vehicle to see if the
cable end is visible.
If the cable is not
visible proceed
to Step 6.
2. If it is visible, ﬁrst try to tighten the cable by
turning the wheel wrench clockwise until you
hear two clicks or feel it skip twice. You cannot
overtighten the cable.
3. Loosen the cable by turning the wrench
counterclockwise three or four turns.
4. Repeat this procedure at least two times. If the
spare tire lowers to the ground, continue with
Step 5 of Removing the Spare Tire and Tools on
page 5-85.
5-96
Information Provided by:

5. If the spare does not lower, turn the wrench
counterclockwise until approximately 6 inches
(15 cm) of cable is exposed.
6. Stand the wheel blocks on their shortest ends, with
the backs facing each other.
7. Place the bottom edge
of the jack (A) on the
wheel blocks (B),
separating them so that
the jack is balanced
securely.
8. Attach the jack handle, extension, and wheel wrench
to the jack and place it (with the wheel blocks) under
the vehicle toward the front of the rear bumper.
5-97
Information Provided by:

9. Position the center lift point of the jack under the
center of the spare tire.
10. Turn the wrench clockwise to raise the jack until it
lifts the end ﬁtting.
11. Continue raising the jack until the spare tire stops
moving upward and is held ﬁrmly in place.
The secondary latch has released and the spare
tire is balancing on the jack.
12. Lower the jack by turning the wheel wrench
counterclockwise. Keep lowering the jack until the
spare tire slides off the jack or is hanging by
the cable.
{CAUTION:
Someone standing too close during the
procedure could be injured by the jack.
If the spare tire does not slide off the jack
completely, make sure no one is behind you or
on either side of you as you pull the jack out
from under the spare.
5-98
Information Provided by:

13. Disconnect the jack handle from the jack and
carefully remove the jack. Use one hand to
push against the spare while ﬁrmly pulling the jack
out from under the spare tire with the other hand.
If the spare tire is hanging from the cable, insert the
hoist end of extension, and wheel wrench into
the hoist shaft hole in the bumper and turn the
wheel wrench counterclockwise to lower the spare
the rest of the way.
14. Tilt the tire retainer at the end of the cable and pull
it through the wheel opening. Pull the tire out from
under the vehicle.
15. Turn the wheel wrench in the hoist shaft hole in the
bumper clockwise to raise the cable back up if the
cable is hanging under the vehicle.
Have the hoist assembly inspected as soon as you can.
You will not be able to store a spare or ﬂat tire using
the hoist assembly until it has been replaced.
To continue changing the ﬂat tire, see Removing the
Flat Tire and Installing the Spare Tire on page 5-89.
5-99
Information Provided by:

Storing a Flat or Spare Tire
and Tools
{CAUTION:
Storing a jack, a tire, or other equipment in the
passenger compartment of the vehicle could
cause injury. In a sudden stop or collision,
loose equipment could strike someone.
Store all these in the proper place.
Notice:
Storing an aluminum wheel with a ﬂat tire
under your vehicle for an extended period of time or
with the valve stem pointing up can damage the
wheel. Always stow the wheel with the valve stem
pointing down and have the wheel/tire repaired
as soon as possible.
Store the tire under the rear of the vehicle in the spare
tire carrier.
1. Put the tire on the ground at the rear of the vehicle
with the valve stem pointed down.
2. Tilt the retainer downward and through the wheel
opening. Make sure the retainer is fully seated
across the underside of the wheel.
5-100
Information Provided by:

3. Attach the wheel wrench and extensions together
as shown.
4. Insert the hoist end of the extension through the hole
in the rear bumper and into the funnel-shaped guide.
5-101
Information Provided by:

5. Turn the wheel wrench clockwise to raise the tire part
way up. Make sure the retainer is seated in the wheel
opening and the valve stem is pointed down.
Continue raising the tire, watch to make sure it
does not get caught on anything on the underbody.
If the tire does get caught, loosen up two or
three turns and push and pull the tire and then
retighten.
Repeat this procedure as many times as needed to
ensure proper stowage.
6. When the tire is properly seated to the underbody,
continue turning the wheel wrench clockwise until
you feel the override which is 2 skips. You cannot
overtighten the cable.
7. Make sure the tire is stored securely. Push, pull (A),
and then try to turn (B) the tire. If the tire moves,
check to make sure the tire valve stem is pointing
down, then use the wheel wrench to loosen
and then tighten the cable.
5-102
Information Provided by:

To store the tools, do the following:
1. Return the wheel wrench, jack extensions and the
storage bag to the locations described under
Removing the Spare Tire and Tools on page 5-85.
2. Install the wheel blocks ﬁrst. Then install the jack.
3. Secure the items in the vehicle as shown next.
A. Jack
B. Wheel Blocks
C. Wing Nut
A. Jack
B. Wheel Blocks
C. Wing Nut
Crew Cab
Regular/Extended Cab
5-103
Information Provided by:

Spare Tire
Compact Spare Tire
Your vehicle may have a compact spare tire. Although
the compact spare tire was fully inﬂated when your
vehicle was new, it can lose air over time. Check the
inﬂation pressure regularly. It should be 60 psi (420 kPa).
Notice:
If your vehicle has four-wheel drive and the
compact spare tire is installed on your vehicle,
do not drive in four-wheel drive until you can have
your ﬂat tire repaired and/or replaced. You could
damage your vehicle, and the repair costs would not
be covered by your warranty. Never use four-wheel
drive when the compact spare tire is installed
on your vehicle.
After installing the compact spare on your vehicle,
you should stop as soon as possible and make
sure your vehicle’s spare tire is correctly inﬂated.
The compact spare is made to perform well at speeds
up to 62 mph (100 km/h) for distances up to 500 miles
(804 km). For heavy payloads or towing, and for
low traction or four-wheel-drive conditions, repair or
replace the full-size tire. Of course, it is best to replace
your vehicle’s spare with a full-size tire as soon as
you can. The spare tire will last longer and be in good
shape in case you need it again.
Notice:
When the compact spare is installed,
do not take your vehicle through an automatic
car wash with guide rails. The compact spare can
get caught on the rails. That can damage the tire
and wheel, and maybe other parts of your vehicle.
Do not use your compact spare on other vehicles.
And do not mix your compact spare tire or wheel with
other wheels or tires. They will not ﬁt. Keep your
spare tire and its wheel together.
Notice:
Tire chains will not ﬁt your compact spare.
Using them can damage your vehicle and can
damage the chains too. Do not use tire chains on
your compact spare.
5-104
Information Provided by:

Full-Size Spare Tire
Your vehicle may have a full-size spare tire, which,
when new, was fully inﬂated. A spare tire may lose air
over time, so check its inﬂation pressure regularly.
See Inﬂation - Tire Pressure on page 5-66 and
Loading Your Vehicle on page 4-34 for information
regarding proper tire inﬂation and loading your vehicle.
For instruction on how to remove, install, or store a
spare tire, see Removing the Flat Tire and Installing the
Spare Tire on page 5-89 and Storing a Flat or Spare
Tire and Tools on page 5-100.
Your vehicle may have a different size spare tire than
the road tires originally installed on your vehicle.
This spare was developed for use on your vehicle, so it
is alright to drive on it. If your vehicle has four-wheel
drive and the different size spare tire is installed, keep
the vehicle in two-wheel drive.
Notice:
If your vehicle has four-wheel drive and the
different size spare tire is installed on your vehicle,
do not drive in four-wheel drive until you can
have your ﬂat tire repaired and/or replaced. You
could damage your vehicle, and the repair costs
would not be covered by your warranty. Never use
four-wheel drive when the different size spare
tire is installed on your vehicle.
After installing the spare tire on your vehicle, you should
stop as soon as possible and make sure the spare is
correctly inﬂated. The spare tire is made to perform well
at speeds up to 62 mph (100 km/h) for distances up
to 500 miles (804 km). For heavy payloads or towing,
and for low traction or four-wheel-drive conditions, repair
or replace the full-size tire. Have the damaged or ﬂat
road tire repaired or replaced as soon as you can
and installed back onto your vehicle. This way, the spare
tire will be available in case you need it again.
Do not mix tires and wheels of different sizes, because
they will not ﬁt. Keep your spare tire and its wheel
together.
5-105
Information Provided by:

Appearance Care
Interior Cleaning
Your vehicle’s interior will continue to look its best if it is
cleaned often. Although not always visible, dust and
dirt can accumulate on your upholstery. Dirt can damage
carpet, fabric, leather, and plastic surfaces. Regular
vacuuming is recommended to remove particles
from your upholstery. It is important to keep your
upholstery from becoming and remaining heavily soiled.
Soils should be removed as quickly as possible.
Your vehicle’s interior may experience extremes of
heat that could cause stains to set rapidly.
Lighter colored interiors may require more frequent
cleaning. Use care because newspapers and garments
that transfer color to your home furnishings may also
transfer color to your vehicle’s interior.
When cleaning your vehicle’s interior, only use cleaners
speciﬁcally designed for the surfaces being cleaned.
Permanent damage may result from using cleaners on
surfaces for which they were not intended. Use glass
cleaner only on glass. Remove any accidental over-spray
from other surfaces immediately. To prevent over-spray,
apply cleaner directly to the cleaning cloth.
Notice:
If you use abrasive cleaners when cleaning
glass surfaces on your vehicle, you could scratch
the glass and/or cause damage to the rear window
defogger. When cleaning the glass on your
vehicle, use only a soft cloth and glass cleaner.
Many cleaners contain solvents that may become
concentrated in your vehicle’s breathing space.
Before using cleaners, read and adhere to all safety
instructions on the label. While cleaning your vehicle’s
interior, maintain adequate ventilation by opening
your vehicle’s doors and windows.
Dust may be removed from small buttons and knobs
using a small brush with soft bristles.
Your dealer/retailer has a product for cleaning your
vehicle’s glass. Should it become necessary, you can
also obtain a product from your dealer/retailer to remove
odors from your vehicle’s upholstery.
5-106
Information Provided by:

Do not clean your vehicle using the following cleaners
or techniques:
•
Never use a knife or any other sharp object to
remove a soil from any interior surface.
•
Never use a stiff brush. It can cause damage to
your vehicle’s interior surfaces.
•
Never apply heavy pressure or rub aggressively
with a cleaning cloth. Use of heavy pressure
can damage your interior and does not improve the
effectiveness of soil removal.
•
Use only mild, neutral-pH soaps. Avoid laundry
detergents or dishwashing soaps with degreasers.
Using too much soap will leave a residue that
leaves streaks and attracts dirt. For liquid cleaners,
about 20 drops per gallon (3.78 L) of water is a
good guide.
•
Do not heavily saturate your upholstery while
cleaning.
•
Damage to your vehicle’s interior may result from
the use of many organic solvents such as naptha,
alcohol, etc.
Fabric/Carpet
Use a vacuum cleaner with a soft brush attachment
frequently to remove dust and loose dirt. A canister
vacuum with a beater bar in the nozzle may only
be used on ﬂoor carpet and carpeted ﬂoor mats.
For soils, always try to remove them ﬁrst with plain
water or club soda. Before cleaning, gently remove as
much of the soil as possible using one of the following
techniques:
•
For liquids: gently blot the remaining soil with a
paper towel. Allow the soil to absorb into the
paper towel until no more can be removed.
•
For solid dry soils: remove as much as possible
and then vacuum.
5-107
Information Provided by:

To clean, use the following instructions:
1. Saturate a lint-free, clean white cloth with water or
club soda.
2. Wring the cloth to remove excess moisture.
3. Start on the outside edge of the soil and gently rub
toward the center. Continue cleaning, using a clean
area of the cloth each time it becomes soiled.
4. Continue to gently rub the soiled area until the
cleaning cloth remains clean.
5. If the soil is not completely removed, use a mild
soap solution and repeat the cleaning process
that was used with plain water.
If any of the soil remains, a commercial fabric cleaner or
spot lifter may be necessary. When a commercial
upholstery cleaner or spot lifter is to be used, test a
small hidden area for colorfastness ﬁrst. If the locally
cleaned area gives any impression that a ring formation
may result, clean the entire surface.
After the cleaning process has been completed, a paper
towel can be used to blot excess moisture from the
fabric or carpet.
Leather
A soft cloth dampened with water can be used to
remove dust. If a more thorough cleaning is necessary,
a soft cloth dampened with a mild soap solution can
be used. Allow the leather to dry naturally. Do not use
heat to dry. Never use steam to clean leather. Never use
spot lifters or spot removers on leather. Many commercial
leather cleaners and coatings that are sold to preserve
and protect leather may permanently change the
appearance and feel of your leather and are not
recommended. Do not use silicone or wax-based
products, or those containing organic solvents to clean
your vehicle’s interior because they can alter the
appearance by increasing the gloss in a non-uniform
manner. Never use shoe polish on leather.
5-108
Information Provided by:

Instrument Panel, Vinyl, and Other
Plastic Surfaces
A soft cloth dampened with water may be used to remove
dust. If a more thorough cleaning is necessary, a clean
soft cloth dampened with a mild soap solution can be
used to gently remove dust and dirt. Never use spot lifters
or removers on plastic surfaces. Many commercial
cleaners and coatings that are sold to preserve and
protect soft plastic surfaces may permanently change
the appearance and feel of your interior and are not
recommended. Do not use silicone or wax-based
products, or those containing organic solvents to clean
your vehicle’s interior because they can alter the
appearance by increasing the gloss in a non-uniform
manner.
Some commercial products may increase gloss on your
instrument panel. The increase in gloss may cause
annoying reﬂections in the windshield and even make it
difficult to see through the windshield under certain
conditions.
Care of Safety Belts
Keep belts clean and dry.
{CAUTION:
Do not bleach or dye safety belts. If you do,
it may severely weaken them. In a crash,
they might not be able to provide adequate
protection. Clean safety belts only with mild
soap and lukewarm water.
Weatherstrips
Silicone grease on weatherstrips will make them last
longer, seal better, and not stick or squeak. Apply
silicone grease with a clean cloth. During very cold,
damp weather frequent application may be required.
See Recommended Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12.
5-109
Information Provided by:

Washing Your Vehicle
The best way to preserve your vehicle’s ﬁnish is to keep
it clean by washing it often.
Notice:
Certain cleaners contain chemicals that can
damage the emblems or nameplates on your
vehicle. Check the cleaning product label. If it states
that it should not be used on plastic parts, do not
use it on your vehicle or damage may occur
and it would not be covered by the warranty.
Do not wash the vehicle in direct sunlight. Use a
car washing soap. Do not use cleaning agents that are
petroleum based or that contain acid or abrasives,
as they can damage the paint, metal or plastic on your
vehicle. Approved cleaning products can be obtained
from your dealer/retailer. See Vehicle Care/Appearance
Materials on page 5-114.
Follow all manufacturers’ directions regarding correct
product usage, necessary safety precautions and
appropriate disposal of any vehicle care product.
Rinse the vehicle well, before washing and after to
remove all cleaning agents completely. If they are
allowed to dry on the surface, they could stain.
Dry the ﬁnish with a soft, clean chamois or an all-cotton
towel to avoid surface scratches and water spotting
High pressure car washes may cause water to enter the
vehicle. Avoid using high pressure washes closer
than 12 inches (30 cm) to the surface of the vehicle.
Use of power washers exceeding 1,200 psi (8 274 kPa)
can result in damage or removal of paint and decals.
Cleaning Exterior Lamps/Lenses
Use only lukewarm or cold water, a soft cloth and a
car washing soap to clean exterior lamps and lenses.
Follow instructions under Washing Your Vehicle on
page 5-110.
5-110
Information Provided by:

Finish Care
Occasional waxing or mild polishing of your vehicle by
hand may be necessary to remove residue from the
paint ﬁnish. You can get approved cleaning products
from your dealer/retailer. See Vehicle Care/Appearance
Materials on page 5-114.
If your vehicle has a basecoat/clearcoat paint ﬁnish,
the clearcoat gives more depth and gloss to the colored
basecoat. Always use waxes and polishes that are
non-abrasive and made for a basecoat/clearcoat
paint ﬁnish.
Notice:
Machine compounding or aggressive
polishing on a basecoat/clearcoat paint ﬁnish may
damage it. Use only non-abrasive waxes and
polishes that are made for a basecoat/clearcoat
paint ﬁnish on your vehicle.
Foreign materials such as calcium chloride and other
salts, ice melting agents, road oil and tar, tree sap, bird
droppings, chemicals from industrial chimneys, etc.,
can damage your vehicle’s ﬁnish if they remain on
painted surfaces. Wash the vehicle as soon as possible.
If necessary, use non-abrasive cleaners that are marked
safe for painted surfaces to remove foreign matter.
Exterior painted surfaces are subject to aging, weather
and chemical fallout that can take their toll over a
period of years. You can help to keep the paint ﬁnish
looking new by keeping your vehicle garaged or covered
whenever possible.
Protecting Exterior Bright Metal Parts
Bright metal parts should be cleaned regularly to keep
their luster. Washing with water is all that is usually
needed. However, you may use chrome polish on
chrome or stainless steel trim, if necessary.
Use special care with aluminum trim. To avoid damaging
protective trim, never use auto or chrome polish,
steam or caustic soap to clean aluminum. A coating of
wax, rubbed to high polish, is recommended for all
bright metal parts.
Windshield and Wiper Blades
Clean the outside of the windshield with glass cleaner.
Clean the rubber blades using a lint free cloth or
paper towel soaked with windshield washer ﬂuid or a
mild detergent. Wash the windshield thoroughly
when cleaning the blades. Bugs, road grime, sap, and a
buildup of vehicle wash/wax treatments may cause
wiper streaking. Replace the wiper blades if they are
worn or damaged.
Wipers can be damaged by:
•
Extreme dusty conditions
•
Sand and salt
•
Heat and sun
•
Snow and ice, without proper removal
5-111
Information Provided by:

Aluminum or Chrome-Plated
Wheels and Trim
Your vehicle may have either aluminum or
chrome-plated wheels.
Keep the wheels clean using a soft clean cloth with mild
soap and water. Rinse with clean water. After rinsing
thoroughly, dry with a soft clean towel. A wax may then
be applied.
Notice:
Chrome wheels and other chrome trim may
be damaged if you do not wash your vehicle after
driving on roads that have been sprayed with
magnesium, calcium or sodium chloride. These
chlorides are used on roads for conditions such as
ice and dust. Always wash your vehicle’s chrome
with soap and water after exposure.
Notice:
If you use strong soaps, chemicals,
abrasive polishes, cleaners, brushes, or cleaners
that contain acid on aluminum or chrome-plated
wheels, you could damage the surface of the
wheel(s). The repairs would not be covered by your
warranty. Use only approved cleaners on aluminum
or chrome-plated wheels.
The surface of these wheels is similar to the painted
surface of your vehicle. Do not use strong soaps,
chemicals, abrasive polishes, abrasive cleaners,
cleaners with acid, or abrasive cleaning brushes on
them because you could damage the surface. Do not
use chrome polish on aluminum wheels.
Notice:
Using chrome polish on aluminum wheels
could damage the wheels. The repairs would not
be covered by your warranty. Use chrome polish on
chrome wheels only.
Use chrome polish only on chrome-plated wheels, but
avoid any painted surface of the wheel, and buff off
immediately after application.
Notice:
If you drive your vehicle through an
automatic car wash that has silicone carbide tire
cleaning brushes, you could damage the aluminum
or chrome-plated wheels. The repairs would not
be covered by your warranty. Never drive a vehicle
equipped with aluminum or chrome-plated wheels
through an automatic car wash that uses silicone
carbide tire cleaning brushes.
5-112
Information Provided by:

Tires
To clean the tires, use a stiff brush with tire cleaner.
Notice:
Using petroleum-based tire dressing
products on your vehicle may damage the paint
ﬁnish and/or tires. When applying a tire dressing,
always wipe off any overspray from all painted
surfaces on your vehicle.
Sheet Metal Damage
If the vehicle is damaged and requires sheet metal
repair or replacement, make sure the body repair shop
applies anti-corrosion material to parts repaired or
replaced to restore corrosion protection.
Original manufacturer replacement parts will provide the
corrosion protection while maintaining the warranty.
Finish Damage
Any stone chips, fractures or deep scratches in the ﬁnish
should be repaired right away. Bare metal will corrode
quickly and may develop into major repair expense.
Minor chips and scratches can be repaired with
touch-up materials available from your dealer/retailer.
Larger areas of ﬁnish damage can be corrected in your
dealer’s/retailer’s body and paint shop.
Underbody Maintenance
Chemicals used for ice and snow removal and dust
control can collect on the underbody. If these are not
removed, corrosion and rust can develop on the
underbody parts such as fuel lines, frame, ﬂoor pan,
and exhaust system even though they have corrosion
protection.
At least every spring, ﬂush these materials from the
underbody with plain water. Clean any areas where mud
and debris can collect. Dirt packed in close areas of
the frame should be loosened before being ﬂushed.
Your dealer/retailer or an underbody car washing system
can do this for you.
Chemical Paint Spotting
Some weather and atmospheric conditions can create a
chemical fallout. Airborne pollutants can fall upon and
attack painted surfaces on the vehicle. This damage can
take two forms: blotchy, ring-shaped discolorations,
and small, irregular dark spots etched into the
paint surface.
Although no defect in the paint job causes this, we will
repair, at no charge to the owner, the surfaces of
new vehicles damaged by this fallout condition within
12 months or 12,000 miles (20 000 km) of purchase,
whichever occurs ﬁrst.
5-113
Information Provided by:

Vehicle Care/Appearance Materials
Description
Usage
Polishing Cloth
Interior and exterior
polishing cloth.
Tar and Road
Oil Remover
Removes tar, road oil,
and asphalt.
Chrome Cleaner and
Polish
Use on chrome or
stainless steel.
White Sidewall
Tire Cleaner
Removes soil and black
marks from whitewalls
and raised white lettering.
Vinyl Cleaner
Cleans vinyl.
Glass Cleaner
Removes dirt, grime,
smoke and ﬁngerprints.
Chrome Wheel Cleaner
Removes dirt and grime
from chrome wheels.
Finish Enhancer
Removes dust,
ﬁngerprints, and surface
contaminants. Spray on
and wipe off.
Description
Usage
Swirl Remover Polish
Removes swirl marks, ﬁne
scratches, and other light
surface contamination.
Cleaner Wax
Removes light scratches
and protects ﬁnish.
Foaming Tire Shine
Low Gloss
Cleans, shines, and
protects tires. No wiping
necessary.
Wash Wax Concentrate
Medium foaming
shampoo. Cleans and
lightly waxes.
Biodegradable and
phosphate free.
Spot Lifter
Quickly removes spots
and stains from carpets,
vinyl, and cloth
upholstery.
Odor Eliminator
Odorless spray odor
eliminator used on fabrics,
vinyl, leather and carpet.
5-114
Information Provided by:

Vehicle Identiﬁcation
Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number (VIN)
This is the legal identiﬁer for your vehicle. It appears on
a plate in the front corner of the instrument panel, on
the driver side. You can see it if you look through
the windshield from outside your vehicle. The VIN also
appears on the Certiﬁcation/Tire and Service Parts
labels and the certiﬁcates of title and registration.
Engine Identiﬁcation
The eighth character in the VIN is the engine code.
This code helps you identify your vehicle’s engine,
speciﬁcations, and replacement parts. See Capacities
and Speciﬁcations on page 5-120 for your vehicle’s
engine code.
Service Parts Identiﬁcation Label
This label is on the inside of the glove box. It is
very helpful if you ever need to order parts. The label
has the following information:
•
Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number (VIN)
•
Model designation
•
Paint information
•
Production options and special equipment
Do not remove this label from the vehicle.
Electrical System
Add-On Electrical Equipment
Notice:
Do not add anything electrical to your
vehicle unless you check with your dealer/retailer
ﬁrst. Some electrical equipment can damage your
vehicle and the damage would not be covered by
your warranty. Some add-on electrical equipment can
keep other components from working as they should.
Add-on equipment can drain your vehicle’s battery, even
if your vehicle is not operating.
Your vehicle has an airbag system. Before attempting to
add anything electrical to your vehicle, see Servicing
Your Airbag-Equipped Vehicle on page 1-74.
5-115
Information Provided by:

Windshield Wiper Fuses
The windshield wiper motor is protected by a circuit
breaker and a fuse. If the motor overheats due to heavy
snow, etc., the wiper will stop until the motor cools.
If the overload is caused by some electrical problem,
have it ﬁxed.
Fuses and Circuit Breakers
The wiring circuits in your vehicle are protected from
short circuits by a combination of fuses and circuit
breakers. This greatly reduces the chance of ﬁres
caused by electrical problems.
Look at the silver-colored band inside the fuse. If the
band is broken or melted, replace the fuse. Be sure you
replace a bad fuse with a new one of the identical
size and rating.
If you ever have a problem on the road and do not have
a spare fuse, you can borrow one that has the same
amperage. Just pick some feature of your vehicle
that you can get along without — like the radio or
cigarette lighter — and use its fuse, if it is the correct
amperage. Replace it as soon as you can.
Engine Compartment Fuse Block
The engine compartment fuse block is located on the
driver side of the engine compartment. See Engine
Compartment Overview on page 5-12 for more
information on location.
To remove the cover, push in on the tab on the end of the
cover and lift. To reinstall the cover, line up the tab and
push down on the cover until the tab clicks into place.
Notice:
Spilling liquid on any electrical components
on your vehicle may damage it. Always keep the
covers on any electrical component.
5-116
Information Provided by:

Fuses
Usage
DRL
Daylight Running Lamps
AUX PWR 1
Accessory Power 1
BLWR
Climate Control Fan
Fuses
Usage
S/ROOF
Sunroof (If Equipped)
A/C
Air Conditioning Control Head,
Power Seats
5-117
Information Provided by:

Fuses
Usage
PWR/SEAT
Power Seat Circuit Breaker
(If Equipped)
RT HDLP
Passenger Side Headlamp
LT HDLP
Driver Side Headlamp
AUX PWR 2
Accessory Power 2
FOG/LAMP
Fog Lamps (If Equipped)
A/C CMPRSR
Air Conditioning Compressor
WSW
Wiper/Washer Switch
RVC
Regulated Voltage Control
PWR/WNDW
Power Windows (If Equipped)
FUEL/PUMP
Fuel Pump
STRTR
Starter Solenoid Relay
WPR
Wiper
ABS 2
Antilock Brake System 2 (ABS Pump)
DR/LCK
Power Door Locks (If Equipped)
ETC
Electronic Throttle Control (ETC)
02 SNSR
Oxygen Sensors, Air Injection
Reactor (AIR) Relay
CRUISE
Cruise Control Switch, Inside
Rearview Mirror, Transfer Case
Control Module, Brake Switch, Clutch
Disable
HTD/SEAT
Heated Seat (If Equipped)
Fuses
Usage
AIRBAG
Supplemental Inﬂatable Restraint
System, Sensing and Diagnostic
Module
ABS
Antilock Brake System (ABS),
ABS Module, Four-Wheel Drive,
Gravity Sensor
BCK/UP
Back-up Lights
FRT/AXLE
Front Axle Actuator
TRN/HAZRD
REAR
Rear Turn/Hazard Lights
ERLS
Mass Air Flow (MAF) Sensor,
Can Purge Solenoid, Air Injection
Reactor (AIR) Relay
PCMI
Powertrain Control Module (PCM)
TRANS
Transmission Solenoid
IGN
Ignition, Clutch Starter Switch,
Neutral Safety Back-Up Switch,
Ignition Coils 1-5, Air Conditioning
Relay
INJ
Injectors
ABS 1
Antilock Brake System 1 (ABS Logic)
FRT PRK
LAMP
Front Park/Turn Lamps, Driver and
Passenger Side Power Window
Switches Lighting
REAR PRK
LAMP
Rear Parking Lamp 1, Passenger
Side Taillamp, License Plate Lamps
5-118
Information Provided by:

Fuses
Usage
REAR PRK
LAMP2
Driver Side Rear Taillamp,
Passenger Side Airbag Indicator
Lighting, Instrument Panel Dimming
Power (2WD/4WD switch lighting)
CLSTR
Cluster
TRN/HAZRD
FRT
Turn/Hazard/Courtesy/Cargo
Lamps/Mirrors
TCCM
Transfer Case Control Module
HORN
Horn
TBC
Truck Body Controller
IGN TRNSD
Ignition Transducers
RDO
Radio
ONSTAR
OnStar®
CNSTR VENT
Fuel Canister Vent Solenoid
PCM B
Powertrain Control Module (PCM) B
Relays
Usage
DRL
Daylight Running Lamps
BEAM SEL
Beam Selection
IGN 3 HVAC
Ignition 3, Climate Control, Climate
Control Head Fuse, Power Seat Fuse
RAP
Retained Accessory Power
(Power Window Fuse, Wiper/Washer
Switch Fuse), Sunroof Fuse
Relays
Usage
PRK/LAMP
Front Parking Lamp Fuse, Rear
Parking Lamps
HDLP
Headlamps
FOG/LAMP
Fog Lamps (If Equipped)
FUEL/PUMP
Fuel Pump, Fuel Pump Fuse
A/C CMPRSR
Air Conditioning Compressor
RUN/CRNK
Run/Crank, Airbag System Fuse,
Cruise Control Fuse, Ignition Fuse,
Back-Up Lamps, ABS Fuse, Front
Axle, PCM-1, Injectors Fuse,
Transmission Fuse, ERLS
PWR/TRN
Powertrain, Electronic Throttle
Control Fuse, Oxygen Sensor Fuse
HORN
Horn
WPR 2
Wiper 2 (High/Low)
WPR
Wipers (On/Off)
STRTR
Starter Relay (PCM Relay)
Miscellaneous
Usage
WPR
Diode — Wiper
A/C CLTCH
Diode — Air Conditioning, Clutch
MEGA FUSE
Mega Fuse
5-119
Information Provided by:

Capacities and Speciﬁcations
The following approximate conversion capacities are given in English and metric conversions. See Recommended
Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12 for more information.
Capacities and Speciﬁcations
Application
Capacities
English
Metric
Air Conditioning Refrigerant R134a
For the air conditioning system refrigerant charge
amount, see the refrigerant caution label located
under the hood. See your dealer/retailer for more
information.
Cooling System
2.9L Engine
10.4 qt
9.8 L
3.7L Engine
10.6 qt
10.0 L
5.3L Engine
13.7 qt
13.0 L
Engine Oil with Filter
2.9L Engine
5.0 qt
4.7 L
3.7L and 5.3LEngines
6.0 qt
5.7 L
Fuel Tank
19.5 gal
76 L
5-120
Information Provided by:

Capacities and Speciﬁcations (cont’d)
Application
Capacities
English
Metric
Transmission (Drain and Reﬁll)
Automatic
5.0 qt
4.7 L
Manual – Rear-Wheel Drive
2.3 qt
2.2 L
Manual – Four-Wheel Drive
2.4 qt
2.3 L
Wheel Nut Torque
100 lb ft
140 Y
All capacities are approximate. When adding, be sure to ﬁll to the appropriate level or as recommended in this
manual. Recheck ﬂuid level after ﬁlling.
Engine Speciﬁcations
Type
VIN Code
Transmission
Spark Plug Gap
2.9L
9
Automatic
Manual
0.040 in (1.01 mm)
3.7L
E
Automatic
0.040 in (1.01 mm)
5.3L
L
Automatic
0.040 in (1.01 mm)
5-121
Information Provided by:

✍NOTES
5-122
Information Provided by:

Maintenance Schedule ......................................6-2
Introduction ...................................................6-2
Maintenance Requirements ..............................6-2
Your Vehicle and the Environment ....................6-2
Using the Maintenance Schedule ......................6-2
Scheduled Maintenance ...................................6-4
Additional Required Services ............................6-6
Maintenance Footnotes ...................................6-7
Owner Checks and Services ............................6-8
At Each Fuel Fill ............................................6-9
At Least Once a Month ...................................6-9
At Least Once a Year ...................................6-10
Recommended Fluids and Lubricants ...............6-12
Normal Maintenance Replacement Parts ..........6-14
Engine Drive Belt Routing ..............................6-15
Maintenance Record .....................................6-16
Section 6
Maintenance Schedule
6-1
Information Provided by:

Maintenance Schedule
Introduction
Important: Keep engine oil at the proper level and
change as recommended.
Have you purchased the GM Protection Plan? The Plan
supplements your new vehicle warranties. See your
Warranty and Owner Assistance booklet or your
dealer/retailer for details.
Maintenance Requirements
Notice:
Maintenance intervals, checks, inspections,
replacement parts, and recommended ﬂuids and
lubricants as prescribed in this manual are necessary
to keep your vehicle in good working condition. Any
damage caused by failure to follow scheduled
maintenance might not be covered by warranty.
Your Vehicle and the Environment
Proper vehicle maintenance not only helps to keep your
vehicle in good working condition, but also helps the
environment. All recommended maintenance is
important. Improper vehicle maintenance can even
affect the quality of the air we breathe. Improper ﬂuid
levels or the wrong tire inﬂation can increase the level of
emissions from your vehicle. To help protect our
environment, and to keep your vehicle in good condition,
be sure to maintain your vehicle properly.
Using the Maintenance Schedule
We want to help you keep your vehicle in good working
condition. But we do not know exactly how you will
drive it. You might drive very short distances only a few
times a week. Or you might drive long distances all
the time in very hot, dusty weather. You might use your
vehicle in making deliveries. Or you might drive it to
work, to do errands, or in many other ways.
Because of all the different ways people use their
vehicles, maintenance needs vary. You might need more
frequent checks and replacements. So please read
the following and note how you drive. If you have any
questions on how to keep your vehicle in good condition,
see your dealer/retailer.
6-2
Information Provided by:

This schedule is for vehicles that:
•
carry passengers and cargo within recommended
limits. You will ﬁnd these limits on the Tire and
Loading Information label. See Loading Your Vehicle
on page 4-34.
•
are driven on reasonable road surfaces within legal
driving limits.
•
are driven off-road in the recommended manner.
See Off-Road Driving on page 4-11.
•
use the recommended fuel. See Gasoline Octane
on page 5-5.
The services in Scheduled Maintenance on page 6-4
should be performed when indicated. See Additional
Required Services on page 6-6 and Maintenance
Footnotes on page 6-7 for further information.
{CAUTION:
Performing maintenance work on a vehicle can
be dangerous. In trying to do some jobs, you
can be seriously injured. Do your own
maintenance work only if you have the required
CAUTION:
(Continued)
CAUTION:
(Continued)
know-how and the proper tools and equipment
for the job. If you have any doubt, see your
dealer/retailer to have a qualiﬁed technician do
the work. See Doing Your Own Service Work
on page 5-4.
Some maintenance services can be complex. So,
unless you are technically qualiﬁed and have the
necessary equipment, you should have your
dealer/retailer do these jobs.
When you go to your dealer/retailer for your service
needs, you will know that trained and supported service
technicians will perform the work using genuine parts.
If you want to purchase service information, see Service
Publications Ordering Information on page 7-16.
6-3
Information Provided by:

Owner Checks and Services on page 6-8 tells you what
should be checked, when to check it, and what you can
easily do to help keep your vehicle in good condition.
The proper replacement parts, ﬂuids, and lubricants to
use are listed in Recommended Fluids and Lubricants
on page 6-12 and Normal Maintenance Replacement
Parts on page 6-14. When your vehicle is serviced,
make sure these are used. All parts should be replaced
and all necessary repairs done before you or anyone
else drives the vehicle. We recommend the use of
genuine parts from your dealer/retailer.
Scheduled Maintenance
When the CHANGE OIL message comes on, it means
that service is required for your vehicle. See DIC
Warnings and Messages on page 3-42. Have your
vehicle serviced as soon as possible within the next
600 miles (1 000 km). It is possible that, if you are
driving under the best conditions, the engine oil life
system may not indicate that vehicle service is
necessary for over a year. However, your engine oil and
ﬁlter must be changed at least once a year and at this
time the system must be reset. Your dealer/retailer has
trained service technicians who will perform this work
using genuine parts and reset the system.
If the engine oil life system is ever reset accidentally,
you must service your vehicle within 3,000 miles
(5 000 km) since your last service. Remember to reset
the oil life system whenever the oil is changed. See
Engine Oil Life System on page 5-18 for information on
the Engine Oil Life System and resetting the system.
When the CHANGE OIL message appears, certain
services, checks, and inspections are required.
Required services are described in the following
for “Maintenance I” and “Maintenance II.” Generally, it is
recommended that your ﬁrst service be Maintenance I,
your second service be Maintenance II, and that
you alternate Maintenance I and Maintenance II
thereafter. However, in some cases, Maintenance II
may be required more often.
Maintenance I — Use Maintenance I if the CHANGE
OIL message comes on within 10 months since the
vehicle was purchased or Maintenance II was performed.
Maintenance II — Use Maintenance II if the previous
service performed was Maintenance I. Always use
Maintenance II whenever the message comes on
10 months or more since the last service or if the
message has not come on at all for one year.
6-4
Information Provided by:

Scheduled Maintenance
Service
Maintenance I
Maintenance II
Change engine oil and ﬁlter. See Engine Oil on page 5-15. Reset oil life
system. See Engine Oil Life System on page 5-18. An Emission Control
Service.
•
•
Visually check for any leaks or damage. See footnote (g).
•
•
Inspect engine air cleaner ﬁlter. If necessary, replace ﬁlter. See Engine Air
Cleaner/Filter on page 5-20. See footnote (j).
•
Rotate tires and check inﬂation pressures and wear. See Tire Inspection and
Rotation on page 5-74 and “Tire Wear Inspection” in At Least Once a Month
on page 6-9.
•
•
Inspect brake system. See footnote (a).
•
•
Check engine coolant and windshield washer ﬂuid levels and add ﬂuid as
needed.
•
•
Perform any needed additional services. See “Additional Required Services” in
this section.
•
•
Inspect suspension and steering components. See footnote (b).
•
Inspect engine cooling system. See footnote (c).
•
Inspect wiper blades. See footnote (d).
•
Inspect restraint system components. See footnote (e).
•
Lubricate body components. See footnote (f).
•
Check transmission and transfer case ﬂuid levels and add ﬂuid as needed.
•
6-5
Information Provided by:

Additional Required Services
The following services should be performed at the ﬁrst maintenance service (I or II) after the indicated
miles (kilometers) shown for each item.
Additional Required Services
Service and Miles (Kilometers)
25,000
(40 000)
50,000
(80 000)
75,000
(120 000)
100,000
(160 000)
125,000
(200 000)
150,000
(240 000)
Inspect fuel system for damage or leaks.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Inspect exhaust system for loose or
damaged components.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Replace engine air cleaner ﬁlter. See
Engine Air Cleaner/Filter on page 5-20.
•
•
•
Change automatic transmission ﬂuid and
ﬁlter (severe service). See footnote (h).
•
•
•
Change automatic transmission ﬂuid and
ﬁlter (normal service).
•
Replace spark plugs. An Emission
Control Service.
•
Engine cooling system service (or every
ﬁve years, whichever occurs ﬁrst).
An Emission Control Service.
See footnote (i).
•
Inspect engine accessory drive belt.
An Emission Control Service.
See footnote (k).
•
6-6
Information Provided by:

Maintenance Footnotes
(a) Visually inspect brake lines and hoses for proper
hook-up, binding, leaks, cracks, chaﬁng, etc. Inspect disc
brake pads for wear and rotors for surface condition.
Inspect drum brake linings/shoes for wear or cracks.
Inspect other brake parts, including drums, wheel
cylinders, calipers, parking brake, etc. Check parking
brake adjustment.
(b) Visually inspect front and rear suspension and
steering system for damaged, loose, or missing parts or
signs of wear. Inspect power steering lines and hoses
for proper hook-up, binding, leaks, cracks, chaﬁng,
etc. Visually check constant velocity joints, rubber boots,
and axle seals for leaks.
(c) Visually inspect hoses and have them replaced if
they are cracked, swollen, or deteriorated. Inspect
all pipes, ﬁttings, and clamps; replace with genuine parts
as needed. To help ensure proper operation, a pressure
test of the cooling system and pressure cap and cleaning
the outside of the radiator and air conditioning condenser
is recommended at least once a year.
(d) Inspect wiper blades for wear, cracking, or
contamination. Clean the windshield and wiper blades, if
contaminated. Replace wiper blades that are worn or
damaged. See Windshield Wiper Blade Replacement on
page 5-57 and Windshield and Wiper Blades on
page 5-111 for more information.
(e) Make sure the safety belt reminder light and safety
belt assemblies are working properly. Look for any
other loose or damaged safety belt system parts. If you
see anything that might keep a safety belt system
from doing its job, have it repaired. Have any torn or
frayed safety belts replaced. Also see Checking
the Restraint Systems on page 1-76.
(f) Lubricate all key lock cylinders, body door and fuel
door hinges, latches and locks (including glove box and
console doors), hood latch assembly, secondary latch,
pivots, spring anchor, release pawl, and any moving seat
hardware. Lubricate hood safety lever pivot and prop rod
pivot and tailgate latch bolt, handle assembly pivot points,
and hinges. More frequent lubrication may be required
when exposed to a corrosive environment. Applying
silicone grease on weatherstrips with a clean cloth will
make them last longer, seal better, and not stick
or squeak.
6-7
Information Provided by:

(g) A ﬂuid loss in any vehicle system could indicate a
problem. Have the system inspected and repaired
and the ﬂuid level checked. Add ﬂuid if needed.
(h) Change automatic transmission ﬂuid and ﬁlter if the
vehicle is mainly driven under one or more of these
conditions:
−In heavy city traffic where the outside temperature
regularly reaches 90°F (32°C) or higher.
−In hilly or mountainous terrain.
−When doing frequent trailer towing.
−Uses such as found in taxi, police, or delivery
service.
(i) Drain, ﬂush, and reﬁll cooling system. This service
can be complex; you should have your dealer/retailer
perform this service. See Engine Coolant on page 5-27
for what to use. Inspect hoses. Clean radiator,
condenser, pressure cap, and ﬁller neck. Pressure test
the cooling system and pressure cap.
(j) If you drive regularly under dusty conditions, inspect
the ﬁlter at each engine oil change.
(k) Visually inspect belt for fraying, excessive cracks, or
obvious damage. Replace belt if necessary.
Owner Checks and Services
These owner checks and services should be performed
at the intervals speciﬁed to help ensure the safety,
dependability, and emission control performance of your
vehicle. Your dealer/retailer can assist you with these
checks and services.
Be sure any necessary repairs are completed at once.
Whenever any ﬂuids or lubricants are added to your
vehicle, make sure they are the proper ones, as shown
in Recommended Fluids and Lubricants on page 6-12.
6-8
Information Provided by:

At Each Fuel Fill
It is important to perform these underhood checks at
each fuel ﬁll.
Engine Oil Level Check
Notice:
It is important to check the engine oil
regularly and keep it at the proper level. Failure to
keep the engine oil at the proper level can cause
damage to the engine not covered by your warranty.
Check the engine oil level and add the proper oil if
necessary. See Engine Oil on page 5-15.
Engine Coolant Level Check
Check the engine coolant level and add DEX-COOL®
coolant mixture if necessary. See Engine Coolant
on page 5-27.
Windshield Washer Fluid Level Check
Check the windshield washer ﬂuid level in the windshield
washer ﬂuid reservoir and add the proper ﬂuid if
necessary.
At Least Once a Month
Tire Inﬂation Check
Inspect your vehicle’s tires and make sure they are
inﬂated to the correct pressures. Do not forget to check
the spare tire. See Inﬂation - Tire Pressure on
page 5-66. Check to make sure the spare tire is stored
securely. See Changing a Flat Tire on page 5-84.
Tire Wear Inspection
Tire rotation may be required for high mileage highway
drivers prior to the Engine Oil Life System service
notiﬁcation. Check the tires for wear and, if necessary,
rotate the tires. See Tire Inspection and Rotation
on page 5-74.
6-9
Information Provided by:

At Least Once a Year
Starter Switch Check
{CAUTION:
When you are doing this inspection, the
vehicle could move suddenly. If the vehicle
moves, you or others could be injured.
1. Before you start, be sure you have enough room
around the vehicle.
2. Firmly apply both the parking brake and the regular
brake. See Parking Brake on page 2-32.
Do not use the accelerator pedal, and be ready to
turn off the engine immediately if it starts.
3. On automatic transmission vehicles, try to start the
engine in each gear. The vehicle should start only
in PARK (P) or NEUTRAL (N). If the vehicle starts in
any other position, contact your dealer/retailer
for service.
On manual transmission vehicles, put the shift lever
in NEUTRAL, push the clutch pedal down halfway,
and try to start the engine. The vehicle should start
only when the clutch pedal is pushed down all the
way to the ﬂoor. If the vehicle starts when the clutch
pedal is not pushed all the way down, contact your
dealer/retailer for service.
Automatic Transmission Shift Lock
Control System Check
{CAUTION:
When you are doing this inspection, the
vehicle could move suddenly. If the vehicle
moves, you or others could be injured.
1. Before you start, be sure you have enough room
around the vehicle. It should be parked on a
level surface.
2. Firmly apply the parking brake. See Parking Brake
on page 2-32.
Be ready to apply the regular brake immediately if
the vehicle begins to move.
3. With the engine off, turn the ignition to ON/RUN,
but do not start the engine. Without applying the
regular brake, try to move the shift lever out
of PARK (P) with normal effort. If the shift lever
moves out of PARK (P), contact your dealer/retailer
for service.
6-10
Information Provided by:

Ignition Transmission Lock Check
While parked, and with the parking brake set, try to turn
the ignition to LOCK/OFF in each shift lever position.
•
With an automatic transmission, the ignition
should turn to LOCK/OFF only when the shift lever
is in PARK (P). The ignition key should come
out only in LOCK/OFF.
•
With a manual transmission, the ignition key should
come out only in LOCK/OFF.
Contact your dealer/retailer if service is required.
Parking Brake and Automatic
Transmission Park (P) Mechanism Check
{CAUTION:
When you are doing this check, your vehicle
could begin to move. You or others could be
injured and property could be damaged. Make
sure there is room in front of your vehicle in
case it begins to roll. Be ready to apply the
regular brake at once should the vehicle begin
to move.
Park on a fairly steep hill, with the vehicle facing
downhill. Keeping your foot on the regular brake, set the
parking brake.
•
To check the parking brake’s holding ability: With
the engine running and transmission in
NEUTRAL (N), slowly remove foot pressure from
the regular brake pedal. Do this until the vehicle is
held by the parking brake only.
•
To check the PARK (P) mechanism’s holding ability:
With the engine running, shift to PARK (P). Then
release the parking brake followed by the
regular brake.
Contact your dealer/retailer if service is required.
Underbody Flushing Service
At least every spring, use plain water to ﬂush any
corrosive materials from the underbody. Take care to
clean thoroughly any areas where mud and other debris
can collect.
6-11
Information Provided by:

Recommended Fluids and
Lubricants
Fluids and lubricants identiﬁed below by name, part
number, or speciﬁcation can be obtained from your
dealer/retailer.
Usage
Fluid/Lubricant
Engine Oil
Engine oil which meets GM
Standard GM6094M and displays
the American Petroleum Institute
Certiﬁed for Gasoline Engines
starburst symbol. To determine the
proper viscosity for your vehicle’s
engine, see Engine Oil on page 5-15.
Engine Coolant
50/50 mixture of clean, drinkable
water and use only DEX-COOL®
Coolant. See Engine Coolant
on page 5-27.
Hydraulic Brake
System
Delco® Supreme 11 Brake Fluid or
equivalent DOT-3 brake ﬂuid.
Windshield
Washer
Optikleen® Washer Solvent.
Usage
Fluid/Lubricant
Parking Brake
Cable Guides
Chassis Lubricant
(GM Part No. U.S. 12377985, in
Canada 88901242) or lubricant
meeting requirements of NLGI #2,
Category LB or GC-LB.
Power Steering
System
GM Power Steering Fluid
(GM Part No. U.S. 89021184, in
Canada 89021186).
Automatic
Transmission
DEXRON®-VI Automatic
Transmission Fluid.
Manual
Transmission
Manual Transmission Fluid
(GM Part No. U.S. 89021806, in
Canada 89021807).
Hydraulic Clutch
System
Hydraulic Clutch Fluid
(GM Part No. U.S. 12345347, in
Canada 10953517) or equivalent
DOT-3 brake ﬂuid.
Key Lock
Cylinders
Multi-Purpose Lubricant, Superlube
(GM Part No. U.S. 12346241, in
Canada 10953474).
Chassis
Lubrication
Chassis Lubricant
(GM Part No. U.S. 12377985, in
Canada 88901242) or lubricant
meeting requirements of NLGI #2,
Category LB or GC-LB.
6-12
Information Provided by:

Usage
Fluid/Lubricant
Front and
Rear Axle
SAE 75W-90 Synthetic
Axle Lubricant
(GM Part No. U.S. 89021677,
in Canada 89021678) meeting
GM Speciﬁcation 9986115.
Transfer Case
Synchromesh Transmission Fluid
(GM Part No. U.S. 12345349,
in Canada 10953465).
Rear Driveline
Center Spline
and Universal
Joints
Chassis Lubricant
(GM Part No. U.S. 12377985, in
Canada 88901242) or lubricant
meeting requirements of NLGI #2,
Category LB or GC-LB.
Constant
Velocity
Universal Joint
Chassis Lubricant
(GM Part No. U.S. 12377985, in
Canada 88901242) or lubricant
meeting requirements of NLGI #2,
Category LB or GC-LB.
Hood Latch
Assembly,
Secondary
Latch, Pivots,
Spring Anchor,
and Release
Pawl
Lubriplate Lubricant Aerosol
(GM Part No. U.S. 12346293, in
Canada 992723) or lubricant meeting
requirements of NLGI #2, Category
LB or GC-LB.
Usage
Fluid/Lubricant
Hood and Door
Hinges, Body
Door Hinge
Pins, Liftgate
Hinge and
Linkage,
Folding Seats,
and Fuel Door
Hinge
Multi-Purpose Lubricant, Superlube
(GM Part No. U.S. 12346241, in
Canada 10953474).
Outer Tailgate
Handle Pivot
Points and
Hinges
Multi-Purpose Lubricant, Superlube
(GM Part No. U.S. 12346241, in
Canada 10953474).
Weatherstrip
Conditioning
Weatherstrip Lubricant
(GM Part No. U.S. 3634770,
in Canada 10953518) or
Dielectric Silicone Grease
(GM Part No. U.S. 12345579,
in Canada 992887).
Weatherstrip
Squeaks
Synthetic Grease with
Teﬂon, Superlube
(GM Part No. U.S. 12371287,
in Canada 10953437).
6-13
Information Provided by:

Normal Maintenance Replacement Parts
Replacement parts identiﬁed below by name, part number, or speciﬁcation can be obtained from your dealer/retailer.
Part
GM Part Number
ACDelco® Part Number
Engine Air Cleaner/Filter
15942429
—
Engine Oil Filter
2.9L Engine
88984215
PF46
3.7L Engine
89017342
PF61
5.3L Engine
89017524
PF48
Spark Plugs
2.9L and 3.7L Engines
12598004
41-103
5.3L Engine
12571164
41-985
Windshield Wiper Blades
Driver’s Side — 22 inches (55 cm)
10389562
—
Passenger’s Side — 19 inches (48 cm)
10389563
—
6-14
Information Provided by:

Engine Drive Belt Routing
2.9L and 3.7L Engines
5.3L Engine
6-15
Information Provided by:

Maintenance Record
After the scheduled services are performed, record the date, odometer reading, who performed the service, and the
type of services performed in the boxes provided. See Maintenance Requirements on page 6-2. Any additional
information from Owner Checks and Services on page 6-8 can be added on the following record pages. You should
retain all maintenance receipts.
Maintenance Record
Date
Odometer
Reading
Serviced By
Maintenance I or
Maintenance II
Services Performed
6-16
Information Provided by:

Maintenance Record (cont’d)
Date
Odometer
Reading
Serviced By
Maintenance I or
Maintenance II
Services Performed
6-17
Information Provided by:

Maintenance Record (cont’d)
Date
Odometer
Reading
Serviced By
Maintenance I or
Maintenance II
Services Performed
6-18
Information Provided by:

Customer Assistance and Information ...............7-2
Customer Satisfaction Procedure ......................7-2
Online Owner Center ......................................7-4
Customer Assistance for
Text Telephone (TTY) Users .........................7-5
Customer Assistance Offices ............................7-5
GM Mobility Reimbursement Program ................7-6
Roadside Assistance Program ..........................7-7
Scheduling Service Appointments .....................7-9
Courtesy Transportation .................................7-10
Collision Damage Repair ................................7-12
Reporting Safety Defects ................................7-15
Reporting Safety Defects to the
United States Government ..........................7-15
Reporting Safety Defects to the
Canadian Government ................................7-16
Reporting Safety Defects to
General Motors .........................................7-16
Service Publications Ordering Information .........7-16
Vehicle Data Recording and Privacy ................7-17
Event Data Recorders ...................................7-18
OnStar® ......................................................7-19
Navigation System ........................................7-19
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID) ..............7-19
Section 7
Customer Assistance Information
7-1
Information Provided by:

Customer Assistance and
Information
Customer Satisfaction Procedure
Your satisfaction and goodwill are important to
your dealer and to Chevrolet. Normally, any concerns
with the sales transaction or the operation of your
vehicle will be resolved by your dealer’s sales or service
departments. Sometimes, however, despite the best
intentions of all concerned, misunderstandings can
occur. If your concern has not been resolved to your
satisfaction, the following steps should be taken:
STEP ONE: Discuss your concern with a member
of dealership management. Normally, concerns can
be quickly resolved at that level. If the matter has
already been reviewed with the sales, service, or parts
manager, contact the owner of the dealership or the
general manager.
STEP TWO: If after contacting a member of dealership
management, it appears your concern cannot be
resolved by the dealership without further help, in the
U.S., contact the Chevrolet Customer Assistance
Center by calling 1-800-222-1020. In Canada, contact
General Motors of Canada Customer Communication
Centre by calling 1-800-263-3777 (English) or
1-800-263-7854 (French).
We encourage you to call the toll-free number in
order to give your inquiry prompt attention. Please
have the following information available to give
the Customer Assistance Representative:
•
Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number (VIN). This is
available from the vehicle registration or title,
or the plate at the top left of the instrument panel
and visible through the windshield.
•
Dealership name and location.
•
Vehicle delivery date and present
mileage (kilometers).
When contacting Chevrolet, please remember that
your concern will likely be resolved at a dealer’s facility.
That is why we suggest you follow Step One ﬁrst if
you have a concern.
STEP THREE — U.S. Owners: Both General Motors
and your dealer are committed to making sure you
are completely satisﬁed with your new vehicle. However,
if you continue to remain unsatisﬁed after following
the procedure outlined in Steps One and Two,
you should ﬁle with the Better Business Bureau (BBB)
Auto Line Program to enforce your rights.
The BBB Auto Line Program is an out of court program
administered by the Council of Better Business Bureaus
to settle automotive disputes regarding vehicle repairs or
the interpretation of the New Vehicle Limited Warranty.
7-2
Information Provided by:

Although you may be required to resort to this informal
dispute resolution program prior to ﬁling a court action,
use of the program is free of charge and your case will
generally be heard within 40 days. If you do not agree
with the decision given in your case, you may reject it and
proceed with any other venue for relief available to you.
You may contact the BBB Auto Line Program using the
toll-free telephone number or write them at the following
address:
BBB Auto Line Program
Council of Better Business Bureaus, Inc.
4200 Wilson Boulevard
Suite 800
Arlington, VA 22203-1838
Telephone: 1-800-955-5100
This program is available in all 50 states and the
District of Columbia. Eligibility is limited by vehicle age,
mileage, and other factors. General Motors reserves
the right to change eligibility limitations and/or
discontinue its participation in this program.
STEP THREE — Canadian Owners: In the event
that you do not feel your concerns have been
addressed after following the procedure outlined in
Steps 1 and 2, General Motors of Canada Limited
wants you to be aware of its participation in a
no-charge Mediation/Arbitration Program.
General Motors of Canada Limited has committed
to binding arbitration of owner disputes involving
factory-related vehicle service claims. The program
provides for the review of the facts involved by an
impartial third party arbiter, and may include an informal
hearing before the arbiter. The program is designed
so that the entire dispute settlement process, from
the time you ﬁle your complaint to the ﬁnal decision,
should be completed in about 70 days. We believe our
impartial program offers advantages over courts in
most jurisdictions because it is informal, quick, and
free of charge.
For further information concerning eligibility in the
Canadian Motor Vehicle Arbitration Plan (CAMVAP),
call toll-free 1-800-207-0685. Alternatively, you may call
the General Motors Customer Communication Centre,
1-800-263-3777 (English), 1-800-263-7854 (French),
or you may write to:
The Mediation/Arbitration Program
c/o Customer Communication Centre
General Motors of Canada Limited
Mail Code: CA1-163-005
1908 Colonel Sam Drive
Oshawa, Ontario L1H 8P7
Your inquiry should be accompanied by your
Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number (VIN).
7-3
Information Provided by:

Online Owner Center
Online Owner Center
(United States only)
The Owner Center is a resource for your GM ownership
needs. Speciﬁc vehicle information can be found in
one place.
The Online Owner Center allows you to:
•
Get e-mail service reminders.
•
Access information about your speciﬁc vehicle,
including tips and videos and an electronic
version of this owner manual.
•
Keep track of your vehicle’s service history and
maintenance schedule.
•
Find GM dealers/retailers for service nationwide.
•
Receive special promotions and privileges only
available to members.
Refer to www.MyGMLink.com on the web for updated
information and to register your vehicle.
My GM Canada (Canada only)
My GM Canada is a password-protected section of
gmcanada.com where you can save information on
GM vehicles, get personalized offers, and use handy
tools and forms with greater ease.
Here are a few of the valuable tools and services you
will have access to:
−My Showroom: Find and save information on
vehicles and current offers in your area.
−My Dealers/Retailers: Save details such as
address and phone number for each of your
preferred GM Dealers or Retailers.
−My Driveway: Receive service reminders and
helpful advice on owning and maintaining
your vehicle.
−My Preferences: Manage your proﬁle, subscribe
to E-News and use tools and forms with
greater ease.
To sign up to My GM Canada, visit the My GM Canada
section within www.gmcanada.com.
7-4
Information Provided by:

Customer Assistance for Text
Telephone (TTY) Users
To assist customers who are deaf, hard of hearing,
or speech-impaired and who use Text Telephones
(TTYs), Chevrolet has TTY equipment available at its
Customer Assistance Center. Any TTY user in the
U.S. can communicate with Chevrolet by dialing:
1-800-833-CHEV (2438). (TTY users in Canada can
dial 1-800-263-3830.)
Customer Assistance Offices
Chevrolet encourages customers to call the toll-free
number for assistance. However, if a customer wishes
to write or e-mail Chevrolet, the letter should be
addressed to:
United States — Customer Assistance
Chevrolet Motor Division
Chevrolet Customer Assistance Center
P.O. Box 33170
Detroit, MI 48232-5170
www.Chevrolet.com
1-800-222-1020
1-800-833-2438 (For Text Telephone devices (TTYs))
Roadside Assistance: 1-800-CHEV-USA (243-8872)
Fax Number: 313-381-0022
From Puerto Rico:
1-800-496-9992 (English)
1-800-496-9993 (Spanish)
Fax Number: 313-381-0022
From U.S. Virgin Islands:
1-800-496-9994
Fax Number: 313-381-0022
Canada — Customer Assistance
General Motors of Canada Limited
Customer Communication Centre, CA1-163-005
1908 Colonel Sam Drive
Oshawa, Ontario L1H 8P7
www.gmcanada.com
1-800-263-3777 (English)
1-800-263-7854 (French)
1-800-263-3830 (For Text Telephone devices (TTYs))
Roadside Assistance: 1-800-268-6800
Overseas — Customer Assistance
Please contact the local General Motors Business Unit.
7-5
Information Provided by:

Mexico, Central America and
Caribbean Islands/Countries
(Except Puerto Rico and U.S. Virgin
Islands) — Customer Assistance
General Motors de Mexico, S. de R.L. de C.V.
Customer Assistance Center
Paseo de la Reforma # 2740
Col. Lomas de Bezares
C.P. 11910, Mexico, D.F.
01-800-508-0000
Long Distance: 011-52-53 29 0 800
GM Mobility Reimbursement
Program
This program, available to qualiﬁed applicants, can
reimburse you up to $1,000 of the cost of eligible
aftermarket adaptive equipment required for your
vehicle, such as hand controls or a wheelchair/scooter lift.
The offer is available for a very limited period of time
from the date of vehicle purchase/lease. For more
details, or to determine your vehicle’s eligibility, visit
gmmobility.com or call the GM Mobility Assistance
Center at 1-800-323-9935. Text telephone (TTY) users,
call 1-800-833-9935.
General Motors of Canada also has a Mobility Program.
Call 1-800-GM-DRIVE (463-7483) for details.
TTY users call 1-800-263-3830.
7-6
Information Provided by:

Roadside Assistance Program
For vehicles purchased in the U.S.,
call 1-800-CHEV-USA (1-800-243-8872);
(Text telephone (TTY): 1-888-889-2438).
For vehicles purchased in Canada,
call 1-800-268-6800.
Service is available 24 hours a day,
365 days a year.
As the owner of a new Chevrolet vehicle,
you are automatically enrolled in the
Chevrolet Roadside Assistance program.
Who is Covered?
Roadside Assistance coverage is for the vehicle
operator, regardless of ownership. In Canada,
a person driving this vehicle without the consent
of the owner is not eligible for coverage.
Services Provided
The following services are provided in the U.S. and
Canada up to 5 years/100,000 miles (160 000 km),
whichever occurs ﬁrst, and, in Canada only, up
to a maximum coverage of $100.
•
Fuel Delivery: Delivery of enough fuel for the
vehicle to get to the nearest service station
(approximately $5 in Canada). In Canada,
service to provide diesel may be restricted.
For safety reasons, propane and other alternative
fuels will not be provided through this service.
•
Lock-out Service: Lock-out service will be covered
at no charge if you are unable to gain entry into
your vehicle. A remote unlock may be available
if you have an active OnStar® subscription.
To ensure security, the driver must present
personal identiﬁcation before lock-out service is
provided. In Canada, the vehicle registration is
also required.
7-7
Information Provided by:

•
Emergency Tow From a Public Roadway
or Highway: Tow to the nearest dealership
for warranty service or in the event of a
vehicle-disabling crash. Winch-out assistance is
provided when the vehicle is mired in sand, mud,
or snow.
•
Flat Tire Change: Installation of a spare tire in
good condition, when equipped and properly
inﬂated, is covered at no charge. The customer is
responsible for the repair or replacement of the
tire if not covered by a warrantable failure.
•
Jump Start: A battery jump start is covered at no
charge if the vehicle does not start.
•
Trip Routing Service (Canada only): Upon
request, Roadside Assistance will send you
detailed, computer personalized maps, highlighting
your choice of either the most direct route or the
most scenic route to your destination, anywhere in
North America, along with helpful travel information
pertaining to your trip.
Please allow three weeks before your planned
departure date. Trip routing requests will be limited
to six per calendar year.
•
Trip Interruption Beneﬁts and Assistance
(Canada only): In the event of a warranty
related vehicle disablement, while en route and
over 250 kilometres from the original point of
departure, you may qualify for trip interruption
expense assistance. This assistance covers
reasonable reimbursement of up to a maximum
of $500 (Canadian) for (A) meals (maximum
of $50/day), (B) lodging (maximum of $100/night)
and (C) alternate ground transportation (maximum
of $40/day). This beneﬁt is to assist you with
some of the unplanned expense you may incur
while waiting for your vehicle to be repaired.
Pre-authorization, original detailed receipts and a
copy of the repair order are required.
Once authorization has been given, your advisor
will help you make any necessary arrangements
and explain how to claim for trip interruption
expense assistance.
•
Alternative Service (Canada only): There may be
times, when Roadside Assistance cannot provide
timely assistance. Your advisor may authorize
you to secure local emergency road service, and
you will be reimbursed up to $100 upon submission
of the original receipt to Roadside Assistance.
7-8
Information Provided by:

In many instances, mechanical failures may be covered.
However, any cost for parts and labor for non-warranty
repairs are the responsibility of the driver.
Chevrolet and General Motors of Canada Limited
reserve the right to limit services or reimbursement
to an owner or driver when, in their sole discretion,
the claims become excessive in frequency or type
of occurrence.
Calling for Assistance
For prompt and efficient assistance when calling,
please provide the following to the Roadside
Assistance Representative:
•
Your name, home address, and home
telephone number
•
Telephone number of your location
•
Location of the vehicle
•
Model, year, color, and license plate number
of the vehicle
•
Odometer reading, Vehicle Identiﬁcation
Number (VIN), and delivery date of the vehicle
•
Description of the problem
Towing and Road Service Exclusions
Speciﬁcally excluded from Roadside Assistance
coverage are towing or services for vehicles operated
on a non-public roadway or highway, ﬁnes, impound
towing caused by a violation of local, Municipal, State,
Provincial, or Federal law, and mounting, dismounting or
changing of snow tires, chains, or other traction devices.
Roadside Assistance is not part of or included in
the coverage provided by the New Vehicle Limited
Warranty. Chevrolet and General Motors of Canada
Limited reserve the right to make any changes or
discontinue the Roadside Assistance program at any
time without notiﬁcation.
Scheduling Service Appointments
When your vehicle requires warranty service, contact
your dealer/retailer and request an appointment.
By scheduling a service appointment and advising your
service consultant of your transportation needs, your
dealer/retailer can help minimize your inconvenience.
If your vehicle cannot be scheduled into the service
department immediately, keep driving it until it can be
scheduled for service, unless, of course, the problem is
safety-related. If it is, please call your dealership/retailer,
let them know this, and ask for instructions.
If the dealer/retailer requests that you simply drop the
vehicle off for service, you are urged to do so as early in
the work day as possible to allow for the same day repair.
7-9
Information Provided by:

Courtesy Transportation
To enhance your ownership experience, we and
our participating dealers are proud to offer Courtesy
Transportation, a customer support program for
vehicles with the Bumper to Bumper (Base Warranty
Coverage period in Canada) and extended powertrain
warranty in both the U.S. and Canada.
Several courtesy transportation options are available to
assist in reducing your inconvenience when warranty
repairs are required.
Courtesy Transportation is not a part of the New
Vehicle Limited Warranty. A separate booklet entitled
“Warranty and Owner Assistance Information” furnished
with each new vehicle provides detailed warranty
coverage information.
Transportation Options
Warranty service can generally be completed while
you wait. However, if you are unable to wait, GM helps
to minimize your inconvenience by providing several
transportation options. Depending on the circumstances,
your dealer can offer you one of the following:
Shuttle Service
Shuttle service is the preferred means of offering
Courtesy Transportation. Dealers may provide you
with shuttle service to get you to your destination with
minimal interruption of your daily schedule. This includes
one-way or round trip shuttle service within reasonable
time and distance parameters of the dealer’s area.
7-10
Information Provided by:

Public Transportation or
Fuel Reimbursement
If your vehicle requires overnight warranty repairs,
and public transportation is used instead of the dealer’s
shuttle service, the expense must be supported by
original receipts and can only be up to the maximum
amount allowed by GM for shuttle service. In addition,
for U.S. customers, should you arrange transportation
through a friend or relative, limited reimbursement
for reasonable fuel expenses may be available.
Claim amounts should reﬂect actual costs and be
supported by original receipts. See your dealer for
information regarding the allowance amounts for
reimbursement of fuel or other transportation costs.
Courtesy Rental Vehicle
Your dealer may arrange to provide you with a courtesy
rental vehicle or reimburse you for a rental vehicle
that you obtain if your vehicle is kept for an overnight
warranty repair. Rental reimbursement will be limited
and must be supported by original receipts. This requires
that you sign and complete a rental agreement and
meet state/provincial, local, and rental vehicle provider
requirements.
Requirements vary and may include minimum age
requirements, insurance coverage, credit card, etc.
You are responsible for fuel usage charges and may
also be responsible for taxes, levies, usage fees,
excessive mileage, or rental usage beyond the
completion of the repair.
It may not be possible to provide a like-vehicle as a
courtesy rental.
Additional Program Information
All program options, such as shuttle service, may not be
available at every dealer. Please contact your dealer
for speciﬁc information about availability. All Courtesy
Transportation arrangements will be administered
by appropriate dealer personnel.
General Motors reserves the right to unilaterally modify,
change or discontinue Courtesy Transportation at
any time and to resolve all questions of claim eligibility
pursuant to the terms and conditions described
herein at its sole discretion.
7-11
Information Provided by:

Collision Damage Repair
If your vehicle is involved in a collision and it is
damaged, have the damage repaired by a qualiﬁed
technician using the proper equipment and quality
replacement parts. Poorly performed collision repairs
diminish your vehicle’s resale value, and safety
performance can be compromised in subsequent
collisions.
Collision Parts
Genuine GM Collision parts are new parts made with
the same materials and construction methods as
the parts with which your vehicle was originally built.
Genuine GM Collision parts are your best choice to
assure that your vehicle’s designed appearance,
durability, and safety are preserved. The use of
Genuine GM parts can help maintain your GM New
Vehicle Warranty.
Recycled original equipment parts may also be used
for repair. These parts are typically removed from
vehicles that were total losses in prior crashes. In most
cases, the parts being recycled are from undamaged
sections of the vehicle. A recycled original equipment
GM part, may be an acceptable choice to maintain your
vehicle’s originally designed appearance and safety
performance, however, the history of these parts is not
known. Such parts are not covered by your GM New
Vehicle Limited Warranty, and any related failures are
not covered by that warranty.
Aftermarket collision parts are also available. These are
made by companies other than GM and may not have
been tested for your vehicle. As a result, these parts may
ﬁt poorly, exhibit premature durability/corrosion problems,
and may not perform properly in subsequent collisions.
Aftermarket parts are not covered by your GM New
Vehicle Limited Warranty, and any vehicle failure related
to such parts are not covered by that warranty.
Repair Facility
GM also recommends that you choose a collision
repair facility that meets your needs before you ever
need collision repairs. Your dealer/retailer may have a
collision repair center with GM-trained technicians and
state of the art equipment, or be able to recommend a
collision repair center that has GM-trained technicians
and comparable equipment.
7-12
Information Provided by:

Insuring Your Vehicle
Protect your investment in your GM vehicle with
comprehensive and collision insurance coverage.
There are signiﬁcant differences in the quality of
coverage afforded by various insurance policy terms.
Many insurance policies provide reduced protection
to your GM vehicle by limiting compensation for damage
repairs by using aftermarket collision parts. Some
insurance companies will not specify aftermarket
collision parts. When purchasing insurance, we
recommend that you assure your vehicle will be
repaired with GM original equipment collision parts.
If such insurance coverage is not available from your
current insurance carrier, consider switching to another
insurance carrier.
If your vehicle is leased, the leasing company may
require you to have insurance that assures repairs with
Genuine GM Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM)
parts or Genuine Manufacturer replacement parts.
Read your lease carefully, as you may be charged at
the end of your lease for poor quality repairs.
If a Crash Occurs
Here is what to do if you are involved in a crash.
•
Try to relax and then check to make sure you
are all right. If you are uninjured, make sure
that no one else in your vehicle, or the other
vehicle, is injured.
•
If there has been an injury, call emergency
services for help. Do not leave the scene of a
crash until all matters have been taken care
of. Move your vehicle only if its position puts you
in danger or you are instructed to move it by a
police officer.
•
Give only the necessary and requested information
to police and other parties involved in the crash.
Do not discuss your personal condition, mental
frame of mind, or anything unrelated to the crash.
This will help guard against post-crash legal action.
•
If you need roadside assistance, call GM Roadside
Assistance. See Roadside Assistance Program
on page 7-7 for more information.
7-13
Information Provided by:

•
If your vehicle cannot be driven, know where the
towing service will be taking it. Get a card from
the tow truck operator or write down the driver’s
name, the service’s name, and the phone number.
•
Remove any valuables from your vehicle before it is
towed away. Make sure this includes your insurance
information and registration if you keep these
items in your vehicle.
•
Gather the important information you will need
from the other driver. Things like name, address,
phone number, driver’s license number, vehicle
license plate, vehicle make, model and model year,
Vehicle Identiﬁcation Number (VIN), insurance
company and policy number, and a general
description of the damage to the other vehicle.
•
If possible, call your insurance company from the
scene of the crash. They will walk you through
the information they will need. If they ask for
a police report, phone or go to the police
department headquarters the next day and you
can get a copy of the report for a nominal fee.
In some states/provinces with “no fault” insurance
laws, a report may not be necessary. This is
especially true if there are no injuries and both
vehicles are driveable.
•
Choose a reputable collision repair facility for
your vehicle. Whether you select a dealer/retailer or
a private collision repair facility to ﬁx the damage,
make sure you are comfortable with them.
Remember, you will have to feel comfortable with
their work for a long time.
•
Once you have an estimate, read it carefully and
make sure you understand what work will be
performed on your vehicle. If you have a question,
ask for an explanation. Reputable shops welcome
this opportunity.
7-14
Information Provided by:

Managing the Vehicle Damage
Repair Process
In the event that your vehicle requires damage repairs,
GM recommends that you take an active role in its
repair. If you have a pre-determined repair facility of
choice, take your vehicle there, or have it towed there.
Specify to the facility that any required replacement
collision parts be original equipment parts, either
new Genuine GM parts or recycled original GM parts.
Remember, recycled parts will not be covered by
your GM vehicle warranty.
Insurance pays the bill for the repair, but you must
live with the repair. Depending on your policy limits,
your insurance company may initially value the repair
using aftermarket parts. Discuss this with your repair
professional, and insist on Genuine GM parts.
Remember if your vehicle is leased you may be
obligated to have the vehicle repaired with Genuine
GM parts, even if your insurance coverage does
not pay the full cost.
If another party’s insurance company is paying for
the repairs, you are not obligated to accept a repair
valuation based on that insurance company’s collision
policy repair limits, as you have no contractual limits
with that company. In such cases, you can have
control of the repair and parts choices as long as
cost stays within reasonable limits.
Reporting Safety Defects
Reporting Safety Defects to the
United States Government
If you believe that your vehicle has a defect which
could cause a crash or could cause injury or
death, you should immediately inform the National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)
in addition to notifying General Motors.
If NHTSA receives similar complaints, it may
open an investigation, and if it ﬁnds that a safety
defect exists in a group of vehicles, it may
order a recall and remedy campaign. However,
NHTSA cannot become involved in individual
problems between you, your dealer/retailer,
or General Motors.
To contact NHTSA, you may call the Vehicle
Safety Hotline toll-free at 1-888-327-4236
(TTY: 1-800-424-9153); go to
http://www.safercar.gov; or write to:
Administrator, NHTSA
400 Seventh Street, SW.
Washington D.C., 20590
You can also obtain other information about motor
vehicle safety from http://www.safercar.gov.
7-15
Information Provided by:

Reporting Safety Defects to the
Canadian Government
If you live in Canada, and you believe that your
vehicle has a safety defect, notify Transport Canada
immediately, in addition to notifying General Motors of
Canada Limited. Call them at 1-800-333-0510 or write to:
Transport Canada
Road Safety Branch
2780 Sheffield Road
Ottawa, Ontario K1B 3V9
Reporting Safety Defects to
General Motors
In addition to notifying NHTSA (or Transport Canada)
in a situation like this, please notify General Motors.
Call 1-800-222-1020, or write:
Chevrolet Motor Division
Chevrolet Customer Assistance Center
P.O. Box 33170
Detroit, MI 48232-5170
In Canada, call 1-800-263-3777 (English) or
1-800-263-7854 (French), or write:
General Motors of Canada Limited
Customer Communication Centre, CA1-163-005
1908 Colonel Sam Drive
Oshawa, Ontario L1H 8P7
Service Publications Ordering
Information
Service Manuals
Service Manuals have the diagnosis and repair
information on engines, transmission, axle suspension,
brakes, electrical, steering, body, etc.
Service Bulletins
Service Bulletins’ give additional technical service
information needed to knowledgeably service
General Motors cars and trucks. Each bulletin contains
instructions to assist in the diagnosis and service of
your vehicle.
Owner Information
Owner publications are written speciﬁcally for owners
and intended to provide basic operational information
about the vehicle. The owner manual includes the
Maintenance Schedule for all models.
In-Portfolio: Includes a Portfolio, Owner Manual,
and Warranty Booklet.
RETAIL SELL PRICE: $35.00 (U.S.) plus processing fee
Without Portfolio: Owner Manual only.
RETAIL SELL PRICE: $25.00 (U.S.) plus processing fee
7-16
Information Provided by:

Current and Past Model Order Forms
Technical Service Bulletins and Manuals are
available for current and past model GM vehicles.
To request an order form, specify year and model
name of the vehicle.
ORDER TOLL FREE: 1-800-551-4123
Monday-Friday 8:00 AM - 6:00 PM
Eastern Time
For Credit Card Orders Only
(VISA-MasterCard-Discover), visit Helm, Inc.
on the World Wide Web at: www.helminc.com
Or you can write to:
Helm, Incorporated
P.O. Box 07130
Detroit, MI 48207
Prices are subject to change without notice and without
incurring obligation. Allow ample time for delivery.
Note to Canadian Customers: All listed prices are
quoted in U.S. funds. Canadian residents are to
make checks payable in U.S. funds.
Vehicle Data Recording
and Privacy
Your GM vehicle has a number of sophisticated
computers that record information about the vehicle’s
performance and how it is driven. For example,
your vehicle uses computer modules to monitor
and control engine and transmission performance,
to monitor the conditions for airbag deployment
and deploy airbags in a crash and, if so equipped,
to provide antilock braking to help the driver control
the vehicle. These modules may store data to help
your dealer/retailer technician service your vehicle.
Some modules may also store data about how
you operate the vehicle, such as rate of fuel
consumption or average speed. These modules
may also retain the owner’s personal preferences,
such as radio pre-sets, seat positions, and
temperature settings.
7-17
Information Provided by:

Event Data Recorders
This vehicle has an Event Data Recorder (EDR).
The main purpose of an EDR is to record, in certain
crash or near crash-like situations, such as an air bag
deployment or hitting a road obstacle, data that will
assist in understanding how a vehicle’s systems
performed. The EDR is designed to record data related
to vehicle dynamics and safety systems for a short
period of time, typically 30 seconds or less. The EDR
in this vehicle is designed to record such data as:
•
How various systems in your vehicle were
operating
•
Whether or not the driver and passenger safety
belts were buckled/fastened
•
How far, if at all, the driver was pressing the
accelerator and/or brake pedal
•
How fast the vehicle was traveling
This data can help provide a better understanding of
the circumstances in which crashes and injuries occur.
Important:
EDR data is recorded by your vehicle
only if a non-trivial crash situation occurs; no data is
recorded by the EDR under normal driving conditions and
no personal data (e.g., name, gender, age, and crash
location) is recorded. However, other parties, such as law
enforcement, could combine the EDR data with the type
of personally identifying data routinely acquired during a
crash investigation.
To read data recorded by an EDR, special equipment
is required, and access to the vehicle or the EDR is
needed. In addition to the vehicle manufacturer, other
parties, such as law enforcement, that have the special
equipment, can read the information if they have access
to the vehicle or the EDR.
GM will not access this data or share it with others
except: with the consent of the vehicle owner or, if the
vehicle is leased, with the consent of the lessee; in
response to an official request of police or similar
government office; as part of GM’s defense of litigation
through the discovery process; or, as required by law.
Data that GM collects or receives may also be used for
GM research needs or may be made available to others
for research purposes, where a need is shown and the
data is not tied to a speciﬁc vehicle or vehicle owner.
7-18
Information Provided by:

OnStar®
If your vehicle has OnStar® and you subscribe to
the OnStar® services, please refer to the OnStar® Terms
and Conditions for information on data collection
and use. See also OnStar® System on page 2-47 in
this manual for more information.
Navigation System
If your vehicle has a navigation system, use of the
system may result in the storage of destinations,
addresses, telephone numbers, and other trip
information. Refer to the navigation system operating
manual for information on stored data and for
deletion instructions.
Radio Frequency
Identiﬁcation (RFID)
RFID technology is used in some vehicles for functions
such as tire pressure monitoring and ignition system
security, as well as in connection with conveniences
such as key fobs for remote door locking/unlocking and
starting, and in-vehicle transmitters for garage door
openers. RFID technology in GM vehicles does not use
or record personal information or link with any other
GM system containing personal information.
7-19
Information Provided by:

✍NOTES
7-20
Information Provided by:

A
Accessories and Modiﬁcations ............................ 5-3
Adding Equipment to Your Airbag-Equipped
Vehicle ....................................................... 1-74
Additives, Fuel ................................................. 5-6
Add-On Electrical Equipment ........................... 5-115
Air Cleaner/Filter, Engine ................................. 5-20
Air Conditioning .............................................. 3-20
Airbag
Passenger Status Indicator ........................... 3-28
Readiness Light .......................................... 3-27
Airbag System ................................................ 1-60
What Will You See After an Airbag Inﬂates? .... 1-68
When Should an Airbag Inﬂate? .................... 1-65
Where Are the Airbags? ............................... 1-63
Airbag Systems
Adding Equipment to Your Airbag-Equipped
Vehicle ................................................... 1-74
How Does an Airbag Restrain? ...................... 1-67
Passenger Sensing System ........................... 1-69
Servicing Your Airbag-Equipped Vehicle .......... 1-74
What Makes an Airbag Inﬂate? ...................... 1-67
Antenna, Fixed Mast ....................................... 3-71
Antenna, XM™Satellite Radio Antenna System .. 3-71
Antilock Brake System (ABS) ............................. 4-4
Antilock Brake, System Warning Light ................ 3-32
Appearance Care
Aluminum or Chrome-Plated Wheels ............. 5-112
Care of Safety Belts ................................... 5-109
Chemical Paint Spotting .............................. 5-113
Cleaning Exterior Lamps/Lenses .................. 5-110
Fabric/Carpet ............................................ 5-107
Finish Care ............................................... 5-111
Finish Damage .......................................... 5-113
Instrument Panel, Vinyl, and Other Plastic
Surfaces ............................................... 5-109
Interior Cleaning ........................................ 5-106
Leather .................................................... 5-108
Sheet Metal Damage .................................. 5-113
Tires ........................................................ 5-113
Underbody Maintenance ............................. 5-113
Vehicle Care/Appearance Materials ............... 5-114
Washing Your Vehicle ................................. 5-110
Weatherstrips ............................................ 5-109
Windshield and Wiper Blades ...................... 5-111
Appointments, Scheduling Service ....................... 7-9
Ashtray ......................................................... 3-20
Assist Handles ............................................... 2-50
Audio System ................................................. 3-46
Chime Level Adjustment ............................... 3-71
Fixed Mast Antenna ..................................... 3-71
Radio Reception .......................................... 3-70
Setting the Time .......................................... 3-47
Theft-Deterrent Feature ................................ 3-70
XM™Satellite Radio Antenna System ............ 3-71
Audio System(s) ............................................. 3-48
1
Information Provided by:

Automatic Headlamp System ............................ 3-16
Automatic Transmission
Fluid .......................................................... 5-21
Operation ................................................... 2-24
B
Battery .......................................................... 5-43
Electric Power Management .......................... 3-18
Run-Down Protection ................................... 3-19
Brake
Emergencies ................................................ 4-5
Brakes .......................................................... 5-39
System Warning Light .................................. 3-31
Braking ........................................................... 4-3
Braking in Emergencies ..................................... 4-5
Break-In, New Vehicle ..................................... 2-19
Bulb Replacement ........................................... 5-51
Center High-Mounted Stoplamp (CHMSL) ........ 5-54
Front Turn Signal, Parking and Daytime
Running Lamps ........................................ 5-53
Halogen Bulbs ............................................ 5-51
Headlamp Aiming ........................................ 5-51
Headlamps ................................................. 5-52
License Plate Lamps .................................... 5-56
Replacement Bulbs ...................................... 5-56
Taillamps, Turn Signal, Stoplamps and
Back-up Lamps ........................................ 5-54
Buying New Tires ........................................... 5-76
C
Calibration ............................................. 2-40, 2-43
California Fuel .................................................. 5-6
California Perchlorate Materials Requirements ....... 5-4
California Proposition 65 Warning ....................... 5-4
Canadian Owners ................................................ ii
Capacities and Speciﬁcations .......................... 5-120
Carbon Monoxide ................... 2-10, 2-37, 4-28, 4-47
Care of
Safety Belts .............................................. 5-109
CD, MP3 ....................................................... 3-64
Center Console Storage Area ........................... 2-50
Center High-Mounted Stoplamp (CHMSL) ........... 5-54
Chains, Tire ................................................... 5-82
Charging System Light .................................... 3-30
Check
Engine Light ............................................... 3-34
Checking Things Under the Hood ...................... 5-10
Chemical Paint Spotting ................................. 5-113
Child Restraints
Child Restraint Systems ............................... 1-39
Infants and Young Children ........................... 1-36
Lower Anchors and Tethers for Children .......... 1-43
Older Children ............................................. 1-33
Securing a Child Restraint in a Rear Seat
Position .................................................. 1-54
2
Information Provided by:

Child Restraints (cont.)
Securing a Child Restraint in the Center Front
Seat Position ........................................... 1-56
Securing a Child Restraint in the Right Front
Seat Position ........................................... 1-56
Where to Put the Restraint ........................... 1-42
Chime Level Adjustment .................................. 3-71
Cigarette Lighter ............................................. 3-20
Cleaning
Aluminum or Chrome-Plated Wheels ............. 5-112
Exterior Lamps/Lenses ................................ 5-110
Fabric/Carpet ............................................ 5-107
Finish Care ............................................... 5-111
Instrument Panel, Vinyl, and Other Plastic
Surfaces ............................................... 5-109
Interior ..................................................... 5-106
Leather .................................................... 5-108
Tires ........................................................ 5-113
Underbody Maintenance ............................. 5-113
Washing Your Vehicle ................................. 5-110
Weatherstrips ............................................ 5-109
Windshield and Wiper Blades ...................... 5-111
Climate Control System ................................... 3-20
Outlet Adjustment ........................................ 3-22
Clock ............................................................ 3-47
Clutch, Hydraulic ............................................. 5-26
Collision Damage Repair .................................. 7-12
Compass ............................................... 2-40, 2-43
Content Theft-Deterrent .................................... 2-15
Control of a Vehicle .......................................... 4-3
Coolant
Engine Temperature Gage ............................ 3-33
Heater, Engine ............................................ 2-23
Cooling System .............................................. 5-32
Cruise Control ................................................ 3-10
Cruise Control Light ........................................ 3-37
Cupholder(s) .................................................. 2-50
Customer Assistance Information
Courtesy Transportation ................................ 7-10
Customer Assistance for Text
Telephone (TTY) Users ............................... 7-5
Customer Assistance Offices ........................... 7-5
Customer Satisfaction Procedure ..................... 7-2
GM Mobility Reimbursement Program ............... 7-6
Reporting Safety Defects to General Motors .... 7-16
Reporting Safety Defects to the
Canadian Government .............................. 7-16
Reporting Safety Defects to the
United States Government ......................... 7-15
Roadside Assistance Program ......................... 7-7
Service Publications Ordering Information ........ 7-16
3
Information Provided by:

D
Daytime Running Lamps .................................. 3-15
Defensive Driving ............................................. 4-2
Disc, MP3 ...................................................... 3-64
Doing Your Own Service Work ........................... 5-4
Dome Lamp ................................................... 3-17
Dome Lamp Override ...................................... 3-18
Door
Locks .......................................................... 2-7
Power Door Locks ......................................... 2-8
Programmable Automatic Door Locks ............... 2-8
Rear Door Security Locks ............................... 2-9
Rear Doors .................................................. 2-9
Driver Information Center (DIC) ......................... 3-38
DIC Operation and Displays .......................... 3-38
DIC Warnings and Messages ........................ 3-42
Driving
At Night ..................................................... 4-24
Before a Long Trip ...................................... 4-26
Defensive ..................................................... 4-2
Drunken ....................................................... 4-2
Highway Hypnosis ....................................... 4-26
Hill and Mountain Roads .............................. 4-27
In Rain and on Wet Roads ........................... 4-24
Off-Road .................................................... 4-11
Recovery Hooks .......................................... 4-33
Rocking Your Vehicle to Get it Out ................. 4-32
Winter ........................................................ 4-28
E
EDR ............................................................. 7-17
Electrical System
Add-On Equipment ..................................... 5-115
Engine Compartment Fuse Block ................. 5-116
Fuses and Circuit Breakers ......................... 5-116
Windshield Wiper Fuses ............................. 5-116
Engine
Air Cleaner/Filter ......................................... 5-20
Check and Service Engine Soon Light ............ 3-34
Coolant ...................................................... 5-27
Coolant Heater ............................................ 2-23
Coolant Temperature Gage ........................... 3-33
Drive Belt Routing ....................................... 6-15
Engine Compartment Overview ...................... 5-12
Exhaust ..................................................... 2-37
Fan Noise .................................................. 5-37
Oil ............................................................. 5-15
Oil Life System ........................................... 5-18
Overheating ................................................ 5-30
Running While Parked .................................. 2-38
Starting ...................................................... 2-21
Event Data Recorders ..................................... 7-18
Exit Lighting ................................................... 3-18
Extender, Safety Belt ....................................... 1-32
Exterior Cargo Lamps ...................................... 3-17
Exterior Lamps ............................................... 3-14
4
Information Provided by:

F
Filter
Engine Air Cleaner ...................................... 5-20
Finish Damage ............................................. 5-113
Fixed Mast Antenna ........................................ 3-71
Flashers, Hazard Warning .................................. 3-6
Flash-to-Pass ................................................... 3-9
Flat Tire ........................................................ 5-83
Flat Tire, Changing ......................................... 5-84
Flat Tire, Storing ........................................... 5-100
Fluid ..................................................... 5-21, 5-24
Power Steering ........................................... 5-37
Windshield Washer ...................................... 5-38
Fog Lamp
Fog ........................................................... 3-16
Four-Wheel Drive .................................... 2-28, 5-49
Front Axle ...................................................... 5-50
Front Turn Signal, Parking and Daytime
Running Lamps ........................................... 5-53
Fuel ............................................................... 5-5
Additives ...................................................... 5-6
California Fuel .............................................. 5-6
Filling a Portable Fuel Container .................... 5-10
Filling the Tank ............................................. 5-8
Fuel (cont.)
Fuels in Foreign Countries .............................. 5-7
Gage ......................................................... 3-37
Gasoline Octane ........................................... 5-5
Gasoline Speciﬁcations .................................. 5-6
Fuses
Engine Compartment Fuse Block ................. 5-116
Fuses and Circuit Breakers ......................... 5-116
Windshield Wiper ....................................... 5-116
G
Gage
Engine Coolant Temperature ......................... 3-33
Fuel .......................................................... 3-37
Speedometer .............................................. 3-25
Tachometer ................................................. 3-25
Gasoline
Octane ........................................................ 5-5
Speciﬁcations ............................................... 5-6
Glove Box ..................................................... 2-50
GM Mobility Reimbursement Program .................. 7-6
5
Information Provided by:

H
Hazard Warning Flashers ................................... 3-6
Head Restraints ............................................... 1-7
Headlamp
Aiming ....................................................... 5-51
Headlamps .................................................... 5-52
Bulb Replacement ....................................... 5-51
Daytime Running Lamps ............................... 3-15
Exterior Lamps ............................................ 3-14
Flash-to-Pass ............................................... 3-9
Halogen Bulbs ............................................ 5-51
High/Low Beam Changer ................................ 3-8
On Reminder .............................................. 3-15
Heated Seats ................................................... 1-4
Heater ........................................................... 3-20
Highbeam On Light ......................................... 3-37
High-Speed Operation, Tires ............................. 5-68
Highway Hypnosis ........................................... 4-26
Hill and Mountain Roads .................................. 4-27
Hood
Checking Things Under ................................ 5-10
Release ..................................................... 5-11
Horn ............................................................... 3-6
How to Wear Safety Belts Properly ................... 1-17
Hydraulic Clutch ............................................. 5-26
I
Ignition Positions ............................................. 2-19
Infants and Young Children, Restraints ............... 1-36
Inﬂation - Tire Pressure ................................... 5-66
Instrument Panel
Overview ..................................................... 3-4
Instrument Panel (I/P)
Brightness .................................................. 3-17
Cluster ....................................................... 3-24
Interior Lamps ................................................ 3-17
J
Jump Starting ................................................. 5-44
K
Keyless Entry System ....................................... 2-4
Keys ............................................................... 2-3
6
Information Provided by:

L
Labeling, Tire Sidewall ..................................... 5-60
Lamps
Dome ........................................................ 3-17
Dome Lamp Override ................................... 3-18
Exterior Cargo ............................................. 3-17
Lap Belt ........................................................ 1-31
Lap-Shoulder Belt ........................................... 1-25
LATCH System
Child Restraints ........................................... 1-43
Latches, Seatback ............................................ 1-8
License Plate Lamps ....................................... 5-56
Light
Airbag Readiness ........................................ 3-27
Antilock Brake System Warning ..................... 3-32
Brake System Warning ................................. 3-31
Charging System ......................................... 3-30
Cruise Control ............................................. 3-37
Highbeam On ............................................. 3-37
Malfunction Indicator .................................... 3-34
Oil Pressure ............................................... 3-36
Passenger Airbag Status Indicator .................. 3-28
Safety Belt Reminders .................................. 3-26
Security ..................................................... 3-37
Light (cont.)
TCS Warning Light ...................................... 3-32
Tire Pressure .............................................. 3-33
Traction Control System (TCS) Warning .......... 3-32
Up-Shift ..................................................... 3-30
Lighting
Exit ........................................................... 3-18
Lights
Exterior Lamps ............................................ 3-14
Flash-to-Pass ............................................... 3-9
High/Low Beam Changer ................................ 3-8
Interior Lamps ............................................. 3-17
On Reminder .............................................. 3-15
Limited-Slip Rear Axle ....................................... 4-6
Loading Your Vehicle ....................................... 4-34
Lockout Protection ............................................ 2-9
Locks
Door ........................................................... 2-7
Lockout Protection ......................................... 2-9
Power Door .................................................. 2-8
Programmable Automatic Door Locks ............... 2-8
Rear Door Security Locks ............................... 2-9
Loss of Control ............................................... 4-10
Lumbar
Manual Controls ............................................ 1-3
Power Controls ............................................. 1-4
7
Information Provided by:

M
Maintenance Schedule
Additional Required Services ........................... 6-6
At Each Fuel Fill ........................................... 6-9
At Least Once a Month .................................. 6-9
At Least Once a Year .................................. 6-10
Introduction .................................................. 6-2
Maintenance Footnotes .................................. 6-7
Maintenance Record .................................... 6-16
Maintenance Replacement Parts .................... 6-14
Maintenance Requirements ............................. 6-2
Owner Checks and Services ........................... 6-8
Recommended Fluids and Lubricants ............. 6-12
Scheduled Maintenance ................................. 6-4
Using .......................................................... 6-2
Your Vehicle and the Environment ................... 6-2
Malfunction Indicator Light ................................ 3-34
Manual Lumbar Controls .................................... 1-3
Manual Seats ................................................... 1-2
Manual Transmission
Fluid .......................................................... 5-24
Operation ................................................... 2-26
Manual, Using .................................................... iii
Manual Windows ............................................ 2-12
Message
DIC Warnings and Messages ........................ 3-42
Mirrors
Automatic Dimming Rearview ........................ 2-40
Automatic Dimming Rearview with Compass
and Temperature Display ........................... 2-43
Automatic Dimming Rearview with OnStar®,
Compass and Temperature Display ............. 2-40
Manual Rearview Mirror ................................ 2-39
Manual Rearview Mirror with OnStar® ............. 2-39
Outside Convex Mirror ................................. 2-46
Outside Manual Mirrors ................................ 2-45
Outside Power Mirrors .................................. 2-46
MP3 ............................................................. 3-64
MyGMLink.com ................................................ 7-4
N
Navigation System, Privacy .............................. 7-19
New Vehicle Break-In ...................................... 2-19
8
Information Provided by:

O
Odometer ...................................................... 3-25
Odometer, Trip ............................................... 3-25
Off-Road Driving ............................................. 4-11
Off-Road Recovery ........................................... 4-9
Oil
Engine ....................................................... 5-15
Pressure Light ............................................. 3-36
Oil, Engine Oil Life System .............................. 5-18
Older Children, Restraints ................................ 1-33
Online Owner Center ........................................ 7-4
OnStar, Privacy .............................................. 7-19
OnStar® System, see OnStar® Manual ............... 2-47
Other Warning Devices ...................................... 3-6
Outlet Adjustment ............................................ 3-22
Outlets
Accessory Power ......................................... 3-19
Outside
Convex Mirror ............................................. 2-46
Manual Mirrors ............................................ 2-45
Power Mirrors ............................................. 2-46
Owner Checks and Services .............................. 6-8
Owners, Canadian ............................................... ii
P
Paint, Damage .............................................. 5-113
Park Brake .................................................... 2-32
Park (P)
Shifting Into ................................................ 2-34
Shifting Out of ............................................ 2-36
Parking
Over Things That Burn ................................. 2-37
Parking Your Vehicle ....................................... 2-36
Passenger Airbag Status Indicator ..................... 3-28
Passenger Sensing System .............................. 1-69
Passing ........................................................... 4-9
PASS-Key® III+ .............................................. 2-17
PASS-Key® III+ Operation ................................ 2-17
Passlock® ...................................................... 2-16
Perchlorate Materials Requirements, California ...... 5-4
Pickup Conversion to Chassis Cab .................... 4-40
Power
Door Locks .................................................. 2-8
Lumbar Controls ........................................... 1-4
Retained Accessory (RAP) ............................ 2-21
Seat ............................................................ 1-3
Steering Fluid ............................................. 5-37
Windows .................................................... 2-13
9
Information Provided by:

Privacy .......................................................... 7-17
Event Data Recorders .................................. 7-18
Navigation System ....................................... 7-19
OnStar ....................................................... 7-19
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation ....................... 7-19
Programmable Automatic Door Locks .................. 2-8
R
Radiator Pressure Cap .................................... 5-30
Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation (RFID), Privacy .... 7-19
Radios .......................................................... 3-46
Radio(s) ........................................................ 3-48
Radios
Reception ................................................... 3-70
Setting the Time .......................................... 3-47
Theft-Deterrent ............................................ 3-70
Rear Axle ...................................................... 5-48
Limited-Slip .................................................. 4-6
Rear Door Security Locks .................................. 2-9
Rear Doors ...................................................... 2-9
Rear Seat Operation ................................. 1-9, 1-10
Rear Storage Area .......................................... 2-51
Rearview Mirror, Automatic Dimming .................. 2-40
Rearview Mirror, Automatic Dimming with
Compass and Temperature Display ................ 2-43
Rearview Mirror, Automatic Dimming with
OnStar®, Compass and Temperature Display ... 2-40
Rearview Mirror with OnStar® ........................... 2-39
Rearview Mirrors ............................................. 2-39
Reclining Seatbacks .......................................... 1-5
Recommended Fluids and Lubricants ................. 6-12
Recovery Hooks ............................................. 4-33
Recreational Vehicle Towing ............................. 4-41
Remote Keyless Entry (RKE) System .................. 2-4
Remote Keyless Entry (RKE) System,
Operation ..................................................... 2-5
Removing the Flat Tire and Installing the
Spare Tire .................................................. 5-89
Removing the Spare Tire and Tools ................... 5-85
Replacement Bulbs ......................................... 5-56
Replacement Parts, Maintenance ...................... 6-14
Reporting Safety Defects
Canadian Government .................................. 7-16
General Motors ........................................... 7-16
United States Government ............................ 7-15
Restraint System Check
Checking the Restraint Systems .................... 1-76
Replacing Restraint System Parts
After a Crash .......................................... 1-77
Retained Accessory Power (RAP) ...................... 2-21
Roadside
Assistance Program ....................................... 7-7
Rocking Your Vehicle to Get it Out .................... 4-32
Routing, Engine Drive Belt ............................... 6-15
Running the Engine While Parked ..................... 2-38
10
Information Provided by:

S
Safety Belt
Reminder Light ............................................ 3-26
Safety Belts
Care of .................................................... 5-109
How to Wear Safety Belts Properly ................ 1-17
Lap Belt ..................................................... 1-31
Lap-Shoulder Belt ........................................ 1-25
Safety Belt Extender .................................... 1-32
Safety Belt Use During Pregnancy ................. 1-31
Safety Belts Are for Everyone ....................... 1-12
Safety Warnings and Symbols .............................. iii
Scheduled Maintenance ..................................... 6-4
Seatback Latches ............................................. 1-8
Seats
Head Restraints ............................................ 1-7
Heated Seats ............................................... 1-4
Manual Lumbar ............................................. 1-3
Power Lumbar .............................................. 1-4
Power Seats ................................................. 1-3
Rear Seat Operation .............................. 1-9, 1-10
Reclining Seatbacks ...................................... 1-5
Seatback Latches .......................................... 1-8
Secondary Latch System ................................. 5-96
Securing a Child Restraint
Center Front Seat Position ............................ 1-56
Rear Seat Position ...................................... 1-54
Right Front Seat Position .............................. 1-56
Security Light ................................................. 3-37
Service ........................................................... 5-3
Accessories and Modiﬁcations ......................... 5-3
Adding Equipment to the Outside of Your
Vehicle ..................................................... 5-5
California Pershlorate Materials
Requirements ............................................ 5-4
California Proposition 65 Warning .................... 5-4
Doing Your Own Work ................................... 5-4
Engine Soon Light ....................................... 3-34
Publications Ordering Information ................... 7-16
Service, Scheduling Appointments ....................... 7-9
Servicing Your Airbag-Equipped Vehicle .............. 1-74
Sheet Metal Damage ..................................... 5-113
Shifting Into Park (P) ....................................... 2-34
Shifting Out of Park (P) ................................... 2-36
Signals, Turn and Lane-Change .......................... 3-8
Sliding Rear Windows ..................................... 2-14
Spare Tire .................................................... 5-104
Installing .................................................... 5-89
Removing ................................................... 5-85
Storing ..................................................... 5-100
Speciﬁcations, Capacities ............................... 5-120
Speedometer .................................................. 3-25
Starting the Engine ......................................... 2-21
Steering .......................................................... 4-7
Steering Wheel, Tilt Wheel ................................. 3-7
11
Information Provided by:

Storage Areas
Center Console Storage Area ........................ 2-50
Cupholder(s) ............................................... 2-50
Glove Box .................................................. 2-50
Rear Storage Area ....................................... 2-51
Stuck in Sand, Mud, Ice, or Snow ..................... 4-32
Sun Visors ..................................................... 2-15
Sunroof ......................................................... 2-52
T
Tachometer .................................................... 3-25
Tailgate ......................................................... 2-10
Taillamps
Turn Signal, Stoplamps and Back-up Lamps .... 5-54
TCS Warning Light .......................................... 3-32
Theft-Deterrent, Radio ..................................... 3-70
Theft-Deterrent Systems ................................... 2-15
Content Theft-Deterrent ................................ 2-15
PASS-Key® III+ ........................................... 2-17
PASS-Key® III+ Operation ............................. 2-17
Passlock® ................................................... 2-16
Tilt Wheel ........................................................ 3-7
Time, Setting .................................................. 3-47
Tire
Pressure Light ............................................. 3-33
Tires ............................................................. 5-59
Aluminum or Chrome-Plated Wheels,
Cleaning ............................................... 5-112
Buying New Tires ........................................ 5-76
Chains ....................................................... 5-82
Changing a Flat Tire .................................... 5-84
Cleaning ................................................... 5-113
Different Size .............................................. 5-78
High-Speed Operation .................................. 5-68
If a Tire Goes Flat ....................................... 5-83
Inﬂation - Tire Pressure ................................ 5-66
Inspection and Rotation ................................ 5-74
Installing the Spare Tire ................................ 5-89
Pressure Monitor Operation ........................... 5-70
Pressure Monitor System .............................. 5-69
Removing the Flat Tire ................................. 5-89
Removing the Spare Tire and Tools ............... 5-85
Secondary Latch System .............................. 5-96
Spare Tire ................................................ 5-104
Storing a Flat or Spare Tire and Tools .......... 5-100
Tire Sidewall Labeling .................................. 5-60
Tire Terminology and Deﬁnitions .................... 5-63
Uniform Tire Quality Grading ......................... 5-79
Wheel Alignment and Tire Balance ................. 5-80
Wheel Replacement ..................................... 5-80
When It Is Time for New Tires ...................... 5-76
12
Information Provided by:

Towing
Recreational Vehicle ..................................... 4-41
Towing a Trailer .......................................... 4-47
Your Vehicle ............................................... 4-41
Traction
Control System (TCS) .................................... 4-5
Control System Warning Light ....................... 3-32
Limited-Slip Rear Axle .................................... 4-6
Trailer
Recommendations ....................................... 4-60
Transmission
Fluid, Automatic ........................................... 5-21
Fluid, Manual .............................................. 5-24
Up-Shift Light .............................................. 3-30
Transmission Operation, Automatic .................... 2-24
Transmission Operation, Manual ........................ 2-26
Trip Odometer ................................................ 3-25
Truck-Camper Loading Information .................... 4-40
Turn and Lane-Change Signals .......................... 3-8
Turn Signal/Multifunction Lever ........................... 3-7
U
Uniform Tire Quality Grading ............................ 5-79
Up-Shift Light ................................................. 3-30
Using this Manual ............................................... iii
V
Vehicle
Control ........................................................ 4-3
Damage Warnings ........................................... iv
Loading ...................................................... 4-34
Parking Your ............................................... 2-36
Symbols ......................................................... iv
Vehicle Data Recording and Privacy .................. 7-17
Vehicle Identiﬁcation
Number (VIN) ............................................ 5-115
Service Parts Identiﬁcation Label .................. 5-115
Ventilation Adjustment ...................................... 3-22
Visors ........................................................... 2-15
13
Information Provided by:

W
Warning Lights, Gages and Indicators ................ 3-23
Warnings
DIC Warnings and Messages ........................ 3-42
Hazard Warning Flashers ............................... 3-6
Other Warning Devices .................................. 3-6
Safety and Symbols ......................................... iii
Vehicle Damage .............................................. iv
Wheels
Alignment and Tire Balance .......................... 5-80
Different Size .............................................. 5-78
Replacement ............................................... 5-80
Where to Put the Restraint ............................... 1-42
Windows ....................................................... 2-12
Manual ...................................................... 2-12
Power ........................................................ 2-13
Sliding Rear ................................................ 2-14
Windshield
Washer ...................................................... 3-10
Washer Fluid .............................................. 5-38
Wiper Blade Replacement ............................. 5-57
Wiper Blades, Cleaning .............................. 5-111
Wiper Fuses ............................................. 5-116
Wipers ......................................................... 3-9
Winter Driving ................................................ 4-28
X
XM Radio Messages ....................................... 3-69
XM™Satellite Radio Antenna System ................ 3-71
Y
Your Vehicle and the Environment ....................... 6-2
14
Information Provided by:

