Chapter 10 
The Notion of a Manifold 
54. The general notion of a manifold. It is rather difficult to define precisely 
the general notion of a manifold. A surface gives some idea of a two-dimensional 
manifold. If we take a sphere or a torus, we can divide each of these surfaces 
into a finite number of regions such that there exists a one-to-one continuous 
representation of each of these regions on a simply connected region of the 
Euclidean plane. 
More precisely, given an arbitrary point Po on the manifold, it is possible 
to find in a neighborhood of the point Po, a coordinate system u, v such that if 
uo,^o are the coordinates of the point Po, then there exists a positive number 
r having the following property. Every system of numbers u, v satisfying the 
inequality 
(u - u0)2 + {v - v})2 < r2 
(10.1) 
is a pair of coordinates of one and only one point of the manifold in a neighbor-
hood of the point P 0. Conversely: in a sufficiently small neighborhood of the 
point Po, every point P has coordinates u, v satisfying inequality in (10.1). 
The sphere and torus are two-dimensional manifolds without boundaries. A 
circular cylinder and a hyperbolic paraboloid are two-dimensional open mani-
folds (with boundaries at infinity). A sheet of a circular cone, the vertex ex-
cluded, forms a manifold which has one part of its boundary at infinity and 
another part at a finite distance (the vertex). 
The volume contained inside a sphere constitutes an open three-dimensional 
manifold whose boundary is the surface of the sphere. When this volume in-
cludes the surfaces, it constitutes a three-dimensional manifold with a boundary, 
but the boundary forms part of the manifold. This is the reason that this type 
of manifold is called a closed manifold. 
In the preceding examples, each manifold is defined as a set points situated 
in a pre-existent space. However, a manifold can be defined in abstracto. In 
the general case, an n-dimensional manifold is characterized by the existence of 
an analytic representation of a neighborhood of each point PQ by means of a 
83 
 Riemannian Geometry in an Orthogonal Frame Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 159.2.243.253 on 11/13/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

84 
B. T H E THEORY OF RIEMANNIAN MANIFOLDS 
system of n coordinates ul that may take arbitrary values in a neighborhood of 
the system of values (wl)o representing the point PQ. 
55. Analytic representation. There are infinitely many ways to choose 
coordinates that can analytically represent a region of a manifold. On passing 
from one of these coordinate systems to another, it is assumed that the new 
coordinates are continuous functions (functions of class C°) of the original co-
ordinates, and vice versa. Topology studies those properties of manifolds that 
are invariant under such transformations of coordinates. 
In differential geometry new conditions are added: the new coordinates con-
sidered as functions of the original ones are not only continuous, but also admit 
continuous partial derivatives up to a certain order q (they are functions of 
class Cq). 
The range of properties that are invariant under such coordinate 
transformations is significantly more extensive than in topology. 
Let us define, for example, a line giving coordinates of its points as functions 
of a parameter t. To say that these functions are differentiable with respect to 
the parameter t is to state a property of the line which is preserved under an 
arbitrary admissible coordinate transformation. We thus arrive to the notion 
of a line element. Analytically, a line element is defined by the n coordinates 
ul,... 
,un and the mutual ratios of the differentials dul,... 
, dun. 
Geometri-
cally, a line element is defined by the collection of lines tangent to each other at 
a given point. 
We arrive at the notion of a plane element by considering the set of line 
elements emanating from the same point and satisfying the same system of 
n — 2 equations which are linear with respect to the differentials du1,... 
, dun. 
Evidently, it is a property of this set of line elements that is preserved under 
any admissible coordinate transformation. The planar elements of dimension 3, 
4, and higher are defined in a similar way. 
If four line elements tangent to the same planar element emanate from a 
given point, then the cross-ratio (the anharmonic ratio) of these line elements 
is a number which is preserved under an arbitrary coordinate change. These 
considerations can be generalized in different ways. 
Summarizing, we can say that the study of the properties of this nature is 
the geometry of the manifold from the point of view of the group of continuous 
and differentiable point transformations, whereas topology is the geometry of 
the manifold from the point of view of the group of simply continuous point 
transformations. 
If we assume that new coordinates admit continuous partial derivatives of the 
two first orders with respect to original coordinates (they are functions of class 
C2), and conversely, then the range of geometric notions extends significantly. 
Then we can study lines tangent to one another with second-order tangency, 
etc. 
56. Riemannian manifolds. Regular metric. A Riemannian 
manifold 
(or a Riemannian space) is a manifold to which a metric is attached. This 
means that in each region of the manifold, analytically represented by means of 
 Riemannian Geometry in an Orthogonal Frame Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 159.2.243.253 on 11/13/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

10 
The Notion of a Manifold 
85 
a coordinate system u%, a quadratic differential form is given, 
ds2 = gijdu%du3. 
We shall assume that the coefficients g^ are functions of class C2. Con-
sequently, we shall only consider those coordinate transformations for which 
the new coordinates admit continuous partial derivatives of the two first orders 
with respect to the original coordinates (they are functions of class C2), and 
conversely. 
We shall say that the metric is regular in a given region of the manifold if at 
any point of this region, the quadratic form ds2 is positive definite with respect 
to the differentials du%. 
Naturally, we shall assume that if the manifold consists of several regions 
admitting distinct analytic representations, then a concordance of metrics in the 
neighboring regions is possible. For example, it could be assumed that the ana-
lytic representation of each region could be extended by a small amount into the 
neighboring regions, and that two forms ds2, thus obtained in the overlapping 
regions, could be transferred to one another by the coordinate transformation 
which takes one analytic representation to another. 
 Riemannian Geometry in an Orthogonal Frame Downloaded from www.worldscientific.com
by 159.2.243.253 on 11/13/23. Re-use and distribution is strictly not permitted, except for Open Access articles.

