See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/340000135
The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture
Preprint · March 2020
DOI: 10.30958/aja.X-Y-Z
CITATIONS
0
READS
1,814
1 author:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
Archi-learn Online View project
Serdar Erişen
Middle East Technical University
24 PUBLICATIONS   2 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Serdar Erişen on 18 March 2020.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.

Athens Journal of Architecture 2020, Volume(Issue): Pages 
https://doi.org/10.30958/aja.X-Y-Z    
 
1 
The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of 
Architecture 
 
By Serdar Erişen*  
 
At the verge of the crisis of production and knowledge, the discourse of 
university has shown how a modernist theoretical insight upon the nature of 
subjectivity could have been integrated with a social concern. It is this concern 
that also signifies the evolution of modern analysis throughout the inquiry of the 
socio-cultural and political collectivity. The discourse of university in the 
reinterpretation of the modernist production and knowledge, in that sense, not 
only gives way to understand the societal volatility because of the problems of 
disintegration but also reveals what is the real behind those problems. Although 
their coexisting circumstances do not directly correspond to May 1968 events, 
the engaged conjecture of the Free University of Berlin and Eishin Campus in 
Japan are two very distinct campus projects that can be analyzed with such an 
inquiry throughout the discourse of university. They are not only significant to 
take a traditional or cultural mode of making into account of practicing, as 
either modernist or vernacular, but also consequential for integrating the social 
concern of a collective demand that having a very active role in the design 
progress of those projects. It is such that, the projects give great clues about the 
re-interpretation of modern mode of making and generation of knowledge under 
the light of the transformation of subjectivity, as the discourse of university. 
Accordingly, the novel interpretation of the spatial production that coexists with 
the changing social and environmental conditions is necessary for the 
assessment of the information age. 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The information age emerges with the advancement in communication 
technologies and media, and with the revolutionary means of making all effecting 
the dynamic relations of individuals and the society in the production of meanings. 
By superseding the place of knowledge, information, thus, represents the 
transformation of the modernist internal, structural, and systematic organizations 
of society and the state, including institutional changes. This requires an 
ideological, hence, a critical gaze towards the hegemony of the networked relations 
of knowledge, production, and consumption. The question of power besides the 
challenge of hegemony, accordingly, is still relevant whether it is engaged with the 
condition of architecture throughout the considerable shift in the theoretical and 
epistemological set of values. So, the crisis of modernism, here, is a considerable 
lesson, as an aftermath, that can be reinforced better as a legitimate culture of 
production and knowledge with „the discourse of university‟1. It is because that the 
                                                                 
*Research Assistant, Middle East Technical University, Turkey. 
1. See J. Lacan, Écrits (New York; London: W.W. Norton & Company, 2006). 

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
2 
experience of modernity is still legitimate with some of its merits that further make 
the theoretical and practical actions even possible in the information age according 
to some of scientific or social principles. In this respect, the discourse of university 
carries consequential meanings in the re-interpretation of that modernity that may 
give the vestiges of scientific inquiry upon knowledge, which had missed the 
insights upon the nature of subjectivity in the volatility of those collective beings. 
The agents of society in “the discourse of university” are historically destined 
to provide an alternative mode against the hegemonic faculties of the dominant 
order. The discourse of university, respectively, corresponds to an endeavor for the 
varied domains of theoretical excursions throughout the alteration of the scientific 
inquiry with the discourse of society. That also betokens for an epoch focusing on 
the autonomy of space, taking into account for the user demands in architectural 
praxis that have been reflected both on the design methods, and their implications. 
Looking from the lenses of the information age, then, it would be meaningful to 
come up with such spatial practices of knowledge production due to the cultural 
domain of modernity yet integrated with a social concern over the particular 
demands of the agents. 
Modernity can be seen as the initial epoch of mass production that has been 
successfully distributed through the different geographies of practices. Engaged 
with the practical solutions of Taylorism, mass-production can be regarded as the 
practical result of scientific inquiries over the rules of nature that have been 
investigated through the age of industrialization. That gives concrete results upon 
the solutions of material practices including the field of architecture. The 
pragmatic approach of the mass-production in coming years, however, had some 
shortcomings of the rigidities of production and the problems in the roles and 
classification of labor heading towards the crisis of 1968 events. 
Nevertheless, the revolution in industrial production has had great advantages 
of developing practical means and solutions grounding for the early modern 
architecture of the 20th century. Until the crisis of the economic and political 
conflicts raising the Second World War, the experience of the development of 
modernity in architecture had great progress. Le Corbusier denotes this progress as 
the practical revolution of modernity. This transformation is shared on the 
pragmatic rules of nature; and is conceptualized throughout the solutions of mass-
production with an unseen universal scale of civilizational growth ever before: 
 
In every domain of industry, new problems have been posed and new 
equipment created to solve them. We underestimate the extent of the break 
between our era and earlier periods; it is agreed that this era has brought 
great transformations, but what would be useful would be to compare its 
intellectual, social, economic, and industrial activity not only with the period 
prior to the start of the nineteenth century, but with the history of civilization 
in general. We would soon see that human tools, the automatic inducers of 
social needs, hitherto subject only to slowly evolving changes, have just been 
transformed with a fabulous speed.2 
                                                                 
2. Le Corbusier, Toward an Architecture (Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2007), 293. 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
3 
Based on the industrial revolution and the survey upon the natural sciences, a 
certain search for a „modernist morality‟ was among the concerns of modernism.3 
Nevertheless, this was what made the modernist approach distant again from being 
successful especially after the World War II, due to its dependency to the rational 
mode of making that is engaged with the means for ends of the industrial 
revolution. Since the early modernist experience was almost the frontrunner of that 
rationality, the unsatisfied development of construction and architectural 
technology after the post-war period have revealed the increasing gap of the new 
scientific inquiry and the new technology, without giving shape to them. 
When considering all of the CIAM gatherings, in another case, it is possible to 
trace out some critical points besides the merits and ideological points that are 
drawn at the meetings. Even according to Giedion, it is almost apparent to offer a 
general critique of modernism in the book Space, Time and Architecture, as 
becoming a tradition of making and thinking.4 By understanding the rigidities in 
the modernist production and organizations, the resultant contradiction among 
particularities and universality becomes crucial to learn further from the rise of 
nationalism and the rise of the owner demands especially after the World War II, 
heading towards 1968 events. 
These rigidities of the universal modernism had been reflected in the 
production relations and the organization of labor and their social and living 
conditions. The contradictions have moved to the intellectual and institutional 
circles; and even led to the upheavals in universities. In May 1, 1968, the well-
known labor demonstrations have signified a new epoch that has transformed not 
only the socio-economic and political reactions accordingly but also initiated many 
novel theoretical interpretations of scientific and social research as well as the 
inquiry on the production of space. 
The experience of modernity, nevertheless, is still legitimate with some of the 
merits that make further theoretical and practical accounts possible even in the 
information age according to some scientific or social principles. With its 
premises, The Athens Charter, for instance, could still claim its power of 
collectivity upon practicing. That reminds the necessity of the collective being of 
executive groups while they have been substituted with the networked consultancy 
companies and the large business agreement contracts in the information age. 
Therefore, what could be alternatively suggested in our own age is still a 
remarkable question.  
The role of the institution as a modern idiom, such as „university‟, respectively, 
still carries a consequential place in the major domain of the „generation of 
knowledge‟ as well as in the embodiment of architectural knowledge which is re-
substantialized for the spatialization of the scientific knowledge itself. 
Accordingly, the spatial practices of educational institutions in modern times are 
engaged to seek for an alternative mode of architecture as a cultural endeavor.  
Starting from the late 1960s, the claim of the autonomous practice of 
architecture within the relations of socio-economic reproduction that are reflected 
                                                                 
3. See also S. Giedion, Space, Time and Architecture (Cambridge, Massachusetts; London: 
Harvard University Press, 2008). 
4. Ibid. 

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
4 
on spatial practices, accordingly, will be examined here through “the discourse of 
university” in the definition of the roles of subjects, the role of educational 
institutions and the production of knowledge. Two different campus projects: as 
one is, in Germany, the Free University of Berlin, and the other is Eishin Campus 
in Japan represent the culture of an architectural mode of making within an epoch 
of sensibility upon the subjective expectations and social meanings to find out the 
solution against the erasure of socio-cultural togetherness. 
 
 
Towards the Theoretical and Practical Shift of Modernism:  
1968 Events and ‘The Discourse of University’ 
 
It is not strange to see the beginning of the contemporary architecture starting 
from 19685. Because of the shift in political theory, practice and the history of 
philosophy, the knowledge of making has also been transformed according to the 
novel theoretical inquiries.6 The consequential changes have also reflected on the 
replacement of the collective groups of modern times with the networked 
organizations of the oligarchic corporations under the relations of intra-national 
flow of information sharing mechanisms.  
In this period, capitalism has achieved a new triumph against/over its 
precedent weaknesses with a deceptive run away from the material world, to 
ground the reality of itself. This retraction can be seen as a strategic withdrawal to 
control the whole substantialization process by the manipulation of evidential 
facts.7 Thus, capitalism has reinvigorated its own top-down approach by the 
logical (computational) belief over certain materiality of the globally networked 
organizations. This can be seen as a recursion to all intermingled relations 
indicating a wicked problem that is hard to define and solve at first glance. The 
condition can be pictured as such: even though, the fact as an input for information 
can be sensed, it is intentionally manipulated and mutated into the desired form by 
these networks.  
Information, thus, is the germane evidence for decision even though it is 
altered for the own sake of the power of/over technology as a peremptory force 
over the tiny data that is processed through the production and formation of 
objects, nature, goods, and utilities; changing directly the formation and the 
substantialization of the existent context.8 It is here to argue that the necessity of a 
collectivity upon the truth of institutional knowledge, then, is compulsory over that 
instrumental information. So, it is still in a sense modern in interpreting the 
scientific knowledge upon the imagination and creativity that makes the 
universities also consequential. The social aspects of universities, respectively, are 
                                                                 
5. M. K. Hays, “Introduction,” Architecture Theory since 1968 (ed.) K. Michael Hays 
(Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1998).  
6. Ibid. 
7. This means that there is a polymorphous production process in the information age. 
8. See also the book of P. Deamer, The Architect as Worker Immaterial Labor, the Creative 
Class, and the Politics of Design (ed.) Peggy Deamer (London; New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 
2015). 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
5 
expected to have such clarifications in a collective coherence in the information 
age.  
That is to discuss here that besides the merits of the universal ideals and the 
representable power of architectural condition, the university, in its modern 
meaning, has still more potentials with respect to the architectural language that is 
attributed to it despite of its own debatable conflicts. This is an academic aspect in 
addition to being an aspect to be challenged with its own declarations on the 
humanitarian approach. The challenge is still also 1968 events; and their 
theoretical and socio-political backgrounds, which are closely connected with the 
condition of modernity, modern architecture, its production, and the production in 
general. After discussing the conceptual merits of the approach, it is here to remind 
the opening gap between the architecture and flexible production techniques since 
then the World War II, which have giving shape to society and culture. As a 
speculative criticism, architecture, accordingly, may be questionable in its own 
evolutionary progress for being either eligible to accommodate for the new 
expectancies, or inevitably dependent to the completely different and discrete 
additional interpretations of the novelties of production techniques. Therefore, the 
place of the discourse of university in this discussion is obvious with its re-
interpretation of the modernist mode of insights upon the change of socio-
economic and production relations focusing on the nature of subjectivity and its 
environment.9 It is such that the discourse of university connects the modern 
                                                                 
9. After the 1968 events, many theoretical changes have been revolutionized as implied that 
are directly related to the everyday life practices and the actions in societies. As a new interpretation 
of Freudian psychoanalysis, in this new epoch of reinterpretation of social exchange and knowledge, 
the French psychoanalyst and the follower of Freud, Jacques Lacan transformed his way of inquiry, 
in this period, under the project of „psychoanalysis upside down‟. See also Lacan (2006), which 
constitutes the seminal discourse of university among the four discourses. The modern inquiry of 
Freudian psychoanalysis, in that sense, could be re-evaluated under the lights of four historical 
discourses as similar to the four archetypes of Jung; and the discourses of Hegel that could gain the 
meaning of symbolic transmittance among the agencies of the society. It can be claimed further that 
after 1968 events, Lacan has also changed his focus on language and feminine sexuality in 
consequence with the rise of subjectivity.  
Lacanian psychoanalysis had not been focusing on a Marxian interpretation of master-slave 
dialectic until the 1968 events; and Lacan himself did not even welcome the initial incidences in 
early 1968. (The inscriptions for this fact can be found in the eclipsed details of the fifteenth seminar 
book of Jacques Lacan in Psychoanalytic Act, The seminar of Jacques Lacan, v.15, accessed from 
http://www.lacaninireland.com/web/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/ Book-15-The-Psychoanalytical-
Act.pdf.). If we return then the seminal description of the discourse of university, it may be enough 
to see the changing role of each agent in the production of knowledge that has been reversed from 
the discourse of Mastery in the affectation of modalities of the agencies (Figure 1). The place of the 
seminars as universities had such a great importance further subsuming for the theoretical meanings. 
Lacan seminally describes the merits of university and knowledge in „Impromptu 1 at Vincennes‟ 
that cannot be found in the books of seminars yet described as an impression by Lacan‟s own words 
in „The Other Side of Psychoanalysis‟. In the version of Cormac Gallager‟s translation Gallagher 
himself gives a note on the background story of the emergence of four discourses as a result of the 
reactions of the audience in the notes for the „Overview of the seminar of 1969-70‟. Cormac 
Gallagher writes: 
This seminar took place against a background of the on-going street violence and disruption of 
public services, which followed the “events‟ in Paris of May 1968. For Lacan personally it was a 
difficult period in that he had been expelled from the prestigious Ecole Normale Superieure 

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
6 
scientific knowledge with the scrutiny of collectivity and production to understand 
better the current age‟s circumstances in the generation of knowledge and its 
actions of spatiotemporal practicing.10 
In Lacanian terms, the role of the institution such as „university‟ is also the 
major domain in the processes of „generation of knowledge.‟11 The role of the 
university,‟12 accordingly, provides to examine and judge the codes of the 
generation of the said socio-cultural and political epoch. By processing information 
in the social organizations, the discourse of university, then, can represent the 
existence of collectivity for cultural values. It also points out the bondage for the 
particularities of things and concepts used to be organized within the desired 
architecture including its subject-architect and its praxis in recent multi-disciplinary 
approaches. 
According to the discourse of university (Figure 1), in short, the collective of 
signifiers have turned into the master agent: the society of university, in a way that 
produces messages or discourse in the production of knowledge. In this respect, 
the university can be seen as a domain that is producing subjects of knowledge 
from a mere subject with a log of rudimentary truth. The subject, here, is dominated 
by a collective knowledge such as modern science; and his/her truth has been 
transformed with the produced signs and codes. 
 
 
Figure 1. The Four Discourses of Jacques Lacan  
Source: Author‟s composition from Lacan (2006). 
                                                                                                                                                                         
and had been confronted with the refusal of some of the most talented members of his School 
to go along with his Proposition on the formation and recognition of psychoanalysts. 
His response was the production of the four discourses, which cast a cold eye on the 
underpinnings of a society, which has abandoned its foundations. The University, with the revolt of 
the students, offers the clearest example of what has gone wrong. But matters cannot be righted by 
the Hysterical dramatics of the protesters which will only lead to a reinforcing of the discourse of 
the Master. Hence, an attempt to re-articulate the position of the Analyst in terms of a discourse may 
contribute to the amelioration of the situation by tackling it from the reverse side.  
(See also Lacan, “Psychoanalysis upside down. The Reverse Side of Psychoanalysis. Book 
17,” 2001). 
10. See also G. A. Sargın and A. Savaş, “„A University is a Society‟: An Environmental 
History of the METU „Campus‟,” The Journal of Architecture 21, no. 4 (2016): 602-629. 
11. Lacan, The Other Side of Psychoanalysis. The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, v.17 (trans.) 
Russell Grigg (New York: Norton, 2006). 
12. University can be placed as the agent designating the collective battery of signifiers in the 
production of objective knowledge, in Four Discourses of Jacques Lacan. Op.cit, Lacan, 2006. 
University is also a socio-political term here representing the collective of intellectual university 
society during and after the 1968 events with respect to Lacanian Seminars. 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
7 
 
It has such a consequential place, then, to evaluate the production of 
university environments not only with the mere schemata of the discourse of 
university taking into consideration of society and the learning subject but also the 
background story of psychoanalysis itself getting been transformed in that progress 
of volatilization and revolution as well. In this respect, some of the neo-modernist 
approaches as in the case of the Free University of Berlin during the epoch of 1968 
events can be seen as one of the frontrunners of the mediation between the 
knowledge of architectural making and the new way of envisioning the social, 
cultural, and historical contexts. This idea can also be disclosed by the words of 
Hays, yet with a strong predilection of making an autonomous architectural 
practice as: 
 
Certain criteria guided the choice of material in this anthology and, equally, 
characterize what I take to be the distinguishing features of architecture 
theory since 1968. First and foremost, architecture theory is a practice of 
mediation. In its strongest form mediation is the production of relationships 
between formal analyses of a work of architecture and its social ground or 
context (however nonsynchronous these sometimes may be), but in such a way 
as to show the work of architecture as having some autonomous force with 
which it could also be seen as negating, distorting, repressing, compensating 
for, and even producing, as well as reproducing, that context.13 
 
This also reminds for the endeavor of Christopher Alexander in Eishin 
Campus project,14 on another side, especially focusing on the autonomy of 
architectural practice with an aim of the environmentally sustainable tectonics of 
space in the practice and generation of architectural knowledge, but still 
encountered with the problems of mass production. 
 
 
The Free University of Berlin 
 
The Free University of Berlin has revealed a peculiar interpretation of 
modernity in the post-war period. After the attentive CIAM experience that had 
been active in urban design especially before the war, it is such an important and 
exemplary project of contemporary campus design in the last half of the century. 
With the claim of being humanized campus environment formed by its users with 
an alternative educational approach after the post-war period, the Free University 
of Berlin shows a fine outcome of the new interpretation of scale in the modernist 
mode of producing environments in between singular architectural works, and the 
planning of urban plots and blocks. With respect to this, the project gets a role of 
infrastructural development between the plot and the society that it would 
                                                                 
13. Hays, “Introduction,” 1998, 1. 
14. C. Alexander, H. Neis and M. Moore Alexander, The Battle for the Life and Beauty of the 
Earth: A Struggle between Two-World Systems (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012). 

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
8 
communicate. It is the idea of „Stem,‟15 in that sense, not only taking into account 
for the user and social community but also generates a flexible use of the modest 
modernist interpretation of the tectonic aspects. The flexibility can be defined in 
such a tangible condition that the structural elements has been decided as 
demountable so that any change in the needs of space, tectonic aspects and 
structure could be responded with that decision.   
 
We are concerned, not with ‘architecture’ or ‘town planning’, but with the 
creation of environment at every scale… The problems which we face in 
making our world are entirely new, for our society is entirely new… The 
concept of society towards which we strive: that of a completely open, non-
hierarchical co-operative in which we all share on a basis of total 
participation and complete confidence… The realization, for instance, that the 
scene of action of reality is not a three-dimensional Euclidean space but 
rather a four-dimensional world in which space and time are linked together 
in-dissolutive sets our civilization apart from any others.16 
 
Shadrach Woods, one of the designers of the project, declared that the reality 
of changing perception of the world had been thrown into the relativity of things 
and subjects in time. Accordingly, the project realized shifting spatial production 
of changing scale and approach towards the practices of the built environment. So, 
the Free University of Berlin Campus carries the claim of being an alternative 
approach of modern designing – to show its capacity to accommodate the flexible 
kind of approach towards the produced space – interpreted later by its users. So, 
rather than directly dictating its functional propositions onto the user, it is designed 
hypothetically and intentionally as a building complex integrating the similar 
architectural qualities of modernity altered at the turn of the new mode of 
planning. What can be regarded as a potential in this designing approach of larger 
scale building complex within the smaller scale urban land is the elegance of this 
modernity having been carried through the spatial practice after the world war 
period. 
Though similar to the idea of autonomy of the spatial production in the 
creation of environments as changing habitats, the design is rather humbler and 
introverted in its character of the architectural formation. So, it carries the idea of 
the refined instrumentality of architectural spaces opening-up new possibilities to 
its users rather than being a monumental structure or a mythical self-standing 
form. Nevertheless, just with this aim, it carries a monumental approach of being 
socially, and even politically conscious.17 With this reclusive approach in 
                                                                 
15. Architectural Association, Free University, Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm 
(London: Architectural Association, 1999). 
16. A. Tzonis and L. Lefaivre, “Beyond Monuments, Beyond Zip-a-tone, Into Space/Time: 
Contextualizing Shadrach Woods‟s Berlin Free University, A Humanist Approach,” in Free 
University, Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm (London: Architectural Association, 1999), 
118-141. 
17. See also G. Wagner, “Looking Back Towards the Free University, Berlin,” in Free 
University, Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm (ed.) Architectural Association, 14-23 
(London: Architectural Association, 1999), 118-141. 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
9 
language, however, it can still be disputed that the design could further provide 
much more potentials of spatial experiences and a new phase for a cultural and 
aesthetic emancipation just to left behind the modern mass production that had 
already been experienced. 
Apparently, it becomes also questionable that could a university space as well 
as its organizational system and the provisional production (of intellectual, 
physical, spatial) offer spatially novel environments; and even suggest some 
actions to the society. At that point, the standardized approach of the traditional 
„precedents‟ of modernism becomes an inquiry to clarify whether the production 
of space could be transformed into the discoveries of new state spaces 
accommodating for the possibilities of other mode of substantialization in between 
thought and practice, between form and matter. As a precedent part of an idea of 
revolution that is discovered essentially in 1968 events, the mode of designing in 
the campus environment would show us the signals of being „revolutionary‟ for 
future projections.  
But looking from the larger scale architectural production that is integrated 
with an infrastructural development, as the designers called as “Stem”, the 
building can also be seen within the rise of the sign value and the symbolic 
representation of the cultural change just stabilizing a modernity preserved against 
the euphoria of the postmodernist sign. In that sense, the predilection towards the 
modern mode of making can be seen as correlated rather with a cultural endeavor 
upon the user inquiry. In other words, the seminal attempt at the Free University 
integrates the modern culture of making with the nature of subjectivity of users as 
the battery of suggestions on the usage of space, which can be reconstructed 
through the analysis of the discourse of university.  
To understand better the necessity of collective of modernist knowledge as a 
rehearsal, on one side, the return to the early history of changing modernity under 
the influence of futurism and the humanitarian approach in design may better 
dwell on the new scale of designing an urban environment after the inherited 
culture of the Athens Charter. Taking consideration into the Frankfurt Römerberg 
scheme, Woods, Josic and Candilis (Figure 2), have shifted the urban design 
paradigm into the possibilities of a development within a suburban environment. 
As a response to the lost conviction upon the collectivity with the absence of the 
urban context, the repeated patterns of that neo-futuristic scheme of the group 
members of Team X have been generated through by their compact design campus 
proposal, the design of the Free University of Berlin in 1973.18 
 
                                                                 
18. K. Frampton, Modern Architecture: A Critical History (New York: Thames and Hudson, 
1992). 

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
10 
 
Figure 2. Urban Design Proposal of Frankfurt Römerberg Scheme by Woods, 
Josic and Candilis, 1963 
Source: Free University, Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm (1999): 112. 
 
The humbler modernist style in the Free University, hence, shows itself in the 
design as being organized only in two-story mass as well as in planar schemata 
implying for the organization of a matrix formation. The major impact of the 
design in that new epoch is the integration of a modest modernist style with the 
reformed principles of decision-making taking into account for the social and 
utility aspects as a whole. Being a project that is developed in a progress of 
competition of different phases, the authentic proposition focuses on a physical 
interchange of different faculties under the same proposal of interconnection of 
„Stem(s),‟19 on the other side.  
After winning the competition, and when the first phase was completed, the 
designers declared the direction of the spatial organization. Accordingly, it had 
still some considerations upon distinguishing main activity zones and academic 
areas for resting that are all connected, nevertheless with long internal „streets‟ that 
are organized around the courtyards (Figure 3). That gives the ultimate recipe for 
the „Stem‟, the connected grid that is matrix formed, which can also be described 
as a web-like scheme. It was such a proposal that the whole shape of design had 
been designed to communicate with the environment throughout the openings and 
voids of non-built areas.  So, the spaces at the ground zero-level are organized 
through the vestiges of the internal streets that are organized according to the 
proposed „Stem‟ connecting different academic areas. 
 
                                                                 
19. Candilis, Josic, Woods and Schiedhelm, “Architects' Statement. Competition Project 
1963-64,” in Free University, Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm (London: Architectural 
Association, 1999), 25. 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
11 
Figure 3. The Free University of Berlin, Plan of Upper Level, 1963-64      
Source: Free University, Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm (1999): 28-29. 
 
As the most outrageous aspect of the design, a group of students surveyed on 
the historical experience of social share of space throughout the excursion of the 
idea of „street‟ in the old city beyond the modernist vulgarity.20 The street was so 
important here to construct a critical point of view against „the erosion of social 
life‟ in response to the industrialization of modernity. So, the idea of integrating 
street as a part of contextual exploration into the project can be seen as the 
pioneering force for the new interpretations of modernism, defining a scale of 
urban fabric per se for social interaction. It can be declared that with its voids, non-
built environments of courtyards and streets, the university design has defined a 
new social ground for its users especially for the students so that it can be 
distinguished from the tradition of modernism. Just as in the transformation of 
modern psychoanalysis in a master-slave dialectic of Marxian thought upon the 
production and enjoyment of surplus value, the historical analysis of the street by 
the students occupy the mastery of the discourse of university. It is such a mastery 
over the construction of spatiotemporal experiences, as a jouissance, and their 
production of subjects as the ultimate product of that knowledge generation 
peculiar to the Free University of Berlin (Figure 4).  
 
 
Figure 4. Re-iteration of the Roles of Agencies according to ‘The Discourse of 
University’ (Author’s own Analysis)     
                                                                 
20. G. Feld, “Shad's 'Idée Fixe': Berlin Free University and the Search for Principles of 
Organization.” in Free University, Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm (ed.) Architectural 
Association, 104-117 (London: Architectural Association, 1999).  

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
12 
The „Stem‟ had also the mission of developing an infrastructural solution that 
has been integrating the city and society with the complex itself. However, that 
was much more challenging than the expected since the environmental and 
economic conditions should also be on the way that had been expected for. The 
designers such as Schiedhelm also criticized the fact that the project had been 
designed with restricted sources of funds and property rights.21  
The same problem of external forces showed themselves similarly in another 
project with the form of the rigid conduction of construction that made Alexander 
ponder upon the principles of autonomous production as well. Although the 
project of Eishin Campus, in that respect, was interpreted in a very different 
language, the concerns upon the assimilation and the integration of socio-cultural 
transformation have been persisting as the common merits of design that can be 
evaluated under the light of the discourse of university. 
 
 
Eishin Campus in Japan 
 
The intention behind the design progress might sometimes be far consequential 
and germane to scrutinize than its formalization practices. Eishin Campus designed 
by Christopher Alexander and built in Japan, carries such a meaning as not only 
being a part of interactive design decision mechanism together with its ultimate 
users but also with the concern of environmental awareness that is integrated with 
the vanishing cultural values of making in everyday life.  
In the 1980s, the Japan economy has been transformed with a competitive 
industrial network that is integrated to the international market, with a JIT (just-in-
time) approach,22 after the crisis of Taylorism. This, however, resulted in the 
displacement of the capital in many new geographies including Japan as well with 
the extent of the vestiges of the popular culture. As a particular frontrunner that is 
resistant against the populism, conversely, Alexander‟s experimental approach 
pursued a new challenge. This design challenge, hence, was to testify an 
environmental approach but also to tout for a subversion grouching against the 
mass-production and its mundane procedures in construction (Figure 5). 
 
                                                                 
21. M. Schiedhelm, “The Berlin Free University Experience,” in Free University, Berlin: 
Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm (ed.) Architectural Association, 96-99 (London: Architectural 
Association, 1999), 97. 
22. M. Castells, The Rise of the Network Society (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Blackwell 
Publishers, 1996). 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
13 
 
Figure 5. The Campus of Eishin Gakuen in Japan, by Christopher Alexander, 
Realized in 1981-1989 
Source: Alexander & Neis & Alexander (2012). 
 
Looking from that perspective, the human environment, which would be a 
part of emotional as well as a social life, required an alteration-in-change as a 
contradiction in the built practice. The users‟ predilections about the environmental 
experiences directed to the site were the common special values and forces that 
drive the design as similar to the Free University, interestingly, as a return back to 
the precedent tradition of making in everyday life. Accordingly, by organizing the 
college buildings around the green courtyard with the arcaded pattern of the 
entrances of buildings, the design of the Eishin High School (completed in 1985) 
was extended into a university campus (1981-1989), which is organized through 
the series of colleges that was added in 1987-1989 (Figure 6).  
So, the resistance against the losing pattern of memories that is fading away 
has provided a new understanding of tradition as a project identity23 that is 
described; associated with a collective enjoyment of social being. Having been 
able to simulate a romantic approach of the wishful past that is engaged with the 
shared cultural values, such kind of approach could gain resistance against the 
popular culture.  
The discussion, however, becomes even more conditioned that is based upon 
the bases of design-decision mechanisms beyond the choice between the old and 
new, creating a contradiction by itself. Alexander describes the major dispute over 
the two world systems comparing the start of the any mode of mass production of 
the dominant with the desired effect of the autonomous production. So, there are 
two systems that Alexander divides the world views into basically two; and 
features them as either being oppressive in his description of the “System B”; or as 
liberalizing the thought and practice in the “System A.”24 
 
                                                                 
23. Castells, The Power of Identity (Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell, 1997). 
24. Alexander, Neis and Moore Alexander, The Battle for the Life and Beauty of the Earth: A 
Struggle between Two-World Systems, 2012. 

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
14 
Figure 6. Site Plan of the New Eishin University in Japan, by Christopher 
Alexander, after 1989 
Source: Alexander, Neis and Moore Alexander (2012). 
 
Accordingly, the battle against the well-being of the cultural and natural 
environment is advocated on the side of “System A”, as has been opposed to the 
“System B” in the aspects of size, speed, profit, efficiency, and the numerical 
productivity. 
 
System-A is a system of production in which local adaptation is primary. Its 
processes are governed by methods that make each building, and each part of 
each building, unique and uniquely crafted to its context. 
System-B is, on the contrary, dedicated to an overwhelmingly machinelike 
philosophy. The components and products are without individual identity and 
most often alienating in their psychological effect.25 
 
It can still be claimed, however, that by the excursion upon the possible 
synthesis in between the “System A” and the “System B”, „the fourth revolution of 
production26 can be seen as grounded upon the evolutionary way in gradual 
change in kind of making and utilizing structures. What makes the project 
invaluable here, accordingly, is the series of some conceptual principles that are 
derived through the reconstruction of knowledge in the flow of information of the 
post-industrial mode of production. Just to know about the principles that are 
drawn in the experience of humanizing this campus experiment into the 
knowledge of designing, it can be reasonable to remember the notes of Alexander. 
                                                                 
25. Ibid. 
26. K. E. Drexler, Radical Abundance: How a Revolution in Nanotechnology will Change 
Civilization (New York: BBS Public Affairs, 2013). 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
15 
The nine corresponding operational elements that Alexander introduces, 
respectively, focus on the unity of the building with its essence adapted to the 
environmental condition.27 Significant to provide a collectivity in the evolutionary 
conditions as a generative progress, any natural being would be reconsidered in a 
mode of making mastered by craftsmanship according to him. This can even be 
efficient to envision in the dynamics of information age to construct a collective 
reality to deal with the changing facts. 
 
… In support of this new production system, there will need to be sweeping 
changes in human organization. These changes of organization will provide 
for involvement and coordination among the interested people and skilled 
workers, and thus give a level of deep involvement in decision-making by all 
concerned. Together, they will act on adaptation.28 
 
Living in the new technologies of intelligence and production enabling the 
possibilities of hyper-technological advances of coding immediately, these 
principles are concrete to re-evaluate them even in the condition of atomically 
precise manufacturing29 today, just to close the described gap between the “techne” 
and the theory of architecture then: 
 
… A major focus on the fragility of human beings and whatever enhances 
their well beings will be respected. This will always be considered as a source 
of feedback and evaluation. 
So, too, care must be given to all animals, insects, and plants, meadows, 
forests, ice-floes and other natural habitats. This intense care for all living 
beings and systems will be a priority. 
…A generative process (something like a pattern language) will always be 
seen as the key dynamic framework that gives generic instructions for all 
planning, design, and construction.30 
 
So, it is here to criticize the harsh incommensurability of the mechanistic 
geometry of the 20th century mass production that is engaged with the war 
industry, which disables the local adaptation of the built mass into the hosting 
environment.31 The Eishin Gakuen Campus can be regarded as a place-making 
activity against the rising power of the dominant mass production again, rather by 
taking into consideration of the discourse and reality of a certain collective 
approach. In that respect, it can be said that the identity of campus again adopts the 
qualities of a common traditional inner street from the everyday life of Japan. 
                                                                 
27. Alexander, Neis and Moore Alexander, The Battle for the Life and Beauty of the Earth: A 
Struggle between Two-World Systems, 2012.  
28.  Ibid. 
29. Drexler, Radical Abundance: How a Revolution in Nanotechnology will Change 
Civilization, 2013. 
30. Alexander, Neis and Moore Alexander, The Battle for the Life and Beauty of the Earth: A 
Struggle between Two-World Systems, 2012, 8-9. 
31. Alexander, Neis and Moore Alexander, The Battle for the Life and Beauty of the Earth: A 
Struggle between Two-World Systems, 2012. 

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
16 
Since it is a challenge to interpret the project in the context of Japan, it is 
extremely difficult to find any relation that hardly repeats itself in European 
modernity except the idea of „Stem‟ that is organized around the streets and 
courtyards, to be scrutinized under the discourse of university.  
 
 
Discussing Architecture of Modernity within and without:  
The Spaces of Condensed Transference 
 
The reality of „the science of modernity‟ in practice makes us to re-concern 
about the hybrid solutions in the Free University of Berlin. It just evokes some 
discussions upon the theoretical manifesto of the discourse of university in the late 
period of the 1960‟s with the precedent spatial experience of futurism. The theme 
of freedom is the key term, in that respect, to think about the institutionalization of 
modernity in university and its spatiotemporal practices. Then, it is possible to 
make a series of analytic assumptions in the appraisal of the university space as a 
spatiotemporal experience. 
Universities are conjunctive spaces of transition of accumulated knowledge 
that is transferred through the sublime substantialization of information meaning 
into the subject. They produce subjects that reproduce the connected flow of 
information into the knowledge that is charged with the collective responsibilities. 
Universities are the spaces for the transference between circulating knowledge 
through the target of science; the object of information (represented for the 
ultimate bastion of the people, with collective shares). Thus, the evidence is 
legitimized through the networked compounds of knowledge; through the faculties 
of perception, understanding, and judgment; and is transferred into the inherent 
information that is entangled with ideological competitions and the free will of the 
subject. The free will volatilizes the desire to attain the universal truth by 
questioning the world, the life, the reality, the existence. Universities are the sites 
placating the free will by the substantialization of thought through the encounter of 
flowing relations of life, matter, the motion of subjects and things. 
Therefore, universities are territorialized by the desire of the scientific search 
for knowledge – by questioning the truth; and they have constantly been de-
territorialized by the scientific information, subjects of knowledge, and flow of 
signs of communication. Since the ultimate agent – produced – is the subject itself, 
they construct the representational kernels of subjects in connection with the real; 
and present them to the realities under the idealized principles. So, the universities 
of today are the spatiotemporal practices of idealization – the free will – for truth 
by the transformation of science into knowledge or information; and are always 
challenged by the realities that having been shaped mostly by ideological 
interactions of society,32 culture, economy, and politics. 
Cultural (re)production of modernity is one of the major issues that having 
been shared the same common ideals of truth and production of knowledge. The 
                                                                 
32. See also Sargın and Savaş, “„A University is a Society‟: An Environmental History of the 
METU „Campus',” 2016. 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
17 
emergence of the modern „University‟ by Humboldt postulates and legitimizes33 
this claim. The desire of providing idealized spaces of knowledge, however, is 
constantly challenged by the ideologies of the sovereign production relations and 
the economic conditions. This tension can reveal itself in the embodiment of the 
real, in the background stories of the spatial practices of campus design and 
construction processes as well as in their history of architectural practice and 
theory with stylistic and cultural concerns. Therefore, it can be said that the idea 
modernity, hence, is established first according to the modern ideals, then, is 
challenged by the formalist-determinant innervations in a new mode of mass 
production. 
It is possible to describe, then, the spatial-temporality of university as the site 
of the condensed transferences. The condensed transference describes the 
transitions between the ideals of humanity and the motion of the reality of the age. 
When we observe the precedent examples of the Free University of Berlin, 
respectively, it inevitably compels us to discuss the issues of modern architecture 
with its existence, its principles, and relation with the historic urban environment. 
With its alterations, contradictions as well as the re-visited principles of the CIAM, 
Team X‟s members‟ experience in the Free University of Berlin, nevertheless, 
differed from its lacking urban context with its construction process. That may still 
explain, accordingly, the encountered obstacles during the integration of the 
infrastructural development of the university to the immediate environment.  
The hostility in the Free University of Berlin (as the similar concern can be 
seen in the creation of Eishin Campus) for the expectancy and the issue of utility 
by their users – academician and students are appraised, and taken into 
consideration as the primary factor. What is the most interesting issue to be 
discussed here is the additional library part in the Free University of Berlin 
(completed in 2005), for example, with a contemporary language that is settled 
within the courtyard of the modernist plan as a result of that flexible concern of 
usage.  
Akin to this, the contemporary experience of Norman Foster at the Free 
University of Berlin (Figure 7) corresponds to a conjunction of the epochs 
emerged with the integration of his additional library part placed in one of the 
main courtyards. Altered from the experience of Candilis, Josic, Woods, 
Schiedhelm to Prouvé‟s façade design of steel Corten inspired by Le Corbusier‟s 
„Modulor,‟34 and finally to Norman Foster‟s additional library part, the 
university‟s spatialization practices signify an evolution of making throughout the 
ages as a result of that described challenge. 
Consequently, the production of institutional knowledge 
and its 
transformation into the data features of information are issued as essential 
discussions here as whether they can be reconstructed into the spatiotemporal 
knowledge or not. More clearly, it is rather to read the parallel relation of the rise 
of the scientific knowledge of the institutional endeavor of universities. As the 
sites of knowledge production, the universities are seemingly transformed with the 
                                                                 
33. W. von Humboldt, The Limits of State Action (London: Cambridge University Press, 
1969). 
34. The data is accessed from https://www.fosterandpartners.com on 16 December 2017. 

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
18 
rise of technological production means and its information, which is superseding 
the knowledge production of the modern institutionalization. 
 
 
Figure 7. Additional Library of the Free University of Berlin, by Foster+Partners, 
Completed in 2005 
Source: Foster and Partners (2017). 
 
What turns us concerned about the modernist planning and making is also 
related with the reality of the contemporary condition and its competitive ground 
so that it makes sense only when to be understood in the urban dynamics of 
society, economy, and space. This is another clause to be engaged with such kind 
of an expected effect of knowledge and of production that only exists within the 
globally significant universities in the 21st century. Just to get a little help from the 
dynamics of the university rankings of the recent decades, it becomes significant 
to understand the spatiotemporal production of institutionalization in the dynamics 
of urbanization, in connectivity with the desired praxis. Which can be inferred 
from the analysis of Castells & Hall with the insights of the sites of technology 
production,35 the previously related knowledge-information conversion is still 
relevant in the dense environments of Boston, the New York City or in the state of 
California in the United States that are engaged also with the successes of the 
universities settled in.  
Integration of the campus environment with the city as a critical discussion is 
relevant to reconsider the contemporary condition under the new concerns of 
information flow and speed but also to understand the role of the architect in the 
changing master-slave relationship. Evaluated in the hegemony of the technology 
and economic development, the described areas generally with “in-house 
                                                                 
35. M. Castells and P. Hall, Technopoles of the World: The Making of Twenty-First-Century 
Industrial Complexes (New York; London: Routledge, 1994). 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
19 
universities” are also depended upon the external funding sources as Castells 
reveals clearly.36 
So, when evaluating the universities with their near environments, the current 
age requires to understand the ideological differences; and to reminisce about the 
densification strategies that can be distinguished between the different 
geographies. The driven suburbanization of the post-war period even in the case of 
the Free University for new architectural practices can be seen as an obstacle, in 
that sense, just preventing further successes of the described institutionalization of 
modernity via the proposal of the described infrastructural integration. Even 
though it can also be seen as a utopian desire to volatilize a new urban 
transformation around, the regional district that the Free University first located 
within can rather be evaluated as a reserved suburban part of Berlin. With the lack 
of density of housing, or any industrial - central business district areas, cultural, 
recreational, service and maintenance facilities, besides the restricted fund sources 
the near environment has had constrains for further development.  
“Stem”, as a pedestrian stand integrating the city with the campus, was 
imagined upon the interaction of the servant and the server, the city and the 
campus37 socio-economically and culturally.  Nevertheless, the faint architectural 
projections that could only be reflected in the complex building structure have not 
made further progress in the transformation of the environment, inhibiting further 
data facilitation to the campus. As a critical reconstruction of the experience in the 
campus design, the contemporary condition of the campus now can also be 
described as located at the green suburban housing district with some social and 
cultural facilities around. The campus can only be nourished by the adjacency of 
European Culture Museum and Ethnology Museum today; and the closest sign of 
the active production or service environment can be enlisted only as the latest 
additional parts of the university. The series of courtyard organizations in the 
campus to create a collective unity representing the formal organization beyond 
the segregation of classes has contradicted later with the further environmental 
development of the new 2-3 story-high houses. The new housing developments, 
hence, provide ample evidence to explain what could have been a factor of 
mitigating the further integration of the idea of campus with the urban fabric. By 
looking from the reality of the contemporary condition of „global‟ universities, it 
seems rather significant, then, to organize the environmental development of 
universities in relation to the possible revolutionary flux of the local dynamics 
with certain socio-economic and cultural projections. 
From an academic/professional perspective, it is clear that universities and the 
new technology campuses of the companies seem intricately contradistinctive and 
yet dependent to each other. With the rise of the information age, the increasing 
impact on the technology transfer, respectively, reveals the necessity to regard the 
special zones of such developments. Having the worldwide known universities 
around, Silicon Valley and Boston Route 128, for instance, are among those most 
remarkable sites of university-company relationships. These examples can be 
                                                                 
36. Ibid.  
37. Tzonis and Lefaivre, “Beyond Monuments, Beyond Zip-a-tone, Into Space/Time: 
Contextualizing Shadrach Woods‟s Berlin Free University, A Humanist Approach,” 1999. 

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
20 
increased with many other cases from Far East, or even from Turkey such as 
ODTÜ Teknokent, and CYBERPARK of Bilkent University nearby even though 
the growth scale and the level of technology transfer cannot be compared 
compatibly with the precedent cases. 
Relatively, the role of the architect, as the designer-subject, in this respect, in 
the design of environments should also be reexamined through the critiques and 
the potentials that are presented. Ideologically speaking, the further interpretation 
of the campus environments by their users seems revolutionary even against the 
discussion of class differences and the over-specialized labor specializations after 
1968. However, the coexisting potentials of planning and the progress of culture 
seem to have been missed such that the progress has shown the weaknesses and 
possible crisis even about the role of the architect that is apparently attenuated. In 
some way, the rise of the service sector and the upsurge in the built environment 
has recovered the role of the architect to some extent with the series of 
expectations upon the working plans in the information age. Nevertheless, the 
mere expectations on the immediate detailing as well as the roles of the subject 
within a socio-cultural endeavor turn the architect solely draw something and yet 
still be engaged with the advertisement culture of the spectacle. 
 
 
Conclusion: Towards the Inquiry of the Global Universities 
 
Universities across the world in the early twenty-first century find themselves 
in a paradoxical position... They receive more public money than they have 
ever done and yet they are more defensive about their public standing than 
they have ever been… While in some quarters universities are heralded as 
engines of technological advance and economic prosperity – and developing 
nations rush to establish more of them in pursuit of these goals – elsewhere 
they are attacked for being ‘self-indulgent’, ‘backward-looking’, and 
‘elitist.’38 
 
The paradox upon the objects of knowledge and their spatial production once 
again evoke the arguments of the global condition. It is the dominant position of 
research universities that are majorly settled in the United States with high funding 
budgets; and some of those in England are again fueled with sponsor-funded 
fellowships.39 What constitutes the reality of the educational realm is engaged with 
the technological and scientific production, on one side, and that is depended upon 
the capital funding of the externalities. As a result of the changing necessities of 
the imagery of the information age, the evolution of the MIT campus beginning 
from 1998 to the early 2000s with the new buildings, in that regard, has a story 
that best narrates the current tendencies as a model of growth. With this 
exceptional example of the transformation, the role of investment in this process 
                                                                 
38. S. Collini, What are Universities for? (London: Penguin Books, 2012). 
39. Ibid. 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
21 
also shows the dependencies of the desire of research universities aiming to 
develop. 
William Mitchell in his book, Imagining MIT (2007), starts to explain the 
evolutionary transformation of the MIT campus with the classical roots designed 
by Thomas Jefferson under the influence of Classicism, Victorianism, and 
Taylorism. The desire behind the idea of the first campus design was to integrate a 
classical style with bucolic green environment just as in the campus design of 
Victoria University again designed by Jefferson in 1820.40 Mitchell, then, presents 
the modern transformation of the campus by Saarinen and Aalto; and arrives to 
discuss the necessities of evolution of the spatial production that coexists with the 
creative knowledge production requiring new accommodation, working, studying, 
even leisure and sports facilities41. As Mitchell gives more details, each building 
that is constructed in the new stage was the end-product of the incentives of the 
foundations focusing on the search of high technology and its spatial 
developments to satisfy the programmatic needs.42 Accordingly, he puts forth that 
each building in the campus as stand-alone edifices was part of the general 
development strategy.  
Mitchell clearly presents the condition of the information age, accordingly, 
that pushed the commission of decision-makers at MIT to extend the campus with 
new architectural environments that are designed and decorated with the 
capabilities of new informational technologies. This proposes such a model that 
tries to strengthen the technology transfer between the companies and their built 
environments at the same time.43 This strategy, on the other hand, also works in 
the way to get the human resources (so the power/product of the university) back 
that is fading away from the campus environments as a result of the appealing 
economy of high-tech industry/market. The transformation of collective design of 
university with its users, thus, has shifted towards the larger scale inquiry with the 
inclusion of the external dynamics to the campus, and the growth of the campus 
towards those neighborhoods. Mitchell vindicates the idea behind the 
programmatic extension of the campus: 
 
This also represents a crucial shift in the economic role of research 
universities. In recent decades, they have increasingly served as core 
components of national innovation systems, centers of high-technology 
industry clusters, and producers of economic growth and nearby jobs- as in 
the Silicon Valley area surrounding Stanford, the Route 128 area on the 
outskirts of Boston, and the biotechnology cluster that has more recently 
developed in MIT’s immediate Cambridge neighborhood. The key mechanism 
in this is the transfer of technology from on-campus laboratories to nearby 
                                                                 
40. W. J. Mitchell, Imagining MIT: Designing a Campus for the Twenty-First Century 
(Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2007). 
41. Ibid. 
42. Ibid. 
43. The start-up companies that are specific at the sites of high technology such as Silicon 
Valley or Boston Route 128, for example, are among the necessary dynamics what are critically 
analyzed before for the growth and sustainability of research and investment. 

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
22 
off-campus startup companies that are largely run by entrepreneurial faculty 
members, part-time student employees, and recent graduates. Urbanistically, 
the complex of new MIT laboratories defines the center of a growing high-
technology neighborhood and reorients the campus to it.”44 
 
It shows the evolutionary transformation of the (post)modern way of 
collective design that leaps into the design highly boosted by external funding. 
Accordingly, it is a transformation from the production of knowledge of the 
modern architecture into the mastery of the capital on the institutional desire. 
However, it can also be seen as distinctively pioneer approach when regarding the 
collective side of designing at institutional, economic, and regional scale.  
Notwithstanding this, Mitchell also reminds the uncertainty and the difficulty 
of decision-making throughout those evolutionary processes among the 
confluential togetherness when especially considering the multiplicity of political 
and economic dynamics. On the other side of the educational realm, according to 
these, it can be said that the autonomy of the universities is under the threat of the 
control of state mechanisms or the paucity of the private donations. The examples 
of the classical type of universities, especially, are having the problems of the 
scarcity of the research environments as well as the human and funding resources.45  
Although these result-based expectations have influenced the autonomy of the 
universities negatively, the freedom in the progress, however, is an advantage of 
the research since the governments with ruling councils cannot completely control 
the processes in libraries or in laboratories. Either in the singular or mostly in 
campus projects, what is significant to learn, then, is the interconnectedness of the 
spatial continuity in between the common university areas, in between the 
different faculties as well as the connection to the immediate surroundings as an 
economic and social infrastructure.  
This emphasizes the evolution of the educational organization of the 
universities into a multi-disciplinary interaction of sciences creating new inter-
disciplinary research areas as well as social and economic interfaces. Accordingly, 
the novelty of the unconditioned behavior „in-between‟ makes the priority of the 
condition and already experienced rules of spatiotemporalities evolve. 
Respectively, the university space itself still provides the undiscovered relations 
and potentials of spatial action and the scientific development that is engaged with, 
as the performative task. The discovery of the dissolution of knowledge back again 
from the reconstruction of the essential features of things and structures, in that 
sense, enjoins us to explore the meanings and the knowledge back from the 
generation of the information, in this convolutional task. 
Then, it is to reveal the concomitant transformation of the necessities of 
spatial production, which coexists with the society, culture, and education through 
the technological evolution in the information age. The relation of academia with 
technology and the transfer of knowledge into public and private zones of practices, 
hence, have more profound traces that ought to be revised when especially 
regarding the role of the university and the modality of „collectivity‟ in the 
                                                                 
44. Mitchell, Imagining MIT: Designing a Campus for the Twenty-First Century, 2007, 99. 
45. Collini, What are Universities for? 2012. 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
23 
production of the knowledge and the subject of that knowledge as well as the 
urban/public environment.  
In the view of these arguments, it is the task of understanding the multiplicity 
of new design parties and the dynamics even though the transformed mode of 
collective design cannot be particularly drawn no more as clear as the ones like 
Lacan‟s four discourses. Nevertheless, these relationships can be mapped out as 
the intricate, even discrete, and yet correlational and networked environments of 
the agencies and their production of space. The new convolutional task of the 
analytical decision making for the production of space and its knowledge, 
respectively, cannot be achieved by solely mapping a singular schema or solely 
one discourse. Conversely, it can only be thrived by mapping the networks and the 
multiplicity of those interrelations through the exchangeable fertilizations with the 
matrix of the number of discourses and agencies, as also Flieger asserts.46 
Analogous to this, the role of the collective decision among the multiplicity of 
those many parties and reference systems and the ground truth for the design and 
development procedures in the direction of certain principles are again to be 
originated, once again, from „the discourse of university‟. Mitchell similarly 
finishes his words by concluding remarks on the role of the institution, university 
and the role of urban space in the complex decision making of those foundations 
while describing the problems of real-time planning and budget-management: 
 
Institutional structures that preserve a critical sense of campus history, urban 
context, and long-range goals can provide effective safeguards against these 
inherent dangers. These can ensure continuity of architecturally sophisticated 
thinking, expertise, and advocacy focused on overall campus design- 
providing, where necessary, the voice of cultural and urban conscience in the 
though debates that accompany a university’s decision making on major 
capital projects. It helps, as well, to establish budgetary processes that give 
sufficient weight to long-term value and sustainability and not just short-term 
targets and constrains.47 
 
The dynamics of information age, hence, still open to be examined with 
respect to the collective mode of decision making to be based upon some of the 
merits of modernity as the basis of architectural knowledge. The evaluation of 
such knowledge together with its social and cultural dynamics necessitates the 
collective coexistence of executive groups with a control over the informational 
transformation beyond the pragmatic expectancies of the networked consultancy 
companies and the large business agreement contracts. The role of the institution 
such as „university‟ in the information age, hence, can still be validated as 
remarkable concept that runs the spatial decision making mechanisms in those 
networked and complex relationships. 
 
                                                                 
46. J. A. Flieger, Is Oedipus Online? Siting Freud after Freud (Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT 
Press, 2005). 
47. Mitchell, Imagining MIT: Designing a Campus for the Twenty-First Century, 2007, 121. 

Vol. X, No. Y 
Erişen: The Architecture of Knowledge from the Knowledge of Architecture 
 
24 
Bibliography 
 
Alexander, C., H. Neis and M. Moore Alexander. The Battle for the Life and Beauty of the 
Earth: A Struggle between Two-World Systems. New York: Oxford University Press, 
2012. 
Architectural Association. Free University, Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm. 
London: Architectural Association, 1999. 
Candilis, Josic, Woods and Schiedhelm. “Architects' Statement. Competition Project 
1963-64.” In Free University, Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm. Edited by 
Architectural Association, 25. London: Architectural Association, 1999. 
Castells, M. The Rise of the Network Society. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Blackwell 
Publishers, 1996. 
____. The Power of Identity. Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell, 1997. 
Castells, M. and P. Hall. Technopoles of the World: the Making of Twenty-First-Century 
Industrial Complexes. New York; London: Routledge, 1994. 
Collini, S. What are Universities for? London: Penguin Books, 2012. 
Deamer, P. The Architect as Worker Immaterial Labor, the Creative Class, and the 
Politics of Design. London; New York: Bloomsbury Academic, 2015. 
Drexler, K. E. Radical Abundance: How a Revolution in Nanotechnology Will Change 
Civilization. New York: BBS Public Affairs, 2013. 
Feld, G. “Shad's 'Idée Fixe': Berlin Free University and the Search for Principles of 
Organization.” In Free University, Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm. 
Edited by Architectural Association, 104-117. London: Architectural Association, 
1999. 
Flieger, J. A. Is Oedipus Online? Siting Freud after Freud. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT 
Press, 2005. 
Foster and Partners. n.d. https://www.fosterandpartners.com. [Accessed 16 December 
2017]. 
Frampton, K. Modern Architecture: A Critical History. New York: Thames and Hudson, 
1992. 
Giedion, S. Space, Time and Architecture. Cambridge, Massachusetts; London: Harvard 
University Press, 2008. 
Hays, M. K. “Introduction.” In Architecture Theory since 1968. Edited by K. Michael 
Hays. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 1998. 
Lacan, J. n.d. The Seminar of Jacques Lacan Book XV, Psychoanalytic Act. Translated 
by Cormac Gallagher. http://www.lacaninireland.com/web/wp-content/uploads/ 
2010/06/Book-15-The-Psychoanalytical-Act.pdf. 
____. “Psychoanalysis upside down. The Reverse Side of Psychoanalysis. Book 17.” In 
Jacques Lacan in Ireland. Translated by Cormac Gallagher. Dublin, 2001. http:// 
www.lacaninireland.com/web/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/Book-17-Psychoana 
lysis-upside-down-the-reverse-side-of-psychoanalysis.pdf. [Accessed 20 May 2018]. 
____. Écrits [Writings.] New York; London: W.W. Norton & Company, 2006. 
____. The Other Side of Psychoanalysis. The Seminar of Jacques Lacan, v.17. Translated 
with notes by Russell Grigg. New York: Norton, 2006. 
Le Corbusier. Toward an Architecture. Los Angeles: Getty Publications, 2007. 
Mitchell, W. J. Imagining MIT: Designing a Campus for the Twenty-First Century. 
Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT Press, 2007. 
Sargın, G. A. and A. Savaş. “„A University is a Society‟: An Environmental History of the 
METU „Campus'.” The Journal of Architecture 21, no. 4 (2016): 602-629. 

Athens Journal of Architecture 
XY 
 
25 
Schiedhelm, M. “The Berlin Free University Experience.” In Free University, Berlin: 
Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm. Edited by Architectural Association, 96-99. 
London: Architectural Association, 1999. 
Tzonis, A. and L. Lefaivre. “Beyond Monuments, Beyond Zip-a-tone, Into Space/Time: 
Contextualizing Shadrach Woods‟s Berlin Free University, A Humanist Approach.” 
In Free University, Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm,. Edited by 
Architectural Association, 118-141. London: Architectural Association, 1999. 
Von Humboldt, W. The Limits of State Action. London: Cambridge University Press, 
1969. 
Wagner, G. “Looking Back Towards the Free University, Berlin.” In Free University, 
Berlin: Candilis, Josic, Woods, Schiedhelm. Edited by Architectural Association, 14-
23. London: Architectural Association, 1999. 
 
 
View publication stats

