Your Guide to Information and Events at A.C.E.
2019 ĩ Issue No. 1
Learn how online PACEs  
will change how students 
and supervisors score. 
Page 1
Learning Center Helps 
Pitfalls to Avoid: Part 1
Six common mistakes that 
supervisors make in the 
Learning Center. Page 3
Old Testament Survey
The complete 4th Edition 
course is now available!
Page 11
Word Building Online: 
Revolutionizing the Scoring Process
Finally, brethren, whatsoever things are true, 
whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things 
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever 
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good 
report; if there be any virtue, and if there be any 
praise, think on these things. (Philippians 4:8)

1
Dear Co-laborer in Christ,
Greetings! 
Please join me in praising our Heavenly Father for 
another year to serve Him. May each of us rejoice and 
give thanks for the blessings our God continues to bestow 
on us and on our ministries. As we labor together to reach 
the children for His glory, we are also expressing our 
gratitude that He chose to use us. O magnify the LORD 
with me, and let us exalt his name together. (Psalm 34:3)
Looking forward to finishing this school year and 
beginning another, I am filled with joyful expectations 
of what God has planned for Accelerated Christian 
Education. Please join us in prayer as we continue to 
seek to minister to the children with a Biblically based, 
character-building, individualized learning program 
“daily in the Temple.” And all thy children shall be taught 
of the LORD; and great shall be the peace of thy children. 
(Isaiah 54:13)
As you review the content of this Accelerator, you will 
find some new and exciting curriculum items for your 
students—Word Building Online and the new 4th 
Edition Biblical Studies. You will also find information 
about avoiding pitfalls in the Learning Center. 
God has been faithful, and by His grace A.C.E. continues 
to develop and expand its ministry to the individual 
child through the local Christian school—Reaching the 
World for Christ . . . One Child at a Time. May each of 
us be faithful to pray for the students, the families, the 
churches, and our world. In all thy ways acknowledge him, 
and he shall direct thy paths. (Proverbs 3:6)
Advancing the cause by lighting the world,
Esther Howard 
President
©2019 Accelerated Christian Education, Inc.
        Online: 
Revolutionizing the 
Scoring Process
Images by A.C.E.®, GettyImages
A.C.E.’s new online course, Word Building 
Online, has many exciting features that will enhance 
the Learning Center experience for students and 
supervisors. These include interactive exercises, 
vocalized character strips, instant notifications,  
digital Goal Cards, a Progress Chart, and varied test 
questions. Perhaps the most innovative feature of all 
is automated scoring.
While the Word Building CD-ROM program 
automated Self Tests and Tests, Word Building  
Online will offer scoring for nearly all activities. 
This will free up time for both the students and 
supervisors. Students will be further motivated and 
encouraged to study the materials as they answer 
activities.
Also, supervisors will have the answers at their 
fingertips when students need assistance. They can 
even track previous student attempts. They will be 
assured that a student is progressing through the 
Word Building Online course without needing to 
double-check the answers to activities. To encourage 
handwriting, writing, and critical thinking skills, 
some activities will still require supervisors to check 
answers.
By encouraging careful study of their work, 
students will gain mastery of the concepts and 
precepts found in Word Building. Please look for 
more updates on the development of Word Building 
Online in coming Accelerators.
From Our 
President . . .

2
d
l
For just $20 you not 
only sponsor a child, 
but the whole family 
is reached with the 
Gospel,  which changes 
their lives forever!
VISIT studentprograms.com/about-BLESS
The purpose behind BLESS these past 15 years 
is so much more than training children in third 
world countries how to read, write, and learn 
basic math skills. BLESS Center staff are trained 
to use these condensed A.C.E. materials to 
introduce the children and their families to 
Jesus Christ and His Word.
Basic Literacy Education Saving Souls®

3
He made a pit, and digged it, and is fallen into the ditch 
which he made. Psalm 7:15
The practice of making pitfalls has been an often-used 
method for trapping wild animals and has also been a 
strategy used against enemy soldiers in times of war. 
Sometimes a man, having made such a pit, covered it over 
so completely that he fell into his own trap. Sometimes a 
supervisor can inadvertently create pitfalls that are hidden 
and whose danger is not easily recognized. Here are six 
such pitfalls you will want to avoid. 
Pitfall #1—Overloading students with gap PACEs 
when diagnostic tests reveal that they are weak in several 
PACEs (in one subject) below their performance levels.
Proper procedure—If a student misses a concept found 
two levels or more below his performance level, prescribe a 
“gap” PACE from the highest level in which the concept is 
taught but that is still below his performance level. The goal 
is to strike a balance between ensuring the student learns 
any missed concepts and not unnecessarily overloading a 
student with gap PACEs. If the highest PACE in which the 
concept is taught is assigned and you see that the student 
is struggling, a lower-level PACE in which the concept is 
taught is prescribed. Gap PACEs, whether above or below 
1097, may be taken for elective credit (for high school 
transfer students only); but Honors, College Preparatory, 
or General students must still complete all required 
courses. Vocational Preparatory students receive full credit 
toward graduation for PACEs completed at performance 
level through 1096.
Pitfall #2—Allowing a student to take the PACE 
Test the same day the PACE is turned in. 
Proper procedure—The PACE Test is given to the 
student the next school day at the testing table with a word 
of encouragement and prayer with the staff. Waiting at least 
until the next day (try to avoid Monday morning testing) 
before allowing the student to take the PACE Test will put 
the information learned into his long-term memory. If the 
learning is only short-term, additional learning gaps may 
be formed.
Pitfall #3—Allowing students to pass PACE Tests 
with a score less than 80 percent. 
Proper procedure—If a student scores above 80 percent, 
he advances to the next PACE in his prescription. If not, 
review the Test by asking yourself these three questions. 
Was the student careless in matching or computations? 
Is his answer an acceptable synonym or alternative? Did 
he misspell an answer so badly the staff did not recognize 
the intended word? Did he work most of the math activity 
correctly but miss the answer because of one small mistake? 
If review indicates the student does not understand the 
material, he must fail the Test and be issued a repeat PACE. 
If a supervisor moves the line once, it becomes easier the 
second time, and still easier the third time. There is the 
danger of an 80 percent turning into a 79 percent then a 
78 percent, until mastery is no longer the standard. An 80 
percent indicates mastery; the remaining 20 percent will 
be caught in review and spiral of curriculum as concepts 
build.
Pitfall #4—Not requiring students to repeat failed 
PACEs in their entirety. 
Proper procedure—When a student scores below the 
minimum score of 80 percent on the PACE Test, he must 
repeat the entire PACE. Do not permit just a review of the 
PACE before retaking the PACE Test. Allowing shortcuts 
gives him permission to learn only enough to pass the Test. 
Remember, mastery of the material is the goal, not passing 
the PACE Test, Honor Roll, or a field trip. (All reasons for 
which one may be tempted to take a shortcut.) Failure to 
follow the Procedures Manual will create future learning 
difficulties and perhaps a learning gap. Repeating a PACE 
helps the student realize the importance of learning the 
material thoroughly. Keep the responsibility of learning 
on the student’s shoulders. When issuing the new PACE, 
increase the goals to allow a quick completion, and ask 
him to score carefully and to correct all errors before 
proceeding. If the student masters the material, he will be 
able to build on it easily in the future rather than trying 
to learn it for the first time along with learning the new 
concept being added.
Learning Center Helps
Pitfalls to Avoid: Part 1

4
Pitfall #5—Neglecting to have students follow 
the recommended procedure for correcting incorrect 
responses on Checkups and Self Tests.
Proper procedure—Students who miss questions on 
Checkups or Self Tests demonstrate a lack of mastery of 
the material. On Checkups the student should find the 
correct answer in that section of the PACE and replace the 
wrong answer with the correct one. Once the student has 
the correct answer to all missed questions, he raises his flag 
for permission to return to the scoring station to rescore 
his work. If the answer is correct, the student circles the 
red “X” placed beside the question when he first scored 
the material, then returns to his office. He thoroughly 
reviews all material in that section, especially questions 
missed, before moving to the next section. For Self Tests 
the student must find the correct answer from the PACE 
and rescore. He should thoroughly review the entire PACE, 
especially questions missed on Checkups and the Self Test, 
before requesting to take the PACE Test. Train students to 
be honest.
Pitfall #6—Giving students the answer instead of 
training them to find the answers themselves.
Proper procedure—The supervisor’s responsibility is not 
to answer the student’s questions for him but to ask leading 
questions to determine the nature of the problem, to focus 
the student’s attention on finding the solution, and to guide 
him to find the answer. For a student to become a good 
learner, supervisors must avoid the temptation to be the 
student’s only source of information. In the conventional 
classroom, the teacher has been “the sage on the stage.” The 
supervisor’s role is to be “the guide on the side.” The answer 
is not the most important thing—training the student to 
find the answer is. Make sure he reads and understands 
the directions (have him read and state the directions in 
his own words) and knows what reference sources are 
available. In math, have him show his work and check to 
see that the correct answer can be achieved with the work 
shown (he didn’t just copy the answer). If the student 
comes to depend on you for the answers, you fail to train 
him to be a learner. Two kinds of supervisors are prone to 
this pitfall.
First, there is the undiscerning supervisor who fails 
to recognize the specific needs and abilities of students 
and makes an inaccurate judgment of how to best help 
them. An undiscerning supervisor may see a student 
struggling with an activity and may intervene too early 
with suggestions like, “Here’s how you do that” or “You 
don’t have to do that activity (or that page); it’s too difficult” 
and strikes out the activity or section with his green pen. 
The student’s opportunity to learn problem-solving skills 
has been short-circuited because the supervisor failed to 
discern the student’s need to find the answer for himself. 
He inadvertently created gaps for the student. Supervisors 
must help students develop critical thinking and  problem-
solving skills—not solve the problems for them! 
Second, there is the distressed supervisor who lacks 
perseverance to do everything possible to help students 
succeed academically. He knows what needs to be done 
to help each student, but when he sees all the Christian 
flags to be answered, he reasons—I don’t have time now to 
answer all those flags. So he hurriedly answers the student 
with “Here’s the answer” or “Here’s the Score Key—find 
the answer.” The supervisor may be saving his time, but 
he is not helping the student discover answers for himself. 
He may give the answer to one activity only to realize the 
student raises his flag again for the next activity and wants 
the answer. This supervisor becomes an economic liability 
to the school and may lead to the need for additional staff. 
“Give a man a fish and he will eat for a day. Teach him 
how to fish and he will eat for a lifetime.” ĝ

5
Learn more at acestudentprograms.com/247-squad.
Behind the scenes at each International Student 
Convention, a group of young people works 
tirelessly to help events run smoothly. They assist 
ISC leadership in many capacities throughout the 
week. These recent graduates set up events, oversee 
booths; judge competitions; serve as mascots, 
ushers, and security; and run errands. Regardless of 
the task, the 24/7 Squad comes prepared to serve.
Squad members arrive at ISC prior to registration 
and remain until after the Awards Ceremony. With 
zeal they work long days—sometimes from 6 a.m. 
to midnight. One minute they might be unpacking 
supplies for an event and the next they could be 
called upon to help set up a computer.
In addition to helping make ISC successful, the 
volunteers also benefit from the experience. Being 
involved with something bigger than themselves is a 
life-changing experience. Along the way they often 
make new friends and learn leadership skills.
Many of the 24/7 Squad members have competed 
as students at ISC in the past and wanted to return the 
favor. Some have even returned several years in a row. 
Organizers also place an emphasis on spiritual 
growth. Through devotions and the rallies each 
night, the Squad members are presented with many 
Biblical truths.
With their help, 24/7 Squad members help make 
ISC a memorable event for all who attend.
REQUIREMENTS
1. Be at least 18 years of age and have previous 
involvement in International Student 
Convention (ISC).
2. Be ineligible to compete as students at ISC. 
3. Must not have responsibilities as sponsors or 
accompanists for any students attending ISC.
4. Be willing to volunteer their time 24/7 for the 
duration of the Convention in any area.
5. Be able to arrive at ISC prior to commencement 
of registration and remain until after the Awards 
Ceremony.
6. Be passionate about the purpose and ministry of 
ISC.
7. Cover their own transportation expenses.
8. Be prepared to use any musical or platform gifts 
they have at rallies. 
His Servants: On Call 24/7

6
May 25–30 at University of Central Missouri, Warrensburg, Missouri
Join Us at ISC 2019
United States Financial Information 
(except Alaska and Hawaii)
Full Package Retail Price: $450 per person
School Registration Fee (nonrefundable)  
$30 per person or $300 maximum
U.S. Participant Fee Schools and students on the 
A.C.E. program receive a 25% 
discount (2 options):
	1. On-campus dorm, meals, 
and registration  
(full package)  
$340 per person
	2. Contestant’s or sponsor’s  
registration fee  
(no dorm and no meals)  
$215 per person
Late registration fee  
(EACH person registering on Sunday, May 26)  
$50 per person
Off-campus guests (Please register at A.C.E. 
Information Center.) $5 per person
Preregistration
U.S. preregistration packets must be postmarked by 
April 12, 2019, or one week following the completion of 
your Regional Student Convention, whichever comes 
later. The registration deadline for those outside the 
United States is April 1, 2019.
ISC Online Registration
For your convenience, ISC registration will be held 
online at acestudentprograms.com/register. Payments 
may be made online via credit card or electronic check. 
Visit the website for instructions and technical support. 
Prepare now by making sure you have available at 
least one computer with Internet access. All ISC 
registrations must be processed online!
No Early Arrivals or Thursday Night Stay Overs
University of Central Missouri (UCM) cannot 
accommodate any early arrivals (May 24) or Thursday 
night stay overs (May 30). 
Transportation
Participants must make all arrangements for 
transportation to and from the University of Central 
Missouri. Be sure your ENTIRE transportation 
arrangements are confirmed before departing from 
home. Transportation outside the campus is the 
responsibility of the schools/families. Arrangements for 
shuttles must be made in advance.
Guests
Guests 13 years of age and older may register 
with a school and stay in the residence halls. Men 
will stay in the boys’ residence halls and ladies 
in the girls’ residence halls. Fees are the same as 
for contestants and sponsors. (Children under 13 
years of age may not stay in residence halls.) Guests 
residing off campus must register at the Information 
Center ($5 fee per person). Registered guests are 
welcome at events and rallies but are not allowed in 
residence halls and are required to abide by the dress 
code of the Convention. Children under the age of six 
are not allowed in competition rooms.
On-Campus Meals
Individuals staying off campus may eat meals in  
the UCM dining facilities for the following prices:
	
Breakfast	
$7.00
	
Lunch	
$7.00
	
Dinner	
$7.00
Judges Needed
International Student Convention is looking for 
qualified staff to assist in judging various areas of 
competition at this year’s Convention. If you have 
training, experience, or other qualifications in a 
particular field and would be willing to assist as a  
paid judge in this vital area of the Convention, please 
fill out the Judge’s Application located at  
acestudentprograms.com/guidelines. 
For more information, email the Student Convention 
Office at studentconventions@aceministries.com or 
call 615-612-5200.   ĝ

7
Features
 Set up billing discounts and apply 
to family accounts
 Issue Homework Assignment slips
 Create and manage an inventory 
and check-out system for 
resources
 Organize subjects in Academic 
Projection automatically
 Customize grading forms for 
standardized testing
 Create and manage staff roles
 Update software and catalog 
automatically (Internet 
connection required)
Version 1.9 Highlights
• Academic Records Reports
Find formatting and reporting improvements.
• Quick Score Entry
Enter multiple PACE scores at once into the    
   Students Section.
• Supervisor’s Progres Report
See Issued (I) and Ordered (O) dates for all    
   incomplete PACES.
• Printed Reports
Print records with improved formatting, and    
   access printable records for students no
   longer enrolled.
Download the new iPad® 
update from the App Store 
for improved connectivity.
aceconnect.com/school-management
Online ordering 
integrated 
directly with 
A.C.E.

8
Character Counts!
UNDERSTANDING is one of the 30 newly added character 
traits to the A.C.E. curriculum. These are character traits 
that need to be instilled into our lives as Believers. A.C.E. 
defines understanding as possessing God-given discretion 
to comprehend the spiritual truths of Scripture that lead 
me to obey its precepts. Note the little word—OBEY.  God 
wants us to obey His Word. To do so, we must understand 
the spiritual truths of Scripture He wants us to obey. 
He wants to give us sound discretion and wisdom to 
comprehend and understand these truths so that we can 
obey them.
The New Testament Scripture used for this trait is 
Colossians 1:9: For this cause we also, since the day we heard 
it, do not cease to pray for you, and to desire that ye might 
be filled with the knowledge of his will in all wisdom and 
spiritual understanding. The Old Testament Scripture is: 
Discretion shall preserve thee, understanding shall keep thee. 
(Proverbs 2:11)  
The Bible is filled with illustrations of this trait. God told 
Moses to build a Tabernacle in the wilderness where He 
would meet with His people. He gave specific instructions 
for every aspect, including all the furniture. God told 
Moses to appoint Bezaleel and Aholiab because they were 
master craftsmen full of wisdom and understanding. Then 
wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every wise hearted man, 
in whom the LORD put wisdom and understanding to 
know how to work all manner of work for the service of the 
sanctuary, according to all that the LORD had commanded. 
(Exodus 36:1) These men were chosen because God had 
given them wisdom and understanding, and they willingly 
obeyed God’s direction.
Solomon provided another illustration. In Gibeon, the 
LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream by night, and God 
said, Ask what I shall give thee. Solomon responded, Give 
therefore thy servant an understanding heart to judge thy 
people, that I may discern between good and bad: for who 
is able to judge this thy so great a people? And the speech 
pleased the Lord, that Solomon had asked this thing. And 
God said unto him, Because thou hast asked this thing, and 
hast not asked for thyself long life; neither hast asked riches 
for thyself, nor hast asked the life of thine enemies; but hast 
asked for thyself understanding to discern judgment; Behold, 
I have done according to thy words: lo, I have given thee a 
wise and an understanding heart; so that there was none like 
thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like unto 
thee. . . . And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding 
exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the sand that 
is on the sea shore. (I Kings 3:5, 9–12; 4:29) Solomon asked 
for understanding, God gave that to him, and he obeyed 
God.
Daniel illustrated understanding as well. He and his 
friends were of outstanding character; they were Children 
in whom was no blemish, but well favoured, and skilful in 
all wisdom, and cunning in knowledge, and understanding 
science, and such as had ability in them to stand in the king’s 
palace, and whom they might teach the learning and the 
tongue of the Chaldeans. (Daniel 1:4) God gave wisdom and 
understanding to Daniel that served him well as he obeyed 
God and stood up for what was right. He was promoted to 
a high position in the Babylonian government and served 
under several different kings for over 70 years.
May God give us sound discretion to comprehend the 
spiritual truths of Scripture that will lead us to always 
OBEY the directives of our Lord and do what He tells us 
to do!  ĝ
This fire reminds me of 
what I read this morning  
in Proverbs 6:27.
“Can a man take fire in his 
bosom, and his clothes not 
be burned?”
I think I understand. That means we  
should “lay aside . . . the sin which  
doth so easily beset us . . . .” 
Hebrews 12:1
Ace, would  
you read that  
for us?
Yes, Racer,  
that is correct. 
Sin is like fire.  
We cannot hold  
onto sin without 
suffering its effects.

9

10

11
Inside You’ll Find
 Revised content 
 Biblical facts & activities 
 24 new character traits 
 Scripture reading & memorization 
 Eye-catching illustrations 
 Detailed charts and maps 
 4th Edition color format
Abel
OLD TESTAMENT SURVEY
This 4th Edition course is not compatible with 
the previous Old Testament Survey Self-Pacs 
or Score Keys.
The first page of 
each Old Testament 
Survey PACE 
introduces the main 
characters, who 
help students realize 
these are not fables 
but real people 
whom God used as 
illustrations of His 
grace and love. 
ENTIRE 
COURSE NOW 
AVAILABLE!
PACEs 1109 –1120
4044109–4044120 (PACEs)
4044309–4044318 (Keys) 
David
Aaron
Moses
Jacob 
and 
Joseph
Noah
Daniel
Fourth Edition
dba SCHOOL OF TOMORROW® Biblical Studies
SCORE KEY
1112−1114
1112–1114
dba SCHOOL OF TOMORROW®
Fourth Edition
Date 
Issued
Test 
Score
Name
Fourth Edition
1112
Biblical Studies
1112
dba SCHOOL OF TOMORROW®
Fourth Edition
Date 
Issued
Test 
Score
Name
Fourth Edition
1113
1113
Biblical Studies
Fourth Edition
Date 
Issued
Test 
Score
Name
Fourth Edition
1114
1114
dba SCHOOL OF TOMORROW®
Biblical Studies

12
aceministries.com
Copy for distribution to parents. 
Permission is granted by A.C.E. to copy this page.
The Importance of Prayer
You have made the right choice to educate your 
child in a Christian school using the Bible-based 
Accelerated Christian Education program. However, 
I Peter 5:8 warns that our “adversary the devil, as a 
roaring lion, walketh about, seeking whom he may 
devour.” Satan is using everything in his power to 
keep young people from serving God; therefore, 
we cannot be passive in the battle. God promises 
that “the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but 
mighty through God to the pulling down of strong 
holds.” (II Corinthians 10:4) We must pray.
However, before we can pray effectually and 
fervently for our children, we must be sure our 
hearts are right before God. James 5:16 gives 
us a promise, “The effectual fervent prayer of a 
righteous man availeth much.” We can have power 
in prayer, but we must first place our own hearts 
before God for cleansing, making our lives right 
before God. Only then can we effectively pray for 
and with our children. 
So, for what do we pray? 
•	
Pray that your children’s friends and peers will 
have positive, spiritual values, since they will 
have an influence on your child. 
•	
Pray that your child will make good life 
choices and influence others in Godly ways. 
•	
Pray that your child will surrender all areas of 
his life to God and be sensitive to the leading 
of the Holy Spirit. 
•	
Pray for your child’s future—God is able to 
lead him to the university, special training, or 
preparation of His choosing.
•	
Pray for your child’s future mate.
We love our children, but God loves them more, 
and only He knows what is best for each one. 
So, how can we become actively involved in the 
lives of our children?
•	
Keep the lines of communication open with 
school staff. 
•	
Know your child’s friends and their parents. 
Truly listen so as to gain insight into your child’s 
thinking and the issues important to him. 
•	
Let him know you are always there to listen, 
understand, and guide. 
•	
Share Scriptural promises and relate how God 
has faithfully led and directed you.
•	
Encourage your child to give the reins of his 
life to the Lord, and God will direct his steps. 
Never underestimate the effectiveness of prayer 
because God’s almighty power is released when 
we call upon His name. “Behold, I am the LORD, the 
God of all flesh: is there any thing too hard for me?” 
(Jeremiah 32:27) ĝ

13
We thank God for the missionaries afar. 
Going to a foreign mission field challenges 
many missionary families. In addition to facing 
numerous obstacles, language barriers, and 
cultural differences, they often have the added 
responsibility of homeschooling their children.
Families like these serve as part of the reason 
Operation Lighthouse (OPL) exists. OPL is 
Accelerated Christian Education Ministries’ (ACEM) 
mission to the missionaries. Lighthouse Christian 
Academy enrolls eligible families who serve 
outside the United States under the guidance of 
U.S. mission boards. 
Missionary families are encouraged with 
assistance, which is a spiritual blessing for their 
children: 
The OPL scholarship has given us an affordable 
way to allow our children to remain with us on 
the field AND to get a quality education. Our kids 
are on their way to having a U.S. diploma, which 
they’ve earned from the comfort of home on the 
other side of the world.—OPL family
Through the blessing of Operation Lighthouse, 
our boys were able to continue using PACEs, and 
their education was a constant in the midst of 
change. The flexibility of the curriculum has also 
allowed our boys to participate more in the ministry 
God has called us to.—OPL family
ACEM continues to Light Our World and assist 
many ministries as they educate students with a 
quality Christian curriculum—One Child at a Time.  
SM 
World Watch: Operation Lighthouse
Serving Missionaries Overseas

P.O. Box 2707
Hendersonville, TN 37077-2707
aceministries.com
PRESORT STD
US Postage
PAID
PERMIT # 55
LEWISVILLE, TX
From Our President
p. 1
WB Online: Revolutionizing Scoring p. 1
BLESS
p. 2
Learning Center Help: 
Pitfalls to Avoid Part 1
p. 3
His Servants: On Call 24/7                  p. 5
Join Us at ISC 2019
p. 6
aceconnect School Management
p. 7
Character Counts!
p. 8
RSC 2019
p. 9
ISC 2019
p. 10
Biblical Studies
p. 11
Parent AcceleGRAM
p. 12
World Watch
p. 13
In This Issue
□ Senior Pastor
□ Senior Administrator
□ Pastor
□ Principal
□ Supervisor
□ Supervisor
□ Supervisor
□ Monitor
□ Monitor
□ Monitor
□ Secretary
□ Pres., P.T.F.
□ School Board 
Members
Staff Distribution List
Introducing a new ACBI College course! 
ED 211: Tutoring Math in the Learning Center
In addition to the many courses ACBI has added since its inception,  
its latest course is aimed at aiding supervisors with math.
This course is designed to:
● Encourage best math practices.
● Help students deal with math anxiety.
● Find creative ways to make math lively, relevant, and fun.
● Show we are better at math than we think.
● Give tips on navigating students through Level 8 Math, 
   Algebra, and Geometry.
Visit acem.org to learn more about how ACBI  
can help you pursue a post-secondary education.

