BI O PH YSICS
A mechanochemical model recapitulates distinct
vertebrate gastrulation modes
Mattia Serra1*, Guillermo Serrano Nájera2, Manli Chuai2, Alex M. Plum1, Sreejith Santhosh1,
Vamsi Spandan3, Cornelis J. Weijer2, L. Mahadevan3,4*
During vertebrate gastrulation, an embryo transforms from a layer of epithelial cells into a multilayered gastrula.
This process requires the coordinated movements of hundreds to tens of thousands of cells, depending on the
organism. In the chick embryo, patterns of actomyosin cables spanning several cells drive coordinated tissue
ﬂows. Here, we derive a minimal theoretical framework that couples actomyosin activity to global tissue ﬂows.
Our model predicts the onset and development of gastrulation ﬂows in normal and experimentally perturbed
chick embryos, mimicking diﬀerent gastrulation modes as an active stress instability. Varying initial conditions
and a parameter associated with active cell ingression, our model recapitulates distinct vertebrate gastrulation
morphologies, consistent with recently published experiments in the chick embryo. Altogether, our results show
how changes in the patterning of critical cell behaviors associated with diﬀerent force-generating mechanisms
contribute to distinct vertebrate gastrulation modes via a self-organizing mechanochemical process.
Copyright © 2023 The
Authors, some
rights reserved;
exclusive licensee
American Association
for the Advancement
of Science. No claim to
original U.S. Government
Works. Distributed
under a Creative
Commons Attribution
License 4.0 (CC BY).
INTRODUCTION
Gastrulation is a highly conserved process in the development of all
vertebrate embryos (1), with the chick being an extensively studied
model because it is easily cultured and imaged. During gastrulation,
the chick transforms from a layer of epithelial cells into a layered
structure of three major embryonic tissues: the ectoderm, meso-
derm, and endoderm. At the moment of egg-laying, the chick
embryo contains around 30,000 cells organized in a circular epiblast
that will give rise to the embryo proper (EP) surrounded by a ring of
extraembryonic (EE) tissue. During the first few hours of develop-
ment, signals from the EE tissues and the developing hypoblast
induce cells to differentiate into mesendoderm precursors in a
sickle-shaped domain at the posterior edge of the epiblast
(Fig. 1A). These mesendoderm precursor cells undergo directed
cell intercalations that result in a contraction of the mesendoderm
tissue toward its central midline, followed by an extension in the
anterior direction, forming the primitive streak (PS) (Fig. 1, A
and B) (2–6). In the streak, mesendoderm precursor cells undergo
an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT), followed by their
individual ingression and migration into the developing embryo
to form various mesodermal and endodermal structures (7, 8).
These cell behaviors drive embryo-scale counter-rotating tissue
flows that converge at the site of PS formation (Fig. 1B) (9, 10).
Three cell-scale active force-generating processes drive tissue
flows: (i) the outward migration of the cells attached to the vitelline
membrane at the boundary of the embryo, (ii) the active intercala-
tion of the mesendoderm precursors generating forces in the plane
of the epiblast, and (iii) the ingression of mesendoderm cells in the
streak, which attracts cells toward the streak and drives the out of
plane motion. The variation in tissue flows and morphologies
seen across vertebrate gastrulation, ranging from fish and amphib-
ians via reptiles to amniotes such as chicks and humans, are due to
differences in embryo geometry and the relative contributions of
these three force-generating processes.
A major unresolved question is which mechanisms underlie the
coordination of these large-scale reproducible tissue flows during
gastrulation. The onset of directional intercalations in the chick
embryo correlates with the appearance of oriented chains of
aligned junctions containing high levels of active myosin II motor
proteins, as detected through phosphorylated myosin light chain
(pMLC) (Fig. 1, A, left, and C) (2, 3). These supracellular chains
of aligned cell junctions with high levels of active myosin are orient-
ed in the direction of cell intercalation, indicating the appearance of
a supracellular oriented organization (planar cell polarity) of inter-
calating cells (Fig. 1E at HH1 stage and fig. S9). As the PS extends,
supracellular cables of highly active myosin reorient perpendicular
to the midline (Fig. 1, A, right, D, and E at HH3). Figure 1E shows
the orientation of actomyosin cables (bar orientation), the extent of
alignment of multicellular cables (bar length) quantified by the
pMLC anisotropy, and the active myosin strength quantified by
pMLC intensity (bar color) on the whole embryo at EGK-XIV,
HH1, and HH3. The pMLC anisotropy is quantified from the asym-
metry of the Fourier power spectrum (11), calculated in a tiling
pattern over the embryo, while myosin intensity is calculated as
average intensity in the same tiles. For experimental details, see
the recently published paper (4). The panels show a high increase
of active myosin over time (see also fig. S10), and at HH3, the PS
region has maximal pMLC intensity and maximal anisotropy per-
pendicular to the PS.
These actomyosin cables, first observed in the directional cell in-
tercalation underlying germ-band extension in fruit fly embryogen-
esis (12, 13), were thought to arise from signaling in the anterior-
posterior patterning system (14, 15). Recent work (16–19) suggests
instead that actomyosin cables could self-organize in a tension-de-
pendent manner, leading to spontaneous large-scale orientation
during germ-band extension. Consistent with this, it is now well es-
tablished that cytoskeletal actin dynamics, myosin activity, and
1Department of Physics, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.
2Division of Cell and Developmental Biology, College of Life Sciences, University of
Dundee, Dundee DD1 5EH, UK. 3School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA. 4Departments of Physics, and Or-
ganismic and Evolutionary Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138,
USA.
*Corresponding author. Email: mserra@ucsd.edu (M.S.); lmahadev@g.harvard.edu
(L.M.)
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Serra et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
6 December 2023
1 of 11
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Harvard University on December 06, 2023

adhesion are mechanosensitive (20, 21), e.g., contraction of a given
junction will increase the tension of neighboring junctions, which
in turn activates the myosin assembly and lowers the dissociation
rate of active myosin in those junctions through a catch-bond mech-
anism (22–24). This positive feedback mechanism could then result
in the formation of supracellular chains of myosin-enriched junc-
tions at the cellular level that drive coordinated supracellular direc-
tional intercalations, organized tissue flows, and PS formation (5).
In the chick, the early embryonic layer can be abstracted as a thin
two-dimensional (2D) fluid in which myosin activity generates
active stresses that induce multicellular flows. Interfering with
myosin activity correlates with the failure of PS formation (2, 4).
But what are the essential mechanisms sufficient to generate supra-
cellular coordination?
To probe the conditions for the self-organization of actomyosin
cables during development and correlate these with observed tissue
flows, we need a quantitative predictive model. Theoretical
approaches include statistical and continuum theories for active
matter (25), vertex models (26–28), and constitutive laws for epithe-
lia (29), with their relative strengths and weaknesses summarized in
a recent review (30). Theoretical work has also started to elucidate
the interplay of signaling, mechanics, and geometrical constraints
(31–40) reviewed in (41). Here, we complement these studies and
devise a continuum model that is specific enough to capture the
essence of the distinct gastrulation modes we observed in wild-
type and experimentally perturbed chick embryos while being
general enough to apply to other morphogenetic processes.
Mathematical framework for gastrulation ﬂows
Predictive model linking mechanochemical activity and
tissue ﬂows
Minimally, a planar mechanochemical predictive model of PS for-
mation during gastrulation should couple three coarse-grained
fields (Fig. 1F): the tissue velocity field v(x, y, t) = [u(x, y, t), v(x,
Fig. 1. Actomyosin cables drive the tissue ﬂows in gastrulation. (A) PS formation diagram. (B) Velocity in the chick gastrula. The convergent extension of the mes-
endoderm (red) generates macroscopic tissue ﬂows on the surface of the embryo. (C) At HH1, the mesendoderm sickle territory is characterized by supracellular cables
with active myosin (phosphorylated myosin light chain; pMLC) perpendicular to the anterior-posterior (AP) direction (see ﬁg. S9 for details). (D) At HH3—12 hours after
HH1—the PS is characterized by supracellular cables with high active myosin (pMLC) perpendicular to the midline. (E) The pattern of actomyosin cables evolves from EGK-
XIV to HH3. Bar lengths represent the pMLC anisotropy and bar colors represent the measured absolute concentration. The red dashed sickle and rectangle indicate the
mesendoderm precursors region and a stripe of tissue containing the PS. At HH3, the PS region has maximal pMLC intensity and maximal anisotropy perpendicular to the
PS, resulting in the highest active stress along cables perpendicular to the PS. Figure S10 shows the same measured pMLC signal intensity as a scalar ﬁeld over the embryo,
demonstrating an overall increase in myosin activity. For experimental details, see (4). (F) Here, we construct a theoretical framework coupling velocity, actomyosin
orientation, and intensity that explains observed gastrulation ﬂows in recent experiments.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Serra et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
6 December 2023
2 of 11
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Harvard University on December 06, 2023

y, t)]⊤, the active stress intensity m(x, y, t) arising from myosin ac-
tivity, and the average cable orientation ϕ(x, y, t). In the limit of
slow, viscous flows associated with morphogenesis, we can neglect
inertia so that the local force balance reads ∇· σT = 0, where the total
stress σT = σV + σA is the sum of the viscous and active stresses. The
viscous stress is σV = −pI + 2μSs, where p is the pressure, I is the
identity matrix, μ is shear viscosity, and Ss = (∇v + ∇v⊤−(∇·
v)I)/2) is the deviatoric rate-of-strain tensor. The active stress asso-
ciated with actomyosin cables is σA = m(B −I/2), with the compo-
nents of B given by B11 = cos2ϕ, B12 = B21 = sin 2ϕ/2, B22 = sin2ϕ.
We model the sheet-like embryo as a two-dimensional com-
pressible fluid to accommodate cell ingression into the third dimen-
sion. This necessitates a continuity law modeling the expectation
that both the passive isotropic stress and isotropic effects of
myosin activity contribute to a negative divergence (or conver-
gence) of the local velocity field. We choose a simple linear model
with ∇· v = c(−2p −p0m). Here, c−1 is the fluid bulk viscosity, −2p
is the isotropic viscous stress, and p0m characterizes the effect of
active cell ingression due to myosin-induced apical contraction
(see sections S1.1 and S1.4.2 for a detailed description and the bio-
physical implications of p0). This continuity law enables us to
express the local pressure p as a function of ∇· v and m. Then,
we may write the equations for local momentum balance for the
planar velocity field v(x, y, t), along with the evolution equations
for the orientation ϕ(x, y, t) and intensity m(x, y, t) of active
Fig. 2. Dynamics of wild-type gastrulation in the chick embryo. (A) In the gastrulation timescale, the tension in the actomyosin cables is maintained by their active
stress intensity Tc ≈〈e, σAe〉= m/2 (section S1.3). High Tc induces a further increase of m via the catch-bond mechanism, which in turn increases Tc. This positive feedback
process causes the instability of Eq. 1. (B) One-dimensional model recapitulates a focusing-type instability of active myosin, which induces a colocated velocity sink
describing cell ingression at the PS. Movie S1 shows the time evolution of m, u, ux. (C) Initial (t0) and ﬁnal (tf) distributions of m, ϕ for the 2D model. The instability
of m drives cable reorientation and active myosin evolution. These, in turn, drive the tissue ﬂows underlying the extension of the streak from posterior (P) to anterior
(A). (D) Model-based domain of attraction (DOA) at t0 (HH1) and the attractor at tf (HH3). Movie S2 shows the time evolution of the relevant model-based v, m, ϕ, La-
grangian grid, repellers, DOAs, and attractors. (E) Same as (D) for the experimental velocity. Movie S3 shows the time evolution of the Lagrangian metrics for the exper-
imental v. Panel (E) adapted with permission from (44). (F and G) Line segments indicate the velocity (yellow) and contracting eigenvector of the deviatoric rate of strain
tensor (cyan) with length proportional to the contraction strength. (F) Model-based and experimental velocity deviatoric rate of strain at HH1 (t0). (G) Same as (F) at HH3
(tf). The experimental panels’ background consists of ﬂuorescence images. (H) Model-based and experimental velocity divergence at HH3 (tf). Color bars in (C), (D), and (H)
(left) are in nondimensional units. Color bars in (E) and (H) (right) are in 1/minutes. See section S4.6 for parameters, boundaries, and initial conditions used in Eq. 1.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Serra et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
6 December 2023
3 of 11
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Harvard University on December 06, 2023

stress as
Force balance:
2p1Δv
|ÇÇ{zÇÇ}
shear
á râr#vä
|ÇÇÇÇ{zÇÇÇÇ}
dilatation
zÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇ}|ÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇ{
viscous
á2p1ÖBrmámr#BÜáp1Öp0 '1Ürm
zÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇ}|ÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇ{
active
à 0
Ö1aÜ
Dynamics of active stress orientation:
ϕt à 'Öv#rÜϕ
zÇÇÇÇÇÇ}|ÇÇÇÇÇÇ{
advection
á
ω
2
z}|{
rigid rotation
áp2
uy ávx
2
cos2ϕá
vy 'ux
2
sin2ϕ
✓
◆
zÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇ}|ÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇ{
shear'induced rotation
Ö1bÜ
Dynamics of active stress intensity:
mt à 'Öv#rÜm
zÇÇÇÇÇÇ}|ÇÇÇÇÇÇ{
advection
á
p3
z}|{
recruitment
'p4e'p5
2 mm
zÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇ}|ÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇÇ{
dissociation
'p6m
zÇÇ}|ÇÇ{
saturation
á
p7Δϕm
zÇÇÇÇ}|ÇÇÇÇ{
tension propagation!induction of m
Ö1cÜ
8
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
<
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
>
:
Here, we have nondimensionalized our model using a character-
istic length scale xc, speed uc, and viscous shear stress μuc/xc. Equa-
tion 1a denotes the balance of forces, wherein the first and second
terms are the passive, viscous forces due to shear and dilatational
deformations. The last three terms are a consequence of active
forces induced by inhomogeneities in the active stress intensity gen-
erated by actomyosin cables, while p1 = μc is the ratio of the shear
viscosity to the bulk viscosity (see section S1 for the derivation of
these equations and fig. S11 for the effect of a higher ratio). Equa-
tion 1b describes the average orientational dynamics of active stress,
dictated by the orientation of actomyosin cables which evolve like
material fibers, advected by the flow, and rotated by vorticity ω and
shear (42). Shear-induced rotation rates are modulated by the non-
dimensional parameter p2 ≈1 for elongated fibers.
Equation 1c describes the dynamics of active stress intensity. The
first two terms account for cell motion (advection) and the recruit-
ment of myosin from the cytoplasm, assumed to have a uniform
constant concentration mn, at scaled rate p3 = (tp/tr)(mnxc)/(μuc).
Here, tr is the recruitment timescale and tp is the timescale for con-
verting active myosin into tissue-scale active stress. This complex
process involves kinetic reactions, single cells, and multicellular
mechanochemical operations (section S1.3). The third term
models a tension (Tc)-dependent dissociation rate associated with
catch-bond dynamics (Fig. 2A), which has an exponential form
p4ep5Tc (23). Using a combination of experimental results, vertex
models, and timescale arguments, in section S1.3, we show that at
gastrulation (i.e., long) timescales, the tissue scale Tc ≈m/2. p4 = tp/
td is the ratio of tp to the dissociation timescale, and p5 = (koμuc)/xc is
the ratio of the characteristic shear stress of the system to the char-
acteristic bonding stress k'1
o
between actin and myosin. The fourth
term on the right side of the last equation ensures that active stress
intensity does not accumulate without bounds. We add the simplest
linear saturation term in p6m, where p6 = χtp and we choose χ to set a
saturation value msat ≈p3/p6. The precise mechanisms and func-
tional form that control myosin saturation are beyond the scope
of our model because we are interested in a finite-time developmen-
tal interval characterized by instability rather than an asymptotic
equilibrium state. This is confirmed by the sensitivity analysis
(section S4.3), showing that our results are robust to changes in
p6. Last, the viscoelastic behavior of the cables also results in the
propagation of active stress intensity along the cable orientations,
making the dynamics of active stress intensity non–cell autono-
mous (37). At the tissue scale, this results in directional diffusion
of active stress intensity Δϕm along the local cable orientation ϕ
in Eq. 1c (see section S1.3 for derivation and section S3 for
visualization). p7 = ξ/(xcuc) is the ratio between the transport of
active stress intensity via advection and induction of active stress
intensity via cable tension propagation, where ξ captures the
tissue-scale effect of tension propagation.
We note that the force balance (Eq. 1a) to determine v(x, y, t) is
elliptic, i.e., v(x, y, t) at a particular location depends on v(x, y, t)
throughout the embryo. Because v(x, y, t) affects m(x, y, t), ϕ(x, y,
t) (Eqs. 1b to 1c), the local active stress dynamics also depend on v in
the whole embryo. In addition, the directional diffusion in the dy-
namics of the myosin field m makes the model non–cell autono-
mous even in Lagrangian coordinates, i.e., along cell trajectories.
Since the chick embryo is roughly planar and circular, we solve
Eq. 1 in polar coordinates by considering a circular spatial
domain with boundary ∂Ω (Fig. 1A) that encloses the embryonic
area and a small fraction of the EE region. This allows us to keep
the size of the domain approximately fixed, as the embryonic area
remains constant during gastrulation.
To complete the formulation of the problem, we need boundary
and initial conditions. We impose a velocity normal to the boun-
dary to represent epiboly and no flux for m, ϕ, as there is no exper-
imental evidence of sources, sinks, or prescribed values of m, ϕ close
to the EP-EE boundary. For details on model derivation, see sec-
tions S1.1 to S1.3. For nondimensionalization, see section S1.4.
For the model in polar coordinates, see section S1.5. For the numer-
ical scheme, see section S2. For parameter selection and sensitivity
analysis, see section S4. The tension-dependent, non–cell-autono-
mous dynamics of actomyosin cables and the coupling of tissue
compressibility to tissue stress and active myosin are two key
aspects that our framework adds to the growing evidence account-
ing for feedback between mechanical and biochemical processes in
development.
Quantiﬁcation of spatiotemporal morphogenetic ﬂows
To complement the theoretical model (Eq. 1) for the spatiotemporal
patterning of actomyosin activity and flow, we also need a properly
invariant approach to quantify the resulting 2D spatiotemporal
flows and compare our model results with experiments. Any frame-
work to analyze spatiotemporal trajectories in morphogenesis re-
quires a self-consistent description of cell motion that is
independent of the choice of reference frame. This frame-invariant
property, called objectivity (43), is a fundamental requirement that
ensures that the description of deforming biological tissue is inde-
pendent of the coordinate frames we choose to describe its motion.
Nonobjective metrics, such as cell velocities, will yield different (in-
consistent) results if they are described from a frame moving with a
drifting embryo or a fixed lab frame [see, e.g., figure 1 in (44)].
By contrast, Lagrangian coherent structures that lead to the
notion of dynamic morphoskeletons (DMs) (44) are objective.
The DM is based on a Lagrangian description (fig. S8A) of tissue
deformation captured by finite-time Lyapunov exponents (FTLE),
which combine local and global mechanisms along cell trajectories.
The DM consists of attractors and repellers toward which cells con-
verge or diverge over a specific time interval T = tf −t0. Repellers are
marked by high values of the forward FTLE Λ
tf
t0Öx0Ü; attractors are
marked by high values of backward FTLE Λt0
tf Öxf Ü and their domain
of attraction (DOA) by high values of the backward FTLE displayed
on the initial cell positions Λt0
tf Öx0Ü (see section S6 for details and fig.
S8B for an illustration). The DM reveals the organizers of
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Serra et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
6 December 2023
4 of 11
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Harvard University on December 06, 2023

spatiotemporal trajectories and is robust to noise (44), hence it is
ideal for quantifying morphogenesis and comparing models with
experiments.
RESULTS
Insights from the 1D model
To gain intuition, we first analyze the 1D version of Eq. 1 modeling
the dynamics perpendicular to AP, as summarized in Fig. 2B
(section S1.4.3). Linear stability analysis of uniform equilibria of
m reveals that the lower equilibrium is linearly stable, the interme-
diate equilibrium is linearly unstable, and the higher equilibrium—
set by the linear saturation term—is linearly stable (fig. S3). Initial-
izing the nonlinear system with a Gaussian perturbation m(x, t0)
near the unstable equilibrium (mimicking the onset of actomyosin
cables in the sickle as in Fig. 1, A, C, and E), we see that our model
develops a focusing-type instability which increases m(x, tf) while
generating a highly compressive region ux(tf) ≪0, representing
cell ingression at the streak. This process shows that a region with
higher initial active stress intensity provided by higher myosin
induces more tension along actomyosin cables (Fig. 2A), which
results in the recruitment of more active myosin, thus increasing
the active stress intensity via the positive feedback mechanism em-
bodied in Eq. 1c. Movie S1 shows the time evolution of the relevant
fields. While this simplified 1D model neglects cable orientations, it
accounts for the important roles of both the catch-bond dynamics
coupled with the flow field, and our effective constitutive law, both
of which carry over to the 2D model. However, without accounting
for the dynamics of actomyosin cable reorientation, this simple 1D
model cannot reproduce the 2D patterns of convergent extension
and vortical flows observed in experiments.
The 2D model predicts epiblast tissue ﬂows during chick
gastrulation
We initialize the 2D model with m(x, t0) consisting of a curved
Gaussian perturbation to the unstable equilibrium of m, mimicking
the sickle-shaped region of mesendoderm precursors, and ϕ(x, t0)
in the azimuthal direction (Fig. 2C), consistent with experiments
(Fig. 1E at HH1) (4). See fig. S12 for the effects of varying the
initial extent of this region. We note that understanding what sets
these initial conditions is beyond the scope of this work. The insta-
bility of m drives both the flow velocity and cable orientations
shown in Fig. 2C and movie S2, reproducing the typical flow pat-
terns observed in wild-type experiments. This instability mecha-
nism is consistent with experimental observations of increasing
pMLC between HH1 and HH3 (Fig. 1E and fig. S10) (4). A closer
look at m, ϕ shows that while at t0 the active stress creates conver-
gence perpendicular to the PS in the posterior, at later times, the
active stress is dominant close to the PS (Fig. 2C), consistent with
experiments. Figure 1E at HH3 quantitatively shows that pMLC has
the highest intensity and pMLC anisotropy perpendicular to the PS,
resulting in the highest active stress in the PS region, as predicted
by Fig. 2C.
We now deploy the DM to quantify whether the Eulerian fields
predicted by Eq. 1 at different times will properly integrate along cell
paths, reproducing the observed morphogenetic features. In Fig. 2
(D and E), we show the DOA (left) and the attractor (right), corre-
sponding to the largest time T in both the model and the experi-
mental v. The attractor marks the formed PS at HH3, while the
DOA marks the initial (HH1) position of cells that will end up in
the PS. Movie S2 shows the time evolution of the model-based v, m,
ϕ, Lagrangian grid, repellers, DOAs, and attractors as T increases,
while movie S3 shows the same Lagrangian quantities obtained
from the experimental velocity field. Consistent with our model,
figure 1 (A to G) and movie S2 of (4) show bright-field images
and gene expression patterns that indicate the mesendoderm
territory.
As an additional model-experiment comparison, we consider
the objective Eulerian quantities Ss and ∇· v. The cyan direction
field in Fig. 2 (F and G) shows the contracting eigenvector field
with the bar length proportional to the contraction strength (i.e.,
the corresponding eigenvalue) of the deviatoric rate of strain
tensor Ss at HH1 and HH3. The contracting direction of Ss and
its strength are a proxy of cell intercalation, consistent with dedicat-
ed intercalation analysis in figure 4 of (4). These results show that at
HH1 (Fig. 2F), intercalation is perpendicular to the AP direction
and dominant in the sickle-shaped domain at the posterior edge
of the epiblast, while at HH3 (Fig. 2G) it is perpendicular to the
entire PS. At HH3, the PS region is characterized by high cell ingres-
sion, resulting in highly negative planar divergence ∇· v, while the
rest of the embryo has positive divergence to ensure embryonic area
homeostasis. Our model predicts these results in Fig. 2H (left), con-
sistent with experiments in Fig. 2H (right). This match of the model
and experiment at the final time (HH3) supports further our simple
continuity law ∇· v = c(−2p −p0m).
However, we emphasize that matching Eulerian snapshots of Ss
and ∇· v between the model and experiments is not sufficient, as it
is their cumulative effect along cell trajectories that quantifies mor-
phogenesis (44). This Lagrangian sum differs from a sum at a fixed
Eulerian location [as explained in detail, e.g., in section S2C of (44)].
For example, the DOA in Fig. 2 (D and E) marks the initial (HH1)
position of cells that will eventually ingress in the PS by HH3, which
results from the Lagrangian sum of ∇· v along cell trajectories. In
section S4, we discuss the selection of parameters, boundaries, and
initial conditions using experiments and numerical simulations and
show with an extensive sensitivity analysis (movies S14 to S27) that
our results are robust to parameter variations.
Model-experiment comparison of active forces
Figure 1E shows that active stress is dominant in the posterior
sickle-shaped domain at HH1, while at HH3, it is dominant in
the PS region, consistent with our model predictions in Fig. 2C.
To support this finding further, Fig. 3 compares the active forces
FA inferred indirectly from the Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV)
velocities with those generated by Eq. 1. To infer the experimental
FA, we use the general force balance for highly viscous active flows
(as in Eq. 1a) FA + FV = 0, where FV denotes the viscous, passive
force. This implies that FA = −FV = −(∇[∇· v] + 2p1Δv), where
the right-hand side can be evaluated from experimental velocities.
Figure 3A outlines the experimental distribution of active force FA
from Fig. 3B over the corresponding fluorescence images.
At HH1, PIV-inferred active forces (Fig. 3B, top) are higher in
the posterior sickle-shaped domain and point toward the AP axis, as
predicted by our model (Fig. 3C, top). The model-based force is
symmetric with respect to the AP direction. The asymmetry of
the experimentally inferred active force has no effect on gastrulation
except for slightly bending the PS to the left (Fig. 2E). At HH3, PIV-
inferred active forces are dominant and perpendicular to the
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Serra et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
6 December 2023
5 of 11
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Harvard University on December 06, 2023

elongated PS region (Fig. 3B, bottom), as predicted by our model
(Fig. 3C, bottom). This experimental evidence, consistent with
the distribution pMLC in Fig. 1E and the corresponding model pre-
dictions (Figs. 2C and 3C), demonstrates that at least in the chick,
active forces are not restricted to a ring-shaped structure at the EP-
EE boundary, as suggested to be the case in the quail (3).
The model predicts perturbations
To further test our model predictions, we move beyond gastrulation
in wild-type avian embryos and introduce four different perturba-
tions that modify either the initial state of the embryonic pattern
(i.e., region of mesendoderm precursors) characterized by high
phosphorylated myosin and hence active stress intensity m(x, t0),
or the propensity for active cell ingression encoded in p0. In
section S4.6, we summarize the values of m(x, t0) and p0 used to
reproduce different gastrulation modes. The rest of the parameters
are the same for all simulations in the paper (section S4.6 and
table S2).
Twin perturbation
Occasionally, a natural event corresponding to the spontaneous for-
mation of twins arises when the mesendoderm precursor area is
split into two regions, from which two streaks emerge. These
streaks interact through their tissue flows and form complete or par-
tially twined embryos (Fig. 4, A and B). We initialize our model as in
the wild type (Fig. 2C) but add two distant Gaussians to the uniform
unstable equilibrium of m. Movie S4 shows the model-based Euler-
ian fields and the induced Lagrangian metrics for increasing T.
Figure 4A shows the model-based repeller and the attractor for
the largest T. The circular repeller separates the EP from the EE
region as well as the A-P regions of the PS, while the attractor
marks the merging PSs. Figure 4B and movie S5 show the same
as Fig. 4A and movie S4 for the experimental v. A comparison of
movies S4 and S5 highlights how our model recapitulates the full
morphogenetic process quantified by the DM. See fig. S13 for
model predictions when PSs form opposite one another and for
when one Gaussian has a greater amplitude than the other.
Reptilian-like mode
In the second perturbation, described in detail in the recently pub-
lished paper (4), we interfered with a signaling pathway, which re-
sulted in a strong inhibition of cell ingression in the streak, via the
application of the VEGF receptor (vascular epithelial growth factor)
inhibitor axitinib (100 nM). We initialize our model as in the wild
type (Fig. 2C) but set p0 = 0 as Axitinib prevents active cell ingres-
sion. Figure 4 (C and D) shows the DOA and attractor for both the
model and experimental v, highlighting how this perturbation
results in a shorter and thicker PS as well as a reduced amount of
ingressed cells, consistent with the bright-field images and gene ex-
pression patterns in figure 2 (H to N) of (4). Movies S6 and S7 show
the time evolution of the model- and experiment-based fields con-
firming similar DM again.
Teleost-like mode
The third perturbation consists of experiments where FGF2 (fibro-
blast growth factor 2) addition to early-stage chick embryos pro-
voked the generation of a mesoderm ring along the marginal
zone (4). To model this case, we use the same conditions as the
wild type but set m(x, t0) as a Gaussian around a fixed radius
added to the unstable equilibrium [see m(x, t0) in movie S8].
Figure 4 (E and F) shows the DOA and attractor corresponding to
the largest T from the model and experimental v, highlighting a
sharp circular PS. Movies S8 and S9 show the Eulerian fields and
the Lagrangian metrics from the model and experimental v for in-
creasing T. In addition, Movie S10 shows a deforming Lagrangian
grid overlaid on the light-sheet microscope images. These results
complement those in figure 1 (H to N) of (4) and confirm again
the predictive power of our model.
Fig. 3. Active forces in the chick embryo. (A) Experimental ﬂuorescence images at HH1 and HH3. A and P mark the anterior-posterior direction, and red arrows illustrate
the dominant active force FA distribution from (B). At HH1, FA is dominant in the posterior embryonic region perpendicular to the AP axis. At HH3, FA is perpendicular to
the PS throughout the AP axis. These FA conﬁgurations are consistent with the corresponding distribution of supracellular actomyosin cables in Fig. 1E. Dimensions are
1300 μm × 1900 μm. (B) and (C) Magnitude and direction of forces at HH1 (top) and HH3 (bottom). Magnitudes are normalized by the maximal spatial force. (B) We
compute FA from the general force balance for highly viscous active ﬂows FA + FV = 0 (cf. Eq. 1a), which gives FA = −(∇[∇· v] + 2p1Δv), where the right-hand side can be
computed using experimental velocities. We use an averaging ﬁlter in space (window size ≈25 μm) and time (window size ≈15 min) on the PIV velocities and compute
velocity derivatives using ﬁnite diﬀerencing. (C) FA is from Eq. 1a. We note that the model FA at HH3 arises from the dynamical variables evolved by Eq. 1 over the entire
gastrulation period. They closely predict the corresponding inferred experimental forces [(B) bottom], further validating our model.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Serra et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
6 December 2023
6 of 11
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Harvard University on December 06, 2023

Amphibian-like mode
In our last perturbation, we induced the formation of a ring-shaped
mesoderm region at the EE-EP interface with a combination of the
BMP (bone morphogenetic protein) receptor inhibitor LDN-
193189 (100 nM) and the GSK3 (glycogen synthase kinase 3) inhib-
itor CHIR-99021 (3 μM) (4). This treatment also blocks apical con-
traction and cell ingression but has little effect on cell intercalations,
resulting in the buckling of the tissue [figure 2 (A to G) and movie
S8 of (4)]. In our model, we use the initial condition of perturbation
3 but set p0 = 0, following the same reasoning of perturbation 2.
Figure 4 (G and H) shows the DOA and the attractor for the
largest T from the model and the experimental v, while movies
S11 and S12 display the corresponding time evolution of the Euler-
ian fields and Lagrangian metrics. While tissue buckling is intrinsi-
cally 3D, our model is sufficient to predict an overall planar
compressive stress that causes the tissue to converge in the center.
This prediction matches precisely the experimental 2D dynamics
inferred by PIV velocities.
Toward a phase space of gastrulation ﬂow patterns
To go beyond studying the gastrulation modes in wild-type avian
embryos exemplified by the chick, we used chemical inhibitors to
uncouple cell intercalation and ingression and perturb the initial
patterning and function of the prospective mesendoderm, as de-
scribed in our recently published experimental paper (4). The
current paper shows that we can recapitulate these phylogenetic var-
iations in the morphodynamics of vertebrate gastrulation using a
mechanochemical model that couples the dynamics of actomyosin
cables to large-scale tissue flow patterns. By changing the cell’s pro-
pensity to undergo active ingression from apical isotropic myosin
contraction, characterized by the parameter p0, together with the
initial prospective mesendoderm, described by m(x, t0) (Fig. 5,
left), we can predict distinct gastrulation flows that resemble those
Fig. 4. Developmental perturbations of gastrulation. Movies show the time evolution of the relevant Eulerian and Lagrangian metrics. (A and B) Spontaneous twin
perturbation. Repeller and attractor for model velocities [(A), movie S4] and experimental velocities [(B), movie S5]. (C and D) VEGF (vascular epithelial growth factor)
inhibition prevents cell ingression at the PS. DOA and attractor for model velocities [(C), movie S6] and experimental velocities [(D), movie S7]. (E and F) FGF2 (ﬁbroblast
growth factor 2) addition provokes a circular PS. DOA and attractor for model velocities [(E), movie S8] and experimental velocities [(F), movie S9]. (G and H) BMP (bone
morphogenetic protein) and GSK3 (glycogen synthase kinase 3) inhibition induce a ring-shaped mesoderm territory at the EE-EP interface while blocking apical con-
traction and cell ingression. DOA and attractor for model velocities [(G), movie S11) and experimental velocities [(H), movie S12]. Color bars in experimental panels show
attraction rates in 1/minutes. See section S4.6 for parameters values, boundaries, and initial conditions used in simulating Eq. 1.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Serra et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
6 December 2023
7 of 11
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Harvard University on December 06, 2023

naturally observed in other vertebrates, consistent with in vivo ex-
periments in the chick embryo (Fig. 5, center right). Specifically, the
PS structures in Fig. 4 (C and D) resemble the blastoporal canal ob-
served in reptilian gastrulation (Fig. 5, second row), the circular
streak structure (Fig. 4, E and F) resembles the germ ring of
teleost fish gastrulation (Fig. 5, last row), while the buckling tissue
in Fig. 4 (G and H) mimics the tissue organization and flow during
the closing blastopore in amphibians (Fig. 5, third row). We high-
light that our biophysical model is sufficient to explain both the
wild-type and manipulated gastrulation flows in the chick
embryo, which show remarkable similarities to the gastrulation pat-
terns naturally observed in other species. Whether our framework
can explain (at least partially) the gastrulation flows in different ver-
tebrates is a separate biological question that requires additional
work (45).
DISCUSSION
In this study, we have investigated the self-organizing principles of
gastrulation flows in wild-type and experimentally perturbed chick
embryos. Using in vivo experiments and biophysical modeling, we
have provided evidence that gastrulation movements arise from the
coupled dynamics of tissue flows and mechanosensitive actomyosin
activity (Eq. 1). Actomyosin activity generates active stresses, which
drive tissue flows and tension. Tissue flows and tension, in turn,
modulate actomyosin (or active stress) dynamics with mechano-
chemical feedback. Specifically, the actomyosin dissociation rate
depends on the tissue-scale tension via a catch-bond mechanism,
while tissue flows modulate actomyosin cable orientation. Because
of the induction of active stress intensity via tension propagation,
our model is non–cell-autonomous even in Lagrangian coordinates
that follow cell trajectories. Our framework shows that gastrulation
flows follow from an active stress instability (Fig. 2), consistent with
experiments (Fig. 1 and fig. S10).
Fig. 5. Evolutionary transitions in gastrulation patterns. A critical morphogenetic parameter p0 models the amount of EMT or active cell ingression caused by the cell’s
propensity to ingress given apical myosin-induced isotropic contraction. The initial condition m(x, t0) models the extent of the mesendoderm precursor territory. Chang-
ing cell behaviors p0 and initial cell types m(x, t0) (left column), our model recapitulates the ﬂow patterns in the phylogeny of vertebrate gastrulation from a self-orga-
nizing dynamical structure. Our model-based predicted ﬂow patterns mimic those naturally observed in reptiles, amphibians, and ﬁsh, and are reproduced
experimentally, in vivo, in the chick embryo [see also the recently published paper (4) for details on the experiments]. The right columns show deformed Lagrangian
grids overlaying the light-sheet microscope images from perturbed chick-experiment velocities (4) and deformed Lagrangian grids from the predicted model velocity for
each gastrulation mode. Scale bars, 500 μm.
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Serra et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
6 December 2023
8 of 11
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Harvard University on December 06, 2023

In particular, providing only the initial conditions for the acto-
myosin cables at the onset of chick gastrulation and the boundary
conditions modeling the epiboly motion of EE cells, our model pre-
dicts subsequent gastrulation stages over 12 hours (Figs. 2 and 4 and
movies S2 to S12). This allows us to recapitulate the observed dy-
namics of actomyosin cable reorientation, as well as the redistribu-
tion of actomyosin levels (Fig. 1E and fig. S10), the observed active
forces, and the large-scale tissue motion. The experimental distribu-
tion of actomyosin cables (Fig. 1E) and the active forces inferred
from PIV velocities (Fig. 3) show that in chick, active forces are
not organized in a ring-shaped structure at the boundary between
embryonic and EE regions, as suggested to be the case in the quail
(3). In fact, at late gastrulation stages, active forces dominate in the
PS region at the embryo’s midline (Fig. 3). While Saadaoui et al. (3)
and Caldarelli et al. (46) directly prescribe active forces on a tensile
ring located at the boundary between the EP and EE area, our active
force distribution evolves spontaneously in space and time through
Eq. 1, leading to a self-organized pattern consistent with experi-
ments (Figs. 1E and 3B). Furthermore, our framework predicts
the velocity divergence and other dynamical fields (Fig. 2 and
movies S2 to S12) from the underlying self-organizing dynamics
in contrast to (3, 46) that fits spatiotemporal experimental velocity
divergence fields into the model. A detailed comparison with the
tensile-ring model is given in section S5.
By changing a nondimensional parameter modeling active cell
ingression (cell behavior)—i.e., the cell’s propensity to ingress due
to high myosin-induced apical contraction—together with the
initial distribution of active myosin as a proxy of prospective mes-
endoderm tissue (cell type), our model recapitulates distinct gastru-
lation flows that mimic those observed in fish, amphibians, and
reptiles, consistent with experiment in vivo in the chick embryo
(Fig. 5). In the recently published paper (4), we used drugs to mod-
ulate the ability for active cell ingression and the initial extent of the
prospective mesendoderm and showed that the resulting gastrula-
tion flows mirror those naturally observed in reptiles, amphibians,
and fish in a single organism, the chick embryo, consistent with our
model predictions. Additional or alternative driving forces may be
at play in these other species (45). For example, studies of amphib-
ian gastrulation in Xenopus have suggested that convergent thick-
ening serves as an additional driving force during blastopore closure
(47–49). Studies of teleost fish gastrulation in zebrafish have sug-
gested that active directed cell migration of mesendoderm precur-
sors plays an important role in their internalization (50, 51).
Therefore, while the driving forces we have modeled are sufficient
to generate flows in chick that mirror gastrulation in these other
species, the exact gastrulation mechanisms in other vertebrates
likely involve additional forces, not yet directly captured in
our model.
To estimate the scalar, time-independent nondimensional pa-
rameters in our model, we use a combination of mechanistic argu-
ments, experiments, and numerical simulations. We also perform
an extensive sensitivity analysis showing the robustness of our
results to parameter variations (section S4 and movies S14 to
S27). Although our model does not account for 3D effects, the mul-
tilayered structure of EE tissue, different cell types, and the overall
size and shape of embryos, we capture the essential differences in
the modes of tissue flow in a range of vertebrate gastrulation. The
consistency of our predictions with in vivo experiments in the chick
embryo shows that a relatively small number of changes in critical
cell behaviors associated with different force-generating processes
contribute to the outcome of distinct vertebrate gastrulation
modes via a self-organizing mechanism. The simplicity of the per-
turbations suggests that these divergent gastrulation morphologies
might be relatively easily evolvable. A natural next step is to account
for the above limitations, starting from different embryo sizes and
geometries, modeling 3D effects, and explicitly accounting for dis-
tinct cell types to link tissue flows and morphogenesis with cell
differentiation.
Linking the gene expression patterns to the myosin patterns and
cell flows is an important step to fully understand the early stages of
development. In principle, we already have the tools to map gene
expression patterns on the cell flows using the Lagrangian DM
framework (44). This mapping will allow us to couple the deforma-
tion of the gene expression domains responsible for mesendoderm
induction and maintenance while ensuring further mesoderm and
endoderm specification and spatial organization. These processes
likely result in further changes in stress generation and mechanical
feedback, completing the current theoretical framework of early
chick development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
For details on the acquisition and processing of the experimental
data used in this work, please see the material and methods
section of our accompanying paper (4). A detailed description of
the numerical schemes used to solve our model (Eq. 1) is in
section S2. The numerical scheme to compute the DMs from exper-
imental and modeled velocity fields is in section S6.
Supplementary Materials
This PDF ﬁle includes:
Supplementary Text
Figs. S1 to S13
Tables S1 to S3
Legends for movies S1 to S27
References
Other Supplementary Material for this
manuscript includes the following:
Movies S1 to S27
REFERENCES AND NOTES
1. C. D. Stern, Gastrulation: From Cells to Embryo (CSHL Press, 2004).
2. E. Rozbicki, M. Chuai, A. I. Karjalainen, F. Song, H. M. Sang, R. Martin, H. J. Knölker,
M. P. MacDonald, C. J. Weijer, Myosin-II-mediated cell shape changes and cell intercalation
contribute to primitive streak formation. Nat. Cell Biol. 17, 397–408 (2015).
3. M. Saadaoui, D. Rocancourt, J. Roussel, F. Corson, J. Gros, A tensile ring drives tissue ﬂows to
shape the gastrulating amniote embryo. Science 367, 453–458 (2020).
4. M. Chuai, G. S. Nájera, M. Serra, L. Mahadevan, C. J. Weijer, Reconstruction of distinct
vertebrate gastrulation modes via modulation of key cell behaviors in the chick embryo.
Sci. Adv. 9, eabn5429 (2023).
5. G. Serrano Nájera, C. J. Weijer, Cellular processes driving gastrulation in the avian embryo.
Mech. Dev. 163, 103624 (2020).
6. O. Voiculescu, F. Bertocchini, L. Wolpert, R. E. Keller, C. D. Stern, The amniote primitive
streak is deﬁned by epithelial cell intercalation before gastrulation. Nature 449,
1049–1052 (2007).
7. Y. Nakaya, E. W. Sukowati, Y. Wu, G. Sheng, RhoA and microtubule dynamics control cell–
basement membrane interaction in EMT during gastrulation. Nat. Cell Biol. 10,
765–775 (2008).
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Serra et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
6 December 2023
9 of 11
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Harvard University on December 06, 2023

8. O. Voiculescu, L. Bodenstein, I.-J. Lau, C. D. Stern, Local cell interactions and self-amplifying
individual cell ingression drive amniote gastrulation. eLife 3, e01817 (2014).
9. L. Gräper, Die Primitiventwicklung des Hühnchens nach stereokinematographischen
Untersuchungen, kontrolliert durch vitale Farbmarkierung und verglichen mit der En-
twicklung anderer Wirbeltiere. Wilhelm Roux Arch. Entwickl. Mech. Org. 116,
382–429 (1929).
10. M. Chuai, W. Zeng, X. Yang, V. Boychenko, J. A. Glazier, C. J. Weijer, Cell movement during
chick primitive streak formation. Dev. Biol. 296, 137–149 (2006).
11. M. Durande, S. Tlili, T. Homan, B. Guirao, F. Graner, H. Delanoë-Ayari, Fast determination of
coarse-grained cell anisotropy and size in epithelial tissue images using Fourier transform.
Phys. Rev. E 99, 062401 (2019).
12. C. Bertet, L. Sulak, T. Lecuit, Myosin-dependent junction remodelling controls planar cell
intercalation and axis elongation. Nature 429, 667–671 (2004).
13. J. T. Blankenship, S. T. Backovic, J. S. Sanny, O. Weitz, J. A. Zallen, Multicellular rosette
formation links planar cell polarity to tissue morphogenesis. Dev. Cell 11, 459–470 (2006).
14. J. A. Zallen, E. Wieschaus, Patterned gene expression directs bipolar planar polarity in
drosophila. Dev. Cell 6, 343–355 (2004).
15. J. Lavalou, Q. Mao, S. Harmansa, S. Kerridge, A. C. Lellouch, J.-M. Philippe, S. Audebert,
L. Camoin, T. Lecuit, Formation of polarized contractile interfaces by self-organized Toll-8/
Cirl GPCR asymmetry. Dev. Cell 56, 1574–1588 (2021).
16. A. Munjal, J.-M. Philippe, E. Munro, T. Lecuit, A self-organized biomechanical network
drives shape changes during tissue morphogenesis. Nature 524, 351–355 (2015).
17. M. Rauzi, U. Krzic, T. E. Saunders, M. Krajnc, P. Ziherl, L. Hufnagel, M. Leptin, Embryo-scale
tissue mechanics during Drosophila gastrulation movements. Nat. Commun. 6,
8677 (2015).
18. S. J. Streichan, M. F. Lefebvre, N. Noll, E. F. Wieschaus, B. I. Shraiman, Global morphogenetic
ﬂow is accurately predicted by the spatial distribution of myosin motors. eLife 7,
e27454 (2018).
19. A. Bailles, C. Collinet, J. M. Philippe, P. F. Lenne, E. Munro, T. Lecuit, Genetic induction and
mechanochemical propagation of a morphogenetic wave. Nature 572, 467–473 (2019).
20. F. J. Vernerey, U. Akalp, Role of catch bonds in actomyosin mechanics and cell mecha-
nosensitivity. Phys. Rev. E 94, 012403 (2016).
21. R. Fernandez-Gonzalez, S. de Matos Simoes, J.-C. Röper, S. Eaton, J. A. Zallen, Myosin II
dynamics are regulated by tension in intercalating cells. Dev. Cell 17, 736–743 (2009).
22. J. M. Laakso, J. H. Lewis, H. Shuman, E. M. Ostap, Myosin I can act as a molecular force
sensor. Science 321, 133–136 (2008).
23. C. Veigel, J. E. Molloy, S. Schmitz, J. Kendrick-Jones, Load-dependent kinetics of force
production by smooth muscle myosin measured with optical tweezers. Nat. Cell Biol. 5,
980–986 (2003).
24. W. E. Thomas, V. Vogel, E. Sokurenko, Biophysics of catch bonds. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 37,
399–416 (2008).
25. M. C. Marchetti, J. F. Joanny, S. Ramaswamy, T. B. Liverpool, J. Prost, M. Rao, R. A. Simha,
Hydrodynamics of soft active matter. Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 1143–1189 (2013).
26. F. Graner, J. A. Glazier, Simulation of biological cell sorting using a two-dimensional ex-
tended Potts model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2013–2016 (1992).
27. A. G. Fletcher, M. Osterﬁeld, R. E. Baker, S. Y. Shvartsman, Vertex models of epithelial
morphogenesis. Biophys. J. 106, 2291–2304 (2014).
28. S. Alt, P. Ganguly, G. Salbreux, Vertex models: From cell mechanics to tissue morpho-
genesis. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 372, 20150520 (2017).
29. A. Bonfanti, J. L. Kaplan, G. Charras, A. Kabla, Fractional viscoelastic models for power-law
materials. Soft Matter 16, 6002–6020 (2020).
30. R. Alert, X. Trepat, Physical models of collective cell migration. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter
Phys. 11, 77–101 (2020).
31. C. Collinet, T. Lecuit, Programmed and self-organized ﬂow of information during mor-
phogenesis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 22, 245–265 (2021).
32. Y. Maroudas-Sacks, K. Keren, Mechanical patterning in animal morphogenesis. Annu. Rev.
Cell Dev. Biol. 37, 469–493 (2021).
33. B. Ladoux, R.-M. Mège, Mechanobiology of collective cell behaviours. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell
Biol. 18, 743–757 (2017).
34. R. Etournay, M. Popović, M. Merkel, A. Nandi, C. Blasse, B. Aigouy, H. Brandl, G. Myers,
G. Salbreux, F. Jülicher, S. Eaton, Interplay of cell dynamics and epithelial tension during
morphogenesis of the Drosophila pupal wing. eLife 4, e07090 (2015).
35. H. J. Gustafson, N. Claussen, S. De Renzis, S. J. Streichan, Patterned mechanical feedback
establishes a global myosin gradient. Nat. Commun. 13, 7050 (2022).
36. N. A. Dye, M. Popović, K. V. Iyer, J. F. Fuhrmann, R. Piscitello-Gómez, S. Eaton, F. Jülicher,
Self-organized patterning of cell morphology via mechanosensitive feedback. eLife 10,
e57964 (2021).
37. N. Noll, M. Mani, I. Heemskerk, S. J. Streichan, B. I. Shraiman, Active tension network model
suggests an exotic mechanical state realized in epithelial tissues. Nat. Phys. 13,
1221–1226 (2017).
38. A.-C. Reymann, F. Staniscia, A. Erzberger, G. Salbreux, S. W. Grill, Cortical ﬂow aligns actin
ﬁlaments to form a furrow. eLife 5, e17807 (2016).
39. E. W. Gehrels, B. Chakrabortty, M.-E. Perrin, M. Merkel, T. Lecuit, Curvature gradient drives
polarized tissue ﬂow in the Drosophilaembryo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120,
e2214205120 (2023).
40. A. Ioratim-Uba, T. B. Liverpool, S. Henkes, Mechano-chemical active feedback generates
convergence extension in epithelial tissue. arXiv:2303.02109 (2023). https://doi.org/10.
48550/arXiv.2303.02109.
41. M. Valet, E. D. Siggia, A. H. Brivanlou, Mechanical regulation of early vertebrate embryo-
genesis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 23, 169–184 (2021).
42. G. Jeﬀery, The motion of ellipsoidal particles immersed in a viscous ﬂuid. Proc. R. Soc. Lond.
102, 161–179 (1922).
43. C. Truesdell, W. Noll, The Non-Linear Field Theories of Mechanics (Springer, 2004).
44. M. Serra, S. Streichan, M. Chuai, C. J. Weijer, L. Mahadevan, Dynamic morphoskeletons in
development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 117, 11444–11449 (2020).
45. G. S. Nájera, C. J. Weijer, The evolution of gastrulation morphologies. Development 150,
dev200885 (2023).
46. P. Caldarelli, A. Chamolly, O. Alegria-Prévot, J. Gros, F. Corson, Self-organized tissue me-
chanics underlie embryonic regulation. bioRxiv 2021.10.08.463661 (2021). https://doi.org/
10.1101/2021.10.08.463661.
47. R. Feroze, J. H. Shawky, M. von Dassow, L. A. Davidson, Mechanics of blastopore closure
during amphibian gastrulation. Dev. Biol. 398, 57–67 (2015).
48. D. R. Shook, E. M. Kasprowicz, L. A. Davidson, R. Keller, Large, long range tensile forces drive
convergence during Xenopus blastopore closure and body axis elongation. eLife 7,
e26944 (2018).
49. M. Valet, E. D. Siggia, A. H. Brivanlou, Mechanical regulation of early vertebrate embryo-
genesis. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 23, 169–184 (2022).
50. A. Carmany-Rampey, A. F. Schier, Single-cell internalization during zebraﬁsh gastrulation.
Curr. Biol. 11, 1261–1265 (2001).
51. S. F. G. Krens, J. H. Veldhuis, V. Barone, D. Čapek, J.-L. Maître, G. W. Brodland, C.-
P. Heisenberg, Interstitial ﬂuid osmolarity modulates the action of diﬀerential tissue
surface tension in progenitor cell segregation during gastrulation. Development 144,
1798–1806 (2017).
52. R. Fernandez-Gonzalez, S. de Matos Simoes, J.-C. Röper, S. Eaton, J. A. Zallen, Myosin II
dynamics are regulated by tension in intercalating cells. Dev. Cell 17, 736–743 (2009).
53. R. Clément, B. Dehapiot, C. Collinet, T. Lecuit, P.-F. Lenne, Viscoelastic dissipation stabilizes
cell shape changes during tissue morphogenesis. Curr. Biol. 27, 3132–3142.e4 (2017).
54. V. Ferro, M. Chuai, D. McGloin, C. J. Weijer, Measurement of junctional tension in epithelial
cells at the onset of primitive streak formation in the chick embryo via non-destructive
optical manipulation. Development 147, dev175109 (2020).
55. M. F. Staddon, K. E. Cavanaugh, E. M. Munro, M. L. Gardel, S. Banerjee, Mechanosensitive
junction remodeling promotes robust epithelial morphogenesis. Biophys. J. 117,
1739–1750 (2019).
56. T. Chung, Computational Fluid Dynamics (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2012).
57. J. S. Bois, F. Jülicher, S. W. Grill, Pattern formation in active ﬂuids. Phys. Rev. Lett. 106,
028103 (2011).
58. R. Sknepnek, I. Djafer-Cherif, M. Chuai, C. Weijer, S. Henkes, Generating active T1 transitions
through mechanochemical feedback. eLife 12, e79862 (2023).
59. G. Haller, Lagrangian coherent structures. Annu. Rev. Fluid. Mech. 47, 137–162 (2015).
60. C. Cui, X. Yang, M. Chuai, J. A. Glazier, C. J. Weijer, Analysis of tissue ﬂow patterns during
primitive streak formation in the chick embryo. Dev. Biol. 284, 37–47 (2005).
61. J. Firmino, D. Rocancourt, M. Saadaoui, C. Moreau, J. Gros, Cell division drives epithelial cell
rearrangements during gastrulation in chick. Dev. Cell 36, 249–261 (2016).
62. J. Ranft, M. Basan, J. Elgeti, J. F. Joanny, J. Prost, F. Jülicher, Fluidization of tissues by cell
division and apoptosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107, 20863–20868 (2010).
63. S. B. Shah, I. Skromne, C. R. Hume, D. S. Kessler, K. J. Lee, C. D. Stern, J. Dodd, Misexpression
of chick Vg1 in the marginal zone induces primitive streak formation. Development 124,
5127–5138 (1997).
Acknowledgments
Funding: M.S. acknowledges the Hellman Foundation and the Schmidt Science Fellowship. G.
S.N. acknowledges support from an EASTBIO BBSRC PhD student training grant (1785593). C.J.
W. thanks the BBSRC (BB/N009789/1, BB/K00204X/1, BB/R000441/1, and BB/T006781/1) for
ﬁnancial support and a Wellcome Trust imaging equipment award (101468/Z/13/Z) for partial
support. L.M. thanks the NSF-Simons Center for Mathematical and Statistical Analysis of Biology
Award 1764269, NIH 1R01HD097068, the Simons Foundation, and the Henri Seydoux Fund for
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Serra et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
6 December 2023
10 of 11
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Harvard University on December 06, 2023

partial support. Author Contributions: Conceptualization: M.S., C.J.W., and L.M. Methodology:
M.S., G.S.N., M.C., A.M.P., S.S., V.S., C.J.W., and L.M. Investigation: M.S., G.S.N., M.C., A.M.P., and S.S.
Supervision: M.S., C.J.W., and L.M. Writing—original draft: M.S., C.J.W., and L.M. Writing—review
and editing: M.S., C.J.W., A.M.P., and L.M. Competing interests: The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Data and materials availability: High-resolution images of
confocal data and the original high-resolution images from the light sheet microscopy have
been deposited in the BioImage Archive under accession number S-BIAD553 (www.ebi.ac.uk/
biostudies/BioImages/studies/S-BIAD553www.ebi.ac.uk/biostudies/BioImages/studies/S-
BIAD553). All other data needed to evaluate the conclusions in the paper are present in the
paper and/or the Supplementary Materials.
Submitted 6 April 2023
Accepted 6 November 2023
Published 6 December 2023
10.1126/sciadv.adh8152
SC I EN C E A D VA N CE S | RESE A RCH ARTI CL E
Serra et al., Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
6 December 2023
11 of 11
Downloaded from https://www.science.org at Harvard University on December 06, 2023

Supplementary Materials for
A mechanochemical model recapitulates distinct vertebrate 
gastrulation modes
Mattia Serra et al.
Corresponding author: Mattia Serra, mserra@ucsd.edu; L. Mahadevan, lmahadev@g.harvard.edu
Sci. Adv. 9, eadh8152 (2023)
DOI: 10.1126/sciadv.adh8152
The PDF file includes:
Supplementary Text
Figs. S1 to S13
Tables S1 to S3
Legends for movies S1 to S27
References
Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following:
Movies S1 to S27

1 Mathematical Model
We derive our model in Cartesian coordinates and then provide an equivalent reformulation in polar coordinates.
1.1 Momentum Balance and Continuity Equation
We denote the tissue velocity field v(x, t) = [u(x, t), v(x, t)]⊤ and its vorticity scalar by ω(x, t). We recall the 
velocity gradient decomposition
∇v(x, t) = S(x, t) + W(x, t),
(S1)
with the rate-of-strain tensor S and the spin tensor W deﬁned as
S = 1
2(∇v + ∇v⊤),
W = 1
2(∇v −∇v⊤) ≡ω
2 R,
R :=
 0
−1
1
0

.
(S2)
We further decompose S into its isotropic and deviatoric parts as
Ss = S −SI,
SI = I1
2∇· v.
(S3)
The viscous, active, total stresses and total stress trace are
σV = −pI + 2µSs
σA =m(x, t)[e(x, t) ⊗e(x, t) −1
2I],
e(x, t) = [cos φ(x, t), sin φ(x, t)]⊤
σT =σV + σA
Tr[σT ] = −2p,
(S4)
where µ denotes the shear viscosity, m denotes the active stress intensity arising from active myosin and φ the
orientation of the myosin cables with respect to the x−axis. The friction exerted by the surrounding ﬂuid on the
epiblast is assumed to be very small, therefore we ignore substrate friction in our model.

Because viscosity is high (µ ≈9 × 103 Pa · s), we ignore inertial terms and write the momentum balance as
∇· σT =∇· σV + ∇· σA = 0
∇· σV =
 −px
−py

+ µ
 uyy + uxx
vxx + vyy

∇· σA =1
2
 cos 2φ (2mφy + mx) + sin 2φ(my −2mφx)
sin 2φ (2mφy + mx) −cos 2φ(my −2mφx)

=⇒
 px
py

=µ
 uyy + uxx
vxx + vyy

+ 1
2
 cos 2φ (2mφy + mx) + sin 2φ(my −2mφx)
sin 2φ (2mφy + mx) −cos 2φ(my −2mφx)

.
(S5)
To close the system, we choose a simple continuity equation in which the ﬂow divergence is proportional to the
isotropic total stress (eq. (S4)) and active myosin concentration i.e.
∇· v =c(Tr[σT ] −p0m) = c(−2p −p0m)
=⇒p = −∇·v
2c −p0m
2 ,
(S6)
where c has units [ Pa · s]−1 and p0 is a non-dimensional parameter modulating the contribution of active myosin
to ﬂow divergence. The intuition behind eq. (S6) is that regions of high isotropic compressive stress and high active
myosin, inducing isotropic apical cell contraction, exhibit negative ﬂow divergence, i.e., cell ingression or folding.
The above relation then serves as a means of writing the local pressure in terms of the ﬂow divergence and the active
myosin concentration. Equation (S6) can also be derived considering the continuity equation of a two-dimensional
conﬂuent epithelium and using the above phenomenological arguments to express the source/sink terms as a function
of ∇· v and m. Substituting eq. (S6) into eq. (S5), we obtain the resulting force balance equations describing our
active continuum without pressure terms
0 = uxx
1 + 2µc
2c
+ uyyµ + vxy
2c + p0mx
2
+ 1
2(cos 2φ (2mφy + mx) + sin 2φ(my −2mφx))
0 = vxxµ + vyy
1 + 2µc
2c
+ uxy
2c + p0my
2
+ 1
2(sin 2φ (2mφy + mx) −cos 2φ(my −2mφx)).
(S7)
1.2
Active Stress Orientation
We assume the evolution of actomyosin cables orientation satisﬁes Jeffery’s equation (42)
φt = −[v · ∇]φ + ω
2 + λ(S12 cos 2φ + S22−S11
2
sin 2φ),
(S8)
which describes the direction evolution of axis-symmetric ﬁbers under a low Reynold’s number ﬂow. In eq. (S8),
φt = ∂φ
∂t , λ is a parameter quantifying the sensitivity of actomyosin cables reorientation due to shear-induced rotations,
Sij denotes the entries of S and the ﬁrst two terms represent the advection term and the rigid-body rotation rate
described by half of the ﬂow vorticity.
1.3
Active Stress Magnitude
The dynamics of active myosin on actin ﬁlaments is characterized by catch bonds (23), i.e., the dissociation rate of
actomyosin bonds depends on the tension along the actomyosin cable Tc, and decreases exponentially for increasing
tension. Laser ablation experiments demonstrate that supracellular actomyosin cables exhibit higher tension and
higher levels of myosin than isolated cell junctions (52). We explain below our reasoning to estimate Tc.

1.3.1
Junction-level modeling
Junction-level modeling of the feedback between total tension and active stress intensity supports active stress in-
tensity as a good proxy for cable tension. Optical manipulation of apical cell-cell junctions in drosophila and chick
embryo suggest that junctions are viscoelastic (53, 54). Among simple viscoelastic models, measurements of junc-
tion deformation through time in chick embryos are best ﬁt by a simple Maxwell model consisting of a spring and
dashpot in series (54) (Figure S1A). Thus, we consider each junction as a Maxwell element in parallel with an active
element generating additional active stresses (Figure S1B). Maxwellian viscoelasticity has been frequently used to
model single-junction dynamics in drosophila (35, 37, 53). It is easy to show that the tension of a Maxwell element
can be written as an elastic term with a continuously relaxing rest length (55). Consistent with the assumption of
Maxwellian viscoelasticity and additional tension induced by myosin activity, the total junction tension is
Tij = K(rij −lij) + mij,
(S9)
where K is a spring constant, rij = rj −ri is the length between vertex positions, lij is a dynamic rest length at which
elastic tension vanishes, and mij represents an active stress intensity due to myosin activity. The rest length relaxes
to the junction length over time as
dlij
dt = (rij −lij) 1
τ ,
(S10)
where τ is the relaxation time. We model the dynamics of myosin activity (active stress intensity) in terms of mecha-
nisms for myosin recruitment and tension-dependent dissociation
dmij
dt
=

mn
tr −mij
td e−koTij −χmij

tp
tc ,
(S11)
where tr is the recruitment time scale of myosin from the cytoplasm, which has a given maximum concentration
mn, and t−1
d e−koTij represents the tension-dependent dissociation rate of actomyosin cables. χ has units [t−1] and
accounts for the saturation of myosin activity on junctions, ensuring that active stress cannot accumulate without
bound. Physically, available myosin may be depleted from basal pools or the number of active myosin motors that
can operate on actin ﬁlaments may be limited. In this work, we remain agnostic as to which saturation mechanisms
may operate and their relative contributions, so we capture saturation effects with a simple linear term. Later, we
show that our results are not sensitive to the saturation mechanism. Note again that m, mn have units [Pa] as they
describe the stress magnitude arising from active myosin. From the time when active myosin is available to the time
it generates active stresses, there is a time scale (tp). We model this delay with the ratio (tp/tc), where tc is the
characteristic time scale of the system.
Equations (S9-S11) model the coupled dynamics of tension and myosin activity in a single junction (Figure
S1B). To couple the dynamics of adjacent edges and model a supracellular actomyosin cable, we further assume
relaxational vertex dynamics. Restricting the cable to one dimension, the dynamics of each vertex are dominated by
its two neighboring cable edges as
dri
dt = 1
ν (Ti,i+1 −Ti,i−1) ,
(S12)
where ν represents effective friction resisting vertex displacement (37, 35, 53). The effective friction models the
internal dissipative mechanisms such as the interaction of the cell junction with the cytosol and the viscous ﬂow
induced in the cytoskeleton due to the motion of the cell vertices (28). External dissipation by the surrounding ﬂuid
is assumed to be minimal. Thus, the length rij between vertices experiences a strain rate
drij
dt = drj
dt −dri
dt = 1
ν (Ti,j+1 −Ti,j −Ti,j + Ti−1,i) = ∆Tij
ν
,
(S13)
where ∆is the discrete Laplacian. In the continuum limit, we replace the discrete laplacian with ∆¯l2, where ¯l is
the characteristic junction length (37). This provides two coupled equations for the dynamics of tension and myosin

activity:



∂T
∂t = K¯l2
ν ∆T −T−m
τ
+

mn
tr −m
td e−koT −χm

tp
tc
∂m
∂t =

mn
tr −m
td e−koT −χm

tp
tc .
(S14)
These equations can be combined to give a differential equation for the difference between T and m
∂(T −m)
∂t
= K¯l2
ν ∆T −T −m
τ
,
(S15)
which can also be understood as a differential equation for the elastic (or passive) component of the tension. The ﬁrst
term causes elastic tension to propagate along cables. The second term causes elastic tension to diminish as the rest
length relaxes. Where the propagation term dominates, we expect transient deviations between m and T. Otherwise,
the dynamics tend to reach T = m. Simulating equations (S14) with an initial central peak of active stress intensity,
we ﬁnd that, when K¯l2τ
ν
is small, T and m follow one another closely, as shown in Movie S13 and Figure S1C.
Supplementary Figure S1: Mechanical feedback along a 1D cable. A) Chick embryo experimental data from (54) shows that a
junction deformed through optical manipulation exhibits a response that is best ﬁt by Maxwellian viscoelasticity. B) Mechanical
element for an actomyosin cable, consisting of a Maxwell element in parallel with an active element. C) Plots from the evolution
of (S14) for sample parameters K¯l2
ν
= 1, τ = 0.001, and χ tp
tc = 2.5 so that cable tension reaches a maximum of m = T = 20.
Sample parameters: mntp
trtc = 50,
tp
tdtc = 100, ko = 0.625, dx = 0.01, dt = 0.00001.
1.3.2
Tissue-level modeling and time scales
The tissue-scale behavior is ﬂuid-like and hence well described by viscous and active stresses (eq.(S5)) at gastrulation
time scales. Extending the above reasoning to the tissue scale, active myosin contributes to cable tension Tc through
an active stress contribution TA = ⟨e, σAe⟩= m
2 . At the junction level, TA corresponds to mij, leaving K(rij −lij)
to be accounted for. One can also compute from the viscous stress TV = ⟨e, σV e⟩. However, σV and TV reﬂect

ﬂuid-like tissue stresses arising from cell division and intercalation. If and how TV may affect junction-level cable
tension is unclear. Regardless, we expect this effect to be of secondary importance because myosin-induced (active)
tension (TA) dominates TV (37).
We are not aware of estimates for K or ν, so we cannot precisely estimate K¯l2
ν . Moreover, the junction-level
modeling presumes propagation over a 1D cable with no constraints on its extent. In the tissue, however, super-cellular
cables have a limited extent spanning from 2 to 8 cells (5). Therefore, even if K and ν were known, propagation
strength should be reduced by the effective length of super-cellular cables, which is small compared to the tissue
scale. Last, the junction relaxation time has been estimated to be in the order of seconds in the chick epiblast (54).
Altogether, the fast relaxation of the junction rest length and a small K¯l2
ν
suggests that the elastic component of
the tension is negligible at leading order. Following brief periods of rest length relaxation, mechanical feedback
adjusts myosin activity to balance the tension of neighboring junctions (35). This is consistent with experimental
observations that levels of myosin activity can serve as a readout for tension on cell junctions (2). Thus, in our coarse-
grained continuum model, which neglects short-timescale elasticity and considers longer timescales over which the
epithelium is effectively viscous, we expect
Tc ≈TA = m
2 ,
(S16)
and that m will exhibit some effective propagation of active stress intensity along cables in their predominant orien-
tation φ. In two dimensions, the effects of this directional propagation can be captured by two directional derivatives
along the cable, ∆φ = DφDφ, and with a coefﬁcient ξ modulating the tissue-scale effect of tension propagation. The
deﬁnition ∆φ = DφDφ is a simpliﬁcation of the more general (e · ∇)2 and assumes that the individual cables along
which propagation occurs are approximately straight locally.
We reason that at the tissue scale, the dynamics of active stress intensity are governed by similar mechanisms of
myosin recruitment and tension-dependent dissociation modeled at the junction scale. Using the above assumptions
and eq. (S16), we model the evolution of active stress magnitude as
mt = (mn
tr −e−ko m
2 m
td −χm)tp
tc −[v · ∇]m + ξ∆φm.
(S17)
The last two terms account for the advection of active stress intensity through material transport of actomyosin cables
and for the directed propagation of active stress intensity along actomyosin cables with ∆φ deﬁned as the second
directional derivative along the cable direction φ.
1.4
Model in Cartesian coordinates
The full model describing our active continuum can be summarized as















0 =
uxx
1+2µc
2c
+ uyyµ + vxy
2c + p0mx
2
+ 1
2(cos 2φ (2mφy + mx) + sin 2φ(my −2mφx))
vxxµ + vyy
1+2µc
2c
+ uxy
2c + p0my
2
+ 1
2(sin 2φ (2mφy + mx) −cos 2φ(my −2mφx))
φt =
λ( uy+vx
2
cos 2φ + vy−ux
2
sin 2φ) −[v · ∇] + ω
2
mt =
(mn
tr −e−ko m
2 m
td −χm)tp
tc −[v · ∇]m + ξ∆φm
+ Boundary Conditions and Initial Conditions.
(S18)

1.4.1
Non-dimensional model in Cartesian coordinates
Denoting by uc, xc, tc = xc/uc and mc = µuc/xc the characteristic velocity, characteristic length scale, characteristic
time scale and the characteristic viscous shear stress, we rewrite eq. (S18) in non-dimensional compact form as











0 =
2p1∆v + ∇[∇· v] + 2p1B∇m + p1(p0 −1)∇m + 2p1∇· Bm
φt =
p2
2 [sin 2φ(vy −ux) + cos 2φ(uy + vx)] −[v · ∇]φ + ω
2
mt =
p3 −p4e−p5
2 mm −p6m −[v · ∇]m + p7∆φm
+ Boundary Conditions and Initial Conditions,
(S19)
where
B = e ⊗e =

cos2 φ
sin φ cos φ
sin φ cos φ
sin2 φ

,
and m, φ, u, v, x, y, t are nondimensional. In eq. (S19), there are seven nondimensional parameters
p0,
p1 = µc,
p2 = λ,
p3 = tp
tr
mn
mc ,
p4 = tp
td ,
p5 = koµuc
xc ,
p6 = χtp,
p7 =
ξ
xcuc .
(S20)
p0 describes the cell’s propensity of ingressing from a myosin-induced apical isotropic contraction and can be thought
of also as the ratio of isotropic to anisotropic active stresses. p1 describes the ratio of the shear to bulk viscosity, p2
is the alignment parameter that describes how the actomyosin cables tend to orient due to shear-induced rotations and
is ≈1 for elongated ﬁbers. p3 represents the ratio of the myosin (or active stress intensity) recruitment time scale tr,
from the ambient myosin pool of concentration mn/mc, to the characteristic tp time scale, multiplied by mn/mc. p4
represents the ratio of the tp time scale to the dissociation time scale td. p5 is the product of the characteristic viscous
shear stress and ko, which represents the inverse of the characteristic tension of the actomyosin cables (with units
[Pa]−1). p6 is the strength of the simplest linear saturation term set by the ratio of tp to the characteristic dissociation
time scale χ−1 controlling saturation. Practically, p6 enables setting a desired saturation level for m. p7 is the ratio
between transport of the active stress magnitude via tension propagation (with effective diffusion constant ξ) and
active stress magnitude transport via advection.
The ﬁrst two terms of the force balance are a viscous force and a force arising from compressibility inhomo-
geneities. Instead, the last three terms are active forces induced by m and φ inhomogeneities. Finally, observing the
ﬁrst two terms in the last equation of (S19), we note that more myosin induces higher tension on the cables, which in
turn decreases the dissociation rate: (m ↑) →Tc ↑(more positive) →diss. rate ↓→myosin increases (m ↑) (Figure
2A). This observation suggests an instability, which will become clear in section 1.4.3.
1.4.2
Role of p0
To gain insights on p0, we rewrite the force balance as
∇[∇· v] = p1(1 −p0)∇m −2p1B∇m −2p1∆v −2p1m∇· B.
(S21)
From eq. (S6), we know that p0 ≥0 reﬂects the expectation that high myosin induces isotropic apical cell contraction
that causes active cell ingression. To elucidate the effect of p0 on the relation between ∇[∇· v] and ∇m, we neglect
the shear force (−2p1∆v), assume a simpliﬁed uniform ridge of active myosin in the y direction (Figure S2), and a
spatially uniform cable distribution (i.e., ∇· B = 0). Therefore, eq. (S21) simpliﬁes to
∇[∇· v] ≈p1(1 −p0)∇m −2p1B∇m.
(S22)
If cables are perpendicular to the myosin ridge (Figure S2A), as in the wild-type development (Figure 1E at HH3
and Figure 2C right), eq. (S22) reveals that for all p0 ≥0, ∇m and ∇[∇· v] have opposite directions, reﬂecting
the expectation that a ridge of high myosin induces a sink in the velocity ﬁeld (Figure 2H). By contrast, if cables are

parallel to the myosin ridge (Figure S2B-C) as in the case of perturbation 3 (Figure 4 of (4) and Movie8), eq. (S22)
reveals that for all p0 > 1 (Figure S2B), ∇m and ∇[∇· v] have opposite directions. On the contrary, if p0 < 1,
∇m and ∇[∇· v] would have the same direction (Figure S2C). Therefore, combining our model with experimental
observations, we use p0 > 1 when active cell ingression is present, and p0 = 0 otherwise.
Supplementary Figure S2: Inﬂuence of p0 on the relationship between ∇m and ∇[∇· v]. We consider a simpliﬁed force
balance (eq. (S22)) with no shear forces, a simple distribution m made of a ridge in the y direction and uniform actomyosin
cables (i.e., ∇· B = 0) perpendicular (A) or parallel (B, C) to the myosin ridge. Equation (S22) reveals that when cables are
perpendicular (A) to the ridge, ∇m and ∇[∇· v] have opposite directions for all values of p0 > 0, reﬂecting the expectation that
a ridge of high myosin induces a sink in the velocity ﬁeld. When cables are perpendicular to the ridge, ∇m and ∇[∇· v] have
opposite directions for p0 > 1 (B), and the same direction for p0 < 1.
1.4.3
One-dimensional model
To gain insights about the model (S19), we assume slow dynamics in the y−direction, ignore the φ−dynamics and
set φ = 0, obtaining the following simpliﬁed one-dimensional model
(
0 = uxx(1 + 2p1) + p1 mx(1 + p0)
mt = p3 −p4e−p5
2 mm −p6m −mxu + p7mxx.
(S23)
Equation (S23) describes the dynamics along a straight line perpendicular to the primitive streak. We set Dirichlet
boundary conditions on the velocity u(0, t) = −|ub|, u(L, t) = |ub| consistent with the symmetric cell migration in
the extra-embryonic area, and no-ﬂux boundary conditions for m: mx(0, t) = mx(L, t) = 0.
We investigate the main features of eq. (S23) by seeking the constant ﬁxed points for m which solve the implicit
equation p3 −(p4e−p5
2 m + p6)m = 0. From the ﬁrst equation, we compute the corresponding equilibrium velocity
ﬁeld ueq. = 2|ub|
L x −|ub|. We then study the linear stability of these equilibrium solutions by computing the spectrum
of the corresponding linearized PDE. Denoting by δh = [δu, δm]⊤the perturbation from the equilibrium, we compute
the linearized version of Eq. (S23) in operator form as Aδh = B(x)δh where
A =
 0
0
0
∂t

, B(x) =
"
(1 + 2p1)∂xx
p1(1 + p0)∂x
0
1
2e−1
2 p5meq.p4(p5meq. −2) −(2|ub|
L x −|ub|)∂x −p6 + p7∂xx
#
,
(S24)
whose boundary conditions are inherited from the nonlinear problem, and correspond to zero Dirichlet boundary
conditions for δu and zero ﬂux boundary conditions for δm. We discretize the linearized PDE using a centered ﬁnite
differencing scheme (56) and compute the generalized eigenvalue problem associated with eq. (S24).

Supplementary Figure S3: 1D model. (A) Top: Graph of p3 −(p4e−p5
2 m + p6)m = 0 shows three meq. marked with a blue
circle, a red asterisk, and a green circle. Bottom: Truncated spectrum of the linearized PDE around corresponding meq., ueq.,
consisting of the 500 eigenvalues with the highest real part. The spectrum at the intermediate equilibrium has positive real parts,
implying that the intermediate equilibrium is linearly unstable. (B) The initial condition of the nonlinear 1D model using as
initial myosin concentration a Gaussian added to the higher unstable meq.. The blue curve shows the associated initial velocity
u0, and the red dashed curve the initial velocity divergence ux0. (C) Same as B at the ﬁnal time. The full time evolution is
available as Movie S1. Sample parameters: p0 = 2, p1 = 0.25, p3 = 50, p4 = 100, p5 = 1.25, p6 = 1, p7 = 0.01, ub =
0.5, L = 4, dx = 0.008, dt = 0.0001.
Supplementary Figure S3A top shows three equilibria meq., while the bottom panel shows the corresponding 500
eigenvalues, with the largest real part, of the linearized operator. The spectrum shows that the lowest and highest
equilibria are linearly stable while the intermediate equilibrium is linearly unstable for the chosen parameter values.
We conﬁrm these linearized results by solving the full nonlinear PDE from an initial Gaussian m distribution (Figure
S3B) added to the unstable meq. (Figure S3A top, red asterisk). From a biological perspective, a region of higher m0
represents the mesendoderm precursor. At later times (Figure S3C), m undergoes a focusing instability, that in turn
generates a 1D attractor corresponding to the PS and marked by a peak of negative divergence (red dashed curve). The
complete time evolution is available as Movie S1. Finally, the velocity divergence ux shows a contracting region close
to the PS as well as two symmetric expanding regions close to the boundary, consistent with the isotropic deformations
observed in the Embryonic and Extra-Embryonic territories (2). Our simple 1D model reproduces several key features
of amniote gastrulation. Yet, it is insufﬁcient to reproduce the convergent extension and vortical patterns observed in
experiments, which we investigate with our 2D model.
We note that eq. (S23) differs from the one-dimensional isotropic active gel instability in (57). Despite both
associated with the dynamics of actomyosin on the cell cortex, eq. (S23) models myosin exchange with the cytoplasm
as opposed to (57), which assume no exchange with the cytoplasm (eq. (1) and [8] in (57)). Additionally, our model
accounts for catch-bonds between actin and myosin in the form experimentally measured in (23), which is absent
in (57). Finally, (57) accounts for friction with the substrate, absent in our case. For a more detailed biological
explanation behind the myosin exchange with the cytoplasm and the catch-bond mechanism in our context, we refer
the reader to Figure 3 of (5).
1.5
Model in polar coordinates
Because of the circular geometry of the Extra-embryonic tissue and the symmetric radial cellular motion at its outer
boundary, we write model (S18) in polar coordinates.

Supplementary Figure S4: Numerical mesh. Illustration of the discretization grid (ﬁrst quadrant) used to solve eq. (S26). β
denotes the cables orientation relative to α.
Denoting the velocity ﬁeld by v = u(r, α, t)er + v(r, α, t)eα and the cables orientation relative to α by β (Figure
S4), we obtain





















0 = r2(1+2cµ)urr+2cµuαα+r(1+2cµ)ur−(1+2cµ)u−(1+4cµ)vα+rvrα+p0cr2mr+cr sin 2β[mα−2rmβr]+cr cos 2β[rmr+2m(1+βα)]
2cr2
0 = 2cµr2vrr+(1+2cµ)vαα+2cµrvr−2cµv+(1+4cµ)uα+rurα+p0crmα+cr sin 2β[2m(1+βα)+rmr]−cr cos 2β[mα−2rmβr]
2cr2
βt =
v−uα+rvr
2r
+ λ
2r[cos 2β(uα −v + rvr) + sin 2β(u + vα −rur)] −(v[1+βα]
r
+ uβr)
mt = (mn
tr −e−ko m
2 m
td −χm)tp
tc −(vmα
r
+ umr) + ξ[mrr cos2 β + mαα sin2 β +
  mαr
r
−mα
2r2

sin 2β]
u(rNr, α, t) = |ub|, v(rNr, α, t) = 0, βr(rNr, α, t) = 0, mr(rNr, α, t) = 0
+ Initial Conditions,
(S25)
which, in non-dimensional form, becomes





















0 = (urr −u
r2 + ur
r )(1+p1
p1 ) + uαα
r2 + vrα
rp1 −vα
r2 (1+2p1
p1
) + p0mr
2
+ cos 2β(m[1+βα]
r
+ mr
2 ) −sin 2β(−mα
2r + mβr)
0 = vrr + vαα
r2 (1+p1
p1 ) + urα
rp1 + vr
r + uα
r2 (1+2p1
p1
) −v
r2 + p0mα
2r
+ cos 2β(−mα
2r + mβr) + sin 2β(m[1+βα]
r
+ mr
2 )
βt =
v−uα
2r
+ vr
2 + p2
2 [cos 2β(uα−v
r
+ vr) + sin 2β(−ur + u+vα
r
)] −(v[1+βα]
r
+ uβr)
mt = p3 −p4e−p5
2 mm −p6m −(vmα
r
+ umr) + p7[mrr cos2 β + mαα sin2 β +
  mαr
r
−mα
2r2

sin 2β]
u(rNr, α, t) = |ub|, v(rNr, α, t) = 0, βr(rNr, α, t) = 0, mr(rNr, α, t) = 0
+ Initial Conditions.
(S26)
2
Numerical Scheme
We develop a ﬁnite-difference numerical scheme to solve eq. (S26) in MATLAB. First, we multiply the momentum
balance equations by r2, leaving their solutions unaltered while avoiding numerical issues at grid points close to the
origin. Then, we discretize spatial differential operators using centered ﬁnite-difference at second-order accuracy,
except at the grid points (r1, αj) (Figure S4), where we use forward ﬁnite-difference at second-order accuracy (56).

We solve the ﬁrst two equations for u, v by inverting (once) the corresponding discretized differential operator, which
we multiply at each time step to the discretized forcing vector arising from the updated β, m-dependent terms. We
adopt a two-step Adams–Bashforth method to solve the last two PDEs for β and α.
Because the cables orientation is a direction instead of a vector ﬁeld, spatial derivatives of β need special care.
Speciﬁcally, when computing βr(i, j) ≈β(i−1,j)−β(i+1,j)
2∆r
, one should make sure that both the sign and the amplitude
are correct. We do so by rewriting β(i−1,j)−β(i+1,j)
2∆r
= βp
r(i, j)+βm
r (i, j), where βp
r(i, j) = β(i+1,j)−β(i,j)
2∆r
, βm
r (i, j) =
β(i,j)−β(i−1,j)
2∆r
, and compute βp
r(i, j) = sign(⟨eβ(i+1,j)×eβ(i,j), ˆez⟩) arccos ⟨eβ(i+1,j), eβ(i,j)⟩, where eβ = [cos β, sin β, 0], ˆez =
[0, 0, 1]. The same strategy can be used for higher-order derivatives and forward ﬁnite difference schemes. We sum-
marize our numerical scheme in the following algorithm.
Algorithm 1 Numerical Solver of eq. (S26)
Inputs:
Grid: ri = i∆r, i = 1...Nr, Nr∆r = L, αj = ∆α
2 + j∆α, j = 0...Nα−1, Nα∆α = 2π
Initial Conditions: m(r, α, 0), β(r, α, 0)
Parameters: pi, i = 0, .., 7
1. Solve for u(r, α, 0), v(r, α, 0) from the ﬁrst two equations
2. Compute m(r, α, ∆t), β(r, α, ∆t) using m(r, α, 0), β(r, α, 0), u(r, α, 0), v(r, α, 0)
3. Repeat step 1 and 2 for all tk = k∆t, k = 0, .., Nt, Tf = Nt∆t
Outputs: u, v, β, m at all grid points {ri, αj, tk}.
To prevent the development of sharp derivatives in β at the origin due to the forward ﬁnite-difference scheme,
we add a diffusion term in the βt equation with a non-dimensional prefactor of 10−3. In all our simulations, we use
∆r = 0.05, L = 1, ∆α = 4◦, ∆t = 5 × 10−6, Tf ≈1. We monitor the accuracy of our numerical solver by
substituting our solution at each time step into the momentum balance equations. We ﬁnd deviations from zero of the
order ≈10−11.
3
Induction of active stress intensity via tension propagation
To visualize the effect of directed propagation (∆φ) of active tension in polar coordinates, we solve the mt equation
in (S26) activating only the diffusion term on the right-end side. Figure S5A shows the evolution of active stress
intensity m starting with high values in the sickle-shaped region of mesendoderm precursors. At later times, active
stress intensity propagates around the epiblast due to the tension-propagation mechanism captured by p7∆φm (Figure
S5B). In the full model, however, all terms in eq. (S17) contribute to the evolution of m. Because the tissue is
ﬂuidized, the propagation of active stress intensity is dominated by advection so that active stress intensity does not
appear to spread to the full extent depicted in Figure S5.

Supplementary Figure S5: Visualization of directional propagation of active stress intensity. A) Initial and ﬁnal distribution
of active stress intensity m under evolution mt = p7∆φm with no evolution of v or φ. B) Initial and ﬁnal distribution of p7∆φm.
Active stress orientations are indicated by white (A) and black (B) line segments. Sample parameter: p7 = 0.01.
4
Parameters, boundary and initial conditions: selection and sensitivity analysis
In all our simulations, we use a single set of parameter values summarized in table 1.
p0
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6
p7
0 or 2
0.15
0.9
50
100
1.25
1
0.01
Table 1: Parameter values.
We have selected parameter values using a combination of experiments, mechanistic arguments and numerical
simulations; and have performed sensitivity analyses with respect to parameter changes as described below.
4.1
p0, p1, p2
According to our arguments in Section 1.4.2, we set p0 = 0 when active cell ingression is inhibited with drugs and
p0 = 2 otherwise. We use p1 = 0.15 and note that increasing p1 models a more compressible tissue. With higher
p1, the typical counter-rotating vortices (polonaise movement) disappear due to increased cell ingression and less cell
redistribution (see Fig.S11). From Jeffery’s equation (S8), p2 modulates the rotation rate due to shear of a material
ﬁber, which is ≈1 for elongated ﬁbers. Here we set p2 = 0.9, and note that slight variations of this value does not
affect our results, as shown in WT simulations Movie S14 (Movie S15) for p2 = 0.6 (p2 = 1).

4.2
p3, p4, p5
tp is the approximate time required to observe active stress at the tissue scale generated by active myosin cables.
This phenomenon involves a complex cascade of operations from kinetic reactions to single-cell and multicellular
mechanochemical processes. Here we estimate tp using the typical time for a junction to fully contract and induce
an intercalation event driven by junctional myosin, a robust and experimentally accessible readout of tissue-scale
active stress induced by actomyosin cables. Experiments in the chick epiblast show that this process takes up to
≈20min (2). A typical time course is shown in ﬁg 4F of (2) where it takes 60 minutes for three junctions to
successively contract. See also supplementary videos 10 and 11 of (2) which show various examples of intercalating
cells, where it takes 4-10 frames (1 frame is 3 minutes) for junctions to contract. This result is consistent with tissue-
scale mechanochemical models, where the actomyosin or active stress dynamics is the slowest (37, 35, 58), and a
given conﬁguration of active stress generates the corresponding tissue-scale velocity ﬁeld by solving a static force
balance (eq. 1 in S19).
The recruitment and dissociation time scales are tr ≃td ≈10s in line with observations
made in Drosophila (53). With these estimates, we set p3 = 50 and p4 = 100. p5 is the coupling strength regulating
myosin intensity and tension via the catch-bond feedback mechanisms. We are unaware of techniques to estimate
p5, and set p5 = 1.25. To test the sensitivity of our results with respect to p5, we show that a 20% reduction of
the sensitivity to actomyosin dissociation rate to tension, induces a higher unstable myosin equilibrium concentration
meq. (Figure S6). The overall dynamic evolution of the system, however, remains qualitatively unchanged as shown
in Movie S16, to be compared with Figure 2 and Movie S2.
Supplementary Figure S6: Sensitivity to p5. A) Exponential actomyosin dissociation rate p4e−p5
2 m for two values of p5. B)
Reducing p5 by 20%, almost doubles the unstable meq.
By contrast, a 25% increase of p5 causes a bifurcation of meq., in which case model evolution differs considerably
from experiments, as shown in Movie S17. Similar conclusions hold if changes in p3 and p4 induce a bifurcation
of meq.. Our results, therefore, show that the active stress instability modulated by the catch-bond dynamics of
actomyosin cables is essential for reproducing observed ﬂow patterns.
4.3
p6, p7
While myosin activity cannot increase without bounds, the precise mechanisms by which and degree to which it satu-
rates on junctions are beyond the scope of our model. This is because we are interested in a ﬁnite-time developmental
interval characterized by instability rather than an asymptotic equilibrium state. To this end, we add a linear saturation

term −p6m as the simplest functional form to dampen positive feedback and create a higher stable equilibrium value
for m (Figure S3A and Figure S7A). For our model parameters, the three meq. persist for p6 < 5.989, preserving the
instability needed for active stress intensity to grow. To show the robustness of our results with respect to changes in
p6, we show that even without (p6 = 0) any saturation term (Figure S7B), the qualitative results of the 2D model do
not change (Movie S18).
Supplementary Figure S7: Sensitivity to p6, controlling active stress intensity saturation. Graphs of p3−(p4e−p5
2 m+p6)m =
0 for saturation parameter p6 = 1 (A) and p6 = 0 (B). Equilibria are marked with a blue circle (stable), red asterisk (unstable)
and green circle (stable).
More generally, we ﬁnd that slight variations in p3, p4, p5, p6 do not alter the overall system behavior as long as
the graph (Figure S3A) determining meq does not change considerably (or undergoes a bifurcation).
Because the tissue is ﬂuid-like and cells undergo embryo-scale motion, we argue that the advective transport of
cells with active myosin dominates the induction of myosin via tension propagation on individual cables. Hence, we
set p7 = 0.01 throughout. Increasing the strength of active force propagation by 500% (p7 = 0.05), the qualitative
results of the 2D model (Movie S19) do not change, conﬁrming the robustness of our results to parameters selection.
4.4
Boundary conditions
At the EP-EE boundary, the velocity is tangential to the boundary, ensuring that the EP area remains approximately
constant over time, while in the EE region, the velocity is radial and roughly symmetric in α, explaining the expansion
of the EE region over time (2). Because here we want to mechanistically predict what generates the observed ﬂow
patterns rather than enforcing it as an input, we do not select the boundary of our domain at the EP-EE interface, where
the Dirichlet velocity boundary conditions would consist of a highly speciﬁc tangential ﬂow proﬁle. By contrast, we
set our domain boundary ∂Ω(Figure 1A) slightly outside the EP-EE boundary, where, from the previous argument,
the velocity is only radial and slightly higher than zero (we set |vb| = 0.2). Remarkably, our model recapitulates the
correct vortical ﬂows within the EP region and the associated tangential velocity behavior at the EP-EE interface. The
most natural choice of boundary conditions for m, φ is no ﬂux, as there is no experimental evidence of sources, sinks,
or constant values of m, φ close to the EP-EE boundary. Mathematically, we set v = vb|∂Ω, ∇m·n = 0, ∇φ·n = 0,
where n is the outer normal to ∂Ω.
To test the sensitivity of our results with respect to |vb|, we ﬁnd that a 50% increase (decrease) of |vb| does not
affect the qualitative behavior of our results, as shown in Movie S20 (Movie S21) to be compared with Movie S2.

Overall, increasing (decreasing) |vb| exerts a stronger (weaker) pulling of the PS towards the boundary.
4.5
Initial conditions
Consistent with experiments (Figure 1E at HH1), we set the initial orientation of actomyosin cables φ(x, t0) along the
tangential direction, and m(x, t0) as a Gaussian distribution (Figure 2C left) added to the unstable meq. equilibrium
(Figure S3A), modeling the onset of high active myosin in the mesendoderm sickle territory. The Gaussian
m(x, t0) = meq. + Ae
−(r−rc)2
2σ2r
−(α−αc)2
2σ2α
(reduced mesendoderm)
(S27)
is centered at rc = 0.6, αc = 250◦, has amplitude A = 5 and standard deviations σr = 0.06, σα = 3σr/rc. We select
αc = 250◦to align the AP axis of the model (Figure 2C) with the AP axis from the experiment (Figure 2E). Changing
αc only changes the AP axis orientation. We set σα = 3σr/rc so that the Gaussian width in the tangential direction is
three times the width in the radial direction, reﬂecting the asymmetry of the mesendoderm sickle.
To test the sensitivity of our results to our Gaussian perturbation, we ﬁnd that a 20% increase (decrease) in A
Movie S22 (Movie S23) does not affect the qualitative behavior of our model. Similar conclusions hold for a 20%
increase (decrease) in σr Movie S24 (Movie S25) and for 20% increase (decrease) in rc Movie S26 (Movie S27).
Increasing rc causes a stronger pulling of the PS towards the boundary.
4.6
Summary
In all our simulations of (S26) (i.e. eq. 1 in the main text) producing different gastrulation modes (Figures 2-
5), we use a single set of parameter values and boundary conditions, summarized in table 2, except for the initial
myosin distribution m(x, t0) and the scalar, constant parameter p0, which controls the ratio of isotropic (ingression)
to anisotropic (intercalation) active stresses, as described in detail in SI Sec. 1.4.2.
p1
p2
p3
p4
p5
p6
p7
epiboly velocity |vb|
0.15
0.9
50
100
1.25
1
0.01
0.2
Table 2: Parameter values used in all two-dimensional simulations.
We change only p0 and m(x, t0). We set p0 = 2 when there is active cell ingression and p0 = 0 otherwise.
Additionally, in the case of reduced mesendoderm precursors, we set m(x, t0) as described in eq. (S27). By contrast,
in the case of circular mesendoderm precursors (or ancestral condition), we use
m(x, t0) = meq. + Ae
−(r−rc)2
2σ2r
(circular mesendoderm)
(S28)
which models a Gaussian function of r, symmetric in α, added to the unstable meq. and with the same parameters used
in the wild type (Section 4.5). We summarize the combination of p0 and m(x, t0) to produce different gastrulation
modes in Table 3.
gastrulation mode
p0
m(x, t0)
Chick
2
reduced mesendoderm, eq.(S27)
Reptile
0
reduced mesendoderm, eq.(S27)
Teolost Fish
2
circular mesendoderm, eq.(S28)
Amphibian
0
circular mesendoderm, eq.(S28)
Table 3: Summary of p0 and m(x, t0) used to generate different gastrulation modes.

5
Comparison with other models
There is an increasing theoretical effort to couple mechanical and chemical signals in multicellular processes (31,32,
33,34,35,36,37,3,46,38). Our model has two main contributions. i) The tension-dependent dynamics of actomyosin
cables (eqs. (S14),(S17)). ii) The coupling of tissue compressibility to tissue stress and active myosin (eq.(S6)).
Regarding i), using a different argument in the context of active vertex models with no cell intercalations, (37) found
for the ﬁrst time that myosin recruitment along active edges must depend on the internal strain rate of the edge (or
myosin cables) to guarantee the mechanical stability of the active tension network.
5.1
Differences with the tensile-ring model from (3,46)
An alternative modeling approach for amniotic gastrulation is proposed in (3,46) suggesting that a tensile ring at the
EP-EE margin is sufﬁcient to reproduce observation. We highlight below the main difference with our approach.
• Tensile ring model from (3) consists of a viscous ﬂow





α∆v = ∇p + Fa,
∇· v = γ,
ﬁtted from data in space and time,
Fa acts on a ring located at EP-EE margin, and is ﬁtted from data in space and time.
(S29)
Instead of ﬁtting Fa over space and time, (46) propose a mechanistic model to evolve Fa at later times starting
from an observed initial distribution.
By contrast, we model the fully coupled mechanochemical process and use information from experiments only
at the initial time (eq. (S19)), hence providing a predictive mechanistic model. Speciﬁcally, we describe the
process as a viscous ﬂow





α∆v = ∇p + Fa, ﬁrst two eqs. in (S19),
∇· v = g(Fa, v, p), eq.(S6),
∂tFa = f(Fa, v), second two eqs. in (S19).
(S30)
Using only experimental actomyosin cables distribution at the initial time (HH1) and predicting experimental
observations over the following twelve hours (up to HH3) is an important difference compared to the procedure
proposed in (3) that requires data ﬁtting over space and time.
• The active force Fa in (3) acts only on a ring centered at the EP-EE margin. By contrast, we model Fa in
the whole embryo because actomyosin cables generating Fa are abundantly distributed and evolve dynamically
within the embryo consistent with experimental observations (Figure 1). At stages after HH1, experiments show
that active myosin is dominant along the PS rather than on the EP-EE boundary (Figures 1D-E), consistent with
our model prediction (Figure 2C). To support further this ﬁnding, in Figure 3 we show Fa inferred from PIV
velocity and eq. (S19) at HH3. The active forces are mainly perpendicular to the PS (Figures 3) rather than
being organized on a ring-shaped structure.
• (3,46) do not address the forces that drive γ (eq. (S29)), which is ﬁtted from data. By contrast, our model (eq.
(S30)) explains and predicts them in time as a response to mechanical stress, recapitulating the ﬂow divergence
and areal changes that we see in experiments (Figures 2F-H), as well as the overall Dynamic Morpphoskeletons
and other Lagrangian metrics (Figure 2 and Movies 2-3).
Our ability to predict four different perturbations in addition to the wild-type development (Figs. 2,4 and Movies
2-12) supports the validity of our model and hence the underlying biological hypothesis.

6
The Dynamic Morphoskeletons quantify morphogenetic ﬂows
To quantify spatio-temporal ﬂows, we use the notion of Lagrangian coherent structures (59) adapted to morphogene-
sis, i.e. the the embryo’s dynamic morphoskeletons (DM) (44). The DM is based on a Lagrangian description (Figure
S8A) of tissue deformation captured by Finite Time Lyapunov Exponents (FTLE), which naturally combine local and
global mechanisms along cell trajectories. The DM consists of attractors and repellers toward which cells converge or
diverge over a speciﬁc time interval T = tf −t0. Repellers are marked by high values of the forward FTLE Λtf
t0(x0);
attractors are marked by high values of backward FTLE Λt0
tf (xf) and their domain of attraction (DOA) by high values
of the backward FTLE displayed on the initial cell positions Λt0
tf (x0) (see Figure S8B for an illustration). The DM is
objective, reveals the intrinsic geometric feature of spatio-temporal trajectories and is robust to noise (44), hence it is
ideal for quantifying morphogenesis and comparing models with experiments.
Supplementary Figure S8: The Dynamic Morphoskeletons (44) quantify morphogenetic ﬂows. A) Eulerian coordinates x
describe ﬁxed spatial locations, while Lagrangian coordinates x0 label the identity of cells or tissue regions at their initial position
and follow their trajectories Ftf
t0 (x0) over time. B) Fix the initial time t0 of the Lagrangian analysis, which we consider to be
the beginning of our experiments (developmental stage HH1). For any Lagrangian time scale T, the Dynamic Morphoskeletons
consist of repellers, attractors and Domain of Attractions (DOA). Repellers mark regions at the initial cell conﬁguration x0 such
that nearby cells (star and square markers) at opposite sides of the repeller will separate by the ﬁnal time tf. Attractors mark
regions at the ﬁnal cell conﬁguration xf such that initially far cells (triangle and circle markers) will converge to the attractor by
the ﬁnal time tf. The DOA (red area) marks the initial position of all the cells that will converge to the attractor by tf.
Given a modelled or experimental planar velocity ﬁeld v(x, t), we compute the Dynamic Morphoskeleton (DM)
(44) from the backward and forward Finite Time Lyapunov Exponents (FTLE). We compute the FTLE as
Λtf
t0(x0) = ln (λ2(x0))
|tf −t0| ,
xf := Ftf
t0(x0) = x0 +
Z tf
t0
v(Fτ
t0(x0), τ) dτ,
(S31)
where λ2(x0) denotes the highest singular value of the Jacobian of the ﬂow map ∇Ftf
t0(x0) and Ftf
t0(x0) the ﬂow map
describing the trajectories from their initial x0 to ﬁnal xf positions. To compute the FTLE, we ﬁrst calculate Ft
t0(x0)
by integrating the cell velocity ﬁeld v(x, t) using the MATLAB built-in Runge-Kutta solver ODE45 with absolute and
relative tolerance of 10−6, linear interpolation in space and time, and a uniform dense grid of initial conditions. Then,

denoting the i −th component of the ﬂow map Ft
t0(x0) by xi(x1
0, x2
0, t0, t), we compute the deformation gradient
∇Ft
t0(x0) using the ﬁnite-difference approximation
∇Ft
t0(x0) ≈
" x1(x1
0+δ,x2
0,t0,t)−x1(x1
0−δ,x2
0,t0,t)
2δ
x1(x1
0,x2
0+δ,t0,t)−x1(x1
0,x2
0−δ,t0,t)
2δ
x2(x1
0+δ,x2
0,t0,t)−x2(x1
0−δ,x2
0,t0,t)
2δ
x2(x1
0,x2
0+δ,t0,t)−x2(x1
0,x2
0−δ,t0,t)
2δ
#
,
(S32)
where δ is the initial conditions’ grid spacing. After computing ∇Ft
t0(x0), we use eq. (S31) for computing the FTLE
ﬁeld.
7
Additional supplementary ﬁgures
Supplementary Figure S9: Actomyosin cables quantiﬁcation. A) Phospho-myosin light chain (pMLC) expression in the chick
gastrula (HH1). Panels 1-3, taken at the positions of the yellow squares in the overview image, show the formation of pMLC
cables spanning several cells. The length and orientation of the bars in panels 1-3 quantify the anisotropy and orientation of
the pMLC cables, and the color of the bars indicates the pMLC concentration. B) The pattern of pMLC cables of the HH1
stage embryo shown in A. The alignment and the orientation of the active myosin cables are quantiﬁed from the asymmetry of
the Fourier power spectrum (11), calculated in a tiling pattern over the embryo, while myosin intensity is calculated as average
intensity in the same tiles. For experimental details, see the accompanying paper (4).
8
Additional model perturbations
In this section, we show the effects of additional model perturbations that provide insight into the role of p1 and
m(x, t0). All other parameters and initial and boundary conditions are the same as WT. First, by increasing the ratio
of shear to bulk viscosity (p1), the polonaise movements are lost (Figure S11A), resembling instead the impaired
gastrulation movements experimentally observed in the absence of cell division (60, 61). We reason that, at leading
order, impairing cell divisions reduces ﬂuidity, which is captured by the increase of tissue-scale shear viscosity µ, and
hence p1 (62).

Supplementary Figure S10: Quantiﬁcation of active myosin via pMLC intensity. The pattern of pMLC intensity evolves in
time, as in Figure 1E. Color represents absolute measured signal intensity (arbitrary units). Changes in absolute pMLC intensity
show a global increase in active myosin as gastrulation progresses, particularly from HH1 to HH3. This increase is consistent
with the active stress instability predicted by our model (Figure 2). For experimental details, see the accompanying paper (4).
Supplementary Figure S11: A higher ratio p1 of shear and bulk viscosity destroys polonaise movements. Model output with a
higher p1 = 0.5. A) Initial (t0) and ﬁnal (tf) velocity ﬁeld. B) Final (tf) distribution of m, φ. C) Model-based DOA at t0 (HH1)
and the attractor at tf (HH3). D) Deformed Lagrangian grid from the predicted model velocity. Units are non-dimensional.
Next, we vary the angular extent (σα) of the initial mesendoderm, encoded in m(x, t0). When σα is much
smaller, a streak forms, but the attractor is shorter and its DOA is far smaller than WT (Figure S12A-D). By instead
increasing σα, the reduced mesendoderm initial condition (eq. (S27)) can be gradually transformed into the circular
mesendoderm initial condition (eq. (S28)). Figure S12E-H showcases the model predictions for an intermediate initial
condition (σα = 0.8). Here, active stress intensity is initialized in a ring with much greater stress in the posterior.
While polonaise movements are generated and maintained, the DM (S12G) lacks a sharp attractor while having a
large DOA caused by excessive contractile activity in the embryo, differing substantially from WT. These results
suggest that the ﬁnite width of the mesendoderm precursor cells at HH1 (see experiments in Fig. 1E) is important

for generating the correct gastrulation ﬂows. The ﬁnite extent of the mesendoderm precursor cells is generated by a
molecular patterning of the embryo before HH1 (5).
Supplementary Figure S12: Effect of extent of initial mesendoderm. Model output from initial conditions with a smaller
mesendoderm σα = σr = 0.06 (A-D) and an intermediate mesendoderm σα = 0.8 (E-H) between the reduced mesendoderm
and circular mesendoderm initial conditions. A,E) Final (tf) velocity ﬁelds. B,F) Initial (t0) and ﬁnal (tf) distributions of m, φ.
C,G) Model-based DOA at t0 (HH1) and the attractor at tf (HH3). D,H) Deformed Lagrangian grids from the predicted model
velocity. Units are non-dimensional.
Finally, we show instances in which two streaks form, either spontaneously or induced by implantation of Vg1
(GDF3) secreting cells (63). In this case, distinct streaks either maintain their separation or fuse. In the ﬁrst case,

we initialize two reduced mesendoderms 180◦apart. Unlike the ordinary twin perturbation, the model predicts that
these two streaks will not fuse but will instead halt each other’s extension from posterior to anterior and vice-versa
S13A-D). In the second case, we nitialize two reduced mesendoderms 90◦apart and reduce the amplitude to A = 0.1
for one of them. Despite the smaller reduced mesendoderm’s weaker convergent extension, which is apparent in
lower scalar values of its corresponding attractor (S13G), it causes the stronger streak to bend away from it, as in the
ordinary twin perturbation.
Supplementary Figure S13: Multiple streaks. Model output from initial conditions with two reduced mesendoderms oriented
180◦apart (A-D) and 90◦apart (E-H). A) Final (tf) velocity ﬁeld. B) Initial (t0) and ﬁnal (tf) distributions of m, φ. C,G) Model-
based DOA at t0 (HH1) and the attractor at tf (HH3). D,H) Deformed Lagrangian grids from the predicted model velocity. E)
Initial (t0) and ﬁnal (tf) velocity ﬁeld. F) Final (tf) distribution of m, φ. Units are non-dimensional.

Supplementary movies
Movie S1: Time evolution movie associated with Fig. 2B.
Movie S2: Time evolution movie associated with Figs. 2C-D.
Movie S3: Time evolution movie associated with Fig. 2E.
Movie S4: Time evolution movie associated with Fig. 4A.
Movie S5: Time evolution movie associated with Fig. 4B.
Movie S6: Time evolution movie associated with Fig. 4C.
Movie S7: Time evolution movie associated with Fig. 4D.
Movie S8: Time evolution movie associated with Fig. 4E.
Movie S9: Time evolution movie associated with Fig. 4F.
Movie S10: Deforming Lagrangian grid overlaid on the light-sheet microscope images corresponding to the experi-
mental data used in Movie S9.
Movie S11: Time evolution movie associated with Fig. 4G.
Movie S12: Time evolution movie associated with Fig. 4H.
Movie S13: Time evolution movie associated with Fig. S1C.
Movie S14: Sensitivity to p2. Same as Movie S2, but using a lower value of the parameter p2.
Movie 15: Sensitivity to p2. Same as Movie S2, but using a higher value of the parameter p2.
Movie S16: Sensitivity to p5. Same as Movie S2, but using a lower value of the parameter p5.
Movie S17: Sensitivity to p5. Same as Movie S2, but using a higher value of the parameter p5.
Movie S18: Sensitivity to p6. Same as Movie S2, but setting p6 = 0.
Movie S19: Sensitivity to p7. Same as Movie S2, but using a higher value of the parameter p7.
Movie S20: Sensitivity to the epiboly velocity |vb|. Same as Movie S2, but using a higher value of |vb|.
Movie S21: Sensitivity to the epiboly velocity |vb|. Same as Movie S2, but using a lower value of |vb|.
Movie S22: Sensitivity to the amplitude A of the Gaussian perturbation added to the unstable m equilibrium. Same
as Movie S2, but using a higher A.
Movie S23: Sensitivity to the amplitude A of the Gaussian perturbation added to the unstable m equilibrium. Same
as Movie S2, but using a lower A.
Movie S24: Sensitivity to the radial standard deviation σr of the Gaussian perturbation added to the unstable m equi-
librium. Same as Movie S2, but using a higher σr.
Movie S25: Sensitivity to the radial standard deviation σr of the Gaussian perturbation added to the unstable m equi-
librium. Same as Movie S2, but using a lower σr.
Movie S26: Sensitivity to the radial mean rc of the Gaussian perturbation added to the unstable m equilibrium. Same
as Movie S2, but using a higher rc.
Movie S27: Sensitivity to the radial mean rc of the Gaussian perturbation added to the unstable m equilibrium. Same
as Movie S2, but using a lower rc.

REFERENCES AND NOTES 
1. C. D. Stern, Gastrulation: From Cells to Embryo (CSHL Press, 2004). 
2. E. Rozbicki, M. Chuai, A. I. Karjalainen, F. Song, H. M. Sang, R. Martin, H. J. Knölker, M. P. 
MacDonald, C. J. Weijer, Myosin-II-mediated cell shape changes and cell intercalation contribute to 
primitive streak formation. Nat. Cell Biol. 17, 397–408 (2015). 
3. M. Saadaoui, D. Rocancourt, J. Roussel, F. Corson, J. Gros, A tensile ring drives tissue flows to shape 
the gastrulating amniote embryo. Science 367, 453–458 (2020). 
4. M. Chuai, G. Serrano Nájera, M. Serra, L. Mahadevan, C. J. Weijer, Reconstruction of distinct 
vertebrate gastrulation modes via modulation of key cell behaviors in the chick embryo. Sci. Adv. 9, 
eabn5429 (2023). 
5. G. Serrano Nájera, C. J. Weijer, Cellular processes driving gastrulation in the avian embryo. Mech. Dev. 
163, 103624 (2020). 
6. O. Voiculescu, F. Bertocchini, L. Wolpert, R. E. Keller, C. D. Stern, The amniote primitive streak is 
defined by epithelial cell intercalation before gastrulation. Nature 449, 1049–1052 (2007). 
7. Y. Nakaya, E. W. Sukowati, Y. Wu, G. Sheng, RhoA and microtubule dynamics control cell–basement 
membrane interaction in EMT during gastrulation. Nat. Cell Biol. 10, 765–775 (2008). 
8. O. Voiculescu, L. Bodenstein, I.-J. Lau, C. D. Stern, Local cell interactions and self-amplifying 
individual cell ingression drive amniote gastrulation. eLife 3, e01817 (2014). 
9. L. Gräper, Die Primitiventwicklung des Hühnchens nach stereokinematographischen Untersuchungen, 
kontrolliert durch vitale Farbmarkierung und verglichen mit der Entwicklung anderer Wirbeltiere. 
Wilhelm Roux Arch. Entwickl. Mech. Org. 116, 382–429 (1929). 
10. M. Chuai, W. Zeng, X. Yang, V. Boychenko, J. A. Glazier, C. J. Weijer, Cell movement during chick 
primitive streak formation. Dev. Biol. 296, 137–149 (2006). 
11. M. Durande, S. Tlili, T. Homan, B. Guirao, F. Graner, H. Delanoë-Ayari, Fast determination of 
coarse-grained cell anisotropy and size in epithelial tissue images using Fourier transform. Phys. Rev. 
E 99, 062401 (2019). 
12. C. Bertet, L. Sulak, T. Lecuit, Myosin-dependent junction remodelling controls planar cell 
intercalation and axis elongation. Nature 429, 667–671 (2004). 
13. J. T. Blankenship, S. T. Backovic, J. S. Sanny, O. Weitz, J. A. Zallen, Multicellular rosette formation 
links planar cell polarity to tissue morphogenesis. Dev. Cell 11, 459–470 (2006). 

14. J. A. Zallen, E. Wieschaus, Patterned gene expression directs bipolar planar polarity in drosophila. 
Dev. Cell 6, 343–355 (2004). 
15. J. Lavalou, Q. Mao, S. Harmansa, S. Kerridge, A. C. Lellouch, J.-M. Philippe, S. Audebert, L. 
Camoin, T. Lecuit, Formation of polarized contractile interfaces by self-organized Toll-8/Cirl GPCR 
asymmetry. Dev. Cell 56, 1574–1588 (2021). 
16. A. Munjal, J.-M. Philippe, E. Munro, T. Lecuit, A self-organized biomechanical network drives shape 
changes during tissue morphogenesis. Nature 524, 351–355 (2015). 
17. M. Rauzi, U. Krzic, T. E. Saunders, M. Krajnc, P. Ziherl, L. Hufnagel, M. Leptin, Embryo-scale tissue 
mechanics during Drosophila gastrulation movements. Nat. Commun. 6, 8677 (2015). 
18. S. J. Streichan, M. F. Lefebvre, N. Noll, E. F. Wieschaus, B. I. Shraiman, Global morphogenetic flow 
is accurately predicted by the spatial distribution of myosin motors. eLife 7, e27454 (2018). 
19. A. Bailles, C. Collinet, J. M. Philippe, P. F. Lenne, E. Munro, T. Lecuit, Genetic induction and 
mechanochemical propagation of a morphogenetic wave. Nature 572, 467–473 (2019). 
20. F. J. Vernerey, U. Akalp, Role of catch bonds in actomyosin mechanics and cell mechanosensitivity. 
Phys. Rev. E 94, 012403 (2016). 
21. R. Fernandez-Gonzalez, S. de Matos Simoes, J.-C. Röper, S. Eaton, J. A. Zallen, Myosin II dynamics 
are regulated by tension in intercalating cells. Dev. Cell 17, 736–743 (2009). 
22. J. M. Laakso, J. H. Lewis, H. Shuman, E. M. Ostap, Myosin I can act as a molecular force sensor. 
Science 321, 133–136 (2008). 
23. C. Veigel, J. E. Molloy, S. Schmitz, J. Kendrick-Jones, Load-dependent kinetics of force production 
by smooth muscle myosin measured with optical tweezers. Nat. Cell Biol. 5, 980–986 (2003). 
24. W. E. Thomas, V. Vogel, E. Sokurenko, Biophysics of catch bonds. Annu. Rev. Biophys. 37, 399–416 
(2008). 
25. M. C. Marchetti, J. F. Joanny, S. Ramaswamy, T. B. Liverpool, J. Prost, M. Rao, R. A. Simha, 
Hydrodynamics of soft active matter. Rev. Mod. Phys. 85, 1143–1189 (2013). 
26. F. Graner, J. A. Glazier, Simulation of biological cell sorting using a two-dimensional extended Potts 
model. Phys. Rev. Lett. 69, 2013–2016 (1992). 
27. A. G. Fletcher, M. Osterfield, R. E. Baker, S. Y. Shvartsman, Vertex models of epithelial 
morphogenesis. Biophys. J. 106, 2291–2304 (2014). 
28. S. Alt, P. Ganguly, G. Salbreux, Vertex models: From cell mechanics to tissue morphogenesis. Philos. 
Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 372, 20150520 (2017). 

29. A. Bonfanti, J. L. Kaplan, G. Charras, A. Kabla, Fractional viscoelastic models for power-law 
materials. Soft Matter 16, 6002–6020 (2020). 
30. R. Alert, X. Trepat, Physical models of collective cell migration. Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys. 
11, 77–101 (2020). 
31. C. Collinet, T. Lecuit, Programmed and self-organized flow of information during morphogenesis. 
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 22, 245–265 (2021). 
32. Y. Maroudas-Sacks, K. Keren, Mechanical patterning in animal morphogenesis. Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. 
Biol. 37, 469–493 (2021). 
33. B. Ladoux, R.-M. Mège, Mechanobiology of collective cell behaviours. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 18, 
743–757 (2017). 
34. R. Etournay, M. Popović, M. Merkel, A. Nandi, C. Blasse, B. Aigouy, H. Brandl, G. Myers, G. 
Salbreux, F. Jülicher, S. Eaton, Interplay of cell dynamics and epithelial tension during morphogenesis 
of the Drosophila pupal wing. eLife 4, e07090 (2015). 
35. H. J. Gustafson, N. Claussen, S. De Renzis, S. J. Streichan, Patterned mechanical feedback establishes 
a global myosin gradient. Nat. Commun. 13, 7050 (2022). 
36. N. A. Dye, M. Popović, K. V. Iyer, J. F. Fuhrmann, R. Piscitello-Gómez, S. Eaton, F. Jülicher, 
Self-organized patterning of cell morphology via mechanosensitive feedback. eLife 10, e57964 
(2021). 
37. N. Noll, M. Mani, I. Heemskerk, S. J. Streichan, B. I. Shraiman, Active tension network model 
suggests an exotic mechanical state realized in epithelial tissues. Nat. Phys. 13, 1221–1226 (2017). 
38. A.-C. Reymann, F. Staniscia, A. Erzberger, G. Salbreux, S. W. Grill, Cortical flow aligns actin 
filaments to form a furrow. eLife 5, e17807 (2016). 
39. E. W. Gehrels, B. Chakrabortty, M.-E. Perrin, M. Merkel, T. Lecuit, Curvature gradient drives 
polarized tissue flow in the Drosophilaembryo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 120, e2214205120 
(2023). 
40. A. Ioratim-Uba, T. B. Liverpool, S. Henkes, Mechano-chemical active feedback generates 
convergence extension in epithelial tissue. arXiv:2303.02109 (2023). 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.02109. 
41. M. Valet, E. D. Siggia, A. H. Brivanlou, Mechanical regulation of early vertebrate embryogenesis. 
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 23, 169–184 (2021). 

42. G. Jeffery, The motion of ellipsoidal particles immersed in a viscous fluid. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. 102, 
161–179 (1922). 
43. C. Truesdell, W. Noll, The Non-Linear Field Theories of Mechanics (Springer, 2004). 
44. M. Serra, S. Streichan, M. Chuai, C. J. Weijer, L. Mahadevan, Dynamic morphoskeletons in 
development. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 117, 11444–11449 (2020). 
45. G. Serrano Nájera, C. J. Weijer, The evolution of gastrulation morphologies. Development 150, 
dev200885 (2023). 
46. P. Caldarelli, A. Chamolly, O. Alegria-Prévot, J. Gros, F. Corson, Self-organized tissue mechanics 
underlie embryonic regulation. bioRxiv 2021.10.08.463661 (2021). 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.10.08.463661. 
47. R. Feroze, J. H. Shawky, M. von Dassow, L. A. Davidson, Mechanics of blastopore closure during 
amphibian gastrulation. Dev. Biol. 398, 57–67 (2015). 
48. D. R. Shook, E. M. Kasprowicz, L. A. Davidson, R. Keller, Large, long range tensile forces drive 
convergence during Xenopus blastopore closure and body axis elongation. eLife 7, e26944 (2018). 
49. M. Valet, E. D. Siggia, A. H. Brivanlou, Mechanical regulation of early vertebrate embryogenesis. 
Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 23, 169–184 (2022). 
50. A. Carmany-Rampey, A. F. Schier, Single-cell internalization during zebrafish gastrulation. Curr. 
Biol. 11, 1261–1265 (2001). 
51. S. F. Gabriel Krens, J. H. Veldhuis, V. Barone, D. Čapek, J.-L. Maître, G. W. Brodland, C.-P. 
Heisenberg, Interstitial fluid osmolarity modulates the action of differential tissue surface tension in 
progenitor cell segregation during gastrulation. Development 144, 1798–1806 (2017). 
52. R. Fernandez-Gonzalez, S. de Matos Simoes, J.-C. Röper, S. Eaton, J. A. Zallen, Myosin II dynamics 
are regulated by tension in intercalating cells. Dev. Cell 17, 736–743 (2009). 
53. R. Clément, B. Dehapiot, C. Collinet, T. Lecuit, P.-F. Lenne, Viscoelastic dissipation stabilizes cell 
shape changes during tissue morphogenesis. Curr. Biol. 27, 3132–3142.e4 (2017). 
54. V. Ferro, M. Chuai, D. McGloin, C. J. Weijer, Measurement of junctional tension in epithelial cells at 
the onset of primitive streak formation in the chick embryo via non-destructive optical manipulation. 
Development 147, dev175109 (2020). 
55. M. F. Staddon, K. E. Cavanaugh, E. M. Munro, M. L. Gardel, S. Banerjee, Mechanosensitive junction 
remodeling promotes robust epithelial morphogenesis. Biophys. J. 117, 1739–1750 (2019). 
56. T. Chung, Computational Fluid Dynamics (Cambridge Univ. Press, 2012). 

57. J. S. Bois, F. Jülicher, S. W. Grill, Pattern formation in active fluids. Phys. Rev. Lett. 106, 028103 
(2011). 
58. R. Sknepnek, I. Djafer-Cherif, M. Chuai, C. Weijer, S. Henkes, Generating active T1 transitions 
through mechanochemical feedback. eLife 12, e79862 (2023). 
59. G. Haller, Lagrangian coherent structures. Annu. Rev. Fluid. Mech. 47, 137–162 (2015). 
60. C. Cui, X. Yang, M. Chuai, J. A. Glazier, C. J. Weijer, Analysis of tissue flow patterns during 
primitive streak formation in the chick embryo. Dev. Biol. 284, 37–47 (2005). 
61. J. Firmino, D. Rocancourt, M. Saadaoui, C. Moreau, J. Gros, Cell division drives epithelial cell 
rearrangements during gastrulation in chick. Dev. Cell 36, 249–261 (2016). 
62. J. Ranft, M. Basan, J. Elgeti, J. F. Joanny, J. Prost, F. Jülicher, Fluidization of tissues by cell division 
and apoptosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 107, 20863–20868 (2010). 
63. S. B. Shah, I. Skromne, C. R. Hume, D. S. Kessler, K. J. Lee, C. D. Stern, J. Dodd, Misexpression of 
chick Vg1 in the marginal zone induces primitive streak formation. Development 124, 5127–5138 
(1997). 

