ORAL PRESENTATION
Open Access
Feature selection in Enose applications
Thomas Nowotny1,2*, Amalia Z Berna2, Russell Binions3, X Rosalind Wang4, Joseph T Lizier4, Mikhail Prokopenko4,
Stephen Trowell2
From 1st International Workshop on Odor Spaces
Hannover, Germany. 4-7 September 2013
In my presentation I will summarise results for feature
selection from a number of Enose applications ranging
from general chemical classification and breath analysis
with metal-oxide based Enoses to work scoping the use of
biological receptors, in particular receptors of the fruit fly
Drosophila, for applications in wine making and explosives
detection. The common thread in all applications is the
availability of high-dimensional data which is often noisy
and in all of its details not necessarily very information
rich for any particular application. The challenge for build-
ing useful classification systems is to define, extract and
select the most “informative” features from the high-
dimensional data. I will give an overview over our work
using exhaustive “wrapper” approaches and a brief com-
parison to information-theory based methods. I will con-
clude by highlighting the most pertinent open questions
encountered in this research area.
Authors’ details
1CCNR, School of Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex, Falmer,
Brighton BN1 9QJ, UK. 2CSIRO Ecosystem Sciences and Food Futures
Flagship, GPO Box 1700 Canberra, ACT 2601, Australia. 3School of
Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University of London,
London E1 4NS, UK. 4CSIRO Information and Communications Technologies
Centre, PO Box 76, Epping, NSW 1710, Australia.
Published: 16 April 2014
doi:10.1186/2044-7248-3-S1-O15
Cite this article as: Nowotny et al.: Feature selection in Enose
applications. Flavour 2014 3(Suppl 1):O15.
Submit your next manuscript to BioMed Central
and take full advantage of: 
• Convenient online submission
• Thorough peer review
• No space constraints or color ﬁgure charges
• Immediate publication on acceptance
• Inclusion in PubMed, CAS, Scopus and Google Scholar
• Research which is freely available for redistribution
Submit your manuscript at 
www.biomedcentral.com/submit
1CCNR, School of Engineering and Informatics, University of Sussex, Falmer,
Brighton BN1 9QJ, UK
Full list of author information is available at the end of the article
Nowotny et al. Flavour 2014, 3(Suppl 1):O15
http://www.flavourjournal.com/content/3/S1/O15
© 2014 Nowotny et al; licensee BioMed Central Ltd. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/2.0), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated.

