If Loud Aliens Explain Human Earliness,
Quiet Aliens Are Also Rare
Robin Hanson∗, Daniel Martin†, Calvin McCarter‡, Jonathan Paulson§
September 7, 2021
Abstract
If life on Earth had to achieve n “hard steps” to reach humanity’s level, then the
chance of this event rose as time to the n-th power. Integrating this over habitable
star formation and planet lifetime distributions predicts >99% of advanced life
appears after today, unless n < 3 and max planet duration <50Gyr. That is, we
seem early. We oﬀer this explanation: a deadline is set by “loud” aliens who are
born according to a hard steps power law, expand at a common rate, change their
volumes’ appearances, and prevent advanced life like us from appearing in their
volumes. “Quiet” aliens, in contrast, are much harder to see. We ﬁt this three-
parameter model of loud aliens to data: 1) birth power from the number of hard
steps seen in Earth history, 2) birth constant by assuming a inform distribution over
our rank among loud alien birth dates, and 3) expansion speed from our not seeing
alien volumes in our sky. We estimate that loud alien civilizations now control 40-
50% of universe volume, each will later control ∼105 - 3x107 galaxies, and we could
meet them in ∼200Myr – 2Gyr. If loud aliens arise from quiet ones, a depressingly
low transition chance (< ∼10−4) is required to expect that even one other quiet
alien civilization has ever been active in our galaxy. Which seems bad news for
SETI. But perhaps alien volume appearances are subtle, and their expansion speed
lower, in which case we predict many long circular arcs to ﬁnd in our sky.
∗Department of Economics, George Mason University, Fairfax, Va, USA, and Future of Humanity
Institute, Oxford University, Oxford, U.K. rhanson@gmu.edu
†Centre for Particle Theory and Department of Mathematical Sciences, Durham University, Durham,
DH1 3LE, U.K. contact@danielgmartin.com
‡Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, U.S.A, and Lightmatter
Inc., Boston, MA, U.S.A. calvin@lightmatter.co
§Jump Trading, U.S.A. jonathanpaulson@gmail.com
1
arXiv:2102.01522v3  [q-bio.OT]  6 Sep 2021

1
Introduction
To a ﬁrst approximation, there are two kinds of aliens: quiet and loud. Loud (or “ex-
pansive”) aliens expand fast, last long, and make visible changes to their volumes. Quiet
aliens fail to meet at least one of these criteria. As quiet aliens are harder to see, we are
forced to accept rather uncertain estimates of their density, via methods like the Drake
equation (1, 2, 3). Loud aliens, in contrast, are far more noticeable if they exist at any
substantial density (4).
Loud aliens are thus much better suited for empirical study via ﬁtting simple models to
available data. One prior researcher, S. Jay Olson, has recently pursued this approach (5,
6,7,8,9,10). Olson estimated loud alien expansion speeds from the fact that we do not see
now see them big in our sky, and he estimated their overall appearance rate by assuming
humanity’s current date to be a representative loud alien birthdate. Olson required only
one further input to estimate a full stochastic spacetime distribution over loud aliens,
which was a somewhat complex appearance function, specifying the distribution of loud
alien birthdates over time.
In this paper, we explore an even simpler model of loud aliens, whom we call “grabby,”
that we also ﬁt to available data. Like Olson’s, our model includes an expansion speed and
an overall appearance rate, which we estimate similarly to Olson. But for an appearance
function we use a simple power law, which has only one additional free parameter, its
power n. This power law comes from the standard hard-steps statistical model of the
origin of advanced life within a limited planetary time window, and its power comes from
the number of “hard steps” in the evolution of advanced life, a number that has been
roughly estimated from the history of major events in Earth history to be near the range
3 to 9. Yes, this simpler appearance function is a cruder approximation, but its simplicity
can let us better understand and apply it.
We will show that a power law at least crudely approximates a more realistic appear-
ance function for large fraction of the relevant parameter space. We will also show that,
unless one assumes fewer than two hard steps and also a very restrictive limit on habitable
planet lifetimes, one must conclude that humanity seems to have appeared implausibly
early in the history of the universe. Loud aliens, who ﬁll the universe early, can robustly
explain human earliness, as they set a deadline by which advanced life must appear if it
is to see an empty universe as we do. Unlike other explanations oﬀered, this one does not
require assuming that advanced life can only result from evolutionary paths close to ours.
As each of our three model parameters is estimable to within roughly a factor of four,
we can and do estimate the stochastic spacetime distribution of grabby aliens, and thus
distributions over grabby alien densities, origin dates, visible angles, and durations until
we meet or see them. We also consider the alternate assumption that we have not yet
noticed subtle appearance diﬀerences that mark the volumes they control, and for this
scenario we estimate how common in the sky would be the volume borders for which
astronomers might search.
If we assume that grabby civilizations arise from more-common non-grabby versions,
2

then the higher the chance p of this non-grabby to grabby transition, the less common
can be such non-grabby versions. We will show that, assuming a generous million year
average duration for non-grabby civilizations, depressingly low transition chances p are
needed to estimate that even one other one was ever active anywhere along our past
lightcone (p < ∼10−3) , has ever existed in our galaxy (p < ∼10−4) , or is active now in
our galaxy (p < ∼10−7) . Such low chances p would bode badly for humanity’s future.
3

Figure 1. These two diagrams each show a sample stochastic outcome from a grabby aliens
model, in one (1D) and two (2D) spatial dimensions. The top diagram shows space on the x-axis
and time moving up the y-axis. The bottom diagram shows two spatial dimensions, with time
moving downward into the box. In both cases, randomly-colored grabby civilizations (GCs) are
each born at a spacetime event, expand in forward-time cones, and then stop upon meeting
another GC. The scenarios shown are for a clock-time volume-power n of 6. This would look
the same for any expansion speed, but if it is at one half lightspeed the 1D diagram shows 61
GC across a spatial width of 2.8 Gpc, while the 2D diagram shows 144 GC within a width of
0.6 Gpc, both widths applying at the median GC birthdate if that is our current date of 13.8
Gyr. We show coordinates co-moving in space and conformal in time, as explained in Section
10. A three-dimensional movie visualisation is found at https://grabbyaliens.com.
4

2
Overview
Ours is a model of “grabby” aliens, who by deﬁnition a) expand the volumes they control
at a common speed, b) clearly change the look of their volumes (relative to uncontrolled
volumes), c) are born according to a power law in time except not within other GC
volumes, and d) do not die unless displaced by other GCs.
See Figure 1 for examples of the space-time pattern produced by this model. GCs
might allow other civilizations to be born within their volumes, but as those should clearly
see that in-volume status, we exclude them from our GC deﬁnition. Our assumptions
reject the “zoo” hypothesis (11).
Our model has three parameters, the ﬁrst of which is the rate at which grabby civi-
lizations are born. We assume that we humans have a non-zero chance of giving birth to a
grabby civilization, and that, if this were to happen, it would happen within roughly ten
million years. We also assume (with (6)) that this chance is space-time-representative,
i.e., we have no good reason to expect our spacetime location to be unusual, relative to
other GC origins. Given these assumptions, and the fact that we do not now seem to
be within a clearly-changed alien volume, our current spacetime event becomes near a
sample from the distribution of grabby civilization origins. That allows us to estimate the
overall grabby birth rate to within roughly a factor of two (for its inter-quartile range),
at least for powers of three or higher.
Yes, it is possible, and perhaps even desirable, that our descendants do not become
grabby. Even so, our current date remains a data point. Surprised? Imagine that you
are standing on a strange planet wondering how strong is its gravity. Your intuition tells
you, from the way things seem to bounce and move around you, that you could probably
jump about 1.3 meters here, compared to the usual 0.5 meters on Earth. Which suggests
that you are on a planet with a gravity like Mars. And it suggests this even if you do
not actually jump. A counterfactual number can be just as valid a data point as a real
number.
The second of our three model parameters is the (assumed universal) speed at which
grabby civilizations expand. Our model predicts that on average at grabby origin dates,
a third to a half of the universe is within grabby-controlled volumes. So if the grabby
expansion speed were low, many such volumes should appear quite large and noticeable
in our sky. However, as noted by (Olson ’15; Olsen ’17) and discussed in Section 13, if
their expansion speed were within ∼25% of lightspeed, a selection eﬀect implies that we
are less likely to see than to not see such volumes. Thus if we could have seen them, they
would likely be here now instead of us. As we do not now see such volumes, we conclude
that grabby aliens, if they exist, expand very fast.
The third of our three model parameters is a power derived from the eﬀective number
of “hard steps” in the “great ﬁlter” process by which simple dead matter evolves to
become a grabby civilization (12). It is well-known that the chance of this entire process
completing within a time duration goes as the length of that duration raised to the power
of the number of hard (i.e., take-very-long) steps (or their multi-step equivalents) in that
5

evolutionary process. Using data on Earth history durations, a literature estimates an
Earth-duration-based power to lie roughly near the range 3-9 (13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,
21,22,23).
Such hard-steps power-law models are usually applied to planets. However, we show
in Section 17.1 that such a power law can also apply well to the chances of advanced life
arising within a larger volume like a galaxy. This volume-based power is our third key
parameter.
For each combination of our three estimated model parameters, we can fully describe
the stochastic spacetime patterns of GC activity across the universe, allowing us to esti-
mate, for example, where they are and when we would meet or see them. We will later
show in detail how these distributions change with our model parameters.
Our grabby aliens model can explain a striking empirical puzzle: why have we humans
appeared so early in the universe? Yes, many calculations often ﬁnd our date to be not
greatly atypical of habitable durations undisturbed by nearby sterilizing explosions, for
both short and long durations (24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35). Other calculations
ﬁnd us to be early, even if not extremely early, when planets at many lower mass stars
are considered habitable (36,37,38,39).
However, all but one of these calculations (22) neglects the hard-steps power-law.
When that is included, humans look much earlier, unless one makes strong assumptions
about both the hard-steps power and the habitability of stars that last longer than our
sun. (See Figure 3.) We will show this via a somewhat less simple appearance model,
which applies the hard-steps power law to planets, allows stars to form at diﬀerent dates,
and allows their planets to last for diﬀerent durations.
Our grabby aliens model resolves this puzzle by denying a key assumption of this
appearance model: that the birth of some advanced life has no eﬀect on the chances that
others are born at later dates (40,41). Our model instead embodies a selection eﬀect: if
grabby aliens will soon grab all the universe volume, that sets a deadline by which others
must be born, if they are not to be born within an alien-controlled volume.
Our deadline explanation for human earliness allows for a wide range of paths by which,
and contexts in which, advanced life might appear. In contrast, many other explanations
posit that planets around long-lifetime stars are just not habitable due to factors like
tidal-locking, solar ﬂares, insuﬃcient early UV light, runaway greenhouses, and early
loss of atmospheres and plate tectonics. However, these theories implicitly assume that
advanced life can only arise through a narrow range of paths similar to Earth’s path. For
example, these theories fail if advanced life can arise on ocean worlds, which suﬀer few of
these problems and comprise a large fraction of planets.
The rest of this paper will now review the robustness of the hard steps model, build
a simple appearance model, use it to show how the hard-steps process makes humanity’s
current date look early, describe the basic logic of our new model and how to simulate it,
show how to change coordinates to account for an expanding universe, show that a power
law often at least crudely approximates advanced life appearance, and ﬁnally describe our
model’s speciﬁc predictions for grabby alien civilization times, distances, angles, speeds,
6

and more, and also describe the constraints our model places on the relative frequency of
non-grabby civilizations if they are to be visible to various SETI eﬀorts.
3
The Hard-Steps Model
In 1983, Brandon Carter introduced a simple statistical model of how civilizations like
ours might arise from simple dead matter, via intermediate steps of simple life, complex
life, etc., a model that he and many others have since pursued (13,14,15,16,17,18,19,20,
21,22,42,23).
Carter posited a sequence of required steps i, each of which has a rate 1/ai per unit
time of being achieved, given the achievement of its previous step. The average duration
ti to achieve step i is ai.
Assume that this process starts at t = 0 when a planet ﬁrst becomes habitable, and
that we are interested in the unlikely scenario where all of these steps are completed by
time t = T. (That is, assume P
i ti < T while P
i ai ≫T.) Assume also for convenience
that steps divide into two classes: easy steps with ai ≪T, and hard steps with ai ≫T.
Conditional on this whole process completing within duration T, each easy step still
on average takes about ai, but each hard step (and also the time T −E −P
i ti left at
the end) on average takes about (T −E)/(n + 1), regardless of its diﬃculty ai. (Where
E = P
i ai for the easy steps.) And the chance of this unlikely completion is proportional
to T n, where n is the number of hard steps.
It turns out that this same model was introduced in 1953 to describe the appearance
of cancer, where it is now a standard model (43,22). To produce cancer, an inividual cell
must host a suﬃcient number of mutations, and the expected time for each mutation to
appear in any one cell is much longer than the organism’s lifetime. Even so, cancer often
appears eventually at some cell in a large organism; humans have ∼3 × 1013 cells, and
∼40% of us develop cancer. Human cancer typically requires 6-7 hard mutations, though
sometimes as few as two. The power law in timing has been conﬁrmed, and is sometimes
used to infer the number of hard mutation steps.
This basic hard steps model can be generalized in many ways. For example, in addition
to these “try-try” steps with a constant per-time chance of success, we can add constant
time delays (which in eﬀect cut available time T) or add “try-once” steps, which succeed
or fail immediately but allow no recovery from failure. These additions preserve the T n
functional form. We can also allow “multi” steps where the chance of completing step i
within time ti goes as tni for a step speciﬁc ni. If all steps have this tni form (try-once
steps are ni = 0, while hard try-try steps are nearly ni = 1), then the n in the T nchance
rule becomes n = P
i ni over all such steps i. (And T nholds here exactly; it is not an
approximation.)
For example, a “try-menu-combo” step might require the creation of a species with a
particular body design, such as the right sort of eye, hand, leg, stomach, etc. If the length
of the available menu for each part (e.g., eye) increased randomly but linearly with time,
and if species were created by randomly picking from the currently available menus for
7

each part, then the chance of completing this try-menu-combo step within time ti goes as
tni
i , where ni is the number of diﬀerent body parts needed to be of the right sort.
We also retain this T nform if we sum over diﬀerent planets (or parts of planets) with
diﬀerent constants multiplying their T n, for example due to diﬀerent volumes of biological
activity, or due to diﬀerent metabolisms per unit volume. We could even sum over large
volumes like a galaxy. Such models can allow for many sorts of “oases” wherein life might
appear and evolve, not just planets. And similar models can accommodate a wide range
of degrees of isolation versus mixing between these diﬀerent parts and volumes.
This set of model elements can be combined in many ways to model diﬀerent relevant
processes.
For example, a time delay plus a try-once step can roughly model a case
where life on a planet dies unless it achieves a particular development within a limited
time window. Such as perhaps Earth having had only a billion year window to construct
habitable niches and a matching Gaian regulation system (44). If this delay-plus-try-
once process could happen in parallel with a sequence of hard steps, then this is nearly
equivalent to adding a single try-once step to that sequence of hard steps.
4
How Many Hard Steps?
A literature tries to estimate the number of (equivalent) hard steps passed so far in Earth’s
history from key durations. Here is an illustrative calculation.
The two most plausibly diagnostic Earth durations seem to be the one remaining after
now before Earth becomes uninhabitable for complex life, ∼1.1 Gyr, (45), and the one
from when Earth was ﬁrst habitable to when life ﬁrst appeared, ∼0.4 Gyr (range 0.2 to
0.8 Gyr (46)). Assuming that only e hard steps have happened on Earth so far (with
no delays or easy steps), the expected value ai for each of these durations should be
∼5.4Gyr/(e+1). Solving for e using the observed durations of 1.1 and 0.4 Gyr then gives
e values of 3.9 and 12.5 (range 5.7 to 26), suggesting a middle estimate of at least 6.
The relevant power n that applies to our grabby aliens model can diﬀer from this
number e. For example, it becomes smaller if evolution on Earth saw many delay steps,
or big ones, such as from many easy steps, in eﬀect reducing Earth’s ∼5.4 Gyr time
window to complete hard steps. But the relevant number of hard steps becomes larger
than this e if there were hard steps before Earth, or if there will be future hard steps
between us today and a future grabby stage.
Note that the enormous complexity and sophistication of even the simplest and earliest
biology of which we know suggests to us that there may have been hard steps before Earth,
which could be plausibly accommodated via panspermia (47,48,49). Similarly, the many
obstacles to becoming grabby allow for future ﬁlters before our descendants can reach that
stage. While calcuations in this paper will assume that any future ﬁlters are try-once or
short delay steps, it would be straightforward (if eﬀortful) to redo these calculations given
speciﬁc assumptions about future long delays or hard steps.
Two more corrections are relevant to the power n that applies to our grabby aliens
model. First, Section 17.2 suggests that this paper’s simplifying assumption of a power
8

law expansion of the universe underestimates the eﬀective volume-power regarding the
space-time distributions of events by roughly a factor of three, because our actual universe
has recently been transitioning toward exponential expansion. Second, Section 17.1 shows
that while a power law also applies to volumes like galaxies, not just planets, that volume-
power tends to be larger than the planet-based power.
In the following, we will take volume power n = 6 as our conservative middle estimate,
and consider n in 3 to 12 as our plausible range, though at times we also consider n as
low as 1 and as high as 50.
5
Advanced Life Timing
We’ve just seen how power laws can describe the timing of advanced life appearance on
individual planets. But how well can power laws approximate advanced life timing for
much larger, perhaps galaxy-sized, co-moving volumes that contain changing mixes of
planets?
To explore this question, and to estimate human earliness, we now consider a somewhat
more realistic model for the timing of the appearance of advanced life. In this model, stars
form at diﬀerent dates, planet lifetimes vary with star lifetimes, and only planets with
lifetimes L < ¯L are suitable for advanced life. The probability density function α(t) of
advanced life to appear at date t becomes
α(t) = q
Z t
max(0,t−¯L)
(t −b)n−1ϱ(b)
h
H(¯L) −H(t −b)
i
db,
(1)
where b is each star’s birthdate, ϱ(t) is a star formation rate (SFR), H[L] is a cumulative
distribution function (c.d.f.) over planet lifetimes, n is a planet-based hard steps c.d.f.
power, and q is a normalization constant (to make
R ∞
0 α(t) = 1).
The c.d.f. of stellar lifetimes L can be approximated as roughly H[L] = L0.5 over an
important range (up to a maximum star lifetime ¯L ∼2×104 Gyr), because stellar mass m
has a c.d.f. that goes roughly as m−1.5, while stellar lifetimes go roughly as m−3.0 (down
to ∼0.08M⊙). Yes, more accurate and complex approximations exist, but this level of
accuracy seems suﬃcient for our purposes.
A large literature tries to estimate a general star formation rate (SFR). While this
literature embraces a wide range of functional forms, a common form is ϱ(t) = tλe−t/ϕ,
which peaks at χ = λϕ. And the most canonical parameter estimates in this literature
seem to be power λ = 1 and decay time ϕ = 4 Gyr (50, 51, 52). However, as the SFR
literature also ﬁnds a wide range of other decay times, we will below consider three decay
times: ϕ in 2, 4, 8 Gyr, all of which we consider plausible.
For the purposes of estimating advanced life timing, we want not general SFRs ϱ(t)
and lifetime distributions H[L], but habitable SFRs ϱ(t) and lifetime distributions H[L].
A habitable SFR ϱ(t) selects from among all stars only those suitable for hosting advanced
life. And a habitable lifetime distribution H[L] describes the durations of habitability of
planets, not their durations of existence.
9

A “galactic habitable zone” literature tries to estimate star habitability as a function
of galactic position and time, in part by considering rates of nearby sterilizing explosions
such as supernovae and gamma ray bursts (24,25,26,27,28,29,30,31,32,33,34,35). While
such explosions are much less damaging to simpler life (53), in this paper we accept
the usual assumption of no panspermia, and thus require habitable planets to support
complex life, which is more fragile.
As this literature has focused on advising SETI eﬀorts, it has focused mostly on dates
before today. But it almost always ﬁnds peak dates χ much later than the canonical SFR
peak of χ = 4 Gyr, and as often as not ﬁnds peak dates after our current date of 13.8
Gyr. We conservatively approximate typical results of this literature by retaining for our
habitable ϱ(t) the SFR functional form ϱ(t) = tλe−t/ϕ, but now with a habitable peak of
χ = 12 Gyr and combining this with the three plausible SFR decay times: ϕ in 2, 4, 8
Gyr. In this literature, the early rise to a peak often seems convex, ﬁtting λ > 1. The
appendix also considers varying this peak χ in 4, 8, 12 Gyr.
(Our approach here of representing habitability via a habitable star formation rate in
eﬀect marks most early-universe stars as entirely unsuitable for life due to overly frequent
nearby explosions. A more precise calculation would consider each star’s speciﬁc duration
lengths between such explosions.)
A related literature asks how the habitable planet lifetime distribution H[L] relates
to the raw star lifetime distribution. Many suggest that low mass star planets are not
habitable due to ways in which they tend to diﬀer from Earth. For example, such planets
tend to suﬀer more that Earth from tidal-locking, solar ﬂares, insuﬃcient early UV light,
runaway greenhouses, and early loss of atmospheres and plate tectonics. Others, however,
see these problems as real but not so severe (36,37,38,39).
In Section 17.1, we will show that Equation (1) is, for our purposes, often at least
crudely approximated by a power law. In our grabby aliens model, we will thus assume
that the chance for an advanced civilization to arise in each “small” (perhaps galaxy size)
volume by date t after the big bang goes as tn. We assume that this tn form applies not
just to the class of all advanced life and civilizations, but also in particular to the subclass
of “grabby” civilizations.
6
Are Humans Early?
In the history of the universe, humans have arrived late relative to the peak of star
formation. However, many have noted that we seem to have arrived early relative to
habitable places and times. Only ∼8% of interstellar gas has yet been turned into stars,
and if stars of all masses were equally habitable, most habitable years should lie in planets
at the far-longer-lived small mass stars (54, 55, 36, 37, 38, 39) After all, 95% of stars last
longer than our sun, and some last roughly two thousand times longer.
Most calculations of human earliness estimate the timing of habitable planet durations,
and many assume minimum duration lengths to produce advanced life. However, only one
prior timing analysis (22) includes the hard steps power law that we include in Equation
10

(1). That one prior analysis ﬁnds, as we also ﬁnd here, that high powers greatly favor
later arrival dates, and so make our current date look much earlier. (Other authors have
acknowledged the relevance of the hard steps model, but not applied its power law to
timing estimates (23,42).)
We now estimate human earliness as a function of the planet-based hard-steps power
n and planet habitability, using two model parameters to represent variation in low mass
star habitability. First, we allow the maximum habitable planet lifetime ¯L to vary from
half of our sun’s lifetime of L⊙≈10Gyr (or roughly Earth’s habitable lifetime) to the
apparent max stellar lifetime of ∼2 × 104 Gyr. Second, we multiply the usual star mass
c.d.f. m−1.5 by a factor mκ, to favor larger star habitability by this factor. This changes
the planet lifetime c.d.f. to go as roughly H[L] = L(3−2κ)/6. (When this is unbounded, we
apply a low lifetime lower bound, which turns out not to matter.) We consider 0 and 3
as values for this mass-favoring power (MFP) κ.
Figure 2. Percentile rank of today’s date in distribution of advanced life arrival dates, as given
by Equation 1, for planet-power n and max habitable planet lifetime ¯L, assuming habitable SFR
decay ϕ = 4, peak χ = 12 Gyr, and mass-favoring power (MFP) κ = 0.
Figure 2 shows the percentile rank of today’s 13.8 Gyr date within the predicted α(t)
11

distribution of advanced life arrival dates, according to Equation 1. It shows how this rank
varies with planet-power n, and max planet lifetime ¯L (56). In Figure 3, we also show
how this percentile rank varies with SFR decay ϕ and mass-favoring power κ. Section
17.2 also shows how results change as we vary the habitable SFR peak χ in 4, 8, 12 Gyr.
10-20
10-10
10-5
10-4
0.1%
1%
10%
25%
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Power n
10-20
10-10
10-5
10-4
0.1%
1%
10%
25%
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Power n
10-20
10-10
10-5
10-4
0.1%
1%
10%
25%
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Power n
10-20
10-10
10-5
10-4
0.1%
1%
10%
25%
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Power n
10-20
10-10
10-5
10-4
0.1%
1%
10%
25%
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Power n
10-20
10-10
10-5
10-4
0.1%
1%
10%
25%
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
5
10 20
50 100
500 1k
5k 10k
1
2
5
10
20
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Power n
MFP
κ=0
MFP
κ=3
Decay φ=2 Gyr
Decay φ=4 Gyr
Decay φ=8 Gyr
Figure 3. Percentile rank of today’s date in distribution of advanced life arrival dates, as given
by Equation 1. Six diagrams show six combinations of MFP κ and SFR decay ϕ.
Figure 2 shows that for substantial powers, the eﬀect of the power law tends to be
overwhelming, while Figure 3 suggests that changes to habitable SFR decay ϕ and MFP κ
make only modest diﬀerences relative to this strong power law eﬀect. For MFP κ = 0 our
percentile rank is always below 1% for max lifetimes ¯L beyond a trillion years, no matter
what the values of other parameters. This also holds for MFP κ = 3, when planet-power
n > 1.5.
Given our middle estimate planet-power of n = 6, then even with a very restrictive
max lifetime ¯L = 10Gyr, all percentile ranks are < 10.6%. For power n = 3, at the low
end of our plausible range, all ranks are < 10% for max lifetime ¯L = 15Gyr. And at
power n = 2 all ranks are < 8.4% for max lifetime ¯L = 20 when MFP κ = 0, and all are
< 12.4% when κ = 3.
12

Thus we are roughly at least 10% “surprisingly early” for (n, ¯L) combinations in
(6, 10), (3, 15), (2, 20). And these are all very restrictive limits on planet lifetimes. Modest
increases in power n or max lifetime ¯L beyond these values quickly make our rank look
quite surprisingly early. (As Section 17.2 shows, assuming earlier SFR peaks χ allows only
modestly reduces the conﬂict.) So unless one is willing to assume rather low powers n,
and also quite restrictive max planet lifetimes ¯L, there seems to be a real puzzle in need
of explanation: why have we humans appeared so early in the history of the universe?
Some have tried to explain this puzzle as due to planets at low mass stars being less
habitable due to the many ways that they tend to be diﬀerent from Earth. For example,
such planets may tend to suﬀer more from tidal-locking, solar ﬂares, insuﬃcient early UV
light, runaway greenhouses, and early loss of atmospheres and plate tectonics. But as we
saw by varying MFP κ above, merely favoring higher mass stars by large factors is not
suﬃcient to solve the puzzle; one must instead do something closer to eliminating low
mass stars entirely from consideration.
However, to infer strict habitability limits from speciﬁc ways in which planets around
low mass stars are not like Earth, such as tidal-locking, one needs to assume that advanced
life can only arise through a narrow range of paths similar to the path that it took on
Earth.
If instead advanced life can arise through many diﬀerent paths across a wide
range of environments, then low-mass-star-planet conditions that make it harder for such
planets to follow Earth’s path do not strongly eliminate such stars from consideration.
For example, a large fraction of planets seem to be ocean worlds, for which most of the
mentioned problems seem largely irrelevant (57, 58, 59). Earth seems to have long been
an ocean world (60). And life may also be possible around binary stars, or even near and
within brown dwarves (61,62,63).
Our loud alien hypothesis instead oﬀers an explanation for human earliness that allows
for a wide range of paths to advanced life. If loud aliens will soon ﬁll the universe, setting
a deadline by which advanced life must appear if it is to not arrive within a grabby-
controlled volume, that deadline applies regardless of the type of advanced life or the
path it might take to become advanced.
Given model parameters n, ¯L, the integral over star birthdate b of Equation 1 can be
used not only to give the percentile rank of our current date t0 = 13.8Gyr, but also the
percentile rank of our Sun’s birthday b⊙= 9.2Gyr within the period [0, t0]. Figure 4 shows
how that rank varies with parameters (n, ¯L) for our standard values of other parameters.
For maximum lifetimes ¯L over ∼20 Gyr, less than ∼10% of stars are born as late as our
Sun, unless power n ≤∼4. This argues for either relatively low planet-powers n, or for
panspermia, which favors higher powers and requires a later Sun birthdate to ﬁt in a
earlier star with a planet at which some hard steps were achieved before Earth.
13

0.1%
1%
10%
30%
50%
70%
90%
5
10
20
50
100
200
500
1
2
5
10
20
5
10
20
50
100
200
500
1
2
5
10
20
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Power n
Figure 4. Fraction of advanced life star birthdates within period from Big Bang to today that
are after Sun’s date b⊙= 9.2Gyr, as given by Equation 1, using the same parameters as in
Figure 2.
7
Model Rationale
While our grabby alien model should ultimately stand or fall on how well it accounts for
observations, readers may want to hear plausibility arguments regarding its key assump-
tions.
We have already discussed (in Section 3) reasons to expect a power law time depen-
dence in the chances to originate advanced life in any one place, due to evolution needing
to pass through several diﬃcult steps. We will also suggest (in Section 17.1) that this
kind of dependence often applies suﬃciently well not just to planets, but also to large
volumes like galaxies. But why might there exist civilizations who expand fast, steadily,
and indeﬁnitely, changing how their volumes look in the process?
In Earth history, competing species, cultures, and organizations have shown consistent
tendencies, when possible, to expand into new territories and niches previously unoccu-
pied by such units. When such new territories oﬀer supporting resources that can aid
reproduction, then behaviors that encourage and enable such colonization have often
been selected for over repeated episodes of expansion (64). (Note that individual motives
are mostly irrelevant when considering such selection eﬀects.)
In addition, expansions that harness resources tend to cause substantial changes to
local processes, which induce changed appearances, at least to observers who can suﬃ-
ciently see key resources and processes. While these two tendencies are hardly iron laws
of nature, they seem common enough to suggest that we consider stochastic models which
embody them.
14

Furthermore, when uncoordinated local stochastic processes are aggregated to large
enough scales, they often result in relatively steady and consistent trends, trends whose
average rates are set by more fundamental constraints.
Examples include the spread
of species and peoples into territories, diseases into populations, and innovations into
communities of practice. Without wide coordination, processes that halt or reverse their
spread locally only rarely stop their spread across very wide scales.
Yes, expanding into the universe seems to us today a very diﬃcult technical and social
challenge, far beyond current abilities. Even so, many foresee a non-trivial chance that
some of our distant descendants may be up to the challenge within ten million years.
Furthermore, the large distances and times involved suggest that large scale coordination
will be diﬃcult, making it more plausible that uncoordinated local processes may aggre-
gate into consistent overall trends. The spatial uniformity of the universe on large scales,
and competitive pressures to expand faster, also suggest that such trends could result in
a steady and universal expansion speed.
Yes, perhaps there is only a tiny chance that any one civilization will fall into such
a scenario wherein internal selection successfully promotes sustained rapid overall expan-
sion. (We discuss such chances in Section 15.) Even so, the few exceptions could have a
vastly disproportionate impact on the universe. If such expansions are at all possible, we
should consider their consequences.
8
The Model
Our basic model sits in a cosmology that is static relative to its coordinates. (An ex-
panding cosmology is addressed in Section 10.) That is, galaxies sit at constant spatial
position vectors v in a D-dimensional space, time moves forward after t = 0, and move-
ment at constant speed s in the x coordinate direction satisﬁes s = ∆x/∆t. (We are
mainly interested in D = 3, but will at times consider D in 1, 2.)
Within this space, “grabby civilizations” (GC) spontaneously arise at spacetime events
(v, t). By deﬁnition, GC volumes look clearly diﬀerent, and consistently expand in every
direction at a constant local speed s until meeting volumes controlled by other GC.
Grabby civilizations are presumed to arise from non-grabby civilizations (NGC) within
a short duration (less than ten million years) of the NGC’s birth (8). We assume that
NGCs which do not give birth to GCs have little cosmic impact, and thus do not block
GCs from the activities that deﬁne them: being born, expanding, and changing volume
appearances.
Though we at times presume that humans today count as a NGC, we
otherwise purposely say little about how exactly to deﬁne NGCs, so that many possible
deﬁnitions can be applied.
We assume that only one in R such NGCs gives birth to a GC, and that this rate
1/R is independent of the other parameters in our model, at least for NGCs who are not
born within a GC-controlled volume. We will later show how this ratio R relates to the
chances that each NGC could see evidence of other NGCs in various spacetime regions.
We assume that once a volume is controlled by any GC, it is forever controlled by some
15

GC, and forever looks diﬀerent from non-GC-controlled volumes. We make no further as-
sumptions about what happens after GCs meet, as our analysis will only consider GC and
NGC origin events where residents can see that they are not in a GC-controlled volume.
Once they meet, GCs might ﬁght over volumes, or maintain peaceful borders at their
meeting locations. Each GC might even, soon after birth, trigger a false vaccum decay,
in eﬀect destroying the universe, though this scenario requires expansion at lightspeed
(credit for this suggestion to Adam Brown).
We assume that each “small” (perhaps galaxy-region-sized) volume has the same uni-
form per-volume chance of a GC being born there, a chance that is independent of the
chances in other volumes (5). As this uniformity ignores the actual spatial clustering of
galaxies, which is mainly on scales below 30 Mpc, we expect our model to be less accurate
on such smaller scales.
We assume that over time the c.d.f. chance of birth by t at some position v rises as
(t/k)n, a volume-power n of time since t = 0 divided by a timescale constant k. Except
that this per-time chance falls to zero as soon as the expanding volume of another GC
includes this position v. There may in fact be civilizations born within GC volumes, but
we decline to call them “grabby” to keep the GC concept relevant to human observations.
As we discuss in Section 17.1, this power law dependence can be a robust feature of the
origin of advanced civilizations.
And that is our whole model. It has three free parameters: the speed s of expansion
and the constant k and volume-power n of the appearance power law. It turns out that
we can estimate each of these parameters at least roughly from data.
Speciﬁc examples of the spacetime distribution resulting from this process are shown
in Figure 1. Notice how smaller GC tend to be found at later origin times in the spatial
“crevices” near where larger earlier GC would meet. (This correlation between origin date
and size is explored in Figure 16.) For simplicity, these examples show each GC retaining
control of its initial volume after GCs meet. This assumption is made for concreteness
only; our analysis only depends on it when we show examples or ﬁnd distributions over
ﬁnal GC volumes.
9
Heuristic 1D Model
A simple deterministic model gives a rough approximation to this stochastic model in one
dimension.
Assume that a regular array of “constraining” GC origins all have the same origin time
t = x, and are equally spaced so that neighboring expansion cones all intersect at t = 1.
(See Figure 5.) If these cones set the deadline for the origins of other “arriving” GC, we
can then ﬁnd a distribution over arriving GC origin times that results from integrating
the arrival power law tn−1 over the regions allowed by the constraining GC.
The key modeling assumption of this simpliﬁed heuristic model is to equate the con-
straining GC origin time x with the percentile rank r of the resulting distribution of
16

Figure 5. Illustration of the heuristic math model of Section 9
.
arriving GC origins. This assumption implies
1 −r
r
Z x
0
tn−1dt =
Z 1
x
tn−1 1 −t
1 −xdt
which is independent of speed s or constant k. This math model thus captures two key
symmetries of our stochastic model, which are described in Section 11.
For each volume-power n, there is some matching rank r where this heuristic model’s
prediction of (1 −x)/x for the ratio of median time till meet aliens to the median GC
origin time equals a 1D simulation result for this ratio. This matching rank is ∼0.88 at
n = 1, falls to a minimum of ∼0.61 at n = 4, and then rises up to ∼0.88 again at n = 24.
This simple heuristic math model thus roughly captures some key features of our full
stochastic model, such as having an overall stochastic shape that is independent of speed
s and constant k.
10
Cosmology
Our model seems to have a big problem: its cosmology has key objects maintaining
constant spatial relations, yet our universe is expanding. Our rather standard solution: a
change of coordinates.
Usually, using ordinary local “ruler” spatial distances dv and “clock” time diﬀerences
dt, the spacetime metric distance d between events is (for lightspeed c = 1) given by
d2 = dt2−dv2. We instead use “model” coordinates, which are co-moving spatial positions
du = dv/a(t) and conformal times dτ = dt/a(t). Here a(t) is a “scale factor” saying how
much the universe has expanded at time t relative to time t = 1. Metric distance then
becomes d2 = a2(t) × (dτ 2 −du2).
17

(Note that this coordinate change preserves local speeds and also relative angles be-
tween spatial positions. We can thus calculate such things in whichever coordinate system
is more convenient.)
In terms of our model spatial coordinates u, galaxies tend to stay near the same
spatial positions. However, in an expanding universe a freely-falling object that starts at
an initial speed ∆u/∆τ, and has no forces acting on it, does not maintain that ∆u/∆τ
coordinate speed as the universe expands. It instead slows down (65). Does this show
that a GC which might in a static universe expand at a constant speed ∆u/∆τ does not
in fact expand at such a constant speed in an expanding universe?
No, because the frontier of an expanding civilization is less like an object thrown and
more like the speed of a plane; a given scenario of wing drag and plane engine power will
set a plane speed relative to the local air, not relative to the ground or its initial launch.
Similarly, a civilization expands by stopping at local resources, developing those resources
for a time, and then using them to travel another spatial distance (66). As this process is
relative to local co-moving materials, it does maintain a constant model speed ∆u/∆τ.
We run our simulations in a static model space u, and in model time τ. To convert
our results from model time τ to clock time t, it suﬃces to know the scale factor function
a(t). This scale factor a(t) went as t1/2 during the “radiation-dominated” era from the
ﬁrst second until about 50,000 years after the big bang, after which it went as t2/3 during
the “matter-dominated” era. In the last few billion years, it has been slowly approaching
eΩt as dark energy comes to dominate.
Assume that the scale factor is a power law a(t) = tm, and that we today are at
percentile rank r in the distribution over GC origin dates. If so, we can convert from
model time τ to clock time t via t = t0(τ/τ0)1/(1−m) and r = F(τ0), where t0 = 13.787 Gyr
is a best estimate of the current age of the universe, and F(τ) is the c.d.f. over GC model
origin times. We can also convert between clock-time volume-power n and model-time
volume-power η via η = n/(1 −m).
Now, a least-squared-error ﬁt of a power law to the actual a(t) within 0-20 Gyr after
the Big Bang gives a best ﬁt of m ≈0.90. However, as this m value tends to give more
extreme results, we conservatively use m = 2/3 in most of our analysis. In Section 17.2,
we show how some results change for m = 0.9.
Note that by assuming a uniform distribution over our origin rank r (i.e., that we
are equally likely to be any percentile rank in the GC origin time distribution), we can
convert distributions over model times τ (e.g., an F(τ) over GC model origin times) into
distributions over clock times t. This in eﬀect uses our current date of 13.8Gyr to estimate
a distribution over the model timescale constant k. If instead of the distribution F(τ)
we use the distribution F0(τ), which considers only those GCs who do not see any aliens
at their origin date, we can also apply the information that we humans do not now see
aliens.
In the rest of this paper we will show spacetime diagrams in terms of model coordinates
(u, τ), but when possible we will discuss and show statistics and distributions in terms of
clock times t, including clock-time volume-powers n. To describe distributions of events
18

in space within an expanding universe, we will focus when possible on counting galaxies,
as their number seems to be largely conserved on our timescales of concern, and galaxies
tend to stay near the same co-moving spatial coordinates u.
At the current date, our universe now has g = ∼7 × 107 galaxies per Gpc3 (67). (This
applies to galaxies deﬁned as star clusters with mass > 106M⊙; there are ∼7 times more
galaxies if we deﬁne them as mass > 105M⊙.) As the average stars per galaxy is ∼108,
while our galaxy has ∼1011, our Milky Way galaxy should count as M = ∼103 average
galaxies for events we expect to happen per star, such as GC and NGC births.
If we identify our current date of t0 = 13.787 Gyr with model time τ in [0, 1], then a
speed s = 1 model box [0, 1]3 corresponds to proper volume of (t0/τ)3(s/c)3Gpc3 at that
time t0. Thus the model box holds G = g(t0/τ)3(s/c)3 galaxies at all model and clock
times. And the model volume corresponding to one average galaxy is at all times 1/G.
11
Simulating The Model
Our stochastic model scales in two ways. That is, two kinds of transformations preserve its
stochastic pattern of GC space-time origins, when expressed in model coordinates. First,
halving the speed s of expansion halves the average spatial distance between GC, but
otherwise preserves their relative spacetime pattern. (Though this can change parameters
that depend on this speed s relative to c, such which GC can see what other GC.) Second,
changing timescale k changes the median GC origin time, but preserves the pattern once
times and distances are rescaled by the same factor to give the same median origin time
as before. (This even preserves who-can-see-who relations.)
Thus simulations need only vary dimension D and volume-power n, and repeatedly
sample, to see the full range of stochastic GC origin patterns that can be produced by this
model. This ability to explore its full range is one of the main virtues of our admitedly
oversimpliﬁed model.
So we can ﬁx expansion speed at s = 1, focus on a unit time range [0, 1] and spatial
volume [0, W]D, and use a “wrap around” (toroidal) metric which identiﬁes x = 0 with
x = W, etc. in all spatial dimensions. (W ≥1 seems wise, and W = 1 usually seems
ﬁne; in Section 17.2 we check for robustness to this choice.) We generate N candidate
GC origins (u, τ) as (uniformly) random positions u within this unit volume, paired with
random times τ drawn from a c.d.f that goes as τ n on [0, 1].
Let us say that, for s = 1, spacetime event A “precludes” event B if A’s time is earlier
and if the spatial distance between them is less than their time diﬀerence. Given a set of
N candidate origin events, we ﬁlter out any members precluded by other members, and
the remaining set C of origins then deﬁnes a stochastic sample from our model. (It helps
to test earlier candidates ﬁrst, each against the test-passing origins collected so far.)
We then rescale all times and distances in C by the same factor, to make the median
origin time be one. We can then transform such a sample into a sample with a diﬀering
speed s by rescaling all distances by the same factor. And we can transform it into samples
with diﬀering timescales k by rescaling all times and distances by the same factor. (Such
19

“samples” may describe the same basic stochastic pattern over larger or smaller spatial
volumes, in essence holding more or less “copies” of the same basic stochastic pattern.)
We know that a spacetime event is controlled by some GC if it is precluded by any
GC origin. While a larger sample of Ncandidate GC origins tends to induce a larger
non-precluded set C, eventually C stops increasing substantially with N, giving a “full”
sample.
Lightspeed c can be varied relative to speed s to calculate who can see who in such
a sample. When c is large compared to s, calculations of what can be seen must look
outside the model box to consider an indeﬁnite array of exact copies of that box and its
contents in every direction.
12
Simulation Statistics
Assume one has a sample of simulation runs, each of which tried N candidates and
produced a set of C grabby civilizations at origins (u, τ) within the model box [0, W]3.
Here are some interesting statistics that one can calculate within each run (and average
over multiple runs).
The following statistics describe how GCs are distributed in space and time:
A) We can collect a distribution F(τ) over model GC origin times τ. (This is indepen-
dent of speed s.)
B) Given a set of GC model origin times, if we assume Earth today has its GC origin
rank r, that gives a constant for converting all model times in that simulation into
clock times. If we then assume a uniform distribution over Earth rank r (expressing
the assumption that we have a spacetime-representative chance of birthing grabby
descendants soon), we can convert any distribution over model times into a distri-
bution over clock times. We can also take any distribution over pairs of model times
into a distribution over clock durations between those times. (This is independent
of speed s.)
C) If at some date, the model volume wherein a particular GC is ﬁrst to arrive is
V < 1, then it covers V G galaxies at that date, at least if we assume that GCs
who meet simply stop and keep control of their prior volumes (9). (Alternatively,
we might call this a GC’s “volume when meet neighbors”.) Iterating through the
GC, a distribution over galaxies per GC can be found for diﬀerent times, as can the
volume fraction of the universe which is controlled by GCs at that GC origin time
τ. (This fraction is independent of speed s.)
D) We can collect a two-dimensional distribution showing the relation between GC
origin times and galaxies per GC.
The following statistics describe what we may see in our future regarding GCs:
20

E) For each GC origin position, we can ﬁnd the model time τ at which a speed s =
1 traveler would arrive at that position from each other GC origin event.
The
minimum of these is the arrival time when the ﬁrst other GC expansion wave would,
if allowed, arrive at this GC position. (This is independent of speed s.)
F) The model time average of that min arrival time and this GC origin time is the meet
time, when the two GC expansion waves would collide (if both were in fact GCs).
The ﬁrst GC it meets is also the ﬁrst one to arrive. (This is independent of speed
s.)
G) If a GC has not yet seen any other GC, it will ﬁrst see the GC that it will ﬁrst
meet, and see it before their meeting for s < c. For s = 1 that when see time is
τ = (d+τ0 +cτ1)/(1+c), where τ0 is the viewer’s origin time, and τ1 is the viewed’s
origin time.
H) We can convert origin and view times from model times into clock times, take the
diﬀerence and get a distribution over clock time until see aliens. (That duration is
zero if aliens can already be seen from a GC origin.)
The following statistics describe what we may see now regarding GCs:
I) If b and d are the (model) time and space distances between two GC origins, then
for s = 1 if d < cb the earlier one would be visible to the later one. The earlier GC-
controlled-volume would (unless it had already collided with another GC) appear
as a disk in the sky to the later one, with angle θ given by tan(θ/2) = x/(c(b −x)),
where x solves d2 = x2 + (c(b −x))2. We can thus ﬁnd a distribution over the max
angle that each GC can see (6). (If the GC sees none, its max angle is zero.)
J) We can ﬁnd a distribution over GCs of the number of other GC origins that each
GC can see at its origin. (This assumes transparent GC volumes.)
K) A GC that appears as a disk of angle θ in the sky will have a border B(θ) of angular
length in the sky B(θ) = 23/2π(1 −cos(θ/2))1/2. If GCs are transparent we can add
up these border lengths over visible GCs to ﬁnd a total border length visible at each
GC origin, and then collect that into a distribution over all GC.
L) We can select the subset of GCs who don’t see any other GC-controlled-volume at
their origin. This GC set can be used to compute other statistics conditional on not
seeing GCs.
The following statistics describe what we may see now regarding NGCs:
L) An NGC to GC ratio R = (gt3
0/MN)(s/c)3τ −η−3 is required to expect one prior NGC
in the same Milky-Way-sized galaxy in the past light cone of a GC (or NGC) origin
there at (model) time τ. Iterating through GC origin dates τ gives a distribution
of such ratios.
21

M) To be visible from Earth today, an NGC in our galaxy with a lifetime of L would
have been born in clock time window of width [t0 −L, t0], which for L ≪t0 is model
time range [τ(1 −(L/(3t0)), τ] , at least when m = 2/3. An NGC to GC ratio
R = (3gt2
0/MNL(η −1))(s/c)3τ −η−2 is required to expect an active NGC visible in
a Milky-Way-sized galaxy at a GC (or NGC) origin there at τ.
N) An NGC to GC ratio R = (1/8πN)(Γ(η + 4)/(Γ(η)(η −1)))(s/c)3τ −η−3 is required
to expect one prior NGC anywhere in the past lightcone of a GC (or NGC) origin
at time τ.
O) An NGC to GC ratio R = (1/8πN)η(η −2)(s/c)2(3t0/L)τ −η−3 is required to expect
one NGC whose active period intersects with the past lightcone of a GC (or NGC)
origin at time τ.
Code to simulate the grabby alien model and compute the above statistics can be
found at https://github.com/jonathanpaulson/grabby_aliens.
13
Estimating Expansion Speed
Our grabby aliens model has three free parameters, and we have so far discussed empirical
estimates of two of them: the volume-power n (in Sections 4 and 17.1) and the power
law constant k (in Section 10). The remaining parameter, expansion speed s, can also be
estimated empirically, via the datum that we humans today do not see alien volumes in
our sky (5,6,7).
We will see in Figure 13 that visible alien volumes are typically huge in the sky, much
larger than the full moon. So there is only a tiny chance of a visible GC volume being
too small to be seen by the naked eye, much less by our powerful telescopes. So if alien
volumes looked noticeably diﬀerent, as we assume in our deﬁnition of “grabby”, and if
their volumes intersected with our backwards light cone, then we should see them clearly.
We will also see in Figure 11 that, averaging over GC origin dates, a third to a half of
the volume of the universe is controlled by GCs. So from a random location at such dates,
one is likely to see large alien-controlled volumes. However, if the GC expansion speed
is a high enough fraction of the speed of light, a selection eﬀect, illustrated in Figure 6,
makes it unlikely for a random GC to see such an alien volume at its origin date. If they
were where we could see them, then they would be here now instead of us.
Given prior estimates regarding the chances for various combinations of power n and
GC expansion speed ratio s/c, we can update such priors via the likelihood ratio of such
a pair (n, s/c) to predict our key evidence that we do not now see alien volumes. Figure 7
show that likelihood ratio, i.e., the number of GC origin events that see no alien volumes,
divided by the number that do.
Speed ratios of s/c < ∼1/3 are greatly disfavored,
especially for high powers.
22

Figure 6. Illustration of selection eﬀect. When expansion speeds s are near lightspeed c, GC
origin events in most of our past lightcone would have created a GC that controls the event from
which we are viewing, preventing us-now from becoming a candidate GC origin (7)
Updating on not seeing alien volumes should also update one toward estimating an
earlier rank, as earlier GC are less likely to see alien volumes. Even so, this does not
weaken the inference from Figure 7 toward a high speed s.
This analysis, like most in our paper, assumes we would have by now noticed diﬀerences
between volumes controlled or not by GCs. Another possibility, however, is that GCs
make their volumes look only subtly diﬀerent, a diﬀerence that we have not yet noticed.
If even so we would have noticed being inside a GC-controlled volume, then our model
still applies, except that we can’t use current data to constrain the expansion speed s.
In this case, there could be hope for astronomers to search the sky for subtle circu-
lar borders between GC volumes and surrounding volumes. Figures 8 and 9 show how
predicted distributions over the number of GC volumes and the total length of such sky
borders vary with speed s and power n.
23

Figure 7. Likelihood ratios, for volume-power and speed (n, s/c) parameter pairs, regarding
the observation that one sees no large alien-controlled volumes in the sky. To obtain a poste-
rior distribution over these pairs, multiply this likelihood ratio by a prior for each pair, then
renormalize.
Figure 8. Distributions over how many other GCs each one sees at its origin. At speed s = c,
none see any others.
24

Figure 9. The total angular length of GC borders on the sky at GC origin dates.
Figure 10. C.d.f.s over GC origin clock-
times, given uniform distribution on hu-
manity’s rank.
This is for speed s = c,
where aliens are never seen.
Figure 11.
Fraction of universe volume
controlled by GCs, as a function of rank of
GC origin time.
25

Figure 12. C.d.f.s over clock-time until some of our descendants directly meet aliens.
Figure 13.
C.d.f.s over largest angle in
sky of GC seen from GC origins. Red line
shows our Moon’s diameter (29′20′′).
Figure 14.
C.d.f.s over clock time till
some GC descendant sees aliens.
For
s = 0.1c, almost all GC have already seen
aliens.
26

Figure
15.
Final galaxies per GC-
controlled volume, if GCs retain initial vol-
umes after meeting. This for s = c; others
go as (s/c)3.
Figure
16.
Final galaxies per GC-
controlled volume, versus the origin time of
each GC. Results from one simulation run.
14
Simulation Results
We now show more graphs describing how distributions over GC statistics vary with
volume-power n, and sometimes also with speed ratio s/c. Unless stated otherwise, these
each come from averaging over ﬁve simulation repetitions, each with W = s = c = 1
and N = 108 sample GC origin events. Model-to-clock time mappings are made using
only GCs who see no others at their origins, but all GCs are shown in the distributions,
even GCs who do see others. Correctness of code has often been checked by comparing
independent implementations.
Figure 10 shows clock GC origin dates, and regarding those origin events Figure 11
shows GC-controlled volume fractions. Figure 12 shows clock durations until a GC de-
scendant meets aliens, Figure 13 shows the largest alien volume angle seen, and Figure
14 shows clock durations until a GC descendant sees aliens.
Figure 15 shows distributions over the number of galaxies per GC at the simulation
end, when GCs ﬁll all volumes, under the assumption that GCs who meet stop and retain
their volumes. We apparently live on a one-in-a-million-galaxies “rare Earth” (24).
Figure 16 shows how GC origin dates and volumes are related to each other. Note
that the higher the volume-power, the more closely spaced are GC origin times, the fewer
galaxies each GC encompasses, and the less time until our GC descendants would meet
or see aliens. The earliest GCs tend to have the largest volumes.
Out of all the ﬁgures in this paper, only Figures 10,12,12,14,16 depend on our assump-
tion of a uniform distribution over humanity’s origin rank among GCs.
For those frustrated by diﬃculties in reading numbers oﬀour many graphs, Table 1
gives speciﬁc numbers for two scenarios.
27

Scenario:
Scenario:
s/c = 1/2, n = 6
s/c = 3/4, n = 12
Percentile
1%
25%
75%
1%
25%
75%
Origin (Gyr)
8.99
15.25
21.24
10.20
13.46
16.02
MinTillMeet (Gyr)
0.019
0.488
2.226
0.006
0.188
0.882
MinTillSee (Gyr)
0
0
0
0
0
0.425
MaxAngle
0
0.132
0.908
0
0
0.313
% Empty
0.010
0.320
0.830
0.010
0.290
0.810
Table 1. Speciﬁc numbers for two scenarios, (n, s/c) = (6, 1/2), (12, 3/4).
15
SETI Implications
The results we have shown so far have been on grabby civilizations (GCs), including where
and when they exist, and how we might see or meet them. Let us now consider non-grabby
civilizations (NGCs), who we have said are R times more common than grabby ones; each
NGC has a 1/R chance to soon birth a GC. This unknown ratio R sets the chances for
both humanity’s grabbiness in the next ten million years, and also for success in SETI
(search for extraterrestrial intelligence) eﬀorts.
On human futures, we can think of humans today as a NGC, or soon to become one.
While we might not want to become a GC, many of the scenarios in which we do not
are because we can not. For example, we may go extinct, or become permanently and
strongly limited. So we might at least like to have the option to become grabby. Thus
human future optimists tend to think that our descendants have a decent chance to birth
a GC, and thus have low estimates of R. (One author’s Twitter poll gave a median for
humanity of R∼2.5.)
In contrast, high estimates of R are needed to expect SETI success anytime soon. The
four Figures 17, 18, 19, and 20 show distributions over the ratio R required to expect one
active NGC in these four diﬀerent spacetime regions where SETI might look:
• Within our past lightcone (Figure 17)
• Intersecting our past lightcone (Figure 18)
• Before “now” in our galaxy (Figure 19)
• “Now” in our galaxy (Figure 20)
NGCs in regions further down this list seem easier for us to see if they are there, but
require larger ratios R for any to be there to see. For example, human future optimists
who see R > 103 as implausible should agree with SETI pessmimists who say there have
probably never been aliens in our galaxy (4).
To expect ten times as many NGCs in a region, you need a ratio R ten times higher.
28

Figure 17. Ratio R required to expect one
NGC ever anywhere within our past light
cone. This is for s = c; others go as (s/c)3.
Figure 18. Ratio R required to expect one
NGC intersecting with our past light cone.
This is for s = c; others go as (s/c)2. This
is for an expected NGC lifetime L = 1Myr;
others go as L−1.
Figure 19. Ratio R required to expect one
NGC has ever existed in our galaxy. That
is, both within our past light cone, and also
in our galaxy. This is for s = c; others go
as (s/c)3.
Figure 20. Ratio R to expect one NGC
“now” in our galaxy. That is, intersects our
past light cone, and in our galaxy.
This
is for s = c; others as (s/c)2. This is for
lifetime L = 1Myr; others go as L−1.
29

GCs lower in the percentile rank r have a smaller required Rr, and would for a true ratio
R expect R/Rr NGC per region. Figures 17, 18, 19, and 20 show results for s = c; for
s = c/2, ratios 8 or 4 times smaller are required. Figures 18 and 20 are for expected
NGC lifetimes of L = 1Myr; for a lifetime ten times smaller, you need a ratio ten times
larger. Thus the longevity of alien technosignatures is a key to SETI success (68). For
example, aliens who build beacons that function long after their civilizations die may be
much easier to see (69,70).
Note that Figures 17 and 19 are actually versions of Figures 18 and 20 in the limit
of indeﬁnite lifetime L. Note also that higher powers n usually require lower ratios R,
and thus oﬀer more room for SETI optimism, though high n also strengthens the human
earliness puzzle, and so pushes more for the grabby aliens model.
At our middle estimate volume power of n = 6, a NGC to GC ratio of over one thou-
sand is required to expect even one NGC active on our past light cone, and a ratio of over
ten thousand is required to expect one anywhere in the past of our galaxy. Furthermore,
a ratio of over ten million is required to expect one NGC active now in our galaxy. (And
that’s for a million year NGC lifetime; shorter lived NGCs require even higher ratios).
Yet today SETI struggles to see NGC techno-signatures for even a tiny fraction of the
stars in our galaxy. Overall these seem discouraging results for SETI.
Note that the widely-used “self indication” prior for indexical probability analysis
favors larger values of R in proportion to R, at least relative to the chances that one
might estimate neglecting anthropic considerations (71,72).
Note also that GC-controlled volumes, like other volumes, are mostly empty and
probably transparent, and that we may have not yet learned how to see their diﬀerences;
Section 13 shows the angle lengths of the circular borders we might then ﬁnd in our sky.
16
Conclusion
A literature has modeled the evolution of life on Earth as a sequence of “hard steps”,
and has compared speciﬁc predictions of this model to Earth’s historical record. This
model seems to roughly ﬁt, and supports inferences about the number of hard steps so
far experienced on Earth. While some argue that other processes besides hard steps also
happened (like the easy, delay, try-once, and multi-try steps discussed in Section 3), we
know of no published cricitism of the basic idea that some hard steps occured. That is,
this hard steps model seems widely accepted.
Yet we suggest that this standard hard-steps model does not seem to have been taken
suﬃciently seriously. For example, the literature that estimates the timing of the appear-
ance of advanced life has only once included the key hard-steps timing power law. In
Section 5 we have presented a simple model which includes this eﬀect, and in Section 6
we ﬁnd that according to this model humanity today seems to be quite early, unless one
assumes both a rather low planet-power and a very restrictive limit on habitable planet
lifetimes.
Related literatures have also apparently not considered applying this hard-steps-based
30

power law to larger volumes like galaxies, instead of to just planets. Sterilizing explosions
reduced galactic habitability eons ago, and some have suggested that this supports a
scenario wherein advanced civilizations are far more common today than they were eons
ago (40). But such authors do not seem to have realized that, with a suﬃciently high
power, a volume-based hard steps power law directly produces a similar eﬀect.
Nor do most prior authors seem to have noticed that a scenario wherein advanced
civilizations grab most of the available volumes can robustly explain humanity’s early
arrival. While others have oﬀered explanations based on the assumption that the evolution
advanced life must follow a path close to Earth’s path, our deadline explanation allows
for a very wide range of evolutionary paths and contexts.
To formalize this argument, we have presented in this paper a very simple model
(plausibly over-simpliﬁed in fact) of what we call “grabby” civilizations (GC), a model
that is a modest variation on models by S. Jay Olson, who recently pursued a similar
approach, minus the hard steps power law (5,6,7,8,9,10).
In our model, GCs are born according to a volume-based power law, and once born they
simply expand at a constant speed relative to local materials. We show that this power
law is often at least a crude approximation to a more realistic model. This expansion
speed and the two parameters of this power law are the only three parameters of our
model, each of which can be estimated from data to within roughly a factor of four.
The hard-steps in Earth history literature helps to estimate the power, and our current
date helps to estimate the power law timescale. Furthermore, the fact that we do not
now see large alien-controlled volumes in our sky, even though they should control much
of the universe volume now, gives us our last estimate, that aliens expand at over half of
lightspeed. Given estimates of all three parameters, we have in this paper shown many
model predictions regarding alien timing, spacing, appearance, and the durations until
we see or meet them. And we have shown how optimism regarding humanity’s future is
in conﬂict with optimism regarding SETI eﬀorts.
Being especially simple, our model is unlikely to be an exact representation of reality.
So future research might explore more realistic variations. For example, one might more
precisely account for the recent exponential expansion of the universe, and use a more
accurate appearance function instead of our power law approximation. Instead of being
uniform across space, the GCs birth rate might be higher within galaxies, higher within
larger galaxies, and follow their typical spatial distributions.
A GC expansion might
take a duration to bring its full eﬀect to any one location, and the GC expansion speed
might vary and depend on local geographies of resources and obstacles.
Finally, GC
subvolumes might sometimes stop expanding or die, either spontaneously or in response
to local disturbances.
Note, however, that in many cases we may not have data available to estimate the extra
parameters that these extended models would introduce. A virtue of our over-simpliﬁed
model is that we can estimate all its parameters using available data, and show the full
range of variation of its behavior.
31

References
1. D. Grinspoon, Lonely Planets: The Natural Philosophy of Alien Life (Ecco, New
York, 2003).
2. N. Drake, How my dad’s equation sparked the search for extraterrestrial intelligence,
National Geographic 30 (2014).
3. T. Westby, C. J. Conselice, The astrobiological copernican weak and strong limits for
intelligent life, The Astrophysical Journal 896, 58 (2020).
4. M. H. Hart, Explanation for the absence of extraterrestrials on earth, Quarterly Jour-
nal of the Royal Astronomical Society 16, 128 (1975).
5. S. J. Olson, Homogeneous cosmology with aggressively expanding civilizations, Clas-
sical and Quantum Gravity 32, 215025 (2015).
6. S. J. Olson, On the visible size and geometry of aggressively expanding civilizations
at cosmological distances, Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics 2016, 021
(2016).
7. S. J. Olson, Estimates for the number of visible galaxy-spanning civilizations and the
cosmological expansion of life, International Journal of Astrobiology 16, 176 (2017).
8. S. J. Olson, Expanding cosmological civilizations on the back of an envelope, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1805.06329 (2018).
9. S. J. Olson, Long-term implications of observing an expanding cosmological civiliza-
tion, International Journal of Astrobiology 17, 87 (2018).
10. S. J. Olson, On the likelihood of observing extragalactic civilizations: Predictions
from the self-indication assumption, arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.08194 (2020).
11. J. A. Ball, The zoo hypothesis, Icarus 19, 347 (1973).
12. R. Hanson, The great ﬁlter: are we almost past it? (1998). Preprint available at
http://hanson.gmu.edu/greatfilter.html.
13. B. Carter, The anthropic principle and its implications for biological evolution, Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and
Physical Sciences 310, 347 (1983).
14. K. Caldeira, J. F. Kasting, The life span of the biosphere revisited, Nature 360, 721
(1992).
15. R. Hanson, Must early life be easy? the rhythm of major evolutionary transitions
(1998). Preprint available at http://hanson.gmu.edu/hardstep.pdf.
32

16. B. Carter, Five-or six-step scenario for evolution?, International Journal of Astrobi-
ology 7, 177 (2008).
17. A. J. Watson, Implications of an anthropic model of evolution for emergence of com-
plex life and intelligence, Astrobiology 8, 175 (2008).
18. M. McCabe, H. Lucas, On the origin and evolution of life in the galaxy, International
Journal of Astrobiology 9, 217 (2010).
19. D. J. Aldous, The great ﬁlter, branching histories, and unlikely events, Mathematical
Scientist 37, 55 (2012).
20. M. Sandora, Multiverse predictions for habitability: Fraction of planets that develop
life, Universe 5, 171 (2019).
21. A. E. Snyder-Beattie, A. Sandberg, K. E. Drexler, M. B. Bonsall, The timing of
evolutionary transitions suggests intelligent life is rare, Astrobiology (2020).
22. D. Waltham, Star masses and star-planet distances for earth-like habitability, Astro-
biology 17, 61 (2017).
23. M. Lingam, A. Loeb, Role of stellar physics in regulating the critical steps for life,
International Journal of Astrobiology 18, 527 (2019).
24. P. D. Ward, D. Brownlee, Rare Earth: Why Complex Life Is Uncommon in the Uni-
verse (Copernicus, New York, 2000).
25. G. Gonzalez, D. Brownlee, P. Ward, The galactic habitable zone: galactic chemical
evolution, Icarus 152, 185 (2001).
26. C. H. Lineweaver, Y. Fenner, B. K. Gibson, The galactic habitable zone and the age
distribution of complex life in the milky way, Science 303, 59 (2004).
27. B. Vukotic, M. M. Cirkovic, On the timescale forcing in astrobiology, arXiv preprint
arXiv:0712.1508 (2007).
28. N. Prantzos, On the “galactic habitable zone”, Space Science Reviews 135, 313 (2008).
29. B. Vukotic, The set of habitable planets and astrobiological regulation mechanisms,
International Journal of Astrobiology 9, 81 (2010).
30. M. G. Gowanlock, D. R. Patton, S. M. McConnell, A model of habitability within
the milky way galaxy, Astrobiology 11, 855 (2011).
31. D. Legassick, The age distribution of potential intelligent life in the milky way, arXiv
preprint arXiv:1509.02832 (2015).
33

32. I. S. Morrison, M. G. Gowanlock, Extending galactic habitable zone modeling to
include the emergence of intelligent life, Astrobiology 15, 683 (2015).
33. X. Cai, J. H. Jiang, K. A. Fahy, Y. L. Yung, A statistical estimation of the occurrence
of extraterrestrial intelligence in the milky way galaxy, Galaxies 9, 5 (2021).
34. D. Forgan, P. Dayal, C. Cockell, N. Libeskind, Evaluating galactic habitability using
high-resolution cosmological simulations of galaxy formation, International Journal
of Astrobiology 16, 60 (2017).
35. R. Spinelli, G. Ghirlanda, F. Haardt, G. Ghisellini, G. Scuderi, The best place and
time to live in the milky way, Astronomy & Astrophysics 647, A41 (2021).
36. M. Lingam, A. Loeb, Is life most likely around sun-like stars?, Journal of Cosmology
and Astroparticle Physics 2018, 020 (2018).
37. J. Haqq-Misra, R. K. Kopparapu, E. T. Wolf, Why do we ﬁnd ourselves around a
yellow star instead of a red star?, International Journal of Astrobiology 17, 77 (2018).
38. J. Gale, A. Wandel, The potential of planets orbiting red dwarf stars to support
oxygenic photosynthesis and complex life, International Journal of Astrobiology 16,
1 (2017).
39. A. Wandel, J. Gale, The bio-habitable zone and atmospheric properties for planets of
red dwarfs, International Journal of Astrobiology 19, 126 (2020).
40. M. M. ´Cirkovi´c, B. Vukoti´c, Astrobiological phase transition: towards resolution of
fermi’s paradox, Origins of Life and Evolution of Biospheres 38, 535 (2008).
41. A. Berezin, “ﬁrst in, last out” solution to the fermi paradox, arXiv preprint
arXiv:1803.08425 (2018).
42. F. Simpson, The longevity of habitable planets and the development of intelligent life,
International Journal of Astrobiology 16, 266 (2017).
43. L. Nunney, Commentary: The multistage model of carcinogenesis, peto’s paradox and
evolution, International journal of epidemiology 45, 649 (2016).
44. A. Chopra, C. H. Lineweaver, The case for a gaian bottleneck: the biology of habit-
ability, Astrobiology 16, 7 (2016).
45. K. Ozaki, C. T. Reinhard, The future lifespan of earth’s oxygenated atmosphere,
Nature Geoscience pp. 1–5 (2021).
46. B. K. Pearce, A. S. Tupper, R. E. Pudritz, P. G. Higgs, Constraining the time interval
for the origin of life on earth, Astrobiology 18, 343 (2018).
34

47. I. Ginsburg, M. Lingam, A. Loeb, Galactic panspermia, The Astrophysical Journal
Letters 868, L12 (2018).
48. A. A. Sharov, Genome increase as a clock for the origin and evolution of life, Biology
Direct 1, 1 (2006).
49. A. A. Sharov, R. Gordon, Life before earth, arXiv preprint arXiv:1304.3381 (2013).
50. P. Madau, M. Dickinson, Cosmic star-formation history, Annual Review of Astronomy
and Astrophysics 52, 415 (2014).
51. P. Mason, P. Biermann, Astrophysical and cosmological constraints on life, Habitabil-
ity of the Universe Before Earth. In: Rampelotto, PH, Seckbach, J., Gordon, R.(Eds.),
Astrobiology: Exploring Life on Earth and Beyond. Elsevier BV, Amsterdam pp. 89–
126 (2017).
52. A. C. Carnall, et al., How to measure galaxy star formation histories. i. parametric
models, The Astrophysical Journal 873, 44 (2019).
53. D. Sloan, R. A. Batista, A. Loeb, The resilience of life to astrophysical events, Scien-
tiﬁc reports 7, 1 (2017).
54. P. Behroozi, M. S. Peeples, On the history and future of cosmic planet formation,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 454, 1811 (2015).
55. A. Loeb, R. A. Batista, D. Sloan, Relative likelihood for life as a function of cosmic
time, Journal of Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics 2016, 040 (2016).
56. Wolfram Research, Mathematica, Version 12.2 (2020). Champaign, IL.
57. L. Zeng, et al., Planet size distribution from the kepler mission and its implications
for planet formation, arXiv preprint arXiv:1806.05909 (2018).
58. A. Martin, A. McMinn, Sea ice, extremophiles and life on extra-terrestrial ocean
worlds, International Journal of Astrobiology 17, 1 (2018).
59. M. Lingam, A. Loeb, Subsurface exolife, International Journal of Astrobiology 18,
112 (2019).
60. P. Voosen, Ancient earth was a water world, Science 371, 1088 (2021).
61. P. A. Mason, J. I. Zuluaga, P. A. Cuartas-Restrepo, J. M. Clark, Circumbinary hab-
itability niches, International Journal of Astrobiology 14, 391 (2015).
62. M. Lingam, A. Loeb, Brown dwarf atmospheres as the potentially most detectable
and abundant sites for life, The Astrophysical Journal 883, 143 (2019).
35

63. M. Lingam, I. Ginsburg, A. Loeb, Prospects for life on temperate planets around
brown dwarfs, The Astrophysical Journal 888, 102 (2020).
64. C. M. Hudson, G. P. Brown, R. Shine, It is lonely at the front: contrasting evolution-
ary trajectories in male and female invaders, Royal Society Open Science 3, 160687
(2016).
65. S. M. Caroll, Spacetime and Geometry (Addison-Wesley, 2004).
66. R. Hanson, Burning the cosmic commons: evolutionary strategies for interstellar
colonization (1998). Preprint available at http://hanson.gmu.edu/filluniv.pdf.
67. C. J. Conselice, A. Wilkinson, K. Duncan, A. Mortlock, The evolution of galaxy
number density at z¡ 8 and its implications, The Astrophysical Journal 830, 83 (2016).
68. A. Balbi, M. M. ´Cirkovi´c, Longevity is the key factor in the search for technosigna-
tures, arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.02923 (2021).
69. J. Benford, G. Benford, D. Benford, Messaging with cost-optimized interstellar bea-
cons, Astrobiology 10, 475 (2010).
70. B. C. Lacki, Lens ﬂare: Magniﬁed x-ray binaries as passive beacons in seti, The
Astrophysical Journal 905, 18 (2020).
71. K. Grace, Sia doomsday: The ﬁlter is ahead (2010).
72. S. J. Olson, T. Ord, Implications of a search for intergalactic civilizations on prior
estimates of human survival and travel speed, arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.13348 (2021).
Acknowledgments
For support, we thank Steve Kuhn, Center for the Study of Public Choice at George
Mason University, and Salem Center for Policy at University of Texas McCombs School
of Business.
For comments and discussion, we thank: Scott Aaronson, David Brin, Andrew Hanson,
Chris Hibbert, Anders Sandberg, Carl Shulman, David Deutsch, Kristian Moﬀat, Adam
Brown, Stuart Armstrong, S. Jay Olson, Sara Walker, Paul Davies. and participants in
the February 8, 2021 online meeting of the Foresight Institute’s Intelligent Cooperation
Group, and participants in the March 5, 2021 online seminar at the Future of Humanity
Institute, Oxford University.
36

17
Appendix
17.1
Power Law Test Appendix
Our grabby aliens model makes the conveniently-simple assumption that advanced civi-
lizations arrive according to a volume-based power law in time. But while we have seen
how such a power law can apply during an individual planet lifetime, and while we have
included a planet-based power law in our more general volume-based expression α(t) of
Equation (1), that formula is not itself a power law.
So how well does a power law
approximate this appearance function?
As Equation (1) is the time integral of a product of several powers laws and an ex-
ponential decay, we expect an overall power law to ﬁt better ﬁt at early times, before
the exponential decay gets strong. We also expect a better ﬁt when contributing powers
are larger, such as for larger planet-powers n, and when powers can act over longer time
periods, such as for larger maximum planet lifetimes ¯L.
2%
5%
10%
10%
20%
20%
50%
50%
50%
100%
100%
200%
500%
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
20
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
20
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Planet power n
Humanity's Rank: 10%
2%
5%
10%
10%
20%
20%
50%
50%
100%
200%
500%
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
20
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
20
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Planet power n
Humanity's Rank: 50%
2%
5%
10%
20%
20%
50%
50%
100%
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
20
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
20
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Planet power n
Humanity's Rank: 90%
Figure 21.
Average absolute error between natural logarithms of Equation 1’s appearance
function α(t) and a best approximating power law (t/k)v−1, for volume-power v, averaged over
GC origin dates from a (t/k)v−1 simulation with humanity at percentile rank r. This percent
error varies with planet-power n, max lifetime ¯L, and rank r. A 1% absolute error is where the
ratio of α(t) to (t/k)v−1 is 1.01 or 0.99, while a 100% error is where that ratio is 2 or 0.5.
To study this error, we have approximated many particular arrival chance functions
α(t) by the power law (t/k)v−1, where v is the volume-based c.d.f. power. Speciﬁcally,
given a particular α(t) set by particular parameter values, including a planet power n,
we vary the power law parameters v, k to minimize, over GC origin dates ti, the average
absolute percent error ln((ti/k)v−1/α(ti)). These origin times ti are clock times taken from
a (t/k)v−1 grabby aliens simulation using that same clock time power v, and assuming
that humanity is at rank r among its GC origins.
Regarding this power-law approximation, Figure 21 shows this percent error, and Fig-
ure 22 shows the best ﬁt volume power v. Both ﬁgures vary planet-power n, max lifetime
37

3
5
7
10
15
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Planet power n
Humanity's Rank: 10%
3
5
7
10
15
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Planet power n
Humanity's Rank: 50%
5
7
10
15
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
5
10
15 20
30
50
100
150
300
500
1
2
3
4
5
7
10
15
Max Planet Lifetime (Gyr)
Planet power n
Humanity's Rank: 90%
Figure 22.
Best-ﬁt volume-power v, found varying the same parameters and via the same
approximation process as Figure 21.
¯L, and humanity rank r. Note that as we could also have varied the SFR parameters ϕ
and χ, these graphs are only representative of more possibilities.
As expected, the error is smaller when planet-power n is larger, max lifetime ¯L is
larger, and when humanity’s rank r is higher, as in this case most GCs appear at much
earlier dates than today, and thus before the 12Gyr peak we’ve assumed for the habitable
star formation rate function ϱ(t).
At high humanity ranks r, a power law is almost always a decent approximation, and
the volume power is larger than the planet power. At middle ranks r, the approximation
is at least crude (i.e., on average within a factor of two) for most of this 2D parameter
space. Such as for planet-powers of n ≥3 and lifetimes ¯L > 50Gyr, or when planet-
power n ≥10. Volume powers remain higher than planet powers for all but the shortest
lifetimes.
A power law is a worse approximation to GC appearance, however, at low humanity
ranks r, unless the planet powers is very large (n ≥10), or unless both the power n is
substantial and planet lifetime ¯L is long. In this case, most GCs appear after the habitable
SFR peak of 12Gyr, and so appear in the SFR exponential decay region. If our analysis is
less reliable when humanity is one of the earliest GCs to arise, these parts of our graphs
become less trusthworthy: early origin ranks, later origin dates, longer times til see or
meet aliens, and more galaxies per GC.
Thus we see that for a large fraction of the relevant parameter space, a general tn
power law is an at least a crude appoximation of the great ﬁlter, not just regarding the
appearance of advanced life on individual planets, but also regarding (limited-enough
periods of) much larger co-moving volumes that contain changing mixes of planets and
other possible oases.
38

17.2
Miscellaneous Appendix
One might worry about simulation border eﬀects due to using speed s = 1, a unit time
interval [0, 1], and a wrap-around metric in a unit width box [0, 1]D. Figure 23 varies box
width by using a box [0, W]3. It seems that width W = 1 is suﬃciently large.
Figure 23. Testing if W=1 is suﬃciently large, when s=1.
As discussed in Section 10, most of our simulations have assumed a power law cosmo-
logical scale factor of a(t) = tm, with m = 2/3. Figure 24 shows how some of our results
change when m = 0.9 instead. It seems that the main eﬀect is to, in eﬀect, increase the
clock-time volume-power n, as we expect from the relation η = n/(1 −m). Figure 25
shows how both of these power law approximations compare to the actual scale factor
a(t).
Figure 26 tests the robustness of our earliness estimates to varying the habitable SFR
peak, by comparing the three values of peak χ in 4, 8, 12 Gyr, all given MFP κ = 0.
39

Figure 24. Comparing results for cosmological scale factor powers of m = 2/3 and m = 0.90.
40

0
5
10
15
20
t
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
a(t)
Universe scale factor
Our universe
a~t2/3,
same a[13.8]
a~t0.9,
same a[13.8]
Figure 25. Cosmological scale factor over time in Gyr, in reality and as assumed in this paper.
41

Figure 26. Percentile rank of today’s 13.8 Gyr date within the distribution of advanced life
arrival dates, as given by equation (1), assuming MFP κ = 0. Nine diagrams show diﬀerent
combinations of habitable SFR peak χ and decay ϕ, while each diagram varies planet-power n
and max habitable planet lifetime ¯L.
42

