arXiv:2201.04667v2  [quant-ph]  18 Jan 2022
Classical and Quantum Measurement Theory
Peter Morgan
peter.w.morgan@yale.edu
Physics Department, Yale University,
New Haven, CT 06520, USA.
January 19, 2022
Abstract: Classical and quantum measurement theories are usually held to be
diﬀerent because the algebra of classical measurements is commutative, however
the Poisson bracket allows noncommutativity to be added naturally. After we
introduce noncommutativity into classical measurement theory, we can also add
quantum noise, diﬀerentiated from thermal noise by Poincar´e invariance. With
these two changes, the extended classical and quantum measurement theories
are equally capable, so we may speak of a single “measurement theory”. The
reconciliation of general relativity and quantum theory has been long delayed
because classical and quantum systems have been thought to be very diﬀerent,
however this uniﬁcation allows us to discuss a uniﬁed measurement theory for
geometry in physics.
Essay written for the Gravity Research Foundation 2022 Awards for Essays on Gravitation.
The classical measurement theory we are accustomed to is incomplete: it cannot describe
all the measurement results that can be described by quantum measurement theory. Instead
of asking how we can complete quantum mechanics so it can be more like classical mechanics,
we should ask how we can complete classical measurement theory so it can be more like
quantum measurement theory.
Some pairs of probability measures do not admit a joint probability measure, a circum-
stance that can be modeled by a noncommutative algebra of measurement operators but
that cannot be modeled by a commutative algebra of measurement operators, which is com-
monly known as measurement incompatibility. Classical measurement theory has long been
straw-manned to allow only a commutative algebra of measurement operators, however we
can also use the Poisson bracket to construct a noncommutative group algebra over a group
of canonical and non-canonical transformations. That larger algebra can be used as a clas-
sical measurement theory whenever measurement results have to be modeled by probability
measures that do not admit joint probability measures.
For a phase space P and real-valued functions u : P →R, there is a commutative algebra
of operators ˆYu that act by multiplication, ˆYu ˆYv = ˆYuv, but the Poisson bracket allows
us to construct a nontrivial Lie algebra of operators ˆYu, ˆZu for which [ ˆYu, ˆYv] = 0,
[ ˆZu, ˆYv] = ˆY{u,v} and [ ˆZu, ˆZv] = ˆZ{u,v}. We can exponentiate the ˆZu operators to give
a group of canonical transformations, whereas exponentiating the ˆZu and the ˆYu
1

operators gives a larger group of canonical and non-canonical transformations. We take
the extended algebra of classical measurements to be the group algebra of that larger
group. We can also think of that extended algebra as an algebra of sums of compositions
of ˆYu1 ˆYu2· · ·ˆYum ˆZv1 ˆZv2· · · ˆZvn instead of the traditional choice, ˆYu1 ˆYu2· · ·ˆYum.
We can quite straightforwardly construct concrete Hilbert space representations of these
classical algebras by introducing a Gibbs thermal state, with the amplitude of the thermal
noise determined by Boltzmann’s constant and by the temperature. To introduce Planck’s
constant, however, we have to introduce ideas from quantum ﬁeld theory, where quantum
ﬂuctuations are Poincar´e invariant with amplitude determined by Planck’s constant, whereas
thermal ﬂuctuations are not invariant under boosts. Such a diﬀerence can only be introduced
in 1+1 or higher dimensions. For a classical measurement theory, correspondingly, we can
introduce both a Poincar´e invariant noise, with amplitude determined by Planck’s constant,
and a thermal noise that is invariant under a subgroup of the Poincar´e group that leaves
invariant a single time-like 4-vector.
With these two classically natural extensions, which are both also well-motivated by
empirical necessity, we can consider the classical and quantum measurement theories to be
eﬀectively a single measurement theory, however a conventional diﬀerence remains: the gen-
erator of time-like evolutions in quantum mechanics, the Hamiltonian operator, is required
to be bounded below, whereas the generator of time-like evolutions in classical mechanics,
the Liouville operator, is unbounded. This diﬀerence makes quantum theory analytic in a
very useful way that is not available for classical theory. As a consequence, however, we have
a somewhat unenviable choice:
• Although joint probability measures associated with measurements at time-like separation
can be modeled classically by operators that commute, the same joint probability measures
are modeled quantum mechanically by operators that in general do not commute, which is
made possible by using the L¨uders transformer (which is more familiarly known as collapse
of the quantum state.)
• Although incompatible probability measures can be modeled using functions of only quan-
tum mechanical position and momentum operators, the same incompatible probability mea-
sures are modeled classically using functions of classical canonical transformations (which
are made possible by the Poisson bracket), as well as of classical position and momentum
operators.
Either joint probability measures can be handled relatively easily or incompatible probability
measures can be handled relatively easily.
The above is presented in a manner peculiar to the author in two recent articles[1, 2],
where references to a selection of other literature may also be found.
One approach to a uniﬁed measurement theory is to introduce an indexed set of mea-
surement operators, { ˆ
Mi : i ∈I}, with which we freely generate an associative ∗-algebra A
over the complex ﬁeld.
The index set I might be, for example, a ﬁnite set of integers,
or, as for a Wightman ﬁeld, a Schwartz space of complex-valued test functions deﬁned on
2

Minkowski space. For the complex anti-linear adjoint of the ∗-algebra, (λ ˆA ˆB)† = λ∗ˆB† ˆA†
and ( ˆ
Mi)† = ˆ
Mic, where the index set involution i 7→ic ∈I may be trivial or not.
For such a ∗-algebra, a state gives a complex-valued N-measurement expected value
ρ( ˆ
Mi1 ˆ
Mi2· · · ˆ
MiN) for any ordered product ˆ
Mi1 ˆ
Mi2· · · ˆ
MiN, which extends to the whole of A
by complex linearity, ρ(λ ˆA + µ ˆB) = λρ( ˆA) + µρ( ˆB); is positive semi-deﬁnite, ρ( ˆA† ˆA) ≥0;
is compatible with the adjoint, ρ( ˆA†) = ρ( ˆA)∗; and is normalized for an identity operator
ˆ1, ρ(ˆ1) = 1. The foundational example of a Gaussian state can be presented in generating
function form as
ρ(eiλ1 ˆ
Mi1eiλ2 ˆ
Mi2 · · · eiλN ˆ
MiN ) = exp
h
−
X
m
λ2
m(ic
m, im)/2 −
X
m<n
λmλn(ic
m, in)
i
,
where (im, in) is a positive semi-deﬁnite matrix for any ﬁnite number of indices i1, i2, ..., iN ∈I.
(i, j) and the involution ic determine the 2-measurement expected values ρ( ˆ
M†
i ˆ
Mj) = (i, j)
and ρ( ˆ
Mi ˆ
Mj) = (ic, j), which determine all N-measurement expected values for a Gaussian
state. For the commutator, we have ρ( ˆA[ ˆ
Mi, ˆ
Mj] ˆB) = [(ic, j)−(jc, i)]ρ( ˆA ˆB), so a Gaussian
state gives us a representation of the Weyl-Heisenberg algebra, which will be trivial,
however, if (ic, j) = (jc, i), which we have been accustomed to calling “classical”.
A G-vacuum state, for a symmetry group G that acts on I, is a state that is invariant
under the action of any g ∈G, ρG( ˆ
Mg(i1) ˆ
Mg(i2)· · · ˆ
Mg(in)) = ρG( ˆ
Mi1 ˆ
Mi2· · · ˆ
Min), for which we
also require compatibility with the involution, g(ic) = g(i)c. For a Gaussian G-vacuum state,
we require that (g(i), g(j)) = (i, j) for any g ∈G. For any G-vacuum state, we can construct
a G-vacuum projection operator ˆVG, G-invariantly deﬁned by ρG( ˆAˆVG ˆB) = ρG( ˆA)ρG( ˆB).
With this, we can construct a ∗-algebra AG that is freely generated by A and ˆVG, which in
general is noncommutative and for which we can prove that ρG is also a state. Starting from
a G-vacuum state, we can construct many states that are not G-invariant, such as, for any
operator ˆX ∈A, ρGX( ˆA) = ρG( ˆX† ˆA ˆX)
ρG( ˆX† ˆX) .
To focus on some of the commitments we might or might not expect to make when
constructing a measurement theory for geometry in physics, we consider the Wightman
axioms, which construct a quantum ﬁeld theory on Minkowski space, with the Poincar´e
group as the symmetry group G of a G-vacuum state. There are variations of the Wightman
axioms in the literature, however there are three additional constraints that are central for
the Bosonic case:
1. any generator of a time-like translation has a spectrum that is bounded below;
2. addition and scalar multiplication are deﬁned for the index set of test functions and ˆ
Mi
is complex linear,
ˆ
Mλi+µj = λ ˆ
Mi + µ ˆ
Mj, so that we can construct an operator-valued
distribution ˆ
M(x);
3. if test functions i and j have space-like separated supports, ρ( ˆA ˆ
Mi ˆ
Mj ˆB) = ρ( ˆA ˆ
Mj ˆ
Mi ˆB).
We ought not necessarily to insist on (1) for a measurement theory for geometry in physics,
because it is not satisﬁed for a classical Liouvillian operator. We also ought not necessarily
to insist on the linearity (2), which is distinct from the linearity of the state, because this
3

linearity does not seem specially natural from a classical perspective, addition might not
be available for index sets that are appropriate for a measurement theory for geometry in
physics, and linearity may be part of why there are no interacting models of the Wightman
axioms in 3+1-dimensions[3]. The no-signaling condition (3) is satisﬁed for a Wightman ﬁeld,
however we can also insist on universal no-signaling, so that A is commutative, in which case
we would construct a noncommutative algebra AG using the G-vacuum projection operator.
Methodologically, the above construction, intentionally following the mathematical struc-
ture of quantum ﬁeld theory rather closely, is rather empiricist. There is a focus on how
we describe the measurements we perform, on the index set I and on the action of the
invariance group G on I, instead of on what we measure. There is, in the mathematical
model suggested here, just one beable, the state, which models the recorded results of the
measurements that we meticulously index. What we might call “what is” is left monolithi-
cally undiﬀerentiated. This does not preclude a diﬀerent mathematics in which the state is
more diﬀerentiated —as a ﬁeld of what is instead of as a ﬁeld of measurements— however it
is not easy to ensure mathematical control when a chaotic dynamics is applied to what will
apparently have to be a non-diﬀerentiable mathematical structure.
For a measurement theory for geometry in physics we might use a group of causal struc-
ture preserving diﬀeomorphisms, Gc, say, however it is not clear what action of Gc we should
use on an index set Ic. If we ﬁrst attempt to construct a Gaussian Gc-vacuum state, every-
thing would also depend on what constructions we might use for (im, in) as a G-invariant
positive semi-deﬁnite matrix and for the involution ic. This ﬁnal paragraph would be a very
limited starting point if general relativity had been reconciled with quantum theory long
ago, however the clariﬁcation of the relationship between classical and quantum measure-
ment theories that is suggested here will hopefully be of some help.
References
[1] P. Morgan, “An algebraic approach to Koopman classical mechanics”, Ann. Phys. 414,
168090 (2020); https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aop.2020.168090
[preprint: https://arxiv.org/abs/1901.00526].
[2] P. Morgan, “The collapse of a quantum state as a joint probability construction”;
[preprint: https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.10931].
[3] P. Morgan, “A source fragmentation approach to interacting quantum ﬁeld theory”;
[preprint: https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.04412].
Only references to the author’s papers are included here. Please see the bibliographies in those papers, which
refer to work on quantum measurement theory, quantum probability, algebraic quantum mechanics, local quan-
tum physics, foundations of quantum mechanics, Koopman-von Neumann classical mechanics, signal analysis,
philosophy of physics, and renormalization.
4

