STaR: Self-Taught Reasoner
Bootstrapping Reasoning With Reasoning
Eric Zelikman∗1, Yuhuai Wu∗12, Jesse Mu1, Noah D. Goodman1
1Department of Computer Science, Stanford University
2 Google Research
{ezelikman, yuhuai, muj, ngoodman}@stanford.edu
Abstract
Generating step-by-step "chain-of-thought" rationales improves language model
performance on complex reasoning tasks like mathematics or commonsense
question-answering. However, inducing language model rationale generation cur-
rently requires either constructing massive rationale datasets or sacriﬁcing accuracy
by using only few-shot inference. We propose a technique to iteratively leverage a
small number of rationale examples and a large dataset without rationales, to boot-
strap the ability to perform successively more complex reasoning. This technique,
the "Self-Taught Reasoner" (STaR), relies on a simple loop: generate rationales to
answer many questions, prompted with a few rationale examples; if the generated
answers are wrong, try again to generate a rationale given the correct answer; ﬁne-
tune on all the rationales that ultimately yielded correct answers; repeat. We show
that STaR signiﬁcantly improves performance on multiple datasets compared to a
model ﬁne-tuned to directly predict ﬁnal answers, and performs comparably to ﬁne-
tuning a 30× larger state-of-the-art language model on CommensenseQA. Thus,
STaR lets a model improve itself by learning from its own generated reasoning.
1
Introduction
Human decision-making is often the result of extended chains of thought [1, 2]. Recent work has
shown that explicit intermediate reasoning (“rationales”) can improve large language model (LLM)
performance as well [3–8]. For example, [5] demonstrated that LLMs explicitly trained to use
“scratchpads” for intermediate steps can attain perfect in-distribution performance on arithmetic,
and strong out-of-distribution generalization, while models trained to predict answers directly fail
to do either. These works suggest that generating explicit rationales before giving a ﬁnal answer
(“rationale generation”) is valuable for LLMs across diverse tasks including mathematical reasoning,
commonsense reasoning, code evaluation, social bias inference, and natural language inference.
However, the two primary methods for inducing rationale generation both have serious drawbacks.
One approach to rationale generation is the construction of a ﬁne-tuning dataset of rationales, either
manually by human annotators or automatically with hand-crafted templates [3–5, 9]. Manual
methods are expensive, and it is infeasible to construct such a dataset for each interesting problem
[3]. Meanwhile, template-based methods rely on automatically-generated rationales but only work
when a general solution is already known [5] or reasonable hard-coded heuristics can be made [4].
An alternative is to leverage in-context learning by including only a few rationale examples in the
language model prompt. This has been shown to improve accuracy on mathematical and symbolic
reasoning tasks relative to prompting without rationales (“direct” prompting) [5, 6]. Yet, while few-
shot techniques with rationales tend to outperform their non-reasoning counterparts, they generally
substantially underperform models ﬁne-tuned to directly predict answers using larger datasets [5, 6].
*These authors contributed equally to this work
arXiv:2203.14465v2  [cs.LG]  20 May 2022

Question
Question, Rationale, Answer
Rationale, Answer
Finetune
Hint
Rationale, Answer
Language 
Model
Rationalize
Wrong 
Answer
Correct 
Answer
Rationale 
Generation
Q: What can be used
to carry a small dog?
Answer Choices:
(a) swimming pool
(b) basket
(c) dog show
(d) backyard
(e) own home
A: The answer must be
something that can be
used to carry a small
dog. Baskets are
designed to hold things.
Therefore, the answer
is basket (b).
Figure 1: An overview of STaR and a STaR-generated rationale on CommonsenseQA. We indicate
the ﬁne-tuning outer loop with a dashed line. The questions and ground truth answers are expected to
be present in the dataset, while the rationales are generated using STaR.
In this paper, we adopt a different approach: by leveraging the LLM’s pre-existing reasoning ability,
we iteratively bootstrap the ability to generate high-quality rationales. Speciﬁcally, we few-shot
prompt a large language model to self-generate rationales and reﬁne the model’s ability further by
ﬁne-tuning on those rationales that lead to correct answers. We repeat this procedure, using the
improved model to generate the next training set each time. This is a synergistic process, where
improvements in rationale generation improve the training data, and improvements in training data
further improve rationale generation.
However, we ﬁnd this loop eventually fails to solve any new problems in the training set because it
receives no direct training signal for problems it fails to solve. To overcome this issue, we propose
rationalization: for each problem that the model fails to answer correctly, we generate a new rationale
by providing the model with the correct answer. This lets the model reason backward—given the
correct answer, the model can more easily generate a useful rationale. These rationales are then
collected as part of the training data, which often improves overall accuracy.
We thus develop the Self-Taught Reasoner (STaR, Fig. 1) method, a scalable bootstrapping method
allowing models to learn to generate their own rationales, while also learning to solve increasingly
difﬁcult problems. In our method, we repeat the following process: in each iteration, ﬁrst construct a
ﬁnetuning dataset by attempting to solve the dataset using the current model’s rationale generation
ability; then, augment this dataset using rationalization, justifying ground-truth answers to problems
the model failed to solve; ﬁnally, ﬁnetune the large language model on the combined dataset.
Applying STaR on arithmetic, math word problems, and commonsense reasoning, we observe it is
able to effectively translate a small number of few-shot prompts into a large rationale dataset, yielding
dramatic performance improvements. On CommonsenseQA [10], we ﬁnd STaR improves over both
a few-shot baseline (+35.9%) and a baseline ﬁne-tuned to directly predict answers (+12.5%) , and
performs comparably to a ﬁne-tuned model that is 30× larger (72.5% vs. 73.0%).
Thus, we make the following contributions:
1. We propose a bootstrapping mechanism to iteratively generate a rationale dataset from a few
initial examples with rationales—without needing to check new rationales’ correctness.
2. We complement rationale generation with rationalization, where a model is tasked with
justifying an answer and then ﬁne-tuned as if it had come up with the rationale without any
hint. We show rationalization accelerates and improves the bootstrapping process.
3. We evaluate these techniques with a variety of ablations in both mathematical and common-
sense reasoning domains.
4. We propose what is, to our knowledge, the ﬁrst technique to allow a pre-trained large
language model to iteratively use its language modeling capacity to improve itself.
2

2
Background and Related Work
In-context Learning
Recently, a collection of works has emerged exploring the capacity for large
language models to perform in-context learning [11, 12]. In essence, in-context learning treats
few-shot learning as a language modeling problem, by showing a few examples in the context (i.e.
prompt), and allowing the model to learn and identify the pattern to apply to new examples. Some
have studied in-context learning based on the language modeling objective in terms of Bayesian
inference [13] while others have attempted to describe the process more mechanistically in terms
of “induction heads” [14]. Moreover, differences in prompt conﬁgurations have been known to have
dramatic effects on few-shot performance. Some have even found that replacing few-shot prompts
with a “soft prompt” which can be optimized in embedding space results in noticeable gains [15].
Instead of emphasizing the representation of the question, we focus on the model output; in particular,
we focus on the model’s ability to reason through a problem before coming to a conclusion.
Rationales
One of the initial works on the impact of rationales on language model performance was
[3], showing that training a language model on a dataset with explicit rationales preceding the answer
could improve a model’s ability to generate the ﬁnal answer. However, this required many thousands
of training examples to be manually annotated with human reasoning. Recently, [5] demonstrated
that step-by-step “scratchpads” can improve ﬁne-tuned LLM performance and generalization on
tasks such as arithmetic, polynomial evaluation, and program evaluation. Similarly, [6] used a single
few-shot “chain-of-thought” reasoning prompt in order to improve model performance on a collection
of tasks, without ﬁne-tuning. Finally, [16] showed that a curriculum learning approach could help
solve formal math problems, as long as 1) they were translated into Lean (a theorem-proving language
[17]), 2) one could directly evaluate the validity of the proofs, 3) one could sample numerous potential
solutions for each problem, 4) had trained a separate value function model, and 5) started with GPT-f
(a model already ﬁne-tuned on a large math dataset [18]). We note that there are many domains where
these conditions do not all apply. In addition, works have aimed to explain why rationales have this
beneﬁcial effect: some have analyzed their impact from the perspective of latent variable models [19]
while others have provided formal proofs of the beneﬁt of intermediate task supervision [20].
Iterated Learning
A variety of iterated learning algorithms have been proposed, where solutions
or successful methods which are found are in turn used to ﬁnd additional solutions [21, 22, 16]. [21]
introduced Expert Iteration (ExIt), a reinforcement learning technique serving as an inspiration for
our approach. Essentially, it consists of a loop of self-play by an “apprentice,” followed by imitation
learning with feedback from a slower “expert” and then the replacement of the expert with the now-
improved apprentice. [16] builds off of ExIt for formal reasoning, while [22] applies iterated learning
to visual question answering using modular networks which can be combined compositionally. There
are further similarities between STaR and expert iteration methods [21]. For example, ﬁltering
generated examples based on whether their ultimate answer matches the target can be seen as expert
feedback. However, we have a ﬁxed “expert” and do not train a separate value function.
Natural Language Explanations
Natural language explanations have also been discussed from the
perspective of explainable machine learning, focusing on justiﬁcation rather than reasoning [23, 24].
The motivation for this line of work is largely grounded in explainable decision making, and similarly
to [3], generally does not ﬁnd that requiring post-hoc explanations improves model performance.
3
Method
3.1
Rationale Generation Bootstrapping (STaR Without Rationalization)
We are given a pretrained LLM M and an initial dataset of problems x with answers y: D =
{(xi, yi)}D
i=1. Our technique starts with a small prompt set P of examples with intermediate ratio-
nales r: P = {(xp
i , rp
i , yp
i )}P
i=1, where P ≪D (e.g. P = 10). Like standard few-shot prompting, we
concatenate this prompt set to each example in D, i.e. xi = (xp
1, rp
1, yp
1, . . . , xp
P , rp
P , yp
P , xi), which
encourages the model to produce a rationale ˆri for xi followed by an answer ˆyi. We assume that
rationales that lead to correct answers are of better quality than those that lead to incorrect answers.
Therefore, we ﬁlter the generated rationales to include only the ones which result in the correct
answer (ˆyi = yi). We ﬁne-tune the base model M on this ﬁltered dataset, and then restart this process
by generating the new rationales with the newly ﬁne-tuned model. We keep repeating this process
until the performance plateaus. Note that during this process, once we collect a new dataset, we train
from the original pre-trained model M instead of continually training one model to avoid overﬁtting.
We provide an outline of this algorithm in Algorithm 1.
3

STaR can be seen as an approximation to an RL-style policy gradient objective. To see this, note
that M can be viewed as a discrete latent variable model pM(y | x) = P
r p(r | x)p(y | x, r); in
other words, M ﬁrst samples a latent rationale r before predicting y. Now, given the indicator reward
function 1(ˆy = y), the total expected reward across the dataset is
J(M, X, Y ) =
X
i
Eˆri,ˆyi∼pM(·|xi)1(ˆyi = yi),
(1)
∇J(M, X, Y ) =
X
i
Eˆri,ˆyi∼pM(·|xi) [1(ˆyi = yi) · ∇log pM(ˆyi, ˆri | xi)] ,
(2)
where the gradient is obtained via the standard log-derivative trick for policy gradients. Note that
the indicator function discards the gradient for all sampled rationales that do not lead to the correct
answer yi: this is the ﬁltering process in STaR (Line 5). Thus, STaR approximates J by (1) greedily
decoding samples of (ˆri, ˆyi) to reduce variance of this estimate (at the cost of potentially biased
exploration of rationales), and (2) taking multiple gradient steps on the same batch of data (similar
to some policy gradient algorithms [25]). These approximations make STaR a simple and broadly
applicable method that can be implemented with standard LLM training machinery; future work
should more closely investigate the link between STaR and the RL objective above.
3.2
Rationalization
Q: Where do you put your grapes just
before checking out?
Answer Choices:
(a) mouth
(b) grocery cart (CORRECT)
(c) super market
(d) fruit basket
(e) fruit market
A: The answer should be the place
where grocery items are placed before
checking out. Of the above choices,
grocery cart makes the most sense for
holding grocery items. Therefore,
the answer is grocery cart (b).
Figure 2: A few-shot prompt hint we use for
rationalization (and not for rationale gener-
ation), using the rationale from [6], with its
hint included in green, followed by the ratio-
nale and the answer generated by the model.
The rationale generation bootstrapping algorithm car-
ries a limitation. Since the model is only trained on
the examples which it answers correctly, improve-
ment ends when the model fails to solve new prob-
lems in the training set. This is fundamentally due
to the fact that the algorithm cannot obtain any train-
ing signal from failed examples. Inspired by [3], we
propose a technique we call “rationalization”. Specif-
ically, we provide the answer as a hint to the model
and ask it to generate rationales in the same style
as in the previous rationale generation step. Given
the answer, the model is able to reason backwards,
and hence more easily generate a rationale that leads
to the correct answer. For example, in Figure 2, we
provide the hint that ”(b) grocery cart” is the cor-
rect answer in the prompt to generate the rationale.
We apply rationalization to the problems which the
model failed to solve with rationale generation. When
adding a rationalization-generated rationale to our dataset, we do not include the hint in its corre-
sponding prompt, as if the model had come up with the rationale without the hint. After ﬁltering, we
ﬁne-tune on the previously generated dataset combined with the rationalization-generated dataset.
Algorithm 1 STaR
Input M: a pretrained LLM; dataset D = {(xi, yi)}D
i=1 (w/ few-shot prompts)
1: M0 ←M # Copy the original model
2: for n in 1...N do # Outer loop
3:
(ˆri, ˆyi) ←Mn−1(xi)
∀i ∈[1, D] # Perform rationale generation
4:
(ˆrrat
i , ˆyrat
i ) ←Mn−1(add_hint(xi, yi))
∀i ∈[1, D] # Perform rationalization
5:
Dn ←{(xi, ˆri, yi) | i ∈[1, D] ∧ˆyi = yi} # Filter rationales using ground truth answers
6:
Drat
n ←{(xi, ˆrrat
i , yi) | i ∈[1, D] ∧ˆyi ̸= yi ∧ˆyrat
i
= yi} # Filter rationalized rationales
7:
Mn ←train(M, Dn ∪Drat
n ) # Finetune the original model on correct solutions - inner loop
8: end for
Algorithm 1 describes the full algorithm, with the parts in blue corresponding to rationalization.
Without those parts, Algorithm 1 corresponds to STaR without rationalization. Figure 1 provides an
overview diagram. Fine-tuning on the dataset generated by rationalization has a crucial beneﬁt of
exposing the model to difﬁcult problems which otherwise would not have appeared in its ﬁnetuning
dataset. This can be understood as challenging the model to “think outside the box” about problems
on which it was unsuccessful. A secondary beneﬁt of rationalization is an increase in dataset size.
4

4
Experiments
For our experiments, we focus on arithmetic, commonsense reasoning, and grade school math to
demonstrate STaR’s breadth. In particular, for arithmetic, we follow a setup inspired by [5]. For
commonsense question-answering we follow [13, 6] and use CommonsenseQA (CQA), a widely
used multiple-choice dataset for this domain [10]. For grade school math, we use GSM8K from [9].
4.1
Experimental Protocol
We used GPT-J as our base language model, and the ﬁne-tuning script from the GPT-J repository
[26]. We chose GPT-J, a 6B-parameter model, because the checkpoint and ﬁne-tuning code are
publicly available [26], and the model is large enough to generate rationales of non-trivial quality to
be bootstrapped from. More hyperparameter details about GPT-J and our ﬁne-tuning are included
in Appendix H. Following the default setting of [26], we perform a 100-step learning rate warmup,
from which point we use a constant learning rate. Unless stated otherwise, we start with 40 training
steps at the ﬁrst outer loop, and increase the number of ﬁne-tuning training steps by 20% with each
outer loop. In general, we found that training more slowly at the beginning ultimately beneﬁts
model performance. We expect that further improvement is possible via a thorough hyperparameter
search—we leave this to future work due to computational constraints.
For arithmetic problems, we ﬁrst generate a dataset of 50,000 randomly sampled questions (uniformly
over the digit lengths) in the format introduced by [5]. For each outer loop iteration on arithmetic,
we sample 10,000 problems from the dataset. We use 10 random few-shot rationale examples for
each digit for its corresponding few-shot prompt. For each of the 9, 741 questions in the training set
of CommonsenseQA, we add the question to the few-shot rationale prompt, and prompt the model
to generate the rationale and answer for that question. For few shot prompting on CQA, we start
with the same 10 questions as used in [6], with the rationales modiﬁed slightly to ﬁx an incorrect
answer and to more explicitly reference relevant knowledge. We include these modiﬁed prompts in
Appendix B1. These prompts serve as our complete set of explanations. We run STaR until we see
performance saturate, and we report the best results.
When performing rationalization, we ﬁnd that the choice to include or omit few-shot prompts on
outer-loop iterations after the ﬁrst iteration does not have a substantial impact on the method’s ultimate
performance. However, there are some nuances which we discuss further in Section 5, leading us to
use few-shot prompts unless stated otherwise.
4.2
Datasets
Input:
6 2 4 + 2 5 9
Target:
<scratch>
6 2 4 + 2 5 9 , C: 0
2 + 5 , 3
C: 1
6 + 2 , 8 3
C: 0
, 8 8 3
C: 0
0 8 8 3
</scratch>
8 8 3
Figure 3: A visualization of
a 3-digit arithmetic problem
with a scratchpad.
C corre-
sponds to the carry from the
previous digit’s summation.
Arithmetic
The arithmetic task is to calculate the sum of two n-
digit integers. We generate the dataset based on the descriptions
in [5] and visualize an example scratchpad in Figure 3. Everything
up to and including “Target:” is given as part of a prompt, and
the model is asked to generate the scratchpad (start/end indicated
by “<scratch>”) and the ﬁnal answer, as in [5]. Each line of the
scratchpad corresponds to the summation of each pair of digits from
the ﬁnal digit to the ﬁrst digit, the accumulating ﬁnal digits of the
answer, and a carry digit corresponding to whether the previous pair
summed to at least 10. We include few-shot prompts for 1 to 5 digits.
When performing rationalization, we include the correct answer after
“Target” and query the model to produce the scratchpad and then
reproduce the correct answer following the scratchpad.
CommonsenseQA
The multiple-choice commonsense reasoning
task, CommonsenseQA [10] (CQA), is constructed from ConceptNet, a semantic graph of concepts
and their relationships with over a million nodes [28]. [10] identiﬁed a set of “target” concepts in
ConceptNet for each question, where the target concepts share a semantic relationship to one “source”
concept. Then each question is crowdsourced to allow a reader to identify one target concept, while
mentioning the source concept. In addition, two distractor answers are added. The dataset has 12,247
questions, each with ﬁve choices, with 9,741 in the train set, 1,221 in the dev set, and 1,285 in the
(withheld) test set.
1Based on [27], this is unlikely to meaningfully affect [6]’s few-shot performance.
5

Iterations
Accuracy (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
1
2
3
4
5
(a) Without rationalization
Iterations
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
4
8
12
16
1
2
3
4
5
(b) With rationalization
Figure 4: A visualization of the accuracy of n-digit summation with each iteration of STaR with
and without rationalization for arithmetic. Each series corresponds to the accuracy of summing two
n-digit numbers.
Corresponding to the broad variety of ConceptNet, CQA contains a diverse set of questions which
require commonsense reasoning ability building off of standard world knowledge, where human
performance is 89% [10]. Many have pointed out that CQA contains a number of biases, along
several dimensions including gender [3]. We discuss how this may impact our method in Appendix G.
There are also many typos and questions which are fundamentally ambiguous2. We use it despite
these issues as it is a general question-answering dataset relying on both common world knowledge
and simple reasoning, which serves as a good test-bed for our method.
Grade School Math (GSM8K)
We also evaluate on the Grade School Math (GSM8K) dataset,
which contains 7,473 train and 1,319 test examples of grade-school-level word problems [9]. These
math problems are posed in natural language and require two to eight calculation steps to arrive at a
ﬁnal answer. This dataset combines the skills needed for arithmetic and commonsense reasoning.
4.3
Symbolic Reasoning: Results on Arithmetic
The accuracies of the model across digits 1-5 over each iteration of the outer loop are plotted in
Figure 4. After running STaR for 16 iterations, the overall accuracy is 89.5%. For reference, a
baseline trained on 10,000 examples without rationales for 5,000 steps attains 76.3% accuracy.
Notably, few-shot accuracy on arithmetic problems is very low, even with rationales: accuracy on
2-digit addition is less than 1%, and accuracy on more digits close to zero.
Iterations
Accuracy (%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
28
32
36
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Figure 5: We introduce additional digits to
STaR with rationalization at the 20th iteration.
With rationalization, the accuracy is able to improve
especially quickly. After one ﬁne-tuning iteration on
the model’s generated scratchpads, 2-digit addition
improves to 32% from less than 1%. Without ratio-
nalization, the performance improvement is stage-
wise: the model generally has poor performance
on the n-digit sum until it has good performance
on the (n −1)-digit sum. With rationalization, the
model can learn many lengths at once, though not
with equal accuracy. Rationalization allows many
problems to be solved few-shot, so we start STaR
training with 300 steps (note, doing so without ra-
tionalization causes overﬁtting on 1-digit addition),
and increase training by 20 steps per iteration.
We also perform an experiment where we continue pre-training STaR with rationalization with
additional digits, starting before the 20th iteration, while keeping the total number of training examples
ﬁxed at each iteration. We ﬁnd that not only does this appear to quickly improve performance on the
initial set of digits, but when evaluated on 9 and 10 digit examples, never seen during training, the
model successfully solves many of these out-of-distribution problems. As visualized in Figure 5, the
introduction of these digits appears to make the training less stable, but the exact cause is unclear.
2For example, “Billy bought coffee and waited for his wife to arrive from France. Where might he have
been?” includes airport and train station as options. The correct answer, perhaps surprisingly, is train station.
6

Table 1: We evaluate several baselines, including a few-shot GPT-J evaluation both with and without
scratchpads, a GPT-J baseline ﬁnetuned to directly predict the answer, and STaR with and without
rationalization applied to GPT-J. We use CoT to denote non-STaR models outputting rationales, and
Direct to indicate those directly predicting the ﬁnal answer. Note the ﬁnal STaR model is trained on
78.2% of the training dataset with rationale generation, and an additional 8.5% from rationalization.
CQA Dev Set Accuracy (%)
Train Data Used (%)
GPT-3 Direct Finetuned [29]
73.0
100
Few-shot Direct GPT-J
20.9
∼0
Few-shot CoT GPT-J 3
36.6
∼0
Few-shot CoT LaMDA 137B [6]
55.6
∼0
GPT-J Direct Finetuned
60.0
100
STaR without rationalization
68.8
69.7
STaR with rationalization
72.5
86.7
4.4
Natural Language Reasoning: Commonsense Question Answering
The CommonsesenseQA (CQA) setting introduces several new challenges. In the arithmetic task,
an incorrect scratchpad in the reasoning step, and to a lesser degree in the rationalization step, was
extremely likely to result in an incorrect answer. On the other hand, CQA problems are 5-way
multiple choice questions. Thus, one will get the right answer at random approximately 20% of
the time, regardless of the quality of reasoning. Moreover, some simple heuristics (e.g. semantic
similarity) can meaningfully improve this to ≈30% without any reasoning, as shown by [10].
We evaluate this dataset as described in the experimental protocol and compare to several baselines.
The ﬁrst baseline is to ﬁnetune GPT-J to directly output the ﬁnal answer, which we call “GPT-J
Finetuned”. We also compare to GPT-3 ﬁnetuned to directly predict the ﬁnal answer from [29], and a
137B parameter Lambda model few-shot prompted with chain-of-thought (CoT) rationales from [6].
We found that, as shown in Table 1, STaR without rationalization outperformed GPT-J ﬁne-tuned
directly on the ﬁnal answer for the entire dataset, despite training on less of the data. The inclusion of
rationalization improved this performance to 72.5%, far closer to the 73% of the 30× larger GPT-3.
As expected, we also see STaR surpassed the few-shot baselines, including the much-larger 137B
LaMDA model [30, 6]. We expect accuracy would be further improved if we applied STaR to a
model with higher few-shot performance.
Case Study
Note that it is harder to judge the rationale quality: for arithmetic, one can compare
them to the ground truth rationales, but for CQA the evaluation is necessarily qualitative. For this
reason, we include a case study in Figure 7. We observe that the rationales provided are generally
coherent and of a similar structure to the few-shot rationales. We make the following two observations:
1. After training with STaR, we see the model was able to generate reasonable rationales that
solve new problems, which explains part of the observed performance gain.
2. We also see that there were many instances in which STaR improved the quality of rationales
over those generated in a few-shot manner.
Human Evaluation
Based on the observation that STaR may improve reasoning quality for prob-
lems even when they were initially answered correctly via few-shot prompting, we performed a
preliminary qualitative analysis. We randomly selected 50 rationales generated from few-shot CoT
and STaR-generated rationales on questions which they both answered correctly, as well as human-
generated rationales for these problems from [3]. We then presented a random subset of 10 questions
and rationales to each of 20 crowdworkers on Proliﬁc [31] with the rationales in a randomized order,
asking them to rank the rationales based on which they felt best justiﬁed the answer. The participants
were 30% more likely to rank the STaR-generated rationales higher than the few-shot rationales
(p = .039). This indicates that, as mentioned in the case study, STaR can improve the quality of
rationale generation.
We also found that the participants were 74% more likely to prefer the STaR-generated rationales
over the human-generated rationales (p < .001). To be clear, we do not believe that this indicates
human-level rationale-generation performance. Instead, we feel that it speaks to the difﬁculty of
eliciting high-quality rationales. We reproduce the test prompts in Appendix C and elaborate on the
limitations of the crowdsourced explanations dataset.
3We use the same few-shot rationales as described in Section 4.1 - namely ﬁxing typos and improving clarity.
7

Table 2: We ﬁnd that STaR substantially improves GSM8K performance over the baselines, despite
training on only 25.0% of the data for the model without rationalization, and 28.7% of the dataset
(with 0.5% from rationalization) for the model with rationalization.
GSM8K Test Accuracy (%)
Train Data Used (%)
Few-shot Direct GPT-J
3.0
∼0
Few-shot CoT GPT-J
3.1
∼0
GPT-J Direct Finetuned
5.8
100
STaR without rationalization
10.1
25.0
STaR with rationalization
10.7
28.7
Failure Cases
Finally, we found a variety of interesting failure cases, many of which corresponded
to standard logical fallacies. For example, the model often made statements related to the topic of the
question but which were not actually arguments for why the answer should be true. Sometimes, the
model claimed the question implied the answer as an argument, without explaining why. Other times,
especially early in training, the model answered as if it has knowledge about a particular individual,
instead of making a general statement - e.g. “the king’s castle is a place where he feels safe” instead
of “castles are places where kings feel safe.” We provide examples and analyze errors in Appendix A.
Few-shot Prompt Training
Including few-shot prompts during ﬁne-tuning [12] appears to have
a meaningful performance beneﬁt (60.9% to 68.8% without rationalization, 69.9% to 72.5% with
rationalization). Thus, we generally suggest its use for at least some portion of the training, though
we discuss some caveats in Section 5.
4.5
Mathematical Reasoning in Language: Grade School Math
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Human-produced calculator steps
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Generated calculator steps
Generated vs human-produced # of calculator steps
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
Log frequency
Figure 6: A comparison of the number of calcu-
lator steps generated by the model in order to
solve examples in the training set relative to the
number of steps used in the ground truth.
We again ﬁnd on GSM8K that STaR substantially
improves performance beyond few-shot with ra-
tionales or training to directly predict the answers
(without rationales), shown in Table 2 and include
the few-shot prompt in Appendix I. We observe
that on this task, the use of rationalization does not
substantially improve performance. Note that, in
training, it was necessary to cap the number of train-
ing steps at the 30th iterations (after 7912 steps),
to prevent the training process from becoming pro-
hibitively long. The results were reached after 36
iterations for STaR without rationalization and an
additional 10 iterations with rationalization.
Most often, the number of calculation steps gen-
erated by the model matches the number of steps
taken by humans (generally between 53% and 57%
agreement across all iterations). We visualize this
explicitly in Figure 6. We see that when the ground
truth and model disagree on the number of calcu-
lation steps, the model typically uses fewer. Sometimes this is because the model skips steps, but
occasionally it ﬁnds different solutions. We show an example in Appendix J, where the model
disregards redundant information and solves a 7-step problem in a single step.
5
Discussion and Challenges
The Impact of Rationalization
An essential question is exactly what role rationalization plays.
Intuitively, rationalization allows a model to reverse-engineer a solution, or provides a heuristic for
identifying whether each step makes the conclusion more likely. This parallels real-world problems
where the ﬁnal result is known, but challenging to derive a good justiﬁcation. From a mathematical
perspective, while rationale generation samples rationales from the distribution p(r | x) provided by
our model M, rationalization conditions on the answer, letting us access an alternative distribution
p(r | x, y) which may be a better search space for rationales. Then rationalization could be framed as
an off-policy estimate of the objective in Equation 1, sampling from the hint-augmented model as a
proposal distribution. Future work should establish more connections between rationalization and
these RL objectives, and examine more generally when and why rationalization improves learning.
8

In addition, due to the low sampling temperature, the outputs without rationalization correspond
to the examples where the model is most conﬁdent in its answer. This results in these examples
providing a weaker gradient signal than the rationalization examples, at least in the ﬁrst iteration.
Since we retrain from the initial pre-trained model every time we run a ﬁne-tuning iteration, the
degree of this effect is also difﬁcult to measure directly. Finally, we must point out that the method
to add the “hint” does not follow immediately from the question and answer and in some contexts
providing it may be nontrivial. An exploration of the various impacts of different hinting techniques
and their generality is an avenue for future work.
Temperature
One intuitive alternative to rationalization, if one seeks to expand the training dataset,
is more and higher-temperature sampling. However, in practice, we found that this is counterpro-
ductive. In general, it substantially increases the likelihood of a correct answer despite incorrect
reasoning, and training on bad or irrelevant reasoning prevents generalization. This is particularly
clear in more structured tasks, like arithmetic, where the scratchpads that the model learns to produce
with a higher-temperature sampling approach diverge into meaninglessness and cause the model to
stagnate. Overall, we found that higher temperatures as an alternative to rationalization (e.g. 0.5
or 0.7) consistently led to models worse than models with reasoning alone. In addition, as text
generation by large language models is sequential (i.e. one cannot produce a token without producing
the preceding token), generating text is a bottleneck and this is computationally far less efﬁcient
than rationalization. For example, generating 10 sample outputs is approximately 10 times slower
than generating one sample output. However, one potentially valuable way to leverage multiple
samples would be to use the method proposed in [32], using the majority-vote result of multiple high-
temperature scratchpads as a ground truth against which we compare a low-temperature scratchpad.
This may allow one to apply STaR to a dataset of only questions, without answers.
Few-shot Prompting
A noteworthy phenomenon is that the inclusion of few-shot prompting during
sampling seems to dramatically reduce “drift” where later rationales become increasingly dissimilar
from the initial few-shot set of rationales. One beneﬁt of this is that the model may be less constrained
by the quality and difﬁculty of the initial rationales, theoretically allowing it to generalize more. One
potentially negative consequence is that the style of the rationales may less-closely match the original
prompting style. Another beneﬁt is in terms of computational resources - a shorter prompt length
allows for a shorter sequence length when sampling. Technically, the point in training at which we
“disable” few-shot prompts is another hyperparameter which we could tune, but we leave this to future
work. In addition, by leaving prompts out after the initial outer-loop iteration, the model tends to
perform gradually worse at rationalization as it trains for longer periods of time. As a result, it may
be necessary to include some hints during training for long periods of time with this approach.
Ultimately, the choice to include few-shot prompts in later iterations of training appears to depend on
the use-case: when the goal is consistent adherence to a particular prompt style, which may beneﬁt
explainability, include few-shot prompts in sampling; when the goal is a faster training loop, one may
remove them. Moreover, it is possible that with other datasets or larger models there is an impact on
performance, so we encourage this to be generally treated as a hyperparameter.
6
Conclusion
We present the Self-Taught Reasoner (STaR), which iteratively improves a model’s ability to generate
rationales to solve problems. We few-shot prompt a model to solve many problems in a step-by-step
manner by generating rationales, and then prompt it to rationalize the correct answer for problems
it gets wrong. We ﬁnetune on both the initially correct solutions and rationalized correct solutions,
and repeat the process. We ﬁnd that this technique signiﬁcantly improves the model’s generalization
performance on both symbolic reasoning and natural language reasoning.
There are several important limitations on STaR as presented. In order for the ﬁrst iteration of STaR
to succeed, few-shot performance must be above chance, implying that the initial model must be
big enough to have some reasoning capabilities. For instance we found that GPT-2 was not able
to bootstrap from few-shot reasoning in even the arithmetic domain. A further limitation is that
settings with a high level of chance performance (e.g. binary decisions) yield many poor rationales,
confounding the STaR approach. An open problem is how to ﬁlter bad reasoning in these settings.
Nonetheless, we believe using examples without reasoning to bootstrap reasoning is a very general
approach, and that STaR can serve as the basis of more sophisticated techniques across many domains.
9

Acknowledgements
We thank Imanol Schlag for his detailed feedback about this work, as well as Rose E Wang, Markus
Rabe, Aitor Lewkowycz, Rishi Bommasani, Allen Nie, Alex Tamkin, and Qian Huang. We thank
Cem Anil for his very helpful insight that rationale ﬁnetuning performance can be improved if the
training includes the few-shot rationales. We also thank Ben Prystawski for his suggestions on survey
creation. We thank Google TPU Research Cloud for TPU access.
References
[1] William James, Frederick Burkhardt, Fredson Bowers, and Ignas K Skrupskelis. The principles
of psychology, volume 1. Macmillan London, 1890.
[2] K Anders Ericsson and Herbert A Simon. Protocol analysis: Verbal reports as data. the MIT
Press, 1984.
[3] Nazneen Fatema Rajani, Bryan McCann, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. Explain yourself!
leveraging language models for commonsense reasoning. ACL, 2019.
[4] Vered Shwartz, Peter West, Ronan Le Bras, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. Unsupervised
commonsense question answering with self-talk. EMNLP 2020, 2020.
[5] Maxwell Nye, Anders Johan Andreassen, Guy Gur-Ari, Henryk Michalewski, Jacob Austin,
David Bieber, David Dohan, Aitor Lewkowycz, Maarten Bosma, David Luan, et al. Show
your work: Scratchpads for intermediate computation with language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2112.00114, 2021.
[6] Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny
Zhou. Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2201.11903, 2022.
[7] Ana Marasovi´c, Iz Beltagy, Doug Downey, and Matthew E Peters. Few-shot self-rationalization
with natural language prompts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.08284, 2021.
[8] Andrew K Lampinen, Ishita Dasgupta, Stephanie CY Chan, Kory Matthewson, Michael Henry
Tessler, Antonia Creswell, James L McClelland, Jane X Wang, and Felix Hill. Can language
models learn from explanations in context? arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02329, 2022.
[9] Karl Cobbe, Vineet Kosaraju, Mohammad Bavarian, Jacob Hilton, Reiichiro Nakano, Christo-
pher Hesse, and John Schulman. Training veriﬁers to solve math word problems. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.14168, 2021.
[10] Alon Talmor, Jonathan Herzig, Nicholas Lourie, and Jonathan Berant. Commonsenseqa: A
question answering challenge targeting commonsense knowledge. In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4149–4158, 2019.
[11] Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal,
Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, et al. Language models are
few-shot learners. Advances in neural information processing systems, 33:1877–1901, 2020.
[12] Jason Wei, Maarten Bosma, Vincent Y Zhao, Kelvin Guu, Adams Wei Yu, Brian Lester, Nan
Du, Andrew M Dai, and Quoc V Le. Finetuned language models are zero-shot learners. ICLR
2022, 2021.
[13] Sang Michael Xie, Aditi Raghunathan, Percy Liang, and Tengyu Ma. An explanation of
in-context learning as implicit bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.02080, 2021.
[14] Catherine Olsson, Nelson Elhage, Neel Nanda, Nicholas Joseph, Nova DasSarma, Tom
Henighan, Ben Mann, Amanda Askell, Yuntao Bai, Anna Chen, and et al. In-context learning
and induction heads. Transformer Circuits, Mar 2022.
10

[15] Brian Lester, Rami Al-Rfou, and Noah Constant. The power of scale for parameter-efﬁcient
prompt tuning. EMNLP 2021, 2021.
[16] Stanislas Polu, Jesse Michael Han, Kunhao Zheng, Mantas Baksys, Igor Babuschkin, and Ilya
Sutskever. Formal mathematics statement curriculum learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.01344,
2022.
[17] Leonardo de Moura, Soonho Kong, Jeremy Avigad, Floris van Doorn, and Jakob von Raumer.
The lean theorem prover (system description). In International Conference on Automated
Deduction, pages 378–388. Springer, 2015.
[18] Stanislas Polu and Ilya Sutskever. Generative language modeling for automated theorem proving.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2009.03393, 2020.
[19] Wangchunshu Zhou, Jinyi Hu, Hanlin Zhang, Xiaodan Liang, Maosong Sun, Chenyan Xiong,
and Jian Tang. Towards interpretable natural language understanding with explanations as latent
variables. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 33:6803–6814, 2020.
[20] Noam Wies, Yoav Levine, and Amnon Shashua. Sub-task decomposition enables learning in
sequence to sequence tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02892, 2022.
[21] Thomas Anthony, Zheng Tian, and David Barber. Thinking fast and slow with deep learning
and tree search. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 30, 2017.
[22] Ankit Vani, Max Schwarzer, Yuchen Lu, Eeshan Dhekane, and Aaron Courville. Iterated
learning for emergent systematicity in vqa. ICLR 2021, 2021.
[23] Oana-Maria Camburu, Tim Rocktäschel, Thomas Lukasiewicz, and Phil Blunsom. e-snli:
Natural language inference with natural language explanations. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 31, 2018.
[24] Hanxiong Chen, Xu Chen, Shaoyun Shi, and Yongfeng Zhang. Generate natural language
explanations for recommendation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.03392, 2021.
[25] John Schulman, Filip Wolski, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alec Radford, and Oleg Klimov. Proximal
policy optimization algorithms. arXiv preprint arXiv:1707.06347, 2017.
[26] Ben Wang. Mesh-Transformer-JAX: Model-Parallel Implementation of Transformer Lan-
guage Model with JAX.
https://github.com/kingoflolz/mesh-transformer-jax,
May 2021.
[27] Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe, Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and
Luke Zettlemoyer. Rethinking the role of demonstrations: What makes in-context learning
work? arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.12837, 2022.
[28] Robyn Speer, Joshua Chin, and Catherine Havasi. Conceptnet 5.5: An open multilingual graph
of general knowledge. singh 2002 (2016). arXiv preprint arxiv:1612.03975, 2016.
[29] Yichong Xu, Chenguang Zhu, Shuohang Wang, Siqi Sun, Hao Cheng, Xiaodong Liu, Jianfeng
Gao, Pengcheng He, Michael Zeng, and Xuedong Huang. Human parity on commonsenseqa:
Augmenting self-attention with external attention. arXiv:2112.03254, December 2021. human
parity result on CommonsenseQA.
[30] Romal Thoppilan, Daniel De Freitas, Jamie Hall, Noam Shazeer, Apoorv Kulshreshtha, Heng-
Tze Cheng, Alicia Jin, Taylor Bos, Leslie Baker, Yu Du, et al. Lamda: Language models for
dialog applications. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.08239, 2022.
[31] Stefan Palan and Christian Schitter. Proliﬁc. ac—a subject pool for online experiments. Journal
of Behavioral and Experimental Finance, 17:22–27, 2018.
[32] Xuezhi Wang, Jason Wei, Dale Schuurmans, Quoc Le, Ed Chi, and Denny Zhou.
Self-
consistency improves chain of thought reasoning in language models, 2022.
[33] Bernease Herman. The promise and peril of human evaluation for model interpretability. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1711.07414, 2017.
11

[34] Alon Jacovi and Yoav Goldberg. Towards faithfully interpretable nlp systems: How should we
deﬁne and evaluate faithfulness? ACL 2020, 2020.
[35] Leo Gao, Stella Biderman, Sid Black, Laurence Golding, Travis Hoppe, Charles Foster, Jason
Phang, Horace He, Anish Thite, Noa Nabeshima, et al. The pile: An 800gb dataset of diverse
text for language modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027, 2020.
[36] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
12

Appendix
A
CommonsenseQA Error Patterns
Throughout our experiments, we came across a variety of interesting failure cases for commonsense
reasoning. Note that all the ﬁnal answers are correct – however, we take issue with the reasoning
used in order to arrive at those answers.
A.1
Question Implies Answer
One key failure case was answers in the form of “the answer must be something that is <question
property>. <answer> is <question property>. Therefore, the correct answer is <answer>.” In these
cases, the model fails to explain why the answer that it has chosen satisﬁes the question property.
Q: What might someone get from learning about science?
Answer Choices:
(a) headache
(b) see things differently
(c) increased knowledge
(d) accidents
(e) appreciation of nature
A: The answer must be something that someone would get from learning about
science. Learning about science would increase knowledge. Therefore, the
answer is increased knowledge (c).
These rationales, while perhaps useful to the model, read to us as opaque and unexplanatory.
A.2
Begging the Question
A related but stronger version of the previous failure case, while less common, is particularly
uninsightful. Sometimes the model will imply the answer that it has chosen in its question.
Q: The christian rock band was on a large stage, the singer’s foot got caught
on a wire and he had a small what?
Answer Choices:
(a) commit sin
(b) fail
(c) disobey
(d) stumble
(e) boo boo
A: The answer must be something that would cause the singer to stumble. The
singer’s foot got caught on a wire, so he would stumble. Therefore, the
answer is stumble (d).
A.3
Exercise to the Reader
A rare failure case is when the model ﬁnds it unnecessary to justify its answer. For example:
Q: Other than school or from text where can one gain knowledge?
Answer Choices:
(a) book
(b) class
(c) thinking
(d) head
(e) meeting
A: The answer must be a place where someone can gain knowledge other than
school or from text. The answer is meeting (e).
13

A.4
World State Assertions
Sometimes, the model will assume that it knows something about a subject or a person whose name
was used as a variable. This leads to somewhat comical examples of reasoning. Part of the reason
for this is that generally, there is an expectation that good rationales will leverage understanding of
more general classes of objects and appeal to the relationship between those general classes and the
particular instance. For example, the argument that “a person would typically feel exhilaration from
heights” is generally more compelling than the argument that “James would feel exhilaration from
heights.”
Q: A person’s hand hurts after hitting the bottle. What might happen to
the bottle?
Answer Choices:
(a) alcoholism
(b) breaking
(c) fly
(d) nausea
(e) ticket
A: The answer must be something that happens to the bottle. The bottle is
broken. Therefore, the answer is breaking (b).
Q: James loved climbing.
What emotion might he feel from heights?
Answer Choices:
(a) exhaustion
(b) exhilaration
(c) falling down
(d) nervousness
(e) vertigo
A: The answer must be a feeling that would cause someone to climb a mountain.
James would feel exhilaration from heights. Therefore, the answer is
exhilaration (b).
A.5
Red Herrings
Some errors in reasoning corresponded to the model making a statement which, while technically
true, is not useful in demonstrating the claim.
Q: A squirrel ran up to it’s home, where is the small dog likely to be
barking up?
Answer Choices:
(a) manhattan apartment
(b) wood
(c) neighbor’s yard
(d) tree
(e) basket
A: The answer must be a place where a small dog would be likely to be
barking. Squirrels are not small dogs. Therefore, the answer is tree (d).
Q: John ran very fast, his feet touched the ground in what way?
Answer Choices:
(a) behind
(b) loose
(c) feverishly
(d) slowly
(e) lightly
A: The answer must be a way of running that is different from the way John
ran. Running is a fast, light-footed activity. Therefore, the answer is
lightly (e).
14

A.6
Hint Short-cutting
In the experiments where the model was shown some examples of “hints” during training, in order to
prevent it from losing the ability to perform rationalization over time, the model appeared to pick up
on the fact that the ﬁnal answer would always correspond to the hinted answer. This led to answers
such as
Q: Billy bought coffee and waited for his wife to arrive from
France.
Where might he have been?
Answer Choices:
(a) airport
(b) grocery store
(c) internet cafe
(d) supermarket
(e) train station
A: The answer must be a place where Billy could have been waiting for his
wife to arrive from France. The airport is a place where people can wait
for flights. Therefore, the answer is train station (e).
15

B
Modiﬁed CQA Prompts
For reference, we include our modiﬁed prompts based closely on those in [6].
Q: What do people use to absorb extra ink from a fountain pen?
Answer Choices:
(a) shirt pocket
(b) calligrapher’s hand
(c) inkwell
(d) desk drawer
(e) blotter
A: The answer must be used to absorb extra ink. Blotters are designed to absorb
liquids. Therefore, the answer is blotter (e).
Q: What home entertainment equipment requires cable?
Answer Choices:
(a) radio shack
(b) substation
(c) television
(d) cabinet
(e) desk
A: The answer must require cable. Cable is used to provide satellite channels to
televisions. Therefore, the answer is television (c).
Q: The fox walked from the city into the forest, what was it looking for?
Answer Choices:
(a) pretty flowers
(b) hen house
(c) natural habitat
(d) storybook
(e) dense forest
A: The answer must be a reason for a fox to go into the forest. The forest is a fox’
s natural habitat. Therefore, the answer is natural habitat (c).
Q: Sammy wanted to go to where the people were. Where might he go?
Answer Choices:
(a) populated areas
(b) race track
(c) desert
(d) apartment
(e) roadblock
A: The answer must be a place with many people. Populated areas, by definition, have
a lot of people. Therefore, the answer is populated areas (a).
Q: Where do you put your grapes just before checking out?
Answer Choices:
(a) mouth
(b) grocery cart
(c) super market
(d) fruit basket
(e) fruit market
A: The answer should be the place where grocery items are placed before checking out
. Of the above choices, grocery cart makes the most sense for holding grocery items.
Therefore, the answer is grocery cart (b).
Q: Google Maps and other highway and street GPS services have replaced what?
Answer Choices:
(a) united states
(b) mexico
(c) countryside
(d) atlas
(e) oceans
A: The answer must be something that used to do what Google Maps and GPS services do
, which is give directions. Atlases were also used to give directions. Therefore,
the answer is atlas (d).
16

Q: Before getting a divorce, what did the wife feel who was doing all the work?
Answer Choices:
(a) harder
(b) anguish
(c) bitterness
(d) tears
(e) sadness
A: The answer should be a feeling which would cause someone who was doing all the
work to get divorced. If someone feels bitter towards their spouse, they are likely
to want a divorce. Therefore, the answer is bitterness (c).
17

C
Human-evaluated Test Prompts
We also selected a random sampling of 50 questions which were correctly answered both few-shot
and by a STaR-trained model (without rationalization), as discussed in 4.4. Presented in a random
order, twenty crowdworkers preferred the STaR-generated answers. We reproduce the examples here
with the few-shot rationale ﬁrst, the STaR-trained rationale second, and the human rationale third,
though these were shufﬂed when presented to participants. We selected human answers from [3]’s
original split rationales where possible, ﬁnding that duplicate rationales were much more common in
the new split rationales. For example, the explanation “Rivers ﬂow trough valleys,” appeared over
400 times verbatim in the new split dataset, and “This word was most relevant” appeared over 150
times. [3]’s dataset also includes explanations like “The only answer that makes sense” or “BOB
WILL NOT POKEMON CARDS WERE COMMON AND WORTHLESS BUT WRONG ABOUT
THEM SO FEEL REALLY RARE TO DELAY” or restatements of the answer. We append the phrase
“Therefore, the answer is ANSWERTEXT (ANSWERLETTER)” with ANSWERTEXT replaced
by the correct answer’s text and ANSWERLETTER replaced by the correct answer letter. This is
done 1) to make it less obvious that one of the answers is generated by a different source and 2) to
prioritize differences in rationales, not the answer format.
Before the questions and after the consent form, we presented the following directions:
Each question will have three explanations for one answer, which is a pre-determined correct ("best") answer.
Please rank the explanations for each question from best to worst (with 1 as the best and 3 as the worst) based on how well
they justify the correct answer.
Note there are some typos and grammatical errors in the examples, in the questions, answers, and the explanation. Please
treat the answer letter (a / b / c / d / e) at the end of the explanations as the correct answer letter, even if another
answer is valid (and perhaps more reasonable), and even if it does not match with the answer text preceding it.
The examples were subsampled and presented to the crowdworkers:
Q: Who is likely yo have a caring heart?
Answer Choices:
(a) person
(b) species
(c) artichoke
(d) all mammals
(e) live animal
A: The answer must be a person. All mammals have a caring
heart. Therefore, the answer is person (a).
A: The answer must be someone who is likely to have a
caring heart. Humans are the most likely to have a caring
heart. Therefore, the answer is person (a).
A: A person is the only human being capable of having a
caring heart. Therefore, the answer is person (a).
Q: If a person wanted to become a good writer what should
they do in college?
Answer Choices:
(a) word sentence
(b) own animal
(c) read the newspaper
(d) catch cold
(e) study literature
A: The answer must be something that would help a person
become a good writer. The answer is study literature (e).
A: The answer must be something that would help a person
become a good writer. Literature is a form of study.
Therefore, the answer is study literature (e).
A: studying literature will give one skills of writing.
Therefore, the answer is study literature (e).
Q: The human always would have fun making up questions for
the A.I. overlords, he found the task quite what?
Answer Choices:
(a) do enjoy
(b) eat cake
(c) enjoy living
(d) get laid
(e) enjoyable
A: The answer must be something that the human would enjoy
doing. The human enjoys making up questions for the A.I.
overlords. Therefore, the answer is enjoyable (e).
A: The answer must be something that the human found
enjoyable. The human found the task of making up questions
for the A.I. overlords enjoyable. Therefore, the answer is
enjoyable (e).
A: Having fun is enjoyable. Therefore, the answer is
enjoyable (e).
Q: What happens when I make a pig of myself eating breakfast
?
Answer Choices:
(a) full stomach
(b) gain energy
(c) dieting
(d) have energy
(e) feeling satisfied
A: The answer must be a feeling which would cause someone
to feel full after eating breakfast. The answer is full
stomach (a).
A: The answer must be a feeling which would cause someone
to make a pig of themselves eating breakfast. If someone
feels full, they are likely to stop eating. Therefore, the
answer is full stomach (a).
A: A colloquial phrase for over indulging in food.
Therefore, the answer is full stomach (a).
Q: In order to see a story on the big screen what must you
do?
Answer Choices:
(a) go to movies
(b) visualize
(c) reading
(d) open book
(e) sketching a picture
A: The answer must be something that you do to see a story
on the big screen. Movies are a way to see a story on the
big screen. Therefore, the answer is movies (a).
A: The answer must be something that is required to see a
story on the big screen. Movies are a form of storytelling.
Therefore, the answer is go to movies (a).
A: The big screen is a colloquial term meaning a movie
theater. Therefore, the answer is go to movies (a).
Q: What is the opposite of remembering?
Answer Choices:
(a) answering question
(b) stopping to think
(c) knowing
(d) closing eyes
18

(e) forgetting
A: The answer must be something that is the opposite of
remembering. The answer is forgetting (e).
A: The answer must be a feeling which would cause someone
to not remember something. If someone forgets something,
they are likely to not remember it. Therefore, the answer
is forgetting (e).
A: Health complications. Therefore, the answer is
forgetting (e).
Q: If you aren’t experiencing curiosity and want to ensure
viewing enjoyment, what may you watch?
Answer Choices:
(a) examine thing
(b) stare into a mirror
(c) go somewhere
(d) hear news
(e) see favorite show
A: The answer must be something that will make you want to
watch. If you are not experiencing curiosity, you may want
to watch something that will make you want to watch.
Therefore, the answer is watch (e).
A: The answer must be something that will not cause you to
want to watch. If you are not experiencing curiosity, you
are likely to want to watch something that is entertaining.
Therefore, the answer is favorite show (e).
A: see favorite show can you do in front of a tv if you
have curiosity about what is being displayed on the tv.
Therefore, the answer is favorite show (e).
Q: The carotid is a main artery susceptible to damage where?
Answer Choices:
(a) neck
(b) face
(c) busy city
(d) torso
(e) human body
A: The answer must be a place where the carotid artery is
susceptible to damage. The carotid artery is located in the
neck. Therefore, the answer is neck (a).
A: The answer must be a place where the carotid is
susceptible to damage. The carotid is susceptible to damage
in the neck. Therefore, the answer is neck (a).
A: The carotid artery is located in the neck. Therefore,
the answer is neck (a).
Q: The king needed to feel safe, where did he go?
Answer Choices:
(a) castle
(b) throne room
(c) deck of cards
(d) fort
(e) court
A: The answer must be a place where the king feels safe.
The king’s castle is a place where he feels safe. Therefore,
the answer is castle (a).
A: The answer must be a place where the king can feel safe.
Castles are places where kings feel safe. Therefore, the
answer is castle (a).
A: In general, King live in castle. Therefore, the answer
is castle (a).
Q: What is the result of instituting civil action?
Answer Choices:
(a) bad feelings
(b) confusion
(c) going to court
(d) hurt feelings
(e) sandwiches
A: The answer must be a result of instituting civil action.
The result of instituting civil action is a lawsuit.
Therefore, the answer is going to court (c).
A: The answer must be a result of instituting civil action.
If someone goes to court, they are likely to feel hurt
feelings. Therefore, the answer is going to court (c).
A: Anger and Trial will not institute a court case.
Therefore, the answer is going to court (c).
Q: The person wanted to fix his car, what did he order?
Answer Choices:
(a) selling things
(b) gas
(c) feel resentful
(d) machine part
(e) cross street
A: The answer must be something that would help the person
fix his car. The person would not want to sell things,
because he would not want to give up his car. Therefore,
the answer is machine part (d).
A: The answer must be something that would be used to fix a
car. Machine parts are used to fix cars. Therefore, the
answer is machine part (d).
A: A machine part is the only thing listed that would fix
the car. Therefore, the answer is machine part (d).
Q: He always traveled up the mountain when winter arrived,
he had a passion and desire to do what?
Answer Choices:
(a) play volleyball
(b) play hockey
(c) ski
(d) knit
(e) skate
A: The answer must be something that the person does when
winter arrives. The answer is skiing (c).
A: The answer must be something that the person did when
winter arrived. The answer is ski (c).
A: Skiing is the only option that is done on a mountain.
Therefore, the answer is ski (c).
Q: Bob thought that his Pokemon cards were common and
worthless, but he was wrong about them. They were really
what?
Answer Choices:
(a) personal
(b) special
(c) shiny
(d) rare
(e) irregular
A: The answer must be something that is not common and
worthless. Pokemon cards are not common and worthless.
Therefore, the answer is rare (d).
A: The answer must be something that are rare. Pokemon
cards are rare. Therefore, the answer is rare (d).
A: BOB WILL NOT POKEMON CARDS WERE COMMON AND WORTHLESS BUT
WRONG ABOUT THEM SO FEEL REALLY RARE TO DELAY. Therefore,
the answer is rare (d).
Q: If you’re lighting a candle to see what are you in?
Answer Choices:
(a) dimly lit room
(b) synagogue
(c) sunlight
(d) birthday cake
(e) bedroom
A: The answer must be a place where you can see what you
are in. The answer is a room with dim lighting. Therefore,
the answer is dimly lit room (a).
A: The answer must be a place where you can see a candle.
Candles are used to see things in the dark. Therefore, the
answer is dimly lit room (a).
A: Lighting or illumination is the deliberate use of light
to achieve a practical or aesthetic effect. Lighting
includes the use of both artificial light sources like
lamps ... Therefore, the answer is dimly lit room (a).
Q: The person was thirsty, what should he have done?
Answer Choices:
(a) eat
(b) sunny days
(c) compliments
(d) drink water
(e) all kinds of things
A: The answer must be something that would make the person
feel better. If the person is thirsty, he should drink
water. Therefore, the answer is drink water (d).
A: The answer must be something that would make someone
feel better if they were thirsty. If someone is thirsty,
they are likely to want to drink water. Therefore, the
answer is drink water (d).
A: The person was thirsty, so drink water. Therefore, the
answer is drink water (d).
Q: Where would you find many products for sale?
Answer Choices:
(a) market
(b) cost one dollar
(c) shelf
(d) salon
(e) demonstration
A: The answer must be a place where many products are sold.
A market is a place where many products are sold.
Therefore, the answer is market (a).
A: The answer must be a place with a lot of products for
sale. Markets are the most common place to buy products.
Therefore, the answer is market (a).
A: The only place products are for sale are in markets and
stores. Therefore, the answer is market (a).
Q: If man and mammoth wanted to meet, they would probably
have to do it during when?
Answer Choices:
(a) a baby shower
(b) ancient history
19

(c) storybook
(d) stone age
(e) forest
A: The answer must be a time when man and mammoth would
meet. Stone age is the time when man and mammoth lived.
Therefore, the answer is stone age (d).
A: The answer must be a time when man and mammoth would be
able to meet. The stone age was a time when man and mammoth
would be able to meet. Therefore, the answer is stone age
(d).
A: During the stone age is the only time mammoths lived.
Therefore, the answer is stone age (d).
Q: They prided themselves on being a wealth of knowledge,
and that’s why many chose to attend their what?
Answer Choices:
(a) book store
(b) university
(c) meeting
(d) class
(e) encyclopedia
A: The answer must be a place where people go to learn
about things. The answer is university (b).
A: The answer must be a place where people go to learn
about things. Universities are places where people go to
learn about things. Therefore, the answer is university (b).
A: because in the university you get more knowledge.
Therefore, the answer is university (b).
Q: what happens when visiting museum that have narrow halls?
Answer Choices:
(a) sore feet
(b) amazement
(c) retrospection
(d) boredom
(e) crowding
A: The answer must be something that happens when visiting
a museum that has narrow halls. Crowding is a common
problem in museums. Therefore, the answer is crowding (e).
A: The answer must be something that would cause someone to
have sore feet if they are walking in narrow halls. If
someone feels cramped, they are likely to want to go
somewhere else. Therefore, the answer is crowding (e).
A: museum is one of the crowdest place. Therefore, the
answer is crowding (e).
Q: On their hike they brought a filtering straw, they were
worried about germs in the what?
Answer Choices:
(a) make sick
(b) doctor
(c) water
(d) stream
(e) mouth
A: The answer must be something that can filter out germs.
Filtering straws are used to filter out germs. Therefore,
the answer is filtering straw (c).
A: The answer must be something that would cause someone to
bring a filtering straw on a hike. Filtering straws are
used to filter water. Therefore, the answer is water (c).
A: straw it something used to drink water. Therefore, the
answer is water (c).
Q: If I am not good at playing poker, I will begin what if I
play?
Answer Choices:
(a) discord
(b) social event
(c) losing money
(d) competition
(e) heightened awareness
A: The answer must be something that will happen if you are
not good at playing poker. If you are not good at playing
poker, you will begin to lose money. Therefore, the answer
is losing money (c).
A: The answer must be something that will help you if you
are not good at playing poker. If you are losing money, you
are likely to want to stop playing. Therefore, the answer
is losing money (c).
A: Poker is a game in which people lose their money.
Therefore, the answer is losing money (c).
Q: People are meeting people, what is the likely physical
gesture?
Answer Choices:
(a) introducing yourself
(b) smiling
(c) shake hands
(d) share a hug
(e) talking
A: The answer must be a physical gesture that is used to
greet someone. The answer is handshake (c).
A: The answer must be a gesture used to meet people. If
someone wants to meet people, they are likely to want to
shake hands. Therefore, the answer is shaking hands (c).
A: A handshake is a globally widespread. Therefore, the
answer is shaking hands (c).
Q: What do dogs get that make them itch?
Answer Choices:
(a) bones
(b) fleas
(c) bad breath
(d) wagging tails
(e) four legs
A: The answer must be something that makes dogs itch. Dogs
get fleas, which make them itch. Therefore, the answer is
fleas (b).
A: The answer must be something that dogs get that make
them itch. Fleas are a common cause of dog itch. Therefore,
the answer is fleas (b).
A: fleas makes you itch. Therefore, the answer is fleas (b).
Q: What is ignorance often equated with?
Answer Choices:
(a) bliss
(b) hostility
(c) peace
(d) accidents
(e) find truth
A: The answer must be something that is often equated with
ignorance. Bliss is often equated with ignorance. Therefore,
the answer is bliss (a).
A: The answer must be a feeling which would cause someone
to be ignorant. If someone feels bliss, they are likely to
be ignorant. Therefore, the answer is bliss (a).
A: bliss comes from ignorance. Therefore, the answer is
bliss (a).
Q: The two teams were competing all the time, what likely
developed between them?
Answer Choices:
(a) accomplishment
(b) enemies
(c) rivalry
(d) friendship
(e) bad blood
A: The answer must be something that developed between the
two teams. The teams were competing all the time. Therefore,
the answer is rivalry (c).
A: The answer must be a feeling which would cause two teams
to compete all the time. Rivalry is a common feeling which
would cause two teams to compete all the time. Therefore,
the answer is rivalry (c).
A: likely developed between them of rivalry. Therefore, the
answer is rivalry (c).
Q: James doesn’t want a relationship. He thinks that loving
another will only create what?
Answer Choices:
(a) satisfaction
(b) jealousy
(c) happiness
(d) wonderful
(e) quiet
A: The answer must be something that would make James feel
bad about not having a relationship. If someone feels
jealous, they are likely to want a relationship. Therefore,
the answer is jealousy (b).
A: The answer must be a feeling which would cause someone
who doesn’t want a relationship to not want one. If someone
feels jealous of another, they are likely to not want a
relationship. Therefore, the answer is jealousy (b).
A: Jealousy is a negative emotion. Therefore, the answer is
jealousy (b).
Q: The had a reputation for celebrating in a debaucherous
manner, what often happened as a result?
Answer Choices:
(a) drunkenness
(b) enjoyment
(c) have fun
(d) hang over
(e) fighting
A: The answer must be a result of a celebration. The answer
is drunkenness (a).
A: The answer must be something that would cause someone to
have a reputation for celebrating in a debaucherous manner.
Alcohol is a depressant. Therefore, the answer is
drunkenness (a).
20

A: it is normal not a good idea to get drunk. Therefore,
the answer is drunkenness (a).
Q: The paper towels are usually in plain sight in the
kitchen, where did the dad go next to find them?
Answer Choices:
(a) pantry
(b) cabinet
(c) grocery store
(d) waste bin
(e) market
A: The answer must be a place where the dad would go to
find the paper towels. The pantry is a place where food is
stored. Therefore, the answer is pantry (a).
A: The answer must be a place where paper towels are stored.
Pantries are the most likely place to store paper towels.
Therefore, the answer is pantry (a).
A: The pantry is in the kitchen and stores things.
Therefore, the answer is pantry (a).
Q: My house is very dry, with little water in the air. What
tool should I use to fix this?
Answer Choices:
(a) humidifier
(b) surface of earth
(c) skating rink
(d) ice cube
(e) burn it to the ground
A: The answer must be a tool that will make the air in your
house moist. A humidifier is a tool that will make the air
in your house moist. Therefore, the answer is humidifier (
a).
A: The answer must be something that would make the air in
my house more humid. A humidifier is used to make the air
in a room more humid. Therefore, the answer is humidifier (
a).
A: This word was most relevant. Therefore, the answer is
humidifier (a).
Q: A motorcycle is quicker because it isn’t as what as a car
?
Answer Choices:
(a) heavy
(b) shiny
(c) red
(d) obesity
(e) expensive
A: The answer must be something that is not as heavy as a
car. A motorcycle is lighter than a car. Therefore, the
answer is not heavy (a).
A: The answer must be something that is not as quick as a
motorcycle. Motorcycles are not as heavy as cars. Therefore,
the answer is heavy (a).
A: Because it is much smaller. Therefore, the answer is
heavy (a).
Q: The baseball team was playing ball. It was time for the
pitcher to act. How did the pitcher get the ball to the
batter?
Answer Choices:
(a) lose
(b) injury
(c) competition
(d) throwing
(e) rolled
A: The answer must be a way to get the ball to the batter.
The pitcher is the one who throws the ball. Therefore, the
answer is throwing (d).
A: The answer must be a way for the pitcher to get the ball
to the batter. The pitcher is the person who is
responsible for getting the ball to the batter. Therefore,
the answer is throwing (d).
A: The pitcher threw the ball to the batter so that he
could hit it. Therefore, the answer is throwing (d).
Q: In what sort of container should you keep your ficus?
Answer Choices:
(a) refigerator
(b) screened porch
(c) clay pot
(d) shady places
(e) arboretum
A: The answer must be a container that keeps the ficus in a
shady place. Clay pots are used to keep plants in shady
places. Therefore, the answer is clay pot (c).
A: The answer must be a container in which ficus can be
kept. Ficus are tropical plants. Therefore, the answer is
clay pot (c).
A: Clay pot is the only type of container listed. Therefore,
the answer is clay pot (c).
Q: James was cooking s stew in his apartment kitchen. Where
might he look for a potato.
Answer Choices:
(a) restaurants
(b) casserole
(c) root cellar
(d) pockets
(e) pantry
A: The answer must be a place where potatoes are stored.
The answer is pantry (e).
A: The answer must be a place where potatoes are stored.
Pantries are the most likely place to store potatoes.
Therefore, the answer is pantry (e).
A: apartments do not often have root cellars, and are not
restaurants. a pantry is closest to James inside his
apartment. Therefore, the answer is pantry (e).
Q: If ships are in a storm and the sun comes out, what has
happened?
Answer Choices:
(a) sinks
(b) cross river
(c) collide
(d) bottom out
(e) carry people
A: The answer must be a thing that happens when ships are
in a storm and the sun comes out. Ships are in a storm when
they are in the middle of the ocean. Therefore, the answer
is bottom out (d).
A: The answer must be something that happens when the sun
comes out. The sun is a source of energy. Therefore, the
answer is bottom out (d).
A: the sun comes out so its not a storm any more. Therefore,
the answer is bottom out (d).
Q: Where do all marmot live before they are captured?
Answer Choices:
(a) switzerland
(b) spain
(c) vancouver island
(d) wilderness
(e) australia
A: The answer must be a place where marmots live. Marmots
live in the wilderness. Therefore, the answer is wilderness
(d).
A: The answer must be a place where marmots are found. The
wilderness is the most likely place to find marmots.
Therefore, the answer is wilderness (d).
A: Marmots don’t live in Australia or Switzerland.
Therefore, the answer is wilderness (d).
Q: Where does one wait on a bench for something on tracks?
Answer Choices:
(a) train station
(b) state park
(c) crosswalk
(d) bus stop
(e) bus depot
A: The answer must be a place where one waits for a train,
bus, or other vehicle. The answer is train station (a).
A: The answer must be a place where one can wait for a
train. Train stations are places where trains stop.
Therefore, the answer is train station (a).
A: Only trains are on tracks. Therefore, the answer is
train station (a).
Q: What can planning vacation lead to between a couple when
they disagree?
Answer Choices:
(a) relaxation
(b) enjoying
(c) arguments
(d) going abroad
(e) spending money
A: The answer must be something that can happen when a
couple disagrees. Arguments are a common result of
disagreements. Therefore, the answer is arguments (c).
A: The answer must be a result of planning vacation.
Arguments are a common result of planning vacation.
Therefore, the answer is arguments (c).
A: Arguments are the direct result of disagreements.
Therefore, the answer is arguments (c).
Q: A sloth climbs slow, but it can eventually reach all the
way up where?
Answer Choices:
(a) forest canopy
(b) universe
(c) tropical rainforest
(d) large trees
(e) nature preserve
21

A: The answer must be a place where a sloth can climb. The
forest canopy is the highest point in the forest. Therefore,
the answer is forest canopy (a).
A: The answer must be a place where a sloth can climb. The
canopy of a forest is the highest point in a forest.
Therefore, the answer is canopy of a forest (a).
A: The sloth is a mammal that lives in the trees of South
America. They have a slow and peculiar way of moving about.
In fact, they are the slowest land mammals and travel very
sluggishly on the ground (0.025 m/s-0.050 m/s). Therefore,
the answer is canopy of a forest (a).
Q: Where in America is known for theaters?
Answer Choices:
(a) new york city
(b) shopping mall
(c) downtown area
(d) skating rink
(e) military base
A: The answer must be a place where people go to see movies.
Theaters are places where people go to see movies.
Therefore, the answer is theater (a).
A: The answer must be a place with a lot of theaters. New
York City is known for its many theaters. Therefore, the
answer is New York City (a).
A: New York City is the main region in US known for
theaters. Therefore, the answer is New York City (a).
Q: What does hearing someone play violin beautifully make
you?
Answer Choices:
(a) buy earplugs
(b) inspiring
(c) guitar
(d) make music
(e) like music
A: The answer must be something that makes you feel
inspired. Hearing someone play violin beautifully makes you
feel inspired. Therefore, the answer is inspiring (b).
A: The answer must be a feeling which would cause someone
to want to hear someone play violin beautifully. Music is a
form of art. Therefore, the answer is inspiring (b).
A: Hearing someone play a violin beautifully makes me
inspired. Therefore, the answer is inspiring (b).
Q: What emotion does committing murder induce?
Answer Choices:
(a) fear
(b) go to jail
(c) problems
(d) cruel
(e) dead
A: The answer must be a feeling that would cause someone to
commit murder. Murder is a crime. Therefore, the answer is
fear (a).
A: The answer must be a feeling which would cause someone
to commit murder. If someone feels fear, they are likely to
want to avoid committing murder. Therefore, the answer is
fear (a).
A: The only feeling. Therefore, the answer is fear (a).
Q: Sitting to close while watching TV can cause what sort of
pain?
Answer Choices:
(a) brain problems
(b) laziness
(c) get fat
(d) headache
(e) laughter
A: The answer must be a pain that comes from sitting too
close to the TV. Sitting too close to the TV can cause
headaches. Therefore, the answer is headache (d).
A: The answer must be a type of pain which can occur if you
are sitting too close to the TV. Headaches are a common
side effect of sitting too close to the TV. Therefore, the
answer is headache (d).
A: the process of aging in humans. Therefore, the answer is
headache (d).
Q: What might people do to protect their legs from getting
dirty on the farm?
Answer Choices:
(a) wear jeans
(b) milk cow
(c) believe in god
(d) avoid mud
(e) plant flowers
A: The answer must be something that people do to protect
their legs from getting dirty. Of the above choices,
wearing jeans is the most logical. Therefore, the answer is
jeans (a).
A: The answer must be something that would protect legs
from getting dirty on the farm. Jeans are used to protect
legs from getting dirty. Therefore, the answer is wear
jeans (a).
A: Jeans cover over legs. Therefore, the answer is wear
jeans (a).
Q: What types of stoves are there?
Answer Choices:
(a) these twos are irrelevent to the questions
(b) warm pot of beans
(c) brown meat
(d) warm room
(e) gas or electric
A: The answer must be a type of stove. The stove is used to
heat food. Therefore, the answer is gas or electric (e).
A: The answer must be a type of stove. Stoves are used to
warm rooms. Therefore, the answer is electric (e).
A: stoves are gas or electric. Therefore, the answer is gas
or electric (e).
Q: In what geological feature will you find fungus growing?
Answer Choices:
(a) shower stall
(b) toenails
(c) basement
(d) forrest
(e) cave
A: The answer must be a place where fungus grows. The
answer is cave (e).
A: The answer must be a place where fungus grows. Fungus
grows in caves. Therefore, the answer is cave (e).
A: Rivers flow trough valleys. Therefore, the answer is
cave (e).
Q: What is our sun considered to be the center of?
Answer Choices:
(a) universe
(b) solar system
(c) outer space
(d) star
(e) beans
A: The answer must be something that is considered to be
the center of the universe. The sun is the center of the
solar system. Therefore, the answer is solar system (b).
A: The answer must be a place where the sun is the center
of. The sun is the center of the solar system. Therefore,
the answer is solar system (b).
A: It is the best option because it is the closest.
Therefore, the answer is solar system (b).
Q: What are people in a library likely doing?
Answer Choices:
(a) talk to each other
(b) board ships
(c) study books
(d) suffer hunger
(e) playing games
A: The answer must be something that people in a library
are likely to be doing. People in a library are likely to
be studying books. Therefore, the answer is study books (c).
A: The answer must be something that is likely to happen in
a library. Libraries are places where people study books.
Therefore, the answer is studying books (c).
A: Books shelved as study-skills: How to Become a Straight-
A Student by Cal Newport, The Study Skills Handbook by
Stella Cottrell, Make It Stick: The Scienc... Therefore,
the answer is study books (c).
Q: A shark isn’t something you have to worry about at the
lake in the woods, but there are plenty of dangers in the
what?
Answer Choices:
(a) great oceans
(b) great outdoors
(c) tropical waters
(d) pacific ocean
(e) gulf of mexico
A: The answer must be something that is dangerous in the
great outdoors. The great outdoors is a place where there
are many dangers. Therefore, the answer is great outdoors (
b).
A: The answer must be a place where sharks are a danger.
Lakes in the woods are not a place where sharks are a
danger. Therefore, the answer is great outdoors (b).
A: The great outdoors is the only choice where you would
find a lake in the woods. Therefore, the answer is great
outdoors (b).
Q: You can share files with someone if you have a connection
to a what?
22

Answer Choices:
(a) freeway
(b) radio
(c) wires
(d) computer network
(e) electrical circuit
A: The answer must be a way to share files. The answer is
computer network (d).
A: The answer must be a connection which allows you to
share files. A computer network is a collection of
computers which are connected to each other. Therefore, the
answer is computer network (d).
A: Files can be transmitted over a computer network, and
not a freeway. "wires" doesnt make any sense. Therefore,
the answer is computer network (d).
Q: What can an injury happen to?
Answer Choices:
(a) emergency room
(b) doctor’s office
(c) living thing
(d) bones
(e) accident
A: The answer must be something that can happen to a living
thing. The answer is living thing (c).
A: The answer must be something that can happen to a living
thing. If someone is injured, they are likely to want to
go to the emergency room. Therefore, the answer is living
thing (c).
A: Living things feel pain, and therefore can be injured.
Therefore, the answer is living thing (c).
23

D
Example Rationalizations on CQA
We include a randomly sampled set of rationalizations which the model is able to produce before
ﬁne-tuning. We observe that sometimes, the model constructs an argument roughly of the form “the
answer must have a set of properties. correct answer has those properties. therefore, the answer is
correct answer.” This structure of argument is fairly standard, but given that the model originally
answered those questions incorrectly, it resembles template-matching more than reasoning. The
technique of rephrasing the question in a simpler way before answering it directly is also often
effective. In general, the rationales from the pretrained model’s rationalization appears to be of
similar quality to the pretrained model’s rationale generation. We reference the pretrained model here
rather than the STaR-trained model, as the ﬁnal iteration’s rationales are the ones which the model
struggled to learn from – that is, if the rationales were good, then we might expect that the model
would have already incorporated them into its rationale generation.
Q: Why do I eat just enough when eating breakfast?
Answer Choices:
(a) gas
(b) full stomach
(c) feeling satisfied (CORRECT)
(d) have energy
(e) bloated
A: The answer must be a reason for eating just enough when eating breakfast. Eating
just enough is a way to feel satisfied. Therefore, the answer is feeling satisfied (
c).
Q: How is a dog likely to communicate with another dog?
Answer Choices:
(a) reproduce
(b) bark (CORRECT)
(c) do many things
(d) clone
(e) jump up
A: The answer must be a way for a dog to communicate with another dog. Dogs bark to
communicate with each other. Therefore, the answer is bark (b).
Q: If a person is trying to weasel out of punishment for a crime, where are they
likely to be?
Answer Choices:
(a) court room (CORRECT)
(b) cherry tree
(c) chicken coop
(d) natural history museum
(e) jail
A: The answer must be a place where a person would be trying to get out of
punishment for a crime. The answer is court room (a).
Q: What would easily hide a snake?
Answer Choices:
(a) living room of a house
(b) kew gardens
(c) terrarium
(d) thick forest (CORRECT)
(e) tropical forest
A: The answer must be something that would hide a snake. The answer is thick forest
(d).
Q: The person didn’t like the varying size of the cake slices handed out, she demand
more what?
Answer Choices:
(a) fairness (CORRECT)
(b) candies
(c) compliments
(d) well fed
(e) arguements
24

A: The answer must be a reason for the person to demand more cake. The person is not
happy with the size of the cake slices. Therefore, the answer is fairness (a).
Q: In America, the courthouse of any given town has a likely location, where is it?
Answer Choices:
(a) electrical circuit
(b) getting married
(c) capital city
(d) center of town (CORRECT)
(e) michigan
A: The answer must be a location where a courthouse is located. The capital city is
the location of the capital of a state. Therefore, the answer is center of town (d).
Q: Where might I find a bowl nestled among other bowls in the kitchen?
Answer Choices:
(a) refrigerator
(b) kitchen top
(c) cupboard (CORRECT)
(d) dishwasher
(e) apartment
A: The answer must be a place where a bowl is found. The kitchen is a place where
bowls are found. Therefore, the answer is cupboard (c).
Q: Which state has blue ridge mountains that are called Blue Mountain?
Answer Choices:
(a) appalachians
(b) virginia
(c) pennsylvania (CORRECT)
(d) north carolina
(e) montana
A: The answer must be a state with mountains. The answer is Pennsylvania (c).
Q: Where could you find many radio studio?
Answer Choices:
(a) radio station
(b) country
(c) clear area
(d) office building
(e) large city (CORRECT)
A: The answer must be a place where many radio studios are located. Radio studios
are used to broadcast radio programs. Therefore, the answer is large city (e).
Q: Where would someone bring you a cup?
Answer Choices:
(a) apartment
(b) closet
(c) restaurant (CORRECT)
(d) table
(e) party
A: The answer must be a place where someone would bring you a cup. A restaurant is a
place where people bring cups. Therefore, the answer is restaurant (c).
25

E
STaR Without Rationalization (Rationale Generation Bootstrapping)
For convenience, we include the rationale generation bootstrapping algorithm alone here. However, it
is simply Algorithm 1, with the blue components removed.
Algorithm 2 Rationale Generation Bootstrapping (STaR without rationalization)
Input M: a pretrained LLM; dataset D = {(xi, yi)}D
i=1 (w/ few-shot prompts)
1: M0 ←M # Copy the original model
2: for n in 1...N do # Outer loop
3:
(ˆri, ˆyi) ←Mn−1(xi)
∀i ∈[1, D] # Perform rationale generation
4:
Dn ←{(xi, ˆri, yi) | i ∈[1, D] ∧ˆyi = yi} # Filter rationales using ground truth answers
5:
Mn ←train(M, Dn) # Finetune the original model on the correct solutions - inner loop
6: end for
F
Case Study
Q: John wants to eat at an Indian
restaurant in on top of the space
needle, where would he have to go?
Answer Choices:
(a) reservation (b) curry
(c) britsh town (d) seattle
(e) large city
A: The answer must be a place with
a space needle. The space needle is
a landmark in Seattle. Therefore,
the answer is Seattle (d).
Q: I put a towel in a cardboard box for
the kitten, I wanted it to have what?
Answer Choices:
(a) farmhouse (b) zoos (c) cold place
(d) floor (e) warm place
A: The answer must be a place where the
kitten would be comfortable. The kitten
would be comfortable in a warm place.
Therefore, the answer is warm place (e).
Q: Needlepoint requires many
accessories, what holds the work taut?
Answer Choices:
(a) sewing (b) collection of folk art
(c) livingroom (d) frame (e) bathroom
A: The answer must be something that
holds the work taut. The work is taut
because it is held in place. Therefore,
the answer is frame (d).
(a) Problems where the model was able to solve ques-
tions which it had previously answered incorrectly.
Q: They prided themselves on being a
wealth
of knowledge, and that’s why many
chose to attend their what?
Answer Choices:
(a) book store (b) university (c) meeting
(d) class (e) encyclopedia
A: The answer must be a place where people
go to learn about things. The answer is
university (b).
A: The answer must be a place where people
go to learn about things. Universities are
places where people go to learn about
things. Therefore, the answer is
university (b).
Q: You want a real estate agent that is
straight forward with you, the last
thing you want is for them to what a
house’s quality?
Answer Choices:
(a) cover up (b) offer price
(c) misrepresent (d) lie (e) falsify
A: The answer must be a way to determine
the quality of a house. The answer is
misrepresent (c).
A: The answer must be something that
would be a bad thing for the real estate
agent to do. The real estate agent would
be misrepresenting the house’s quality
if they were to lie about it. Therefore,
the answer is misrepresent (c).
(b) Problems where the model was already able to an-
swer them with few-shot reasoning, but was able to
answer better after more iterations.
Figure 7: Case study on STaR. We highlight some problems which the model is not initially able
to solve, as well as rationales which are initially correct but improve. We note that for CQA, one is
tasked with selecting the “best” answer, where multiple answers may be technically correct.
26

G
Bias and Faithfulness
It is important to note that STaR is designed to amplify the reasoning that leads to correct solutions
on a given dataset. The implication of this with a dataset like CommonsenseQA is that if biases are
“useful” in solving the dataset then they will be ampliﬁed. This is made worse by rationalization, as
biased answers that the model may not naturally arrive at are, in a sense, pulled out of the model.
The exact interaction between the bias in a dataset and the pre-existing bias learned by the model
is unclear, and something to consider before real-world deployment of all large language models in
general, but STaR-trained models in particular.
We ﬁnd some encouraging initial results on this however: for questions where gender is not relevant,
the model appears to disregard it in its explanation. For example: “Q: Where is a good place for
a woman to store her sunglasses? →A: The answer must be a place where sunglasses are stored.
Sunglasses are stored in purses. Therefore, the answer is purse (e).” or “Q: The only baggage the
woman checked was a drawstring bag, where was she heading with it? →A: The answer must be
a place where a drawstring bag is checked. The answer is airport (e).” We believe this question
warrants a much more comprehensive study.
One important challenge with models which seek to be interpretable or provide explanations for
their reasoning is that of faithfulness. While our primary emphasis is not on the explainability
beneﬁts that STaR may bring, there is a fundamental challenge around evaluating explanations
and rationales: namely, faithfulness [33, 34]. [34] describe faithful explanations as those which
“accurately [represent] the reasoning process behind the model’s prediction.” While STaR encourages
the use of reasoning in rationales which leads the model to correct answers, it is difﬁcult, if not
impossible, to ensure that the rationales reﬂect the model’s internal processing. For example, it is
straightforward to imagine the model implicitly selecting a particular answer immediately and then
generating a rationale to justify that selected answer. This would allow a model to generate unbiased
rationales while selecting answers in a biased way.
The fact that our model outperforms one ﬁne-tuned to directly predict the answers, and ablation
studies from papers such as [6] make it clear that the generation of a rationale before producing an
answer non-trivially improves the model’s answer quality. However, it is difﬁcult to evaluate the
degree to which any particular answer’s rationale is faithful. However, we note that there problems
are not unique to STaR, but are symptomatic of the difﬁculty of understanding large language models
and in particular the rationales generated by large language models.
H
Hyperparameters
GPT-J is a 28-layer decoder-only transformer, with an embedding size of 1024, 16 attention heads of
dimension 256, and an FFN hidden layer of size 16384. It was pre-trained on the Pile [35], with a
vocabulary size of 50.4K
In general, unless otherwise stated, we use a batch size of 8 sequences, each of length 1024. We also
use packing, namely, packing the shorter examples to form longer sequences (up to length 1024) to
improve TPU utilization. We do not use weight decay, and we train and sample on a single TPU-v3
node. We performed a hyperparameter search over learning rates from 10−7 to 10−4 using the Adam
optimizer [36]. We found that 10−6 was consistently the best-performing learning rate.
27

I
GSM8K Few-shot Prompt
We include the following few-shot prompts for GSM8K, based on the examples in [9].
Q: Natalia sold clips to 48 of her friends in April, and then she sold half as many
clips in May. How many clips did Natalia sell altogether in April and May?
A: Natalia sold 48/2 = <<48/2=24>>24 clips in May.
Natalia sold 48+24 = <<48+24=72>>72 clips altogether in April and May.
#### 72
Q: Betty is saving money for a new wallet which costs $100. Betty has only half of
the money she needs. Her parents decided to give her $15 for that purpose, and her
grandparents twice as much as her parents. How much more money does Betty need to
buy the wallet?
A: In the beginning, Betty has only 100 / 2 = $<<100/2=50>>50.
Betty’s grandparents gave her 15 * 2 = $<<15*2=30>>30.
This means, Betty needs 100 - 50 - 30 - 15 = $<<100-50-30-15=5>>5 more.
#### 5
Q: Julie is reading a 120-page book. Yesterday, she was able to read 12 pages and
today, she read twice as many pages as yesterday. If she wants to read half of the
remaining pages tomorrow, how many pages should she read?
A: Maila read 12 x 2 = <<12*2=24>>24 pages today.
So she was able to read a total of 12 + 24 = <<12+24=36>>36 pages since yesterday.
There are 120 - 36 = <<120-36=84>>84 pages left to be read.
Since she wants to read half of the remaining pages tomorrow, then she should read
84/2 = <<84/2=42>>42 pages.
#### 42
Q: Mark has a garden with flowers. He planted plants of three different colors in it
. Ten of them are yellow, and there are 80% more of those in purple. There are only
25% as many green flowers as there are yellow and purple flowers. How many flowers
does Mark have in his garden?
A: There are 80/100 * 10 = <<80/100*10=8>>8 more purple flowers than yellow flowers.
So in Mark’s garden, there are 10 + 8 = <<10+8=18>>18 purple flowers.
Purple and yellow flowers sum up to 10 + 18 = <<10+18=28>>28 flowers.
That means in Mark’s garden there are 25/100 * 28 = <<25/100*28=7>>7 green flowers.
So in total Mark has 28 + 7 = <<28+7=35>>35 plants in his garden.
#### 35
Q: Alexis is applying for a new job and bought a new set of business clothes to wear
to the interview. She went to a department store with a budget of $200 and spent
$30 on a button-up shirt, $46 on suit pants, $38 on a suit coat, $11 on socks, and
$18 on a belt. She also purchased a pair of shoes, but lost the receipt for them.
She has $16 left from her budget. How much did Alexis pay for the shoes?
A: Let S be the amount Alexis paid for the shoes.
She spent S + 30 + 46 + 38 + 11 + 18 = S + <<+30+46+38+11+18=143>>143.
She used all but $16 of her budget, so S + 143 = 200 - 16 = 184.
Thus, Alexis paid S = 184 - 143 = $<<184-143=41>>41 for the shoes.
#### 41
Q: Tina makes $18.00 an hour. If she works more than 8 hours per shift, she is
eligible for overtime, which is paid by your hourly wage + 1/2 your hourly wage. If
she works 10 hours every day for 5 days, how much money does she make?
A: She works 8 hours a day for $18 per hour so she makes 8*18 = $
<<8*18=144.00>>144.00 per 8-hour shift
She works 10 hours a day and anything over 8 hours is eligible for overtime, so she
gets 10-8 = <<10-8=2>>2 hours of overtime
Overtime is calculated as time and a half so and she makes $18/hour so her overtime
pay is 18*.5 = $<<18*.5=9.00>>9.00
Her overtime pay is 18+9 = $<<18+9=27.00>>27.00
Her base pay is $144.00 per 8-hour shift and she works 5 days and makes 5 * $144 = $
<<144*5=720.00>>720.00
Her overtime pay is $27.00 per hour and she works 2 hours of overtime per day and
makes 27*2 = $<<27*2=54.00>>54.00 in overtime pay
28

2 hours of overtime pay for 5 days means she makes 54*5 = $270.00
In 5 days her base pay is $720.00 and she makes $270.00 in overtime pay so she makes
$720 + $270 = $<<720+270=990.00>>990.00
#### 990
29

J
STaR GSM8K Solutions
We observe some interesting patterns with the GSM8K solutions proposed by the STaR-trained
model. Typically, when the solution takes substantially fewer calculation steps than the ground truth,
it corresponds to an instance where the model accidentally answered the question correctly despite
mistakes in its reasoning. In some cases, however, the model produces simpler solutions than those in
the ground truth. One example is shown in Figure 8.
Q: A van is delivering  180 bottles of drinks to a neighborhood, and each bottle contains 
either cider or beer or a mixture of two. Out of the  180 bottles, 40 contain only cider, 80 
contain only beer, and the rest are a mixture of the two drinks. If the delivery man gives 
half the number of each bottle of drink to the first house, how many bottles does the first 
house get?
STaR (on GPT-J):
The delivery man gives half the number of 
each bottle of drink to the first house.
So he gives 180/2 = <<180/2=90>>90 bottles 
of drink to the first house.
#### 90
Human (Ground truth from GSM8K dataset):
The total number of bottles containing 
cider or beer is 40+80 = <<40+80=120>>120
If the number of bottles in the van was 
180, then 180-120 =<<180-120=60>>60 
contains a mixture of the two drinks.
At the first house, the delivery man 
dropped 1/2*40 = <<1/2*40=20>>20 bottles.
There were also 1/2*80 = <<1/2*80=40>>40 
bottles of beer that the delivery man gave 
to the first house.
Together, the first house received 40+20 = 
<<40+20=60>>60 bottles of cider and beer
The total number of bottles that had a 
mixture of the two drinks that were dropped 
at the first house is 1/2*60 = 
<<1/2*60=30>>30
The first house got 60+30 = <<60+30=90>>90 
bottles of all types of drinks.
#### 90
Figure 8: An example problem in the training set where STaR derives a signiﬁcantly simpler solution
than the ground truth.
30

