Toward Modeling Creative Processes for Algorithmic Painting
Aaron Hertzmann
Adobe Research
hertzman@dgp.toronto.edu
Abstract
This paper proposes a framework for computational
modeling of artistic painting algorithms, inspired by hu-
man creative practices. Based on examples from expert
artists and from the author’s own experience, the paper
argues that creative processes often involve two impor-
tant components: vague, high-level goals (e.g., “make a
good painting”), and exploratory processes for discov-
ering new ideas. This paper then sketches out possible
computational mechanisms for imitating those elements
of the painting process, including underspeciﬁed loss
functions and iterative painting procedures with explicit
task decompositions.
Introduction
In this paper, I describe aspects of human creativity and cre-
ative practice missing from current computational formula-
tions, and sketch possible ways these ideas could be incor-
porated into algorithms. Perhaps by basing algorithms on
human creative processes, we could develop new kinds of
tools for artists. Such algorithms could even shed light on
the mechanisms of human creativity.
This paper begins with several examples from expert
artists’ processes across different art forms, together with
my own experience. These examples illustrate two main
points. First, creative processes are often driven by vague,
high-level goals, such as “make a good painting.” Exist-
ing formulations treat an artwork as deriving from prede-
termined styles and goals. This paper argues the opposite:
often, an artwork’s apparent goals and style emerge from
the creative process. Second, exploratory processes play a
key role: different painting strategies will lead to different
outcomes, rather than being purely a function of goals. In-
deed, artists frequently discuss the importance of process in
creative practice, e.g., (Saltz 2020), and some psychology
research on creativity emphasizes process, e.g., (Gl˘aveanu
and Beghetto 2021; Wasserman 2021), but such ideas have
not, to my knowledge, made it into algorithms in meaningful
ways.
To make the discussion concrete, this paper focuses on
algorithms that take a photograph as input and produce a
painting as output. Many different types of algorithms for
creating digital paintings from input photographs have been
developed, including methods based on hand-authored pro-
cedures, optimization of brush strokes, learning from ex-
ample paintings, and learning generative networks. These
methods can produce appealing and artistic results. How-
ever, they do not handle vague, high-level goals: the style of
the output is highly determined by the combination of algo-
rithm, parameters, and inputs used. Indeed, a knowledgable
viewer can generally recognize the class of algorithms used,
and sometimes the speciﬁc algorithm. In contrast, an artist’s
work can evolve in distinctive and surprising directions.
This paper then proposes possible computational frame-
works based on the above observations. I propose to de-
scribe vague goals as underspeciﬁed problems, which may
be thought of as optimization problems where high-level
choices like style and the speciﬁc goals of the painting
are part of the search space.
In order to model creative
processes, the optimization objectives would incorporate
perceptual models that can approximate aspects of human
judgement of artworks, and the outcomes would depend on
both hand-designed exploration processes and numerical op-
timization. I describe possible ways to design exploratory
processes to place brush strokes, incorporating hierarchical
task decompositions based on human behaviors.
Existing Computational Painting Frameworks
To focus on a concrete problem domain, this paper discusses
stroke-based rendering algorithms that take a photograph as
input and produce an image composed of strokes, i.e., curves
with color, thickness, and often texture (Hertzmann 2003).
The earliest methods were mostly procedural: an algorithm
deﬁnes the steps to create each brush stroke (Haeberli 1990;
Litwinowicz 1997; Hertzmann 1998; Zeng et al.
2009;
Colton 2012).
These procedures embody very speciﬁc
strategies.
For example, Litwinowicz (1997) described a
method that places a set of small brush strokes on a jit-
tered grid, sampling colors and orientations from a source
image, to achieve an “impressionist” effect (Fig. 1(a)).
These methods frequently employ random-number genera-
tion to avoid regularity and create variety. Harold Cohen’s
AARON (1995) is a particularly sophisticated example of
hand-authored generative rules for painting, though it is out-
side the scope of this paper because it does not take a photo-
graph as an input.
Purely procedural methods provide a very limited
arXiv:2205.01605v2  [cs.AI]  23 May 2022

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: Existing approaches to stroke-based painterly im-
age stylization. (a) A procedural method, where strokes are
placed on a jittered grid, drawing color and orientations from
a source image (Litwinowicz 1997). The stroke arrangement
does not adapt to the source image. (b) An optimization
method, allowing strokes to adapt to image content, but with
a costly optimization process (Hertzmann 2001). (c) Opti-
mization with differentiable rendering (Zou et al. 2021).
paradigm for understanding painting, since they rely on
hard-coded, low-level strategies. Authoring rules for where
brush strokes go is very difﬁcult.
This leads to the appeal of optimization algorithms
(Fig. 1(a)), in which one speciﬁes an objective function for
the painting (Hertzmann 2001; Collomosse and Hall 2005;
Li et al. 2020; Zou et al. 2021). The objective models the
way that an artist may have a goal, e.g., “accurately represent
shapes,” without requiring the algorithm author to specify a
low-level strategy for where brush strokes go. These goals
are typically represented with a perceptual image-based loss
function, and a generic optimizer is used to optimize the
loss, such as gradient descent or evolutionary algorithms.
Recent deep painting algorithms (Huang, Heng, and Zhou
2019; Jia et al. 2019; Mellor et al. 2019; Nakano 2019;
Schaldenbrand and Oh 2021) combine procedural and opti-
mization methods. In these methods, an agent or policy (typ-
ically, a Recurrent Neural Network) is trained to optimize an
image-based loss. In all of these optimization-based meth-
ods, the choice of objective function, its parameters, and any
training data, deﬁne the artistic style.
Each of these different approaches to painting mirrors dif-
ferent aspects of human creative practices, summarized in
Table 1. Speciﬁcally, procedural algorithms mimic the use
of very speciﬁc rules and strategies, e.g., place a jittered grid
of strokes; draw big strokes before small strokes. Such rules
do not easily adapt to different styles, inputs, or goals. Op-
timization mimics the search for a high-quality result, e.g.,
the way a human might iterate over and over on an image
until satisﬁed. Current optimization algorithms correspond
to very speciﬁc styles; they do not model the way a human
might choose a different style for each subject, or even in-
vent new styles along the way. Moreover, they do not model
human search strategies, instead they use generic numeri-
cal techniques. Deep painting algorithms are optimization
algorithms that search for procedures, and thus model how
someone might learn to draw, but are also limited to a single
style and without explicitly modeling human search.
There are some nuances in the relationship of these ap-
proaches. All optimization methods are procedural in the
sense that they comprise algorithms and code that gener-
ate outputs.
But the philosophy for designing optimiza-
tion algorithms and the philosophy to designing low-level
stroke generation procedures are quite different. Likewise,
the exploratory processes proposed later in this paper can be
thought of as a special case of optimization procedures, but
with a different philosophy for how to design them.
A related approach, outside of this paper’s focus, uses
image processing algorithms without explicit brush strokes
(Rosin and Collomosse 2013). Early examples include dif-
fusion (Bangham, Gibson, and Harvey 2003) and physical
paint simulation (Curtis et al. 1997). Style transfer methods
copy features from example images (Hertzmann et al. 2001;
Ramanarayanan and Bala 2007; Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge
2016) to optimize image-based losses. More recently, CLIP-
based methods (Radford et al. 2021; Ramesh et al. 2022)
optimize images according to a textual prompt rather than an
input image (or an input image alone). These methods can
randomly select styles or be controlled with style prompts;
CLIPDraw (Frans, Soros, and Witkowski 2021) also applies
these losses to stroke-based rendering.
Open-ended search.
Stanley and Lehman criticize objec-
tives (2015), narrating many evocative examples of human
innovation and creativity that did not seem to be the product
of goals and objectives. They argue that explicit goals hin-
der exploration and discovery. Although their ideas have not
been used in algorithmic painting, their argument provoked
some of the ideas described in this paper.
They propose open-ended search as an alternative to
optimization.
They argue that open-ended search is dis-
tinct from optimization because the objective is continually
changing. However, operationalizing it as an algorithm dis-
tinct from optimization proves elusive. For example, their
Novelty Search algorithm (Lehman and Stanley 2011), when
applied to path planning, is essentially a variant on the clas-
sic goal-directed RRT algorithm (LaValle 1998). Curiosity-
driven learning (Pathak et al. 2017) provides another ef-
fective computational framework for seeking novelty—also
based on an optimization framework—but it is unclear how
to apply it to creative tasks.

Human activities
Computer algorithms
Steps, strategy, process
Algorithm, procedure
Goal-directed search
Numerical optimization
Skill learning
Policy optimization, Reinforcement learning
Intrinsically-motivated exploration, creative play
Open-ended search, curiosity-driven learning
Creative problem solving
Underspeciﬁed problem solving
Table 1: A possible correspondence between human activities and the computational procedures discussed in this paper. The
processes on the right provide models or metaphors to describe the activities on the left. Some of these activities/processes may
be complementary, nested, and/or overlapping, e.g., all computational algorithms are procedures. This is not meant to imply
equivalence between human behaviors and computational models; as the famous quote by George Box goes: “All models are
wrong, but some are useful.”
I argue that, in many examples of human innovation, it’s
not that the innovator lacks a goal or objective, but that the
real goal is expressed at a very high level, much more so
than in normal optimization problems. This includes many
of Stanley and Lehman’s (2015) examples. For example,
they describe how Elvis Presley’s signature sound was not
planned, but rather arose simply from playing around in the
studio. They use this example to illustrate how “having no
objective can lead to the greatest discoveries of all.” How-
ever, in this example, I argue that Elvis and his band did
have an objective: to record a good song. Even though they
made unplanned discoveries along the way, these resulted
from working toward a high-level goal with an open-ended
process, not from aimless exploration. “Open-ended” is a
possible description for why someone chooses to make an
artwork, but, once that choice is made, the process of mak-
ing an artwork does have an objective.
Examples from Expert Artists
There appears to be a widespread view that art arises from
an artist’s speciﬁc intent, such expressing an emotion. Com-
puter science discussions of artwork tend to treat the process
as fairly linear. For example, to motivate the use of optimiza-
tion, Durand (2002) writes “Because pictures always have a
purpose, producing a picture is essentially an optimization
process ... The purpose of the picture can be a message, col-
laborative work, education, aesthetic, emotions, etc.” That
is, the artist begins with a goal, and then takes steps toward
that goal. I argue that things aren’t so simple.
This section provides examples to illustrate two main
points. First, art is typically the product of working to-
ward the vague, high-level goal of making art. It does
not follow a linear path from goals to execution, nor does it
come from purely open-ended exploration. Second, the per-
ceived intent or emotion in a work may often be a product
of an exploratory process, rather than its driver. We can of-
ten infer intent in a work, but this intent may have come late
in the artistic process, if at all.
Pablo Picasso indicated a lack of intent when he said “I
don’t know in advance what I am going to put on canvas any
more than I decide beforehand what colors I am going to use
... Each time I undertake to paint a picture I have a sensation
of leaping into space. I never know whether I shall fall on
my feet. It is only later that I begin to estimate more exactly
the effect of my work.” (Read 1960)
Art often does begin with an initial idea or direction, as
described by the artist Francis Bacon: “one has an intention,
but what really happens comes about in working ... In work-
ing, you are following this cloud of sensation in yourself,
but don’t know what it really is.” (Sylvester 1993). That is,
his work starts with an initial intention, but it quickly gives
way to surprise and discovery. He operates on the high-level
goal of making paintings, but the speciﬁc intentions of those
paintings are not ﬁxed in advance.
Philosopher Nigel Warburton (2003) argues against
intent-based deﬁnitions of art, citing the above examples
from Picasso and Bacon to illustrate “the part played by the
unconscious, ..., and the relatively minor role that conscious
planning may play in the making of a work of art...” Art
critic Jerry Saltz writes “Art is not about understanding and
mastery, it’s about doing and experience. No one asks what
Mozart or Matisse means.”
Numerous illustrations appear in the recent documentary
Get Back (Jackson 2021). The documentary follows The
Beatles in January 1969 when they were under enormous
pressure to write, record, and perform an entirely new al-
bum in only a few weeks’ time. In one clip1, Paul McCart-
ney comes into the studio and improvises random sounds
on his guitar, until the kernel of a new melody and chorus
emerge. We then see The Beatles experimenting with dif-
ferent approaches to reﬁning the song. Ultimately, this song
became the hit single “Get Back.” The song arose from the
high-level goal of making a good song, and then going into
the studio and exploring until something emerged.
At one point in this process, The Beatles considered mak-
ing it a protest song about anti-immigration policies. In this
version, the chorus “Get back to where you once belonged,”
which came from the original jam session, had a totally dif-
ferent meaning than in the ﬁnal song. Had they released it
as a protest song, surely many listeners would have inferred
that the song originated from the political message, when in
fact the song came before the message.
This example illustrates two kinds of goals in a work.
There is the initial, high-level goal (“write a good song”),
and the apparent goal or intent of the ﬁnal song (“protest
immigration policies”). As noted by Bacon, there is often
also an initial idea or goal that begins the work, but this ini-
1https://youtu.be/rUvZA5AYhB4

tial goal may be discarded along the way.
Artists carefully consider and develop their artistic pro-
cesses; process is not merely incidental to outcomes. In the
context of the ﬁne art world, Saltz (2020) writes “serious
artists tend to develop a kind of creative mechanism—a con-
ceptual approach—that allows them to be led by new ideas
and surprise themselves without deviating from their artistic
principles.” Computer artist Charles Csuri wrote “When I
allow myself to play and search in the space of uncertainty,
the more creativity becomes a process of discovery. The
more childlike and curious I become about this world and
space full of objects, the better the outcome” (Greenberger
2022). Painter Gerhard Richter says “I want to end up with
a picture that I haven’t planned,” for which he uses a pro-
cess that involves chance. “There have been times when this
has worried me a great deal, and I’ve seen this reliance on
chance as a shortcoming on my part.” But, “it’s never blind
chance: it’s a chance that is always planned, but also al-
ways surprising. And I need it in order to carry on, in order
to eradicate my mistakes, to destroy what I’ve worked out
wrong, to introduce something different and disruptive. I’m
often astonished to ﬁnd how much better chance is than I
am.” (Richter, Elger, and Obrist 2009)
Improv theatre is an entire art-form of developing theatre
pieces from scratch before a live audience (Johnstone 1979).
One of my improv teachers compared it to driving on a dark
foggy road in the night, with your headlights illuminating
only the road immediately in front of you. All you can do is
to keep driving to the next visible spot and continuing from
there. You cannot plan, you can only take it one step at a
time. Yet, somehow even amateur improv actors can create
compelling performances out of nothing. Driving on a foggy
night in search of any interesting destination seems like an
excellent metaphor for the creative process in general.
The use of creativity exercises (Barry 2019; Brotchie
1993; Parikh and Zitnick 2020) further illustrates the impor-
tance of strategy and starting point. Exercises like Exquisite
Corpse and automatic drawing can lead to entirely different
outcomes each time.
The reader with experience in computer science research
may relate to these observations in another way. In many re-
search projects, the goal is to develop new ideas or technolo-
gies and publish a paper, while the speciﬁc problem being
tackled may change along the way during the project. The
ﬁnal paper might look quite different from the initial project
idea. It is often said that the most important skill in research
is ﬁguring out what problem to work on, and ﬁguring this out
is part of the exploration. The distinguished mathematician
Michael Atiyah, when asked “How do you select a problem
to study?”, responded “... I don’t think that’s the way I work
at all. ... I just move around in the mathematical waters ... I
have practically never started off with any idea of what I’m
going to be doing or where it’s going to go. ... I have never
started off with a particular goal, except the goal of under-
standing mathematics.” (Minio 2001)
Lessons from Digital Painting
The examples above provide little insight into the speciﬁc
processes involved. Toward this end, I describe personal
experience from my own process of learning to paint digi-
tally. I began digital painting as a hobby in 2019, with the
purchase of a new digital tablet and stylus. I had received
some training with traditional media many years prior. Now,
I painted purely for pleasure, and in the spirit of exploration.
But, along the way, I began to recognize speciﬁc impor-
tant features missing from existing approaches to automatic
painting algorithms, including the algorithms I had previ-
ously developed.
Why might the reader be interested in my own amateur
experiences? As I began painting regularly, I observed how
my experiences differed from our current computational
models for painting. My observations echo the expert ex-
amples described in the previous section. But, while many
artists have described their own practices at a high level, of-
ten these descriptions do not map easily to computational
frameworks. Many of my colleagues have tried to develop
algorithms by reading art books or talking to artists, only
to be frustrated by the seeming impossibility of translating
artists’ descriptions to algorithms. Here I attempt to relate
my experiences to computer science concepts.
For the reader with a computer science background, I
hope these stories provide a useful window into artistic ex-
perience, targeted to thinking about computational creativ-
ity. For the reader with some artistic experience, I hope you
may recognize elements of your own experience.
Outcomes are unpredictable
As I began to make my own artwork, I often started with the
goal of making my paintings as realistic as possible. Early
on, I tried to paint a watercolor of a speciﬁc building. After
awhile, I became frustrated and disappointed with the paint-
ing’s progress (Fig. 2); it lacked the detail and precision that
I’d wanted. So I switched strategies, adding ink outlines in-
stead, in a way that violated my original goals. The resulting
drawing is not in a style that I intended or anticipated, and
lacks the realism I’d wanted. Nonetheless, I was happy with
the painting and received compliments on it from friends.
A few days later, I decided to try out digital pastels while
looking at some ﬂowers on a table at a cafe in front of
me. Again, I found the intermediate drawing too messy and
again decided to add outlines. I again ended up with a draw-
ing that appeared totally different from my initial goals, but
still satisfactory. Moreover, I was surprised how recogniz-
able the style was; like I’ve seen hundreds or thousands of
other drawings in this style. It wouldn’t have felt out of place
in a hotel room or dentist’s ofﬁce. Perhaps familiarity with
this style affected my choices.
The key lesson that I kept relearning over and over is that
art comes from a process; I cannot choose the outcome of a
new artwork when I begin. I can’t even predict it. It’s about
following the process until I get “something good,” not about
trying to produce a speciﬁc result in a speciﬁc style.
Even as I have gained more skill since then, and more
ability to control the outcomes of my drawings, still I am
surprised again and again by the painting that comes out.
My paintings have become more realistic, but still abstracted
in surprising (to me) ways. I always start with some idea or

Figure 2: A digital painting of the Radcliffe Camera in Oxford, made in 2019 when I was still getting started with digital
drawing tools. I started out intending to make a realistic watercolor of the building. I grew frustrated with watercolor, and
decided to switch strategies midway through by adding ink strokes over the watercolor. The ﬁnal picture didn’t meet my initial
goals at all—it’s not very accurate, and it’s not in the style I intended—but I’m still happy with it.
goal for each painting. But I also have to be ready to shift or
abandon that initial idea as the painting emerges.
Of course, highly-trained artists working in more applied
domains, e.g., skilled architectural designers, may employ
more predictable styles. But, once the style becomes pre-
dictable the work becomes less “creative.”
The goal of a painting
I started out solely painting from life, without photography,
in order to better develop my skills. At some point, I be-
gan taking photos along with each painting, so that I would
have a reference in case I wanted to keeping working on the
painting later.
And I noticed two things. First, putting the photograph
next to the painting made the painting look “wrong.” Side-
by-side, I could see all the technical ﬂaws in the painting.
Second, I didn’t care. I still liked the painting more.
This seemed like a contradiction: I wanted to make im-
ages look as real as possible, yet, I didn’t want to duplicate
photographs, and I was quite happy when my paintings were
not photographic. Indeed, had I truly sought photorealism, I
could just take photographs.
These thoughts led me to the following realization, which
seems obvious, even vacuous, but is really quite important:
The goal of painting is to make a good picture.
What is a “good” picture? There are lots of ways that
a picture can be “good.” For me, “good” does not mean
photorealistic, or even accurate. It means that I like looking
at it, that other people like looking at it. Depicting reality
can be part of it. Or perhaps the picture conveys something
about my subjective experience. Or maybe it just looks nice.
I always start out with some kind of goal or idea for a
painting. But, my goals might change along the way, and,
ultimately, I seek only a painting that somehow achieves
something.
Along the way, I assess my progress—and
whether I am done and can stop—looking at the painting and
evaluating it, and where it may need improvement, using my
own judgement as to whether the painting is as good as I can
make it, and what parts I can try improving. In these assess-
ments I am simultaneously watching the painting evolve and
discovering what its “goals” might be.
I sometimes sense a jarring disconnect between the way
that others (quite understandably) interpret my paintings,
versus the actual history of how those paintings evolved.
One friend commented that my painting allowed her to see
through my eyes, yet I thought it was poor depiction of re-
ality. Another friend commented that I’d done a good job of
capturing the lighting in a scene. I didn’t think the painting
conveyed my actual experience well—it’s just that lighting I
painted looked good anyway.
Dependence on choices and content
In optimization algorithms, the objective and the constraints
are meant to determine the outcomes, and any dependence
on initialization or parameterization is viewed as a short-
coming. Yet, if the artist’s goals were all that mattered, then
artistic process would be no more than a matter of develop-
ing technical skill. In my own experience, initial choices of
strategy, media, and process are paramount to the outcome.
Existing algorithms, typically treat an image’s “style” and
its “content” as independent, e.g., (Hertzmann et al. 2001;
Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016). Yet, often the style that
emerges is very much a function of the scene I’m trying to
depict.
At each stage of a painting, I have many choices to make.
Which media should I use—solid brushes, oil simulation,
watercolor simulation, or something else? Should I try a
new brush I haven’t tried before? Should I draft an outline
ﬁrst, or just start drawing the ﬁrst object that catches my
eye? Should I start drawing the background or foreground
ﬁrst? And so on.
I found that every single one of these choices has a trans-
formative effect on the resulting painting.
Something so
seemingly inconsequential as starting with a dark back-
ground would lead to a painting with a completely different
character than had I begun with white background. In some
cases, these choices were made randomly or by accident;
I only started drawing with pencil because of a time when

Figure 3: Three examples of digital drawings in which the subject determined the style I ended up using. In the ﬁrst, I used
simulated oil paint to depict shading variations. In the second, I used solid-color strokes since the water could be clustered into
three distinct colors. In the third, I used semi-transparent, texture-less strokes to illustrate transparency and refraction. While
each of these subjects could have been drawn in any of these styles, the results would have been very different, and it would
have been much more difﬁcult to achieve a satisfying result.
I forgot to change the brush from the default, and quickly
discovered that I loved it. While it is hypothetically possi-
ble to steer a painting far from where it began, it is rarely
worthwhile, since it takes much more time and may produce
a painting which is more “stale.”
Often my initial choices about media and style will be a
function of the scene I’m trying to depict. For example, in
Figure 3(a), the real scene involved smooth tonal gradients,
and so I chose simulated oil paint, which allows me to use
blending with wet-in-wet painting. In contrast, in Figure
3(b), the scene involved stark late afternoon lighting, where
the tones off the water could be clustered into a few col-
ors, due to the Fresnel effect reﬂections on the water: one
for bright sunlight reﬂections, one for sky reﬂections, and
one for refraction; the bridge appeared silhouetted against
the sky, so a solid black was sufﬁcient. Hence, I chose an
opaque, solid color brush for the water and the bridge, with
no need for blending. In Figure 3(c), the object had com-
plex transparency and reﬂection, so I chose semi-transparent
strokes together with layering as provided in the drawing
app.
In principle, I could choose any strategy for any scene.
I have tried drawing complex architectural scenes without
an initial sketch; they often come off loose and sloppy. I
could have depicted the transparent bottle with a single layer
of oil paint strokes. This would have been far more difﬁ-
cult to paint, most likely doing a poorer job at capturing the
transparency. And sometimes these alternative approaches
produce results that are appealing in other ways; it is truly
hard to claim that one approach is intrinsically better than
another.
Figure 4 shows four paintings painted at roughly the same
time and location, with different techniques and very differ-
ent outcomes.
In short, the the style of an image arises both from the
subject of the scene and the techniques chosen along the
way, rather than the starting with a desired style and goals.
Intuitions and Conscious Choices
So how do all of these choices get made? Much of learn-
ing to paint is about developing intuitions. In my initial at-
tempts, sometimes I would consciously decide to try a new
approach or technique. Some of these experiments felt like
failures, others felt like unexpected successes. From this ex-
perience, I have developed intuitions about which choices
to make.
Considering a new subject, I may consciously
choose whether or not to begin sketching an outline, or sim-
ply to start drawing the nearest object. I might consider how
sloppy the subject might look without the sketched outline,
versus the extra time it would take to do so, and the dan-
ger of losing spontaneity. Or, if I’m in a rush, I’ll pick one
without too much deliberation.
At each stage, these is a question of what to work on next.
Reﬁne details in one object? Adjust the overall arrange-
ment? Fix the background? There are countless options at
each stage, and conscious deliberation would take forever.
One skill is to look at the current state of the painting and
select the next element to work on.
At times, I do stop and stare at the painting, sometimes
comparing it to the real subject. It can take time to get a
sense for what is working in the painting and what to im-
prove.
At some point, I tend to transition from exploration to re-
ﬁnement, improving little details and ﬁxing little ﬂaws. One
could say that reﬁnement happens once the style and content
of the painting have emerged.
One of the biggest problems is deciding when to stop. I
particularly struggled with this when I used to use physi-
cal oil paint and watercolor. At some point I’d be trying to
reﬁne a piece, and each new change would make it worse.
Digital tools and “undo” are more forgiving, but it can still
be hard to recognize the point at which there is no beneﬁt to
continuing to work on a painting. According to one quote,
attributed to many artists at different times: “A work of art
is never completed, only abandoned.”

Figure 4: Four paintings made at roughly the same time
in the same spot, illustrating how different choices of me-
dia and technique can produce very different outcomes. I
painted the ﬁrst three quickly en plein air, and the fourth
from a photograph later on. Each one surprised me when
completed.
Intuition or Impulse.
Instinctive choices often feel mag-
ical, and there is considerable mythology around the idea
of “artistic insight.” To what extent are these seemingly-
ineffable choices about intuitions, random impulse, or some
other “subconscious force”?
In the language of Kahneman and Tversky (2011), intu-
itions correspond to System 1 and conscious choice to Sys-
tem 2, which, in machine learning, can be associated with
supervised learning and conceptual reasoning, respectively
(Bengio 2019). In the extreme version of this view, intu-
itions are optimizations that allow one make decisions from
experience without further cognition.
One can also associate intuitions and cognition with Pri-
mary and Secondary Processes, which is hypothesized in
psychology to be crucial to creativity. As summarized by
Runco (2014), primary processes reﬂect “impulse, libido,
and uncensored thoughts and feelings,” while secondary
processes are “purposeful, rational, and guided by conven-
tional restraints.” Several studies describe creative work as a
“magic synthesis,” a collaboration of primary and secondary
processes.
Toward Algorithms
How can we devise algorithms that capture some of the
above observations? I now propose a framework with two
components: a formulation of vague, high-level goals, and
a structured exploratory search process for ﬁnding outputs
that satisfy the goals. Following the observations in the pre-
vious sections, both elements are essential components.
Underspeciﬁed Problems
In conventional painting optimizations, the style of a paint-
ing is largely ﬁxed in advanced by user-set loss functions
and their weights, the type of brush strokes (e.g., ﬁxed stroke
sizes or lengths, texture or paint simulation, etc.), limits on
the number of strokes, style training images, and so on.
I ﬁrst propose to model painting as an underspeciﬁed
problem. I deﬁne an underspeciﬁed problem as a problem
for which there are many valid solutions that correspond
to different high-level choices, such as different choices of
media, abstraction, style, emphasis, exaggeration/distortion,
apparent intent, and so on; any of these would be considered
a “valid” solution to the problem. An output that satisﬁes the
goals of the problem might be a style adapted to ﬁt the sub-
ject well; it could be a new style. An underspeciﬁed problem
could be phrased as, for example, “make me a nice painting
of a tree in any style,” modeled as optimizing a painting of
that tree for human perception and aesthetic appreciation.
For speciﬁc applications, there may be other goals orthogo-
nal to the underspeciﬁed problem, for example, more precise
depictions of shape, or style matching a speciﬁc user’s pref-
erences.
In research,
underspeciﬁed problems might include
“prove an interesting theorem” or “write a publishable pa-
per.”
Underspeciﬁed problems would likely include subjective
or hard-to-quantify goals, such as aesthetic beauty and vi-
sual novelty. This requires developing a perceptual model
that models the artist’s judgment of their own work-in-
progress (Moruzzi 2021), which provides the objective func-
tion for optimization, incorporation notions of aesthetics,
scene perception, and novelty. Developing such a model is
a “grand challenge” problem, but one for which incremen-
tal progress could still lead to useful algorithms. That is, it
does not need to truly capture human perception to lead to
useful painting algorithms, just as the Creative Adversarial
Network (Elgammal et al. 2017) produces interesting styles
with only a limited model. Curiosity-driven learning (Pathak
et al. 2017) presents possible insights for modeling visual
novelty.
Rather than building such an artiﬁcial “critic,” one could
use human judgements. This human-in-the-loop approach
has also been explored extensively in other contexts, for
collaborative artistic exploration (Draves 2005; Sims 1991;
Secretan et al. 2011; Klingemann and others 2021) and for
exploratory user interfaces, e.g., (Koyama, Sato, and Goto
2020; Marks et al. 1997). Including humans in the loop
limits an approach’s usefulness and its ability to model real
processes. But these human judgements could be used to
bootstrap or improve the critic.
Artistic Exploration and Search Algorithms
It is not sufﬁcient to have a perfect model of a human
viewer’s perception and judgement of a work, even if such
a thing were possible. Fortunately, it is not necessary that
the model be perfect either. The exploration and search al-
gorithm is also crucial, and it can make up for limitations of
the perceptual model. The search algorithm’s goal is to ﬁnd

good solutions to the underspeciﬁed problem; moreover, the
design of the exploratory search process can help determine
the space of styles as well.
There are several aspects that such an exploratory search
procedure would likely have. All of these are about making
choices at each step: choosing strategies, choosing media,
choosing where individual strokes go, and so on. Generic
optimization algorithms as used in existing methods are not
sufﬁcient.
Explicit task decomposition.
When starting a painting,
one may choose a strategy, e.g., start with an outline sketch,
start drawing the ﬁrst object, start drawing the background,
and so on. Within each strategy one has a set of sub-tasks,
e.g., drawing speciﬁc objects, reﬁning shape, or color, or
shading, or each together, evaluating the current painting
and deciding whether to stop, etc.
Algorithmically, this corresponds to hierarchical task de-
composition (Lu et al. 2021). A painting algorithm could
be represented as a loop of selecting a current strategy, and,
within this strategy, selecting the next task to perform, and
then performing it for some duration, and then selecting the
next task. While the parameters could be learned in some
cases, the design of these classes of strategies and tasks
would likely be done by the algorithm designer.
Transition from Exploration to Optimization.
The
search should also be guided by the underspeciﬁed loss func-
tion. At early stages of the painting, the loss may play a
small role, whereas later steps should largely be reﬁnement,
similar to conventional optimization. In other words, the al-
gorithm may behave much like a hand-designed procedural
algorithm early in the process, and more like an optimization
algorithm later on.
Randomness when making choices plays a key role in
producing unexpected outputs, and randomness is more im-
portant early in the process. Randomly selecting a strategy
early on could lead to an entirely different output, whereas
randomness in stroke placement toward the end of the pro-
cess may only provide a bit of stroke jittering.
Learned vs. procedural decision-making.
How does the
system make these choices? The simplest answer is to as-
sess the change to the painting according to the underspeci-
ﬁed loss, and randomly pick from the high-scoring options.
In this way, the loss can guide decision-making. A second
answer is to procedurally author rules for the early stages
of the process. A more intriguing and complex approach
would be to use existing deep learning frameworks to learn
some parameters of these decision-making steps, for exam-
ple, by having users rate outputs of the system and allowing
the system to learn over time. This would be distinct from
the existing systems by the use of the hierarchical task de-
composition and the underspeciﬁed loss. Moreover, it could
be intriguing to watch the system learn and see its styles
evolve.
Conclusion
The central thesis of this paper is that many creative prac-
tices can be described as satisfying vague, high-level goals
through exploratory search processes, and that we can at-
tempt to model these practices computationally. Building
such a computational formulation includes difﬁcult “grand
challenge” problems, such as the problem of sufﬁciently ap-
proximating how a viewer perceives a new painting.
The idea of goal-directed exploration overlaps with many
ideas of creativity and open-ended search (Stanley and
Lehman 2015), such as quality and novelty. But it is more
speciﬁc: it implies the existence of a high-level goal (pro-
duce an output image), and it suggests the existence of a
mathematical formulation (the language of optimization).
Open-endedness and curiosity-driven (Pathak et al. 2017)
are good descriptions of why we might choose to paint at
all, whereas the framework described in this paper describes
the act of making a speciﬁc painting.
It is hard to know which aspects of human cre-
ativity are “fundamental,” and which are secondary ef-
fects/epiphenomena (Jordanous 2012). Which attributes of
creative people, products, and behaviors are important? For
example, it has often been asserted that left-handed peo-
ple are more likely to be creative (van der Feen et al.
2020). However, forming a research program around left-
handed robots does not sound fruitful. This paper points
out attributes of creative practice that, to my knowledge,
have not been deeply explored in the creativity literature
and may be important candidates, in addition to, or instead
of, concepts like novelty and effectiveness (Boden 1998;
Jordanous 2012; Runco and Jaeger 2012).
Many deﬁnitions of creativity focus on the qualities of
the output, including both in the psychology literature, e.g.,
(Runco and Jaeger 2012), and in computation, e.g., (Bo-
den 1998; Colton and Wiggins 2012). Yet, in some cases,
very simple rules can produce results that are judged as
“creative” by experts, e.g., (Goldenberg, Mazursky, and
Solomon 1999).
Instead, some researchers have argued
for understanding the process itself in deﬁning creativity
(Gl˘aveanu and Beghetto 2021) and evaluating it (Colton
2008; Moruzzi 2021).
This paper focuses on building systems inspired by hu-
man creativity, and, toward this end, we likewise argue that
it is not sufﬁcient to consider losses and evaluations, but to
carefully formulate the processes by which artifacts are pro-
duced when designing these systems.
Author Contributions
AH ideated and wrote the paper alone.
Acknowledgements
Thanks to Josh Davis, Laura Herman, and Manuel Ladron
De Guevara.

References
[Bangham, Gibson, and Harvey 2003] Bangham, J. A.; Gib-
son, S. E.; and Harvey, R. W. 2003. The art of scale-space.
In BMVC, 1–10.
[Barry 2019] Barry, L. 2019. Making Comics. Drawn &
Quarterly.
[Bengio 2019] Bengio,
Y.
2019.
From system 1
deep learning to system 2 deep learning.
NeurIPS
keynote talk. https://www.youtube.com/watch?
v=FtUbMG3rlFs.
[Boden 1998] Boden, M. A. 1998. Creativity and artiﬁcial
intelligence. Artiﬁcial intelligence 103(1-2):347–356.
[Brotchie 1993] Brotchie, A. 1993. Surrealist Games. Red-
stone Press.
[Cohen 1995] Cohen, H.
1995.
The further exploits of
AARON, painter. Stanford Humanities Review 4(2).
[Collomosse and Hall 2005] Collomosse, J. P., and Hall,
P. M. 2005. Genetic paint: A search for salient paintings. In
Workshops on Applications of Evolutionary Computation.
[Colton and Wiggins 2012] Colton, S., and Wiggins, G. A.
2012.
Computational creativity: The ﬁnal frontier?
In
Proc. ECAI, volume 12, 21–26. Montpelier.
[Colton 2008] Colton, S. 2008. Creativity versus the percep-
tion of creativity in computational systems. In AAAI spring
symposium: creative intelligent systems.
[Colton 2012] Colton, S. 2012. The Painting Fool: Stories
from Building an Automated Painter. In Proc. Computers
and Creativity.
[Curtis et al. 1997] Curtis, C. J.; Anderson, S. E.; Seims,
J. E.; Fleischer, K. W.; and Salesin, D. H. 1997. Computer-
generated watercolor. In Proc. SIGGRAPH, 421–430.
[Draves 2005] Draves, S. 2005. The Electric Sheep Screen-
Saver: A Case Study in Aesthetic Evolution.
In Proc.
EvoWorkshops.
[Durand 2002] Durand, F. 2002. An invitation to discuss
computer depiction. In Proc. NPAR.
[Elgammal et al. 2017] Elgammal, A.; Liu, B.; Elhoseiny,
M.; and Mazzone, M. 2017. CAN: Creative Adversarial
Networks Generating “Art” by Learning About Styles and
Deviating from Style Norms. In Proc. Int. Conf. on Compu-
tational Creativity.
[Frans, Soros, and Witkowski 2021] Frans, K.; Soros, L.;
and Witkowski, O.
2021.
Clipdraw: Exploring text-to-
drawing synthesis through language-image encoders. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2106.14843.
[Gatys, Ecker, and Bethge 2016] Gatys, L. A.; Ecker, A. S.;
and Bethge, M. 2016. Image Style Transfer Using Con-
volutional Neural Networks. In Proc. Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition.
[Gl˘aveanu and Beghetto 2021] Gl˘aveanu,
V.
P.,
and
Beghetto, R. A.
2021.
Creative experience:
A non-
standard deﬁnition of creativity.
Creativity Research
Journal 33(2):75–80.
[Goldenberg, Mazursky, and Solomon 1999] Goldenberg, J.;
Mazursky, D.; and Solomon, S. 1999. Creative sparks. Sci-
ence 285(5433).
[Greenberger 2022] Greenberger,
A.
2022.
Charles
csuri,
‘father
of
computer
art,’
dies
at
99.
https://www.artnews.com/art-news/news/
charles-csuri-dead-1234621107/.
[Haeberli 1990] Haeberli, P. 1990. Paint By Numbers: Ab-
stract Image Representations. In Proc. SIGGRAPH.
[Hertzmann et al. 2001] Hertzmann,
A.;
Jacobs,
C. E.;
Oliver, N.; Curless, B.; and Salesin, D. H. 2001. Image
Analogies. In Proc. SIGGRAPH.
[Hertzmann 1998] Hertzmann, A. 1998. Painterly Render-
ing with Curved Brush Strokes of Multiple Sizes. In Proc.
SIGGRAPH.
[Hertzmann 2001] Hertzmann, A. 2001. Paint by relaxation.
In Proc. CGI.
[Hertzmann 2003] Hertzmann, A. 2003. A Survey of Stroke-
Based Rendering. IEEE Computer Graphics & Applications
23(4).
[Huang, Heng, and Zhou 2019] Huang, Z.; Heng, W.; and
Zhou, S. 2019. Learning to paint with model-based deep
reinforcement learning. In Proc. ICCV.
[Jackson 2021] Jackson, P. 2021. The Beatles: Get Back.
[motion picture].
[Jia et al. 2019] Jia, B.; Brandt, J.; Mech, R.; Kim, B.; and
Manocha, D. 2019. Lpaintb: Learning to paint from self-
supervision. In Proc. Paciﬁc Graphics.
[Johnstone 1979] Johnstone, K. 1979. Impro: Improvisation
and the Theatre. Faber and Faber.
[Jordanous 2012] Jordanous, A. 2012. A standardised proce-
dure for evaluating creative systems: Computational creativ-
ity evaluation based on what it is to be creative. Cognitive
Computation 4(3):246–279.
[Kahneman 2011] Kahneman, D. 2011. Thinking: Fast and
Slow. Farrar, Straus and Giroux.
[Klingemann and others 2021] Klingemann, M., et al. 2021.
Botto,
decentralized autonomous artist.
https://
botto.com/.
[Koyama, Sato, and Goto 2020] Koyama, Y.; Sato, I.; and
Goto, M. 2020.
Sequential gallery for interactive visual
design optimization. ACM Trans. Graph. 39(4).
[LaValle 1998] LaValle, S. M. 1998. Rapidly-exploring ran-
dom trees: A new tool for path planning. Technical Report
TR 98-11, Computer Science Dept., Iowa State University.
[Lehman and Stanley 2011] Lehman, J., and Stanley, K. O.
2011. Abandoning objectives: Evolution through the search
for novelty alone.
Evolutionary Computation 19(2):189–
223.
[Li et al. 2020] Li, T.-M.; Luk´aˇc, M.; Micha¨el, G.; and
Ragan-Kelley, J. 2020. Differentiable vector graphics raster-
ization for editing and learning. ACM Trans. Graph. (Proc.
SIGGRAPH Asia) 39(6):193:1–193:15.

[Litwinowicz 1997] Litwinowicz, P. 1997. Processing Im-
ages and Video for an Impressionist Effect. In Proc. SIG-
GRAPH.
[Lu et al. 2021] Lu, Y.; Shen, Y.; Zhou, S.; Courville, A.;
Tenenbaum, J. B.; and Gan, C. 2021. Learning task decom-
position with ordred memory policy network. In Proc. ICLR.
[Marks et al. 1997] Marks, J.; Andalman, B.; Beardsley,
P. A.; Freeman, W.; Gibson, S.; Hodgins, J.; Kang, T.; Mir-
tich, B.; Pﬁster, H.; Ruml, W.; Ryall, K.; Seims, J.; and
Shieber, S. 1997. Design galleries: A general approach to
setting parameters for computer graphics and animation. In
Proc. SIGGRAPH, 389–400.
[Mellor et al. 2019] Mellor, J. F. J.; Park, E.; Ganin, Y.;
Babuschkin, I.; Kulkarni, T.; Rosenbaum, D.; Ballard, A.;
Weber, T.; Vinyals, O.; and Eslami, S. M. A.
2019.
Unsupervised doodling and painting with improved spiral.
arXiv:1910.01007.
[Minio 2001] Minio, R. 2001. An Interview with Michael
Atiyah.
Mathematical Conversations.
https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-1-4613-0195-0_2.
[Moruzzi 2021] Moruzzi, C. 2021. Measuring creativity: an
account of natural and artiﬁcial creativity. Euro Jnl Phil Sci
1(11).
[Nakano 2019] Nakano, R. 2019. Neural painters: A learned
differentiable constraint for generating brushstroke paint-
ings. arXiv:1904.08410.
[Parikh and Zitnick 2020] Parikh, D., and Zitnick, C. L.
2020. Exploring crowd co-creation scenarios for sketches.
In Proc. ICCC.
[Pathak et al. 2017] Pathak, D.; Agrawal, P.; Efros, A. A.;
and Darrell, T. 2017. Curiosity-driven exploration by self-
supervised prediction. In ICML.
[Radford et al. 2021] Radford, A.; Kim, J. W.; Hallacy, C.;
Ramesh, A.; Goh, G.; Agarwal, S.; Sastry, G.; Askell, A.;
Mishkin, P.; Clark, J.; Krueger, G.; and Sutskever, I. 2021.
Learning transferable visual models from natural language
supervision. In Proc. ICML.
[Ramanarayanan and Bala 2007] Ramanarayanan, G., and
Bala, K.
2007.
Constrained texture synthesis via en-
ergy minimization. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics 13(1):167–178.
[Ramesh et al. 2022] Ramesh, A.; Dhariwal, P.; Nichol,
A.;
Chu,
C.;
and Chen,
M.
2022.
Hierarchi-
cal text-conditional image generation with clip latents.
arxiv.org/abs/2204.06125.
[Read 1960] Read, H. 1960. Art Now: an Introduction to the
Theory of Modern Painting and Sculpture. Faber & Faber.
[Richter, Elger, and Obrist 2009] Richter, G.; Elger, D.; and
Obrist, H. U. 2009. Gerhard Richter — Text: Writing, Inter-
views and Letters 1961–2007. London: Thames & Hudson.
[Rosin and Collomosse 2013] Rosin, P., and Collomosse, J.,
eds.
2013.
Image and Video-Based Artistic Stylization.
Springer.
[Runco and Jaeger 2012] Runco, M. A., and Jaeger, G. J.
2012. The standard deﬁnition of creativity. Creativity Re-
search Journal 24(1):92–96.
[Runco 2014] Runco, M. A. 2014. Creativity. Elsevier, 2nd
edition.
[Saltz 2020] Saltz, J. 2020. How To Be An Artist. Riverhead
Books.
[Schaldenbrand and Oh 2021] Schaldenbrand, P., and Oh, J.
2021.
Content masked loss:
Human-like brush stroke
planning in a reinforcement learning painting agent.
In
Proc. AAAI.
[Secretan et al. 2011] Secretan, J.; Beato, N.; D’Ambrosio,
D. B.; Rodriguez, A.; Campbell, A.; Folsom-Kovarik, J. T.;
and Stanley, K. O. 2011. Picbreeder: A case study in col-
laborative evolutionary exploration of design space. Evolu-
tionary computation 19(3):373–403.
[Sims 1991] Sims, K. 1991. Artiﬁcial evolution for computer
graphics. In Proc. SIGGRAPH.
[Stanley and Lehman 2015] Stanley, K., and Lehman, J.
2015. Why Greatness Cannot Be Planned: The Myth of the
Objective. Springer.
[Sylvester 1993] Sylvester, D. 1993. Interviews with Francis
Bacon. Thames & Hudson.
[van der Feen et al. 2020] van der Feen, F. E.; Zickert, N.;
Groothuis, T. G.; and Geuze, R. H. 2020. Does hand skill
asymmetry relate to creativity, developmental and health
issues and aggression as markers of ﬁtness?
Laterality
25(1):53–86. PMID: 31117903.
[Warburton 2003] Warburton, N. 2003. The Art Question.
Routledge.
[Wasserman 2021] Wasserman, E. A. 2021. As If By De-
sign: How Creative Behaviors Really Evolve. Cambridge
University Press.
[Zeng et al. 2009] Zeng, K.; Zhao, M.; Xiong, C.; and Zhu,
S.-C.
2009.
From image parsing to painterly rendering.
ACM Trans. Graph. 29(1):2:1–2:11.
[Zou et al. 2021] Zou, Z.; Shi, T.; Qiu, S.; Yuan, Y.; and
Shi, Z. 2021. Stylized neural painting. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 15689–15698.

