DERA: Enhancing Large Language Model Completions
with Dialog-Enabled Resolving Agents
Varun Nair∗
Elliot Schumacher∗
Geoffrey Tso
Anitha Kannan
{varun, elliot, geoff, anitha}@curai.com
Curai Health
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have emerged
as valuable tools for many natural language
understanding tasks.
In safety-critical appli-
cations such as healthcare, the utility of these
models is governed by their ability to gen-
erate outputs that are factually accurate and
complete.
In this work, we present dialog-
enabled resolving agents (DERA). DERA is
a paradigm made possible by the increased
conversational abilities of LLMs, namely GPT-
4. It provides a simple, interpretable forum
for models to communicate feedback and it-
eratively improve output. We frame our dia-
log as a discussion between two agent types –
a Researcher, who processes information and
identiﬁes crucial problem components, and a
Decider, who has the autonomy to integrate
the Researcher’s information and makes judg-
ments on the ﬁnal output.
We test DERA against three clinically-focused
tasks.
For medical conversation summariza-
tion and care plan generation, DERA shows
signiﬁcant improvement over the base GPT-
4 performance in both human expert prefer-
ence evaluations and quantitative metrics. In
a new ﬁnding, we also show that GPT-4’s per-
formance (70%) on an open-ended version of
the MedQA question-answering (QA) dataset
(Jin et al. (2021), USMLE) is well above the
passing level (60%), with DERA showing sim-
ilar performance. We release the open-ended
MEDQA dataset at https://github.com/
curai/curai-research/tree/main/DERA.
1
Introduction
Large language models (LLMs; Brown et al.
(2020); Lewis et al. (2020)) are deep-learning mod-
els that have been trained to predict natural lan-
guage text conditioned on an input. The use of
these models has led to advances in natural lan-
guage performance far beyond just language mod-
∗The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.
eling tasks. Within the realm of medicine, LLM-
powered methods have shown improvements in
medical tasks such as question answering (Singhal
et al., 2022; Liévin et al., 2022), information ex-
traction (Agrawal et al., 2022), and summarization
(Chintagunta et al., 2021).
LLM-powered methods use natural language in-
structions called prompts. These instruction sets
often include a task deﬁnition, rules the predictions
must follow, and optionally some examples of the
task input and output (Reynolds and McDonell,
2021; Brown et al., 2020). The ability of gener-
ative language models to create output based on
natural language instructions (or prompts) removes
the need for task-speciﬁc training (Min et al., 2022)
and allows non-experts to build upon this technol-
ogy.
While many tasks can be formulated as a sin-
gle prompt, later work has shown that breaking
down single tasks into sub-tasks (called chain-
ing) has beneﬁts in terms of task performance and
interpretability (Wu et al., 2022). Examples of
chaining strategies include chain-of-thought (Wei
et al., 2022) and other task-speciﬁc approaches (e.g,
Agrawal et al. (2022)). Chain-of-thought strategies
prompt the model to think through a problem as
an expert might approach it, leading to improve-
ments in some tasks (Liévin et al., 2022; Wang
et al., 2022; Tafjord et al., 2022).
All of these approaches attempt to coerce the
correct generation from the base language model.
However, one fundamental limitation of this strat-
egy is that these prompting architectures are re-
stricted to a ﬁxed set of prompts designed for spe-
ciﬁc tasks in mind, such as writing explanations
or resolving anomalies within the output. Further-
more, they struggle with generating factually accu-
rate text and often can include hallucinations and
omissions (Maynez et al., 2020; Dziri et al., 2022;
Berezin and Batura, 2022). This poses a signiﬁcant
hurdle when applying them to real-world scenarios,
arXiv:2303.17071v1  [cs.CL]  30 Mar 2023

Figure 1: Overview of DERA. The method consists of two agents–a Researcher and a Decider. The Decider
generates an initial output for the task (step 1). Then, the Decider and Researcher work through the problem via
conversation (step 2), with the Researcher tasked to help identify crucial problem components. The Decider has
the autonomy to integrate the Researcher ’s inputs and makes judgments on the ﬁnal output (step 3). Neither agent
has knowledge of the ideal ﬁnal output.
especially in the clinical domain.
We advocate for a different approach that has
two essential elements. First, it consists of an itera-
tive approach to reﬁning the initial output. This al-
lows the generation to be reﬁned holistically as op-
posed to conditional chaining. Second, it includes
an advisor that can guide by suggesting areas to
focus on in each iteration, adding interpretability
to the process. With the advent of GPT-4 (OpenAI,
2023) capable of robust, realistic conversation, we
can use dialog as the medium for interaction.
We propose DERA: Dialog-Enabled Resolving
Agents. DERA is a framework to explore how we
can improve performance on natural language tasks
using agents tasked with resolving (or improving)
the output through dialog. We propose that scop-
ing each agent in the dialog to a speciﬁc role will
better enable them to focus on discrete portions
of the task, and ensure their partner agent stays
aligned with the overall goal. One agent role, the
Researcher, works to identify relevant information
for the problem and suggest areas of focus to the
other agent. Another agent role, the Decider, has
the autonomy to react to that information and make
ﬁnal decisions about the output.
Our paper makes the following contributions:
• We introduce DERA (§ 2) - a framework for
agent-agent dialog to improve performance
on natural language tasks.
• We evaluate DERA on three different types of
clinical tasks. Each of these requires different
types of textual inputs and types of knowledge
to solve.
– The medical conversation summarization
task (§ 3) focuses on generating a sum-
mary of a doctor-patient chat that is fac-
tually accurate without omissions or hal-
lucinations.
– The careplan generation task (§4) is
knowledge-intensive with long outputs
that are useful in clinical decision sup-
port. There is not a single best answer to
the task and the goal is to maximize the
amount of factually accurate and relevant
information generated.
– Medical question answering (Jin et al.,
2021) is a knowledge reasoning task with
a single answer but posed as an open-
ended task without access to multiple
choices. We study in this harder setting
using two question-answering datasets
(§5).
• In both human-annotated evaluations, we ﬁnd
that DERA outperforms base GPT-4 perfor-
mance in the careplan generation and medical

conversation summarization tasks on a vari-
ety of metrics. In quantitative evaluations, we
ﬁnd that DERA successfully corrects medical
conversation summaries with large amounts
of errors. Conversely, we ﬁnd small to no im-
provement between GPT-4 performance and
DERA on question-answering.
• We theorize this approach is well suited for
longer-form generation tasks, in which there
are a lot of ﬁne-grained details.
• We will work to release a new open-ended
medical question-answering task based on
MedQA, which consists of United States Med-
ical Licensing Exam (USMLE) practice ques-
tions1. This opens up new research in the mod-
eling and evaluation of question-answering
systems.
2
DERA: Overview
DERA is a general chat framework that leverages
dialog-capable agents to iteratively work through a
task (Figure 1). We focus on agent setups that work
to probe knowledge sources, whether internal (from
within GPT-4) or external (from text, documents,
etc.). In approaches like chain-of-thought, these
roles are generally performed jointly. In contrast,
we propose that pairing an information-focused
agent with a decision-maker agent will lead to a
higher-quality output. Furthermore, this approach
allows for DERA to alternate between processing
knowledge and acting upon them, as opposed to
doing them concurrently.
First, we propose the use of a Researcher agent.
The goal of a researcher agent is to review pieces
of information – which can be internal to GPT-4 or
external – and make suggestions on what is likely
to be crucial in solving the problem. As we do
not have a deﬁnitive source of what is and is not
relevant, we rely on GPT-4’s ability to identify rel-
evancy in light of the current task. We do not treat
this agent as the deﬁnitive source of truth. Rather,
we task it with being helpful and constructive dur-
ing the dialog.
Second, we propose the use of a Decider agent.
In addition to starting the conversation, this agent is
tasked with responding to the information provided
by the Researcher agent, and deciding whether to
integrate that information into the task output. This
1https://github.com/curai/curai-research/tree/
main/DERA
allows GPT-4 to make discrete decisions in reaction
to the information highlighted by the Researcher.
At no point, however, does the Decider defer to the
Researcher. This agent is ultimately responsible
for the ﬁnal decision, and while it is tasked with re-
viewing all information highlighted by Researcher,
it does not have to use any of that information.
The speciﬁcs of each agent can vary for different
tasks. For Question Answering, the Researcher is
tasked with pulling information from the question,
using the internal knowledge of GPT-4 alone. For
summarization, the Researcher has access to exter-
nal texts which contain the full patient encounter.
Conversely, the edits to the text generation task are
made incrementally by the Decider in the summa-
rization task, while they are made more discretely
in the question-answering task. In some settings,
agents take a hybrid role, where they each have
access to different information and jointly make
decisions. Overall, the goal remains the same –
that this approach allows for information to be pro-
cessed in a manner that is both role-deﬁned and
iterative, producing better quality output.
We apply DERA to three natural language gen-
eration tasks. The ﬁrst, medical conversation sum-
marization (§3), probes the ability of DERA to
create a summary of a doctor-patient chat. This re-
quires the ability to identify and rewrite medically-
relevant information in a concise format.
The
second, care plan generation (§4), tests whether
DERA can generate doctor-facing suggestions for
potential actions to address patient concerns. This
requires similar abilities, with the added challenge
of knowing the appropriate next steps for a variety
of medical conditions. Finally, medical question-
answering (§5) tests the ability of DERA to gener-
ate a wide variety of medical knowledge in a short
format.
3
Medical Conversation Summarization
Overview
The task of medical conversation sum-
marization is to encapsulate a patient-doctor con-
versation (Enarvi et al., 2020; Joshi et al., 2020;
Zhang et al., 2021; Chintagunta et al., 2021). We
focus on summarizing patient-doctor chats into six
independent sections: Demographics and Social
Determinants of Health, Medical Intent, Pertinent
Positives, Pertinent Negatives, Pertinent Unknowns,
and Medical History. This structured format re-
quires the model to summarize the chat while plac-
ing each piece of information in the appropriate

section. As these summaries are typically used
by doctors for downstream tasks such as clinical
decision-making, it is important that the generated
summaries are both factually accurate (no halluci-
nations) and complete (no omissions).
DERA Setup
We formulate the DERA setup for
medical conversation summarization as follows.
Both Decider and Researcher have access to the
full medical conversation between the patient and
the physician. Both agents are prompted to con-
verse with one another. The Decider agent gener-
ates an initial summary of the medical conversa-
tion (Prompt 1) and shares it with the Researcher
agent. The Researcher agent’s role (Prompt 4) is
to “read” the summary and point out any discrep-
ancies to Decider. Decider, using Prompt 3, either
accepts or rejects those discrepancies, by agreeing
with the suggestion or disagreeing and respond-
ing with some reasoning. Instead of regenerating
the summary at each step of the conversation, De-
cider writes the accepted suggestions to a shared
scratchpad, which acts like a memory that it uses
at the end of the conversation to generate the ﬁnal
summary. The conversation terminates once Re-
searcher is satisﬁed with the suggestions made to
the scratchpad or a maximum conversation length
is reached (set to 15 turns total). As the ﬁnal step,
the Decider generates (Prompt 5) the ﬁnal sum-
mary using the contents of the scratchpad and the
original summary.
GPT-4 prompts are run with the settings men-
tioned in Table 5.
Dataset
We randomly sampled 500 medical en-
counters from a chat-based telehealth platform.
Each encounter contains the patient’s age, sex, and
chat conversation with a licensed medical provider.
Encounters in this dataset cover a wide variety
of common presentations in telehealth, includ-
ing urinary tract infections, back/abdominal pains,
toothaches, and others. All data is de-identiﬁed and
scrubbed for protected health information prior to
experimentation. Conversations contain 27 dialog
turns on average (min of 9 turns, max of 82 turns)
and average 646 unigram tokens per encounter
(min 42 tokens, max 2031 tokens).
Human Expert Evaluation
To evaluate the ef-
fectiveness of DERA to generate better summaries,
we conducted human evaluation studies with four
licensed physicians on a random subset of 50 out of
the 500 encounters described above. We sampled
a smaller, random subset due to the high labeling
cost induced by using expert physicians.
The licensed physicians were provided with the
encounter and the two summaries. These included
the initial GPT-4 generated summary, and the ﬁnal
generated summary produced using DERA. Each
physician was asked to answer three main questions
in the light of the summary’s clinical utility for
themselves or another physician:
1. Which summary do you prefer to use for the
given patient and encounter? (Options: Initial,
Final).
2. What percentage of the overall clinical infor-
mation in the dialog is captured by the sum-
mary? (Options: All, Most, Some, None)
3. What percentage of the suggestions added to
the DERA scratchpad do you agree with? (Op-
tions: All, Most, Some, None)
Figure 2 shows the results of our human expert
evaluation. Physicians notably choose the summary
produced after DERA over the initially generated
summary 90% - 10%. Their preference for the
DERA-produced summary is further corroborated
by the fraction of medical information captured
in the ﬁnal DERA summary vs. initial, as ﬁnal
summaries were rated as capturing "All" medical
information from the patient-physician dialog in
86% of encounters vs. the initial summaries cap-
turing "All" medical information in just 56% of en-
counters. In general, we also ﬁnd broad agreement
for the suggestions in each encounter’s scratch-
pad: they agreed with "All" corrections suggested
for a given encounter’s summary 63% of the time,
"Most" 14% of the time, "Some" 5% of the time,
and "None" 18% of the time. On average, each
scratchpad contains 2-3 suggestions.
In addition to these questions, we also asked
the physician-experts the following: If this sum-
mary were acted upon by another clinical provider,
does this summary contain information that could
potentially be harmful to the patient given their
presentation? (Options: Yes, No). The amount of
summaries containing "harmful" information drops
from 2% in the initial summary to 0% in the ﬁnal
DERA summary. We caution against drawing gen-
eralizations from these harmfulness numbers. Our
evaluations are both limited in number and drawn
from a patient population speciﬁc to the telehealth
platform; thus cannot predict the generalizability
of these ﬁndings in other settings.

Figure 2: Results from physician-expert evaluations on the medical conversation summarization task. (Left) Physi-
cians choose the ﬁnal summary produced by DERA over the initial GPT-4 generated summary 90% to 10%. (Cen-
ter) Final DERA summaries capture far more clinical information than initial GPT-4 generated summaries, with
physicians rating "All" relevant clinical information from the patient-physician chat captured in 86% of DERA
summaries vs. 56% of initial GPT-4 summaries. (Right) For summary correction suggestions in the scratchpad,
physicians rate agreement with "All" suggestions in 63% of encounters, Most" in 14%, "Some" in 5%, and "None"
in 18%.
Corruption
Level
Summ.
Version
Pertinent
Positives
Pertinent
Negatives
Pertinent
Unknowns
Medical
History
Average
low ( 3
10)
Initial
89.38
83.05
87.42
80.88
85.18
DERA
95.65
96.77
97.10
97.35
96.71
medium ( 5
10)
Initial
83.12
81.6
71.14
73.82
77.42
DERA
94.29
95.31
96.17
98.12
95.97
high ( 7
10)
Initial
68.35
70.07
68.79
57.27
66.12
DERA
92.96
90.86
94.81
95.16
93.45
Table 1: Medical conversation summarization task: Quantitative evaluation (GPT-F1 scores) of the initial summary
with errors and the DERA corrected version. We show that by introducing synthetic corruption (hallucinations,
omissions, etc.) into medical summaries, DERA can resolve these corruptions at low, medium, and high levels of
corruption. GPT-F1 scores for the DERA-produced summary are consistently higher than the initial summaries.
Quantitative Evaluation
We also perform a
more large-scale study without the need for hu-
man annotation. We generate GPT-4 summaries
for all the 500 encounters and assume them to be
ground truth. Then, we synthetically induce “cor-
ruptions” into the generated summary and use that
as the initial input. These mistakes artiﬁcially lower
the summary’s quality and produce signiﬁcant hal-
lucinations and omissions. The goal is to quanti-
tatively evaluate DERA’s ability to write medical
summaries by measuring the degree to which the
Researcher and Decider agents can identify and ﬁx
"corruptions" introduced to the medical summary.
Prompt 2 contains speciﬁc instructions for gen-
erating the corruptions. We can control the level
of corruption desired by passing one of three lev-
els of corruption as a variable to our corruption
prompt: low ( 3
10), medium ( 5
10), or high ( 7
10). The
higher the corruption, the more symptoms could
be rearranged. Similarly, hallucinated symptoms
could be introduced, among other corruptions. For
a qualitative example of this process of generating
an initial summary, corrupting it, resolving with
DERA, and generating a ﬁnal summary see Fig. 6.
We measure the degree to which corruptions are
present by using a GPT-based metric that tracks the
medical concept coverage of the medical summary,
GPT-F1. To compute GPT-F1, we compute the
harmonic mean of two sub-metrics: GPT-Recall
and GPT-Precision. We describe each sub-metric
below.
GPT-Recall: To compute, we ﬁrst extract medi-
cal entities from both the predicted text and ground-

truth text2 of the same summary section (using
Prompt 6) and use a veriﬁcation prompt (Prompt
7) to infer if the entities extracted from the ground-
truth section are also present in the predicted text,
This produces tpgt and fn values, which is used to
calculate GPT-Recall =
tpgt
tpgt+fn .
GPT-Precision: To compute, we also ﬁrst ex-
tract medical entities from the corresponding pre-
dicted and ground-truth summary sections and
verify concepts extracted from the predicted sec-
tion are also present in the ground-truth text, ei-
ther as exact matches or re-phrasings. This pro-
duces tppred and fp, which is used to calculate
GPT-Precision =
tppred
tppred+fp .
We present the results of our quantitative evalua-
tion using the GPT-F1 metric in Table 1. Speciﬁ-
cally, we compare GPT-F1 on the initial summary
with errors to the DERA corrected summary. Note
ﬁrst how the higher levels of corruption manifest
in the initial summary GPT-F1. As the corrup-
tion level of the initial summary increases, the
initial GPT-F1 score drops. We ﬁnd that DERA
can produce signiﬁcantly improved summaries in
low, medium, and high levels of corruption, as ev-
idenced by increases in GPT-F1. This suggests
that the interaction between the Researcher and
Decider agents is identifying hallucinations and
omissions and resolving them through dialog, even
when many such corruptions are present.
4
Care Plan Generation
We also analyze the performance of DERA on the
task of generating a care management plan. This
care plan contains suggestions that are meant to be
physician-facing - that is, we generate suggestions
that a physician would be required to approve of
and then communicate to a patient. Our care plans
contain ﬁve sections: Medications, Referrals, Tests,
Lifestyle, and Supportive Care.
DERA setup
As in the medical conversation
summarization task, the goal of DERA is to im-
prove the quality of the generated care plan by sug-
gesting more appropriate home care for the patient,
recommending additional lab tests, or otherwise
better aligning the generated summary. The DERA
setup is the same as the medical conversation sum-
marization task with care plan-speciﬁc prompts.
2Note that the terms "predicted" and "ground-truth" are
used loosely here, and can also refer to synthetic text that is
used as ground-truth (as in the case of the corruption experi-
ments).
The Decider starts with an initial care plan. The
Researcher is prompted (Prompt 10) to converse
with the Decider (Prompt 9). Finally, the Decider
generates the ﬁnal care plan (Prompt 11). by com-
bining the initial care plan with the content of the
‘scratchpad’ accumulated during the conversation.
We run DERA on the care plan generation task
using GPT-4 with the settings mentioned in Table
5.
Dataset
We used the same set of 50 medical en-
counters we used for the human expert evaluation
of the medical conversation summarization task.
Human Experts Evaluation
We evaluated the
effectiveness of DERA to generate care plans
through human evaluation with four licensed physi-
cians. We explicitly instructed the physician evalu-
ators that the generated plan is deﬁned as "meant to
be provider-facing, meaning that not all suggested
interventions will necessarily be recommended to
the patient or followed by the patient." The physi-
cians who evaluated the quality of these care plans
were not those who provided care to the patients in
the original encounter.
The experts were provided with the encounter
and the two careplans – the baseline GPT-4 gener-
ated summary and the DERA generated summary
starting from GPT-4 generated summary. They
were asked to answer the following three questions:
1. Which careplan do you prefer to use for the
given patient and encounter? (Options: Initial,
Final).
2. What fraction of the necessary care plan man-
agement steps are captured? (Options: All,
Most, Some, None)
3. What percentage of the suggestions added to
the DERA scratchpad do you agree with? (Op-
tions: All, Most, Some, None)
Figure 4 shows the results. In a head-to-head
comparison, the physicians prefer the ﬁnal care
plan produced by DERA 84% of the time. Fur-
thermore, when asked to give what fraction of care
plan corrections were useful, they fully agreed with
72% of suggestions. They agree with none of the
suggestions only 14% of the time. Finally, they
rated 92% of care plans as complete, compared to
64% of initial care plans. In summation, the appli-
cation of DERA to care plan generation increased
the resulting quality substantially.

Doctor-Patient Chat
Patient: UTI
Doctor: Hi NAME, thank you for starting a visit. My name
is NAME, and I am your clinical associate for this live
chat. . . . I am sorry to hear that.
Patient: Okay thank you ...
Doctor: When was your last sexual encounter?
Patient: Two days ago. I’m not having any since then because
of the pain with my bladder infection.
Doctor: Was the encounter unprotected?
Patient: No
Doctor: How many sexual partners have you had in the past
6 months?
Patient: Several. I did however get tested for HIV and STIs
a couple weeks ago and all came back negative. I get
tested regularly since I am sexually active.
Doctor: Do you have a new sexual partner?
Patient: No new ones
Doctor: Do you douche or use feminine hygiene products?
Patient: No Sometimes I use baby wipes
. . .
Doctor: For what medical conditions you are taking BuSpar,
LaMICtal, Zoloft?
Patient: Buspar for Bipolar, Lamictal for anxiety, Zoloft for
depression
Initial Care Plan
Tests: (1) Perform a urinalysis and urine culture to conﬁrm the presence of a urinary tract infection and to identify . . .
Medications: (1) Prescribe an appropriate antibiotic, such as nitrofurantoin, fosfomycin, or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, to
treat the infection. Note that the choice of antibiotic may be adjusted based on the results of the urine culture. (2) Continue the
use of over-the-counter pain relief medication, such as AZO, until the antibiotic treatment relieves symptoms.
Lifestyle: (1) Encourage the patient to increase ﬂuid intake, particularly water, to help ﬂush out bacteria from the urinary tract.
(2) Suggest urinating frequently and fully emptying the bladder to help clear the infection. (3) Recommend proper hygiene
practices, such as ...(4) Advise the use of a urinary health supplement . . .
Referrals: (1) If symptoms worsen or do not improve after a few days of antibiotic treatment, refer the patient to . . .
Supportive Care: (1) Provide education on recognizing the signs and symptoms of recurrent urinary tract infections and the
importance of seeking timely medical care. (2) Offer reassurance and support regarding the patient’s mental health and . . .
DERA Dialog
Researcher: Starting with the Tests section, everything looks good with the urinalysis and urine culture being recommended.
However, in the Medications section, it would be helpful to include that antibiotic choice should consider the patient’s
previous antibiotic exposure and allergies. It will also be useful to mention any potential drug interactions with BuSpar,
LaMICtal, and Zoloft. In the Lifestyle section, there is no mention of the patient’s sexual practices, which could
contribute to recurrent UTIs. Considering the patient’s history of multiple sexual partners, you might want to add a
recommendation to educate the patient on safe sexual practices and the importance of using a barrier method during sex
to reduce the risk of UTIs. ...
Decider: Thank you for your suggestions. I agree with the recommendation to consider the patient’s previous antibiotic
exposure and allergies, as well as potential drug interactions with their other medications. I also see the importance
of addressing safe sexual practices and barrier method usage to reduce the risk of UTIs. In terms of supportive care,
providing guidance on managing UTIs and potential medication interactions concerning their mental health medications
is crucial.
Researcher: Thank you for considering my suggestions. Please make sure to discuss these points with the patient, and . . .
Scratchpad
1) Add a note in the Medications section to consider the patient’s previous antibiotic exposure, allergies, and potential drug
interactions with BuSpar, LaMICtal, and Zoloft.
2) In the Lifestyle section, include a recommendation to educate the patient on safe sexual practices and the importance of
using barrier methods during sex to reduce the risk of UTIs.
3) In the Supportive Care section, offer guidance on managing UTIs and potential medication interactions related to their
mental health medications.
Final Care Plan
Tests: (1) Perform a urinalysis and urine culture to conﬁrm the presence of a urinary tract infection and to identify . . .
Medications: (1) Prescribe an appropriate antibiotic, such as nitrofurantoin, fosfomycin, or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole, to
treat the infection. Note that the choice of antibiotic may be adjusted based on the results of the urine culture. Consider the
patient’s previous antibiotic exposure, allergies, and potential drug interactions with BuSpar, LaMICtal, and Zoloft.
(2) Continue the use of over-the-counter pain relief medication, such as AZO, until the antibiotic treatment relieves symptoms.
Lifestyle: (1) Encourage the patient to increase ﬂuid intake, particularly water, to help ﬂush out bacteria from the urinary tract.
(2) Suggest urinating frequently and fully emptying the bladder to help clear the infection. (3) Recommend proper hygiene
practices, such as ...(4) Advise the use of a urinary health supplement ... (5) Educate the patient on safe sexual practices
and the importance of using barrier methods during sex to reduce the risk of UTIs.
Referrals: (1) If symptoms worsen or do not improve after a few days of antibiotic treatment, refer the patient to . . .
Supportive Care: (1) Provide education on recognizing the signs and symptoms of recurrent urinary tract infections and the
importance of seeking timely medical care. (2) Offer reassurance and support regarding the patient’s mental health ...(3)
Offer guidance on managing UTIs and potential medication interactions related to their mental health medications.
Figure 3: Qualitative example of care plan generation with DERA abridged for space. Starting with the initial chat,
the Decider generates an initial care plan. The Researcher and Decider agents in DERA then converse with one
another, visible in DERA dialog. The Decider adds accepted suggestions to a scratchpad, which collects the ﬁnal
changes to make to the care plan. The ﬁnal care plan is generated by the Decider using this scratchpad. Note the
points in bold that were added to the ﬁnal care plan.

Figure 4: Care plan generation task: Results from physician-expert evaluations. (Left) Physicians choose the
ﬁnal care plan produced by DERA over the initial GPT-4 generated care plan 84% to 16%. (Center) Final DERA
care plans capture far more of the necessary care management steps than initial GPT-4 generated care plans, with
physicians rating "All" relevant steps inferred from the patient-physician chat generated in 92% of DERA care
plans vs. 64% of initial GPT-4 care plans. (Right) For care plan correction suggestions in the scratchpad, physicians
rate agreement with "All" suggestions in 72% of encounters, Most" in 14%, "Some" in 0%, and "None" in 14%.
In addition to these questions, we also asked
the physician-experts the following: If this care
plan were acted upon by the patient, does this care
plan contain information that could potentially be
harmful to the patient given their presentation?
(Options: Yes, No). The amount of careplan con-
taining "harmful" information drops from 2% in the
initial careplan to 0% in the ﬁnal DERA summary.
We caution against drawing generalizations from
these harmfulness numbers. Our evaluations are
both limited in number and drawn from a patient
population speciﬁc to the telehealth platform; thus
cannot predict the generalizability of these ﬁndings
in other settings.
Qualitative Examples
We show a qualitative ex-
ample of the care plan generation task with DERA
in Figure 3. The initial care plan generated by the
Decider was originally rated as containing "Most"
necessary care management steps by our physician-
expert evaluator, suggesting there were still some
improvements possible. In the DERA dialog, the
Researcher highlights potential drug interactions
with the patient’s current medications and the rec-
ommendation to educate the patient on safe sexual
practices. These corrections were accepted by the
Decider, as evidenced by the notes written to the
scratchpad. In turn, the corrections were mani-
fested in the ﬁnal care plan, with the three changes
bolded. This ﬁnal care plan was rated as contain-
ing "All" necessary care management steps by our
physician-expert evaluator.
5
Open-Ended Medical Question
Answering
Overview
We
also
investigate
the
use
of
DERA for short-form medical reasoning. A com-
monly used dataset for this task is MedQA (Jin
et al., 2021) which consists of USMLE-style
practice multiple-choice questions. Previous ap-
proaches for this dataset have included using
RoBERTa (Liu et al., 2019), reﬁning chain-of-
thought using GPT-3 (Liévin et al., 2022), and
ﬁne-tuning PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022; Sing-
hal et al., 2022). While most previously-reported
results achieved passing results, recent GPT-4 is
shown to work at a near-expert level (Nori et al.,
2023).
In all previous work, the primary focus was on
the multiple-choice question format which has lim-
ited applicability in the real world. If these models
are to support doctors in decision-making, these
models need to operate without any options pro-
vided. To mimic this setting, we extend the MedQA
dataset to be open-ended to evaluate the model in a
more realistic and harder setting. In an open-ended
form, the model must generate the correct answer
free-form and not choose from a given bank of
options. We also evaluate a set of continuing edu-
cation questions from the New England Journal of
Medicine (NEJM), again in an open-ended setting.
A method that can perform at a high level on
this task requires several attributes. First, it must
be able to recall a large set of knowledge across
multiple domains of medicine. Second, it must be

able to reason over long questions, which will likely
include both irrelevant and crucial facts needed to
arrive at the solution.
Datasets
We evaluate our approach using two
Medical Question answering datasets - MedQA US
dataset (Jin et al., 2021) and New England Journal
of Medicine Test Questions (NEJM). Both datasets
consist of questions taken from practice or real
medical exams (United States Medical Licensing
for MedQA, and continuing education questions
for NEJM). For both datasets, the questions are
originally written in multiple-choice format (e.g,
Which of the following is the best diagnosis?). Our
goal is to test DERA ’s performance on open-ended
question answering, where the task will be to gen-
erate the answer free-form.
Therefore, we use GPT-4 to alter the questions
to be open-ended. In most cases, this requires a
simple rephrasing of the ﬁnal sentence. For ex-
ample, the previous question could be re-written
as What is the best diagnosis?. In these cases,
we restrict GPT-4 to rewrite only the ﬁnal sen-
tence of the question, so as to guard against hallu-
cinations. When a more complex rewrite is re-
quired, we prompt GPT-4 to rewrite the entire
question and ﬁnd that it only changes the relevant
sentence. Some questions could already be an-
swered open-ended and required no rewriting. Al-
though we performed quality checks, as the entire
process is automated, there may be some errors.
The prompts for rewriting the ﬁnal sentence 13
and the full question 12 are included in the Ap-
pendix. We also release the full MedQA open-
ended dataset at https://github.com/curai/
curai-research/tree/main/DERA. We cannot
release the NEJM dataset due to licensing issues.
For MedQA, we sample a portion of the train-
ing set (1178 questions) as a development set and
maintain the integrity of the test set (1273 ques-
tions) as formulated by the authors. For NEJM, we
split the datasets by area, reserving 7 areas 3 as a
development set (consisting of 639 questions), with
the remainder serving as a test set (1112 questions).
We do not exclude questions containing images.
DERA setup
To generate an initial answer for
DERA to discuss, we use a single-shot prompt
which outputs a short answer (Prompt 14). We use
a single-shot prompt to ensure a consistent output,
3Reproductive, Gastrointestinal, Neurologic/Psychogenic,
Special Sensory, Endocrine, Musculoskeletal, and Maternity
Care
which we were unable to achieve with a zero-shot
prompt. Earlier work (Singhal et al., 2022) has
shown that using a self-consistency strategy pro-
vides stronger results. We adopt this approach by
running 5 completions of our single-shot prompt
and selecting the answer with the most votes as
the single-shot answer, and consider this as our
baseline4.
Instead of initializing our Decider with a single
answer, we provide it with the distribution of votes.
This approach provides DERA with the distribu-
tion better captures the underlying uncertainty of
the model5. A prompt (Prompt 15) is tasked with
writing a reasoning behind the votes, which is used
as the initial Decider message.
Starting with the initial Decider message, both
Decider (Prompt 17) and Researcher have access
only to the question and their own conversation as
they iteratively discuss the problem and attempt to
achieve the right answer. The Researcher can stop
the dialogue when they have exhausted all relevant
information, otherwise, it is set to end after n = 3
turns. At each turn, the Decider must state what
their current answer is and explain their reasoning,
and they may choose to either conﬁrm or change
their answer.
We instruct both prompts to act as medical doc-
tors who work at an expert level. To arrive at a ﬁnal
answer, a prompt is given the same information as
the original one-shot prompt, with the exception
that it is also given the full chat history to use as
additional context. We generate n = 5 answers
and use the most frequently generated answer as
our ﬁnal answer (see Prompt 18).
We run DERA on open-ended question answer-
ing with the parameters noted in Table 6. For the
multiple-choice setting, we use a very similar con-
ﬁguration. The primary prompt changes are limited
to the fact that Decider is given a set of options and
asked to generate the letter (A-D) instead of a short
phrase.
Evaluation Metrics
There are two main chal-
lenges when evaluating open-ended responses to
the questions. Some questions may have multi-
ple correct answers, given that it is no longer con-
strained to a discrete set of options. More impor-
tantly, we need a mechanism to map the free-form
4We do not account for variations in the text, each lexical
form is counted separately.
5This also handles cases where closely related lexical
forms receive separate votes, as the Decider output will con-
clude that the options are similar.

Question [ID 4]:A 20-year-old woman presents with menorrhagia for the past several years. She says that her menses
“have always been heavy”, and she has experienced easy bruising for as long as she can remember. Family history is
signiﬁcant for her mother, who had similar problems with bruising easily. The patient’s vital signs include: heart rate
98/min, respiratory rate 14/min, temperature 36.1°C (96.9°F), and blood pressure 110/87 mm Hg. Physical examination
is unremarkable. Laboratory tests show the following: platelet count 200,000/mm3, PT 12 seconds, and PTT 43 seconds.
What is the most likely cause of this patient’s symptoms?
Gold Answer: Von Willebrand Disease, 1-shot : Inherited Bleeding Disorder
Decider: The patient’s symptoms of menorrhagia and easy bruising, along with a family history of similar problems,
suggest an inherited bleeding disorder. However, Von Willebrand disease, which is the most common inherited
bleeding disorder, cannot be ruled out. Both options are possible causes of the patient’s symptoms, but the
presence of a family history of bleeding problems slightly increases the likelihood of an inherited bleeding
disorder.
Researcher: Remember to consider the fact that the patient has experienced menorrhagia for several years and easy
bruising for as long as she can remember, along with a family history of similar problems
Decider: After considering the patient’s symptoms of menorrhagia and easy bruising, along with a family history of
similar problems, I believe that Von Willebrand disease is the most likely cause of this patient’s symptoms.
Researcher: Take note of the laboratory test results, speciﬁcally the platelet count, PT, and PTT values, as these can
help determine the cause of the patient’s symptoms.
Decider: After taking into consideration the laboratory test results, speciﬁcally the platelet count, PT, and PTT values,
I still believe that Von Willebrand disease is the most likely cause of this patient’s symptoms. The patient’s
symptoms of menorrhagia and easy bruising, along with a family history of similar problems, further support this
diagnosis.
Researcher: Pay attention to the patient’s vital signs, speciﬁcally the heart rate, respiratory rate, temperature, and blood
pressure, as these can also provide clues to the cause of her symptoms.
Decider: After taking into consideration the patient’s vital signs, speciﬁcally the heart rate, respiratory rate, temperature,
and blood pressure, I still believe that Von Willebrand disease is the most likely cause of this patient’s symptoms.
The patient’s symptoms of menorrhagia and easy bruising, along with a family history of similar problems and
laboratory test results further support this diagnosis.
DERA answer: Von Willebrand Disease
Figure 5: We provide several examples of chats between the Decider and Researcher agents taken from our
MedQA development set (more shown in Appendix Section A.1). We include the Gold Answer, 1-shot answer, and
DERA answer. This example is a case where the single-shot answer is not speciﬁc enough, and the DERA dialog
changes the answer to the correct one.
answer to the correct answer text. While we only
evaluate against the ground truth correct option,
we include metrics that attempt to account for the
degree of similarity between the answer text and
the correct option.
To identify generated answers that are related
to the gold standard answer, we prompt GPT-
4 to score the relatedness of the generated and
gold answers (Prompt 19).
To evaluate a bi-
nary prompt that judges if the generated and
gold answers are the exactly same, and provides
an explanation (Prompt 20).
Finally, we eval-
uate the generated and gold answer similarity
using BERTScore (Zhang et al. (2019), model
scibert-basevocab-uncased). While this met-
ric has limitations (Hanna and Bojar, 2021; Sun
et al., 2022), it is commonly reported for genera-
tion tasks. We do not use a knowledge base such as
UMLS(Aronson, 2001) based similarity (McInnes
et al., 2009) as many answers do not map directly
to a single entity in a medical knowledge base.
Model
Accuracy
PaLM (Singhal et al., 2022)
0.676
Nori et al. (2023)
0.814
GPT-4 0-shot
0.834
DERA
0.840
Table 2: Results on the multiple-choice (4-option) ver-
sion of MedQA. The GPT-4 0-shot and DERA results
were generated on a version of GPT-4 available in
February 2023.
Results
We compare DERA to single-shot per-
formance using GPT-4, where n = 5 answers are
detected, and the one with the most votes is selected
as the answer6. Due to the costs involved with run-
ning the experiments, we only report single runs.
We include quantitative results for open-ended
question answering in Table 3, and for multiple-
choice question answering in Table 2.
6If there are ties, the ﬁrst completion of the highest-ranking
answers is selected.

MEDQA
NEJM
BERTScore
GPT-4 Exact
GPT-4 Sim
BERTScore
GPT-4 Exact
GPT-4 Sim
GPT-4 1-shot
0.746
0.698
0.65
0.676
0.703
0.711
DERA
0.744
0.703
0.67
0.670
0.711
0.724
Table 3: Results on the Open-Ended versions of MedQA and NEJM. We evaluate using a variety of metrics,
including GPT-4 prompts that identify exact matches and similar matches (using a 0-1 scale). In addition, we
calculate the average BERTScore F1 to measure the similarity between the gold and generated answers using a
separate model.
For the multiple-choice results, we ﬁnd that GPT-
4 outperforms the best previously published ap-
proaches out of the box on MedQA. This is in
line with that reported by Nori et al. (2023), which
uses a very similar approach. We suspect that our
results are slightly higher due to our use of a self-
consistency approach. We do not see signiﬁcant
improvements when applying DERA compared to
the multiple choice setting.
In the open-ended setting, we see strong per-
formance in both one-shot GPT-4 and DERAfor
both NEJM and MedQA. Liévin et al. (2022) notes
that the passing grade for the MedQA test set is
60%. For both GPT-4 one-shot and DERA, we
see that GPT-4 Exact Matching is above 60% and
BERTScore and Similarity measures are above 0.6.
This marks an impressive ability to generate open-
ended answers to questions. Yet there still exists a
gap between open-ended and multiple-choice per-
formance, suggesting opportunities for future work.
Similarly
to
the
multiple
choice
setting,
DERA shows small to no improvement over GPT-
4, depending on the metric. The largest gain for
DERA is in the similarity metric for both MedQA
and NEJM, which suggests that DERA can lead to
answers that are closer to the ground truth. Exam-
ples of the open-ended question-answering chats
are included in Figure 5 and Appendix Section A.1.
Qualitative Analysis
We include the ﬁrst 10 ex-
amples from the MedQA development set (which
we randomly drew from their training set) in Ap-
pendix Table 47. In our analysis of these develop-
ment examples, we see several patterns.
First, sometimes the agent successfully changes
an incorrect answer to the correct answer. For
example, in Question 4 shown in Figure 5, the
original answer is Inherited bleeding disorder, and
DERA changes it to the more speciﬁc Von Wille-
brand Disease. In other cases, DERA leaves the
7These results were generated with an earlier version of
GPT-4 available in February 2023.
answer as the same in the original 1-shot genera-
tion (e.g, Questions 5, 9, 55, 94, 98). We also note
that this does not occur in a majority of cases, as
only 542 of the 1273 MedQA training examples
have the exact same answer between DERA and
one-shot.
In other cases,
such as in Question 54,
DERA adds additional details to the 1-shot an-
swer (1-shot Smoking cessation counseling and
support to the Decider’s ﬁnal answer Assessing for
occupational lung disease and providing smoking
cessation. There are some clear challenges with
open-ended question answering that show in both
the DERA and 1-shot generations. Speciﬁcally, of-
ten both give a more general answer than is given
in the gold standard answer. For example, in Ques-
tion 74, the gold standard answer text is a speciﬁc
medication (Deantrolene), while both DERA and 1-
shot produce more general answers (e.g, Immediate
hospitalization and supportive care).
Overall, without the inclusion of a speciﬁc set of
options, it is difﬁcult for GPT-4 to generate an an-
swer at a correct level of speciﬁcity (e.g, a speciﬁc
treatment instead of a general approach) and a cor-
rect length (e.g, answering in short answer format
instead of long sentences). In some settings, these
attributes may be useful, but it results in a challeng-
ing approach to evaluate. We predict the need for
additional work in methods that automatically eval-
uate the output of large language model-powered
tools, given the inherent complexity present.
6
Discussion and Conclusion
We introduce a framework for agent-agent dialog
called DERA. This approach allows agents to focus
on speciﬁc roles, reducing the need for an LLM
to achieve the correct answer in one or two gener-
ations. In this setup, we use two types of agents
– Researcher, tasked with reviewing and selecting
information, and Decider, tasked with integrating
that information into the ﬁnal output. Both dis-

cuss the problem in a chat format, with the goal of
improving the output of GPT-4.
As found in Sections 3 and 4, we ﬁnd DERA im-
proves the quality of the generated text in a variety
of metrics. Importantly, this reduces the number of
hallucinations and omissions in the resulting text.
This ﬁnding is important given the ability of large
language models (LLM), in particular GPT-4, to
generate text that is ﬂuent but potentially prone to
errors. The ability of DERA to identify and correct
these hallucinations and omissions is critical when
applying these models to real-world scenarios. A
key feature is that the same LLM can be harnessed
in both roles.
We did not ﬁnd similar improvements in the
question-answering task. As discussed in Section
5, DERA produced little to no improvement over
a GPT-4 baseline. We suggest this is due to sev-
eral factors, including the requirement to generate
a single, granular answer. DERA often adds infor-
mation to an answer, which is not helpful for short
text generation. These ﬁndings, paired with those
discussed above, suggest this method is well-suited
for longer-generation tasks.
Furthermore, the chat-based format of DERA al-
lows for increased interpretability when auditing
the results. Even though LLMs such as GPT-4 may
achieve high performance in zero-shot or one-shot
settings, generating long-form explanations does
not provide a granular forum for understanding
resulting generations. Conversely, the chat-based
format allows for discussions that are granular and
could be veriﬁed by an end user for mistakes.
In the future, this setup could be altered to in-
clude human input in the discussion. Alternatively,
different problems may dictate the inclusion of dif-
ferent types of agents. Overall, we believe that
while LLM-based tools are critical in increasing the
quality of natural language performance, additional
research is required to ensure they are consistent
and auditable.
Finally, we reiterate the need for further research
in automated metrics for evaluating LLM output.
Human-led qualitative evaluations can provide im-
portant insights, but it remains a challenge to mea-
sure improvement given the limited tools currently
available.
7
Limitations
The experiments in this paper were performed us-
ing OpenAI’s API, mostly using GPT-4 models.
While these models generate text at a higher qual-
ity than other previous models, there are still lim-
itations. First, we do not have access to what the
model has and has not been trained on. Speciﬁcally,
we do not know if openly-released datasets, such
as MedQA, were included in the training data. Sec-
ond, we report results using the latest version of
GPT-4 available at the time. As OpenAI does not
persist models, this may make reproducing results
challenging.
While we include a variety of quantitative evalu-
ations, the task of automatically evaluating gener-
ated text needs further research. Previous methods,
such as BERTScore, use models that are less pow-
erful than GPT-4, yet using GPT-4 to evaluate itself
is also potentially problematic. Similarly, evalu-
ations of the ability of DERA to reduce the pres-
ence of harmful text in generations are promising,
but given the limited amount of harmful content
present to begin with, we caution against a broad
interpretation of that result.
Another limitation is inherent to clinical text
datasets. As stated in Section 3, our evaluations
and style of summary and care plan are limited
to a patient population speciﬁc to a single tele-
health service, and may not be applicable to uses
for the general population. Several of our evalu-
ation datasets cannot be openly released for data
privacy or licensing reasons, yet this is likely true
for a broad amount of medically-focused research.
Additionally, some other datasets that are openly
available cannot be directly used with API-based
models (Agrawal et al., 2022), further limiting op-
tions. We also acknowledge that while MedQA
does probe medical knowledge, it likely does so
in a different form than is likely to be applied in a
regular clinical setting.
References
Monica Agrawal, Stefan Hegselmann, Hunter Lang,
Yoon Kim, and David Sontag. 2022. Large language
models are zero-shot clinical information extractors.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.12689.
Alan R Aronson. 2001. Effective mapping of biomed-
ical text to the umls metathesaurus: the metamap
program. In Proceedings of the AMIA Symposium,
page 17. American Medical Informatics Associa-
tion.
Sergey Berezin and Tatiana Batura. 2022. Named en-
tity inclusion in abstractive text summarization. In
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Scholarly
Document Processing, pages 158–162, Gyeongju,

Republic of Korea. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie
Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda
Askell, et al. 2020. Language models are few-shot
learners. Advances in neural information processing
systems, 33:1877–1901.
Bharath Chintagunta, Namit Katariya, Xavier Amatri-
ain, and Anitha Kannan. 2021.
Medically aware
GPT-3 as a data generator for medical dialogue sum-
marization.
In Proceedings of the Second Work-
shop on Natural Language Processing for Medical
Conversations, pages 66–76, Online. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin,
Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam Roberts,
Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton,
Sebastian Gehrmann, et al. 2022.
Palm: Scaling
language modeling with pathways. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02311.
Nouha Dziri, Sivan Milton, Mo Yu, Osmar Zaiane, and
Siva Reddy. 2022. On the origin of hallucinations
in conversational models: Is it the datasets or the
models? In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of
the North American Chapter of the Association for
Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 5271–5285, Seattle, United States.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Seppo Enarvi, Marilisa Amoia, Miguel Del-Agua Teba,
Brian Delaney, Frank Diehl, Stefan Hahn, Kristina
Harris, Liam McGrath, Yue Pan, Joel Pinto, Luca
Rubini, Miguel Ruiz, Gagandeep Singh, Fabian
Stemmer, Weiyi Sun, Paul Vozila, Thomas Lin,
and Ranjani Ramamurthy. 2020. Generating medi-
cal reports from patient-doctor conversations using
sequence-to-sequence models.
In Proceedings of
the First Workshop on Natural Language Process-
ing for Medical Conversations, pages 22–30, Online.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
Michael Hanna and Ondˇrej Bojar. 2021. A ﬁne-grained
analysis of BERTScore. In Proceedings of the Sixth
Conference on Machine Translation, pages 507–517,
Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Di Jin, Eileen Pan, Nassim Oufattole, Wei-Hung Weng,
Hanyi Fang, and Peter Szolovits. 2021. What dis-
ease does this patient have? a large-scale open do-
main question answering dataset from medical ex-
ams. Applied Sciences, 11(14):6421.
Anirudh Joshi, Namit Katariya, Xavier Amatriain, and
Anitha Kannan. 2020. Dr. summarize: Global sum-
marization of medical dialogue by exploiting local
structures. In Findings of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics: EMNLP 2020, pages 3755–
3763, Online. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Mike
Lewis,
Yinhan
Liu,
Naman
Goyal,
Mar-
jan Ghazvininejad, Abdelrahman Mohamed, Omer
Levy, Veselin Stoyanov, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
2020. BART: Denoising sequence-to-sequence pre-
training for natural language generation, translation,
and comprehension. In Proceedings of the 58th An-
nual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics, pages 7871–7880, Online. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
Valentin Liévin, Christoffer Egeberg Hother, and Ole
Winther. 2022.
Can large language models rea-
son about medical questions?
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2207.08143.
Yinhan Liu, Myle Ott, Naman Goyal, Jingfei Du, Man-
dar Joshi, Danqi Chen, Omer Levy, Mike Lewis,
Luke Zettlemoyer, and Veselin Stoyanov. 2019.
Roberta: A robustly optimized bert pretraining ap-
proach. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.11692.
Joshua Maynez, Shashi Narayan, Bernd Bohnet, and
Ryan McDonald. 2020. On faithfulness and factu-
ality in abstractive summarization. In Proceedings
of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pages 1906–1919, On-
line. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Bridget T McInnes, Ted Pedersen, and Serguei VS
Pakhomov.
2009.
Umls-interface
and
umls-
similarity: open source software for measuring paths
and semantic similarity.
In AMIA annual sympo-
sium proceedings, volume 2009, page 431. Ameri-
can Medical Informatics Association.
Sewon Min, Xinxi Lyu, Ari Holtzman, Mikel Artetxe,
Mike Lewis, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, and Luke Zettle-
moyer. 2022. Rethinking the role of demonstrations:
What makes in-context learning work?
Harsha Nori, Nicholas King, Scott Mayer McKinney,
Dean Carignan, and Eric Horvitz. 2023. Capabilities
of GPT-4 on Medical Challenge Problems.
OpenAI. 2023. Gpt-4 technical report.
Laria Reynolds and Kyle McDonell. 2021. Prompt pro-
gramming for large language models: Beyond the
few-shot paradigm.
In Extended Abstracts of the
2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Com-
puting Systems, pages 1–7.
Karan Singhal, Shekoofeh Azizi, Tao Tu, S Sara Mah-
davi, Jason Wei, Hyung Won Chung, Nathan Scales,
Ajay Tanwani, Heather Cole-Lewis, Stephen Pfohl,
et al. 2022. Large language models encode clinical
knowledge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.13138.
Tianxiang Sun, Junliang He, Xipeng Qiu, and Xuanjing
Huang. 2022. BERTScore is unfair: On social bias
in language model-based metrics for text generation.
In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empiri-
cal Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages
3726–3739, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. As-
sociation for Computational Linguistics.

Oyvind Tafjord, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, and Peter
Clark. 2022.
Entailer: Answering questions with
faithful and truthful chains of reasoning. In Proceed-
ings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 2078–2093,
Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
Boshi Wang, Xiang Deng, and Huan Sun. 2022.
It-
eratively prompt pre-trained language models for
chain of thought. In Proceedings of the 2022 Con-
ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 2714–2730, Abu Dhabi, United
Arab Emirates. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics.
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten
Bosma, Ed Chi, Quoc Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022.
Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.11903.
Tongshuang Wu, Michael Terry, and Carrie Jun Cai.
2022.
Ai chains:
Transparent and controllable
human-ai interaction by chaining large language
model prompts.
In Proceedings of the 2022 CHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems, CHI ’22, New York, NY, USA. Association
for Computing Machinery.
Longxiang Zhang, Renato Negrinho, Arindam Ghosh,
Vasudevan Jagannathan, Hamid Reza Hassanzadeh,
Thomas Schaaf, and Matthew R Gormley. 2021.
Leveraging pretrained models for automatic sum-
marization of doctor-patient conversations.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2109.12174.
Tianyi Zhang, Varsha Kishore, Felix Wu, Kilian Q
Weinberger, and Yoav Artzi. 2019. Bertscore: Eval-
uating text generation with bert.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1904.09675.

A
Appendix
A.1
Question Answering Examples
We provide several examples of chats between
the Decider and Researcher agents taken from
our MedQA development set.
We include the
Gold Answer, 1-shot answer, and DERA answer.
In the following example, the 1-shot prompt
arrives at the correct answer, but DERA expands
the answer to include additional information.
Question [ID 574]:Your colleague has been read-
ing the literature on beta-carotene supplementation
and the risk of heart disease.
She thinks they
may share a clinically relevant association and
would like to submit an editorial to a top journal.
Upon ﬁnal literature review, she discovers a
newly published study that refutes any association
between beta-carotene and heart disease. Your
colleague is upset; you suggest that she, instead,
mathematically pool the results from all of the
studies on this topic and publish the ﬁndings. What
type of study design are you recommending to
your colleague?
Gold Answer: Meta-analysis,
1-shot : Meta-analysis
Decider: Both options are viable for pooling
results from multiple studies, but a meta-
analysis (80%) is more likely to be recom-
mended as it allows for a quantitative syn-
thesis of the data. A systematic review and
meta-analysis (20%) would also be a good
option, as it includes a comprehensive liter-
ature search and qualitative analysis, but it
may be more time-consuming. Ultimately,
the choice depends on the speciﬁc goals and
resources of the researcher.
Researcher: Consider the fact that your col-
league wants to ’mathematically pool the
results from all of the studies on this topic’
and think about which study design would
best allow for this type of analysis.
Decider: Based on the fact that my colleague
wants to mathematically pool the results
from all of the studies, I believe a meta-
analysis would be the best study design as
it allows for a quantitative synthesis of the
data.
Researcher: Think about the goal of your col-
league, which is to ’submit an editorial to a
top journal’ and consider which study design
would be most appropriate for achieving this
goal.
Decider: After considering the goal of my col-
league to submit an editorial to a top jour-
nal, I believe a systematic review and meta-
analysis would be the most appropriate study
design. This design includes both a com-
prehensive literature search and qualitative
analysis, in addition to the quantitative syn-
thesis of data, which would make it more
suitable for publication in a top journal.
Researcher: Consider the fact that your col-
league discovered a ’newly published study
that refutes any association between beta-
carotene and heart disease’ and think about
how this might impact the choice of study
design.
Decider: After considering the fact that my col-
league discovered a newly published study
that refutes any association between beta-
carotene and heart disease, I still believe a
systematic review and meta-analysis would
be the most appropriate study design. This
design would allow for the inclusion of this
new study in the comprehensive literature
search and analysis, providing a more com-
plete picture of the current state of research
on this topic. DERA answer: Systematic
review and meta-analysis
In the following example, the 1-shot prompt
arrives
at
the
wrong
answer,
and
while
DERA changes the answer, it is also not correct.
Question [ID 2599]:A 15-year-old girl is brought
to her pediatrician’s ofﬁce complaining of frequent
diarrhea, fatigue, and inability to gain weight.
Her vital signs are within normal limits, and
her BMI is 17. She describes her stools as pale,
malodorous, and bulky. She often has abdominal
bloating.
Her symptoms are most prominent
after breakfast when she typically consumes
cereal. After several weeks of careful evaluation
and symptomatic treatment,
the pediatrician
recommends an esophagogastroduodenoscopy. A
diagnostic biopsy shows blunting of intestinal
villi and ﬂat mucosa with multiple intraepithelial
lymphocytes. What is the patient likely deﬁcient
in? Gold Answer: IgA, 1-shot : Gluten tolerance
Decider:
Based on the patient’s symptoms

and the results of the esophagogastroduo-
denoscopy, it is likely that the patient has a
gluten intolerance or Celiac disease. How-
ever, without further testing and conﬁrma-
tion, it is difﬁcult to determine the exact diag-
nosis with certainty. Therefore, the options
of Gluten intolerance/Celiac Disease, Gluten
intolerance or celiac disease, and Gluten in-
tolerance or Celiac disease are all rated at
20%. The option of Gluten tolerance is rated
at 40% as it is possible that the patient’s
symptoms are caused by another condition.
Researcher: Consider the patient’s symptoms
of frequent diarrhea, fatigue, and inability to
gain weight, along with her description of
pale, malodorous, and bulky stools.
Decider: After considering the patient’s symp-
toms of frequent diarrhea, fatigue, and inabil-
ity to gain weight, along with her description
of pale, malodorous, and bulky stools, I be-
lieve that Celiac Disease is the most likely
diagnosis. The results of the esophagogastro-
duodenoscopy showing blunting of intestinal
villi and ﬂat mucosa with multiple intraep-
ithelial lymphocytes also support this con-
clusion.
Researcher: Think about the patient’s symptoms
being most prominent after breakfast when
she typically consumes cereal, and how this
could be related to her condition.
Decider: After considering the patient’s symp-
toms being most prominent after breakfast
when she typically consumes cereal, I be-
lieve this further supports my conclusion that
Celiac Disease is the most likely diagnosis.
The consumption of cereal, which often con-
tains gluten, could be triggering her symp-
toms.
Researcher: Consider the diagnostic biopsy re-
sults which show blunting of intestinal villi
and ﬂat mucosa with multiple intraepithelial
lymphocytes, and how this could be related
to the patient’s condition.
Decider: After considering the patient’s symp-
toms, the timing of her symptoms being most
prominent after consuming cereal, and the
diagnostic biopsy results showing blunting
of intestinal villi and ﬂat mucosa with mul-
tiple intraepithelial lymphocytes, I believe
Celiac Disease is the most likely diagnosis.
DERA answer: Celiac Disease

Table 4: Examples from the MedQA Training set (used as a development set in our experiments). We include
the id (or line number), the rewritten open-ended question, the correct original gold answer, the student predicted
answer, and the 1-shot answer.
id
question
gold text
DERA
an-
swer
1-shot
answer
4
A 20-year-old woman presents with men-
orrhagia for the past several years. She
says that her menses “have always been
heavy”, and she has experienced easy
bruising for as long as she can remem-
ber. Family history is signiﬁcant for her
mother, who had similar problems with
bruising easily. The patient’s vital signs
include: heart rate 98/min, respiratory rate
14/min, temperature 36.1°C (96.9°F), and
blood pressure 110/87 mm Hg. Physical
examination is unremarkable. Laboratory
tests show the following: platelet count
200,000/mm3, PT 12 seconds, and PTT
43 seconds. What is the most likely cause
of this patient’s symptoms?
Von
Wille-
brand
disease
Von
Wille-
brand
disease
Inherited
bleeding
disorder
5
A 40-year-old zookeeper presents to the
emergency department complaining of se-
vere abdominal pain that radiates to her
back, and nausea.
The pain started 2
days ago and slowly increased until she
could not tolerate it any longer. Past medi-
cal history is signiﬁcant for hypertension
and hypothyroidism. Additionally, she re-
ports that she was recently stung by one
of the zoo’s smaller scorpions, but did not
seek medical treatment. She takes aspirin,
levothyroxine, oral contraceptive pills, and
a multivitamin daily. Family history is non-
contributory. Today, her blood pressure is
108/58 mm Hg, heart rate is 99/min, res-
piratory rate is 21/min, and temperature is
37.0°C (98.6°F). On physical exam, she is
a well-developed, obese female that looks
unwell. Her heart has a regular rate and
rhythm. Radial pulses are weak but sym-
metric. Her lungs are clear to auscultation
bilaterally. Her lateral left ankle is swollen,
erythematous, and painful to palpate. An
abdominal CT is consistent with acut...
Scorpion
sting
Scorpion
venom-
induced
acute
pan-
creatitis
Scorpion
venom-
induced
acute
pan-
creatitis
Continued on next page

id
question
answer text
DERA
an-
swer
1-shot
answer
9
A 35-year-old male presents to his pri-
mary care physician with complaints of
seasonal allergies. He has been using in-
tranasal vasoconstrictors several times per
day for several weeks. What is a likely
consequence of the chronic use of topical
nasal decongestants?
Persistent
congestion
Rhinitis
Medica-
mentosa
(rebound
nasal
con-
gestion)
Rhinitis
medica-
mentosa
(rebound
nasal
con-
gestion)
54
A 60-year-old man comes to the physi-
cian for an examination prior to a sched-
uled cholecystectomy. He has hyperten-
sion treated with hydrochlorothiazide. His
mother had chronic granulomatous disease
of the lung. He works in a glass manufac-
turing plant. He has smoked two packs
of cigarettes daily for 38 years. His vi-
tal signs are within normal limits. Exam-
ination shows no abnormalities. Labora-
tory studies are within the reference range.
An x-ray of the chest is shown. What is
the most appropriate next step in manage-
ment?
Request pre-
vious chest
x-ray
Assessing
for occupa-
tional
lung
disease and
providing
smoking
cessation
counseling.
Smoking
cessation
counseling
and support.
55
You are examining a 3-day-old newborn
who was delivered vaginally without any
complications. The newborn presents with
vomiting, hyperventilation, lethargy, and
seizures. Blood work demonstrates hy-
perammonemia, elevated glutamine levels,
and decreased blood urea nitrogen. A CT
scan demonstrates cerebral edema. Which
enzyme defects would result in a clinical
presentation similar to this infant?
Carbamoyl
phosphate
synthetase I
"Urea cycle
enzyme deﬁ-
ciencies"
Urea
cycle
enzyme deﬁ-
ciencies
64
An 18-year-old man comes to the clinic
with his mom for “pins and needles” of
both of his arms. He denies any past medi-
cal history besides a recent anterior cruci-
ate ligament (ACL) tear that was repaired
1 week ago. The patient reports that the
paresthesias are mostly located along the
posterior forearms, left more than the right.
What would you expect to ﬁnd on physical
examination of this patient?
Loss
of
wrist exten-
sion
Decreased
sensation
and possible
weakness
in
both
posterior
forearms,
with
the
left
side
being more
affected
than
the
right.
Decreased
sensation
and possible
weakness in
the posterior
forearms.
Continued on next page

id
question
answer text
DERA
an-
swer
1-shot
answer
74
A 16-year-old girl is brought to the emer-
gency department by her friends who say
that she took a whole bottle of her mom’s
medication. They do not know which med-
ication it was she ingested. The patient is
slipping in and out of consciousness and
is unable to offer any history. Her temper-
ature is 39.6°C (103.2°F), the heart rate is
135/min, the blood pressure is 178/98 mm
Hg, and the respiratory rate is 16/min. On
physical examination, there is signiﬁcant
muscle rigidity without tremor or clonus.
What is the best course of treatment for
this patient?
Dantrolene
Immediate
stabilization
and support-
ive care with
emergency
toxicology
consulta-
tion.
Immediate
hospital-
ization and
supportive
care.
77
A 3-week-old boy is brought to the emer-
gency department by his parents because
of a 3-day history of progressive lethargy
and difﬁculty feeding. He was born at term
and did not have difﬁculty feeding previ-
ously. His temperature is 39.4°C (103°F),
pulse is 220/min, respirations are 45/min,
and blood pressure is 50/30 mm Hg. Pulse
oximetry on 100% oxygen shows an oxy-
gen saturation of 97%. Examination shows
dry mucous membranes, delayed capillary
reﬁll time, and cool skin with poor turgor.
Despite multiple attempts by the nursing
staff, they are unable to establish periph-
eral intravenous access. What is the most
appropriate next step in management for
this 3-week-old boy?
Intraosseous
cannulation
Establishing
intraosseous
access
for
ﬂuid
resus-
citation and
medication
administra-
tion.
Intraosseous
needle place-
ment
for
ﬂuid
resus-
citation and
antibiotics.
94
A 70-year-old man comes to the physician
because of a 4-month history of epigas-
tric pain, nausea, and weakness. He has
smoked one pack of cigarettes daily for 50
years and drinks one alcoholic beverage
daily. He appears emaciated. He is 175
cm (5 ft 9 in) tall and weighs 47 kg (103
lb); BMI is 15 kg/m2. He is diagnosed
with gastric cancer. What cytokine is the
most likely direct cause of this patient’s
examination ﬁndings?
IL-6
Tumor
necrosis
factor-alpha
(TNF-α)
Tumor
necrosis
factor-alpha
(TNF-α)
Continued on next page

id
question
answer text
DERA
an-
swer
1-shot
answer
98
Three days after starting a new drug for
malaria prophylaxis, a 19-year-old college
student comes to the physician because
of dark-colored urine and fatigue. He has
not had any fever, dysuria, or abdominal
pain. He has no history of serious illness.
Physical examination shows scleral icterus.
Laboratory studies show a hemoglobin of
9.7 g/dL and serum lactate dehydrogenase
of 234 U/L. Peripheral blood smear shows
poikilocytes with bite-shaped irregulari-
ties. What drug has the patient most likely
been taking?
Primaquine
Primaquine
Primaquine

Prompt
temp.
max_tokens
top_p
freq. penalty
num. turns
Summarization - Initial (1)
1
512
1
0
-
Summarization - Decider (3)
1
512
1
0
15
Summarization - Researcher (4)
1
512
1
0
15
Summarization - Corruption (2)
1
512
1
0
-
Summarization - Final (5)
1
512
1
0
-
GPT-F1 Metric - Concept Extractor (6)
0
200
1
0
-
GPT-F1 Metric - Concept Veriﬁer (7)
0
200
1
0
-
Care Plan - Initial (8)
1
512
1
0
-
Care Plan - Decider (9)
1
512
1
0
15
Care Plan - Researcher (10)
1
512
1
0
15
Care Plan - Final (11)
1
512
1
0
-
Table 5: Experimental details for Summarization and Care Plan Experiments. For each prompt, we include the
Temperature, Maximum Number of Tokens for Generation, Top-P, the Frequency Penalty, and the Number of Turns
for the prompt(s) (where applicable). In all cases, the ﬁnal parameters of the model were decided by qualitative
evaluation of the output.
Prompt
temp.
max_tokens
top_p
num comp.
freq. penalty
num. turns
1-shot (14)
0.7
50
1
5
0
1
Decider Initial Msg. (15)
0
400
1
1
0
1
Res.-Dec. Msg. (17 & 16)
0.3
250
1
1
0.5
3
Final Decider Answer (18)
0
100
1
5
0
1
Pred - Gold Ans. Sim. (19)
0
100
1
1
0
1
Table 6: Experimental details for Question Answering. For each prompt, we include the Temperature, Maximum
Number of Tokens for Generation, Top-P, the Number of Completions (e.g, the number of generations we prompted
from GPT-4), the Frequency Penalty, and the Number of Turns for the prompt(s). In all cases, the ﬁnal parameters
of the model were decided by qualitative evaluation of the output. For GPT-3 CoT, the two turns refers to 1) the
generation of the chain of thought, and 2) the generation of the answer.

Doctor-Patient Chat
Patient: I have a sinus infection and need something to knock it out.
Doctor: Hi NAME thank you for starting a visit. I am so sorry to hear about your sinus infection. How long have you had the
symptoms for?
Patient: Since Sunday
Doctor: Ah I see. Which symptoms do you have at present?
Patient: My face is swollen my cheeks hurt my eyelids are swollen and I am running a slight fever and I can feel something
draining down the back of my throat...
Initial Summary, Corruptions in Red
Demographics and Social Determinants of Health: The patient’s speciﬁc demographics are not mentioned in the encounter.
The patient experiences sinus infections multiple times a year. . .
Patient Intent: The patient seeks care for a sinus infection, which they have identiﬁed themselves. They are . . .
Pertinent Positives: The patient has been experiencing sinus infection symptoms since Sunday. Their face is swollen, cheeks
hurt, eyelids are swollen, and they have a slight fever at night. The patient can also feel something draining down the back of
their throat. They have a history of 3-6 sinus infections a year, with the last one occurring a couple of months ago →last
two occurring simultaneously a couple of months ago.
Pertinent Unknowns: There are no pertinent unknowns mentioned in this medical encounter. →The patient is unsure
whether their current condition is a sinus infection or a viral infection..
Pertinent Negatives: The patient has not been vaccinated against COVID-19 →The patient has received the COVID-19
vaccine.. Their temperature is currently normal but spikes at night.
Medical History: The patient has a history of seasonal allergies and sinus infections →The patient has had chickenpox,
seasonal allergies, and sinus infections. They typically use an Albuterol inhaler for asthma due to their allergies causing
wheezing in the spring and fall, however they currently do not have one. They have had COVID-19 before and were previously
prescribed amoxicillin →penicillin for sinus infections. The patient currently uses Tylenol severe sinus medication and
ibuprofen to alleviate symptoms →The patient currently uses ibuprofen and a nasal spray to alleviate symptoms..
DERA dialog
Researcher: Let’s go through the summary section by section. First, the Pertinent Positives section - there is no mention of the
patient taking Tylenol severe sinus medication, which was mentioned in the dialogue. Also, the last sentence about the
last two sinus infections occurring simultaneously might be misleading as it’s not explicitly mentioned in the dialogue.
Could you please add the Tylenol information and consider rephrasing the last part?
Decider: Thank you for pointing that out. I’ll add the information about Tylenol severe sinus medication to the summary. I
agree that the last part about the last two sinus infections occurring simultaneously can be misleading; I will rephrase it.
Do you have any other suggestions or corrections to make in the summary?
Researcher: Great, let’s move on to the Pertinent Unknowns section. The patient actually mentioned that they know it’s a
sinus infection, so we shouldn’t include that they are unsure about their condition. Could you please remove this part
from the Pertinent Unknowns section?
Decider: You’re right, the patient did mention that they know it’s a sinus infection. I apologize for the confusion. I’ll remove
that part from the Pertinent Unknowns section. . . .
Scratchpad
Add Tylenol severe sinus medication to the summary, and rephrase the sentence about the last two sinus infections.
Remove the patient being unsure about their condition from Pertinent Unknowns section.
Correct the COVID-19 vaccine information in the Pertinent Negatives section.
Update the summary to mention the patient using the Albuterol inhaler for wheezing and change medication name to
amoxicillin.
Final Summary
Demographics and Social Determinants of Health: The patient’s speciﬁc demographics are not mentioned in the encounter.
The patient experiences sinus infections multiple times a year. . .
Patient Intent: The patient seeks care for a sinus infection, which they have identiﬁed themselves. They are . . .
Pertinent Positives: The patient has been experiencing sinus infection symptoms since Sunday. Their face is swollen, cheeks
hurt, eyelids are swollen, and they have a slight fever at night. The patient can also feel something draining down the back of
their throat. They have a history of 3-6 sinus infections a year, with the last one occurring a couple of months ago and being
treated with amoxicillin.
Pertinent Unknowns: There are no pertinent unknowns mentioned in this medical encounter.
Pertinent Negatives: The patient has not been vaccinated against COVID-19. Their temperature is currently normal but spikes
at night.
Medical History: The patient has a history of seasonal allergies and sinus infections. They typically use an Albuterol inhaler
for wheezing due to their allergies causing wheezing in the spring and fall, however they currently do not have one. They have
had COVID-19 before. The patient currently uses Tylenol severe sinus medication and ibuprofen to alleviate symptoms.
Figure 6: Medical conversation summarization - Quantitative evaluation: The above is a condensed example taken
from our summarization dataset. Starting with the initial chat, we generate an initial summary, which is then
corrupted (see red text) using Prompt 2. The DERA dialog generates a scratchpad of edits, which results in the
ﬁnal corrected summary. The quantitative evaluation compares the initial summary with the ﬁnal summary .

1 ----
2 Below is a medical encounter between an {age}
3
and {sex} patient and a doctor done over chat.
4 Chief Complaint: "{cc}".
5 ----
6 Medical Encounter
7 ----
8 {chat}
9 ----
10 Summary Instructions
11 ----
12 Provide a summary of the medical encounter between the doctor and the {age_and_sex}
patient in 6 sections (Demographics and Social Determinants of Health , Patient
Intent , Pertinent Positives , Pertinent Unknowns , Pertinent Negatives , Medical
History). The definitions of each section are listed below. Write a paragraph
under each section , not bullet points.
13
14 Demographics and Social Determinants of Health:
15 // Definition of section
16
17 Patient Intent:
18 // Definition of section
19
20 Pertinent Positives:
21 // Definition of section
22
23 Pertinent Unknowns:
24 // Definition of section
25
26 Pertinent Negatives:
27 // Definition of section
28
29 Medical History:
30 // Definition of section
31
32 ----
33 Summary of Medical Encounter
34 ----
Prompt 1: Prompt for generating initial summary.

1 ---
2 Below is a medical encounter between a {age_and_sex} patient and a doctor done over
chat.
3 Chief complaint: "{cc}".
4 ----
5 Medical Encounter
6 ----
7 {chat}
8 ----
9 Below is a summary of the conversation that was written using the following
instructions:
10
11 // Definition of medical summary (same as in initial summarization prompt)
12 ----
13 Summary of Medical Encounter
14 ----
15 {summary}
16 ----
17 Using the above dialogue and provided summary , corrupt the summary slightly. This
could include moving a positive symptom to be a negative symptom , making up
medical history mentioned , etc.
18
19 Corruptions should only occur on the Pertinent Positives , Pertinent Unknowns ,
Pertinent Negative , or Medical History section.
20
21 The lower the desired corruption level , the fewer the changes made. Note that a 0
would be not changing the summary at all , and a 10 would be completely
corrupting the summary.
22
23 Note that any changes/corruption should make the summary less factual.
24
25 Desired Corruption Level: {corruption_level}/10
26 ----
27 Corrupted Summary of Medical Encounter
28 ----
Prompt 2: Prompt for generating corruptions based off of the initial summary.

1 You (Person A) are a very good summary writer for medical dialogues between
physicians and patients.
2
3 This is the medical dialogue you summarized for a {age} and {sex} patient:
4 -Medical Dialogue -
5 {chat}
6 -Medical Dialogue -
7
8 You are discussing the summary you wrote for this dialogue with another summary
writer (Person B) whose job it is to verify your summary for correctness.
9
10 Person B will give you points for correction and it will be your job to add the
points of correction to a scratchpad if you agree with them.
11
12 This is your original version of the summary:
13 -Your Original Summary -
14 {summary}
15 -Your Original Summary -
16
17 Here is your current scratchpad of corrections to make to the summary:
18 -Correction Scratchpad -
19 {scratchpad}
20 -Correction Scratchpad -
21
22 You are generally very confident about the summary you wrote , however , when
presented with compelling arguments by the verifying summary writer , you add to
the correction scratchpad. You also suggest any edits of your own in case you
notice a mistake.
23
24 This is the summary discussion so far:
25 -Summary Discussion -
26 {discussion}
27 -Summary Discussion -
28
29 Question: What do you say next? Respond to Person B in the tag [RESPONSE: "<
your_response_here >"] and output any corrections to add to the scratchpad in the
tag [SCRATCHPAD: "<things_to_add_to_the_scratchpad_here >"]. Make sure to use
the "[]" when outputting tags.
30 Answer:
Prompt 3: Prompt for decider agent used in DERA summarization experiments.

1 ---
2 You (Person B) are a very good summary editer for medical dialogues between
physicians and patients.
3
4 This is the medical dialogue you will be referencing for a {age} and {sex} patient:
5 -Medical Dialogue -
6 {chat}
7 -Medical Dialogue -
8
9 You are discussing the summary that another summary writer (Person A) wrote for this
dialogue one section at a time.
10
11 You will be giving Person A points for correction based on any mistakes/
discrepancies you see between the dialogue and summary one section at a time.
Person A will add the points of correction that they agree on to a scratchpad to
later make edits.
12
13 However , you will only go through the Pertinent Positives , Pertinent Negatives ,
Pertinent Unknowns , and Medical History sections.
14
15 This is Person A’s original version of the summary:
16 -Person A’s Original Summary -
17 {summary}
18 -Person A’s Original Summary -
19
20 Here is Person A’s current scratchpad of corrections to make to the summary:
21 -Correction Scratchpad -
22 {scratchpad}
23 -Correction Scratchpad -
24
25 Go through each section of the summary one at a time and point out any text that
does not have a grounding in the dialogue. It must be possible to directly tie
any span of the summary to the dialogue.
26
27 Make sure to make accurate , useful suggestions for corrections.
28
29 Person A may not initially agree with you , but if you are confident there is an
error do your best to convince Person A of the mistake.
30
31 Once you have gone through each section and have confirmed each section with Person
A, and you are satisfied with all of the corrections added to the scratchpad and
/or all of Person A’s reasoning to reject additional corrections , output the tag
"[STOP ]".
32
33 This is the summary discussion with Person A so far:
34 -Summary Discussion -
35 {discussion}
36 -Summary Discussion -
37
38 Question: What do you say next? Respond to Person A in the tag [RESPONSE: "<
your_response_here >"]. If you are done correcting and are satisfied , output the
"[STOP]" tag.
39 Answer:
Prompt 4: Prompt for researcher agent used in DERA summarization experiments.

1 ---
2 You are a very good summary writer for medical dialogues between physicians and
patients.
3
4 This is the medical dialogue you summarized for a {age} and {sex} patient:
5 -Medical Dialogue -
6 {chat}
7 -Medical Dialogue -
8
9 This is your original version of the summary:
10 -Original Summary -
11 {summary}
12 -Original Summary -
13
14 Here is your current scratchpad of corrections to make to the summary:
15 -Correction Scratchpad -
16 {scratchpad}
17 -Correction Scratchpad -
18
19 Make all changes mentioned in the scratchpad to the original summary to output the
corrected summary.
20
21 Output the tag "[STOP]" when finished writing the corrected summary.
22
23 -Corrected Summary -
Prompt 5: Prompt for ﬁnal summarization step (incorporating scratchpad of corrections into the original summary)
used in DERA summarization experiments.

1 Given the following snippet of a medical dialogue summary , extract the medical
concepts (symptoms , diseases , conditions , allergies , lab tests , etc.) present.
2
3 The heading of the section from which the summary was extracted will also be
provided.
4
5 ---Example 1---
6 Pertinent Negatives:
Patient reports no <concept_1 >, no <concept_2 >, <concept_3 >,
and <concept_4 >. Patient also reports having no trouble with <concept_5 >.
7
8 Medical Concepts: [<concept_1 >, <concept_2 >, <concept_3 >, <concept_4 >, <concept_5 >]
9 ---Example 1---
10
11 ---Example 2---
12 Pertinent Positives:
Patient ongoing <concept_1 > for the past 5 days , <concept_2 >,
and some <concept_3 >. Patient had <concept_4 > done in May 2021.
13
14 Medical Concepts: [<concept_1 >, <concept_2 >, <concept_3 >, <concept_4 >]
15 ---Example 2---
16
17 ---Example 3---
18 Pertinent Unknowns:
Patient is unsure about <concept_1 > and <concept_2 >.
19
20 Medical Concepts: [<concept_1 >, <concept_2 >]
21 ---Example 3---
22
23 ---Example 4---
24 Medical History: Patient reports some <concept_1 > in the past , and had last <
concept_2 > on DATE_1.
25
26 Medical Concepts: [<concept_1 >, <concept_2 >]
27 ---Example 4---
28
29 Here is the example to extract medical concepts from:
30
31 {section_heading}: {section_value}
32
33 Medical Concepts:
Prompt 6: Prompt for extracting medical concepts from the summary used to compute the GPT-F1 metric.

1 Given a snippet (snippet) from a medical dialogue summary and a corresponding list (
list_a) of medical concepts extracted from that snippet , evaluate what medical
concepts from a separate list (list_b) can be found in either list_a or snippet.
2
3 Note that on some occasions a medical concept from list_b may not be found in list_a
, but can be appropriate to be present given the snippet. This could include
rephrasings of medical concepts that are clinically equivalent (Ex: COVID and
COVID -19).
4
5 ---Example ---
6 snippet: <snippet >
7 list_a: [<concept_1 >, <concept_2 >, <concept_3 >, <concept_4 >, <concept_5 >, <concept_7
>]
8 list_b: [<concept_0 >, <concept_1 >, <concept_3 >, <concept_4 >, <concept_5 >, <concept_6
>]
9
10 found_b: [<concept_1 >, <concept_3 >, <concept_4 >, <concept_5 >]
11 not_found_b: [<concept_0 >, <concept_6 >]
12
13 ---Example ---
14
15 Here is the snippet , list_a. Evaluate the medical concepts in list_b as above.
16
17 snippet: {snippet}
18 list_a: {list_a}
19 list_b: {list_b}
20
21 found_b:
Prompt 7: Prompt for verifying medical concepts from a summary section used to compute the GPT-F1 metric.

1 ----
2 Care Plan Instructions
3 ----
4 You are a primary care physician tasked with writing a care plan , which lists the
next steps in care management that the patient and the physician will perform.
5 Categorize the next steps into five sections: Medications , Referrals , Tests ,
Lifestyle and Supportive Care. Definitions and scopes of each section are
defined below.
6
7 Medications:
8 // Definition of section
9 Referrals:
10 // Definition of section
11 Tests:
12 // Definition of section
13 Lifestyle:
14 // Definition of section
15 Supportive Care:
16 // Definition of section
17
18 {example}
19 ----
20 Care Plan Instructions
21 ----
22 Now that you ’ve seen an example , you will now write a care plan of the same format (
five sections: Medications , Referrals , Tests , Lifestyle and Supportive Care).
23
24 The dialogue you will use to write a care plan about is a medical encounter between
a {age} and {sex} patient and a doctor done over chat:
25 ----
26 Dialogue
27 ----
28 {chat}
29 ----
30 Care Plan
31 ----
Prompt 8: Prompt for generating initial care plan

1 ---
2 You (Person A) are a very good writer of care plans for patients following their
discussion with a physician. The full instructions are presented below.
3 ---
4 Care Plan Writing Instructions
5 ---
6 // Same instructions as in initial care plan generation prompt. Removed for brevity.
7 ---
8 Given the instructions , this is the medical dialogue you see for a
{{age}} {{sex}}
patient:
9 ---
10 Medical Dialogue
11 ---
12 {chat}
13 ---
14 You are discussing the care plan you wrote for this dialogue with another care plan
writer (Person B) whose job it is to verify your care plan for soundness.
15
16 Person B will give you points for correction and it will be your job to add the
points of correction to a scratchpad if you agree with them.
17
18 This is your original version of the care plan:
19 ---
20 Your Original Care Plan
21 ---
22 {careplan}
23 ---
24 Here is your current scratchpad of corrections to make to the care plan:
25 ---
26 Correction Scratchpad
27 ---
28 {scratchpad}
29 ---
30 You are generally very confident about the care plan you wrote , however , when
presented with compelling arguments by the verifying care plan writer , you add
to the correction scratchpad. You also suggest any edits of your own in case you
notice a mistake.
31
32 This is the care plan discussion so far:
33 ---
34 Care Plan Discussion
35 ---
36 {discussion}
37 ---
38 Question: What do you say next? Respond to Person B in the tag [RESPONSE: "<
your_response_here >"] and output any corrections to add to the scratchpad in the
tag [SCRATCHPAD: "<things_to_add_to_the_scratchpad_here >"]. Make sure to use
the "[]" when outputting tags. All text should be within the tag brackets.
39 An example answer would be: [RESPONSE: "I think we should remove ... from the care
plan"] [SCRATCHPAD: "Remove ... from the care plan because ..."]
40 ---
41 Answer:
Prompt 9: Prompt for decider agent used in DERA care plan experiments.

1 ---
2 You are a primary care physician and very good editor of care plans for patients
following their discussion with a physician. The full instructions for writing
care plans are presented below.
3 ---
4 Care Plan Writing Instructions
5 ---
6 // Same instructions as in initial care plan generation prompt. Removed for brevity.
7 ---
8 Given the instructions , this is the medical dialogue you see for a {age_and_sex}
patient:
9 ---
10 Medical Dialogue
11 ---
12 {chat}
13 ---
14
15 You are discussing the care plan that another care plan writer (Person A) wrote for
this dialogue one section at a time.
16
17 You will be giving Person A points for correction based on any reconsiderations you
see between the dialogue and care plan one section at a time. Person A will add
the points of correction that they agree on to a scratchpad to later make edits.
18
19 This is Person A’s original version of the care plan:
20 ---
21 Person A’s Original Care Plan
22 ---
23 {careplan}
24 ---
25 Here is Person A’s current scratchpad of corrections to make to the care plan:
26 ---
27 Correction Scratchpad
28 ---
29 {scratchpad}
30 ---
31 Go through each section of the care plan one section at a time and point out any
suggestions that does not have a grounding in the dialogue. All suggestions must
be grounded in information from the dialogue.
32
33 Remember to make sure the care plan is congruent with the Care Plan Writing
Instructions.
34
35 Make sure to make accurate , useful suggestions for corrections.
36
37 Person A may not initially agree with you , but if you are confident there is an
error do your best to convince Person A of the mistake.
38
39 Once you have gone through each section and have confirmed each section with Person
A, and you are satisfied with all of the corrections added to the scratchpad and
/or all of Person A’s reasoning to reject additional corrections , output the tag
"[DONE ]".
40
41 This is the care plan discussion with Person A so far:
42 ---
43 Care Plan Discussion
44 ---
45 {discussion}
46 ---
47 Question: What do you say next? Respond to Person A in the tag [RESPONSE: "<
your_response_here >"]. If you are done correcting , are satisfied , and want to
end the conversation , output "DONE".
48 ---
49 Answer:
Prompt 10: Prompt for researcher agent used in DERA care plan experiments.

1 ---
2 You are a very good writer of care plans for patients following their discussion
with a physician. The full instructions are presented below.
3 ---
4 Care Plan Writing Instructions
5 ---
6 // Same instructions as in initial care plan generation prompt. Removed for brevity.
7 ---
8 Given the instructions , this is the medical dialogue you see for a {age} and {sex}
patient:
9 ---
10 Medical Dialogue
11 ---
12 {{chat}}
13 ---
14 You have been discussing the care plan you wrote for this dialogue with another care
plan writer (Person B) whose job it is to verify your care plan for soundness.
15
16 You added corrections to a scratchpad after discussing them with Person B, and you
will later be tasked with updating the original care plan based off of the
correctness suggested in the scratchpad.
17
18 This is your original version of the care plan:
19 ---
20 Your Original Care Plan
21 ---
22 {careplan}
23 ---
24 Here is your current scratchpad of corrections to make to the care plan:
25 ---
26 Correction Scratchpad
27 ---
28 {scratchpad}
29 ---
30 Make all changes mentioned in the scratchpad to the original care plan to output the
corrected care plan. Make sure all changes are congruent to the Care Plan
Writing Instructions.
31
32 Output the tag "[STOP]" when finished writing the corrected care plan.
33 ---
34 Corrected Care Plan
35 ---
Prompt 11: Prompt for ﬁnal care plan generation step (incorporating scratchpad of corrections into the original
care plan) used in DERA care plan experiments.

1 The following question was written as a multiple choice question.
Rewrite it as
posing an open -ended question. If it is already an open -ended question and the
question requires no rewrite , output "[OPEN]" only.
Do not change any details
or facts in the question , and only change the phrasing of the question.
2
3 --Example --
4 Question: A 60-year -old man comes to the physician for an examination prior to a
scheduled cholecystectomy. He has hypertension treated with hydrochlorothiazide.
His mother had chronic granulomatous disease of the lung. He works in a glass
manufacturing plant. He has smoked two packs of cigarettes daily for 38 years.
His vital signs are within normal limits. Examination shows no abnormalities.
Laboratory studies are within the reference range. An x-ray of the chest is
shown. Which of the following is the most appropriate next step in management?
5
6 Rewrite: A 60-year -old man comes to the physician for an examination prior to a
scheduled cholecystectomy. He has hypertension treated with hydrochlorothiazide.
His mother had chronic granulomatous disease of the lung. He works in a glass
manufacturing plant. He has smoked two packs of cigarettes daily for 38 years.
His vital signs are within normal limits. Examination shows no abnormalities.
Laboratory studies are within the reference range. An x-ray of the chest is
shown. What is the most appropriate next step in management?
7 --Example --
8 Question: Several patients at a local US hospital present with chronic secretory
diarrhea. Although there are multiple potential causes of diarrhea present in
these patients , which of the following is most likely the common cause of their
chronic secretory diarrhea?
9
10 Rewrite: Several patients at a local US hospital present with chronic secretory
diarrhea.
Although there are multiple potential causes of diarrhea present in
these patients , what is most likely the common cause of their chronic secretory
diarrhea?
11
12 --Example --
13 Question: A 39-year -old male presents to your office with nodular skin lesions that
progress from his right hand to right shoulder. The patient reports that the
initial lesion , currently necrotic and ulcerative , developed from an injury he
received while weeding his shrubs a couple weeks earlier. The patient denies
symptoms of respiratory or meningeal disease. Which of the following most likely
characterizes the pattern of this patient ’s skin lesions:
14
15 Rewrite: A 39-year -old male presents to your office with nodular skin lesions that
progress from his right hand to right shoulder. The patient reports that the
initial lesion , currently necrotic and ulcerative , developed from an injury he
received while weeding his shrubs a couple weeks earlier. The patient denies
symptoms of respiratory or meningeal disease. How would you characterize the
pattern of this patient ’s skin lesions?
16 --Example --
17 Question: A 71-year -old man presents to the clinic with complaints of right wrist
pain for 2 days. On examination , redness and swelling were noted on the dorsal
aspect of his right wrist. He had
pain with extreme range of motion of the
wrist. His history includes 2 hip replacements , 2 previous episodes of gout in
both first metatarsophalangeal joints , and hypertension. Two days later , the
swelling had increased in the dorsal aspect of his right wrist and hand. Wrist
flexion was limited to 80% with severe pain. The pain was present on palpation
of the scaphoid bone. Due to the suspicion of fracture , the patient was referred
to his general practitioner for radiographs. These findings were consistent
with gouty arthritis. What is the most likely cytokine involved in this process?
18
19 Rewrite: [OPEN]
20 ---
21 Question: {{question}}
22
23 Rewrite:
Prompt 12: Prompt for rewriting the question in full (temperature at 0 and otherwise uses default parameters)

1 The following question was written as a multiple choice quesiton.
For the sentence
in the question poses a multiple choice , rewrite it as posing an open -ended
question. If the relevant is a compound sentence , re -write the entire sentence.
If it is already an open -ended question and the question requires no rewrite ,
output "[OPEN]" only.
Do not change any details or facts in the question , and
only change the phrasing of the question.
2
3 --Example --
4 Question: A 60-year -old man comes to the physician for an examination prior to a
scheduled cholecystectomy. He has hypertension treated with hydrochlorothiazide.
His mother had chronic granulomatous disease of the lung. He works in a glass
manufacturing plant. He has smoked two packs of cigarettes daily for 38 years.
His vital signs are within normal limits. Examination shows no abnormalities.
Laboratory studies are within the reference range. An x-ray of the chest is
shown. Which of the following is the most appropriate next step in management?
5
6 Original: Which of the following is the most appropriate next step in management?
7
8 Rewrite: What is the most appropriate next step in management?
9 --Example --
10 Question: Several patients at a local US hospital present with chronic secretory
diarrhea. Although there are multiple potential causes of diarrhea present in
these patients , which of the following is most likely the common cause of their
chronic secretory diarrhea?
11
12 Original: Although there are multiple potential causes of diarrhea present in these
patients , which of the following is most likely the common cause of their
chronic secretory diarrhea?
13
14 Rewrite: Although there are multiple potential causes of diarrhea present in these
patients , what is most likely the common cause of their chronic secretory
diarrhea?
15 --Example --
16 Question:A 39-year -old male presents to your office with nodular skin lesions that
progress from his right hand to right shoulder. The patient reports that the
initial lesion , currently necrotic and ulcerative , developed from an injury he
received while weeding his shrubs a couple weeks earlier. The patient denies
symptoms of respiratory or meningeal disease. Which of the following most likely
characterizes the pattern of this patient ’s skin lesions:
17
18 Original: Which of the following most likely characterizes the pattern of this
patient ’s skin lesions:
19
20 Rewrite: How would you characterize the pattern of this patient ’s skin lesions?
21 --Example --
22 Question: A 71-year -old man presents to the clinic with complaints of right wrist
pain for 2 days. On examination , redness and swelling were noted on the dorsal
aspect of his right wrist. He had
pain with extreme range of motion of the
wrist. His history includes 2 hip replacements , 2 previous episodes of gout in
both first metatarsophalangeal joints , and hypertension. Two days later , the
swelling had increased in the dorsal aspect of his right wrist and hand. Wrist
flexion was limited to 80% with severe pain. The pain was present on palpation
of the scaphoid bone. Due to the suspicion of fracture , the patient was referred
to his general practitioner for radiographs. These findings were consistent
with gouty arthritis. What is the most likely cytokine involved in this process?
23
24 Original: What is the most likely cytokine involved in this process?
25
26 Rewrite: [OPEN]
27 ---
28 Question: {{question}}
29
30 Original:
Prompt 13: Prompt for rewriting the question by changing the last sentence only (temperature at 0 and otherwise
uses default parameters).

1 Given the following medical question , respond with the phrase that best answers the
question.
2
3 --Example --
4 Question: A mother brings her 3-week -old infant to the pediatrician ’s office because
she is concerned about his feeding habits. He was born without complications
and has not had any medical problems up until this time. However , for the past 4
days , he has been fussy , is regurgitating all of his feeds , and his vomit is
yellow in color. On physical exam , the child ’s abdomen is minimally distended
but no other abnormalities are appreciated. What embryologic error could account
for this presentation?
5
6 What phrase best answers the question posed?
7
8 Answer: Abnormal migration of ventral pancreatic bud
9 ----
10 Question: {question}
11
12 What phrase best answers the question posed?
13
14 Answer:
Prompt 14: Prompt for generating the single-shot answer.
1 {question}
2
3 {options_filtered_str}
4
5 You think the relative likelihood of each option is {relative_likelihood}. Write a
3-4 sentence message explaining why you rate the options in that way , without
taking a decisive stand.
6
7 Message:
Prompt 15: Prompt for generating the explanation for the single-shot answer distribution.

1 You are an expert medical doctor who is guiding a medical student through thinking
about which of several answers is best for a given question.
You cannot give
the student the answer.
Your role is to help the student think through the
question , specifically by pointing out portions of the question that are
important in understanding the problem.
2 Rules;
3 - All responses should include a quote from the question.
4 - Consider what you , as the teacher , have said in the previous conversation , and do
not repeat yourself.
5 - Responses should be at most 4 sentences long.
6 - Stop only when you , as the teacher , have pointed out all important aspects of the
question in the previous discussion.
To stop , respond with ’STOP ’ at the next
turn.
7
You cannot;
8
- Directly give the answer to the student
9
- Include the correct option in your response , or any paraphrasing of the correct
answer.
10
- Do not narrow down the options in your response.
11
12 Question: {question}
13
14 The previous discussion between you and the expert advisor is as follows;
15 {chat_history}
16 {last_student_message}
17
18 Help the student find the correct answer by pointing out specific parts of the
questions they need to think through , but do not include the correct phrase in
your response. Your response should be no more than 3-4 sentences.
If you have
pointed out all challenging aspects of the question in the previous conversation
, respond with "STOP" after the student ’s next turn.
19
20 Response:
Prompt 16: Prompt for question-answering Researcher.
1 You are an expert doctor who is trying to select the answer to a medical question ,
and is willing to be open -minded about their answer.
The questions are taken
from a short -answer medical exam , and your role is to arrive at the correct
answer.
2
3 You are chatting with an expert medical advisor , who will try to help you think
through the problem , but will not directly tell you the answer.
They will help
you by pointing out aspects of the question that are important in finding the
answer.
Do not assume that the teacher knows the answer; only that they know
how to think through the question. You can change your answer at any point , but
do not assume that the expert knows the exact answer and is providing leading
questions. Think about their guidance as a whole , and do not only respond to
their last message
4
5 Question: {question}
6
7 The previous discussion between you and the expert advisor is as follows;
8 {chat_history}
9 {last_teacher_message}
10
11 Rethink the question by considering what the teacher pointed out , in light of your
original hypothesis.
Remember they do not know the answer , but only how to
think through the question. You can change your mind on the correct answer , but
remember that unless the question explicitly asks for multiple answers , you can
only provide a single answer. Respond with the option you believe most likely to
be the right answer (" Answer:<SHORT ANSWER >") and a response to that message ("
Response:<MESSAGE >"):
12
13 Answer:
Prompt 17: Prompt for question-answering Decider.

1 You are an expert doctor who is trying to select the answer to a medical question ,
and is willing to be open -minded about their answer.
The questions are taken
from a short -answer medical exam , and your role is to arrive at the correct
answer.
2
3 You are chatting with an expert medical advisor , who will try to help you think
through the problem , but will not directly tell you the answer.
They will help
you by pointing out aspects of the question that are important in finding the
answer.
Do not assume that the teacher knows the answer; only that they know
how to think through the question. You can change your answer at any point , but
do not assume that the expert knows the exact answer and is providing leading
questions. Think about their guidance as a whole , and do not only respond to
their last message
4
5 Question: {question}
6
7 The previous discussion between you and the expert advisor is as follows;
8 {chat_history}
9 {last_teacher_message}
10
11 Rethink the question by considering what the teacher pointed out , in light of your
original hypothesis.
Remember they do not know the answer , but only how to
think through the question. You can change your mind on the correct answer , but
remember that unless the question explicitly asks for multiple answers , you can
only provide a single answer. Respond with the option you believe most likely to
be the right answer (" Answer:<SHORT ANSWER >") and a response to that message ("
Response:<MESSAGE >"):
12
13 Answer:
Prompt 18: Prompt for question-answering ﬁnal answer.
1 Assign a dxSimilarityScore to each of the following pairs where the first diagnosis
is an "expectedDx" and the second diagnosis is the "providedDiagnosis ".
2
3 Expected Vs Provided Dx Pairs:
4 {answer_text} | {predicted_answer_text}
5 {answer_text} | {zero_shot_option_index}
6
7 Output each pair in one line using this format "dx1" "|" "dx2" "|" "
dxSimilarityScore"
8 output:
Prompt 19: Prompt similar to that used for similarity score between generated and gold answers. Note that
occasionally this outputs a number outside of 0-1. Unless these are all 100s we set these to 0s. This commonly
occurs with math problems.
1 Question:{question}
2
3 Do the following two answers refer to the same medical concept? Respond with an
answer (" Answer:True" or "Answer:False ") followed by an explanation ("
Explanation :")
4
5 {answer_text}
6 {predicted_answer_text}
7
8 Answer:
Prompt 20: Prompt for exact matching between generated and gold answers.

