1 
 
 
ROSE: A Neurocomputational Architecture for Syntax 
Elliot Murphy1,2 
 
Affiliations: 1. Vivian L. Smith Department of Neurosurgery, McGovern Medical 
School, UTHealth, Houston, TX, USA 
2. Texas Institute for Restorative Neurotechnologies, UTHealth, 
Houston, TX, USA 
Correspondence: elliot.murphy@uth.tmc.edu 
Conflict of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest. 
 

2 
 
Abstract: A comprehensive model of natural language processing in the brain must 
accommodate four components: representations, operations, structures and 
encoding. It further requires a principled account of how these different components 
mechanistically, and causally, relate to each another. While previous models have 
isolated regions of interest for structure-building and lexical access, and have utilized 
specific neural recording measures to expose possible signatures of syntax, many 
gaps remain with respect to bridging distinct scales of analysis that map onto these 
four components. By expanding existing accounts of how neural oscillations can index 
various linguistic processes, this article proposes a neurocomputational architecture 
for syntax, termed the ROSE model (Representation, Operation, Structure, Encoding). 
Under ROSE, the basic data structures of syntax are atomic features, types of mental 
representations (R), and are coded at the single-unit and ensemble level. Elementary 
computations (O) that transform these units into manipulable objects accessible to 
subsequent structure-building levels are coded via high frequency broadband γ 
activity. Low frequency synchronization and cross-frequency coupling code for 
recursive categorial inferences (S). Distinct forms of low frequency coupling and 
phase-amplitude coupling (δ-θ coupling via pSTS-IFG; θ-γ coupling via IFG to 
conceptual hubs in lateral and ventral temporal cortex) then encode these structures 
onto distinct workspaces (E). Causally connecting R to O is spike-phase/LFP coupling; 
connecting O to S is phase-amplitude coupling; connecting S to E is a system of 
frontotemporal traveling oscillations; connecting E back to lower levels is low-
frequency phase resetting of spike-LFP coupling. This compositional neural code has 
important implications for algorithmic accounts, since it makes concrete predictions for 
the appropriate level of study for psycholinguistic parsing models. ROSE is reliant on 
neurophysiologically plausible mechanisms, is supported at all four levels by a range 
of recent empirical research, and provides an anatomically precise and falsifiable 
grounding for the basic property of natural language syntax: hierarchical, recursive 
structure-building. 
Keywords: Syntax; neural oscillations; ROSE; delta; traveling waves 
 

3 
 
Modern linguistics has arrived at the general assumption that the human mind/brain 
applies a set of syntactic rules to recursively combine linguistic units into larger 
objects, deriving an unbounded array of hierarchically structured expressions, with 
humans inferring sentence meaning based on syntactic configuration (Chomsky, 
1957; Everaert et al., 2015; Hagoort, 2023; Mukherji, 2022). Despite some recent 
claims that “there are no traits present in humans and absent in other animals that in 
isolation explain our species’ superior cognitive performance”, and that humans are 
simply “flexible cognitive allrounders” (Laland and Seed, 2021, p. 689), amongst other 
claims that language cannot even be given a biological account (Smit, 2022), many 
linguists maintain, as I will here, that this capacity for constructing hierarchical 
syntactic objects and assigning them a categorized, labeled identity is human-specific, 
even if the generic facility for recursion might be shared with other species (Liao et al., 
2022). Furthermore, this capacity for hierarchical recursion has been linked to human-
specific cognitive superiority (Dehaene et al., 2022; Hauser and Watumull, 2017). 
Certain aspects of language can only be captured via the postulation of structures with 
relations between their elements (Everaert et al., 2015), motivating a qualitative 
computational distinction between human and non-human psychology, in contrast to 
frameworks invoking “allrounders”.  
Meanwhile, an emerging consensus in neuroscience is that complex behavior and 
cognition rely on coordinated interactions between brain regions (Miller and Wilson, 
2008), with phase synchronization being a major candidate for a mechanism 
implementing this coordination, by gating information transmission (Bressler and 
Kelso, 2001). Yet, unlike for models of attention and working memory, there is a 
current absence of oscillatory phase coding in models of natural language. 
The central question that will occupy this article concerns whether we can begin to 
draw causal, mechanistic connections between theoretical linguistics and the brain 
sciences. I will begin by reviewing some current accounts that map syntactic 
operations onto neural systems, before proposing a novel neurocomputational 
architecture for syntax. After progressing to the theme of causal evidence for this 
architecture, I will evaluate some open questions and future directions, before 
concluding with a focus on testability. 
 

4 
 
Cracking the Neural Code for Syntax 
The past decade has seen the emergence of low frequency phase coherence as a 
feasible index of hierarchical syntactic structure building. This measure refers to 
whether two or more brain regions have similar oscillatory activity based on phase 
consistency. This has been associated chiefly with rule-based chunking rather than 
morphophonological or semantic features of phrases, typically utilizing extra-cranial 
recording (Lu et al., 2022a, b). Concurrently, recent work has examined local cortical 
processing with intracranial recordings, often focusing instead on high frequency 
power changes. This work has exposed signatures for basic linguistic operations and 
conceptual categories (Murphy et al., 2022c; Woolnough et al., 2022a, c). How these 
two distinct recording scales can be combined into a coherent model of natural 
language syntax and cortical computation has yet to be addressed. 
One way to explore this issue is through the lens of an existing neurocomputational 
model of syntax (Murphy, 2020a). The combinatorial power of language is here 
indexed via various oscillatory interactions such as forms of cross-frequency coupling. 
In Murphy (2020a), empirical and conceptual motivations are presented to defend the 
idea that δ-θ inter-regional phase-amplitude coupling constructs multiple sets of 
syntactic and semantic features. This occurs when the phase of δ is synchronized with 
the amplitude of θ. δ represents supraordinate syntactic categories, and θ represents 
feature-bundles generated via lexical access. Phase-resetting (Harris, 2023) of this 
mechanism alongside concurrent encoding/storage of its products in workspaces 
before a newly-generated δ-θ complex is created permits a facility for recursive self-
call. Distinct β (inferior frontal cortex) and γ sources (cross-cortical sites of conceptual 
storage; see below) are also coupled, respectively, with δ and θ (e.g., θ-γ phase-
amplitude coupling) for syntactic prediction and conceptual binding.  
Traveling oscillations will also be relevant for our discussion (Muller, 2018; Murphy, 
2018; Woolnough et al., 2022b). These are oscillations which migrate in phase 
coherence across the brain, whereby the spiking of neural clusters is coordinated not 
just across two fixed points but across a particular extended path. Traveling 
oscillations support brain connectivity and function (Zhang et al., 2018). In Murphy 
(2020a), δ waves cycle across left posterior temporal and inferior frontal cortices, 
building up the syntactic workspace as successive θ-complexes are synchronized with 

5 
 
δ. Traveling δ waves are assumed to be responsible for patterning spiking from single- 
to multi-unit lexical structures in each δ cycle. As such, δ would coordinate phrasal 
construction while θ-γ interactions would support the representational construction of 
linguistic feature-bundles. δ-γ coupling is involved in fluid intelligence (Gągol et al., 
2018) and linguistic phrase composition via low γ activity detected with scalp EEG 
(Brennan and Martin, 2020), whereby δ embeds cross-cortical γ rhythms depending 
on the cortical areas needed for the particular task, i.e., geometric reasoning, visual 
processing. Murphy (2018, 2020a) proposes that δ-γ coupling may be a generic 
combinatorial process, combining representations from within and across domains. 
Brennan and Martin (2020) discovered an increasing scale of δ-θ and δ-γ coupling 
beginning at the point of a word completing a single phrase, progressing into multi-
phrase units, supporting the foundations of the current model. The finding of increasing 
θ and β activity in MEG during incremental sentence processing also supports these 
assumptions (Bastiaansen et al., 2010).  
Lastly, the basic aspects of the oscillatory dynamics of language result from genetic 
guidance, and a confident list of candidate genes for this guidance can be posited 
(Murphy and Benítez-Burraco, 2018); these candidate genes map onto specific 
aspects of brain function, particularly onto neurotransmitter function, and through 
dopaminergic, GABAergic and glutamatergic synapses. 
Below, I will expand on this model in ways that help address some important recent 
critiques of it (e.g., Kazanina and Tavano, 2022; Leivada, 2017; Martorell, 2021; 
Mondal, 2022; Mukherji, 2022) pertaining to the separability of syntax from semantics, 
issues of precise spatiotemporal details, the possiblility that oscillations are simply 
‘emergent’, the apparent non-uniqueness to humans of oscillatory binding 
mechanisms, and causal evidence. Reasons to focus on this model can be found via 
some recent empirical support for it: Dekydtspotter et al. (2023) test the model in 
Murphy (2020a) and find support for syntactic processing load effects in β from EEG 
recordings of anaphora resolution in successive wh-movement in native and nonnative 
speakers of French. 
Aiding with initial direction, Ding (2022) poses perhaps the most important question 
for the neurobiology of syntax: What type of neural activity, such as low-frequency 
activity, high γ power, or spiking rate, can track very long or very brief phrases? I will 

6 
 
try to answer this question here in the following way, associating roughly the respective 
scales of recording and neurobiological organization with particular levels of linguistic 
complexity: low frequency activity (structures), high γ power (operations), spiking rate 
(basic units/representations). I will argue that present models of syntax do not 
adjudicate between appropriate levels of linguistic complexity and scales of neural 
complexity (unlike, for example, neural models of speech processing). 
 
Current Neural Models of Syntax  
Building on past insights, new brain models of syntax should seek not only to 
incrementally add to existing knowledge and assumptions – they should also 
occasionally be “disruptive” (Kozlov, 2023; Park et al., 2023) with respect to existing 
pre-conceptions and disciplinary boundaries. While traditional models of working 
memory (e.g., Baddeley and Hitch, 1974) have been replaced by neurophysiologically 
sophisticated models (e.g., Lisman and Jensen, 2013), within linguistics the traditional 
localizationist models have yet to be supplanted in a similar way.  
A comprehensive model of natural language processing in the brain must 
accommodate four components: representations, operations, structures, and their 
encoding and storage in short-term memory. Previous accounts of syntax in the brain 
have focused mostly, or exclusively, on only a subset of these components. For 
example, Friederici (2017) entertains a model of linguistic structures (S) and encoding 
(E), but omits details about the electrophysiological or neurophysiological basis of 
representations (R) and operations (O).  
When summarizing previous models below, I stress that I will be evaluating these 
purely with respect to how they address the implementational basis of R, O, S and E. 
Each of these following models have great strengths with respect to how they frame 
various components of syntax (be that at the elementary structure-building level, or 
the complex sentential level), but my goal here is not to evaluate these models against 
each other; rather, it is to address how they deal with the issue of resolving appropriate 
neural mechanisms for the basic computational components of syntax. 

7 
 
Beginning with the model in Murphy (2020a), outlined above: This took into account O 
and S, there was no focus on R or how distinct components of linguistic structure are 
related and encoded (E). 
Matchin and Hickok (2020) take into account the localization of O and S, with less 
emphasis on E. Although these authors present extensive evidence to distinguish the 
computational roles of posterior temporal cortex (lexical-syntactic structures) and 
inferior frontal cortex (morphosyntactic linearization), once we have successfully 
localized these computational distinctions, this is effectively the end of the road for the 
localizationist project.  
Krauska and Lau (2022) take full consideration of the appropriate computational-level 
resolution for R, O, S and E, and provide a clear algorithmic-level model of syntactic 
processing, but the implementation-level resolution for each of these components 
remains unresolved.  
Following the centralization of labeling in the psycholinguistics of syntax proposed in 
recent work (Adger, 2017; Chomsky et al., 2019; Murphy, 2015a, b), Goucha et al. 
(2017) focus on the importance of labeling in neurolinguistic models of syntax. They 
keep to network-level tractographic concerns of motivating how frontotemporal regions 
interface to generate S and E, with no relations to R or O. Although Goucha et al. 
(2017) defend a clear picture of hierarchy-category relations across frontotemporal 
sites, the implementation of this keeps to discussion of “cross-talk” between regions. 
In addition, the central theme of the model is that “labeling would be anatomically […] 
enabled by the arcuate fascicle”, but what precisely this enabling would look like is not 
explored. Nevertheless, it remains well-motivated to focus on structure-building via 
labeling, since this operation feeds recursivity and provides a uniform account of 
various syntactic phenomena, such as traditional islands and locality-of-movement 
effects (Bošković, 2021). 
The model in Pylkkänen (2019) provides a computationally explicit depiction of the 
general spatiotemporal dynamics of structure/meaning inferences, taking O and S as 
the focal points of discussion, but to the exclusion of R and E. 
Other models propose hypotheses about O and S, but the causal and mechanistic 
connection between these levels is not addressed. Some models that take 
neurophysiological details seriously nevertheless fall short with respect to fleshing out 

8 
 
computational details for neural activity scales; e.g., in Martin (2020) γ activity is 
associated with “the retrieval of memory-based linguistic representations by minimal 
or thresholded acoustic cues” (but see Kaushik and Martin, 2022, for new directions 
here). What is needed is not just an account of R, O, S and E, but also a principled 
means to link these components. 
Recent research has shown that the human brain and autoregressive deep language 
models both engage in continuous next-word prediction before word onset (Goldstein 
et al., 2022), but this literature has focused almost exclusively on single-element, 
lexical statistics and prediction, which many linguists would argue do not form the core 
basis of human language (see also Oota et al., 2022). 
Empirical issues also remain. The claim that the basic structure-building operation 
MERGE “appears to be localized in a very confined region” (Friederici and Singer, 
2015, pp. 334-335), BA 44, does not align with intracranial recordings (Murphy et al., 
2022e) and lesion data (Matchin et al., 2020, 2022). Chronic Broca’s aphasia is 
associated with damage to both Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas (Fridriksson et al., 
2015). Young et al. (2021) review a range of existing results from intracranial cortical 
stimulation mapping and showed how left inferior frontal regions do indeed play a role 
in syntax-semantics, but likely in complex sentence processing, rather than in 
elementary structure-building.  
Turning to other models, Hagoort’s (2005, 2013) Memory-Unification-Control (MUC) 
model takes into consideration O and E, but R and S appear only via localizationist 
assumptions of mappings to gross anatomical regions, rather than being assembled 
bottom-up via specific neurophysiological mechanisms. MUC assumes that the 
Memory component constitutes “the only language-specific component of the model” 
(Hagoort, 2013), with Unification being directed by lexico-semantic properties and 
syntactic templates inherent to Memory. Unification is also assumed to take place in 
frontal cortex, however inferior frontal cortex seems to be modulated more specifically 
by unification demands, or the use of structure for a given task (Murphy et al., 2022e). 
Hagoort has qualified this stance by claiming that Broca’s area forms only the major 
node in the Unification network, and that it is the interactions between Broca’s area 
and posterior temporal gyrus that are crucial (see also Baggio, 2018; Baggio and 
Hagoort, 2011), opening up further questions about the relative involvement (Murphy 

9 
 
et al., 2022e), and causal involvement (Matchin et al., 2022), of frontal cortex in 
structure-building. Other claims about inferior frontal cortex (“Activity in LIFC is 
presumably relatively insensitive to the onset and offset times of the stimuli, and is 
rather a self-sustaining state which is relatively unaffected by trial-to-trial variation”; 
Hagoort, 2013) are incompatible with intracranial recordings of rapid frontal responses 
to linguistic stimuli of varying types, including the integration of lexical, phrasal and 
sentential meaning (Woolnough et al., 2021, 2022a, 2023).  
With respect to models of semantics more broadly, the Controlled Semantic Cognition 
account (Lambon Ralph et al., 2017) is split into a representation component and a 
control component, for storing and manipulating semantic information during verbal 
and non-verbal tasks. While this provides a clear algorithmic picture for accessing and 
manipulating elementary semantic representations, and provides a clear localizationist 
topography, the model currently lacks any relation to specific levels of 
neurophysiological complexity. This critique also applies to even the most recent 
reviews of the neurocomputational basis of semantic memory (Frisby et al., 2023), 
despite algorithmic models of semantic memory becoming more sophisticated (e.g., 
distinct types of contiguous or dispersed codes). 
The work of Dehaene and colleagues (Dehaene et al., 2015, 2022) has perhaps come 
the closest to relating scales of neural activity to language. Yet, even here focus is 
placed mostly on R and O with no linking hypotheses between them (“The precise 
neural mechanisms of chunk formation remain unknown, and are probably widely 
distributed in multiple cortical areas”; Dehaene et al., 2015, p. 6). Under Dehaene’s 
framework, there are no principled delimitations as to where, and why, we would detect 
signatures of syntax, that might be built from independent assumptions concerning 
how the brain might encode basic units of information, or parse complex tree 
structures in real time. The frameworks in Dehaene et al. (2015, 2022) seem equally 
open to discovering cellular ‘barcodes’ for syntactic tree-structure composition as they 
are open to discovering more global signatures, which is certainly sound experimental 
practice but it also renders it more difficult to motivate any specific neural architecture 
tying different levels of linguistic complexity together (but see Desbordes et al., 2023 
for new directions mapping out the neural geometry of linguisitc composition). 
Although this is admittedly more of a critique of the existing state of the field, I will 

10 
 
claim below that a more systematic means of constraining neural models of syntax 
exists. 
Lastly, Poeppel and Idsardi (2022) maintain that neurolinguistic models promulgating 
associationist frameworks to brain-language mappings will fall short of genuine 
explanation. They further claim that words should be seen as “a conjunction of form 
and concept” (where forms can be speech, sound, sign, Braille). This neatly accounts 
for a range of orthographic and auditory forms, but we should also qualify that form-
concept conjunctions are not the full story either, with silent syntactic and inert 
elements standing on less clear ground. In addition, Poeppel and Idsardi’s (2022) 
form-concept conjunction account does not pertain to the many ways that lexicalization 
of a concept seems to alter it, to imbue it with elements of aiteational formatting, or 
teleological or functional identity, in ways that deny many common nouns simple 
definitions (Chomsky, 2000; Gotham, 2016). The ultimate cognitive or neurobiological 
reason for why lexicalization seems to place concepts on a different ‘plane’ is unclear 
(see Hagoort, 2023 and Pietroski 2018 for related discussion). 
 
ROSE 
As noted, any comprehensive account of syntax needs to accommodate 
Representations (atomic units of computation), Operations (manipulation and 
transformation of representations into a novel format), Structures (arrangements of 
representations into hierarchical relations with independent identities not reliant purely 
on the properties of individual units) and Encoding (the real-time maintenance of 
structures, and the ‘shielding’ of their identity against decay and transformation). As 
such, I will defend what I will term the ROSE model.  
Below is an outline of the basic scales of analysis that map onto each component of 
the model, which I will then motivate throughout the remainder of this article (see 
Figure 1 for a schema of components with their associated causal/mechanistic links). 
Representation-Operation-Structure-Encoding (ROSE) 
R: Single-unit encoding of conceptual features and formal syntactic 
features. This level involves a cellular barcode for distinct features that 
compose into syntactic objects coherently bound by high γ at O. It also 

11 
 
involves vector codes for ensembles hosting features common to objects 
represented at O and that are ultimately coordinated by S. 
O: High γ sensorimotor transformation into a lexicalized object (core 
network nodes: mid-fusiform gyrus, orbitofrontal cortex, middle temporal 
gyrus) accessible to δ/θ phase-locking. This level can implement the 
semantic composition of language-specific concepts (minimal phrase 
schemes) that coordinate the firing of R units. High γ activates assemblies 
of distinct units hosting the barcode or vector code for units R1 … Rn that 
compose into feature-bundles. 
S: A low frequency neural program for generating structural inferences over 
O. δ-θ phase-amplitude coupling (posterior superior temporal sulcus to 
inferior frontal gyrus) for categorial inferences modulating the representation 
of feature-bundles in θ-γ (inferior frontal gyrus to cross-modular hubs).  
E: Local and global workspaces for bottom-up lexical memory and top-down 
hierarchical memory. Traveling waves implement δ-θ coupling for 
hierarchical memory, and θ-γ coupling for lexical memory. α power codes 
for workspace ‘disruption’ (posterior temporal, inferior parietal cortex). β 
power coding for syntactic predictions (inferior frontal cortex). 
Under ROSE, high γ activity reflects operations like lexical selection from a set in 
Broca’s area, or orthographic-to-phonological conversions in inferior parietal cortices 
– core operations of language and its interfaces, but these do not appear to directly 
index units of computation (R). 

12 
 
 
Figure 1: Basic components of the ROSE model. Each box contains a graphical depiction of the 
relevant organizational scale (top), a description of how each scale relates to the relevant component 
of language (middle, boxed text), and the putative mechanistic link between components (bottom text). 
Components are named representation (R), operation (O), structure (S), encoding (E). The colored 
boxes in the Encoding component (hierarchical memory, lexical memory) correspond to the colors of 
the level of linguistic representation they are associated with (i.e., S for hierarchical memory, O for 
lexical memory). 
Some researchers will claim that the brain does not recognize constructs like ‘tense’ 
or ‘pronominal binding’ because they cannot detect a signature of these constructs at 
a particular resolution. However, many such anxieties and issues with current models 
of language in the brain can be overcome if we more carefully entertain appropriate 
scales of neural complexity and signal processing. Instead of viewing each component 
of the model separately, successive levels of syntactic composition under ROSE follow 
mechanistically from the next, constituting a full-scale model with principled and 
falsifiable 
(Kleiner 
and 
Hoel, 
2021) 
connections. 
The 
most 
advanced 
neurocomputational models of language processing (reviewed in Hale et al., 2022) 
rely on decoding BOLD responses and scalp EEG signatures, dissociating hierarchical 
from lexical-related signatures across specific time windows, but there is no clear 
demarcation between the components in ROSE with respect to their levels of neural 
organization. Many such models are also extensional in character, as opposed to 
being concerned with the operations and representations that are needed to arrive at 

13 
 
the output of language processing (but see Brennan et al., 2020, who centralize 
psycholinguistic processes and algorithmic steps). Other models make lexicalist 
distinctions between lexical node representations and higher-order structure 
representations in posterior temporal cortex (Wilson et al., 2018), but clear-cut 
localizationist distinctions between lexicality/structure seem unmotivated (Murphy et 
al., 2022e). Taking again Hagoort’s MUC model to illustrate this argument, there is no 
clear neurophysiological transition across M, U and C, and all three components lack 
a specific motivation in terms of a scale of neurobiological complexity. For example, it 
is unclear which scale of neural complexity is optimal across M, U and C.  
I will now turn to motivating each component of ROSE, before presenting converging 
causal evidence, and concluding with a discussion of future prospects. Before doing 
so, I note here that the discussion below should be seen as being aligned with 
assumptions about language processing that try and integrate computation-level 
accounts with algorithm-level accounts, such as the ‘one-system’ contention (Lewis 
and Phillips, 2015) that grammatical theories and language processing models 
describe the same cognitive system. This is evidenced by grammar-parser 
misalignments occurring as a consequence of limitations in domain-general systems 
such as memory access and control mechanisms, and is also evidenced by the 
convergence between online and offline responses to grammatical anomalies 
(Sprouse and Almeida, 2013). While I do not aim here to adjudicate between rival 
parsing models (e.g., various flavours of minimalist parsers), I note that one cannot 
even begin to robustly test distinct parsing models in a neurophysiologically plausible 
way if the appropriate level of neural organization is not first arrived at for the specific 
process under consideration. The architecture of ROSE is precisely that: an 
architecture, compatible with a range of psycholinguistic accounts. 
 
Representation 
Recent work at the single-unit level in humans has elucidated place and time cells, 
face cells, stubby shape cells, spiky shape cells, and cells sensitive to animacy (Bao 
et al., 2020). What will single-unit resolution recordings for language look like? Under 
ROSE, small ensembles of temporarily cooperating neurons, some of which are highly 
specialized for particular lexico-semantic feature types (e.g., φ, Q), collectively 

14 
 
represent atomic features that operate as feature-bundles. Semantic features of lexical 
items likely “combine sparse codes with the flexibility and combinatorial richness of 
assembly codes” (Friederici and Singer, 2015), with semantically related items 
exhibiting overlapping single-unit responses across medial temporal and lateral 
posterior middle temporal cortices, depending on approximation to canonical 
categories that these regions seem sensitive to. For instance, posterior middle 
temporal cortex may serve language-specific representational features, such as 
abstract word meaning, and may be involved in lexicalization of non-linguistic concepts 
(intracranial evidence for the unique involvement of posterior temporal cortex in 
abstract word representations – often framed and domain-specific – supports this 
view; Murphy et al., 2022d). Verguts (2017) plausibly speculates that different neural 
populations which have their spiking patterns modulated by γ rhythms are, 
“presumably, cognitive representations”. The full spread of concept-specific activation 
profiles for linguistic features remains to be comprehensively mapped, in particular 
those pertaining to features with grammatical/formal status, but new research is 
beginning to emerge here; for example, the temporal features of lexical items appear 
to be partially subserved by time perception circuits in parietal cortex (Johari et al., 
2023).  
Syntactic features are assumed here to be represented much like other long-term 
memory representations. Recent work suggests that single cells in human medial 
temporal lobe can shift their concept-related selectivity based on task demands while 
other cells are less susceptible to being re-coded (Donoghue et al., 2023). For 
syntactic features, it is possible that a similar kind of mismatch of fixed vs. flexible cells 
exists, and that this varies across feature type (e.g., formal, semantic, categorial). To 
elaborate on this point further, and to stress caution when assigning concept-related 
or feature-related neuronal profiles, consider how grid cells had their representational 
profile expand from spatial navigation to auditory navigation to conceptual navigation 
(in brief, navigation in all its guises) (Mok and Love, 2019). In contrast, face cells have 
enjoyed the opposite journey, shifting from concept cell status to recently being 
implicated in navigation (Khandhadia et al., 2023). Similar journeys may soon await 
syntax-related and theta-role-related cells. 
The major, relevant activity scales for the R and O components of ROSE are as 
follows: 

15 
 
SUA (single-unit activity): Extracellularly-recorded activity of an individual 
neuron. 
MUA (multi-unit activity): Multiple neurons, between ~50–300 microns 
(Buzsáki, 2004). 
ESA (envelope of spiking activity): The envelope of MUA (Ahmadi et al., 
2021). 
LFP (local field potential): Mesoscopic, large number of neurons, from ~250µ 
to several millimeters (Buzsáki et al., 2012). 
Before moving to the specifics of the current model, I stress that the notion of 
representation entertained here is synonymous with atomic feature or unit: I am not 
concerned with, for example, notions of representation found with formulations such 
as ‘the syntactic representation of multiple wh-movemenet’, or ‘the representation of 
long-distance pronominal binding relations’. I am concerned with elementary 
representations – there are also representations of structure or workspace 
representations, but to avoid terminological confusion I will simply refer to these below 
as S and E. 
 
Basic Units 
The atoms of linguistic computation are commonly assumed to be bundles of features 
or functional categories (Chomsky, 1967, 1974; Ramchand and Svenonius, 2014). 
However, linguists within, for example, the Distributed Morphology tradition have 
abandoned hope in a coherent notion of ‘word’; there are simply groups of features 
coding for conceptual roots, derivations and inflections (Gwilliams, 2020). Morphology 
and syntax are part of the same structure-building system, hence why we can generate 
words that, structurally, look like ‘mini sentences’, like anti-institutionalization. In 
polysynthetic languages, a single word can be composed of many productive 
morphemes, representing complex meanings. Although further specifics will not 
concern us, ROSE can accommodate (i) sets of syntactic atoms (R), (ii) mapping rules 
between syntax and concepts (O), and (iii) mapping rules between syntax and form 
(i.e., production) (Preminger, 2021). ROSE therefore permits the single-unit or 
assembly-based representations of distinct features from these domains, as opposed 

16 
 
to single-unit encoding of a ‘lexical item’ and ‘word’. Stored linguistic knowledge can 
involve the mapping from a semantic feature, to a syntactic feature, and to a 
phonological feature, and this process is hypothesized to take place at the O level (see 
below).  
Emerging evidence for this framework comes from Dijksterhuis et al. (2022), in which 
pronouns referring to previous discourse entities reactivate single cells in the human 
medial temporal lobe. Other work points to single-neuron representations of 
ambiguous words (specifically, homonym), also in the medial temporal lobe 
(Samimizad et al., 2022). Relatedly, Cai et al. (2022) conducted single-neuron 
recordings in five patients undergoing planned intraoperative interventions, and 
exposed them to auditory sentence recordings. They found that many neurons in 
lateral inferior frontal cortex and lateral middle temporal cortex responded significantly 
to a variety of lexical features during comprehension (lexico-semantic features and 
thematic roles), and some were also engaged in accurate next-word prediction.  
These recent studies all point to the existence of coordinated assemblies of neurons 
that encode a variety of lexico-semantic features. This is likely done in a mostly 
redundant format, although the range of inter-featural combinations available to a 
given representation (e.g., syntactic feature X can combine with sets Y and Z, but 
feature P can only combine with set Y) may relate to whether an atomic feature is 
sparsely (cell-specific) or redundantly encoded.  
Other work from Nelson et al. (2022) discovered preferential activity for content words 
over function words in the anterior temporal lobe, independent of word length and word 
position in the sentence. Indeed, anterior temporal regions (along with ventromedial 
prefrontal cortex) appear to be involved in conceptual combination in basic phrases, 
but not syntactic combination (Pylkkänen, 2019), important for semantic hub-based 
operations. More generally, concept cells that preferentially activate for stimuli that 
occupy a certain position in some categorial axis (e.g., animate/inanimate, 
spiky/stubby; Bao et al., 2020), seem to support declarative memory formation. 
Together with the more established finding that high frequency ripple oscillations 
(~150-250 Hz) and fast ripple (250-500 Hz) activity is modulated by human memory 
encoding and recall across the cortex (Kucewicz, 2014), these new results point to the 

17 
 
involvement of local cortical circuits and individual neurons encoding basic atomic 
features.  
Lastly, an extensive study of lexical access in epilepsy patients (via common object 
naming) has revealed another strong candidate for a lexico-semantic feature hub, the 
mid-fusiform gyrus and surrounding ventral temporal cortex, which are strongly 
associated with post-operative naming decline (Snyder et al., 2023). Importantly, 
Snyder and colleagues note that these loci coincide with the sites of susceptibility 
artifacts during echo-planar imaging, potentially explaining why this region has been 
previously underappreciated with respect to its role in lexical access (both in the 
clinical and neurolinguistic worlds). 
All together, these recent results indicate the existence of previously under-
appreciated scales of neural complexity and cortical sites that code for basic R units. 
 
Mapping from R to O 
How can we relate these ideas to O, the component of ROSE responsible for 
manipulating and combining R units rather than simply accessing them? Local field 
potentials (LFPs) reflect the common synaptic activity of a population of neighboring 
neurons (or the weighted sum of the aggregate activity of a group of neurons, reflecting 
mostly postsynaptic activity) (Buzsáki et al., 2012; Freeman, 1975; Jansen et al., 2015; 
Łęski et al., 2013; McCarty et al., 2022). Spikes are short-timed high-frequency content 
signals reflecting individual cellular activity. Neural synchronization can be evinced by 
temporally relating spiking activity to the background oscillations of LFPs (Fries, 2009, 
2015), and this relationship has been documented across multiple brain regions and 
cognitive functions (Zarei et al., 2020). This spike-phase coupling has functional 
consequences, such that in rats the coupling between spike timing and the LFP phase 
in β oscillations represents sensory information, with an inverted bell-shaped tuning 
curve (Zarei et al., 2020).  
LFPs are a highly effective means of exposing what state a given cortical region is in, 
since it captures general dynamics not specific to any individual cell, but also some 
cells that do not spike. In the same way that there is likely much information available 
at the LFP level that is not represented at the single-unit level (Kay and Lazzara, 2010) 

18 
 
– dynamics and emergent properties exist that can only be detected at the level of 
summed activity over millions of neurons – so too is it expected to be the case that 
there are aspects of cortical computation that are only represented at the interactional, 
global scale, and not at the LFP or spike level. This is a basic presupposition of ROSE, 
but also many other frameworks in cognitive neuroscience (e.g., Pessoa, 2023). An 
exemplar candidate process here is working memory, which seems to involve 
discontinuous bouts of spiking activity, as opposed to steady-state neural dynamics, 
with cortical rhythms being thought by some to control these dynamics, implementing 
executive control and allowing us to direct our memory and attentional resources at 
will (Buschman and Miller, 2022).  
Relating R to O is far from trivial. Consider how communication-through-coherence 
has typically been assumed to reflect phase-synchronization between oscillators. 
Recent work suggests an alternative mechanism, through which coherence is the 
consequence of communication and emerges because spiking activity in a sending 
area causes post-synaptic potentials in the same but also other areas (Schneider et 
al., 2021). These authors identified afferent synaptic inputs rather than spiking 
entrainment as the principal determinant of coherence, opening up new directions for 
framing the relation between units and coherence. LFP coherence appears to be 
determined by two factors (Schneider et al., 2021): (i) coherence due to the direct 
contribution of afferent synaptic inputs; (ii) coherence between the sender LFP and 
the summed population spiking activity in the receiver. Coherence therefore depends 
on connectivity strength and oscillation power, and does not need purely oscillatory 
coupling or spike-phase locking in a receiver. 
Further complexities arise here. Perhaps the biggest obstacle concerns the 
observation that cognitive processes do not necessarily lead to an increase in 
oscillatory power, and there is no necessary or clear connection between neural 
activity and computational complexity. For example, rhythms may emerge under 
stationary conditions and for low-dimensional sensory inputs. Schneider et al. (2021) 
found in monkeys that β coherence and power were most prominent during fixation, 
not during memory and movement. In macaque V1, high γ oscillations have been 
found for low-dimensional visual stimuli highly redundant across space, but these 
oscillations disappear for more salient stimuli (Uran et al., 2021). Genuine inter-areal 
phase-synchronization has been extensively documented, particularly in hippocampal 

19 
 
θ, but the point to be made here is that although the basics of ROSE are well-
supported, the specific mechanistic, causal interactions between levels remains very 
much an open question. 
Nevertheless, successfully relating the two fundamental signals discussed in this 
section (spike-LFP) can provide us with a comprehensive explanation regarding the 
neurobiology of cognition (Perge et al., 2014). Since many signals picked up by the 
LFP will also very likely be able to be found at the unit level, care must be taken to 
map out assembly-level effects from single-unit responses and also from multiple, 
clustered single-unit responses, to establish which levels of linguistic resolution can 
confidently be mapped to units. 
 
Gain-Field Mechanisms 
I have so far presented a framework for representing and accessing basic features. 
However, there also exists a plausible neural code for representing multiple features 
at once, as in the case of feature-bundles that compose into objects manipulable and 
searchable by syntax, in the form of a gain-field mechanism (Botvinick and Watanabe, 
2007). Gain-field mechanisms can conjoin information coded at the spike level across 
distinct domains, and in the case of lexical features, we might expect portions of 
posterior middle temporal cortex (serving as an interface between conceptual 
representations in anterior temporal cortex, and thematic representations in angular 
gyrus; Matchin and Hickok, 2020) to be tuned to the product of two variables 
(conceptual, event, etc.), and would hence exhibit a preference for a specific 
conceptual and thematic space. For instance, research utilizing fMRI suggests that the 
superior temporal sulcus is subdivided into regions that encode agents, verbs, and 
patients, independent of temporal order (Frankland and Greene, 2015). Pushing these 
ideas further, posterior middle temporal gyrus and inferior parietal lobe both respond 
to conceptual information from three separate input modalities (action, motion, sound), 
whereas other cortical areas responded in a bimodal or unimodal manner (Kuhnke et 
al., 2022), suggesting that single-unit responses in these two regions will likely code 
for conceptual features called upon by complex lexical instructions triggered by 
sensorimotor γ.  

20 
 
The posterior temporal sulcus is well-placed to organize much of this activity. It is 
positioned next to areas responsible for lexical search (posterior middle temporal 
gyrus), conceptual combination (anterior temporal lobe) and verbal/event semantics 
(angular gyrus). This argument is made with great force in Matchin and Hickok (2020). 
Compare this with the organization of inferior frontal cortex: sub-portions recruited for 
semantic control are “topographically sandwiched” (Chiou et al., 2022) between the 
multiple-demand and default-mode systems, and intracranial recordings can also 
evince distinct topographies for frontal control regions in high γ activity (Assem et al., 
2023). This mosaic-like architecture of frontotemporal language networks nodes 
(Murphy et al., 2022a) can likely inform the complexity architecture of ROSE, such that 
cortical sites of clear functional tesselation are predicted to be the very same sites of 
close interactivity between the ROSE components. 
What other neurobiological details are relevant here? It is known that neurons can 
participate in multiple large networks, simultaneously, via firing at difference 
frequencies (Bucher et al., 2006), contributing to all components of ROSE. Neurons in 
medial temporal and medial parietal cortices (Woolnough et al., 2020) would be readily 
capable of coding the product of multiple variables along category-sensitive cortices, 
given the categorial topology of these regions (see Murphy, 2020c for limitations of 
gain modulation models for higher-order aspects of language, beyond the lexical 
level). Single-unit recordings and cortical stimulation mapping in humans also point to 
medial temporal lobe as coding for aspects of subjective memory and conceptual 
recall (Fried, 2022), overlapping with cortex responsible for early orthographic lexical 
access. A common set of mechanisms for gain modulation have also been identified: 
GABAergic inhibition, synaptically driven fluctuations in membrane potential, and 
changes in cellular conductance (Ferguson and Cardin, 2020).  
Although ROSE simply requires features of language-relevant representations to be 
coded at the spike and ensemble level, indexed by gain-field mechanisms, other 
recent insights into single-cell computation are emerging that might refine this 
framework (Gallistel, 2021). Although synaptic weight remains the focus of information 
models, neurons are eukaryotic cells with multiple information storage and processing 
mechanisms (Fitch, 2021), including aspects of wetware (protein phosphorylation, 
gene transcription) and cell morphology (dendritic form), and features of non-synaptic 
information-processing may contribute to the development of the R component of 

21 
 
ROSE, in addition to R-to-O mappings. For instance, computation via wetware is 
substantially less expensive than cell signalling (Sterling and Laughlin, 2015). The 
single cell is ultimately where genetics, thermodynamics and theories of computation 
can meet (Niven, 2016). Neuronal excitability itself is an intracellular process 
interacting with synaptic plasticity, capable of being transferred via mRNA transplants 
across cells (Abraham et al., 2019; Lisman et al., 2018). If one is also concerned with 
issues of computational efficiency in syntax (Murphy et al., 2022b), intracellular 
computations (pertaining to synaptic weights, electrochemical dynamics, protein 
phosphorylation, gene transcription, and cell morphology) appear to operate near the 
noisy coding optimum (Riecke et al., 1997) and are also orders of magnitude less 
costly than inter-cellular signalling (Gallistel, 2017). A genuine explanation for basic 
properties of linguistic information access may be in the near future achievable via this 
reverse-engineering perspective of basic properties of cellular computation, in 
particular if we follow Prasada (2021) in assuming that Gallistel’s (2021) observations 
about the single-cell basis of memory must also be applied equally to conceptual 
representations relevant to higher-order cognition. For instance, memories for abstract 
quantitative facts, concerning durations, distances, numerosities, rates and 
probabilities, are claimed by Gallistel (2021) to be stored in terms of representations 
that depend on information-bearing molecules within neurons. Basic human concepts 
manipulated by language also bear abstract and quantitative dimensions to them (e.g., 
concrete concepts and their individuation criteria via numeric quantification; Gotham, 
2016) that exhibit considerable internal complexity (Chomsky, 2000), potentially 
rendering them compatible with this scale of neural representation. 
As Trettenbrein (2016) summarises the relevant literature: “[M]emory persists despite 
synapses having been destroyed and synapses are turning over at very high rates 
even when nothing is being learned”. Pursuing this intuition, Ryan et al. (2015) suggest 
that synapses should be understood as providing “access points” to information 
already stored within cells. Linked memories furthermore appear to share synaptic 
clusters within the dendrites of overlapping neural populations, and the locus of protein 
synthesis shapes the structure of the memory trace (Kastellakis et al. 2016). Kristan 
Jr. (2016, p. 950) adds another note of caution: “[S]ome perfectly good neurons have 
no processes, some vertebrate neurons do not generate action potentials, and some 

22 
 
small (less than a millimeter in any dimension) invertebrate animals get along just fine 
without fast action potentials in any of their neurons.” 
How can we begin to relate these issues of basic information processing to other 
scales of complexity? Concurrently, many researchers in systems neuroscience are 
embracing Chuderski’s (2016, p. 1) assessment that “[c]ross-frequency coupling may 
serve as the optimal level of description of neurocognitive processes, integrating their 
genetic, structural, neurochemical, and bioelectrical underlying factors with 
explanations in terms of cognitive operations driven by neuronal oscillations”. It is in 
this spirit that ROSE aims to mechanistically link both single-unit and population-level 
dynamics for natural language syntax. This is the theme we will turn to beow. 
 
Cells to Circuits 
One final source of tension here, though certainly not unresolvable, is between 
Sherringtonian and Hopfieldian views of neural computation. This is essentially a 
distinction between anchoring computation around biophysical details and highly 
specified cellular connections (focusing on the transformation of signals by nodes in a 
point-to-point architecture, viewing cognition as the result of patterns of node-to-node 
connections whereby nodes transform representations), or dynamics of neural spaces 
and populations (focusing on representational spaces with computation considered to 
be the transformation between spaces; an extreme interpretation of the Hopfieldian 
view omits biophysical details altogether) (Barack and Krakauer, 2021). At the heart 
of ROSE (in particular, the transition from R to O) lies the question of which domains 
of language specifically demand attention via either of these views (the neuron 
doctrine vs. the population doctrine), and to what extent they can be unified. These 
concerns lead us into one of the most difficult challenges for modern cognitive 
neuroscience: varying across domains, brain areas, behaviors, and species, do single-
unit responses possess explanatory power because they are part of a larger 
population, or, conversely, do population dynamics possess explanatory power 
because of the inherent computations performed by single-unit constituents? For 
example, evolutionarily older brain areas may be explained better via Sherringtonian 
accounts, but more recently evolved structured might not. 

23 
 
Quite independently of these exciting challenges, the aspects of R reviewed here allow 
us to go some way from coding distinct features to feature-bundles. Our next topic 
concerns operations over these objects. 
 
Operation 
It should hopefully by now be clear that ROSE makes direct predictions for what kind 
of experimental paradigms will be optimally utilized across distinct recording scales, 
and this becomes highly salient with the case of basic linguistic operations (O). The 
current model will assume that high γ activity indexes operations pertaining to 
transformations of R. γ oscillations can be generated via the reciprocal interaction 
between excitatory glutamatergic and inhibitory GABAergic neurons (Welle and 
Contreras, 2017), although their comprehensive neurochemical profile remains 
unsettled. High γ is assumed to index local cortical activity (multi-unit activity) 
(Leszczyński et al., 2020). Adopting assumptions in Murphy (2020a), narrowband and 
broadband γ parcellate representations of distinct complexity during coupling with θ, 
such that broadband γ transforms complex linguistic features and narrowband γ 
extracts more elementary representations (for empirical support of this complexity 
contrast outside of language, see Saleem et al., 2017; Storchi et al., 2017). In this 
section, I will focus more on the basic properties of high γ activity, and will return to 
these concerns of low frequency interactivity for the S and E components. 
 
Semantics of γ 
A fundamental assumption of ROSE is that much (perhaps all) of the relevant space 
of computation at the O level takes place within the varying dimensions of γ. It is 
therefore necessary here to consider the different types of γ rhythms in cognition, 
rather than viewing γ as a monolithic unit. The integration between broadband and 
slow (30–50Hz) γ is an interesting case in this respect. Broadband γ correlates with 
neuronal spiking; spiking is phase-locked to slow γ; and, in turn, fast γ exhibits coupling 
with slow γ (Bahramisharif et al., 2016). Intracranial recordings suggest that, in 
contrast to fast γ, slow γ does not seem to be triggered in a strictly item-specific 
manner, and so slow γ power likely does not carry information via amplitude but is 

24 
 
rather responsible for temporally organizing other signals (Bahramasharif et al., 2018); 
see also Bartoli et al. (2019). It is possible that the sites of slow γ rhythms act as relay 
stations between the sites of slow rhythms and the ultimate representational content 
accessed via broadband γ clusters (triggering the R level), necessitated and structured 
by specific projections. Indeed, this may demand an expansion of the δ-θ-γ code (see 
below) in Murphy (2020a) to a δ-θ-γL-γH code (L = low, H = high). 
Recent experimental work helps inform our understanding of the processes indexed 
by γ. Woolnough et al. (2021) show that broadband high γ indexes orthographic-to-
lexical transformations. Other recent work documents γ signatures of basic lexical 
conversions during reading aloud single words (exception, regular, pseudowords) 
(Woolnough et al., 2022a): mid-fusiform cortex encodes lexicality; word frequency is 
encoded by mid-fusiform (earliest), inferior frontal and inferior parietal cortices; and 
orthographic neighborhood sensitivity in found in inferior parietal sulcus. This points to 
a distributed network for distinct features that compose into lexical items. Or, more 
specifically, it suggests that these regions are involved in regulating spiking activity 
across multiple sites encoding these features, potentially via spike-phase coupling or 
a similar mechanism. Other portions of cortex are likely dedicated to varying degrees 
to aspects of R that are accessed via O; for example, living and non-living nouns can 
be selectively impaired (Bi et al., 2016) and neurally represented (Chan et al., 2011), 
whilst nouns and verbs are also selectively impaired (Daniele et al., 1994) and neurally 
represented (Yang et al., 2017).  
High γ is also a strong candidate for indexing the mapping of other basic 
psycholinguistic features, such as mappings between ortho-phonological information 
and meaning (de Zubicaray et al., 2022). Angular gyrus is a likely hub for γ-encoded 
O transformations for higher-order verbal semantic R units, being implicated in 
thematic/event structure (Graves et al., 2022) and the reconstruction of semantics 
from word-level phonology (Junker et al., 2023). Lastly, low frequency MEG activity in 
anterior temporal lobe and ventromedial prefrontal cortex seems to be sensitive to 
properties of conceptual combination (e.g., conceptual specificity), rather than 
syntactic structure itself (Pylkkänen, 2019), and future research could explore how 
these regions coordinate the activity of faster, cross-cortical activity likely recruited for 
accessing the relevant R features. 

25 
 
Consider next the results in Artoni et al. (2019). These authors constructed 
homophonous phrases with the same acoustic content but which are interpreted as 
either noun phrases or verb phrases depending of their syntactic context. Using 
intracranial recordings, they showed that VPs – semantically more complex than NPs 
– elicited greater activity in the high γ (150–300Hz) range than NPs across language-
relevant areas. Again, we see clear involvement of high frequency activity in 
representational transformations (converting identical sensory information into 
semantically distinct data structures, with local cortical activity increases indexed by 
high frequency power modulations).  
Other recent intracranial work directly supports this hypothesis concerning high γ 
indexing of lower to higher-order feature transformations. Focusing on auditory cortex 
and surrounding sites of superior temporal gyrus, Keshishian et al. (2023) showed a 
transition from the representation of early acoustic, phonetic and phonotactic features 
in high γ, to the later representation of lexico-semantic features, with these higher-
order semantic features being represented further away from primary auditory cortex. 
The representation of earlier features was sustained throughout, with the 
transformation of speech sounds to lexical meaning being indexed by high γ.  
Overall, these studies suggest that high γ is involved in the conversion or mapping of 
primitive units to larger feature-bundles that compose into complex linguistic objects. 
These linguistic representations often seem to be used by the same cortical sites in 
both comprehension and production (Hu et al., 2022). The cortex appears to 
implement a range of reusable computations (Marcus et al., 2014), permitting this 
generic mapping process to take scope over (evolutionarily) novel feature spaces. For 
example, prefrontal cortex may host circuits supporting variable binding, sequencing, 
gating and working memory storage (syntax-external demands), while lateral posterior 
temporal cortex might more reliably and efficiently subserve cross-modal semantic 
integration and supraordinate categorization (syntax-internal demands). 
This theme of conversion and mapping is directly related to concerns of the type/token 
distinction. Other neural models of language have addressed the type/token issue 
comprehensively (Baggio, 2018), providing a level of depth that I will not attempt 
presently. I will simply note that, at least in terms of the semantic network for 
orthographic language comprehension, a model for types, tokens and referents has 

26 
 
recently been proposed from a large cohort of intracranial recordings (Murphy et al., 
2022a). This network implicates posterior superior temporal sulcus (pSTS) and inferior 
frontal sulcus as coding for types in high γ activity, with processes pertaining to lexical 
search and semantic coherence implicating a considerably widespread network 
(medial parietal cortex, parahippocampal cortex, ventromedial prefrontal cortex, 
posterior middle temporal gyrus). The role of medial parietal cortex here is particularly 
important in the context of discussions of endogeous attention, sensorimotor 
conjunctions, and prediction/error correction (Alexander et al., 2023). With respect to 
ROSE, it is notable that pSTS and closely neighboring portions of posterior temporal 
cortex code for all three components of meaning (type, token, referent). In many ways, 
the present assumptions about pSTS hosting types (i.e., types at the R level via sparse 
coding of single-cell features, or more redundant features further away from pSTS and 
towards neighboring temporal sites) and its interactions with frontal and parietal 
cortices generating tokens and referents provides support for core aspects of the MUC 
model (Baggio & Hagoort, 2011; Hagoort, 2013), but with the additional 
neurocomputational architure scaling from single-cell to ensemble to a coordinated, 
multiplexed network. 
Lastly, are there any similar proposals outside of the language domain that fit the 
present model? A potential relation between the scales of complexity for R and O can 
be found in the domain of motor chunking. During motor sequence learning in 
monkeys, single neurons in the prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia begin by emitting 
a burst of spikes to each action in the sequence (an individual motor representation), 
but then shift to firing only at the first and last items, seemingly indexing chunk 
boundaries (Fujii and Graybiel, 2003; Jin et al., 2014). This moves us from single-cell 
representations of acquired motor habits, to the more dynamic operation of 
establishing a more complex representation.  
 
Structure 
Acquiring and manipulating embedded tree structures, in a recursive fashion, is a 
defining human achievement (Fitch, 2014). Even basic structures exhibit sensitivity to 
syntactic identity (Lasnik, 2017; Martin et al., 2020). Sentence structure, in variable 
ways, guides a number of linguistic processes such as lexical recognition and 

27 
 
semantic integration (Lowder et al., 2022; Pietroski, 2008). Discovering a feasible 
neural code for recursive syntactic composition would contribute to an explanation for 
the generativity of human intelligence and, potentially, the acquisition of composable 
functions more broadly (Dekker et al., 2022).  
Thus far, I have mapped out candidate neural mechanisms for elementary linguistic 
representations and their manipulation. This section will begin by outlining the profile 
of supraordinate structures aimed to be captured by ROSE, before progressing to how 
this model converges with existing research. 
 
Basic Structures 
The syntactic component of language involves the construction of binary-branching 
hierarchically organized sets via the operation MERGE. This operation initiates with 
lexical access, manipulating objects from the lexicon or objects part of the syntactic 
workspace. Given the set {X, Y}, we can either select a new lexical object and MERGE 
it, to form {Z, {X, Y}}, or we can select an existing object to form {X, {X, Y}} or {Y, {X, 
Y}}. These sets are then labeled and given a syntactic identity, based on which 
element is most structurally prominent and easiest to search for (i.e., Z in the structure 
{Z, {X, Y}}). MERGE can also derive some set-theoretic properties of linguistic 
relations, such as membership and term-of, as well as the derived relation of c-
command (sister of). In an attempt to render theoretical models more 
psycholinguistically compatible, MERGE has recently been defined as an operation 
on a workspace and its objects (Chomsky et al. 2019), formalized as follows (WS = 
workspace; P/Q = workspace objects; X = additional elements):  
WS = {P,Q,…} 
MERGE(P,Q,WS) = WS’ = {{P,Q},X1,…,Xn} 
A basic case of traditional External MERGE (responsible for argument structure) can 
be represented as:  
WS = [X, Y, Z] → MERGE(X, Y) → WS’ = [{X, Y}, Z] 
In contrast, we can also implement Internal MERGE (‘movement’; responsible for 
discourse- and information-related properties): 

28 
 
WS = [{X, Y}, Z] → MERGE(X, {X, Y}) → WS’ = [{X, {X, Y}}, Z] 
The execution of MERGE relates ultimately to structural relations, rather than to 
independent pressures like communicative priorities (Murphy, 2020b). As Hagoort 
(2023) comprehensively reviews, the computational system of language seems to be 
related to neural signals integrating perception and action, providing humans with 
novel modes of planning and interpretation, whereby lexical units and unification 
processes like MERGE provide “an imaginary space that transcends the influence of 
direct perception-action cycles” (Hagoort, 2023, p. 2). This positions MERGE outside 
of the direct influence of sensorimotor γ signatures, for example.  
I will be concerned here with exploring candidate neural mechanisms for MERGE in 
an effort to construct the S component of ROSE, putting aside some of the 
performance-related issues pertaining to real-time parsing, which require deeper 
empirical exploration. 
 
Syntactic Signatures 
I will assume here that the processing correlates of MERGE and labeling take place 
after posterior temporal δ phase-locks to θ either in neighboring temporal sites or 
inferior frontal sites, depending on the category of structure being composed. Dorsal 
arcuate fasciculus, connecting posterior temporal with posterior inferior frontal sites, 
contributes to syntactic encoding here (Goucha et al., 2017), whereas more ventral 
portions, and also more anterior temporal regions, are recruited for conceptual-
semantic processes (Pylkkänen, 2019). The importance of posterior temporal cortex 
for the basic property of syntactic computation cannot be emphasized enough 
(Matchin and Hickok, 2020). For example, the native language of polyglots is 
processed locally within posterior temporal cortex, with only minimal frontal 
involvement, and frontal cortex is recruited more for their many non-native language 
representations, presumably demanding more plastic, controlled representational 
access to variations in functional morphosyntactic structure (Malik-Moraleda et al., 
2023). Lesion-symptom mapping of language impairments in individuals with brain 
tumors also suggests that while single-word production deficits are associated with 
inferior parietal cortex, phrase and sentence production deficits are additionally 
associated with posterior temporal gyri (Ntemou et al., 2023). 

29 
 
A range of converging evidence for the role of neural oscillations in posterior lateral 
temporal cortex coding for natural language structure is emerging (e.g., Matar et al., 
2021). Importantly, the role of endogenous oscillations in neural computation, over 
and above the role of entrainment, has been recently documented (Duecker et al., 
2021; van Bree et al., 2021). The δ-θ frontotemporal interactions in S are assumed to 
influence medial temporal and frontal θ-γ coupling pertaining to representational 
bundling. This model is also supported by the low frequency tracking literature, which 
finds stronger δ signatures for sentence-tracking, and also chunk-tracking, in temporal 
cortex over frontal cortex (Jin et al., 2020). By focusing on syntactic hierarchies, I put 
aside here issues of morphophonology, or morphosyntactic linearization, which seem 
to implicate inferior frontal cortex (Matchin and Hickok, 2020; Sahin et al., 2009), and 
which may also recruit aspects of the θ-γ code for linear sequencing (Heusser et al., 
2016; Lizarazu et al., 2023). 
Neighboring domains of cognitive neuroscience provide some converging insights 
here. In a reward-based decision-making task utilizing EEG, Riddle et al. (2022) found 
that reward-evaluation was marked by frontal θ phase coupled with parietal γ, whereas 
goal-directed behavior was positively correlated with coupling between frontal δ to 
motor β amplitude. The executive, supraordinate signatures of δ-driven coupling seem 
clear.  
In the language domain, Keitel et al. (2018) analysed speech tracking in source-
localised MEG data and found the following structures were tracked at particular 
bands: phrases (0.6–1.3 Hz), words (1.8–3 Hz), syllables (2.8–4.8 Hz) and phonemes 
(8–12.4 Hz). The δ rhythm which tracked phrases was coupled with β power in motor 
areas, which likely implements top-down speech predictions. Across humans, 
monkeys and mice, β seems to be generated by nearly synchronous bursts of 
excitatory synaptic drive targeting proximal and distal dendrites of pyramidal neurons 
(Sherman et al., 2016). 
Keitel et al.’s (2017) MEG study of auditory cortical δ entrainment, and its interactions 
with frontoparietal networks, provide further insights. During intelligible speech 
processing, δ entrained with three networks: δ-β coupling occurred between δ in the 
left anterior superior temporal gyrus and β in left-lateralised medial orbitofrontal areas, 
which the authors claim reflected predictive top-down modulations of auditory 

30 
 
encoding. δ-α coupling occurred between δ in left Heschl’s gyrus and α in anterior 
superior temporal gyrus. Finally, δ in right posterior superior temporal gyrus coupled 
with predominantly right-lateralised parietal θ, which likely reflected semantic memory 
engagement. Auditory δ entrainment thereby seems to be influenced by left 
orbitofrontal β and parietal θ. These δ-θ interactions may index the mapping of 
acoustic-phonemic processing to more specific morphosyntactic features, which are 
then subject to coordination by other δ-driven mechanisms. Relatedly, using MEG 
Klimovich-Gray et al. (2021) showed that the joint support of temporal and contextual 
predictability reduces word and phrase-level cortical tracking in δ, likely due to less 
parsing effort being needed in these contexts, supporting the higher-order inferential 
function of δ. 
Nevertheless, some recent research has pointed to potential concerns with this 
frequency-tagging paradigm when used with natural speech, such that models 
invoking endogenous synchronicity may be better placed to explain the spatiotemporal 
dynamics of syntax (as opposed to purely chunking via exogenous entrainment). The 
paradigm used by Keitel and colleagues has technical issues that may prevent it from 
exposing phrase-specific responses: Zhang et al. (2023) show via simulations that the 
1 Hz phrase-level tracking largely originates from the pauses in natural speech. The 
dynamics that arise through faster δ-driven and θ-driven interactions seem less 
susceptible to this problem. 
I have focused here on concrete neural mechanisms, mostly abstracted away from 
parsing details. Questions of timing are here purely empirical, but interactions between 
these layers of the ROSE processing hierarchy afford a considerable degree of rapid 
flexibility. Consider how hierarchical phrase composition appears to be indexed 
around 200–300ms after the composition-permitting item (Hale et al., 2022; Murphy et 
al., 2022e). Just because δ can host, for example, three cycles per second (3 Hz), this 
does not mean that, therefore, syntactic computation must occur over relatively long 
spans (~300–350ms). The δ-coordinating activity takes place mostly in the period 
immediately after the trough of the cycle. Furthermore, only a portion of this post-
trough period will be directly responsible for phase-amplitude coupling dynamics, not 
the entire trough/peak cycle. As such, this will take place over much faster periods, 
likely within ~80–165ms chunks, or faster (keeping purely with 3 Hz as an example). 
These windows are compatible with MEG-derived and EEG-derived time courses for 

31 
 
syntactic binding and semantic composition (Murphy et al., 2022e; Pylkkänen, 2019), 
with effects lasting around ~90–120 ms for conceptual composition, argument 
structure encoding, and sensitivity to long-distance dependencies.  
In addition, recent work has begun to push back against the traditional, Friederician 
‘syntax-first’ processing model of sentence comprehension, and has shown that 
syntactic categories do not appear to be identified first and also do not condition 
lexical-semantic integration, demanding a revision to strictly seriel models of phrase 
structure comprehension. For instance, instead of observing a LAN-P600 complex for 
syntactic category violations, or only a P600 effect, Fromont et al. (2020) 
systematically observed an N400-P600 effect. In terms of timing relevant to ROSE, 
this work indicates that the initial semantics-driven properties of R and O can readily 
integrate with each other over time windows partially overlapping with slower (and low 
frequency) signals integrating syntactic information. 
Reinforcing the importance of the generation of supraordinate categories, in MEG 
decoding of speech for basic adjective-noun phrases, “the head of the phrase, the 
noun, engages a much more stable set of neural representations than its modifier, the 
adjective” (Honari-Jahromi et al., 2021), potentially due to its labeled status. We also 
find β oscillations in posterior temporal cortex exhibiting sensitivity to syntactic 
complexity (Matar et al., 2021), positioning this as a core component of identity-
attribution in syntactic labeling (Murphy, 2020a), responsible for aspects of 
maintenance as opposed to active structure-generation (δ-θ). 
 
Mapping from O to S 
One of the earliest stages of transitioning from O to S likely comes in the form of 
activating in parallel multiple (and potentially overlapping) unit groups coding for R but 
being manipulated, mapped, or transformed by γ. It has recently been discovered via 
human intracerebral recordings that high γ oscillations (70–200Hz) can exhibit long-
range phase synchronization, which appears behaviorally relevant in a response-
inhibition task (Arnulfo et al., 2020). This broadens the scope for simultaneously active 
(bound) linguistic features to be organized into a set via cross-cortical manipulation 
(coordinated, under ROSE, via low frequency activity in the service of workspace 
construction; see below). This approximates the formal notion of unordered binary set-

32 
 
formation (Chomsky et al., 2019) more so than the linear feature-clocking of phase-
amplitude coupling suggested in Murphy (2020a). The joint coordination and activation 
of cross-cortical linguistic features (free from any serialization constrained via phase-
amplitude coupling) may constitute one of the earliest stages of phrase structure 
building, prior to morphosyntactic linearization. 
 
Low Frequency Structure-Tracking 
One of the most important research directions in neurolinguistics that pertains 
specifically to the S component of ROSE is the low frequency tracking literature (Di 
Liberto et al., 2018; Ding et al., 2016; Jin et al., 2020; Keitel et al., 2018; Lu et al., 
2022a, b; Makov et al., 2017, Schmidt et al., 2022). The most recent advances here 
have shown separable low frequency repsonses to syntactic rule-based chunking 
independently of lexico-semantic features (Lu et al., 2022a, b), constituting an 
independent neural process from basic statistical analysis of word features. Other 
seminal work here includes Kaufeld et al.’s (2020) demonstration of how δ-band scalp 
EEG activity is modulated by lexically driven combinatorial processing beyond 
prosody. Low frequency oscillations can appear in synchrony with chunks of structure, 
varying also with flexible time scales of speech presentation.  
What makes low frequency behavior highly relevant here is that certain tracking effects 
may be unique to higher cognition. Multi-syllabic zebra finch songs do not result in 
slow neural activity matching the time scales of specific chunks, and we instead find 
bursts of discrete, transient activity for each syllable, rendering this appropriate for 
item-based state transition models, but not models invoking syntactic structure (Long 
et al., 2010; for further discussion, see Schlenker et al., 2022). There is also recent 
evidence for the role of a category-sensitive phrase-building (labeling) mechanism 
driving the cortical tracking (via low frequencies) of hierarchical linguistic structures 
(Burroughs et al., 2021), as predicted in Murphy (2020a) and which is in line with the 
present ROSE architecture. 
Despite the above reservations about frequency-tagging paradigms when applied to 
naturalistic speech, neural envelope tracking seems vital for a number of 
comprehension mechanisms, and is decreased in individuals with post-stroke aphasia 
(De Clercq et al., 2022). Low frequency cortical activity tracks both overt and covert 

33 
 
prosodic changes, and this tracking interplays with syntactic processing. Using scalp 
EEG, Glushko et al. (2022) showed that alignment of syntax and prosody boosted 
EEG responses, whereas their misalignment had the opposite effect. This was true for 
both overt and imagined prosody. A range of studies have shown how prosody serves 
as an aid to syntactic parsing, such that speakers tend to use stronger prosodic 
boundaries to mark left dependencies (Degano et al., 2022). Yet, as Glushko et al. 
(2022) demonstrated, some signature of syntax is still provided with δ tracking, even 
if constituent structure is not uniquely encoded via δ frequency-tagging.  
Consider also the findings of Rimmele et al. (2022). Using MEG, these authors had 
participants listen to disyllabic words presented at a rate of 4 syllables per second. 
They found that lexical content (as opposed to syllable-transition information) activated 
a left-lateralized frontal and superior/middle temporal network. The authors discovered 
δ-θ phase-amplitude coupling in middle temporal gyrus and superior temporal gyrus 
in conditions with lexical, transitional and syllable information, but not with only syllable 
information, suggesting that syllable information is exploited for lexical-level 
processing. As noted above, ROSE places δ-θ interactions as part of a more general 
syntactic, categorization process, not unique to ‘word’-level elements, applying also to 
sets of lexical objects to form phrases. Purely at the level of speech properties, there 
appears to be a role for θ tracking throughout sustained acoustic fluctuations, but a 
greater involvement of δ tracking at speech onset (Chalas et al., 2023). 
Other supporting evidence for ROSE comes from Gross et al. (2013), who discovered 
δ-θ phase-phase coupling during speech perception, with θ also modulating the 
amplitude of γ, suggesting that δ phase likely modulates θ in distinct ways depending 
on the computation. Halgren et al. (2017) also revealed that in the human brain cortical 
δ phase “robustly modulates theta power, with an increase in theta-band power during 
the falling phase of the ongoing delta rhythm”. It is currently an open question what 
type of parsing procedures are indexed by various types of δ-θ relations (e.g., phase-
phase versus phase-amplitude relations). 
 
Dissociating Structure and Meaning 
Contrasting with low frequency signatures of structure, high γ appears to encode 
elements of meaning at the minimal phrase level (Murphy et al., 2022e) and, 

34 
 
incrementally, in orthographic sentence processing (Woolnough et al., 2023) – but not 
structural identity at the complex multi-phrase, syntactic node-tracking level 
(Woolnough et al., 2023). Importantly, Woolnough et al. (2023) failed to detect γ 
signatures of syntactic node structure, as initially reported in Nelson et al. (2017), likely 
due to Nelson et al. not including lexical frequency in their model; once this is included, 
structure-related parsing effects disappear in high γ. Importantly, Woolnough et al. 
(2023) found increased γ for Jabberwocky over Pseudoword lists, but this was crucially 
punctuated and not sustained across multiple words in the sentence. As such, this 
likely represents a signature of the basic structure-building operation, MERGE, and 
these Jabberwocky γ effects also lasted around 200–300ms, seemingly the right 
resolution for the timing of syntactic composition (Pylkkänen, 2019). When considered 
alongside the failure to find γ signatures for structure-building parsing models, these 
results conspire to suggests that operations (O) can be detected transiently via γ, and 
that semantic information is represented here more robustly, while structural identity 
itself (S) is represented more globally in low frequencies.  
While these results are in line with the framing of conceptual composition in ROSE, 
how can we address this apparent mismatch between high γ sensitivity to phrase and 
sentence meaning, but not sentence structure? One thing to consider is that constructs 
such as the labeling algorithm from theoretical syntax may not easily map to 
psycholinguistic factors (Murphy, 2023a), and so it seems that multi-unit syntactic 
node opening/closure might also not be encoded in high γ. Although the signal from a 
basic, minimal compositional scheme might be strong enough to be detected, driven 
likely by its semantic properties unique to the phrasal over lexical configuration, upon 
encountering more diffuse representations across multiple phrases, this may become 
difficult at the purely structural level. Hence, in terms of basic semantic composition 
operations, and perhaps also transient instances of MERGE, high γ seems sensitive. 
Indeed, propositional sentence-level meaning is represented in fMRI as a distributed 
network, not specific to any specific site (Anderson et al., 2021), already pointing to 
the functional utility of global mechanisms like low frequency coupling and phase 
synchronization. Other converging evidence for the present model comes from Toneva 
et al. (2022), who show that inferred sentence meaning (‘supra-lexical’ meaning) can 
be detected via fMRI in the posterior superior temporal sulcus but not via MEG, 

35 
 
suggesting again that local cortical computation via synchronized pyramidal cell firing 
does not code for supraordinate elements of complex syntactic structure building. 
As such, structures and storage may need separate scales of encoding, which under 
ROSE come in the form of low frequency synchronization and cross-frequency 
coupling. Operations (O) can occur at the intra-lexical or extra-lexical level, depending 
on the type of featural manipulation being carried out: transforming graphemes to 
phonemes, or to conceptual representations, or triggering a cluster of R features that 
go beyond the simple summation of discrete features, or building incremental 
sentence meaning or a situation model that is independent of structural format. 
In effect, single cells under ROSE can represent formal and semantic features (similar 
to how they appear to represent various sound features; Leonard et al., 2022) such as 
root elements and categorization elements that assemble into basic syntactic objects, 
but structural information may be a Hopfieldian concern of population dynamics, 
calling upon more global (cross-cortical) and inter-areal coordination (as opposed to 
category-specific, unit-specific memory storage).  
Quite suitably for this purpose, cross-frequency coupling has been widely linked with 
information integration across neuronal populations. Bybee et al. (2022) propose a 
role for cross-frequency coupling in the memory of discretized phase patterns, based 
on a principle in analog computing (subharmonic injection locking). Using a novel 
coupled oscillator Q-state phasor associative memory (PAM), Bybee et al. (2022) 
show that the presence of coupling increases the memory capacity in plastic 
synapses. If the present ROSE architecture is appropriate for language, then specific, 
memorized syntactic configurations (akin to Hagoort’s syntactic schemas in posterior 
temporal cortex, or Matchin and Hickok’s treelets) may be stored via types of 
discretized phase patterns exposed by Bybee et al. (2022), readily and efficiently 
called upon via cross-frequency coupling. With respect to related neural mechanisms, 
silent synapses (Vardalaki et al., 2022) in lateral posterior temporal cortex may be 
called upon (‘unsilenced’) to store new complex syntactic schemas for rapid recall, 
both during learning and short-term consolidation, coordinated by the low frequency 
ROSE code. 
 
Mapping from S to E  

36 
 
We have so far presented candidate neural mechanisms for R, O, and S, and have 
also outlined means to map R to O, and O to S. Are there other potential means to 
further link R, O and S, and is there a means to further map S to E? This section will 
discuss vector codes and traveling oscillations as a means of positively answering 
these questions. 
The present system of low frequency modulations of faster local cortical activity can 
serve to implement the algorithmic vector symbolic architecture of Eliasmith et al. 
(2012). Vector codes take scope over a fixed population of neurons and determine 
approximate values of activity across this cohort (e.g., active vs. silent). As mentioned, 
the existence of spike-phase coupling, seen as part of the more global system of low 
frequency phase coherence under ROSE, would permit a direct path from global low 
frequency synchrony, to a specific γ activation profile (across the trough-peak of the 
lower rhythm), to the vector code of this fixed population of neurons. It is known that 
spike-phase coupling increases with memory demand (Hanslmayr et al., 2021), but 
we currently lack any such evidence for syntactic composition demands, although this 
is predicted by ROSE. Even though this vector code itself remains obscure with 
respect to syntax (and requires a joint combination of single-unit recordings and LFP 
signatures), in principle ROSE can readily accommodate the more global dynamics 
that emerge from it. Indeed, ROSE leads to the prediction that syntactic node 
boundaries and complex, successive syntactic operations will have no robust vectorial 
representation at the single-unit level. For now, we can surmise that the monotonically 
increasing level of γ activity over the course of sentence processing (Woolnough et 
al., 2023) likely reflects this output of global low frequency coordination over this space 
of local vector codes.  
One final mechanism ties together all presently discussed components of ROSE: 
traveling waves. Zabeh et al. (2022) show how traveling waves (in β) regulate neuronal 
spiking activity across space and time, being related to reward history in the monkey 
brain. These authors show how frontoparietal LFPs form traveling waves, and claim 
that wave direction is a proxy of intra-regional communication. This provides a feasible 
mechanism not simply for regulating δ-θ interactional dynamics in language, but also 
the dynamics of R units, controlling the co-activation probability of neurons in 
topographic networks.  

37 
 
Other recent work suggests that, at least in ventral temporal cortex, the propagation 
of event-related phase synchronization does not seem category-specific (i.e., there 
are few difference between faces and words) (Woolnough et al., 2022b), suggesting 
that traveling waves serve a more domain-general information transfer function in this 
portion of cortex, while the R and O scales serve domain-specific representational and 
computational functions. Note here that in order for this type of research to more 
stringently conclude that portions of cortex are category-sensitive or selective, we 
would have to detect the relevant activity profiles in the absence of stimuli triggering a 
given representation, not simply when subjects are shown pictures or words depicting 
these representations. The propagation of phase modulation “may represent the 
dynamic coordination of neural processing across spatially disparate regions […] 
modulating excitability of local neural populations” (Woolnough et al., 2022b). These 
results support a phase reset model of event-related potential generation, such that a 
resetting of the instantaneous phase of ongoing oscillations results in the ERP through 
creating a coherent superposition of phase components (Iemi et al., 2019).  
In contrast, in association cortex distinct types of traveling waves (feedback, top-down) 
that are more category-specific seem to exist (Murphy, 2020a), which may encode 
higher-order information. Nevertheless, Bhattacharya et al. (2022), in their study of 
monkey lateral prefrontal cortex, did not observe any changes in traveling wave profile 
across different working memory task sample items, which is again consistent with the 
view that traveling waves have a ‘meta’ network function that is independent of item 
identity. Essentially, S codes specifically for recursive structure generation, and 
traveling waves migrate these representations over to relevant workspaces in E (see 
below). 
Much other work suggests that traveling waves can create timing relationships 
fostering spike-timing-dependent plasticity and memory encoding (Sreekumar et al., 
2020), and that they contribute information about the recent history of activation of 
local networks (Muller et al., 2018). Connecting the distinct levels of ROSE, 
microelectrode recordings in the human brain suggest that it also seems feasible for 
macro-scale waves to co-occur with micro-scale waves, which can be temporally 
locked to single-unit spiking (Sreekumar et al., 2020). Temporal coordination between 
traveling waves at different spatial scales, and between waves and spiking activity, 
points to a role for traveling waves in neural communication. The different types of 

38 
 
macro- vs. micro-scale traveling waves may form their own internal hierarchy of 
sensitivity to distinct structures or higher-order relations in language processing, e.g., 
global situation model maintenance vs. local phrase structure coordination. 
A more ostentatious series of speculations concerns the role of brain shape in cross-
cortical information transfer, such that the human brain has assumed a more globular 
shape than our closest relatives (Benítez-Burraco and Murphy, 2019), and this may 
contribute causally to explaining efficient cross-cortical synchronization, opening up 
new paths for traveling waves and inter-areal connectivity. Recent work in this 
connection has pointed to various geometric constraints on human brain function 
(Pang et al., 2023) and highlighted strong relations between functional connectivity 
profiles and critical episodes of neural regularity and complexity (Krohn et al., 2023), 
although presently little else can be said of direct relevance to ROSE. 
For now, traveling waves seem suited to memory-related and encoding-related 
processing, dynamically coordinating the local storage of cortical information, forming 
the foundation of any notion of syntactic workspace arising out of implementations of 
ROSE. Bhattacharya et al. (2022) document rotating traveling waves relevant for 
working memory in prefrontal cortex in the monkey brain. These ranged from θ to β, 
and during task performance some waves (mostly β) increased in number in a given 
direction greater than during baseline conditions. Soroka and Idiart (2021) propose a 
model for working memories under which δ, θ and α are traveling waves, whilst 
simulatenously undergoing phase-amplitude coupling relations coding for the ordering 
of working memory items (γ) – and constraints on working memory size – by slower 
rhythms. In their model, the interactions between θ and γ determine the allocation of 
multiple items, while interference between θ and α disrupts the maintenance of the 
current workspace. Under ROSE, a similar architecture exists but with the additional 
layer of hierarchical, executive coordination by δ for syntactic inferences over 
workspaces. 
 
Summary 
In brief, ROSE assumes that the amplitude of θ (involved in θ-γ bundling of elementary 
features for syntactic manipulation) is in turn coupled with the phase of structure-
indexing δ, with δ-θ interactions alongside δ-β interactions providing an additional 

39 
 
layer of phase coding to yield recursive structure formation necessary for natural 
language syntax (see Murphy, 2020a, for further cartographic details concerning 
specific frontotemporal network nodes). Notice that the neural codes outlined for 
structural inferences (S) and representational binding (R, O) are mechanistically 
related, but they are distinct in ways that lead to empirical predictions for the 
processing of logical and grammatical relations, such as negation, pronominal binding, 
agreement, and sentence coordination. These processes are predicted to yield high γ 
signatures over sites of representational binding (à la the binding of visual stimuli into 
faces or scenes; Woolnough et al., 2020; see also Yu & Lau, 2023), since while they 
are constrained by structural factors the ultimate signature is expected to be 
concerned with accessing a specific representational format (R) via sensorimotor 
mappings (O), even if this is to be guided by the more global, supraordinate labeled 
identity of the current workspace (S, E). Intracranial recordings of morphosyntactic 
agreement, for example, could probe this issue further. 
 
Encoding 
Syntactic comprehension seems to require multiple workspaces. For Chomsky (2023, 
Forthcoming), there are parallel search procedures for labeling. For Adger (2017), one 
workspace is used to construct syntactic phrases, and the other is used to temporarily 
maintain these units once they have been transferred. This topic constitutes the final 
component of ROSE: encoding structures after their generation (E). Following Murphy 
(2020a), this encoding aspect can be addressed as follows: the initial θ-γ code 
constitutes the first workspace (sensitive to lexical memory), and the subsequent δ-θ 
code constitutes the second (sensitive to supraordinate, hierarchical memory).  
To illustrate, consider the sentence ‘old men walk slowly’. During the comprehension 
of the first two words, the δ-γ combinatorial code coordinates the feature-bundling of 
the atomic data structures hosted by ‘old’ and ‘men’ (Brennan and Martin, 2020). At a 
minimum, this involves pSTS low frequency activity coupled with neighboring posterior 
temporal cortex but also cross-cortical sites responsible for the specific feature types 
in question (e.g., ATL, IFG) (Murphy et al., 2022e). θ-γ coupling maintains in short-
term memory the relevant units (R) via high frequency activity (O) in a linear sequence 
(Heusser et al., 2016). At the transition between ‘men’ and ‘walk’, the supraordinate 

40 
 
δ-θ code maintains the categorial (i.e., structural) identity of the object, in this case the 
negotiation between a multi-unit noun phrase and a more complex verb phrase hosting 
‘old men’. During the same period, the initial lexical memory code increases its number 
of θ-nested chunks due to the occurrence of ‘walk’. The same transition occurs from 
‘walk’ and ‘slowly’, with the exception that while the lexical memory code still increases 
in coupling strength, the hierarchical memory code would decrease closer to (but not 
identical to) its pre-verb baseline, due to the adjunction relation not demanding a 
revision of the hierarchical memory representation. The transfer of relevant lexical 
information (i.e., for categorization and labeling/search) would take place via 
interactions between these two neural codes, potentially via θ-θ phase-phase coupling 
or phase-locking of the θ-γ workspace and the δ-θ workspace. θ-driven dynamics 
effectively constitute the ‘hand-off’ of information after lexicality has been established 
by lower-level R and O processes, transitioning from encoding lexical memory to multi-
object memory. Direct testing of these dynamics specifically with respect to syntactic 
workspace construction has currently not been undertaken, although much work has 
been carried out demonstrating increased θ-γ coupling in human hippocampus during 
memory formation (Lega et al., 2016), as well as enhanced frontal θ to posterior γ 
coupling (Friese et al., 2013). 
Recent research is compatible with this model: Becker and Hervais-Adelman (2023) 
found that left posterior middle temporal gyrus θ-entrainment in MEG is associated 
with syllabic and lexical recognition during speech processing, while δ-entrainment 
across broader portions of posterior temporal cortex is associated with phrasal 
recognition. In a word and face processing task using MEG and intracranial 
recordings, Fellner et al. (2019) found that across a number of brain areas increases 
in γ power and decreases in θ power predicted memory formation irrespective of 
material, and that γ increases occurred significantly earlier compared to θ decreases, 
aligning with the general transition of γ (R/O) to θ and δ (S/E) complexes that conclude 
with the encoding component of ROSE. This is compatible with the Information via 
Desynchronization Hypothesis, which states that neural desynchronization increases 
the amount of information that can be neurally encoded since it allows discrete cells 
to transmit individual messages, as opposed to a group attempting to transmit the 
same message (Schneidman et al., 2011). 

41 
 
At the highest level of abstraction, we can summarize that δ-driven coupling 
constitutes the encoding of top-down syntactic information, while θ-γ coupling 
represents bottom-up (feature-to-assembly) level information driven more directly by 
perceptual inference. The remainder of this section will elaborate on this proposal and 
explore further connections with the above framework for R, O and S. 
 
Syntactic Memory as Phase-Synchronization over Successive Cycles 
Given that we are dealing here with domain-specific cognitive properties (as they 
pertain to linguistic structure building), are there any reasons to highlight the ROSE 
components as being suitably distinct from a neurocomputational perspective? 
Consider how there appears to be a broader range of cross-frequency coupling 
relations in the human brain relative to the anthropoid apes, with the human cortex 
exhibiting a species-specific level of richness in its cross-frequency coupling profile 
(Maris et al., 2016), pointing to interactional dynamics as being a possible major index 
of human-specific computational capacities. These assumptions are bolstered by 
recent work showing that individual differences in syntactic processing performance is 
related to white matter connectivity differences between nodes of the language 
network (Sánchez et al., 2022). These low frequency interactional dynamics seem to 
be encoded via Erdős-Rényi networks (Murphy, 2020a). Future modeling of oscillatory 
networks for language and their connectivity profiles (Thiebaut de Schotten and 
Forkel, 2022) crucially need to be centred around biophysical models that are 
inherently compatible with recorded neural signals, rather than intuitive models of 
oscillations that may lead to spurious detection of rhythms (Doelling and Assaneo, 
2021; van Bree et al., 2022).  
This species-specific richness in cross-frequency interactions may be principally 
related to the expansion-fractionation-specialization (EFS) hypothesis (DiNicola and 
Buckner, 2021). Evolutionary expansion of human association cortex may have 
allowed for an archetype distributed network to fractionate into multiple specialized 
networks (DiNicola and Buckner place special emphasis on frontotemporal areas 
implicated in higher-order language). One such network seems to be anchored around 
a cortical mosaic for linguistic structure and meaning along the pSTS (Murphy et al., 
2022e), interacting with inferior frontal cortices during more complex functional 

42 
 
grammatical structure-building (Woolnough et al., 2023), and under ROSE would form 
the basis of low frequency hierarchical coupling in the δ-θ range. 
At the algorithmic level, the present conception of E is compatible with the framing of 
syntactic working memory as arising from continuous or discrete attractor states, 
implemented neurally via activity in recurrent networks (Wang, 2013) and the 
coordination of firing patterns via low frequency phase coding. 
 
Symbolic Computation 
Recent directions in the neurobiology of navigation and memory are relevant to the 
present conception of E. As reviewed in Kurth-Nelson et al. (2023), hippocampal-
cortical sequence replay and encoding is not constrained to simply repeat past 
experience. Rather, this process is informed by an internal model of the world, 
generating representations of inferred entities not necessarily encountered physically. 
This active, generative capacity motivates the authors to propose that replay in the 
brain instantiates a form of compositional computation. A given replay sequence 
constitutes a set of entities strung together into a compound, whereby each entity is 
bound to a representation of its compound role, determining its function as part of a 
whole. This establishes a clear separation, with respect to composability, between 
entity and role (or semantics and syntax). While roles encoded by hippocampal-
cortical interactions can certainly be spatial, they can also be non-spatial, and even 
non-spatial and non-Euclidean (Kurth-Nelson et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2019), potentially 
involving arbitrary roles such as ‘verb’. The entity-role bindings currently explored 
empirically in humans are limited to things like ‘which position’ and ‘which sequence’, 
but if other roles like ‘if’, ‘then’ and ‘else’ can be encoded in a similar way then replay 
may form a viable candidate for a neurophysiological mechanism implementing 
symbolic computation. This compositional nature of replay is implemented via θ-γ (and 
also fast ripple) hippocampal-cortical interactions (Kurth-Nelson et al., 2023), mirroring 
closely the present assumptions of lexical feature sequencing and basic semantic 
compositionality being implemented via the same dynamics and high γ activity. 
 
Memory Transfer 

43 
 
Other neural mechanisms are beginning to emerge for memory transfer that may bear 
some relevance for transferring chunks of structure to distinct cognitive systems. 
Interhemispheric transfer of working memories has been found to be achieved via left 
and right prefrontal cortex via θ synchrony, with transferred memory traces activating 
different ensembles than feedforward-induced traces (Brincat et al., 2021). Cortical 
feedforward processing has been shown to be mediated by θ and γ (Bastos et al., 
2015). The assumption of ROSE is not simply that γ increases during maintenance 
and decreases during read-out, as in current working memory models (Lundqvist et 
al., 2018), but rather that this process naturally requires coordination over a set of 
distinct memory representations that are concurrently clustered via more global, 
supraordinate control mechanisms, which take the form of phase-amplitude coupling 
in δ-θ for syntactic category and hierarchical memory and θ-γ for ‘lexical’ (feature-
bundle) memory (Figure 1).  
As briefly mentioned, β increases seem to signal the build-up of syntactic predictions 
(Murphy, 2020a), but it also seems that β suppression in prefrontal cortex marks 
cortical dishinhibition permitting working memories to be expressed. β suppression 
likely co-occurs alongside the encoding steps in ROSE (Figure 1), in keeping with 
current models, while β increases at different periods of sentence processing seem to 
index prediction (Murphy et al., 2022e), potentially in neighboring inferior frontal sites. 
The transfer of working memories from one portion of cortex to another occurs at 
around 120ms (Brincat et al., 2021), such that working memory representations 
decrease after the initial increase at the receiver, signalling a ‘soft handoff’ of 
information whereby some trace still remains at the initial construction site during this 
brief period. It may be that the duration of this handoff period for natural language (as 
opposed to the working memory tasks in the monkey brain probed in Brincat et al., 
2021) increases with the complexity of the multiplexed, compressed signal of feature-
bundles to be spell-out. Indeed, it is thought that interhemispheric communication is 
disrupted in certain dyslexias (Dhar et al., 2010). In addition, familial sinistrality has 
been found to impact the brain’s responses to morphosyntactic violations (Leckey et 
al., 2023); the field currently lacks a consensus on the interhemispheric organization 
of syntax-specific and extra-syntactic comprehension mechanisms, and inter-areal 
analyses centred on oscillatory dynamics may well contribute here. 
 

44 
 
Alpha/Beta Dynamics 
So far we have focused mostly on δ-θ signatures, but as indicated briefly above, other 
low frequency signatures seem to play essential roles in the regulation of form-
meaning mappings and the integration of information from syntax-semantics into 
domain-general systems.  
Keeping for the moment with syntactic memory, results reported in Gehrig et al. (2019) 
support a role for β in syntactic identity. These authors investigated speech memory 
representations using intracranial recordings in the left perisylvian cortex during 
delayed sentence reproduction in patients undergoing awake tumor surgery. Based 
on the memory performance of patients, they found that the phase of frontotemporal 
β represents sentence identity in working memory. The notion of sentential identity 
presupposes a labeled structure (i.e., CP, VP), seemingly represented (at least 
partially) by frontotemporal β. Converging with other literature (reviewed in Murphy, 
2020a), β may represent aspects of the global cognitive set going beyond syntax-
specific information to include conceptual and statistical information pertaining to 
sentence identity that is immediately captured by structure-building, whereas the δ-θ-
γ interactions discussed above code for more specific language-internal compositional 
processes.  
Intracranial recordings of auditory language comprehension implicate frontal α/β 
power (8–30 Hz) in phrasal prediction/anticipation (Murphy et al., 2022e). Pefkou et 
al. (2017) found that both θ and γ are sensitive to syllable rate, but only β power is 
modulated by comprehension rates and is insensitive to syllabic structure. This 
suggests, again, that θ power plays a more bottom-up role in feature-set construction 
(Figure 1) while β appears to be involved in the tracking or prediction of semantic or 
phrasal identity. Independently, θ power can code for lower-level stimulus features, 
but when coupled with δ, a more higher-order role can be established, likely depending 
on cortical site. 
In parietal cortex, α enhancement seems to index syntactic working memory demands 
(Meyer et al., 2013). Much like the regulation of γ by α in control and attention 
mechanisms (Bonnefond & Jensen, 2015; Jensen et al., 2014), parietal cortex may 
play an important role in memory and complexity, such that low frequency rhythms 
originating in lateral or medial parietal cortex regulate the activity of γ-encoded O in 

45 
 
lateral temporal cortex, and single-unit or assembly-encoded R in medial temporal or 
inferior frontal cortex.  
Another likely site of syntactic working memory for E is inferior frontal sulcus, since 
this is implicated in task-related evaluation of phrasal meaning, and exhibits functional 
coupling with posterior temporal sites during structure composition (Murphy et al., 
2022e), and is engaged for a number of semantic integration demands (Murphy et al., 
2022a). As such, it is expected that lower frequency components in inferior frontal 
sulcus and inferior parietal cortex are functionally coupled with other low frequency 
components coding for S, discussed above, providing the read-out of structure into 
short-term encoding (Makuuchi and Friederici, 2013). 
Turning lastly to the issue of memory training, using MEG Wang et al. (2021) trained 
native German speakers in syntactically complex German sentences via 
comprehension tests over a series of four days. They found that successful training 
strengthened the use of the dorsal processing stream, with working memory-related 
regions in inferior frontal sulcus demonstrating decreased γ (55–95 Hz) over the 
course of the four days. Future work testing ROSE could explore the 
electrophysiological dynamics of this region, likely a source of the δ-θ coupling-driven 
hierarchical workspace. 
All of these assumptions take place within the context of the present traveling wave 
framework, with lower frequencies migrating objects across the cortex, which is 
particularly relevant to issues of maintenance and storage. Traditional ‘standing’ 
waves lead to periods when all neurons in a network are turned ‘off’, whereas traveling 
waves can ensure that sub-portions of a network remain consistently active 
(Bhattacharya et al., 2022), directly compatible with the mosaic-like architecture of 
posterior temporal and inferior frontal cortices in semantic integration processes 
(Murphy et al., 2022a).  
 
Causal Evidence 
This section will explore current evidence that the neural architecture outlined here for 
ROSE may have some causal-explanatory power.  

46 
 
Beginning with the basic components of ROSE, we cannot directly claim that LFPs 
‘do’ computation; their activity seems to index some underlying code that remains 
elusive in its formal character and neurochemical basis. Yet, aspects of brain 
dynamics have recently been associated with causal disruptions in cognitive and 
perceptual functions. A general guiding question that neurolinguists should 
consistently ask is the following: ‘Is this signal important for the brain, or is it important 
for the neuroscientist?’ There are many possible neural signals to record and make 
theoretical claims about, but a systemic means for adjudicating between correlation 
and causation remains a difficult obstacle. Nevertheless, some directions are opening 
up for establishing the causal role of oscillations.  
As Snyder (2015) reviews, oscillations are increasingly being shown to play a causal, 
and not correlational, role in the perceptual segregation of sound patterns. Riecke et 
al. (2018) used speech-envelope-shaped transcranial current stimulation to conduct 
two experiments involving a cocktail party-like scenario and a listening situation devoid 
of any speech-amplitude envelope input. The results suggest effects on listeners’ 
speech recognition performance, implying the existence of a causal role for speech-
brain entrainment.  
Moving closer to our concerns, Riddle et al. (2020) provide causal evidence from TMS 
that θ is involved in the control of working memory. That δ-β and θ-γ coupling are also 
causally involved in cognitive control (Riddle et al., 2021) suggests that phase-
amplitude coupling can be used as a neurocomputational algorithm for feature 
extraction and association. Other research using hippocampal-targeted TMS-fMRI 
points to the causal role of θ-γ nested oscillations in memory encoding (Hermiller et 
al., 2020). θ has a causal role in spatial memory re-play (Zielinski et al., 2020). 
Fernández-Ruiz et al. (2019) looked at the rat brain and showed that learning and 
correct recall in spatial memory tasks are associated with extended sharp wave 
ripples. Artificially prolonging these ripples improved working memory performance, 
suggesting again a causal role for these rhythms in representational maintenance, at 
least over these specific neural populations. There also appears to be a causal role 
for α oscillations in perceptual binding (Zhang et al., 2019). 
At the same time, in the realm of speech it has been suggested that ‘forward 
entrainment’ (neural entrainment that outlasts the entraining stimulus) “may instantiate 

47 
 
a dynamic auditory afterimage that lasts a fraction of a second to minimize prediction 
error in signal processing” (Saberi and Hickok, 2022). Speech envelope tracking via θ 
may “leverage forward entrainment as a generative model of speech-segment timing 
to more efficiently process upcoming segments (where timing is inferred from 
expectations and priors in a Bayesian sense)” (Ibid.). This particular topic remains a 
contested space. 
Regardless, as noted by Earl K. Miller, questions about the causal role of oscillations 
could also be asked of spikes. Both are signals that work together, and decoupling 
them seems difficult. Dismissing observed signals as ‘epiphenomenal’ without 
showing how, or why, does little to advance the neurobiology of cognition (Krakauer, 
2022). Indeed, claims like ‘X is epiphenomenal’ are often synonymous with ‘X does 
not fit my theory’, as Miller has noted. It is also difficult to imagine what the alternative 
would be for the brain to implement complex computations and goal-directed behavior. 
Rhythmic fluctuations provide the foundations for these systems almost for free. 
Coordinating a large number of gates across a huge number of neurons seems 
impossible without this mechanism. That said, it is worth noting here that the frequency 
bands invoked in ROSE should not be seen as types, or fixed bounds for computation, 
but rather tokens of computation that are physiologically bound over brain maturation 
and development.  
Following the chain of processes intrinsic to ROSE, I assume here that single-unit and 
assembly representations coding for discrete semantic and formal syntactic features 
would act as the spark igniting the neurocomputational architecture of the model. This 
would trigger LFP-scaled operations such as feature composition and sensorimotor 
transformations (grapheme-to-phoneme transitions, etc.), which in turn would be 
regulated by low frequency coordination of spike-LFP synchronization, and cross-
regional synchronization via migrating waves of δ-θ coupling. An emerging consensus 
in this general direction is that spike-related activity is also present in low frequency 
activity, as well as in the γ band (Buzsáki et al., 2012; Łęski et al., 2013). Under ROSE, 
each scale of representation and computation can mechanistically be linked to the 
next. This departs from other current models that attempt, for example, to ground N400 
ERP effects directly from single-unit responses, with no causal-explanatory 
mechanism linking them (Samimizad et al., 2022), or models that relate 

48 
 
neurotransmitter profiles to the N400, without a mechanistic bridge tying together 
these scales of analysis (Hagoort, 2013).  
 
The Fallen Leaves Tell a Story: Prospects for ROSE 
“[W]e run the risk of being able to measure every cell (or subcellular component even) in 
the brain in a theoretical vacuum.” (Pessoa, 2023, p. 358) 
This article proposed a new neurocomputational architecture for natural language, 
termed ROSE (Representation, Operation, Structure, Encoding). Although the 
‘boxology’ of classical models of language in the brain often placed emphasis on 
numerous aspects of the four components of ROSE, they did so in a way that did not 
narrow down the specific scale of system complexity, or rapid spatiotemporal 
dynamics necessary for a more neurobiologically plausible theory of syntax. Indeed, 
one of the common criticisms of neural oscillations is that they simply transfer 
localizationist claims from regions to frequency bands. Yet, what neural oscillations 
can provide is the potential to relate lower-level neural mechanisms, of the kind 
invoked by ROSE, to such frequency-specific activity. Although I have been concerned 
here with the “basic property” (Chomsky, 2021) of syntactic structure building (MERGE 
and its affiliate interface processes), future research should more concretely map 
complex syntactic processes, such as pronominal binding and wh-movement, to 
various stages of the interactions between the components of ROSE. 
Importantly, while one researcher may be inclined to pursue accounts of relating 
generative grammar or minimalist parsing processes to ROSE, other researchers may 
argue for relations between the components of ROSE and other psycholinguistic 
models of language. It may turn out that minimalist grammar accounts, for example, 
have a more difficult time relating R with O, and O with S, than other accounts. For 
example, Stanojević et al. (2021) examine the derivations assigned by a near-context 
free formalism, Combinatory Categorial Grammar (CCG). CCG improves BOLD signal 
modeling in six language-relevant brain regions, and including a parsing step 
facilitating late-attachment of modifier phrases improves the fit in anterior temporal and 
inferior frontal cortices. Meanwhile, other researchers (Brennan et al., 2016; Li and 
Hale, 2019) discovered that node counts on X-bar structures derived by minimalist 
grammars predict unique variance in BOLD signal in the posterior temporal lobe. 

49 
 
Given that basic structure-building mechanisms are associated under ROSE as 
originating in posterior temporal cortex, and that extra-syntactic processing stages 
commonly implicate inferior frontal cortex, these joint results may suggest that different 
grammatical theories can capture varying aspects of sentence processing complexity 
(basic MERGE vs. late parsing stages and dependencies). 
Some exciting prospects for testing ROSE come in the form of multi-channel 
recordings with broad cortical access using planar microelectrode arrays, implanted 
intracortically during awake brain surgery. These have recently been used to unveil 
traveling waves and also single-unit responses indexing basic mathematical 
operations in brain tumor patients in lateral parietal cortex (Eisenkolb et al., 2022). 
Both high γ power and the speed of traveling waves were greater when processing 
higher numerosities. Scaling from single-units to traveling waves would permit a 
comprehensive language mapping of the kind needed to test and refine ROSE. 
Brain models informed by computational concerns will continue to be needed in the 
neurosciences, in particular as we approach the advent of widespread availability of 
single-unit human recordings (Rust and LeDoux, 2023). This (partially) ‘outside-in’ 
perspective has been critiqued recently. Buzsáki (2019) advocates for an inside-out 
perspective on building neural models of cognition, and considers the classical Marrian 
framework a purely outside-in perspective. Yet, Marr himself stressed that the three 
levels should be investigated in parallel, not necessarily prioritizing any given level 
(see also Marcus, 2001). But this is a balancing act: too much outside-in, and we will 
soon get claims about ‘Neo-Davidsonian existential closure neurons’; too much inside-
out, and we will receive calls to dismantle models of sentence parsing. Regardless of 
one’s philosophical bent, single-unit and other types of intracranial recordings are 
plainly the most direct and reliable means to further test and refine ROSE (McCarty et 
al., 2022), in particular given recent independent assessments that spontaneous 
BOLD activity may be more closely aligned with offline plasticity and homeostatic 
processes than online fluctuations in cognitive content (Laumann and Snyder, 2021), 
and sceptical editorial commentary from major journals concerning the validity of fMRI: 
“[I]t is extremely difficult to conclude that functional connectivity as measured by 
functional MRI genuinely measures information exchange between brain regions” 
(Kullmann, 2020, p. 1045; but see also Esfahlani et al., 2020; Toi et al., 2022). 

50 
 
More broadly, ROSE is sympathetic to recent moves in philosophy of biology to view 
a range of biological constructs as processes rather than objects (Nicholson and 
Dupré, 2018). To invoke David Bohm (Bohm and Biederman, 1999, p. 12), “[t]here 
really is no ‘thing’ in the world” (see also Murphy, 2023b). ROSE is built entirely from 
neurocomputational mechanisms that are already known to subserve clusters of 
generic perceptual and cognitive operations. As Hasson et al. (2018) note, many 
language-specific 
interpretations 
of 
experimental 
neurophysiological 
and 
electrophysiological data might be better seen as implementations of highly generic 
processes, like monotonic integration of information, establishment of coherence, 
prediction, and representational binding. While Meyer (2018) reasonably speculates 
that cross-frequency coupling may be involved in “the neural binding of discrete 
phonological units at different granularity levels”, under ROSE this generic process 
may be implicated in binding and associating other features ranging far beyond 
phonology. 
Questions that remain concern the precise cortical infrastructure of ROSE, and how 
best to establish a mathematically rigorous algorithmic architecture. For example, 
superficial cortical layers oscillate at faster frequencies, and deeper layers at slower 
frequencies, potentially due to different interneurons (e.g., FS-PV vs. SOM) (Neske 
and Connors, 2016), while superficial layers are sources of feed-forward structural 
connections, and deeper layers are sources of feed-back connections (Mendoza-
Halliday et al., 2022). At the same time, the relation between these remains unclear 
since increases in high γ power are not always found alongside decreases in low 
frequency power; this depends on cortical region (Fellner et al., 2019). 
 
Conclusion 
The development of the present ROSE architecture comes partly in response to the 
current absence of oscillatory phase coding in models of natural language syntax. This 
absence is growing increasingly stark given that this mechanism has long been known 
to be computationally useful in executing rapid neural binding. Many researchers who 
have kept to frameworks emerging purely from MEG-derived event-related fields, 
scalp EEG-derived event-related potentials, and fMRI-derived BOLD responses have 
begun to lose hope in the possibility of finding the neural basis of syntax, but have 

51 
 
done so without moving beyond the limitations of their scale of analysis or recording, 
or linking hypotheses. For example, Pylkkänen (2019) writes that “[t]he neuroscience-
of-language field has long assumed that our brains build syntactic structure during 
language processing. Today, it is reasonable to question this assumption”.  
Under ROSE, there is no sense to be made out of claims that syntax (a complex series 
of operations and representations) lies in one specific brain region. Even claims about 
syntax existing across multiple regions via white matter connectivity require substantial 
enrichment via the four components of ROSE. Each level of linguistic representation 
and structure-building requires its own suitable scale of neural organization, not just 
cartographic mapping. In this respect, one goal for the future would be to refine our 
understanding of the principled links between each of the four components of ROSE 
(i.e., how R mechanistically maps to O, and O to R), since this forms the crux around 
which the distinct scales of system complexity can be most directly tested and falsified. 
For instance, the line between ‘oscillation or not’ can sometimes be blurred, with a 
leaky integrate-and-fire model being both an oscillator and a model of evoked 
responses, and there is also heterogeneity in the possible mechanisms for oscillations 
(Doelling and Assaneo, 2021), and hence how they relate to single-unit information 
sources. At the same time, oscillations do in fact display some unique properties, such 
as their eigenfrequency, their Arnold Tongue, or their independence of rhythmic 
stimulus (their ‘echo’) (Fröhlich, 2015; van Bree et al., 2022). Many possible 
candidates for linking the four ROSE components exist once we refine our biophysical 
models of oscillations.  
In terms of their roles in shaping information processing in cognition, the currently 
identified frequency-specific mechanisms seem to align with an emerging consensus 
that slow frequencies control input sampling, α/β gate information flow, and high 
frequency activity is controlled by slower rhythms (ElShafei et al., 2022).  
Research into this topic may progressively validate the present assignment of linguistic 
constructs to particular scales of neural organization. Alternatively, it may ultimately 
transpire that the foundational structures of natural language syntax are not to be 
found at any of these scales, and will instead remain at a remote distance to modern 
science, lost to us on “the wide fathomless sea of living existence” (Montgomery 1886, 
p. 574).  

52 
 
Appendix: Glossary of Terms 
Agreement: When the form of a word/morpheme covaries with that of another word 
or phrase. Compare ‘John runs to the park’ with ‘We run to the park’, where the form 
of the verb is conditioned by whether the noun is singular or plural.  
Binding theory: A set of principles accounting for the distribution of anaphoric 
elements (e.g., pronouns). A pronoun, or ‘bindee’, typically has an antecedent, or 
‘binder’, as in ‘John said he was happy’, where the pronoun can successfully refer to 
the noun, unlike in ‘*He said John was happy’. 
Brodmann area (BA): A region of the cortex defined by its cytoarchitectonics, or cell 
structure. 
C-command: An expression of the relationship between nodes on a hierarchically 
organized syntactic tree. If a node has any ‘sibling’ nodes (nodes which are dominated 
by the same node) then it c-commands them, and if not then it c-commands every 
node that its dominating ‘parent’ node c-commands. 
Cell assembly: A network of functionally connected neurons that is activated by a 
particular mental process and whose excitatory connections have been strengthened 
in time. 
Content word: Words which name objects and their qualities. These are typically 
nouns but can also be verbs, adjectives and adverbs. 
Cross-frequency coupling: When interactions between discrete frequency bands 
give rise to more complex regulatory structures. For instance, phase-amplitude 
coupling denotes the statistical dependence between the phase of a low-frequency 
band and the amplitude of a high-frequency band. 
Embedding: The ability for a linguistic unit to host within it another linguistic unit. 
Erdős-Rényi network: A random graph where each possible edge has the same 
probability p of existing, and the degree of a node i(ki) is defined as the number of 
connections it has to other nodes. The degree distribution P(k) of the network is a 
binomial distribution, decaying exponentially for large degrees k, permitting only small 
degree fluctuations. Facilitates coupling between slow frequency components. 

53 
 
Function word: Words denoting grammatical relationships between content words, 
such as prepositions, pronouns and conjunctions. 
Gain modulation: How neurons nonlinearly combine information from multiple 
sources. 
Generative grammar: The branch of linguistics which assumes that natural language 
is a mental computational system of rules generating an unbounded array of 
hierarchically structured expressions, with varying degrees of acceptability. 
Labeling: The categorization of a MERGE-generated object at the point of conceptual 
interpretation, providing an asymmetric syntactic identity based on which element is 
most structurally prominent and easiest to search for, e.g., Z in WS = {Z, {X, Y}}. 
MERGE: The computational operation which selects two objects from the lexicon, α 
and β, and forms an unordered set mapping them to an active workspace, WS = {α,β}. 
Oscillation: The unfolding of repeated events in terms of frequency. In the context of 
the brain, neural oscillations (or brain rhythms) are repetitive patterns of activity in 
caused by excitatory and inhibitory cycles in cell assemblies. 
Phase synchronization: When multiple cyclic signals oscillate such that their phase 
angles stand in a systematic relation. 
Phi-feature (φ): Linguistic features of Person, Number and Gender. 
Phonology: The system of sound, or a set of sound-related features and rules 
stipulating how these features interact in a given language. 
Recursion: The hallmark of natural language syntax; when a linguistic rule can be 
applied to the result of the application of the same rule, creating, for instance, ‘nested’ 
structures like ‘John, who likes Sarah, will come to the party’ from ‘John will come to 
the party’. 
Syntax: Informally termed the ‘grammar’, this is the set of principles governing the 
structure of morphologically complex word-like elements, phrases and sentences, and 
their combinatorial processes. 
Word movement: A core concept in generative grammar whereby syntactic objects 
are displaced from the position where certain of their features are interpreted. 

54 
 
Acknowledgements 
My sincere thanks to all members of the Tandon Lab at the Department of 
Neurosurgery, UTHealth, who taught me to appreciate that what linguists wish to find 
in the brain is scarcely a realistic picture of what we can actually observe, including 
Nitin Tandon, Oscar Woolnough, Meredith McCarty, Kathryn Snyder, Tessy Thomas, 
Aditya Singh, Patrick Rollo and Kiefer Forseth. My thanks go to Patrick Trettenbrein 
for comments of an earlier draft. I would also like to thank Antonio Benítez-Burraco, 
Karl Friston, Koji Hoshi, Evelina Leivada, Gary Marcus and Jae-Young Shim for their 
more recent collaborative efforts with me, which have helped shape my understanding 
of the limits of the neurolinguistic enterprise and have each directly influenced the 
framing of at least one of the four components of the model presented here. This work 
was supported by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (Grant 
NS098981). 
 
References 
Abraham, W.C., Jones, O.D., and Glanzman, D.L. (2019). Is plasticity of synapses the mechanism of 
long-term memory? npj Science of Learning 4: 1–10. 
Adger, D. (2017). A Memory Architecture for Merge. Ms. Queen Mary University of London. 
ling.auf.net/lingbuzz/003440. 
Ahmadi, N., Constandinou, T.G., and Bouganis, C.-S. (2021). Robust and accurate decoding of hand 
kinematics from entire spiking activity using deep learning. Journal of Neural Engineering 18(2): 
026011. DOI:10.1088/1741-2552/abde8a. 
Alexander, A.S., Place, R., Starrett, M.J., Chrastil, E.R., and Nitz, D.A. (2023). Rethinking retrosplenial 
cortex: Perspectives and predictions. Neuron 111(2): 150–175. 
Anderson, A.J., Kiela, D., Binder, J.R., Fernandino, L., Humphries, C.J., Conant, L.L. et al. (2021). Deep 
artificial neural networks reveal a distributed cortical network encoding propositional sentence-level 
meaning. Journal of Neuroscience 41(18): 4100–4119. 
Arnulfo, G., Wang, S.H., Myrov, V., Toselli, B., Hirvonen, J., Fato, M.M., et al. (2020). Long-range phase 
synchronization of high-frequency oscillations in human cortex. Nature Communications 11: 5363. 
Assem, M., Hart, M.G., Coelho, P., Romero-Garcia, R., McDonald, A., Woodberry, E. et al. (2023). High 
gamma activity distinguishes frontal cognitive control regions from adjacent cortical networks. Cortex 
159: 286–298. 

55 
 
Baddeley, A.D., and Hitch, G. (1974). Working memory. Bower, G.H. (Ed.). The Psychology of Learning 
and Motivation: Advances in Research and Theory. Vol. 8. New York: Academic Press. 47–89. 
Baggio, G. (2018). Meaning in the Brain. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Baggio, G., and Hagoort, P. (2011). The balance between memory and unification in semantics: a 
dynamic account of the N400. Language and Cognitive Processes 26(9): 1338–1367. 
Bahramisharif, A., Jensen, O., Jacobs, J., and Lisman, J. (2018). Serial representation of items during 
working memory maintenance at letter-selective cortical sites. PloS Biology 16(8): e2003805. 
Bahramisharif, A., Mazaheri, A., Levar, N., Schuurman, P.R., Figee, M., and Denys, D. (2016). Deep 
brain stimulation diminishes cross-frequency coupling in obsessive-compulsive disorder. Biological 
Psychiatry 80(7): e57–58. 
Bao, P., She, L., McGill, M., and Tsao, D. (2020). A map of object space in primate inferotemporal 
cortex. Nature 583: 103–108. 
Barack, D.L., and Krakauer, J.W. (2021). Two views on the cognitive brain. Nature Reviews 
Neuroscience 22: 359–371. 
Bartoli, E., Bosking, W., Chen, Y., Li, Y., Sheth, S.A., Beauchamp, M.S., et al. (2019). Functionally 
distinct gamma range activity revealed by stimulus tuning in human visual cortex. Current Biology 
29(20): 3345–3358. 
Bastiaansen, M., Magyari, L., and Hagoort, P. (2010). Syntactic unification operations are reflected in 
oscillatory dynamics during on-line sentence comprehension. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 22(7): 
1333–1347. 
Bastos, A.M., Vezoli, J., Bosman, C.A., Schoffelen, J.-M., Oostenveld, R., Dowdall, J.R., et al. (2015). 
Visual areas exert feedforward and feedback influences through distinct frequency channels. Neuron 
85(2): 390–401. 
Becker, R., and Hervais-Adelman, A. (2023). Individual theta-band cortical entrainment to speech in 
quiet 
predicts 
word-in-noise 
comprehension. 
Cerebral 
Cortex 
Communication 
tgad001. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/texcom/tgad001. 
Bhattacharya, S., Brincat, S.L., Lundqvist, M., and Miller, E.K. (2022). Traveling waves in the prefrontal 
cortex during working memory. PLoS Computational Biology 18(1): e1009827. 
Bi, Y., Wang, X., and Caramazza, A. (2016). Object domain and modality in the ventral visual pathway. 
Trends in Cognitive Sciences 20(4): 282–290.  
Bonnefond, M., and Jensen, O. (2015). Gamma activity coupled to alpha phase as a mechanism for 
top-down controlled gating. PLoS ONE 10(6): e0128667. 
Bohm, D., and Biederman, C. (1999). Bohm-Biederman Correspondence, vol. 1: Creativity and 
Science. London: Routledge. 

56 
 
Bošković, Ž. (2021). Merge, move, and contextuality of syntax: the role of labeling, successive-cyclicity, 
and EPP effects. Ms. University of Connecticut. 
Botvinick, M., and Watanabe, T. (2007). From numerosity to ordinal rank: a gain-field model of serial 
order representation in cortical working memory. Journal of Neuroscience 27(32): 8636–8642. 
Brennan, J.R., Dyer, C., Kuncoro, A., and Hale, J.T. (2020). Localizing syntactic predictions using 
recurrent neural network grammars. Neuropsychologia 146: 107479. 
Brennan, J.R., and Martin, A.E. (2020). Phase synchronization varies systematically with linguistic 
structure composition. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 375: 1791. 
Brennan, J.R., Stabler, E.P., Van Wagenen, S.E., Luh, W.M., and Hale, J.T. (2016). Abstract linguistic 
structure correlates with temporal activity during naturalistic comprehension. Brain and Language 157-
158: 81–94. 
Bressler, S.L., and Kelso, J.A. (2001). Cortical coordination dynamics and cognition. Trends in Cognitive 
Sciences 5: 26–36. 
Brincat, S.L., Donoghue, J.A., Mahnke, M.K., Kornblith, S., Lundqvist, M., and Miller, E.K. (2021). 
Interhemispheric transfer of working memories. Neuron 109(6): 1055–1066. 
Bucher, D., Taylor, A.L., and Marder, E. (2006). Central pattern generating neurons simultaneously 
express fast and slow rhythmic activities in the stomatogastric ganglion. Journal of Neurophysiology 95: 
3617–3632. 
Burroughs, A., Kazanina, N., and Burroughs, C. (2021). Grammatical category and the neural 
processing of phrases. Scientific Reports 11L 2446. 
Buschman, T., and Miller, E.K. (2023). Working memory is complex and dynamic, like your thoughts. 
Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 35(1): 17–23. 
Buzsáki, G. (2004). Large-scale recording of neuronal ensembles. Nature Neuroscience 7: 446–451. 
Buzsáki, G. (2019). The Brain from Inside Out. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Buzsáki, G., Anastassiou, C.A., and Koch, C. (2012). The origin of extracellular fields and currents – 
EEG, ECoG, LFP and spikes. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 13: 407–420. 
Bybee, B., Belsten, A., and Sommer, F. (2022). Cross-frequency increases memory capacity in 
oscillatory neural networks. Poster presented at Neuroscience 2022 (Society for Neuroscience Annual 
Meeting), November 12-16. 
Cai, J., Jamali, M., Kfir, Y., Belinkov, Y., Paulk, A., Cash, S., and Williams, Z. (2022). Single neuronal 
decoding of human speech processing: a deep learning approach. Poster presented at Neuroscience 
2022 (Society for Neuroscience Annual Meeting), November 12-16. 

57 
 
Chalas, N., Daube, C., Kluger, D.S., Abbasi, O., Nitsch, R., and Gross, J. (2023). Speech onsets and 
sustained speech contribute differentially to delta and theta speech tracking in auditory cortex. Cerebral 
Cortex bhac502. https://doi.org/10.1093/cercor/bhac502. 
Chan, A.M., Halgren, E., Marinkovic, K., and Cash, S.S. (2011). Decoding word and category-specific 
spatiotemporal representations from MEG and EEG. NeuroImage 54(4): 3028-3039. 
Chiou, R., Jeffries, E., Duncan, J., Humphreys, G.F., and Lambon Ralph, M.A. (2022). A middle ground 
where executive control meets semantics: the neural substrates of semantic control are topographically 
sandwiched between the multiple-demand and default-mode systems. Cerebral Cortex bhac358. 
Chomsky, N. (1957). Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton de Gruyter. 
Chomsky, N. (1967). The formal nature of language. E. Lenneberg (Ed). Biological Foundations of 
Language. New York: Wiley and Sons. 397–442. 
Chomsky, N. (1974). The Amherst Lectures. University of Paris VII. 
Chomsky, N. (2000). New Horizons in the Study of Language and Mind. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
Chomsky, N. (2021). Minimalism: where we are now, and where we can hope to go. Gengo Kenkyu 
(Journal of the Linguistic Society of Japan) 160: 1–41. 
Chomsky, N. (2023). Genuine explanation and the strong minimalist thesis. Cognitive Semantics 8(3): 
347–365.  
Chomsky, N. (Forthcoming). Genuine explanation. G. Bocci, D. Botteri, C. Manetti and V. Moscati 
(Eds.). Issues in Comparative Morpho-Syntax and Language Acquisition.  
Chomsky, N., Gallego, Á.J., and Ott, D. (2019). Generative grammar and the faculty of language: 
insights, questions, and challenges. In Gallego, Á.J. and Ott, D. (eds.). Generative Syntax: Questions, 
Crossroads, and Challenges. Special issue of Catalan Journal of Linguistics 226–261. 
Chuderski, A. (2016). Fluid intelligence and the cross-frequency coupling of neuronal oscillations. 
Spanish Journal of Psychology 19(e91): 1–13. 
Daniele, A., Giustolisi, L., Caterina Silveri, M., Colosimo, C., and Gainotti, G. (1994). Evidence for a 
possible neuroanatomical basis for lexical processing of nouns and verbs. Neuropsychologia 32(11): 
1325–1341. 
De Clercq, P., Kries, J., Mehraram, R., Vanthornhout, J., Francart, T., and Vandermosten, M. (2022). 
Decreased neural envelope tracking in individuals with post-stroke aphasia. Poster presented at 
Neuroscience 2022 (Society for Neuroscience Annual Meeting), November 12-16. 
de Zubicaray, G.I., Arciuli, J., Kearney, E., Guenther, F., and McMahon, K.L. (2022). On the roles of 
form systematicity and sensorimotor effects in language processing. Journal of Experimental 
Psychology: Learning, Memory, and Cognition https://doi.org/10.1037/xlm0001201. 

58 
 
Degano, G., Donhauser, P., Gwilliams, L., Merlo, P., and Golestani, N. (2022). Cortical signatures of 
the interaction between prosody and syntax during naturalistic speech listening. Poster presented at 
Neuroscience 2022 (Society for Neuroscience Annual Meeting), November 12-16. 
Dehaene, S., Al Roumi, F., Lakretz, Y., Planton, S., and Sablé-Meyer, M. (2022). Symbols and mental 
programs: a hypothesis about human singularity. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 26(9): 751–766. 
Dehaene, S., Meyniel, F., Wacongne, C., Wang, L., and Pallier, C. (2015). The neural representation 
of sequences: from transition probabilities to algebraic patterns and linguistic trees. Neuron 88(1): 2–
19. 
Dekker, R.B., Otto, F., and Summerfield, C. (2022). Curriculum learning for human compositional 
generalization. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 
119(41): e2205582119. DOI:10.1073/pnas.2205582119. 
Dekydtspotter, L., Miller, A.K., Iverson, M., Xiong, Y., Swanson, K., and Gilbert, C. (2023). The timing 
versus resource problem in nonnative sentence processing: evidence from a time-frequency analysis 
of anaphora resolution in successive wh-movement in native and nonnative speakers of French. PLoS 
ONE 18(1): e0275305. 
Desbordes, T., Lakretz, Y., Chanoine, V., Oquab, M., Badier, J-M., Trébuchon, A. et al. (2023). 
Dimensionality and ramping: signatures of sentence integration in the dynamics of brains and deep 
language models. bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.02.28.530443. 
Dhar, M., Been, P.H., Minderaa, R.B., and Althaus, M. (2010). Reduced interhemispheric coherence in 
dyslexic adults. Cortex 46(6): 794–798. 
Di Liberto, G.M., Lalor, E.C., and Millman, R.E. (2018). Causal cortical dynamics of a predictive 
enhancement of speech intelligibility. NeuroImage 166: 247–258. 
DiNicola, L.M., and Buckner, R.L. (2021). Precision estimates of parallel distributed association 
networks: evidence for domain specialization and implications for evolution and development. Current 
Opinion in Behavioral Sciences 40: 120–129. 
Dijksterhuis, D.E., Self, M.W., Possel, J.K., Peters, J.C., van Straaten, E.C.W., Idema, S., et al. (2022). 
Pronouns reactive concepts cells in the human medial temporal lobe. Poster presented at the Human 
Single Neuron Meeting 2022, UCLA, November 10-11. 
Ding, N. (2022). The neural correlates of linguistic structure building: comments on Kazanina & Tavano 
(2022). arXiv:2212.04219. 
Ding, N., Melloni, L., Zhang, H., Tian, X., and Poeppel, D. (2016). Cortical tracking of hierarchical 
linguistic structures in connected speech. Nature Neuroscience 19: 158–164. 
Doelling, K.B., and Assaneo, M.F. (2021). Neural oscillations are a start toward understanding brain 
activity rather than the end. PLoS Biology 19(5): e3001234. 

59 
 
Donoghue, T., Cao, R., Han, C.Z., Holman, C.M., Brandmeir, N.J., Wang, S., and Jacobs, J. (2023). 
Single neurons in the human medial temporal lobe flexibly shift representations across spatial and 
memory tasks. bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2023.02.22.529437. 
Duecker, K., Gutteling, T.P., Herrmann, C.S., and Jensen, O. (2021). No evidence for entrainment: 
endogenous gamma oscillations and rhythmic flicker responses coexist in visual cortex. Journal of 
Neuroscience 41(31): 6684–6698. 
Eisenkolb, V.M., Held, L.M., Utzschmid, A., Lin, X-X., Krieg, S.M., Meyer, B., et al. (2022). Human acute 
microelectrode array recordings with broad cortical access, single-unit resolution and parallel behavioral 
monitoring. bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.10.27.514100. 
Eliasmith, C., Stewart, T.C., Choo, X., Bekolay, T., DeWolf, T., Tang, Y., and Rasmussen, D. (2012). A 
large-scale model of the functioning brain. Science 338(6111): 1202–1205. 
ElShafei, H.A., Zhou, Y.J., and Haegens, S. (2022). Shaping information processing: the role of 
oscillatory dynamics in a working memory task. eNeuro 9(5): ENEURO.0489-21.2022. 
Esfahlani, F.Z., Jo, Y., Faskowitz, J., Byrge, L., Kennedy, D.P., Sporns, O., and Betzel, R.F. (2020). 
High-amplitude cofluctuations in cortical activity drive functional connectivity. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 117(45): 28393–28401. 
Everaert, M.B.H., Huybregts, M.A.C., Chomsky, N., Berwick, R.C., and Bolhuis, J.J. (2015). Structures, 
not strings: linguistics as part of the cognitive sciences. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 19(12): 729–743. 
Fellner, M.-C., Gollwitzer, S., Rampp, S., Kreiselmeyr, G., Bush, D., Diehl, B., Axmacher, N., Hamer, 
H., and Hanslmayr, S. (2019). Spectral fingerprints or spectral tilt? Evidence for distinct oscillatory 
signatures of memory formation. PLoS Biology 17: e3000403. 
Ferguson, K.A., and Cardin, J.A. (2020). Mechanisms underlying gain modulation in the cortex. Nature 
Neuroscience 21: 80–92. 
Fernández-Ruiz, A., Oliva, A., Fermino de Oliveira, E., Rocha-Almeida, F., Tingley, D., and Buzsáki, G. 
(2019). Long-duration hippocampal sharp wave ripples improve memory. Science 364(6445): 1082–
1086. 
Fitch, W.T. (2014). Toward a computational framework for cognitive biology: unifying approaches from 
cognitive neuroscience and comparative cognition. Physics of Life Reviews 11: 329–364. 
Fitch, W.T. (2014). Information and the single cell. Current Opinion in Neurobiology 71: 150–157. 
Frankland, S.M., and Greene, J.D. (2015). An architecture for encoding sentence meaning in left mid-
superior temporal cortex. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of 
America 112: 11732–11737. 
Freeman, W.J. (1975). Mass Action in the Nervous System: Examination of the Neurophysiological 
Basis of Adaptive Behavior through the EEG. New York: Academic Press. 

60 
 
Fried, I. (2022). Neurons as will and representation. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 23(2): 104–114. 
Friederici, A.D., and Singer, W. (2015). Grounding language processing on basic neurophysiological 
principles. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 19(6): 329–338. 
Fries, P. (2009). Neuronal gamma-band synchronization as a fundamental process in cortical 
computation. Annual Review of Neuroscience 32: 209–224. 
Fries, P. (2015). Rhythms for cognition: communication through coherence. Neuron 88(1): 220–235. 
Friese, U., Koster, M., Hassler, U., Martens, U., Trujillo-Barreto, N., and Gruber, T. (2013). Successful 
memory encoding is associated with increased cross-frequency coupling between frontal theta and 
posterior gamma oscillations in human scalp-recorded EEG. Neuroimage 66: 642–647. 
DOI:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.11.002. 
Fridriksson, J., Fillmore, P., Guo, D., and Rorden, C. (2015). Chronic Broca’s aphasia is caused by 
damage to Broca’s and Wernicke’s areas. Cerebral Cortex 25(12): 4689–4696. 
Frisby, S.L., Halai, A.D., Cox, C.R., and Lambon Ralph, M.A. (2023). Decoding semantic 
representations in mind and brain. Trends in Cognitive Sciences DOI:10.1016/j.tics.2022.12.006. 
Fröhlich, F. (2015). Experiments and models of cortical oscillations as a target for noninvasive brain 
stimulation. Progress in Brain Research 222: 41–73. 
Fromont, L.A., Steinhauer, K., and Royle, P. (2020). Verbing nouns and nouning verbs: Using a 
balanced design provides ERP evidence against “syntax-first” approaches to sentence processing. 
PLoS ONE 15(3): e0229169. 
Fujii, N., and Graybiel, A.M. (2003). Representation of action sequence boundaries by macaque 
prefrontal cortical neurons. Science 301(5637): 1246–1249. 
Gągol, A., Magnuski, M., Kroczek, B., Kałamała, P., Ociepka, M., Santarnecchi, E., et al. (2018). Delta-
gamma coupling as a potential neurophysiological mechanism of fluid intelligence. Intelligence 66: 54–
63. 
Gallistel, C.R. (2017). The coding question. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 21(7): 498–508. 
Gallistel, C.R. (2021). The physical basis of memory. Cognition 213: 104533. 
Gehrig, J., Michalareas, G., Forster, M.-T., Lei, J., Hok, P., Laufs, H., et al. (2019). Low frequency 
oscillations code speech during verbal working memory. Journal of Neuroscience 39(33): 6498–6512. 
Glushko, A., Poeppel, D., and Steinhauer, K. (2022). Overt and implicit prosody contribute to 
neurophysiological responses previously attributed to grammatical processing. Scientific Reports 12: 
14759.  

61 
 
Goldstein, A., Zada, Z., Buchnik, E., Schain, M., Price, A., Aubrey, B. et al. (2022). Shared 
computational principles for language processing in humans and deep language models. Nature 
Neuroscience 25: 369–380. 
Gotham, M. (2016). Composing criteria of individuation in copredication. Journal of Semantics 34(2): 
333–371. 
Goucha, T., Zaccarella, E., and Friederici, A.D. (2017). A revival of Homo loquens as a builder of labeled 
structures: neurocognitive considerations. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 81(B): 213–224. 
Graves, W.W., Purcell, J., Rothlein, D., Bolger, D.J., Rosenberg-Lee, M., and Staples, R. (2022). 
Correspondence between cognitive and neural representations for phonology, orthography, and 
semantics in supramarginal compared to angular gyrus. Brain Structure and Function 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-022-02590-y. 
Gross, J., Hoogenboom, N., Thut, G., Schyns, P., Panzeri, S., Belin, P., and Garrod, S. (2013). Speech 
rhythms and multiplexed oscillatory sensory coding in the human brain. PLoS ONE 11(12): e1001752. 
Gwilliams, L. (2020). How the brain composes morphemes into meaning. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 375(1791): 20190311. 
Hagoort, P. (2005). On Broca, brain, and binding: a new framework. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 9: 
416–423. 
Hagoort, P. (2013). MUC (Memory, Unification, Control) and beyond. Frontiers in Psychology 4: 416. 
Hagoort, P. (2023). The language marker hypothesis. Cognition 230: 105252. 
Hale, J.T., Campanelli, L., Li, J., Bhattasali, S., Pallier, C., and Brennan, J.R. (2022). 
Neurocomputational models of language processing. Annual Review of Linguistics 8: 427–446. 
Halgren, M., Fabo, D., Ulbert, I., Madsen, J.R., Erőss, L., Doyle, W.K., Devinsky, O., Schomer, D., 
Cash, S.S., and Halgren, E. (2017). Superficial slow rhythms integrate cortical processing in humans. 
Scientific Reports 8: 2055. 
Hanslmayr, S., Jensen, O., and Staresina, B. (2021). Oscillatory brain mechanisms for memory 
formation – online and offline processes. Kahana, M. and Wagner, A. (Eds.). Oxford Handbook of 
Human Memory. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Harris, A.M. (2023). Phase resets undermine measures of phase-dependent perception. Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences DOI:10.1016/j.tics.2022.12.008. 
Hasson, U., Egidi, G., Marelli, M., and Willems, R.M. (2018). Grounding the neurobiology of language 
in first principles: the necessity of non-language-centric explanations for language comprehension. 
Cognition 180: 135–157. 
Hauser, M., and Watumull, J. (2017). The universal generative faculty: the source of our expressive 
power in language, mathematics, morality, and music. Journal of Neurolinguistics 43(B): 78–94. 

62 
 
Hermiller, M.S., Chen, Y.F., Parrish, T.B., and Voss, J.L. (2020). Evidence for immediate enhancement 
of hippocampal memory encoding by network-targeted theta-burst stimulation during concurrent fMRI. 
Journal of Neuroscience 40(37): 7155–7168. 
Heusser, A.C., Poeppel, D., Ezzyat, Y., and Davachi, L. (2016). Episodic sequence memory is 
supported by a theta-gamma phase code. Nature Neuroscience 19(10): 1374–1380. 
Honari-Jahromi, M., Chouinard, B., Blanco-Elorrieta, E., Pylkkänen, L., and Fyshe, A. (2021). Neural 
representation of words within phrases: temporal evolution of color-adjectives and object-nouns during 
simple composition. PLoS ONE 16(3): e0242754. 
Hu, J., Small, H., Kean, H., Takahashi, A., Zekelman, L., Kleinman, D., et al. (2022). Precision fMRI 
reveals that the language-selective network supports both phrase-structure building and lexical access 
during language production. Cerebral Cortex bhac350. 
Jansen, M., Li, X., Lashgari, R., Kremkow, J., Bereshpolova, Y., Swadlow, H. A., et al. (2015). Chromatic 
and achromatic spatial resolution of local field potentials in awake cortex. Cerebral Cortex 25: 3877–
3893. 
Jensen, O., Gips, B., Bergmann, T.O., and Bonnefond, M. (2014). Temporal coding organized by 
coupled alpha and gamma oscillations prioritize visual processing. Trends in Neurosciences 37(7): 
357–369. 
Jin, P., Lu, Y., and Ding, N. (2020). Low-frequency neural activity reflects rule-based chunking during 
speech listening. eLife 9: e55613. 
Jin, X., Tecuapetla, F., and Costa, R.M. (2014). Basal ganglia subcircuits distinctively encode the 
parsing and concatenation of action sequences. Nature Neuroscience 17: 423–430. 
Johari, K., Riccardi, N., and Desai, R.H. (2023). Temporal features of concepts are grounded in time 
perception neural networks: an EEG study. Brain and Language 237: 105220. 
Junker, F.B., Schlaffke, L., Lange, J., & Schmidt-Wilcke, T. (2023). The angular gyrus serves as an 
interface between the non-lexical reading network and the semantic system: evidence from dynamic 
causal modeling. Brain Structure and Function https://doi.org/10.1007/s00429-023-02624-z. 
Kastellakis, G., Silva, A.J., and Piorazi, P. (2016). Linking memories across time via neuronal and 
dendritic overlaps in model neurons with active dendrites. Cell Reports 17: 1491–1504. 
Kaufeld, G., Bosker, H.R., Ten Oever, S., Alday, P.M., Meyer, A.S., and Martin, A.E. (2020). Linguistic 
structure and meaning organize neural oscillations into a content-specific hierarchy. Journal of 
Neuroscience 40(49): 9467–9475. 
Kaushik, K., and Martin, A.E. (2022). A mathematical neural process model of language 
comprehension, from syllable to sentence. PsyArXiv DOI:10.31234/osf.io/xs5kr. 

63 
 
Kay, L.M., and Lazzara, P. (2010). How global are olfactory bub oscillations? Journal of 
Neurophysiology 104(3): 1768–1773. 
Kazanina, N., and Tavano, A. (2022). What neural oscillations can and cannot do for syntactic structure 
building. Nature Reviews Neuroscience https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-022-00659-5. 
Keitel, A., Gross, J., and Kayser, C. (2018). Perceptually relevant speech tracking in auditory and motor 
cortex reflects distinct linguistic features. PLOS Biology 16(3): e2004473. 
Keitel, A., Ince, R.A.A., Gross, J., and Kayser, C. (2017). Auditory cortical delta-entrainment interacts 
with oscillatory power in multiple fronto-parietal networks. NeuroImage 147: 32–42. 
Keshishian, M., Akkol, S., Herrero, J., Bickel, S., Mehta, A.D., & Mesgarani, N. (2023). Joint, distributed 
and hierarchically organized encoding of linguistic features in the human auditory cortex. Nature Human 
Behavior https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-023-01520-0. 
Khandhadia, A.P., Murphy, A.P., Koyano, K.W., and Leopold, D.A. (2023). Encoding of 3D physical 
dimensions by face-selective cortical neurons. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the 
United States of America 120(9): e2214996120. 
Kleiner, J., and Hoel, E. (2021). Falsification and consciousness. Neuroscience of Consciousness 1: 
niab001. 
Klimovich-Gray, A., Barrena, A., Agirre, E., and Molinaro, N. (2021). One way or another: cortical 
language areas flexibly adapt processing strategies to perceptual and contextual properties of speech. 
Cerebral Cortex 31(9): 4092–4103. 
Kozlov, M. (2023). ‘Disruptive’ science has declined – and no one knows why. Nature. News, 4 January. 
https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-022-04577-5. 
Krakauer, J.W. (2022). Modular brain, entangled argument. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience  
https://doi.org/10.1162/jocn_a_01932. 
Krauska, A., and Lau, E. (2022). Moving away from lexicalism in psycho- and neuro-linguistics. 
PsyArXiv DOI:10.31234/osf.io/vyf94. 
Kristan Jr., W.B. (2016). Early evolution of neurons. Current Biology 26: R949–R954. 
Krohn, S., Schwanenflug, N.V., Waschke, L., Romanello, A., Gell, M., Garrett, D.G., et al. (2023). A 
spatiotemporal complexity architecture of human brain activity. Science Advances 9(5): eabq3851. DOI: 
10.1126/sciadv.abq3851. 
Kucewicz, M.T., Cimbalnik, J., Matsumoto, J.Y., Brinkmann, B.H., Bower, M.R., Vasoli, V., et al. (2014). 
High frequency oscillations are associated with cognitive processing in human recognition memory. 
Brain 137(8): 2231–2244. 

64 
 
Kuhnke, P., Beaupain, M.C., Arola, J., Kiefer, M., and Hartwigsen, G. (2022). Meta-analytic evidence 
for 
a 
novel 
hierarchical 
model 
of 
conceptual 
processing. 
bioRxiv 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.11.05.515278. 
Kullmann, D.M. (2020). Editorial. Brain 143(4): 1045. 
Kurth-Nelson, Z., Behrens, T., Wayne, G., Miller, K., Luettgau, L., Dolan, R. et al. (2023). Replay and 
compositional computation. Neuron 111. DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2022.12.028. 
Laland, K., and Seed, A. (2021). Understanding human cognitive uniqueness. Annual Review of 
Psychology 72: 689–716. 
Lambon Ralph, M.A., Jefferies, E., Patterson, K., and Rogers, T.T. (2017). The neural and 
computational bases of semantic cognition. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 18: 42–55. 
Lasnik, H. (2017). The locality of transformational movement: progress and prospects. McGilvray, J. 
(ed.). The Cambridge Companion to Chomsky. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 39–60. 
Lau, E.F., Phillips, C., and Poeppel, D. (2008). A cortical network for semantics: (de)constructing the 
N400. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 9(12): 920–933. 
Laumann, T.O., and Snyder, A.Z. (2021). Brain activity is not only for thinking. Current Opinion in 
Behavioral Sciences 40: 130–136. 
Leonard, M., Gwilliams, L., Sellers, K., Chung, J., Datta, B., and Chang, E. (2022). Single neuron 
encoding of speech across cortical layers of the human superior temporal gyrus. Presentation at the 
Society for the Neurobiology of Language annual meeting. October 6–8. 
Li, J., and Hale, J.T. (2019). Grammatical predictors for fMRI timecourses. Minimalist Parsing. E.P. 
Stabler, and R.C. Berwick (Eds.). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 159–173. 
Liao, D.A., Brecht, K.F., Johnston, M., and Nieder, A. (2022). Recursive sequence generation in crows. 
Science Advances 8(44). DOI:10.1126/sciadv.abq3356. 
Lisman, J., Cooper, K., Sehgal, M., and Silva, A.J. (2018). Memory formation depends on both synapse-
specific modifications of synaptic strength and cell-specific increases in excitability. Nature 
Neuroscience 21: 309–314. 
Lisman, J.E., & Jensen, O. (2013). The theta-gamma neural code. Neuron 77: 1002–1016. 
Liu, Y., Dolan, R.J., Kurth-Nelson, Z., and Behrens, T.E.J. (2019). Human replay spontaneously 
reorganizes experience. Cell 178: 640–652.e14. 
Lizarazu, M., Carreiras, M., & Molinaro, N. (2023). Theta-gamma phase-amplitude coupling in auditory 
cortex is modulated by language proficiency. Human Brain Mapping https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.26250.  
Leckey, M., Troyer, M., and Federmeier, K.D. (2023). Patterns of hemispheric asymmetry provide 
evidence dissociating the semantic and syntactic P600. Neuropsychologia 179: 108441. 

65 
 
Lega, B.C., Jacobs, J., and Kahana, M. (2012). Human hippocampal theta oscillations and the formation 
of episodic memories. Hippocampus 22(4): 748–761. DOI:10.1002/hipo.20937. 
Leivada, E. (2017). What's in (a) label? Neural origins and behavioral manifestations of identity 
avoidance in language and cognition. Biolinguistics 11: 221–250. 
Łęski, S., Lindén, H., Tetzlaff, T., Pettersen, K.H., and Einevoll, G.T. (2013). Frequency dependence of 
signal power and spatial reach of the local field potential. PLoS Computational Biology 9(7): e1003137. 
Leszczyński, M., Barczak, A., Kajikawa, Y., Ulbert, I., Falchier, A.Y., Tal, I. et al. (2020). Dissociation of 
broadband high-frequency activity and neuronal firing in the neocortex. Science Advances 6(33): 
eabb0977. DOI:10.1126/sciadv.abb097. 
Lewis, S., and Phillips, C. (2015). Aligning grammatical theories and language processing models. 
Journal of Psycholinguistic Research 44: 27–46. 
Long, M.A., Jin, D.Z., and Fee, M.S. (2010). Support for a synaptic chain model of neuronal sequence 
generation. Nature 468: 394–399. 
Lowder, M.W., Cardoso, A., Pittman, M., and Zhou, A. (2022). Effects of syntactic structure on the 
processing 
of 
lexical 
repetition 
during 
sentence 
reading. 
Memory 
& 
Cognition 
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13421-022-01380-5. 
Lu, Y., Jin, P., Pan, X., and Ding, N. (2022a). Delta-band neural activity primarily tracks sentences 
instead of semantic properties of words. NeuroImage 251: 118979. 
Lu, Y., Jin, P., Pan, X., and Ding, N. (2022b). Delta-band neural tracking primarily reflects rule-based 
chunking instead of semantic relatedness between words. Cerebral Cortex bhac354. 
Lundqvist, M., Herman, P., Warden, M.R., Brincat, S.L., and Miller, E.K. (2018). Gamma and beta bursts 
during working memory readout suggest roles in its volitional control. Nature Communications 9: 394. 
Makuuchi, M., and Friederici, A.D. (2013). Hierarchical functional connectivity between the core 
language system and the working memory system. Cortex 49: 2416–2423. 
Malik-Moraleda, M., Jouravlev, O., Mineroff, Z., Cucu, T., Taliaferro, M., Mahowald, K., et al. (2023). 
Functional characterization of the language network of polyglots and hyperpolyglots with precision fMRI. 
bioRxiv DOI:10.1101/2023.01.19.524657. 
Marcus, G.F. (2001). The Algebraic Mind: Integrating Connectionism and Cognitive Science. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Marcus, G., Marblestone, A., and Dean, T. (2014). The atoms of neural computation. Science 
346(6209): 551–552. 
Maris, E., Fries, P., and van Ede, F. (2016). Diverse phase relations among neuronal rhythms and their 
potential function. Trends in Neurosciences 39(2): 86–99. 

66 
 
Martin, A., Holtz, A., Abels, K., Adger, D., and Culbertson, J. (2020). Experimental evidence for the 
influence of structure and meaning on linear order in the noun phrase. Glossa: A Journal of General 
Linguistics 5(1): 97. 
Martin, A.E. (2020). A compositional neural architecture for language. Journal of Cognitive 
Neuroscience 32(8): 1407–1427. 
Martorell, J. (2021). Review of Elliot Murphy, The Oscillatory Nature of Language. Journal of Linguistics 
57(2): 453–457. 
Matar, S., Dirani, J., Marantz, A., and Pylkkänen, L. (2021). Left posterior temporal cortex is sensitive 
to syntax within conceptually matched Arabic expressions. Scientific Reports 11: 7181. 
Matchin, W., Basilakos, A., den Ouden, D-B., Stark, B.C., Hickok, G., and Fridriksson, J. (2022). 
Functional differentiation in the language network revealed by lesion-symptom mapping. NeuroImage 
247: 118778. 
Matchin, W., Basilakos, A., Stark, B.C., den Ouden, D-B., Fridriksson, J., and Hickok, G. (2020). 
Agrammatism and paragrammatism: a cortical double dissociation revealed by lesion-symptom 
mapping. Neurobiology of Language 1(2): 208–225. 
McCarty, M.J., Woolnough, O., Mosher, J.C., Seymour, J., and Tandon, N. (2022). The listening zone 
of human electrographic field potential recordings. eNeuro 9(2): ENEURO.0492-21.2022. 
Mendoza-Halliday, D., Major, A.J., Lee, N., Lichtenfeld, M., Carlson, B., Mitchell, B., et al. (2022). A 
ubiquitous spectrolaminar motif of local field potential power across the primate cortex. bioRxiv 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.09.30.510398. 
Meyer, L. (2018). The neural oscillations of speech processing and language comprehension: state of 
the art and emerging mechanisms. European Journal of Neuroscience 48(7): 2609–2621. 
Meyer, L., Obleser, J., and Friederici, A.D. (2013). Left parietal alpha enhancement during working 
memory-intensive sentence processing. Cortex 49(3): 711–721. 
Miller, E.K., and Wilson, M.A. (2008). All my circuits: using multiple electrodes to understand functioning 
neural networks. Neuron 60: 483–488. 
Mok, R.M., and Love, B.C. (2019). A non-spatial account of place and grid cells based on clustering 
models of concept learning. Nature Communications 10: 5685. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-
13760-8. 
Mondal, P. (2022). A critical perspective on the (neuro)biological foundations of language and linguistic 
cognition. Integrative Psychological and Behavioral Science. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12124-022-
09741-0. 
Montgomery, E.D. (1886). The scientific basis of religious intuition. The Index, ns 6, May 27. 

67 
 
Mukherji, N. (2022). The Human Mind through the Lens of Language: Generative Explorations. London: 
Bloomsbury. 
Muller, L., Chavane, F., Reynolds, J., and Sejnowski, T.J. (2018). Cortical travelling waves: 
mechanisms and computational principles. Nature Reviews Neuroscience 19(5): 255–268. 
Murphy, E. (2015a). Labels, cognomes, and cyclic computation: an ethological perspective. Frontiers 
in Psychology 6: 715. 
Murphy, E. (2015b). The brain dynamics of linguistic computation. Frontiers in Psychology 6: 1515. 
Murphy, E. (2018). “Interfaces (travelling oscillations) + recursion (delta-theta code) = language,” in The 
Talking Species: Perspectives on the Evolutionary, Neuronal and Cultural Foundations of Language, 
eds E. Luef and M. Manuela (Graz: Unipress Graz Verlag), 251–269. 
Murphy, E. (2020a). The Oscillatory Nature of Language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Murphy, E. (2020b). Language design and communicative competence: the minimalist perspective. 
Glossa: A Journal of General Linguistics 5(1): 2. 
Murphy, E. (2020c). Commentary: a compositional neural architecture for language. Frontiers in 
Psychology 11: 2101. 
Murphy, E. (2023a). The nature of language and the structure of reality. Ms. UTHealth. 
Murphy, E. (2023b). Animals sick with language: from syntax to socialism in Nietzsche. McManus, M. 
(ed.). Nietzsche and the Politics of Reaction: Essays on Liberalism, Socialism, and Aristocratic 
Radicalism. London: Palgrave Macmillan. 263–286. 
Murphy, E., and Benítez-Burraco, A. (2018). Toward the language oscillogenome. Frontiers in 
Psychology 9: 1999. 
Murphy, E., Forseth, K.J., Donos, C., Rollo, P.S., and Tandon, N. (2022a). The spatiotemporal 
dynamics 
of 
semantic 
integration 
in 
the 
human 
brain. 
bioRxiv 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.09.02.506386. 
Murphy, E., Holmes, E., and Friston, K. (2022b). Natural language syntax complies with the free-energy 
principle. arXiv:2210.15098. 
Murphy, E., Hoshi, K., and Benítez-Burraco, A. (2022c). Subcortical syntax: Reconsidering the neural 
dynamics of language. Journal of Neurolinguistics 62: 101062. 
Murphy, E., Woolnough, O., Morse, C., Scherschligt, X., and Tandon, N. (2022d). Mapping the 
concreteness network with intracranial recordings and cortical stimulation. Poster presented at 
Neuroscience 2022 (Society for Neuroscience Annual Meeting), November 12-16. 

68 
 
Murphy, E., Woolnough, O., Rollo, P.S., Roccaforte, Z., Segaert, K., Hagoort, P., and Tandon, N. 
(2022e). Minimal phrase composition revealed by intracranial recordings. Journal of Neuroscience 
42(15): 3216–3227. 
Nelson, M.J., El Karoui, I., Giber, K., Yang, X., Cohen, L., Koopman, H., et al. (2017). 
Neurophysiological dynamics of phrase-structure building during sentence processing. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 114(18): E3669–E3678. 
Nelson, M., Smith, C., Barrentine, B., Bentley, N., Basilico, D., and Walker, H. (2022). Preferential 
activation for semantic content words in the left anterior temporal lobe. Poster presented at the Human 
Single Neuron Meeting 2022, UCLA, November 10-11. 
Neske, G.T., and Connors, B.W. (2016). Distinct roles of SOM and VIP interneurons during cortical up 
states. Frontiers in Neural Circuits 10: 52. 
Nicholson, D.J., and Dupré, J. (eds). (2018). Everything Flows: Towards a Processual Philosophy of 
Biology. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Niven, J.E. (2016). Neuronal energy consumption: biophysics, efficiency and evolution. Current Opinion 
in Neurobiology 41: 129–135. 
Ntemou, E., Rybka, L., Lubbers, J., Tuncer, M.S., Vajkoczy, P., Rofes, P. et al. (2023). Lesion-symptom 
mapping of language impairments in people with brain tumours: The influence of linguistic stimuli. 
Journal of Neuropsychology https://doi.org/10.1111/jnp.12305. 
Oota, S.R., Gupta, M., and Toneva, M. (2022). Joint processing of linguistic properties in brains and 
language models. arxiv:2212.08094. 
Pang, J.C., Aquino, K.M., Oldehinkel, M., Robinson, P.A., Fulcher, B.D., Breakspear, M., et al. (2023). 
Geometric constraints on human brain function. bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.10.04.510897. 
Park, M., Leahey, E. and Funk, R.J. (2023). Papers and patents are becoming less disruptive over time. 
Nature 613: 138–144. 
Pefkou, M., Arnal, L.H., Fontolan, L., and Giraud, A.-L. (2017). θ-band and β-band neural activity reflect 
independent syllable tracking and comprehension of time-compressed speech. Journal of 
Neuroscience 37(33): 7930–7938. 
Perge, J.A., Zhang, S., Malik, W.Q., Homer, M.L., Cash, S., Friehs, G., et al. (2014). Reliability of 
directional information in unsorted spikes and local field potentials recorded in human motor cortex. 
Journal of Neural Engineering 11: 046007. 
Pessoa, L. (2023). The entangled brain. Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience 35(3): 349–360.  
Pietroski, P. (2008). Minimalist meaning, internalist interpretation. Biolinguistics 2(4): 317–341. 
Pietroski, P. (2018). Conjoining Meanings: Semantics without Truth Values. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 

69 
 
Prasada, S. (2021). The physical basis of conceptual representation – an addendum to Gallistel 2020. 
Cognition 214: 1047516. 
Preminger, O. (2021). Natural language without semiosis. Presentation at the 14th annual conference 
on Syntax, Phonology and Language Analysis (SinFonIJA 14). 
Pylkkänen, L. (2019). The neural basis of combinatory syntax and semantics. Science 366(6461): 62–
66. 
Ramchand, G., and Svenonius, P. (2014). Deriving the functional hierarchy. Language Sciences 46: 
152–174. 
Riddle, J., Alexander, M.L., Schiller, C.E., Rubinow, D.R., and Frohlich, F. (2022). Reward-based 
decision-making engages distinct modes of cross-frequency coupling. Cerebral Cortex 32(10): 2079–
2094. 
Riddle, J., McFerren, A., and Frohlich, F. (2021). Causal role of cross-frequency coupling in distinct 
components of cognitive control. Progress in Neurobiology 202: 102033. 
Riddle, J., Scimeca, J.M., Cellier, D., Dhanani, S., and D’Esposito, M. (2020). Causal evidence for a 
role of theta and alpha oscillations in the control of working memory. Current Biology 30(9): 1748–1754. 
Riecke, F., Warland, D., de Ruyter van Steveninck, R., and Bialek, W. (1997). Spikes: Exploring the 
Neural Code. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Riecke, L., Formisano, E., Sorger, B., Başkent, D., and Gaurdain, E. (2018). Neural entrainment to 
speech modulates speech intelligibility. Current Biology 28(2): 161–169. 
Rimmele, J.M., Sun, Y., Michalareas, G., Ghitza, O., and Poeppel, D. (2022). Dynamics of functional 
networks 
for 
syllable 
and 
word-level 
processing. 
Neurobiology 
of 
Language 
https://doi.org/10.1162/nol_a_00089. 
Rust, N.C., and LeDoux, J.E. (2023). The tricky business of defining brain functions. Trends in 
Neurosciences 46(1): 3–4. 
Ryan, T.J., Roy, D.S., Pignatelli, M., Arons, A., and Tonegawa, S. (2015). Engram cells retain memory 
under retrograde amnesia. Science 348: 1007–1013. 
Saberi, K., and Hickok, G. (2022). Forward entrainment: psychophysics, neural correlates, and function. 
Psychonomic Bulletin & Review https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-022-02220-y. 
Sahin, N.T., Pinker, S., Cash, S.S., Schomer, D., and Halgren, E. (2009). Sequential processing of 
lexical, grammatical, and phonological information within Broca's area. Science 326: 445–449. 
Saleem, A.B., Lien, A.D., Krumin, M., Haider, B., Roman Roson, M., Ayaz, A., et al. (2017). Subcortical 
source and modulation of the narrowband gamma oscillation in mouse visual cortex. Neuron 93: 315–
322. 

70 
 
Samimizad, B., Reber, T., Borger, V., Surges, R., and Mormann, F. (2022). Single-neuron 
representations of ambiguous words on the human medial temporal lobe. Poster presented at 
Neuroscience 2022 (Society for Neuroscience Annual Meeting), November 12-16. 
Sánchez, S.M., Schmidt, H., Gallardo, G., Anwander, A., Brauer, J., Friederici, A.D., Knösche, T.R. 
(2022). White matter brain structure predicts language performance and learning success. Human Brain 
Mapping  https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.26132. 
Schlenker, P., Coye, C., Steinert-Threlkeld, S., Klinedinst, N., and Chemla, E. (2022). Beyond 
anthropocentrism in comparative cognition: recentering animal linguistics. Cognitive Science 46(12): 
e13220. 
Schmidt, F., Chen, Y.-C., Keitel, A., Rösch, S., Hannemann, R., Serman, M., et al. (2022). Neural 
speech tracking shifts from the syllabic to the modulation rate of speech as intelligibility decreases. 
bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.25.437033. 
Schneider, M., Broggini, A.C., Dann, B., Tzanou, A., Uran, C., Sheshadri, S., et al. (2021). A mechanism 
for inter-areal coherence through communication based on connectivity and oscillatory power. Neuron 
109(24): 4050–4067. 
Schneidman, E., Puchalla, J.L., Segev, R., Harris, R.A., Bialek, W., and Berry, M.J., 2nd. (2011). 
Synergy from silence in a combinatorial neural code. Journal of Neuroscience 31(44): 15732–15741. 
DOI:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0301-09.2011. 
Sherman, M.A., Lee, S., Law, R., Haegens, S., Thorn, C.A., Hämäläinen, M.S., et al. (2016). Neural 
mechanisms of transient neocortical beta rhythms: converging evidence from humans, computational 
modeling, monkeys, and mice. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States 
of America 113(33): E4885–E4894. 
Smit, H. (2022). An overarching framework for understanding and explaining human nature. Biological 
Theory https://doi.org/10.1007/s13752-022-00425-x. 
Snyder, J.S. (2015). Sound perception: rhythmic brain activity really is important for auditory 
segregation. Current Biology 25: R1166–R1185. 
Snyder, K.M., Forseth, K.J., Donos, C., Rollo, P.S., Fischer-Baum, S., Breier, J., and Tandon, N. (2023). 
The critical role of the ventral temporal lobe in naming. Epilepsia https://doi.org/10.1111/epi.17555. 
Soroka, G.D., and Idiart, M.A.P. (2021). Theta, alpha and gamma traveling waves in a multi-item 
working memory model. arXiv:2103.15266. 
Sprouse, J., and Almeida, D. (2013). The empirical status of data in syntax: a reply to Gibson and 
Fedorenko. Language and Cognitive Processes 28(3): 222–228. 
Sreekumar, V., Wittig, J.H., Chapeton, J., Inati, S.K., and Zaghloul, K.A. (2020). Low frequency traveling 
waves in the human cortex coordinate neural activity across spatial scales. 
bioRxiv 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.03.04.977173. 

71 
 
Stanojević, M., Bhattasali, S., Dunagan, D., Campanelli, L., Steedman, M., Brennan, J., and Hale, J. 
(2021). Modeling incremental language comprehension in the brain with Combinatory Categorial 
Grammar. Proceedings of the Workshop on Cognitive Modeling and Computational Linguistics. 
Association for Computational Linguistics. 23–38. https://doi.org/10.18653/v1/2021.cmcl-1.3. 
Sterling, P., and Laughlin, S. (2015). Principles of Neural Design. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Storchi, R., Bedford, R.A., Martial, F.P., Allen, A.E., Wynne, J., Montemurro, M.A., et al. (2017). 
Modulation of fast narrowband oscillations in the mouse retina and dLGN according to background light 
intensity. Neuron 93: 299–307. 
Thiebaut de Schotten, M., and Forkel, S.J. (2022). The emergent properties of the connected brain. 
Science 378(6619): 505–510. 
Toi, P.T., Jang, H.J., Min, K., Kim, S.-P., Lee, S.-K., Lee, J., Kwag, J., and Park, J.-Y. (2022). In vivo 
direct imaging of neuronal activity at high temporospatial resolution. Science 378(6616): 160–168.  
Toneva, M., Mitchell, T.M. & Wehbe, L. (2022). Combining computational controls with natural text 
reveals aspects of meaning composition. Nature Computational Science 2: 745–757. 
Trettenbrein, P.C. (2016). The demise of the synapse as the locus of memory: a looming paradigm 
shift? Frontiers Systems Neuroscience 10: 88. 
Uran, C., Peter, A., Lazar, A., Barnes, W., Klon-Lipok, J., Shapcott, K.A., et al. (2021). Predictive coding 
of natural images by V1 activity revealed by self-supervised deep neural networks. bioRxiv 
https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.10.242958. 
van Bree, S., Alamia, A., and Zoefel, B. (2022). Oscillation or not—Why we can and need to know 
(commentary on Doelling and Assaneo, 2021). European Journal of Neuroscience 55(1): 201-204. 
van Bree, S., Sohoglu, E., Davis, M.H., and Zoefel, B. (2021). Sustained neural rhythms reveal 
endogenous oscillations supporting speech perception. PLoS Biology 19(2): e3001142. 
Vardalaki, D., Chung, K., Harnett, M.T. (2022). Filopodia are a structural substrate for silent synapses 
in adult neocortex. Nature 612: 323–327. 
Verguts, T. (2017). Binding by random bursts: a computational model of cognitive control. Journal of 
Cognitive Neuroscience 29(6): 1103–1118. 
Wang, P., Knösche, T.R., Chen, L., Brauer, J., Friederici, A.D., and Maess, B. (2021). Functional brain 
plasticity during L1 training on complex sentences: changes in gamma-band oscillatory activity. Human 
Brain Mapping 42(12): 3858–3870. 
Wang, X-J. (2013). The prefrontal cortex as a quintessential “cognitive-type” neural circuit: working 
memory and decision making. D.T. Stuss and R.T. Knight (eds.). Principles of Frontal Lobe Function. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 226–248. 
Welle, C.G., and Contreras, D. (2017). New light on gamma oscillations. Neuron 93: 247–249. 

72 
 
Wilson, S.M., Bautista, A., and McCarron, A. (2018). Convergence of spoken and written language 
processing in the superior temporal sulcus. NeuroImage 171: 62–74. 
Woolnough, O., Donos, C., Rollo, P.S., Forseth, K.J., Yakretz, Y., Crone, N.E., et al. (2021). 
Spatiotemporal dynamics of orthographic and lexical processing in the ventral visual pathway. Nature 
Human Behaviour 5: 389–398. 
Woolnough, O., Donos, C., Murphy, E., Rollo, P.S., Roccaforte, Z.J., Dehaene, S., and Nitin, T. (2023). 
Two spatiotemporally distinct cortical networks for sentence reading. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences of the United States of America. In press. 
Woolnough, O., Donos, C., Curtis, A., Rollo, P.S., Roccaforte, Z.J., Dehaene, S., Fischer-Baum, S., 
and Tandon, N. (2022a). A spatiotemporal map of reading aloud. Journal of Neuroscience 42(27): 
5438–5450. 
Woolnough, O., Forseth, K.J., Rollo, P.S., Roccaforte, Z.J., and Tanton, N. (2022b). Event-related 
phase synchronization propagates rapidly across human ventral visual cortex. NeuroImage 256: 
119262. 
Woolnough, O., Rollo, P.S., Forseth, K.J., Kadipasaoglu, C.M., Ekstrom, A.D., and Tandon, N. (2020). 
Category selectivity for face and scene recognition in human medial parietal cortex. Current Biology 
30(4): 2707–2715. 
Woolnough, O., Snyder, K.M., Morse, C.W., McCarty, M.J., Lhatoo, S.D., and Tandon, N. (2022c). 
Intraoperative localization and preservation of reading in ventral occipitotemporal cortex. Journal of 
Neurosurgery 137(6): 1610–1617. 
Yang, H., Lin, Q., Han, Z., Li, H., Song, L., Chen, L., et al. (2017). Dissociable intrinsic functional 
networks support noun-object and verb-action processing. Brain and Language 175: 29–41. 
Young, J.S., Lee, A.T., and Chang, E.F. (2021). A review of cortical and subcortical stimulation mapping 
for language. Neurosurgery nyaa436. 
Yu, X., and Lau, E. (2023). The binding problem 2.0: beyond perceptual features. Cognitive Science 
47: e13244. 
Zabeh, E., Foley, N., Jacobs, J., and Gottlieb, J. (2022). Traveling waves in the monkey frontoparietal 
network predict recent reward memory. bioRxiv https://doi.org/10.1101/2022.02.03.478583. 
Zarei, M., Parto Dezfouli, M., Jahed, M., and Daliri, M.R. (2020). Adaptation modulates spike-phase 
coupling tuning curve in the rat primary auditory cortex. Frontiers in System Neuroscience 14: 55. 
Zhang, H., Watrous, A.J., Patel, A., and Jacobs, J. (2018). Theta and alpha oscillations are travelling 
waves in the human neocortex. Neuron 98: 1269–1281. 

73 
 
Zhang, Y., Zhang, Y., Cai, P., Luo, H., and Fang, F. (2019). The causal role of α-oscillations in feature 
binding. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 116(34): 
17023-17028. 
Zhang, Y., Zou, J., and Ding, N. (2023). Complex mapping between neural response frequency and 
hierarchical linguistic units in natural speech. 
arXiv:2301.08011. 
Zielinski, M.C. Tang, W., and Jadhav, S.P. (2020). The role of replay and theta sequences in mediating 
hippocampal-prefrontal interactions for memory and cognition. Hippocampus 30(1): 60–72. 

