RECKONING: Reasoning through Dynamic
Knowledge Encoding
Zeming Chen1
Gail Weiss1
Eric Mitchell2
Asli Celikyilmaz3
Antoine Bosselut1
Natural Language Processing Lab, EPFL1
Stanford University2
Meta AI Research3
{zeming.chen, gail.weiss, antoine.bosselut}@epfl.ch
eric.mitchell@cs.stanford.edu
aslic@meta.com
Abstract
Recent studies on transformer-based language models show that they can answer
questions by reasoning over knowledge provided as part of the context (i.e., in-
context reasoning). However, since the available knowledge is often not ﬁltered
for a particular question, in-context reasoning can be sensitive to distractor facts,
additional content that is irrelevant to a question but that may be relevant for a
different question (i.e., not necessarily random noise). In these situations, the model
fails to distinguish the knowledge that is necessary to answer the question, leading
to spurious reasoning and degraded performance. This reasoning failure contrasts
with the model’s apparent ability to distinguish its contextual knowledge from all
the knowledge it has memorized during pre-training. Following this observation,
we propose teaching the model to reason more robustly by folding the provided
contextual knowledge into the model’s parameters before presenting it with a
question. Our method, RECKONING, is a bi-level learning algorithm that teaches
language models to reason by updating their parametric knowledge through back-
propagation, allowing them to then answer questions using the updated parameters.
During training, the inner loop rapidly adapts a copy of the model weights to encode
contextual knowledge into its parameters. In the outer loop, the model learns to
uses the updated weights to reproduce and answer reasoning questions about the
memorized knowledge. Our experiments on two multi-hop reasoning datasets show
that RECKONING’s performance improves over the in-context reasoning baseline
(by up to 4.5%). We also ﬁnd that compared to in-context reasoning, RECKONING
generalizes better to longer reasoning chains unseen during training, is more robust
to distractors in the context, and is more computationally efﬁcient when multiple
questions are asked about the same knowledge.
1
Introduction
Consider the sentence: “John is David’s dad, and Tom is John’s dad”. Concluding that Tom is
David’s grandfather involves reasoning about the information in the sentence. Speciﬁcally, it requires
understanding the direct information, or contextual knowledge, given in the sentence: the stated
relationships between John, David, and Tom; and combining it with our existing, commonsense
knowledge of the world: someone’s dad’s dad is their grandfather. Achieving such logical reasoning
automatically has long been a goal of AI [51, 16, 71, 79].
The example above demonstrates two necessary abilities required for successful reasoning: ﬁrst,
holding large amounts of commonsense or general knowledge about the world, and second, processing
and combining new information with existing knowledge. Transformer-based large language models
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2305.06349v1  [cs.CL]  10 May 2023

θ
Knowledge Encoding
ℒinner
∇inner
θ
Grandson
Who is Peter to Griffin?
 
̂θ𝒦
N
Relevant Facts 

Peter is a son to Kyle. 
Kyle is Julia’s son.
Amy is a daughter to Griffin.
Amy is Kyle’s sister.
𝒦
Knowledge Encoding for Reasoning — Inference
Figure 1: Our algorithm, RECKONING, solves reasoning problems by encoding external contextual
knowledge into a model’s parameters through gradient updates. At inference time, RECKONING
performs a few parameter updates using the gradients of a language modeling loss to encode the
relevant facts. Then, the updated model answers the question using only its implicit knowledge.
have shown a remarkable capacity for the ﬁrst of these abilities, repeatedly being demonstrated to
memorize large amounts of data, or parametric knowledge, in their weights [61, 7, 10, 48].
For the second, recent work showed that transformers ﬁne-tuned to predict answers over a concate-
nated context (“The cow is big; If something is big then it chases the dog; If the cow chases the dog
then the cow sees the rabbit”) and question (“Did the cow see the rabbit?”) achieve high performance
on reasoning tasks where all necessary knowledge is provided in the context [16]. We refer to this
setting as in-context reasoning, with further disambiguation according to the amount and type of
information provided [30].
In real-world question-answering settings [38, 21, 40, 15], though, large amounts of contextual
knowledge may be provided at once, and the information may not be perfectly ﬁltered for a speciﬁc
question. Unfortunately, in-context reasoning is highly sensitive to distractors [67]: additional facts
that are not relevant to a question (e.g., “Mary is Tom’s sister” in the opening example would be
irrelevant). Indeed, we ﬁnd that ﬁne-tuning and evaluating GPT-2 [57] for in-context reasoning drops
performance from 99.4% to only 70.9% accuracy for the same questions when adding distractors
to the context (§4.2). This sensitivity to distractors in contextual knowledge contrasts with the
transformer’s apparent robustness to distractors in parametric knowledge. At any point in time,
most of the training data seen by a model, which forms the parameters of the model, is likely to be
completely irrelevant to the example being processed. As such, presenting contextual knowledge in
the same way as memorized knowledge—by encoding it into the model parameters—may improve
the reasoning abilities of transformer-based language models.
In this work, we propose a novel bi-level optimization algorithm, RECKONING, that learns to
memorize (and reason) over facts (i.e., knowledge) by performing inference-time parameter updates
using gradients computed from a language modeling loss on those facts. Then, when presented
with questions about those facts after the parameter updates, the model can answer them correctly.
During training, our framework involves two nested loops: the inner loop performs fast adaptations
on initial weights to memorize a set of external knowledge through a few gradient updates; the
outer loop optimizes the updated model to solve reasoning problems associated with the memorized
knowledge. The outer loop learns optimal meta-parameters (i.e., the initialization of the inner loop)
that can rapidly memorize and successfully reason over contextual knowledge, allowing knowledge
memorization to be optimized directly for downstream reasoning. At inference time, instead of
including external knowledge in the input sequence as the preﬁx to a question prompt, the model
can encode it in its parameters through gradient updates and then reason over its updated parametric
knowledge to reach a conclusion.
We evaluate RECKONING on two synthetic multi-hop reasoning datasets: ProofWriter [71] and
CLUTRR-Systematic-Generalization (CLUTRR-SG) [27], comparing against a ﬁne-tuned in-context
reasoning baseline that uses the same underlying model. Our results show that RECKONING con-
sistently outperforms the in-context reasoning baseline on each benchmark, demonstrating that
RECKONING learns to answer multi-hop reasoning questions by encoding contextual knowledge into
the model’s parameters and accessing this information when the question presented after the model’s
parameters have been updated. In particular, we ﬁnd through robustness tests that RECKONING
2

Knowledge Encoding for Reasoning — Bi-level Optimization Training
θ
Outer-loop Learning
For each (𝒦, x, y)
Inner-loop Learning
Relevant 
facts 𝒦
ℒinner
∇inner
θ
∑ℒouter
Reasoning Problems
Question (x, y)
 
̂θ𝒦
N
x: Who is Peter to Griffin?
y: Grandson 
Relevant Facts 

Peter is a son to Kyle. 
Kyle is Julia’s son.
Amy is a daughter to Griffin.
Amy is Kyle’s sister.
𝒦
______________________
…
______________________
∇outer
θ
Figure 2: The two-stage training process of RECKONING with an inner and outer loop.
more successfully generalizes to adversarial settings, such as the presence of distractor facts and the
introduction of longer reasoning chains at inference time. Finally, while RECKONING requires more
time to encode knowledge than a typical forward pass due to its inference-time gradient updates, our
run-time analysis shows that RECKONING is more efﬁcient when solving multiple problems that use
a common set of knowledge, as RECKONING only needs to encode the knowledge once to answer
multiple questions using the updated parameters. Overall, we demonstrate that RECKONING is an
effective algorithm for reasoning through dynamic and controllable knowledge encoding, overcoming
an observed weakness in the common reasoning setting and providing multiple additional beneﬁts.
2
Background
Language Modeling and Memorization
In the causal language modeling training objective, a
language model f with parameters θ is trained to estimate the conditional probabilities of tokens in a
sequence given the preceding ones: p(xt|x<t). Speciﬁcally, we train fθ, the function computed by f
with parameters θ, to approximate p using the causal language modeling (CLM) loss:
LCLM(fθ, x) = −
T
X
t=1
log fθ(xt|x1, ..., xt−1).
(1)
This training objective allows language models to memorize individual training examples [10, 9], and
we will exploit this ability in order to memorize and draw on contextual knowledge in our work.
Reasoning, and Transformers as Soft Reasoners
In natural language reasoning tasks, we are
given (in natural language) a set of context knowledge K, a question x about the information in K,
and a set of possible answers Y for x, from which we must choose the correct answer. In in-context
reasoning, language models fθ trained with a next-token objective are applied to this task by selecting
as the correct response the answer y ∈Y with a maximum probability according to the model’s next-
token prediction after the concatenated context and question: y = arg maxy′ fθ(y′|[K; x]). Previous
works have shown that, after relevant supervised ﬁne-tuning, transformer language models can
achieve high performance in this setting [16, 71, 27], though this performance degrades signiﬁcantly
in the presence of irrelevant facts (distractors) [67].
3
Method
Addressing these challenges, we propose RECKONING (REasoning through dynamiC KnOwledge
eNcodING), which solves reasoning problems by memorizing the provided contextual knowledge,
and then using this encoded knowledge when prompted with downstream questions. Speciﬁcally,
RECKONING uses bi-level optimization to learn a set of meta-parameters primed to encode relevant
knowledge in a limited number of gradient steps. The model can then use its updated weights to
solve reasoning problems over this knowledge, without further presentation of the knowledge itself.
Notation
We consider only decoder-based transformer language models, and reserve f : X × θ →
Y to refer to such models, where X is the set possible inputs and θ are their possible weights
3

(parameters). We use fθ : x 7→f(x, θ) to easily refer to any f with a given set of parameters θ.
We describe reasoning problems with triples (K, x, y) such that y ∈Y is the correct answer for the
question x given facts K, and use D to refer to sets of such problems.
Overview: Inference
Given a reasoning problem (K, x, Y), we initialize our model with weights
copied from a set of meta-parameters θ and perform a constant number N of gradient descent steps
on these with the goal of minimizing the causal language modeling objective on the knowledge set
K. This allows the model to memorize K in its updated parameters, which we refer to as ˆθK
N. Next,
we pass the question x to the model, using f ˆθK
N to obtain a distribution over Y, and taking as output
the answer y ∈Y with the highest probability. For this method to consistently output the ground
truth y∗, we seek a set of optimal meta-parameters θ∗that can quickly memorize (i.e., learn) the
given knowledge in a way that then allows accurate reasoning when queried about the knowledge
downstream.
Training RECKONING
Given a distribution p(D) of reasoning problems, our proposed bi-level
optimization framework RECKONING (seen in Figure 2) optimizes the following objective:
θ∗∈arg min
θ
E
(K,x,y)∼p(D)[LCE(f ˆθK
N (x), y)]
(2)
where for all K, n ∈N, and θ: ˆθK
0 = θ, and
ˆθK
n+1 = ˆθK
n −α∇LCLM(f ˆθK
n , K).
(3)
Here, LCE(f(x), y) denotes the cross-entropy (CE) loss, which we apply with the relevant parameters
for each reasoning question in D, LCLM(f, K) =
1
|K|
P
k∈K LCLM(f, k) denotes the causal language
modeling loss, and N and α are pre-deﬁned hyperparameters of the ﬁne-tuning. We seek our actual
meta-parameters θ through gradient descent. In particular, denoting by θ0 our initial meta-parameters,
and ˆθK
N,i the parameters ˆθK
N obtained when initializing ˆθK
0 with θi, we iteratively compute
θi+1 = θi −η∇1
|Di|
X
(K,x,y)∈Di
LTotal(f ˆθK
N,i, K, x, y),
(4)
Algorithm 1 RECKONING
Require: An example distribution p(D), a transformer lan-
guage model f, initial meta-parameters θ, outer step
size η, inner step size α, inner loop length N.
1: while not converged do
▷outer loop
2:
Sample D′ ∼p(D)
3:
LD′ ←0
4:
for each (K, x, y) ∈D′ do
5:
Initialize ˆθK
0 = θ
6:
for n := 0 to N −1 do
▷inner loop
7:
ˆθK
n+1 ←ˆθK
n −α∇LCLM(f ˆθK
n , K)
8:
end for
9:
LD′ ←LD′ + LTotal(f ˆθK
N , K, x, y)
10:
end for
11:
θ ←θ −η∇
1
|D′|LD′
12: end while
where LTotal(f, K, x, y) = LCE(f(x), y)
and for each i, Di is a random batch sampled
from p(D). We continue this progression un-
til LTotal converges.
The training can be seen as two nested loops:
at each iteration, the outer loop (Equa-
tion (4)) samples a random batch Di ⊆D of
reasoning problems for evaluating (in order
to update) the current meta-parameters θi,
after the inner loop (Equation (3)) adapts
them to encode the associated knowledge
through N steps of gradient updates.
Multi-Task Objective
During our exper-
iments, we ﬁnd that adding a knowledge-
recovery objective to the outer loop—such
that it must not only answer the question but also state the relevant contextual knowledge when
prompted with the question—improves the reasoning performance of the model. We evaluate the
knowledge recovery with a causal language modeling loss and model the two losses by simple linear
combination, following prior works [23, 75, 74]. The entire change is achieved by redeﬁning the total
loss in our outer loop (Equation (4)) as:
LTotal(f, K, x, y) = LCE(f(x), y) + LCLM(f, x, K)
(5)
where LCLM(f, x, K) is the language modeling loss on K, as in Equation (3), but this time conditioned
on the question x. The overall process for training RECKONING is depicted in Algorithm 1 and
Figure 2. Additionally, we dynamically learn a per-step-per-layer learning rate to replace the shared
constant learning rate in the inner loop. We give more details in Appendix D.
4

4
Experiments
Setup
We conduct our experiments on two datasets focusing on multi-hop logical reasoning over
natural language knowledge: ProofWriter [71], which measures the model’s ability to emulate
reasoning over facts and rules expressed in natural language, and CLUTRR-SG [27], which is
generated from the CLUTRR [69] benchmark, a logical reasoning task that involves reasoning over
family relationships between entities grounded in ﬁrst-order logical proofs. For these datasets, each
problem requires multiple reasoning hops to reach an answer.1 The more reasoning hops a problem
requires, the more complex that problem is.
We compare our method against the following baselines: (1) a ﬁne-tuned model that performs a
forward pass on only the question without access to the knowledge (No-Facts), (2) a model trained
using RECKONING with random knowledge that is not relevant to the questions (Random-Facts),
and (3) an in-context reasoning baseline that concatenates the knowledge K with the question x in
a single context and is trained using supervised learning to predict the answer (FT-ICR). Our ﬁrst
two baselines sanity-check whether any surface-level patterns in the question or the knowledge set
can be exploited to make an accurate prediction. The last baseline compares RECKONING to the
conventional way of prompting models for reasoning abilities. In all experiments, we use the base
GPT-2 [57] model (∼124M parameters) as our initialization. For each reported score, we compute the
average across three different runs. Unless stated otherwise, we refer by RECKONING to our method
trained with the multi-task objective. For more details on the implementation, dataset statistics, and
examples, see Appendix A.
4.1
Multi-hop Reasoning Performance
ProofWriter
CLUTRR-SG
Method
2-h
3-h
5-h
2-h
4-h
6-h
No-Facts
64.1
63.0
64.2
0.0
8.8
8.9
Random-Facts
64.1
63.0
64.2
0.0
1.3
2.5
FT-ICRST
98.4
98.8
97.8
97.4
91.3
89.1
FT-ICRMT
99.4
99.2
99.6
98.1
96.9
90.3
RECKONINGST
98.3
98.3
99.1
96.0
90.2
91.2
RECKONINGMT
99.5
99.7
99.8
98.3
97.6
94.8
Table 1: Label accuracy of RECKONING on ProofWriter
and CLUTRR-SG. We compare RECKONING to ﬁne-tuned
in-context reasoning (ICR) baselines where the supporting
facts are given as part of the input. Models with MT are
trained with the multi-task objective in the outer loop that
co-optimizes multi-hop question answering and knowledge
memorization.
Main Results
We ﬁrst evaluate
whether RECKONING learns to per-
form reasoning by updating model pa-
rameters with relevant facts through
back-propagation. As input, a model
is given a set of supporting facts (with-
out the presence of distractors) and
a question (or hypothesis). First, the
model performs a few inner loop learn-
ing steps of causal language modeling
on the facts. Then, the updated model
receives only the question and gener-
ates an answer. To answer the ques-
tion correctly, the model must reason
over the encoded facts and the ques-
tion, meaning it must encode the facts
during the inner loop such that com-
plex multi-hop questions can be an-
swered by the updated model.
We train our models and the ﬁne-tuned in-context reasoning (FT-ICR) baselines with both the single-
task (LCE) and multi-task (LCE+LCLM) objectives. For multi-task training, the model learns to answer
the question and generate its relevant knowledge in the outer loop. Table 1 shows the evaluation
results on questions answering (or hypothesis classiﬁcation). For all hop numbers in ProofWriter and
in CLUTRR-SG, multi-task RECKONING outperforms the best result of all baselines (consistently
obtained by multi-task FT-ICR) by an average of 1%. We conclude that RECKONING can effectively
solve reasoning problems by using parametric knowledge updated with relevant knowledge through
gradient updates and do so better than existing baselines. The multi-task objective is crucial for this
success: not only is RECKONING’s performance consistently higher (by an average of 2.8% over
the two datasets and their hop counts) when using the multi-task rather than single-task objective,
it also underperforms both FT-ICR baselines when trained with only the single-task objective. The
multi-task objective also improves FT-ICR consistently (average 1.8%), though it is not enough
1In ProofWriter, the number of reasoning hops is called the proof depth. To unify the presentation of the
results, we use the term “hop” to describe the number of reasoning steps for both datasets.
5

0
20
40
60
80
100
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Label Accuracy (%)
Number of Test Hops
Training on 2-hop Questions
ICR
RECKONING
0
20
40
60
80
100
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Number of Test Hops
Training on 6-hop Questions
ICR
RECKONING
0
20
40
60
80
100
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Number of Test Hops
Training on 4-hop Questions
ICR
RECKONING
Figure 3: System generalization evaluation on CLUTRR-SG. From left to right, the models are
trained on 2-hop, 4-hop, and 6-hop CLUTRR-SG data portions. We evaluate the model on 2-10 hop
test sets. The higher the hops, the more facts a question has, and the more difﬁcult that question is.
to beat RECKONING with the multi-task objective. In all further experiments, we consider only
RECKONING and in-context reasoning (ICR) with a multi-task objective.
Generalizing to Longer Reasoning Chains
Our ﬁrst experiments assume an alignment between
the number of reasoning hops in the questions in the training and test set. However, we may not be
able to train on all n-hop reasoning questions we encounter in the wild, and we rarely know the number
of reasoning hops in a question a priori. Consequently, we also measure the generalization capacity
of our model to questions with hop numbers unseen during training. We compile interpolation
(fewer hops than the train set) and extrapolation (more hops than the train set) test sets from the
CLUTRR-SG dataset. Again, we train models individually on 2-hop, 4-hop, and 6-hop examples
and evaluate these three sets of models on the test sets, which contain 2-10-hop reasoning questions.
Results in Figure 3 show that both RECKONING models and ICR baselines retain high performance
on the interpolation test sets but exhibit decreasing performance as the number of hops increases.
Importantly, though, RECKONING outperforms ﬁne-tuned baselines on all the test sets regardless
of the number of training hops, with the highest performance gains of RECKONING being more
than 10% in every training setting (15%, 30%, 10%, respectively). These performance gains happen
when testing on extrapolation data, suggesting that training with RECKONING better generalizes to
examples with high OOD hop counts compared to in-context reasoning.
93.7
56.7
60.2
95.3
82.7
77
99
96
84.7
99.6
99
94.9
40
60
80
100
2-hop
4-hop
6-hop
Label Accuracy (%)
1-step
2-step
4-step
6-step
Figure 4: Impact of the number of inner loop steps
on multi-hop reasoning performance. Each group
of plots involves training and testing on a subset of
questions in CLUTRR-SG with a different number
of hops. Each colored bar refers to a different
number of gradient steps in the inner loop.
Does RECKONING’s performance depend on
the number of inner loop gradient steps?
In
RECKONING, the model performs multi-hop rea-
soning over facts by encoding facts using mul-
tiple gradient steps in the inner loop optimiza-
tion (§3). Naturally, this process prompts the
question of whether there is a correlation be-
tween the number of reasoning hops and the
number of gradient steps needed to reliably en-
code the knowledge (i.e., problems with more
reasoning hops require more gradient steps in
the inner loop to encode the facts). In Figure 4,
we show for CLUTRR-SG that as the number of
inner loop steps increases, the label accuracy of
the outer-loop task also increases. Furthermore,
when considering the performance gains for rea-
soning with 6 inner loop steps (i.e., knowledge encoding) steps as opposed to one, we observe that
this gap is much more pronounced for 4-hop (42.3%) and 6-hop (34.7%) reasoning than it is for
2-hop reasoning (5.9%). These results show that problems requiring more hops of reasoning also
greatly beneﬁt from more steps of inner loop knowledge encoding.
4.2
Reasoning with Distractors
In cases where multiple questions must be answered about the same knowledge set, some knowledge
that is relevant to one question will likely be irrelevant to another question. For example, in Table 5,
6

99.5
94.1
89.8
89.5
79.8
99.4
88.9
80.6
78.9
62.7
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
6
all
Label Accuracy (%)
Number of Distractors
Training on 2-hop Questions
RECKONING
ICR
99.7
94.7
91.8
87.2
83.7
99.2
92.9
82.7
78.6
72.7
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
6
all
Number of Distractors
Training on 3-hop Questions
RECKONING
ICR
99.8
96.0
93.9
91.5
84.0
99.6
94.1
88.9
81.5
77.2
40
60
80
100
0
2
4
6
all
Number of Distractors
Training on 5-hop Questions
RECKONING
ICR
Figure 5: Robustness under distractors for ProofWriter. Each of the three plots corresponds to training
and testing on a subset of questions in ProofWriter with a different number of hops (2,3,5-hops).
Each bar corresponds to the number of distractors in the knowledge sets for those questions.
the fact “Charlie is White.” is not needed to answer the question “Harry is red?”. Thus, it is important
to evaluate the robustness of RECKONING when there exists irrelevant information (i.e., distractors)
in the knowledge set. In this experiment, we analyze RECKONING’s ability to focus on the correct
knowledge and ignore distractors when answering questions. We use ProofWriter as the evaluation
dataset since it already has a setting with distractors included in the knowledge. For systematic
analysis, we gradually add distractors to the context (starting from 2 and ﬁnishing at all possible
distractors, of which there are an average of 7 per question). We train RECKONING and the baseline
using the multi-task objective, where the model must (1) recall all of the facts and rules relevant to
the question and (2) predict the conclusion based on the correct knowledge. In this case, we adapt
training such that for each question x, the outer-loop (Equation (5)) CLM loss is only computed
with respect to the relevant facts from K, thereby learning to recall relevant facts during training. In
Figure 5, we see that RECKONING’s performance is consistently more robust under distractors than
the in-context reasoning baseline. When we include all of the distractors in the context, RECKONING
achieves a signiﬁcantly higher average label accuracy (82.5%) across hops than the baseline (70.9%),
as computed by average of the 3 considered hop depths. Additionally, compared to performance with
no distractors, RECKONING’s performance only drops 17.1% while the baseline performance drops
28.6%, thereby exhibiting a better ability to disentangle the correct knowledge from the distractors.
4.3
Run-time Analysis
Model
Wall-clock
Time (s)
Single question
FT-IRC
0.1887
RECKONING1step
0.2532
RECKONING4step
0.9664
Multiple questions (18)
FT-IRC
2.0436
RECKONING1step
0.6228
RECKONING4step
1.4839
Table 2: Run-time analysis of the ﬁne-tuned
in-context reasoning baseline and RECKON-
ING. We measure the wall-clock time with
seconds as the unit.
One of the advantages of RECKONING is the ability
to memorize a large set of knowledge and answer
multiple related questions about that knowledge at
little extra cost per question. Speciﬁcally, in con-
trast to in-context reasoning, RECKONING can en-
code knowledge once and answer multiple questions
without needing to reprocess the knowledge for each
question asked. To test whether RECKONING could
be a more efﬁcient method for inference when mul-
tiple questions are asked about the same knowledge,
we measure the wall-clock time (in seconds) of the
complete inference pipeline of RECKONING vs. ICR.
For this experiment, we use a synthetic reasoning
dataset with examples where the model is given a
sequence of random letters as contextual knowledge,
and the question asks for the most frequent letter in
the context. The total number of tokens in each ex-
ample is 1024: 7 for the question, 1 for the answer, and the remaining 1016 as random letters in the
context, presented as 8 “facts”. The ﬁne-tuned in-context reasoning baseline receives a sequence
including all 8 facts and the question. In contrast, RECKONING receives the 8 facts as a batch of eight
segments of 127 tokens and encodes them in parallel in the inner loop. In the outer loop, the model
only receives the question or a batch of questions. We focus on two settings: (1) inference time for a
single question and (2) inference time when answering multiple questions. In the multiple-question
setting, we set the number of questions to 18 (the same as in ProofWriter). For RECKONING, the
inference process includes the inner-loop knowledge encoding through gradient updates and the ﬁnal
7

forward pass to encode the question. We set the number of inner loop gradient steps to 1 and 4. In
Table 2, we see that when answering a single question, RECKONING does not perform inference
faster compared to in-context reasoning. However, RECKONING shows signiﬁcant advantages under a
multi-question setting. Both the 1-step inner loop and the 4-step inner loop are faster than the baseline.
Since RECKONING encodes the knowledge in model parameters, it does not need to reprocess the
knowledge for a related question and is more efﬁcient. We run this experiment on 1 RTX 3090 GPU.2
4.4
Memorizing Knowledge
Method
LCLM
∆LCLM
RECKONINGST
10.74
9.55
RECKONINGMT
0.167
12.61
Table 3: Average validation loss after the
inner loop (LCLM) and change in inner
loop loss (∆LCLM) between single-task
and multi-task outer-loop loss. ∆LCLM
measures how much the loss decreases
after the gradient steps.
In Table 1, we saw that training RECKONING with a multi-
task outer loop objective improved over training with the
single-task objective, potentially because the multi-task
objective improves the model’s ability to memorize the
knowledge in the inner loop. To validate our hypothesis,
we evaluate and analyze RECKONING’s performance in
reproducing memorized knowledge. We ﬁrst show in Ta-
ble 3 the average inner loop loss (LCLM) and inner loop
loss difference (∆LCLM) from the ﬁrst inner loop evalu-
ation to the last on validation examples from the 5-hop
ProofWriter data. We can see that the average inner loop
loss for RECKONINGST is much higher than RECKONINGMT, and indeed starts out much higher as
well. This observation shows that the single-task outer loop objective, which optimizes the model
only for multi-hop question answering, does not learn to encode the knowledge in the inner loop by
memorizing it, despite learning how to reason over it to answer questions. In contrast, the multi-task
objective forces the model to learn to memorize the knowledge in the inner loop too: we observe that
RECKONINGMT minimizes the inner loop loss as it reads the knowledge. This pattern is also shown
in the average inner-loss difference (∆LCLM). The inner loop loss decreases more after the gradient
updates when trained with the multi-task objective.
ProofWriter
CLUTRR-SG
Method
2-h
3-h
5-h
2-h
4-h
6-h
FT-ICRMT
99.8
99.0
98.7
100.0
100.0
99.9
RECKONINGMT
98.9
98.6
98.2
100.0
99.9
99.9
Table 4: Exact match score for reproducing memorized
knowledge. In contrast to in-context reasoning, RECKON-
ING does not have direct access to the knowledge.
Next, we report the evaluation results
on the model’s ability to reproduce the
memorized facts correctly under a multi-
task setting in Table 4. For the metric,
we calculate the exact match score be-
tween the reproduced facts and the gold
facts.3 We compare the results to the
ﬁne-tuned baseline with in-context rea-
soning (FT-ICR).
63.5
63.2
66.1
79.8
83.7
84.0
40
60
80
100
2-hop
3-hop
5-hop
Label Accuracy (%)
single-task
multi-task
Figure 6: Performance comparison be-
tween models trained with a single-task
and a multi-task objective under distrac-
tors. With the multi-task objective, the
model learns to memorize the relevant
facts and perform reasoning over these
facts memorized in the parameters.
The results show that RECKONINGMT can correctly re-
cover the relevant facts from its model parameters with an
average exact match score of 99.3, which is comparable
to the FT-ICR baseline. Note that this task is easier for
the full-context baseline since it can directly attend to and
copy the facts from the input, while RECKONINGMT does
not have direct access to the facts when recalling them (as
they have instead been encoded in the model parameters).
This result shows that the supporting facts are successfully
encoded into the model parameters such that the model
can reproduce them without losing much information.
Finally, we show that RECKONING with a multi-task ob-
jective is also more robust to distractors as it trains the
model to only reproduce the facts that would be relevant to
a particular question we ask in the outer loop. As in Sec-
2We perform this experiment in a limited setting and do not handle the case where hidden states could be
cached for the forward pass of in-context reasoning, likely speeding up multi-question inference [11].
3This is done by prompting the model with the question and comparing its output (after its answer to the
question) to the concatenation of all of the facts. The model is able to produce these facts in the expected order
due to an implementation detail: they are numbered and labeled when given to the inner loop.
8

tion 4.2, we use the ProofWriter dataset and, for each question, add all the distractors to the context.
We train the model using the multi-task objective, and we report the label accuracy. While in Table 1,
we originally saw a ∼1% improvement from training with a multi-task objective on ProofWriter
with no distractors, we see a much more signiﬁcant performance gap in Figure 6 (∼18.2%) when
distractors are available. We also note that the performance of the single-task model is essentially
random (see the Random-Facts baseline from Table 1). By learning how to memorize knowledge
in the inner loop so that it can recall relevant facts in the outer loop, the model also learns how to
encode facts more robustly over them.
5
Related Work
Logical Reasoning Datasets and Benchmarks
As a central building block of human cognition
and intelligence [26], logical reasoning has been a long-pursued topic in the ﬁeld of AI [53, 46, 8,
2, 16, 12, 70, 44]. Logical reasoning, in general, can be categorized in a trichotomy of deductive,
inductive, and abductive reasoning [24]. Multiple datasets have been published that evaluate neural
models’ ability on these three types of logical reasoning [16, 5, 69]. Initially, logical reasoning tasks
focused on hypothesis classiﬁcation, where, given a theory consisting of multiple facts and rules, a
model would determine whether the hypothesis was correct. Recently, transformer-based language
models have been directly used to solve this task in synthetic [16, 63], real-world [28], and adversarial
[59, 25, 65] settings. However, simply predicting whether the hypothesis is valid does not elucidate
whether the model correctly reasons over the provided knowledge. To better analyze and interpret the
reasoning process of language models, new tasks focus on generating the valid proof that explains
the model’s decision [71, 19]. Our proposed method, RECKONING, is optimized for the hypothesis
classiﬁcation reasoning task and evaluates on many of these datasets [71, 27].
Logical Reasoning over Natural Language
Historically, automatic logical reasoners used sym-
bolic systems and formal languages as a knowledge representation [41, 53, 50, 1, 47, 78]. However,
these systems were hard to scale up due to the knowledge-acquisition bottleneck and the brittleness
of formal representation [33, 81]. With recent advances in transformer-based language modeling
[73] and self-supervised pre-training [20, 57, 58], a novel paradigm for logical reasoning emerged,
where pre-trained language models (PLMs) could be used as soft reasoners over knowledge expressed
in natural language. Natural language as a knowledge representation allowed PLMs to handle raw
input with diverse formats [31, 14], resulting in PLMs being applied to various types of deductive
[16], abductive [5], and inductive [27] reasoning tasks. However, language models as soft reasoners
also showed structural weaknesses, as their performance dropped on complex logical operations
[77, 12], and their reasoning process was not interpretable [62, 43]. Consequently, a new line of work
uses neuro-symbolic methods to combine the best of both language models and symbolic reasoning
[34, 42, 13, 6, 39]. Speciﬁcally, the interpretability gap motivated modular and step-wise reasoning
systems that use PLMs as intermediate modules [64, 72, 32, 66, 56, 80] to generate reasoning steps
(e.g., proofs). In contrast to these works, our method RECKONING dynamically encodes natural
language knowledge into the model parameters through gradient updates, thereby reasoning by
mixing contextual knowledge with pre-encoded parametric knowledge and allowing the model to
determine a conclusion based on its updated parametric knowledge.
Model Editing
While our motivations are grounded in research on machine reasoning, our methods
are more often used in the area of model editing. Model editing is a method to edit a model’s
parameters to correct its errors or update the model. Several works propose hypernetwork-based
methods to edit knowledge in a model by predicting updates conditioned on new factual statements
[29] or transforming the gradients from new provided facts [52] to make local edits to a model. Other
approaches focus on more direct edits of model behavior, such as directly modifying neuron outputs
[18, 82], localizing distinct feed-forward layers that are responsible for factual recall, and modifying
these weights [48], and performing weight updates across multiple layers to perform simultaneous
edits [49]. Similarly, our method also rapidly edits the model parameters to add knowledge. However,
our bi-level framework optimizes model edits for the reasoning task in the outer loop, allowing the
model to learn to do fast memorization of knowledge that can support the model’s reasoning ability.
Language Models as Knowledge Bases
Our work learns to reason by dynamically encoding
contextual knowledge in the parameters of language models before answering questions about
them. Previous studies have found that LLMs can store real-world facts learned during pre-training
[61, 10, 48, 9]. Learning these facts during pre-training allows language models to be prompted
[55, 37, 68, 83] or adapted [7, 60, 35, 36] to produce these facts on-demand. However, LLM
9

knowledge is latent and hard to identify or control. The model generation is sensitive to speciﬁc
words or phrases. LLMs emit knowledge encoded in the parameters only when prompted appropriately
[54, 22, 17, 9]. It is also difﬁcult to inject or update knowledge for LLMs [48], and the memorization
of knowledge in LLMs is not optimized toward their reasoning ability. In our work, we seek to
ﬁnd a way to add knowledge to LLMs in a controllable and adaptive way that can be beneﬁcial to
downstream reasoning applications.
6
Conclusion
We present RECKONING, a bi-level learning framework for multi-hop reasoning that encodes knowl-
edge verbalized using natural language into a model’s parameters through gradient updates. During
training, the inner loop encodes the contextual knowledge into the model parameters by backpropa-
gating a language modeling loss. In the outer loop, the model solves reasoning problems using the
memorized knowledge given only the question as input. Through bi-level optimization, RECKONING
ﬁnds a set of meta-parameters that allows it to perform quick knowledge-based updates for reasoning.
Our experiments show that RECKONING learns to reason only by relying on its parametric knowledge
after external knowledge has been encoded through gradient updates. Using a multi-task objective
that co-optimizes reasoning and knowledge memorization in the outer loop, RECKONING outperforms
in-context reasoning baselines that are trained to encode external knowledge as part of the context.
Through our analysis, we show that RECKONING is more generalizable to problems with longer
reasoning chains, less susceptible to irrelevant distractor knowledge, and that RECKONING is more
efﬁcient than the baseline when answering multiple questions that require common knowledge.
Acknowledgements
We thank Shikhar Murty and Christopher Manning for helpful discussions in crafting ideas for this
project. We also gratefully acknowledge the support of Innosuisse under PFFS-21-29, the EPFL
Science Seed Fund, the EPFL Center for Imaging, Sony Group Corporation, and the Allen Institute
for AI.
References
[1] Lasha Abzianidze. A tableau prover for natural logic and language. In Proceedings of the 2015
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2492–2502, Lisbon,
Portugal, September 2015. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[2] Lasha Abzianidze. LangPro: Natural language theorem prover. In Proceedings of the 2017
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations,
pages 115–120, Copenhagen, Denmark, September 2017. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[3] Antreas Antoniou, Harrison Edwards, and Amos Storkey. How to train your MAML. In
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
[4] Sungyong Baik, Myungsub Choi, Janghoon Choi, Heewon Kim, and Kyoung Mu Lee. Meta-
learning with adaptive hyperparameters. ArXiv, abs/2011.00209, 2020.
[5] Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Chaitanya Malaviya, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Ari Holtzman,
Hannah Rashkin, Doug Downey, Scott Wen tau Yih, and Yejin Choi. Abductive commonsense
reasoning, 2020.
[6] Antoine Bosselut, Ronan Le Bras, , and Yejin Choi. Dynamic neuro-symbolic knowledge graph
construction for zero-shot commonsense question answering. In Proceedings of the 35th AAAI
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AAAI), 2021.
[7] Antoine Bosselut, Hannah Rashkin, Maarten Sap, Chaitanya Malaviya, Asli Celikyilmaz, and
Yejin Choi. Comet: Commonsense transformers for automatic knowledge graph construction.
In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
pages 4762–4779, 2019.
10

[8] Samuel R. Bowman, Christopher Potts, and Christopher D. Manning. Recursive neural networks
can learn logical semantics. In Proceedings of the 3rd Workshop on Continuous Vector Space
Models and their Compositionality, pages 12–21, Beijing, China, July 2015. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[9] Nicholas Carlini, Daphne Ippolito, Matthew Jagielski, Katherine Lee, Florian Tramer, and
Chiyuan Zhang. Quantifying memorization across neural language models. In The Eleventh
International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023.
[10] Nicholas Carlini, Florian Tramer, Eric Wallace, Matthew Jagielski, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Kather-
ine Lee, Adam Roberts, Tom Brown, Dawn Song, Ulfar Erlingsson, Alina Oprea, and Colin
Raffel. Extracting training data from large language models, 2021.
[11] Carol Chen. Transformer inference arithmetic. https://kipp.ly/blog/transformer-inference-
arithmetic/, 2022.
[12] Zeming Chen and Qiyue Gao. Curriculum: A broad-coverage benchmark for linguistic phe-
nomena in natural language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North
American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Tech-
nologies, pages 3204–3219, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[13] Zeming Chen, Qiyue Gao, and Lawrence S. Moss. NeuralLog: Natural language inference with
joint neural and logical reasoning. In Proceedings of *SEM 2021: The Tenth Joint Conference
on Lexical and Computational Semantics, pages 78–88, Online, August 2021. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[14] Aakanksha Chowdhery, Sharan Narang, Jacob Devlin, Maarten Bosma, Gaurav Mishra, Adam
Roberts, Paul Barham, Hyung Won Chung, Charles Sutton, Sebastian Gehrmann, Parker
Schuh, Kensen Shi, Sasha Tsvyashchenko, Joshua Maynez, Abhishek Rao, Parker Barnes,
Yi Tay, Noam Shazeer, Vinodkumar Prabhakaran, Emily Reif, Nan Du, Ben Hutchinson,
Reiner Pope, James Bradbury, Jacob Austin, Michael Isard, Guy Gur-Ari, Pengcheng Yin,
Toju Duke, Anselm Levskaya, Sanjay Ghemawat, Sunipa Dev, Henryk Michalewski, Xavier
Garcia, Vedant Misra, Kevin Robinson, Liam Fedus, Denny Zhou, Daphne Ippolito, David
Luan, Hyeontaek Lim, Barret Zoph, Alexander Spiridonov, Ryan Sepassi, David Dohan, Shivani
Agrawal, Mark Omernick, Andrew M. Dai, Thanumalayan Sankaranarayana Pillai, Marie Pellat,
Aitor Lewkowycz, Erica Moreira, Rewon Child, Oleksandr Polozov, Katherine Lee, Zongwei
Zhou, Xuezhi Wang, Brennan Saeta, Mark Diaz, Orhan Firat, Michele Catasta, Jason Wei,
Kathy Meier-Hellstern, Douglas Eck, Jeff Dean, Slav Petrov, and Noah Fiedel. Palm: Scaling
language modeling with pathways, 2022.
[15] Manuel Ciosici, Joe Cecil, Dong-Ho Lee, Alex Hedges, Marjorie Freedman, and Ralph
Weischedel. Perhaps PTLMs should go to school – a task to assess open book and closed
book QA. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 6104–6111, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[16] Peter Clark, Oyvind Tafjord, and Kyle Richardson. Transformers as soft reasoners over language.
In Christian Bessiere, editor, Proceedings of the Twenty-Ninth International Joint Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, IJCAI-20, pages 3882–3890. International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Organization, 7 2020. Main track.
[17] Jeff Da, Ronan Le Bras, Ximing Lu, Yejin Choi, and Antoine Bosselut. Analyzing commonsense
emergence in few-shot knowledge models. In Proceedings of the Conference on Automated
Knowledge Base Construction (AKBC), 2021.
[18] Damai Dai, Li Dong, Yaru Hao, Zhifang Sui, Baobao Chang, and Furu Wei. Knowledge neurons
in pretrained transformers. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 8493–8502, Dublin, Ireland, May
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[19] Bhavana Dalvi, Peter Jansen, Oyvind Tafjord, Zhengnan Xie, Hannah Smith, Leighanna Pi-
patanangkura, and Peter Clark. Explaining answers with entailment trees. In Proceedings of the
2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 7358–7370,
Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
11

[20] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina Toutanova. BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers), pages 4171–4186, Minneapolis,
Minnesota, June 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[21] Matthew Dunn, Levent Sagun, Mike Higgins, V. Ugur Guney, Volkan Cirik, and Kyunghyun
Cho. Searchqa: A new q&a dataset augmented with context from a search engine, 2017.
[22] Yanai Elazar, Nora Kassner, Shauli Ravfogel, Abhilasha Ravichander, Eduard Hovy, Hinrich
Schütze, and Yoav Goldberg. Measuring and improving consistency in pretrained language
models. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 9:1012–1031, 2021.
[23] Christopher Fifty, Ehsan Amid, Zhe Zhao, Tianhe Yu, Rohan Anil, and Chelsea Finn. Measuring
and harnessing transference in multi-task learning, 2021.
[24] Peter A. Flach and Antonis C. Kakas. Abductive and inductive reasoning: Background and
issues. In Applied Logic Series, pages 1–27. Springer Netherlands, 2000.
[25] Alexander Gaskell, Yishu Miao, Francesca Toni, and Lucia Specia. Logically consistent adver-
sarial attacks for soft theorem provers. In Proceedings of the Thirty-First International Joint
Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence. International Joint Conferences on Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Organization, July 2022.
[26] Vinod Goel, Gorka Navarrete, Ira A. Noveck, and Jérôme Prado. Editorial: The reasoning brain:
The interplay between cognitive neuroscience and theories of reasoning. Frontiers in Human
Neuroscience, 10, January 2017.
[27] Nicolas Gontier, Koustuv Sinha, Siva Reddy, and Christopher Joseph Pal. Measuring systematic
generalization in neural proof generation with transformers. ArXiv, abs/2009.14786, 2020.
[28] Simeng Han, Hailey Schoelkopf, Yilun Zhao, Zhenting Qi, Martin Riddell, Luke Benson, Lucy
Sun, Ekaterina Zubova, Yujie Qiao, Matthew Burtell, David Peng, Jonathan Fan, Yixin Liu,
Brian Wong, Malcolm Sailor, Ansong Ni, Linyong Nan, Jungo Kasai, Tao Yu, Rui Zhang,
Shaﬁq Joty, Alexander R. Fabbri, Wojciech Kryscinski, Xi Victoria Lin, Caiming Xiong, and
Dragomir Radev. Folio: Natural language reasoning with ﬁrst-order logic, 2022.
[29] Peter Hase, Mona Diab, Asli Celikyilmaz, Xian Li, Zornitsa Kozareva, Veselin Stoyanov, Mohit
Bansal, and Srinivasan Iyer. Do language models have beliefs? methods for detecting, updating,
and visualizing model beliefs, 2021.
[30] Chadi Helwe, Chloé Clavel, and Fabian M. Suchanek. Reasoning with transformer-based mod-
els: Deep learning, but shallow reasoning. In Danqi Chen, Jonathan Berant, Andrew McCallum,
and Sameer Singh, editors, 3rd Conference on Automated Knowledge Base Construction, AKBC
2021, Virtual, October 4-8, 2021, 2021.
[31] Dan Hendrycks, Collin Burns, Steven Basart, Andy Zou, Mantas Mazeika, Dawn Song, and
Jacob Steinhardt. Measuring massive multitask language understanding, 2021.
[32] Ruixin Hong, Hongming Zhang, Xintong Yu, and Changshui Zhang. METGEN: A module-
based entailment tree generation framework for answer explanation. In Findings of the Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2022, pages 1887–1905, Seattle, United States,
July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[33] Hai Hu, Qi Chen, Kyle Richardson, Atreyee Mukherjee, Lawrence S. Moss, and Sandra Kuebler.
MonaLog: a lightweight system for natural language inference based on monotonicity. In
Proceedings of the Society for Computation in Linguistics 2020, pages 334–344, New York,
New York, January 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[34] Zhiting Hu, Xuezhe Ma, Zhengzhong Liu, Eduard Hovy, and Eric Xing. Harnessing deep
neural networks with logic rules. In Proceedings of the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association
for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 2410–2420, Berlin, Germany,
August 2016. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[35] Jena D Hwang, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras, Jeff Da, Keisuke Sakaguchi, Antoine
Bosselut, and Yejin Choi. (comet-) atomic 2020: On symbolic and neural commonsense
knowledge graphs. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, volume 35,
pages 6384–6392, 2021.
12

[36] Liwei Jiang, Antoine Bosselut, Chandra Bhagavatula, and Yejin Choi. “I’m not mad”: Common-
sense implications of negation and contradiction. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, pages 4380–4397, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[37] Zhengbao Jiang, Frank F. Xu, Jun Araki, and Graham Neubig. How can we know what language
models know? Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics, 8:423–438,
2020.
[38] Mandar Joshi, Eunsol Choi, Daniel Weld, and Luke Zettlemoyer. TriviaQA: A large scale
distantly supervised challenge dataset for reading comprehension. In Proceedings of the 55th
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
pages 1601–1611, Vancouver, Canada, July 2017. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[39] Jaehun Jung, Lianhui Qin, Sean Welleck, Faeze Brahman, Chandra Bhagavatula, Ronan Le Bras,
and Yejin Choi. Maieutic prompting: Logically consistent reasoning with recursive explana-
tions. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 1266–1279, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association
for Computational Linguistics.
[40] Tom Kwiatkowski, Jennimaria Palomaki, Olivia Redﬁeld, Michael Collins, Ankur Parikh, Chris
Alberti, Danielle Epstein, Illia Polosukhin, Jacob Devlin, Kenton Lee, Kristina Toutanova, Llion
Jones, Matthew Kelcey, Ming-Wei Chang, Andrew M. Dai, Jakob Uszkoreit, Quoc Le, and Slav
Petrov. Natural questions: A benchmark for question answering research. Transactions of the
Association for Computational Linguistics, 7:452–466, 2019.
[41] Douglas B. Lenat, Mayank Prakash, and Mary Shepherd. Cyc: Using common sense knowledge
to overcome brittleness and knowledge acquisition bottlenecks. AI Magazine, 6(4):65, Mar.
1985.
[42] Tao Li, Vivek Gupta, Maitrey Mehta, and Vivek Srikumar. A logic-driven framework for
consistency of neural models. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-
guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 3924–3935, Hong Kong, China, November 2019.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[43] Zhengzhong Liang, Steven Bethard, and Mihai Surdeanu. Explainable multi-hop verbal reason-
ing through internal monologue. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 1225–1250, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[44] Hanmeng Liu, Ruoxi Ning, Zhiyang Teng, Jian Liu, Qiji Zhou, and Yue Zhang. Evaluating the
logical reasoning ability of chatgpt and gpt-4, 2023.
[45] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. Decoupled weight decay regularization. In International
Conference on Learning Representations, 2017.
[46] Bill MacCartney and Christopher D. Manning. Natural logic for textual inference. In Proceed-
ings of the ACL-PASCAL Workshop on Textual Entailment and Paraphrasing, pages 193–200,
Prague, June 2007. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[47] Pascual Martínez-Gómez, Koji Mineshima, Yusuke Miyao, and Daisuke Bekki. On-demand
injection of lexical knowledge for recognising textual entailment. In Proceedings of the 15th
Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Volume
1, Long Papers, pages 710–720, Valencia, Spain, April 2017. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[48] Kevin Meng, David Bau, Alex J Andonian, and Yonatan Belinkov. Locating and editing factual
associations in GPT. In Alice H. Oh, Alekh Agarwal, Danielle Belgrave, and Kyunghyun Cho,
editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2022.
[49] Kevin Meng, Arnab Sen Sharma, Alex J Andonian, Yonatan Belinkov, and David Bau. Mass-
editing memory in a transformer. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023.
[50] K. S. Metaxiotis, Dimitris Askounis, and John Psarras. Expert systems in production planning
and scheduling: A state-of-the-art survey. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing, 13(4):253–260,
2002.
13

[51] Kostas S. Metaxiotis, Dimitris Askounis, and John E. Psarras. Expert systems in production
planning and scheduling: A state-of-the-art survey. Journal of Intelligent Manufacturing,
13:253–260, 2002.
[52] Eric Mitchell, Charles Lin, Antoine Bosselut, Chelsea Finn, and Christopher D. Manning. Fast
model editing at scale, 2021.
[53] Stephen Muggleton and Luc de Raedt. Inductive logic programming: Theory and methods. The
Journal of Logic Programming, 19-20:629–679, May 1994.
[54] Fabio Petroni, Patrick Lewis, Aleksandra Piktus, Tim Rocktäschel, Yuxiang Wu, Alexander H.
Miller, and Sebastian Riedel. How context affects language models’ factual predictions, 2020.
[55] Fabio Petroni, Tim Rocktäschel, Sebastian Riedel, Patrick Lewis, Anton Bakhtin, Yuxiang Wu,
and Alexander Miller. Language models as knowledge bases? In Proceedings of the 2019
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International
Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 2463–2473, Hong
Kong, China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[56] Hanhao Qu, Yu Cao, Jun Gao, Liang Ding, and Ruifeng Xu. Interpretable proof generation via
iterative backward reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
pages 2968–2981, Seattle, United States, July 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[57] Alec Radford, Jeff Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan, Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. Language
models are unsupervised multitask learners. 2019.
[58] Colin Raffel, Noam Shazeer, Adam Roberts, Katherine Lee, Sharan Narang, Michael Matena,
Yanqi Zhou, Wei Li, and Peter J. Liu. Exploring the limits of transfer learning with a uniﬁed
text-to-text transformer, 2020.
[59] Kyle Richardson and Ashish Sabharwal. Pushing the limits of rule reasoning in transformers
through natural language satisﬁability. Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence, 36(10):11209–11219, June 2022.
[60] Adam Roberts, Colin Raffel, and Noam Shazeer. How much knowledge can you pack into
the parameters of a language model? In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 5418–5426, Online, November
2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[61] Anna Rogers, Olga Kovaleva, and Anna Rumshisky. A primer in BERTology: What we
know about how BERT works. Transactions of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
8:842–866, 2020.
[62] Cynthia Rudin. Stop explaining black box machine learning models for high stakes decisions
and use interpretable models instead. Nature Machine Intelligence, 1(5):206–215, May 2019.
[63] Mohammed Saeed, Naser Ahmadi, Preslav Nakov, and Paolo Papotti. RuleBERT: Teaching
soft rules to pre-trained language models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1460–1476, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican
Republic, November 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[64] Swarnadeep Saha, Prateek Yadav, and Mohit Bansal. multiPRover: Generating multiple proofs
for improved interpretability in rule reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the
North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, pages 3662–3677, Online, June 2021. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[65] Soumya Sanyal, Zeyi Liao, and Xiang Ren. RobustLR: A diagnostic benchmark for evaluating
logical robustness of deductive reasoners. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 9614–9631, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates,
December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[66] Soumya Sanyal, Harman Singh, and Xiang Ren. FaiRR: Faithful and robust deductive reasoning
over natural language. In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 1075–1093, Dublin, Ireland, May
2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[67] Freda Shi, Xinyun Chen, Kanishka Misra, Nathan Scales, David Dohan, Ed H. Chi, Nathanael
Schärli, and Denny Zhou. Large language models can be easily distracted by irrelevant context.
CoRR, abs/2302.00093, 2023.
14

[68] Taylor Shin, Yasaman Razeghi, Robert L. Logan IV, Eric Wallace, and Sameer Singh. Auto-
Prompt: Eliciting Knowledge from Language Models with Automatically Generated Prompts.
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing (EMNLP), pages 4222–4235, Online, November 2020. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[69] Koustuv Sinha, Shagun Sodhani, Jin Dong, Joelle Pineau, and William L. Hamilton. CLUTRR:
A diagnostic benchmark for inductive reasoning from text. In Proceedings of the 2019 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint
Conference on Natural Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP), pages 4506–4515, Hong Kong,
China, November 2019. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[70] Aarohi Srivastava, Abhinav Rastogi, Abhishek Rao, Abu Awal Md Shoeb, Abubakar Abid,
Adam Fisch, Adam R. Brown, Adam Santoro, Aditya Gupta, Adrià Garriga-Alonso, Agnieszka
Kluska, Aitor Lewkowycz, Akshat Agarwal, Alethea Power, Alex Ray, Alex Warstadt, Alexan-
der W. Kocurek, Ali Safaya, Ali Tazarv, Alice Xiang, Alicia Parrish, Allen Nie, Aman Hussain,
Amanda Askell, Amanda Dsouza, Ambrose Slone, Ameet Rahane, Anantharaman S. Iyer, An-
ders Andreassen, Andrea Madotto, Andrea Santilli, Andreas Stuhlmüller, Andrew Dai, Andrew
La, Andrew Lampinen, Andy Zou, Angela Jiang, Angelica Chen, Anh Vuong, Animesh Gupta,
Anna Gottardi, Antonio Norelli, Anu Venkatesh, Arash Gholamidavoodi, Arfa Tabassum, Arul
Menezes, Arun Kirubarajan, Asher Mullokandov, Ashish Sabharwal, Austin Herrick, Avia
Efrat, Aykut Erdem, Ayla Karaka¸s, B. Ryan Roberts, Bao Sheng Loe, Barret Zoph, Bartłomiej
Bojanowski, Batuhan Özyurt, Behnam Hedayatnia, Behnam Neyshabur, Benjamin Inden, Benno
Stein, Berk Ekmekci, Bill Yuchen Lin, Blake Howald, Cameron Diao, Cameron Dour, Catherine
Stinson, Cedrick Argueta, César Ferri Ramírez, Chandan Singh, Charles Rathkopf, Chenlin
Meng, Chitta Baral, Chiyu Wu, Chris Callison-Burch, Chris Waites, Christian Voigt, Christo-
pher D. Manning, Christopher Potts, Cindy Ramirez, Clara E. Rivera, Clemencia Siro, Colin
Raffel, Courtney Ashcraft, Cristina Garbacea, Damien Sileo, Dan Garrette, Dan Hendrycks, Dan
Kilman, Dan Roth, Daniel Freeman, Daniel Khashabi, Daniel Levy, Daniel Moseguí González,
Danielle Perszyk, Danny Hernandez, Danqi Chen, Daphne Ippolito, Dar Gilboa, David Dohan,
David Drakard, David Jurgens, Debajyoti Datta, Deep Ganguli, Denis Emelin, Denis Kleyko,
Deniz Yuret, Derek Chen, Derek Tam, Dieuwke Hupkes, Diganta Misra, Dilyar Buzan, Dim-
itri Coelho Mollo, Diyi Yang, Dong-Ho Lee, Ekaterina Shutova, Ekin Dogus Cubuk, Elad Segal,
Eleanor Hagerman, Elizabeth Barnes, Elizabeth Donoway, Ellie Pavlick, Emanuele Rodola,
Emma Lam, Eric Chu, Eric Tang, Erkut Erdem, Ernie Chang, Ethan A. Chi, Ethan Dyer, Ethan
Jerzak, Ethan Kim, Eunice Engefu Manyasi, Evgenii Zheltonozhskii, Fanyue Xia, Fatemeh Siar,
Fernando Martínez-Plumed, Francesca Happé, Francois Chollet, Frieda Rong, Gaurav Mishra,
Genta Indra Winata, Gerard de Melo, Germán Kruszewski, Giambattista Parascandolo, Giorgio
Mariani, Gloria Wang, Gonzalo Jaimovitch-López, Gregor Betz, Guy Gur-Ari, Hana Galijase-
vic, Hannah Kim, Hannah Rashkin, Hannaneh Hajishirzi, Harsh Mehta, Hayden Bogar, Henry
Shevlin, Hinrich Schütze, Hiromu Yakura, Hongming Zhang, Hugh Mee Wong, Ian Ng, Isaac
Noble, Jaap Jumelet, Jack Geissinger, Jackson Kernion, Jacob Hilton, Jaehoon Lee, Jaime Fer-
nández Fisac, James B. Simon, James Koppel, James Zheng, James Zou, Jan Koco´n, Jana
Thompson, Jared Kaplan, Jarema Radom, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Jason Phang, Jason Wei, Jason
Yosinski, Jekaterina Novikova, Jelle Bosscher, Jennifer Marsh, Jeremy Kim, Jeroen Taal, Jesse
Engel, Jesujoba Alabi, Jiacheng Xu, Jiaming Song, Jillian Tang, Joan Waweru, John Burden,
John Miller, John U. Balis, Jonathan Berant, Jörg Frohberg, Jos Rozen, Jose Hernandez-Orallo,
Joseph Boudeman, Joseph Jones, Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Joshua S. Rule, Joyce Chua, Kamil
Kanclerz, Karen Livescu, Karl Krauth, Karthik Gopalakrishnan, Katerina Ignatyeva, Katja
Markert, Kaustubh D. Dhole, Kevin Gimpel, Kevin Omondi, Kory Mathewson, Kristen Chia-
fullo, Ksenia Shkaruta, Kumar Shridhar, Kyle McDonell, Kyle Richardson, Laria Reynolds, Leo
Gao, Li Zhang, Liam Dugan, Lianhui Qin, Lidia Contreras-Ochando, Louis-Philippe Morency,
Luca Moschella, Lucas Lam, Lucy Noble, Ludwig Schmidt, Luheng He, Luis Oliveros Colón,
Luke Metz, LütﬁKerem ¸Senel, Maarten Bosma, Maarten Sap, Maartje ter Hoeve, Maheen
Farooqi, Manaal Faruqui, Mantas Mazeika, Marco Baturan, Marco Marelli, Marco Maru, Maria
Jose Ramírez Quintana, Marie Tolkiehn, Mario Giulianelli, Martha Lewis, Martin Potthast,
Matthew L. Leavitt, Matthias Hagen, Mátyás Schubert, Medina Orduna Baitemirova, Melody
Arnaud, Melvin McElrath, Michael A. Yee, Michael Cohen, Michael Gu, Michael Ivanitskiy,
Michael Starritt, Michael Strube, Michał Sw˛edrowski, Michele Bevilacqua, Michihiro Yasunaga,
Mihir Kale, Mike Cain, Mimee Xu, Mirac Suzgun, Mo Tiwari, Mohit Bansal, Moin Aminnaseri,
15

Mor Geva, Mozhdeh Gheini, Mukund Varma T, Nanyun Peng, Nathan Chi, Nayeon Lee, Neta
Gur-Ari Krakover, Nicholas Cameron, Nicholas Roberts, Nick Doiron, Nikita Nangia, Niklas
Deckers, Niklas Muennighoff, Nitish Shirish Keskar, Niveditha S. Iyer, Noah Constant, Noah
Fiedel, Nuan Wen, Oliver Zhang, Omar Agha, Omar Elbaghdadi, Omer Levy, Owain Evans,
Pablo Antonio Moreno Casares, Parth Doshi, Pascale Fung, Paul Pu Liang, Paul Vicol, Pegah
Alipoormolabashi, Peiyuan Liao, Percy Liang, Peter Chang, Peter Eckersley, Phu Mon Htut,
Pinyu Hwang, Piotr Miłkowski, Piyush Patil, Pouya Pezeshkpour, Priti Oli, Qiaozhu Mei, Qing
Lyu, Qinlang Chen, Rabin Banjade, Rachel Etta Rudolph, Raefer Gabriel, Rahel Habacker,
Ramón Risco Delgado, Raphaël Millière, Rhythm Garg, Richard Barnes, Rif A. Saurous, Riku
Arakawa, Robbe Raymaekers, Robert Frank, Rohan Sikand, Roman Novak, Roman Sitelew,
Ronan LeBras, Rosanne Liu, Rowan Jacobs, Rui Zhang, Ruslan Salakhutdinov, Ryan Chi, Ryan
Lee, Ryan Stovall, Ryan Teehan, Rylan Yang, Sahib Singh, Saif M. Mohammad, Sajant Anand,
Sam Dillavou, Sam Shleifer, Sam Wiseman, Samuel Gruetter, Samuel R. Bowman, Samuel S.
Schoenholz, Sanghyun Han, Sanjeev Kwatra, Sarah A. Rous, Sarik Ghazarian, Sayan Ghosh,
Sean Casey, Sebastian Bischoff, Sebastian Gehrmann, Sebastian Schuster, Sepideh Sadeghi,
Shadi Hamdan, Sharon Zhou, Shashank Srivastava, Sherry Shi, Shikhar Singh, Shima Asaadi,
Shixiang Shane Gu, Shubh Pachchigar, Shubham Toshniwal, Shyam Upadhyay, Shyamolima,
Debnath, Siamak Shakeri, Simon Thormeyer, Simone Melzi, Siva Reddy, Sneha Priscilla
Makini, Soo-Hwan Lee, Spencer Torene, Sriharsha Hatwar, Stanislas Dehaene, Stefan Divic,
Stefano Ermon, Stella Biderman, Stephanie Lin, Stephen Prasad, Steven T. Piantadosi, Stuart M.
Shieber, Summer Misherghi, Svetlana Kiritchenko, Swaroop Mishra, Tal Linzen, Tal Schuster,
Tao Li, Tao Yu, Tariq Ali, Tatsu Hashimoto, Te-Lin Wu, Théo Desbordes, Theodore Roth-
schild, Thomas Phan, Tianle Wang, Tiberius Nkinyili, Timo Schick, Timofei Kornev, Timothy
Telleen-Lawton, Titus Tunduny, Tobias Gerstenberg, Trenton Chang, Trishala Neeraj, Tushar
Khot, Tyler Shultz, Uri Shaham, Vedant Misra, Vera Demberg, Victoria Nyamai, Vikas Raunak,
Vinay Ramasesh, Vinay Uday Prabhu, Vishakh Padmakumar, Vivek Srikumar, William Fedus,
William Saunders, William Zhang, Wout Vossen, Xiang Ren, Xiaoyu Tong, Xinran Zhao, Xinyi
Wu, Xudong Shen, Yadollah Yaghoobzadeh, Yair Lakretz, Yangqiu Song, Yasaman Bahri, Yejin
Choi, Yichi Yang, Yiding Hao, Yifu Chen, Yonatan Belinkov, Yu Hou, Yufang Hou, Yuntao Bai,
Zachary Seid, Zhuoye Zhao, Zijian Wang, Zijie J. Wang, Zirui Wang, and Ziyi Wu. Beyond the
imitation game: Quantifying and extrapolating the capabilities of language models, 2022.
[71] Oyvind Tafjord, Bhavana Dalvi, and Peter Clark. ProofWriter: Generating implications, proofs,
and abductive statements over natural language. In Findings of the Association for Computa-
tional Linguistics: ACL-IJCNLP 2021, pages 3621–3634, Online, August 2021. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[72] Oyvind Tafjord, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, and Peter Clark. Entailer: Answering questions with
faithful and truthful chains of reasoning. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical
Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 2078–2093, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates,
December 2022. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[73] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez,
Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In I. Guyon, U. Von Luxburg,
S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R. Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, and R. Garnett, editors, Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, volume 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[74] Xinyi Wang, Yulia Tsvetkov, and Graham Neubig. Balancing training for multilingual neural
machine translation. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Com-
putational Linguistics, pages 8526–8537, Online, July 2020. Association for Computational
Linguistics.
[75] Zirui Wang, Zachary C. Lipton, and Yulia Tsvetkov. On negative interference in multilingual
models: Findings and a meta-learning treatment. In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 4438–4450, Online,
November 2020. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[76] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chaumond, Clement Delangue, Anthony
Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim Rault, Rémi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam Shleifer,
Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain
Gugger, Mariama Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush. Huggingface’s transformers:
State-of-the-art natural language processing, 2020.
16

[77] Hitomi Yanaka, Koji Mineshima, Daisuke Bekki, and Kentaro Inui. Do neural models learn
systematicity of monotonicity inference in natural language? In Proceedings of the 58th Annual
Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 6105–6117, Online, July 2020.
Association for Computational Linguistics.
[78] Hitomi Yanaka, Koji Mineshima, Pascual Martínez-Gómez, and Daisuke Bekki. Acquisition of
phrase correspondences using natural deduction proofs. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference
of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human
Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long Papers), pages 756–766, New Orleans, Louisiana,
June 2018. Association for Computational Linguistics.
[79] Kaiyu Yang, Jia Deng, and Danqi Chen. Generating natural language proofs with veriﬁer-guided
search. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
Processing, pages 89–105, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates, December 2022. Association for
Computational Linguistics.
[80] Kaiyu Yang, Jia Deng, and Danqi Chen. Generating natural language proofs with veriﬁer-guided
search, 2022.
[81] Zonglin Yang, Xinya Du, Rui Mao, Jinjie Ni, and Erik Cambria. Logical reasoning over natural
language as knowledge representation: A survey, 2023.
[82] Yunzhi Yao, Shaohan Huang, Li Dong, Furu Wei, Huajun Chen, and Ningyu Zhang. Kformer:
Knowledge injection in transformer feed-forward layers, 2022.
[83] Wenhao Yu, Dan Iter, Shuohang Wang, Yichong Xu, Mingxuan Ju, Soumya Sanyal, Chen-
guang Zhu, Michael Zeng, and Meng Jiang. Generate rather than retrieve: Large language
models are strong context generators. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2023.
17

A
Dataset
ProofWriter
The ProofWriter [71] dataset has 500k pairs of questions, answers, and proofs over
natural-language rule bases. Each example in the dataset contains a set of facts, a set of rules, a
hypothesis, and a label indicating whether the hypothesis is true, false, or unknown. The dataset
comprise ﬁve datasets named D0, D1, D2, D3, D5, each with 100k examples. Each dataset’s questions
require reasoning up to depths D (D = 0, 1, 2, 3, 5) to determine their answers. In our experiments,
we only focus on the datasets that require more reasoning depths (D2, D3, D5). We show an example
from the dataset in Table 5. In these datasets, a set of facts and rules are mapped to 18 questions,
where the questions can be answered based on a subset of the facts and rules. Thus, some of the
facts or rules can be irrelevant to some questions, and we call them distractors in Section 4.2. In the
experiment for knowledge encoding with distractors, we encode all the facts in the model parameters
and evaluate its ability to reproduce and reason over the correct facts. We show an example of
distractor and relevant knowledge of a question in Table 7
CLUTRR-SG
The CLUTRR-SG [27] is an evaluation dataset for inductive reasoning on family
relations adapted from the [69] dataset for measuring systematic generalization. Each example in
the dataset contains (i) a set of facts representing a family graph G = (V, E) where nodes (V ) are
entities and edges (E) are the relationships. (ii) a question asking the relationship between two
entities (v1, vn ∈V ), and (iii) a target relationship e∗∈E as the answer for the question. The facts
are expressed as a list of (vi, ej, vk) tuples. The two entities in the question are separated by more
than one hop in the graph. There are 272 unique entities, 20 relationship types, and nearly 1.5M
possible facts in the dataset. Following the authors, we deﬁne the difﬁculty of examples based on the
number of family graph edges (i.e., the number of reasoning hops required to determine a relation),
in which k edges (k-hop) correspond to k facts. We show an example from the dataset in Table 6.
B
In-context Reasoning with Distractors
To motivate the advantage of RECKONING on mitigating interference from distractors, we analyze the
performance change of ﬁne-tuned in-context reasoning with and without distractors present in the con-
text of the questions. We deﬁne distractors as additional facts or rules present in a question’s context
that is not directly relevant to the questions. A model should not be able to use only these distractors to
answer a question correctly. For an example of distractors in a question’s context, please see Table 7.
Identiﬁer
Content
fact 1
Harry is nice.
fact 2
Fiona is quite Nice.
fact 3
Fiona is round.
fact 4
Fiona is white.
fact 5
Dave is furry.
fact 6
Charlie is white.
rule 1
Furry people are green.
rule 2
Round, green people are red.
rule 3
All red people are white.
rule 4
Nice, round people are furry.
rule 5
If someone is nice, then they are round.
rule 6
If Charlie is round and Charlie is nice, then Charlie is white.
question-answer 1
Harry is red? True
question-answer 2
Harry is not red? False
question-answer 3
Dave is not white? Unknown
Table 5: An example from the dataset ProofWriter. There are 6 facts and 6 rules mapped to three
question-answer pairs. Each question can be answered based on the given facts and rules.
18

Identiﬁer
Content
fact 1
C is H’s father.
fact 2
Z is J’s aunt.
fact 3
J is S’s daughter.
fact 4
D is C’s father
fact 5
S is B’s father.
fact 6
H is Z’s son.
question-answer 1
How are D and B related to each other? Grandfather
Table 6: An example of 6-hop reasoning from the CLUTRR-SG dataset.
Identiﬁer
Content
fact 1
Harry is nice.
fact 2
Fiona is quite Nice.
fact 3
Fiona is round.
fact 4
Fiona is white.
fact 5
Dave is furry.
fact 6
Charlie is white.
rule 1
Furry people are green.
rule 2
Round, green people are red.
rule 3
All red people are white.
rule 4
Nice, round people are furry.
rule 5
If someone is nice, then they are round.
rule 6
If Charlie is round and Charlie is nice, then Charlie is white.
question-answer 1
Harry is red? True
Table 7: Example of distractors (black) and relevant knowledge (red) in the ProofWriter dataset.
98.3
99.4
75.1
70.8
40
60
80
100
FT-ICR
FT-ICR-MT
Label Accuracy
FT-ICR With vs. Without All Distractors
Without
With
Figure 7: Label accuracy of ﬁne-tuned in-context
reasoning on questions with and without distractors
in the context. With the same questions, adding dis-
tractors to contexts signiﬁcantly lower the perfor-
mance of in-context reasoning, both in the single-
task and multi-task setting.
We evaluate the baseline on the ProofWriter
dataset since it naturally contains contexts in-
cluding distractors (Table 7). Recall that we
have two training objectives. The single-task
objective only trains the model to predict an an-
swer for each question given their contexts. The
multi-task objective (MT) trains the model to not
only predict an answer but also reproduce the
correct facts and rules (in contrast to distractors)
based on the contexts. We evaluate the baseline
on 2, 3, and 5-hop datasets with both training
objectives, and we report the average label ac-
curacy across hops in Figure 7. Compared to
the baseline’s performance without distractors
in the context, the performance with distractors
decreases signiﬁcantly. For single-task, the per-
formance drops 23.2% when adding distractors
to the contexts, and the performance with the multi-task objective drops 28.6%. The results highlight
in-context reasoning’s high sensitivity to the interference of irrelevant information in the contexts.
C
Implementation Details
We select GPT-2-base [57] as the model for our method and all the baselines. We use the version
implemented by the Huggingface Transformers library [76]. All the experiments for RECKONING
19

are conducted on a cluster with NVIDIA A100 (40GB) GPUs. All the baseline experiments are
conducted on a local machine with NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU (24GB).
Fine-tuned In-context Reasoning
We set the train batch size to 16 and train the model for 6
epochs with early stopping based on the validation label accuracy. We set the learning rate to 3e-5
and use the AdamW optimizer with ϵ set to 1e-8. We validate the model on the development set for
every epoch and select the best checkpoint using the validation accuracy as the metric.
RECKONING
In the inner loop, we generally perform 4 gradient steps for lower-hop questions (2,
3, 4-hop) and 5 gradient steps for higher-hop questions (5 and 6-hop). We select the AdamW [45] as
the optimizer for the inner loop since the main task is language modeling. The inner-loop learning
rate is set to 3e-5 before training and the algorithm dynamically learns a set of optimal learning rates
when converged. In our experiments and analysis, we only report the results from RECKONING with
a multi-task objective since its performance is better than the single-task objective. In the outer loop,
we also use the AdamW with a learning rate of 3e-5. For both optimizers, we set ϵ to 1e-8. We set
the train batch size to 2 due to memory limitations. We apply the technique of gradient accumulation
and set the accumulation step to 2. We train the model for 6 epochs with early stopping. For each
epoch, we validate the model twice: once in the middle and once at the end. We select the best model
checkpoint based on the validation label accuracy.
D
Adaptive Learning Rate
Prior works [3, 4] show that a ﬁxed learning rate shared across steps and across parameters does not
beneﬁt the generalization performance of the system. Instead, [3] recommend learning a learning rate
for each layer of the network and for each adaptation step in the inner loop. The layer parameters
have the freedom to learn to adjust the learning rates at each step. To control the learning rate α in
the inner loop adaptively, we deﬁne α as a set of adjustable variable: α = {α0, α1, ...αL}, where L
is the number of layers and for every l = 0, ..., L, αl is a vector with N elements given a pre-deﬁned
inner loop step number N. The inner loop update equation then becomes
ˆθK
n+1,l = ˆθK
n,l −α(l)
n ⊙∇LCLM(f ˆθK
n , K)
(6)
where ⊙is an element-wise product and ˆθ(l)
n is the parameters for layer l at the inner step n. We
learn the set of optimal inner loop learning rates α∗by optimizing the parameters in the outer loop:
α ←α −η∇1
|Di|
X
(K,x,y)∈Di
LTotal(f ˆθK
[ θi]N(x), y),
(7)
where η is the outer loop learning rate and ˆθ is the updated parameters from inner loop. Below, we
show the ﬁnal algorithm of RECKONING in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2 Dynamic Knowledge Encoding for Reasoning
Require: An example distribution p(D), a transformer language model f, initial meta-parameters θ, outer step
size η, initial inner step size α, inner loop length N.
1: while not converged do
▷outer loop
2:
Sample D′ ∼p(D)
3:
LD′ ←0
4:
for each (K, x, y) ∈D′ do
5:
Initialize ˆθK
0 = θ
6:
for n := 0 to N −1 do
▷inner loop
7:
ˆθK
n+1 ←ˆθK
n −α ⊙∇LCLM(f ˆθK
n , K)
8:
end for
9:
LD′ ←LD′ + LTotal(f ˆθK
N , K, x, y)
10:
end for
11:
α ←α −η∇LD′
▷Update inner step size
12:
θ ←θ −η∇LD′
13: end while
20

81.5
50.5
45.2
99
96
84.7
40
60
80
100
2-hop
4-hop
6-hop
Label Accuracy (%)
Dynamic LR vs. Static LR
LR-fix
LR-dyna
Figure 8: We study how much the dynamic
learning rate in the inner loop contributes to
the outer loop performance. We ﬁx all the hy-
perparameters except the option of using the
dynamic or ﬁxed learning rate. We conduct
the analysis using the CLUTRR-SG dataset
since it is more complex and difﬁcult (lower
random performance).
Are dynamic learning rates necessary for RECK-
ONING’s performance?
Following prior works on
meta-learning [3, 4], we dynamically learn a set of
per-step-per-layer learning rates for RECKONING.
In this ablation study, we analyze whether dynamic
learning rates for the inner loop are effective in im-
proving the outer loop reasoning performance. Sim-
ilarly, we ﬁx other experimental settings and set the
number of inner loop steps to 4. As Figure 8 shows,
when using a static learning rate (i.e., all layers and
inner loop steps share a constant learning rate), the
performance drops by a large margin (average drop
of 34.2%). The performance drop becomes more sig-
niﬁcant on questions requiring more reasoning hops
(45.5% drop for 4-hop and 39.5% drop for 6-hop),
demonstrating the importance of using a dynamic
learning rate in the inner loop of our framework.
21

