 
1 
Message in a Bottle – An Update to the Golden Record 
Part I: Objectives and key content of the Message 
Jonathan H. Jiang1, Anamaria Berea2, Heather Bowden3, Prithwis Das4, Kristen A. Fahy1, Robert Jew5, 
Xiaoming Jiang6, Arik Kershenbaum7, David Kipping8, Graham Lau9, Karen Lewis10,  
C. Isabel Nunez Lendo11, Philip E. Rosen12, Nick Searra13, Stuart F. Taylor14, John Traphagan15 
1. Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA 
2. Computational and Data Sciences Department, George Mason University, VA, USA 
3. Los Alamos National Laboratory, NM, USA 
4. Vivekananda Mission High School, WB, India 
5. All Earth Citizens Foundation, Irvine, CA, USA 
6. School of Physics and Technology, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China 
7. Department of Zoology, University of Cambridge, UK 
8. Department of Astronomy, Columbia University, NY, USA 
9. Blue Marble Space Institute of Science, Boulder, CO, USA 
10. Department of Philosophy, Barnard College, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA 
11. Climate Change Cluster, University of Technology Sydney, Ultimo, Australia 
12. Independent Researcher, Vancouver, WA, USA 
13. Interstellar Foundation, Johannesburg, Gauteng, South Africa 
14. The SETI Institute, Mountain View, CA, USA 
15. Center for International Education, Waseda University, Tokyo, Japan 
Keywords: Cosmic Ocean, Interstellar, Spacecraft Message, Civilization, Earth 
Corresponding: jonathan@jpl.caltech.edu  
Abstract 
Communication is an essential asset enabling humankind to forge an advanced civilization. 
Using approximately 31,000 languages from the Stone Age to our present digital information 
society, humans have connected and collaborated to accomplish remarkable feats. As the newly 
dawned Space Age progresses, we are attempting to communicate with intelligent species beyond 
our world, on distant planets and in Earth’s far future. Absent mutually understood signs, symbols, 
and semiotic conventions, this study, the “Message in a Bottle”, uses scientific methods to assess 
and design a means of communication encapsulating the story of humanity, conveying our 
thoughts, emotions, ingenuity, and aspirations. The message will be structured to provide a 
universal yet contextual understanding of modern human society, evolution of life on Earth, and 
challenges for the future. In assembling this space and time capsule, we aim to energize and unite 
current generations to celebrate and preserve humanity. 
1.  Introduction 
How would we want humanity to be perceived by extraterrestrial intelligences, by future 
generations, or by archeologists of different species if our civilization were to disappear? The 
Voyager Golden Records, an early attempt at off-world communication, served not only the 
purpose of sending a record about Earth and humanity into deep space, but also stands as a worthy 
effort to establish contact with advanced alien civilizations. Such extraterrestrial intelligences 
(ETIs), dwelling somewhere in our galaxy or even beyond, have long been theorized but remain 
completely unknown to us as perhaps they too are unaware of Earth. Message in a Bottle (MIAB) 

 
2 
continues this quest of finding answers to the provocative question put forth by the Roman 
Epicurean Lucretius - Are we alone in this vast ocean of the cosmos?  
MIAB would be sent into interstellar space aboard an uncrewed probe with the hope that an 
advanced, space-faring civilization would discover this communique from humanity. A direct 
descendant of the Golden Records launched aboard Voyager 1 and 2 in 1977, MIAB is a radically 
advanced and carefully detailed reconsideration of its predecessor. This paper, the first in a series, 
presents the possible nomenclatures, objectives, structure, and suggested key content of new and 
more expansive messages that recites humankind's and Earth’s history to a distant civilization.  
Although it is highly unlikely that an alien civilization would receive our message, the archived 
identical version maintained on Earth would likely give invaluable insights about us and our legacy 
to future generations or perhaps future intelligent beings who might someday arrive on Earth. The 
message shall not only serve the purpose of laying the groundwork for establishing successful 
communications with extraterrestrial civilizations, but will also set an ever-lasting impression of 
what humanity truly is and can achieve both in the vast ocean of the cosmos and here on Earth. 
2. Purpose and Objective 
Imagine if we received a message from aliens detailing themselves and their way of life. Such 
a confirmation of the existence of self-aware living beings in the cosmos has the potential to 
radically change humanity’s perspective about our place in the universe and influence the course 
of human history. Extraterrestrials may be pondering the same question and if they receive a 
message from us, it could be similarly transformative. The importance of first contact, with all the 
hope, wonder and potential for advancing our civilization’s technical and social knowledge, cannot 
be overstated. Accordingly, we need a clear vision and purpose in the design of messages humanity 
sends forth, leveraging diverse and collaborative efforts to sufficiently represent humanity. In the 
nearly half century since Voyager, our society and technology has advanced substantially, enabling 
the creation of more detailed and representative messages.  
To properly design the structure and content of this new message, we must imagine our 
audience in broad terms as we develop a clear purpose and objective. In one scenario, our 
spacecraft is intercepted by a highly advanced space-faring civilization, Type 2 or greater on the 
Kardashev Scale [1]. Logic suggests three potential outcomes: 1. They ignore us because it is not 
worth the effort and resources to respond, perhaps considering humans to be too primitive to 
interact with, as if an ant tried to get a human’s attention; 2. They make contact and our two species 
interact; 3. They simply learn about us but there can be no further interaction as humans have gone 
extinct.  In all outcomes the message plays a critical role in influencing reaction, hence the purpose 
is one of diplomacy- i.e., inviting a response which can lead to greater possibilities. In order to 
facilitate understanding, any message should contain more than just facts and figures, but a 
window into our lives and achievements, our talents and passions, and our aspirations. In any case, 
it is crucial to show humans as an intellectual, emotional, caring species worthy of interacting with 
regardless of the distance, time, and energy required to respond. To capture their interest and 
imagination even in a future where humans are extinct, we should strive to make the message as 
engaging and informative as humanly possible.  
In an alternative scenario, the spacecraft reaches pre-Type 1 civilizations who are not yet 
space-faring. Our message must arrive intact on the surface of their planet like a “black box” 
recorder found after an airplane crash. Accordingly, the structure and content of the message will 
be organized in two tiers to accommodate aliens with different levels of sophistication. Tier 1 
content will consist of simply illustrated fundamental concepts and information about humanity 

 
3 
and our environment using a medium not requiring power or specific devices to sense, thus 
accessible to a pre-industrialized society. Tier 2 content will include more complex information in 
a digital format intended for alien civilizations that are closer to Type 1, possessing the ability to 
view the content and learn about us in a more detailed and meaningful way. Even if the aliens are 
not technologically capable of interacting with the digital content at the time of the encounter, they 
can eventually learn more about us as their civilization matures. In either scenario, the purpose of 
our message is to inform about our existence and inspire them to someday make contact with us. 
As the spacecraft travels through the vastness of the cosmos, with even the nearest star 4.2 
lightyears away, the most likely outcome is that it will wander endlessly without ever making 
contact. Or it may be that we are alone in the universe; there are no other intelligent life forms to 
find our message. In this sobering case, the audience of the message is not extraterrestrials but 
rather humans ourselves. The purpose of the message will be to create and preserve a 
comprehensive record about humanity and Earth in videos, images, and sounds. In doing so, the 
message provides an opportunity to reflect on and celebrate our character, culture, knowledge, 
environment, and accomplishments. It would stand as a demonstration to our bustling civilization 
of so far eight billion individuals, as well as the generations to come, of how connected we are as 
one species, sharing a common origin, home, and purpose. While parted in so many ways, we are 
also united as members of the same species across our world with a shared feeling of pride in what 
we have accomplished and how far we have reached into an otherwise quiet cosmos. It is also a 
kind of time capsule of human civilization and the Earth prior to the 2030s, opening the prospect 
for future generations to find valuable historical relics. If Earth is destroyed in the future, we can 
at least take some measure of comfort that a record of humanity survives in deep space. 
3. Suggested Message Names 
To begin, we must first decide how the Message in a Bottle will itself be known among the 
technological race which creates and sends it forth into the cosmos. As the content of the MIAB 
is to be representative of all humanity, as well as be sourced in part from the public, the name we 
chose carries great importance. For such an undertaking the dryly descriptive, however sufficient 
in dispassionate correctness, is not likely to achieve the critical goal of inspiring broader wonder 
and engagement. The first impression, if succulently captured in a well-chosen name, can well be 
the key which opens the door to successful collaborative creation.  
Keeping such considerations firmly in mind, a short list of possible names for the MIAB is 
suggested below, and their respective rationales are explained in the Appendix A. 
1. Earth and Our Nature (EON) Record & Archive. 
2. Earth’s Record & Archive. 
3. Interstellar Wanderer. 
4. Humans on Earth’s Record & Archive, 
5. 大 Record. 
4. Suggested Content of the MIAB 
The idea of Time Capsules has not only been an emerging realization of a more rational and 
scientific society, but its essence has been anticipated since millennia. In pursuit of this irresistible 
temptation of communicating with the future, virtually every ancient civilization attempted to 
create their record and in the best possible cases, these records allow us to paint a detailed picture 
of our own past, often giving us a perspective of the significance of our own actions at this moment 

 
4 
in the long journey of our species [2]. In this section, we focus on the most important aspect of our 
proposed record ⸺ content. Taking into account the rich and carefully designed sequence of 
information embedded on board the first Voyager Golden Records, we discuss possible 
modifications besides proposing newer content in order to mark our socio-economic and 
technological advances since the launch of the Voyager in 1977. We also attempt to fix the 
imperfections (which may lead to misinterpretation of the message) that were present in the Golden 
Record due to the inadequacy of the necessary technologies required for their elimination [3].  In 
short, the content of the updated record will not only serve the purpose of yet another record, but 
will bear the timeline of human civilization from the ancient past to the latest present and possible 
causes of our extinction into the future. 
4.1 Key Components of the MIAB 
Figure 1 illustrates the key components we consider to be included in the MIAB, while Figure 
2 (in the next subsection) illustrates the logic-based guidelines to design these components, 
detailed in follow-on papers. To support communicating meaningfully with an intelligent alien 
civilization, we have laid down three assumptions for establishing relevant parameters to guide 
efforts in effectively developing the structure and content of the message. Starting with our primary 
hypothesis, let us assume that all intelligent life with an advanced civilization, both scientifically 
and technologically, cannot do so without sophisticated communication and collaboration, 
regardless of their physiology and home planet’s ecosystem. Even if they develop more advanced 
communication, extraterrestrials will still possess some method and system of communication that 
resembles language, or they might have the capability of more advanced forms of communication. 
For our second assumption, we assume the aliens possess sensory modalities to perceive and 
interact with the world around them, albeit their sensory organs may be very different from those 
of humans. Due to physical constraints in accordance with the laws of physics across the universe, 
there are a limited number of likely pathways that the evolutionary process could take to develop 
the most efficient sensory systems. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume they have an inherent 
ability to sense and process stimuli from electromagnetic (EM) waves, analogous to the human 
visual sense, and/or oscillations in pressure, comparable to our audio sense. Although the range 
and/or mode of interpretation of their perception of EM wavelengths might be quite different, they 
would fundamentally “see” the world around them and/or “hear” sounds within a certain range of 
auditory frequencies. For our final and most critical assumption, we consider that aliens can 
integrate and process information, think logically, and learn. With these three assumptions, we 
have a starting point for creating a message incorporating deep and complex information 
sufficiently representing the intricacies of humanity. While there are still many challenges to 
creating a universally understandable message, these assumptions lend a measure of confidence 
that extraterrestrial intelligence could decipher and understand the intended meaning of a carefully 
crafted message.  
The message shall be housed in two mediums, a scroll and an advanced minicomputer. We 
propose incorporating a series of images to display elementary information about humanity and 
Earth on the scroll, intended for simple direct perception (e.g., visual or tactile sensing) by 
extraterrestrial civilizations that are relatively less technologically advanced. For civilizations at 
least at the current level of human technological advancement or beyond, the record shall consist 
of instructions based on a symbolic representation of the procedure to reveal the digital message 
in the correct sequence on the minicomputer. Vast amounts of information would then be 
accessible in the form of videos, images, sounds, games and simulations, text, mathematical 
models, and computer code.  

 
5 
 
Figure 1. A diagram illustrating the key components of the Message in a Bottle (MIAB). 
One challenge not easily recognized is that an interstellar message, if received by ETI, is 
received without any context to help interpret it. The message is not situated against any 
background outside of itself. By contrast, in trying to interpret the language of a newly discovered 
people or communication among animals, one can observe the behavior of the people or animals 
in question. Isolated, our message will not be received against this sort of background. Beyond 
that, ETI have no social, cultural, or historical background of humans or life on earth against which 
to interpret it. Finally, they may not share many of the ways we conceptualize the world as humans. 
These problems extend, in a more limited way, to future species on Earth or future humans not 
familiar with present culture. Key to the framework for the message is to fill this lacuna, i.e., the 
message should provide context for itself, as much as possible. We aim to accomplish this in three 
ways: using videos, carefully sequencing information presentation, and linking modalities (e.g., 
having combined images and sounds together rather than separate). 
Video (including audio) provides a way of approximating the experience of landing on Earth 
and observing humanity directly. It also circumvents the issue of ETI first having to decode a 
symbolic system to understand the initial part of the message (though the instructions on how to 
play the video would have to be simply represented). The message will be hierarchical: each layer 
forms a key to the next, more complex layer, guided by the principle that each should be 
understandable and informative. In this way, earlier layers of video provide context for later layers; 
for example, the concept of music would be introduced in a simple way before major musical 
works and the importance of music in cultures around the world are conveyed. Furthermore, video 
provides context beyond that of separate images and sounds. Taking again music as an example, a 
video of a band playing a song has a better chance of being interpreted for what it is than an image 
of an instrument and a disconnected sound recording of a song. 
The Introductory Section begins a scientific conversation through establishment of a common 
understanding using universal laws of nature on Earth and logical operations capable of bridging 
the gap between our comprehension to that of recipients. Some instances include discussion of 
basic mathematics, constant speed of light in vacuum, and the emission spectra of commonly 

 
6 
occurring elements. We then introduce the Earth, our solar system and galaxy, based on 
fundamental concepts and facts that should be relatively straightforward to interpret by 
scientifically adept ETIs. Once we establish a basis for communication, it would follow to 
introduce translation tools with reference tables and dictionaries to create some building blocks 
and framework upon which more detailed communications would be rendered relatively simple. 
The second, Teaching/Interactive Section, will transition to topics about humanity and life on Earth 
which may be less familiar. Upon first contact, alien lifeforms would likely have little in common 
with humans and may not comprehend the intended purpose and meaning of the message. We 
therefore plan to include encoding and decoding keys for message encryption. Effective 
communication between two parties should be based on some commonalities and preestablished 
understanding regarding each other, thus the initial step would be to educate and initiate 
interactions with our message to develop shared experiences and a fundamental understanding. 
Accordingly, this section constitutes elementary information about various pertinent topics such 
as our emotions, social structure, culture, art, music and history. In addition to videos, sounds, text 
and images, we can include interactive activities and games to engage the recipients. By guiding 
the aliens to integrate some fundamental knowledge, in addition to glimpses of background and 
historical information, we can provide the foundation and context to rightly start understanding 
the more complex yet meaningful content that follows in the next section. Building on the second 
section with advanced knowledge and complex concepts, the third Detailed Information Section 
contains topics such as knowledge, technology, art, music, politics, culture, and economics, which 
represent the forefront of human ingenuity and creation. For economics, the second section will 
introduce basic concepts like trade interaction, supply and demand, and the value of money, while 
the third section will display the intricacies of global commodities markets, dynamic equity and 
debt markets, and intricate supply chains. 
The taxa of knowledge that we plan to include will follow the principles developed by 
epistemologists and ontologists with respect to the organization and representation of knowledge 
as we have it today in our civilization. In computer science and information science, 
an ontology encompasses a representation, formal naming, and definition of the categories, 
properties, and relations between the concepts, data, and entities that substantiate one, many, or 
all domains of discourse. More simply, an ontology is a way of showing the properties of a subject 
area and how they are related by defining a set of concepts and categories that represent the subject. 
The three main branches of knowledge in the tree are: "Memory"/History, "Reason"/Philosophy, 
and "Imagination"/Poetry, as originally devised by Francis Bacon, and which largely also follow 
the epistemological classifications into perception, memory, introspection, inference and 
testimony. Additionally, we will use the classifications of science, cultures, and examples of what 
is a human, a society and life itself. 
The team that designed and produced the original Voyager Golden Record did so in a span of 
weeks, but the effort to update that record into its new form, the Message in a Bottle, allows for 
years to design and produce a representative content of humanity. Along with leveraging this 
expanded time resource, the intent is to also engage the citizens of the world to provide ideas for 
the videos, images, sounds, games, and other digital content that will convey the essence of 
humanity and what life is like on Earth. The digital content shall explain what it means to hope 
and dream, to love and care about each other, to explore and create new knowledge, and to create 
art and music. This global effort will provide many perspectives and diverse ideas which illustrate 
the collective intelligence and experience of the human species. While all these components, 

 
7 
though carefully engineered, may well make the message complex and thus difficult to understand, 
to be worthwhile it is imperative to capture the full array of humanity. 
Harkening back to our past, but with an emphasis onto a detailed representation of the present 
scenario of human life and technological advancements, the contents of the newly designed 
message must incorporate the ideas of the Voyager Golden Records while including newer facts 
of the present. All of which, taken as a whole, shall be critical for a complete narration of our story 
– with whomever it may come to rest in the vast, seemingly endless ocean of the cosmos. In this 
context, the key components should include two broad categories based on the form in which the 
content would be encoded: imagery and sounds from Earth. Audio will not only include sounds 
from our natural surroundings, but also incorporate music and a myriad of others commonly 
encountered in our lives along with impressions of the modern and technologically advanced 
societal structure that we are all a part of.  It should be noted, however, some images and their 
associated sounds should be connected, preferably by video, as de-contextualized sounds of Earth 
would be almost impossible to decipher. Considering a generally similar approach to that opted 
for in the content selection of the Voyager Golden Records, we shall as well suggest modifications 
while also including the most relevant content spanning the two generations which have elapsed. 
We have further classified the imagery content into two subsections that would address the three 
most important questions the recipients might be concerned with: the origin of the record, the 
senders of the record, and most importantly, a detailed overview of our nature. 
4.2. Methodology for Key Components Design 
The logic flow used in the overall construction of the MIAB content is illustrated in Figure 2. 
Essential in this endeavor are clearly stated controlling concepts serving as guiding principles, 
forming the conceptual foundation upon which the MIAB will be built. First, the location and 
timing of the MIAB’s origin is articulated in objectively scientific terms, placing the message in 
context within the spacetime scale it is expected to traverse. Leveraging the methods of prior 
messages to ETIs afford an efficient means of accomplishing this. Next, the MIAB will be 
engineered as an emissary of Earth, encompassing the full spectrum of humanity, our planet 
including non-human life, and humanity’s aspirations reaching to the future. Finally, in weighing 
the multitude of information to include, we employ as a sounding board what we, an emerging 
spacefaring civilization, would want to receive in a message from an ETI. 
The bulk of the MIAB, which using present day technology could at least be derived in part 
from public input, will consist of the history of its creator species, descriptions of humanity’s home 
world, and our hopes for what is to come. In describing ourselves, we logically begin with the long 
path evolution has taken us starting from the simplest of lifeforms, followed by the arc of 
civilization across the last 5,200 years. Encompassed within this description are our scientific 
achievements such as splitting the atom and space exploration, along with the wide array of 
cultures and knowledges which comprise the complex human tapestry. Having introduced 
ourselves, the physical Earth is then depicted in detail accompanied by an overview of the 
biosphere across the range of environments life has come to fill. 
In completing the MIAB, humanity looks ahead to the far future. Our message can also be 
thought of as a testimonial, sent on behalf of our world and its life. To fulfill this role, an 
encapsulation of who we are in the present must also extend to what we intend to become – in 
short, our aspirations. Though assembled in a present whose troubles are all too apparent, the 
MIAB should speak to a helpful future of peaceful advancement above all else. In concert, such 
aspirations would see Earth and its biosphere preserved and protected even as humanity makes 

 
8 
other worlds in the Solar System, and eventually worlds around other stars, our new homes. 
Returning to the most basic purpose, we conclude with an invitation to any ETI who may encounter 
the MIAB to reply with their own story. In summary, the MIAB’s key components, collected and 
constructed via the logic flow described, will offer a comprehensive and eloquent statement worthy 
of humanity now and into the far future. 
 
Figure 2: A diagram illustrating the methodology for the key components design. 
4.3. Dictionaries 
Dictionaries serve as one of the most efficient means of conveying large quantities of data due 
their immense potential for the symbolic and careful inclusion of rich and interconnected pieces 
of information through the utilization of concise imagery. Besides acting as a representative of the 
hierarchical classification of imagery chronicle with an increasing level of complexity, dictionaries 
exhibit the unique aptitude of their demonstration in the form of index tables, which reshape this 
genre into universally compatible set of information, often in conjunction with  videography, the 
transfiguring notion of visualizing the world in unison with auditory effects that pose a 
phenomenal impact on the proposed next-generation of advanced content for the updated record. 
Dictionaries were a major constituent of the Voyager Golden Records and their forerunners, the 
Pioneer plaques, were themselves a type of dictionary, although with relatively lesser content.  
    For MIAB, we will utilize dictionaries as a means of not only ciphering answers, but also 
reflecting upon a prior universal knowledge that would indeed facilitate the understanding of our 
conventions and art of scientific communication from the perspective of the intended recipients. 
Therefore, the proposed dictionaries require carefully design methodology with an absolute 
priority on logic, a circumstantial discussion of which shall be laid out in further studies in this 
series. As a starting point, the projection of these distinctive documents might be two-fold, with a 
former class incorporating a detailed overview about the basic understanding of mathematics and 
physics (thus, also serving as a tool to unlock the rest of the quantitative information present in the 
record) and a latter class, conveying the more complex yet pivotal information about our origins, 

 
9 
i.e., the solar system and our Earth as well as the major components that have made life possible 
on planet Earth, thereby signifying our home world as a planet where intelligent life is prevalent. 
4.4 Our Location and Time Stamps  
4.4.1 Location Stamp 
One of the monumental aspects critical towards the careful design and construction of the 
proposed message is the inclusion of a logical representation indicative of our place in the cosmos. 
Assuming that the recipients are at least at the level of technological and scientific advancement 
as we are now, the need for schematic representation puts forth a myriad of diverse and wide-
ranging options in terms of interpretable astronomical details. In other words, the design of an 
effective galactic positioning system (GPS) would take us one step closer towards the 
establishment of a generalized location map for the potential alien races to discover humanity and 
in-turn, our pale blue dot of a home. 
 
Figure 3: The proposed GC-Based Location Map for MIAB. 
For MIAB we propose implementation of GPS with the application of globular clusters as the 
founding principle and millisecond pulsars acting as secondary indicators in the creation of the 
location map. This new map is based on a systemic inclusion of GCs’ properties, such as 
luminosities, metallicities, and other observed factors. A detailed explanation of the proposed 
location map is presented in Appendix B.   
4.4.2 Time Stamp 
In general, due to the substructure evolution in the galaxy, it is critical to proclaim the design 
and launch time of the proposed location map. Otherwise, though future life may decode the map 
successfully, they would not necessarily realize the timeline of human existence and as a 

 
10 
consequence, will not be able to manifest the galactic scenario at a specific time in the past. 
Fortunately, proper motion makes the map itself time-dependent, thus making the GC map enclose 
time information in the relative location of globular clusters. Combining Gaia’s long-period 
precise location measurements and ESO or Keck’s radial velocity data, the three-dimensional 
proper motion velocities of 154 globular clusters are available [4]. 
As illustrated in Fig. 4’s left-panel, the proper motion velocities are distributed in the range of 
0 to 500 km/s, and a large number of them are over 100 km/s. According to the GC map’s spatial 
resolution of 1 ly, this can be converted to time resolution easily. Curves in Fig. 4’s right-panel 
proclaim the time resolution of the GC map at different proper motion velocities and different 
spatial resolutions. As to the 1 ly space resolution GC map, its time resolution can reach 1000 
years easily, once the GC’s proper motion velocity exceeds 300 km/s. If we lower the spatial 
resolution to 10 ly to reduce the message size, the 10,000-year resolution also can be achieved. 
 
Figure 4:  Left panel: distribution of 154 GCs’ proper motion velocity, data from Baumgardt, H.  et al. 
2019 [4]; Right panel: time resolution of the GC map at different proper motion velocities and different 
spatial resolutions. 
However, the time stamp precision not only depends on spatial resolution but on location 
precision as well. Three-dimensional location measurements of objects are still limited by the 
observation capability, especially the distance measurement. For example, for a 0.5 kpc distance 
error coupled with 500 km/s proper motion, the corresponding time is about 106 years, much higher 
than the time resolution as we mention above. If we have a more precise distance, like an error 
lower than 0.1 kpc, with the 300 km/s proper motion, the time error will decrease to 3.3×105 years, 
which is much better than before. Therefore, we suggest implication of location map as a medium 
of timestamp in itself. Further developments in observational technology, enabling the locations 
of GCs to be known with more precision, would foster even higher time resolution measurements. 
5. Conclusion and Discussion 
    With the acceleration in our societal evolution towards a Type I civilization and beyond, we 
have come to the point of questioning the long-term continuation of our own existence. The 
relentless utilization of natural resources, with a still developing grasp towards renewal technology, 
is evident in our continued reliance on fossil fuels which puts the global economy and energy 
security at the mercy of geopolitical shocks and crises (as stated by the Secretary General of the 

 
11 
United Nations on 2021 United Nations Climate Change Conference). Hedging against scenarios 
of this and other potential Great Filter events [5] in the near or distant future that might threaten 
survival of our race, carefully designed and well-preserved time capsules can serve as an effective 
means of carrying into the future the legacy of humankind. The MIAB is one such bold approach 
towards representing humanity in all its complexity. The notion devises a logically universal 
symbolic and pictorial form of communication interpretable by intelligent extraterrestrial 
civilizations possessing a level of advancement at least equivalent to its senders. Starting from a 
foundation of a working design built from ideas of the creators of Voyagers’ Golden Record, we 
strive to make the MIAB a state-of-the-art implementation of well-reasoned facts in an increasing 
order of complexity. To accomplish this goal, the message is communicated through apparently 
discrete yet interconnected segments of information, depicted in modes of imagery, audio-visual 
and textual documentation.   
Considering the dual scenarios of potentially less and more advanced civilizations relative to 
our current level of technological advancement, the record is being crafted to incorporate 
meaningful content interpretable by both classifications of civilizations, dictated over the two-fold 
structural design of the key components of the record. Besides the primary focus on 
implementation aspects, we have analyzed a series of possible nomenclatures which embody the 
core principles of the proposed record. These include communication with extra-terrestrial 
intelligence, an Earth-based archive and the much greater near-term objective of global STEM 
educational campaigns, thus keeping the project aligned with promotion of citizen science. The 
methodology that we intend to apply for the careful construction and selection of the key 
components encompasses a three-tier logic flow. Involved is a diagrammatic representation of the 
central theme of the mission and proposed guiding principles. Contained within is the high-level 
detailing of the steps involved in efficient arrangement of message contents. In conclusion, we 
pose an in-depth discussion on the two major components of the record, namely, dictionaries and 
location and timestamps. These play the key role of illustrating the importance of the message and 
establishing an initial connection between the minds of the recipients and humans.  
The first part of MIAB, being an introduction to the workflow of the anticipated mission, opens 
up the gateway to innumerable possibilities of relevant content to be discussed in subsequent 
papers concerning specific aspects of the curated contents. Taken in sum, the MIAB acts as the 
cornerstone to symbolizing humanity’s presence in the vastness of the cosmos.   
Acknowledgement: This work was supported by the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California 
Institute of Technology, sponsored by NASA. We also acknowledge the support from the George 
Mason University, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Vivekananda Mission High School, All Earth 
Citizens Foundation, Wuhan University, University of Cambridge, Columbia University, Barnard 
College, University of Technology Sydney, Interstellar Foundation, SETI Institute, and Waseda 
University.  
References 
[1] Kardashev, N.S. Transmission of Information by Extraterrestrial Civilizations. Sov. Astron. 
1964, 8, 217. Available online: https://articles.adsabs.harvard.edu/pdf/1964SvA.....8..217K. 
[2] Rebecca Boyle, Why These Scientists Fear Contact With Space Aliens, Feb. 8, 2017, NBC 
News Storyline, (rebecca.b.boyle@gmail.com) https://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/the-big-
questions/why-these-scientists-fear-contact-space-aliens-n717271. 

 
12 
[3] Ethan Siegel, Forbes, Aug 17, 2017,  
https://www.forbes.com/sites/startswithabang/2017/08/17/voyagers-cosmic-map-of-earths-
location-is-hopelessly-wrong/ 
[4] Baumgardt, H.  et al. 2019 (https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/sty2997). 
[5] Jiang, J. H., Huang, R., Das, P., Feng, F., Rosen, P.E., et al. (2023). Avoiding the Great 
Filter: A Simulation of Important Factors for Human Survival. J. Hum. Soc. Sci., 6(1), 33-54. 
 
 

 
13 
Appendix A: Suggested Message Names for “Message in a Bottle”  
Jonathan H. Jiang1, Philip E. Rosen2, Prithwis Das3, Robert Jew4, Nick Searra5, Jiaxu Zhou6 
1.Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA, USA 
2. Independent Researcher, Vancouver, WA, USA 
3. Vivekananda Mission High School, WB, India 
4. All-Earth Citizens Foundation, Irvine, CA, USA 
5. Interstellar Foundation, Johannesburg, Gauteng, South Africa 
6. Avon Old Farm School, Avon, CT, USA 
Copyright@2023, All Rights Reserved 
A short list of possible names for the Message in a Bottle (MIAB) is suggested below together 
with their respective rationales. 
1. Earth and Our Nature (EON) Record & Archive 
“Remember to look up at the stars and not down at your feet” ⸺Stephen Hawking 
As humanity reaches deeper into interstellar space, we do so on the bounty of our remarkably 
fertile home world and our evolution to Earth’s only technological civilization. Innovation is the 
key, enabling our distant ancestors to fashion crude clubs, sharpened edges and other tools of 
survival on antediluvian savannahs. In the Modern Age, innovation has led our finest scientists 
and engineers to construct vehicles which roam the surface of a world orbiting tens of millions of 
kilometers away while other probes have departed the Solar System altogether. Expedience, 
however, leaves us no time to rest on yesterday’s glories. As the great American poet Robert Frost 
so eloquently wrote, “But I have promises to keep, and miles to go before I sleep.” We, too, have 
promises to keep to future generations, and still much further to go in our quest to understand the 
Universe and humanity’s place within it. This is not a task measured in years, decades or even 
centuries – such is the vastness of the cosmos and the rules imposed by its physical laws, as far as 
our current understanding allows. Carrying our legacy and that of our world to worlds orbiting 
other stars may well require as much time as has taken humanity to advance from those ancient 
savannahs, through the uprising of Egypt’s pyramids, to leaving footprints upon the Moon. Indeed, 
it is quite possibly the work of eons. 
Although radio signals traveling at the speed of light and encoded with information about 
humanity and Earth are far swifter than any robotic deep space vehicle which could be constructed 
using current technology, their content is constrained by the imperative to mitigate transmission 
error, among other factors [4]. Alternatively, an archive recorded on physical media such as a laser 
disc or flash drive (and shielded from cosmic radiation) would offer a means to contain many 
orders of magnitude more data. Within the immense memory of what would mass only grams, a 
thorough archive of human and other species’ evolutions, our development of language, 
knowledge (such as mathematics, science, and traditional knowledge), culture and art, along with 
extensive descriptions of our physical environment on Earth and that of the Solar System, could 
be contained. Almost without limit, the breadth and depth of the human experience – an Archive 
of Earth and Our Nature (AEON) ¾ could be sent on a “slow boat to the stars”. This endeavor, 
“EON”, evokes the grand sweep of time involved, while “AEON” hints at a sense of cosmic 
immortality that might be gained should we decide to move forward. 
In the literal sense, an “eon” is considered the longest unit of measure among geologic time 
scales. While the quantified span of an eon of geochronologic time is not precisely defined, it is 

 
14 
broadly taken to range in the hundreds of millions of years with no established upper boundary. 
This nomenclature of large-scale time periods, including those of lesser extent such as “era” and 
“epoch”, are closely associated with the history of Earth itself. “EON” would thus intrinsically 
encompass the home world of its creators, a self-evident theme speaking to space and time – the 
very dimensionality through which our message and its messenger will long travel. Rather than be 
humbled into meekness by the breadth of this undertaking, construction of a tangible and lasting 
means and message which communicates the details of Earth and our nature across interstellar 
space should be embraced as a challenge, indeed a purpose, to all who have and will call this world 
home. 
“Aeon” is a somewhat more esoteric notion. While also denoting time, the concept is 
completely unbound in scale even as compared to the age of the Universe itself. In a sense this 
may seem contradictory to an implicit intent of sending forth a message – i.e., for it to eventually 
be received by other civilizations in the cosmos. If our message and its ark were to remain forever 
in transit, one could curtly argue this circumstance being tantamount to humanity choosing silence. 
Such a conclusion, however, tacitly ignores the project’s more immediate goals of motivating 
humanity in the here and now to reach beyond ourselves. Pessimists, found in conspicuous 
abundance amid the many predicaments we clever tool users have conjured for ourselves in recent 
times, should not be afforded this safe rhetorical quarter. The messages launched aboard Pioneer 
and Voyager, however modest as compared to what is next envisioned, have served as inspiration 
for two generations of scientists, engineers and forward-thinkers. Indeed, were it not for those 
endeavors of the turbulent 1970s there may well be no serious thought given to leveraging 
technological advancements in the decades since to go further and faster. 
Humanity, it can be stipulated, has stood at a critical crossroads in our troubled evolution since 
the beginning of the Nuclear Age in 1945. Battered by a cacophony of societal-wide neuroses, the 
impulse to withdraw inward upon ourselves - ever-present over our five millennia of civilization 
¾ has arguably never been stronger. A means to successfully resist these malevolent 
manifestations of social gravitation, perhaps the Great Filter itself, can logically be found in 
pursuing outwardly a common purposed project. No better example of that goal would be to 
redirect our creativity towards the grandest of communicative initiatives. Whether we are alone in 
the Milky Way, or just one among many technical civilizations longing to make contact with each 
other, the (A)EON recording will be our testimony to who we are, from where we came forth, and 
our aspirations for a still greater and still longer future among the stars. 
2. Earth’s Record & Archive  
“The Earth is what we all have in common” ⸺Wendell Berry 
 “What we all have in common” is we are Earthlings, the inhabitants of the planet Earth. Since 
the dawn of human civilization, intellectuals had begun to record their journeys about their lives 
at different stages adapting to the conditions prevailing in those ancient times. We have seen some 
of these records in the form of hieroglyphic scripts on the walls of magnificent structures of ancient 
Egypt, sometimes in the cuneiform inscriptions in Mesopotamia, writings on papyrus, cave 
paintings, etc. They used this approach perhaps to leave a legacy for future generations so that 
once they met their death, the records would remain for us to discover.      
 
In the same way, if it is considered that we are not alone in the universe, scientists would 
logically want to send an Earth Record chronicling our world’s formation to its current status into 
deep space, much like a MIAB. The record would be based on research from the samples of fossils 

 
15 
and rock strata to understand the emergence and extinction of different living organisms – animals 
and plants at different geological stages, as well as phenomena of climatic conditions related to 
the structural changes of the Earth due to continuous movement of tectonic plates, and formations 
of different reliefs and oceans. Included as well would be data about the origin of Earth’s magnetic 
field and its effects, its valuable ecosystem services, including  different matter and energy sources 
and how the supply of energy in trophic  chains maintains a vast diversity of ecosystems, lastly, 
the atmospheric, terrestrial, and oceanic conditions that support any form of life in addition to the 
most precious asset, humans, and our interaction with Earth. 
According to the physicist Mark Buchana, any civilization detecting our presence is likely to 
be technologically very advanced [1]. Over many decades scientists and astronomers have 
suggested possible explanations, ranging from social to biological complexity, as to why we have 
not, as the Fermi Paradox asks, come across any advanced alien civilization. Despite this seeming 
silence, we cannot rule out all possibilities of intelligent life elsewhere. And if they do exist, we 
must not ignore opportunities to reach out to them, enriching our knowledge with their new and 
advanced technologies that can act as a helping hand for humankind to progress at a speedy rate, 
and protect our existence from sudden or slowly evolving catastrophes. 
3. Interstellar Wanderer  
“We began as wanderers, and we are wanderers still. We have lingered long enough on the 
shores of the cosmic ocean. We are ready at last to set sail for the stars.” ⸺ Carl Sagan 
As we orbit the Milky Way galaxy, we refer to space as a distant place to look at, to send 
spacecraft there and to visit one day. We find it difficult to normalize the fact we are already in 
space, flying in it with no barrier between us and the vastness of the universe. Our planet is itself 
an interstellar wanderer and humans have been a wandering species since the beginning of our 
existence. We have recently started to build spacecraft which will be winding between the stars of 
our interstellar neighborhood long after we have departed. It is our hope for the people of Earth 
who hear about our record that wandering can make us feel a little more connected to our small 
spaceship’s slow journey, here tucked away in an otherwise backwater planetary system of the 
Milky Way’s Orion-Cygnus Arm (https://erikwernquist.com/wanderers/). 
4. Humans on Earth’s Record & Archive  
“We have a universe within ourselves that mimics the universe outside. None of us are just black 
or white, or never wrong and always right.” ⸺Suzy Kassem. 
Space exploration has been among the most popular topics in the world since 1957, when the 
Soviet Union launched Sputnik and ushered in an era of increasing interest in the possibilities of 
discovering the existence of a cosmic life-form or civilization. However, we have yet to find 
evidence of an alien life form, thus the premise and viability of the MIAB is to be questioned given 
the lack of evidence that there is anyone else who might find it and be capable of understanding it. 
Nonetheless, the MIAB still has value even if it is only a representation of self-reflection about 
humanity and human-sustained efforts of space exploration in the past decades. Considering the 
difficulty and little chance of a civilization receiving our message, we should record as much 
information as possible in the message. Moreover, culture, knowledge, technology and languages 
should be the main focus of the message as they are the most fundamental areas of information 
about us human beings. Cultures, representing the behaviors and habits of humans; knowledge 
encompassing the vast diversity of understandings (e.g. modern and traditional knowledges); 
technology, meaning the history of human inventions, and languages, expressing the methods by 
which people communicate. All this fundamental information has one thing in common — they 

 
16 
were all created and used by humans. Humans have been the most intelligent and dominant species 
on Earth for a long time. Thus, it must be taken into consideration that while we represent the 
planet we live on, we also represent ourselves, which is the Homo sapiens species. It may be 
predictable that the process of contacting an interstellar civilization will take such a long time that 
it may be perceived as forever. However, such a process has significant and unperceivable value 
to our kind. Humans have a long history of making contact and exploring other civilizations here 
on Earth. Just like the judicious writer William S. Burroughs once said, “Man is an artifact 
designed for space travel. He is not designed to remain in his present biological state any more 
than a tadpole is designed to remain a tadpole." Humans are designated to explore regardless of 
the time or the distance involved. The MIAB will make its way into the grand universe and 
humanity is destined to prosper whether it is now or the future. “To infinity and beyond!” — Buzz 
Lightyear. 
5. 大 Record 
“大 Record is a simple and elegant name that evokes emotions, thought, and imagination.” 
⸺Bella Jew, an 8th grade student 
Creating the name of the message using one language is insufficient in conveying the richness 
and variety of languages on Earth. Then again, it is impossible to incorporate all languages, so 
employing the concept of East meeting West shall enable us to use two languages to exemplify the 
range of possibilities. Among thousands of languages, Chinese and English are proposed for two 
reasons: first, these are the two most widely spoken languages worldwide and secondly, their 
construct is completely different. 
In Chinese, 大 means huge, great, grand, and it is used in many names, like Great Britain 大
不列颠, The Great Pyramid 大金字塔, The Grand Canal 大运河. Similarly, naming the new 
message 大 Record signifies that it is a Grand Record that is all encompassing. Additionally, 
Chinese characters visually look like something, which in this case, 大 reminds a stick figure 
drawing of a person, with a head, arms, and legs. Another interpretation of 大 Record is a record 
of the people. 
In English, “The” is used when people want to emphasize the importance of something. For 
instance, this is not just a record, this is “The” record; He is not just a man, he is The Man. In 
popular culture, there is a colloquial term “Da Man” where Da is slang for The. The character 大 
is pronounced “Da” and spelled “DA” using Pinyin. We can call this message “Da Record”, 
injecting a little humor with a play on words. 
Open to diverse interpretations, 大 Record invokes emotions, thought, and imagination. This 
witty multilingual name represents the ideals of this mission, to send The Grand Record of 
Humanity into the Cosmos. 
 
Reference  
[1] Rebecca Boyle, Why These Scientists Fear Contact With Space Aliens, NBC News, 2017, 
https://www.nbcnews.com/storyline/the-big-questions/why-these-scientists-fear-contact-
space-aliens-n717271.  
 
 

 
17 
Appendix B: An Explanation of the Modified Location Map 
Prithwis Das1, Jonathan H. Jiang2 and Yosef Ginsberg3 
1. Vivekananda Mission High School, Panskura, WB 721139, India 
2. Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91108, USA 
5. Yeshiva University, New York, NY, USA 
This document presents a detailed exposition of the proposed location stamp for Message in a 
Bottle (MIAB), the next-generation Golden Record for the anticipated Interstellar Probe mission 
by NASA (in collaboration with Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University) and 
other future missions. Inspired by the propositions of Scott Ransom and the dramatic progress in 
stellar observations, we propose the creation of the Galactic Positioning System, which utilizes 
globular clusters as its founding principle and millisecond pulsars (MSPs) as locational hints to 
these fascinating celestial objects. Using the extensive selection of globular clusters found in 
Harris 1996 (2010 edition) as well as a rigorous analysis of the chosen set of binary MSPs, the 
map in Figure 1 has been constructed in a manner analogous to the Voyager Pulsar map, while 
also employing color encoding to display critical information about the type of our unique star, 
the Sun. In the following sections, we shall delve deeper into the design and underlying ideas 
that have been instrumental in devising the modified location map and portraying the interplay of 
information that lies embedded therein. 
 
Figure 1: The modified location map for MIAB (Drawn to Scale). 
1. Introduction 

 
18 
The pulsar map aboard the Pioneer and Voyager probes outline a pathway of radio pulsars 
whose locations are pinpointed with respect to our Sun. This map identified the distance and 
direction of 14 pulsars relative to the distance and direction of the center of the Milky Way, 
along with their periods of rotation (in units of the hyperfine transition period of hydrogen [1], 
which serves as the basic unit of time used to unlock the information that lies on the record). But 
despite the notable implications and design of this pulsar map, there remain some innate 
quantitative and qualitative inaccuracies that have emerged in comparison with later 
astronomical data (for instance, pulsar distances and their galactic longitudes found in the current 
ATNF Pulsar catalogue) and advanced modes of computation. For instance, one of the serious 
challenges that an intelligent species might be confronted with is how to correctly decipher the 
positions and periods needed to properly identify the intended 14 pulsars. This complexity is 
compounded by the non-uniqueness of pulsar periods [2] and the potential misinterpretation of 
the binary representation of the same, as well as the dramatic change in relative orientations and 
periods of the pulsars over timespans of millions of years. These challenging issues could be 
mitigated by utilizing one of two (related) approaches ⸺ either the creation of a new location 
map based on the conceptual design behind the Pioneer and Voyager pulsar map, with careful 
updating in line with recent quantitative analysis, or the introduction of radical changes to the 
map’s design and the fabrication of a complete set of new norms and arguments with bold 
designs at par with modern astronomical observations and discoveries. The former might seem to 
be the more appealing approach, since it connects back to the basic logic behind the prior 
attempts at extraterrestrial communication, but it assumes the best-case scenario of both the 
Golden Records and MIAB finding their ways to an interpretive audience. Moreover, the core 
idea of using isolated pulsars, even with sophisticated application of the most recent 
astronomical observations, poses certain intrinsic defects [3], primarily pertaining to their long-
term endurance and the anisotropic nature of pulsar radiation, in addition to other shortcomings. 
Therefore, the proceedings of this study, and the greater mission of laying down the foundations 
of the MIAB, will follow the latter approach of introducing a radically new method of interstellar 
mapping, built on present-day qualitative and quantitative data. Accordingly, using globular 
clusters (GCs) as reference points is deemed to be a superior option for a multitude of reasons 
that are well-suited for implementation purposes [3].  
Tracing back to prior works on the subject, one of the most appealing designs is the one 
proposed by astronomer Scott Ransom [4], a construction that utilizes GCs in addition to binary 
millisecond pulsars (MSPs) located within them. Unlike ordinary pulsars, millisecond pulsars 
spin faster, and typically have longer lifespans, while also aging at a slower rate [4]. MSPs in 
binary systems orbit their dead companions, thus introducing the second identifier of orbital 
periods, which remain constant over billions of years [4]. Among the best aspects of a map 
constituting GCs as its underlying principle pertains to their long-term stability and the fact that 
these fascinating symmetrical stellar systems are each highly unique conglomerations of tens of 
thousands to several million stars, all held together by mutual gravitational attraction. 
Furthermore, the spectral classes of globular clusters, which can be inferred from simple stellar 
models reflecting the homogeneity of the stars within a given GC, afford the map the extra 
potential of establishing a link to the spectral type of our Sun, thus setting up an interconnected 
set of information embedded within a single pictorial representation. Although this does not 

 
19 
eliminate the problem of anisotropy in pulsar radiation, which would likely be known to 
advanced extraterrestrials, binary MSPs nonetheless serve as an efficient means to indicate their 
respective parent GCs, given the fact that every illustrated GC-embedded MSP has an 
association with some of the brightest GCs.  
2. Globular Clusters  
Globular clusters (GCs) are tightly bound conglomerations of tens of thousands to millions of 
stars associated with all types of galaxies [5]. The primary reason behind the homogeneous 
properties of the constituent stars, at least in terms of their initial composition, is the 
conventional assumption that all stars formed out of the same cloud of interstellar gas. Although 
some stars may in reality form earlier than others, in comparison to their lifetimes, the spread in 
their formation times is small and can be ignored [6]. A second convention essential to the map’s 
design is the fact that all constituent stars are assumed to be equally distant from the observer, 
owing to their insignificant spread of distances in comparison to the distance of the parent GC. 
Furthermore, the intense gravitational attraction between the closely packed stars  in a GC 
contributes towards their stability and characteristically spherical. With GCs established as most 
suitable for forming the basic protocol behind the next generation of interstellar location maps, 
this next section deals with the various modes of classification and the resulting selection of 
globular clusters, in addition to the inconsistencies that led to the designation of a separate set of 
GCs with slight deviation from the conventional notion. 
 
Figure 2: Scatterplot of first set of chosen GCs with 𝑀! 𝜖 (−11, −9). 
As a starting point, we pose the basic, yet evaluative condition of  the absolute magnitude 
(M), which is a measure of the luminosity of stellar objects, assuming that they were placed at a 
constant distance of 10 parsecs away from Earth [7, 8]. Analogous to other magnitudes on an 
astronomical scale, the absolute magnitude can be specified in different wavelength ranges, 
corresponding to specific filter bands. A common inference of the absolute magnitude is the 
absolute visual magnitude (MV), which utilizes the visual band of the spectrum in accordance 
with the UBV photometric system. The central reason behind leveraging this aspect of cluster 
luminosities as the foundation of the classification system is the mathematical fact that absolute 
magnitudes help in comparing the intrinsic brightness of different stars, as well as the fact that 

 
20 
the visual band is a representative of humanity’s mode of envisioning the world. The reason 
behind the non-inclusion of absolute bolometric magnitudes (MB) (which projects the luminosity 
over all wavelengths) owes to the inadequacy of sufficient data to deduce the conversion results 
to MB. Therefore, for the purpose of performing a proper in-depth analysis, we set the lower and 
upper bounds for MV to be -11 and -9 respectively, concerning the aspect that intrinsic brightness 
of stellar object is inversely proportional to its absolute magnitude, and with -10.26 being the 
maximum reported luminosity. The aforementioned condition leads to the creation of the 
following primary list of limited set of GCs, with their absolute magnitudes being projected by 
the scatterplot in Figure 2.  
In contrast to the actual map in Figure 1, certain departures from the usual trend are 
detectable when it comes to selecting the ideal globular clusters for a specialized cosmic map. 
The primary cause can be attributed to the lack of attainment of the added factors that govern the 
design mechanism of the location map, namely, reported discoveries of binary MSPs present 
within the chosen GCs (given that they satisfy the constraints critical to the structure), visually 
distinct representation of two or more GCs in terms of their galactic longitudes, and the auxiliary 
conception towards the inclusion of GCs across all four quadrants of the range of galactic 
longitudes (while considering the mapping of three dimensional space onto a two dimensional 
map), from 0 to 2π, as illustrated in Figure 3.  
 
Figure 3:  The four quadrants of the location map w.r.t. the galactic longitudes. All GCs in the second 
quadrant have no reported existence of binary MSPs, and thus were excluded from the location map.  
Recurring over the prior rationalization, the inclusion of select globular clusters is primarily 
governed by three factors, namely, in-range absolute visual magnitudes, existence of binary 
MSPs, and distinct illustrations of chosen GCs, which together form the baseline of the rationale 
presented in Table 1. In the following two sections, we introduce and establish arguments 
towards the inclusion of GCs while not ignorant of the scientific inclination on selective GCs in 
lieu of the ones that had to be revoked, with respect to the primary list of 12 GCs .  
Table 1: Globular Clusters in the Location Map 

 
21 
Name 
Distance from 
the Sun (kpc) 
L (Galactic 
Longitude) 
B (Galactic 
Latitude) 
Rationale 
NGC 5139 (ꞷ-Cen) 
5.2 
309.10 
14.97 
Based on MV 
NGC 6441 
11.6 
353.53 
-5.01 
Based on MV and spectral class G 
NGC 104 (47 Tucanae) 
4.5 
305.89 
-44.89 
Based on MV and spectral class G  
NGC 6440 
8.5 
7.73 
3.80 
Spectral Class G 
NGC 6402 (M14) 
9.3 
21.32 
14.81 
Based on MV 
NGC 7089 (M2) 
11.5 
53.37 
-35.77 
Based on MV 
NGC 7078 (M15) 
10.4 
65.01 
-27.31 
Based on MV 
NGC 1851 
12.1 
244.51 
-35.03 
Third Quadrant 
2.1. Included Globular Clusters     
NGC 5139, popularly known as Omega Centauri, is the most massive and the brightest 
globular cluster in the Milky Way. Nevertheless, its classification as a GC has been challenged, 
making it a possible candidate for being a stripped off core of an accreted dwarf galaxy [9]. A 
unique feature of the location map, ꞷ-Cen differs from other GCs because of its intricate 
composition of different populations of stars [10]. Multi-beam observations from MeerKAT as 
part of the TRAPUM GC Survey in 2021 revealed the presence of 13 new pulsars in Omega 
Centauri (besides the previously discovered five pulsars), more than half of which reside in 
binary systems; these are worth exploring in profundity.  
NGC 6441 is a globular cluster in the southern constellation of Scorpius. With an absolute 
visual magnitude of -9.63, this GC is one of the most luminous globular clusters in the Milky 
Way. At a distance of 11.6 kpc from the Sun, this globular cluster is of particular significance 
due to the fact that the spectral type of the integrated cluster light is G, which acts as the first step 
towards hinting at the spectral class of our own star, through the implementation of a visual 
encoding scheme based on color, allowing the demonstration of a clear manifestation of the 
same. 
One of the magnificent showpieces of the night sky, NGC 104, famously known as 47 
Tucanae, is part of the southern constellation of Tucana. With an absolute visual magnitude of -
9.42 and located at a distance of 4.5 kpc from the Sun, this dense GC comprises of 27 
millisecond pulsars [11] besides having a multitude of X-Ray sources which include LMXBs 
containing neutron stars that are not presently in accretion phase [12]. Analogous to the globular 
cluster NGC 6441, 47 Tucanae shows no disparity from the primary set of 12 GCs and exhibits a 
spectral class of G. In light of its diversity regarding pulsar population, NGC 104 stands out as 
an ideal GC, both in terms of exploration and design of the location map. 
The depiction of multiple instances indicative of the spectral class of our Sun calls for 
exploration of other G-type GCs in the Milky Way. By the same token, NGC 6440 in the 
constellation Aquila is a newly introduced member with respect to the primary convention 
pertaining to absolute visual magnitudes and is a substitution for the G-type globular cluster 
NGC 6388. The observational efforts using the Green Bank Telescope’s (GBT) S-band receiver 

 
22 
and the Pulsar Spigot spectrometer [13], resulting into the successful systematic search of binary 
pulsars besides the two-fold execution of the prior algorithm encircling cluster luminosities 
suggest the inclusion of the fourth brightest GC of spectral class G, i.e. NGC 6440, with NGC 
6441, NGC 104 (47 Tucanae), and NGC 6388 as its forerunners. As a consequence of all these 
factual implications, the insertion of NGC 6440 appears to be more scientific and drives the 
audience one step closer to efficiently interpreting the information encoded. 
With an absolute visual magnitude of -9.10 and located at an approximate distance of 9.3 kpc 
from the Sun, NGC 6402 is situated in the constellation Ophiuchus and is home to over 150,000 
stars [14]. Unlike its antecedent, NGC 6402 does not exhibit divergence from the primary list of 
chosen globular clusters, pertaining to the presence of five MSPs [15] within the cluster and thus 
opening up the possible inclusion of a multitude of binary pulsar systems, chiefly determined by 
their nature and anticipated endurance of the system.   
The first globular cluster to be added to the Messier catalogue, NGC 7089 (M2) is a globular 
cluster located at a distance of 11.5 kpc from the Sun in the constellation Aquarius [16].  With an 
absolute visual magnitude of -9.03, this GC stands out to be the dimmest among all the globular 
clusters tracked down in our initial inventory of plausible GCs, but is one of the brightest 
amongst all the GCs lurking around in the Milky Way. With the recent discovery of the first 
pulsars in M2 [15], this globular cluster happens to be a component of our initial derived record 
with no divergence from the convention, and thus forms a unique component of the modified 
location map.  
A spectacular swarm of stars, the globular cluster NGC 7078 (M15) was the first GC to host 
a planetary nebula [17]. Located in the constellation Pegasus and situated at a distance of 10.4 
kpc from the Sun, this GC hosts an Intermediate-Mass Black Hole (IMBH) at its center. With a 
cluster luminosity of magnitude -9.19, M15 is a major constituent of our conventional plot, 
which comprises 12 GCs. Although studies suggest the existence of nine pulsars in the cluster, 
seven of those are known to be isolated MSPs, another is an NS-NS binary system, and the last is 
likely to be binary system – although substantive evidence of this has yet to be published.  
The last element of the select list of globular clusters, NGC 1851 is a relatively massive GC 
sited in the southern constellation of Columba, at a distance of 12.1 kpc from the Sun. A 
plausible former member of the Canis Major Dwarf galaxy and with an absolute visual 
magnitude of -8.83, this GC forms the sole representative of the third quadrant, which in turn 
renders the complete schematic representation in three quadrants of the two-dimensional location 
map. Despite being an extrinsic inclusion, the choice of NGC 1851 over other clusters with 
galactic longitudes falling within the range of the same quadrant can be primarily credited to the 
conventional notion of maximum cluster luminosity and confirmatory studies proving the 
existence of binary MSPs. One of the GCs selected for the TRAPUM GC Survey, recent 
observations of NGC 1851 using the MeerKAT radio telescope have led to the outstanding 
discovery of 13 new pulsars, seven of which are classified as binary systems, thus enabling 
detailed studies of the cluster structure and dynamics [18].   
2.2. Dropped Globular Clusters 
    In view of the one of most challenging aspects of determination of the ideal globular clusters 
for the location map, certain deviations from the initial hypothesis are evident and call for a 

 
23 
careful analysis, down to the least significant detail. Parallel to the preceding section which 
outlines the rigorous profiling of the 8 GCs introduced in the location map, this section sheds 
light on the ones that had to be ruled out in regard to the primary list of 12 GCs. 
    In analogy to the primary list, the finalized set of included globular clusters excludes NGC 
6715, NGC 2419, NGC 6388, NGC 2808, NGC 6266, and NGC 6273. Despite the fact that all of 
the GCs satisfy the primary prerequisites, auxiliary constrains pose restrictions on the 
incorporation of these globular clusters, with depiction of some notable instances beyond the 
known convention. Likewise, NGC 6388, although being a globular cluster of spectral class G2, 
shows no reported detection of pulsars [13], which therefore impedes its inclusion. In contrast, 
the globular cluster NGC 6266, despite having reported existence of binary MSPs [19], 
confronted the drawback of indistinctive representation of both NGC 6441 and NGC 6266 onto 
the 2D location map, owing to a longitudinal difference of only 0.04 degrees. Similar to the 
reason of exclusion for NGC 6388 yet slightly different, we were unable to pinpoint prior 
literature reporting the presence of binary MSPs in the oblate globular cluster NGC 6273, and 
thus leading to omission. NGC 2808 possesses a unique shortcoming that challenges the 
sustainability of the map ⸺ the only existence of a transient accreting millisecond X-Ray pulsar 
(AMXP) with coherent pulsations at a period of 2.9 ms. A coherent AMXP which is transient is 
a binary system in which the neutron star emits X-ray pulsations at precise and stable period 
during the accretion phase, but also exhibits irregular and unpredictable outbursts, interspersed 
by periods of quiescence which may even last several decades. Therefore, this GC, regardless of 
having a unique stellar realm worth depiction, had to be excluded in light of the plausible 
misinterpretation and perhaps non-detection of the very phenomenon intended to make it 
notable. At length, the globular clusters NGC 6715 (M54) and NGC 2419, besides lacking 
documented existence of binary MSPs (as per ATNF Pulsar Catalogue v1.70), challenge the 
intelligible representation of GCs in the two-dimensional location map. Therefore, in order to 
address this unique shortcoming of indistinct rendition centralized to that of a planar map, we 
have proposed the modeling of a three-dimensional version, as stated in the discussions.  
3. Binary Pulsars 
A fascinating class of astrophysical systems, binary pulsars comprise a neutron star and a 
binary companion orbiting about a common center of mass. The binary companion can be a main 
sequence star (MS), a white dwarf (WD) or even other neutron stars (NS). One of the key 
features of binary pulsars is the exchange of matter between the two stars. In some instances, the 
companion star is close enough to the neutron star to lose material through Roche-lobe overflow, 
which often happens by way of an accretion disk [20] around the neutron star. The accretion that 
follows may cause the rotation of the neutron star to speed up, and thus leads to the formation of 
a millisecond pulsar (MSP).  
MSPs comprise a new aspect of the modified location map, having been incorporated to 
serve as distinct cosmic identifiers indicative of their parent globular clusters, while also 
augmenting the effective sustainability of the map pertaining to the outstanding endurances of 
these intriguing stellar lighthouses. In light of the important GCs subject to nomination above for 
the new map, this section undergoes a detailed discussion of the binary pulsar(s) which appear to 

 
24 
be the most feasible for our purposes, including relevant scientific arguments based on past 
observations that support the same.  
We propose yet another convention as a mechanism of prioritizing the nomination of the 
binary MSPs ⸺ inclusion of non-eclipsing binaries that are not associated with black widow and 
redback systems. Both black widows and redbacks have relatively shorter lifespans than other 
binary MSPs, which is a direct consequence of the intense mass transfer in these systems that 
results in accelerated erosion, and finally, consumption of the companion star by the pulsar. 
While most GCs analyzed seem to possess only one binary pulsar which ideally satisfy the 
constraints of our map, some notable instances signify the uncertainty of prioritizing only one 
system over others, especially due to similar nature of two or more binary pulsars housed within 
the same GC. In such occurrences, we pose convincing arguments that support the inclusion of 
all such analogous binary systems. Future observations might eventually shed light on the 
plausible hierarchization scenarios, paving the path towards more scientifically detailed choices. 
3.1. J1326-4728Q 
MeerKAT observations of the majestic globular cluster NGC 5139 led to the revelation of 13 
new pulsars, in addition to the previously discovered five. Among the newly discovered ones, 
seven have emerged as binary systems, with a clear majority of black-widow systems, while the 
rest turn out to be isolated MSPs, with J1326-4728B being designated as an X-ray source [21]. 
The binary systems J1326-4728 G and H, with spin periods of 3.30 and 2.5 ms respectively, have 
orbital periods and minimum companion masses falling within the range of typical black widow 
systems. Despite the lack of eclipsing phenomena, the tight orbits, low mass companions and 
rapid spin periods further bolster these claims. Unlike the former, the binaries J1326-4728 K and 
L (having periods 4.71 and 3.53 ms respectively) were determined to be eclipsing black widows 
[10]. In an alternate scenario, J1326-4728I, having a spin period of 18.95 ms, points to an orbital 
solution that suggests an orbital period of 26.71 hours with a companion mass range of [0.020, 
0.046] Mʘ. In addition, the pulsar period indicates the fact that it might be a mildly recycled 
pulsar [10], although assertion of the nature of the pulsar is subject to further observations. The 
last sections of exploration encompass the analysis of J1326-4728 N and Q, with spin periods of 
6.88 and 4.13 ms respectively. Despite the difficulties in constraining the orbital parameters for 
J1326-4728 N due to low and uneven orbital coverage in both observations in [10], yet pulsar Q 
was brightly detected in one observation and its companion mass is clearly suggestive of an 
MSP-helium white dwarf binary system. Therefore, the inclusion of J1326-4728Q acquires a 
position of unprecedented importance, enhanced by recent observational efforts and empowered 
with factual refinements that have been aided by ever-advancing technology.  
3.2. J1750-3703B 
Based upon the 1950 MHz pulse profiles obtained by adding all observations made with 
mode 2 of the Pulsar Spigot spectrometer, two MSPs of NGC 6441 were detected to be residing 
in binary systems ⸺ J1750-3703A and B [13], with pulsar periods of 111.6 ms and 6.07 ms 
respectively. In light of the spin periods, the latter is at the lower end of the spin period 
distribution, which is a typical of what is found among similar MSP-WD systems in other GCs in 
the Galactic disk [13]. In contrast, the previously discovered J1750-3703A, with its high orbital 
eccentricity of 0.71, has a companion (with a 99% probability of being more massive than 0.53 

 
25 
Mʘ) yet to be discovered. Centered on the these facts, J1750-3703B turns up to be the best 
scientific inference, especially in terms of establishing an encoded pattern of consistent, yet 
critical information housed  within a two dimensional cosmic map.   
3.3. J0024-7204aa/E/H/Q/S/T/U/X/Y 
The largest repository of cosmic “lighthouses” after Terzan 5, the number of MSPs in NGC 
104 presents a standalone projection of the diversity of pulsar population in the Milky Way. Out 
of the 27 binary pulsars reported in the cluster, 18 have been predicted to be associated with 
binary systems [11, 22, 23, 24]. Unlikely to be a fast binary system, PSR J0024-7204aa 
possesses a pulse period of 1.84 ms which is short relative to other MSPs in the cluster [23]. An 
in-depth search of MeerKAT data led to the recent revelation of two previously unknown binary 
MSPs, namely, J0024-7204ac and J0024-7204ad. While J0024-7204ac belongs to the class of 
eclipsing black widow systems, the binary mass function of PSR J0024-7204ad, indicative of the 
minimum companion masses, appertains to the eclipsing redback systems [11]. The pulsars 
J0024-7204I and J0024-7204J are black widow systems with eclipsing prevalent for about a 
quarter of the orbital period in case of the latter [25, 26]. Analogous to the prior two binary 
MSPs, J0024-7204O, P and R have short orbital periods and low companion masses. Although 
the period of J0024-7204R is considerably shorter than that of J0024-7204J, there is no reason to 
suspect these three systems as fundamentally different from the former duo [26, 27]. Based on 
the results observational inferences [27, 24], the pulsars J0024-7204E, H (mildly eccentric due to 
probable dynamic interaction [26]), Q, S, T, U, and Y are most likely to be binary systems with 
He-WD companions, while MSP J0024-7204W being one of the first binaries to be classified 
under redback systems [24]. Similarly, the 4.81 ms binary pulsar J0024-7204V, with its strong 
orbital variability and additional hints from mass function and presence of eclipses, offers 
substantial evidence that this MSP is redback pulsar, with observations predictive of the fact that 
the MSP is actually a transitional MSP, owing to the irregular eclipses, occasional disappearance 
of radio pulsations and mass of companion star [28]. In light of the slight ambiguity circling the 
true nature of WD companion (more likely to be a CO-WD) of the unique MSP J0024-7204X, 
this very pulsar does not belong to any of the groups of pulsars discovered in the cluster. With a 
long orbital period, the MSP looks just like many other MSPs in the field, which are in wide 
orbits coupled with a He-WD companion, yet dense and ionizing dynamical environment 
generally hinders visualization of such systems in GCs [28]. Therefore, based on the 
aforementioned observations and factual deductions from a myriad of observations over the past 
three decades of extensive research, the natural conclusion supports the inclusion of only half of 
the binary MSPs present in the cluster, although future observations from TRAPUM project and 
others might contribute to the list of potential MSPs for inclusion into the modified location map 
and as well, pose a better echelon for leveraging the scientific accuracy of the map.  
3.4. J1748-2021F 
Alongside J1750-3703B, this binary pulsar is located within NGC 6440, has an orbital period 
of 9.8d and a minimum mass companion of approximately 0.30 Mʘ (assuming pulsar mass of 1.4 
Mʘ), and may be the only “normal” MSP-WD binary system among the recent pulsars 
discovered 13]. Analogous to J1750-3703B, J1748-2021F is at the lower end of the spin period 
distribution but is typical of what has been reported among similar MSP-WD systems. In 

 
26 
comparison to the highly eccentric NGC 6440B, the MSP has a relatively small orbital 
eccentricity (e = 0.0531) but is nevertheless much larger than typical binary systems with similar 
orbital periods [13]. Another unique binary system retained within the cluster is J1748-2021D, 
which is an Eclipsing Low-Mass Binary Pulsar (ELMBP) with a non-measurable orbital 
eccentricity and a period of 6.9 hours. The rationale behind choosing J1748-2021F over D owes 
to its simplicity of signifying non-eclipsing binary systems rather than eclipsing ones, which 
would otherwise open up a new realm of complexity (owing to the variations in pulsar signal) 
and thus hinder effective communication with advanced extra-terrestrial intelligences. 
3.5. J1737-0314B/C 
Observations through the Five-hundred-meter Aperture Spherical radio Telescope (FAST) 
led to the recent discovery of five pulsars in the M14 globular cluster, namely, J1737-0314A, B, 
C, and D. With a spin period of approximately 1.98 ms, J1737-0314A reveals itself as the second 
fastest spinning GC black widow pulsar [15]. On the other hand, J1737-0314D and E exhibit 
probable eclipsing and clear eclipsing phenomena respectively, implying that both are redback 
pulsars, owing to the aspects of low-mass companions and circular orbits. Contrary to the 
former, J1737-0314B and C have relatively wide pulsar profiles with a slight variation of their 
spin periods in different epochs, indicating they are binaries with orbital periods being of the 
order of a few days [15]. Alongside an initial survey of the facts that support the inclusion of 
J1737-0314B and C, a sheer confirmation boils up with a deeper understanding of the endurance 
of the different types of binary MSPs, especially concerning the black widow pulsars and 
redbacks.  Therefore, J1737-0314B and C unfold to be the ideal candidates for incorporation into 
the location map. 
3.6. J2133-0049A/B/C/D/E 
The observational efforts detailed in [15] have led to the recent discovery of the first five 
pulsars in the globular cluster M2. The variations of the observed spin periods indicate that all 
the pulsars are in fact binary systems with orbital periods of several days [15]. Primarily, the 
very high percentage of binary systems in the discovered pulsars can be delineated by their 
relatively low encounter rate per binary [29], which leaves a high surviving probability of a 
binary once formed [15]. Concerning the non-disclosure of the classification of each one of the 
newly discovered binary pulsar, there prevails an equal probability of all of the five binary 
systems to be included into the location map. Yet adopting the exact binary system at par with 
our current understanding of neutron stars requires a wealth of information based on further 
observations aimed to reveal the true nature of these binaries. 
3.7. J2129+1210C 
Aside from the MSP-WD binary systems that have dominated the modified location map, 
corroborations of other types of binary pulsar systems would serve as a mode of decentralizing 
encoded information, evincing the diversity of the pulsar population and thus portraying a deeper 
picture of our conceptualization of these fascinating stellar creations. J2129+1210C, residing in 
the globular cluster M15, belongs to a relatively rare class of binary pulsar system, termed 
Neutron Star-Neutron Star (NS-NS) systems, which are born out of two supernova explosions 
[30]. Another plausible binary pulsar system worth mentioning is J2129+1210I, which may be 
insinuated from the significant period variation during entire observation in [13].  

 
27 
3.8. J0514-4002A/D/E/F/G/H/I/L 
In the last sections that guide the final components of the location map, the legacy of 
scientific exploration encompasses the eight binary pulsars in NGC 1851, seven of them being 
newly discovered ones based on the recent MeerKAT observations. J0514-4002F, G, H, I and L 
are binary systems with low mass companions and low-eccentricity orbits [18]. Furthermore, the 
pulsars F, G and H have orbital periods which are typical of MSP-WD systems. Even though 
J0514-4002I and L have orbital periods like those of redbacks, the absence of eclipsing 
phenomena is a strong indication that the companion stars are not extended like the companions 
of redbacks, but instead, are also low-mass WDs [18]. Amidst the new pulsars, [18] refers to 
J0514-0042D and E as the most interesting eccentric binary MSPs. With conditions resembling 
that of the previously discovered J0514-0042A, these pulsars are very likely to be the result of 
secondary exchange encounters, with the preliminary conclusion stating the present companion 
of J0514-0042D to be a more massive carbon-oxygen white dwarf [18]. Yet not deterministic 
about the true nature of the companion stars, which are influential in revealing the nature of the 
binaries in greater depth, we propose the possible inclusion of all of the binary pulsars, besides 
the intuitive predilection towards the pulsars A, D and E, owing to the fact that secondary 
exchange encounters might open up the possibility of increased system endurance (although 
difficult to predict without ample data), which in turn is governed by the separation between the 
neutron star and its new companion.  
4. Final Note 
As humanity embarks on its journey into deep space and beyond, the notion of existing 
intelligent lifeforms becomes increasingly realistic. While there has been no real evidence of 
other-worldly communication as of yet, the future possibility of its occurrence raises the issue of 
how to effectively represent ourselves, and to a large extent, locate human civilization in the vast 
ocean of the cosmos. MIAB’s location map, scientifically stated as a GC-MSP map, hopes to 
achieve universality at a cosmic scale, and indicate our place in the cosmos more accurately than 
prior attempts. While relying on a design mechanism analogous to the Voyager pulsar map, the 
modified location map utilizes globular clusters as its core mapping protocol, with millisecond 
pulsars in binary systems acting as secondary clues to locate their parent GCs. Despite the 
significant difference in permanence of both classes of stellar wonders, the inclusion of binary 
MSPs serves as one the most effective modes of projecting the cosmological information we 
want to convey.  
Yet the modified planar location map includes its own layer of shortcomings that need to be 
addressed. These shortcomings lie in the basic problem of projecting the galactic information on 
a two dimensional map, since the distribution of orbits in GCs is a complex and dynamic 
process, influenced by a variety of factors with an interplay of certain stochastic elements. When 
considering evolution on a long time scale, the encoded longitudinal information would 
substantially vary, which calls for the incorporation of a second governing factor in terms of 
coordinates of the GCs, i.e., the galactic latitude. Thus, the insertion of this critical aspect into 
the modified location map requires the important transition from the two dimensional map to one 
that deals with three dimensions, as projected in Figure 4.  

 
28 
 
Figure 4: Skeletal structure of the three dimensional version of the modified Location Map. 
Even though the upgrade to an interactive 3D map contributes to the increasing complexity 
of deciphering the encoded information, it should be possible to include both types of maps on 
the record, granting recipients the liberty to interpret the duo based on their level of technological 
advancement. 
In conclusion, this appendix presents the supporting arguments instrumental in designing the 
generalized location map of the MIAB. In this document, the map has been redesigned to 
accommodate a more human-readable format, with the actual map to be presented in subsequent 
studies. While there are many future challenges to be overcome, the creation of a location map is 
the important step in preparation for the possibility of contact with other-worldly beings. By 
designing a sustainable map that is both near-accurate and easily interpreted, we may help to 
facilitate communication and understanding with potential extraterrestrials.  
5. References  
[1] Globular Cluster, https://esahubble.org/wordbank/globular-cluster/  last accessed on March 
26, 2023. 
[2] Measuring the Age of a Star Cluster, https://www.e-
education.psu.edu/astro801/content/l7_p6.html last accessed on March 26, 2023. 
[3] Wikipedia contributors. "Absolute magnitude." Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 
Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia, 6 Feb. 2023. Web. 12 Feb. 2023. 
[4] Absolute Magnitude, https://astronomy.swin.edu.au/cosmos/a/Absolute+Magnitude  last 
accessed on March 26, 2023. 
[5] Paulo C. C. Freire et al 2008 ApJ 675 670 
[6] Zhichen Pan et al 2021 ApJL 915 L28 

 
29 
[7] Messier 14, https://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2017/messier-14 last accessed on March 
26, 2023. 
[8] Paulo C. C. Freire et al 2005 ApJ 621 959  
[9] Messier 2, https://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2017/messier-2 last accessed on March 26, 
2023. 
[10] On the disruption of pulsar and X-ray binaries in globular clusters., Frank  Verbunt, Paulo 
C. C.  Freire., A&A 561 A11 (2014)., DOI: 10.1051/0004-6361/201321177. 
[11] Messier 15, https://www.nasa.gov/feature/goddard/2017/messier-15 last accessed on March 
26, 2023. 
[12] Lorimer, D.R. Binary and Millisecond Pulsars. Living Rev Relativ 1, 10 (1998). 
https://doi.org/10.12942/lrr-1998-10S 
[13] Eva Noyola et al 2008 ApJ 676 1008 
[14] W Chen, P C C Freire, A Ridolfi, E D Barr, B Stappers, M Kramer, A Possenti, S M 
Ransom, L Levin, R P Breton, M Burgay, F Camilo, S Buchner, D J Champion, F Abbate, 
V Venkatraman Krishnan, P V Padmanabh, T Gautam, L Vleeschower, M Geyer, J-M 
Grießmeier, Y P Men, V Balakrishnan, M C Bezuidenhout, MeerKAT discovery of 13 new 
pulsars in Omega Centauri, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 
520, Issue 3, April 2023, Pages 3847–3856, https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stad029 
[15] Simon Henleywillis, Adrienne M Cool, Daryl Haggard, Craig Heinke, Paul Callanan, Yue 
Zhao, A Deep X-ray Survey of the globular cluster Omega Centauri, Monthly Notices of the 
Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 479, Issue 2, September 2018, Pages 2834–
2852, https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/sty675 
[16] TRAPUM discovery of 13 new pulsars in NGC 1851 using MeerKAT; A. Ridolfi, P. C. C. 
Freire, T. Gautam, S. M. Ransom, E. D. Barr, S. Buchner, M. Burgay, F. Abbate, V. 
Venkatraman Krishnan, L. Vleeschower, A. Possenti, B. W. Stappers, M. Kramer, W. 
Chen, P. V. Padmanabh, D. J. Champion, M. Bailes, L. Levin, E. F. Keane, R. P. Breton, M. 
Bezuidenhout, J.-M. Grießmeier, L. Künkel, Y. Men, F. Camilo, M. Geyer, B. V. Hugo, A. 
Jameson, A. Parthasarathy and M. Serylak; A&A, 664 (2022) A27; DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202143006 
[17] Roche-Lobe Overflow, https://astronomy.swin.edu.au/cosmos/r/Roche-lobe+Overflow last         
accessed on March 26, 2023. 
[18] Reading the Pioneer/Voyager Pulsar Map, W.M. Johnston, 
http://www.johnstonsarchive.net/astro/pulsarmap.html last accessed on March 26, 2023. 
 
[19] Siegel, E. Voyager’s ‘Cosmic Map’ of Earth’s Location Is Hopelessly Wrong. Forbes. 
2017., https://www.forbes.com/sites/startswithabang/2017/08/17/voyagers-cosmic-map-of-
earths-location-is-hopelessly-wrong/ last accessed on March 26, 2023. 
 
[20] Jiang JH, Li H, Chong M, Jin Q, Rosen PE, Jiang X, Fahy KA, Taylor SF, Kong Z, Hah J, 
Zhu Z-H. A Beacon in the Galaxy: Updated Arecibo Message for Potential FAST and SETI 
Projects. Galaxies. 2022; 10(2):55. https://doi.org/10.3390/galaxies10020055 

 
30 
 
[21]Drake N., Ransom S., Earth or Bust! A Map for Aliens., https://epizodyspace.ru/bibl/inostr-
yazyki/national_geographic/2020/4/Drake_Ransom_A_Map_for_Aliens_National_Geograp
hic_238_no_04_(2020).pdf last accessed on March 26, 2023. 
[22] A Ridolfi, T Gautam, P C C Freire, S M Ransom, S J Buchner, A Possenti, V 
Venkatraman Krishnan, M Bailes, M Kramer, B W Stappers, F Abbate, E D Barr, M 
Burgay, F Camilo, A Corongiu, A Jameson, P V Padmanabh, L Vleeschower, D J 
Champion, W Chen, M Geyer, A Karastergiou, R Karuppusamy, A Parthasarathy, D J 
Reardon, M Serylak, R M Shannon, R Spiewak, Eight new millisecond pulsars from the first 
MeerKAT globular cluster census, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 
Volume 504, Issue 1, June 2021, Pages 1407–1426, https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stab790 
[23] Jonathan E. Grindlay, Craig Heinke, Peter D. Edmonds, Stephen S. Murray., High-
Resolution X-ray Imaging of a Globular Cluster Core: Compact Binaries in 47Tuc., DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1061135 
[24] A. Possenti et al 2003 ApJ 599 475 
[25] M. Cadelano et al 2015 ApJ 812 63 
[26] Z. Pan, G. Hobbs, D. Li, A. Ridolfi, P. Wang, P. Freire, Discovery of two new pulsars in 
47 Tucanae (NGC 104), Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters, 
Volume 459, Issue 1, 11 June 2016, Pages L26–L30, https://doi.org/10.1093/mnrasl/slw037 
[27] Clive Robinson, A. G. Lyne, R. N. Manchester, M. Bailes, N. D’Amico, S. Johnston, 
Millisecond pulsars in the globular cluster 47 Tucanae, Monthly Notices of the Royal 
Astronomical Society, Volume 274, Issue 2, May 1995, Pages 547–
554, https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/274.2.547 
[28] Pulsars in globular clusters, http://www.naic.edu/~pfreire/GCpsr.html last accessed on 
March 26, 2023. 
[29] F. Camilo et al 2000 ApJ 535 975 
[30] L. E. Rivera-Sandoval, M. van den Berg, C. O. Heinke, H. N. Cohn, P. M. Lugger, P. Freire, 
J. Anderson, A. M. Serenelli, L. G. Althaus, A. M. Cool, J. E. Grindlay, P. D. Edmonds, R. 
Wijnands, N. Ivanova, Discovery of near-ultraviolet counterparts to millisecond pulsars in 
the globular cluster 47 Tucanae, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 
Volume 453, Issue 3, 01 November 2015, Pages 2707–
2717, https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stv1810 
[31] A. Ridolfi, P. C. C. Freire, P. Torne, C. O. Heinke, M. van den Berg, C. Jordan, M. Kramer, 
C. G. Bassa, J. Sarkissian, N. D'Amico, D. Lorimer, F. Camilo, R. N. Manchester, A. Lyne, 
Long-term observations of the pulsars in 47 Tucanae – I. A study of four elusive binary 
systems, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 462, Issue 3, 01 
November 2016, Pages 2918–2933, https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stw1850 
 
 

