Bell Correlations as Selection Artefacts
Huw Price* and Ken Wharton†
31st October 2023
Abstract
We show that Bell correlations may arise as a special sort of selection
artefact, produced by ordinary control of the initial state of the experi-
ments concerned. This accounts for nonlocality, without recourse to
any direct spacelike causality or influence. The argument improves an
earlier proposal in [Price & Wharton 2021b, Price & Wharton 2022] in
two main respects: (i) in demonstrating its application in a real Bell ex-
periment; and (ii) in avoiding the need for a postulate of retrocausality.
Keywords: Bell correlations, nonlocality, collider bias, entanglement,
retrocausality
1
Introduction
1.1
Overview
We propose an explanation of the correlations characteristic of Bell experi-
ments, showing how they may arise as a special sort of preselection artefact.
This explanation accounts for nonlocality, without recourse to any direct
spacelike causality or influence. If correct, the proposal offers a novel way
to reconcile nonlocality with relativity.1
*University of Bonn and Trinity College, Cambridge, UK; email hp331@cam.ac.uk.
†Department of Physics and Astronomy, San José State University, San José, CA 95192-
0106, USA; email kenneth.wharton@sjsu.edu.
1The present paper strengthens our earlier proposals in [Price & Wharton 2021b,
Price & Wharton 2022] in two main respects: (i) in demonstrating its application in a
real Bell experiment; and (ii) in avoiding the need for an explicit postulate of retrocausality.
arXiv:2309.10969v2  [quant-ph]  30 Oct 2023

We begin with a brief account of the landscape of discussions of the
implications of Bell’s Theorem, in order to explain where our proposal sits
in relation to other approaches.
1.2
Orientation
In the discussions of issues arising from the work of Einstein, Podolsky,
and Rosen and Schrödinger in the 1930s [EPR 1935, Schrödinger 1935a,
Schrödinger 1935b], and John Bell in the 1960s [Bell 1964], a key reference
point is the Common Cause Principle (CCP). The following formulation of
CCP will do for our purposes [Hofer-Szabó et al 2013]:
The Common Cause Principle says that every correlation is
either due to a direct causal effect linking the correlated entities,
or is brought about by a third factor, a so-called common cause.
With reference to CCP, the relevant history goes like this. In 1935 EPR noted
that correlations implied by what Schrödinger soon dubbed ‘entanglement’
seemed to require explanation by common causes, not present within QM
itself. EPR concluded that QM was incomplete, and Schrödinger concurred.
The alternative – the other option allowed by CCP – was that measurement
choices on one side of an experiment could influence results on the other,
even though the two sides might be far apart, and spacelike separated. To
EPR and Schrödinger, that sort of ‘nonlocal’ influence seemed absurd; as
Schrödinger put it, ‘that would be magic’ [Schrödinger 1935a].
In the 1960s, however, Bell proved that under plausible assumptions,
the common cause option is untenable. That seems to leave us, as the above
formulation of CCP puts it, with ‘a direct causal effect linking the correlated
entities’; and hence with the kind of nonlocality that EPR and Schrödinger
believed to be absurd. As Bell saw, of course, this meant at least a prima
facie conflict with Relativity.
In broad-brush terms, we can classify responses to Bell’s argument as
follows. This taxonomy is not comprehensive or precise, but it will serve to
locate our current proposal.
1. Accept nonlocality, acknowledging its conflict with Relativity. Most
such responses seek to mitigate the conflict, by arguing, for example,
that Bell nonlocality is not the kind of full-blown (signalling) caus-
2

ation that would be in serious conflict with Relativity; or that the
preferred frame required by nonlocality is not empirically detectable.2
2. Avoid nonlocality, by arguing that Bell’s result depends on an as-
sumption of ‘Realism’ or ‘Classicality’, and rejecting this assumption.3
3. Render nonlocality compatible with Relativity, by arguing that it
is a partially retrocausal process, acting via the past light cones of the
two observers. This requires that we abandon Bell’s assumption of
Statistical Independence (SI), so as to allow measurement choices to
influence hidden variables (HVs) in their past.4
4. Restore common causes (and hence avoid nonlocality), by treating
measurement settings as among the elements of reality influenced by
factors in the common past of the experimenters. This option, called
superdeterminism, also requires violation of SI, and hence is sometimes
confused with option 3.5 As this classification shows, however, it
rests on a different choice between the two alternatives offered by
CCP.
5. Seek to avoid the problem, by arguing that the Bell correlations are
not subject to CCP. Here there are at least two previous proposals.
(a) Arguing that the Bell correlations arise from the fact that our
viewpoint as observers is always ‘perspectival’, e.g., confined
to one branch of a larger set of ‘many worlds’ (with no need for
nonlocality in the bigger picture).6
2See [Maudlin 2011] for a comprehensive defence of this option.
3See [Maudlin 2014, Gömöri & Hoefer 2023] for critical discussion of such views, and
[Wiseman & Cavalcanti 2017] for a more sympathetic treatment of the former version.
4See [Wharton & Argaman 2020] for a review of this approach. We discuss SI further
in §8.3 below. Note that this option requires that we make a choice about the term
‘nonlocality’. There is a narrow use of the term, implying direct spacelike influence, and a
broad use, allowing the indirect influence proposed here. Those who prefer the narrow
use will regard this option as another way of avoiding nonlocality.
5Some authors, though not themselves guilty of this confusion, use the term ‘superde-
terminism’ for any view rejecting SI [Hossenfelder & Palmer 2019].
6As [Myrvold et al 2021] put it, Bell’s ‘entire analysis is predicated on the assumption
that, of the potential outcomes of a given experiment, one and only one occurs, and hence
that it makes sense to speak of the outcome of an experiment.’
3

(b) Rejecting CCP altogether, arguing that the lesson of the Bell
correlations is simply that the world contains robust patterns of
correlations not explicable in the two ways that CCP allows.7
1.3
Our approach
In our own previous work we have explored option 3, seeking to make a
case for retrocausality.8 Part of the case, of course, was its evident potential
to mitigate the consequences of nonlocality for Relativity.
More recently [Price & Wharton 2021b], we noted that retrocausality
has the effect of introducing colliders (i.e., variables influenced by more than
one contributing cause) into the causal model of Bell experiments, because
the source event is influenced by measurement choices from both sides.
This is interesting, in our view, because it suggests an avenue for explaining
Bell correlations that bypasses CCP altogether.
It is well known that ‘conditioning on a collider’ – i.e., selecting cases in
which the collider variable takes a particular value – can induce correlations
between its independent causes. Such correlations do not call for explana-
tion by one of the two routes permitted by CCP. They are merely ‘selection
artefacts’, as people say, and are not robust, in the sense of supporting
difference-making counterfactuals.
In recent work [Price & Wharton 2021a], we show that some cases of en-
tanglement – namely, those due to delayed-choice entanglement-swapping –
are selection artefacts, in this sense.9 As we argue there, it follows that EPR-
Bell experiments that rely on such delayed-choice entanglement-swapping
do not imply nonlocality, in the usual way. The correlations involved do
not support the required counterfactuals.10
7See [van Fraassen 1982] for a view of this kind. This view does not avoid nonlocality,
of course. It merely declines to explain it as CCP requires.
8See [Price 1996, Price & Wharton 2015, Wharton & Argaman 2020].
9This argument does not assume retrocausality; indeed, the conclusion is especially
straightforward if retrocausality is explicitly excluded.
10The correlations concerned are only evident in certain post-selected ensembles, and
a change in a measurement setting on one side of such an experiment might make a
difference (say, via an intermediate quantum state) to the corresponding ensemble. So there
is no need for it ever to make a difference to the outcome on the far side of the experiment.
See [Price & Wharton 2021a] for details, and [Bacciagaluppi & Hermens 2021], for similar
results.
4

Building on this work, we proposed that ordinary cases of entangle-
ment might be explained in these terms, if we add two ingredients: ret-
rocausality, and normal control of the initial conditions of an experiment
[Price & Wharton 2022]. As we explain below, the latter factor turns out
to account for the difference between the non-robust correlations in the
delayed-choice entanglement-swapping case, and the robust, counterfactual-
supporting Bell correlations in ordinary EPR-Bell experiments.
The present piece improves our proposal in two ways: first, by working
through its application in a real Bell experiment; and second, importantly,
by eliminating the need for a independent assumption of retrocausality.
We show that we can get all the retrocausality the proposal needs by con-
sidering an imaginary case in which ordinary initial control is absent. (We
compare this to the use of frictionless idealisations in mechanics.) In this
imaginary case, causality is time-symmetric by definition. This gives us the
colliders on which the proposal depends, while at the same time explaining
why the retrocausality in question is lacking in the real world, in which
ordinary initial control is not absent.
In terms of our taxonomy in §1.2, our proposal is a hybrid. It agrees
with 5(a) and 5(b) that the observed phenomena of Bell correlations do not
call for the application of CCP, once properly understood, although not
for the reasons that those options propose.11 Yet it agrees with option 3
that there is a robust counterfactual-supporting connection between the
two wings of a Bell experiment, albeit one that is explained as a special
sort of selection artefact, rather than as the kind of causal link mandated
by CCP, once common causes are abandoned. As in the case of option 3,
this connection is fully explained by connections within the light cones, so
doesn’t require any primitive spacelike connections, or preferred frame.
2
The Dortmund model
Let’s begin with two versions of a familiar ∨-shaped Bell experiment. The
term ‘∨-shaped’ alludes to the spacetime geometry of the experiments
concerned, in a typical diagram with time on the y-axis.
11Our view doesn’t postulate additional real phenomena to which we don’t have ac-
cess, as the Everett view does. And unlike 5(b), it doesn’t claim that Bell experiments
involve a new kind of CCP-independent correlation – on the contrary, we propose that Bell
correlations turn out to fall under a familiar exception to CCP.
5

In the first version (∨1), a pair of entangled spin-1/2 particles is pro-
duced with parallel spins in the plane of eventual measurement; we label
this initial state I1.12 The particles are sent to two observers, Alice and
Bob, who each perform a spin measurement at one of three angles in the
specified measurement plane, arranged at 120° from each other. Let {a, b}
be the settings and {A, B} be the outcomes, in the usual notation. The
probabilities predicted by quantum theory are as follows:
When a = b, P(A = B) = 1, P(A ̸= B) = 0
When a ̸= b, P(A = B) = 0.25, P(A ̸= B) = 0.75.
The expression P(A = B) = 0.25 is shorthand for two equally probable
cases, A = B = 0 and A = B = 1 (each, in this case, with probability
0.125). Similarly P(A ̸= B) = 0.75 is shorthand for the two outcome pairs
A = 0, B = 1 and A = 1, B = 0, each with probability 0.375.
The second version (∨2) of the experiment is the same, except that we
begin with a pair of particles with antiparallel spins (the singlet state); we
label this state I2. This yields the complementary probabilities:
When a = b, P(A = B) = 0, P(A ̸= B) = 1
When a ̸= b, P(A = B) = 0.75, P(A ̸= B) = 0.25.
Let’s also imagine an experiment BIG-∨that runs both ∨1 and ∨2, and
mixes the results, randomly and in equal proportions.13 We call it ‘big’
because it combines two component experiments, ∨1 and ∨2.
It is easy to check that in BIG-∨, the probabilities of having originated
in I1 or I2, given the final results, are given by the following expressions.
For originating in I1 we have:
When a = b, P(I1|A = B) = 1, P(I1|A ̸= B) = 0
When a ̸= b, P(I1|A = B) = 0.25, P(I1|A ̸= B) = 0.75.
For originating in I2 we have the complementary values:
When a = b, P(I2|A = B) = 0, P(I2|A ̸= B) = 1
When a ̸= b, P(I2|A = B) = 0.75, P(I2|A ̸= B) = 0.25.
12For example, if all measurements are constrained to occur in the x −y plane, the
state (|↑↓⟩+ |↓↑⟩)/
√
2 has the desired property. This is distinct from the singlet state
(|↑↓⟩−|↓↑⟩)/
√
2, which will be used in the next example.
13We can actually imagine several versions of such an experiment – more on some of
those variations below (§8.2).
6

a
I
A
B
b
Figure 1: Probabilistic dependencies in BIG-∨.
a
I
A
B
b
Figure 2: An unrealistic causal interpretation of BIG-∨
BIG-∨does not exhibit Bell correlations in its results as a whole. The
Bell correlations of the two sub-ensembles cancel out, so that the four
variables in {a, b, A, B} are pairwise independent of each other. The Bell
correlations reappear, of course, if we sort the results of BIG-∨into the two
sub-ensembles: those originating from I1 (case ∨1) and those originating
from I2 (case ∨2).
These facts imply that in BIG-∨there are probabilistic dependencies
between the four variables in {a, b, A, B} and a variable I, representing the
initial state (i.e., I1 or I2). Each of the variables in {a, b, A, B} is probabil-
isitically dependent on I, conditional on the remaining three variables in
{a, b, A, B}. We depict these dependencies in Figure 1. We have marked in
green the setting variables, over which Alice and Bob have experimental
control. We stress that the dashed bidirectional arrows represent probabil-
istic dependencies, but not causal dependencies. In particular, Alice’s and
Bob’s choice of settings would not normally be taken to influence the initial
state variable I, as in Figure 2.
Let’s think about what this means for the counterfactual judgements
Alice makes, about what would have happened, had she made a different
7

a
A
B
b
I
Figure 3: BIG-∨with Bell nonlocality.
choice of the setting a. Since her choice does not influence I, I would have
had the same value, had she chosen differently. But we know that B would
have been different, in some cases – that’s Bell nonlocality at work.
Figure 3 shows the intuitive causal model for BIG-∨, or equivalently for
each of the two sub-cases, ∨1 and ∨2. The red and blue arrows represent
the nonlocal influences implied by the existence of Bell correlations. It is a
contentious question exactly what sort of influences these are (e.g., whether
they are really causal).14 We set aside that issue, and ask readers to interpret
the blue and red arrows in terms of their own view of the matter.15
3
What’s wrong with Figure 2?
Why is Figure 2 physically unrealistic? A number of answers suggest
themselves: (i) causation works from past to future, not the reverse; (ii) the
past is fixed, and therefore not amenable to influence by later choices; and
(iii) as an initial variable, I is the kind of thing that an experimenter can
control, or fix, before Alice and Bob choose their settings.
The precise meaning of such answers, and their relation to one another,
need not concern us here. But we note that for all of them, it is plausible that
they are related in some way to the prevailing thermodynamic asymmetry
in our universe (or our region of the universe, if we don’t want to exclude
14For discussion, see [Maudlin 2011, Wiseman & Cavalcanti 2017, Myrvold et al 2021]
and references therein.
15We do require that the connection be counterfactual-supporting, so readers who are
unconvinced about that may want to get off at this stop.
8

the possibility that it might be a local matter, as some have suggested).
One thing that counts in favour of this suggestion is that in any of these
three forms, we are trying to explain something time-asymmetric. The
thermodynamic asymmetry isn’t the only possible physical basis for such
time-asymmetries, but it is by far the most plausible one.16
Again, we don’t need to examine this argument in detail. What matters
here is that we can imagine the case in which the asymmetry that makes
Figure 2 physically unrealistic is absent. The suggested link with the
thermodynamic asymmetry makes that relatively easy, because we seem to
be able to imagine that it might be absent (or oriented differently in distant
regions of our universe).
For terminological convenience, we adopt the label Initial Control for the
time-asymmetric feature of our world – whatever it is – that makes Figure 2
unrealistic. Our next step is to imagine a world in which Initial Control is
absent.
4
Turning off Initial Control
We want to imagine turning off Initial Control in BIG-∨. We need to imagine
that the factors that normally enable control of initial conditions of an
experiment are absent. It doesn’t matter how we imagine this happening –
our argument doesn’t require that it be physically realistic – but turning off
the Past Hypothesis seems a reliable, if drastic, way to achieve it!17
As a loose analogy, it may be helpful to compare turning off Initial
Control to turning off friction. The frictionless case is wholly unrealistic,
in many domains, but is nevertheless helpful to consider, not least to
distinguish the effects of friction from other things.18
Consider the effect of turning off Initial Control on the counterfactuals
in BIG-∨. Normally, as we have seen, Alice will be entitled to treat I as
16For discussion of this point, see, e.g. [Price 1996, Albert 2000, Price & Weslake 2010,
Rovelli 2021]. Some authors argue that agency is a crucial ingredient here; but that, too,
plausibly depends on the thermodynamic asymmetry.
17By ‘Past Hypothesis’ we mean the low entropy boundary condition apparently re-
quired in the early universe to explain the observed thermodynamic asymmetry, and all
that rests on it. See [Price 1996, Albert 2000, Price 2010, Rovelli 2021] for discussion.
18It speaks in favour of this comparison that the time-asymmetric nature of friction is
also linked to the thermodynamic asymmetry.
9

a
I
A
B
b
Figure 4: Without Initial Control – I may become a collider.
fixed, in one direction or other, even if she doesn’t know which.19 This
means she’s entitled to say that had she chosen a different setting, I would
have had the same value as it actually has; which means, as we said, that
the difference would need to show up in Bob’s outcome, in some cases.
But with Initial Control turned off, Alice loses her entitlement to say that
had she chosen a different setting, I would nevertheless have had the same
value. That’s what turning off Initial Control means. It means not treating
initial values (in this case, the value of the variable I) as necessarily fixed,
for the purposes of one’s causal modelling.20
Once Alice allows that in this imagined case – with Initial Control turned
off – her choices might make a difference to the value of I, then she should
model the case in the way shown in Figure 4. The green arrows represent
the new possible dependencies, admitted by turning off Initial Control. The
new feature of this case that interests us is that Figure 4 treats the variable I
as a collider, in causal modelling terms.21
19We are setting aside for the moment the question whether there might be actual
versions of BIG-∨in which we do not have control of the variable I; see §8.2.
20We don’t mean that turning off Initial Control would give Alice and Bob this new kind
of control of I in any version of BIG-∨whatsoever. That seems unlikely. What’s important is
that it removes the usual barrier to embedding ∨1 and ∨2 within an imagined version of
BIG-∨in which there is this kind of control.
21Two notes about Figure 4. First, the black arrows should be regarded as legacies of
the causal structure shown in Figure 3, the case in which Initial Control is not turned off.
Other than adding the new green arrows, we set aside questions about the effect of turning
off Initial Control on the dependencies shown in Figure 3. Second, we acknowledge that
there are reasonable questions about the meaning of causal dependence in this imaginary
case. We set those aside, too, simply noting that whatever account we use, it needs to be
time-symmetric in this case – that’s the point.
10

Your choice
A meeting?
Death’s choice
Figure 5: A simple collider (‘Death in Damascus’)
5
Conditioning on a collider
5.1
General considerations
A collider is a variable with more than one direct cause, within a causal
model. In other words, in the graphical format of directed acyclic graphs
(DAGs), it is a node at which two or more arrows converge (hence the term
‘collider’).
It is well known that conditioning on such a variable – i.e., selecting the
cases in which it takes a certain value – may induce a correlation between
its causes, even if they are actually independent. As [Cole et al 2010, 417]
put it, ‘conditioning on the common effect imparts an association between
two otherwise independent variables; we call this selection bias.’22
Here’s a simple example, adapting the so-called ‘Death in Damascus’
case, familiar in decision theory [Gibbard & Harper 1978]. Suppose that
you and Death are each deciding where to travel tomorrow. You have
the same two possible destinations – in the usual version, Damascus and
Aleppo. As in Figure 5, your choice and Death’s choice both influence an
(aptly named) collider variable, which determines your survival. Let this
variable take value 0 if you and Death do not meet, and 1 if you do. (We
assume for simplicity that if the two of you choose the same destination,
you will meet; and that this will be fatal, from your perspective.)
If we sample statistics for this kind of case, across a large population,
22Collider bias is also called Berkson’s bias, after a Mayo Clinic physician and statistician
who noted it in the 1940s [Berkson 1946]. But the point dates back at least to the Cambridge
economist A C Pigou [Pigou 1911]. (We are grateful to Jason Grossman and George Davey
Smith here.)
11

they may suggest that people have an uncanny ability to evade Death,
always choosing the opposite destination. If so, we’ve probably introduced
selection bias, by interviewing survivors only.
If you are a survivor, you might think to yourself, “I’m a survivor, so if
I had chosen the other destination, Death would also have made a different
choice.” You would be wrong. If you had chosen the other destination,
you wouldn’t have been a survivor. This illustrates an important fact. The
correlations that result from conditioning on a collider do not support
counterfactuals (in normal circumstances – we’ll come to an exception in a
moment).
5.2
Colliders in BIG-∨
Let’s return to our imagined version of BIG-∨, with Initial Control turned
off, depicted in Figure 4. As Alice reflects on this imagined case, these
notions from causal modelling give her an obvious way of thinking about
the Bell correlations in ∨1 and ∨2. They look like selection artefacts, each
resulting from conditioning on one of the two possible values of the collider
variable I.
As we just saw, selection artefacts don’t support counterfactuals, but in
this imagined case they don’t need to. In this case, Alice’s choices make a
difference to I, and so it is a plus, not a minus, that they wouldn’t support
the counterfactuals associated with nonlocality. Alice can say, “I thought
my measurement choices were making a difference to the outcomes on
Bob’s side of the experiment, but that was a selection artefact. They were
actually making a difference to the value of I.”
The reader may wonder how this imagined case could possibly be
relevant to the real world. In the real world, after all:
• Initial Control is not turned off
• The causal model in Figure 4 is unrealistic
• Bell correlations do support counterfactuals.
Remarkably, there’s a way to solve all three problems, in one step. All we
need to do is to turn Initial Control back on. But to explain why this does
the trick, we need one more observation about colliders.
12

6
Constrained colliders
In our previous work we have introduced the notion of a constrained col-
lider [Price & Wharton 2021b, Price & Wharton 2022]. Intuitively, this is a
restriction imposed from outside a causal model, biasing or completely
specifying the value of the variable at the collider.
In Death in Damascus, for example, we saw that your choice and Death’s
choice both influence a collider variable that takes value 0 if you do not
meet, and 1 if you do. If Fate wants to ensure that your number’s up, as
it were, she constrains this collider, setting its value to 1. In effect, Fate
imposes a future boundary condition, requiring that the collider variable
take value 1.
This boundary condition makes a big difference to the counterfactuals.
If it weren’t for Fate’s involvement, grieving relatives would be entitled
to say, “If only they had made the other choice, they would still be with
us today!” Once Fate constrains the collider, this is no longer true. If
you’d made the other choice you would have met Death in the other place,
instead.
With Fate constraining the collider, in other words, there is a counter-
factual-supporting connection between your movement and Death’s. You
control Death’s movements, in effect.23 This is what we term Connection
across a Constrained Collider (CCC) [Price & Wharton 2022].
Collider constraint can come by degrees. Fate might be kind to you, and
give you some small chance of eluding Death, at least tomorrow. We will
be interested here in the full constraint version, in which case we’ll say that
the variable at the collider is locked.
A locked variable can only take one value – that’s the point. This means
that it is no longer really a variable at all, in the usual sense of a causal
model, and can no longer be an effect of any of the remaining variables.
We could put it like this: causation requires making a difference, and
locking prevents making a difference. By locking the collider variable in
the Death in Damascus case, Fate makes it the case that your choice makes
no difference to whether you encounter Death. You no longer have any
causal influence on the matter.
This may seem highly unrealistic, but there is at least one place in
23This is the kind of thing that makes the Death in Damascus case interesting for decision
theorists, of course; see [Price & Weslake 2010] for discussion.
13

physics where collider constraint has actually been proposed. It is the key
to the so-called Horowitz-Maldecena hypothesis, concerning the black hole
information paradox. Horowitz and Maldacena describe the proposal as
follows:
In the process of black hole evaporation, particles are created
in correlated pairs with one falling into the black hole and the
other radiated to infinity. The correlations remain even when
the particles are widely separated. The final state boundary
condition at the black hole singularity acts like a measurement
that collapses the state into one associated with the infalling
matter. This transfers the information to the outgoing Hawk-
ing radiation in a process similar to “quantum teleportation”.
[Horowitz & Maldacena 2004]
The key difference from ordinary quantum teleportation is that the ‘final
state boundary condition’ imposes a particular result on the measurement
concerned, thus eliminating the usual need for postselection. In our termin-
ology, this amounts to constraining a collider at that point.
Discussing the Horowitz-Maldacena hypothesis recently, Malcolm Perry
puts it like this:
[t]he interior of the black hole is therefore a strange place where
one’s classical notions of causality ... are violated. This does
not matter as long as outside the black hole such pathologies do
not bother us. [Perry 2021, 9]
As we’ll explain, our proposal is going to be that boundary conditions doing
this job are actually extremely common, if you know where to look. In the
other direction of time, they are just ordinary initial boundary conditions,
and don’t need black holes.
7
Turning Initial Control back on
We noted two points about constrained colliders. Connection across a
Constrained Collider (CCC) does support counterfactuals. And a locked
collider is removed from its causal model altogether, in the sense that
because it is locked, it cannot be influenced by variables elsewhere.
14

a
I2
I1
A
b
B
Figure 6: BIG-∨with the dependencies induced by a locked node at I2.
This gives Alice a way of applying the lessons of the imaginary case
of BIG-∨(without Initial Control) to the real case. Turning Initial Control
back on – adding it by hand to the imagined version of BIG-∨, as it were –
produces a model applicable to real-world operational versions of ∨1 and
∨2. Each of these experiments may be regarded as a locked case of the
imagined version of BIG-∨. In ∨1, Initial Control locks the variable I to
value I1; in ∨2 it locks it to value I2.
As just noted, locking the collider at I removes it from the causal model,
thereby explaining why Figure 2 and Figure 4 are unrealistic. And it gener-
ates a connection across the collider that does support the counterfactual-
supporting influences shown in red and blue in Figure 3.
This proposal has a huge payoff, from Alice’s point of view. It gives her
a way of explaining the Bell correlations, without any relativity-challenging
nonlocality. Referring to Figure 6, in other words, Alice can say that the
Bell correlations in ∨2 are explained by the fact that ∨2 may be regarded as
a product of a locked collider, the collider itself having the structure shown
in Figure 4.
In Figure 6 we again indicate by red and blue arrows the dependencies
entailed by the Bell correlation. Now, however, it seems appropriate to
represent these dependencies as linking the two sides of the experiment via
the locked node at I2. If nothing else, this depiction serves to emphasise
that there is no direct spacelike influence involved. The connection arises
from the locked collider, which is in the overlap of the past light cones of
Alice and Bob.
We stress again that the retrocausality that Alice needs in Figure 4, to
explain Bell correlations in this way, is something that comes for free when
15

Initial Control is imagined turned off. It is an ingredient that becomes avail-
able anyway, to the extent that the argument needs it, when we consider
the case in which Initial Control is absent.24
Of course, Alice might have some other notion of causality in mind,
such that turning off Initial Control is not sufficient for retrocausality in her
sense. For example, she might regard it as true by definition (according to
what she means by ‘causality’) that causation only works forward. That
doesn’t matter for our argument. We don’t require that the variable I be a
collider in Alice’s sense of causation, whatever that might be; but simply
that it be a collider in the minimal sense that comes for free by turning off
Initial Control.
We also emphasise that the argument does not require that Alice has
retrocausal influence over the initial state of actual experiments of the form
of ∨1 and ∨2. It simply requires that she not rule out such influence in the
imaginary case in which Initial Control is missing – which turns out to be
true by definition, in the sense of causality that matters. This is sufficient to
make sense of a version of BIG-∨without Bell correlations, from which the
Bell experiments ∨1 and ∨2 emerge by a kind of preselection: by fixing the
value of the initial variable I. In other words, it shows how Bell correlations
in real experiments can be a selection artefact.
8
Discussion
8.1
The real world is a lot bigger than BIG-∨
In the argument above, BIG-∨is a stand-in for something much bigger. It
takes a huge amount of Initial Control to prepare a version of BIG-∨, of
course, even if we don’t take the additional step of choosing between ∨1
and ∨2. So we haven’t really got rid of Initial Control – we’ve just moved
it a little further out. Still, we’ve provided a simple but realistic model
on which more general versions can be built, and a proof of principle.
Intuitively, enlarging the model will provide more, rather than fewer, ways
in which Bell correlations can emerge as preselection artefacts.
24Contrary to our own argument in [Price & Wharton 2022, Price & Wharton 2023],
then, this recipe for explaining entanglement needs three ingredients, not four!
16

8.2
Physically realistic unlocked versions of BIG-∨?
We have been assuming that any actual, physically realistic version of
BIG-∨would be the kind that mixes results from versions of ∨1 and ∨2 in
which the initial state is indeed locked. But is this really the case, or are
there realistic versions of BIG-∨in which I is not locked? We leave this as
an open question,25 and recommend it among other things as a training
exercise. As we said, our argument does not depend on a positive answer,
but it does require the ability to imagine that the answer might be positive.
That’s a step on the path to imagining the case in which there is no Initial
Control.
8.3
Two paths to retrocausality26
There are important differences between the approach taken above and
typical retrocausal approaches to the explanation of Bell correlations.27 We
noted one of these in §1.2. In terms of our taxonomy there, typical retro-
causal approaches fall into category 3. They seek to make Bell’s nonlocality
relativity-friendly, by representing it as a zigzag process, via past light
cones. The present approach aims instead to remove Bell correlations from
the scope of CCP altogether, by construing them as selection artefacts.
This difference is linked to another. So far as we are aware, all previous
work in this area (including our own) considers retrocausal influences
on properties conventionally denoted by λ, understood to be the factors
not fixed by the initial preparation of the state ψ of the quantum system
concerned.
As noted in §1.2, retrocausality requires a violation of a key assumption
required by Bell’s Theorem, the principle called Statistical Independence
(SI), or Measurement Independence. Expressed in terms of λ, Statistical
Independence amounts to this:
(SI) P(λ|α) = P(λ) (where α is a setting variable).
Standard retrocausal models allow the possibility that P(λ|α) ̸= P(λ).
25The delayed choice framework seems a promising place to look.
26Not to be confused with Adlam’s [Adlam 2022] two roads to retrocausality!
27See [Friedrich & Evans 2019, Wharton & Argaman 2020, Adlam 2022] for recent sur-
veys of the latter.
17

In the usual approach, ψ is an input variable, and is simply not assigned
a probability. Hence it doesn’t make sense to ask whether
(SIψ) P(ψ|α) = P(ψ).
Turning off Initial Control changes this. ψ can now be assigned a probability,
if we wish, and turning off Initial Control can be then be regarded as
an explicit rejection of the assumption SIψ. We remind readers that our
argument requires this only in what we termed an imagined case, which
can be physically unrealistic. The argument works even if in the actual
world, ψ is always subject to Initial Control.
Why is this difference between these two approaches interesting? For
at least two reasons, we think. First, the present approach doesn’t require
any actual retrocausality, and thereby presents a much smaller target to
would-be objectors. Second, the approach seems to be ontology-neutral, at
least over a broad range,28 in the sense that whatever account is offered of
the ontology of quantum state preparation – whatever the ontological basis
of ψ, in effect – there will be a way of raising the possibility of turning off
Initial Control in that ontology.
8.4
Remembering the sub-operational level
We have noted that the kind of retrocausality needed for our argument
comes for free, when we imagine turning off Initial Control. Turning off
Initial Control in BIG-∨just is allowing the possibility that Alice’s and Bob’s
settings choices might influence I, in the sense that matters. But if Initial
Control is turned off, so that Alice’s and Bob’s settings choices may make a
difference to I, how is this supposed to work? To what else, between I and
the setting choices a and b, can the latter also make a difference?
This question takes us to the sub-operational level, and we should
expect any answers to be heavily dependent on choice of quantum ontology.
We note the following general points. First, whatever goes into this sub-
operational level, it will need to allow the kind of retrocausality, or future
input dependence, that comes for free with giving up Initial Control. It
would be nonsense to imagine making a difference to I without making a
difference to the proposed intermediate ontology.
28The exceptions will include approaches that reject ontological questions altogether, in
the quantum realm.
18

Second, the converse does not hold. That is, Initial Control of I need not
imply full Initial Control of sub-operational ontology between I and the
settings. In the sense that has turned out to matter, retrocausality and lack
of Initial Control go together. And in ordinary circumstances, we don’t have
reason to assume that we full control over HVs in the quantum realm – quite
the contrary. So the equation of lack of Initial Control with retrocausality,
in the sense of the latter relevant to present discussions, seems to imply
that retrocausality is always the default option in the HV case. This would
be a striking reversal of fortune for the retrocausal approach, putting its
would-be opponents on the back foot.
9
Summary
We have shown that in a simple but realistic case, Bell correlations may be
regarded as a special sort of preselection artefact, produced by ordinary
control of the initial conditions of the relevant experiments. We conjecture
that the reason this explanation has not been noticed is the sheer familiarity
of the initial control concerned. To understand the role it plays we need to
imagine it absent. This step has not previously been taken in this context,29
so far as we are aware.
When we do imagine the Initial Control-free regime, we bring into
play the causal model of Figure 4, in which the initial state of BIG-∨is a
retrocausal collider. In this regime, the Bell correlations in ∨1 and ∨2 can be
explained as collider artefacts. Restoring Initial Control, taking us back to
the real world, then constrains the collider in question, a step known from
other cases to convert mere collider artefacts into counterfactual-supporting
connections, from one side of the constraint to the other.
In effect, the initial state preparation that Initial Control allows thus
‘thwarts’ the influence that Alice’s and Bob’s choices of settings would
otherwise have on the same initial variable. Thwarted at that point, the
difference due to different setting choices has to emerge somewhere else,
and the result is Bell nonlocality.30
29It has been taken in a single-particle context, including by us; see, for example:
[Price 2012, Price & Wharton 2015, Leifer & Pusey 2017].
30We are grateful for comments from Michael Cuffaro. HP is also grateful to Heinrich
Päs and his group at TU Dortmund, for discussions that prompted some of the ideas
presented here.
19

References
[Adlam 2022] Adlam, E. Two roads to retrocausality. arXiv:2201.12934
[physics.hist-ph]. doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2201.12934
[Albert 2000] Albert, D. Time and Chance, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
[Bacciagaluppi & Hermens 2021] Bacciagaluppi, G. & Hermens, R. Bell
Inequality Violation and Relativity of Pre- and Postselection.
arXiv:2002.03935
[Bell 1964] Bell, J. S. On the Einstein-Podolsky-Rosen paradox. Physics, 1,
195–200, reprinted in [Bell 2004].
[Bell 2004] Bell, J. S. Speakable and Unspeakable in Quantum Mechanics, Second
Edition. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge.
[Berkson 1946] Berkson, J. Limitations of the application of fourfold table
analysis to hospital data. Biometrics Bulletin, 2, 47–53.
[Cole et al 2010] Cole, S., Platt, R., Schisterman, E., Chu, H., Westreich,
D., Richardson, D., Poole, C. Illustrating bias due to conditioning
on a collider. International Journal of Epidemiology, 39, 417–420. ht-
tps://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyp334
[EPR 1935] Einstein, A., Podolsky, B. and Rosen, N. Can quantum-
mechanical description of physical reality be considered complete?
Physical Review, 47, 777–780.
[Friedrich & Evans 2019] Friederich,
S.
and
Evans,
P.
Retrocaus-
ality
in
quantum
mechanics.
In
The
Stanford
Encyclopedia
of
Philosophy
(Summer
2019
Edition);
Zalta,
Edward
(ed.).
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/sum2019/entries/qm-
retrocausality/
[Gibbard & Harper 1978] Gibbard, A. and Harper, W. Counterfactuals and
two kinds of expected utility. In C. Hooker, J. Leach and E. McCle-
nnen (eds.), Foundations and Applications of Decision Theory, Dordrecht:
Reidel, 125–162.
20

[Gömöri & Hoefer 2023] Gömöri,
M. & Hoefer,
C. Classicality and
Bell’s theorem. European Journal for Philosophy of Science, 13, 45.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13194-023-00531-y
[Hofer-Szabó et al 2013] Hofer-Szabó, G., Rédei, M., & Szabó, L. The Prin-
ciple of the Common Cause. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139094344
[Horowitz & Maldacena 2004] Horowitz, G. and Maldacena, J. The black
hole final state, JHEP 0402:008 (2004). arXiv:hep-th/0310281
[Hossenfelder & Palmer 2019] Hossenfelder,
S.
&
Palmer,
T.
Re-
thinking superdeterminism. Frontiers of Physics, 06 May 2020.
doi.org/10.3389/fphy.2020.00139. arXiv:1912.06462
[Leifer & Pusey 2017] Leifer, M. & Pusey, M. Is a time symmetric interpret-
ation of quantum theory possible without retrocausality? Proc. R. Soc.
A, 2017, 473, 20160607. arXiv:1607.07871
[Maudlin 2011] Maudlin, T. Quantum Non-Locality and Relativity: Metaphys-
ical Intimations of Modern Physics (3rd edn.). Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
[Maudlin 2014] Maudlin, T. What Bell did. J. Phys. A: Math. Theor., 47,
424010. DOI 10.1088/1751-8113/47/42/424010
[Myrvold et al 2021] Myrvold, W., Marco G. & Shimony, A. Bell’s The-
orem. The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2021 Edition), Zalta,
E. (ed.). https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2021/entries/bell-
theorem/
[Perry 2021] Perry, M. No future in black holes. arXiv:2106.03715
[Pigou 1911] Pigou, A. C. Alcoholism and heredity. Westminster Gazette,
2nd February 1911. Reprinted in International Journal of Epidemiology,
51(2022), e227–e228. doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyw340
[Price 1996] Price, H. Time’s Arrow and Archimedes’ Point, Oxford University
Press, New York.
[Price 2010] Price, H. Time’s arrow and Eddington’s challenge. Sémin-
aire
Poincaré
XV,
Le
Temps,
115–140.
Accessible
online
at
http://www.bourbaphy.fr/price.pdf
21

[Price 2012] Price, H. Does time-symmetry imply retrocausality? How the
quantum world says “maybe”. Studies in History and Philosophy of
Modern Physics, 43, 75–83. arXiv:1002.0906
[Price & Weslake 2010] Price, H. & Weslake, B. The time-asymmetry of
causation. In Helen Beebee, Christopher Hitchcock and Peter Menzies
(eds), The Oxford Handbook of Causation (OUP), 414–443.
[Price & Wharton 2015] Price, H. & Wharton, K. Disentangling the
quantum world. Entropy 17:11, 7752–7767. arXiv:1508.01140
[Price & Wharton 2021a] Price, H. & Wharton, K. Entanglement swap-
ping and action at a distance. Foundations of Physics, 51, 105.
doi.org/10.1007/s10701-021-00511-3
[Price & Wharton 2021b] Price, H. & Wharton, K. Appendix to ArXiV ver-
sion of [Price & Wharton 2021a]. arXiv:2101.05370v4 [quant-ph]
[Price & Wharton 2022] Price, H. & Wharton, K. Why entanglement?
arXiv:2212.06986 [quant-ph]. doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2212.06986
[Price & Wharton 2023] Price, H. & Wharton, K. Untangling entanglement.
Aeon, 29 June 2023. https://aeon.co/essays/our-simple-magic-free-
recipe-for-quantum-entanglement
[Rovelli 2021] Rovelli, C. Agency in physics. In Claudio Calosi, Pierluigi
Graziani, Davide Pietrini, Gino Tarozzi, eds., Experience, abstraction
and the scientific image of the world: Festschrift for Vincenzo Fano. Franco
Angeli editore. Available at arXiv:2007.05300.
[Schrödinger 1935a] Schrödinger, E. Die gegenwärtige Situation in der
Quantenmechanik. Naturwissenschaften, 23, 807–812; English transla-
tion in Trimmer, 1980. doi:10.1007/BF01491891
[Schrödinger 1935b] Schrödinger, E. Discussion of probability relations
between separated systems. Mathematical Proceedings of the Cambridge
Philosophical Society, 31, 555–563.
[Trimmer 1980] Trimmer, J. D., 1980, The present situation in quantum
mechanics: A translation of Schrödinger’s ‘cat paradox’ paper. Pro-
ceedings of the American Philosophical Society, 124: 3230–338.
22

[van Fraassen 1982] van Fraassen, Bas C. The charybdis of realism: epi-
stemological implications of Bell’s inequality. Synthese, 52(1): 25–38.
doi:10.1007/BF00485253
[Wharton & Argaman 2020] Wharton, K. & Argaman, N. Bell’s Theorem
and locally-mediated reformulations of quantum mechanics. Reviews
of Modern Physics, 92, 21002. arXiv:1906.04313
[Wiseman & Cavalcanti 2017] Wiseman, H. & Cavalcanti, E. Causarum in-
vestigatio and the two Bell’s theorems of John Bell. In Reinhold
Bertlmann and Anton Zeilinger (eds.), Quantum [Un]Speakables II:
Half a Century of Bell’s Theorem (Springer, Switzerland7), 119–142.
arXiv:1503.06413 [quant-ph]
23

