
Neil Postman 
Technopoly 
Neil Postman is a critic, communications theorist, and Chair 
of the Department of Communication Arts and Sciences at 
New York University. In 1987 he was given the George Orwell 
Award for Clarity in Language by the National Council of 
Teachers of English. In 1989 he received the Distinguished 
Professor Award at New York University. In the spring of 
1991 he was Laurence Lombard Visiting Professor of the 
Press and Public Policy at Harvard University. For ten years 
he was editor of Et Cetera, the journal of General Semantics. 
His seventeen previous books include Teaching as a Subversive 
Activity (with Charles Weingartner), The Disappearance of 
Childhood, Amusing Ourselves to Death, and Conscientious 
Objections. 

ALSO 
BY 
NEIL 
P O S T M A N 
Conscientious Objections 
Teaching as a Subversive Activity 
(with Charles Weingartner) 
Crazy Talk, Stupid Talk 
Teaching as a Conserving Activity 
The Disappearance of Childhood 
Amusing Ourselves to Death 

Technopoly 


Neil Postman 
Technopoly 
The Surrender of Culture 
to Technology 
Vintage Books 
A Division of Random House, Inc. 

FIRST VINTAGE BOOKS EDITION, APRIL 1993 
Copyright © 1992 by Neil Postman 
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright 
Conventions  Published in the United States by Vintage Books, a division 
of Random House, Inc , New York, and simultaneously in Canada by 
Random House of Canada Limited, Toronto  Originally published in 
hardcover by Alfred A  Knopf, Inc , New York, in 1992  
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Postman, Neil  
Technopoly  the surrender of culture to technology / Neil Postman, 
p  
cm  
Originally published  1st ed  New York  Knopf, 1992  
Includes bibliographical references and index  
ISBN 0-679-74540-8 (pbk ) 
1  Technology—Social aspects  
I  Title  
T14 5 P667 
1993 
303 48'3—dc2o 
92-50584 
CIP 
Book design by Mia Vander Els 
Manufactured in the United States of America 
579C864 

For Faye and Manny 

Whether or not it draws on new scientific research, 
technology is a branch of moral philosophy, not of science. 
PAUL G O O D M A N , New Reformation 

Contents 
Introduction 
xi 
1. 
The Judgment of Thamus 
3 
2. From Tools to Technocracy 
21 
3. From Technocracy to Technopoly 
40 
4. The Improbable World 
56 
5. The Broken Defenses 
71 
6. The Ideology of Machines: Medical 
Technology 
92 
7. The Ideology of Machines: Computer 
Technology 
107 
8. Invisible Technologies 
123 

x 
Contents 
9. 
Scientism 
144 
10. The Great Symbol Drain 
164 
11. 
The Loving Resistance Fighter 
181 
Notes 
201 
Bibliography 
207 
Index 
211 

Introduction 
In 1959, Sir Charles Snow published The Two Cultures and the 
Scientific Revolution, which was both the title and the subject of 
the Rede Lecture he had given earlier at Cambridge University. 
The lecture was intended to illuminate what Sir Charles saw as a 
great problem of our age—the opposition of art and science, or, 
more precisely, the implacable hostility between literary intel-
lectuals (sometimes called humanists) and physical scientists. 
The publication of the book caused a small rumble among academ-
ics (let us say, a 2.3 on the Richter Scale), not least because 
Snow came down so firmly on the side of the scientists, giving 
humanists ample reason and openings for sharp, funny, and nasty 
ripostes. But the controversy did not last long, and the book 
quickly faded from view. For good reason. Sir Charles had posed 
the wrong question, given the wrong argument, and therefore 
offered an irrelevant answer. Humanists and scientists have no 
quarrel, at least none that is of sufficient interest to most people. 
Nonetheless, to Snow must go some considerable credit for 
noticing that there are two cultures, that they are in fierce 
opposition to each other, and that it is necessary for a great 

xii 
Introduction 
debate to ensue about the matter. Had he been attending less 
to the arcane dissatisfactions of those who dwell in faculty clubs 
and more to the lives of those who have never been in one, he 
would surely have seen that the argument is not between 
humanists and scientists but between technology and every-
body else. This is not to say that "everybody else" recognizes 
this. In fact, most people believe that technology is a staunch 
friend. There are two reasons for this. First, technology is a 
friend. It makes life easier, cleaner, and longer. Can anyone ask 
more of a friend? Second, because of its lengthy, intimate, and 
inevitable relationship with culture, technology does not invite 
a close examination of its own consequences. It is the kind of 
friend that asks for trust and obedience, which most people are 
inclined to give because its gifts are truly bountiful. But, of 
course, there is a dark side to this friend. Its gifts are not without 
a heavy cost. Stated in the most dramatic terms, the accusation 
can be made that the uncontrolled growth of technology de-
stroys the vital sources of our humanity. It creates a culture 
without a moral foundation. It undermines certain mental pro-
cesses and social relations that make human life worth living. 
Technology, in sum, is both friend and enemy. 
This book attempts to describe when, how, and why technol-
ogy became a particularly dangerous enemy. The case has been 
argued many times before by authors of great learning and 
conviction—in our own time by Lewis Mumford, Jacques Ellul, 
Herbert Read, Arnold Gehlen, Ivan Illich, to name a few. The 
argument was interrupted only briefly by Snow's irrelevancies 
and has continued into our own time with a sense of urgency, 
made even more compelling by America's spectacular display of 
technological pre-eminence in the Iraqi war. I do not say here 
that the war was unjustified or that the technology was misused, 
only that the American success may serve as a confirmation of 
the catastrophic idea that in peace as well as war technology 
will be our savior. 

Technopoly 


1 
The Judgment of Thamus 
ou will find in Plato's Phaedrus 
a story about Thamus, the king of a great city of Upper Egypt. 
For people such as ourselves, who are inclined (in Thoreau's 
phrase) to be tools of our tools, few legends are more instructive 
than his. The story, as Socrates tells it to his friend Phaedrus, 
unfolds in the following way: Thamus once entertained the god 
Theuth, who was the inventor of many things, including num-
ber, calculation, geometry, astronomy, and writing. Theuth ex-
hibited his inventions to King Thamus, claiming that they 
should be made widely known and available to Egyptians. 
Socrates continues: 
Thamus inquired into the use of each of them, and as 
Theuth went through them expressed approval or disap-
proval, according as he judged Theuth's claims to be well 
or ill founded. It would take too long to go through all that 
Thamus is reported to have said for and against each of 
Theuth's inventions. But when it came to writing, Theuth 
declared, "Here is an accomplishment, my lord the King, 
Y 

4 
Technopoly 
which will improve both the wisdom and the memory of 
the Egyptians. I have discovered a sure receipt for memory 
and wisdom." To this, Thamus replied, "Theuth, my para-
gon of inventors, the discoverer of an art is not the best 
judge of the good or harm which will accrue to those who 
practice it. So it is in this; you, who are the father of 
writing, have out of fondness for your off-spring at-
tributed to it quite the opposite of its real function. Those 
who acquire it will cease to exercise their memory and 
become forgetful; they will rely on writing to bring things 
to their remembrance by external signs instead of by their 
own internal resources. What you have discovered is a 
receipt for recollection, not for memory. And as for wis-
dom, your pupils will have the reputation for it without 
the reality: they will receive a quantity of information 
without proper instruction, and in consequence be thought 
very knowledgeable when they are for the most part quite 
ignorant. And because they are filled with the conceit of 
wisdom instead of real wisdom they will be a burden to 
society."1 
I begin my book with this legend because in Thamus' re-
sponse there are several sound principles from which we may 
begin to learn how to think with wise circumspection about a 
technological society. In fact, there is even one error in the 
judgment of Thamus, from which we may also learn something 
of importance. The error is not in his claim that writing will 
damage memory and create false wisdom. It is demonstrable 
that writing has had such an effect. Thamus' error is in his 
believing that writing will be a burden to society and nothing but 
a burden. For all his wisdom, he fails to imagine what writing's 
benefits might be, which, as we know, have been considerable. 
We may learn from this that it is a mistake to suppose that any 
technological innovation has a one-sided effect. Every technol-

The Judgment of Thamus 
5 
ogy is both a burden and a blessing; not either-or, but this-and-
that. 
Nothing could be more obvious, of course, especially to 
those who have given more than two minutes of thought to the 
matter. Nonetheless, we are currently surrounded by throngs of 
zealous Theuths, one-eyed prophets who see only what new 
technologies can do and are incapable of imagining what they 
will undo. We might call such people Technophiles. They gaze 
on technology as a lover does on his beloved, seeing it as 
without blemish and entertaining no apprehension for the fu-
ture. They are therefore dangerous and are to be approached 
cautiously. On the other hand, some one-eyed prophets, such as 
I (or so I am accused), are inclined to speak only of burdens (in 
the manner of Thamus) and are silent about the opportunities 
that new technologies make possible. The Technophiles must 
speak for themselves, and do so all over the place. My defense 
is that a dissenting voice is sometimes needed to moderate the 
din made by the enthusiastic multitudes. If one is to err, it is 
better to err on the side of Thamusian skepticism. But it is an 
error nonetheless. And I might note that, with the exception of 
his judgment on writing, Thamus does not repeat this error. 
You might notice on rereading the legend that he gives argu-
ments for and against each of Theuth's inventions. For it is) 
inescapable that every culture must negotiate with technology, 
whether it does so intelligently or not. A bargain is struck in 
which technology giveth and technology taketh away. The 
wise know this well, and are rarely impressed by dramatic 
technological changes, and never overjoyed. Here, for example, 
is Freud on the matter, from his doleful Civilization and Its 
Discontents: 
One would like to ask: is there, then, no positive gain in 
pleasure, no unequivocal increase in my feeling of happi-
ness, if I can, as often as I please, hear the voice of a child 

6 
Technopoly 
of mine who is living hundreds of miles away or if I can 
learn in the shortest possible time after a friend has reached 
his destination that he has come through the long and 
difficult voyage unharmed? Does it mean nothing that 
medicine has succeeded in enormously reducing infant 
mortality and the danger of infection for women in child-
birth, and, indeed, in considerably lengthening the average 
life of a civilized man? 
Freud knew full well that technical and scientific advances are 
not to be taken lightly, which is why he begins this passage by 
acknowledging them. But he ends it by reminding us of what 
they have undone: 
If there had been no railway to conquer distances, my child 
would never have left his native town and I should need 
no telephone to hear his voice; if travelling across the 
ocean by ship had not been introduced, my friend would 
not have embarked on his sea-voyage and I should not 
need a cable to relieve my anxiety about him. What is the 
use of reducing infantile mortality when it is precisely that 
reduction which imposes the greatest restraint on us in the 
begetting of children, so that, taken all round, we never-
theless rear no more children than in the days before the 
reign of hygiene, while at the same time we have created 
difficult conditions for our sexual life in marriage. . . . And, 
finally, what good to us is a long life if it is difficult and 
barren of joys, and if it is so full of misery that we can only 
welcome death as a deliverer?2 
In tabulating the cost of technological progress, Freud takes 
a rather depressing line, that of a man who agrees with Tho-
reau's remark that our inventions are but improved means to an 
unimproved end. The Technophile would surely answer Freud 

The Judgment of Thamus 
7 
by saying that life has always been barren of joys and full of 
misery but that the telephone, ocean liners, and especially the 
reign of hygiene have not only lengthened life but made it a 
more agreeable proposition. That is certainly an argument I 
would make (thus proving I am no one-eyed Technophobe), but 
it is not necessary at this point to pursue it. I have brought 
Freud into the conversation only to show that a wise man— 
even one of such a woeful countenance—must begin his cri-
tique of technology by acknowledging its successes. Had King 
Thamus been as wise as reputed, he would not have forgotten 
to include in his judgment a prophecy about the powers that 
writing would enlarge. There is a calculus of technological 
change that requires a measure of even-handedness. 
So much for Thamus' error of omission. There is another 
omission worthy of note, but it is no error. Thamus simply takes 
for granted—and therefore does not feel it necessary to say— 
that writing is not a neutral technology whose good or harm 
depends on the uses made of it. He knows that the uses made 
of any technology are largely determined by the structure of the 
technology itself—that is, that its functions follow from its 
form. This is why Thamus is concerned not with what people 
will write; he is concerned that people will write. It is absurd to 
imagine Thamus advising, in the manner of today's standard-
brand Technophiles, that, if only writing would be used for the 
production of certain kinds of texts and not others (let us say, 
for dramatic literature but not for history or philosophy), its 
disruptions could be minimized. He would regard such counsel 
as extreme naïveté. He would allow, I imagine, that a technol-
ogy may be barred entry to a culture. But we may learn from 
Thamus the following: once a technology is admitted, it plays 
out its hand; it does what it is designed to do. Our task is to 
understand what that design is—that is to say, when we admit 
a new technology to the culture, we must do so with our eyes 
wide open. 

8 
Technopoly 
All of this we may infer from Thamus' silence. But we may 
learn even more from what he does say than from what he 
doesn't. He points out, for example, that writing will change 
what is meant by the words "memory" and "wisdom." He fears 
that memory will be confused with what he disdainfully calls 
"recollection," and he worries that wisdom will become indistin-
guishable from mere knowledge. This judgment we must take 
to heart, for it is a certainty that radical technologies create new 
definitions of old terms, and that this process takes place with-
out our being fully conscious of it. Thus, it is insidious and 
dangerous, quite different from the process whereby new tech-
nologies introduce new terms to the language. In our own time, 
we have consciously added to our language thousands of new 
words and phrases having to do with new technologies— 
"VCR," "binary digit," "software," "front-wheel drive," "win-
dow of opportunity," "Walkman," etc. We are not taken by 
surprise at this. New things require new words. But new things 
also modify old words, words that have deep-rooted meanings. 
The telegraph and the penny press changed what we once 
meant by "information." Television changes what we once 
meant by the terms "political debate," "news," and "public 
opinion." The computer changes "information" once again. 
Writing changed what we once meant by "truth" and "law"; 
printing changed them again, and now television and the com-
puter change them once more. Such changes occur quickly, 
surely, and, in a sense, silently. Lexicographers hold no plebis-
cites on the matter. No manuals are written to explain what is 
happening, and the schools are oblivious to it. The old words 
still look the same, are still used in the same kinds of sentences. 
But they do not have the same meanings; in some cases, they 
have opposite meanings. And this is what Thamus wishes to 
teach us—that technology imperiously commandeers our most 
important terminology. It redefines "freedom," "truth," "intelli-
gence," "fact," "wisdom," "memory," "history"—all the words 

The Judgment of Thamus 
9 
we live by. And it does not pause to tell us. And we do not 
pause to ask. 
This fact about technological change requires some elabora-
tion, and I will return to the matter in a later chapter. Here, there 
are several more principles to be mined from the judgment of 
Thamus that require mentioning because they presage all I will 
write about. For instance, Thamus warns that the pupils of 
Theuth will develop an undeserved reputation for wisdom. He 
means to say that those who cultivate competence in the use of 
a new technology become an elite group that are granted 
undeserved authority and prestige by those who have no such 
competence. There are different ways of expressing the interest-
ing implications of this fact. Harold Innis, the father of modern 
communication studies, repeatedly spoke of the "knowledge 
monopolies" created by important technologies. He meant pre-
cisely what Thamus had in mind: those who have control over 
the workings of a particular technology accumulate power and 
inevitably form a kind of conspiracy against those who have no 
access to the specialized knowledge made available by the 
technology. In his book The Bias of Communication, Innis pro-
vides many historical examples of how a new technology 
"busted up" a traditional knowledge monopoly and created a 
new one presided over by a different group. Another way of 
saying this is that the benefits and deficits of a new technology 
are not distributed equally. There are, as it were, winners and 
losers. It is both puzzling and poignant that on many occasions 
the losers, out of ignorance, have actually cheered the winners, 
and some still do. 
Let us take as an example the case of television. In the United 
States, where television has taken hold more deeply than any-
where else, many people find it a blessing, not least those who 
have achieved high-paying, gratifying careers in television as 
executives, technicians, newscasters, and entertainers. It should 
surprise no one that such people, forming as they do a new 

10 
Technopoly 
knowledge monopoly, should cheer themselves and defend and 
promote television technology. On the other hand and in the 
long run, television may bring a gradual end to the careers of 
schoolteachers, since school was an invention of the printing 
press and must stand or fall on the issue of how much impor-
tance the printed word has. For four hundred years, school-
teachers have been part of the knowledge monopoly created by 
printing, and they are now witnessing the breakup of that 
monopoly. It appears as if they can do little to prevent that 
breakup, but surely there is something perverse about school-
teachers' being enthusiastic about what is happening. Such en-
thusiasm always calls to my mind an image of some 
turn-of-the-century blacksmith who not only sings the praises 
of the automobile but also believes that his business will be 
enhanced by it. We know now that his business was not en-
hanced by it; it was rendered obsolete by it, as perhaps the 
clearheaded blacksmiths knew. What could they have done? 
Weep, if nothing else. 
We have a similar situation in the development and spread of 
computer technology, for here too there are winners and losers. 
There can be no disputing that the computer has increased the 
power of large-scale organizations like the armed forces, or 
airline companies or banks or tax-collecting agencies. And it is 
equally clear that the computer is now indispensable to high-
level researchers in physics and other natural sciences. But to 
what extent has computer technology been an advantage to the 
masses of people? To steelworkers, vegetable-store owners, 
teachers, garage mechanics, musicians, bricklayers, dentists, and 
most of the rest into whose lives the computer now intrudes? 
Their private matters have been made more accessible to pow-
erful institutions. They are more easily tracked and controlled; 
are subjected to more examinations; are increasingly mystified 
by the decisions made about them; are often reduced to mere 
numerical objects. They are inundated by junk mail. They are 

The Judgment of Thamus 
11 
easy targets for advertising agencies and political organizations. 
The schools teach their children to operate computerized sys-
tems instead of teaching things that are more valuable to chil-
dren. In a word, almost nothing that they need happens to the 
losers. Which is why they are losers. 
It is to be expected that the winners will encourage the losers 
to be enthusiastic about computer technology. That is the way 
of winners, and so they sometimes tell the losers that with 
personal computers the average person can balance a checkbook 
more neatly, keep better track of recipes, and make more logical 
shopping lists. They also tell them that their lives will be 
conducted more efficiently. But discreetly they neglect to say 
from whose point of view the efficiency is warranted or what 
might be its costs. Should the losers grow skeptical, the winners 
dazzle them with the wondrous feats of computers, almost all 
of which have only marginal relevance to the quality of the 
losers' lives but which are nonetheless impressive. Eventually, 
the losers succumb, in part because they believe, as Thamus 
prophesied, that the specialized knowledge of the masters of a 
new technology is a form of wisdom. The masters come to 
believe this as well, as Thamus also prophesied. The result is 
that certain questions do not arise. For example, to whom will 
the technology give greater power and freedom? And whose 
power and freedom will be reduced by it? 
I have perhaps made all of this sound like a well-planned 
conspiracy, as if the winners know all too well what is being 
won and what lost. But this is not quite how it happens. For one 
thing, in cultures that have a democratic ethos, relatively weak 
traditions, and a high receptivity to new technologies, everyone 
is inclined to be enthusiastic about technological change, believ-
ing that its benefits will eventually spread evenly among the 
entire population. Especially in the United States, where the lust 
for what is new has no bounds, do we find this childlike convic-
tion most widely held. Indeed, in America, social change of any 

12 
Technopoly 
kind is rarely seen as resulting in winners and losers, a condition 
that stems in part from Americans' much-documented opti-
mism. As for change brought on by technology, this native 
optimism is exploited by entrepreneurs, who work hard to 
infuse the population with a unity of improbable hope, for they 
know that it is economically unwise to reveal the price to be 
paid for technological change. One might say, then, that, if 
there is a conspiracy of any kind, it is that of a culture conspiring 
against itself. 
In addition to this, and more important, it is not always clear, 
at least in the early stages of a technology's intrusion into a 
culture, who will gain most by it and who will lose most. This 
is because the changes wrought by technology are subtle if not 
downright mysterious, one might even say wildly unpredict-
able. Among the most unpredictable are those that might be 
labeled ideological. This is the sort of change Thamus had in 
mind when he warned that writers will come to rely on external 
signs instead of their own internal resources, and that they will 
receive quantities of information without proper instruction. He 
meant that new technologies change what we mean by "know-
ing" and "truth"; they alter those deeply embedded habits of 
thought which give to a culture its sense of what the world is 
like—a sense of what is the natural order of things, of what is 
reasonable, of what is necessary, of what is inevitable, of what 
is real. Since such changes are expressed in changed meanings 
of old words, I will hold off until later discussing the massive 
ideological transformation now occurring in the United States. 
Here, I should like to give only one example of how technology 
creates new conceptions of what is real and, in the process, 
undermines older conceptions. I refer to the seemingly harmless 
practice of assigning marks or grades to the answers students 
give on examinations. This procedure seems so natural to most 
of us that we are hardly aware of its significance. We may even 
find it difficult to imagine that the number or letter is a tool or, 

The Judgment of Thamus 
13 
if you will, a technology; still less that, when we use such a 
technology to judge someone's behavior, we have done some-
thing peculiar. In point of fact, the first instance of grading 
students' papers occurred at Cambridge University in 1792 at 
the suggestion of a tutor named William Farish.3 No one knows 
much about William Farish; not more than a handful have ever 
heard of him. And yet his idea that a quantitative value should 
be assigned to human thoughts was a major step toward con-
structing a mathematical concept of reality. If a number can be 
given to the quality of a thought, then a number can be given 
to the qualities of mercy, love, hate, beauty, creativity, intelli-
gence, even sanity itself. When Galileo said that the language 
of nature is written in mathematics, he did not mean to include 
human feeling or accomplishment or insight. But most of us are 
now inclined to make these inclusions. Our psychologists, soci-
ologists, and educators find it quite impossible to do their work 
without numbers. They believe that without numbers they can-
not acquire or express authentic knowledge. 
I shall not argue here that this is a stupid or dangerous idea, 
only that it is peculiar. What is even more peculiar is that so 
many of us do not find the idea peculiar. To say that someone 
should be doing better work because he has an IQ of 134, or 
that someone is a 7.2 on a sensitivity scale, or that this man's 
essay on the rise of capitalism is an A — and that man's is a C + 
would have sounded like gibberish to Galileo or Shakespeare or 
Thomas Jefferson. If it makes sense to us, that is because our 
minds have been conditioned by the technology of numbers so 
that we see the world differently than they did. Our understand-
ing of what is real is different. Which is another way of saying 
that embedded in every tool is an ideological bias, a predisposi-
tion to construct the world as one thing rather than another, to 
value one thing over another, to amplify one sense or skill or 
attitude more loudly than another. 
This is what Marshall McLuhan meant by his famous apho-

14 
Technopoly 
rism "The medium is the message." This is what Marx meant 
when he said, "Technology discloses man's mode of dealing 
with nature" and creates the "conditions of intercourse" by 
which we relate to each other. It is what Wittgenstein meant 
when, in referring to our most fundamental technology, he 
said that language is not merely a vehicle of thought but also 
the driver. And it is what Thamus wished the inventor Theuth 
to see. This is, in short, an ancient and persistent piece of 
wisdom, perhaps most simply expressed in the old adage that, 
to a man with a hammer, everything looks like a nail. Without 
being too literal, we may extend the truism: To a man with a 
pencil, everything looks like a list. To a man with a camera, 
everything looks like an image. To a man with a computer, 
everything looks like data. And to a man with a grade 
sheet, everything looks like a number. 
But such prejudices are not always apparent at the start of a 
technology's journey, which is why no one can safely conspire 
to be a winner in technological change. Who would have imag-
ined, for example, whose interests and what world-view would 
be ultimately advanced by the invention of the mechanical 
clock? The clock had its origin in the Benedictine monasteries of 
the twelfth and thirteenth centuries. The impetus behind the 
invention was to provide a more or less precise regularity to the 
routines of the monasteries, which required, among other 
things, seven periods of devotion during the course of the day. 
The bells of the monastery were to be rung to signal the 
canonical hours; the mechanical clock was the technology that 
could provide precision to these rituals of devotion. And indeed 
it did. But what the monks did not foresee was that the clock 
is a means not merely of keeping track of the hours but also of 
synchronizing and controlling the actions of men. And thus, by 
the middle of the fourteenth century, the clock had moved 
outside the walls of the monastery, and brought a new and 
precise regularity to the life of the workman and the merchant. 

The Judgment of Thamus 
15 
"The mechanical clock," as Lewis Mumford wrote, "made possi-
ble the idea of regular production, regular working hours and a 
standardized product." In short, without the clock, capitalism 
would have been quite impossible.4 The paradox, the surprise, 
and the wonder are that the clock was invented by men who 
wanted to devote themselves more rigorously to God; it ended 
as the technology of greatest use to men who wished to devote 
themselves to the accumulation of money. In the eternal strug-
gle between God and Mammon, the clock quite unpredictably 
favored the latter. 
Unforeseen consequences stand in the way of all those who 
think they see clearly the direction in which a new technology 
will take us. Not even those who invent a technology can be 
assumed to be reliable prophets, as Thamus warned. Gutenberg, 
for example, was by all accounts a devout Catholic who would 
have been horrified to hear that accursed heretic Luther describe 
printing as "God's highest act of grace, whereby the business of 
the Gospel is driven forward." Luther understood, as Gutenberg 
did not, that the mass-produced book, by placing the Word of 
God on every kitchen table, makes each Christian his own 
theologian—one might even say his own priest, or, better, from 
Luther's point of view, his own pope. In the struggle between 
unity and diversity of religious belief, the press favored the 
latter, and we can assume that this possibility never occurred to 
Gutenberg. 
Thamus understood well the limitations of inventors in 
grasping the social and psychological—that is, ideological— 
bias of their own inventions. We can imagine him addressing 
Gutenberg in the following way: "Gutenberg, my paragon of 
inventors, the discoverer of an art is not the best judge of the 
good or harm which will accrue to those who practice it. So it 
is in this; you, who are the father of printing, have out of 
fondness for your off-spring come to believe it will advance the 
cause of the Holy Roman See, whereas in fact it will sow discord 

16 
Technopoly 
among believers; it will damage the authenticity of your be-
loved Church and destroy its monopoly." 
We can imagine that Thamus would also have pointed out to 
Gutenberg, as he did to Theuth, that the new invention would 
create a vast population of readers who "will receive a quantity 
of information without proper instruction . . . [who will be] filled 
with the conceit of wisdom instead of real wisdom"; that read-
ing, in other words, will compete with older forms of learning. 
This is yet another principle of technological change we may 
infer from the judgment of Thamus: new technologies compete 
with old ones—for time, for attention, for money, for prestige, 
but mostly for dominance of their world-view. This competition 
is implicit once we acknowledge that a medium contains an 
ideological bias. And it is a fierce competition, as only ideologi-
cal competitions can be. It is not merely a matter of tool against 
tool—the alphabet attacking ideographic writing, the printing 
press attacking the illuminated manuscript, the photograph at-
tacking the art of painting, television attacking the printed 
word. When media make war against each other, it is a case of 
world-views in collision. 
In the United States, we can see such collisions every-
where—in politics, in religion, in commerce—but we see them 
most clearly in the schools, where two great technologies con-
front each other in uncompromising aspect for the control of 
students' minds. On the one hand, there is the world of the 
printed word with its emphasis on logic, sequence, history, 
exposition, objectivity, detachment, and discipline. On the 
other, there is the world of television with its emphasis on 
imagery, narrative, presentness, simultaneity, intimacy, immedi-
ate gratification, and quick emotional response. Children come 
to school having been deeply conditioned by the biases of 
television. There, they encounter the world of the printed word. 
A sort of psychic battle takes place, and there are many casual-
ties—children who can't learn to read or won't, children who 

The Judgment of Thamus 
17 
cannot organize their thought into logical structure even in a 
simple paragraph, children who cannot attend to lectures or oral 
explanations for more than a few minutes at a time. They are 
failures, but not because they are stupid. They are failures 
because there is a media war going on, and they are on the 
wrong side—at least for the moment. Who knows what schools 
will be like twenty-five years from now? Or fifty? In time, the 
type of student who is currently a failure may be considered a 
success. The type who is now successful may be regarded as a 
handicapped learner—slow to respond, far too detached, lack-
ing in emotion, inadequate in creating mental pictures of reality. 
Consider: what Thamus called the "conceit of wisdom"—the 
unreal knowledge acquired through the written word—eventu-
ally became the pre-eminent form of knowledge valued by the 
schools. There is no reason to suppose that such a form of 
knowledge must always remain so highly valued. 
To take another example: In introducing the personal com-
puter to the classroom, we shall be breaking a four-hundred-
year-old truce between the gregariousness and openness 
fostered by orality and the introspection and isolation fostered 
by the printed word. Orality stresses group learning, coopera-
tion, and a sense of social responsibility, which is the context 
within which Thamus believed proper instruction and real 
knowledge must be communicated. Print stresses individualized 
learning, competition, and personal autonomy. Over four centu-
ries, teachers, while emphasizing print, have allowed orality its 
place in the classroom, and have therefore achieved a kind of 
pedagogical peace between these two forms of learning, so that 
what is valuable in each can be maximized. Now comes the 
computer, carrying anew the banner of private learning and 
individual problem-solving. Will the widespread use of comput-
ers in the classroom defeat once and for all the claims of commu-
nal speech? Will the computer raise egocentrism to the status of 
a virtue? 

18 
Technopoly 
These are the kinds of questions that technological change 
brings to mind when one grasps, as Thamus did, that technolog-
ical competition ignites total war, which means it is not possible 
to contain the effects of a new technology to a limited sphere 
of human activity. If this metaphor puts the matter too brutally, 
we may try a gentler, kinder one: Technological change is 
neither additive nor subtractive. It is ecological. I mean "ecolog-
ical" in the same sense as the word is used by environmental 
scientists. One significant change generates total change. If you 
remove the caterpillars from a given habitat, you are not left 
with the same environment minus caterpillars: you have a new 
environment, and you have reconstituted the conditions of 
survival; the same is true if you add caterpillars to an environ-
ment that has had none. This is how the ecology of media 
works as well. A new technology does not add or subtract 
something. It changes everything. In the year 1500, fifty years 
after the printing press was invented, we did not have old 
Europe plus the printing press. We had a different Europe. After 
television, the United States was not America plus television; 
television gave a new coloration to every political campaign, to 
every home, to every school, to every church, to every indus-
try. And that is why the competition among media is so fierce. 
Surrounding every technology are institutions whose organiza-
tion—not to mention their reason for being—reflects the 
world-view promoted by the technology. Therefore, when an 
old technology is assaulted by a new one, institutions are 
threatened. When institutions are threatened, a culture finds 
itself in crisis. This is serious business, which is why we learn 
nothing when educators ask, Will students learn mathematics 
better by computers than by textbooks? Or when businessmen 
ask, Through which medium can we sell more products? Or 
when preachers ask, Can we reach more people through televi-
sion than through radio? Or when politicians ask, How effective 
are messages sent through different media? Such questions have 

The Judgment of Thamus 
19 
an immediate, practical value to those who ask them, but they 
are diversionary. They direct our attention away from the seri-
ous social, intellectual, and institutional crises that new media 
foster. 
Perhaps an analogy here will help to underline the point. In 
speaking of the meaning of a poem, T. S. Eliot remarked that the 
chief use of the overt content of poetry is "to satisfy one habit 
of the reader, to keep his mind diverted and quiet, while the 
poem does its work upon him: much as the imaginary burglar 
is always provided with a bit of nice meat for the house-dog." 
In other words, in asking their practical questions, educators, 
entrepreneurs, preachers, and politicians are like the house-dog 
munching peacefully on the meat while the house is looted. 
Perhaps some of them know this and do not especially care. 
After all, a nice piece of meat, offered graciously, does take care 
of the problem of where the next meal will come from. But for 
the rest of us, it cannot be acceptable to have the house invaded 
without protest or at least awareness. 
What we need to consider about the computer has nothing 
to do with its efficiency as a teaching tool. We need to know 
in what ways it is altering our conception of learning, and how, 
in conjunction with television, it undermines the old idea of 
school. Who cares how many boxes of cereal can be sold via 
television? We need to know if television changes our concep-
tion of reality, the relationship of the rich to the poor, the idea 
of happiness itself. A preacher who confines himself to consider-
ing how a medium can increase his audience will miss the 
significant question: In what sense do new media alter what is 
meant by religion, by church, even by God? And if the politician 
cannot think beyond the next election, then we must wonder 
about what new media do to the idea of political organization 
and to the conception of citizenship. 
To help us do this, we have the judgment of Thamus, who, 
in the way of legends, teaches us what Harold Innis, in his way, 

20 
Technopoly 
tried to. New technologies alter the structure of our interests: 
the things we think about. They alter the character of our 
symbols: the things we think with. And they alter the nature of 
community: the arena in which thoughts develop. As Thamus 
spoke to Innis across the centuries, it is essential that we listen 
to their conversation, join in it, revitalize it. For something has 
happened in America that is strange and dangerous, and there 
is only a dull and even stupid awareness of what it is—in part 
because it has no name. I call it Technopoly. 

2 
From Tools to Technocracy 
mong the famous aphorisms 
from the troublesome pen of Karl Marx is his remark in The 
Poverty of Philosophy that the "hand-loom gives you society 
with the feudal lord; the steam-mill, society with the industrial 
capitalist." As far as I know, Marx did not say which technology 
gives us the technocrat, and I am certain his vision did not 
include the emergence of the Technopolist. Nonetheless, the 
remark is useful. Marx understood well that, apart from their 
economic implications, technologies create the ways in which 
people perceive reality, and that such ways are the key to 
understanding diverse forms of social and mental life. In The 
German Ideology, he says, "As individuals express their life, so 
they are," which sounds as much like Marshall McLuhan or, for 
that matter, Thamus as it is possible to sound. Indeed, toward 
the end of that book, Marx includes a remarkable paragraph that 
would be entirely at home in McLuhan's Understanding Media. 
"Is Achilles possible," he asks, "when powder and shot have 
been invented? And is the Iliad possible at all when the printing 
press and even printing machines exist? Is it not inevitable 
A 

22 
Technopoly 
that with the emergence of the press, the singing and the telling 
and the muse cease; that is, the conditions for epic poetry 
disappear?"1 
By connecting technological conditions to symbolic life and 
psychic habits, Marx was doing nothing unusual. Before him, 
scholars found it useful to invent taxonomies of culture based 
on the technological character of an age. And they do it still, for 
the practice is something of a persistent scholarly industry. We 
think at once of the best-known classification: the Stone Age, 
the Bronze Age, the Iron Age, the Steel Age. We speak easily 
of the Industrial Revolution, a term popularized by Arnold 
Toynbee, and, more recently, of the Post-Industrial Revolution, 
so named by Daniel Bell. Oswald Spengler wrote of the Age of 
Machine Technics, and C. S. Peirce called the nineteenth century 
the Railway Age. Lewis Mumford, looking at matters from a 
longer perspective, gave us the Eotechnic, the Paleotechnic, and 
the Neotechnic Ages. With equally telescopic perspective, José 
Ortega y Gasset wrote of three stages in the development of 
technology: the age of technology of chance, the age of tech-
nology of the artisan, the age of technology of the technician. 
Walter Ong has written about Oral cultures, Chirographic 
cultures, Typographic cultures, and Electronic cultures. Mc-
Luhan himself introduced the phrase "the Age of Gutenberg" 
(which, he believed, is now replaced by the Age of Electronic 
Communication). 
I find it necessary, for the purpose of clarifying our present 
situation and indicating what dangers lie ahead, to create still 
another taxonomy. Cultures may be classified into three types: 
tool-using cultures, technocracies, and technopolies. At the 
present time, each type may be found somewhere on the planet, 
although the first is rapidly disappearing: we must travel to 
exotic places to find a tool-using culture.2 If we do, it is well to 
go armed with the knowledge that, until the seventeenth cen-

From Tools to Technocracy 
23 
tury, all cultures were tool-users. There was, of course, consider-
able variation from one culture to another in the tools that were 
available. Some had only spears and cooking utensils. Some had 
water mills and coal- and horsepower. But the main characteris-
tic of all tool-using cultures is that their tools were largely 
invented to do two things: to solve specific and urgent prob-
lems of physical life, such as in the use of waterpower, wind-
mills, and the heavy-wheeled plow; or to serve the symbolic 
world of art, politics, myth, ritual, and religion, as in the con-
struction of castles and cathedrals and the development of the 
mechanical clock. In either case, tools did not attack (or, more 
precisely, were not intended to attack) the dignity and integrity 
of the culture into which they were introduced. With some 
exceptions, tools did not prevent people from believing in their 
traditions, in their God, in their politics, in their methods of 
education, or in the legitimacy of their social organization. 
These beliefs, in fact, directed the invention of tools and limited 
the uses to which they were put. Even in the case of military 
technology, spiritual ideas and social customs acted as control-
ling forces. It is well known, for example, that the uses of the 
sword by samurai warriors were meticulously governed by a set 
of ideals known as Bushido, or the Way of the Warrior. The 
rules and rituals specifying when, where, and how the warrior 
must use either of his two swords (the katana, or long sword, 
and the wakizashi, or short sword) were precise, tied closely to 
the concept of honor, and included the requirement that the 
warrior commit seppuku or hara-kiri should his honor be com-
promised. This sort of governance of military technology was 
not unknown in the Western world. The use of the lethal 
crossbow was prohibited, under threat of anathema, by Pope 
Innocent II in the early twelfth century. The weapon was judged 
to be "hateful to God" and therefore could not be used against 
Christians. That it could be used against Muslims and other 

24 
Technopoly 
infidels does not invalidate the point that in a tool-using culture 
technology is not seen as autonomous, and is subject to the 
jurisdiction of some binding social or religious system. 
Having defined tool-using cultures in this manner, I must add 
two points so as to avoid excessive oversimplification. First, the 
quantity of technologies available to a tool-using culture is not 
its defining characteristic. Even a superficial study of the Roman 
Empire, for example, reveals the extent to which it relied on 
roads, bridges, aqueducts, tunnels, and sewers for both its eco-
nomic vitality and its military conquests. Or, to take another 
example, we know that, between the tenth and thirteenth centu-
ries, Europe underwent a technological boom: medieval man 
was surrounded by machines.3 One may even go as far as Lynn 
White, Jr., who said that the Middle Ages gave us for the first 
time in history "a complex civilization which rested not on the 
backs of sweating slaves or coolies but primarily on non-human 
power."4 Tool-using cultures, in other words, may be both 
ingenious and productive in solving problems of the physical 
environment. Windmills were invented in the late twelfth cen-
tury. Eyeglasses for nearsightedness appeared in Italy in 1280. 
The invention in the eleventh century of rigid padded collars to 
rest on the shoulder blades of horses solved the problem of how 
to increase the pulling power of horses without decreasing their 
ability to breathe. In fact, as early as the ninth century in Europe, 
horseshoes were invented, and someone figured out that, when 
horses are hitched, one behind the other, their pulling power is 
enormously amplified. Corn mills, paper mills, and fulling mills 
were part of medieval culture, as were bridges, castles, and 
cathedrals. The famous spire of Strasbourg Cathedral, built in 
the thirteenth century, rose to a height of 466 feet, the equiva-
lent of a forty-story skyscraper. And, to go further back in time, 
one must not fail to mention the remarkable engineering 
achievements of Stonehenge and the Pyramids (whose con-

From Tools to Technocracy 
25 
struction, Lewis Mumford insisted, signifies the first example of 
a megamachine in action). 
Given the facts, we must conclude that tool-using cultures are 
not necessarily impoverished technologically, and may even be 
surprisingly sophisticated. Of course, some tool-using cultures 
were (and still are) technologically primitive, and some have 
even displayed a contempt for crafts and machinery. The 
Golden Age of Greece, for example, produced no important 
technical inventions and could not even devise ways of using 
horsepower efficiently. Both Plato and Aristotle scorned the 
"base mechanic arts," probably in the belief that nobility of 
mind was not enhanced by efforts to increase efficiency or 
productivity. Efficiency and productivity were problems for 
slaves, not philosophers. We find a somewhat similar view in 
the Bible, which is the longest and most detailed account of an 
ancient tool-using culture we have. In Deuteronomy, no less an 
authority than God Himself says, "Cursed be the man who 
makes a graven or molten image, an abomination to the Lord, 
a thing made by the hands of a craftsman, and sets it up in 
secret." 
Tool-using cultures, then, may have many tools or few, may 
be enthusiastic about tools or contemptuous. The name "tool-
using culture" derives from the relationship in a given culture 
between tools and the belief system or ideology. The tools are 
not intruders. They are integrated into the culture in ways that 
do not pose significant contradictions to its world-view. If we 
take the European Middle Ages as an example of a tool-using 
culture, we find a very high degree of integration between its 
tools and its world-view. Medieval theologians developed an 
elaborate and systematic description of the relation of man to 
God, man to nature, man to man, and man to his tools. Their 
theology took as a first and last principle that all knowledge and 
goodness come from God, and that therefore all human enter-

26 
Technopoly 
prise must be directed toward the service of God. Theology, not 
technology, provided people with authorization for what to do 
or think. Perhaps this is why Leonardo da Vinci kept his design 
of a submarine secret, believing that it was too harmful a tool 
to unleash, that it would not gain favor in God's eyes. 
In any case, theological assumptions served as a controlling 
ideology, and whatever tools were invented had, ultimately, to 
fit within that ideology. We may say, further, that all tool-using 
cultures—from the technologically most primitive to the most 
sophisticated—are theocratic or, if not that, unified by some 
metaphysical theory. Such a theology or metaphysics provides 
order and meaning to existence, making it almost impossible for 
technics to subordinate people to its own needs. 
The "almost" is important. It leads to my second qualifica-
tion. As the spirit of Thamus reminds us, tools have a way of 
intruding on even the most unified set of cultural beliefs. There 
are limits to the power of both theology and metaphysics, and 
technology has business to do which sometimes cannot be 
stayed by any force. Perhaps the most interesting example of a 
drastic technological disruption of a tool-using culture is in the 
eighth-century use of the stirrup by the Franks under the leader-
ship of Charles Martel. Until this time, the principal use of 
horses in combat was to transport warriors to the scene of the 
battle, whereupon they dismounted to meet the foe. The stirrup 
made it possible to fight on horseback, and this created an 
awesome new military technology: mounted shock combat. The 
new form of combat, as Lynn White, Jr., has meticulously de-
tailed, enlarged the importance of the knightly class and 
changed the nature of feudal society.5 Landholders found it 
necessary to secure the services of cavalry for protection. Even-
tually, the knights seized control of church lands and distributed 
them to vassals on condition that they stay in the service of the 
knights. If a pun will be allowed here, the stirrup was in the 

From Tools to Technocracy 
27 
saddle, and took feudal society where it would not otherwise 
have gone. 
To take a later example: I have already alluded to the trans-
formation of the mechanical clock in the fourteenth century 
from an instrument of religious observance to an instrument of 
commercial enterprise. That transformation is sometimes given 
a specific date—1370—when King Charles V ordered all citi-
zens of Paris to regulate their private, commercial, and industrial 
life by the bells of the Royal Palace clock, which struck every 
sixty minutes. All churches in Paris were similarly required to 
regulate their clocks, in disregard of the canonical hours. Thus, 
the church had to give material interests precedence over spiri-
tual needs. Here is a clear example of a tool being employed to 
loosen the authority of the central institution of medieval life. 
There are other examples of how technologies created prob-
lems for the spiritual life of medieval Europe. For example, the 
mills to which farmers flocked to have their grain ground be-
came a favorite place for prostitutes to attract customers. The 
problem grew to such proportions that Saint Bernard, the leader 
of the Cistercian order in the twelfth century, tried to close 
down the mills. He was unsuccessful, because the mills had 
become too important to the economy. In other words, it is 
something of an oversimplification to say that tool-using cul-
tures never had their customs and symbolic life reoriented by 
technology. And, just as there are examples of such cases in the 
medieval world, we can find queer but significant instances in 
technologically primitive societies of tools attacking the su-
premacy of custom, religion, or metaphysics. Egbert de Vries, a 
Dutch sociologist, has told of how the introduction of matches 
to an African tribe altered their sexual habits.6 Members of this 
community believed it necessary to start a new fire in the 
fireplace after each act of sexual intercourse. This custom meant 
that each act of intercourse was something of a public event, 

28 
Technopoly 
since when it was completed someone had to go to a neighbor-
ing hut to bring back a burning stick with which to start a fresh 
fire. Under such conditions, adultery was difficult to conceal, 
which is conceivably why the custom originated in the first 
place. The introduction of matches changed all this. It became 
possible to light a new fire without going to a neighbor's hut, 
and thus, in a flash, so to speak, a long-standing tradition was 
consumed. In reporting on de Vries' finding, Alvin Toffler raises 
several intriguing questions: Did matches result in a shift in 
values? Was adultery less or more frowned upon as a result? By 
facilitating the privacy of sex, did matches alter the valuation 
placed upon it? We can be sure that some changes in cultural 
values occurred, although they could not have been as drastic 
as what happened to the Ihalmiut tribe early in the twentieth 
century, after the introduction of the rifle. As described by Far-
ley Mowat in The People of the Deer, the replacement of bows and 
arrows with rifles is one of the most chilling tales on record of a 
technological attack on a tool-using culture. The result in this 
case was not the modification of a culture but its eradication. 
Nonetheless, after one acknowledges that no taxonomy ever 
neatly fits the realities of a situation, and that in particular the 
definition of a tool-using culture lacks precision, it is still both 
possible and useful to distinguish a tool-using culture from a 
technocracy. In a technocracy, tools play a central role in the 
thought-world of the culture. Everything must give way, in 
some degree, to their development. The social and symbolic 
worlds become increasingly subject to the requirements of that 
development. Tools are not integrated into the culture; they 
attack the culture. They bid to become the culture. As a conse-
quence, tradition, social mores, myth, politics, ritual, and reli-
gion have to fight for their lives. 
The modern technocracies of the West have their roots in the 
medieval European world, from which there emerged three great 
inventions: the mechanical clock, which provided a new concep-

From Tools to Technocracy 
29 
tion of time; the printing press with movable type, which attacked 
the epistemology of the oral tradition; and the telescope, which 
attacked the fundamental propositions of Judeo-Christian theol-
ogy. Each of these was significant in creating a new relationship 
between tools and culture. But since it is permissible to say that 
among faith, hope, and charity the last is most important, I shall 
venture to say that among the clock, the press, and the telescope 
the last is also the most important. To be more exact (since 
Copernicus, Tycho Brahe, and to some extent Kepler did their 
work without benefit of the telescope), somewhat cruder instru-
ments of observation than the telescope allowed men to see, 
measure, and speculate about the heavens in ways that had not 
been possible before. But the refinements of the telescope made 
their knowledge so precise that there followed a collapse, if one 
may say it this way, of the moral center of gravity in the West. 
That moral center had allowed people to believe that the earth 
was the stable center of the universe and therefore that human-
kind was of special interest to God. After Copernicus, Kepler, and 
especially Galileo, the Earth became a lonely wanderer in an 
obscure galaxy in some hidden corner of the universe, and this left 
the Western world to wonder if God had any interest in us at all. 
Although John Milton was only an infant when Galileo's Messen-
ger from the Stars was printed in 1610, he was able, years later, to 
describe the psychic desolation of an unfathomable universe that 
Galileo's telescopic vision thrust upon an unprepared theology. 
In Paradise Lost, Milton wrote: 
Before [his] eyes in sudden view appear 
The secrets of the hoary Deep—a dark 
Illimitable ocean, without bound, 
Without dimension. . . . 
Truly, a paradise lost. But it was not Galileo's intention— 
neither was it Copernicus' or Kepler's—to so disarm their cul-

30 
Technopoly 
ture. These were medieval men who, like Gutenberg before 
them, had no wish to damage the spiritual foundations of their 
world. Copernicus, for example, was a doctor of canon law, 
having been elected a canon of Frauenburg Cathedral. Although 
he never took a medical degree, he studied medicine, was pri-
vate physician to his uncle, and among many people was better 
known as a physician than as an astronomer. He published only 
one scientific work, On the Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, 
the first completed copy arriving from the printer only a few 
hours before his death, at the age of seventy, on May 24, 1543. 
He had delayed publishing his heliocentric theory for thirty 
years, largely because he believed it to be unsound, not because 
he feared retribution from the church. In fact, his book was not 
placed on the Index until seventy-three years after it was pub-
lished, and then only for a short time. (Galileo's trial did not take 
place until ninety years after Copernicus' death.) In 1543, schol-
ars and philosophers had no reason to fear persecution for their 
ideas so long as they did not directly challenge the authority of 
the church, which Copernicus had no wish to do. Though the 
authorship of the preface to his work is in dispute, the preface 
clearly indicates that his ideas are to be taken as hypotheses, and 
that his "hypotheses need not be true or even probable." We 
can be sure that Copernicus believed that the earth really 
moved, but he did not believe that either the earth or the 
planets moved in the manner described in his system, which he 
understood to consist of geometric fictions. And he did not 
believe that his work undermined the supremacy of theology. 
It is true that Martin Luther called Copernicus "a fool who went 
against Holy Writ," but Copernicus did not think he had done 
so—which proves, I suppose, that Luther saw more deeply than 
Copernicus. 
Kepler's is a somewhat similar story. Born in 1571, he began 
his career by publishing astrological calendars, and ended it as 
court astrologer to the duke of Wallenstein. Although he was 

From Tools to Technocracy 
31 
famous for his service as an astrologer, we must credit him with 
believing that "Astrology can do enormous harm to a monarch 
if a clever astrologer exploits his human credulity." Kepler 
wished astrology to be kept out of sight of all heads of state, 
a precaution that in recent years has not always been taken. His 
mother was accused of being a witch, and although Kepler did 
not believe this specific charge, he would probably not have 
denied categorically the existence of witches. He spent a great 
deal of his time corresponding with scholars on questions con-
cerning chronology in the age of Christ, and his theory that 
Jesus was actually born in 4 or 5 B.C. is generally accepted 
today. In other words, Kepler was very much a man of his time, 
medieval through and through. Except for one thing: He be-
lieved that theology and science should be kept separate and, in 
particular, that angels, spirits and the opinions of saints should 
be banished from cosmology. In his New Astronomy, he wrote, 
"Now as regards the opinions of the saints about these matters 
of nature, I answer in one word, that in theology the weight of 
authority, but in philosophy the weight of Reason alone is 
valid." After reviewing what various saints had said about the 
earth, Kepler concluded, ". . . but to me more sacred than all 
these is Truth, when I, with all respect for the doctors of the 
Church, demonstrate from philosophy that the earth is round, 
circumhabited by antipodes, of a most insignificant smallness, 
and a swift wanderer among the stars." 
In expressing this idea, Kepler was taking the first significant 
step toward the conception of a technocracy. We have here a 
clear call for a separation of moral and intellectual values, a 
separation that is one of the pillars of a technocracy—a signifi-
cant step but still a small one. No one before Kepler had asked 
why planets travel at variable rates. Kepler's answer was that it 
must be a force emanating from the sun. But this answer still had 
room in it for God. In a famous letter sent to his colleague 
Maestlin, Kepler wrote, "The sun in the middle of the moving 

32 
Technopoly 
stars, himself at rest and yet the source of motion, carries the 
image of God the Father and Creator. . . . He distributes his 
motive force through a medium which contains the moving 
bodies even as the Father creates through the Holy Ghost." 
Kepler was a Lutheran, and although he was eventually ex-
communicated from his own church, he remained a man of 
sincere religious conviction to the end. He was, for example, 
dissatisfied with his discovery of the elliptical orbits of planets, 
believing that an ellipse had nothing to recommend it in the 
eyes of God. To be sure, Kepler, building on the work of 
Copernicus, was creating something new in which truth was not 
required to gain favor in God's eyes. But it was not altogether 
clear to him exactly what his work would lead to. It remained 
for Galileo to make visible the unresolvable contradictions be-
tween science and theology, that is, between intellectual and 
moral points of view. 
Galileo did not invent the telescope, although he did not 
always object to the attribution. A Dutch spectacle-maker 
named Johann Lippershey was probably the instrument's true 
inventor; at any rate, he was the first to claim a license for its 
manufacture, in 1608. (It might also be worth remarking here 
that the famous experiment of dropping cannon balls from the 
Tower of Pisa was not only not done by Galileo but actually 
carried out by one of his adversaries, Giorgio Coressio, who 
was trying to confirm, not dispute, Aristotle's opinion that 
larger bodies fall more quickly than smaller ones.) Nonetheless, 
to Galileo must go the entire credit for transforming the tele-
scope from a toy into an instrument of science. And to Galileo 
must also go the credit of making astronomy a source of pain 
and confusion to the prevailing theology. His discovery of the 
four moons of Jupiter and the simplicity and accessibility of his 
writing style were key weapons in his arsenal. But more impor-
tant was the directness with which he disputed the Scriptures. 
In his famous Letter to the Grand Duchess Christina, he used 

From Tools to Technocracy 
33 
arguments first advanced by Kepler as to why the Bible could 
not be interpreted literally. But he went further in saying that 
nothing physical that could be directly observed or which dem-
onstrations could prove ought to be questioned merely because 
Biblical passages say otherwise. More clearly than Kepler had 
been able to do, Galileo disqualified the doctors of the church 
from offering opinions about nature. To allow them to do so, 
he charged, is pure folly. He wrote, "This would be as if an 
absolute despot, being neither a physician nor an architect, but 
knowing himself free to command, should undertake to adminis-
ter medicines and erect buildings according to his whim—at 
grave peril of his poor patients' lives, and the speedy collapse 
of his edifices." 
From this and other audacious arguments, the doctors of the 
church were sent reeling. It is therefore astonishing that the 
church made persistent efforts to accommodate its beliefs to 
Galileo's observations and claims. It was willing, for example, to 
accept as hypotheses that the earth moves and that the sun 
stands still. This, on the grounds that it is the business of 
mathematicians to formulate interesting hypotheses. But there 
could be no accommodation with Galileo's claim that the move-
ment of the earth is a fact of nature. Such a belief was defini-
tively held to be injurious to holy faith by contradicting 
Scripture. Thus, the trial of Galileo for heresy was inevitable 
even though long delayed. The trial took place in 1633, result-
ing in Galileo's conviction. Among the punishments were that 
Galileo was to abjure Copernican opinion, serve time in a formal 
prison, and for three years repeat once a week seven penitential 
psalms. There is probably no truth to the belief that Galileo 
mumbled at the conclusion of his sentencing, "But the earth 
moves" or some similar expression of defiance. He had, in fact, 
been asked four times at his trial if he believed in the Copernican 
view, and each time he said he did not. Everyone knew he 
believed otherwise, and that it was his advanced age, infirmities, 

34 
Technopoly 
and fear of torture that dictated his compliance. In any case, 
Galileo did not spend a single day in prison. He was confined 
at first to the grand duke's villa at Trinità del Monte, then to the 
palace of Archbishop Piccolomini in Siena, and finally to his 
home in Florence, where he remained for the rest of his life. He 
died in 1642, the year Isaac Newton was born. 
Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo put in place the dynamite 
that would blow up the theology and metaphysics of the medie-
val world. Newton lit the fuse. In the ensuing explosion, Aris-
totle's animism was destroyed, along with almost everything 
else in his Physics. Scripture lost much of its authority. Theol-
ogy, once the Queen of the Sciences, was now reduced to the 
status of Court Jester. Worst of all, the meaning of existence 
itself became an open question. And how ironic it all was! 
Whereas men had traditionally looked to Heaven to find author-
ity, purpose, and meaning, the Sleepwalkers (as Arthur Koestler 
called Copernicus, Kepler, and Galileo) looked not to Heaven 
but to the heavens. There they found only mathematical equa-
tions and geometric patterns. They did so with courage but not 
without misgivings, for they did their best to keep their faith, 
and they did not turn away from God. They believed in a God 
who had planned and designed the whole of creation, a God 
who was a master mathematician. Their search for the mathe-
matical laws of nature was, fundamentally, a religious quest. 
Nature was God's text, and Galileo found that God's alphabet 
consisted of "triangles, quadrangles, circles, spheres, cones, 
pyramids, and other mathematical figures." Kepler agreed, and 
even boasted that God, the author, had to wait six thousand 
years for His first reader—Kepler himself. As for Newton, he 
spent most of his later years trying to compute the generations 
since Adam, his faith in Scripture being unshaken. Descartes, 
whose Discourse on Method, published in 1637, provided nobil-
ity to skepticism and reason and served as a foundation of the 
new science, was a profoundly religious man. Although he saw 

From Tools to Technocracy 
35 
the universe as mechanistic ("Give me matter and motion," he 
wrote, "and I will construct the world"), he deduced his law of 
the immutability of motion from the immutability of God. 
All of them, to the end, clung to the theology of their age. 
They would surely not have been indifferent to knowing when 
the Last Judgment would come, and they could not have imag-
ined the world without God. Moreover, the science they cre-
ated was almost wholly concerned with questions of truth, not 
power. Toward that end, there developed in the late sixteenth 
century what can only be described as a passion for exactitude: 
exact dates, quantities, distances, rates. It was even thought 
possible to determine the exact moment of the Creation, which, 
as it turned out, commenced at 9:00 a.m., October 23, 4004 B.C. 
These were men who thought of philosophy (which is what 
they called science) as the Greeks did, believing that the true 
object of investigating nature is speculative satisfaction. They 
were not concerned with the idea of progress, and did not 
believe that their speculations held the promise of any impor-
tant improvements in the conditions of life. Copernicus, Kepler, 
Galileo, Descartes, and Newton laid the foundation for the 
emergence of technocracies, but they themselves were men of 
tool-using cultures. 
Francis Bacon, born in 1561, was the first man of the techno-
cratic age. In saying this, I may be disputing no less an authority 
than Immanuel Kant, who said that a Kepler or a Newton was 
needed to find the law of the movement of civilization. Perhaps. 
But it was Bacon who first saw, pure and serene, the connection 
between science and the improvement of the human condition. 
The principal aim of his work was to advance "the happiness of 
mankind," and he continually criticized his predecessors for 
failing to understand that the real, legitimate, and only goal of 
the sciences is the "endowment of human life with new inven-
tions and riches." He brought science down from the heavens, 
including mathematics, which he conceived of as a humble 

36 
Technopoly 
handmaiden to invention. In this utilitarian view of knowledge, 
Bacon was the chief architect of a new edifice of thought in 
which resignation was cast out and God assigned to a special 
room. The name of the building was Progress and Power. 
Ironically, Bacon was not himself a scientist, or at least not 
much of one. He did no pioneering work in any field of research. 
He did not uncover any new law of nature or generate a single 
fresh hypothesis. He was not even well informed about the 
scientific investigations of his own time. And though he prided 
himself on being the creator of a revolutionary advance in 
scientific method, posterity has not allowed him this presump-
tion. Indeed, his most famous experiment makes its claim on our 
attention because Bacon died as a result of it. He and his good 
friend Dr. Witherborne were taking a coach ride on a wintry 
day when, seeing snow on the ground, Bacon wondered if flesh 
might not be preserved in snow, as it is in salt. The two decided 
to find out at once. They bought a hen, removed its innards, and 
stuffed the body with snow. Poor Bacon never learned the result 
of his experiment, because he fell immediately ill from the cold, 
most probably with bronchitis, and died three days later. For 
this, he is sometimes regarded as a martyr to experimental 
science. 
But experimental science was not where his greatness lay. 
Although others of his time were impressed by the effects of 
practical inventions on the conditions of life, Bacon was the first 
to think deeply and systematically on the matter. He devoted 
much of his work to educating men to see the links between 
invention and progress. In Novum Organum he wrote, 
It is well to observe the force and effect and consequences 
of discoveries. These are to be seen nowhere more con-
spicuously than in those three which were unknown to the 
ancients, and of which the origin, though recent, is ob-
scure; namely, printing, gunpowder, and the magnet. For 

From Tools to Technocracy 
37 
these three have changed the whole face and state of 
things throughout the world; the first in literature, the 
second in warfare, the third in navigation; whence have 
followed innumerable changes; insomuch that no empire, 
no sect, no star seems to have exerted greater power and 
influence in human affairs than these changes. 
In this passage, we can detect some of Bacon's virtues and the 
source of his great influence. Here is no sleepwalker. He knows 
full well what technology does to culture and places technologi-
cal development at the center of his reader's attention. He writes 
with conviction and verve. He is, after all, among the world's 
great essayists; Bacon was a master propagandist, who knew 
well the history of science but saw science not as a record of 
speculative opinion but as the record of what those opinions 
had enabled man to do. And he was ceaselessly energetic in 
trying to convey this idea to his countrymen, if not the world. 
In the first two books of Novum Organum, which consist of 182 
aphorisms, Bacon sets out nothing less than a philosophy of 
science based on the axiom that "the improvement of men's 
minds and the improvement of his lot are one and the same 
thing." It is in this work that he denounces the infamous four 
Idols, which have kept man from gaining power over nature: 
Idols of the Tribe, which lead us to believe our perceptions are 
the same as nature's facts; Idols of the Cave, which lead us to 
mistaken ideas derived from heredity and environment; Idols of 
the Market-place, which lead us to be deluded by words; and 
Idols of the Theater, which lead us to the misleading dogmas of 
the philosophers. 
To read Bacon today is to be constantly surprised at his 
modernity. We are never far from the now familiar notion that 
science is a source of power and progress. In The Advancement 
of Learning, he even outlines the foundation of a College for 
Inventors that sounds something like the Massachusetts Insti-

38 
Technopoly 
tute of Technology. Bacon would have the government provide 
inventors with allowances for their experiments and for travel-
ing. He would have scholarly journals and international associa-
tions. He would encourage full cooperation among scientists, an 
idea that would have startled Tycho Brahe, Kepler, and Galileo, 
who used some of their genius to devise ways of concealing 
their work from one another. Bacon also believed that scientists 
should be paid well to give public lectures, and that informing 
the public of the utility of invention was as important as inven-
tion itself. In short, he conceived of the scientific enterprise as 
it is conceived today—organized, financially secure, public, and 
mankind's best weapon in the struggle to improve his condition 
and to do so continuously. 
As I have said, Bacon is the first man of technocracy, but it 
was some time before he was joined by the multitude. He died 
in 1626, and it took another 150 years for European culture to 
pass to the mentality of the modern world—that is, to technoc-
racy. In doing so, people came to believe that knowledge is 
power, that humanity is capable of progressing, that poverty is 
a great evil, and that the life of the average person is as mean-
ingful as any other. It is untrue to say that along the way God 
died. But any conception of God's design certainly lost much of 
its power and meaning, and with that loss went the satisfactions 
of a culture in which moral and intellectual values were inte-
grated. At the same time, we must remember that in the tool-
using culture of the older European world, the vast majority of 
people were peasants, impoverished and powerless. If they 
believed their afterlife was filled with unending joy, their lives 
on earth were nonetheless "nasty, brutish and short." As C. P. 
Snow remarked, the Industrial Revolution of the nineteenth 
century, which was the fruit of Baconian science, was the only 
hope for the poor. And if their "true Deity became mechanism," 
as Thomas Carlyle said, it is probable that by then most people 
would not have traded their earthly existence for life in a godly, 

From Tools to Technocracy 
39 
integrated tool-using culture. It didn't matter if they would, 
since there was little use in lamenting the past. The Western 
world had become a technocracy from which there could be no 
turning back. Addressing both those who were exhilarated by 
technocracy and those who were repulsed by it, Stephen Vin-
cent Benét gave the only advice that made any sense. In John 
Brown's Body he wrote: 
If you at last must have a word to say, 
Say neither, in their way, 
"It is a deadly magic and accursed," 
Nor "It is blest," but only "It is here." 

3 
From Technocracy to Technopoly 
ay only, "It is here." But when 
did "here" begin? When did Bacon's ideology become a reality? 
When, to use Siegfried Giedion's phrase, did mechanization take 
command? To be cautious about it, we might locate the emer-
gence of the first true technocracy in England in the latter half 
of the eighteenth century—let us say with James Watt's inven-
tion of the steam engine in 1765. From that time forward, a 
decade did not pass without the invention of some significant 
machinery which, taken together, put an end to medieval "man-
ufacture" (which once meant "to make by hand"). The practical 
energy and technical skills unleashed at this time changed for-
ever the material and psychic environment of the Western 
world. 
An equally plausible date for the beginnings of technocracy 
(and, for Americans, easier to remember) is 1776, when Adam 
Smith's Wealth of Nations was published. As Bacon was no 
scientist, Smith was no inventor. But, like Bacon, he provided a 
theory that gave conceptual relevance and credibility to the 
direction in which human enterprise was pointed. Specifically, 
S 

From Technocracy to Technopoly 
41 
he justified the transformation from small-scale, personalized, 
skilled labor to large-scale, impersonal, mechanized production. 
He not only argued convincingly that money, not land, was the 
key to wealth, but gave us his famous principle of the self-
regulating market. In a technocracy—that is, a society only 
loosely controlled by social custom and religious tradition and 
driven by the impulse to invent—an "unseen hand" will elimi-
nate the incompetent and reward those who produce cheaply 
and well the goods that people want. It was not clear then, and 
still isn't, whose unseen mind guides the unseen hand, but it is 
possible (the technocratic industrialists believed) that God could 
have something to do with it. And if not God, then "human 
nature," for Adam Smith had named our species "Economic 
Man," born with an instinct to barter and acquire wealth. 
In any case, toward the end of the eighteenth century, tech-
nocracy was well underway, especially after Richard Arkwright, 
a barber by trade, developed the factory system. In his cotton-
spinning mills, Arkwright trained workers, mostly children, "to 
conform to the regular celerity of the machine," and in doing so 
gave an enormous boost to the growth of modern forms of 
technocratic capitalism. In 1780, twenty factories were under his 
control, for which a grateful nation knighted him, and from 
which an equally grateful son inherited a fortune. Arkwright 
may fairly be thought of as the first—even archetypal—techno-
cratic capitalist. He exemplified in every particular the type of 
nineteenth-century entrepreneur to come. As Siegfried Giedion 
has described him, Arkwright created the first mechanization of 
production "[in] a hostile environment, without protectors, 
without government subsidy, but nourished by a relentless 
utilitarianism that feared no financial risk or danger." By the 
beginning of the nineteenth century, England was spawning 
such entrepreneurs in every major city. By 1806, the concept of 
the power loom, introduced by Edmund Cartwright (a clergy-
man no less), was revolutionizing the textile industry by elimi-

42 
Technopoly 
nating, once and for all, skilled workers, replacing them with 
workers who merely kept the machines operating. 
By 1850, the machine-tool industry was developed—ma-
chines to make machines. And beginning in the 1860s, espe-
cially in America, a collective fervor for invention took hold of 
the masses. To quote Giedion again: "Everyone invented, who-
ever owned an enterprise sought ways and means to make his 
goods more speedily, more perfectly, and often of improved 
beauty. Anonymously and inconspicuously the old tools were 
transformed into modern instruments."1 Because of their famil-
iarity, it is not necessary to describe in detail all of the inven-
tions of the nineteenth century, including those which gave 
substance to the phrase "communications revolution": the pho-
tograph and telegraph (1830s), rotary-power printing (1840s), 
the typewriter (1860s), the transatlantic cable (1866), the tele-
phone (1876), motion pictures and wireless telegraphy (1895). 
Alfred North Whitehead summed it up best when he remarked 
that the greatest invention of the nineteenth century was the 
idea of invention itself. We had learned how to invent things, 
and the question of why we invent things receded in impor-
tance. The idea that if something could be done it should be 
done was born in the nineteenth century. And along with it, 
there developed a profound belief in all the principles through 
which invention succeeds: objectivity, efficiency, expertise, 
standardization, measurement, and progress. It also came to be 
believed that the engine of technological progress worked most 
efficiently when people are conceived of not as children of God 
or even as citizens but as consumers—that is to say, as markets. 
Not everyone agreed, of course, especially with the last 
notion. In England, William Blake wrote of the "dark Satanic 
mills" which stripped men of their souls. Matthew Arnold 
warned that "faith in machinery" was mankind's greatest men-
ace. Carlyle, Ruskin, and William Morris railed against the spiri-
tual degradation brought by industrial progress. In France, 

From Technocracy to Technopoly 
43 
Balzac, Flaubert, and Zola documented in their novels the spiri-
tual emptiness of "Economic man" and the poverty of the 
acquisitive impulse. 
The nineteenth century also saw the emergence of "utopian" 
communities, of which perhaps the most famous is Robert 
Owen's experimental community in Scotland called New La-
nark. There, he established a model factory community, provid-
ing reduced working hours, improved living conditions, and 
innovative education for the children of workers. In 1824, 
Owen came to America and founded another utopia at New 
Harmony, Indiana. Although none of his or other experiments 
endured, dozens were tried in an effort to reduce the human 
costs of a technocracy.2 
We also must not omit mentioning the rise and fall of the 
much-maligned Luddite Movement. The origin of the term is 
obscure, some believing that it refers to the actions of a youth 
named Ludlum who, being told by his father to fix a weaving 
machine, proceeded instead to destroy it. In any case, between 
1811 and 1816, there arose widespread support for workers 
who bitterly resented the new wage cuts, child labor, and elimi-
nation of laws and customs that had once protected skilled 
workers. Their discontent was expressed through the destruc-
tion of machines, mostly in the garment and fabric industry; 
since then the term "Luddite" has come to mean an almost 
childish and certainly naïve opposition to technology. But the 
historical Luddites were neither childish nor naïve. They were 
people trying desperately to preserve whatever rights, privi-
leges, laws, and customs had given them justice in the older 
world-view.3 
They lost. So did all the other nineteenth-century nay-sayers. 
Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, and Newton might well have been 
on their side. Perhaps Bacon as well, for it was not his intention 
that technology should be a blight or a destroyer. But then, 
Bacon's greatest deficiency had always been that he was unfa-

44 
Technopoly 
miliar with the legend of Thamus; he understood nothing of the 
dialectic of technological change, and said little about the nega-
tive consequences of technology. Even so, taken as a whole, the 
rise of technocracy would probably have pleased Bacon, for 
there can be no disputing that technocracy transformed the face 
of material civilization, and went far toward relieving what 
Tocqueville called "the disease of work." And though it is true 
that technocratic capitalism created slums and alienation, it is 
also true that such conditions were perceived as an evil that 
could and should be eradicated; that is to say, technocracies 
brought into being an increased respect for the average person, 
whose potential and even convenience became a matter of 
compelling political interest and urgent social policy. The nine-
teenth century saw the extension of public education, laid the 
foundation of the modern labor union, and led to the rapid 
diffusion of literacy, especially in America, through the develop-
ment of public libraries and the increased importance of the 
general-interest magazine. To take only one example of the last 
point, the list of nineteenth-century contributors to The Satur-
day Evening Post, founded in 1821, included William Cullen 
Bryant, Harriet Beecher Stowe, James Fenimore Cooper, Ralph 
Waldo Emerson, Nathaniel Hawthorne, and Edgar Allan Poe— 
in other words, most of the writers presently included in Ameri-
can Lit. 101. The technocratic culture eroded the line that had 
made the intellectual interests of educated people inaccessible to 
the working class, and we may take it as a fact, as George 
Steiner has remarked, that the period from the French Revolu-
tion to World War I marked an oasis of quality in which great 
literature reached a mass audience. 
Something else reached a mass audience as well: political and 
religious freedom. It would be an inadmissible simplification to 
claim that the Age of Enlightenment originated solely because 
of the emerging importance of technology in the eighteenth 
century, but it is quite clear that the great stress placed on 

From Technocracy to Technopoly 
45 
individuality in the economic sphere had an irresistible reso-
nance in the political sphere. In a technocracy, inherited royalty 
is both irrelevant and absurd. The new royalty was reserved for 
men like Richard Arkwright, whose origins were low but whose 
intelligence and daring soared. Those possessed of such gifts 
could not be denied political power and were prepared to take 
it if it were not granted. In any case, the revolutionary nature 
of the new means of production and communication would 
have naturally generated radical ideas in every realm of human 
enterprise. Technocracy gave us the idea of progress, and of 
necessity loosened our bonds with tradition—whether political 
or spiritual. Technocracy filled the air with the promise of new 
freedoms and new forms of social organization. Technocracy 
also speeded up the world. We could get places faster, do things 
faster, accomplish more in a shorter time. Time, in fact, became 
an adversary over which technology could triumph. And this 
meant that there was no time to look back or to contemplate 
what was being lost. There were empires to build, opportunities 
to exploit, exciting freedoms to enjoy, especially in America. 
There, on the wings of technocracy, the United States soared 
to unprecedented heights as a world power. That Jefferson, 
Adams, and Madison would have found such a place uncom-
fortable, perhaps even disagreeable, did not matter. Nor did it 
matter that there were nineteenth-century American voices— 
Thoreau, for example—who complained about what was being 
left behind. The first answer to the complaints was, We leave 
nothing behind but the chains of a tool-using culture. The 
second answer was more thoughtful: Technocracy will not 
overwhelm us. And this was true, to a degree. Technocracy did 
not entirely destroy the traditions of the social and symbolic 
worlds. Technocracy subordinated these worlds—yes, even hu-
miliated them—but it did not render them totally ineffectual. In 
nineteenth-century America, there still existed holy men and the 
concept of sin. There still existed regional pride, and it was 

46 
Technopoly 
possible to conform to traditional notions of family life. It was 
possible to respect tradition itself and to find sustenance in ritual 
and myth. It was possible to believe in social responsibility and 
the practicality of individual action. It was even possible to 
believe in common sense and the wisdom of the elderly. It was 
not easy, but it was possible. 
The technocracy that emerged, fully armed, in nineteenth-
century America disdained such beliefs, because holy men and 
sin, grandmothers and families, regional loyalties and two-
thousand-year-old traditions, are antagonistic to the techno-
cratic way of life. They are a troublesome residue of a tool-using 
period, a source of criticism of technocracy. They represent a 
thought-world that stands apart from technocracy and rebukes 
it—rebukes its language, its impersonality, its fragmentation, its 
alienation. And so technocracy disdains such a thought-world 
but, in America, did not and could not destroy it. 
We may get a sense of the interplay between technocracy 
and Old World values in the work of Mark Twain, who was 
fascinated by the technical accomplishments of the nineteenth 
century. He said of it that it was "the plainest and sturdiest and 
infinitely greatest and worthiest of all the centuries the world 
has seen," and he once congratulated Walt Whitman on having 
lived in the age that gave the world the beneficial products of 
coal tar. It is often claimed that he was the first writer regularly 
to use a typewriter, and he invested (and lost) a good deal of 
money in new inventions. In his Life on the Mississippi, he gives 
lovingly detailed accounts of industrial development, such as 
the growth of the cotton mills in Natchez: 
The Rosalie Yarn Mill of Natchez has a capacity of 6000 
spindles and 160 looms, and employs 100 hands. The 
Natchez Cotton Mills Company began operations four 
years ago in a two-story building of 50 x 190 feet, with 
4000 spindles and 128 looms. . . . The mill works 5000 

From Technocracy to Technopoly 
47 
bales of cotton annually and manufactures the best stan-
dard quality of brown shirtings and sheetings and drills, 
turning out 5,000,000 yards of these goods per year. 
Twain liked nothing better than to describe the giantism and 
ingenuity of American industry. But at the same time, the 
totality of his work is an affirmation of preindustrial values. 
Personal loyalty, regional tradition, the continuity of family life, 
the relevance of the tales and wisdom of the elderly are the soul 
of his work throughout. The story of Huckleberry Finn and Jim 
making their way to freedom on a raft is nothing less than a 
celebration of the enduring spirituality of pretechnological man. 
If we ask, then, why technocracy did not destroy the world-
view of a tool-using culture, we may answer that the fury of 
industrialism was too new and as yet too limited in scope to 
alter the needs of inner life or to drive away the language, 
memories, and social structures of the tool-using past. It was 
possible to contemplate the wonders of a mechanized cotton 
mill without believing that tradition was entirely useless. In 
reviewing nineteenth-century American history, one can hear 
the groans of religion in crisis, of mythologies under attack, of 
a politics and education in confusion, but the groans are not yet 
death-throes. They are the sounds of a culture in pain, and 
nothing more. The ideas of tool-using cultures were, after all, 
designed to address questions that still lingered in a technoc-
racy. The citizens of a technocracy knew that science and tech-
nology did not provide philosophies by which to live, and they 
clung to the philosophies of their fathers. They could not con-
vince themselves that religion, as Freud summed it up at the 
beginning of the twentieth century, is nothing but an obses-
sional neurosis. Nor could they quite believe, as the new cos-
mology taught, that the universe is the outcome of accidental 
collocations of atoms. And they continued to believe, as Mark 
Twain did, that, for all their dependence on machinery, tools 

48 
Technopoly 
ought still to be their servants, not their masters. They would 
allow their tools to be presumptuous, aggressive, audacious, 
impudent servants, but that tools should rise above their servile 
station was an appalling thought. And though technocracy 
found no clear place for the human soul, its citizens held to the 
belief that no increase in material wealth would compensate 
them for a culture that insulted their self-respect. 
And so two opposing world-views—the technological and 
the traditional—coexisted in uneasy tension. The technological 
was the stronger, of course, but the traditional was there—still 
functional, still exerting influence, still too much alive to ignore. 
This is what we find documented not only in Mark Twain but 
in the poetry of Walt Whitman, the speeches of Abraham 
Lincoln, the prose of Thoreau, the philosophy of Emerson, the 
novels of Hawthorne and Melville, and, most vividly of all, in 
Alexis de Tocqueville's monumental Democracy in America. In a 
word, two distinct thought-worlds were rubbing against each 
other in nineteenth-century America. 
With the rise of Technopoly, one of those thought-worlds 
disappears. Technopoly eliminates alternatives to itself in pre-
cisely the way Aldous Huxley outlined in Brave New World. It 
does not make them illegal. It does not make them immoral. It 
does not even make them unpopular. It makes them invisible 
and therefore irrelevant. And it does so by redefining what we 
mean by religion, by art, by family, by politics, by history, by 
truth, by privacy, by intelligence, so that our definitions fit its 
new requirements. Technopoly, in other words, is totalitarian 
technocracy. 
As I write (in fact, it is the reason why I write), the United 
States is the only culture to have become a Technopoly. It is a 
young Technopoly, and we can assume that it wishes not 
merely to have been the first but to remain the most highly 
developed. Therefore, it watches with a careful eye Japan and 

From Technocracy to Technopoly 
49 
several European nations that are striving to become Technopo-
lies as well. 
To give a date to the beginnings of Technopoly in America 
is an exercise in arbitrariness. It is somewhat like trying to say, 
precisely, when a coin you have flipped in the air begins its 
descent. You cannot see the exact moment it stops rising; you 
know only that it has and is going the other way. Huxley 
himself identified the emergence of Henry Ford's empire as the 
decisive moment in the shift from technocracy to Technopoly, 
which is why in his brave new world time is reckoned as BF 
(Before Ford) and AF (After Ford). 
Because of its drama, I am tempted to cite, as a decisive 
moment, the famous Scopes "monkey" trial held in Dayton, 
Tennessee, in the summer of 1925. There, as with Galileo's 
heresy trial three centuries earlier, two opposing world-views 
faced each other, toe to toe, in unconcealed conflict. And, as in 
Galileo's trial, the dispute focused not only on the content of 
"truth" but also on the appropriate process by which "truth" 
was to be determined. Scopes' defenders brought forward (or, 
more accurately, tried to bring forward) all the assumptions and 
methodological ingenuity of modern science to demonstrate 
that religious belief can play no role in discovering and under-
standing the origins of life. William Jennings Bryan and his 
followers fought passionately to maintain the validity of a belief 
system that placed the question of origins in the words of their 
god. In the process, they made themselves appear ridiculous in 
the eyes of the world. Almost seventy years later, it is not 
inappropriate to say a word in their behalf: These "fundamental-
ists" were neither ignorant of nor indifferent to the benefits of 
science and technology. They had automobiles and electricity 
and machine-made clothing. They used telegraphy and radio, 
and among their number were men who could fairly be called 
reputable scientists. They were eager to share in the largesse of 

50 
Technopoly 
the American technocracy, which is to say they were neither 
Luddites nor primitives. What wounded them was the assault 
that science made on the ancient story from which their sense 
of moral order sprang. They lost, and lost badly. To say, as 
Bryan did, that he was more interested in the Rock of Ages than 
the age of rocks was clever and amusing but woefully inade-
quate. The battle settled the issue, once and for all: in defining 
truth, the great narrative of inductive science takes precedence 
over the great narrative of Genesis, and those who do not agree 
must remain in an intellectual backwater. 
Although the Scopes trial has much to recommend it as an 
expression of the ultimate repudiation of an older world-view, 
I must let it pass. The trial had more to do with science and faith 
than technology as faith. To find an event that signaled the 
beginning of a technological theology, we must look to a 
slightly earlier and less dramatic confrontation. Not unmindful 
of its value as a pun, I choose what happened in the fall of 1910 
as the critical symptom of the onset of Technopoly. From 
September through November of that year, the Interstate Com-
merce Commission held hearings on the application of North-
eastern railroads for an increase in freight rates to compensate 
for the higher wages railroad workers had been awarded earlier 
in the year. The trade association, represented by Louis Bran-
deis, argued against the application by claiming that the rail-
roads could increase their profits simply by operating more 
efficiently. To give substance to the argument, Brandeis brought 
forward witnesses—mostly engineers and industrial manag-
ers—who claimed that the railroads could both increase wages 
and lower their costs by using principles of scientific management. 
Although Frederick W. Taylor was not present at the hearings, 
his name was frequently invoked as the originator of scientific 
management, and experts assured the commission that the sys-
tem developed by Taylor could solve everyone's problem. The 
commission ultimately ruled against the railroad's application, 

From Technocracy to Technopoly 
51 
mostly because it judged that the railroads were making enough 
money as things were, not because it believed in scientific 
management. But many people did believe, and the hearings 
projected Taylor and his system onto the national scene. In the 
years that followed, attempts were made to apply the principles 
of the Taylor System in the armed forces, the legal profession, 
the home, the church, and education. Eventually, Taylor's name 
and the specifics of his system faded into obscurity, but his ideas 
about what culture is made of remain the scaffolding of the 
present-day American Technopoly. 
I use this event as a fitting starting point because Taylor's 
book The Principles of Scientific Management, published in 1911, 
contains the first explicit and formal outline of the assumptions 
of the thought-world of Technopoly. These include the beliefs 
that the primary, if not the only, goal of human labor and 
thought is efficiency; that technical calculation is in all respects 
superior to human judgment; that in fact human judgment can-
not be trusted, because it is plagued by laxity, ambiguity, and 
unnecessary complexity; that subjectivity is an obstacle to clear 
thinking; that what cannot be measured either does not exist or 
is of no value; and that the affairs of citizens are best guided and 
conducted by experts. In fairness to Taylor (who did not invent 
the term "scientific management" and who used it reluctantly), 
it should be noted that his system was originally devised to 
apply only to industrial production. His intention was to make 
a science of the industrial workplace, which would not only 
increase profits but also result in higher wages, shorter hours, 
and better working conditions for laborers. In his system, which 
included "time and motion studies," the judgment of individual 
workers was replaced by laws, rules, and principles of the "sci-
ence" of their job. This did mean, of course, that workers would 
have to abandon any traditional rules of thumb they were 
accustomed to using; in fact, workers were relieved of any 
responsibility to think at all. The system would do their think-

52 
Technopoly 
ing for them. That is crucial, because it led to the idea that 
technique of any kind can do our thinking for us, which is 
among the basic principles of Technopoly. 
The assumptions that underlay the principles of scientific 
management did not spring, all at once, from the originality of 
Taylor's mind. They were incubated and nurtured in the 
technocracies of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. And a 
fair argument can be made that the origins of Technopoly are 
to be found in the thought of the famous nineteenth-century 
French philosopher Auguste Comte, who founded both positiv-
ism and sociology in an effort to construct a science of society. 
Comte's arguments for the unreality of anything that could not 
be seen and measured certainly laid the foundation for the future 
conception of human beings as objects. But in a technocracy, 
such ideas exist only as by-products of the increased role of 
technology. Technocracies are concerned to invent machinery. 
That people's lives are changed by machinery is taken as a 
matter of course, and that people must sometimes be treated as 
if they were machinery is considered a necessary and unfortu-
nate condition of technological development. But in technocra-
cies, such a condition is not held to be a philosophy of culture. 
Technocracy does not have as its aim a grand reductionism in 
which human life must find its meaning in machinery and tech-
nique. Technopoly does. In the work of Frederick Taylor we 
have, I believe, the first clear statement of the idea that society 
is best served when human beings are placed at the disposal of 
their techniques and technology, that human beings are, in a 
sense, worth less than their machinery. He and his followers 
described exactly what this means, and hailed their discovery as 
the beginnings of a brave new world. 
Why did Technopoly—the submission of all forms of cul-
tural life to the sovereignty of technique and technology—find 
fertile ground on American soil? There are four interrelated 
reasons for the rise of Technopoly in America, why it emerged 

From Technocracy to Technopoly 
53 
in America first, and why it has been permitted to flourish. As 
it happens, all of these have been written about extensively in 
many contexts and are well known. The first concerns what is 
usually called the American character, the relevant aspect of 
which Tocqueville described in the early nineteenth century. 
"The American lives in a land of wonders," he wrote; "every-
thing around him is in constant movement, and every move-
ment seems an advance. Consequently, in his mind the idea of 
newness is closely linked with that of improvement. Nowhere 
does he see any limit placed by nature to human endeavor; in 
his eyes something that does not exist is just something that has 
not been tried."4 
This feature of the American ethos is plain to everyone who 
has studied American culture, although there are wide varia-
tions in the explanation of it. Some attribute it to the immigrant 
nature of the population; some to the frontier mentality; some 
to the abundant natural resources of a singularly blessed land 
and the unlimited opportunities of a new continent; some to the 
unprecedented political and religious freedom afforded the aver-
age person; some to all of these factors and more. It is enough 
to say here that the American distrust of constraints—one 
might even say the American skepticism toward culture itself— 
offered encouragement to radical and thoughtless technological 
intrusions. 
Second, and inextricably related to the first, is the genius and 
audacity of American capitalists of the late nineteenth and early 
twentieth centuries, men who were quicker and more focused 
than those of other nations in exploiting the economic possibili-
ties of new technologies. Among them are Samuel Morse, Alex-
ander Graham Bell, Thomas Edison, John D. Rockefeller, John 
Jacob Astor, Henry Ford, Andrew Carnegie, and many others, 
some of whom were known as Robber Barons. What they were 
robbing—it is clearer now than it was then—was America's 
past, for their essential idea was that nothing is so much worth 

54 
Technopoly 
preserving that it should stand in the way of technological 
innovation. These were the men who created the twentieth 
century, and they achieved wealth, prestige, and power that 
would have amazed even Richard Arkwright. Their greatest 
achievement was in convincing their countrymen that the future 
need have no connection to the past. 
Third, the success of twentieth-century technology in pro-
viding Americans with convenience, comfort, speed, hygiene, 
and abundance was so obvious and promising that there seemed 
no reason to look for any other sources of fulfillment or creativ-
ity or purpose. To every Old World belief, habit, or tradition, 
there was and still is a technological alternative. To prayer, the 
alternative is penicillin; to family roots, the alternative is mobil-
ity; to reading, the alternative is television; to restraint, the 
alternative is immediate gratification; to sin, the alternative is 
psychotherapy; to political ideology, the alternative is popular 
appeal established through scientific polling. There is even an 
alternative to the painful riddle of death, as Freud called it. The 
riddle may be postponed through longer life, and then perhaps 
solved altogether by cryogenics. At least, no one can easily 
think of a reason why not. 
As the spectacular triumphs of technology mounted, some-
thing else was happening: old sources of belief came under 
siege. Nietzsche announced that God was dead. Darwin didn't 
go as far but did make it clear that, if we were children of God, 
we had come to be so through a much longer and less dignified 
route than we had imagined, and that in the process we had 
picked up some strange and unseemly relatives. Marx argued 
that history had its own agenda and was taking us where it 
must, irrespective of our wishes. Freud taught that we had no 
understanding of our deepest needs and could not trust our 
traditional ways of reasoning to uncover them. John Watson, 
the founder of behaviorism, showed that free will was an illu-
sion and that our behavior, in the end, was not unlike that of 

From Technocracy to Technopoly 
55 
pigeons. And Einstein and his colleagues told us that there were 
no absolute means of judging anything in any case, that every-
thing was relative. The thrust of a century of scholarship had the 
effect of making us lose confidence in our belief systems and 
therefore in ourselves. Amid the conceptual debris, there re-
mained one sure thing to believe in—technology. Whatever 
else may be denied or compromised, it is clear that airplanes do 
fly, antibiotics do cure, radios do speak, and, as we know now, 
computers do calculate and never make mistakes—only faulty 
humans do (which is what Frederick Taylor was trying to tell us 
all along). 
For these well-known reasons, Americans were better pre-
pared to undertake the creation of a Technopoly than anyone 
else. But its full flowering depended on still another set of 
conditions, less visible and therefore less well known. These 
conditions provided the background, the context in which the 
American distrust of constraints, the exploitative genius of its 
captains of industry, the successes of technology, and the 
devaluation of traditional beliefs took on the exaggerated sig-
nificance that pushed technocracy in America over into Tech-
nopoly. That context is explored in the following chapter, 
which I call "The Improbable World." 

4 
The Improbable World 
lthough it is clear that "social 
science" is a vigorous ally of Technopoly and must therefore be 
regarded with a hostile eye, I occasionally pay my respects to 
its bloated eminence by inflicting a small experiment on some 
of my colleagues. Like many other social-science experiments, 
this one is based on deceit and exploitation, and I must rely on 
the reader's sense of whimsy to allow its point to come through. 
The experiment is best conducted in the morning when I see 
a colleague who appears not to be in possession of a copy of 
The New York Times. "Did you read the Times this morning?" 
I ask. If my colleague says, "Yes," there is no experiment that 
day. But if the answer is "No," the experiment can proceed. 
"You ought to check out Section C today," I say. "There's a 
fascinating article about a study done at the University of 
Minnesota." "Really? What's it about?" is the usual reply. The 
choices at this point are almost endless, but there are two that 
produce rich results. The first: "Well, they did this study to find 
out what foods are best to eat for losing weight, and it turns out 
A 

The Improbable World 
57 
that a normal diet supplemented by chocolate eclairs eaten three 
times a day is the best approach. It seems that there's some 
special nutrient in the eclairs—encomial dyoxin—that actually 
uses up calories at an incredible rate." 
The second changes the theme and, from the start, the uni-
versity: "The neurophysiologists at Johns Hopkins have uncov-
ered a connection between jogging and reduced intelligence. 
They tested more than twelve hundred people over a period of 
five years, and found that as the number of hours people jogged 
increased there was a statistically significant decrease in their 
intelligence. They don't know exactly why, but there it is." 
My role in the experiment, of course, is to report something 
quite ridiculous—one might say, beyond belief. If I play my role 
with a sense of decorum and collegial intimacy, I can achieve 
results worth reporting: about two-thirds of the victims will 
believe or at least not wholly disbelieve what I have told them. 
Sometimes they say, "Really? Is that possible?" Sometimes they 
do a double-take and reply, "Where'd you say that study was 
done?" And sometimes they say, "You know, I've heard some-
thing like that." I should add that for reasons that are probably 
worth exploring I get the clearest cases of credulity when I use 
the University of Minnesota and Johns Hopkins as my sources 
of authority; Stanford and MIT give only fair results. 
There are several conclusions that might be drawn from these 
results, one of which was expressed by H. L. Mencken fifty 
years ago, when he said that there is no idea so stupid that you 
can't find a professor who will believe it. This is more an 
accusation than an explanation, although there is probably 
something to it. (I have, however, tried this experiment on 
nonprofessors as well, and get roughly the same results.) An-
other possible conclusion was expressed by George Bernard 
Shaw, also about fifty years ago, when he wrote that the aver-
age person today is about as credulous as was the average 

58 
Technopoly 
person in the Middle Ages. In the Middle Ages, people believed 
in the authority of their religion, no matter what. Today, we 
believe in the authority of our science, no matter what. 
However, there is still another possibility, related to Shaw's 
point but off at a right angle to it. It is, in any case, more 
relevant to understanding the sustaining power of Technopoly. 
I mean that the world we live in is very nearly incomprehensible 
to most of us. There is almost no fact, whether actual or imag-
ined, that will surprise us for very long, since we have no 
comprehensive and consistent picture of the world that would 
make the fact appear as an unacceptable contradiction. We 
believe because there is no reason not to believe. And I assume 
that the reader does not need the evidence of my comic excur-
sion into the suburbs of social science to recognize this. Abetted 
by a form of education that in itself has been emptied of any 
coherent world-view, Technopoly deprives us of the social, 
political, historical, metaphysical, logical, or spiritual bases for 
knowing what is beyond belief. 
That is especially the case with technical facts. Since this book 
is filled with a variety of facts, I would hardly wish to shake 
confidence in them by trying my experiment on the reader. But 
if I informed you that the paper on which this book is printed 
was made by a special process which uses the skin of a pickled 
herring, on what grounds would you dispute me? For all you 
know—indeed, for all I know—the skin of a pickled herring 
could have made this paper. And if the facts were confirmed by 
an industrial chemist who described to us some incomprehensi-
ble process by which it was done (employing, of course, en-
comial dyoxin), we might both believe it. Or not wholly 
disbelieve it, since the ways of technology, like the ways of 
God, are awesome and mysterious. 
Perhaps I can get a bit closer to the point with an analogy. 
If you open a brand-new deck of cards and start turning the 
cards over, one by one, you can get a pretty firm idea of what 

The Improbable World 
59 
their order is. After you have gone from the ace of spades 
through to the nine of spades, you expect a ten of spades to 
come up next. And if the three of diamonds appears, you are 
surprised and wonder what kind of deck of cards this is. But if 
I give you a deck that had been shuffled twenty times and then 
ask you to turn the cards over, you do not expect any card in 
particular—a three of diamonds would be just as likely as a ten 
of spades. Having no expectation of a pattern, no basis for 
assuming a given order, you have no reason to react with 
incredulity or even surprise to whatever card turns up. 
The belief system of a tool-using culture is rather like a 
brand-new deck of cards. Whether it is a culture of technological 
simplicity or sophistication, there always exists a more or less 
comprehensive, ordered world-view, resting on a set of meta-
physical or theological assumptions. Ordinary men and women 
might not clearly grasp how the harsh realities of their lives fit 
into the grand and benevolent design of the universe, but they 
have no doubt that there is such a design, and their priests and 
shamans are well able, by deduction from a handful of princi-
ples, to make it, if not wholly rational, at least coherent. The 
medieval period was a particularly clear example of this point. 
How comforting it must have been to have a priest explain the 
meaning of the death of a loved one, of an accident, or of a piece 
of good fortune. To live in a world in which there were no 
random events—in which everything was, in theory, compre-
hensible; in which every act of nature was infused with mean-
ing—is an irreplaceable gift of theology. The role of the church 
in premodern Europe was to keep the deck of cards in reason-
able order, which is why Cardinal Bellarmine and other prelates 
tried to prevent Galileo from shuffling the deck. As we know, 
they could not, and with the emergence of technocracies moral 
and intellectual coherence began to unravel. 
What was being lost was not immediately apparent. The 
decline of the great narrative of the Bible, which had provided 

60 
Technopoly 
answers to both fundamental and practical questions, was ac-
companied by the rise of the great narrative of Progress. The 
faith of those who believed in Progress was based on the 
assumption that one could discern a purpose to the human 
enterprise, even without the theological scaffolding that sup-
ported the Christian edifice of belief. Science and technology 
were the chief instruments of Progress, and in their accumula-
tion of reliable information about nature they would bring 
ignorance, superstition, and suffering to an end. As it turned 
out, technocracies did not disappoint Progress. In sanitation, 
pharmacology, transportation, production, and communication, 
spectacular improvements were made possible by a Niagara of 
information generated by just such institutions as Francis Bacon 
had imagined. Technocracy was fueled by information—about 
the structure of nature as well as the structure of the human soul. 
But the genie that came out of the bottle proclaiming that 
information was the new god of culture was a deceiver. It 
solved the problem of information scarcity, the disadvantages 
of which were obvious. But it gave no warning about the 
dangers of information glut, the disadvantages of which were 
not seen so clearly. The long-range result—information 
chaos—has produced a culture somewhat like the shuffled deck 
of cards I referred to. And what is strange is that so few have 
noticed, or if they have noticed fail to recognize the source of 
their distress. You need only ask yourself, What is the problem 
in the Middle East, or South Africa, or Northern Ireland? Is it 
lack of information that keeps these conflicts at fever pitch? Is 
it lack of information about how to grow food that keeps 
millions at starvation levels? Is it lack of information that brings 
soaring crime rates and physical decay to our cities? Is it lack of 
information that leads to high divorce rates and keeps the beds 
of mental institutions filled to overflowing? 
The fact is, there are very few political, social, and especially 
personal problems that arise because of insufficient information. 

The Improbable World 
61 
Nonetheless, as incomprehensible problems mount, as the con-
cept of progress fades, as meaning itself becomes suspect, the 
Technopolist stands firm in believing that what the world needs 
is yet more information. It is like the joke about the man who 
complains that the food he is being served in a restaurant is 
inedible and also that the portions are too small. But, of course, 
what we are dealing with here is no joke. Attend any conference 
on telecommunications or computer technology, and you will 
be attending a celebration of innovative machinery that gener-
ates, stores, and distributes more information, more conve-
niently, at greater speeds than ever before. To the question 
"What problem does the information solve?" the answer is 
usually "How to generate, store, and distribute more informa-
tion, more conveniently, at greater speeds than ever before." 
This is the elevation of information to a metaphysical status: 
information as both the means and end of human creativity. In 
Technopoly, we are driven to fill our lives with the quest to 
"access" information. For what purpose or with what limita-
tions, it is not for us to ask; and we are not accustomed to 
asking, since the problem is unprecedented. The world has 
never before been confronted with information glut and has 
hardly had time to reflect on its consequences. 
As with so many of the features of all that is modern, the 
origins of information glut can be traced many centuries back. 
Nothing could be more misleading than the claim that computer 
technology introduced the age of information. The printing 
press began that age in the early sixteenth century.1 Forty years 
after Gutenberg converted an old wine press into a printing 
machine with movable type, there were presses in 1 1 0 cities in 
six different countries. Fifty years after the press was invented, 
more than eight million books had been printed, almost all of 
them filled with information that had previously been unavail-
able to the average person. There were books on law, agricul-
ture, politics, exploration, metallurgy, botany, linguistics, 

62 
Technopoly 
pediatrics, and even good manners. There were also assorted 
guides and manuals; the world of commerce rapidly became a 
world of printed paper through the widespread use of contracts, 
deeds, promissory notes, and maps. (Not surprisingly, in a 
culture in which information was becoming standardized and 
repeatable, mapmakers began to exclude "paradise" from their 
charts on the grounds that its location was too uncertain.) 
So much new information, of so many diverse types, was 
generated that printers could no longer use the scribal manu-
script as their model of a book. By the mid-sixteenth century, 
printers began to experiment with new formats, among the 
most important innovations being the use of Arabic numerals to 
number pages. (The first known example of such pagination is 
Johann Froben's first edition of Erasmus' New Testament, 
printed in 1516.) Pagination led inevitably to more accurate 
indexing, annotation, and cross-referencing, which in turn was 
accompanied by innovations in punctuation marks, section 
heads, paragraphing, title-paging, and running heads. By the 
end of the sixteenth century, the machine-made book had a 
typographic form and a look comparable to books of today. 
All of this is worth mentioning because innovations in the 
format of the machine-made book were an attempt to control 
the flow of information, to organize it by establishing priorities 
and by giving it sequence. Very early on, it was understood that 
the printed book had created an information crisis and that 
something needed to be done to maintain a measure of control. 
The altered form of the book was one means. Another was the 
modern school, which took shape in the seventeenth century. In 
1480, before the information explosion, there were thirty-four 
schools in all of England. By 1660, there were 444, one school 
for every twelve square miles. There were several reasons for 
the rapid growth of the common school, but none was more 
obvious than that it was a necessary response to the anxieties 
and confusion aroused by information on the loose. The inven-

The Improbable World 
63 
tion of what is called a curriculum was a logical step toward 
organizing, 
limiting, and discriminating among available 
sources of information. Schools became technocracy's first secu-
lar bureaucracies, structures for legitimizing some parts of the 
flow of information and discrediting other parts. Schools were, 
in short, a means of governing the ecology of information. 
With the rise of technocracies, information became a more 
serious problem than ever, and several methods of controlling 
information had to be invented. For a richly detailed account of 
what those methods were, I refer the reader to James Beniger's 
The Control Revolution, which is among the three or four most 
important books we have on the subject of the relation of 
information to culture. In the next chapter, I have relied to a 
considerable degree on The Control Revolution in my discussion 
of the breakdown of the control mechanisms, but here I must 
note that most of the methods by which technocracies have 
hoped to keep information from running amok are now dys-
functional. 
Indeed, one way of defining a Technopoly is to say that its 
information immune system is inoperable. Technopoly is a form 
of cultural AIDS, which I here use as an acronym for Anti-
Information Deficiency Syndrome. This is why it is possible to 
say almost anything without contradiction provided you begin 
your utterance with the words "A study has shown . . ." or 
"Scientists now tell us that . . ." More important, it is why in a 
Technopoly there can be no transcendent sense of purpose or 
meaning, no cultural coherence. Information is dangerous when 
it has no place to go, when there is no theory to which it 
applies, no pattern in which it fits, when there is no higher 
purpose that it serves. Alfred North Whitehead called such 
information "inert," but that metaphor is too passive. Informa-
tion without regulation can be lethal. It is necessary, then, to 
describe briefly the technological conditions that led to such a 
grim state of affairs. 

64 
Technopoly 
If the telescope was the eye that gave access to a world of 
new facts and new methods of obtaining them, then the printing 
press was the larynx. The press not only created new sources 
of data collection but vastly increased communication among 
scientists on a continent-wide basis. The movement toward 
standardization of scientific discourse resulted, for example, in 
uniform mathematical symbols, including the replacement of 
Roman with Arabic numerals. Galileo's and Kepler's reference to 
mathematics as the language or alphabet of nature could be 
made with assurance that other scientists could speak and un-
derstand that language. Standardization largely eliminated am-
biguity in texts and reduced error in diagrams, charts, and visual 
aids. Printing brought an end to the alchemists' secrets by 
making science into a public enterprise. And not only for scien-
tists: printing led to the popularization of scientific ideas 
through the use of vernaculars. Although some scientists— 
Harvey, for example—insisted on writing in Latin, many others 
(Bacon, of course) eagerly employed the vernacular in an effort 
to convey the new spirit and methods of scientific philosophy. 
When we consider that Vesalius, Brahe, Bacon, Galileo, Kepler, 
Harvey, and Descartes were all born in the sixteenth century, 
we can begin to grasp the relationship between the growth of 
science and the printing press, which is to say, the press an-
nounced the advent of science, publicized it, encouraged it, and 
codified it. 
As is known, the press did the same for what is now called 
Protestantism. Martin Luther's reliance on printed pamphlets 
and books as a means of religious propaganda is well docu-
mented, as is his own acknowledgment of the importance of 
print to his mission. And yet, for all of Luther's astuteness about 
printing, even he was surprised on occasion by the unsuspected 
powers of the press. "It is a mystery to me," he wrote in a letter 
to the Pope, "how my theses . . . were spread to so many places. 
They were meant exclusively for our academic circle here. 

The Improbable World 
65 
. . . They were written in such a language that the common 
people could hardly understand them." What Luther over-
looked was the sheer portability of printed books. Although his 
theses were written in academic Latin, they were easily trans-
ported throughout Germany and other countries by printers 
who just as easily had them translated into vernaculars. 
Without going any further into the details of the impact of 
print on medieval thought, all of which are lucidly presented in 
Elizabeth Eisenstein's The Printing Press as an Agent of Change, I 
will instead merely assert the obvious point: By the beginning 
of the seventeenth century, an entirely new information envi-
ronment had been created by print. Astronomy, anatomy, and 
physics were accessible to anyone who could read. New forms 
of literature, such as the novel and personal essays, were avail-
able. Vernacular Bibles turned the Word of God into the words 
of God, since God became an Englishman or a German or a 
Frenchman, depending on the language in which His words 
were revealed. Practical knowledge about machines, agriculture, 
and medicine was widely dispersed. Commercial documents 
gave new form and vigorous impetus to entrepreneurial adven-
tures. And, of course, printing vastly enhanced the importance 
of individuality. 
Vitalized by such an information explosion, Western culture 
set itself upon a course which made technocracies possible. And 
then something quite unexpected happened; in a word, nothing. 
From the early seventeenth century, when Western culture 
undertook to reorganize itself to accommodate the printing 
press, until the mid-nineteenth century, no significant technolo-
gies were introduced that altered the form, volume, or speed of 
information. As a consequence, Western culture had more than 
two hundred years to accustom itself to the new information 
conditions created by the press. It developed new institutions, 
such as the school and representative government. It developed 
new conceptions of knowledge and intelligence, and a height-

66 
Technopoly 
ened respect for reason and privacy. It developed new forms of 
economic activity, such as mechanized production and corpo-
rate capitalism, and even gave articulate expression to the possi-
bilities of a humane socialism. New forms of public discourse 
came into being through newspapers, pamphlets, broadsides, 
and books. It is no wonder that the eighteenth century gave us 
our standard of excellence in the use of reason, as exemplified 
in the work of Goethe, Voltaire, Diderot, Kant, Hume, Adam 
Smith, Edmund Burke, Vico, Edward Gibbon, and, of course, 
Jefferson, Madison, Franklin, Adams, Hamilton, and Thomas 
Paine. I weight the list with America's "Founding Fathers" be-
cause technocratic-typographic America was the first nation 
ever to be argued into existence in print. Paine's Common Sense 
and The Rights of Man, Jefferson's Declaration of Independence, 
and the Federalist Papers were written and printed efforts to 
make the American experiment appear reasonable to the people, 
which to the eighteenth-century mind was both necessary and 
sufficient. To any people whose politics were the politics of the 
printed page, as Tocqueville said of America, reason and print-
ing were inseparable. We need not hesitate to claim that the 
First Amendment to the United States Constitution stands as a 
monument to the ideological biases of print. It says: "Congress 
shall make no law respecting the establishment of religion, or 
prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging freedom of 
speech or of the press; or of the right of the people peaceably 
to assemble, and to petition the government for a redress of 
grievances." In these forty-five words we may find the funda-
mental values of the literate, reasoning mind as fostered by the 
print revolution: a belief in privacy, individuality, intellectual 
freedom, open criticism, and community action. 
Equally important is that the words of that amendment pre-
sume and insist on a public that not only has access to informa-
tion but has control over it, a people who know how to use 

The Improbable World 
67 
information in their own interests. There is not a single line 
written by Jefferson, Adams, Paine, Hamilton, or Franklin that 
does not take for granted that when information is made avail-
able to citizens they are capable of managing it. This is not to 
say that the Founding Fathers believed information could not be 
false, misleading, or irrelevant. But they believed that the mar-
ketplace of information and ideas was sufficiently ordered so 
that citizens could make sense of what they read and heard and, 
through reason, judge its usefulness to their lives. Jefferson's 
proposals for education, Paine's arguments for self-governance, 
Franklin's arrangements for community affairs assume coherent, 
commonly shared principles that allow us to debate such ques-
tions as: What are the responsibilities of citizens? What is the 
nature of education? What constitutes human progress? What 
are the limitations of social structures? 
The presumed close connection among information, reason, 
and usefulness began to lose its legitimacy toward the mid-
nineteenth century with the invention of the telegraph. Prior to 
the telegraph, information could be moved only as fast as a train 
could travel: about thirty-five miles per hour. Prior to the tele-
graph, information was sought as part of the process of under-
standing and solving particular problems. Prior to the telegraph, 
information tended to be of local interest. Telegraphy changed 
all of this, and instigated the second stage of the information 
revolution. The telegraph removed space as an inevitable con-
straint on the movement of information, and, for the first time, 
transportation and communication were disengaged from each 
other. In the United States, the telegraph erased state lines, 
collapsed regions, and, by wrapping the continent in an infor-
mation grid, created the possibility of a unified nation-state. But 
more than this, telegraphy created the idea of context-free 
information—that is, the idea that the value of information need 
not be tied to any function it might serve in social and political 

68 
Technopoly 
decision-making and action. The telegraph made information 
into a commodity, a "thing" that could be bought and sold 
irrespective of its uses or meaning.2 
But it did not do so alone. The potential of the telegraph to 
transform information into a commodity might never have been 
realized except for its partnership with the penny press, which 
was the first institution to grasp the significance of the annihila-
tion of space and the saleability of irrelevant information. In 
fact, the first known use of the telegraph by a newspaper 
occurred one day after Samuel Morse gave his historic demon-
stration of the telegraph's workability. Using the same Wash-
ington-to-Baltimore line Morse had constructed, the Baltimore 
Patriot gave its readers information about action taken by the 
House of Representatives on the Oregon issue. The paper con-
cluded its report by noting, ". . . we are thus enabled to give our 
readers information from Washington up to two o'clock. This is 
indeed the annihilation of space." Within two years of this 
announcement, the fortunes of newspapers came to depend not 
on the quality or utility of the news they provided but on how 
much, from what distances, and at what speed. 
And, one must add, with how many photographs. For, as it 
happened, photography was invented at approximately the 
same time as telegraphy, and initiated the third stage of 
the information revolution. Daniel Boorstin has called it "the 
graphic revolution," because the photograph and other icono-
graphs brought on a massive intrusion of images into the sym-
bolic environment: photographs, prints, posters, drawings, 
advertisements. The new imagery, with photography at its 
forefront, did not merely function as a supplement to language 
but tended to replace it as our dominant means for construing, 
understanding, and testing reality. By the end of the nineteenth 
century, advertisers and newspapermen had discovered that a 
picture was worth not only a thousand words but, in terms of 
sales, many thousands of dollars. 

The Improbable World 
69 
As the twentieth century began, the amount of information 
available through words and pictures grew exponentially. With 
telegraphy and photography leading the way, a new definition 
of information came into being. Here was information that 
rejected the necessity of interconnectedness, proceeded without 
context, argued for instancy against historical continuity, and 
offered fascination in place of complexity and coherence. And 
then, with Western culture gasping for breath, the fourth stage 
of the information revolution occurred, broadcasting. And then 
the fifth, computer technology. Each of these brought with it 
new forms of information, unprecedented amounts of it, and 
increased speeds (if virtual instancy can be increased). 
What is our situation today? In the United States, we have 
260,000 billboards; 11,520 newspapers; 11,556 periodicals; 
27,000 video outlets for renting video tapes; more than 500 
million radios; and more than 100 million computers. Ninety-
eight percent of American homes have a television set; more 
than half our homes have more than one. There are 40,000 new 
book titles published every year (300,000 worldwide), and 
every day in America 41 million photographs are taken. And if 
this is not enough, more than 60 billion pieces of junk mail 
(thanks to computer technology) find their way into our mail-
boxes every year. 
From millions of sources all over the globe, through every 
possible channel and medium—light waves, airwaves, ticker 
tapes, computer banks, telephone wires, television cables, satel-
lites, printing presses—information pours in. Behind it, in every 
imaginable form of storage—on paper, on video and audio tape, 
on discs, film, and silicon chips—is an ever greater volume of 
information waiting to be retrieved. Like the Sorcerer's Appren-
tice, we are awash in information. And all the sorcerer has left 
us is a broom. Information has become a form of garbage, not 
only incapable of answering the most fundamental human ques-
tions but barely useful in providing coherent direction to the 

70 
Technopoly 
solution of even mundane problems. To say it still another way: 
The milieu in which Technopoly flourishes is one in which the 
tie between information and human purpose has been severed, 
i.e., information appears indiscriminately, directed at no one in 
particular, in enormous volume and at high speeds, and discon-
nected from theory, meaning, or purpose. 
All of this has called into being a new world. I have referred 
to it elsewhere as a peek-a-boo world, where now this event, 
now that, pops into view for a moment, then vanishes again. It 
is an improbable world. It is a world in which the idea of human 
progress, as Bacon expressed it, has been replaced by the idea 
of technological progress. The aim is not to reduce ignorance, 
superstition, and suffering but to accommodate ourselves to the 
requirements of new technologies. We tell ourselves, of course, 
that such accommodations will lead to a better life, but that is 
only the rhetorical residue of a vanishing technocracy. We are 
a culture consuming itself with information, and many of us do 
not even wonder how to control the process. We proceed under 
the assumption that information is our friend, believing that 
cultures may suffer grievously from a lack of information, 
which, of course, they do. It is only now beginning to be 
understood that cultures may also suffer grievously from infor-
mation glut, information without meaning, information without 
control mechanisms. 

5 
The Broken Defenses 
echnopoly is a state of culture. 
It is also a state of mind. It consists in the deification of technol-
ogy, which means that the culture seeks its authorization in 
technology, finds its satisfactions in technology, and takes its 
orders from technology. This requires the development of a 
new kind of social order, and of necessity leads to the rapid 
dissolution of much that is associated with traditional beliefs. 
Those who feel most comfortable in Technopoly are those who 
are convinced that technical progress is humanity's supreme 
achievement and the instrument by which our most profound 
dilemmas may be solved. They also believe that information is 
an unmixed blessing, which through its continued and uncon-
trolled production and dissemination offers increased freedom, 
creativity, and peace of mind. The fact that information does 
none of these things—but quite the opposite—seems to change 
few opinions, for such unwavering beliefs are an inevitable 
product of the structure of Technopoly. In particular, Tech-
nopoly flourishes when the defenses against information break 
down. 
T 

72 
Technopoly 
The relationship between information and the mechanisms 
for its control is fairly simple to describe: Technology increases 
the available supply of information. As the supply is increased, 
control mechanisms are strained. Additional control mech-
anisms are needed to cope with new information. When addi-
tional control mechanisms are themselves technical, they in turn 
further increase the supply of information. When the supply of 
information is no longer controllable, a general breakdown in 
psychic tranquillity and social purpose occurs. Without de-
fenses, people have no way of finding meaning in their experi-
ences, lose their capacity to remember, and have difficulty 
imagining reasonable futures. 
One way of defining Technopoly, then, is to say it is what 
happens to society when the defenses against information glut 
have broken down. It is what happens when institutional life 
becomes inadequate to cope with too much information. It is 
what happens when a culture, overcome by information gener-
ated by technology, tries to employ technology itself as a 
means of providing clear direction and humane purpose. The 
effort is mostly doomed to failure. Though it is sometimes 
possible to use a disease as a cure for itself, this occurs only 
when we are fully aware of the processes by which disease is 
normally held in check. My purpose here is to describe the 
defenses that in principle are available and to suggest how they 
have become dysfunctional. 
The dangers of information on the loose may be understood 
by the analogy I suggested earlier with an individual's biologi-
cal immune system, which serves as a defense against the un-
controlled growth of cells. Cellular growth is, of course, a 
normal process without which organic life cannot survive. But 
without a well-functioning immune system, an organism cannot 
manage cellular growth. It becomes disordered and destroys the 
delicate interconnectedness of essential organs. An immune sys-
tem, in short, destroys unwanted cells. All societies have institu-

The Broken Defenses 
73 
tions and techniques that function as does a biological immune 
system. Their purpose is to maintain a balance between the old 
and the new, between novelty and tradition, between meaning 
and conceptual disorder, and they do so by "destroying" un-
wanted information. 
I must emphasize that social institutions of all kinds function 
as control mechanisms. This is important to say, because most 
writers on the subject of social institutions (especially sociolo-
gists) do not grasp the idea that any decline in the force of 
institutions makes people vulnerable to information chaos.1 To 
say that life is destabilized by weakened institutions is merely 
to say that information loses its use and therefore becomes a 
source of confusion rather than coherence. 
Social institutions sometimes do their work simply by deny-
ing people access to information, but principally by directing 
how much weight and, therefore, value one must give to infor-
mation. Social institutions are concerned with the meaning of 
information and can be quite rigorous in enforcing standards of 
admission. Take as a simple example a court of law. Almost all 
rules for the presentation of evidence and for the conduct of 
those who participate in a trial are designed to limit the amount 
of information that is allowed entry into the system. In our 
system, a judge disallows "hearsay" or personal opinion as 
evidence except under strictly controlled circumstances, specta-
tors are forbidden to express their feelings, a defendant's previ-
ous convictions may not be mentioned, juries are not allowed 
to hear arguments over the admissibility of evidence—these are 
instances of information control. The rules on which such con-
trol is based derive from a theory of justice that defines what 
information may be considered relevant and, especially, what 
information must be considered irrelevant. The theory may be 
deemed flawed in some respects—lawyers, for example, may 
disagree over the rules governing the flow of information—but 
no one disputes that information must be regulated in some 

74 
Technopoly 
manner. In even the simplest law case, thousands of events may 
have had a bearing on the dispute, and it is well understood 
that, if they were all permitted entry, there could be no theory 
of due process, trials would have no end, law itself would be 
reduced to meaninglessness. In short, the rule of law is con-
cerned with the "destruction" of information. 
It is worth mentioning here that, although legal theory has 
been taxed to the limit by new information from diverse 
sources—biology, psychology, and sociology, among them— 
the rules governing relevance have remained fairly stable. This 
may account for Americans' overuse of the courts as a means of 
finding coherence and stability. As other institutions become 
unusable as mechanisms for the control of wanton information, 
the courts stand as a final arbiter of truth. For how long, no one 
knows. 
I have previously referred to the school as a mechanism for 
information control. What its standards are can usually be found 
in a curriculum or, with even more clarity, in a course catalogue. 
A college catalogue lists courses, subjects, and fields of study 
that, taken together, amount to a certified statement of what a 
serious student ought to think about. More to the point, in what 
is omitted from a catalogue, we may learn what a serious 
student ought not to think about. A college catalogue, in other 
words, is a formal description of an information management 
program; it defines and categorizes knowledge, and in so doing 
systematically excludes, demeans, labels as trivial—in a word, 
disregards certain kinds of information. That is why it "makes 
sense" (or, more accurately, used to make sense). By what it 
includes/excludes it reflects a theory of the purpose and mean-
ing of education. In the university where I teach, you will not 
find courses in astrology or dianetics or creationism. There is, of 
course, much available information about these subjects, but the 
theory of education that sustains the university does not allow 
such information entry into the formal structure of its courses. 

The Broken Defenses 
75 
Professors and students are denied the opportunity to focus 
their attention on it, and are encouraged to proceed as if it did 
not exist. In this way, the university gives expression to its idea 
of what constitutes legitimate knowledge. At the present time, 
some accept this idea and some do not, and the resulting contro-
versy weakens the university's function as an information con-
trol center. 
The clearest symptom of the breakdown of the curriculum is 
found in the concept of "cultural literacy," which has been put 
forward as an organizing principle and has attracted the serious 
attention of many educators.2 If one is culturally literate, the 
idea goes, one should master a certain list of thousands of 
names, places, dates, and aphorisms; these are supposed to make 
up the content of the literate American's mind. But, as I will seek 
to demonstrate in the final chapter, cultural literacy is not an 
organizing principle at all; it represents, in fact, a case of calling 
the disease the cure. The point to be stressed here is that 
any educational institution, if it is to function well in the man-
agement of information, must have a theory about its purpose 
and meaning, must have the means to give clear expression 
to its theory, and must do so, to a large extent, by excluding 
information. 
As another example, consider the family. As it developed in 
Europe in the late eighteenth century, its theory included the 
premise that individuals need emotional protection from a cold 
and competitive society. The family became, as Christopher 
Lasch calls it, a haven in a heartless world.3 Its program included 
(I quote Lasch here) preserving "separatist religious traditions, 
alien languages and dialects, local lore and other traditions." To 
do this, the family was required to take charge of the socializa-
tion of children; the family became a structure, albeit an informal 
one, for the management of information. It controlled what 
"secrets" of adult life would be allowed entry and what "se-
crets" would not. There may be readers who can remember 

76 
Technopoly 
when in the presence of children adults avoided using certain 
words and did not discuss certain topics whose details and 
ramifications were considered unsuitable for children to know. 
A family that does not or cannot control the information envi-
ronment of its children is barely a family at all, and may lay 
claim to the name only by virtue of the fact that its members 
share biological information through DNA. In fact, in many 
societies a family was just that—a group connected by genetic 
information, itself controlled through the careful planning of 
marriages. In the West, the family as an institution for the 
management of nonbiological information began with the as-
cendance of print. As books on every conceivable subject 
become available, parents were forced into the roles of guard-
ians, protectors, nurturers, and arbiters of taste and rectitude. 
Their function was to define what it means to be a child by 
excluding from the family's domain information that would 
undermine its purpose. That the family can no longer do this is, 
I believe, obvious to everyone. 
Courts of law, the school, and the family are only three of 
several control institutions that serve as part of a culture's 
information immune system. The political party is another. As 
a young man growing up in a Democratic household, I was 
provided with clear instructions on what value to assign to 
political events and commentary. The instructions did not re-
quire explicit statement. They followed logically from theory, 
which was, as I remember it, as follows: Because people need 
protection, they must align themselves with a political organiza-
tion. The Democratic Party was entitled to our loyalty because 
it represented the social and economic interests of the working 
class, of which our family, relatives, and neighbors were mem-
bers (except for one uncle who, though a truck driver, consis-
tently voted Republican and was therefore thought to be either 
stupid or crazy). The Republican Party represented the interests 
of the rich, who, by definition, had no concern for us. 

The Broken Defenses 
77 
The theory gave clarity to our perceptions and a standard by 
which to judge the significance of information. The general 
principle was that information provided by Democrats was 
always to be taken seriously and, in all probability, was both 
true and useful (except if it came from Southern Democrats, who 
were helpful in electing presidents but were otherwise never to 
be taken seriously because of their special theory of race). 
Information provided by Republicans was rubbish and was 
useful only to the extent that it confirmed how self-serving 
Republicans were. 
I am not prepared to argue here that the theory was correct, 
but to the accusation that it was an oversimplification I would 
reply that all theories are oversimplifications, or at least lead to 
oversimplification. The rule of law is an oversimplification. A 
curriculum is an oversimplification. So is a family's conception 
of a child. That is the function of theories—to oversimplify, and 
thus to assist believers in organizing, weighting, and excluding 
information. Therein lies the power of theories. Their weakness 
is that precisely because they oversimplify, they are vulnerable 
to attack by new information. When there is too much informa-
tion to sustain any theory, information becomes essentially 
meaningless. 
The most imposing institutions for the control of information 
are religion and the state. They do their work in a somewhat 
more abstract way than do courts, schools, families, or political 
parties. They manage information through the creation of 
myths and stories that express theories about fundamental ques-
tions: why are we here, where have we come from, and where 
are we headed? I have already alluded to the comprehensive 
theological narrative of the medieval European world and how 
its great explanatory power contributed to a sense of well-being 
and coherence. Perhaps I have not stressed enough the extent 
to which the Bible also served as an information control mecha-
nism, especially in the moral domain. The Bible gives manifold 

78 
Technopoly 
instructions on what one must do and must not do, as well as 
guidance on what language to avoid (on pain of committing 
blasphemy), what ideas to avoid (on pain of committing heresy), 
what symbols to avoid (on pain of committing idolatry). 
Necessarily but perhaps unfortunately, the Bible also ex-
plained how the world came into being in such literal detail that 
it could not accommodate new information produced by the 
telescope and subsequent technologies. The trials of Galileo 
and, three hundred years later, of Scopes were therefore 
about the admissibility of certain kinds of information. Both 
Cardinal Bellarmine and William Jennings Bryan were fighting 
to maintain the authority of the Bible to control information 
about the profane world as well as the sacred. In their defeat, 
more was lost than the Bible's claim to explain the origins and 
structure of nature. The Bible's authority in defining and catego-
rizing moral behavior was also weakened. 
Nonetheless, Scripture has at its core such a powerful my-
thology that even the residue of that mythology is still suffi-
cient to serve as an exacting control mechanism for some 
people. It provides, first of all, a theory about the meaning of 
life and therefore rules on how one is to conduct oneself. With 
apologies to Rabbi Hillel, who expressed it more profoundly 
and in the time it takes to stand on one leg, the theory is as 
follows: There is one God, who created the universe and all that 
is in it. Although humans can never fully understand God, He 
has revealed Himself and His will to us throughout history, 
particularly through His commandments and the testament of 
the prophets as recorded in the Bible. The greatest of these 
commandments tells us that humans are to love God and ex-
press their love for Him through love, mercy, and justice to our 
fellow humans. At the end of time, all nations and humans will 
appear before God to be judged, and those who have followed 
His commandments will find favor in His sight. Those who have 

The Broken Defenses 
79 
denied God and the commandments will perish utterly in the 
darkness that lies outside the presence of God's light. 
To borrow from Hillel: That is the theory. All the rest is 
commentary. 
Those who believe in this theory—particularly those who 
accept the Bible as the literal word of God—are free to dismiss 
other theories about the origin and meaning of life and to give 
minimal weight to the facts on which other theories are based. 
Moreover, in observing God's laws, and the detailed require-
ments of their enactment, believers receive guidance about what 
books they should not read, about what plays and films they 
should not see, about what music they should not hear, about 
what subjects their children should not study, and so on. For 
strict fundamentalists of the Bible, the theory and what follows 
from it seal them off from unwanted information, and in that 
way their actions are invested with meaning, clarity, and, they 
believe, moral authority. 
Those who reject the Bible's theory and who believe, let us 
say, in the theory of Science are also protected from unwanted 
information. Their theory, for example, instructs them to dis-
regard information about astrology, dianetics, and creationism, 
which they usually label as medieval superstition or subjective 
opinion. Their theory fails to give any guidance about moral 
information and, by definition, gives little weight to information 
that falls outside the constraints of science. Undeniably, fewer 
and fewer people are bound in any serious way to Biblical or 
other religious traditions as a source of compelling attention 
and authority, the result of which is that they make no moral 
decisions, only practical ones. This is still another way of defin-
ing Technopoly. The term is aptly used for a culture whose 
available theories do not offer guidance about what is accept-
able information in the moral domain. 
I trust the reader does not conclude that I am making an 

80 
Technopoly 
argument for fundamentalism of any kind. One can hardly 
approve, for example, of a Muslim fundamentalism that decrees 
a death sentence to someone who writes what are construed as 
blasphemous words, or a Christian fundamentalism that once 
did the same or could lead to the same. I must hasten to 
acknowledge, in this context, that it is entirely possible to live 
as a Muslim, a Christian, or a Jew with a modified and temperate 
view of religious theory. Here, I am merely making the point 
that religious tradition serves as a mechanism for the regulation 
and valuation of information. When religion loses much or all 
of its binding power—if it is reduced to mere rhetorical ash— 
then confusion inevitably follows about what to attend to and 
how to assign it significance. 
Indeed, as I write, another great world narrative, Marxism, is 
in the process of decomposing. No doubt there are fundamen-
talist Marxists who will not let go of Marx's theory, and will 
continue to be guided by its prescriptions and constraints. The 
theory, after all, is sufficiently powerful to have engaged the 
imagination and devotion of more than a billion people. Like the 
Bible, the theory includes a transcendent idea, as do all great 
world narratives. With apologies to a century and a half of 
philosophical and sociological disputation, the idea is as follows: 
All forms of institutional misery and oppression are a result of 
class conflict, since the consciousness of all people is formed by 
their material situation. God has no interest in this, because 
there is no God. But there is a plan, which is both knowable and 
beneficent. The plan unfolds in the movement of history itself, 
which shows unmistakably that the working class, in the end, 
must triumph. When it does, with or without the help of revolu-
tionary movements, class itself will have disappeared. All will 
share equally in the bounties of nature and creative production, 
and no one will exploit the labors of another. 
It is generally believed that this theory has fallen into disre-
pute among believers because information made available by 

The Broken Defenses 
81 
television, films, telephone, fax machines, and other technolo-
gies has revealed that the working classes of capitalist nations 
are sharing quite nicely in the bounties of nature while at the 
same time enjoying a considerable measure of personal free-
dom. Their situation is so vastly superior to those of nations 
enacting Marxist theory that millions of people have concluded, 
seemingly all at once, that history may have no opinion what-
ever on the fate of the working class or, if it has, that it is 
moving toward a final chapter quite different in its point from 
what Marx prophesied. 
All of this is said provisionally. History takes a long time, and 
there may yet be developments that will provide Marx's vision 
with fresh sources of verisimilitude. Meanwhile, the following 
points need to be made: Believers in the Marxist story were 
given quite clear guidelines on how they were to weight infor-
mation and therefore to understand events. To the extent that 
they now reject the theory, they are threatened with conceptual 
confusion, which means they no longer know who to believe or 
what to believe. In the West, and especially in the United States, 
there is much rejoicing over this situation, and assurances are 
given that Marxism can be replaced by what is called "liberal 
democracy." But this must be stated more as a question than an 
answer, for it is no longer entirely clear what sort of story liberal 
democracy tells. 
A clear and scholarly celebration of liberal democracy's 
triumph is found in Francis Fukuyama's essay "The End of 
History?" Using a somewhat peculiar definition of history, 
Fukuyama concludes that there will be no more ideological 
conflicts, all the competitors to modern liberalism having been 
defeated. In support of his conclusion, Fukuyama cites Hegel as 
having come to a similar position in the early nineteenth cen-
tury, when the principles of liberty and equality, as expressed 
in the American and French revolutions, emerged triumphant. 
With the contemporary decline of fascism and communism, no 

82 
Technopoly 
threat now remains. But Fukuyama pays insufficient attention to 
the changes in meaning of liberal democracy over two centuries. 
Its meaning in a technocracy is quite different from its meaning 
in Technopoly; indeed, in Technopoly it comes much closer to 
what Walter Benjamin called "commodity capitalism." In the 
case of the United States, the great eighteenth-century revolu-
tion was not indifferent to commodity capitalism but was none-
theless infused with profound moral content. The United States 
was not merely an experiment in a new form of governance; it 
was the fulfillment of God's plan. True, Adams, Jefferson, and 
Paine rejected the supernatural elements in the Bible, but they 
never doubted that their experiment had the imprimatur of 
Providence. People were to be free but for a purpose. Their 
God-given rights implied obligations and responsibilities, not 
only to God but to other nations, to which the new republic 
would be a guide and a showcase of what is possible when 
reason and spirituality commingle. 
It is an open question whether or not "liberal democracy" in 
its present form can provide a thought-world of sufficient moral 
substance to sustain meaningful lives. This is precisely the ques-
tion that Václav Havel, then newly elected as president of 
Czechoslovakia, posed in an address to the U.S. Congress. "We 
still don't know how to put morality ahead of politics, science, 
and economics," he said. "We are still incapable of understand-
ing that the only genuine backbone of our actions—if they are 
to be moral—is responsibility. Responsibility to something 
higher than my family, my country, my firm, my success." What 
Havel is saying is that it is not enough for his nation to liberate 
itself from one flawed theory; it is necessary to find another, and 
he worries that Technopoly provides no answer. To say it in 
still another way: Francis Fukuyama is wrong. There is another 
ideological conflict to be fought—between "liberal democracy" 
as conceived in the eighteenth century, with all its transcendent 
moral underpinnings, and Technopoly, a twentieth-century 

The Broken Defenses 
83 
thought-world that functions not only without a transcendent 
narrative to provide moral underpinnings but also without 
strong social institutions to control the flood of information 
produced by technology. 
Because that flood has laid waste the theories on which 
schools, families, political parties, religion, nationhood itself are 
based, American Technopoly must rely, to an obsessive extent, 
on technical methods to control the flow of information. Three 
such means merit special attention. They are interrelated but for 
purposes of clarity may be described separately. 
The first is bureaucracy, which James Beniger in The Control 
Revolution ranks as "foremost among all technological solutions 
to the crisis of control."4 Bureaucracy is not, of course, a cre-
ation of Technopoly. Its history goes back five thousand years, 
although the word itself did not appear in English until the 
nineteenth century. It is not unlikely that the ancient Egyptians 
found bureaucracy an irritation, but it is certain that, beginning 
in the nineteenth century, as bureaucracies became more impor-
tant, the complaints against them became more insistent. John 
Stuart Mill referred to them as "administrative tyranny." Carlyle 
called them "the Continental nuisance." In a chilling paragraph, 
Tocqueville warned about them taking hold in the United 
States: 
I have previously made the distinction between two 
types of centralization, calling one governmental and the 
other administrative. Only the first exists in America, the 
second being almost unknown. If the directing power in 
American society had both these means of government at 
its disposal and combined the right to command with the 
faculty and habit to perform everything itself, if having 
established the general principles of the government, it 
entered into the details of their application, and having 
regulated the great interests of the country, it came down 

84 
Technopoly 
to consider even individual interest, then freedom would 
soon be banished from the New World.5 
Writing in our own time, C. S. Lewis believed bureaucracy to 
be the technical embodiment of the Devil himself: 
I live in the Managerial Age, in a world of "Admin." The 
greatest evil is not now done in those sordid "dens of 
crime" that Dickens loved to paint. It is not done even in 
concentration camps and labour camps. In those we see its 
final result. But it is conceived and ordered (moved, sec-
onded, carried, and minuted) in clean, carpeted, warmed, 
and well-lighted offices, by quiet men with white collars 
and cut fingernails and smooth-shaven cheeks who do not 
need to raise their voices. Hence, naturally enough, my 
symbol for Hell is something like the bureaucracy of a 
police state or the office of a thoroughly nasty business 
concern.6 
Putting these attacks aside for the moment, we may say that 
in principle a bureaucracy is simply a coordinated series of 
techniques for reducing the amount of information that requires 
processing. Beniger notes, for example, that the invention of the 
standardized form—a staple of bureaucracy—allows for the 
"destruction" of every nuance and detail of a situation. By 
requiring us to check boxes and fill in blanks, the standardized 
form admits only a limited range of formal, objective, and 
impersonal information, which in some cases is precisely what 
is needed to solve a particular problem. Bureaucracy is, as Max 
Weber described it, an attempt to rationalize the flow of infor-
mation, to make its use efficient to the highest degree by 
eliminating information that diverts attention from the problem 
at hand. Beniger offers as a prime example of such bureaucratic 
rationalization the decision in 1884 to organize time, on a 

The Broken Defenses 
85 
worldwide basis, into twenty-four time zones. Prior to this 
decision, towns only a mile or two apart could and did differ on 
what time of day it was, which made the operation of railroads 
and other businesses unnecessarily complex. By simply ignoring 
the fact that solar time differs at each node of a transportation 
system, bureaucracy eliminated a problem of information chaos, 
much to the satisfaction of most people. But not of everyone. 
It must be noted that the idea of "God's own time" (a phrase 
used by the novelist Marie Corelli in the early twentieth cen-
tury to oppose the introduction of Summer Time) had to be 
considered irrelevant. This is important to say, because, in at-
tempting to make the most rational use of information, bureauc-
racy ignores all information and ideas that do not contribute to 
efficiency. The idea of God's time made no such contribution. 
Bureaucracy is not in principle a social institution; nor are all 
institutions that reduce information by excluding some kinds or 
sources necessarily bureaucracies. Schools may exclude dianet-
ics and astrology; courts exclude hearsay evidence. They do so 
for substantive reasons having to do with the theories on which 
these institutions are based. But bureaucracy has no intellectual, 
political, or moral theory—except for its implicit assumption 
that efficiency is the principal aim of all social institutions and 
that other goals are essentially less worthy, if not irrelevant. 
That is why John Stuart Mill thought bureaucracy a "tyranny" 
and C. S. Lewis identified it with Hell. 
The transformation of bureaucracy from a set of techniques 
designed to serve social institutions to an autonomous meta-
institution that largely serves itself came as a result of several 
developments in the mid- and late-nineteenth century: rapid 
industrial growth, improvements in transportation and commu-
nication, the extension of government into ever-larger realms of 
public and business affairs, the increasing centralization of gov-
ernmental structures. To these were added, in the twentieth 
century, the information explosion and what we might call the 

86 
Technopoly 
"bureaucracy effect": as techniques for managing information 
became more necessary, extensive, and complex, the number of 
people and structures required to manage those techniques 
grew, and so did the amount of information generated by bureau-
cratic techniques. This created the need for bureaucracies to 
manage and coordinate bureaucracies, then for additional struc-
tures and techniques to manage the bureaucracies that coor-
dinated bureaucracies, and so on—until bureaucracy became, to 
borrow again Karl Kraus's comment on psychoanalysis, the 
disease for which it purported to be the cure. Along the way, 
it ceased to be merely a servant of social institutions and became 
their master. Bureaucracy now not only solves problems but 
creates them. More important, it defines what our problems 
are—and they are always, in the bureaucratic view, problems of 
efficiency. As Lewis suggests, this makes bureaucracies exceed-
ingly dangerous, because, though they were originally designed 
to process only technical information, they now are commonly 
employed to address problems of a moral, social, and political 
nature. The bureaucracy of the nineteenth century was largely 
concerned with making transportation, industry, and the distri-
bution of goods more efficient. Technopoly's bureaucracy has 
broken loose from such restrictions and now claims sovereignty 
over all of society's affairs. 
The peril we face in trusting social, moral, and political affairs 
to bureaucracy may be highlighted by reminding ourselves 
what a bureaucrat does. As the word's history suggests, a 
bureaucrat is little else than a glorified counter. The French word 
bureau first meant a cloth for covering a reckoning table, then 
the table itself, then the room in which the table was kept, and 
finally the office and staff that ran the entire counting room or 
house. The word "bureaucrat" has come to mean a person who 
by training, commitment, and even temperament is indifferent 
to both the content and the totality of a human problem. The 
bureaucrat considers the implications of a decision only to the 

The Broken Defenses 
87 
extent that the decision will affect the efficient operations of the 
bureaucracy, and takes no responsibility for its human conse-
quences. Thus, Adolf Eichmann becomes the basic model and 
metaphor for a bureaucrat in the age of Technopoly.7 When 
faced with the charge of crimes against humanity, he argued 
that he had no part in the formulation of Nazi political or 
sociological theory; he dealt only with the technical problems 
of moving vast numbers of people from one place to another. 
Why they were being moved and, especially, what would hap-
pen to them when they arrived at their destination were not 
relevant to his job. Although the jobs of bureaucrats in today's 
Technopoly have results far less horrific, Eichmann's answer is 
probably given five thousand times a day in America alone: I 
have no responsibility for the human consequences of my deci-
sions. I am only responsible for the efficiency of my part of the 
bureaucracy, which must be maintained at all costs. 
Eichmann, it must also be noted, was an expert. And exper-
tise is a second important technical means by which Technopoly 
strives furiously to control information. There have, of course, 
always been experts, even in tool-using cultures. The pyramids, 
Roman roads, the Strasbourg Cathedral, could hardly have been 
built without experts. But the expert in Technopoly has two 
characteristics that distinguish him or her from experts of the 
past. First, Technopoly's experts tend to be ignorant about any 
matter not directly related to their specialized area. The average 
psychotherapist, for example, barely has even superficial knowl-
edge of literature, philosophy, social history, art, religion, and 
biology, and is not expected to have such knowledge. Second, 
like bureaucracy itself (with which an expert may or may not be 
connected), Technopoly's experts claim dominion not only over 
technical matters but also over social, psychological, and moral 
affairs. In the United States, we have experts in how to raise 
children, how to educate them, how to be lovable, how to make 
love, how to influence people, how to make friends. There is no 

88 
Technopoly 
aspect of human relations that has not been technicalized and 
therefore relegated to the control of experts. 
These special characteristics of the expert arose as a result 
of three factors. First, the growth of bureaucracies, which, in 
effect, produced the world's first entirely mechanistic specialists 
and thereby gave credence and prestige to the specialist-as-
ignoramus. Second, the weakening of traditional social institu-
tions, which led ordinary people to lose confidence in the value 
of tradition. Third, and underlying everything else, the torrent 
of information which made it impossible for anyone to possess 
more than a tiny fraction of the sum total of human knowledge. 
As a college undergraduate, I was told by an enthusiastic profes-
sor of German literature that Goethe was the last person who 
knew everything. I assume she meant, by this astounding re-
mark, less to deify Goethe than to suggest that by the year of 
his death, 1832, it was no longer possible for even the most 
brilliant mind to comprehend, let alone integrate, what was 
known. 
The role of the expert is to concentrate on one field of 
knowledge, sift through all that is available, eliminate that 
which has no bearing on a problem, and use what is left to assist 
in solving a problem. This process works fairly well in situations 
where only a technical solution is required and there is no 
conflict with human purposes—for example, in space rocketry 
or the construction of a sewer system. It works less well in 
situations where technical requirements may conflict with 
human purposes, as in medicine or architecture. And it is disas-
trous when applied to situations that cannot be solved by 
technical means and where efficiency is usually irrelevant, such 
as in education, law, family life, and problems of personal malad-
justment. I assume I do not need to convince the reader that 
there are no experts—there can be no experts—in child-rearing 
and lovemaking and friend-making. All of this is a figment of the 
Technopolist's imagination, made plausible by the use of techni-

The Broken Defenses 
89 
cal machinery, without which the expert would be totally dis-
armed and exposed as an intruder and an ignoramus. 
Technical machinery is essential to both the bureaucrat and 
the expert, and may be regarded as a third mechanism of 
information control. I do not have in mind such "hard" tech-
nologies as the computer—which must, in any case, be treated 
separately, since it embodies all that Technopoly stands for. I 
have in mind "softer" technologies such as IQ tests, SATs, 
standardized forms, taxonomies, and opinion polls. Some of 
these I discuss in detail in chapter eight, "Invisible Technolo-
gies," but I mention them here because their role in reducing the 
types and quantity of information admitted to a system often 
goes unnoticed, and therefore their role in redefining traditional 
concepts also goes unnoticed. There is, for example, no test that 
can measure a persons intelligence. Intelligence is a general term 
used to denote one's capacity to solve real-life problems in a 
variety of novel contexts. It is acknowledged by everyone 
except experts that each person varies greatly in such capacities, 
from consistently effective to consistently ineffective, depend-
ing on the kinds of problems requiring solution. If, however, we 
are made to believe that a test can reveal precisely the quantity 
of intelligence a person has, then, for all institutional purposes, 
a score on a test becomes his or her intelligence. The test 
transforms an abstract and multifaceted meaning into a technical 
and exact term that leaves out everything of importance. One 
might even say that an intelligence test is a tale told by an 
expert, signifying nothing. Nonetheless, the expert relies on our 
believing in the reality of technical machinery, which means we 
will reify the answers generated by the machinery. We come to 
believe that our score is our intelligence, or our capacity for 
creativity or love or pain. We come to believe that the results 
of opinion polls are what people believe, as if our beliefs can be 
encapsulated in such sentences as "I approve" and "I disap-
prove." 

90 
Technopoly 
When Catholic priests use wine, wafers, and incantations to 
embody spiritual ideas, they acknowledge the mystery and the 
metaphor being used. But experts of Technopoly acknowledge 
no such overtones or nuances when they use forms, standard-
ized tests, polls, and other machinery to give technical reality to 
ideas about intelligence, creativity, sensitivity, emotional imbal-
ance, social deviance, or political opinion. They would have us 
believe that technology can plainly reveal the true nature of 
some human condition or belief because the score, statistic, or 
taxonomy has given it technical form. 
There is no denying that the technicalization of terms and 
problems is a serious form of information control. Institutions 
can make decisions on the basis of scores and statistics, and 
there certainly may be occasions where there is no reasonable 
alternative. But unless such decisions are made with profound 
skepticism—that is, acknowledged as being made for adminis-
trative convenience—they are delusionary. In Technopoly, the 
delusion is sanctified by our granting inordinate prestige to 
experts who are armed with sophisticated technical machinery. 
Shaw once remarked that all professions are conspiracies against 
the laity. I would go further: in Technopoly, all experts are 
invested with the charisma of priestliness. Some of our priest-
experts are called psychiatrists, some psychologists, some soci-
ologists, some statisticians. The god they serve does not speak 
of righteousness or goodness or mercy or grace. Their god 
speaks of efficiency, precision, objectivity. And that is why such 
concepts as sin and evil disappear in Technopoly. They come 
from a moral universe that is irrelevant to the theology of 
expertise. And so the priests of Technopoly call sin "social 
deviance," which is a statistical concept, and they call evil 
"psychopathology," which is a medical concept. Sin and evil 
disappear because they cannot be measured and objectified, and 
therefore cannot be dealt with by experts. 
As the power of traditional social institutions to organize 

The Broken Defenses 
91 
perceptions and judgment declines, bureaucracies, expertise, and 
technical machinery become the principal means by which 
Technopoly hopes to control information and thereby provide 
itself with intelligibility and order. The rest of this book tells the 
story of why this cannot work, and of the pain and stupidity 
that are the consequences. 

few years ago, an enterpris-
ing company made available a machine called HAGOTH, of 
which it might be said, this was Technopoly's most ambitious 
hour. The machine cost $1,500, the bargain of the century, for 
it was able to reveal to its owner whether someone talking on 
the telephone was telling the truth. It did this by measuring the 
"stress content" of a human voice as indicated by its oscillations. 
You connected HAGOTH to your telephone and, in the course 
of conversation, asked your caller some key question, such as 
"Where did you go last Saturday night?" HAGOTH had sixteen 
lights—eight green and eight red—and when the caller replied, 
HAGOTH went to work. Red lights went on when there was 
much stress in the voice, green lights when there was little. As 
an advertisement for HAGOTH said, "Green indicates no stress, 
hence truthfulness." In other words, according to HAGOTH, it 
is not possible to speak the truth in a quivering voice or to lie 
in a steady one—an idea that would doubtless amuse Richard 
Nixon. At the very least, we must say that HAGOTH's defini-
tion of truthfulness was peculiar, but so precise and exquisitely 
A 
6 
The Ideology of Machines: 
Medical Technology 

Medical Technology 
93 
technical as to command any bureaucrat's admiration. The same 
may be said of the definition of intelligence as expressed in a 
standard-brand intelligence test. In fact, an intelligence test 
works exactly like HAGOTH. You connect a pencil to the fingers 
of a young person and address some key questions to him or 
her; from the replies a computer can calculate exactly how much 
intelligence exists in the young person's brain.1 
HAGOTH has mercifully disappeared from the market, for 
what reason I do not know. Perhaps it was sexist or culturally 
biased or, worse, could not measure oscillations accurately 
enough. When it comes to machinery, what Technopoly insists 
upon most is accuracy. The idea embedded in the machine is 
largely ignored, no matter how peculiar. 
Though HAGOTH has disappeared, its idea survives—for 
example, in the machines called "lie detectors." In America, 
these are taken very seriously by police officers, lawyers, and 
corporate executives who ever more frequently insist that their 
employees be subjected to lie-detector tests. As for intelli-
gence tests, they not only survive but flourish, and have been 
supplemented by vocational aptitude tests, creativity tests, 
mental-health tests, sexual-attraction tests, and even marital-
compatibility tests. One would think that two people who have 
lived together for a number of years would have noticed for 
themselves whether they get along or not. But in Technopoly, 
these subjective forms of knowledge have no official status, and 
must be confirmed by tests administered by experts. Individual 
judgments, after all, are notoriously unreliable, filled with ambi-
guity and plagued by doubt, as Frederick W. Taylor warned. 
Tests and machines are not. Philosophers may agonize over the 
questions "What is truth?" "What is intelligence?" "What is the 
good life?" But in Technopoly there is no need for such intellec-
tual struggle. Machines eliminate complexity, doubt, and ambi-
guity. They work swiftly, they are standardized, and they 
provide us with numbers that you can see and calculate with. 

94 
Technopoly 
They tell us that when eight green lights go on someone is 
speaking the truth. That is all there is to it. They tell us that a 
score of 136 means more brains than a score of 104. This is 
Technopoly's version of magic. 
What is significant about magic is that it directs our attention 
to the wrong place. And by doing so, evokes in us a sense of 
wonder rather than understanding. In Technopoly, we are sur-
rounded by the wondrous effects of machines and are encour-
aged to ignore the ideas embedded in them. Which means we 
become blind to the ideological meaning of our technologies. In 
this chapter and the next, I should like to provide examples of 
how technology directs us to construe the world. 
In considering here the ideological biases of medical technol-
ogy, let us begin with a few relevant facts. Although the U.S. 
and England have equivalent life-expectancy rates, American 
doctors perform six times as many cardiac bypass operations 
per capita as English doctors do. American doctors perform 
more diagnostic tests than doctors do in France, Germany, or 
England. An American woman has two to three times the 
chance of having a hysterectomy as her counterpart in Europe; 
60 percent of the hysterectomies performed in America are 
done on women under the age of forty-four. American doctors 
do more prostate surgery per capita than do doctors anywhere 
in Europe, and the United States leads the industrialized world 
in the rate of cesarean-section operations—50 to 200 percent 
higher than in most other countries. When American doctors 
decide to forgo surgery in favor of treatment by drugs, they 
give higher dosages than doctors elsewhere. They prescribe 
about twice as many antibiotics as do doctors in the United 
Kingdom and commonly prescribe antibiotics when bacteria are 
likely to be present, whereas European doctors tend to prescribe 
antibiotics only if they know that the infection is caused by 
bacteria and is also serious.2 American doctors use far more 
X-rays per patient than do doctors in other countries. In one 

Medical Technology 
95 
review of the extent of X-ray use, a radiologist discovered cases 
in which fifty to one hundred X-rays had been taken of a single 
patient when five would have been sufficient. Other surveys 
have shown that, for almost one-third of the patients, the X-ray 
could have been omitted or deferred on the basis of available 
clinical data.3 
The rest of this chapter could easily be filled with similar 
statistics and findings. Perhaps American medical practice is best 
summarized by the following warning, given by Dr. David E. 
Rogers in a presidential address to the Association of American 
Physicians: 
As our interventions have become more searching, they 
have also become more costly and more hazardous. Thus, 
today it is not unusual to find a fragile elder who walked 
into the hospital, [and became] slightly confused, dehy-
drated, and somewhat the worse for wear on the third 
hospital day because his first 48 hours in the hospital were 
spent undergoing a staggering series of exhausting diag-
nostic studies in various laboratories or in the radiology 
suite.4 
None of this is surprising to anyone familiar with American 
medicine, which is notorious for its characteristic "aggressive-
ness." The question is, why? There are three interrelated rea-
sons, all relevant to the imposition of machinery. The first has 
to do with the American character, which I have previously 
discussed as being so congenial to the sovereignty of technol-
ogy. In Medicine and Culture, Lynn Payer describes it in the 
following way: 
The once seemingly limitless lands gave rise to a spirit that 
anything was possible if only the natural environment 
. . . could be conquered. Disease could also be conquered, 

96 
Technopoly 
but only by aggressively ferreting it out diagnostically 
and just as aggressively treating it, preferably by taking 
something out rather than adding something to increase 
the resistance.5 
To add substance to this claim, Ms. Payer quotes Oliver Wen-
dell Holmes as saying, with his customary sarcasm: 
How could a people which has a revolution once in four 
years, which has contrived the Bowie Knife and the re-
volver . . . which insists in sending out yachts and horses 
and boys to outsail, outrun, outfight and checkmate all the 
rest of creation; how could such a people be content with 
any but "heroic" practice? What wonder that the stars and 
stripes wave over doses of ninety grams of sulphate of 
quinine and that the American eagle screams with delight 
to see three drachms [180 grains] of calomel given at a 
single mouthful?6 
The spirit of attack mocked here by Holmes was given impe-
tus even before the American Revolution by Dr. Benjamin Rush, 
perhaps the most influential medical man of his age. Rush be-
lieved that medicine had been hindered by doctors placing 
"undue reliance upon the powers of nature in curing disease," 
and specifically blamed Hippocrates and his tradition for this 
lapse. Rush had considerable success in curing patients of yel-
low fever by prescribing large quantities of mercury and per-
forming purges and bloodletting. (His success was probably due 
to the fact that the patients either had mild cases of yellow fever 
or didn't have it at all.) In any event, Rush was particularly 
enthusiastic about bleeding patients, perhaps because he be-
lieved that the body contained about twenty-five pints of 
blood, which is more than twice the average actual amount. He 
advised other doctors to continue bleeding a patient until four-

Medical Technology 
97 
fifths of the body's blood was removed. Although Rush was not 
in attendance during George Washington's final days, Washing-
ton was bled seven times on the night he died, which, no doubt, 
had something to do with why he died. All of this occurred, 
mind you, 153 years after Harvey discovered that blood circu-
lates throughout the body. 
Putting aside the question of the available medical knowl-
edge of the day, Rush was a powerful advocate of action— 
indeed, gave additional evidence of his aggressive nature by 
being one of the signers of the Declaration of Independence. He 
persuaded both doctors and patients that American diseases 
were tougher than European diseases and required tougher 
treatment. "Desperate diseases require desperate remedies" was 
a phrase repeated many times in American medical journals in 
the nineteenth century. The Americans, who considered Euro-
pean methods to be mild and passive—one might even say 
effeminate—met the challenge by eagerly succumbing to the 
influence of Rush: they accepted the imperatives to intervene, to 
mistrust nature, to use the most aggressive therapies available. 
The idea, as Ms. Payer suggests, was to conquer both a conti-
nent and the diseases its weather and poisonous flora and fauna 
inflicted. 
So, from the outset, American medicine was attracted to new 
technologies. Far from being "neutral," technology was to be 
the weapon with which disease and illness would be van-
quished. The weapons were not long in coming. The most 
significant of the early medical technologies was the stetho-
scope, invented (one might almost say discovered) by the 
French physician René-Théophile-Hyacinthe Laënnec in 1816. 
The circumstances surrounding the invention are worth men-
tioning. 
Working at the Necker Hospital in Paris, Laënnec was exam-
ining a young woman with a puzzling heart disorder. He tried 
to use percussion and palpation (pressing the hand upon the 

98 
Technopoly 
body in hope of detecting internal abnormalities), but the pa-
tient's obesity made this ineffective. He next considered auscul-
tation (placing his ear on the patient's chest to hear the heart 
beat), but the patient's youth and sex discouraged him. Laënnec 
then remembered that sound traveling through solid bodies is 
amplified. He rolled some sheets of paper into a cylinder, placed 
one end on the patient's chest and the other to his ear. Voilà! 
The sounds he heard were clear and distinct. "From this mo-
ment," he later wrote, "I imagined that the circumstance might 
furnish means for enabling us to ascertain the character, not 
only of the action of the heart, but of every species of sound 
produced by the motion of all the thoracic viscera." Laënnec 
worked to improve the instrument, eventually using a rounded 
piece of wood, and called it a "stethoscope," from the Greek 
words for "chest" and "I view."7 
For all its simplicity, Laënnec's invention proved extraor-
dinarily useful, particularly in the accuracy with which it helped 
to diagnose lung diseases like tuberculosis. Chest diseases of 
many kinds were no longer concealed: the physician with a 
stethoscope could, as it were, conduct an autopsy on the patient 
while the patient was still alive. 
But it should not be supposed that all doctors or patients 
were enthusiastic about the instrument. Patients were often 
frightened at the sight of a stethoscope, assuming that its pres-
ence implied imminent surgery, since, at the time, only surgeons 
used instruments, not physicians. Doctors had several objec-
tions, ranging from the trivial to the significant. Among the 
trivial was the inconvenience of carrying the stethoscope, a 
problem some doctors solved by carrying it, crosswise, inside 
their top hats. This was not without its occasional embarrass-
ments—an Edinburgh medical student was accused of possess-
ing a dangerous weapon when his stethoscope fell out of his hat 
during a snowball fight. A somewhat less trivial objection raised 

Medical Technology 
99 
by doctors was that if they used an instrument they would be 
mistaken for surgeons, who were then considered mere crafts-
men. The distinction between physicians and surgeons was 
unmistakable then, and entirely favorable to physicians, whose 
intellect, knowledge, and insight were profoundly admired. It is 
perhaps to be expected that Oliver Wendell Holmes, professor 
of anatomy at Harvard and always a skeptic about aggressive-
ness in medicine, raised objections about the overzealous use of 
the stethoscope; he did so, in characteristic fashion, by writing 
a comic ballad, "The Stethoscope Song," in which a physician 
makes several false diagnoses because insects have nested in his 
stethoscope. 
But a serious objection raised by physicians, and one which 
has resonated throughout the centuries of technological devel-
opment in medicine, is that interposing an instrument between 
patient and doctor would transform the practice of medicine; the 
traditional methods of questioning patients, taking their reports 
seriously, and making careful observations of exterior symp-
toms would become increasingly irrelevant. Doctors would lose 
their ability to conduct skillful examinations and rely more on 
machinery than on their own experience and insight. In his 
detailed book Medicine and the Reign of Technology, Stanley Joel 
Reiser compares the effects of the stethoscope to the effects of 
the printing press on Western culture. The printed book, he 
argues, helped to create the detached and objective thinker. 
Similarly, the stethoscope 
helped to create the objective physician, who could move 
away from involvement with the patient's experiences and 
sensations, to a more detached relation, less with the pa-
tient but more with the sounds from within the body. 
Undistracted by the motives and beliefs of the patient, the 
auscultator [another term for the stethoscope] could make 

100 
Technopoly 
a diagnosis from sounds that he alone heard emanating 
from body organs, sounds that he believed to be objective, 
bias-free representations of the disease process.8 
Here we have expressed two of the key ideas promoted by 
the stethoscope: Medicine is about disease, not the patient. And, 
what the patient knows is untrustworthy; what the machine 
knows is reliable. 
The stethoscope could not by itself have made such ideas 
stick, especially because of the resistance to them, even in 
America, by doctors whose training and relationship to their 
patients led them to oppose mechanical interpositions. But the 
ideas were amplified with each new instrument added to the 
doctor's arsenal: the ophthalmoscope (invented by Hermann 
von Helmholtz in 1850), which allowed doctors to see into the 
eye; the laryngoscope (designed by Johann Czermak, a Polish 
professor of physiology, in 1857), which allowed doctors to 
inspect the larynx and other parts of the throat, as well as the 
nose; and, of course, the X-ray (developed by Wilhelm Roent-
gen in 1895), which could penetrate most substances but not 
bones. "If the hand be held before the fluorescent screen," 
Roentgen wrote, "the shadow shows the bones darkly with 
only faint outlines of the surrounding tissues." Roentgen was 
able to reproduce this effect on photographic plates and make 
the first X-ray of a human being, his wife's hand. 
By the turn of the century, medicine was well on its way to 
almost total reliance on technology, especially after the devel-
opment of diagnostic laboratories and the discovery and use of 
antibiotics in the 1940s. Medical practice had entered a new 
stage. The first had been characterized by direct communication 
with the patient's experiences based on the patient's reports, 
and the doctor's questions and observations. The second was 
characterized by direct communication with patients' bodies 
through physical examination, including the use of carefully 

Medical Technology 
101 
selected technologies. The stage we are now in is characterized 
by indirect communication with the patient's experience and 
body through technical machinery. In this stage, we see the 
emergence of specialists—for example, pathologists and radi-
ologists—who interpret the meaning of technical information 
and have no connection whatsoever with the patient, only with 
tissue and photographs. It is to be expected that, as medical 
practice moved from one stage to another, doctors tended to 
lose the skills and insights that predominated in the previous 
stage. Reiser sums up what this means: 
So, without realizing what has happened, the physician in 
the last two centuries has gradually relinquished his un-
satisfactory attachment to subjective evidence—what the 
patient says—only to substitute a devotion to technologi-
cal evidence—what the machine says. He has thus ex-
changed one partial view of disease for another. As the 
physician makes greater use of the technology of diagno-
sis, he perceives his patient more and more indirectly 
through a screen of machines and specialists; he also relin-
quishes control over more and more of the diagnostic 
process. These circumstances tend to estrange him from 
his patient and from his own judgment.9 
There is still another reason why the modern physician is 
estranged from his own judgment. To put it in the words of a 
doctor who remains skilled in examining his patients and in 
evaluating their histories: "Everyone who has a headache wants 
and expects a CAT scan." He went on to say that roughly six 
out of every ten CAT scans he orders are unnecessary, with no 
basis in the clinical evidence and the patient's reported experi-
ence and sensations. Why are they done? As a protection 
against malpractice suits. Which is to say, as medical practice 
has moved into the stage of total reliance on machine-generated 

102 
Technopoly 
information, so have the patients. Put simply, if a patient does 
not obtain relief from a doctor who has failed to use all the 
available technological resources, including drugs, the doctor is 
deemed vulnerable to the charge of incompetence. The situation 
is compounded by the fact that the personal relationship be-
tween doctor and patient now, in contrast to a century ago, has 
become so arid that the patient is not restrained by intimacy or 
empathy from appealing to the courts. Moreover, doctors are 
reimbursed by medical-insurance agencies on the basis of what 
they do, not on the amount of time they spend with patients. 
Nontechnological medicine is time-consuming. It is more prof-
itable to do a CAT scan on a patient with a headache than to 
spend time getting information about his or her experiences and 
sensations. 
What all this means is that even restrained and selective 
technological medicine becomes very difficult to do, economi-
cally undesirable, and possibly professionally catastrophic. The 
culture itself—its courts, its bureaucracies, its insurance system, 
the training of doctors, patients' expectations—is organized to 
support technological treatments. There are no longer methods 
of treating illness; there is only one method—the technological 
one. Medical competence is now defined by the quantity and 
variety of machinery brought to bear on disease. 
As I remarked, three interrelated reasons converged to create 
this situation. The American character was biased toward an 
aggressive approach and was well prepared to accommodate 
medical technology; the nineteenth-century technocracies, ob-
sessed with invention and imbued with the idea of progress, 
initiated a series of remarkable and wondrous inventions; and 
the culture reoriented itself to ensure that technological aggres-
siveness became the basis of medical practice. The ideas pro-
moted by this domination of technology can be summed up as 
follows: Nature is an implacable enemy that can be subdued 
only by technical means; the problems created by technological 

Medical Technology 
103 
solutions (doctors call these "side effects") can be solved only 
by the further application of technology (we all know the joke 
about an amazing new drug that cures nothing but has interest-
ing side effects); medical practice must focus on disease, not on 
the patient (which is why it is possible to say that the operation 
or therapy was successful but the patient died); and information 
coming from the patient cannot be taken as seriously as infor-
mation coming from a machine, from which it follows that a 
doctor's judgment, based on insight and experience, is less 
worthwhile than the calculations of his machinery. 
Do these ideas lead to better medicine? In some respects, yes; 
in some respects, no. The answer tends to be "yes" when one 
considers how doctors now use lasers to remove cataracts 
quickly, painlessly, and safely; or how they can remove a gall-
bladder by using a small television camera (a laparoscope) in-
serted through an equally small puncture in the abdomen to 
guide the surgeon's instruments to the diseased organ through 
still another small puncture, thus making it unnecessary to cut 
open the abdomen. Of course, those who are inclined to answer 
"no" to the question will ask how many laparoscopic cholecys-
tectomies are performed because of the existence of the technol-
ogy. This is a crucial point. 
Consider the case of cesarean sections. Close to one out of 
every four Americans is now born by C-section. Through mod-
ern technology, American doctors can deliver babies who 
would have died otherwise. As Dr. Laurence Horowitz notes in 
Taking Charge of Your Medical Fate, ". . . the proper goal of 
C-sections is to improve the chances of babies at risk, and that 
goal has been achieved."10 But C-sections are a surgical proce-
dure, and when they are done routinely as an elective option, 
there is considerable and unnecessary danger; the chances of a 
woman's dying during a C-section delivery are two to four 
times greater than during a normal vaginal delivery. In other 
words, C-sections can and do save the lives of babies at risk, but 

104 
Technopoly 
when they are done for other reasons—for example, for the 
convenience of doctor or mother—they pose an unnecessary 
threat to health, and even life. 
To take another example: a surgical procedure known as 
carotid endarterectomy is used to clean out clogged arteries, 
thus reducing the likelihood of stroke. In 1987, more than one 
hundred thousand Americans had this operation. It is now 
established that the risks involved in such surgery outweigh the 
risks of suffering a stroke. Horowitz again: "In other words, for 
certain categories of patients, the operation may actually kill 
more people than it saves."11 To take still another example: 
about seventy-eight thousand people every year get cancer 
from medical and dental X-rays. In a single generation, it is 
estimated, radiation will induce 2.34 million cancers.12 
Examples of this kind can be given with appalling ease. But 
in the interests of fairness the question about the value of 
technology in medicine is better phrased in the following way: 
Would American medicine be better were it not so totally 
reliant on the technological imperative? Here the answer is 
clearly, yes. We know, for example, from a Harvard Medical 
School study which focused on the year 1984 (no Orwellian 
reference intended), that in New York State alone there were 
thirty-six thousand cases of medical negligence, including seven 
thousand deaths related in some way to negligence. Although 
the study does not give figures on what kinds of negligence 
were found, the example is provided of doctors prescribing 
penicillin without asking the patients whether they were hyper-
sensitive to the drug. We can assume that many of the deaths 
resulted not only from careless prescriptions and the doctors' 
ignorance of their patients' histories but also from unnecessary 
surgery. In other words, iatrogenics (treatment-induced illness) 
is now a major concern for the profession, and an even greater 
concern for the patient. Doctors themselves feel restricted and 
dominated by the requirement to use all available technology. 

Medical Technology 
105 
And patients may be justifiably worried by reports that quite 
possibly close to 40 percent of the operations performed in 
America are not necessary. In Health Shock, Martin Weitz cites 
the calculations of Professor John McKinlay that more deaths 
are caused by surgery each year in the United States than the 
annual number of deaths during the wars in Korea and Vietnam. 
As early as 1974, a Senate investigation into unnecessary sur-
gery reported that American doctors had performed 2.4 million 
unnecessary operations, causing 11,900 deaths and costing 
about $3.9 billion.13 We also know that, in spite of advanced 
technology (quite possibly because of it), the infant-survival rate 
in the United States ranks only fourteenth in the world, and it 
is no exaggeration to say that American hospitals are com-
monly regarded as among the most dangerous places in the 
nation. It is also well documented that, wherever doctor strikes 
have occurred, the mortality rate declines. 
There are, one may be sure, very few doctors who are 
satisfied with technology's stranglehold on medical practice. 
And there are far too many patients who have been its serious 
victims. What conclusions may we draw? First, technology is 
not a neutral element in the practice of medicine: doctors do not 
merely use technologies but are used by them. Second, technol-
ogy creates its own imperatives and, at the same time, creates 
a wide-ranging social system to reinforce its imperatives. And 
third, technology changes the practice of medicine by redefin-
ing what doctors are, redirecting where they focus their atten-
tion, and reconceptualizing how they view their patients and 
illness. 
Like some well-known diseases, the problems that have 
arisen as a result of the reign of technology came slowly and 
were barely perceptible at the start. As technology grew, so did 
the influence of drug companies and the manufacturers of medi-
cal instruments. As the training of doctors changed, so did the 
expectations of patients. As the increase in surgical procedures 

106 
Technopoly 
multiplied, so did the diagnoses which made them seem neces-
sary. Through it all, the question of what was being undone had 
a low priority if it was asked at all. The Zeitgeist of the age 
placed such a question in a range somewhere between peevish-
ness and irrelevance. In a growing Technopoly, there is no time 
or inclination to speak of technological debits. 

hat American Technopoly has 
now embraced the computer in the same hurried and mindless 
way it embraced medical technology is undeniable, was perhaps 
inevitable, and is certainly most unfortunate. This is not to say 
that the computer is a blight on the symbolic landscape; only 
that, like medical technology, it has usurped powers and en-
forced mind-sets that a fully attentive culture might have 
wished to deny it. Thus, an examination of the ideas embedded 
in computer technology is worth attempting. Others, of course, 
have done this, especially Joseph Weizenbaum in his great and 
indispensable book Computer Power and Human Reason. Weizen-
baum, however, ran into some difficulties, as everyone else has, 
because of the "universality" of computers, meaning (a) that 
their uses are infinitely various, and (b) that computers are 
commonly integrated into the structure of other machines. It is, 
therefore, hard to isolate specific ideas promoted by computer 
technology. The computer, for example, is quite unlike the 
stethoscope, which has a limited function in a limited context. 
Except for safecrackers, who, I am told, use stethoscopes to hear 
7 
The Ideology of Machines: 
Computer Technology 
T 

108 
Technopoly 
the tumblers of locks click into place, stethoscopes are used only 
by doctors. But everyone uses or is used by computers, and for 
purposes that seem to know no boundaries. 
Putting aside such well-known functions as electronic filing, 
spreadsheets, and word-processing, one can make a fascinating 
list of the innovative, even bizarre, uses of computers. I have 
before me a report from The New York Times that tells us how 
computers are enabling aquatic designers to create giant water 
slides that mimic roller coasters and eight-foot-high artificial 
waves.1 In my modest collection, I have another article about 
the uses of personal computers for making presentations at 
corporate board meetings.2 Another tells of how computer 
graphics help jurors to remember testimony better. Gregory 
Mazares, president of the graphics unit of Litigation Sciences, is 
quoted as saying, "We're a switched-on, tuned-in, visually ori-
ented society, and jurors tend to believe what they see. This 
technology keeps the jury's attention by simplifying the mate-
rial and by giving them little bursts of information."3 While Mr. 
Mazares is helping switched-on people to remember things, 
Morton David, chief executive officer of Franklin Computer, is 
helping them find any word in the Bible with lightning speed 
by producing electronic Bibles. (The word "lightning," by the 
way, appears forty-two times in the New International version 
and eight times in the King James version. Were you so inclined, 
you could discover this for yourself in a matter of seconds.) This 
fact so dominates Mr. David's imagination that he is quoted as 
saying, "Our technology may have made a change as momen-
tous as the Gutenberg invention of movable type."4 And then 
there is an article that reports a computer's use to make invest-
ment decisions, which helps you, among other things, to create 
"what-if" scenarios, although with how much accuracy we are 
not told.5 In Technology Review, we find a description of how 
computers are used to help the police locate the addresses of 
callers in distress; a prophecy is made that in time police officers 

Computer Technology 
109 
will have so much instantly available information about any 
caller that they will know how seriously to regard the caller's 
appeal for help. 
One may well wonder if Charles Babbage had any of this in 
mind when he announced in 1822 (only six years after the 
appearance of Laënnec's stethoscope) that he had invented a 
machine capable of performing simple arithmetical calculations. 
Perhaps he did, for he never finished his invention and started 
work on a more ambitious machine, capable of doing more 
complex tasks. He abandoned that as well, and in 1833 put aside 
his calculator project completely in favor of a programmable 
machine that became the forerunner of the modern computer. 
His first such machine, which he characteristically never fin-
ished, was to be controlled by punch cards adapted from de-
vices French weavers used to control thread sequences in their 
looms. 
Babbage kept improving his programmable machine over the 
next thirty-seven years, each design being more complex than 
the last.6 At some point, he realized that the mechanization of 
numerical operations gave him the means to manipulate non-
numerical symbols. It is not farfetched to say that Babbage's 
insight was comparable to the discovery by the Greeks in the 
third century B.C. of the principle of alphabetization—that is, 
the realization that the symbols of the alphabet could be sepa-
rated from their phonetic function and used as a system for the 
classification, storage, and retrieval of information. In any case, 
armed with his insight, Babbage was able to speculate about the 
possibility of designing "intelligent" information machinery, 
though the mechanical technology of his time was inadequate 
to allow the fulfillment of his ideas. The computer as we know 
it today had to await a variety of further discoveries and in-
ventions, including the telegraph, the telephone, and the appli-
cation of Boolean algebra to relay-based circuitry, resulting in 
Claude Shannon's creation of digital logic circuitry. Today, 

110 
Technopoly 
when the word "computer" is used without a modifier before it, 
it normally refers to some version of the machine invented 
by John von Neumann in the 1940s. Before that, the word 
"computer" referred to a person (similarly to the early use of the 
word "typewriter") who performed some kind of mechanical cal-
culation. As calculation shifted from people to machines, so did 
the word, especially because of the power of von Neumann's 
machine. 
Certainly, after the invention of the digital computer, it was 
abundantly clear that the computer was capable of performing 
functions that could in some sense be called "intelligent." In 
1936, the great English mathematician Alan Turing showed that 
it was possible to build a machine that would, for many practical 
purposes, behave like a problem-solving human being. Turing 
claimed that he would call a machine "intelligent" if, through 
typed messages, it could exchange thoughts with a human 
being—that is, hold up its end of a conversation. In the early 
days of MIT's Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Joseph Weizen-
baum wrote a program called ELIZA, which showed how easy 
it was to meet Turing's test for intelligence. When asked a 
question with a proper noun in it, ELIZA's program could 
respond with "Why are you interested in," followed by the 
proper noun and a question mark. That is, it could invert state-
ments and seek more information about one of the nouns in the 
statement. Thus, ELIZA acted much like a Rogerian psycholo-
gist, or at least a friendly and inexpensive therapist. Some 
people who used 
ELIZA refused to believe that they were 
conversing with a mere machine. Having, in effect, created a 
Turing machine, Weizenbaum eventually pulled the program off 
the computer network and was stimulated to write Computer 
Power and Human Reason, in which, among other things, he 
raised questions about the research programs of those working 
in artificial intelligence; the assumption that whatever a com-
puter can do, it should do; and the effects of computer technol-

Computer Technology 
111 
ogy on the way people construe the world—that is, the ideol-
ogy of the computer, to which I now turn. 
The most comprehensive idea conveyed by the computer is 
suggested by the title of J. David Bolter's book, Turing's Man. 
His title is a metaphor, of course, similar to what would be 
suggested by saying that from the sixteenth century until re-
cently we were "Gutenberg's Men." Although Bolter's main 
practical interest in the computer is in its function as a new kind 
of book, he argues that it is the dominant metaphor of our age; 
it defines our age by suggesting a new relationship to informa-
tion, to work, to power, and to nature itself. That relationship 
can best be described by saying that the computer redefines 
humans as "information processors" and nature itself as informa-
tion to be processed. The fundamental metaphorical message of 
the computer, in short, is that we are machines—thinking ma-
chines, to be sure, but machines nonetheless. It is for this reason 
that the computer is the quintessential, incomparable, near-
perfect machine for Technopoly. It subordinates the claims of 
our nature, our biology, our emotions, our spirituality. The 
computer claims sovereignty over the whole range of human 
experience, and supports its claim by showing that it "thinks" 
better than we can. Indeed, in his almost hysterical enthusiasm 
for artificial intelligence, Marvin Minsky has been quoted as 
saying that the thinking power of silicon "brains" will be so 
formidable that "If we are lucky, they will keep us as pets."7 An 
even giddier remark, although more dangerous, was offered by 
John McCarthy, the inventor of the term "artificial intelligence." 
McCarthy claims that "even machines as simple as thermostats 
can be said to have beliefs." To the obvious question, posed by 
the philosopher John Searle, "What beliefs does your thermo-
stat have?," McCarthy replied, "My thermostat has three be-
liefs—it's too hot in here, it's too cold in here, and it's just right 
in here."8 
What is significant about this response is that it has redefined 

112 
Technopoly 
the meaning of the word "belief." The remark rejects the view 
that humans have internal states of mind that are the foundation 
of belief and argues instead that "belief" means only what 
someone or something does. The remark also implies that simu-
lating an idea is synonymous with duplicating the idea. And, 
most important, the remark rejects the idea that mind is a 
biological phenomenon. 
In other words, what we have here is a case of metaphor 
gone mad. From the proposition that humans are in some 
respects like machines, we move to the proposition that humans 
are little else but machines and, finally, that human beings are 
machines. And then, inevitably, as McCarthy's remark suggests, 
to the proposition that machines are human beings. It follows 
that machines can be made that duplicate human intelligence, 
and thus research in the field known as artificial intelligence was 
inevitable. What is most significant about this line of thinking 
is the dangerous reductionism it represents. Human intelligence, 
as Weizenbaum has tried energetically to remind everyone, is 
not transferable. The plain fact is that humans have a unique, 
biologically rooted, intangible mental life which in some limited 
respects can be simulated by a machine but can never be du-
plicated. Machines cannot feel and, just as important, cannot 
understand. ELIZA can ask, "Why are you worried about your 
mother?," which might be exactly the question a therapist 
would ask. But the machine does not know what the question 
means or even that the question means. (Of course, there may 
be some therapists who do not know what the question means 
either, who ask it routinely, ritualistically, inattentively. In that 
case we may say they are acting like a machine.) It is meaning, 
not utterance, that makes mind unique. I use "meaning" here to 
refer to something more than the result of putting together 
symbols the denotations of which are commonly shared by at 
least two people. As I understand it, meaning also includes 
those things we call feelings, experiences, and sensations that 

Computer Technology 
113 
do not have to be, and sometimes cannot be, put into symbols. 
They "mean" nonetheless. Without concrete symbols, a com-
puter is merely a pile of junk. Although the quest for a machine 
that duplicates mind has ancient roots, and although digital 
logic circuitry has given that quest a scientific structure, artificial 
intelligence does not and cannot lead to a meaning-making, 
understanding, and feeling creature, which is what a human 
being is. 
All of this may seem obvious enough, but the metaphor of 
the machine as human (or the human as machine) is sufficiently 
powerful to have made serious inroads in everyday language. 
People now commonly speak of "programming" or "depro-
gramming" themselves. They speak of their brains as a piece of 
"hard wiring," capable of "retrieving data," and it has become 
common to think about thinking as a mere matter of processing 
and decoding. 
Perhaps the most chilling case of how deeply our language 
is absorbing the "machine as human" metaphor began on No-
vember 4, 1988, when the computers around the A R P A N E T 
network became sluggish, filled with extraneous data, and then 
clogged completely. The problem spread fairly quickly to six 
thousand computers across the United States and overseas. The 
early hypothesis was that a software program had attached 
itself to other programs, a situation which is called (in another 
human-machine metaphor) a "virus." As it happened, the in-
truder was a self-contained program explicitly designed to dis-
able computers, which is called a "worm." But the technically 
incorrect term "virus" stuck, no doubt because of its familiarity 
and its human connections. As Raymond Gozzi, Jr., discovered 
in his analysis of how the mass media described the event, 
newspapers noted that the computers were "infected," that the 
virus was "virulent" and "contagious," that attempts were made 
to "quarantine" the infected computers, that attempts were also 
being made to "sterilize" the network, and that programmers 

114 
Technopoly 
hoped to develop a "vaccine" so that computers could be 
"inoculated" against new attacks.9 
This kind of language is not merely picturesque anthropo-
morphism. It reflects a profound shift in perception about the 
relationship of computers to humans. If computers can become 
ill, then they can become healthy. Once healthy, they can think 
clearly and make decisions. The computer, it is implied, has a 
will, has intentions, has reasons—which means that humans are 
4 
relieved of responsibility for the computer's decisions. Through 
a curious form of grammatical alchemy, the sentence "We use 
the computer to calculate" comes to mean "The computer calcu-
lates." If a computer calculates, then it may decide to miscalcu-
late or not calculate at all. That is what bank tellers mean when 
they tell you that they cannot say how much money is in your 
checking account because "the computers are down." The impli-
cation, of course, is that no person at the bank is responsible. 
Computers make mistakes or get tired or become ill. Why blame 
people? We may call this line of thinking an "agentic shift," a 
term I borrow from Stanley Milgram to name the process 
whereby humans transfer responsibility for an outcome from 
themselves to a more abstract agent.10 When this happens, we 
have relinquished control, which in the case of the computer 
means that we may, without excessive remorse, pursue ill-
advised or even inhuman goals because the computer can ac-
complish them or be imagined to accomplish them. 
Machines of various kinds will sometimes assume a human 
or, more likely, a superhuman aspect. Perhaps the most absurd 
case I know of is in a remark a student of mine once made on 
a sultry summer day in a room without air conditioning. On 
being told the thermometer read ninety-eight degrees Fahren-
heit, he replied, "No wonder it's so hot!" Nature was off the 
hook. If only the thermometers would behave themselves, we 
could be comfortable. But computers are far more "human" than 
thermometers or almost any other kind of technology. Unlike 

Computer Technology 
115 
most machines, computers do no work; they direct work. They 
are, as Norbert Wiener said, the technology of "command and 
control" and have little value without something to control. 
This is why they are of such importance to bureaucracies. 
Naturally, bureaucrats can be expected to embrace a technol-
ogy that helps to create the illusion that decisions are not under 
their control. Because of its seeming intelligence and impartial-
ity, a computer has an almost magical tendency to direct atten-
tion away from the people in charge of bureaucratic functions 
and toward itself, as if the computer were the true source of 
authority. A bureaucrat armed with a computer is the unac-
knowledged legislator of our age, and a terrible burden to bear. 
We cannot dismiss the possibility that, if Adolf Eichmann had 
been able to say that it was not he but a battery of computers 
that directed the Jews to the appropriate crematoria, he might 
never have been asked to answer for his actions. 
Although (or perhaps because) I came to "administration" 
late in my academic career, I am constantly amazed at how 
obediently people accept explanations that begin with the 
words "The computer shows . . ." or "The computer has deter-
mined . . ." It is Technopoly's equivalent of the sentence "It is 
God's will," and the effect is roughly the same. You will not be 
surprised to know that I rarely resort to such humbug. But on 
occasion, when pressed to the wall, I have yielded. No one has 
as yet replied, "Garbage in, garbage out." Their defenselessness 
has something Kafkaesque about it. In The Trial, Josef K. is 
charged with a crime—of what nature, and by whom the charge 
is made, he does not know. The computer turns too many of us 
into Josef Ks. It often functions as a kind of impersonal accuser 
which does not reveal, and is not required to reveal, the sources 
of the judgments made against us. It is apparently sufficient that 
the computer has pronounced. Who has put the data in, for 
what purpose, for whose convenience, based on what assump-
tions are questions left unasked. 

116 
Technopoly 
This is the case not only in personal matters but in public 
decisions as well. Large institutions such as the Pentagon, the 
Internal Revenue Service, and multinational corporations tell us 
that their decisions are made on the basis of solutions generated 
by computers, and this is usually good enough to put our minds 
at ease or, rather, to sleep. In any case, it constrains us from 
making complaints or accusations. In part for this reason, the 
computer has strengthened bureaucratic institutions and sup-
pressed the impulse toward significant social change. "The ar-
rival of the Computer Revolution and the founding of the 
Computer Age have been announced many times," Weizen-
baum has written. "But if the triumph of a revolution is to be 
measured in terms of the social revision it entrained, then there 
has been no computer revolution."11 
In automating the operation of political, social, and commer-
cial enterprises, computers may or may not have made them 
more efficient but they have certainly diverted attention from 
the question whether or not such enterprises are necessary or 
how they might be improved. A university, a political party, a 
religious denomination, a judicial proceeding, even corporate 
board meetings are not improved by automating their opera-
tions. They are made more imposing, more technical, perhaps 
more authoritative, but defects in their assumptions, ideas, and 
theories will remain untouched. Computer technology, in other 
words, has not yet come close to the printing press in its power 
to generate radical and substantive social, political, and religious 
thought. If the press was, as David Riesman called it, "the 
gunpowder of the mind," the computer, in its capacity to 
smooth over unsatisfactory institutions and ideas, is the talcum 
powder of the mind. 
I do not wish to go as far as Weizenbaum in saying that 
computers are merely ingenious devices to fulfill unimportant 
functions and that the computer revolution is an explosion of 
nonsense. Perhaps that judgment will be in need of amendment 

Computer Technology 
117 
in the future, for the computer is a technology of a thousand 
uses—the Proteus of machines, to use Seymour Papert's phrase. 
One must note, for example, the use of computer-generated 
images in the phenomenon known as Virtual Reality. Putting on 
a set of miniature goggle-mounted screens, one may block out 
the real world and move through a simulated three-dimensional 
world which changes its components with every movement of 
one's head. That Timothy Leary is an enthusiastic proponent of 
Virtual Reality does not suggest that there is a constructive 
future for this device. But who knows? Perhaps, for those who 
can no longer cope with the real world, Virtual Reality will 
provide better therapy than ELIZA. 
What is clear is that, to date, computer technology has served 
to strengthen Technopoly's hold, to make people believe that 
technological innovation is synonymous with human progress. 
And it has done so by advancing several interconnected ideas. 
It has, as already noted, amplified beyond all reason the 
metaphor of machines as humans and humans as machines. I do 
not claim, by the way, that computer technology originated this 
metaphor. One can detect it in medicine, too: doctors and 
patients have come to believe that, like a machine, a human 
being is made up of parts which when defective can be replaced 
by mechanical parts that function as the original did without 
impairing or even affecting any other part of the machine. Of 
course, to some degree that assumption works, but since a 
human being is in fact not a machine but a biological organism 
all of whose organs are interrelated and profoundly affected by 
mental states, the human-as-machine metaphor has serious med-
ical limitations and can have devastating effects. Something 
similar may be said of the mechanistic metaphor when applied 
to workers. Modern industrial techniques are made possible by 
the idea that a machine is made up of isolatable and interchange-
able parts. But in organizing factories so that workers are also 
conceived of as isolatable and interchangeable parts, industry 

118 
Technopoly 
has engendered deep alienation and bitterness. This was the 
point of Charlie Chaplin's Modern Times, in which he tried to 
show the psychic damage of the metaphor carried too far. But 
because the computer "thinks" rather than works, its power to 
energize mechanistic metaphors is unparalleled and of enor-
mous value to Technopoly, which depends on our believing 
that we are at our best when acting like machines, and that in 
significant ways machines may be trusted to act as our surro-
gates. Among the implications of these beliefs is a loss of 
confidence in human judgment and subjectivity. We have de-
valued the singular human capacity to see things whole in all 
their psychic, emotional and moral dimensions, and we have 
replaced this with faith in the powers of technical calculation. 
Because of what computers commonly do, they place an 
inordinate emphasis on the technical processes of communica-
tion and offer very little in the way of substance. With the 
exception of the electric light, there never has been a technol-
ogy that better exemplifies Marshall McLuhan's aphorism "The 
medium is the message." The computer is almost all process. 
There are, for example, no "great computerers," as there are 
great writers, painters, or musicians. There are "great programs" 
and "great programmers," but their greatness lies in their inge-
nuity either in simulating a human function or in creating new 
possibilities of calculation, speed, and volume.12 Of course, if J. 
David Bolter is right, it is possible that in the future computers 
will emerge as a new kind of book, expanding and enriching the 
tradition of writing technologies.13 Since printing created new 
forms of literature when it replaced the handwritten manuscript, 
it is possible that electronic writing will do the same. But for the 
moment, computer technology functions more as a new mode 
of transportation than as a new means of substantive communi-
cation. It moves information—lots of it, fast, and mostly in a 
calculating mode. The computer, in fact, makes possible the 
fulfillment of Descartes' dream of the mathematization of the 

Computer Technology 
119 
world. Computers make it easy to convert facts into statistics 
and to translate problems into equations. And whereas this can 
be useful (as when the process reveals a pattern that would 
otherwise go unnoticed), it is diversionary and dangerous when 
applied indiscriminately to human affairs. So is the computer's 
emphasis on speed and especially its capacity to generate and 
store unprecedented quantities of information. In specialized 
contexts, the value of calculation, speed, and voluminous infor-
mation may go uncontested. But the "message" of computer 
technology is comprehensive and domineering. The computer 
argues, to put it baldly, that the most serious problems con-
fronting us at both personal and public levels require technical 
solutions through fast access to information otherwise unavail-
able. I would argue that this is, on the face of it, nonsense. Our 
most serious problems are not technical, nor do they arise from 
inadequate information. If a nuclear catastrophe occurs, it shall 
not be because of inadequate information. Where people are 
dying of starvation, it does not occur because of inadequate 
information. If families break up, children are mistreated, crime 
terrorizes a city, education is impotent, it does not happen 
because of inadequate information. Mathematical equations, in-
stantaneous communication, and vast quantities of information 
have nothing whatever to do with any of these problems. And 
the computer is useless in addressing them. 
And yet, because of its "universality," the computer compels 
respect, even devotion, and argues for a comprehensive role in 
all fields of human activity. Those who insist that it is foolish to 
deny the computer vast sovereignty are singularly devoid of 
what Paul Goodman once called "technological modesty"— 
that is, having a sense of the whole and not claiming or obtrud-
ing more than a particular function warrants. Norbert Wiener 
warned about lack of modesty when he remarked that, if digital 
computers had been in common use before the atomic bomb 
was invented, people would have said that the bomb could not 

120 
Technopoly 
have been invented without computers. But it was. And it is 
important to remind ourselves of how many things are quite 
possible to do without the use of computers. 
Seymour Papert, for example, wishes students to be epis-
temologists, to think critically, and to learn how to create 
knowledge. In his book Mindstorms, he gives the impression 
that his computer program known as LOGO now makes this 
possible. But good teachers have been doing this for centuries 
without the benefit of LOGO. I do not say that LOGO, when 
used properly by a skilled teacher, will not help, but I doubt that 
it can do better than pencil and paper, or speech itself, when 
used properly by a skilled teacher. 
When the Dallas Cowboys were consistently winning foot-
ball championships, their success was attributed to the fact that 
computers were used to evaluate and select team members. 
During the past several years, when Dallas has been hard put 
to win more than a few games, not much has been said about 
the computers, perhaps because people have realized that com-
puters have nothing to do with winning football games, and 
never did. One might say the same about writing lucid, eco-
nomical, stylish prose, which has nothing to do with word-
processors. Although my students don't believe it, it is actually 
possible to write well without a processor and, I should say, to 
write poorly with one. 
Technological immodesty is always an acute danger in Tech-
nopoly, which encourages it. Technopoly also encourages in-
sensitivity to what skills may be lost in the acquisition of new 
ones. It is important to remember what can be done without 
computers, and it is also important to remind ourselves of what 
may be lost when we do use them. 
I have before me an essay by Sir Bernard Lovell, founder of 
Britain's Jodrell Bank Observatory, in which he claims that 
computers have stifled scientific creativity.14 After writing of 
his awe at the ease with which computerized operations provide 

Computer Technology 
121 
amazing details of distant galaxies, Sir Bernard expresses con-
cern that "literal-minded, narrowly focused computerized re-
search is proving antithetical to the free exercise of that happy 
faculty known as serendipity—that is, the knack of achieving 
favorable results more or less by chance." He proceeds to give 
several examples of monumental but serendipitous discoveries, 
contends that there has been a dramatic cessation of such dis-
coveries, and worries that computers are too narrow as filters of 
information and therefore may be antiserendipitous. He is, of 
course, not "against" computers, but is merely raising questions 
about their costs. 
Dr. Clay Forishee, the chief FAA scientist for human perform-
ance issues, did the same when he wondered whether the auto-
mated operation of commercial aircraft has not disabled pilots 
from creatively responding when something goes wrong. Rob-
ert Buley, flight-standards manager of Northwest Airlines, goes 
further. He is quoted as saying, "If we have human operators 
subordinated to technology then we're going to lose creativity 
[in emergencies]." He is not "against" computers. He is worried 
about what we lose by using them.15 
M. Ethan Katsch, in his book The Electronic Media and the 
Transformation of Law, worries as well. He writes, "The replace-
ment of print by computerized systems is promoted to the legal 
profession simply as a means to increase efficiency."16 But he 
goes on to say that, in fact, the almost unlimited capacity of 
computers to store and retrieve information threatens the au-
thority of precedent, and he adds that the threat is completely 
unrecognized. As he notes, "a system of precedent is unneces-
sary when there are very few accessible cases, and unworkable 
when there are too many." If this is true, or even partly true, 
what exactly does it mean? Will lawyers become incapable of 
choosing relevant precedents? Will judges be in constant confu-
sion from "precedent overload"? 
We know that doctors who rely entirely on machinery have 

122 
Technopoly 
lost skill in making diagnoses based on observation. We may 
well wonder what other human skills and traditions are being 
lost by our immersion in a computer culture. Technopolists do 
not worry about such things. Those who do are called techno-
logical pessimists, Jeremiahs, and worse. I rather think they are 
imbued with technological modesty, like King Thamus. 

8 
Invisible Technologies 
f we define ideology as a set of 
assumptions of which we are barely conscious but which none-
theless directs our efforts to give shape and coherence to the 
world, then our most powerful ideological instrument is the 
technology of language itself. Language is pure ideology. It 
instructs us not only in the names of things but, more important, 
in what things can be named. It divides the world into subjects 
and objects. It denotes what events shall be regarded as pro-
cesses, and what events, things. It instructs us about time, space, 
and number, and forms our ideas of how we stand in relation to 
nature and to each other. In English grammar, for example, there 
are always subjects who act, and verbs which are their actions, 
and objects which are acted upon. It is a rather aggressive 
grammar, which makes it difficult for those of us who must use 
it to think of the world as benign. We are obliged to know the 
world as made up of things pushing against, and often attack-
ing, one another. 
Of course, most of us, most of the time, are unaware of how 
language does its work. We live deep within the boundaries of 
I 

124 
Technopoly 
our linguistic assumptions and have little sense of how the 
world looks to those who speak a vastly different tongue. We 
tend to assume that everyone sees the world in the same way, 
irrespective of differences in language. Only occasionally is this 
illusion challenged, as when the differences between linguistic 
ideologies become noticeable by one who has command over 
two languages that differ greatly in their structure and history. 
For example, several years ago, Susumu Tonegawa, winner of 
the 1987 Nobel Prize in Medicine, was quoted in the newspaper 
Yomiuri as saying that the Japanese language does not foster 
clarity or effective understanding in scientific research. Address-
ing his countrymen from his post as a professor at MIT in 
Cambridge, Massachusetts, he said, "We should consider chang-
ing our thinking process in the field of science by trying to 
reason in English." It should be noted that he was not saying 
that English is better than Japanese; only that English is better 
than Japanese for the purposes of scientific research, which is a 
way of saying that English (and other Western languages) have 
a particular ideological bias that Japanese does not. We call that 
ideological bias "the scientific outlook." If the scientific outlook 
seems natural to you, as it does to me, it is because our language 
makes it appear so. What we think of as reasoning is determined 
by the character of our language. To reason in Japanese is 
apparently not the same thing as to reason in English or Italian 
or German. 
To put it simply, like any important piece of machinery— 
television or the computer, for example—language has an ideo-
logical agenda that is apt to be hidden from view. In the case 
of language, that agenda is so deeply integrated into our per-
sonalities and world-view that a special effort and, often, special 
training are required to detect its presence. Unlike television or 
the computer, language appears to be not an extension of our 
powers but simply a natural expression of who and what we are. 
This is the great secret of language: Because it comes from 

Invisible Technologies 
125 
inside us, we believe it to be a direct, unedited, unbiased, 
apolitical expression of how the world really is. A machine, on 
the other hand, is outside of us, clearly created by us, modifiable 
by us, even discardable by us; it is easier to see how a machine 
re-creates the world in its own image. But in many respects, a 
sentence functions very much like a machine, and this is no-
where more obvious than in the sentences we call questions. 
As an example of what I mean, let us take a "fill-in" question, 
which I shall require you to answer exactly if you wish full 
credit: 
Thomas Jefferson died in the year ––––––. 
Suppose we now rephrase the question in multiple-choice 
form: 
Thomas Jefferson died in the year (a) 1788 (b) 1826 
(c) 1926 (d) 1809. 
Which of these two questions is easier to answer? I assume 
you will agree with me that the second question is easier unless 
you happen to know precisely the year of Jefferson's death, in 
which case neither question is difficult. However, for most of us 
who know only roughly when Jefferson lived, Question Two 
has arranged matters so that our chances of "knowing" the 
answer are greatly increased. Students will always be "smarter" 
when answering a multiple-choice test than when answering a 
"fill-in" test, even when the subject matter is the same. A 
question, even of the simplest kind, is not and can never be 
unbiased. I am not, in this context, referring to the common 
accusation that a particular test is "culturally biased." Of course 
questions can be culturally biased. (Why, for example, should 
anyone be asked about Thomas Jefferson at all, let alone when 
he died?) My purpose is to say that the structure of any question 
is as devoid of neutrality as is its content. The form of a question 
may ease our way or pose obstacles. Or, when even slightly 
altered, it may generate antithetical answers, as in the case of the 
two priests who, being unsure if it was permissible to smoke and 

126 
Technopoly 
pray at the same time, wrote to the Pope for a definitive answer. 
One priest phrased the question "Is it permissible to smoke 
while praying?" and was told it is not, since prayer should be 
the focus of one's whole attention; the other priest asked if it is 
permissible to pray while smoking and was told that it is, since 
it is always appropriate to pray. The form of a question may 
even block us from seeing solutions to problems that become 
visible through a different question. Consider the following 
story, whose authenticity is questionable but not, I think, its 
point: 
Once upon a time, in a village in what is now Lithuania, there 
arose an unusual problem. A curious disease afflicted many of 
the townspeople. It was mostly fatal (though not always), and 
its onset was signaled by the victim's lapsing into a deathlike 
coma. Medical science not being quite so advanced as it is now, 
there was no definite way of knowing if the victim was actually 
dead when burial appeared seemly. As a result, the townspeople 
feared that several of their relatives had already been buried 
alive and that a similar fate might await them. How to overcome 
this uncertainty was their dilemma. 
One group of people suggested that the coffins be well 
stocked with water and food and that a small air vent be drilled 
into them, just in case one of the "dead" happened to be alive. 
This was expensive to do but seemed more than worth the 
trouble. A second group, however, came up with a less expen-
sive and more efficient idea. Each coffin would have a twelve-
inch stake affixed to the inside of the coffin lid, exactly at the 
level of the heart. Then, when the coffin was closed, all uncer-
tainty would cease. 
The story does not indicate which solution was chosen, but 
for my purposes the choice is irrelevant. What is important to 
note is that different solutions were generated by different 
questions. The first solution was an answer to the question, 
How can we make sure that we do not bury people who are still 

Invisible Technologies 
127 
alive? The second was an answer to the question, How can we 
make sure that everyone we bury is dead? 
Questions, then, are like computers or television or stetho-
scopes or lie detectors, in that they are mechanisms that give 
direction to our thoughts, generate new ideas, venerate old 
ones, expose facts, or hide them. In this chapter, I wish to 
consider mechanisms that act like machines but are not normally 
thought of as part of Technopoly's repertoire. I must call atten-
tion to them precisely because they are so often overlooked. For 
all practical purposes, they may be considered technologies— 
technologies in disguise, perhaps, but technologies all the same. 
Aside from language itself, I don't suppose there is a clearer 
example of a technology that doesn't look like one than the 
mathematical sign known as zero. A brief word about it may 
help to illuminate later examples. 
The zero made its way from India to Europe in the tenth 
century. By the thirteenth century, it had taken hold of Western 
consciousness. (It was unknown to the Romans and the classical 
Greeks, although analogous concepts were known to Babylo-
nian mathematicians of the Hellenistic period.) Without the 
zero, you will find it difficult to perform any of the calculations 
that are quite simple to do with it. If you should try multiplying 
MMMMMM by MMDCXXVI, you will have this point con-
firmed. I have been told, by the way, that such a calculation can 
be done, but the process is so laborious that the task is unlikely 
to be completed, a truth that did not escape the notice of 
medieval mathematicians. There is, in fact, no evidence that 
Roman numerals were ever used, or intended to be used, for 
calculation. For that purpose, mathematicians used an abacus, 
and between the tenth and thirteenth centuries, a struggle of 
sorts took place between abacists, who wrote Roman numerals 
but calculated with the abacus, and algorists, who used Hindu 
numerals employing the zero sign. The objection raised by the 
abacists was that the zero registered the absence of a power of 

128 
Technopoly 
ten, which no Roman numeral did, and which struck them as 
philosophically and perhaps aesthetically offensive. After all, 
the zero is a sign that affects values of numerals wherever it 
occurs but has no value in itself. It is a sign about signs, whose 
very etymology, via "cipher" from the Hindu word for "void," 
suggests the idea of "nothingness." To the abacists, it was a 
bizarre idea to have a sign marking "nothing," and I fear that I 
would have sided with the abacists. 
I speak of the zero for two reasons: First, to underscore that 
it is a kind of technology that makes both possible and easy 
certain kinds of thoughts which, without it, would remain inac-
cessible to the average person. If it does not exactly have an 
ideology, it contains, at least, an idea. I have previously alluded 
to the technology of using letters or numbers to grade students' 
papers, and to the Greek discovery of the technology of alpha-
betization: like the use of zero, these are examples of how 
symbols may function like machines in creating new mind-sets 
and therefore new conceptions of reality. Second, the use of the 
zero and, of course, the Hindu numbering system of which it 
was a part made possible a sophisticated mathematics which, in 
turn, led to one of the most powerful technologies now in use: 
statistics. 
Stàtistics makes possible new perceptions and realities by 
making visible large-scale patterns. Its uses in science are too 
well known to warrant notice here, except to remark that if, as 
the physicists tell us, the world is made up of probabilities at the 
level of subatomic particles, then statistics is the only means by 
which to describe its operations. Indeed, the uncertainty princi-
ple ensures that in the nature of things physics is unable to do 
more than make statistical predictions. 
Of course, it is possible that physicists conceive of the world 
as probabilistic because statistics was invented. But that is not 
the question I wish to pursue here. A more practical question is, 
To what extent has statistics been allowed entry to places 

Invisible Technologies 
129 
where it does not belong? Technopoly, by definition, grants free 
rein to any technology, and we would expect that no limits 
have been placed on the use of statistics. We would expect 
correctly. 
Perhaps the most abusive example is found in the work of 
Francis Galton, who was born in 1822, died in 1911, and there-
fore lived during the richest period of technological invention. 
He may be thought of as one of the Founding Fathers of 
Technopoly. Galton is also known as the founder of "eugenics," 
a term he coined, which means the "science" of arranging mar-
riage and family so as to produce the best possible offspring 
based on the hereditary characteristics of the parents. He be-
lieved that anything could be measured and that statistical 
procedures, in particular, were the technology that could open 
the pathway to real knowledge about every form of human 
behavior. The next time you watch a televised beauty contest 
in which women are ranked numerically, you should remember 
Francis Galton, whose pathological romance with numbers 
originated this form of idiocy. Being unsatisfied with vagueness 
about where the most "beauty" was to be found, he constructed 
a "beauty map" of the British Isles. As he told us, he classified 
"the girls I passed in streets or elsewhere as attractive, indiffer-
ent, or repellent." He then proved statistically that London had 
the most beautiful girls, Aberdeen the ugliest; this no doubt 
made it awkward for Galton to spend his vacation in Scotland. 
If this were not enough, he also invented a method for quantify-
ing boredom (by counting the number of fidgets) and even 
proposed a statistical inquiry for determining the efficacy of 
prayer. 
But Galton's main interest was in demonstrating, statistically, 
the inheritance of intelligence. To that end, he established a 
laboratory at the International Exposition of 1884, where for 
threepence people could have their skulls measured and receive 
Galton's assessment of their intelligence. Apparently, a visitor 

130 
Technopoly 
received no extra credit for demanding his or her money back, 
which would surely have been a sign of intelligence. We can be 
sure that not many did, since Galton was considered a major 
intellect of his day. In fact, Lewis Terman, the man most respon-
sible for promoting IQ tests in America, calculated that Galton's 
IQ was more than 200. Terman, who fancied making such 
estimates of the dead, ranked Charles Darwin (Galton's cousin, 
incidentally) at a mere 135, and poor Copernicus somewhere 
between 100 and 110.1 
For a definitive history and analysis of the malignant role 
played by statistics in the "measurement" of intelligence, I refer 
the reader to Stephen Jay Gould's brilliant book The Mismeasure 
of Man. Here, I will only cite three points made by Gould, 
which I believe are sufficient to convince anyone with a higher 
IQ than Copernicus of the dangers of abusing statistics. 
The first problem is called reification, which means convert-
ing an abstract idea (mostly, a word) into a thing. In this 
context, reification works in the following way: We use the 
word "intelligence" to refer to a variety of human capabilities 
of which we approve. There is no such thing as "intelligence." 
It is a word, not a thing, and a word of a very high order of 
abstraction. But if we believe it to be a thing like the pancreas 
or liver, then we will believe scientific procedures can locate it 
and measure it. 
The second problem is ranking. Ranking requires a criterion 
for assigning individuals to their place in a single series. As 
Gould remarks, what better criterion can be used than an objec-
tive number? In the ranking of intelligence, we therefore assume 
that intelligence is not only a thing, but a single thing, located 
in the brain, and accessible to the assignment of a number. It is 
as if "beauty" were determined to inhere in the size of a 
woman's breasts. Then all we would have to do is measure 
breasts and rank each woman accordingly, and we would have 
an "objective" measure of "beauty." 

Invisible Technologies 
131 
The third point is that in doing this, we would have formu-
lated our question "Who is the fairest of all?" in a restricted and 
biased way. And yet this would go unnoticed, because, as 
Gould writes, "The mystique of science proclaims that numbers 
are the ultimate test of objectivity." This means that the way we 
have defined the concept will recede from our consciousness— 
that is, its fundamental subjectivity will become invisible, and 
the objective number itself will become reified. One would think 
that such a process would appear ridiculous on the breast of it, 
especially since, by believing it, we must conclude that Dolly 
Parton is objectively proved to be more beautiful than Audrey 
Hepburn. Or, in the case of intelligence, that Galton had twice 
as much of it as Copernicus. 
Nonetheless, in Technopoly all this is taken very seriously, 
albeit not without a few protests. After a lifetime of working in 
the field of intelligence measurement, E. L. Thorndike observed 
that intelligence tests suffer from three small defects: "Just what 
they measure is not known; how far it is proper to add, subtract, 
multiply, divide, and compute ratios with the measures obtained 
is not known; just what the measures signify concerning intel-
lect is not known."2 In other words, those who administer 
intelligence tests quite literally do not know what they are 
doing. That is why David McClelland remarked, "Psychologists 
should be ashamed of themselves for promoting a view of 
general intelligence that has engendered such a testing pro-
gram." Joseph Weizenbaum summed it up by saying, "Few 
'scientific' concepts have so thoroughly muddled the thinking of 
both scientists and the general public as that of the 'intelligence 
quotient' or 'IQ.' The idea that intelligence can be quantitatively 
measured along a single linear scale has caused untold harm to 
our society in general, and to education in particular."3 
Gould has documented some of this harm, and Howard 
Gardner has tried to alleviate it (in his book Frames of Mind). But 
Technopoly resists such reproaches, because it needs to believe 

132 
Technopoly 
that science is an entirely objective enterprise. Lacking a lucid 
set of ethics and having rejected tradition, Technopoly searches 
for a source of authority and finds it in the idea of statistical 
objectivity. 
This quest is especially evident not only in our efforts to 
determine precisely how smart people are but also in our at-
tempts to find out precisely how smart groups of people are. 
Aside from the fact that the procedures used do not and cannot 
give such an answer, one must ask, Of what earthly use is it to 
declare that one group of people is smarter than another? Sup-
pose it is shown that according to objective measures Asians 
have more "intelligence" than Caucasians, or that Caucasians 
have more than African-Americans. Then what? Of what use is 
this information to, say, a teacher or an employer? Is the teacher 
or employer to assume that a particular Asian is smarter than a 
particular African-American? Or even that six Asians are 
smarter than six African-Americans? Obviously not. And yet 
who knows? We must keep in mind the story of the statistician 
who drowned while trying to wade across a river with an 
average depth of four feet. That is to say, in a culture that 
reveres statistics, we can never be sure what sort of nonsense 
will lodge in people's heads. 
The only plausible answer to the question why we use statis-
tics for such measurements is that it is done for sociopolitical 
reasons whose essential malignancy is disguised by the cover of 
"scientific inquiry." If we believe that blacks are dumber than 
whites, and that this is not merely our opinion but is confirmed 
by objective measures, then we can believe we have an irre-
proachable authority for making decisions about the allocation 
of resources. This is how, in Technopoly, science is used to 
make democracy "rational." 
Polling is still another way. Just as statistics has spawned a 
huge testing industry, it has done the same for the polling of 
"public opinion." One may concede, at the start, that there are 

Invisible Technologies 
133 
some uses of polling that may be said to be reliable, especially 
if the case involves a greatly restricted question such as, Do you 
plan to vote for X or Y? But to say a procedure is reliable is not 
to say it is useful. The question is as yet undecided whether 
knowledge of voter trends during a political campaign enriches 
or demeans the electoral process. But when polls are used to 
guide public policy, we have a different sort of issue altogether. 
I have been in the presence of a group of United States 
congressmen who were gathered to discuss, over a period of 
two days, what might be done to make the future of America 
more survivable and, if possible, more humane. Ten consultants 
were called upon to offer perspectives and advice. Eight of them 
were pollsters. They spoke of the "trends" their polling uncov-
ered; for example, that people were no longer interested in the 
women's movement, did not regard environmental issues as of 
paramount importance, did not think the "drug problem" was 
getting worse, and so on. It was apparent, at once, that these 
polling results would become the basis of how the congressmen 
thought the future should be managed. The ideas the congress-
men had (all men, by the way) receded to the background. Their 
own perceptions, instincts, insights, and experience paled into 
irrelevance. Confronted by "social scientists," they were in-
clined to do what the "trends" suggested would satisfy the 
populace.4 
It is not unreasonable to argue that the polling of public 
opinion puts democracy on a sound and scientific footing. If our 
political leaders are supposed to represent us, they must have 
some information about what we "believe." In principle, there 
is no problem here. The problems lie elsewhere, and there are 
at least four of them. 
The first has to do with the forms of the questions that are 
put to the public. I refer the reader to the matter of whether it 
is proper to smoke and pray at the same time. Or, to take a more 
realistic example: If we ask people whether they think it accept-

134 
Technopoly 
able for the environment to continue to be polluted, we are 
likely to come up with answers quite different from those gener-
ated by the question, Do you think the protection of the envi-
ronment is of paramount importance? Or, Do you think safety 
in the streets is more important than environmental protection? 
The public's "opinion" on almost any issue will be a function of 
the question asked. (I might point out that in the seminar held 
by the congressmen, not one asked a question about the ques-
tions. They were interested in results, not in how these were 
obtained, and it did not seem to occur to them that the results 
and how they are obtained are inseparable.) 
Typically, pollsters ask questions that will elicit yes or no 
answers. Is it necessary to point out that such answers do not 
give a robust meaning to the phrase "public opinion"? Were 
you, for example, to answer "No" to the question "Do you 
think the drug problem can be reduced by government pro-
grams?" one would hardly know much of interest or value about 
your opinion. But allowing you to speak or write at length on 
the matter would, of course, rule out using statistics. The point 
is that the use of statistics in polling changes the meaning of 
"public opinion" as dramatically as television changes the mean-
ing of "political debate." In the American Technopoly, public 
opinion is a yes or no answer to an unexamined question. 
Second, the technique of polling promotes the assumption 
that an opinion is a thing inside people that can be exactly 
located and extracted by the pollster's questions. But there is an 
alternative point of view, of which we might say, it is what 
Jefferson had in mind. An opinion is not a momentary thing but 
a process of thinking, shaped by the continuous acquisition of 
knowledge and the activity of questioning, discussion, and de-
bate. A question may "invite" an opinion, but it also may 
modify and recast it; we might better say that people do not 
exactly "have" opinions but are, rather, involved in "opinion-
ing." That an opinion is conceived of as a measurable thing 

Invisible Technologies 
135 
falsifies the process by which people, in fact, do their opinion-
ing; and how people do their opinioning goes to the heart of 
the meaning of a democratic society. Polling tells us nothing 
about this, and tends to hide the process from our view. 
Which leads to the third point. Generally, polling ignores 
what people know about the subjects they are queried on. In a 
culture that is not obsessed with measuring and ranking things, 
this omission would probably be regarded as bizarre. But let us 
imagine what we would think of opinion polls if the questions 
came in pairs, indicating what people "believe" and what they 
"know" about the subject. If I may make up some figures, let us 
suppose we read the following: "The latest poll indicates that 72 
percent of the American public believes we should withdraw 
economic aid from Nicaragua. Of those who expressed this 
opinion, 28 percent thought Nicaragua was in central Asia, 18 
percent thought it was an island near New Zealand, and 27.4 
percent believed that 'Africans should help themselves,' obvi-
ously confusing Nicaragua with Nigeria. Moreover, of those 
polled, 61.8 percent did not know that we give economic aid to 
Nicaragua, and 23 percent did not know what 'economic aid' 
means." Were pollsters inclined to provide such information, 
the prestige and power of polling would be considerably re-
duced. Perhaps even congressmen, confronted by massive igno-
rance, would invest their own understandings with greater trust. 
The fourth problem with polling is that it shifts the locus of 
responsibility between political leaders and their constituents. It 
is true enough that congressmen are supposed to represent the 
interests of their constituents. But it is also true that congress-
men are expected to use their own judgment about what is in 
the public's best interests. For this, they must consult their own 
experience and knowledge. Before the ascendance of polling, 
political leaders, though never indifferent to the opinions of 
their constituents, were largely judged on their capacity to make 
decisions based on such wisdom as they possessed; that is, 

136 
Technopoly 
political leaders were responsible for the decisions they made. 
With the refinement and extension of the polling process, they 
are under increasing pressure to forgo deciding anything for 
themselves and to defer to the opinions of the voters, no matter 
how ill-informed and shortsighted those opinions might be. 
We can see this process of responsibility-shift even more 
clearly in the case of the statistically based ratings of television 
shows. The definition of a "good" television show has become 
purely and simply a matter of its having high ratings. A "bad" 
show has low ratings. The responsibility of a television writer, 
therefore, begins and ends with his or her ability to create a 
show that many millions of viewers will watch. The writer, in 
a word, is entirely responsible to the audience. There is no need 
for the writer to consult tradition, aesthetic standards, thematic 
plausibility, refinements of taste, or even plain comprehensibil-
ity. The iron rule of public opinion is all that matters. Television 
executives are fond of claiming that their medium is the most 
democratic institution in America: a plebiscite is held every 
week to determine which programs will survive. This claim is 
given added weight by a second claim: creative artists have 
never been indifferent to the preferences and opinions of their 
audiences. Writers, for example, write for people, for their ap-
probation and understanding. But writers also write for them-
selves and because they have something they want to say, not 
always because readers have something they want to hear. By 
giving constant deference to public preferences, polling changes 
the motivation of writers; their entire effort is to increase "the 
numbers." Popular literature now depends more than ever on 
the wishes of the audience, not the creativity of the artist. 
Before leaving the subject of the technology of statistics, I 
must call attention to the fact that statistics creates an enormous 
amount of completely useless information, which compounds 
the always difficult task of locating that which is useful to a 
culture. This is more than a case of "information-overload." It is 

Invisible Technologies 
137 
a matter of "information-trivia," which has the effect of placing 
all information on an equal level. No one has expressed this 
misuse of a technology better than the New Yorker magazine 
cartoonist Mankoff. Showing an attentive man watching televi-
sion news, Mankoff has the newscaster saying, "A preliminary 
census report indicates that for the first time in our nation's 
history female anthropologists outnumber male professional 
golfers." When statistics and computers are joined, volumes of 
garbage are generated in public discourse. Those who have 
watched television sports programs will know that Mankoff's 
cartoon is, in fact, less of a parody than a documentary. Useless, 
meaningless statistics flood the attention of the viewer. Sports-
casters call them "graphics" in an effort to suggest that the 
information, graphically presented, is a vital supplement to the 
action of the game. For example: "Since 1984, the Buffalo Bills 
have won only two games in which they were four points ahead 
with less than six minutes to play." Or this: "In only 17 percent 
of the times he has pitched at Shea Stadium has Dwight Gooden 
struck out the third and fourth hitters less than three times when 
they came to bat with more than one runner on base."5 What 
is one to do with this or to make of it? And yet there seems to 
be a market for useless information. Those who read USA 
Today, for example, are offered on the front page of each issue 
an idiotic statistic of the day that looks something like this: "The 
four leading states in banana consumption from 1980 through 
1989 are Kansas, North Dakota, Wyoming, and Louisiana. 
Oddly, Nevada, which was ninth in 1989, fell to twenty-sixth 
last year, which is exactly where it ranks in kiwi consumption."6 
It is surprising how frequently such blather will serve as the 
backbone of conversations which are essentially meaningless. I 
have heard New Yorkers, with a triumphant flourish, offer out-
of-towners the statistic that New York City is only eighth in the 
nation in per-capita violent crimes and then decline to go out-
side because it was past 6:00 p.m. 

138 
Technopoly 
I do not say, of course, that all such statistical statements are 
useless. If we learn that one out of every four black males 
between the ages of twenty and thirty has spent some time in 
prison, and that the nation's expenditure for the education of 
black children is 23 percent less than it is for white children, we 
may have some statistical facts that will help us to see a cause-
and-effect relationship, and thereby suggest a course of action. 
But statistics, like any other technology, has a tendency to run 
out of control, to occupy more of our mental space than it 
warrants, to invade realms of discourse where it can only wreak 
havoc. When it is out of control, statistics buries in a heap of 
trivia what is necessary to know. 
And there is another point, which in fact is the core of this 
chapter. Some technologies come in disguise. Rudyard Kipling 
called them "technologies in repose." They do not look like 
technologies, and because of that they do their work, for good 
or ill, without much criticism or even awareness. This applies 
not only to IQ tests and to polls and to all systems of ranking 
and grading but to credit cards, accounting procedures, and 
achievement tests. It applies in the educational world to what 
are called "academic courses," as well. A course is a technology 
for learning. I have "taught" about two hundred of them and do 
not know why each one lasts exactly fifteen weeks, or why each 
meeting lasts exactly one hour and fifty minutes. If the answer 
is that this is done for administrative convenience, then a course 
is a fraudulent technology. It is put forward as a desirable 
structure for learning when in fact it is only a structure for 
allocating space, for convenient record-keeping, and for control 
of faculty time. The point is that the origin of and raison d'être 
for a course are concealed from us. We come to believe it exists 
for one reason when it exists for quite another. One characteris-
tic of those who live in a Technopoly is that they are largely 
unaware of both the origins and the effects of their tech-
nologies.7 

Invisible Technologies 
139 
Perhaps the most interesting example of such lack of aware-
ness is the widespread belief that modern business invented the 
technology of management. Management is a system of power 
and control designed to make maximum use of relevant knowl-
edge, the hierarchical organization of human abilities, and the 
flow of information from bottom to top and back again. It is 
generally assumed that management was created by business 
enterprises as a rational response to the economic and techno-
logical demands of the Industrial Revolution. But research by 
Alfred Chandler, Sidney Pollard, and especially Keith Hoskin 
and Richard Macve reveals a quite different picture and leads to 
a startling conclusion: modern business did not invent manage-
ment; management invented modern business.8 
The most likely place for management to have originated is, 
of course, in Great Britain in the late eighteenth and early 
nineteenth centuries. But there is no evidence that British indus-
try knew anything about management as late as 1830, nor did 
there exist anything approximating a "managerial class." Man-
agement was created in the United States "out of the blue," as 
Hoskin and Macve say. It was not a creation of any obvious 
needs of American industry, which was only a marginal force in 
the world economy in the mid-nineteenth century. The roots of 
management may be traced to a new educational system, intro-
duced in 1817 to the United States Military Academy by the 
academy's fourth superintendent, Sylvanus Thayer. Thayer 
made two innovations. The first, borrowed from the Ecole 
Polytechnique in Paris, was to grade examinations by giving 
numerical marks. As I have previously noted, the grading of 
student papers originated in Cambridge University toward the 
end of the eighteenth century, and the practice was taken up by 
several schools on the Continent. Thayer's use of this technol-
ogy is probably the first instance of it in America. As every 
teacher knows, the numerical mark changes the entire experi-
ence and meaning of learning. It introduces a fierce competition 

140 
Technopoly 
among students by providing sharply differentiated symbols of 
success and failure. Grading provides an "objective" measure of 
human performance and creates the unshakable illusion that 
accurate calculations can be made of worthiness. The human 
being becomes, to use Michel Foucault's phrase, "a calculable 
person." 
Thayer's second innovation, apparently his own invention, 
was a line-and-staff system. He divided the academy into two 
divisions, each organized hierarchically. As Hoskin and Macve 
describe it: "Daily, weekly and monthly reports were required, 
all in writing. There were continual relays of written communi-
cation and command, going from the bottom to the top of each 
line, before being consolidated and passed to the central 'Staff 
Office.'" Thayer rejected the traditional leader's role of direct, 
visible command. He ruled indirectly through the medium of 
written reports, charts, memos, personnel files, etc., not unlike 
the way a modern CEO functions. 
We do not know how most of the two hundred cadets at the 
academy reacted to Thayer's new system (which Hoskin and 
Macve term the "grammatocentric principle," meaning that ev-
erything was organized around the use of writing). But we do 
know that two of them, Daniel Tyler and George Whistler, 
were impressed. Both were in the graduating class of 1819, and 
took with them their lieutenant's rank and Thayer's general 
approach to organizations. 
Daniel Tyler, working at the Springfield Armory, did a time-
and-motion study in 1832 (sixty years before Frederick Taylor's 
"scientific management" got under way) and established objec-
tively based norms of production for every job in the armory. 
Workers were kept under surveillance, and their actual produc-
tivity was measured against the established productivity norms. 
Tyler also introduced quality control and inventory accounting. 
The result of all these methods was a dramatic increase in 
productivity and decrease in costs. 

Invisible Technologies 
141 
Meanwhile, George Whistler (incidentally, the father of 
James Whistler and therefore the husband of "Whistler's 
Mother"), having become the chief engineer of the Western 
Railroad, developed a managerial system in 1839 that would 
have made Sylvanus Thayer proud. He organized the railroad 
along hierarchical lines, beginning with a central staff office, 
descending to regional managers and then local managers. He 
employed, to great effect, the grammatocentric principle, which 
he had no doubt learned well at the academy when serving in 
the staff office as cadet staff sergeant major. 
The principles of calculability and grammatocentrism are, of 
course, the foundation of modern systems of management. Cal-
culability led inevitably to such ideas as detailed accounting 
systems, inventory control, and productivity norms. Gram-
matocentrism promoted the idea that the best way to run a 
business is to know it through reports of those lower down the 
line. One manages, in other words, by the "numbers" and by 
being removed from the everyday realities of production. 
It is worth saying that the basic structure of business manage-
ment originated in nonbusiness contexts. Still, it did not take 
very long for American businesses to begin to adopt the princi-
ples of Thayer, Tyler, and Whistler, and by doing so they 
created what we now think of as a modern corporation. Indeed, 
management defines what we mean by a corporation, and has 
led John Kenneth Galbraith to remark in The New Industrial 
State: "More perhaps than machinery, massive and complex 
business organizations are the tangible manifestation of ad-
vanced technology." 
There are two reasons why the case of management is in-
structive. First, as suggested by Galbraith, management, like the 
zero, statistics, IQ measurement, grading papers, or polling, 
functions as does any technology. It is not made up of mechani-
cal parts, of course. It is made up of procedures and rules 
designed to standardize behavior. We may call any such system 

142 
Technopoly 
of procedures and rules a technique; and there is nothing to fear 
from techniques, unless, like so much of our machinery, they 
become autonomous. There's the rub. In a Technopoly, we tend 
to believe that only through the autonomy of techniques (and 
machinery) can we achieve our goals. This idea is all the more 
dangerous because no one can reasonably object to the rational 
use of techniques to achieve human purposes. Indeed, I am not 
disputing that the technique known as management may be the 
best way for modern business to conduct its affairs. We are 
technical creatures, and through our predilection for and our 
ability to create techniques we achieve high levels of clarity and 
efficiency. As I said earlier, language itself is a kind of tech-
nique—an invisible technology—and through it we achieve 
more than clarity and efficiency. We achieve humanity—or 
inhumanity. The question with language, as with any other 
technique or machine, is and always has been, Who is to be the 
master? Will we control it, or will it control us? The argument, 
in short, is not with technique. The argument is with the tri-
umph of technique, with techniques that become sanctified and 
rule out the possibilities of other ones. Technique, like any other 
technology, tends to function independently of the system it 
serves. It becomes autonomous, in the manner of a robot that 
no longer obeys its master. 
Second, management is an important example of how an 
"invisible technology" works subversively but powerfully to 
create a new way of doing things, a classic instance of the tail 
wagging the dog. It is entirely possible for business and other 
institutions to operate without a highly technicalized manage-
ment structure, however hard for us to imagine. We have grown 
so accustomed to it that we are near to believing management 
is an aspect of the natural order of things, just as students and 
teachers have come to believe that education would be impossi-
ble without the structure of a college "course." And politicians 
believe they would be adrift without the assistance of public-

Invisible Technologies 
143 
opinion polling. When a method of doing things becomes so 
deeply associated with an institution that we no longer know 
which came first—the method or the institution—then it is 
difficult to change the institution or even to imagine alternative 
methods for achieving its purposes. 
And so it is necessary to understand where our techniques 
come from and what they are good for; we must make them 
visible so that they may be restored to our sovereignty. In the 
next chapter, I hope to do this with the intricate and vast 
ensemble of techniques I call Scientism. 

9 
Scientism 
n December 5, 1989, Daniel 
Goleman, covering the social-science beat for The New York 
Times, gave considerable space to some "recent research find-
ings" that doubtless unsettled readers who hadn't been keeping 
informed about the work of our scientists of the mind: Goleman 
reported that psychological researchers have discovered that 
people fear death. This insight led them to formulate "a sweep-
ing theory," to quote Goleman, "that gives the fear of death a 
central and often unsuspected role in psychological life." To 
whom death's role is unsuspected we were not told, but the 
theory is sufficiently rich to allow the hypothesis that all cul-
tures (to quote Goleman again) "prescribe what people should 
do to lead a 'good' and 'meaningful' life and offer some hope of 
immortality, as in the the [sic] Christian afterlife or the Hindu 
notion of reincarnation into a better life." (The repetition of the 
word "the" in the sentence quoted above may have been a 
typographical error—or else perhaps an excited stammer in the 
face of such an astounding hypothesis.) As if this were not 
enough, Goleman also reported the same psychologists as hav-
0 

Scientism 
145 
ing discovered that how one reacts to death depends on one's 
moral code, and that those who value open-mindedness are 
more tolerant of people whose values differ from theirs—which 
means that those who are open-minded tend to be open-
minded, a fact that is not sufficiently appreciated, if known at all. 
On September 11, 1990, Goleman revealed the results of new 
research which suggests that Asian-American students do well 
in school because they come from intact families that value 
advanced academic degrees. And on October 2, 1990, he re-
ported that psychologists have discovered that children who 
are inept at social relations tend to be unpopular with other 
children. 
I cite these reports from The New York Times because it is 
considered by many to be the "newspaper of public record" and 
may be assumed to be reporting the best of social science. It is 
possible, of course, that Goleman is a "mole," or an undercover 
agent, who is trying to reveal where our culture stands by 
ridiculing the trivialities of social science. But I doubt it. He 
seems to believe in social science, as so many in Technopoly do. 
That is, he believes that the study of human behavior, when 
conducted according to the rigorous principles established by 
the physical and biological sciences, will produce objective 
facts, testable theories, and profound understandings of the 
human condition. Perhaps even universal laws. 
I have previously attributed the origins of this belief to the 
work of Auguste Comte, which is a defensible position but 
something of an oversimplification. In fact, the beginning for-
mulations of a "science of man" are more precisely attributed to 
a school than to a man. The school, founded in 1794 in Paris, 
was called the Ecole Polytechnique (the same school that, as I 
mentioned earlier, quickly adopted the practice begun at Cam-
bridge of assigning number grades to student work). The Ecole 
Polytechnique gathered for its teaching staff the best scientists, 
mathematicians, and engineers France had produced, and be-

146 
Technopoly 
came famous for its enthusiasm for the methods of the natural 
sciences. Lavoisier and Ampere taught there, as did, later, Volta 
and Alexander von Humboldt. Their work in chemistry and 
physics helped to lay the foundation of modern science, and in 
that respect the Ecole Polytechnique is justly honored. But there 
were others associated with the school whose exuberance for 
the methods of the natural sciences led them to believe that 
there were no limits to the powers of the human mind, and in 
particular no limits to the power of scientific research. The most 
famous expression of what may be called "scientific hubris" 
appeared in Pierre-Simon de Laplace's Essai philosophique sur les 
probabilités, published in 1814. He wrote: "A mind that in a 
given instance knew all the forces by which nature is animated 
and the position of all the bodies of which it is composed, if it 
were vast enough to include all these data within his analysis, 
could embrace in one single formula the movements of the 
largest bodies of the universe and of the smallest atoms; nothing 
would be uncertain for him; the future and the past would be 
equally before his eyes."1 
There is, of course, no scientist today who takes this view 
seriously, and there were few enough who did in the nineteenth 
century. But the spirit behind this scientific ideal inspired several 
men to believe that the reliable and predictable knowledge that 
could be obtained about stars and atoms could also be obtained 
about human behavior. Among the best known of these early 
"social scientists" were Claude-Henri de Saint-Simon, Prosper 
Enfantin, and, of course, Auguste Comte. They held in common 
two beliefs to which Technopoly is deeply indebted: that the 
natural sciences provide a method to unlock the secrets of both 
the human heart and the direction of social life; that society can 
be rationally and humanely reorganized according to principles 
that social science will uncover. It is with these men that the idea 
of "social engineering" begins and the seeds of Scientism are 
planted. 

Scientism 
147 
By Scientism, I mean three interrelated ideas that, taken to-
gether, stand as one of the pillars of Technopoly. Two of the 
three have just been cited. The first and indispensable idea is, as 
noted, that the methods of the natural sciences can be applied 
to the study of human behavior. This idea is the backbone of 
much of psychology and sociology as practiced at least in 
America, and largely accounts for the fact that social science, to 
quote F. A. Hayek, "has contributed scarcely anything to our 
understanding of social phenomena."2 
The second idea is, as also noted, that social science generates 
specific principles which can be used to organize society on a 
rational and humane basis. This implies that technical means— 
mostly "invisible technologies" supervised by experts—can be 
designed to control human behavior and set it on the proper 
course. 
The third idea is that faith in science can serve as a compre-
hensive belief system that gives meaning to life, as well as a 
sense of well-being, morality, and even immortality. 
I wish here to show how these ideas spiral into each other, 
and how they give energy and form to Technopoly. 
The term "science," as it is generally used today—referring 
to the work of those in the physical, chemical, and biological 
disciplines—was popularized in the early nineteenth century, 
with significant help from the formation of the British Associa-
tion for the Advancement of Science in 1831 (although Mur-
ray's New English Dictionary gives 1867 as the earliest use of the 
term in its modern sense). By the early twentieth century, the 
term had been appropriated by others, and it has since become 
increasingly familiar as a description of what psychologists, 
sociologists, and even anthropologists do. It will come as no 
surprise that I claim this is a deceptive and confusing use of the 
term, in part because it blurs the distinction between processes 
and practices. 
Using definitions proposed by the British philosopher Mi-

148 
Technopoly 
chael Oakeshott, we may say that "processes" refers to those 
events that occur in nature, such as the orbiting of planets or the 
melting of ice or the production of chlorophyll in a leaf. Such 
processes have nothing to do with human intelligence, are 
governed by immutable laws, and are, so to say, determined by 
the structure of nature. If one were so inclined, one might even 
say that processes are the creation of God. By "practices," on 
the other hand, Oakeshott means the creations of people— 
those events that result from human decisions and actions, such 
as writing or reading this book or forming a new government 
or conversing at dinner or falling in love. These events are a 
function of human intelligence interacting with environment, 
and although there is surely a measure of regularity in human 
affairs, such affairs are not determined by natural laws, immuta-
ble or otherwise. In other words, there is an irrevocable differ-
ence between a blink and a wink. A blink can be classified as a 
process; it has physiological causes which can be understood 
and explained within the context of established postulates and 
theories. But a wink must be classified as a practice, filled with 
personal and to some extent unknowable meanings and, in any 
case, quite impossible to explain or predict in terms of causal 
relations. 
What we may call science, then, is the quest to find the 
immutable and universal laws that govern processes, presuming 
that there are cause-and-effect relations among these processes. 
It follows that the quest to understand human behavior and 
feeling can in no sense except the most trivial be called science. 
One can, of course, point to the fact that students of both 
natural law and human behavior often quantify their observa-
tions, and on this common ground classify them together. A fair 
analogy would be to argue that, since a housepainter and an 
artist both use paint, they are engaged in the same enterprise 
and to the same end. 
The scientist uses mathematics to assist in uncovering and 

Scientism 
149 
describing the structure of nature. At best, sociologists (to take 
one example) use quantification merely to give some precision 
to their ideas. But there is nothing especially scientific in that. 
All sorts of people count things in order to achieve precision 
without claiming they are scientists. Bail bondsmen count the 
number of murders committed in their cities; judges count the 
number of divorce actions in their jurisdictions; business execu-
tives count the amount of money spent in their stores; and 
young children like to count their toes and fingers in order not 
to be vague about how many they have. Information produced 
by counting may sometimes be valuable in helping a person get 
an idea, or, even more so, in providing support for an idea. But 
the mere activity of counting does not make science. 
Nor does observing things, though it is sometimes said that 
if one is empirical, one is scientific. To be empirical means to 
look at things before drawing conclusions. Everyone, therefore, 
is an empiricist, with the possible exception of paranoid schizo-
phrenics. To be empirical also means to offer evidence that 
others can see as clearly as you. You may, for example, conclude 
that I like to write books, offering as evidence that I have 
written this one and several others besides. You may also offer 
as evidence a tape recording, which I can supply on request, on 
which I tell you that I like to write books. Such evidence may 
be said to be empirical, and your conclusion empirically based. 
But you are not therefore acting as a scientist. You are acting 
as a rational person, to which condition many people who are 
not scientists may make a just claim. 
Scientists do strive to be empirical and where possible pre-
cise, but it is also basic to their enterprise that they maintain a 
high degree of objectivity, which means that they study things 
independently of what people think or do about them. The 
opinions people hold about the external world are, to scientists, 
always an obstacle to be overcome, and it is well known that 
the scientist's picture of the external world is quite different 

150 
Technopoly 
from what most people believe the world to be like. Moreover, 
in their quest for objectivity, scientists proceed on the assump-
tion that the objects they study are indifferent to the fact that 
they are being studied. Heisenberg's uncertainty principle indi-
cates that at subatomic levels particles do "know" they are 
being studied, at least in a special meaning of "knowing." An 
electron, for example, changes either its momentum or its posi-
tion when it is being tracked—i.e., when it interacts with a 
photon—but the electron does not, in the usual sense of the 
word, "know" or "care" that the interaction is taking place. Nor 
do objects like leaves, apples, planets, kidneys, or bridges. This 
fact relieves the scientist of inquiring into their values and 
motivations and for this reason alone separates science from 
what is called social science, consigning the methodology of the 
latter (to quote Gunnar Myrdal) to the status of the "metaphysi-
cal and pseudo-objective."3 
The status of social-science methods is further reduced by the 
fact that there are almost no experiments that will reveal a 
social-science theory to be false. Theories in social science disap-
pear, apparently, because they are boring, not because they are 
refuted. But, as Karl Popper has demonstrated, science depends 
on the requirement that theories must be stated in a way that 
permits experiments to reveal that they are false. If a theory 
cannot be tested for its falsity, it is not a scientific theory—as, 
for example, Freud's theory of the Oedipus complex. Psychia-
trists can provide many examples supporting the validity of the 
theory, but they have no answer to the question "What evi-
dence would prove the theory false?" Believers in the God 
theory (sometimes called Creation Science) are silent on the 
question "What evidence would show that there is no God?" 
I do not say, incidentally, that the Oedipus complex and God 
do not exist. Nor do I say that to believe in them is harmful—far 
from it. I say only that, there being no tests that could, in 
principle, show them to be false, they fall outside the purview 

Scientism 
151 
of science, as do almost all theories that make up the content of 
"social science." 
I shall say in a few moments what I believe social science to 
be, as well as why Technopoly wishes to link it to the scientific 
enterprise. Here, I should like to give an example of social 
science to amplify the reasons why it is misleading to call it 
science. 
A piece of work that is greatly admired as social science, at 
least from a technical if not an ethical point of view, is the set 
of experiments (so called) supervised by Stanley Milgram, the 
account of which was published under the title Obedience to 
Authority. In this notorious study, Milgram sought to entice 
people to give electric shocks to "innocent victims" who were 
in fact conspirators in the experiment and did not actually 
receive the shocks. Nonetheless, most of Milgram's subjects 
believed that the victims were receiving the shocks, and many of 
them, under psychological pressure, gave shocks that, had they 
been real, might have killed the victims. Milgram took great 
care in designing the environment in which all this took place, 
and his book is filled with statistics that indicate how many did 
or did not do what the experimenters told them to do. Some-
where in the neighborhood of 65 percent of his subjects were 
rather more compliant than would have been good for the 
health of their victims. Milgram drew the following conclusion 
from his research: In the face of what they construe to be 
legitimate authority, most people will do what they are told. 
Or, to put it another way, the social context in which people 
find themselves will be a controlling factor in how they behave. 
Now, in the first place, this conclusion is merely a common-
place of human experience, known by just about everyone from 
Maimonides to your aunt and uncle. The exceptions seem to be 
American psychiatrists. Before he conducted his experiment, 
Milgram sent a questionnaire to a large group of psychiatrists 
from whom he solicited opinions as to how many subjects 

152 
Technopoly 
would be likely to continue giving electric shocks when ordered 
to do so. The psychiatrists thought the number would be very 
much smaller than it actually was, basing their estimates on their 
knowledge of human behavior (which only recently has admit-
ted the idea that people fear death). I do not mean to imply that 
real scientists never produce commonplaces, but only that it is 
rare, and never a cause for excitement. On the other hand, 
commonplace conclusions are almost always a characteristic of 
social research pretending to be science. 
In the second place, Milgram's study was not empirical in the 
strict sense, since it was not based on observations of people in 
natural life situations. I assume that no one is especially inter-
ested in how people behave in a laboratory at Yale or any other 
place; what matters is how people behave in situations where 
their behavior makes a difference to their lives. But any conclu-
sions that can be drawn from Milgram's study must specify that 
they apply only to people in laboratories under the conditions 
Milgram arranged. And even if we assume a correspondence 
between laboratory behavior and more lifelike situations, no 
predictions can be made about what lifelike situations these 
might be. Nor can any serious claim be made that there is a 
causal relationship between the acceptance of legitimate author-
ity and doing what you are told. In fact, Milgram himself shows 
us that there is not, since 35 percent of his subjects told the 
"authority figure" to bug off. Moreover, Milgram had no idea 
why some people did and some people did not tell him to bug 
off. For myself, I feel quite sure that if each of Milgram's subjects 
had been required to read Hannah Arendt's Eichmann in Jerusa-
lem before showing up at the laboratory, his numbers would 
have been quite different. 
But let us suppose that I am wrong about that, and let us 
further suppose that Milgram had found that 100 percent of his 
subjects did what they were told, with or without Hannah 
Arendt. And now let us suppose that I tell you a story of a 

Scientism 
153 
group of people who in some real situation refused to comply 
with the orders of a legitimate authority—let us say, the Danes 
who in the face of Nazi occupation helped nine thousand Jews 
escape to Sweden. Would you say to me that this cannot be so 
because Milgram's study proves otherwise? Or would you say 
that this overturns Milgram's work? Perhaps you would say that 
the Danish response is not relevant, since the Danes did not 
regard the Nazi occupation as constituting legitimate authority. 
But then, how would we explain the cooperative response to 
Nazi authority of the French, the Poles, and the Lithuanians? I 
think you would say none of these things, because Milgram's 
experiment does not confirm or falsify any theory that might be 
said to postulate a law of human nature. His study—which, 
incidentally, I find both fascinating and terrifying—is not sci-
ence. It is something else entirely. 
Which leads me to say what sort of work I think Milgram 
was engaged in—and what sort of work those who study 
human behavior and situations are engaged in. I will start by 
making reference to a famous correspondence between Sig-
mund Freud and Albert Einstein. Freud once sent a copy of one 
of his books to Einstein, asking for his evaluation of it. Einstein 
replied that he thought the book exemplary but was not quali-
fied to judge its scientific merit. To which Freud replied some-
what testily that, if Einstein could say nothing of its scientific 
merit, he, Freud, could not imagine how the book could be 
judged exemplary: it was science or it was nothing. Well, of 
course, Freud was wrong. His work is exemplary—indeed, 
monumental—but scarcely anyone believes today that Freud 
was doing science, any more than educated people believe that 
Marx was doing science, or Max Weber or Lewis Mumford or 
Bruno Bettelheim or Carl Jung or Margaret Mead or Arnold 
Toynbee. What these people were doing—and Stanley Mil-
gram was doing—is documenting the behavior and feelings of 
people as they confront problems posed by their culture. Their 

154 
Technopoly 
work is a form of storytelling. Science itself is, of course, a form 
of storytelling too, but its assumptions and procedures are so 
different from those of social research that it is extremely mis-
leading to give the same name to each. In fact, the stories of 
social researchers are much closer in structure and purpose to 
what is called imaginative literature; that is to say, both a social 
researcher and a novelist give unique interpretations to a set of 
human events and support their interpretations with examples 
in various forms. Their interpretations cannot be proved or 
disproved but will draw their appeal from the power of their 
language, the depth of their explanations, the relevance of their 
examples, and the credibility of their themes. And all of this has, 
in both cases, an identifiable moral purpose. The words "true" 
and "false" do not apply here in the sense that they are used in 
mathematics or science. For there is nothing universally and 
irrevocably true or false about these interpretations. There are 
no critical tests to confirm or falsify them. There are no natural 
laws from which they are derived. They are bound by time, by 
situation, and above all by the cultural prejudices of the re-
searcher or writer. 
A novelist—for example, D. H. Lawrence—tells a story 
about the sexual life of a woman—Lady Chatterley—and from 
it we may learn things about the secrets of some people, and 
wonder if Lady Chatterley's secrets are not more common than 
we had thought. Lawrence did not claim to be a scientist, but 
he looked carefully and deeply at the people he knew and 
concluded that there is more hypocrisy in heaven and earth than 
is dreamt of in some of our philosophies. Alfred Kinsey was also 
interested in the sexual lives of women, and so he and his 
assistants interviewed thousands of them in an effort to find out 
what they believed their sexual conduct was like. Each woman 
told her story, although it was a story carefully structured by 
Kinsey's questions. Some of them told everything they were 
permitted to tell, some only a little, and some probably lied. But 

Scientism 
155 
when all their tales were put together, a collective story 
emerged about a certain time and place. It was a story more 
abstract than D. H. Lawrence's, largely told in the language of 
statistics and, of course, without much psychological insight. 
But it was a story nonetheless. One might call it a tribal tale of 
one thousand and one nights, told by a thousand and one 
women, and its theme was not much different from Law-
rence's—namely, that the sexual life of some women is a lot 
stranger and more active than some other stories, particularly 
Freud's, had led us to believe. 
I do not say that there is no difference between Lawrence and 
Kinsey. Lawrence unfolds his story in a language structure 
called a narrative. Kinsey's language structure is called exposi-
tion. These forms are certainly different, although not so much 
as we might suppose. It has been remarked about the brothers 
Henry and William James that Henry was the novelist who 
wrote like a psychologist, and William the psychologist who 
wrote like a novelist. Certainly, in my meaning of the word 
"story," exposition is as capable of unfolding one as is narra-
tive. Of course, Lawrence's story is controlled entirely by the 
limits of his own imagination, and he is not obliged to con-
sult any social facts other than those he believed he knew. His 
story is pure personal perception, and that is why we call 
it fiction. Kinsey's story comes from the mouths of others, 
and he is limited by what they answered when he asked his 
questions. Kinsey's story, therefore, we may call a documentary. 
But, like all stories, it is infused with moral prejudice and 
sociological theory. It is Kinsey who made up the questions, and 
chose who would be interviewed, the circumstances of the inter-
view, and how the answers would be interpreted. All of this 
gives shape and point to his story. Indeed, we may assume that 
Kinsey, like Lawrence, knew from the outset what the theme 
of his story would be. Otherwise, he probably wouldn't have 
cared to tell it. 

156 
Technopoly 
Both the novelist and the social researcher construct their 
stories by the use of archetypes and metaphors. Cervantes, for 
example, gave us the enduring archetype of the incurable 
dreamer and idealist in Don Quixote. The social historian Marx 
gave us the archetype of the ruthless and conspiring, though 
nameless, capitalist. Flaubert gave us the repressed bourgeois 
romantic in Emma Bovary. And Margaret Mead gave us the 
carefree, guiltless Samoan adolescent. Kafka gave us the alien-
ated urbanite driven to self-loathing. And Max Weber gave us 
hardworking men driven by a mythology he called the Protes-
tant Ethic. Dostoevsky gave us the egomaniac redeemed by 
love and religious fervor. And B. F. Skinner gave us the automa-
ton redeemed by a benign technology. 
I think it justifiable to say that, in the nineteenth century, 
novelists provided us with most of the powerful metaphors and 
images of our culture. In the twentieth century, such metaphors 
and images have come largely from the pens of social historians 
and researchers. Think of John Dewey, William James, Erik 
Erikson, Alfred Kinsey, Thorstein Veblen, Margaret Mead, 
Lewis Mumford, B. F. Skinner, Carl Rogers, Marshall McLuhan, 
Barbara Tuchman, Noam Chomsky, Robert Coles, even Stanley 
Milgram, and you must acknowledge that our ideas of what we 
are like and what kind of country we live in come from their 
stories to a far greater extent than from the stories of our most 
renowned novelists. 
I do not mean, incidentally, that the metaphors of social 
research are created in the same way as those of novels and 
plays. The writer of fiction creates metaphors by an elaborate 
and concrete detailing of the actions and feelings of particular 
human beings. Sociology is background; individual psychology 
is the focus. The researcher tends to do it the other way around. 
The focus is on a wider field, and the individual life is seen in 
silhouette, by inference and suggestion. Also, the novelist pro-
ceeds by showing. The researcher, using abstract social facts, 

Scientism 
157 
proceeds by reason, by logic, by argument. That is why fiction 
is apt to be more entertaining. Whereas Oscar Wilde or Evelyn 
Waugh shows us the idle and conspicuously consuming rich, 
Thorstein Veblen argues them into existence. In the character of 
Sammy Glick, Budd Schulberg shows us the narcissist whose 
origins Christopher Lasch has tried to explain through sociologi-
cal analysis. So there are differences among storytellers, and 
most of the time our novelists are more pleasurable to read. But 
the stories told by our social researchers are at least as compel-
ling and, in our own times, apparently more credible. 
Why do such social researchers tell their stories? Essentially 
for didactic and moralistic purposes. These men and women tell 
their stories for the same reason the Buddha, Confucius, Hillel, 
and Jesus told their stories (and for the same reason D. H. 
Lawrence told his). It is true, of course, that social researchers 
rarely base their claims to knowledge on the indisputability of 
sacred texts, and even less so on revelation. But we must not be 
dazzled or deluded by differences in method between preachers 
and scholars. Without meaning to be blasphemous, I would say 
that Jesus was as keen a sociologist as Veblen. Indeed, Jesus' 
remark about rich men, camels, and the eye of a needle is as 
good a summary of Veblen's Theory of the Leisure Class as it is 
possible to make. As social researchers, Jesus and Veblen dif-
fered in that Veblen was more garrulous.4 
Unlike science, social research never discovers anything. It 
only rediscovers what people once were told and need to be 
told again. If, indeed, the price of civilization is repressed sexual-
ity, it was not Sigmund Freud who discovered it. If the con-
sciousness of people is formed by their material circumstances, 
it was not Marx who discovered it. If the medium is the mes-
sage, it was not McLuhan who discovered it. They have merely 
retold ancient stories in a modern style. And these stories will 
be told anew decades and centuries from now, with, I imagine, 
less effect. For it would seem that Technopoly does not want 

158 
Technopoly 
these kinds of stories but facts—hard facts, scientific facts. We 
might even say that in Technopoly precise knowledge is pre-
ferred to truthful knowledge but that in any case Technopoly 
wishes to solve, once and for all, the dilemma of subjectivity. In 
a culture in which the machine, with its impersonal and end-
lessly repeatable operations, is a controlling metaphor and con-
sidered to be the instrument of progress, subjectivity becomes 
profoundly unacceptable. Diversity, complexity, and ambiguity 
of human judgment are enemies of technique. They mock statis-
tics and polls and standardized tests and bureaucracies. In Tech-
nopoly, it is not enough for social research to rediscover ancient 
truths or to comment on and criticize the moral behavior of 
people. In Technopoly, it is an insult to call someone a "moral-
izer." Nor is it sufficient for social research to put forward 
metaphors, images, and ideas that can help people live with 
some measure of understanding and dignity. Such a program 
lacks the aura of certain knowledge that only science can pro-
vide. It becomes necessary, then, to transform psychology, 
sociology, and anthropology into "sciences," in which human-
ity itself becomes an object, much like plants, planets, or ice 
cubes. 
That is why the commonplaces that people fear death and 
that children who come from stable families valuing scholarship 
will do well in school must be announced as "discoveries" of 
scientific enterprise. In this way, social researchers can see them-
selves, and can be seen, as scientists, researchers without bias or 
values, unburdened by mere opinion. In this way, social policies 
can be claimed to rest on objectively determined facts. In Tech-
nopoly, it is not enough to argue that the segregation of blacks 
and whites in schools is immoral, and it is useless to offer Black 
Boy or Invisible Man or The Fire Next Time as proof. The courts 
must be shown that standardized academic and psychological 
tests reveal that blacks do less well than whites and feel de-
meaned when segregation exists. In Technopoly, it is not 

Scientism 
159 
enough to say it is immoral and degrading to allow people to 
be homeless. You cannot get anywhere by asking a judge, a 
politician, or a bureaucrat to read Les Misérables or Nana or, 
indeed, the New Testament. You must show that statistics have 
produced data revealing the homeless to be unhappy and to be 
a drain on the economy. Neither Dostoevsky nor Freud, Dick-
ens nor Weber, Twain nor Marx, is now a dispenser of legiti-
mate knowledge. They are interesting; they are "worth 
reading"; they are artifacts of our past. But as for "truth," we 
must turn to "science." Which brings me to the crux of what I 
mean by Scientism, and why it has emerged in Technopoly. 
I have tried to show that science, social research, and the kind 
of work we call imaginative literature are three quite different 
kinds of enterprise. In the end, all of them are forms of story-
telling—human attempts to account for our experience in co-
herent ways. But they have different aims, ask different ques-
tions, follow different procedures, and give different meanings 
to "truth." In most of these respects, social research has little in 
common with science, and much in common with other forms 
of imaginative literature. Yet social "scientists" have consis-
tently sought to identify themselves, and in more than name, 
with physicists, chemists, biologists, and others who inquire 
into the lawful regularities of the natural world. Why students 
of the human condition should do this is not hard to explain. 
The great successes of modern times—indeed, perhaps the only 
successes—have come in medicine, pharmacology, biochemis-
try, astrophysics, and all the feats of mechanical, biological, and 
electronic engineering made possible by the consistent applica-
tion of the aims, assumptions, and procedures of natural science. 
These successes have attached to the name of science an awe-
some measure of authority, and to those who claim the title 
"scientist" a similar measure of respect and prestige. Beyond 
that lies the nineteenth-century hope that the assumptions and 
procedures of natural science might be applied without modifi-

160 
Technopoly 
cation to the social world, to the same end of increased predict-
ability and control, and with the same kind of engineering 
success. This hope has proved both misguided and illusory. But 
the illusion is a powerful one, and, given the psychological, 
social, and material benefits that attach to the label "scientist," 
it is not hard to see why social researchers should find it hard 
to give it up. 
It is less easy to see why the rest of us have so willingly, even 
eagerly, cooperated in perpetuating the same illusion. In part, 
the explanation lies in a profound misunderstanding of the aims 
of natural and of social studies, and of the differences between 
the physical and social worlds. But there is more to it than that. 
When the new technologies and techniques and spirit of men 
like Galileo, Newton, and Bacon laid the foundations of natural 
science, they also discredited the authority of earlier accounts of 
the physical world, as found, for example, in the great tale of 
Genesis. By calling into question the truth of such accounts in 
one realm, science undermined the whole edifice of belief in 
sacred stories and ultimately swept away with it the source to 
which most humans had looked for moral authority. It is not too 
much to say, I think, that the desacralized world has been 
searching for an alternative source of moral authority ever since. 
So far as I know, no responsible natural scientist, either of the 
Renaissance or of recent times, has claimed that the procedures 
of natural science or its discoveries can tell us what we ought to 
do—whether some way of dealing with our fellow humans is 
good or evil, right or wrong. Indeed, the very principles of 
natural science, with its requirement of an objective stance 
toward what is studied, compel the natural scientist to abjure 
in his or her role as a scientist such moral judgments or claims. 
When natural scientists speak out on moral questions, on what 
is good or evil to do, they speak as the rest of us—as concerned 
citizens on a threatened planet, as rational women and men, as 
people of conscience who must struggle no less than you must, 

Scientism 
161 
or I, to answer for themselves where the ultimate authority for 
their moral judgment lies. It is the world of desperate listeners, 
longing for a more powerful moral authority, that begs the 
natural scientist to say it is the science that speaks, not the 
woman or man. But the scientist cannot with honor consent. 
Our social "scientists" have from the beginning been less 
tender of conscience, or less rigorous in their views of science, 
or perhaps just more confused about the questions their proce-
dures can answer and those they cannot. In any case, they have 
not been squeamish about imputing to their "discoveries" and 
the rigor of their procedures the power to direct us in how we 
ought rightly to behave. That is why social "scientists" are so 
often to be found on our television screens, and on our best-
seller lists, and in the "self-help" sections of airport bookstands: 
not because they can tell us how some humans sometimes 
behave but because they purport to tell us how we should; not 
because they speak to us as fellow humans who have lived 
longer, or experienced more of human suffering, or thought 
more deeply and reasoned more carefully about some set of 
problems, but because they consent to maintain the illusion that 
it is their data, their procedures, their science, and not them-
selves, that speak. We welcome them gladly, and the claim 
explicitly made or implied, because we need so desperately to 
find some source outside the frail and shaky judgments of 
mortals like ourselves to authorize our moral decisions and 
behavior. And outside of the authority of brute force, which can 
scarcely be called moral, we seem to have little left but the 
authority of procedures. 
This, then, is what I mean by Scientism. It is not merely the 
misapplication of techniques such as quantification to questions 
where numbers have nothing to say; not merely the confusion 
of the material and social realms of human experience; not 
merely the claim of social researchers to be applying the aims 
and procedures of natural science to the human world. Scientism 

162 
Technopoly 
is all of these, but something profoundly more. It is the desper-
ate hope, and wish, and ultimately the illusory belief that some 
standardized set of procedures called "science" can provide us 
with an unimpeachable source of moral authority, a suprahuman 
basis for answers to questions like "What is life, and when, and 
why?" "Why is death, and suffering?" "What is right and wrong 
to do?" "What are good and evil ends?" "How ought we to 
think and feel and behave?" It is Scientism on a personal level 
when one says, as President Reagan did, that he personally 
believes that abortion is wrong but we must leave it to science 
to tell us when a fetus enters life. It is Scientism on a cultural 
level when no scientist rises to demur, when no newspaper 
prints a rebuttal on its "science" pages, when everyone cooper-
ates, willfully or through ignorance, in the perpetuation of such 
an illusion. Science can tell us when a heart begins to beat, or 
movement begins, or what are the statistics on the survival of 
neonates of different gestational ages outside the womb. But 
science has no more authority than you do or I do to establish 
such criteria as the "true" definition of "life" or of human state 
or of personhood. Social research can tell us how some people 
behave in the presence of what they believe to be legitimate 
authority. But it cannot tell us when authority is "legitimate" 
and when not, or how we must decide, or when it may be right 
or wrong to obey. To ask of science, or expect of science, or 
accept unchallenged from science the answers to such questions 
is Scientism. And it is Technopoly's grand illusion. 
Toward the end of his life, Sigmund Freud debated with 
himself what he called The Future of an Illusion. The illusion he 
referred to was the belief in a supranatural and suprahuman 
source of being, knowledge, and moral authority: the belief in 
God. The question Freud debated was not whether God exists, 
but whether humankind could survive without the illusion of 
God—or, rather, whether humankind would fare better psycho-
logically, culturally, and morally without that illusion than with 

Scientism 
163 
it. Freud states his own doubts (expressed through the device of 
an alter ego with whom he debates) in the strongest possible 
voice, but in the end it is the voice of Freud's reason (or faith 
in reason) that "wins": humankind may or may not fare better, 
but it must do without the illusion of God. Freud did not see 
that, even as he wrote, his own work was lending substance to 
another illusion: the illusion of a future in which the procedures 
of natural and social science would ultimately reveal the "real" 
truth of human behavior and provide, through the agency of 
objectively neutral scientists, an empirical source of moral au-
thority. Had he foreseen the peculiar transformation that the 
image of ultimate authority would take in our own time—from 
an old man in a long white beard to young men and women in 
long white coats—Freud might have changed the question that 
was the focus of his inquiry. He could not. And so I will change 
it here, not to provide an answer, but in the hope of stirring 
renewed debate: as among the illusion of God, the illusion of 
Scientism, and no illusion or hope at all for an ultimate source 
of moral authority, which is most likely to serve the human 
interest, and which to prove most deadly, in the Age of Tech-
nopoly? 

10 
The Great Symbol Drain 
t is possible that, some day 
soon, an advertising man who must create a television commer-
cial for a new California Chardonnay will have the following 
inspiration: Jesus is standing alone in a desert oasis. A gentle 
breeze flutters the leaves of the stately palms behind him. Soft 
Mideastern music caresses the air. Jesus holds in his hand a 
bottle of wine at which he gazes adoringly. Turning toward the 
camera, he says, "When I transformed water into wine at Cana, 
this is what I had in mind. Try it today. You'll become a 
believer." 
If you think such a commercial is not possible in your lifetime, 
then consider this: As I write, there is an oft-seen commercial for 
Hebrew National frankfurters. It features a dapper-looking 
Uncle Sam in his traditional red, white, and blue outfit. While 
Uncle Sam assumes appropriate facial expressions, a voice-over 
describes the delicious and healthful frankfurters produced by 
Hebrew National. Toward the end of the commercial, the voice 
stresses that Hebrew National frankfurters surpass federal stan-
dards for such products. Why? Because, the voice says as the 
I 

The Great Symbol Drain 
165 
camera shifts our point of view upward toward heaven, "We 
have to answer to a Higher Authority." 
I will leave it to the reader to decide which is more incred-
ible—Jesus being used to sell wine or God being used to sell 
frankfurters. Whichever you decide, you must keep in mind that 
neither the hypothetical commercial nor the real one is an 
example of blasphemy. They are much worse than that. Blas-
phemy is, after all, among the highest tributes that can be paid 
to the power of a symbol. The blasphemer takes symbols as 
seriously as the idolater, which is why the President of the 
United States (circa 1991) wishes to punish, through a constitu-
tional amendment, desecrators of the American flag. 
What we are talking about here is not blasphemy but triviali-
zation, against which there can be no laws. In Technopoly, the 
trivialization of significant cultural symbols is largely conducted 
by commercial enterprise. This occurs not because corporate 
America is greedy but because the adoration of technology 
pre-empts the adoration of anything else. Symbols that draw 
their meaning from traditional religious or national contexts 
must therefore be made impotent as quickly as possible—that 
is, drained of sacred or even serious connotations. The elevation 
of one god requires the demotion of another. "Thou shalt have 
no other gods before me" applies as well to a technological 
divinity as any other. 
There are two intertwined reasons that make it possible to 
trivialize traditional symbols. The first, as neatly expressed by 
the social critic Jay Rosen, is that, although symbols, especially 
images, are endlessly repeatable, they are not inexhaustible. 
Second, the more frequently a significant symbol is used, the 
less potent is its meaning. This is a point stressed in Daniel 
Boorstin's classic book The Image, published thirty years ago.1 
In it, Boorstin describes the beginnings, in the mid-nineteenth 
century, of a "graphics revolution" that allowed the easy repro-
duction of visual images, thus providing the masses with contin-

166 
Technopoly 
uous access to the symbols and icons of their culture. Through 
prints, lithographs, photographs, and, later, movies and televi-
sion, religious and national symbols became commonplaces, 
breeding indifference if not necessarily contempt. As if to an-
swer those who believe that the emotional impact of a sacred 
image is always and ever the same, Boorstin reminds us that 
prior to the graphics revolution most people saw relatively few 
images. Paintings of Jesus or the Madonna, for example, would 
have been seen rarely outside churches. Paintings of great na-
tional leaders could be seen only in the homes of the wealthy 
or in government buildings. There were images to be seen in 
books, but books were expensive and spent most of their time 
on shelves. Images were not a conspicuous part of the environ-
ment, and their scarcity contributed toward their special power. 
When the scale of accessibility was altered, Boorstin argues, the 
experience of encountering an image necessarily changed; that 
is to say, it diminished in importance. One picture, we are told, 
is worth a thousand words. But a thousand pictures, especially 
if they are of the same object, may not be worth anything at all. 
What Boorstin and Rosen direct our attention to is a common 
enough psychological principle. You may demonstrate this for 
yourself (if you have not at some time already done so) by 
saying any word, even a significant one, over and over again. 
Sooner than you expect, you will find that the word has been 
transformed into a meaningless sound, as repetition drains it of 
its symbolic value. Any male who has served in, let us say, the 
United States Army or spent time in a college dormitory has 
had this experience with what are called obscene words, espe-
cially the notorious four-letter word which I am loath to repro-
duce here. Words that you have been taught not to use and that 
normally evoke an embarrassed or disconcerted response, when 
used too often, are stripped of their power to shock, to embar-
rass, to call attention to a special frame of mind. They become 
only sounds, not symbols. 

The Great Symbol Drain 
167 
Moreover, the journey to meaninglessness of symbols is a 
function not only of the frequency with which they are invoked 
but of the indiscriminate contexts in which they are used. An 
obscenity, for example, can do its work best when it is reserved 
for situations that call forth anger, disgust, or hatred. When it 
is used as an adjective for every third noun in a sentence, 
irrespective of the emotional context, it is deprived of its magi-
cal effects and, indeed, of its entire point. This is what happens 
when Abraham Lincoln's image, or George Washington's, is 
used to announce linen sales on Presidents' Day, or Martin 
Luther King's birthday celebration is taken as an occasion for 
furniture discounts. It is what happens when Uncle Sam, God, 
or Jesus is employed as an agent of the profane world for an 
essentially trivial purpose. 
An argument is sometimes made that the promiscuous use of 
sacred or serious symbols by corporate America is a form of 
healthy irreverence. Irreverence, after all, is an antidote to exces-
sive or artificial piety, and is especially necessary when piety is 
used as a political weapon. One might say that irreverence, not 
blasphemy, is the ultimate answer to idolatry, which is why 
most cultures have established means by which irreverence may 
be expressed—in the theater, in jokes, in song, in political 
rhetoric, even in holidays. The Jews, for example, use Purim as 
one day of the year on which they may turn a laughing face on 
piety itself. 
But there is nothing in the commercial exploitation of tradi-
tional symbols that suggests an excess of piety is itself a vice. 
Business is too serious a business for that, and in any case has 
no objection to piety, as long as it is directed toward the idea 
of consumption, which is never treated as a laughing matter. In 
using Uncle Sam or the flag or the American Eagle or images 
of presidents, in employing such names as Liberty Insurance, 
Freedom Transmission Repair, and Lincoln Savings and Loan, 
business does not offer us examples of irreverence. It is merely 

168 
Technopoly 
declaring the irrelevance, in Technopoly, of distinguishing be-
tween the sacred and the profane. 
I am not here making a standard-brand critique of the ex-
cesses of capitalism. It is entirely possible to have a market 
economy that respects the seriousness of words and icons, and 
which disallows their use in trivial or silly contexts. In fact, 
during the period of greatest industrial growth in America— 
from roughly 1830 to the end of the nineteenth century— 
advertising did not play a major role in the economy, and such 
advertising as existed used straightforward language, without 
recourse to the exploitation of important cultural symbols. 
There was no such thing as an "advertising industry" until the 
early twentieth century, the ground being prepared for it by the 
Postal Act of March 3, 1879, which gave magazines low-cost 
mailing privileges. As a consequence, magazines emerged as the 
best available conduits for national advertising, and merchants 
used the opportunity to make the names of their companies 
important symbols of commercial excellence. When George 
Eastman invented the portable camera in 1888, he spent 
$25,000 advertising it in magazines. By 1895, "Kodak" and 
"camera" were synonymous, as to some extent they still are. 
Companies like Royal Baking Powder, Baker's Chocolate, Ivory 
Soap, and Gillette moved into a national market by advertising 
their products in magazines. Even magazines moved into a 
national market by advertising themselves in magazines, the 
most conspicuous example being Ladies' Home Journal, whose 
publisher, Cyrus H. K. Curtis, spent half a million dollars be-
tween 1883 and 1888 advertising his magazine in other maga-
zines. By 1909, Ladies' Home Journal had a circulation of more 
than a million readers. 
Curtis' enthusiasm for advertising notwithstanding, the most 
significant figure in mating advertising to the magazine was 
Frank Munsey, who upon his death in 1925 was eulogized by 
William Allen White with the following words: "Frank Munsey 

The Great Symbol Drain 
169 
contributed to the journalism of his day the talent of a meat 
packer, the morals of a money changer and the manners of an 
undertaker. He and his kind have about succeeded in transform-
ing a once-noble profession into an 8% security. May he rest in 
trust." What was the sin of the malevolent Munsey? Simply, he 
made two discoveries. First, a large circulation could be 
achieved by selling a magazine for much less than it cost to 
produce it; second, huge profits could be made from the high 
volume of advertising that a large circulation would attract. In 
October 1893, Munsey took out an ad in the New York Sun 
announcing that Munsey's Magazine was cutting its price from 
25 cents to 10 cents, and reducing a year's subscription from $3 
to $1. The first 10-cent issue claimed a circulation of forty 
thousand; within four months, the circulation rose to two hun-
dred thousand; two months later, it was five hundred thousand. 
Munsey cannot, however, be blamed for another discovery, 
which for convenience's sake we may attribute to Procter and 
Gamble: that advertising is most effective when it is irrational. 
By irrational, I do not, of course, mean crazy. I mean that 
products could best be sold by exploiting the magical and even 
poetical powers of language and pictures. In 1892, Procter and 
Gamble invited the public to submit rhymes to advertise Ivory 
Soap. Four years later, H-O employed, for the first time, a 
picture of a baby in a high chair, the bowl of H-O cereal before 
him, his spoon in hand, his face ecstatic. By the turn of the 
century, advertisers no longer assumed that reason was the best 
instrument for the communication of commercial products and 
ideas. Advertising became one part depth psychology, one part 
aesthetic theory. In the process, a fundamental principle of 
capitalist ideology was rejected: namely, that the producer and 
consumer were engaged in a rational enterprise in which con-
sumers made choices on the basis of a careful consideration of 
the quality of a product and their own self-interest. This, at least, 
is what Adam Smith had in mind. But today, the television 

170 
Technopoly 
commercial, for example, is rarely about the character of the 
products. It is about the character of the consumers of products. 
Images of movie stars and famous athletes, of serene lakes and 
macho fishing trips, of elegant dinners and romantic interludes, 
of happy families packing their station wagons for a picnic in 
the country—these tell nothing about the products being sold. 
But they tell everything about the fears, fancies, and dreams of 
those who might buy them. What the advertiser needs to know 
is not what is right about the product but what is wrong about 
the buyer. And so the balance of business expenditures shifts 
from product research to market research, which means orient-
ing business away from making products of value and toward 
making consumers feel valuable. The business of business be-
comes pseudo-therapy; the consumer, a patient reassured by 
psychodramas. 
What this means is that somewhere near the core of Tech-
nopoly is a vast industry with license to use all available sym-
bols to further the interests of commerce, by devouring the 
psyches of consumers. Although estimates vary, a conservative 
guess is that the average American will have seen close to two 
million television commercials by age sixty-five. If we add to 
this the number of radio commercials, newspaper and magazine 
ads, and billboards, the extent of symbol overload and therefore 
symbol drain is unprecedented in human history. Of course, not 
all the images and words used have been cannibalized from 
serious or sacred contexts, and one must admit that as things 
stand at the moment it is quite unthinkable for the image of 
Jesus to be used to sell wine. At least not a chardonnay. On the 
other hand, his birthday is used as an occasion for commerce to 
exhaust nearly the entire repertoire of Christian symbology. 
The constraints are so few that we may call this a form of 
cultural rape, sanctioned by an ideology that gives boundless 
supremacy to technological progress and is indifferent to the 
unraveling of tradition. 

The Great Symbol Drain 
171 
In putting it this way, I mean to say that mass advertising is 
not the cause of the great symbol drain. Such cultural abuse 
could not have occurred without technologies to make it possi-
ble and a world-view to make it desirable. In the institutional 
form it has taken in the United States, advertising is a symptom 
of a world-view that sees tradition as an obstacle to its claims. 
There can, of course, be no functioning sense of tradition with-
out a measure of respect for symbols. Tradition is, in fact, 
nothing but the acknowledgment of the authority of symbols 
and the relevance of the narratives that gave birth to them. 
With the erosion of symbols there follows a loss of narrative, 
which is one of the most debilitating consequences of Tech-
nopoly's power. 
We may take as an example the field of education. In Tech-
nopoly, we improve the education of our youth by improving 
what are called "learning technologies." At the moment, it is 
considered necessary to introduce computers to the classroom, 
as it once was thought necessary to bring closed-circuit televi-
sion and film to the classroom. To the question "Why should we 
do this?" the answer is: "To make learning more efficient and 
more interesting." Such an answer is considered entirely ade-
quate, since in Technopoly efficiency and interest need no justi-
fication. It is, therefore, usually not noticed that this answer does 
not address the question "What is learning for?" "Efficiency and 
interest" is a technical answer, an answer about means, not ends; 
and it offers no pathway to a consideration of educational 
philosophy. Indeed, it blocks the way to such a consideration by 
beginning with the question of how we should proceed rather 
than with the question of why. It is probably not necessary to 
say that, by definition, there can be no education philosophy 
that does not address what learning is for. Confucius, Plato, 
Quintilian, Cicero, Comenius, Erasmus, Locke, Rousseau, Jeffer-
son, Russell, Montessori, Whitehead, and Dewey—each be-
lieved that there was some transcendent political, spiritual, or 

172 
Technopoly 
social idea that must be advanced through education. Confucius 
advocated teaching "the Way" because in tradition he saw the 
best hope for social order. As our first systematic fascist, Plato 
wished education to produce philosopher kings. Cicero argued 
that education must free the student from the tyranny of the 
present. Jefferson thought the purpose of education is to teach 
the young how to protect their liberties. Rousseau wished edu-
cation to free the young from the unnatural constraints of a 
wicked and arbitrary social order. And among John Dewey's 
aims was to help the student function without certainty in a 
world of constant change and puzzling ambiguities. 
Only in knowing something of the reasons why they ad-
vocated education can we make sense of the means they sug-
gest. But to understand their reasons we must also understand 
the narratives that governed their view of the world. By narra-
tive, I mean a story of human history that gives meaning to the 
past, explains the present, and provides guidance for the future. 
It is a story whose principles help a culture to organize its 
institutions, to develop ideals, and to find authority for its 
actions. At the risk of repetition, I must point out again that the 
source of the world's greatest narratives has been religion, as 
found, for example, in Genesis or the Bhagavad-Gita or the 
Koran. There are those who believe—as did the great historian 
Arnold Toynbee—that without a comprehensive religious nar-
rative at its center a culture must decline. Perhaps. There are, 
after all, other sources—mythology, politics, philosophy, and 
science, for example—but it is certain that no culture can flour-
ish without narratives of transcendent origin and power. 
This does not mean that the mere existence of such a narra-
tive ensures a culture's stability and strength. There are destruc-
tive narratives. A narrative provides meaning, not necessarily 
survival—as, for example, the story provided by Adolf Hitler 
to the German nation in the 1930s. Drawing on sources in 
Teutonic mythology and resurrecting ancient and primitive 

The Great Symbol Drain 
173 
symbolism, Hitler wove a tale of Aryan supremacy that lifted 
German spirits, gave point to their labors, eased their distress, 
and provided explicit ideals. The story glorified the past, eluci-
dated the present, and foretold the future, which was to last a 
thousand years. The Third Reich lasted exactly twelve years. 
It is not to my point to dwell on the reasons why the story 
of Aryan supremacy could not endure. The point is that cultures 
must have narratives and will find them where they will, even 
if they lead to catastrophe. The alternative is to live without 
meaning, the ultimate negation of life itself. It is also to the 
point to say that each narrative is given its form and its emo-
tional texture through a cluster of symbols that call for respect 
and allegiance, even devotion. The United States Constitution, 
for example, is only in part a legal document, and, I should add, 
a small part. Democratic nations—England, for one—do not 
require a written constitution to ensure legal order and the 
protection of liberties. The importance of the American Consti-
tution is largely in its function as a symbol of the story of our 
origins. It is our political equivalent of Genesis. To mock it, to 
ignore it, to circumvent it is to declare the irrelevance of the 
story of the United States as a moral light unto the world. In like 
fashion, the Statue of Liberty is the key symbol of the story of 
America as the natural home of the teeming masses, from any-
where, yearning to be free. There are, of course, several reasons 
why such stories lose their force. This book is, in fact, an 
attempt to describe one of them—i.e., how the growth of 
Technopoly has overwhelmed earlier, more meaningful stories. 
But in all cases, the trivialization of the symbols that express, 
support, and dramatize the story will accompany the decline. 
Symbol drain is both a symptom and a cause of a loss of 
narrative. 
The educators I referred to above based their philosophies on 
narratives rich in symbols which they respected and which they 
understood to be integral to the stories they wanted education 

174 
Technopoly 
to reveal. It is, therefore, time to ask, What story does American 
education wish to tell now? In a growing Technopoly, what do 
we believe education is for? The answers are discouraging, and 
one of them can be inferred from any television commercial 
urging the young to stay in school. The commercial will either 
imply or state explicitly that education will help the persevering 
student to get a good job. And that's it. Well, not quite. There 
is also the idea that we educate ourselves to compete with the 
Japanese or the Germans in an economic struggle to be number 
one. Neither of these purposes is, to say the least, grand or 
inspiring. The story each suggests is that the United States is 
not a culture but merely an economy, which is the last refuge 
of an exhausted philosophy of education. This belief, I might 
add, is precisely reflected in the President's Commission Report, 
A Nation at Risk, where you will find a definitive expression of 
the idea that education is an instrument of economic policy and 
of very little else. 
We may get a sense of the desperation of the educator's 
search for a more gripping story by using the "television com-
mercial test." Try to imagine what sort of appeals might be 
effectively made on a TV commercial to persuade parents to 
support schools. (Let us, to be fair, sidestep appeals that might 
be made directly to students themselves, since the youth of any 
era are disinclined to think schooling a good idea, whatever the 
reasons advanced for it. See the "Seven Ages of Man" passage 
in As You Like It.) 
Can you imagine, for example, what such a commercial 
would be like if Jefferson or John Dewey prepared it? "Your 
children are citizens in a democratic society," the commercial 
might say. "Their education will teach them how to be valuable 
citizens by refining their capacity for reasoned thought and 
strengthening their will to protect their liberties. As for their 
jobs and professions, that will be considered only at a late and 
convenient hour'" (to quote John Stuart Mill, who would be 

The Great Symbol Drain 
175 
pleased to associate himself with Jefferson's or Dewey's pur-
pose). Is there anyone today who would find this a compelling 
motivation? Some, perhaps, but hardly enough to use it as the 
basis of a national program. John Locke's commercial would, I 
imagine, be even less appealing. "Your children must stay in 
school," he might say, "because there they will learn to make 
their bodies slaves of their minds. They will learn to control 
their impulses, and how to find satisfaction and even excitement 
in the life of the mind. Unless they accomplish this, they can be 
neither civilized nor literate." How many would applaud this 
mission? Indeed, whom could we use to speak such words— 
Barbara Bush? Lee Iacocca? Donald Trump? Even the estimable 
Dr. Bill Cosby would hardly be convincing. The guffaws would 
resound from Maine to California. 
In recent years, a valiant attempt has been made by some— 
for example, E. D. Hirsch, Jr.—to provide a comprehensive 
purpose to education. In his book Cultural Literacy, Hirsch de-
fines literacy as the capacity to understand and use the words, 
dates, aphorisms, and names that form the basis of communica-
tion among the educated in our culture. Toward this end, he and 
some of his colleagues compiled a list that contains, according 
to them, the references essential to a culturally literate person in 
America. The first edition of the book (1987) included Norman 
Mailer but not Philip Roth, Bernard Malamud, Arthur Miller, or 
Tennessee Williams. It included Ginger Rogers but not Richard 
Rodgers, Carl Rogers, or Buck Rogers, let alone Fred Rogers. 
The second greatest home-run hitter of all time, Babe Ruth, was 
there, but not the greatest home-run hitter, Hank Aaron. The 
Marx Brothers were there, but not Orson Welles, Frank Capra, 
John Ford, or Steven Spielberg. Sarah Bernhardt was included, 
but not Leonard Bernstein. Rochester, New York, was on the 
list. Trenton, New Jersey, one of our most historic cities, was 
not. Hirsch included the Battle of the Bulge, which pleased my 
brother, who fought in it in 1944. But my uncle who died in the 

176 
Technopoly 
Battle of the Coral Sea, in 1942, might have been disappointed 
to find that it didn't make the list. 
To fill in the gaps, Hirsch has had to enlarge his list, so that 
there now exists a Cultural Literacy Encyclopedia. We may be 
sure that Hirsch will continue to expand his list until he reaches 
a point where a one-sentence directive will be all he needs to 
publish: "See the Encyclopedia Americana and Webster's Third 
International." 
It is, of course, an expected outcome of any education that 
students become acquainted with the important references of 
their culture. Even Rousseau, who would have asked his stu-
dents to read only one book, Robinson Crusoe (so that they 
would learn how to survive in the wild), would probably have 
expected them to "pick up" the names and sayings and dates 
that made up the content of the educated conversation of their 
time. Nonetheless, Hirsch's proposal is inadequate for two rea-
sons that reflect the inadequacies of Technopoly. The first, 
which I have discussed in chapter four, "The Improbable 
World," is that the present condition of technology-generated 
information is so long, varied, and dynamic that it is not possi-
ble to organize it into a coherent educational program. How do 
you include in the curriculum Rochester, New York, or Sarah 
Bernhardt or Babe Ruth? Or the Marx Brothers? Where does 
Ginger Rogers go? Does she get included in the syllabus under 
a unit titled "Fred Astaire's Dancing Partners"? (In which case, 
we must include Cyd Charisse and, if I am not mistaken, Win-
ston Churchill's daughter, Sarah.) Hirsch's encyclopedic list is 
not a solution but a description of the problem of information 
glut. It is therefore essentially incoherent. But it also confuses a 
consequence of education with a purpose. Hirsch attempted to 
answer the question "What is an educated person?" He left 
unanswered the question "What is an education for?" Young 
men, for example, will learn how to make lay-up shots when 
they play basketball. To be able to make them is part of the 

The Great Symbol Drain 
177 
definition of what good players are. But they do not play 
basketball for that purpose. There is usually a broader, deeper, 
and more meaningful reason for wanting to play—to assert 
their manhood, to please their fathers, to be acceptable to their 
peers, even for the sheer aesthetic pleasure of the game itself. 
What you have to do to be a success must be addressed only 
after you have found a reason to be successful. In Technopoly, 
this is very hard to do, and Hirsch simply sidestepped the 
question. 
Not so Allan Bloom. In his book The Closing of the American 
Mind, he confronts the question by making a serious complaint 
against the academy. His complaint is that most American 
professors have lost their nerve. They have become moral rela-
tivists, incapable of providing their students with a clear under-
standing of what is right thought and proper behavior. 
Moreover, they are also intellectual relativists, refusing to de-
fend their own culture and no longer committed to preserving 
and transmitting the best that has been thought and said. 
Bloom's solution is that we go back to the basics of Western 
thought. He does not care if students know who Ginger Rogers 
and Groucho Marx are. He wants us to teach our students what 
Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, Saint Augustine, and other luminar-
ies have had to say on the great ethical and epistemological 
questions. He believes that by acquainting themselves with 
great books our students will acquire a moral and intellectual 
foundation that will give meaning and texture to their lives. 
Though there is nothing especially original in this, Bloom is a 
serious education philosopher, which is to say, unlike Hirsch, 
he is a moralist who understands that Technopoly is a malev-
olent force requiring opposition. But he has not found many 
supporters. 
Those who reject Bloom's idea have offered several argu-
ments against it. The first is that such a purpose for education 
is elitist: the mass of students would not find the great story of 

178 
Technopoly 
Western civilization inspiring, are too deeply alienated from the 
past to find it so, and would therefore have difficulty connecting 
the "best that has been thought and said" to their own struggles 
to find meaning in their lives. A second argument, coming from 
what is called a "leftist" perspective, is even more discouraging. 
In a sense, it offers a definition of what is meant by elitism. It 
asserts that the "story of Western civilization" is a partial, 
biased, and even oppressive one. It is not the story of blacks, 
American Indians, Hispanics, women, homosexuals—of any 
people who are not white heterosexual males of Judeo-Christian 
heritage. This claim denies that there is or can be a national 
culture, a narrative of organizing power and inspiring symbols 
which all citizens can identify with and draw sustenance from. 
If this is true, it means nothing less than that our national 
symbols have been drained of their power to unite, and that 
education must become a tribal affair; that is, each subculture 
must find its own story and symbols, and use them as the moral 
basis of education. 
Standing somewhat apart from these arguments are, of 
course, religious educators, such as those in Catholic schools, 
who strive to maintain another traditional view—that learning 
is done for the greater glory of God and, more particularly, to 
prepare the young to embrace intelligently and gracefully the 
moral directives of the church. Whether or not such a purpose 
can be achieved in Technopoly is questionable, as many reli-
gious educators will acknowledge. 
I will reserve for the next and final chapter my own view 
of the struggle to find a purpose for education in Technopoly. 
But here it must be said that the struggle itself is a sign that 
our repertoire of significant national, religious, and mythologi-
cal symbols has been seriously drained of its potency. "We 
are living at a time," Irving Howe has written, "when all the 
once regnant world systems that have sustained (also dis-
torted) Western intellectual life, from theologies to ideologies, 

The Great Symbol Drain 
179 
are taken to be in severe collapse. This leads to a mood of 
skepticism, an agnosticism of judgment, sometimes a world-
weary nihilism in which even the most conventional minds 
begin to question both distinctions of value and the value 
of distinctions."2 
Into this void comes the Technopoly story, with its emphasis 
on progress without limits, rights without responsibilities, and 
technology without cost. The Technopoly story is without a 
moral center. It puts in its place efficiency, interest, and eco-
nomic advance. It promises heaven on earth through the conve-
niences of technological progress. It casts aside all traditional 
narratives and symbols that suggest stability and orderliness, 
and tells, instead, of a life of skills, technical expertise, and the 
ecstasy of consumption. Its purpose is to produce functionaries 
for an ongoing Technopoly. It answers Bloom by saying that 
the story of Western civilization is irrelevant; it answers the 
political left by saying there is indeed a common culture whose 
name is Technopoly and whose key symbol is now the com-
puter, toward which there must be neither irreverence nor blas-
phemy. It even answers Hirsch by saying that there are items 
on his list that, if thought about too deeply and taken too 
seriously, will interfere with the progress of technology. 
I grant that it is somewhat unfair to expect educators, by 
themselves, to locate stories that would reaffirm our national 
culture. Such narratives must come to them, to some degree, 
from the political sphere. If our politics is symbolically impover-
ished, it is difficult to imagine how teachers can provide a 
weighty purpose to education. I am writing this chapter during 
the fourth week of the war against Iraq; the rhetoric accompany-
ing the onset of the war is still fresh in mind. It began with the 
President's calling Americans to arms for the sake of their 
"life-style." This was followed by the Secretary of State's re-
quest that they fight to protect their jobs. Then came the 
appeal—at a late and convenient hour, as it were—to thwart 

180 
Technopoly 
the "naked aggression" of a little "Hitler." I do not say here that 
going to war was unjustified. My point is that, with the Cold 
War at an end, our political leaders now struggle, as never 
before, to find a vital narrative and accompanying symbols that 
would awaken a national spirit and a sense of resolve. The 
citizens themselves struggle as well. Having drained many of 
their traditional symbols of serious meaning, they resort, some-
what pitifully, to sporting yellow ribbons as a means of symbol-
izing their fealty to a cause. After the war, the yellow ribbons 
will fade from sight, but the question of who we are and what 
we represent will remain. Is it possible that the only symbol left 
to use will be an F-15 fighter plane guided by an advanced 
computer system? 

11 
The Loving Resistance Fighter 
nyone who practices the art 
of cultural criticism must endure being asked, What is the solu-
tion to the problems you describe? Critics almost never appreci-
ate this question, since, in most cases, they are entirely satisfied 
with themselves for having posed the problems and, in any 
event, are rarely skilled in formulating practical suggestions 
about anything. This is why they became cultural critics. 
The question comes forth nonetheless, and in three different 
voices. One is gentle and eager, as if to suggest that the critic 
knows the solutions but has merely forgotten to include them 
in the work itself. A second is threatening and judgmental, as if 
to suggest that the critic had no business bothering people in 
the first place unless there were some pretty good solutions at 
hand. And a third is wishful and encouraging, as if to suggest 
that it is well known that there are not always solutions to 
serious problems but if the critic will give it a little thought 
perhaps something constructive might come from the effort. 
It is to this last way of posing the question that I should like 
to respond. I have indeed given the matter some thought, and 
A 

182 
Technopoly 
this chapter is the result. Its simplicity will tell the reader that 
I am, like most other critics, armed less with solutions than with 
problems. 
As I see it, a reasonable response (hardly a solution) to the 
problem of living in a developing Technopoly can be divided 
into two parts: what the individual can do irrespective of what 
the culture is doing; and what the culture can do irrespective of 
what any individual is doing. Beginning with the matter of 
individual response, I must say at once that I have no intention 
of providing a "how to" list in the manner of the "experts" I 
ridiculed in chapter five, on our "broken defenses." No one is an 
expert on how to live a life. I can, however, offer a Talmudic-like 
principle that seems to me an effective guide for those who wish 
to defend themselves against the worst effects of the American 
Technopoly. It is this: You must try to be a loving resistance 
fighter. That is the doctrine, as Hillel might say. Here is the 
commentary: By "loving," I mean that, in spite of the confusion, 
errors, and stupidities you see around you, you must always 
keep close to your heart the narratives and symbols that once 
made the United States the hope of the world and that may yet 
have enough vitality to do so again. You may find it helpful to 
remember that, when the Chinese students at Tiananmen Square 
gave expression to their impulse to democracy, they fashioned 
a papier-mâché model, for the whole world to see, of the Statue 
of Liberty. Not a statue of Karl Marx, not the Eiffel Tower, not 
Buckingham Palace. The Statue of Liberty. It is impossible to say 
how moved Americans were by this event. But one is compelled 
to ask, Is there an American soul so dead that it could not 
generate a murmur (if not a cheer) of satisfaction for this use of 
a once-resonant symbol? Is there an American soul so shrouded 
in the cynicism and malaise created by Technopoly's emptiness 
that it failed to be stirred by students reading aloud from the 
works of Thomas Jefferson in the streets of Prague in 1989? 
Americans may forget, but others do not, that American dissent 

The Loving Resistance Fighter 
183 
and protest during the Vietnam War may be the only case in 
history where public opinion forced a government to change its 
foreign policy. Americans may forget, but others do not, that 
Americans invented the idea of public education for all citizens 
and have never abandoned it. And everyone knows, including 
Americans, that each day, to this hour, immigrants still come to 
America in hopes of finding relief from one kind of deprivation 
or another. 
There are a hundred other things to remember that may help 
one to warm to the United States, including the fact that it has 
been, and perhaps always will be, a series of experiments that 
the world watches with wonder. Three such experiments are of 
particular importance. The first, undertaken toward the end of 
the eighteenth century, posed the question, Can a nation allow 
the greatest possible degree of political and religious freedom 
and still retain a sense of identity and purpose? Toward the 
middle of the nineteenth century, a second great experiment 
was undertaken, posing the question, Can a nation retain a sense 
of cohesion and community by allowing into it people from all 
over the world? And now comes the third—the great experi-
ment of Technopoly—which poses the question, Can a nation 
preserve its history, originality, and humanity by submitting 
itself totally to the sovereignty of a technological thought-
world? 
Obviously, I do not think the answer to this question will be 
as satisfactory as the answers to the first two. But if there is an 
awareness of and resistance to the dangers of Technopoly, there 
is reason to hope that the United States may yet survive its 
Ozymandias-like hubris and technological promiscuity. Which 
brings me to the "resistance fighter" part of my principle. Those 
who resist the American Technopoly are people 
who pay no attention to a poll unless they know what 
questions were asked, and why; 

184 
Technopoly 
who refuse to accept efficiency as the pre-eminent goal of 
human relations; 
who have freed themselves from the belief in the magical 
powers of numbers, do not regard calculation as an 
adequate substitute for judgment, or precision as a syno-
nym for truth; 
who refuse to allow psychology or any "social science" to 
pre-empt the language and thought of common sense; 
who are, at least, suspicious of the idea of progress, and 
who do not confuse information with understanding; 
who do not regard the aged as irrelevant; 
who take seriously the meaning of family loyalty and 
honor, and who, when they "reach out and touch some-
one," expect that person to be in the same room; 
who take the great narratives of religion seriously and 
who do not believe that science is the only system of 
thought capable of producing truth; 
who know the difference between the sacred and the 
profane, and who do not wink at tradition for moder-
nity's sake; 
who admire technological ingenuity but do not think it 
represents the highest possible form of human achieve-
ment. 
A resistance fighter understands that technology must never 
be accepted as part of the natural order of things, that every 

The Loving Resistance Fighter 
185 
technology—from an IQ test to an automobile to a television 
set to a computer—is a product of a particular economic and 
political context and carries with it a program, an agenda, and 
a philosophy that may or may not be life-enhancing and that 
therefore require scrutiny, criticism, and control. In short, a 
technological resistance fighter maintains an epistemological 
and psychic distance from any technology, so that it always 
appears somewhat strange, never inevitable, never natural. 
I can say no more than this, for each person must decide how 
to enact these ideas. But it is possible that one's education may 
help considerably not only in promoting the general conception 
of a resistance fighter but in helping the young to fashion their 
own ways of giving it expression. It is with education, then, that 
I will conclude this book. This is not to say that political action 
and social policy aren't useful in offering opposition to Tech-
nopoly. There are even now signs that Technopoly is under-
stood as a problem to which laws and policies might serve as 
a response—in the environmental movement, in the contempla-
tion of legal restrictions on computer technology, in a develop-
ing distrust of medical technology, in reactions against 
widespread testing, in various efforts to restore a sense of 
community cohesion. But in the United States, as Lawrence 
Cremin once remarked, whenever we need a revolution, we get 
a new curriculum. And so I shall propose one. I have done this 
before to something less than widespread acclamation.1 But it 
is the best way I can think of for the culture to address the 
problem. School, to be sure, is a technology itself, but of a 
special kind in that, unlike most technologies, it is customarily 
and persistently scrutinized, criticized, and modified. It is Amer-
ica's principal instrument for correcting mistakes and for ad-
dressing problems that mystify and paralyze other social 
institutions. 
In consideration of the disintegrative power of Technopoly, 
perhaps the most important contribution schools can make to 

186 
Technopoly 
the education of our youth is to give them a sense of coherence 
in their studies, a sense of purpose, meaning, and interconnect-
edness in what they learn. Modern secular education is failing 
not because it doesn't teach who Ginger Rogers, Norman 
Mailer, and a thousand other people are but because it has no 
moral, social, or intellectual center. There is no set of ideas or 
attitudes that permeates all parts of the curriculum. The curricu-
lum is not, in fact, a "course of study" at all but a meaningless 
hodgepodge of subjects. It does not even put forward a clear 
vision of what constitutes an educated person, unless it is a 
person who possesses "skills." In other words, a technocrat's 
ideal—a person with no commitment and no point of view but 
with plenty of marketable skills. 
Of course, we must not overestimate the capability of 
schools to provide coherence in the face of a culture in which 
almost all coherence seems to have disappeared. In our tech-
nicalized, present-centered information environment, it is not 
easy to locate a rationale for education, let alone impart one con-
vincingly. It is obvious, for example, that the schools cannot 
restore religion to the center of the life of learning. With the ex-
ception of a few people, perhaps, no one would take seriously 
the idea that learning is for the greater glory of God. It is 
equally obvious that the knowledge explosion has blown 
apart the feasibility of such limited but coordinated curricu-
lums as, for example, a Great Books program. Some people 
would have us stress love of country as a unifying principle 
in education. Experience has shown, however, that this invari-
ably translates into love of government, and in practice becomes 
indistinguishable from what still is at the center of Soviet or 
Chinese education. 
Some would put forward "emotional health" as the core of 
the curriculum. I refer here to a point of view sometimes called 
Rogerian, sometimes Maslovian, which values above all else the 
development of one's emotional life through the quest for one's 

The Loving Resistance Fighter 
187 
"real self." Such an idea, of course, renders a curriculum irrele-
vant, since only "self-knowledge"—i.e., one's feelings—is con-
sidered worthwhile. Carl Rogers himself once wrote that 
anything that can be taught is probably either trivial or harmful, 
thus making any discussion of the schools unnecessary. But 
beyond this, the culture is already so heavy with the burden of 
the glorification of "self" that it would be redundant to have the 
schools stress it, even if it were possible. 
One obviously treads on shaky ground in suggesting a plau-
sible theme for a diverse, secularized population. Nonetheless, 
with all due apprehension, I would propose as a possibility the 
theme that animates Jacob Bronowski's The Ascent of Man. It is 
a book, and a philosophy, filled with optimism and suffused 
with the transcendent belief that humanity's destiny is the dis-
covery of knowledge. Moreover, although Bronowski's empha-
sis is on science, he finds ample warrant to include the arts and 
humanities as part of our unending quest to gain a unified 
understanding of nature and our place in it. 
Thus, to chart the ascent of man, which I will here call "the 
ascent of humanity," we must join art and science. But we must 
also join the past and the present, for the ascent of humanity is 
above all a continuous story. It is, in fact, a story of creation, 
although not quite the one that the fundamentalists fight so 
fiercely to defend. It is the story of humanity's creativeness in 
trying to conquer loneliness, ignorance, and disorder. And it 
certainly includes the development of various religious systems 
as a means of giving order and meaning to existence. In this 
context, it is inspiring to note that the Biblical version of cre-
ation, to the astonishment of everyone except possibly the 
fundamentalists, has turned out to be a near-perfect blend of 
artistic imagination and scientific intuition: the Big Bang theory 
of the creation of the universe, now widely accepted by cos-
mologists, confirms in essential details what the Bible proposes 
as having been the case "in the beginning." 

188 
Technopoly 
In any event, the virtues of adopting the ascent of humanity 
as a scaffolding on which to build a curriculum are many and 
various, especially in our present situation. For one thing, with 
a few exceptions which I shall note, it does not require that we 
invent new subjects or discard old ones. The structure of the 
subject-matter curriculum that exists in most schools at present 
is entirely usable. For another, it is a theme that can begin in the 
earliest grades and extend through college in ever-deepening 
and -widening dimensions. Better still, it provides students with 
a point of view from which to understand the meaning of 
subjects, for each subject can be seen as a battleground of sorts, 
an arena in which fierce intellectual struggle has taken place and 
continues to take place. Each idea within a subject marks the 
place where someone fell and someone rose. Thus, the ascent of 
humanity is an optimistic story, not without its miseries but 
dominated by astonishing and repeated victories. From this 
point of view, the curriculum itself may be seen as a celebration 
of human intelligence and creativity, not a meaningless collec-
tion of diploma or college requirements. 
Best of all, the theme of the ascent of humanity gives us a 
nontechnical, noncommercial definition of education. It is a 
definition drawn from an honorable humanistic tradition and 
reflects a concept of the purposes of academic life that goes 
counter to the biases of the technocrats. I am referring to the 
idea that to become educated means to become aware of the 
origins and growth of knowledge and knowledge systems; to 
be familiar with the intellectual and creative processes by which 
the best that has been thought and said has been produced; to 
learn how to participate, even if as a listener, in what Robert 
Maynard Hutchins once called The Great Conversation, which 
is merely a different metaphor for what is meant by the ascent 
of humanity. You will note that such a definition is not child-
centered, not training-centered, not skill-centered, not even 
problem-centered. It is idea-centered and coherence-centered. It 

The Loving Resistance Fighter 
189 
is also otherworldly, inasmuch as it does not assume that what 
one learns in school must be directly and urgently related to a 
problem of today. In other words, it is an education that stresses 
history, the scientific mode of thinking, the disciplined use of 
language, a wide-ranging knowledge of the arts and religion, 
and the continuity of human enterprise. It is education as an 
excellent corrective to the antihistorical, information-saturated, 
technology-loving character of Technopoly. 
Let us consider history first, for it is in some ways the central 
discipline in all this. It is hardly necessary for me to argue here 
that, as Cicero put it, "To remain ignorant of things that hap-
pened before you were born is to remain a child." It is enough 
to say that history is our most potent intellectual means of 
achieving a "raised consciousness." But there are some points 
about history and its teaching that require stressing, since they 
are usually ignored by our schools. The first is that history is not 
merely one subject among many that may be taught; every 
subject has a history, including biology, physics, mathematics, 
literature, music, and art. I would propose here that every 
teacher must be a history teacher. To teach, for example, what 
we know about biology today without also teaching what we 
once knew, or thought we knew, is to reduce knowledge to a 
mere consumer product. It is to deprive students of a sense of 
the meaning of what we know, and of how we know. To teach 
about the atom without Democritus, to teach about electricity 
without Faraday, to teach about political science without Aris-
totle or Machiavelli, to teach about music without Haydn, is to 
refuse our students access to The Great Conversation. It is to 
deny them knowledge of their roots, about which no other 
social institution is at present concerned. For to know about 
your roots is not merely to know where your grandfather came 
from and what he had to endure. It is also to know where your 
ideas come from and why you happen to believe them; to know 
where your moral and aesthetic sensibilities come from. It is to 

190 
Technopoly 
know where your world, not just your family, comes from. To 
complete the presentation of Cicero's thought, begun above: 
"What is a human life worth unless it is incorporated into the 
lives of one's ancestors and set in an historical context?" By 
"ancestors" Cicero did not mean your mother's aunt. 
Thus, I would recommend that every subject be taught as 
history. In this way, children, even in the earliest grades, can 
begin to understand, as they now do not, that knowledge is not 
a fixed thing but a stage in human development, with a past and 
a future. To return for a moment to theories of creation, we 
want to be able to show how an idea conceived almost four 
thousand years ago has traveled not only in time but in mean-
ing, from science to religious metaphor to science again. What 
a lovely and profound coherence there is in the connection 
between the wondrous speculations in an ancient Hebrew des-
ert tent and the equally wondrous speculations in a modern 
MIT classroom! What I am trying to say is that the history of 
subjects teaches connections; it teaches that the world is not 
created anew each day, that everyone stands on someone else's 
shoulders. 
I am well aware that this approach to subjects would be 
difficult to use. There are, at present, few texts that would help 
very much, and teachers have not, in any case, been prepared 
to know about knowledge in this way. Moreover, there is the 
added difficulty of our learning how to do this for children of 
different ages. But that it needs to be done is, in my opinion, 
beyond question. 
The teaching of subjects as studies in historical continuities is 
not intended to make history as a special subject irrelevant. If 
every subject is taught with a historical dimension, the history 
teacher will be free to teach what histories are: hypotheses and 
theories about why change occurs. In one sense, there is no such 
thing as "history," for every historian from Thucydides to 
Toynbee has known that his stories must be told from a special 

The Loving Resistance Fighter 
191 
point of view that will reflect his particular theory of social 
development. And historians also know that they write histo-
ries for some particular purpose—more often than not, either to 
glorify or to condemn the present. There is no definitive history 
of anything; there are only histories, human inventions which 
do not give us the answer, but give us only those answers called 
forth by the questions that have been asked. 
Historians know all of this—it is a commonplace idea among 
them. Yet it is kept a secret from our youth. Their ignorance of 
it prevents them from understanding how "history" can change 
and why the Russians, Chinese, American Indians, and virtually 
everyone else see historical events differently than the authors 
of history schoolbooks. The task of the history teacher, then, is 
to become a "histories teacher." This does not mean that some 
particular version of the American, European, or Asian past 
should remain untold. A student who does not know at least 
one history is in no position to evaluate others. But it does mean 
that a histories teacher will be concerned, at all times, to show 
how histories are themselves products of culture; how any 
history is a mirror of the conceits and even metaphysical biases 
of the culture that produced it; how the religion, politics, geog-
raphy, and economy of a people lead them to re-create their 
past along certain lines. The histories teacher must clarify for 
students the meaning of "objectivity" and "events," must show 
what a "point of view" and a "theory" are, must provide some 
sense of how histories may be evaluated. 
It will be objected that this idea—history as comparative 
history—is too abstract for students to grasp. But that is one of 
the several reasons why comparative history should be taught. 
To teach the past simply as a chronicle of indisputable, frag-
mented, and concrete events is to replicate the bias of Tech-
nopoly, which largely denies our youth access to concepts and 
theories, and to provide them only with a stream of meaningless 
events. That is why the controversies that develop around what 

192 
Technopoly 
events ought to be included in the "history" curriculum have a 
somewhat hollow ring to them. Some people urge, for example, 
that the Holocaust, or Stalin's bloodbaths, or the trail of Indian 
tears be taught in school. I agree that our students should know 
about such things, but we must still address the question, What 
is it that we want them to "know" about these events? Are they 
to be explained as the "maniac" theory of history? Are they to 
be understood as illustrations of the "banality of evil" or the 
"law of survival"? Are they manifestations of the universal force 
of economic greed? Are they examples of the workings of 
human nature? 
Whatever events may be included in the study of the past, 
the worst thing we can do is to present them devoid of the 
coherence that a theory or theories can provide—that is to say, 
as meaningless. This, we can be sure, Technopoly does daily. 
The histories teacher must go far beyond the "event" level into 
the realm of concepts, theories, hypotheses, comparisons, de-
ductions, evaluations. The idea is to raise the level of abstraction 
at which "history" is taught. This idea would apply to all 
subjects, including science. 
From the point of view of the ascent of humanity, the scien-
tific enterprise is one of our most glorious achievements. On 
humanity's Judgment Day we can be expected to speak almost 
at once of our science. I have already stressed the importance 
of teaching the history of science in every science course, but 
this is no more important than teaching its "philosophy." I 
mention this with some sense of despair. More than half the 
high schools in the United States do not even offer one course 
in physics. And at a rough guess, I would estimate that in 90 
percent of the schools chemistry is still taught as if students 
were being trained to be druggists. To suggest, therefore, that 
science is an exercise in human imagination, that it is something 
quite different from technology, that there are "philosophies" of 
science, and that all of this ought to form part of a scientific 

The Loving Resistance Fighter 
193 
education, is to step out of the mainstream. But I believe it 
nonetheless. 
Would it be an exaggeration to say that not one student in 
fifty knows what "induction" means? Or knows what a scientific 
theory is? Or a scientific model? Or knows what are the opti-
mum conditions of a valid scientific experiment? Or has ever 
considered the question of what scientific truth is? In The Identity 
of Man Bronowski says the following: "This is the paradox of 
imagination in science, that it has for its aim the impoverishment 
of imagination. By that outrageous phrase, I mean that the 
highest flight of scientific imagination is to weed out the prolif-
eration of new ideas. In science, the grand view is a miserly 
view, and a rich model of the universe is one which is as poor 
as possible in hypotheses." 
Is there one student in a hundred who can make any sense 
out of this statement? Though the phrase "impoverishment of 
imagination" may be outrageous, there is nothing startling or 
even unusual about the idea contained in this quotation. Every 
practicing scientist understands what Bronowski is saying. Yet 
it is kept a secret from our students. It should be revealed. In 
addition to having each science course include a serious histori-
cal dimension, I would propose that every school—elementary 
through college—offer and require a course in the philoso-
phy of science. Such a course should consider the language 
of science, the nature of scientific proof, the source of scien-
tific hypotheses, the role of imagination, the conditions of ex-
perimentation, and especially the value of error and disproof. If 
I am not mistaken, many people still believe that what makes a 
statement scientific is that it can be verified. In fact, exactly 
the opposite is the case: What separates scientific statements 
from nonscientific statements is that the former can be sub-
jected to the test of falsifiability. What makes science possible 
is not our ability to recognize "truth" but our ability to recog-
nize falsehood. 

194 
Technopoly 
What such a course would try to get at is the notion that 
science is not pharmacy or technology or magic tricks but a 
special way of employing human intelligence. It would be im-
portant for students to learn that one becomes scientific not by 
donning a white coat (which is what television teaches) but by 
practicing a set of canons of thought, many of which have to 
do with the disciplined use of language. Science involves a 
method of employing language that is accessible to everyone. 
The ascent of humanity has rested largely on that. 
On the subject of the disciplined use of language, I should 
like to propose that, in addition to courses in the philosophy of 
science, every school—again, from elementary school through 
college—offer a course in semantics—in the processes by 
which people make meaning. In this connection I must note the 
gloomy fact that English teachers have been consistently obtuse 
in their approach to this subject—which is to say, they have 
largely ignored it. This has always been difficult for me to 
understand, since English teachers claim to be concerned with 
teaching reading and writing. But if they do not teach anything 
about the relationship of language to reality—which is what 
semantics studies—I cannot imagine how they expect reading 
and writing to improve. 
Every teacher ought to be a semantics teacher, since it is not 
possible to separate language from what we call knowledge. 
Like history, semantics is an interdisciplinary subject: it is neces-
sary to know something about it in order to understand any 
subject. But it would be extremely useful to the growth of their 
intelligence if our youth had available a special course in which 
fundamental principles of language were identified and ex-
plained. Such a course would deal not only with the various uses 
of language but with the relationship between things and 
words, symbols and signs, factual statements and judgments, 
and grammar and thought. Especially for young students, the 
course ought to emphasize the kinds of semantic errors that are 

The Loving Resistance Fighter 
195 
common to all of us, and that are avoidable through awareness 
and discipline—the use of either-or categories, misunderstand-
ing of levels of abstraction, confusion of words with things, 
sloganeering, and self-reflexiveness. 
Of all the disciplines that might be included in the curriculum, 
semantics is certainly among the most "basic." Because it deals 
with the processes by which we make and interpret meaning, it 
has great potential to affect the deepest levels of student intelli-
gence. And yet semantics is rarely mentioned when "back to the 
basics" is proposed. Why? My guess is that it cuts too deep. To 
adapt George Orwell, many subjects are basic but some are 
more basic than others. Such subjects have the capability of 
generating critical thought and of giving students access to 
questions that get to the heart of the matter. This is not what 
"back to the basics" advocates usually have in mind. They want 
language technicians: people who can follow instructions, write 
reports clearly, spell correctly. There is certainly ample evidence 
that the study of semantics will improve the writing and reading 
of students. But it invariably does more. It helps students to 
reflect on the sense and truth of what they are writing and of 
what they are asked to read. It teaches them to discover the 
underlying assumptions of what they are told. It emphasizes the 
manifold ways in which language can distort reality. It assists 
students in becoming what Charles Weingartner and I once 
called "crap-detectors." Students who have a firm grounding in 
semantics are therefore apt to find it difficult to take reading 
tests. A reading test does not invite one to ask whether or not 
what is written is true. Or, if it is true, what it has to do with 
anything. The study of semantics insists upon these questions. 
But "back to the basics" advocates don't require education to be 
that basic. Which is why they usually do not include literature, 
music, and art as part of their agenda either. But of course, in 
using the ascent of humanity as a theme, we would of necessity 
elevate these subjects to prominence. 

196 
Technopoly 
The most obvious reason for such prominence is that their 
subject matter contains the best evidence we have of the unity 
and continuity of human experience and feeling. And that is 
why I would propose that, in our teaching of the humanities, we 
should emphasize the enduring creations of the past. The 
schools should stay as far from contemporary works as possible. 
Because of the nature of the communications industry, our 
students have continuous access to the popular arts of their own 
times—its music, rhetoric, design, literature, architecture. Their 
knowledge of the form and content of these arts is by no means 
satisfactory. But their ignorance of the form and content of the 
art of the past is cavernous. This is one good reason for empha-
sizing the art of the past. Another is that there is no subject 
better suited to freeing us from the tyranny of the present than 
the historical study of art. Painting, for example, is more than 
three times as old as writing, and contains in its changing styles 
and themes a fifteen-thousand-year-old record of the ascent of 
humanity. 
In saying this, I do not mean to subsume art under the 
heading of archeology, although I should certainly recommend 
that the history of art forms be given a serious place in the 
curriculum. But art is much more than a historical artifact. To 
have meaning for us, it must connect with those levels of feeling 
that are in fact not expressible in discursive language. The 
question therefore arises whether it is possible for students of 
today to relate, through feeling, to the painting, architecture, 
music, sculpture, or literature of the past. The answer, I believe, 
is: only with the greatest difficulty. They, and many of us, have 
an aesthetic sensibility of a different order from what is required 
to be inspired, let alone entertained, by a Shakespeare sonnet, 
a Haydn symphony, or a Hals painting. To oversimplify the 
matter, a young man who believes Madonna to have reached 
the highest pinnacle of musical expression lacks the sensibility 
to distinguish between the ascent and descent of humanity. But 

The Loving Resistance Fighter 
197 
it is not my intention here to blacken the reputation of popular 
culture. The point I want to make is that the products of the 
popular arts are amply provided by the culture itself. The 
schools must make available the products of classical art forms 
precisely because they are not so available and because they 
demand a different order of sensibility and response. In our 
present circumstances, there is no excuse for schools to sponsor 
rock concerts when students have not heard the music of Mo-
zart, Beethoven, Bach, or Chopin. Or for students to have 
graduated from high school without having read, for example, 
Shakespeare, Cervantes, Milton, Keats, Dickens, Whitman, 
Twain, Melville, or Poe. Or for students not to have seen at 
least a photograph of paintings by Goya, El Greco, David. It is 
not to the point that many of these composers, writers, and 
painters were in their own times popular artists. What is to the 
point is that they spoke, when they did, in a language and from 
a point of view different from our own and yet continuous with 
our own. These artists are relevant not only because they 
established the standards with which civilized people approach 
the arts. They are relevant because the culture tries to mute their 
voices and render their standards invisible. 
It is highly likely that students, immersed in today's popular 
arts, will find such an emphasis as I suggest tedious and even 
painful. This fact will, in turn, be painful to teachers, who, 
naturally enough, prefer to teach that which will arouse an 
immediate and enthusiastic response. But our youth must be 
shown that not all worthwhile things are instantly accessible 
and that there are levels of sensibility unknown to them. Above 
all, they must be shown humanity's artistic roots. And that task, 
in our own times, falls inescapably to the schools. 
On the matter of roots, I want to end my proposal by 
including two subjects indispensable to any understanding of 
where we have come from. The first is the history of technol-
ogy, which as much as science and art provides part of the story 

198 
Technopoly 
of humanity's confrontation with nature and indeed with our 
own limitations. It is important for students to be shown, for 
example, the connection between the invention of eyeglasses in 
the thirteenth century and experiments in gene-splicing in the 
twentieth: that in both cases we reject the proposition that 
anatomy is destiny, and through technology define our own 
destiny. In brief, we need students who will understand the 
relationships between our technics and our social and psychic 
worlds, so that they may begin informed conversations about 
where technology is taking us and how. 
The second subject is, of course, religion, with which so much 
painting, music, technology, architecture, literature, and science 
are intertwined. Specifically, I want to propose that the curricu-
lum include a course in comparative religion. Such a course 
would deal with religion as an expression of humanity's crea-
tiveness, as a total, integrated response to fundamental ques-
tions about the meaning of existence. The course would be 
descriptive, promoting no particular religion but illuminating 
the metaphors, the literature, the art, the ritual of religious 
expression itself. I am aware of the difficulties such a course 
would face, not the least of which is the belief that the schools 
and religion must on no account touch each other. But I do not 
see how we can claim to be educating our youth if we do not 
ask them to consider how different people of different times and 
places have tried to achieve a sense of transcendence. No educa-
tion can neglect such sacred texts as Genesis, the New Testa-
ment, the Koran, the Bhagavad-Gita. Each of them embodies a 
style and a world-view that tell as much about the ascent of 
humanity as any book ever written. To these books I would add 
the Communist Manifesto, since I think it reasonable to classify 
this as a sacred text, embodying religious principles to which 
millions of people have so recently been devoted. 
To summarize: I am proposing, as a beginning, a curriculum 
in which all subjects are presented as a stage in humanity's 

The Loving Resistance Fighter 
199 
historical development; in which the philosophies of science, of 
history, of language, of technology, and of religion are taught; 
and in which there is a strong emphasis on classical forms of 
artistic expression. This is a curriculum that goes "back to the 
basics," but not quite in the way the technocrats mean it. And 
it is most certainly in opposition to the spirit of Technopoly. I 
have no illusion that such an education program can bring a halt 
to the thrust of a technological thought-world. But perhaps it 
will help to begin and sustain a serious conversation that will 
allow us to distance ourselves from that thought-world, and 
then criticize and modify it. Which is the hope of my book as 
well. 


Notes 
ONE 
1. Plato, p. 96. 
2  Freud, pp  38-39  
3  This fact is documented in Keith Hoskin's "The Examination, Discipli-
nary Power and Rational Schooling," in History of Education, vol  VIII, no  2 
(1979), pp  135-46  Professor Hoskin provides the following story about 
Farish  Farish was a professor of engineering at Cambridge and designed and 
installed a movable partition wall in his Cambridge home  The wall moved 
on pulleys between downstairs and upstairs  One night, while working late 
downstairs and feeling cold, Farish pulled down the partition  This is not 
much of a story, and history fails to disclose what happened next  All of 
which shows how little is known of William Farish  
4  For a detailed exposition of Mumford's position on the impact of the 
mechanical clock, see his Technics and Civilization. 
TWO 
1  Marx, p  150  
2  Perhaps another term for a tool-using culture is "third-world country," 
although vast parts of China may be included as tool-using  

202 
Notes 
3  For a detailed analysis of medieval technology, see Jean Gimpel's The 
Medieval Machine. 
4  Quoted in Muller, p  30  
5  See his Medieval Technology and Social Change. 
6  De Vries' findings are recounted by Alvin Toffler in his article "Value 
Impact Forecaster  A Profession of the Future," in Baier and Reseller's book 
Values and the Future: The Impact of Technological Change on American Values 
(New York  Free Press, 1969), p  3  
THREE 
1  Giedion, p  40  
2  The best account of the history of utopias may be found in Segal  
3  See David Linton's "Luddism Reconsidered" in Etcetera, Spring 1985, pp  
32-36  
4  Tocqueville, p  404  
FOUR 
1  For a detailed examination of the impact of the printing press on 
Western culture, see Eisenstein  
2  See Postman's Amusing Ourselves to Death for a more full-bodied treat-
ment of the telegraph  
FIVE 
1  An emphatic exception among those sociologists who have written on 
this subject is Arnold Gehlen  See his Man in the Age of Technology. 
2  Though this term is by no means original with E  D  Hirsch, Jr , its 
current popularity is attributable to Hirsch's book Cultural Literacy. 
3  This poignant phrase is also the title of one of Lasch's most important 
books  
4  James Beniger, The Control Revolution, p  13  As I have already noted, 
Beniger's book is the best source for an understanding of the technical means 
of eliminating—i e , controlling—information  

Notes 
203 
5  Tocqueville, p  262  
6  Lewis, p  x  
7  See Arendt  
SIX 
1  I am not sure whether the company still exists, but by way of proving 
that it at least once did, here is the address of the H A G O T H Corporation as 
I once knew it  85 NW Alder Place, Department C, Issaquah, Washington 
98027. 
2  All these facts and more may be found in Payer, or in Inlander et al  
3  Reiser, p  160  
4  Ibid , p  161  
5  Payer, p  127  
6  Quoted in ibid  
7  For a fascinating account of Laënnec's invention, see Reiser  
8  Ibid , p  38  
9  Ibid , p  230  
10  Horowitz, p  31  
11  Ibid , p  80  
12  Cited in Inlander et al , p  106  
13  Cited in ibid , p  113  
SEVEN 
1  New York Times, August 7, 1990, sect  C, p  1  
2  Personal Computing, June 29, 1990, p  36  
3  New York Times, November 24, 1989  
4  Publishers Weekly, March 2, 1990, p  26  
5  Bottom Line, July 15, 1989, p  5  

204 
Notes 
6  For a concise and readable review of the development of the computer, 
I would recommend Arno Penzias' Ideas and Information: Managing in a 
High-Tech World. 
7  Quoted in Hunt, p  318  
8  Searle, p  30  
9  See Gozzi, pp  177-80  
10  See Milgram  
11  Weizenbaum, p  32  
12  The March 1991 issue of The Sun reports that Lance Smith, who is two 
years old, is called "the Mozart of video games," mainly because he gets 
astronomical scores on one of Nintendo's games  This is as close to approach-
ing the artistry of Mozart as computers can get  
13  See J  D  Bolter's 1991 book, Writing Space: The Computer, Hypertext and 
the History of Writing (Hillsdale, N J  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates)  
14  Science Digest, June 1984  
15  Both men are quoted in the Raleigh, North Carolina, News and Ob-
server, Sunday, August 13, 1989  
16  Katsch, p  44  
EIGHT 
1  Cited in Gould, p  75  I am indebted to Gould's wonderful book for 
providing a concise history of the search to quantify intelligence  
2. The National Elementary Principal March/April 1975. 
3  Weizenbaum, p  203  
4  The occasion, in the spring of 1990, was a retreat outside of Washing-
ton, D C  The group of twenty-three Democratic congressmen was led by 
Richard Gephardt  
5  I have, of course, made up these ridiculous statistics  The point is, it 
doesn't matter  
6  See the preceding note  
7  An interesting example of the tyranny of statistics is in the decision 
made by the College Board (on November 1, 1990) that its Scholastic 
Aptitude Test will not include asking students to write an essay  To deter-

Notes 
205 
mine the student's ability to write, the SAT will continue to use a multiple-
choice test that measures one's ability to memorize rules of grammar, spell-
ing, and punctuation  It would seem reasonable—wouldn't it?—that the best 
way to find out how well someone writes is to ask him or her to write 
something  But in Technopoly reason is a strange and wondrous thing  For 
a documentation of all of this, see the January 16, 1991, issue of The Chronicle 
of Higher Education. 
8  See Keith W  Hoskin and Richard H  Macve, "The Genesis of Account-
ability  The West Point Connections," in Accounting Organizations and Society, 
vol  13, no  1 (1988), pp  37-73  I am especially indebted to these scholars 
for their account of the development of modern systems of management  
NINE 
1  Cited in Hayek, p  201  I am indebted to Hayek's book for his history 
of the Ecole Polytechnique  
2  Ibid , p  21  
3  Myrdal, p  6  
4  I have borrowed much of the material dealing with the distinctions 
between natural science and social research from my own essay "Social 
Science as Moral Theology," in Conscientious Objections. 
TEN 
1  Although in some ways Boorstin's book is dated, to him and his book 
go credit for calling early attention to the effects of an image society  
2  The New Republic, February 18, 1991, p  42  
ELEVEN 
1  What follows is a version of a proposal I have made several times before  
A somewhat fuller version appears in my Teaching as a Conserving Activity. 


Bibliography 
Al-Hibri, A , and Hickman, L  (eds )  Technology and Human Affairs. London  
The C  V  Mosby Company, 1981  
Arendt, H  Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil. New 
York  Penguin Books, 1977  
Bellah, R  N ; Madsen, R ; Sullivan, W  H ; Swidler, A ; and Tipton, S  M  
Habits of the Heart: Individualism and Commitment in American Life. Berkeley  
University of California Press, 1985  
Beniger, J  R  The Control Revolution: Technological and Economic Origins of 
the Information Society. Cambridge, Mass , and London  Harvard University 
Press, 1986  
Bolter, J  D  Turing's Man: Western Culture in the Computer Age. Chapel Hill  
The University of North Carolina Press, 1984  
Bury, J  B  The Idea of Progress: An Inquiry into its Origin and Growth. New 
York  Dover Publications, Inc , 1932  
Callahan, R  E  Education and the Cult of Efficiency: A Study of the Social Forces 
That Have Shaped the Administration of the Public Schools. Chicago  The Univer-
sity of Chicago Press, 1962  
Christians, C  G , and Van Hook, J  M  (eds )  Jacques Ellul: Interpretive Essays. 
Chicago  University of Illinois Press, 1981  

208 
Bibliography 
Eisenstein, E  The Printing Revolution in Early Modern Europe. Cambridge, 
Mass  Cambridge University Press, 1983  
Ellul, J  The Technological Society. New York  Alfred A  Knopf, 1964  
Ellul, J  The Betrayal of the West. New York  The Seabury Press, 1978  
Farrington, B  Francis Bacon: Philosopher of Industrial Science. New York  
Henry Schuman, Inc , 1949  
Freud, S  Civilization and Its Discontents. New York  W  W  Norton & Co , 
1961  
Gehlen, A  Man in the Age of Technology. New York  Columbia University 
Press, 1980  
Giedion, S  Mechanization Takes Command: A Contribution to Anonymous 
History. New York  W  W  Norton & Co , 1948  
Gimpel, J  The Medieval Machine: The Industrial Revolution of the Middle 
Ages. New York  Holt, Rinehart & Winston, 1976  
Gould, S  J  The Mismeasure of Man. New York  W  W  Norton & Co , 
1981  
Gozzi, R , Jr  "The Computer 'Virus' as Metaphor," in Etcetera: A Review of 
General Semantics, vol  47, no  2 (Summer 1990)  
Hayek, F  H  The Counter-Revolution of Science: Studies on the Abuse of Reason. 
Indianapolis  Liberty Press, 1952  
Hirsch, E  D , Jr  Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to Know. 
Boston  Houghton Mifflin Co , 1987  
Hodges, A  Alan Turing: The Enigma. New York  Simon & Schuster, 1983  
Hoffer, E  The Ordeal of Change. New York  Harper & Row, 1952  
Horowitz, L  C , M D  Taking Charge of Your Medical Fate. New York  
Random House, 1988  
Hunt, M  The Universe Within: A New Science Explores the Mind. New York  
Simon & Schuster, 1982  
Hutchins, R  M  The Higher Learning in America. New Haven  Yale Univer-
sity Press, 1936  
Inlander, C  B ; Levin, L  S ; and Weiner, E  Medicine on Trial: The Appalling 
Story of Medical Ineptitude and the Arrogance that Overlooks It. New York  
Pantheon Books, 1988  
Katsch, M  E  The Electronic Media and the Transformation of Law. New York 
and Oxford  Oxford University Press, 1989  

Bibliography 
209 
Koestler, A  The Sleepwalkers. New York  The Macmillan Company, 1968  
Lasch, C  Haven in a Heartless World: The Family Besieged. New York  Basic 
Books, Inc , 1975  
Lewis, C  S  The Screwtape Letters. New York  Macmillan, 1943  
Logan, R  K  The Alphabet Effect: The Impact of the Phonetic Alphabet on the 
Development of Western Civilization. New York  St  Martin's Press, 1986  
Luke, C  Pedagogy, Printing, and Protestantism. Albany  State University of 
New York Press, 1989  
Marx, K , and Engels, F  The German Ideology. New York  International 
Publishers, 1972  
Milgram, S  Obedience to Authority: An Experimental View. New York  
Harper & Row, 1974  
Muller, H  J  The Children of Frankenstein: A Primer on Modern Technology 
and Human Values. Bloomington and London  Indiana University Press, 1970  
Mumford, L  Technics and Civilization. New York  Harcourt Brace Jovano-
vich, 1963  
Myrdal, G  Objectivity in Social Research. New York  Pantheon Books, 1969  
Papert, S  Mindstorms: Children, Computers, and Powerful Ideas. New York  
Basic Books, Inc , 1980  
Payer, L  Medicine and Culture: Varieties of Treatment in the United States, 
England, West Germany, and France. New York  Penguin Books, 1988  
Penzias, A  Ideas and Information: Managing in a High-Tech World. New 
York and London  W  W  Norton & Co , 1989  
Plato  Phaedrus and Letters VII and VIII. New York  Penguin Books, 1973  
Postman, N  Amusing Ourselves to Death: Public Discourse in the Age of Show 
Business. New York  Penguin Books, 1985  
Read, H  To Hell with Culture and Other Essays on Art and Society. New York  
Schocken Books, 1963  
Reiser, S  J  Medicine and the Reign of Technology. Cambridge, London, New 
York and Melbourne  Cambridge University Press, 1978  
Rifkin, J  Time Wars: The Primary Conflict in Human History. New York  
Henry Holt and Company, 1987  
Schumacher, E  F  Small Is Beautiful: Economics As If People Mattered. New 
York, Hagerstown, San Francisco and London  Harper & Row  

210 
Bibliography 
Schumacher, E  F  A Guide for the Perplexed. New York  Viking Penguin, Inc , 
1977  
Searle, J  Minds, Brains and Science. Cambridge, Mass  Harvard University 
Press, 1984  
Segal, H  P  Technological Utopianism in American Culture. Chicago  The 
University of Chicago Press, 1985  
Snow, C  P  The Two Cultures and the Scientific Revolution. New York  
Cambridge University Press, 1959  
Sturt, M  Francis Bacon. New York  William Morrow & Company, 1932  
Szasz, T  Anti-Freud: Karl Kraus's Criticism of Psychoanalysis and Psychiatry. 
Syracuse  Syracuse University Press, 1976  
Tocqueville, A  de  Democracy in America. New York  Anchor Books (Dou-
bleday & Co , Inc ), 1969  
Usher, A  P  History of Mechanical Inventions. New York  Dover Publica-
tions, Inc , 1929  
Weingartner, C  "Educational Research  The Romance of Quantification," 
Etcetera: A Review of General Semantics, vol  39, no  2 (Summer 1982)  
Weizenbaum, J  Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgment to 
Calculation. San Francisco  W  H  Freeman and Company, 1976  
White, L , Jr  Medieval Technology and Social Change. London  Oxford 
University Press, 1962  
Whitehead, A  N  The Aims of Education and Other Essays. New York  The 
Free Press, 1929  
Whitrow, G  J  Time in History: The Evolution of Our General Awareness of 
Time and Temporal Perspective. Oxford and New York  Oxford University 
Press, 1988  

Index 
abacus, abacists, 127-8 
accounting procedures, 138, 141 
Adams, John, 45, 66-7, 82 
Advancement of Learning, The 
(Bacon), 37 
advertising, 69, 164-5, 167-71 
"agentic shift," 114 
algorists, 127 
alphabetization, 109, 128 
Ampère, Andre Marie, 146 
anthropology, 147, 158 
antibiotics, 94, 100, 104 
Arabic numerals, 62, 64 
Arendt, Hannah, 152 
Aristotle, 25, 32, 34, 177 
Arkwright, Richard, 41, 45, 54 
Arnold, Matthew, 42 
Arpanet network breakdown, 
113 
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 
(MIT), 110 
arts, the, 187, 189, 195-7 
Ascent of Man, The (Bronowski), 
187 
Astor, John Jacob, 53 
astrology, 74, 79, 85 
astronomy, 29-35 
Augustine, St , 177 
authority  of church, 30-1, 77-9; 
obedience to, 151-3, 162; of 
state; 79; see also moral 
authority 
Babbage, Charles, 109 
Bacon, Francis, 35-8, 40, 43-4, 
60, 64, 70, 160 
Baltimore Patriot, 68 
Balzac, Honoré de, 43 
"belief," computer redefinition of, 
1 1 1 - 1 2 
belief systems  in technocracy, 
45-8; in tool-using cultures, 
23-4, 25-6, 38, 59 
Bell, Alexander Graham, 53 
Bell, Daniel, 22 
Bellarmine, Cardinal, 59, 78 
Benét, Stephen Vincent, 39 
Beniger, James, 63, 83, 84-5 
Benjamin, Walter, 82 
Bernard of Clairvaux, St , 27 
Bettelheim, Bruno, 153 
Bhagavad-Gita, 172, 198 
Bias of Communication, The (Innis), 9 
Bible, the, 25, 33, 34, 59, 77-9, 
80, 82, 198; electronic, 108; 

212 
Index 
Bible, the (cont.) 
Genesis, 50, 160, 172, 187; 
vernacular, 65 
Big Bang theory, 187 
Blake, William, 42 
blasphemy, 78, 165, 167 
Bloom, Allan, 177, 179 
Bolter, J  David, 1 1 1 , 1 1 8 
books, printed, 61-2, 64-5 
Boorstin, Daniel, 68, 165-6 
Brahe, Tycho, 29, 38, 64 
Brandeis, Louis, 50 
Brave New World (Huxley), 48, 49 
British Association for the 
Advancement of Science, 147 
broadcasting, 69, 170; see also 
television 
Bronowski, Jacob, 187, 193 
Bryan, William Jennings, 49-50, 
78 
Bryant, William Cullen, 44 
Buddha, 157 
Buley, Robert, 1 2 1 
bureaucracy, 83-7, 88, 89, 91, 
158; computer and, 1 1 5 - 1 6 ; as 
meta-institution, 85-6; term, 83 
bureaucrat, description of, 86-7 
"bureaucratic effect," 86 
Burke, Edmund, 66 
Bush, George, 165, 179 
calculability, 1 1 8 - 1 9 , 141; see also 
measurement; numbers, 
technology of 
Cambridge University, 13, 139 
capitalism, 15, 21, 41, 44, 66, 81, 
82, 168, 169; American, 53-4 
Carlyle, Thomas, 38, 42, 83 
Carnegie, Andrew, 53 
Cartwright, Edmund, 41 
Cervantes, Miguel de, 156 
Chandler, Alfred, 139 
Chaplin, Charlie, 1 1 8 
Charles V, King of France, 27 
Charles Martel, Frankish King, 26 
Chomsky, Noam, 156 
Christian fundamentalism, 49-50, 
79-80, 187 
Cicero, Marcus Tullius, 171-2, 
177, 189-90 
Civilization and Its Discontents 
(Freud), 5-6 
clock, mechanical, invention of, 
14-15, 27, 28-9 
Closing of the American Mind, The 
(Bloom), 177 
Coles, Robert, 156 
college catalogues, 74-5 
college "course," 138, 142 
Comenius, John Amos, 1 7 1 
"commodity capitalism," 82 
Common Sense (Paine), 66 
communications revolution, 42, 
60-1, 67, 85; computers in, 
1 1 8 - 1 9 
Communist Manifesto, 198 
competition, technological, 1 6 - 1 9 
computer(s), 8, 1 0 - 1 1 , 61, 69, 
107-22, 124, 127, 179; 
anthropomorphic terminology, 
1 1 1 - 1 5 ; digital, 109-10, 113, 
119-20; "garbage in, garbage 
out" risk, 115; graphics, 108; 
history of, 109-10; legal 
restrictions on, 185; limitations 
of, 115-20; skills lost due to, 
120-2; as teaching tool, 17, 
18, 19, 120; "viruses" and 
"worms," 1 1 3 
Computer Power and Human 
Reason (Weizenbaum), 107, 1 1 1 
Comte, Auguste, 52, 145, 146 
Confucius, 157, 1 7 1 - 2 
consumer age, 42, 179 
control mechanisms, for 
information, 72-3; breakdown 
of, 63, 70, 72, 74, 75, 83; 
courts of law as, 73-4, 76, 77, 
85; family as, 75-6, 77; 
political parties as, 76-7; 
religion as, 77-80; school 

Index 
213 
curriculum as, 63, 74-5, 76, 77, 
85; state as, 77, 80-3; 
technical, 83-91 
Control Revolution, The (Beniger), 
63, 83 
Cooper, James Fenimore, 44 
Copernicus, Nicholas, 29-30, 32, 
33, 34, 35, 43, 130, 1 3 1 
Corelli, Marie, 85 
Coressio, Giorgio, 32 
courts of law, 73-4, 76, 77, 85 
creationism, 74, 79 
Creation Science, 150 
creativity, 187, 188 
credit cards, 138 
Cremin, Lawrence, 185 
cultural change, 12, 46-8 
"cultural literacy," 75, 1 7 5 - 6 
Cultural Literacy (Hirsch), 175 
Cultural Literacy Encyclopedia, 176 
culture  domination by 
technology, 12, 52, 71-2; 
taxonomy of, 22, 28 
curriculum, school, 63, 74-5, 76, 
77, 85; reform of, 186-99 
Curtis, Cyrus H  K , 168 
Czermak, Johann, 100 
Darwin, Charles, 54, 130 
David, Morton, 108 
Declaration of Independence, 66, 
97 
democracy, 173, 182; liberal, 
81-3; opinion polling in, 133, 
135-6; "rational," in 
Technopoly, 132; technological 
advances in, 1 1 - 1 2 
Democracy in America 
(Tocqueville), 48 
Democratic Party, 76-7 
Descartes, René, 34, 35, 64, 1 1 8 
de Vries, Egbert, 27-8 
Dewey, John, 156, 1 7 1 - 2 , 174-5 
diagnosis, medical, 98-101, 106, 
122 
dianetics, 74, 79, 85 
Dickens, Charles, 84, 159 
Diderot, Denis, 66 
Discourse on Method (Descartes), 
34 
Dostoevsky, Fedor, 156, 159 
drugs, medical use of, 94, 100, 
102, 104, 105 
Eastman, George, 168 
Ecole Polytechnique, Paris, 139, 
145-6 
ecology, as metaphor, 18 
economic advance, as god of 
Technopoly, 179-80 
"Economic Man," 41, 43 
Edison, Thomas Alva, 53 
education, 13, 44, 62-3, 1 7 1 - 2 , 
173-9, 183; "courses," 138, 
142; curriculum, 63, 74-5, 76, 
77, 85, 186-99; grading in, 
1 2 - 1 3 , 128, 138, 139-40; print 
vs  television vs  computer in, 
1 6 - 1 7 , 19; reform proposals, 
185-99; segregation in, 158; 
testing, 13, 131; see also 
learning 
efficiency, 42, 51, 85, 87, 90, 142, 
171, 179; problems of, 86 
egocentrism, 17 
Eichmann, Adolf, 87, 1 1 5 
Eichmann in Jerusalem (Arendt), 
152 
Einstein, Albert, 55, 153 
Eisenstein, Elizabeth, 65 
electronic media, 69 
Electronic Media and the 
Transformation of Law, The 
(Katsch), 1 2 1 
electronic writing, 1 1 8 
Eliot, T  S , 19 
elitism, 177-8 
Eliza computer program, 110, 
112, 1 1 7 
Ellul, Jacques, xii 

214 
Index 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo, 44, 48 
empiricism, 149 
Enfantin, Prosper, 146 
engineering, see inventions 
England, industrialization in, 
40-1, 139 
Enlightenment, Age of, 44-5 
epic poetry, 2 1 - 2 
Erasmus, Desiderius, 62, 171 
Erikson, Erik, 156 
eugenics, 129 
evidence, rules of, as information 
control, 73-4, 85 
expertise, experts, 42, 87-91 
fact, term, 8 
factory system, 4 1 - 2 
family, 46, 48, 75-6, 77 
Farish, William, 13 
Federalist Papers, 66 
feudalism, 21, 26-7 
First Amendment, 66 
Flaubert, Gustave, 43, 156 
Ford, Henry, 49, 53 
Forishee, Clay, 1 2 1 
forms, standardized, 84, 89, 90 
Foucault, Michel, 140 
Founding Fathers, 66-7 
Frames of Mind (Gardner), 1 3 1 
Franklin, Benjamin, 66-7 
Franklin Computer, 108 
freedom, 44-5, 66, 183; effect of 
technology on, 11; term, 8 
free will, 54 
Freud, Sigmund, 5-7, 47, 54, 150, 
153, 155, 157, 159, 162-3 
Froben, Johann, 62 
Fukuyama, Francis, 8 1 - 2 
fundamentalism, 4 9 - 5 0 , 7 9 - 8 0 , 
1 8 7 
Future of an Illusion, The (Freud), 
162 
Galbraith, John Kenneth, 141 
Galileo Galilei, 13, 29-30, 32-4, 
35, 38, 43, 49, 64, 160; trial of, 
30, 33, 59, 78 
Galton, Francis, 129-30, 1 3 1 
Gardner, Howard, 131 
Gehlen, Arnold, xii 
German Ideology, The (Marx), 21 
Gibbon, Edward, 66 
Giedion, Siegfried, 40, 41, 42 
God, 25-6, 29, 31-2, 34-5, 38, 
65, 78-9, 82; illusion of, 162-3 
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von, 
66, 88 
Goleman, Daniel, 144-5 
Goodman, Paul, 1 1 9 
Gould, Stephen Jay, 130-1 
government, 83-4, 85; see also 
state, the 
Gozzi, Raymond, Jr , 113 
grading of school performance, 
12-13, 
138, 139-40 
grammatocentric principle, 140-1 
graphics revolution, 68, 165-6 
Great Conversation, The, 188, 
189 
Greece, Golden Age of, 25 
gunpowder, invention of, 21, 
36-7 
Gutenberg, Johann, 15-16, 30, 
61, 108 
H a g o t h (machine), 9 2 - 3 
Hamilton, Alexander, 66-7 
Harvard Medical School, 104 
Harvey, William, 64, 97 
Havel, Václav, 82 
Hawthorne, Nathaniel, 44, 48 
Hayek, F  A , 147 
Health Shock (Weitz), 105 
Hegel, Georg Friedrich Wilhelm, 
81 
Heisenberg, Werner, 150 
heliocentrism, 29-30, 31-4 
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 100 
heresy, 33-4, 49, 78 
hierarchies, management, 139, 
140-1 

Index 
215 
Hillel, Rabbi, 78-9, 157, 182 
Hindu numerals, 127-8 
Hippocrates, 96 
Hirsch, E  D , Jr , 175-7, 179 
history, 54, 189-92; of art, 
196-7; comparative, 191; 
interdisciplinary, 189-90, 194, 
197-8; Marxist view of, 80-1; 
social, 156; teaching of, 
189-92; term, 8, 48, 191 
Hitler, Adolf, 172-3 
Holmes, Oliver Wendell, 96, 99 
Horowitz, Laurence, 103 
Hoskin, Keith, 139, 140 
Howe, Irving, 178-9 
human condition, improvement 
of, 35-7; see also progress 
humanities, teaching of, 195-7 
Humboldt, Alexander von, 146 
Hume, David, 66 
Hutchins, Robert Maynard, 188 
Huxley, Aldous, 48, 49 
iatrogenics, 104 
Identity of Man, The (Bronowski), 
193 
ideological bias, 93, 124-5; of 
computer technology, 107, 
111-22; of languages, 123-5; 
of medical technology, 94-106, 
107 
ideological change, 12, 15-16; in 
technocracy, 28; in tool-using 
cultures, 26-8 
ideology, 123, 178-9; in 
tool-using cultures, 25-6, 38; 
see also belief systems 
idolatry, 78, 167 
Idols, four (Bacon), 37 
Illich, Ivan, xii 
Image, The (Boorstin), 165 
industrialization, 38, 40-3, 47, 
139 
information, 8, 12, 60-1, 71, 1 1 1 ; 
access to, 61, 119; chaos, 60, 
69-70; as commodity, 68; 
defense against, 71-83 (see also 
control mechanisms); explosion, 
60-6, 67-9, 85, 136-7, 176; 
management of, 83-91; 
overload, 136; and reason, 
66-7; speed, 61, 65, 67-9, 
118-19; technology, 109-11, 
1 1 8 - 1 9 
information-trivia, 137 
Innis, Harold, 9, 19-20 
Innocent II, Pope, 23 
intelligence  artificial, 109-15; 
measurement of, 89, 93, 
129-32, 138; term, 8, 48 
interest, 171, 179 
Interstate Commerce Commission, 
50 
invention(s), 36-7, 42; benefits vs  
burdens of, 3-6, 9-12, 14-18; 
industrial age, 40-2; medical, 
97-100; telecommunications, 
42, 69; in tool-using cultures, 
24-8 
inventory accounting, 140, 141 
James, Henry, 155 
James, William, 155, 156 
Japanese language, 124 
Jefferson, Thomas, 13, 45, 66-7, 
82, 134, 171-2, 174-5, 182 
Jesus Christ, 157 
Jodrell Bank Observatory, 120 
John Brown's Body (Benét), 39 
judgment, human, estrangement 
from, 51, 55, 118, 158, 179; in 
medicine, 93, 101, 103 
Jung, Carl, 153 
Kafka, Franz, 115, 156 
Kant, Immanuel, 35, 66 
Katsch, M  Ethan, 121 
Kepler, Johannes, 29, 30-2, 33, 
34, 35, 38, 43, 64 
King, Martin Luther, Jr , 167 
Kinsey, Alfred, 154-5, 156 

216 
Index 
Kipling, Rudyard, 138 
knowledge, 188-90; explosion, 
88, 186; monopolies of, 9 - 1 1 ; 
numerical quantification of, 13; 
as power, 38; vs  wisdom, 4, 8, 
11, 12, 1 6 - 1 7 
Koestler, Arthur, 34 
Koran, 172, 198 
Kraus, Karl, 86 
labor, 41-2, 43; mechanistic 
metaphors, 117-18; Taylor 
system, 51-2; unions, 44 
Ladies' Home Journal, 168 
Laënnec, René-Théophile-
Hyacinthe, 97-8, 109 
language, 14, 123-7, 142; 
disciplined use of, 189, 194-5; 
effects of new technology on, 
8, 48, 68; vernacular, 64-5 
LaPlace, Pierre-Simon de, 146 
laryngoscope, 100 
Lasch, Christopher, 75, 157 
Lavoisier, Antoine Laurent, 146 
law, 73-4; precedent overload 
due to computers, 121; term, 
8 
Lawrence, D  H , 154-5, 157 
learning, 19, 139-40, 171-2; 
orality vs  isolation in, 17; 
print vs  image in, 16-17; 
technologies, 171 
Leary, Timothy, 1 1 7 
Leonardo da Vinci, 26 
Letter to the Grand Duchess 
Christina (Galileo), 32-3 
Lewis, C  S , 84, 85, 86 
liberal democracy, 81-3 
lie detectors, 93, 127 
Life on the Mississippi (Twain), 
46-7 
Lincoln, Abraham, 48, 167 
line-and-staff system, 140 
Lippershey, Johann, 32 
literacy, 44; cultural, 75, 175 
literature, 44, 65, 118, 195-6, 
197; epic, 21-2; imaginative, 
154-9 
Litigation Sciences, 108 
Locke, John, 171, 175 
LOGO computer program, 120 
Lovell, Sir Bernard, 120-1 
Luddite Movement, 43 
Luther, Martin, 15, 30, 64-5 
"machine-as-human" metaphor, 
1 1 1 - 1 5 , 1 1 7 - 1 8 
machinery, 92-4, 142; "faith" in, 
42; ideological bias of, 93-4, 
107, 1 1 1 - 1 2 , 124-5; medical, 
94-106; technocratic view of, 
52; technopolic view of, 51, 
52, 158; see also technical 
machinery, as mechanism of 
information control 
machine-tool industry, 42 
Macve, Richard, 139, 140 
Madison, James, 45, 66 
Maestlin, Michael, 31 
magazines, 44, 69, 168-9, 170 
management, 139-42; scientific, 
50-2 
Mankoff (cartoonist), 137 
market(s), 42; self-regulating, 41 
Marx, Karl, 14, 21-2, 54, 80, 
153, 156, 157, 159 
Marxism, 80-1 
mathematical concept of reality, 
13, 128 
mathematics, 34, 35-6, 118-19, 
127-8, 148, 154; as universal 
language, 64 
Mazares, Gregory, 108 
McCarthy, John, 1 1 1 - 1 2 
McClelland, David, 131 
McKinley, John, 105 
McLuhan, Marshall, 13-14, 21, 
22, 118, 156, 157 
Mead, Margaret, 153, 156 
meaning, computers and, 1 1 2 - 1 3 

Index 
217 
measurement, 13, 35, 42, 51-2, 
92-3, 129, 134-5, 139-40; of 
IQ, 89, 93, 129-32, 138 
mechanization, 38, 40-2, 47, 66 
media  ecology of (metaphor), 18; 
proliferation, 69; war, 16-19 
medical insurance, 102 
medical practice and technology, 
94-106, 107; disease- vs  
patient-orientation of, 96-7, 
99-103; distrust of, 185; 
"human-as-machine" metaphor 
in, 117; inventions, 97-100; 
specialization, 101; U S  vs  
abroad, 94-5, 97 
Medicine and Culture (Payer), 
95-6 
Medicine and the Reign of 
Technology (Reiser), 99 
"medium is the message, the" 
(McLuhan), 14, 118, 157 
megamachine, 25 
Melville, Herman, 48 
memory, vs  recollection (legend 
of Thamus), 4, 8; term, 8 
Mencken, H  L , 57 
Messenger from the Stars (Galileo), 
29 
metaphysics, 26, 27, 34 
Middle Ages, 23-4, 25-7, 28-9, 
58, 59, 77 
Milgram, Stanley, 114, 151-3, 
156 
military technology, 21, 23-4, 
26-7, 28, 36-7 
Mill, John Stuart, 83, 85, 174-5 
Milton, John, 29 
mind, as biological phenomenon, 
1 1 1 - 1 2 
Mindstorms (Papert), 120 
Minsky, Marvin, 1 1 1 
Mismeasure of Man, The (Gould), 
130 
Modern Times (film), 118 
monopolies of knowledge (Innis), 
9 - 1 1 
Montessori, Maria, 171 
moral authority, 38, 147, 160-3; 
religious, 78-9; secular, 82-3, 
160 
Morris, William, 42 
Morse, Samuel, 53, 68 
Mowat, Farley, 28 
Mumford, Lewis, xii, 15, 22, 25, 
153, 156 
Munsey, Frank, 168-9 
Munsey's Magazine, 169 
Muslim fundamentalism, 80 
Myrdal, Gunnar, 150 
mythology, 77, 78, 172 
narratives, great, loss of, 50, 
59-60, 77-8, 160, 172-3, 
178-80 
Nation at Risk, A (report), 174 
Nazism, 87, 172-3 
New Astronomy (Kepler), 31 
New English Dictionary (Murray), 
147 
New Industrial State, The 
(Galbraith), 141 
newspapers, 8, 68, 69, 170 
Newton, Isaac, 34, 35, 43, 160 
New Yorker, The, 137 
New York Times, The, 108, 144-5 
Nietzsche, Friedrich, 54 
nihilism, 179 
Nixon, Richard M , 92 
Novum Organum (Bacon), 36-7 
numbers, technology of, 13, 93, 
127-31, 139-41; see also 
measurement; statistics 
numerals, 62, 64, 127-8 
Oakeshott, Michael, 148 
Obedience to Authority (Milgram), 
151 
objectivity, 42, 51, 90, 99-100, 
132; numbers as test of, 130-1, 
140; scientific, 132, 149-50, 16c 

218 
Index 
Ong, Walter, 22 
On the Revolutions of the Heavenly 
Spheres (Copernicus), 30 
ophthalmoscope, 100 
opinion polls, 89, 90, 132-6, 138, 
158 
orality, in learning, 17 
oral tradition, 22, 29 
Ortega y Gasset, José, 22 
Orwell, George, 195 
Owen, Robert, 43 
Paine, Thomas, 66-7, 82 
Papert, Seymour, 117, 120 
Paradise Lost (Milton), 29 
Payer, Lynn, 95-6, 97 
Peirce, C  S , 22 
People of the Deer, The (Mowat), 
28 
Phaedrus (Plato), 3 
philosophy, 35, 47, 172; of 
science, 192-4; weight of 
reason in, 31 
photography, 16, 42, 68-9, 168 
Physics (Aristotle), 34 
Plato, 3, 25, 171-2, 177 
Poe, Edgar Allan, 44 
poetry, 19; epic, 2 1 - 2 
political freedom, 44-5, 183 
political parties, 76-7 
politics, 48, 172; media and, 
18-19; polls, 133-6, 138 
Pollard, Sidney, 139 
Popper, Karl, 150 
popular art and culture, 196-7 
positivism, 52 
poverty, 38, 44 
Poverty of Philosophy, The (Marx), 
21 
power, 35; accumulation through 
technology, 9, 11; knowledge 
as, 38; science as source of, 
36-7 
"practices" vs  "processes," 147-8 
press, the, 8, 68, 69 
Principles of Scientific Management, 
The (Taylor), 51 
print, and printing press, 8, 10, 
15-16, 17, 18, 21-2, 29, 36-7, 
61-2, 64-6, 99, 116, 118; 
rotary, 42 
Printing Press as an Agent of 
Change, The (Eisenstein), 65 
privacy, respect for, 48, 66 
probability theory, 128 
"processes" vs  "practices," 147-8 
Procter and Gamble, 169 
productivity norms, 140, 141 
professions, 90 
progress, 44-5, 60; 19th-century 
view of, 42, 102; science as 
source of, 36-8, 60; 
technology as source of, 42, 
60, 117, 158 
Protestantism, spread of, 64-5 
psychiatry, 150, 1 5 1 
psychology, 13, 131, 144-5, 147, 
150-5, 158 
public opinion polls, 89, 90, 
132-6, 138, 158 
quality control, 140 
quantification, 35, 129, 161; of 
thought, 13, 149; see also 
measurement 
questions, phrasing of, 125-6, 
133; in opinion polls, 133-4; in 
tests, 125 
Quintilian, 171 
radio, 69, 170 
ranking, in measurement, 130, 
135, 138 
Read, Herbert, xii 
reading, 16, 195 
Reagan, Ronald, 162 
reality, 17, 19; mathematical 
measuring of, 13, 128 
reason, 31, 34, 66-7, 82, 163 

Index 
219 
recollection, vs  memory, 4, 8 
regulation, by clock, 14-15, 27 
reification, in measurement, 130 
Reiser, Stanley Joel, 99, 101 
religion, 47, 48, 49-50, 77-80, 
172, 178, 186, 187, 189; 
comparative, 198; see also 
theology 
religious freedom, 44, 183 
Republican Party, 76-7 
responsibility, 82 
Riesman, David, 116 
Rights of Man, The (Paine), 66 
Robinson Crusoe (Defoe), 176 
Rockefeller, John D , 53 
Roentgen, Wilhelm, 100 
Rogers, Carl, 186-7 
Rogers, David E , 95 
Roman numerals, 64, 127-8 
Rosen, Jay, 165-6 
Rousseau, Jean Jacques, 171-2, 176 
Rush, Benjamin, 96-7 
Ruskin, John, 42 
Russell, James Earl, 1 7 1 
Saint-Simon, Claude Henri de, 
146 
samurai, code of, 23 
Saturday Evening Post, The, 44 
schools, see education; learning 
Schulberg, Budd, 157 
science, 34, 47, 49-50, 60, 64, 79, 
145-50, 154, 162, 172, 187, 
189; Bacon's utilitarian view of, 
35-8; experimental, 35-6, 193; 
natural, 34, 145-6, 147-8, 
159-61, 163; objectivity in, 
132, 149-50, 160; philosophy 
of, 192-4; social research not 
based in, 145, 150-9; teaching 
of, 189, 192-5; term, 147, 
148-50, 159; vs  theology, 
30-5 
scientific management, 50-2, 140 
"scientific outlook," 124 
scientific theory, 150, 193 
Scientism, 143, 146-7, 159-63; 
basic principles of, 147 
Scopes "monkey" trial, 49-50, 78 
Searle, John, 1 1 1 
semantics, 194-5 
serendipity, and discovery, 121 
Shakespeare, William, 13 
Shannon, Claude, 109 
Shaw, George Bernard, 57-8, 90 
skepticism, 34; American, 53, 179 
skilled workers, 42, 43 
Skinner, B  F , 156 
Smith, Adam, 40-1, 66, 169 
Snow, Sir Charles (C  P ), xi, xii, 
38 
social change, 1 1 - 1 2 , 15-16, 71; 
lack of, in computer age, 116; 
in technocracy, 28, 44-5; in 
tool-using cultures, 26-8 
social engineering, 146, 147 
social institutions, 86, 90-1; as 
information control 
mechanisms, 72-83, 85 
social policy, 158-9 
social research, 150-60, 161-2; 
archetypes and metaphors of, 
156-7; technique in, 158, 
1 6 1 - 2 
social sciences, 13, 56, 133, 
144-5, 146-7, 150-63 
sociology, 13, 52, 73, 147, 156, 
158 
Socrates, 3 
specialization, 87-8; in medicine, 
101 
Spengler, Oswald, 22 
spirituality, 82 
standardization, 42, 89-90, 93, 
141-2, 162; bureaucratic, 84-5; 
by clock, 15; of information, 
62, 64; of time, 85 
state, the, 77, 80-3 
statistics, 128-32, 136-8, 158; 
abuses of, 129-30; in polling, 
133-6; trivia, 137-8 

220 
Index 
Statue of Liberty, 173, 182 
Steiner, George, 44 
stethoscope, invention of, 
97-100, 107-8, 109, 127 
Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 44 
subjectivity, 51, 93, 101, 118, 
131, 158 
surgery, 103-5; statistics, 94, 105 
symbols and icons, 182-3; as 
technological mechanisms, 
127-8; trivialization of, 165-8, 
170-1, 173, 178-80 
Taking Charge of Your Medical 
Fate (Horowitz), 103 
taxonomy, 89, 90; of cultural 
ages, 22, 28 
Taylor, Frederick W , 50-2, 55, 
93, 140 
Taylor system, 51-2, 140 
technical machinery, as 
mechanism of information 
control, 89-91 
technique, 142-3, 158, 161 
technocracy, 21, 22, 40-9, 52, 55, 
70, 102; emergence of, 38-9, 
40-1, 59; foundations laid for, 
by Bacon, 35-8, 64; goals of, 
52; human costs of, 42-3; 
information explosion, 60, 63; 
Kepler's early conception of, 
31; and liberal democracy, 82; 
and progress, 42, 44-5, 102; 
vs  tool-using culture, 28, 
38-9, 45-6 
technological change, 70; dialectic 
of, 44; ecology of (metaphor), 
18 
"technological modesty," 119-20, 
122 
"technologies in repose" (Kipling), 
138 
technology, 47-8, 60; benefits vs  
burdens of, 3-6, 9-12, 14-18, 
44; language as, 123-7; of 
management, 50-2, 139-42; of 
numbers, 13, 93, 127-41; 
submission of cultural life to, 
12, 52, 71-2; in taxonomy of 
culture, 22, 28; teaching of 
history of, 197-8; uses of, 7 
Technology Review, 108 
Technophiles, 5, 6-7 
Technophobes, 7 
technopoly, 20, 21, 22, 71, 83, 
129, 145, 157-8; advertising 
in, 165, 168, 170-1; 
bureaucracy in, 86-7; as 
cultural "AIDS," 63, 72-3; 
definitions of, 48, 71-2, 79; 
education in, 174-9, 183; 
educational reform proposals, 
185-99; emergence of, 48-55; 
experts in, 87-9; information-
driven, 60-1, 63, 69-70; and 
liberal democracy, 82-3; 
reliance on machines, 51, 52, 
92-4, 101, 107, 1 1 1 , 115-22, 
142; reliance on statistics, 
128-38; Scientism as pillar and 
illusion of, 146-7, 162-3; use 
of techniques in, 142-3 
telecommunications, 42, 61, 109 
telegraphy, 8, 42, 67-8, 69 
telephone, 42, 109 
telescope, 29, 32, 64 
television, 8, 9-10, 18, 69, 124, 
127; commercials, 170, 174; in 
education, 16-17, 19; ratings, 
136 
Terman, Lewis, 130 
terminology, effects of new 
technologies on, 8 
tests, 89-90, 93, 158; 
achievement, 89, 138; cultural 
bias in, 125; distrust of, 185; 
grading of, 12-13, 128, 138; 
intelligence, 89, 93, 129-32, 
138; multiple-choice vs  
"fill-in," 125 
Thamus, king of Egypt, 3-4, 5, 
7-9, 1 1 - 1 2 , 14, 15-18, 19-20, 
21, 26, 44, 122 

Index 
221 
Thayer, Sylvanus, 139-40, 141 
theology, 25-6, 27, 60, 178-9; 
and astronomy revolution, 
29-35; Scopes trial, 49-50; 
technological, 50-1 
theory, 192; nature of, 77; 
principle of falsifiability of, 
150-1, 193 
Theory of the Leisure Class, The 
(Veblen), 157 
Theuth, inventions of (legend), 
3-5, 9, 14, 16 
thinking, computer and, 1 1 3 
Thoreau, Henry David, 3, 6, 45, 48 
Thorndike, E  L , 131 
Thucydides, 190 
Tiananmen Square 
demonstrations, 182 
time, 45; zones, 85 
time-and-motion studies, 140 
Tocqueville, Alexis de, 44, 48, 53, 
66, 83 
Toffler, Alvin, 28 
Tonegawa, Susuma, 124 
tools, 42; cultural integration of, 
23-4, 25-6; culture attacked 
by, 26-9, 42; in technocracy, 
42, 47-8 
tool-using cultures, 22-4, 38-9, 
87; defined, 23-4, 25, 28; 
integration of belief systems in, 
23-4, 25-6, 38, 59; shedding 
of "chains" of, 45-6; survival 
of traditions of, 46-8 
totalitarian technocracy, 48 
Toynbee, Arnold, 22, 153, 172, 
190 
tradition, 45-8, 88; devaluation 
of, 54-5, 71, 132, 165-6, 
170-1, 178-80 
transportation, 61, 67, 85, 86 
Trial The (Kafka), 1 1 5 
trivialization of symbols, 165-8, 
170-1, 173, 178-80 
truth  pursuit of, 35, 159; 
scientific, 193; term, 8, 12, 48, 
49-50 
Tuchman, Barbara, 156 
Turing, Alan, 1 1 0 
Turing's Man (Bolter), 1 1 1 
Twain, Mark, 46-8, 159 
Tyler, Daniel, 140, 141 
typewriter, 42, 1 1 0 
uncertainty principle, 128, 150 
Understanding Media (McLuhan), 
21 
United States  ideological change 
in, 12; invention and 
technology fervor in, 42, 95, 
102; management's rise in, 
139-42; medical practice in, 
94-9, 101-5, 107; national 
experiments of, 183; 
19th-century technocracy of, 
42-8; symbols and icons of, 
165, 173, 179-80, 182; as a 
Technopoly, 48-55, 182 
universe  Big Bang theory of 
creation of, 187; mechanistic 
view of, 35; medieval view of, 
29-34 
universities, as information 
control centers, 74-5 
unskilled labor, 4 1 - 2 
USA Today, 137 
U S  Military Academy, 139-40 
utopian communities, 43 
Veblen, Thorstein, 156, 157 
vernacular, use of, 64-5 
Vesalius, Andreas, 64 
Vico, Giovanni Battista, 66 
Virtual Reality images, 1 1 7 
Volta, Alessandro, 146 
Voltaire, François Marie Arouet 
de, 66 
von Neumann, John, 1 1 0 
Washington, George, 97, 167 
Watson, John, 54 

222 
Index 
Watt, James, 40 
Waugh, Evelyn, 157 
wealth, 41 
Wealth of Nations, The (Smith), 40 
Weber, Max, 84, 153, 156, 159 
Weingartner, Charles, 195 
Weitz, Martin, 105 
Weizenbaum, Joseph, 107, 1 1 1 , 
112, 116, 1 3 1 
Whistler, George, 140, 141 
Whistler, James McNeill, 141 
White, Lynn, Jr , 24, 26 
White, William Allen, 168 
Whitehead, Alfred North, 42, 63, 
171 
Whitman, Walt, 46, 48 
Wiener, Norbert, 115, 1 1 9 
Wilde, Oscar, 157 
wisdom  false vs  real (legend of 
Thamus), 4, 8, 9, 11, 16-17; 
term, 8 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 14 
word-processing, 108, 120 
working class, 76, 80-1 
writing, 120, 136, 195; electronic, 
118; as invention, 7; Thamus's 
view of (in Phaedrus), 3-4, 7-9, 
1 5 - 1 6 
X-rays, 100; and cancer, 104; 
statistics, 94-5 
Yomiuri (newspaper), 124 
zero, sign of, 127-8 
Zola, Emile, 43 

