 
 
The Bakerian Lecture, 1982: Galaxies and Their Nuclei
Author(s): M. J. Rees
Source: Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical
Sciences, Vol. 400, No. 1819 (Aug. 8, 1985), pp. 183-218
Published by: Royal Society
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2397961
Accessed: 28-02-2023 13:16 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Royal Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and extend access to
Proceedings of the Royal Society of London. Series A, Mathematical and Physical
Sciences
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 400, 183-218 (1985)
 Printed in Great Britain?
 THE BAKERIAN LECTURE, 1982
 Galaxies and their nucleit
 BY M. J. REES, F.R.S.
 Institute of Astronomy, Madingley Road, (>'ambridye (B3 OHA
 (Lecture delivered 1 April 1982 - Typescript received 14 March 1985)
 This lecture briefly reviews current ideas on some key problems in
 extragalactic physics. Our understanding of galaxies and how they evolve
 is still tentative and fragmentary - perhaps at the same level as the study
 of stellar structure several decades ago. The 'seeds' from which galaxies
 formed were small-amplitude fluctuations imprinted during the initial
 high-energy phases of the Big Bang; but it is conventional phvsics - gas
 dynamics, atomic physics and Newtonian gravity - that determines their
 characteristic sizes and shapes. Quantitative modelling of galactic evolu-
 tion is impeded by our poor understanding of how stars form from
 protogalactic gas. Another stumbling block has been the realization that
 90 o of the gravitating material in galaxies is in some 'hidden' form: the
 conspicuous stars and gas are merely 'sediment' in a potential well ten
 times larger contributed by material of unknown nature. The hidden
 mass could be small faint stars or the collapsed remnants of massive stars;
 alternatively, it could be some species of particle surviving from the Big
 Bang.
 Some galaxies harbour, in their centres, 'engines' more powerful than
 the entire integrated output of their ca. 101l constituent stars. Extreme
 instances of this phenomenon are the quasars - galactic nuclei that flare
 up to outshine the rest of the galaxy. Galaxies sometimes eject well-
 collimated jets of (possibly electron-positron) plasma, flowing at almost
 the speed of light. These jets, transporting an energy flux that may
 amount to an entire galactic luminosity, propagate for up to 106 light
 years; their interaction with the external medium is manifested in the
 intense synchrotron radiation from strong radio sources. Active galactic
 nuclei probably involve spinning black holes of 108 MO (described in
 Einstein's theory by the Kerr metric) created by a runaway gravitational
 collapse. The luminosity and the plasma outflow could be energized by
 infall of surrounding material, or by the rotational energy of the holes,
 which can be extracted via electromagnetic torques. Massive black holes
 may lurk quiescent in the centres of several nearby galaxies, and even
 at our own Galactic Centre.
 1. INTRODUCTION
 There is no mystery about why stars have masses and luminosities in the general
 range we observe. Calculations of stellar structure and evolution, and of how, as
 a by-product of stellar evolution, heavier elements are synthesized from H and He,
 t Text is an updated and extended version of the Bakerian Lecture given at the Royal Society
 in 1982.
 7 [ 183 ] N oI. 400. A (8 August 1985)
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 184 M. J. Rees
 have been a prime activity of astrophysicists over the last 50 years. But, despite
 much real progress, the most basic questions about galaxies are still unresolved,
 and a general lecture like this offers an opportunity to assess them. In particular
 the following will be considered.
 (i) We do not know why such things as galaxies should exist at all; i.e. why these
 assemblages of stars and gas with moderately standardized properties are the most
 conspicuous large-scale features of the cosmos.
 (ii) About 90 0 of the mass associated with galaxies is 'hidden'. The luminous
 stars and gas contribute only about a tenth of the gravitating material inferred
 from dynamical arguments; what the rest consists of is still a mystery.
 (iii) It is unclear why the nuclei of some galaxies flare up, and release the colossal
 amount of non-stellar radiation emitted from quasars and radio galaxies.
 We are perplexed about these issues, just as 50 years ago, our predecessors were
 perplexed about the nature of stars. But some of us are hopeful that the physical
 processes underlying galaxies and their nuclei are coming into focus, just as they
 did for stars.
 2. NORMAL GALAXIES AS WE SEE THEM
 The most familiar types of galaxy are the disc-like or spiral systems. Our own
 Galaxy and Andromeda are of this type: they contain about 1011 stars, and about
 100 as much material in the form of gas, configured as a differentially rotating
 disc about 50000 light years in radius. Such systems are in dynamical equilibrium,
 with centrifugal force-balancing gravity. A typical star takes about 200 Ma to
 make one circuit.
 The other main distinct class (apart from the disc galaxies) is the 'ellipticals'.
 These are amorphous swarms containing up to 1012 stars, each star tracing out a
 complicated path determined by the overall gravitational field of all the other stars.
 The smooth brightness profile of elliptical galaxies indicates that the orbits have
 become thoroughly mixed in phase, and that a virial equilibrium has been set up.
 Elliptical galaxies do not contain conspicuous amounts of gas; neither the hot
 glowing gas associated with regions of star formation nor the cool gas that
 radioastronomers detect via the 21 cm line of neutral hydrogen. Nor are any bright
 patches containing young blue stars observed. Elliptical galaxies, generally less
 photogenic than spirals, have a variety of apparent shapes. This is not only a result
 of different orientations relative to our line of sight, but also to genuine differences
 in shape.
 Astronomers have developed an elaborate taxonomy for classifying galaxies with
 greater precision. Most galaxies can, however, be crudely categorized as either
 'disc' or 'elliptical' systems; a simple classification can be based simply on the
 relative prominence of disc and elliptical components (Ostriker & Meisels I985).
 Disc galaxies such as our own contain a mixture of young and old stars; clouds
 of gas (in the Orion Nebula, for instance) are continually condensing into new stars.
 Ellipticals, on the other hand, apparently contain neither dense gas nor young stars.
 This correlation between gas and recently formed stars offers a clue to the nature
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 185
 of these systems. Suppose that a galaxy started life as an irregularly shaped gas
 cloud contracting under gravity, and that the collapse of such a gas cloud were
 highly dissipative, in the sense that any two globules of gas that collided would
 radiate their relative energy and merge. The end-result of the collapse of such a
 gas cloud would be a rotating disc. This is the lowest energy state that the cloud
 can reach if it does not lose or redistribute its angular momentum. On the other
 hand, stars do not collide with each other, and are unable to dissipate energy in
 the same fashion as gas clouds (see figure 1). So the rate of conversion of gas into
 stars seems to be the crucial feature determining the type of galaxy that results,
 with elliptical galaxies being those in which the conversion is fast, so that most
 of the stars have already formed before the gas has had time to settle down in a
 disc. Disc galaxies are those in which the star formation is delayed until the gas
 has already settled into a disc. According to this picture, ellipticals and spirals may
 have the same age. Disc galaxies are those with slower 'metabolism', which have
 not yet got so close to the final state in which essentially all the gas is tied up in
 low-mass stars or dead remnants. The 'irregular galaxies' are even more extreme
 cases of arrested development; these are systems in which maybe less than half of
 the gas has so far been incorporated into stars.
 Over the lifetime of a galaxy star formation depletes the original gas: stars of
 low mass (less than 0.8 MO) have hydrogen-burning lifetimes exceeding 101
 higher-mass stars may by now have died and ejected processed material back into
 interstellar space. Our poor understanding of star formation is the main stumbling
 block preventing us from quantifying how galaxies evolve. We do not know what
 determines the initial mass function (i.m.f.) of stars forming now in our own
 Galaxy; still less do we know how the i.m.f. depends on physical conditions. Nor
 do we know much about the efficiency of star formation: this determines how much
 gas can be turned into stars on the free-fall timescale, and how efficiently enriched
 gas can be recycled into new stars.
 Galaxy formation straddles the interface between cosmology and astrophysics.
 The origin of the clouds envisaged in figure 1 falls in the cosmologist's province.
 On the other hand, once galaxies have formed, the phenomena within them that
 interest astrophysicists proceed more or less regardless of the broader cosmic
 context. (At least this is true unless the universe eventually collapses on top of
 them.)
 We still do not know why galaxies should have the characteristic masses
 (1010-1012 M.) and radii (104-105 light years) that we observe. Galaxies are
 standardized than stars. We understand why stars (gravitationally bound fusion
 reactors) exist only for a certain range of masses. Ordinary stellar masses lie within
 an order of magnitude of the Chandrasekhar mass [hc/lGm mp, where m is the
 proton mass. (The dimensionless number in square brackets is the reciprocal of the
 gravitational fine structure constant aG . The fact that ac-I is so huge (ca. 1038) and
 stars are consequently so large reflects the weakness of gravity on the microscopic
 scale.) But an equally convincing physical explanation for galactic masses still
 eludes us. Conceivably the right characteristic mass is somehow 'imprinted' in the
 early Universe; alternatively, the galactic mass range may be singled out by
 7-2
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 186 M. J. Rees
 physical processes, just as stars in the stable mass range around cx-2 Mare the
 end-product of condensation from a broad mass spectrum of inhomogeneities (in,
 for example, the Orion nebula) without that mass having to be specially prominent
 in the inhomogeneities of the interstellar medium.
 A suggestive clue that galactic dimensions may be determined by astrophysical
 processes is the following (see also Rees & Ostriker I977; Silk 1977; Binney I977).
 Two timescales are important in determining how a self-gravitating gas cloud
 evolves. The first of these is the dynamical, or free-fall, time tdyn; this is of order
 (Gp)-2, its precise value depending on the geometry of the collapse. The second is
 the radiative cooling timescale; this depends on the gas temperature Tg, and can
 be written tcool = Tg/pA (Tg), where A (Tg) depends on the composition and i
 of the gas and can be calculated from atomic physics. (The cooling rate per unit
 volume is proportional to p2A(Tg). At high temperatures, bremsstrahlung cooling
 dominates, andA(Tg) oc Tg; where kTg <1 a.u.t, (or Tg < t.6x5 K) recombin
 tion and line emission from H and He are more important.)
 If tcool > tdyn, a cloud of mass M and radius R can be in quasistatic equilib
 with Tg equal to the virial temperature kTv = GMmp/R. But if tcool < tdy
 equilibrium is impossible; the cloud cools below the virial temperature and
 undergoes free-fall collapse or fragmentation. The criterion tcoo
 determines whether a shock developing during infall is isothermal (permitting a
 density enhancement of the order of the Mach number squared) or adiabatic (with
 density enhancement less than 4). We would expect clouds to collapse and
 fragment in the fashion depicted in figure 1 only if they enter the part of the M-R
 plane where tcool < tdyn. A simple calculation shows that this happens below 
 mass-independent radius
 Rcrit = [e2/(me C2)] [L1 42(mp/me)2] 75 kpc, (1)
 where aCf is the electromagnetic fine structure constant (e2/hc), for all masses such
 that the virial temperatures (when R = Rcrit) lies in the range me c2 > kT > 4f me c2
 (i.e. for values of kTv between 1 a.u. and the electron rest mass, when non-relativistic
 bremsstrahlung is the main radiative process). The mass for which the virial
 temperature at Rcrit is kTv = me c2 is
 Mcrit = [- 2 5(mp/me)]2mp 1012 Mo. (2)
 Masses below Mcrit cool efficiently'by H and He recombination and li
 even at radii somewhat larger than Rcrit Clouds with mass below Mcri
 fragment, but above Mcrit fragmentation is impossible unless the clou
 to R < Rcrit (See figure 2.)
 These masses and radii are of the general order relevant to large galaxies, and
 play a role in many schemes for galaxy formation. However, some cosmological
 processes in the early universe must have given rise to gas clouds spanning the
 range around Mcrit; only then can mass-dependent cooling processes single o
 preferred scale for galaxies.
 1 a.u. = 1 Xmec2 C 2.4252 x10-18 J.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Baklerian Lecture, 1982 187
 0.
 0 0
 * 0
 0 0
 * 0~~~~~~~~
 * 0~~~~~~~~
 * 0
 * 0 * a.0 0
 * .0.. ..
 0 0
 *0 0 0
 * 0~~~ 0
 * 0
 FIGURE 1. Schematic illustration of a collapsing protogalaxy. A gravitationally bound cloud for
 which tcool < tdyn would contract at almost the free-fall rate. Inhomogeneities would
 develop into dissipative internal shocks, and the gas would settle into a thin rotating disc.
 (The cloud's original angular momentum would have been derived from tidal interactions
 with its neighbours.) Stars that condense from the gas after formation of the disc will
 themselves retain a disc-like distribution; but stars forming during the preceding free-fall
 would retain orbits filling the entire original volume. Elliptical galaxies are those in which
 star formation proceeds so efficiently during the initial infall that rather little gas survives
 to form a disc.
 106
 10
 10
 103 l0 12 14
 1 0 1 0 1 0
 M/Mo
 FIGURE 2. This diagram, adopted from Rees & Ostriker (I977), delineates the mass-radius
 tion for which tCool = tdyn (assuming primordial composition, cooling due to bremsst
 and H and He recombination and line emission). A cloud of given mass whose radius
 was initially very large would deflate quasi-statically (because t .., > tdyn) until it cros
 the critical line; it would then collapse in free fall and evolve in the fashion depicted in
 figure 1. This simple argument (which can readily be rnodified to allow for non-spherical
 geometry, or a non-baryonic component of mass, etc.) suggests why there are no
 galaxies with baryonic masses greater than 1012 MO and radii greater than 105 pc.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 188 M. J. Rees
 3. HIDDEN MASS
 3.1. Evidence for non-luminous gravitating material
 An impediment to understanding galaxies is that the stars and gas we observe
 may be little more than tracers for the material that is dynamically dominant. The
 evidence for 'hidden mass' is now compelling; what this dark matter consists of
 is, however, still a mystery.
 The evidence for large amounts of hidden mass dates back to 1933 when Zwicky
 applied the virial theorem to the Coma cluster of galaxies, and showed that this
 system could not be gravitationally bound (as it appears to be) unless it contained
 a lot of mass over and above the amount seen in its constituent galaxies (Zwicky
 I933). Modern data on Coma and other clusters bear out this trend; the overall
 mass: blue-light ratio M/L within the virialized parts of clusters is ca. 300 H100 solar
 units (where H1oo denotes the Hubble constant in units of 102 kilometres per secon
 per megaparsec); whereas the stellar content of ordinary luminous galaxies yields
 M/L = 1-10 Hloo. (There is still, however, a factor 2 uncertainty, owing to the
 limited number of galaxy redshifts known in typical clusters.) The X-rays from
 clusters of galaxies reveal that hot gas is present, with a temperature such that
 the sound speed is similar to the virial velocity (Forman & Jones I982). The
 inferred amount of gas is not enough to satisfy the virial theorem; it is comparable
 with the amount in 'luminous' galactic material.
 Kahn & Woltjer (I 9 59), studying the motion of Andromeda (M31) with respect
 to our Galaxy, concluded that the total mass of the Local Group must be
 4 x 101 Me. Several later reanalyses (Einasto & Lynden-Bell I 982; L
 I982 and references cited therein) have essentially confirmed this result; the
 inferred M/L is ca. 150. Results for other groups are vulnerable to observable
 errors, misattributions of group membership, etc., but nonetheless recent studies
 generally confirm a similar trend (Einasto et al. I 975; Huchra & Geller I 982; Geller
 & Huchra I983). A statistical method of Geller & Peebles (I973) does not
 depend on a knowledge of which galaxies belong to which groups. A related 'cosmic
 virial' analysis (Bean et al. I983) yields a density ca. 0.15 of the critical value (i.e.
 M/L ~ 300 H1oo). In principle one might have expected binary galaxies to be 
 to analyse than the groups, but the results here have been controversial and reveal
 few clear correlations (White et al. I983 and references cited therein).
 The masses inferred from relative motions of galaxies are thus higher than those
 inferred from the internal dynamics of the luminous parts of galaxies. This
 apparent discrepancy could be resolved if galaxies were embedded in extensive
 dark 'halos'. This hypothesis can be checked in some edge-on disc galaxies, where
 emission from gas can be observed at radii far exceeding the extent of the
 conspicuous stellar disc (see Rubin (i 983) for a recent review). The mass of this gas
 is itself negligible, but rotation velocities derived from its spectral lines do not fall
 off as r-', as would be expected if the gas were orbiting a mass distribution
 concentrated at much smaller radii. Instead, the velocity remains almost constant,
 implying M (< r) oc r, out to ca. 80 kpc in some cases. This implies local values
 of M/L exceeding 300 H1oo at the periphery, and an extensive dark halo more
 massive than the disc component. Direct lower limits on M/L can be obtained for
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 189
 the matter in the outlying parts of galaxies with measured rotation curves and
 for the halos of edge-on galaxies (Hegyi & Gerber I977; Boughn et al. I98I).
 X-ray observations from the Einstein Observatory (Fabricant et al. I980; Fabian
 et al. I984 and references cited therein) indicate that giant galaxies are surrounded
 by coronae of hot gas. This gas serves as a diagnostic for the gravitational
 potential, and offers independent support for the presence of hidden mass. The
 motions of hydrogen clouds and globular clusters offer probes for the gravitational
 potential in the outlying parts of massive galaxies; these data also indicate hidden
 mass. Comprehensive discussions of this topic are given by Peebles (i 980) and
 by Dekel et al. (I985).
 3.2. Global properties of the hidden matter
 There is of course no reason why dark matter should all be the same stuff;
 conceivably different forms dominate on the scales of individual galaxies, clusters,
 and superclusters. An important question is the dependence of M/L on scale. The
 available data are summarized in figure 3a, adapted from Faber (I984) and
 Blumenthal et al. (I984), which displays the often-cited trend for M/L to increase
 with scale. However, a more relevant quality than M/L is the ratio of 'ordinary'
 matter to hidden matter. The ordinary baryonic matter comprises the stars (which
 themselves have an M/L depending on galaxy type), and also the diffuse gas. The
 graph of Mlum/Mtot does not display the same monotonic rise (figure 3b; see
 caption for further explanation); on the contrary, it suggests that on scales
 Mtot > 1012 ]) the ratio Mlum: Mt.t remains steady at a value ca. 0.1. The
 that this quantity is no larger for a rich cluster than for a single galaxy-plus-halo,
 even though the M/L for the cluster is larger, is a result of the different stellar
 populations in the ellipticals in rich clusters, plus the large contribution of X-ray
 emitting gas in clusters to Mlum.
 This evidence, taken at face value, suggests that 2 (defined as the ratio of the
 actual mean density to the cosmological critical density Pcrit = (iT[Gt2)-l is in the
 range 0.1-0.2, but that only IO o of this (Qb = 0.01-0.02) is definitely baryonic.
 However, there is no dynamical evidence for Q = 1. There are no bound systems
 with M/L = 2000 H1oo solar units, which would be the universal value if Q = 1.
 This discrepancy of a factor of 10 between the amount of 'luminous' mass and
 the amount reliably inferred from the dynamics of groups and clusters is the prime
 evidence for hidden matter; this matter could, as far as the astronomical data are
 concerned, either be composed of baryons in some non-luminous form or be
 non-baryonic.
 3.3. Baryonic dark matter
 Standard Big Bang nucleosynthesis yields a favoured value for the baryon
 density such that Qb H0oo / 0.03 (see Tayler (i 984) for an accessible recent rev
 It is important to note that if H = 50 km s-1 Mpc-1, this value of Qb is compatible
 with all the dynamically inferred dark matter being baryonic. The astronomical
 constraints on baryonic dark matter are summarized in figure 4 (see the caption
 for further details). The main message of this diagram is that baryonic dark matter
 must either be 'Jupiters' (stars of below 0.1 solar masses), or else in black holes
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 190 M. J. Rees
 3
 (a)
 siall E groups
 I lar-ge
 2 _Al Nv.av 4 (llltstel _
 d vaimniical mnass X es
 small Spiral 'roup1s
 1 (wlarf Sp)heroi(ls
 tlllill(tis mtiass
 2__
 (b) I<a, ov
 S M~~~~~~~A wav us
 (Ivilia iial niass m es
 X , , ~~~~~~si11all Spliral g1'r11) ps SlalE810l
 dlwarf Spheroid5tllsg
 0 Itillillmtis miiass
 IIIII I
 6 8 10 12 14 16
 1g M
 FIGURE 3. (a) The apparent increase with scale of the mass: light ratio. This increase is due to
 two distinct trends: (i) ordinary stars and gas are a decreasing proportion of the mass of
 the larger systems; and (ii) in the larger systems, even the 'ordinary' (star + gas) component
 has a higher M/L, because they consist primarily of elliptical galaxies with few young stars,
 and contain much hot gas revealed only by its X-ray emission. (b) Effect (ii) subtracted
 out. One finds that the physically more fundamental ratio of 'ordinary' matter to unseen
 matter is independent of scale in all virialized systems larger than galaxies, and has a value
 consistent with Q2 0.2.
 This figure is adapted from Faber (I984) and Blumenthal et al. (I984); fuller details of
 the data on which it is based can be found in the latter paper. (The issue of unseen 'mass
 in dwarf spheroidal galaxies is uncertain and controversial; the diagrams show these
 systems plotted twice, depending on whether they do or do not contain unseen mass.)
 which are the remnants of very massive objects (v.m.os) with masses between a
 few hundred solar masses and 106 solar masses. (Black holes of more than 1
 are excluded, at least within the halos of individual galaxies, because two-body
 interactions leading towards equipartition would then be rapid enough to increase
 the random motions of stars in disc galaxies, and make the discs thicker than they
 are observed to be.)
 We do not yet understand star formation well enough to decide theoretically
 between these possibilities, but there is real hope of observational progress by
 searching for manifestations of gravitational lensing in distant quasars. The
 angular separation 01 of lens images is a diagnostic of the masses involved
 pathlength of the order of the Hubble radius, 02 106 (M1/M0)- arc seconds,
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 191
 lighlt:':J ni icl ilei it r at
 1~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. . . . . . . - . .
 W iiglit ~~~.. .. :jlillllt.::...... . ..:.zAllat ... --:
 10-2
 10-4
 4 8 15 Mc
 lo-l 10 103 105 to7
 M/MQ
 FIGURE 4. This diagram, from Carr et al. (I984) shows various constraints on the fraction Q of
 the critical cosmological density that can be contributed by first-generation stars (or their
 remnants) in different mass ranges. The objects are assumed to form at a redshift z.
 Dynamical friction arguments constrain the number of larger than 106 M O black holes in
 galactic halos. The requirement not to overproduce heavy elements constrains the number
 of remnants of ordinary heavy stars which end their lives by exploding as supernovae. The
 possible options are 'Jupiters' of below 0.1 M.), or the remnants of very massive objec
 (v.m.os) in the mass range from a few hundred to 106 MO, which could have formed at
 large z. These objects do not necessarily eject any material processed beyond helium, and
 leave black hole remnants.
 where M1 is the lens mass. For M1 > 1 05 M 0, very long baseline radio interferometers
 provide adequate resolution. For M1 < 0.1 MO ('Jupiters') the angular scale is less
 than 10-6 arc seconds. This cannot be resolved by any technique until we have
 optical interferometers in space. However, there is a genuine prospect of detecting
 lensing of this kind because of the variability that would occur if the 'lens' were
 to move transversely. (It takes only a few years for an object at the Hubble radius
 moving at ca. 103 km s-5 to traverse an angle 10-6 arc seconds.) The possibility
 of observing such an effect along a line of sight is not small; it is of order Ql,
 fraction of the critical density contributed by the lensing objects. (This probability
 is independent of M, because the cross section per object scales with M,, whereas
 the number of objects scales as Mj1, for a given Ql-)
 3.4. Non-baryonic unseen mass?
 If neutrinos have negligible rest mass, the present density expected for relic
 neutrinos from the Big Bang is nv = 109 (T7/2.7 K)3 cm-3 for each two-component
 species. This is of 0(n,), where n, is the photon density, differing just by a factor
 l (i.e. a factor 3 (because neutrinos are fermions rather than bosons), multiplied
 by 14, the factor by which the neutrinos are diluted when e+-e- annihilation boosts
 the photon density). This conclusion holds for non-zero masses, provided that m, c2
 is far below the thermal energy (ca. 5 MeV) at which neutrinos decouple from other
 species, and that the neutrinos are stable for the Hubble time. Comparison with
 the baryon density, related to Q by nb = 1.5>x 10-5 ?H2oH00 cm, shows that
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 192 M. J. Rees
 neutrinos outnumber baryons by such a big factor that they can be dynamically
 dominant, even if their masses are only a few electron volts. In fact, a single species
 of neutrino would yield a contribution to Q of
 Q= 0.01(mv)ev H-2o; (3)
 so, if HIoo = 0.5, only 25 eV is sufficient 
 It was conjectured more than a decade ago (Cowsik & McClelland I973; Marx &
 Szalay I972) that neutrinos could provide the hidden mass in galactic halos and
 clusters. In recent years, astrophysicists have explored this possibility in some
 detail, and considered scenarios for galaxy formation in which neutrino clustering
 and diffusion play a key role. Despite its attractiveness in many ways (Doroshkevich
 et al. I983), the neutrino-dominated picture of galaxy formation has serious
 weaknesses.
 If mv = 0, primordial neutrinos would cease moving relativistically when
 Universe cooled below a temperature such that kT ` mv C2; the neutrino th
 velocities would then cool adiabatically in proportion to T,, and would (if
 the Universe remained homogeneous) now be only ca. 100 (mv)-l km s-1. For
 v 1 eV (see equation (3)) these velocities are low enough to suggest, prima facie,
 that neutrinos would surely 'feel' the perturbing gravitational field of galaxies and
 would participate in clustering. There are, however, two quantitative constraints
 on this.
 The first is based on phase-space considerations; there is a limit (proportional
 to m3) to the number density with which neutrinos with velocities less than or equal
 to v can be packed without exceeding their primordial phase-space density. There
 is thus a lower limit on the possible value of mv if neutrinos are to be able to for
 a gravitationally bound system of given mass and radius. For a halo of core
 radius a, and velocity dispersion v., this yields the inequality (Tremaine & 
 I 979)
 .M > 9(6t)l h 3/4Gv0a2. (4)
 This relation is interesting in that it combines microphysical quantities (mv and
 the Planck constant h) with the 'astrophysical' quantities v. and a. For galactic
 halos (taking a = 5 kpc), equation (4) yields mv > 25 eV (for a more careful assess-
 ment, see Madsen & Epstein I 984). This looks like a gratifying coincidence, because
 the value mv = 25 eV falls squarely in the range given by the apparently
 independent argument leading to (3). However, equality cannot prevail in (4)
 unless bound systems (such as galactic halos) could form and virialize without
 diluting the phase-space density. When we consider how galaxies might have
 formed, we find that this would be unlikely.
 (Condition (4) is equivalent to the statement that a bound system with velocity
 dispersion vo cannot have a higher density than the mean cosmological density 
 the epoch where the neutrinos (if still homogeneously distributed) would have had
 thermal velocities ca. vo. The primordial phase space density in the 'Hot' Big Bang
 is less than half that of a cold and fully degenerate neutrino gas.)
 In the early Universe, neutrinos would have been collisionless at all times t > 1 s.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 193
 At time t, they could traverse (and homogenize their distribution on) mass scales
 up to
 ca. p(t) (vv t)3, (5)
 where p(t) (and hence T,(t)) are give
 c (kT, > mvc2),
 vv c (kT7 < M) C2). (6)
 The mass-scale (5) attains its maximum value when kT7
 no primordial inhomogeneities in the neutrino distribution would survive on scales
 smaller than ca. (ct)3]kT = mvC2. This is approximately 1018 (mV) -2 M0, and c
 equivalently be expressed as (mv/mp)-2 times the Chandrasekhar mass. A more
 detailed calculation along these lines shows that the corresponding length scale,
 measured in the present-day Universe, is (Bond & Szalay I983)
 Acrit = 41 (mv/30 eV)-1 Mpc. (7)
 Relating mv and Qv by (3), this can be written as
 Acrit = 13Q?-1 H-2 Mpc. (8)
 Unless there are primordial fluctuations in the photon: baryon ratio ('entropy'
 fluctuations), it is a firm prediction of neutrino-dominated cosmological models
 that the first bound systems to form should be on scales O(Acrit); models of this
 type have been discussed in great detail, particularly by Zeldovich and his Moscow
 colleagues (Doroshkevich et al. I983). The value of Acrit is embarrassingly large
 (even if Qv = 1). Formation of individual galaxies must result from complex
 gas-dynamical processes in regions where the baryonic component has been
 compressed into sheets ('pancakes') or filaments, and it is unclear to what extent
 the neutrinos could remain 'cool' enough to aggregate into galactic halos, rather
 than forming a diffuse component of hidden mass. Regions with dimensions
 ca. Acrit or more must have collapsed early enough to explain the subsequent
 formation of galaxies; and if quasars involve galactic nuclei (see ?5) we must
 conclude that some galaxies had formed at redshifts z > 3. Clustering on those large
 scales ca. Acrit or more is not as conspicuous as the neutrino-dominated model wou
 predict; some authors (see, for example, Frenk et al. I 983; Hut & White I 984) have
 indeed adduced this objection as fatal. However, there is certainly evidence for
 some superclustering and voids on characteristic scales ca. Acrit; moreover, we do
 not understand galaxy formation well enough to know whether the distribution
 of galaxies traces the overall density on these scales. Inclusion of more realistic
 physics might conceivably reconcile the neutrino-dominated model with the data.
 Otherwise, we must either invoke initial entropy fluctuations, or else abandon the
 idea that we inhabit a neutrino-dominated universe. (If the Lyubimov et al. (i 980)
 experiment indicating a mass ca. 35 eV for Pe were confirmed, we would have to
 think harder.)
 Neutrino-dominated models for galaxy formation have one clear advantage
 over baryon-dominated models. Because neutrinos are not coupled to the
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 194 M. J. Rees
 baryon-plus-photon fluid, inhomogeneities in their distribution can start to
 grow via the usual gravitational instability before the era of recombination
 (t = trec; Ty = 4000 K). The neutrino distribution at trec can thus be 
 the baryonic distribution. After trec, however, the baryons (being the
 from photons) can fall into the potential wells provided by the neutrino fluctuations.
 This is an advantage because the small-scale isotropy measurements of the
 microwave background, revealing AT/T < 2 x 10-5 on scales ca. 3' (Uson &
 Wilkinson I984), are primarily probing velocity perturbations in the baryons at
 trec. In a baryon-dominated universe with adiabatic perturbations, the backgro
 radiation isotropy limit rules out any fluctuations with amplitude large enough
 to have led to the observed distribution of galaxies by the present day.
 A hypothesis that retains this last advantage of the neutrino model, but evades
 the difficulties entailed by the large value of Acrit, is that the Universe is dominated
 by non-baryonic matter that is 'cold', in the sense that fluctuations on the scale
 of galaxies are not attenuated by free-streaming (see, for example, Blumenthal
 et al. (i 984) for a detailed discussion). Particle physicists have many candidates 'in
 reserve' including axions, photinos, dense grains of a novel kind of baryonic matter
 containing 'strange' quarks, or even primordial black holes. The cosmogenic
 consequences are essentially independent of what this 'cold dark matter' actually
 is, provided that it is non-dissipative in the sense that it clusters only under the
 action of gravity. (The baryonic component would condense dissipatively, as in
 figure 1, into the centre of gravitational potential wells dominated by the dark
 matter.)
 3.5. Narrowing the range of options
 The cosmic material that reveals itself by emitting radiation is a small and
 atypical fraction of the gravitating stuff that pervades our Universe. Maybe this
 should not surprise us, as there are so many plausible candidates for hidden mass.
 Discrete objects of stellar mass could perhaps be detected by new observational
 techniques: very faint low-mass stars in our own Galactic halo might show up as
 high-proper-motion objects in infrared surveys; black holes (remnants of massive
 stars) may reveal themselves as weak X-ray sources powered by accretion of
 surrounding gas; remote objects observed with high angular resolution may show
 an image structure indicative of gravitational lensing by compact objects along
 the line of sight. If the hidden mass consists of entities of microscopic dimensions,
 there is plainly not much chance of detecting them other than by their collective
 gravitational effect. (Experimental searches for an axion background pervading
 our galactic halo have, however, been proposed (Sikivie I983; Moody & Wilczek
 I984); they seem challenging but not impossible; and tiny grains of 'strange
 matter' as envisaged by Witten (I984) could have interesting geophysical effects
 (De Rujula & Glashow I984).)
 Progress in particle physics may exclude some candidates, or, alternatively,
 predict a firm mass for at least one species of particle that should survive from
 the Big Bang (for a brief recent survey, see Sciama I984). On the astrophysical
 side, detailed simulations of galaxy formation and clustering may allow us to use
 astronomical data to discriminate among the various options. At the moment at
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 195
 least 90 0 of the cosmic material is in unknown entities whose individual masses
 could be almost anything from 1039 g (a massive black hole) down to 10-5 eV (the
 axion mass favoured by cosmological arguments); an uncertainty of 1075.
 Note that the unseen mass inferred from virial-type arguments makes a
 contribution to Q of 0.1-0.2; in other words, it falls short of the critical density
 by a factor of 5-10. If Q = 1 (a possibility that is very appealing to theorists,
 especially in the context of 'inflationary' models for the early universe), then there
 must be still more mass hidden between the clusters. This possibility cannot be
 ruled out; it would, however, require that galaxies form in a 'patchy' fashion, their
 spatial distribution being less homogeneous than that of the total mass, even on
 scales as large as 10-20 Mpc, so that the rising trend in figure 3a continues out
 to these scales (Rees I984a).
 4. ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI
 4.1. Radio evidence
 The radiation from ordinary galaxies comes from their constituent stars and gas,
 but in 1954 radio astronomy provided the first clues that some galaxies involve
 more than this. Baade & Minkowski (I 954) showed that the radio source Cygnus A,
 the second most intense object in the radio sky, was associated with a remote
 galaxy with a redshift of 0.05. This immediately indicated that some peculiar
 galaxies might be detectable by radio techniques even if they were so far away
 that the integrated light from their ca. 1011 stars failed to register optically. Radio
 maps (figure 5) tell us that the emission from a source like Cygnus A comes from
 3C 405 4.995GfHz
 36'30"0
 36'00"
 40035 5 0O0 ---- . ; I_ ! _L
 50S 48S 46S 44S 42s 40S 38S
 19 57
 FIGURE 5. A historic radio map (at 5 GHz) of Cygnus A, made with the Cambridge 'one-mile'
 telescope (Mitton & Ryle I969). This illustrates the best data available on any strong radio
 source in the 1960s, revealing the characteristic double structure, but no evidence of any
 energetic link between the central galaxy and the lobes.
 two blobs symmetrically disposed on either side of the central galaxy. This double
 structure, in which the overall separation of the components may be a million light
 years (or even more), seems characteristic of the strongest radio sources.
 The (polarized) radio emission was quickly recognized as synchrotron radiation,
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 196 M. J. Rees
 implying that the radio lobes must contain relativistic electrons and magnetic
 fields. The field strength is unknown, but the magnetic energy content of the lobes
 must be (B2/8t) x (volume). The energy in relativistic electrons depends on the field
 strength, being proportional to (radio power output) x B` (the B dependence arises
 because more particles, of higher individual energy, would be needed to produce
 the observed synchrotron power in a weak field). The total energy is minimized
 when there is rough equipartition between these two forms. Burbidge (I958) was
 the first to do such a calculation; he showed that the energy stored within giant
 radio sources, in magnetic fields and relativistic plasma, must exceed the rest mass
 of a million suns.
 The major contribution of optical astronomy came in 1963, when searches for
 the optical counterparts of some radio sources led to the discovery of an
 unsuspected new class of objects, which looked like stars on photographic plates,
 but whose spectra displayed emission lines with large redshifts (Hazard et al. I 963;
 Schmidt I963). These objects, the quasars, have optical luminosities far exceeding
 normal galaxies, while appearing much more compact. Some are strongly variable:
 the luminosity may change by more than 103 galactic luminosities in only a few
 days. The optical emission in these highly variable objects is strongly polarized,
 and is probably synchrotron radiation. Most quasars, however, are less variable
 and only weakly polarized; in these, the central synchrotron source may be
 shrouded by gas, so that we only see 'secondary' radiation that has been
 reprocessed and thermalized further out.
 During the last twenty-one years a bewildering body of accumulated data has
 borne out the general concept (adumbrated in the pioneering paper by Burbidge
 et al. I963) of 'violent activity' in galactic nuclei. Radio sources and quasars are
 the prime examples of this phenomenon, but the Seyfert galaxies and BL Lac
 objects are generally interpreted as instances of the same thing.
 Optical observations offer a wealth of information on the spectrum, polarization
 and variability of galactic nuclei. From such data, physical conditions in the
 emission regions can be inferred. However, there is essentially no direct information
 about the spatial structure of the central regions where the visible light originates.
 Radio astronomers, on the other hand, can provide structural information. This
 is because the radio-emitting regions are often very extended, and also because
 the angular resolution of radio interferometers surpasses anything optical imaging
 can yet achieve.
 Consequently we now have important clues as to why radio sources have their
 characteristic double morphology, and to the nature of the energetic link between
 the nucleus and the radio lobes. These were entirely mysterious in the 1960s, when
 the best maps available resembled figure 5, but have been clarified in the last
 decade, thanks mainly to the improved resolution and sensitivity of the Very Large
 Array (V.L.A.) in New Mexico.
 Figure 6 shows a well-known double source, Hercules A (3C 348), displaying
 conspicuous bridges of radio emission stretching almost all the way from the
 central galaxy to the lobes. Jet-like features are now detected in more than 100
 double sources (Bridle & Perley I984). Some of the jets are rather inconspicuous;
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 197
 4.995 G0lz
 III I I I I _
 05'00 -
 30 -
 5004'00"
 III I I I I
 46 42 38 32
 FIGURE 6. V.L.A. map of the giant double source Hercules A, showing narrow straight 'jets'
 linking the galaxy to the lobes (Dreher & Feigelson I 984). This is a high-power source which
 is atypical in showing such conspicuous jets: normally the jets are only as strong as this
 (relative to the lobes) in sources of lower power.
 the jet in Cygnus A (Perley et al. I 984) was only recently discovered, and is barely
 detected even with the V.L.As dynamic range.
 The smallest angular scales resolvable by the V.L.A. (0.1 arc second) correspond
 to linear dimensions as large as several hundred parsecs in a remote extragalactic
 source; for finer resolution we must resort to very long baseline interferometry
 (v.l.b.i.), a technique whereby a source is observed simultaneously by radio
 telescopes thousands of kilometres apart, the records (on tape) being subsequently
 correlated. The montage of NGC 6251 (figure 7) is especially interesting in showing
 direct continuity between a plasma 'blowtorch' 1 pc long and the large-scale jets
 and giant radio structure. A common characteristic of jets detected by the v.l.a.
 in strong double sources is that they are asymmetrical: they are detected on only
 one side; or, if there is a counterjet, it is much fainter (by a factor 60: 1 in NGC
 6251 shown in figure 7).
 It is a natural inference that the jets are conduits along which energy and
 momentum flow into the extended lobes. But the V.L.A. maps offer no direct
 evidence for motion. V.l.b.i. maps, however, sometimes show dramatic evidence
 of this: there are several instances where blobs appear to move across the sky at
 5-10 times the speed of light (see figure 8). There is nothing paradoxical about these
 'superluminal' apparent velocities; they probably arise from plasma moving at
 close to the speed of light in directions making a small angle with the line of sight
 (Rees I966). Not only, therefore, do the jets contain radiating electrons with high
 individual Lorentz factors, but the entire medium (electrons, protons (or positrons)
 and magnetic field) sometimes has a bulk Lorentz factor greater than 5.
 The one-sidedness of the large-scale jets in powerful double sources could arise
 from Doppler favouritism; there would be jets on both sides, flowing in opposite
 directions, and unless the motion were exactly transverse to our line of sight, the
 approaching side would appear enhanced. This interpretation gains support from
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 198 M. J. Rees
 16 40 oo 16 h32m oo 16h24 oo 8
 0 z 82050'
 82050'-~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~1975
 16 56 009 16 48m 0 *t 0824 1975
 0~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
 z?30 I 1 ~610 MHFz 2090
 1978.24
 16h56moos 16h48mW0 164Om\O\
 0 164MH
 / ? ^X? S o ~~~~~~~~~~~~~1 978.92-
 200 1 oo o 100 200 300 Noo a82030'
 0~~1
 P ~- 1410 MHz t 1979.44
 I I I I * 0 S
 8 0 5 0 5 00 201b/
 16hf5 t fonI 1648oO(asel(s 16n40;))
 1664 Mllz t1980.52
 20 0 0 100 20 300 50 0S
 Ioffset froiti co
 110651 MHz beam
 offse f? co1 2 milliarc seconds
 FIGURE 7. Montage, adapted from Bridle & Perley (1984)5 showing the radio source associated
 with the galaxy NGC 6251 over a wide range of angular scales. The top panel shows the
 large-scale structure: a double source ca. 2 Mpc in extent. The second panel shows the jet
 and the (much weaker) counterjet; lower panels show the high-surface-brightness inner
 parts of the jet at increasing resolution. The large brightness asymmetry between jet and
 counterjet, and the straightness of the jet, are characteristic of moderately high-power radio
 sources. The bottom panel, obtained with milliarc second resolution by using the v.l.b.i.
 technique, shows that the jet emanates from a 'inozzle less than 1 pc in scale at the galactic
 nucleus. The primary power supply probably comes from a region 105 times smaller still.
 FIGURE 8. For description see opposite.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 199
 the fact that, when a small-scale jet is detected by v.l.b.i., this is on the same side
 of the galactic nucleus as the stronger large-scale jet (see figure 7, for example). If
 the small-scale jets were relativistic (and emitted their radiation predominantly
 in a forward cone) whereas the extended jets were not (and so radiated isotropically),
 one would expect to find more 'disembodied' extended jets.
 The famous jet in the giant elliptical galaxy M87 could be a relativistic outflow,
 the counterjet being suppressed by the Doppler effect. This jet, discovered by
 Curtis in 1918, reminds us that it was actually the optical astronomers who first
 detected this phenomenon; the V.L.A. radio map (figure 9) shows that M87 has
 weak double radio lobes plus a one-sided radio jet (coinciding with the optical jet).
 The M87 jet has also been detected by X-ray astronomers; the emission in all
 wavebands is probably synchrotron radiation, produced by electrons accelerated
 at strong shocks associated with the conspicuous 'knots' in the jet.
 Jet-like phenomena are seen on a smaller scale within our own galaxy. The
 extraordinary object SS 433 (Margon I984 and references cited therein) has twin
 jets with a flow speed of 0.27c (the only jet whose speed is unambiguously known).
 Recently, directed outflow has been found from some protostars (Bally & Lada
 I982). These involve much lower energies (and shallower gravitational potential
 wells), though the collimation may arise from a mechanism analogous to that in
 the more spectacular extragalactic jets. Associated with the galactic X-ray source
 Sco XI are double radio components, resembling a miniature version of an
 extragalactic double source (Fomalont et al. I983).
 4.2. Physical models for the jets
 Any theory of radio sources has, in effect, three ingredients: (i) a source of
 relativistic plasma in the centre; (ii) some bifurcation and collimation mechanism,
 i.e. a way in which relativistic plasma can be squirted out preferentially in two
 opposite directions; and (iii) a place far away where the relativistic plasma is
 stopped by interaction with the intergalactic medium, in a shock front (see
 figure 10).
 The speed of advance, V, of the 'working surface' where the jet is stopped by
 the external medium is governed by the ram pressure balance: the balance between
 the momentum density in the beam and the Pext V2 pressure force exerted by the
 surrounding medium. The beam energy is randomized by shocks when it impinges
 on the external medium; particles here are accelerated and these regions are
 DESCRIPTION OF FIGURE 8
 FIGURE 8. This diagram, taken from Pearson et al. (i 98 I), shows v.l.b.i. maps of the radio quasar
 3C273 at 5 epochs. The observing frequency is 10.65 GHz. The high-surface-brightness
 feature on the left-hand side is probably identifiable with the optical nucleus. The 'blob'
 on the right-hand side, emitting synchrotron continuum radiation, has moved with an
 apparent speed of 5 H-'0c, and points in the direction of a larger-scale optical jet in 3C2
 It is moving with a bulk Lorentz factor of 5-10 in a direction within ca. 10? of our line of
 sight. The apparent intensity of blobs moving at ca. c in such directions would be greatly
 enhanced by aberration. When this effect is allowed for, it is not improbable that a radio
 source with a given apparent intensity would have this special orientation.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 200 M. J. Rees
 M87C 4885 MHz
 I I I , I I X I
 10" -
 _12040'00"
 50"
 12 8 1.0 18.0 17.0O 16.0(
 / ight ascension ( 1950.0) \
 FIGURE 9. Two radio maps of M87 .The bottom picture (from Biretta et al. I983 ) shows a 15 GHz
 vila, map of the jet, with 0.12" resolution. The high-brightness features correspond with
 the optical knots (the emission being synchrotron radiation in both bands). The top picture
 (from Owen et al. I1980) shows a more extended radio view at lower resolution, which reveals
 that M87 is a miniature double source, with roughly symmetrical lobes ca. 2 kpc in size and
 a one-sided jet.
 identified with the ' hot spots ' in the radio source components. Even if the beams
 are relativistic, V itself is not; we therefore do not expect the same Doppler
 asymmetry in the lobes and the hot spots as in the emission from the jets
 themselves. The relativistic plasma then accumulates in a cocoon of lower energy
 density and lower radio emissivity. Many jets and cocoons, on scales 1-100 kpc,
 are now mapped beautifully with the V.L.A.
 We can regard jets as basically fluid phenomena and apply fluid-dynamical
 analogies, because the gyroradius me ye ve/eB for the particles in the jet, and the
 Debye length (kTe/le e2)l, are both much less than the jet dimensions, so that
 charge neutrality is closely satisfied, unless the particles have energies of 1019 eV
 (see Lovelace I 976); also the relative mean velocities of the electrons and ions is
 small. In effect, the flow is fluid-like and the m.h.d. approximation is valid (as in
 the solar wind).
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 201
 ambient medium
 lobe bead
 ~~~ ~hot
 V nucleus spot
 cocoon of 'waste'
 plasma and energy _ bow
 shock
 (interstellar or intergalactic gas)
 FIGURE 10. Schematic diagram of a strong double radio source, illustrating the nomenclature
 according to the so called 'twin exhaust' theory (Blandford & Rees I974). The entire 'head'
 advances into the intergalactic medium at a speed, V, given by ram pressure balance (see
 text), which is much smaller than the jet speed.
 The data on jets pose a whole range of questions (all discussed more fully by
 Begelman et al. 1984).
 What are the speeds of the flow?
 The small-scale superluminal sources certainly indicate outflow at a speed ca. c,
 but it is unclear whether the nuclei of all radio sources generate relativistic jets;
 nor is it clear that the high speeds necessarily persist over the whole jet length,
 or whether viscosity and dissipative effects gradually slow them down. A tenable
 viewpoint is that in the strong double sources (Cygnus A, for instance) the jets
 have high Mach number, low internal dissipation, and maintain speeds ca. c out
 to distances of several hundred kiloparsecs, thereby transporting energy to the
 extended components in an almost loss-free way. The fact that often only one jet
 is seen could then arise merely from Doppler favouritism. In lower luminosity
 sources, where the jets often appear two-sided and are more conspicuous relative
 to the extended lobes, the flow is presumably slower and more dissipative.
 Do the jets primarily contain electron-positron plasma, or do they consist of ordina
 (entrained) material?
 A slow-moving jet would presumably contain ordinary interstellar and interga-
 lactic material. However, there are reasons (discussed below) for conjecturing that
 the 'central engine' generates an e+-e- plasma. The kinetic energy requirements
 of relativistic jets are then somewhat reduced; each electron need be neutralized
 by just one positron (0.5 MeV of rest mass) rather than a proton (900 MeV).
 How is the collimation of narrow jets maintained.?
 There are three basic possibilities.
 (i) The internal pressure may be balanced by external gas pressure. This requires
 Pext = &-2 X (momentum flux density along jet), (9)
 where X# is the jet's internal Mach number. As the jet travels outward through
 regions of decreasing Pext it would widen in accordance with a Bernouilli-type
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 202 M. J. Rees
 equation (modified, however, by the effects of the internal dissipation, whose
 occurrence is implied by the presence of freshly accelerated relativistic electrons
 in the jet).
 (ii) If the jets were 'heavy', their internal sound speed being small compared
 with the flow velocity, they could flow outward ballistically, staying narrow even
 without confinement. This requires an internal Mach number of X& > 01, where
 0 is the collimation angle.
 (iii) If the jet were magnetically confined by a field with a toroidal component
 BT, whose strength varied inversely with distance d from the jet axis for d in the
 range dmin < d < dmax, then the pressure in the core of the jet (i.e. for d < dmin)
 could exceed the external pressure by a factor
 Pjetcore = (dmax/dmin)2 Pext, (10)
 For stability, there would need to be a component of magnetic field aligned with
 the jet, maintained by a velocity gradient (shear).
 X-ray observations can set an upper limit to the density of hot gas in a galaxy
 or cluster potential well and hence place a limit on Pext IUnless this exceeds the
 minimum internal pressure of a jet emitting synchrotron radiation, then (i) can
 be ruled out. Alternative (ii) can also be excluded in some cases, because the
 required amount of material in the jet would produce too much Faraday rotation
 to be compatible with the observed polarization. A jet encounters a wide range
 of external conditions as it propagates out from the galactic nucleus through the
 interstellar medium of the host galaxy and eventually into intergalactic space;
 different mechanisms could well be responsible for collimating jets on different
 scales.
 How do jets propagate stably out to such vast distances?
 Clues to this question can come from simulations. Aerodynamical experiments
 may provide valuable insights into jet physics. They have limitations, however:
 they cannot demonstrate the dynamical effects of magnetic fields and relativistic
 bulk velocity, and only restricted ranges of Mach number, density ratio, and
 adiabatic index are practicable in the laboratory. Higher Mach numbers could be
 attained by experiments of a rather different kind, involving propagation of
 intense particle beams (or, alternatively, laser beams) into an ambient gas (see
 Bekefi et al. I980). Although the internal dynamics of such beams differ crucially
 from those in the cosmic-scale beams, they could provide a much higher momentum
 density than an ordinary gas jet. The interaction with the external medium as such
 a beam advances may simulate the structure of 'hot spots' and cocoons in very
 strong sources.
 The greatest progress will surely come, however, from the use of increasingly
 sophisticated and powerful hydrodynamical codes. These have already uncovered
 some gas-dynamical properties of supersonic flows that were not anticipated by
 analytical models and may have counterparts in radio maps (Norman et al. I 982;
 Williams & Gull I985). Within a few years, high-resolution three-dimensional
 computations incorporating electromagnetic effects (m.h.d.) should be feasible,
 permitting us to test the likely stability of magnetic confinement and to model th
 polarization patterns observed in jets.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 203
 In the extended radio components, the energy deposited by the jets is dissipated
 via complex interactions with interstellar and intergalactic media; to model their
 intricate and environment-dependent morphology will be difficult, just as weather
 prediction is difficult. But the jets are plainly initiated on a scale of less than 1 p
 So a key characteristic of active galactic nuclei (a.g.ns) is that they can not
 only generate a vast in situ luminosity (as in the quasars), but sometimes squirt
 out relativistic jets. The jets, however, are just one aspect of a.g.ns.
 5. ACTIVE GALACTIC NUCLEI IN GENERAL:
 THE PRIMARY POWER SUPPLY
 5.1. Gravitational collapse
 Galactic nuclei display activity in many fornis, in all wavebands, and on scales
 spanning many powers of ten (see figure 11). The central engines may nevertheless
 be similar in all the most highly active nuclei, the primary power being reprocessed
 in a variety of ways, depending on details of the galactic environment.
 What then is the central engine? My favoured view - the 'bottom line' of the
 diagram reproduced as figure 12 - is that a variety of runaway processes might
 be expected in galactic nuclei, but that the almost inevitable endpoint is the
 collapse of a large fraction of the matter involved to a massive black hole. A black
 hole offers a more efficient power source than any conceivable progenitor. This
 suggests that we should associate the most powerful a.g.ns (quasars and strong
 radio sources) with black holes, and then consider, as a secondary issue, whether
 some other categories (such as the so-called starburst nuclei, Seyfert galaxies, etc.)
 could be precursor stages in any of the evolutionary pathways in figure 12.
 The various precursors (supermassive stars, dense star clusters, etc.) received
 perfunctory attention in the 1960s, but all merit further study. Spherical super-
 massive stars are fragile: they would be supported almost entirely by radiation
 pressure, whose adiabatic index of 4 renders them only neutrally stable in
 Newtonian theory; general relativistic corrections, even when these are small, are
 then destabilizing. However, not much is known about supermassive stars with
 realistic (differential) rotation. The stars in an idealized cluster can be treated
 as 'point masses', interacting with each other only gravitationally; but in real
 systems stellar collisions and interactions with gas would be important, and we
 do not know whether a dense cluster of ordinary stars would turn itself into a
 supermassive star, or into a cluster of compact stars (neutron stars) which would
 then evolve further via dynamical processes.
 Before 'homing in' on black holes, let me venture a historical digression, by
 quoting from a paper in Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London
 in I784 by John Michell, an underappreciated polymath of eighteenth century
 science (Michell 1784):
 If the semi-diameter of a sphaere of the same density with the sun were to
 exceed that of the sun in the proportion of 500 to 1, a body falling from an
 infinite height towards it, would have acquired at its surface a greater velocity
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 204 M. J. Rees
 r/pc
 extended radio sources
 J 106
 $ 8 scales of optical galaxy
 102
 narrow emission lines
 minimum q.s.r.s. size at gigahertz vi.b.i. radio structure
 frequencies set by
 synchrotron self-absorption i_
 broad line region
 1 year or less variability
 possible in line profiles
 10I2 reprocessed thermal continuum
 radius of 104 K black -
 body emitting 1046 erg s-'
 non-thermal optical continuum; X-rays
 -10-4
 radius of 108 M0
 black hole
 FIGURE 11. A rough indication of the scales involved in the various forms of activity
 energized by a.g.ns. (1 erg = 10-1 J.)
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 205
 intergalactic gas
 s ineall l emitte
 .X galactic wind
 or ' sweeping '
 fro suh boy wul be mtade toreaturn toad it yisonpoe
 gas in galaxy ddLlcaeade latr stars in galaxy
 infall
 dense gas cloud in obr s tar formati i centra l l
 centre of galaxy mas losLn star cluster
 material orbitingnerthem.Istellar collisions
 - | ontacto7n stellar l|supernovae, etc
 e c d tack coalescence nIa
 Michell based hisargumentsupermassive cluster of
 raccretion lobject ' spinar ' compact stellar
 or ' magnetoid 'remnants
 l tidal disruptionl l
 l l | ~~~of stars l
 i'post-Newtonian ' pos Neworia
 instability l l instability l
 light. Imassive black hole w
 FIGURE 12. A flow chart indicating the ways whereby gas and stars may accum
 centre of a galaxy, leading eventually to a runaway catastrophe. This may occur via a
 variety of pathways, but the almost inevitable end-point is a massive black hole.
 than that of light, and consequently, supposing light to be attracted by the
 same force in proportion to its vis inertiae, with other bodies, all light emitted
 from such a body would be made to return towards it, by its own proper
 gravity.
 He thus notes, as did Laplace a decade later, that the most massive objects in the
 Universe might be unobservable except by their gravitational influence on
 material orbiting near them. If we accord Michell his deserved priority, 1984 can
 be celebrated as the black hole bicentennial.
 Michell based his argument on Newtonian gravity and the ballistic theory of
 light. I shall later discuss some astrophysical effects which depend on black holes
 having the specific properties inferred from Einstein's general relativity; but some
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 206 M. J. Rees
 important order-of-magnitude statements are insensitive to black-hole physics,
 and apply in any gravitational potential well of '1/r' form around a compact
 mass M. A characteristic luminosity is the so-called Eddington limit, at which
 radiation pressure on free electrons balances the force of gravity on the associated
 protons: LEd = 4ntGMm c/o- 1.3xt038(M/MO) ergs-', (1
 TT being the Thomson scattering cross section. The relevance of LEd in an actu
 a.g.n. model depends on the details. However, in so far as LEd is a fiducial limiting
 luminosity in accretion-powered sources, it suggests that the relevant mass range
 for quasars (with L t1046 erg s-1) is greater than 108 MO. Strong radio sources 
 a second argument pointing to a similar mass; whatever produced the overall
 energy content of the extended lobes must have involved a mass of at least this
 order. The Schwarzschild radius of a black hole of mass 108 M8 solar masses is
 rs = 2rg = 2GM/c2 = 3 x t013 M8 Cm. (12)
 Note that 108 Mo is roughly the mass envisaged by Michell: it i
 of a Schwarzschild hole whose 'density', defined as ca. M/r3, equals that of the
 Sun (which is similar to the density of terrestrial solids).
 A massive black hole sitting isolated in empty space would be passive and
 quiescent. To release any power, it must be surrounded by plasma (or magnetic
 fields, or both). This would indeed be expected in a galactic nucleus. Gas expelled
 from ordinary stars via stellar winds and supernovae could fall in from the body
 of the galaxy; gas could even come from intergalactic clouds captured by the
 galaxy. (Relevant here is the evidence that galaxies are more likely to be active
 if they are interacting with a neighbour (Balick & Heckman 1982), and that
 quasars may be interacting galaxies (Hutchings & Campbell I 983).) Alternatively,
 the gas supply may originate in the central parts of the galaxy; for example, (a)
 debris from stars tidally disrupted by the hole, (b) debris from stellar collisions
 in a compact star cluster around the hole, or (c) a positive feedback process
 whereby stars are induced to lose mass (and thereby provide further fuel) by
 irradiation from a luminous central source.
 There are several powers of ten (see figure 11) between the relativistic domain
 (where r - rg) and the scales (ca. 1 pc or greater) probed directly by v.l.b.i., and
 whence the optical emission lines come. Within this range of scales, flow patterns
 would be controlled by a potential with the familiar Newtonian '1/r' form.
 However, because this potential well is much deeper than that ordinarily encoun-
 tered in stellar or galactic physics, it can compress or confine gas at extraordinarily
 high temperatures.
 5.2. Some general features of compact sources
 The virial temperature is given by
 kTv = GMmp/r = Mpc2(r/rg)-'. (13)
 Within a radius ca. 103 rg, kTv exceeds the rest-mass energy
 (ca. 0.5 MeV corresponding to Tv = 5 x 109 K). However, cooling processes
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 207
 (especially pair production and Compton cooling) are so efficient that electrons
 cannot in general be maintained at such elevated temperatures. So, pressure
 gradients cannot balance gravity where r < 103 rg unless either: (a) radiation
 pressure balances gravity, which requires L % LEd; or (b) ion pressure balances
 gravity, which requires Tio?J Tv (greater than Te), and is possible only if the
 ion-->electron transfer is slower than the inflow timescale. (This kind of 'two-
 temperature plasma' (see Eardley et al. I975) can exist only at low densities where
 Coulomb collisions between ions and electrons are rare, and in the absence of
 collective plasma effects coupling the two species (see Rees et al. (I982) for a fuller
 discussion of ion-supported equilibria in contexts where kTv > me c2).
 If neither (a) nor (b) is fulfilled then material at r < 103 rg must either be in
 almost free fall, or be in a rotationally supported thin disc.
 Another surprising property of compact luminous sources is that they naturally
 give rise to electron-positron plasma. I shall discuss below how a specific model
 for the central engine in radio galaxies can bring this about, but in fact one can
 give a more general argument that applies to any compact high-energy source.
 Suppose that a source of radius r* emits a luminosity LY in the form of
 mega-electronvolt photons. These photons can interact with each other to produce
 e+ -e pairs, the interaction cross section being O(OT). The photons (each carrying
 energy exceeding me c2) will collide with each other before escaping if nn ,fTr*
 exceeds unity, where n~ (Ln,/4xtmwc3 r2) is the photon density; y-rays cannot
 escape freely from any source whose 'compactness parameter' LY/r* exceeds a
 certain threshold value. This condition is equivalent to
 L 10(m /mp) (r*/rg) LEd, (14)
 and when it is written this way we see that it is readily fulfilled by non-thermal
 sources associated with black holes. If (14) were to hold, the primary source would
 shroud itself in an optically thick 'false photosphere' of e+-e- pairs, which would
 scatter all radiation, not just the part with hv > mec2 (Guilbert et al. I983).
 5.3. The general relativistic domain
 Material falling inward will eventually reach r . rg, where a Newtonian '1/r'
 potential no longer applies. Indeed it is here, in the deepest part of the potential
 well, that the main power output is generated. We must therefore take the
 inherently relativistic features of the gravitational field into account.
 The physics of dense star clusters and of supermassive objects are complex and
 poorly understood. In contrast, the final state of such a system, when gravitational
 collapse occurs, is comparatively simple, at least if we accept general relativity.
 According to the so-called 'no-hair' theorems, the endpoint of a gravitational
 collapse, however messy and asymmetric it may have been, is a standardized black
 hole characterized by just two parameters, mass and spin, and described exactly
 by the Kerr metric. If the collapse occurred in a violent or sudden way, it would
 take a few dynamical timescales for the black hole to settle down and during that
 period gravitational waves would be emitted. But the final stationary state would
 be described by the Kerr solution, provided only that the material left behind
 outside the hole did not provide a strong gravitational perturbation.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 208 M. J. Rees
 Simple order-of-magnitude considerations tell us that the material participating
 in an accretion flow does not significantly perturb a Kerr metric. The dynamical
 (or free-fall) timescale near the gravitational radius is
 tfree fall ' (rg/c) - 500 M. s. ( 15)
 The mass flow rate required to yield an accretion-powered luminosity, LEd, with
 efficiency c, is e-'JMEd, where MEd = LEd/c2. The time it would take for the hole's
 mass to double, if it accreted at a rate MEd, is (Salpeter I964)
 tEd = (cO_T)/(4tGmP) % 4 x 108 a. (16)
 So, the ratio of the mass of inflowing material to the mass of the hole itself is
 ca. (tfreefall/tEd) e '(L/LEd) (Vfreefall/Vinlfiow) (17)
 Because tfree fall 10-13 M t this ratio is negligibly small, for all plausible values
 freefall""' 8 tEd'
 of the other terms in (17).
 The expected spin of the hole depends on the route by which it formed (see
 figure 12). A precursor spinning fast enough to be significantly flattened by
 rotational effects when its radius was much greater than r would probably have
 more angular momentum per unit mass than the critical value GM/c. A massive
 black hole that forms 'in one go' is thus likely to have been fed with as much spin
 as it can accept, and to end up near the top of the range of angular momentum
 permitted by the Kerr metric; the same is true for black holes that grow by
 accretion of infalling galactic gas (though the expectation is less clear if they grow
 by tidal disruption of stars). The distinctive properties of spinning black holes are
 therefore relevant.
 The binding energy per unit mass for a circular orbit of radius r around a
 Schwarzschild hole is
 c2{1 -[(r-2rg)/(r2-3rrg)A]}. (18)
 For r > rg this reduces to GM/2r, which is just the Newtonian binding energy.
 However, the binding energy has a maximum of 0.057c for an orbit at rmin = 6rg.
 This is the innermost stable orbit; a particle in circular orbit at r < rmin would have
 more angular momentum and be less tightly bound (as for orbits in classical theory
 when the effective force law is proportional to r-, with n > 3). In the Kerr metric,
 the behaviour of orbits depends on their orientation with respect to the hole, and
 on whether they are co-rotating or counter-rotating (Bardeen et al. I972). For
 co-rotating equatorial orbits, the innermost stable orbit moves inward (as compared
 with the Schwarzschild case), becoming more tightly bound. For holes whose
 angular momentum approaches the limiting value GM2/c, the stable co-rotating
 orbits extend inward toward r = rg, and their binding energy approaches
 (1-3-1) c2 = 0.42c2. These numbers determine the maximum theoretical efficiency
 of accretion discs.
 Interactions of black holes with magnetic fields imposed on their surroundings
 can have important astrophysical effects. When a hole forms from collapsing
 magnetized material, the magnetic field outside the horizon decays ('redshifts
 away') on the collapse time scale rg/c. But if, for instance, an external electric field
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakertan Lecture, 1982 209
 were applied to a Schwarzschild hole, then after transients had decayed, a modified
 field distribution would be established where the electric field appeared to cross
 the horizon normally. The event horizon (or 'surface') of the hole thus behaves in
 some respects like a conductor (Damour 1975; Macdonald & Thorne I982; Znajek
 I977). It does not have perfect conductivity, however. If it did, electromagnetic
 flux could never penetrate the horizon. Comparing the decay timescale for
 transients around a black hole (rg/c) with the timescale (r2/4ntc) appropriate to
 a sphere of radius rg and conductivity cr, we can associate a finite resistivity with
 the horizon. This analogy can be made more rigorous (Znajek 1977) and the
 'resistance' of a black hole is found to be ZH 100 Q. More generally, a Kerr black
 hole behaves like a spinning conductor.
 Fortunately, there is one inherently relativistic effect that simplifies things. The
 Lense-Thirring 'dragging of inertial frames' can create a flow pattern near the hole
 which is axisymmetric (with respect to the hole's spin axis), irrespective of the
 symmetry and orientation of the flow at larger distances.
 The accretion flow pattern depends on two quantities: (i) the value of
 m= i /MEd' which determines (for a given radiative efficiency) the dynamical
 importance of radiation pressure; and (ii) the inflow timescale, which depends
 primarily on the effective viscosity.
 The cooling timescale depends inversely on the density, and is therefore
 proportional to vinflow for a given h. The ratio of inflow and cooling tim
 an important parameter that controls the temperature of the gas, depends on
 Th(Vinflow/Vfree fall) 2 When h > 1 this quantity is large, cooling is efficient, a
 the accretion-powered luminosity would be of order LEd. But for sufficiently low
 Th, cooling via thermal processes may be ineffective; the infalling material then
 attains temperatures exceeding mec2/lk and the only significant radiation emitted
 during the inflow would be synchrotron or Compton emission.
 There is an extensive literature on a.g.n. models powered by accretion onto
 massive black holes (see Rees (I984b); Wiita (I985) for reviews). Such models can,
 in broad terms, provide acceptable models for quasars. However, one cannot
 reliably predict the spectrum, nor whether the radiation is thermal or non-thermal;
 the hardest thing to estimate is what fraction of the power dissipated by viscous
 friction would go into relativistic particles (via shocks, magnetic reconnection, etc.)
 rather than being shared among all the particles. Nor do we know how steady or
 stable the inflow pattern might be. This is a topic where detailed numerical
 simulations would be worthwhile, particularly if these allowed us to treat unsteady
 accretion, non-axisymmetric instabilities, and realistic radiative emission and
 transfer processes.
 5.4. Energy generation in strong radio sources
 Despite the lack of quantitative understanding of a.g.ns in general, the strong
 radio galaxies (such as Cygnus A) have a distinctive property that offers a clue
 to their central mechanism. The remarkable feature of these particular a.g.ns is
 that the 'kinetic' power required to energize the extended radio lobes (transmitted
 by the jets in the form of relativistic particles or Poynting flux) exceeds the
 radiative luminosity of the nucleus itself. Is there a mechanism that could generate
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 210 M. J. Rees
 an intense plasma outflow, even if the accretion rate and nuclear luminosity were
 low?
 There is indeed another possible source of power over and above the gravitational
 energy released by infalling matter. The part of a spinning black hole's rest mass
 that is associated with its spin can in principle be extracted, as was first emphasized
 by Penrose (I969). By exploiting the analogy between a black hole's horizon and
 an electrical conductor, Blandford & Znajek (I977) suggested a realistic astro-
 physical context whereby electromagnetic torques can extract this energy, rather
 as the unipolar inductor mechanism brakes an ordinary spinning conductor. Three
 conditions are necessary, all of which can be fulfilled if the hole is surrounded by
 a small amount of plasma (as could result from accretion with low im).
 (i) Magnetic fields threading the hole must be maintained by an external current
 system. The requisite flux could have been advected in by slow accretion; even
 if the field within the inflowing matter were tangled, around the hole it would
 nevertheless be well ordered. The surrounding plasma would be a good enough
 conductor to maintain surface currents that could confine such a field within the
 hole's magnetosphere. The only obvious upper limit to the field is set by the
 requirement that its total energy should not exceed the gravitational binding
 energy of the infalling gas.
 (ii) There must be a current flowing into the hole. Although the relativistic
 plasma expected around the hole when Th is low radiates very little, it emits some
 bremsstrahlung y-rays. Some of these will interact in the funnel to produce a
 cascade of electron-positron pairs, yielding more than enough charge density to
 'complete the circuit' and carry the necessary current; enough, indeed, to make
 the magnetosphere essentially charge-neutral, in the sense that I (n+ - n) I <E
 (n++n ), so that relativistic m.h.d. can be applied.
 (iii) The proper 'impedance match' must be achieved between the hole and the
 external resistance. Phinney (i 983) has explored the physics of the relativistic wind
 whose source is the pair plasma created by 7y + 7? e+ + e- in the ho
 magnetosphere, which flows both outward along the funnel and into the hole. He
 finds consistent wind solutions in which ca. I of the hole's spin energy is
 transformed into Poynting flux and a relativistic electron-positron outflow.
 The general scheme is depicted in figure 14. Even a low-level and inefficient
 accretion flow can 'anchor' a magnetic field that threads the hole, and thereby
 tap the hole's spin energy; in these conditions the extracted power naturally goes
 predominantly into a relativistic bifurcated outflow. The power extracted is
 O(B2r2 c); for a field ca. 104 G, which can be confined by plasma of density only
 10-11 g cm-3, this can be ca. 1045 erg s-1. This mechanism seems specially
 appropriate for strong radio galaxies such as Cygnus A (Rees et al. I982): objects
 where the energy flowing along the jets dominates the radiative output of the a.g.n.
 itself. Electron-positron pairs moving with Lorentz factors ca. 100 would transport
 some kinetic energy, but most of the power outflow would initially be in the form
 of Poynting flux associated with the magnetic field coiled round the jet axis, and
 'frozen in' to the pair plasma. This Poynting flux may be converted into fast
 particles where the jet encounters ambient material (perhaps on the scale of the
 v.l.b.i. radio components). The expected magnetic field in the jet has the kind of
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 211
 relativistic synchrotron ad photos witl phtos with
 electrons inverse Compton hv>1MeV h.v <1 MeV
 [If Ly>4tmc2ia i 1r
 e+ -e- Comptonized
 plasma XX- rays
 FIGURE 13. Processes that lead inevitably to the production of an optically thick e+-e-
 plasma in sources with a hard spectrum and a high 'compactness parameter' L/r.
 configuration that could cause magnetic confinement and collimation (see
 equation (10)). The plasma around the hole that supplies the currents and anchors
 the field is just a catalyst; in principle, the power output of a radio galaxy could
 be sustained with zero accretion rate if some of the hole's spin energy were
 channelled into the surrounding plasma to compensate for its (small) radiative
 losses.
 According to this idea, radio galaxies harbour massive black holes formed long
 ago via catastrophic collapse (maybe during a quasar phase of activity). The holes
 lurked quiescent, the galaxy being swept clean of gas, for billions of years. Then
 some event, perhaps interaction with a companion, triggered renewed infall;
 maybe at a low rate, but sufficient to reactivate the nucleus by applying a magnetic
 field. This 'engages the clutch', tapping the hole's latent spin energy, and
 converting it into non-thermal directed outflow (Poynting flux and e+-e plasma),
 which ploughs its way out to scales ca. 1010 times larger. If this is indeed what
 happens in Cygnus A and M87, then these very large-scale manifestations of a.g.n.
 activity could offer the most direct evidence for inherently relativistic effects.
 How much energy is available? Up to 29 0 of a hole's mass can be extracted
 in principle; models for relativistic winds with realistic efficiency factors allow
 conversion of rest mass with at least a few percent efficiency; more than enough
 to power the largest radio galaxy, provided that the hole mass is greater than
 108 MOJ
 5. STATISTICS OF A.G.NS AND THEIR DEFUNCT REMNANTS
 5.1. A.g.ns and galactic evolution
 So there are two quite distinct ways in which massive black holes can generate
 a high luminosity: straightforwardly by accretion; or via the electromagnetic
 process just described, where the energy comes from the hole itself. The latter
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 212 M. J. Rees
 process tends to give purely non-thermal phenomena, whereas accretion yields an
 uncertain mixture of thermal and non-thermal power. The properties of an a.g.n.
 must depend, among other things, on the relative contributions of these two
 mechanisms, which are functions of Th and the spin of the hole. The properties of
 a.g.ns must depend on other parameters such as the nuclear mass M, the
 orientation and properties of the host galaxy, etc. Ideally, one would like a unified
 model that explains the multifarious types of a.g.n. in the same way that our
 theories for the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram do this for stars.
 Still more ambitiously, one would like to place quasars in the general context
 of galactic evolution. Do quasars die and get resurrected as radio galaxies? How
 and by what route does a condensed mass first accumulate in the centres of
 galaxies? What are the masses involved? How do the pyrotechnics in the nucleus
 react back on the rest of the galaxy? How common is it for massive holes, remnants
 of past activity, to lurk quiescent in the centres of normal galaxies? Already we
 have some clues from quasar demography and from the study of nearby galaxies.
 Even if a.g.ns are precursors on the route towards black hole formation rather
 than involving black holes that have already formed (see figure 12), massive black
 holes should exist in profusion as remnants of past activity; they would be
 inconspicuous unless infall onto them recommenced, and generated a renewed
 phase of accretion-powered output or catalysed the extraction of latent spin
 energy.
 Estimates of the masses of a.g.ns and numbers of 'dead' a.g.ns are bedevilled
 by uncertainty about how long individual active objects live, and the evolutionary
 properties of the a.g.n. population. Quasars are so luminous that they can be
 detected at a distance such that their light set out when the Universe was less than
 4 its present scale (i.e. with redshift factor z > 3). They therefore offer direc
 information on how active galaxies were when they were young. It has long been
 known that at the epoch corresponding to z = 2, the strongest sources were ca. 1000
 times more common per co-moving volume than they are today. The enhancement
 is, however, much less for lower-luminosity objects of all kinds. We are still a long
 way from understanding why the luminosity function evolves in this way. Anyway,
 at the epoch z = 2 the population of powerful a.g.ns was declining on a timescale
 tevo / 2 x 109 Hl-o a; this is of course an upper limit to the active lifetime, tQ, of
 a typical individual a.g.n.
 The individual remnant masses would be
 8x 107 Hlo>-(Q/tEvo) MO,(9
 e being the overall efficiency with which rest mass is converted into electromagnetic
 radiation over typical active lifetime, tQ, of an a.g.n.
 Clearly tQ cannot exceed tevo. On the other hand, it could be that tQ < tevo, SO
 that many successive short-lived generations of quasars or strong radio sources are
 born and die during the time it takes for the overall population to decline. Because
 of this uncertainty, a.g.n. statistics would be compatible with either a small number
 of very massive remnants (109-1010 MO), obtained by writing tQ = tevo in (19), or
 a larger number of less massive ones.
 Another issue is the nature of the lower luminosity a.g.ns (Seyfert galaxies, etc.).
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakertan Lecture, 1982 213
 FIGURE 14. Schematic Illustration of the hypothetical 'central 
 et al. 1982; Phinney A983). In h a te m i f .... e
 a : hyroanei wid Exera plsm (sipld cofie a pooia magnetic fiel B,:: of/:: :::::::::::::
 stent 10 1O 0, toP th hole Th preis gemer isuiprathtsoni
 W. \ \ / , X / ., .................~.................... .: .A ............
 appropriatefora pressure-supporte torus w h c t s ific au.. ....n....7................... ...
 ::~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. . \ / . . . . . . . X. . . . .'"''''
 ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. D.N E\.z Z . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...
 \ 6 ( ~~~~~~~. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
 O~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~. . .. .. . . : : : :. . . .1::::::::::::::::::.::::::::.::
 th xvn hoizon, ths par car a curen which:: extracts: rotationa enrg from: the::
 :::::::::::~~~~~~~~~~~ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ./ / . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .: :::::Z::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::;:::
 . / I ~~~~~~~~/ \ I \ \~~~~~~~~.. " . . . . . .. . . . . . .. .i. '.''." 1. '. '. :.'. '. . . ':"''
 holUE in. tchefomaofia disrect-crrnofth Poynohtingalux. nrlegie nrdo ore Re
 qestions deen on2 thiney complexinteraction s between evlvn galaxiese and theimgei fedgnrae
 nce,an hyrmusnti awaitd Etheoretial progres asipledongie a broaoda front.fildB,o
 approriat 5.2. Massresiuepblaed holes winh cnetarby galaxies?nuarmmnum
 (whaty canbes)adiatd abou theetra possibl presene ofir massivthrwe blackyholes(te
 'starvd rhesmnantraxs ofrsome early accrtive phase)ia in nearbyed galaxieldlns Young etral.
 (t978 advanedt evridenchee thatr thererwa a darken whchentralcmas roaiona thenterg ofro the
 massie eipticalor galaxyM7 Thec-creyt Ploytted thf uraebrgtnsxs.unto
 ofe ditance anduror foun qashih-rightness 'cgusp'2) and alsog qanoalosyit high stelard
 vlocities neare they ceintreqThyacar'wimed on thi basi that thwerea a? centeral darkes
 maestos ofependO Mon this conclusiontehactos betensbect tvolvinaraious doubt (seer
 Richston &n Trmutaaine (heo85)iand preferencs cited threin) Ifrotheselrvlcte
 are ot sotopic5on2ca expainthe observationst without invkig alageenra
 dakmasat call;e sand evenui therei ponsbe, itrdesenceot havestove ablack hole, buth
 could8b adstarnclusteriec wthathrws a largeetra mass lihiaionehv toe awaitrte Spache
 Telotesopea tohet dantae wThbette resolution.ti Perapis mothre onvincingris Tonryk
 Tevience for ae darcetral mass inte M32ol(tion.Pryap mo4)rTe ionferrecmas is 'on
 evidence for a dark central mass in M32 (Tonry I 984)~~~...............is ony
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 214 M. J. Rees
 5 x 106 MO; but M32 is a s
 such objects may not be uncommon.
 When the jets of a strong radio source are switched off, the extended lobes would
 expand adiabatically and their radio luminosity would fade, on a timescale of a
 few times 108 a. The nearby galaxy Centaurus A is a rather weak radio source, but
 has giant diffuse lobes; it may be a dying source that, in its prime, rivalled Cygnus A
 in luminosity. The nucleus is shrouded by dust, so we do not have the kind of
 optical data that Young et al. obtained for M87. But Centaurus A is the nearest
 galaxy which we have reason to think spewed out a great deal of energy in the
 past. It has a compact radio and X-ray nucleus, with a jet, which is evidence of
 some residual activity. The only reason for believing that there is some large
 (greater than 108 M.) mass at the centre is that the extended radio 
 Centaurus A (if one applies the classic Burbidge argument) pose extremely high
 energy requirements.
 There is a compact (and variable) radio source in our own Galactic Centre that
 is still almost unresolved (Lo et al. I985). Its dimensions are ca. 3 x 1014 cm or less.
 Another peculiar phenomenon towards the Galactic Centre is a strong electron-
 positron annihilation line, which there is strong reason to believe is variable. (The
 variability is claimed on the basis of obtaining different results on balloon flights
 six months apart.) This can be modelled in terms of low-level accretion onto a
 ca. 106 M. (or less) hole (Rees I982).
 There cannot, however, be a monster black hole in our Galactic centre. Infrared
 data on the motions of gas in the central parsec imply that if there is a black hole
 there at all its mass cannot be more than ca. 3 x 106 MO0. That is the mass inferre
 if one interprets the velocities as virial velocities; but it is not mandatory to
 interpret them that way; they could be ejection velocities, and therefore this may
 be just an upper limit (Lacy et al. I 982). There is really no firm evidence for a black
 hole in the Galactic centre. There are, however, two phenomena that are unique
 to the Galactic centre: the radio source and the large fraction of the 7-ray energy
 coming out in the annihilation line. If unique phenomena occur in a unique location
 in the Galaxy, it is not necessarily 'ad hoc' to invoke a special kind of object, and
 a ca. 106 M0O black hole can account for both these things.
 6. CONCLUDING REMARKS
 It is now more than 30 years since Cygnus A was recognized to be an
 extragalactic source, and more than 20 years since the discovery of quasars
 triggered serious interest in the subject of 'relativistic astrophysics'. In retrospect,
 the progress in relating theoretical ideas to the observed phenomena seems rather
 meagre. Sometimes one has the illusion that the subject is advancing rapidly, but
 we have really had a rather slow advance, with 'sawtooth' variations superposed
 on it as fashions come and go. Many of the bizarre ideas current in the early days
 can now be abandoned; but if we look back at the insight of the early work of,
 for instance, Salpeter (i 964), Zeldovich & Novikov (1 964) and Lynden-Bell (i 969),
 who were already arguing that supermassive collapsed objects were implicated in
 the a.g.n. phenomenon, progress indeed seems slow. This is partly because quasars
 were, in a sense, discovered prematurely. Had they been discovered in (say) the
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 215
 early 1970s, when Seyfert galaxies and other lower level a.g.ns were already
 familiar, and when pulsars and compact X-ray sources had familiarized us with
 the likely efficiency of gravitationally-powered sources, a consensus might have
 developed more quickly, and there would have been less disposition to regard
 quasars as demanding 'new physics', etc.
 The central engine, less than 1 light day across, involves plasmas under much
 more extreme conditions than those normally studied (electron-positron pairs,
 etc.). Inherently relativistic effects may be crucial. If so, the study of active
 galactic nuclei acquires another motivation; the evidence for Einstein's theory of
 gravity is so far restricted to contexts where the gravitational field is weak, so we
 eagerly seek some diagnostic that would test strong-field general relativity and tell
 us whether spacetime around a collapsed object does indeed resemble the Kerr
 metric.
 Conditions around black holes are extreme, but the relevant physics is essentially
 'well known' (in the sense that it can be found in, for instance, Landau & Lifshitz:
 A course in theoretical physics (9 volumes), Pergamon Press). Moreover the key
 problem is at least well posed as that of axisymmetric plasma dynamics in a specified
 gravitational field, the aim being to calculate how much power is derived from
 accretion and extracted from the hole's spin, and to find the form in which these
 respective contributions emerge. Such calculations play the same part in the
 modelling of a.g.ns that nuclear physics does in theories of stellar structure and
 evolution. The evidence that black holes have anything to do with a.g.ns is
 circumstantial. The more enthusiastic advocates of black holes might assert,
 unabashed, that this is no less true for other cherished beliefs in astrophysics. The
 almost unquestioned dogma that stars are powered by nuclear energy is supported
 by evidence that is also 'merely' circumstantial. However, the confrontation of
 models with observations, indirect even for stars, is more ambiguous still for a.g.ns.
 This is because in stars the energy percolates to the observable surface in a relatively
 steady and well-understood way, but in a.g.ns it is reprocessed into all parts of
 the electromagnetic spectrum on scales spanning many powers often (see figure 12),
 in a fashion that depends on poorly known environmental and geometrical effects
 within the host galaxy. Indeed, our understanding of quasars and radio galaxies
 will remain incomplete until they are placed in the general context of galactic
 evolution. The massive black hole hypothesis is, nevertheless, vulnerable in
 various ways. It would, for instance, have to be abandoned (or at least severely
 modified) if very regular periodicities were found in a.g.ns, or if there were
 observational upper limits much less than 108 M0 to the central masses in strong
 radio galaxies.
 Given a galaxy, calculable runaway processes can lead to gravitational collapse,
 and the formation of black holes of up to 108 M0. in their centres. We can at least
 attempt a quantitative discussion of the physics of the central engine that powers
 quasars and radio galaxies, and initiates cosmic jets. From the viewpoint of the
 galaxy itself, the energetic non-thermal activity is just a relatively short-lived
 pathological phase in the lifetime of its nucleus. This does, though, leave behind
 a spinning black hole - a latent energy source that can be reactivated if infall is
 resumed.
 But let us recall that, to get this process started, the cosmologists must tell us
 8 Vol. 400. A
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 216 M. J. Rees
 what initiated the galaxies. I argued earlier that even though the mundane physics
 of gas cooling and Newtonian collapse singles out a galactic mass and length scale
 (so that a favoured mass need not be imprinted ab initio), there must have been
 some initial fluctuations. Otherwise the Universe would still be amorphously
 uniform, with no galaxies, no stars, and no physicists. On the other hand, the early
 Universe was not too chaotic, because on cosmological scales the Robertson-Walker
 metric fits amazingly well. There is no agreed understanding of why the Universe
 combines the small-scale roughness needed to initiate galaxy formation with a
 large-scale uniformity that has allowed it to expand smoothly for 1010 years.
 Moreover, 90 0 of the gravitating stuff in galaxies could be a relic of the very hot
 early phases of the Big Bang, whose elucidation must await further progress in
 high-energy physics.
 It is here, if nowhere else, that even the most normal and quiescent galaxies pose
 problems that transcend the physics we understand.
 I am grateful to many colleagues, and especially to Dr M. C. Begelman,
 Dr R. D. Blandford, Dr A. Dekel, Dr A. C. Fabian, and Dr E. S. Phinney for
 collaborative research on topics summarized in this lecture.
 REFERENCES
 Baade, W. & Minkowski, R. I954 Astrophys. J. 119, 206.
 Balick, B. & Heckman, T. M. I982 A. Rev. Astr. Astrophys. 20, 431.
 Bally, J. & Lada, C. J. I982 Astrophys. J. 265, 824.
 Bardeen, J. M., Press, W. H. & Teukolsky, S. A. I972 Astrophys. J. 178, 347.
 Bean, A. J., Efstathiou, G., Ellis, R. S., Peterson, B. A. & Shanks, T. I983 Mon. Not. R. astr.
 Soc. 205, 605.
 Begelman, M. C., Blandford, R. D. & Rees, M. J. I984 Rev. mod. Phys. 56, 255.
 Bekefi, G., Field, B. T., Parmentola, J. & Tsipis, K. I980 Nature, Lond. 248, 219.
 Binney, J. J. I977 Astrophys. J. 215, 483.
 Biretta, J. A., Owen, F. N. & Hardee, P. E. I983 Astrophys. J. Lett. 274, L27.
 Blandford, R. D. & Rees, M. J. I974 Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 169, 395.
 Blandford, R. D. & Znajek, R. L. I977 Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 179, 433.
 Blumenthal, G., Faber, S. M., Primack, J. R. & Rees, M. J. I984 Nature, Lond. 311, 517.
 Bond, J. R. & Szalay, A. S. I983 Astrophys. J. 274, 443.
 Boughn, S. P., Saulson, P. R. & Seldner, M. I98I Astrophys. J. 250, L15.
 Bridle, A. H. & Perley, R. A. I984 A. Rev. Astr. Astrophys. 22, 319.
 Burbidge, G. R. I958 Astrophys. J. 129, 841.
 Burbidge, G. R., Burbidge, E. M. & Sandage, A. R. I963 Rev. mod. Phys. 35, 947.
 Carr, B. J., Bond, J. R. & Arnett, W. D. I984 Astrophys. J. 277, 445.
 Cowsik, R. & McClelland, J. I973 Astrophys. J. 180, 7.
 Curtis, H. D. 19I8 Lick Observatory Publications, vol. 13, p. 11.
 Damour, T. I975 Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 262, 113.
 Dekel, A., Einasto, J. & Rees, M. J. I985 (In preparation.)
 De Rejula, A. & Glashow, S. L. I984 Nature, Lond. 312, 734.
 Doroshkevich, A. G., Shandarin, S. F. & Zeldovich, Ya B. I983 In I.A.U. Symposium 104:
 Early evolution of the universe and its present structure (ed. G. 0. Abell & G. Chincarini),
 p. 387. Dordrecht: D. Reidel.
 Dreher, J. W. & Feigelson, E. D. I984 Nature, Lond. 308, 43.
 Eardley, D. M., Lightman, A. P. & Shapiro, S. L. I975 Astrophys. J. Lett. 199, 1153.
 Efstathiou, G. & Silk, J. I983 Fundam. cosmic phys. 9, 1.
 Einasto, J., Kaasik, A., Kalamees, P. & Vennik, J. I975 Astron. Astrophys. 40, 161.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 The Bakerian Lecture, 1982 217
 Einasto, J. & Lynden-Bell, D. I982 Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 199, 67.
 Faber, S. M. 1984 In Proc. E.S.O./CERN Conference on cosmology and particle physics (ed. L.
 van Hove & G. Setti), p. 187. CERN Publications.
 Fabian, A. C., Nulsen, P. E. J. & Canizares, C. I984 Nature, Lond. 310, 733.
 Fabricant, D., Lecar, J. & Gorenstein, P. I980 Astrophys. J. 241, 552.
 Fomalont, E. B., Geldzahler, B. J., Hjellming, R. M. & Wade, C. M. I983 Astrophys. J. Lett.
 275, 802.
 Forman, W. & Jones, C. I982 A. Rev. Astr. Astrophys. 20, 547.
 Frenk, C., White, S. D. M. & Davis, M. I983 Astrophys. J. 271, 417.
 Geller, M. J. & Huchra, J. P. I983 Astrophys. J. suppl. Ser. 52, 61.
 Geller, M. J. & Peebles, P. J. E. I973 Astrophys. J. 184, 329.
 Guilbert, P. W., Fabian, A. C. & Rees, M. J. I983 Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 205, 593.
 Hazard, C., Mackay, M. B. & Shimmins, A. J. I963 Nature, Lond. 197, 1037.
 Hegyi, D. J. & Gerber, G. L. I977 Astrophys. J. 218, L7.
 Huchra, J. P. & Geller, M. J. I982 Astrophys. J. 257, 423.
 Hut, P. & White, S. D. M. I984 Nature, Lond. 310, 637.
 Kahn, F. D. & Woltjer, L. I959 Astrophys. J. 130, 705.
 Lacy, J. H., Townes, C. H. & Hollenbach, D. J. I982 Astrophys. J. 262, 120.
 Lo, K. Y., Backer, D. C., Ekers, R. D., Kellermann, K. I., Reid, M. & Moran, J. M. I985 Nature,
 Lond.315,124.
 Lovelace, R. V. E. I976 Nature, Lond. 262, 649.
 Lynden-Bell, D. I969 Nature, Lond. 223, 690.
 Lynden-Bell, D. I982 In Astrophysical cosmology (ed. H. A. Bruck, G. V. Coyne & M. S. Long-
 air), p. 85. Vatican Publications.
 Lyubimov, V. A., Novikov, E. G., Nozik, V. Z., Tretyakov, E. F. & Kozik, V. S. I980 Physics
 Lett. B94, 266.
 MacDonald, D. & Thorne, K. S. I982 Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 198, 345.
 Madsen, R. & Epstein, R. E. I984 Astrophys. J. 282, 11.
 Margon, B. I984 A. Rev. Astr. Astrophys. 22, 507.
 Marx, G. & Szalay, A. I972 In Proc. Neutrino '72, vol. 1, p. 191. Technoinform: Budapest.
 Michell, J. I784 Phil. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. 74, 35.
 Mitton, S. & Ryle, M. I969 Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 146, 221.
 Moody, J. & Wilezek, F. I984 Phys. Rev. D30, 130.
 Norman, M. L., Smarr, L. L., Winkler, K.-H. A. & Smith, M. D. I982 Astron. Astrophys. 113,
 285.
 Ostriker, J. P. & Meisels, A. I985 Astrophys. J. (In the press.)
 Owen, F. N., Hardee, P. E. & Bignell, R. L. I980 Astrophys. J. Lett. 239, L11.
 Pearson, T. J., Unwin, S., Cohen, M. H., Linfield, R., Readhead, A. C. S., Serelstad, G. A., Simon,
 R. S. & Walker, R. C. I98I Nature, Lond. 290, 365.
 Peebles, P. J. E. I980 In Physical cosmology (ed. R. Balian, J. Audouze & D. N. Schramm),
 p. 213. Amsterdam: North Holland.
 Penrose, R. I969 Riv. nuovo Cim. 1, 252.
 Perley, R. A., Dreher, J. W. & Cowan, J. J. I984 Astrophys. J. Lett. 285, L35.
 Phinney, E. S. I983 Theory of radio sources. Ph.D. thesis, University of Cambridge.
 Rees, M. J. I966 Nature, Lond. 211, 468.
 Rees, M. J. I982 In The Galactic centre (ed. R. Blandford & G. Riegler), p. 166. American
 Institute of Physics.
 Rees, M. J. I984a J. Astrophys. Astron. 5, 331.
 Rees, M. J. I984b A. Rev. Astr. Astrophys. 22, 471.
 Rees, M. J., Begelman, M. C., Blandford, R. D. & Phinney, E. S. 1982 Nature, Lond. 295, 17.
 Rees, M. J. & Ostriker, J. P. I977 Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 179, 541.
 Richstone, D. 0. & Tremaine, S. I985 Astrophys. J. (In the press.)
 Rubin, V. C. I983 Science, Wash. 220, 1339.
 Salpeter, E. E. I964 Astrophys. J. 140, 796.
 Sciama, D. W. I984 Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 394, 1.
 Schmidt, M. I963 Nature, Lond. 197, 1040.
 Sikivie, P. I983 Phys. Rev. Lett. 51, 1415.
 8-2
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 218 M. J. Rees
 Silk, J. I977 Astrophys. J. 211, 638.
 Tayler, R. J. I984 Proc. R. Soc. Lond. A 396, 21.
 Tonry, J. L. I984 Astrophys. J. Lett. 283, L27.
 Tremaine, S. & Gunn, J. E. I979 Phys. Rev. Lett. 42, 407.
 Uson, J. & Wilkinson, D. T. I984 Astrophys. J. 277, Li.
 White, S. D. M., Huchra, J., Latham, D. & Davis, M. I983 Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 203, 701.
 Wiita, P. I985 Physics Rep. (In the press.)
 Williams, D. & Gull, S. I985 Nature, Lond. 303, 39.
 Witten, E. I984 Phys. Rev. D30, 272.
 Young, P. J., Westphal, J. A., Kristian, J., Wilson, C. P. & Landauer, F. P. I978 Astrop
 J. 221, 721.
 Zeldovich, Y. B. & Novikov, I. D. I964 Dokl. Acad. Nauk. SSSR 158, 811.
 Znajek, R. L. I977 Mon. Not. R. astr. Soc. 179, 457.
 Zwicky, F. I933 Helv. phys. Acta 6, 110.
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:16:50 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

