American Mineralogist, Volume 93, pages 1693–1720, 2008
0003-004X/08/1112–1693$05.00/DOI: 10.2138/am.2008.2955	
     1693 
Review Paper
Mineral evolution
Robert M. Hazen,1,* Dominic Papineau,1 Wouter Bleeker,2 Robert T. Downs,3                  
John M. Ferry,4 Timothy J. McCoy,5 Dimitri A. Sverjensky,4 and Hexiong Yang3
1Geophysical Laboratory, Carnegie Institution, 5251 Broad Branch Road NW, Washington, D.C. 20015, U.S.A.
2Geological Survey of Canada, 601 Booth Street, Ottawa, Ontario K1A OE8, Canada
3Department of Geosciences, University of Arizona, 1040 East 4th Street, Tucson, Arizona 85721-0077, U.S.A.
4Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland 21218, U.S.A.
5Department of Mineral Sciences, National Museum of Natural History, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, D.C. 20560, U.S.A.
Abstract
The mineralogy of terrestrial planets evolves as a consequence of a range of physical, chemical, 
and biological processes. In pre-stellar molecular clouds, widely dispersed microscopic dust particles 
contain approximately a dozen refractory minerals that represent the starting point of planetary mineral 
evolution. Gravitational clumping into a protoplanetary disk, star formation, and the resultant heat­
ing in the stellar nebula produce primary refractory constituents of chondritic meteorites, including 
chondrules and calcium-aluminum inclusions, with ~60 different mineral phases. Subsequent aque­
ous and thermal alteration of chondrites, asteroidal accretion and differentiation, and the consequent 
formation of achondrites results in a mineralogical repertoire limited to ~250 different minerals found 
in unweathered meteorite samples. 
Following planetary accretion and differentiation, the initial mineral evolution of Earth’s crust 
depended on a sequence of geochemical and petrologic processes, including volcanism and degassing, 
fractional crystallization, crystal settling, assimilation reactions, regional and contact metamorphism, 
plate tectonics, and associated large-scale fluid-rock interactions. These processes produced the first 
continents with their associated granitoids and pegmatites, hydrothermal ore deposits, metamorphic 
terrains, evaporites, and zones of surface weathering, and resulted in an estimated 1500 different 
mineral species. According to some origin-of-life scenarios, a planet must progress through at least 
some of these stages of chemical processing as a prerequisite for life.
Biological processes began to affect Earth’s surface mineralogy by the Eoarchean Era (~3.85–3.6 
Ga), when large-scale surface mineral deposits, including banded iron formations, were precipitated 
under the influences of changing atmospheric and ocean chemistry. The Paleoproterozoic “Great Oxida­
tion Event” (~2.2 to 2.0 Ga), when atmospheric oxygen may have risen to >1% of modern levels, and 
the Neoproterozoic increase in atmospheric oxygen, which followed several major glaciation events, 
ultimately gave rise to multicellular life and skeletal biomineralization and irreversibly transformed 
Earth’s surface mineralogy. Biochemical processes may thus be responsible, directly or indirectly, for 
most of Earth’s 4300 known mineral species.
The stages of mineral evolution arise from three primary mechanisms: (1) the progressive separation 
and concentration of the elements from their original relatively uniform distribution in the pre-solar 
nebula; (2) an increase in range of intensive variables such as pressure, temperature, and the activities 
of H2O, CO2, and O2; and (3) the generation of far-from-equilibrium conditions by living systems. 
The sequential evolution of Earth’s mineralogy from chondritic simplicity to Phanerozoic complex­
ity introduces the dimension of geologic time to mineralogy and thus provides a dynamic alternate 
approach to framing, and to teaching, the mineral sciences.
Keywords: Pre-solar minerals, meteorite minerals, biominerals, organominerals, teaching mineralogy
Introduction
Earth today boasts about 4300 known species of minerals, 
with as many as 50 new types being identified each year (e.g., 
http://rruff.info/ima). Yet the mineralogical diversity now found 
at or near Earth’s surface, defined here as micro- or macroscopic 
solid phases (>1 µm diameter) at crustal depths less than about 
3 km (i.e., where direct interaction with microbial life is likely), 
was not present for much of the planet’s history. Indeed, both the 
variety and relative abundances of near-surface minerals have 
changed dramatically over more than 4.5 billion years of Earth 
history through a variety of physical, chemical, and biological 
processes.
Our principal objective is to explore the nature of mineral 
evolution by reviewing significant episodes of change in the 
diversity and distribution of minerals on Earth (Table 1 and Fig. 
1). Thousands of previous publications document specific aspects 
of Earth’s mineral evolution, from the pre-planetary alteration of 
* E-mail: rhazen@ciw.edu 

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1694
primitive chondritic meteorites, through igneous, metamorphic 
and sedimentary petrology, to metazoan biomineralization of 
the Phanerozoic Era. However, few attempts have been made to 
synthesize these mineralogical data into a coherent chronology 
(see, however, Wenk and Bulakh 2004, p. 594–595; Hazen 2008, 
p. 4–6). The concept of mineral evolution provides an important 
perspective on Earth’s history and a potentially useful framework 
for teaching mineralogy. Furthermore, it may prove particularly 
useful in attempts to understand chemical aspects of life’s origins, 
as well as the development of quantitative measures for compara­
tive planetology and the search for other living worlds.
Earth’s history is a continuum, yet several significant irre­
versible mineralogical events, each triggered by new physical, 
chemical and/or biological processes, have been recognized in 
the geological record and provide a chronological framework for 
this overview. These processes diversified Earth’s mineralogy in 
three ways. First, they increased the range of bulk compositions 
from which minerals form, from the original, relatively uniform 
composition of the solar nebula. Second, geological processes 
increased the range of physical and chemical conditions under 
which minerals form from a given bulk composition (e.g., P, 
T, aH2O, aCO2, aO2, etc.). Third, living organisms opened up new 
reaction pathways by which minerals formed that were not ac­
cessible in the abiotic world.
In particular, Earth has experienced three broad eras of min­
eral evolution, which can be further subdivided into 10 partially 
overlapping stages (Table 1; Fig. 1), each of which saw the 
expansion of mineralogical diversity and/or variation in rela­
tive mineral abundances. The first era began with the extreme 
mineralogical simplicity of pre-stellar “dense” molecular clouds, 
in which widely dispersed microscopic dust particles contained 
only about a dozen known refractory oxides, carbides, nitrides, 
and silicates that represent the starting point of mineral evolu­
tion. Gravitational clumping into a protoplanetary disk, star 
formation, and the resultant heating in the solar nebula produced 
the distinctive chondrules and calcium-aluminum inclusions 
that dominate chondritic meteorites, which incorporate ~60 
primary mineral phases that formed by direct condensation, 
melt solidification, or solid-state recrystallization. Subsequent 
aqueous and thermal alteration of chondrites led to dozens of 
Table 1. 	 Ten stages of mineral evolution of terrestrial planets, with possible timing on Earth, examples of minerals, and estimates of the 
cumulative number of different mineral species
Stage	
 Age (Ga)	
 Examples of minerals	
 ~ Cumulative no. species
The era of planetary accretion (>4.55 Ga)
1. Primary chondrite minerals	
 >4.56 Ga	
Mg-olivine/pyroxene, Fe-Ni metal, FeS, CAIs	
60	
2. Planetesimal alteration/differentiation	
>4.56 to 4.55 Ga	
	
250
 a) aqueous alteration	
	
phyllosilicates, hydroxides, sulfates, carbonates, halite
 b) thermal alteration	
	
albite, feldspathoids, biopyriboles
 c) shock phases	
	
ringwoodite, majorite, akimotoite, wadsleyite
 d) achondrites	
	
quartz, K-feldspar, titanite, zircon 
 e) iron meteorites	
	
many transition metal sulfides and phosphates 
The era of crust and mantle reworking (4.55 to 2.5 Ga)
3. Igneous rock evolution	
4.55 to 4.0 Ga	
	
350 to 500
a) fractionation	
	
feldspathoids, biopyriboles (volatile-poor planets)	
350
b) volcanism, outgassing, surface hydration		
hydroxides, clay minerals (volatile-rich planets)	
500
4. Granite formation 	
4.0 to 3.5 Ga	
	
1000
a) granitoids	
	
quartz, alkali feldspar (perthite), hornblende, micas, zircon
b) pegmatites	
	
beryl, tourmaline, spodumene, pollucite, many others 
5. Plate tectonics	
>> 3.0 Ga	
	
1500
a) hydrothermal ores	
	
sulfides, selenides, arsenides, antimonides, tellurides, sulfosalts
b) metamorphic minerals	
	
kyanite, sillimanite, cordierite, chloritoid, jadeite, staurolite
6. Anoxic biological world	
3.9 to 2.5 Ga	
	
1500
a) metal precipitates	
	
banded iron formations (Fe and Mn)
b) carbonates	
	
ferroan carbonates, dolostones, limestones
c) sulfates	
	
barite, gypsum
d) evaporites	
	
halides, borates
e) carbonate skarns 	
	
diopside, tremolite, grossularite, wollastonite, scapolite
 
The era of bio-mediated mineralogy (>2.5 Ga to present)
7. Paleoproterozoic atmospheric changes	
2.5 to 1.9 Ga 	
>2000 new oxide/hydroxide species, especially ore minerals 	
>4000
surface oxidation	
	
8. Intermediate ocean	
1.9 to 1.0 Ga	
minimal mineralogical innovation	
>4000
	
	
9. Neoproterozoic biogeochemical changes	
1.0 to 0.542 Ga	
	
>4000
a) glaciation	
	
extensive ice deposition, but few new minerals
b) post-glacial oxidation	
	
extensive oxidative weathering of all surface rocks
10. Phanerozoic Era	
0.542 Ga to present	
	
4300+
a) biomineralization	
	
extensive skeletal biomineralization of calcite, aragonite,
 	
	
dolomite, hydroxylapatite, and opal
b) bio-weathering	
	
increased production of clay minerals, soils
Note: The timings of some of these stages overlap and several stages continue to the present.
►Figure 1. Geologic time scale (a), major events and milestones 
in Earth evolution (b), and the 10 stages of mineral evolution discussed 
in this paper (c). The main time intervals of the mineral stages, which 
represent significant developments in terms of mineral diversity, are 
indicated with solid vertical lines; less certain initiations of these stages, 
or gradual transitions, are indicated with dotted vertical lines; gray vertical 
lines indicate continuation to the present of key processes associated with 
some of the mineral stages. Figure adapted from Bleeker (2004); eon, 
era, and period terminology of the time scale follows Gradstein et al. 
(2004); the “Geon” scale on the left provides a convenient shorthand for 
100 million year time intervals, after Hoffman (1990).

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1695
Mesoz.
Paleoz.
C.
Paleoproterozoic
(“eo-Proterozoic”)
Neoarchean
Mesoarchean
Paleoarchean
Eoarchean
Accretion & Differentiation
Nebular Processes & Collapse
Mesoproterozoic
Neoproterozoic
Jurassic
Cretaceous
Paleogene
Neogene
Quaternary
Triassic
Permian
Carboniferous
Devonian
Silurian
Ordovician
Cambrian
Phanerozoic
Proterozoic
Archean
Hadean
“early Earth”
Planetary accretion & formation of differentiated meteorites
Giant impacts & formation of the Moon
Differentiation complete, superheated Fe-Ni(-S) core & accretion of late veneer
Oldest detrital zircons & early hydro/atmosphere
Solidification of magma ocean
Heavy Bombardment
Late Heavy Bombardment (LHB)?
Isua supracrustal belt, Greenland
Acasta gneisses
Onset of inner core crystallization & generation of Earth’s magnetic field
sometime prior to life’s colonization of shallow hydrosphere (undated)
Oldest supracrustals (including BIF and chemofossils): Isua, Akilia, Nuvvuagittuq
Oxygenic photosynthesis?
Regional basement complexes of several Archean cratons
Oldest microfossils (contested): Apex chert, Warrawoona Group, Pilbara craton
Oldest recorded eukaryotic biomarkers
Archaean-Proterozoic boundary (defined)
Cambrian radiation & first shelly metazoan fossils
Gunflint microfossils
Oldest phosphatic stromatolites (Aravalli, India)
Ediacarian faunas
Deccan flood basalts
Core crystallization: ±6% complete (by mass)
Ontong-Java flood basalts & onset of Cretaceous normal polarity interval (124-83 Ma)
Chicxulub impact & major extinction
Siberian flood basalts & Major extinction 
Central Atlantic large igneous province & initiation of rifting of supercontinent Pangaea
Progressive amalgamation
of supercontinent Pangaea
Partial breakup of supercntinent Nuna
& reorganization towards Rodinia
Progressive amalgamation of
Archean supercratons (perhaps
supercontinent Kenorland?)
Amalgamation of supercontinent Gondwana
Progressive amalgamation of supercontinent Rodinia
Progressive rifting of supercontinent Rodinia
Major period of atmospheric oxygenation (ca. 850-500 Ma)
& worldwide stromatolites
Abundant phosphorites
(ca. 580-500 Ma)
Giant radiating dikes: the Mackenzie swarm
Progressive amalgamation of Earth’s first “modern” supercontinent: Nuna
Oldest sedimentary exhalative 
Pb-Zn  deposits
(SEDEX) 
First redox sensitive “unconformity-type” U deposits
Matachewan giant radiating dyke swarm and correlative swarms on other cratons
2775-2700 Ma: widespread (global?) flood basalt volcanism & komatiites
Fig Tree & Moodies Groups, Barberton greenstone belt
Onverwacht Group, Barberton greenstone belt
Oldest stromatolites and barite deposits
(ca. 3490 Ma, Pilbara & Barberton)
Pre-Warrawoona & Onverwacht supracrustals
Great Dike, Zimbabwe craton
Craton-scale strike-slip faults: rigid plate behavior
e.g., Central Slave Cover Group (Slave craton), Manjeri Fm. (Zimbabwe craton)
Steep Rock succession: well-developed stromatolitic carbonate platform
Ca. 2800-3100 Ma: Widespread transient stability of early Archean continental nuclei,
as indicated by numerous quartzite-BIF-komatiite cover sequences on basement
Extension, progressive rifting and break-up of late Archean supercratons
& dispersal of numerous Archean continental micro-plates
Sediment-dominated passive margin sequences, abundant stromatolites worldwide
First widespread evaporite deposits and continental red beds (ca. 2300-2200 Ma)
Neoproterozoic glaciations (“Snowball Earth states”)
(possibly four discrete cycles)
Late Ordovician glaciations
Permo-Carboniferous glaciations
Pleistocene glaciations
North Atlantic Igneous Province, Paleocene-Eocene thermal maximum
Paleoproterozoic glaciations, at least three cycles
(e.g. Huronian and Snowy Pass supergroups)
Giant BIFs (banded iron formations), e.g. Hamersley & Transvaal Basins
Younger tonalites & granites at Acasta
Emergence of life?
Condensation & CAIs
Pre-solar dust particles
Solar Nebula collapse & planetary disk formation
Bushveld layered intrusion
First continental red beds
&
the “Great Oxidation Event”
Age
(in Ma)
542±1
±500
66±0.5
Present
251±1
200
67-65
121
1600
1000
740
580
±1269
2023
2060
±2000
±1800
1850
1878
±2680-2580
3600
±3500
3465
2700
3000
2900
3200
2800
2500
±2450
±3230
±3460
±3530
2575
±2820
3900
4500
4567
±4400
3700
±4030
±4000
±4050
±3850
Eon
Era
Period
Mineral Evolution: Stages 1 to 10
Stage 10
Stage 9
Stage 8
Stage 7
Stage 5
Stage 4
Stage 3
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 6
Ter.
Geon
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40
41
42
43
44
45
A
B
C

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1696
additional minerals in chondritic meteorites. Planetesimal ac­
cretion, melting, differentiation, and impact processes yielded 
additional mineral phases, though no more than ~250 different 
minerals have been observed in unweathered meteorites. These 
~250 species provided the mineralogical raw materials for Earth 
and other terrestrial planets.
The second era of Earth’s mineral evolution was a time when 
elements and molecules in the crust and upper mantle were first 
subjected to repeated, strictly physical and chemical processing 
by various mechanisms. Igneous fractional crystallization, crystal 
settling, partial melting, and associated fluid-rock interactions re­
sulted in radial differentiation accompanied by vertical tectonics 
and development of a variety of new hydrothermal, igneous, and 
contact metamorphic lithologies. The resulting separation and 
concentration of the elements, which in part reflected a gradual 
chemical decoupling of Earth’s crust from the more reduced 
mantle, led to a marked diversification of the terrestrial min­
eral realm. In addition, lithospheric subduction and collisional 
zones at convergent plate boundaries and hydrothermal activity 
at deep-sea vents and ridges resulted in a host of new minerals 
associated with large-scale upper mantle and crustal reworking, 
massive hydrothermal ore deposits, and surface exposure of 
high-pressure metamorphic terrains.
The third major era of Earth’s mineral evolution, which spans 
at least the last 3.5 billion years, is associated with biological 
activity and the coevolution of the geo- and biospheres. Gradual 
irreversible redox changes in ocean and atmospheric composi­
tion, in part mediated by surface weathering processes, carbon 
burial, and the episodic rise in atmospheric oxygen fostered by 
photosynthetic microorganisms, led to the precipitation of mas­
sive carbonates, banded iron formations, sulfates, evaporates, and 
other lithologies. Microbes, with their varied metabolic redox 
strategies, high surface reactivities that are able to concentrate 
metals, and ability to create and sustain chemical gradients in a 
variety of geochemical environments, precipitated minerals at 
scales from microenvironments to regional terrains. The Phanero­
zoic innovation of bioskeletons of carbonate, phosphate or silica 
resulted in new mechanisms of mineralization that continue to 
the modern era. The following sections examine in greater detail 
these evolutionary eras of mineral diversification.
Table 2a. 	 Micro- and nano-mineral phases identified from interstellar 
grains in chondritic meteorites (Brearley and Jones 1998; 
Nittler 2003; Messenger et al. 2003; Mostefaoui and Hoppe 
2004; Vollmer et al. 2007)
Name	
Formula 
Diamond/lonsdaleite (~2 nm)	
C
Graphite	
C
Moissanite	
SiC 
Nano-particles of TiC, ZrC, MoC, FeC, and Fe-Ni metal within pre-solar graphite
Osbornite	
TiN
Nierite	
α-Si3N4
Rutile	
TiO2
Corundum	
Al2O3
Spinel	
MgAl2O4
Hibonite	
CaAl12O19
Forsterite	
Mg2SiO4
Perovskite structure	
MgSiO3
GEMS (silicate glass with embedded metal and sulfides) 
Table 2b. 	 Primary mineral phases in chondrules of type 3.0 chondrites
Name	
Formula
Forsterite	
Mg2SiO4
Clinoenstatite	
MgSiO3
Orthopyroxene	
(Mg,Fe)SiO3
Pigeonite	
(Mg,Fe,Ca)SiO3
Augite 	
Ca(Mg,Fe,Al)(Si,Al)2O6
Anorthite	
CaAl2Si2O8 
Spinel	
MgAl2O4
Chromite	
FeCr2O4
Ilmenite	
FeTiO3
Kamacite	
α-(Fe,Ni) metal 
Taenite	
γ-(Ni,Fe) metal
Troilite 	
FeS 
Pentlandite	
(Ni,Fe)9S8
*Magnetite	
Fe3O4
*Cohenite	
(Fe,Ni)3C
*Haxonite	
(Fe,Ni)23C6
*Cristobalite/Tridymite	
SiO2
*Fayalite	
Fe2SiO4
*Merrihueite/Roedderite	
(K,Na)2(Fe,Mg)5Si12O30
*Pseudobrookite	
Fe2TiO5
†Schreibersite	
(Fe,Ni)3P
†Perryite	
(Ni,Fe)8(Si,P)3
†Oldhamite	
CaS
†Niningerite	
(Mg,Fe,Mn)S
†Daubreelite	
FeCr2S4
†Caswellsilverite	
NaCrS2
* Indicates minor minerals probably formed by solid-state reaction of other phases. 
† Indicates minor phases observed in chondrules of enstatite chondrites (Brearley 
and Jones 1998). 	
	
	
              (continued next page)
Table 2. 	 Five lists of names and idealized chemical compositions of primary minerals identified in type 3 chondrites (Rubin 1997a; Brearley 
and Jones 1998; Stroud et al. 2004; Ebel 2006; Messenger et al. 2006; MacPherson 2007)
The era of planetary accretion (>4.55 Ga)
The mineral evolution of terrestrial planets begins in pre-
stellar nebulas. So called “dense molecular clouds,” which are 
the breeding grounds of stars and their associated protoplanetary 
disks, are composed of gas (primarily H and He) with widely 
dispersed dust grains. Pre-solar interstellar grains are identi­
fied by their anomalous isotopic compositions, which point 
to an origin in late-stage stellar events, such as supernovae 
and asymptotic giant branch (AGB) stars that shed their outer 
envelopes. Individual interstellar grains can be recovered from 
the matrix of chondritic meteorites and are found to incorporate 
nanometer- to micrometer-sized particles of a handful of refrac­
tory minerals, including carbides, nitrides, oxides, and silicates, 
as recorded in Table 2a (Brearley and Jones 1998; Nittler 2003; 
Messenger et al. 2003, 2006; Stroud et al. 2004; Mostefaoui and 
Hoppe 2004; Vollmer et al. 2007). Stars and their associated 
planets arise through gravitational clumping of this primitive 
nebular material. 
Stage 1. Formation of primary chondritic minerals (>4.56 Ga) 
Chondrites include a variety of stony meteorites that formed 
early in the history of the solar nebula from the accretion of fine-
grained nebular material into primitive planetesimals (Brearley 
and Jones 1998; Weisberg et al. 2006). The most striking features 
of chondritic meteorites are chondrules (Fig. 2), which are small 
spherical objects (typically ~1 mm in diameter) that represent 
molten droplets formed in space, presumably by flash heating 
and rapid cooling during the T-Tauri phase of the Sun’s forma­
tion (Rubin 2000; Desch and Connolly 2002). Chondrites also 
commonly contain calcium-aluminum-rich inclusions (CAI), 

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1697
Table 2c. 	 Primary mineral phases in chondrite calcium-aluminum-rich 
inclusions (Brearley and Jones 1998; MacPherson 2007)
Name	
Formula 
Major phases
Corundum	
Al2O3
Spinel	
MgAl2O4
Perovskite	
CaTiO3
Grossite	
CaAl4O7
Hibonite	
CaAl12O19
Ca-Al-oxide (spinelloid?)	
CaAl2O4
Forsterite	
Mg2SiO4
Melilite (gehlenite-akermanite 	
Ca2Al2SiO7-Ca2MgSi2O7
solid solution) 	
Anorthite	
CaAl2Si2O8
Ca-pyroxenes
     Diopside	
CaMgSi2O6
     Fassaite	
CaMgSi2O6-CaAl2SiO6
Rhönite	
Ca2(Mg,Al,Ti)6(Si,Al)6O20
Kamacite	
α-(Fe,Ni) metal 
Taenite	
γ-(Ni,Fe) metal
Awaruite	
Ni3Fe 
Minor accessory phases (commonly << 10 µm)
Platinum group	
Pt Group element alloys
Copper	
Cu,Ni,Zn alloy
Millerite	
NiS
Molybdenite	
MoS2
Troilite 	
FeS 
Pentlandite	
(Ni,Fe)9S8
Rutile	
TiO2
Baddelyite	
ZrO2
Thorianite	
ThO2
Armalcolite	
(Mg,Fe)Ti2O5
Magnetite	
Fe3O4
Hercynite	
FeAl2O4
Chromite 	
FeCr2O4
Coulsonite	
FeV2O4
Orthoenstatite	
MgSiO3
Periclase (magnesiowüstite)	
(Mg,Fe)O
Lime	
CaO	
Cohenite	
Fe3C
Cristobalite 	
SiO2 
Merrillite 	
Ca9NaMg(PO4)7
Table 2d. Primary mineral phases in the fine-grained (typically <5 
µm) matrix of type 3.0 chondritic meteorites (Brearley and 
Jones 1998)
Name	
Formula 
Forsterite	
Mg2SiO4
Fayalite	
Fe2SiO4
Clinoenstatite	
MgSiO3
Augite	
Ca(Mg,Fe,Al)(Si,Al)2O6
Hedenbergite	
CaFeSi2O6
Anorthite	
CaAl2Si2O8
Magnetite	
Fe3O4
Chromite	
FeCr2O4
Ilmenite	
FeTiO3
Spinel	
MgAl2O4
Pentlandite	
(Ni,Fe)9S8
Troilite	
FeS
Pyrrhotite	
Fe1–xS
Anhydrite	
CaSO4
Merrillite	
Ca9NaMg(PO4)7
Kamacite	
(Fe,Ni) metal
Taenite	
(Ni,Fe) metal
Awaruite	
Ni3Fe
Copper	
Cu metal
Table 2e. 	 Primary opaque mineral phases in type 3.0 chondritic 
meteorites (Brearley and Jones 1998)
Name	
Formula 
Graphite	
C
Kamacite	
α-Fe,Ni metal
Taenite/Tetrataenite	
γ-Ni,Fe metal
Awaruite	
Ni3Fe
Wairauite	
Co,Fe,Ni metal
Copper	
Cu metal
Troilite	
FeS
Pyrrhotite	
Fe1–xS
Pentlandite	
(Ni,Fe)9S8
Magnetite	
Fe3O4	
*Schreibersite	
(Fe,Ni)3P
*Perryite	
(Ni,Fe)8(Si,P)3
*Oldhamite	
CaS
*Sphalerite	
ZnS
*Niningerite	
(Mg,Fe,Mn)S
*Daubreelite	
FeCr2S4
*Caswellsilverite	
NaCrS2
*Djerfisherite	
K6Na(Fe,Cu,Ni)24S26Cl
*Osbornite	
TiN
*Cohenite	
(Fe,Ni,Co)3C
* Indicates highly reduced accessory phases in sulfide and metal nodules and 
clasts in enstatite chondrites.
amoeboid olivine aggregates (AOA), and other small (~1 mm 
diameter) refractory objects that formed in the high-temperature 
proto-stellar environment by evaporation, condensation, and 
melting of nebular materials.
Chondritic meteorites are complex aggregations of chon­
drules, CAI, AOA, and other refractory objects in a fine-grained 
matrix of mineral grains and dust. The least altered (type 3.0) 
chondritic meteorites—those that have experienced a minimum 
of aqueous and thermal alteration—range from extremely 
reduced EH3.0 enstatite chondrites to oxidized CV3.0 carbo­
naceous chondrites, and include CO3.0 and LL3.0 ordinary 
chondrites that formed under intermediate oxygen fugacities. 
Primary minerals are also largely preserved, although with some 
metamorphic overprint, in the relatively oxidized CK3 and R3 
chondrites, as well as in EL3 enstatite chondrites and H3 and 
L3 ordinary chondrites. Chondrules and CAI, even those in the 
least-altered type 3.0 meteorites, have been subjected to complex 
histories of fluid interactions, multiple episodes of reheating, im­
pacts and other events that have modified the initial mineralogy. 
Consequently, it is difficult to identify unambiguously “primary” 
chondrite minerals, which are defined as those earliest phases 
that formed directly through condensation, melt solidification, 
or solid-state recrystallization (MacPherson 2007). Nevertheless, 
type 3.0 chondrites are characterized by extreme mineralogical 
parsimony, as recorded in Tables 2b–2e (e.g., Brearley and Jones 
1998; Ebel 2006; Messenger et al. 2006; MacPherson 2007). 
The most important primary chondrule minerals (Table 2b) 
are Mg-rich olivine and pyroxene, with kamacite and taenite 
(both Fe-Ni metal) and troilite (FeS) as the major iron-bearing 
phases, and chromite (FeCr2O4) and pentlandite [(Ni,Fe)9S8] as 
important but volumetrically minor accessory minerals. Calcium-
aluminum-rich inclusions feature a dozen primary Ca-Al-Mg 
oxide and silicate minerals, with at least 20 accessory minerals 
that usually occur as micro- or nano-scale phases (Table 2c). 
Additional mineralogical diversity occurs in the fine-grained 
predominantly silicate matrix of chondrites (Table 2d), and 
as opaque minerals, primarily metals and sulfides (Table 2e). 
Of special interest in this regard are phases in the remarkable 
enstatite chondrites, which display a distinctive mineralogy of 
highly reduced phases such as oldhamite (CaS), niningerite 
[(Mg,Fe,Mn)S], osbornite (TiN), caswellsilverite (NaCrS2), per­
ryite [(Ni,Fe)8(Si,P)3], and djerfisherite [K6(Fe,Cu,Ni)25S26Cl].
All told, type 3 chondrites have been found to contain ~60 dif­
ferent primary minerals (Table 2), of which at least 20 occur only 
in micrometer- to nanometer-scale grains. These phases represent 

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1698
the earliest stage in the mineral evolution of terrestrial planets. 
It is important to recognize that unaltered chondrites contain all 
of the chemical complexity of terrestrial planets. Most of the 83 
stable geochemical elements are present in solid solutions, but 
are presumably too widely dispersed to form their own discrete 
mineral phases. An intriguing question is the degree to which 
some of these elements may form additional nano-mineral do­
mains within the meteorite matrix and at grain interfaces.
Stage 2. Aqueous alteration, metamorphism, and 
differentiation of planetesimals (4.56 to 4.55 Ga) 
As planetesimal accretion progressed and chondrite parent 
bodies became larger, aqueous and thermal alteration led to new 
suites of minerals (Brearley and Jones 1998; Krot et al. 2006; 
Brearley 2006; MacPherson 2007). Low-temperature (typically 
<100 °C) aqueous alteration products of olivine and pyroxene 
(notably in CI-, CM-, and CR-type chondrites) include the first 
appearances of chlorite, serpentine, talc, and other phyllosilicate 
minerals (Brearley and Jones 1998), as well as hydroxides, 
sulfates, and carbonates. The effects of aqueous processes are 
dramatically illustrated by the occurrence of fluid inclusions in 
halite (NaCl), for example from the Monahans chondrite (Zol­
ensky et al. 1999; Fig. 3).
Thermal alteration below the (Fe,Ni)-FeS eutectic tempera­
ture (<950 °C; McCoy et al. 2006), including impact-induced 
alteration, yielded new species, notably the first significant ap­
pearance of albite, feldspathoids, and a variety of micas, amphi­
boles, and pyroxenes. Some chondrites also display the overprint 
of impact shock, which produced micrometer-scale grains of such 
unusual high-pressure phases as the majorite, akimotoite, and 
perovskite forms of (Mg,Fe)SiO3, the wadsleyite and ringwoodite 
forms of (Mg,Fe)2SiO4, and the coesite and stishovite forms of 
SiO2 (Chen et al. 1996; Sharp et al. 1997; Scott 2002; Xie et al. 
2006). Yet, in spite of the appearance of these distinctive dense 
phases, the total known mineralogical repertoire of chondritic 
meteorites is limited to fewer than 150 different mineral species 
(Rubin 1997a, 1997b; Brearley and Jones 1998; Brearley 2006; 
MacPherson 2007).
Mineralogical diversity increased with the advent of plan­
etesimal melting and differentiation, which was triggered in 
bodies greater than about 200 km in diameter principally by 
radiogenic heating from decay of 26Al (Ghosh et al. 2006) and 
other short-lived radioisotopes (e.g., Shukolyukov and Lugmair 
1992), although some authors continue to champion electrical 
conduction heating by the T-Tauri solar wind (Sonett et al. 1970) 
and impact heating (Lodders et al. 1993). The mineralogical 
diversity of achondrites results from differing extents of partial 
melting and differentiation, under the influence of variable oxy­
gen fugacity, volatile contents, heat sources, and impact events 
(McCoy et al. 2006).
The most primitive achondrites, which appear to be derived 
from chondrites that experienced only partial melting and 
minimal differentiation, include acapulcoites, lodranites, and 
winonaites. These meteorites are composed principally of ol­
ivine, orthopyroxene (bronzite), plagioclase, troilite, and Fe-Ni 
metal. The presence of occasional relict chondrules, the lack of 
significant plagioclase in some of these (e.g., lodranites) com­
pared to chondrites, and the occurrence of veins of metal and 
sulfide in some specimens point to partial melting (at T ranging 
from 950 to 1200 °C) and the removal of a plagioclase-rich melt 
(McCoy et al. 2006). 
Planetesimals that underwent more extensive melting ex­
perienced large-scale separation of stony (crustal) and metallic 
(core) components, as well as fractionation of silicate magmas 
(Shukolyukov and Lugmair 2002; McCoy et al. 2006; Wadhwa 
et al. 2006). Individual differentiated meteorites, including sev­
eral classes of stony achondrites as well as stony-iron and iron 
meteorites (Fig. 4), tend to be more equilibrated, and thus have 
fewer different mineral species, than many primitive chondrites 
(Weisberg et al. 2006). Nevertheless, a great variety of differenti­
ated meteorites evolved and many minerals appeared for the first 
time in these achondrites. 
Figure 2. Photomicrograph of chondrules and calcium-aluminum-
inclusions in the Allende (USNM 3658) CV3 carbonaceous chondrite, 
viewed in crossed Nichols (image width ~7 mm). Olivine is the most 
abundant birefringent mineral. These particles, along with the matrix in 
which they are contained, formed in the solar nebula and represent the 
chemical and mineralogical building blocks of planets. Photo courtesy 
of T. McCoy.
Figure 3. The Monahans chondrite has been found to contain 
halite crystals with fluid inclusions (image width ~5 mm), which point 
to extensive aqueous processing of the meteorite parent body (Zolensky 
et al. 1999). Photo courtesy of M. Zolensky and R. Bodner.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1699
Several distinctive types of stony achondrites represent 
planetesimal crust. Eucrites, the most common achondrites with 
an igneous mineralogy dominated by plagioclase and pyroxene, 
are similar to terrestrial basalts and thus represent partial melts. 
Eucrites feature the first significant appearance of several impor­
tant rock-forming minerals, including the quartz form of SiO2, 
potassium feldspar (KAlSi3O8), titanite (CaTiSiO5), and zircon 
(ZrSiO4). Diogenites, by contrast, are Ca- and Fe-poor meteorites 
that formed through melting and accumulation of orthopyroxene, 
while brachinites represent olivine cumulates. Superimposed on 
these lithologies in many meteorites are effects of impacts, brec­
ciation, hydrothermal alteration, and other metamorphism.
Iron-nickel meteorites, which represent the core material 
of differentiated planetesimals, are dominated by Fe-Ni alloys 
(kamacite, taenite), with significant metal sulfides (troilite, 
daubreelite), carbides (cohenite and haxonite), graphite, and the 
phosphides barringerite [(Fe,Ni)2P] and schreibersite [(Fe,Ni)3P], 
which may have provided Earth with a major prebiotic source of 
reactive phosphorus (Pasek et al. 2007). Iron-nickel meteorites 
tend to be relatively simple in their major mineralogy, but they 
incorporate a host of exotic transition metal sulfide minerals, as 
well as more than two dozen novel phosphates, including the 
graftonite and sarcopside forms of [(Fe,Mn)3(PO4)2], buchwaldite 
(NaCaPO4), farringtonite [Mg3(PO4)2], and the Na-Ca-Mg phos­
phates johnsomervillite, panthite, chladniite, and brianite (Rubin 
1997a, 1997b). Other important accessory minerals include 
such high-pressure phases as the coesite, stishovite, and post-
stishovite forms of SiO2, and diamond and its closely related 
carbon polymorph, lonsdaleite. 
A total of ~250 mineral species are known to occur in all 
types of meteorites (e.g., Mason 1967; Rubin 1997a, 1997b; 
Brearley and Jones 1998; Gaffey et al. 2002; MacPherson 2007). 
All varieties of meteorites have fallen throughout Earth’s 4.5 bil­
lion year history; hence, all of these diverse meteorite minerals, 
including many phases that are thermodynamically unstable at 
surface conditions, have been present continuously in Earth’s 
near-surface environment, albeit in small quantities. These 
minerals, dominated volumetrically by magnesium silicates, 
iron sulfide, and Fe-Ni metal, provided raw materials for the 
accreting Earth and other terrestrial planets. 
The era of crust and mantle reworking 
(4.55 to 2.5 Ga)
Earth’s crust and outer mantle were violently disrupted and 
largely melted (and thus “reset”) by the epic Moon-forming 
impact event at ~4.55 Ga (Tonks and Melosh 1993; Ruzicka et 
al. 1999; Touboul et al. 2007). At that early stage, virtually all 
near-surface mineralogical diversity of the four terrestrial plan­
ets and Earth’s Moon developed by crystallization of igneous 
rocks, supplemented by a steady bombardment of asteroidal and 
cometary material. Nevertheless, Earth’s mineralogy was poised 
to diversify as a result of intense crust and mantle reworking.
The major challenge to documenting Earth’s mineral evolu­
tion prior to the Neoarchean Era (~2.8 Ga) is the relative paucity 
and typical extreme alteration of the rock record. No known 
rocks survive from before ~4.03 Ga, though hope may be held 
out that relatively unaltered early Hadean samples might eventu­
ally be recovered in the form of Earth meteorites on the Moon 
(Armstrong et al. 2002; Chapman 2002; Jakosky et al. 2004). 
Consequently, many critical aspects of early Earth geology 
and petrology—the timing of the initiation of subduction and 
orogenic processes, the chronology of the formation of cratons 
and the first continents, and the identities and distribution of 
major lithologies, for example—represent topics of debate and 
contention. It is not our intention to resolve these debates, nor 
is the exact timing of such events critical to the general concept 
of mineral evolution. Whatever the chronology, many of Earth’s 
earliest mineral-forming processes can be inferred from the exist­
ing rock record and knowledge of petrologic, geochemical, and 
geodynamic principles.
Stage 3. Initiation of igneous rock evolution (4.55 to 4.0 Ga)
Igneous activity appears likely to have dominated Earth’s 
near-surface mineral evolution for at least half a billion years 
following planetary accretion, differentiation, and formation 
of primary magmas. The earliest shallow crustal igneous rocks 
would have been mafic and ultramafic lithologies, notably 
basalts composed primarily of plagioclase, pyroxene, some ol­
ivine and minor oxides, and similar in composition to eucrites. 
Slow crystallization of magma bodies would have resulted in 
crystal settling and cumulates, for example in extensive layers 
of chromite (Kerrich et al. 2005). Very large magma bodies, or 
magma oceans, may also have formed low-density plagioclase-
rich crusts by flotation, as observed for the ancient anorthositic 
crust of the lunar highlands.
The oldest known tangible pieces of evidence of Hadean 
mineralogy are detrital zircon grains, with ages of 4.4 to 4.0 Ga, 
which have been recovered from Archean quartzites from West­
ern Australia (Fig. 5). These ancient mineral grains have been 
interpreted variously as remnants of early granitic continental 
crust (Harrison et al. 2005; Cavosie 2005; Cavosie et al. 2005, 
2006) or pre-continental mafic to ultramafic crust (Shirey et 
al. 2008). Shirey et al. (2008) employed Lu-Hf isotopic data to 
Figure 4. The Staunton iron meteorite (USNM 590), ~20 cm 
in length. This polished and etched slice displays the distinctive 
Widmanstatten pattern characteristic of many iron meteorites, with 
plates of low-Ni kamacite (Fe,Ni metal) exsolved from high-Ni taenite 
at cooling rates of 1–100 °C/Myr. Iron meteorites sample the cores of 
differentiated asteroids, provide some of our best clues to the chemical 
nature of our own core, and continue to fall to Earth. Photo courtesy 
of T. McCoy.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1700
suggest that the Hadean Earth’s wet mafic igneous veneer was 
repeatedly cycled by fractional melting, fractional crystalliza­
tion, and magma immiscibility—processes that would have led 
to a diversity of igneous lithologies, in part following Bowen’s 
familiar reaction series (Bowen 1928). The reaction series is char­
acterized by two independent, but contemporaneous, mineralogi­
cal trends: plagioclase feldspars display a continuous variation 
from Ca-rich (anorthitic) to Na-rich (albitic) compositions, and 
subsequently to Na- + K-rich alkali feldspars, whereas ferromag­
nesian minerals form a discontinuous series from Mg-olivine 
to increasingly iron-rich pyroxenes and, following buildup of 
H2O in the residual magma, hornblende, and ultimately biotite. 
These parallel mineral progressions lead to a range of igneous 
lithologies—gabbro, diorite, granodiorite, and granite—though 
variations in temperature, pressure, magma composition, and 
magma chamber geometry, for example, result in a wide variety 
of bulk rock compositions. This wider spectrum of bulk composi­
tions allowed for a greater diversity in mineralogy (e.g., Yoder 
1976; Hess 1989; Marsh 2006).
These igneous events represent the probable end point of 
mineral evolution for relatively small (<5000 km diameter), 
volatile-poor terrestrial bodies, including the Moon (Jolliff et 
al. 2006), Mercury (Clark 2007), and asteroid 4Vesta, from 
which the eucrites are thought to derive (Binzel and Xu 1993). 
With the exception of space weathering caused by the action of 
cosmic rays, effects of solar wind particles, and bombardment by 
micrometeorites (Hapke 2001), the near-surface mineralogy of 
such objects is essentially frozen. The limited near-surface min­
eralogical diversity of these bodies, which we estimate to be no 
more than ~350 species, points to the dominant role that volatiles 
play in the mineral evolution of larger terrestrial planets. 
Igneous activity on the volatile-rich Earth (as well as on 
Venus and Mars) commenced immediately after initial accretion 
at ~4.55 Ga and led to new near-surface mineralogical diversity. 
Much of that diversification resulted from volcanic outgassing 
and fluid-rock interactions associated with the formation of the 
atmosphere and hydrosphere. Earth’s principal initial atmo­
spheric components are thought to have been N2, CO2, and H2O, 
with minor H2S (e.g., Holland 1984), though a more reduced 
suite of volcanic gases, including CO, H2, and CH4, also has 
been suggested as important localized atmospheric inputs during 
the Hadean Eon (Kump et al. 2001; Catling and Claire 2005). 
An immediate mineralogical consequence of these interactions 
would have been copious formation of hydrous silicates and 
hydroxides, including serpentinization and the first significant 
production of clay minerals. In addition, as Earth’s poles cooled 
below the freezing point, crystalline H2O would have appeared 
for the first time.
From their inception at least 4.3 billion years ago (Mojzsis et 
al. 2001), oceans would have steadily increased in salinity [pre­
dominantly Na, Ca, Mg, and Cl, though ratios may have varied 
significantly over time (e.g., Hardie 1996, 2003; Lowenstein et 
al. 2001; Dickson 2002)]. Ocean concentrations of sulfate would 
also have increased slightly by photolytic and lightning-induced 
reactions in the atmosphere and subsequent ocean-atmosphere 
exchange. Oceanic nitrate levels probably remained minimal 
because of the low efficiency of nitrate-producing reactions in 
anoxic conditions, as well as facile deep-ocean hydrothermal 
conversion of nitrate to ammonia (Brandes et al. 1998). These 
compositional changes may have resulted in Earth’s first evapo­
rite deposits with their associated sulfate minerals, although no 
traces of ephemeral evaporite minerals have been found prior 
to about 3.4 Ga (Tice and Lowe 2004).
An important consequence of volcanic degassing was the 
gradual chemical decoupling of the crust and shallow mantle 
from the deep interior (Rohrbach et al. 2007; Burgisser and 
Scaillet 2007). Photo-dissociation of water and subsequent hy­
drogen loss may have contributed to the oxidation of the crust 
relative to the mantle. For a time early in Earth’s history, the 
oxidation state of the surface may have been buffered, at least 
in part, by the mantle through the mediating effects of reduced 
volcanic gases (Kump et al. 2001). Nevertheless, mantle oxygen 
fugacity (and hence the composition of its volcanogenic gases) 
had approached its modern value by 3.9 Ga, based on Cr and V 
trace concentrations in peridotites and komatiites (Canil 1997, 
2002), as well as Fe3+/Fe2+ in Cr-spinels (Delano 2001). Thus, 
the mantle and crust must have begun to chemically decouple 
relatively early in Earth’s history.
Given the present day atmospheres on Venus and Mars, as 
well as chemical, mineralogical, and morphological evidence for 
once extensive surface water on Mars (Squyres et al. 2004; Paige 
2005; Bibring et al. 2006; Andrews-Hanna et al. 2007), we can be 
reasonably certain that these planets progressed to this stage in their 
mineral evolution. However, as yet there is no positive evidence that 
Venus and Mars experienced three additional key steps to further 
mineral diversification: (1) production of extensive granite (and 
its volcanic equivalent rhyolite); (2) development of chemically 
evolved and aerially extensive continental crust and lithosphere 
(whether or not this crust displayed the long-term stability of a 
craton); and (3) plate tectonics. Without these processes, and the 
consequent extensive hydrothermal and tectonic-magmatic rework­
ing of a planet’s outer several tens of kilometers, it is unlikely that a 
planet can develop more than a few hundred near-surface mineral 
species (see, for example, Campbell and Taylor 1983).
Figure 5. Detrital zircon grains (maximum grain dimension ~200 
µm) with ages of 4.4 to 4.0 Ga have been recovered from Archean 
quartzites from Western Australia and are interpreted as remnants of 
early granitic continental crust or pre-continental mafic to ultramafic crust 
(Cavosie 2005; Cavosie et al. 2006). Photo courtesy of J. Valley.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1701
Stage 4. Granitoid production and the initiation of craton 
formation (~4.0 to 3.5 Ga)
Archean cratons are relatively stable but lithologically com­
plex fragments of ancient crust and co-evolved subcontinental 
mantle lithosphere (Bleeker 2003; Pearson 1999; Smithies 
et al. 2005a). Although a large proportion of cratonic crust is 
Neoarchean in age, and a majority of cratons only attained 
final stability after 2.7 Ga, nearly all contain ancient nuclei 
with a rock record that stretches back to >>3.5 Ga. Hence, the 
initiation of craton formation can be traced back to at least the 
earliest Archean and possibly earlier (Fig. 6). Two important and 
intimately related processes contributed to the formation and 
eventual stabilization of Archean cratons: (1) continued granitoid 
production and growth of buoyant lithosphere, thus increas­
ing the scale and preservation potential of early crust, and (2) 
continued internal differentiation, with irreversible transport of 
heat-producing elements to the upper crust, and resulting cooling 
and strengthening of the crustal (lithospheric) profile (Sandiford 
and McLaren 2002; Jordan 1978). Both processes were to some 
extent stochastic: only those ancient crustal nuclei that became 
embedded in and surrounded by younger buoyant lithosphere 
survived with their coupled subcontinental lithospheric mantle 
root. Only those early landmasses that grew to sufficient size, 
internally differentiating in the process and restricting deforma­
tion to their margins, acquired the strength (“kratos” in ancient 
Greek) to develop long-term stability. The early geological record 
thus has an aspect of “survival of the fittest” (Bleeker 2002).
Whatever the exact timing, production of abundant granitoid 
rocks, initial craton development, and the assembly of the first 
micro-continents represent key innovations in the mineral evolu­
tion of a terrestrial planet. Eutectic-like or minimum melting of 
mafic and ultramafic lithologies resulted in suites of granitoid 
rocks, from tonalite-trondhjemite-granodiorite (TTG) to grano­
diorite-granite-monzogranite (GGM) and high-K syenite-granite 
(SG) suites (Zegers 2004). On Earth the more Na-rich TTG suites 
dominated the earliest stages of continent formation, while GGM 
and SG suites appear to have arisen subsequently, primarily 
through secondary partial melting of older TTGs (Smithies and 
Champion 2000; Smithies et al. 2003).
The composition of granitoids closely corresponds to eutectic 
melting in the SiO2-Al2O3-Na2O-K2O system, and as such gran­
ites can occur in a variety of lithologic and tectonic settings. For 
example, granitic magmas occur as the last stage in the liquid line 
of descent of oceanic and continental basalts (Perfit et al. 1980). 
However, this highly fractionated, silica-rich residual liquid 
represents only a few percent of the basaltic parent magma, so it 
is unlikely that this widely dispersed and highly viscous residual 
magma could accumulate to form significant intrusive bodies as 
the result of basalt crystallization alone (Hersum et al. 2005). It is 
also important to note that granite cannot be derived directly from 
melting of a peridotitic mantle source because granitic magmas 
are not in equilibrium with Mg-rich olivines. Therefore, most 
granitoid rocks must be derived from other sources. 
The principal mode of granite petrogenesis is thought to be 
magmas produced by partial melting of wet igneous and silici­
clastic sedimentary rocks (e.g., White and Chappell 1983; Hess 
1989; Kemp et al. 2007; Eiler 2007). Eutectic melting of pera­
luminous sediments, for example, can yield up to 25% granitic 
melt, with melting commencing at temperatures as low as 630 
°C at 1 GPa and 670 °C at 0.3 GPa (Luth et al. 1964). Similarly, 
granitic magmas form from partial melting of basalt or andesite 
under high H2O pressure. Heat provided by successive, episodic 
intrusions of basalt into the base of the crust can thus repeatedly 
generate significant amounts of granitoid rocks in the overlying 
continental crust (Parman 2007; Pearson et al. 2007). 
The timing of the appearance of Earth’s first granitoid rocks 
is uncertain; however, the partial melting mechanism invoked 
for most such bodies implies that significant granitoid formation 
could not have occurred prior to the initial assembly of basaltic 
crust, and perhaps the accumulation of significant sediment 
wedges as well. Bédard (2006) has suggested that TTG grani­
toid formation first occurred prior to plate tectonics and may 
have been triggered by mantle plumes, which partially melted 
basaltic crust. Zircon from Archean sediments of Jack Hills, 
Australia, dated at 4.38 Ga has been interpreted as an indication 
that production of granitic continental crust material was active 
within 150 million years of accretion. Evidence includes δ18O 
values higher than mantle values (Wilde et al. 2001; Mojzsis et 
al. 2001; Cavosie et al. 2005; Harrison et al. 2005; Valley et al. 
2006; Kemp et al. 2006, 2007; Scherer et al. 2007; Trail et al. 
2007), as well as K-feldspar and monazite inclusions in some 
of these ancient zircons (Maas et al. 1991, 1992; Cavosie et al. 
2004; Crowley et al. 2005). However, these postulated early 
granitic masses, possibly because of their limited scale, were 
likely recycled into the mantle prior to the end of the Hadean 
Eon and thus are not preserved (Shirey et al. 2008). 
Even if stable continent formation required an additional 600 
million years (Boyet et al. 2003; Rino et al. 2004), many granitic 
minerals, including quartz (SiO2), K-feldspar (KAlSi3O8), albitic 
plagioclase (NaAlSi3O8), and a variety of micas, amphiboles, 
and alkali pyroxenes, would have appeared in the Hadean Eon 
for the first time in significant amounts. Peraluminous granites, 
derived from partial melting of Al-rich shales, also feature mus­
covite [KAl2(AlSi3)O10(OH)2], cordierite (Mg2Al4Si5O18), and the 
sillimanite and andalusite forms of Al2SiO5 (depending on the 
temperature and pressure of crystallization), while peralkaline 
granites often contain the alkali silicates acmite (NaFeSi2O6) 
Figure 6. The 4.03 Ga Acasta Gneiss from the Slave Craton, 
northwestern Canada, the oldest known rock unit on Earth, is crosscut 
by 3.6 Ga granite veins. Photo by W. Bleeker.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1702
and riebeckite [Na2(Fe,Mg)5Si8O22(OH)2]. The common granite 
accessory phases, such as titanite (CaTiSiO5), zircon (ZrSiO4), 
monazite [(Ce,La,Y,Th)PO4], apatite [Ca5(PO4)3(OH,F)], and 
fluorite (CaF2), would also have been produced in significantly 
greater abundance than previously.
The nature of early cratonic crust constitutes an important 
contrast between the Archean Earth and that of today. The low-
relief basaltic (pre-granite) surface of the prebiotic Earth was 
likely subject to weathering by hydration and intense mechanical 
erosion (Dott 2003), including a tidal cycle of <8 h and much 
greater amplitude (Lathe 2006; Varga et al. 2006). With no plants 
to hold regolith, physical erosion may have prevented extensive 
soil formation, and might have led to significant near-shore 
sediment wedges. If the original protolith for the Jack Hills 
zircon was a clay-rich marine sedimentary rock, then an active 
sedimentary cycle must also have been established within Earth’s 
first 150 million years.
An important mineralogical consequence of GGM suites 
of granites was the enrichment of more than 20 rare pegmato­
phile elements in residual supercritical aqueous fluids and the 
eventual production of pegmatite minerals (Foord 1982; Moore 
1982; Černý 1982a; Ewing and Chakoumakos 1982; London 
1987, 2008). Development of complex pegmatites marked the 
first occurrences of distinctive minerals of lithium (spodumene, 
lepidolite, cookeite, triphyllite), cesium (pollucite), boron 
(tourmaline, datolite, axinite, danburite), beryllium (beryl, 
bertrandite, gadolinite, phenakite, bromellite), and Nb-Ta (pyro­
chlore, columbite, tantalite), as well as a host of Zr-Hf, Ga, Sn, 
rare-earth elements, and U minerals. Pegmatites feature >550 
minerals, many of which are unique to those environments. 
Furthermore, the development of giant single crystals (>1 m in 
length) of Li-, Be-, B-, Cs-, and other rare element-containing 
minerals underscores the repeated melting, fluid cycling, and 
unusual elemental concentration that occurred in some of these 
bodies (Černý 1982b). 
Consider one of the oldest known complex pegmatites, the 
2.67 Ga Tanco pegmatite from Manitoba. Based on the chem­
istry of Cs, London (2008) estimates that this relatively small 
body represents at a minimum the extraction and concentration 
of 5% melt from 18 000 km3 of metapelite (assuming 100% of 
that melt coalesced to form the pegmatite, rather than becoming 
widely dispersed in mineral interstices). Accordingly, complex 
pegmatites represent multiple cycles of large-scale eutectic 
melting, aqueous phase concentration, and consequent extreme 
elemental concentration, and thus must considerably postdate 
the first GGM granite suites.
Granite formation may represent the end point of igneous 
mineral evolution for some terrestrial planets. On Earth, how­
ever, plate tectonics coupled with dramatic changes in ocean 
and atmospheric chemistry led to significant additional stages 
of mineral diversification. 
Stage 5. Plate tectonics and large-scale hydrothermal 
reworking of the crust (>>3.0 Ga)
The timing of the beginnings of plate tectonics, and in par­
ticular the commencement of large-scale subduction and associ­
ated crustal reworking and arc volcanism, remains a matter of 
intense debate (Stern 2005; Cawood et al. 2006). Nevertheless, 
most researchers conclude that at least some form of episodic 
subduction was active significantly before 3.0 Ga, and possibly 
before 4.0 Ga (Harrison et al. 2005; Smithies et al. 2005b; Witze 
2006; Silver et al. 2006; Silver and Behm 2008). 
Shirey et al. (2008) present several lines of evidence regarding 
the early stages of lateral tectonics. Separation of the primordial 
magma ocean and silicate perovskite was active >3.5 Ga; hence 
some form of mantle convection was operational at that early 
stage. Pillow basalts and sheeted dikes from the ~3.8 Ga Isua su­
pracrustal belt, southwest Greenland (Komiya et al. 1999; Furnes 
et al. 2007) suggest at least localized seafloor spreading (Fig. 7), 
while the formation of supracrustal belts in Archean cratons (>3 
Ga) and Os isotopic evidence from 3.5 Ga diamonds point to sub­
duction prior to 3 Ga. Shirey et al. (2008) thus suggest that initial 
stages of plate tectonics had begun by ~3.85 Ga. Further, they 
argue that prior to plate tectonics the crust was predominantly 
mafic (not granitic), and that significant continent building and 
granite formation postdated lateral tectonics, even if divergent 
boundaries and subduction zones had not yet become established 
on a global scale. Accordingly, Workman and Hart (2005) suggest 
a ~3 Ga age for modern continental crust formation.
Whatever the timing of its onset, lateral tectonics, large-scale 
recycling of ocean lithosphere, and convection (if not plate tec­
tonics sensu stricto) had significant mineralogical consequences 
(Parnell 2004). Most notably, extensive hydrothermal processing 
of the upper mantle and crust associated with magmatic and vol­
canogenic processes at subduction zones and at ridges produced 
the first episodes of massive sulfide deposition and associated 
precious metal concentrations (Sangster 1972; Hutchinson 1973). 
Many hydrothermal ore deposits arise from interactions with 
hot solutions (initially >600 °C) ascending through a volume of 
rock that may exceed 30 km3 (Barnes and Rose 1998). Chemical 
complexation in these solutions, principally with Cl–, selectively 
dissolves and concentrates many incompatible elements, includ­
ing the transition metals that provide the principal economic 
rationale for exploitation. Ore body precipitation may occur 
at relatively shallow depths through a combination of cooling, 
pressure release, fluid mixing, and fluid-rock interactions (Robb 
Figure 7. Pillow basalts from the 3.8 Ga Isua supracrustal belt, 
southwest Greenland suggest at least localized seafloor spreading. Photo 
by D. Papineau.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1703
2004), as well as near-surface microbial activity (Labrenz et al. 
2000; Edwards et al. 2003; Reith et al. 2006).
The earliest evidence for hydrothermal ore deposits may be 
volcanic-hosted massive sulfide and stratiform Cu-Zn-Pb sulfide 
deposits in the North Pilbara Terrain of Western Australia, which 
have been dated at ~3.5 Ga, based on the age of felsic volcanic 
host rocks. In addition, Cu-Mo porphyry deposits associated 
with felsic plutons in the North Pilbara have been dated at ~3.3 
to 3.4 Ga, based on direct U-Pb dating of titanite and zircon 
(Huston et al. 2002). The important 2.9 to 2.7 Ga detrital gold 
and uranium deposits of the Witwatersrand, as well as the 2.4 
Ga Blind River uranium deposits of Canada, which must have 
been derived from erosion of earlier ore bodies, also provide 
evidence for mechanisms that produced Archean hydrothermal 
ores (Meyer 1985; Kerrich et al. 2005). For the Witwatersrand 
gold, Kirk et al. (2002) determined Re-Os isochron ages just 
over 3.0 Ga. Deep-seated hydrothermal ore-forming processes 
were thus active prior to 3.0 Ga and are contemporaneous with 
significant craton formation and assembly (Folinsbee 1982; 
Bleeker 2003). 
Less than two dozen different minerals account for much of 
the economic production in massive sulfide deposits, but the 
mineralogical diversity of these bodies is much greater because 
of a rich spectrum of associated minor phases including selenides, 
tellurides, arsenides, antimonides, and a host of sulfosalts. Dana 
(1958) records more than 125 such minerals, compared to 37 
sulfides (of which fewer than 20 species account for the prin­
cipal ore minerals). Additional new mineral phases, including 
many sulfosalts and complex sulfides, form during the inevitable 
metamorphism of sulfide deposits. 
Another mineralogical consequence of plate tectonics was the 
uplift and subsequent exposure of regional metamorphic terrains—
events that could have brought characteristic moderate-pressure 
phases such as kyanite (Al2SiO5), lawsonite (CaAl2Si2O8·2H2O), 
glaucophane [Na2(Fe,Mg,Mn)3Al2Si8O22(OH)2], chloritoid 
[(Fe,Mg)2A14Si2O10(OH)4], staurolite [(Fe,Mg)2Al9(Si,Al)4O20(O,
OH)4], and jadeite (NaAlSi2O6) to near-surface environments. 
Stage 6. The anoxic biosphere of the Archean Eon (3.9 to 
2.5 Ga)
The Archean Eon saw the rise of microbial life, yet the influ­
ence of life on Earth’s mineral diversity was minimal prior to 
the Proterozoic Eon. Banded iron formations (BIFs) are among 
the earliest types of sedimentary rocks found in Eoarchean su­
pracrustal belts and represent a major economic source of iron 
ore (Fig. 8). The abundance of BIFs during the Precambrian is 
uneven with a few occurrences in the Eo- and Paleoarchean Eras 
(perhaps corresponding to the paucity of the early rock record) 
and a culminating development near the Archean-Proterozoic 
boundary (Isley and Abbott 1999; Klein 2005). The origin of 
these chemically precipitated sedimentary rocks is not well 
understood, but the early hypothesis that microorganisms were 
responsible for their formation (e.g., LaBerge 1973) has recently 
received support from experimental work showing that rates of 
photooxidation of Fe2+ and Mn2+ are negligible when compared 
to rates of biological oxidation (Anbar and Holland 1992; 
Konhauser et al. 2007a). The hypothesis that BIF precipitation 
requires either the presence of photosynthetically produced O2 
or Fe2+-oxidizing microorganisms (Cloud 1972; Holland 1973; 
Widdel et al. 1993; Akai et al. 1999; Tazaki 2000; Konhauser et 
al. 2002; Kappler et al. 2005) is significant because BIFs are one 
of the oldest types of sedimentary rocks. However, BIFs are not 
unambiguously biotic (Klein 2005). Significant abiotic compo­
nents of BIFs originated from hydrothermal sources as evidenced 
by REE abundances, which show that Fe2+, Mn2+, and some SiO2 
were derived from such fluids (Jacobsen and Pimentel-Klose 
1988; Bau and Möller 1993; Klein 2005). In contrast, the Ge/
Si ratios of chert bands in BIFs suggest that some of the silica 
was derived from weathering of continental material and thus 
suggests different sources (hydrothermal and continental) for 
different BIF components (Hamade et al. 2003). 
As inferred from studies of low-grade metamorphosed ex­
posures, Precambrian BIFs initially formed from colloidal/gel 
SiO2 and aqueous Fe2+ and Fe3+ in environments with variable 
amounts of dissolved Na+, K+, HCO3
–, Mg2+, and Ca2+ in porewa­
ter (Klein 1974). Environmental and compositional factors that 
influence redox state and pH dictate the composition of BIFs, 
which informally can be classified into three families based on 
their dominant mineralogy: an oxide facies [with jasper, hema­
tite (Fe2O3), and/or magnetite (Fe3O4)], a sulfide facies [often 
organic-rich and containing pyrite and marcasite (both FeS2), 
pyrrhotite (Fe1–xS) and chalcopyrite (CuFeS2)], and a carbon­
ate facies {including siderite (FeCO3), ankerite [FeCa(CO3)2], 
Fe-dolomite [Ca(Mg,Fe)CO3], and calcite (CaCO3)}. The most 
abundant BIF type in the Archean is the oxide facies, but sulfide 
and carbonate facies also occur. The mineralogy of Eoarchean 
BIFs, such as those from the Isua supracrustal belt in southwest 
Greenland and in the Nuvvuagittuq supracrustal belt in north­
ern Quebec, is typically dominated by quartz and magnetite 
(Dymek and Klein 1988; Dauphas et al. 2007). Starting in the 
Paleoarchean Era, hematite and jasper are also found in some 
BIFs, such as in the 3.25 Ga Fig Tree Group of the Barberton 
Greenstone Belt in South Africa. The mineralogy of BIFs can 
be significantly transformed during post-depositional processes 
of diagenesis, metamorphism, and metasomatism. Upon di­
Figure 8. Banded iron formations from the ~2.76 Ga Temagami 
greenstone belt of Ontario, Canada, are dominated by magnetite, chert, 
and jasper and are typical of Neoarchean BIFs. Photo by D. Papineau.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1704
agenesis, the ferruginous-siliceous gel crystallized into chert, 
hematite, hydromagnetite (Fe3O4·nH2O, which eventually trans­
formed to magnetite), amorphous greenalite [Fe2+xSi2O5(OH)4], 
stilpnomelane [K(Fe,Mg)8(Si,Al)12(O,OH)27·nH2O], and 
fine-grained carbonate mixtures. Subsequent metamorphic 
recrystallization led to variable mineral assemblages that can 
include chlorite [(Fe,Mg,Al)6(Si,Al)4O10(OH)8], cummingtonite-
grunerite amphiboles [(Mg,Fe)7Si8O22(OH)2], minnesotaite 
[(Mg,Fe)3Si4O10(OH)2], chamosite [(Fe,Mg)5Al2Si3O10(OH,O)8], 
almandine (Fe3Al2Si3O12), orthopyroxene [(Mg,Fe)SiO3] and 
clinopyroxene [Ca(Mg,Fe)SiO3], hornblende [Ca2(Mg,Fe,Al)5(Al, 
Si)8O22(OH)2], fayalite (Fe2SiO4), and pyrrhotite (Klein 2005).
The advent of oxygenic photosynthesis and the oxygenation 
of Earth’s atmosphere are of central concern in the coevolu­
tion of minerals and life. Even without biological O2 sources, 
the atmosphere may have experienced a gradual, but minor, 
oxidation through photodissociation of water and subsequent 
hydrogen escape (Walker 1977; Holland 1984; but see Tian et 
al. 2005, who argue for significant concentrations of atmospheric 
H2). Serpentinization and microbial production of atmospheric 
methane (which also leads to hydrogen escape) would also 
have contributed to gradual atmospheric oxidation (Rye et al. 
1995; Rye and Holland 1998; Catling et al. 2001; Pavlov et al. 
2003). Even so, microbial photosynthesis became the dominant 
oxygen-producing mechanism sometime in the Archean Eon 
(Brocks et al. 1999; Rosing and Frei 2004). While the oldest 
unambiguous fossils of photosynthetic organisms are from the 
~1.9 Ga Gunflint black cherts from northwest Ontario (Barg­
hoorn and Tyler 1965; Knoll 2003a), several researchers argue 
for evidence of photosynthetic processes much earlier in the 
Eo- and Paleoarchean rock record (Schopf and Packer 1987; 
Schidlowski 1988; Schopf 1993; Rosing 1999; Summons et al. 
1999; Brocks et al. 2003; Noffke et al. 2003; Tice and Lowe 
2004; see, however, Brasier et al. 2002).
In spite of these potential oxygen sources, mineralogical and 
isotopic evidence indicates that Earth’s atmosphere was mostly 
devoid of free oxygen prior to 2.25 Ga (Holland 1984; Farquhar 
et al. 2001). The occurrence of rounded detrital grains of pyrite 
(FeS2), siderite (FeCO3), and uraninite (UO2) in the South African 
Witwatersrand and Canadian Blind River Archean deposits sug­
gests erosion and transport in an oxygen-deficient environment 
(Rasmussen and Buick 1999; England et al. 2002). The lack of 
a cerium anomaly in the 2.5 Ga Pronto paleosols (Murakami et 
al. 2001) and the general absence of iron hydroxides in paleosols 
older than 2.3 Ga (Holland and Rye 1997) provide further min­
eralogical evidence for an essentially oxygen-free atmosphere 
prior to the Paleoproterozoic (see, however, Ohmoto 1997 for 
a dissenting viewpoint). Multiple sulfur isotope ratios in sedi­
mentary rocks indicate that the atmosphere was mostly anoxic 
from the beginning of the sedimentary rock record at about 3.85 
Ga until the Paleoproterozoic glaciations (Farquhar et al. 2000, 
2001, 2007; Mojzsis et al. 2003; Ono et al. 2003; Bekker et al. 
2004; Papineau et al. 2005, 2007; Papineau and Mojzsis 2006). 
It should be noted that even if the Mesoarchean atmosphere was 
lacking in oxygen, the possibility remains of “oxygen oases” in 
which oxygen-producing cyanobacteria locally influenced the 
mineralogy of redox-stratified marine environments. However, 
while small amounts of oxygen may have occurred locally, it did 
not accumulate globally (Ono et al. 2006; Ohmoto et al. 2006; 
Kaufman et al. 2007; Farquhar et al. 2007). This lack of oxygen 
may be due to higher levels of reducing gases and oxygen sinks in 
the Archean atmosphere promoted by predominantly submarine 
volcanism (Kump and Barley 2007).
Even in the absence of free oxygen, microbial activity could 
have triggered significant mineralogical consequences. For 
example, Rosing et al. (2006) have proposed that plate tecton­
ics and biological activity in the early Archean may have had a 
significant effect on the rate of granite production, and hence the 
stabilization of continents prior to 3.0 Ga. Their argument rests 
on the fact that granite formation is largely a consequence of the 
subduction and dehydration of altered basalt and sediments. Mi­
crobial activity is known to increase rates of silicate weathering 
by an order of magnitude over abiotic processes (Bennett et al. 
1996; Paris et al. 1996; Barker et al. 1998; Tazaki 2005). It is pos­
sible, therefore, that surface microbial communities on an anoxic 
world may have affected the rate of continent formation.
One of the most dramatic mineralogical innovations of the 
Mesoarchean Era (3.2–2.8 Ga) was the first precipitation of 
massive carbonate sequences in relatively shallow epicontinental 
environments. The history of carbonate deposition on Earth is, 
in part, a history of atmospheric CO2 concentration, and several 
lines of evidence suggest that atmospheric CO2 levels may have 
been much higher and fluctuated more significantly on the early 
Earth. Sagan and Chyba (1997) pointed to the need for significant 
concentrations of some greenhouse gases, presumably some 
combination of CO2, water vapor, and methane, throughout much 
of Earth’s first 2 billion years because of the so-called “early 
faint Sun paradox.” The Sun’s luminosity has increased gradu­
ally over geologic time, from about 70% of present intensity 4.5 
billion years ago, to roughly 90% 1.5 billion years ago (Bahcall 
et al. 2001). Without significant greenhouse warming, the early 
Earth would have been frozen, and thus CO2 appears to have 
been a significant greenhouse gas throughout the Paleo- and 
Mesoarchean Eras. Rye et al. (1995) place CO2 concentrations at 
2.75 Ga at ~100× present levels based on observations of Archean 
paleosols, while Kaufman and Xiao (2003) used microfossil 
isotope data to estimate that the atmospheric pressure of CO2 
at 1.4 Ga was at least 10 and perhaps as much as 200× greater 
than today. The occurrence of calcified cyanobacteria in 1.2 Ga 
dolostones has been interpreted to indicate CO2 levels <0.36%, 
~10× current levels (Kah and Riding 2007). Others have proposed 
Precambrian CO2 levels at least 1000× that of today (Walker et 
al. 1981; Ohmoto et al. 2004). 
Carbonates are present throughout the geologic record, but 
their abundances and mineralogy changed significantly over 
time (Sumner 1997). The earliest known carbonates are iron-
bearing ankerite [Ca(Fe,Mg)(CO3)2] and siderite (FeCO3) from 
calc-silicate rocks in the >3.77 Ga Isua supracrustal belt, which 
have been interpreted as metasomatic in origin (Rose et al. 1996). 
Ferruginous carbonate minerals are also common as accessory 
phases in BIFs from Isua and these are likely not metasomatic 
(Dymek and Klein 1988). In the >3.75 Ga Nuvvuagittuq su­
pracrustal belt in northern Québec, ferruginous carbonates in 
sedimentary rocks have been proposed to have formed from 
the alteration of primary siderite on the basis of fractionated Fe 
isotopes, which would also imply deposition under high pCO2 

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1705
(Dauphas et al. 2007). Ferroan carbonates, which form massive 
deposits hundreds to thousands of square kilometers in aerial 
extent in beds tens to hundreds of meters thick (Kimberley 
1989), cannot precipitate without restrictive chemical condi­
tions. These conditions include (1) aqueous Fe2+; (2) anoxic 
ocean water to prevent iron removal by FeO(OH) precipitation; 
(3) low SO4
2– and H2S to prevent iron removal by pyrite (FeS2) 
precipitation; and (4) significant dissolved HCO3
– (Moore et al. 
1992; Ohmoto et al. 2004). 
An ongoing debate centers on the absence of siderite (FeCO3) 
in Archean paleosols, which are contemporaneous with marine 
ferroan carbonate precipitation. Rye et al. (1995) cite this absence 
as evidence that atmospheric CO2 was not the major greenhouse 
gas at that time. Ohmoto and coworkers (2004), by contrast, 
explain the absence of siderite in paleosols as a consequence of 
trace levels of atmospheric O2, which precluded surface forma­
tion of siderite, even with high CO2 concentrations.
An important unanswered question regarding Eo- and Pa­
leoarchean mineralogy is the extent to which biological activ­
ity, either directly or indirectly, influenced mineral deposition. 
Unequivocal biomineralization did occur on a limited scale in 
the Paleoarchean Era, however. Stromatolites are laminated 
carbonate or cherty structures dating from at least 3.48 Ga 
(Walter et al. 1980; Lowe 1980; Buick et al. 1981; Byerly et 
al. 1986; Walter 1994; Grotzinger and Knoll 1999; Allwood et 
al. 2006; Van Kranendonk 2006, 2007). Modern stromatolites 
form by intermittent lithification of cyanobacterial mats (Reid 
et al. 2000), and there is clear evidence as far back as the Pa­
leoarchean Era (>3.4 Ga) for microbially mediated carbonate 
mineralization in stromatolites. These distinctive fossil structures 
provide the most unambiguous case for localized Paleoarchean 
biomineralization.
Unambiguous Paleoarchean sedimentary carbonates occur as 
laminated stromatolitic dolomites in the 3.40 Ga Strelley Pool 
chert and as ankerite-chert beds in the 3.49 Ga Dresser Formation 
in the Pilbara Craton of Western Australia (Van Kranendonk et 
al. 2003; Allwood et al. 2006; Van Kranendonk 2007). However, 
in spite of ferroan carbonate formation, extensive sedimentary 
carbonates are uncommon in the geologic record until ~3.0 Ga, 
when the first dolostone [CaMg(CO3)2] units appear. One of the 
thickest Archean carbonate platforms occurs in the ~2.95 Ga 
Steep Rock Group of northwestern Ontario and preserves giant 
stromatolites (up to 5 to 10 m) with aragonite fans, calcite, and 
rare gypsum molds (Jolliffe 1955; Wilks and Nisbet 1988; Tom­
linson et al. 2003). However, most limestone (CaCO3) carbonate 
platforms do not appear until ~2.7 Ga (Sumner 1997), though 
it has been argued that earlier dolostones represent chemically 
replaced limestones (Tucker 1982; Grotzinger and Read 1983). 
Large dolomitic stromatolites occur in the 2.72 Ga Tumbiana 
Formation in Western Australia and specimens of these contain 
the oldest primary aragonite in the form of nanocrystals closely 
associated with organic globules (Lepot et al. 2008).
Metamorphism of platform limestones and dolostones 
produced marbles and new associated suites of Ca-Mg miner­
als. Of special note are the diverse carbonate skarn minerals 
produced by metasomatism and contact metamorphism with 
hot, near-surface igneous bodies. Distinctive carbonate skarn 
minerals include wollastonite (CaSiO3), diopside (CaMgSi2O6), 
monticellite (CaMgSiO4), grossular (Ca3Al2Si3O12), tremolite 
[Ca2Mg5Si8O22(OH)2], scapolite [Ca4Al3Si6O24(CO3,Cl,OH,SO4)], 
vesuvianite [Ca10(Mg,Fe,Mn)2Al4Si9O34(OH,Cl,F)4], and dozens 
of other species. 
Sulfate mineralogy also played an important role in early 
Archean oceans. Sulfate is the ocean’s second most abundant 
anion today, but its concentration has varied over time. Some 
sulfate was generated by atmospheric photolytic reactions in the 
anoxic atmosphere and delivered to the oceans (Farquhar et al. 
2000), but the primary source was probably continental weath­
ering, primarily from the early Paleoproterozoic Era onward 
(Habicht et al. 2002). Kah et al. (2004) estimate that sulfate levels 
in the Proterozoic ocean were only 5 to 15% of modern levels. 
In the absence of sulfate-reducing microbes, this sulfate would 
be primarily reduced to H2S during hydrothermal circulation 
through mid-ocean ridges.
Barite (BaSO4), a relatively insoluble mineral that precipitates 
from reaction of Ba leached from volcanic rocks and low levels 
of aqueous SO4
2–, appears to be the only sulfate mineral that com­
monly survived from the Archean Eon. The oldest known barite 
deposits (3.5 to 3.4 Ga) are from South Africa, Western Australia, 
and India (Strauss 2003; Buick and Dunlop 1990; Van Kranen­
donk 2006). In addition to hydrothermal sulfates, evaporite 
sulfates such as anhydrite (CaSO4) and gypsum [CaSO4·2(H2O)] 
may have formed locally. Few ancient evaporite deposits have 
survived, although true Archean evaporites with the Na carbon­
ate, nahcolite (NaHCO3), were described from the Barberton 
Greenstone Belt (Tice and Lowe 2004) and from the Pilbara 
Craton in Western Australia (Sugitani et al. 2003). In addition, 
some researchers argue that North Pole (Western Australia) barite 
has replaced gypsum in a shallow marine evaporite setting (Buick 
and Dunlop 1990; Shen et al. 2001), although Van Kranendonk 
(2006) has presented evidence that the North Pole barite replaced 
sedimentary carbonate as a result of low-temperature (white 
smoker) hydrothermal alteration during exhalative cooling of 
the underlying felsic magma chamber. 
The Paleoarchean sulfur cycle was undoubtedly influenced 
by biology, as well. Evidence from a large range of δ34S values 
indicates microbial sulfur metabolism as early as 3.5 Ga in 
Western Australia (Shen et al. 2001; Phillippot et al. 2007). 
Smaller ranges of δ34S values from the 3.8 Ga Isua formation 
do not unambiguously suggest microbial sulfur processing in 
the Eoarchean Era (Papineau and Mojzsis 2006). Huston and 
Logan (2004) have also suggested that biological processes 
played a role in barite deposition associated with some banded 
iron formations.
In spite of such possible influences of cellular life on the 
nature and distribution of carbonates, sulfates, and even gran­
ites, primitive microbes on the anoxic Archean Earth appear to 
have played a relatively minor role in modifying Earth’s surface 
mineralogy. We estimate that by the end of the Neoarchean 
Era (2.5 Ga) Earth’s near-surface environment hosted perhaps 
1500 different mineral species, most of which could occur in 
near-surface environments of any volatile-rich anoxic terrestrial 
planet that had experienced cycles of granite formation and plate 
tectonics. However, this situation changed dramatically in the 
Paleoproterozoic Era with the advent of large-scale biologically 
mediated changes in ocean and atmospheric chemistry.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1706
Minerals and the origin of life
The geochemical processes that led from a lifeless world 
to the chemical origin of life are not known. However, several 
scenarios for life’s origins on Earth rely explicitly on minerals 
as templates, catalysts, and/or metabolites (e.g., Hazen 2005, 
2006). Consequently, the origin of life on a terrestrial planet 
may require that the planet has first achieved some minimal 
degree of mineral evolution (Parnell 2004). The two mineral 
groups most often cited in this regard are clays (e.g., Lahav et 
al. 1978; Cairns-Smith and Hartman 1986; Ferris 1993; Hanc­
zyc et al. 2003) and transition metal sulfides (Wächtershäuser 
1992; Russell and Hall 1997; Cody et al. 2004). If common early 
stage minerals suffice for prebiotic processes, then they should 
be readily available early in the history of any wet terrestrial 
planet or moon. However, if specific exotic mineral species are 
required—i.e., mackinawite [(Fe,Ni)S0.9] or griegite (Fe3S4) as 
cited by Russell and Hall (2002) and Cody (2004), or borates 
as proposed by Ricardo et al. (2004)—then a greater degree of 
mineral evolution may be required.
The era of biologically mediated mineralogy 
(2.5 Ga to present)
For most of the past 2.5 billion years, since the Paleopro­
terozoic Era, minerals at Earth’s surface have co-evolved with 
life. Indeed, most of Earth’s mineral diversity today may be a 
consequence, direct or indirect, of the biosphere. 
Stage 7. The Paleoproterozoic “Great Oxidation Event” 
(2.5 to 1.9 Ga)
The rise of atmospheric oxygen in the Paleoproterozoic Era 
was one of the most significant irreversible events in Earth’s 
history (Canfield et al. 2000; Kump et al. 2001; Kasting 2001; 
Kasting and Siefert 2002; Towe 2002; Holland 2002; Bekker et 
al. 2004; Barley et al. 2005; Catling and Claire 2005; Papineau 
et al. 2005, 2007; Kump and Barley 2007). A surge in tectonic 
activity likely occurred during the assembly of large continental 
landmasses (possibly a supercontinent) in the Neoarchean Era 
and during the onset of their break-up in the early Paleopro­
terozoic Era (Barley et al. 2005; Aspler and Chiarenzelli 1998). 
Elevated tectonic activity and rifting at that time may have 
perturbed the greenhouse-controlled climate by triggering a 
series of major glaciations. Higher tectonic activity combined 
with rapid climate change in the Paleoproterozoic Era would 
have accelerated erosion, which may have provided a critical 
source of nutrients in seawater to stimulate primary biological 
productivity at that time (Papineau et al. 2007). 
This episode saw an increase in atmospheric oxygen in 
between major glaciations (Bekker et al. 2004; Papineau et 
al. 2007) and during a post-glacial period of carbon isotope 
excursion in carbonates until about 2.06 Ga (Karhu and Hol­
land 1996). Atmospheric oxygenation in the Paleoproterozoic 
Era was principally a consequence of oxygenic photosynthesis 
by cyanobacteria, as the post-glacial period is characterized by 
an unprecedented increase in taxonomic diversity and expan­
sion of stromatolites (Melezhik et al. 1997). Goldblatt et al. 
(2006) suggest that the early rise of cyanobacteria led to two 
simultaneously stable states for atmospheric oxygen and that 
this bistability arose from ozone shielding. According to their 
model, an increase in tropospheric ozone above a critical value 
resulted in effective ultraviolet shielding, causing a nonlinear 
increase in the half-life of atmospheric oxygen. This bistability 
might explain sulfur isotope evidence that points to a possible 
earlier transitory interval of minor oxygenation between 2.76 
and 2.92 Ga (Ohmoto et al. 2006; Ono et al. 2007) and again 
at 2.51 Ga (Anbar et al. 2007; Kaufman et al. 2007). However, 
Farquhar et al. (2007) interpret changes in the mass independent 
fractionation of sulfur isotopes in the Mesoarchean Era (3.2 to 
2.8 Ga) in terms of changes in atmospheric sulfur chemistry, not 
necessarily an episodic increase in oxygen. 
Methanogenesis, both biotic and abiotic, may have also 
impeded Archean atmospheric oxidation. Serpentinization and 
microbial methanogenesis during the Archean Eon would have 
led to progressively higher atmospheric methane concentrations 
(Sherwood-Lollar et al. 1993, 2006; Catling et al. 2001; Kasting 
and Siefert 2002; Scott et al. 2004; Ueno et al. 2006)—perhaps as 
much as 600× present levels (Pavlov et al. 2003). The methane 
could have represented a significant greenhouse gas at the time, 
but should have fluctuated significantly during the glacial period 
in the early Paleoproterozoic Era (Claire et al. 2006; Papineau 
et al. 2005).
The Great Oxidation Event had irreversible consequences and 
a profound effect on Earth’s near-surface mineralogy (Folinsbee 
1982). In the aftermath of the Paleoproterozoic glaciations, car­
bonate deposits between 2.25 and 2.06 Ga contain some of the 
highest stromatolite diversity in Earth’s history (Grotzinger and 
Knoll 1999; Melezhik et al. 1997), indicating robust microbial 
carbonate and phosphate biomineralization (Fig. 9). Carbonates 
in this time-period are also known to record a worldwide carbon 
isotope excursion, which is interpreted to indicate a significant 
accumulation of oxygen in the atmosphere (Karhu and Holland 
1996). 
Atmospheric oxygenation in the Paleoproterozoic Era led to 
large-scale deposition of oxidized hematitic BIFs as well as mas­
sive manganese deposits in marine environments. Between about 
2.6 and 2.2 Ga, large BIF deposits formed in Western Australia, 
South Africa, and Brazil (Barley et al. 1997) simultaneously 
with the emplacement of numerous large igneous provinces 
and their dike swarms across Archean cratons (e.g., Heaman 
1997; Bleeker and Ernst 2006). The world’s largest economic 
sources of iron, which contain an estimated 90% of all Fe ore 
reserves, are BIFs ~2.5 to 1.85 Ga in age of the Lake Superior 
type (James and Trendall 1982). Notably this major event of 
BIF deposition occurred simultaneously with the emplacement 
of the giant Matechewan radiating dike swarms and correlative 
swarms on other cratons (Heaman 1997). Some BIF, carbonates, 
and other marine sediments deposited during and after the carbon 
isotope excursion in South Africa, Gabon, and India have high 
levels of manganese and constitute large economic deposits of 
minerals such as kutnahorite [Ca(Mn,Mg,Fe)(CO3)2], pyrolus­
ite (MnO2), rhodochrosite (MnCO3), rhodonite [(Mn,Fe,Ca)
SiO3], bixbyite [(Mn,Fe)2O3], braunite (Mn2+Mn6
3+SiO12), 
and hausmannite (Mn2+Mn2
3+O4) (Leclerc and Weber 1980; 
Dasgupta et al. 1992; Tsikos and Moore 1997; Roy 2006). 
Iron minerals commonly encountered in Paleoproterozoic 
BIF include minnesotaite [(Fe,Mg)3Si4O10(OH)2], ferri-annite 
[K(Fe,Mg)3(Fe,Al)Si3O10(OH)2], riebeckite [Na2Fe5Si8O22(OH)2], 

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1707
chamosite [(Fe,Mg)5(Al2Si3O10(OH,O)8], and ripidolite 
[(Mg,Fe,Al)6(Si,Al)4O10(OH)8]. The traditional interpretation 
of the cessation of BIF deposition at ~1.85 Ga is an increase in 
deep-ocean oxidation, which completely removed the source 
of upwelling Fe2+ (Cloud 1972; Holland 1984). However, deep 
ocean oxidation is not necessary to explain the end of BIF deposi­
tion, as it could have been due to an increased supply of H2S from 
microbial sulfate reduction, which overcame the hydrothermal 
flux of iron to the deep ocean and resulted in sulfidic bottom 
waters (Canfield 1998; Poulton et al. 2004).
Enhanced oxidative weathering and increased redox states also 
had profound effects on the chemistry of coastal seawater. During 
the warm period in the aftermath of glaciations, oxidative weather­
ing of sulfides exposed on the Archean crust led to the delivery 
of higher riverine sulfate fluxes to the ocean. Sulfur isotopes of 
sulfides in post-glacial sedimentary rocks suggest highly variable 
seawater sulfate levels (Bekker et al. 2004; Papineau et al. 2005, 
2007) and sulfate minerals such as anhydrite and gypsum became 
more abundant in shallow marine environments (Cameron 1983; El 
Tabakh et al. 1999; Bekker et al. 2006). Weathering after the end of 
the Paleoproterozoic glacial epoch is also evidenced by widespread 
occurrences of Al-rich quartzite, which suggest a transition to 
greenhouse conditions (Bekker et al. 2006). Combined with high 
weathering rates and changing oceanographic patterns driven by 
climate change, increased redox conditions were also probably 
responsible for the formation of phosphatic sediments in shallow 
marine environments. Sedimentary phosphorites occur for the first 
time in the geological record after the rise of atmospheric oxygen 
(Bekker et al. 2003). The largest Paleoproterozoic phosphate 
deposits occur as ~2.0 Ga stromatolitic phosphorites embedded 
in dolomites in Rajasthan, India, and are composed mainly of 
carbonate fluorapatite (Banerjee 1971; Chauhan 1979). Other 
Paleoproterozoic phosphate-rich sedimentary deposits, which 
occur in the form of apatite-rich bands a few centimeters thick, 
are also associated with BIF in the Paleoproterozoic Era (Button 
1982; Gehör 1994) and as small rounded masses of carbonate fluo­
rapatite in ferruginous cherts that are possibly of microbial origin 
(Mancuso et al. 1975). Archean levels of oceanic phosphorus may 
have been lower than in the Paleoproterozoic Era, which could be a 
reflection of higher sequestration of phosphorus by adsorption onto 
iron oxides, such as in hydrothermal environments (Berner 1972; 
Wheat et al. 1996) and/or a smaller flux of riverine phosphorus 
(Bjerrum and Canfield 2002; cf. Konhauser et al. 2007b).
The Paleoproterozoic rise in atmospheric oxygen (and 
concomitant oxygenation of near-surface groundwater) likely 
represents the single most important event in the diversification 
of Earth’s mineralogy. Of the ~4300 known mineral species, more 
than half are oxidized and hydrated weathering products of other 
minerals. A survey of the RRUFF database (http://rruff.info), 
which tabulates mineral species according to principal elements, 
underscores this point. Of 4259 approved mineral species tabu­
lated (as of March 1, 2008), 2425 (57%) are hydrated products. 
For example, 256 of 321 known copper-oxide minerals are hy­
drated species, most of which likely resulted from weathering in 
an oxygen-rich environment. Thus, such distinctive copper min­
erals as chrysocolla [(Cu,Al)2H2Si2O5(OH)4·n(H2O)], turquoise 
[CuAl6(PO4)4(OH)8·4(H2O)], shattuckite [Cu5(SiO3)4(OH)2], 
chalcanthite [CuSO4·5(H2O)], malachite [Cu2(CO3)(OH)2], azur­
ite [Cu3(CO3)2(OH)2], and brochanthite [Cu4(SO4)(OH)6] may 
not have occurred to any significant extent prior to biological 
oxygenesis. Similarly, the database reveals that many minerals 
in metal ore bodies are associated with oxidative weathering. 
As many as 202 of 220 different uranium minerals, 319 of 451 
minerals with Mn and O, 47 of 56 minerals with Ni and O, and 
582 of 790 minerals with Fe and O are hydrated and oxidized. 
Many of these species are quite rare, some known from only a 
handful of specimens. Nevertheless, the biologically mediated 
Paleoproterozoic occurrence of many of these phases would 
have marked a significant rise in Earth’s mineralogical diversity. 
In this view, it is possible that the majority of mineral species 
on Earth are biologically mediated through the effects of atmo­
spheric oxidation, even though they are not biominerals directly 
produced by living cells.
Stage 8. The “intermediate ocean” (1.9 to 1.0 Ga)
The billion-year interval commencing ~1.9 Ga appears to 
have been a period of relative stasis in the mineral evolution of 
Earth. At ~1.85 Ga the production of banded iron formations 
ceased relatively abruptly, signaling a significant change in ocean 
chemistry likely driven by microbial activity. This gradual change 
to an “intermediate ocean”—an ocean of intermediate oxidation 
state—appears to have resulted from increased microbial sulfate 
reduction and surface oxidation (Anbar and Knoll 2002). On 
the one hand, relatively reducing surface conditions in the early 
Paleoproterozoic Era limited the solubility and weathering of 
continental sulfides, thus maintaining the relatively low H2S 
concentration of the oceans. Increased atmospheric oxygen in the 
that era, on the other hand, might have led to delivery of sulfate 
to the deep ocean, where microbial sulfate reduction to H2S led 
to the sulfidic (and hence anoxic) conditions. 
Deep ocean anoxia would have been further maintained 
through the raining out of organic carbon, also the consequence 
of biological activity. The deep ocean thus would have become 
starved of Fe and other metals, not by oxidation, but through 
precipitation of insoluble metal sulfides. This latter scenario has 
important implications for life. Anbar and Knoll (2002) pointed 
Figure 9. The ~2.0 Ga Aravalli stromatolitic phosphorites of 
Udaipur, Rajasthan, India, likely reflect a period of elevated productivity 
due to high levels of nutrients associated with the Great Oxidation Event. 
Photo by D. Papineau.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1708
out that such sulfidic deep-ocean conditions would have scav­
enged biologically important metals such as Fe and Mo (Scott et 
al. 2008), as well as phosphorus (Berner 1972; Wheat et al. 1996), 
thus restricting biological productivity in the Mesoproterozoic 
Era. Consequently, Proterozoic sulfide mineralization may have 
deterred the radiation of life for a billion years.
The late Paleoproterozoic to Mesoproterozoic Era (1.8 to 1.0 
Ga) appears to have been a time of minimal mineralogical in­
novation. Many mineral forming processes had already evolved, 
and atmospheric and ocean chemistries appear not to have 
changed sufficiently to trigger significant new modes of miner­
alization. Even so, environmental and biological controls have 
been ascribed to the distribution of distinctive stratiform lead-
zinc deposits in sedimentary environments of cratonic margins 
after about 1.8 Ga (Lyons et al. 2006), uranium deposits (with 
dozens of secondary minerals) derived from weathering of gra­
nitic rocks in Canada and Northern Australia at 1.8 to 1.1 Ga, and 
sedimentary copper deposits of the Zambian or “Kupferschiefer” 
(Central European) type at 1.4 to 0.2 Ga (Folinsbee 1982).
Stage 9. The Neoproterozoic snowball Earth and 
oxygenation events (1.0 to 0.542 Ga)
Multiple lines of evidence indicate that Earth experienced 
dramatic fluctuations in climate and atmospheric composition 
between about 1.0 and 0.542 Ga, with at least two (and possibly 
as many as four) “snowball Earth” events between about 0.75 
and 0.54 Ga (Hoffman et al. 1998; Kennedy et al. 1998; Jacobsen 
2001). Evidence includes extensive near-sea level, low-latitude 
glacial deposits (Young 1995; Hoffman and Prave 1996; Halv­
erson 2005; Evans 2006), carbon and sulfur isotope excursions 
(Hoffman et al. 1998; Gorjan et al. 2000; Hurtgen et al. 2005; 
Fike et al. 2006), the occurrence of cap carbonate overlying gla­
cial diamictites (Fairchild 1993; Kennedy 1996; Halverson et al. 
2005), the distribution of iron minerals (Young 1976; Canfield et 
al. 2007), and Ir anomalies (Bodiselitsch et al. 2005). According 
to this so-called “snowball Earth” scenario (Kirschvink 1992; 
Hoffman and Schrag 2000), glacial cycles occurred during a 
period when continents, undergoing active rifting, were clustered 
near the equator. Partial snow cover triggered a runaway albedo 
feedback, possibly amplified by decreases in atmospheric CO2 
(Ridgwell et al. 2003; Donnadieu et al. 2004), that ultimately 
covered Earth in ice or slush. During global glaciations, life 
may have been more restricted, but phototrophic organisms and 
complex microbial communities (“biological refugia”) persisted 
and were active in marine environments (Olcott et al. 2005).
Evidence from estimates of volcanic CO2 fluxes at convergent 
margins (Caldeira 1991) and accumulated iridium in glacial depos­
its (Bodiselitsch et al. 2005) suggest that these snowball or slush­
ball episodes lasted on the order of 10 million years. During those 
intervals, the hydrologic cycle must have slowed significantly. 
Meanwhile, as surface weathering processes slowed down, atmo­
spheric concentrations of volcanic CO2 increased to as high as 0.12 
atmospheres (Caldeira and Kasting 1992; Pierrehumbert 2004). 
Ultimately, this CO2 led to a rapid greenhouse warming, melting 
of the ice cover, and a dramatic episode of rapid cap carbonate 
deposition, including thick carbonate crystal fans of aragonite, 
which suggest highly supersaturated seawater (Fig. 10). 
An increase in atmospheric oxygen, from <2% to ~15% of 
modern values, appears to have occurred immediately follow­
ing glacial melting, based on high-resolution carbon and sulfur 
isotope data (Fike et al. 2006) and the sudden occurrence of 
deep-water iron oxide deposits (Canfield et al. 2007). Liang et 
al. (2006) proposed that this oxidation event resulted from the 
production of hydrogen peroxide by photochemical reactions 
involving water vapor, and its subsequent diffusion and seques­
tration in the ice until released during melting. An alternative 
hypothesis is that an increased weathering flux of phosphorus 
to the oceans after glaciations stimulated photosynthetic oxygen 
production (Lenton and Watson 2004). This model may be sup­
ported by biomarker evidence for algal blooms in the aftermath 
of snowball glaciation, where post-glacial weathering could 
have delivered massive amounts of nutrients to seawater (Elie 
et al. 2007). The inferred increase in the relative rate of organic 
Figure 10. Neoproterozoic snowball Earth glaciation events are 
documented in sequences of glacial deposits (lower slopes) overlain by 
cap carbonates (cliff faces) with aragonite crystal fans. This sequence 
is from the Skeleton Coast of Namibia. Photo courtesy of P. Hoffman 
(www.snowballearth.org).
Figure 11. The compound eyes of the phacopid trilobite Eldgredops 
rana from the Silurian Silica Shale of Silica, Ohio, are formed from 
rows of calcite single crystals with the c axes aligned parallel to the 
lens axis. Individual lenses have been found to display variable Mg 
content that is zoned in such a way as to reduce chromatic aberration. 
Photo by R. Hazen.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1709
carbon burial in Neoproterozoic carbonates (e.g., Halverson et 
al. 2005; DesMarais et al. 1992) may also be consistent with the 
latter scenario. In any case, the Neoproterozoic increase of atmo­
spheric oxygen was essential to the rise of large oxygen-breathing 
animals (e.g., Runnegar 1991; Canfield et al. 2007).
Whatever the source, the Neoproterozoic cyclic episodes 
of cooling and global glaciation, atmospheric CO2 enrichment, 
greenhouse warming, and oxygenation had significant effects on 
surface mineralogy. Among the most intriguing mineralogical 
proposals related to Neoproterozoic oxygenation is the so-called 
“clay mineral factory” (Kennedy et al. 2006). It is well established 
that microbial activity enhances clay mineral production, for ex­
ample by the bio-weathering of feldspar and mica (Schwartzman 
and Volk 1989; Bennett et al. 1996; Paris et al. 1996; Barker et 
al. 1998; Ueshima and Tazaki 1998; Ueshima et al. 2000; Tazaki 
2005). Kennedy et al. (2006) observe a significant increase in 
clay mineral deposition in the Neoproterozoic that may have been 
the result of increased microbial activity in soils. An important 
consequence of this clay mineral production is the enhanced 
marine sequestration of organic carbon adsorbed onto clay 
surfaces (Hedges and Keil 1995; Mayer et al. 2004). Oxidation 
of organic carbon represents an important sink for atmospheric 
oxygen; hence clay-mediated burial of organic carbon may have 
contributed to the rise in atmospheric oxygen. Note also that in 
the context of mineral evolution, weathering in soils produces 
a suite of clay minerals—i.e., smectite [(Na,Ca)0.3(Al,Mg)4–6 
(Si,Al)8O20(OH)4] and kaolinite [Al2Si2O5(OH)4]—quite distinct 
from that of the serpentine-chlorite mineralogy characteristic of 
hydrothermal alteration (Weaver 1989; Chamley 1989). Thus, the 
postulated clay mineral factory represents an irreversible change 
in both the total clay production and the relative abundances of 
different clay minerals.
Enhanced oxidative weathering of sulfides during the Neo­
proterozoic period of cyclic glaciations is likely responsible for 
the increased abundance of seawater sulfate at that time (Canfield 
and Teske 1996; Hurtgen et al. 2005; Fike et al. 2006; Halverson 
and Hurtgen 2007). Concomitantly, the supply of phosphorus 
by rivers to the oceans should have created new opportunities 
for photosynthetic organisms and biomineralization. Large 
sedimentary phosphorite deposits are restricted to time intervals 
when oceanic circulation experienced dramatic changes, such 
as in the late Neoproterozoic-early Cambrian. Stagnation of the 
oceans during snowball Earth events was followed by periods 
of vigorous circulation, which could have been conducive to 
phosphorite production (Donnelly et al. 1990). Major Neopro­
terozoic/early Cambrian phosphorite deposits occur in North and 
South America, Africa, Europe, Asia, and Australia (Notholt and 
Sheldon 1986), and also stratigraphically overlie glacially de­
rived sedimentary rocks (Cook and Shergold 1984). For instance, 
phosphorites occur stratigraphically near and above tillites in the 
Australian Adelaide Geosyncline (Howard 1986), in the Chinese 
Doushantuo Formation (Yueyan 1986), in the West African Volta 
and Taoudeni Basins (Flicoteaux and Trompette 1998), and in the 
Brazilian São Francisco Supergroup (Dardenne et al. 1986; Misi 
et al. 2006). These occurrences suggest yet another connection 
between climate change and the abundance of phosphorus in 
seawater that can lead to mineralogical changes.
Stage 10. Phanerozoic biomineralization (<0.542 Ga)
By the beginning of the Phanerozoic Eon (0.542 Ga) biology 
came to dominate the mineralogical diversification of Earth’s 
surface. A comprehensive review of Phanerozoic biominerals, 
which are “the products of selective uptake of elements from 
the local environment and their incorporation into functional 
structures under strict biological control” (Mann 2001; Perry et 
al. 2007), is beyond the scope of this review (but see Dove et 
al. 2003). Examples of the formation of more than 60 minerals 
mediated by microbes, plants, invertebrates, and vertebrates 
[including more than two dozen in humans (Yoder 2002)] will 
serve to illustrate the richness of the subject (Table 3). 
Of greatest significance in terms of rock volume, the early 
Cambrian saw the abrupt rise of all major skeletal minerals (cal­
cite, aragonite, magnesian calcite, apatite, and opal), and few new 
types have appeared since then (Runnegar 1987; Knoll 2003b). 
Volumetrically, calcium carbonates represent the most significant 
biominerals. Of special note in this regard was the evolution of 
planktonic calcifiers, which for the first time provided a steady 
source of CaCO3 to deep ocean sediments, thus reducing the epi­
sodic formation of shallow-water sedimentary (cap) carbonates. 
This buffering of ocean carbonate-ion concentration moderated 
glacial events and reduced the likelihood of future snowball 
events (Ridgwell et al. 2003). In the Phanerozoic Eon, for the first 
time in Earth’s history carbonate deposition in the deep oceans 
was comparable to that in shallow ocean environments. 
A significant mineralogical novelty related to biologically 
mediated carbonates is the variable biomineralization of calcium 
carbonate by corals, mollusks, and other invertebrates (Knoll 
2003b). Calcite is observed to dominate from the Cambrian through 
early Carboniferous, but a dramatic and sudden shift to aragonite 
biomineralization is observed in the late Paleozoic through the 
mid-Jurassic. Calcite again became the dominant biocarbonate 
after the mid-Jurassic (Stanley and Hardie 1998). For example, 
both rugose corals, which thrived prior to their eventual extinction 
at the terminal Permian event, and Mesozoic scleractinian corals 
have calcitic skeletons. Modern scleractinian corals, by contrast, are 
composed of aragonitic skeletons (Stolarski et al. 2007). Modern 
mollusks, which display similar variation in their skeletal mineral­
ogy, use macromolecules (glycoproteins) to control the precipitation 
of aragonite vs. calcite (Falini et al. 1996; Cohen and McCon­
naughey 2003). These shifts have been attributed to variations in 
ocean chemistry, when the Mg/Ca mole ratio is >2 aragonite and 
Mg-calcite are favored (Stanley and Hardie 1998).
Magnesium-bearing carbonates are also incorporated into 
bioskeletons. For example, some sulfate-reducing microbes 
precipitate dolomite directly from anoxic solutions (Warthmann 
et al. 2000). Remarkably, the compound eyes of some phacopid 
trilobites (Fig. 11), which are formed from rows of calcite single 
crystals with the c axes aligned parallel to the lens axes, display 
variable Mg content that is zoned in such a way as to reduce 
chromatic aberration (Clarkson and Levi-Setti 1975; Lee et al. 
2007). 
A variety of phosphate minerals (Table 3), notably hydroxylap­
atite [Ca5(PO4)3(OH)] and whitlockite [Ca18H2(Mg,Fe)2(PO4)14], 
serve as skeletal minerals in both vertebrates (i.e., as the principal 
minerals in teeth and bones) and invertebrates (for example, in 

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1710
the shells of inarticulate brachiopods; Knoll 2003b). Microbial 
precipitation of phosphates, predominantly hydroxylapatite but 
also carbonate fluorapatite (Schulz and Schulz 2005), played 
the dominant role in the formation of what are now commercial 
phosphorite deposits (Zhao et al. 1985; Burnett and Riggs 1990; 
Cook and Shergold 1990).
The history of clay mineralization provides another im­
portant example of the increasing importance of biological 
activity through time. Phanerozoic production of clay minerals 
in soils, especially since the advent of land plants in the Siluro-
Devonian Period, is estimated to have been at least an order of 
magnitude greater than that of previous eras (Schwartzman and 
Volk 1991; Bennett et al. 1996; Paris et al. 1996; Barker et al. 
1998; Tazaki 2005). This increase, which is an extension of the 
“clay mineral factory” hypothesis and associated rise of oxygen 
(Kennedy et al. 2006), is a distinctive aspect of post-Ordovician 
mineralogy. Indeed, evidence suggests that atmospheric oxygen 
concentrations have continued to rise during the Phanerozoic 
Era, especially in the Permo-Carboniferous (Berner et al. 2000). 
Falkowski et al. (2005) exploited carbon isotope data to estimate 
that atmospheric oxygen increased from ~10 to more than 20 
mol% over the past 205 Ma. 
Phanerozoic mineralogical novelty is enhanced by more 
than a dozen organic minerals, which have been identified 
from coal, black shales, oil shales, and other carbon-rich fossil 
sources. These biologically derived minerals include the remark­
able Ni-porphyrin abelsonite (Ni2+C31H32N4), the purine uricite 
(C5H4N4O3), and several hydrocarbons ranging in size from 
kratochvilite (C13H10) to carpathite (C24H12). Perry et al. (2007) 
have also introduced the term “organomineral” to designate a 
“mineral product containing organic carbon,” but “not directly 
produced by living cells.” As examples they cite carbon-bearing 
siliceous hot-spring deposits, desert varnish, stromatolites, and 
a variety of trace fossils. 
In addition to oxygenation, microbes in the Phanerozoic Era 
are likely to have played many roles in modifying Earth’s near-
surface mineralogy, and today the geochemical cycles of most 
elements are affected by biology (Banfield and Nealson 1997; 
Banfield et al. 1998; Frankel and Bazylinski 2003). Among the 
many ways that biology influences mineralogy, airborne mi­
crobes may play a dominant role in the nucleation and growth 
of ice particles in clouds and in subsequent snowfall (Christner 
et al. 2008). Microbial colonies can also form biofilms and col­
loids with large negatively charged reactive surface areas that 
may adsorb metals and precipitate various minerals. Microbes 
that catalytically oxidize pyrite and produce acidic waters may 
increase dissolution and precipitation reaction rates by six orders 
of magnitude (Singer and Stumm 1970; Nordstrom and Southam 
1997). Even gold geochemistry may be strongly affected by bio­
logical activity; Reith et al. (2006) find that microbes can both 
solubilize gold (see also Lyalikova and Mockeicheva 1969; Ko­
robushkina et al. 1983) and trigger the precipitation of secondary 
gold grains from aqueous AuCl4
– in shallow crustal environments. 
Thus, gold deposits may be enriched by microbial activity, and 
it is possible that some gold nuggets are the ultimate weathered 
consequence of subsurface biological processing.
In addition to numerous examples of indirect biologically 
mediated mineral formation, more than 60 minerals are known 
to be formed directly by intra-, inter-, and extracellular processes 
(Table 3), including several mineralogical rarities. For example, 
Akai et al. (1999) describe direct microbial precipitation of 
alternating (possibly seasonal) layers of the distinctive iron 
Table 3. 	 Names and idealized chemical compositions of selected 
minerals produced by biological mineralization processes 
(expanded from Dove and Weiner 2003, Table 1) 
Name	
Formula
Elements
α-sulfur	
S
γ-sulfur (Rosickyite)	
S
Carbonates
Amorphous calcium carbonates	
CaCO3
.H2O or CaCO3
(at least 5 forms)
*Aragonite	
CaCO3
*Calcite	
CaCO3
Hydrocerussite	
Pb3(CO3)2(OH)2
Lansfordite	
MgCO3·5H2O
Magnesite	
MgCO3
Mg-calcite	
(MgxCa1–x)CO3
*Monohydrocalcite	
CaCO3
.H2O
Nesquehonite	
Mg(CO3)·3H2O	
Protodolomite 	
CaMg(CO3)2
Rhodochrosite	
MnCO3
Siderite	
FeCO3
*Vaterite	
CaCO3
Phosphates
Amorphous calcium phosphate	
variable 
	
(at least 6 forms)
Amorphous calcium pyrophosphate	
Ca2P2O7
.2H2O
Bakhchisaraitsevite	
Na2Mg5(PO4)4·7H2O
*Brushite	
Ca[PO3(OH)]·2H2O
*Carbonate-hydroxylapatite 	
Ca5(PO4,CO3)3(OH)
Chlorapatite	
Ca5(PO4)3Cl
*Fluorapatite	
Ca5(PO4)3F
*Hannayite	
Mg3(NH4)2H4(PO4)4·8H2O
*Hydroxylapatite	
Ca5(PO4)3(OH)
*Monetite	
Ca[PO3(OH)]
*Newberryite	
Mg[PO3(OH)]·3H2O
Octacalcium phosphate	
Ca8H2(PO4)6
*Struvite	
Mg(NH4)(PO4)·6H2O
Hazenite	
KNaMg2(PO4)2·14H2O
Vivianite	
Fe3
2+(PO4)2·8H2O
*Whitlockite	
Ca18H2(Mg,Fe)2(PO4)14
Sulfates
Aphthitalite	
K3Na(SO4)2
Ardealite	
Ca2[PO3(OH)](SO4)·4H2O
Barite 	
BaSO4
Celestine	
SrSO4
*Epsomite	
MgSO4·7H2O
*Gypsum	
CaSO4·2H2O
*Hexahydrite	
MgSO4·6H2O
Jarosite	
KFe3
3+(SO4)2(OH)6
Melanterite	
Fe2+SO4·7H2O
Schwertmannite	
Fe3+
16O16(OH)9.6(SO4)3.2·10H2O
Nitrates
Gwihabaite	
(NH4)NO3
Sulfides
Acanthite	
Ag2S
Amorphous pyrrhotite	
Fe1–xS (x = 0 – 0.17)
Galena	
PbS
Greigite	
Fe3S4
Hydrotroilite	
FeS.nH2O
Mackinawite	
(Fe,Ni)9S8
Marcasite	
FeS2
Pyrite	
FeS2
Pyrrhotite	
Fe7S8
Orpiment	
As2S3
Sphalerite	
ZnS
Wurtzite	
ZnS
* Minerals found in humans (after Yoder 2002).

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1711
sulfate jarosite [KFe3
3+(SO4)2(OH)6] and goethite [FeO(OH)] at 
the Gunma iron mine in Japan. Jaws of the marine bloodworm 
Glycera dibranchiata contain the rare copper mineral atacamite 
[Cu2(OH)3Cl] (Lichtenegger et al. 2002). Microbes and multi­
cellular organisms produce intercellular magnetic grains of the 
unusual sulfide greigite (Fe3S4), as well as magnetite (Chang 
and Kirschvink 1989; Pósfai et al. 1998; Thomas-Keprta et al. 
2001; Lins et al. 2007; Coker et al. 2008). And several miner­
als, including various organic minerals, γ-sulfur, and hazenite 
[KNaMg2(PO4)2·14H2O] (Table 3), may occur exclusively as 
microbially generated minerals. 
Discussion
Mineral evolution occurs on all solar system objects, but in 
particular on terrestrial planets and moons, in a variety of guises. 
The most obvious change over time, which is emphasized in 
this paper, is the increasing number of different mineral species. 
However, Earth’s mineralogy has also changed in other respects, 
including the relative abundances of near-surface minerals, the 
diversity of mineral associations, the compositional ranges of 
minerals displaying solid solution, and the grain sizes and mor­
phologies of minerals. For example, SiO2 initially appeared as 
rare micro-grains of cristobalite in chondrites, then as dispersed 
millimeter-sized grains of quartz in some achondrites, and 
eventually as common centimeter-sized crystals in granitoids 
and megacrysts in pegmatites. Various forms of SiO2 also accu­
mulated in sediments, were transformed to stishovite and coesite 
in impacts, were metamorphosed in quartzites, and became 
important in bioskeletons. Feldspar minerals display similar 
increases in associations and grain sizes, while expanding greatly 
in compositional extent from Ca-rich feldspars in chondrites, 
to the full range of Ca-Na plagioclase in achondrites, to Na-K 
alkali feldspars in the subsequent evolution of igneous rocks on 
Earth. Thus the concept of mineral evolution incorporates more 
than just the diversity of mineral species.
Three processes that drive mineral evolution
The evolution of Earth’s near-surface mineralogy results 
primarily from three principal processes. First are separation and 
concentration processes, for example planetary differentiation, 
outgassing, fractional crystallization, partial melting, crystal 
settling, and leaching by aqueous fluids. These processes led to 
diversification of the initially homogeneous element distribution 
in the pre-solar nebula into a broad spectrum of bulk composi­
tions. As previously dispersed elements became selected and 
concentrated, new suites of minerals invariably emerged. Note 
that separation and concentration of an element only creates a 
new mineral when the volume of new composition exceeds some 
minimum spatial dimension. In this regard, it is likely that the 
stages and timing of mineral evolution would be somewhat dif­
ferent if one considers nano-scale minerals. Continuing studies 
of the distribution of minor and trace elements in undifferentiated 
meteorites will provide important insights on this size aspect of 
mineral evolution.
The second process that drives mineral evolution on terres­
trial planets and moons is the emergence of an increased range 
of intensive variables, including temperature, pressure, and the 
activities of volatiles such as H2O, CO2, and O2. On Earth, the 
range of these variables is reflected in the formation of such var­
ied environmental regimes as ice caps, dry lakes, high-pressure 
metamorphic terrains corresponding to exhumed subduction 
zones, deep-ocean hydrothermal ecosystems, impact sites, and 
continental climate zones. 
Finally, processes in living organisms have created and sus­
tained both local and global compositional gradients that promote 
reaction pathways leading to new minerals. Note that both prebi­
otic and biologically mediated mineral diversification represents 
minimization of Gibbs free energy under new combinations of 
temperature, pressure and composition. In biological systems, 
however, new minerals may be catalyzed by living organisms 
in highly localized volumes that are not in equilibrium with the 
surrounding geochemical milieu (e.g., the biological precipitation 
of aragonite in shallow marine environments).
Table 3.—Continued
Name	
Formula 
Oxides
Amorphous iron titanate	
Fe2+TiO3
Amorphous iron oxide	
Fe2O3
Amorphous manganese oxide	
Mn3O4
*Anatase	
TiO2
Ilmenite	
FeTiO3
*Maghemite	
Fe2.67O4
*Magnetite	
Fe3O4
*Periclase	
MgO
Ice	 	
H2O
Hydroxides and hydrous oxides
Birnessite	
NaMn4O8·3H2O
*Brucite	
Mg(OH)2	
Ferrihydrite	
Fe4–5(OH,O)12
Goethite	
α-FeO(OH)
Lepidocrocite	
γ-FeO(OH)
Todorokite	
NaMn6O12·3–4H2O
Chlorides
Atacamite	
Cu2Cl(OH)3
*Halite	
NaCl
*Sylvite	
KCl
Fluorides
Fluorite	
CaF2
Hieratite	
K2SiF6
Silicates
Amorphous silica	
SiO2·nH2O
*Quartz	
SiO2
Organic crystals*
Abelsonite	
Ni2+C31H32N4
Ca malate	
C4H4CaO5
Ca tartrate	
C4H4CaO6
Carpathite	
C24H12
Earlandite	
Ca3(C6H5O7)2·4H2O
Glushinskite	
MgC2O4·2H2O
Guanine	
C5H3(NH2)N4O
Hartite	
C20H34
Hoganite	
Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O
Idrialite	
C22H14
Kratochvílite	
C13H10
Lindbergite	
MnC2O4·2H2O
Moolooite	
CuC2O4·nH2O
Paceite	
CaCu(CH3COO)2·6H2O
Paraffin hydrocarbon
Sodium urate	
C5H3N4NaO3
*Urea	
CO(NH2)2
Uricite	
C5H4N4O3
*Weddelite	
CaC2O4·2H2O
*Whewellite	
CaC2O4·H2O
* Minerals found in humans (after Yoder 2002).

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1712
Comparative planetology
The general principles observed for the emergence of 
mineralogical complexity on Earth apply equally to any 
differentiated asteroid, moon, or terrestrial planet. In every 
instance mineral evolution will occur in a logical progression 
as a result of local, regional, and global processes (i.e., the 
stages outlined in Table 1 and Fig. 1). The degree to which 
a body will advance in mineralogical complexity beyond the 
relatively simple achondrite stage is dictated by the nature and 
intensity of subsequent cycling (and hence repeated separa­
tion and concentration of elements). Consequently, a planet’s 
surface mineralogy will directly reflect the extent to which 
cyclic processes, including igneous differentiation, granitoid 
formation, plate tectonics, atmospheric and oceanic rework­
ing (including weathering), and biological influences, have 
affected the body’s history. 
Arguably the single most important cause for mineralogical 
diversification is Earth’s surface oxygenation associated with 
biological activity, which may be responsible directly or indi­
rectly for more than two thirds of all known mineral species. 
Thus, for at least the last 2.5 billion years, and possibly since 
the emergence of life, Earth’s mineralogy has evolved in parallel 
with biology. Accordingly, remote observations of the mineral­
ogy of other moons and planets may provide crucial evidence 
for biological influences beyond Earth. 
A comment on the term “evolution”
The use of the term “evolution” in the context of mineralogy 
may strike some readers as odd, perhaps even inappropriate. In 
spite of similar previous geological applications [notably Nor­
man Bowen’s (1928) The Evolution of the Igneous Rocks], the 
word continues to have contentious overtones (e.g., Ayala et al. 
2008). Part of the difficulty is semantic, for “evolution” has at 
least half a dozen different social and technical meanings (Scott 
2004, Chapter 2). At the most basic level, evolution is simply 
defined as “change over time,” and in this respect there can 
be no question that mineral evolution has occurred. However, 
we suggest that mineral evolution implies something more, as 
it arises in part from a sequence of deterministic, irreversible 
processes that lead from the mineralogical parsimony of the 
pre-solar era to progressively more diverse and complex phase 
assemblages. In this sense, mineral evolution is a fascinat­
ing specific example of the more general process of cosmic 
evolution (Chaisson 2001; Morowitz 2002; Zaikowski and 
Friedrich 2008).
Nevertheless, mineral evolution is not analogous to bio­
logical evolution through Darwinian natural selection (Darwin 
1859). In spite of creative suggestions to the contrary (e.g., 
Cairns-Smith 1982; Cairns-Smith and Hartman 1986), minerals 
do not mutate or compete for geochemical niches in the biologi­
cal sense, nor do they pass information to progeny through a 
genetic mechanism. For example, quartz does not out-compete 
olivine for crystallization from granite magma. Minimization 
of Gibbs free energy simply leads to nucleation and growth of 
quartz, but not olivine. The driving force for mineral evolution, 
rather, is the evolving diversity of prebiotic and biologically 
mediated temperature-pressure-composition environments.
Complex evolving systems
Systems that evolve from relatively simple states to those of 
increasing complexity are a recurrent characteristic of the physi­
cal world (Zaikowski and Friedrich 2008). Examples include the 
evolution of chemical elements through stellar nucleosynthesis 
(Olive 2008); prebiotic organic chemical evolution (Hazen 2005); 
the evolution of technologies through invention, technology 
transfer, and competitive selection (Eldredge 2002); the evolution 
of languages (Dixon 1997; Atkinson et al. 2008); and the evolu­
tion of life (Futuyma 2005). The diversification of the mineral 
realm over 4.5 billion years of Earth history displays intriguing 
similarities, as well as important differences, to these and other 
complex evolving systems. In this context, mineral evolution has 
the potential to inform efforts to identify and quantify principles 
that underlie all complex evolving systems.
A detailed analysis of the properties of evolving systems is 
beyond the scope of this introductory review, but three essential 
aspects of many evolving systems—selection, punctuation, and 
extinction—are worth noting in the context of mineral evolution.
Selection. Complex systems commonly arise through the 
interaction of numerous individual components, or “agents” with 
their environment (Morowitz 2002; Hazen 2005, 2008). In such 
systems, agents are intrinsically able to adopt combinatorially 
large numbers of different states, yet only a relatively small frac­
tion of these configurations are observed as a consequence of 
selection rules (e.g., Morowitz 2002; Hazen et al. 2007). Thus, 
neutrons and protons assemble into only a few hundred stable 
isotopic species, while the 83 geochemically stable chemical 
elements combine to form only a few thousand mineral species. 
Stochastic processes may influence the specific outcomes of 
some selective events, but selection is guided by physical and 
chemical principles and thus, by definition, is not random. 
Punctuation. The proposal by Eldredge and Gould (1972) 
that biological evolution may at times occur in rapid spurts of 
innovation, or “punctuated equilibrium,” is now recognized as 
a common theme in a variety of complex systems, including 
nucleosynthesis (Olive 2008), technological innovations (El­
dredge 2002), and language (Dixon 1997; Atkinson et al. 2008). 
A similar phenomenon is observed in mineral evolution. Key 
irreversible events in Earth’s history—planetary differentiation 
at 4.5 Ga and subsequent formation of the atmosphere and hydro­
sphere, the initiation of subduction at >3.0 Ga, major atmospheric 
oxidation events at around 2.2 and 0.6 Ga, and the emergence of 
a terrestrial biota in the Phanerzoic Era, for example—forever 
altered Earth’s mineralogical landscape. Each event changed 
the distribution and initiated a jump in the diversity of Earth’s 
near-surface mineralogy. Thus, as in other evolutionary systems, 
mineral diversity vs. time may have the punctuated character of 
a step function rather than a continuous increase. 
Extinction. Extinction, the selective disappearance of some 
states, is a recurrent feature of many evolving systems. New 
technological innovations inevitably replace the old, some words 
become obsolete, and biological species eventually die out. Is the 
same true of mineral phases? Mineral evolution points to the fact 
that many mineral species had a specific time of first appearance 
on Earth, but is it likely that some near-surface species become 
unstable and disappear permanently from a terrestrial planet? 

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1713
Some mineral-forming processes, for example those that formed 
the unusual reduced minerals of enstatite chondrites (Table 2), 
have ceased. These phases, which are unstable at Earth’s oxidized 
surface, are now found only because of the continuing flux of 
EH chondrites. Nevertheless, given that surface temperatures 
throughout Earth’s history have spanned the range from water 
ice to water vapor, and that most, if not all, of Earth’s mineral 
forming processes (i.e., continued delivery of varied meteorites 
to the surface, igneous and metamorphic processes, plate tecton­
ics, surface weathering, and microbial metabolism, for example) 
are still in play, Earth’s mineralogical diversity has likely not 
diminished significantly. Indeed, one would be hard pressed 
to postulate a single mineral species that once was found in a 
near-surface environment but no longer exists. 
Nevertheless, the permanent disappearance of species 
must have played a significant role in the mineral evolution of 
some terrestrial planets. Venus, for example, may have had a 
water-rich and clement surface environment early in its history 
(Ingersoll 1969; Donahue and Pollack 1983; Grinspoon 1997). 
However, the gradual loss of water (via hydrogen escape) and 
subsequent runaway CO2-mediated greenhouse effect with pres­
ent day surface temperatures of 480 °C must have resulted in 
the loss of some low-temperature and hydrous mineral phases 
(Johnson and Fegley 2000, 2003). For example, hydrated mag­
nesium sulfates (MgSO4·nH2O), including kieserite, starkeyite, 
hexahydrite, epsomite, and meridianiite (with n = 1, 4, 6, 7, 
and 11, respectively) are observed in carbonaceous chondrites, 
hypersaline environments on Earth, and possibly on the surface 
of Mars (Kargel 1991; Fortes 2005; Peterson et al. 2007). They 
were likely also once present on the surface of Venus, but in the 
present dry, high-temperature environment they (and hundreds 
of other hydrous minerals) are no longer stable phases.
Given these and other parallels between mineral evolution 
and the behavior of other living and non-living complex systems, 
the search for unifying evolutionary principles will provide a 
continuing motivation for studying the history of Earth’s chang­
ing mineralogical landscape.
Concluding remarks: Framing mineral 
sciences 
For more than a century, mineralogists have framed their 
science primarily in terms of equilibrium chemical and physical 
properties. Dana’s systematic chemical classification and related 
schemes (Hurlbut 1971; Deer et al. 1996; Gaines et al. 1997) 
rely on the principal anion (silicates, carbonates, halides, etc.) 
to divide the mineral kingdom into chemically related groups of 
species. Further classification based on crystal chemical criteria 
(i.e., orthosilicates, cyclosilicates, biopyriboles, etc. for silicates) 
serves to subdivide groups of minerals according predominant 
topological motifs (Liebau 1985; Putnis 1992; Nesse 2000). 
Equilibrium phase diagrams amplify this approach by defining 
conditions of stability under which individual minerals form and 
groups of minerals coexist. This versatile approach to framing 
the subject of mineralogy, by combining equilibrium crystal 
chemical and thermodynamic considerations, underscores the 
close relationships between a mineral’s physical properties and 
the arrangement of its atoms. Nevertheless, by adopting this 
sometimes static framing of our science, an inherent drama and 
excitement of mineralogy may be lacking.
Mineral evolution represents an alternative approach to 
systematizing—and to teaching—the subject of mineralogy. The 
mineral diversity of terrestrial planets evolves as a consequence 
of the dynamic histories of planets. Epic physical, chemical, and 
biological processes—planetary accretion and differentiation, 
plate tectonics and associated large-scale reworking of the litho­
sphere, and the origin and evolution of life—create gradients in 
temperature, pressure, and composition that selectively process 
elements and lead to new equilibrium mineral species. In this 
approach, the chronological stage of planetary evolution and the 
associated paragenetic processes that lead to distinctive suites 
of minerals, rather than the equilibrium structure, composition, 
and properties of the minerals themselves, is the underlying or­
ganizing principle. Geologic time becomes a central parameter 
of mineralogy.
This is not to say that core chemical and physical processes 
are not vital to mineralogy. Consider the dozen or so earliest min­
eral phases to appear in the pre-solar nebulae (Table 2a). These 
“ur-minerals”—the logical starting point of any mineral evolu­
tion course—manifest a variety of bond types (metallic bonds, 
covalent bonds, ionic bonds, and van der Waals interactions), 
while they also incorporate structural motifs (e.g., coordination 
polyhedra of Si, Mg, Al, and Ca) that are common to many 
rock-forming phases. These dozen species also illustrate such 
key mineralogical concepts as solid solution, order-disorder, and 
polymorphism. These characteristics, coupled with the relatively 
simple phase relationships that lead to their condensation, provide 
a rich context by which to introduce the chemical and physical 
principles that are fundamental to all mineralogy. However, 
unlike traditional mineralogy curricula, these principles are 
introduced as part of a larger evolutionary story.
Consider as an example the silicate garnet group of minerals, 
X2+
3Y3+
2Si3O12, which share the same structure and are thus tradi­
tionally lumped together in mineralogy texts. From the perspec­
tive of mineral evolution, however, different garnet-structured 
phases are scattered across several different mineralogical stages. 
Majorite and its Mg-isomorph [Mg3(FeSi)Si3O12 and Mg3(MgSi)
Si3O12, respectively], which form by the impact metamorphism 
of pyroxene in meteorites and asteroids, must have appeared in 
the earliest stages of mineral evolution. Grossular (Ca3Al2Si3O12) 
arose shortly thereafter during thermal alteration of chondrites, as 
did andradite (Ca3Fe2Si3O12) in achondrites. Pyrope (Mg3Al2Si3 
O12), a principal mineral phase in deep-formed ecologite, may 
have appeared on Earth’s surface as a result of volcanic transport 
as early as stage 3, while almandine (Fe3Al2Si3O12), the common 
red garnet of peraluminous granites, is representative of stage 4. 
Spessartine (Mn3Al2Si3O12) is associated with uplifted and eroded 
regional metamorphic terrains, and thus may have required 
the lateral tectonics of stage 5. We conclude that garnet group 
minerals are not all closely related in their mineral evolution 
context; their crystal chemistries are similar, but their stories are 
vastly different. Thus the garnet structure represents the motif of 
a mineralogical rondo that returns again and again in different 
geological settings throughout Earth’s history, up to and includ­
ing the modern synthesis of yttrium aluminum garnet (YAG) and 
other technological garnets. Similar arguments could be made 
for the diverse evolutionary histories of individual members of 

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1714
olivines, pyroxenes, feldspars, clay minerals, sulfides, carbon­
ates, and most other groups of rock-forming minerals.
Mineral evolution complements more traditional approaches 
to teaching mineralogy by providing an historical narrative for 
each mineral phase. The 4.5 billion year story integrates the 
principal themes of planetary science: geodynamics, petrology, 
geochemistry, thermodynamics, and geobiology. As such, min­
eralogy becomes key to unlocking our planet’s history, and thus 
assumes its rightful central role in the Earth sciences.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to H.J. Cleaves, W.G. Ernst, P. Heaney, R. Hemley, C. Klein, S. 
Mojzsis, C.T. Prewitt, D. Rumble, P. Silver, and M. Van Kranendonk for in-depth 
reviews of this manuscript. We also thank C.M. O’D. Alexander, A. Bekker, N. 
Boctor, J. Eigenbrode, M. Fogel, M. Fries, M. Krekeler, B. Marsh, H. Morowitz, 
B. Mysen, L. Nittler, S. Ono, S. Shirey, S. Solomon, A. Steele, and M. Zolensky 
for helpful comments and suggestions. This work was supported in part by grants 
from NASA’s Astrobiology Institute and the National Science Foundation, and by 
the continuing support of the Carnegie Institution.
References cited
Akai, J., Akai, K., Ito, M., Nakano, S., Maki, Y., and Sasagawa, I. (1999) Biologi­
cally induced iron ore at Gunma iron mine, Japan. American Mineralogist, 
84, 171–182.
Allwood, A.C., Walter, M.R., Kamber, B.S., Marshall, C.P., and Burch, I.W. 
(2006) Stromatolite reef from the Early Archaean era of Australia. Nature, 
441, 714–718.
Anbar, A.D. and Holland, H.D. (1992) The photochemistry of manganese and 
the origin of banded iron formations. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 
56, 2595–2603.
Anbar, A.D. and Knoll, A.H. (2002) Proterozoic ocean chemistry and evolution: 
A bioinorganic bridge? Science, 297, 1137–1142.
Anbar, A.D., Duan, Y., Lyons, T.W., Arnold, G.L., Kendall, B., Creaser, R.A., Kauf­
man, A.J., Gordon, G.W., Scott, C., Garvin, J., and Buick, R. (2007) A whiff of 
oxygen before the great oxidation event? Science, 317, 1903–1906.
Andrews-Hanna, J.C., Phillips, R.J., and Zuber, M.T. (2007) Meridiani Planum 
and the global hydrology of Mars. Nature, 446, 163–166.
Armstrong, J.C., Wells, L.E., and Gonzalez, G. (2002) Rummaging through Earth’s 
attic for remains of ancient life. Icarus, 160, 183–196.
Aspler, L.B. and Chiarenzelli, J.B. (1998) Two Neoarchean supercontinents? Evi­
dence from the Paleoproterozoic. Sedimentary Geology, 120, 75–104.
Atkinson, Q.D., Meade, A., Venditti, C., Greenhill, S.J., and Pagel, M. (2008) 
Languages evolve in punctuational bursts. Science, 319, 588.
Ayala, F. and committee (2008) Science, Evolution, and Creationism. National 
Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C.
Bahcall, J.N., Pinsonneault, M.H., and Basu, S. (2001) Solar models: Current 
epoch and time dependences, neutrinos, and helioseismological properties. 
Astrophysical Journal, 555, 990–1012.
Banerjee, D.M. (1971) Precambrian stromatolitic phosphorites of Udaipur, Rajas­
than, India. GSA Bulletin, 82, 2319–2329.
Banfield, J.F. and Nealson, K.H. (1997) Geomicrobiology: Interactions between 
Microbes and Minerals, 35, 448 p. Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 
Mineralogical Society of America, Chantilly, Virginia.
Banfield, J.F., Welch, S.A., and Edwards, K.J. (1998) Microbes as geochemical 
agents. The Geochemical Society News, 96, 11–17.
Barghoorn, E.S. and Tyler, S.A. (1965) Microorganisms from the Gunflint Chert: 
These structurally preserved Precambrian fossils from Ontario are the most 
ancient organisms known. Science, 147, 563–575.
Barker, W.W., Welch, S.A., and Banfield, J.F. (1998) Experimental observations 
of the effects of bacteria on aluminosilicate weathering. American Mineralo­
gist, 83, 1551–1563.
Barley, M.E., Pickard, A.L., and Sylvester, P.J. (1997) Emplacement of a large 
igneous province as a possible cause of banded iron formation 2.45 billion 
years ago. Nature, 385, 55–58.
Barley, M.E., Bekker, A., and Krapez, B. (2005) Late Archean to early Paleopro­
terozoic global tectonics, environmental change, and the rise of atmospheric 
oxygen. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 238, 156–171.
Barnes, H.L. and Rose, A.W. (1998) Origins of hydrothermal ores. Science, 279, 
2064–2065.
Bau, M. and Möller, P. (1993) Rare earth element systematics of the chemically 
precipitated component in Early Precambrian iron-formations and the evolution 
of the terrestrial atmosphere-hydrosphere-lithosphere system. Geochimica et 
Cosmochimica Acta, 57, 2239–2249.
Bédard, J. (2006) A catalytic delamination-driven model for coupled genesis of 
Archaean crust and sub-continental lithospheric mantle. Geochimica et Cos­
mochima Acta, 70, 1188–1214.
Bekker, A., Karhu, J.A., Eriksson, K.A., and Kaufman, A.J. (2003) Chemostratig­
raphy of Paleoproterozoic carbonate successions of the Wyoming Craton: 
Tectonic forcing of biogeochemical change? Precambrian Research, 120, 
279–325.
Bekker, A., Holland, H.D., Wang, P.-L., Rumble, III, D., Stein, H.J., Hannah, J.L., 
Coetzee, L.L., and Beukes, N.L. (2004) Dating the rise of atmospheric oxygen. 
Nature, 427, 117–120.
Bekker, A., Karhu, J.A., and Kaufman, A.J. (2006) Carbon isotope record for the 
onset of the Lomagundi carbon isotope excursion in the Great Lakes area, North 
America. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 148, 145–180.
Bennett, P.C., Hiebert, F.K., and Choi, W.J. (1996) Microbial colonization and 
weathering of silicates in petroleum-contaminated groundwater. Chemical 
Geology, 132, 45–53.
Berner, R.A. (1972) Phosphate mineral removal from sea water by adsorption on 
volcanogenic ferric oxides. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 18, 77–86.
Berner, R.A., Petsch, S.A., Lake, J.A., Beerling, D.J., Popp, B.N., Lane, R.S., 
Laws, E.A., Westley, M.B., Cassar, N., Woodward, F.I., and Quick, W.P. (2000) 
Isotope fractionation and atmospheric oxygen: Implications for Phanerozoic 
O2 evolution. Science, 287, 1630–1633.
Bibring, J.-P., Langevin, Y., Mustard, J.F., Poulet, F., Arvidson, R., Gendrin, A., 
Gondet, B., Mangold, N., Pinet, P., Forget, F., and the OMEGA Team (2006) 
Global mineralogical and aqueous Mars history derived from OMEGA/Mars 
Express data. Science, 312, 400–404.
Binzel, R.P. and Xu, S. (1993) Chips off of asteroid 4Vesta—Evidence for the parent 
body of basaltic achondrite meteorites. Science, 260, 186–191. 
Bjerrum, C.J. and Canfield, D.E. (2002) Ocean productivity before about 1.9 
Gyr ago limited by phosphorus adsorption onto iron oxides. Nature, 417, 
159–162.
Bleeker, W. (2002). Archaean tectonics: A review, with illustrations from the Slave 
craton. In C.M.R. Fowler, C.J. Ebinger, and C.J. Hawkesworth, Eds., The Early 
Earth: Physical, Chemical, and Biological Development. Geological Society 
of London, Special Publication No. 199, 151–181.
——— (2003) The late Archean record: A puzzle in ca. 35 pieces. Lithos, 71, 
99–134.
——— (2004) Toward a “natural” Precambrian time scale. In F.M. Gradstein, J.G. 
Ogg, and A.G. Smith, Eds., A Geological Time Scale, p. 141–146. Cambridge 
University Press, New York.
Bleeker, W. and Ernst, R.E. (2006) Short-lived mantle generated magmatic events 
and their dyke swarms: The key unlocking Earth’s palaeogeographic record 
back to 2.6 Ga. In E. Hanski, S. Mertanen, T. Rämö, and J. Vuollo, Eds., Dyke 
Swarms—Time Markers of Crustal Evolution, p. 3–26. Selected papers of 
the Fifth International Dyke Conference in Finland, Rovaniemi, Finland, 31 
July – 3 Aug 2005 and Fourth International Dyke Conference, Kwazulu-Natal, 
South Africa 26–29 June 2001, A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Bodiselitsch, B., Koeberl, C., Master, S., and Reimold, W.U. (2005) Estimating 
duration and intensity of Neoproterozoic snowball glaciations from Ir anoma­
lies. Science, 308, 239–242.
Bowen, N.L. (1928) The Evolution of the Igneous Rocks. Princeton University 
Press, New Jersey.
Boyet, M., Blichert-Toft, J., Rosing, M., Storey, M., Telouk, P., and Albarede, F. 
(2003) Nd-142 evidence for early Earth differentiation. Earth and Planetary 
Science Letters, 214, 427–442.
Brandes, J.A., Boctor, N.Z., Cody, G.D., Cooper, B.A., Hazen, R.M., and Yoder, 
Jr., H.S. (1998) Abiotic nitrogen reduction in the early earth. Nature, 395, 
365–367.
Brasier, M.D., Green, O.R., Steele, A., and Lindsay, J.F. (2002) Questioning the 
evidence for Earth’s oldest fossils. Nature, 416, 768.
Brearley, A.J. (2006) The action of water. In D.S. Lauretta and H.Y. McSween, 
Jr., Eds., Meteorites and the Early Solar System II, p. 587–624. University of 
Arizona Press, Tucson.
Brearley, A.J. and Jones, R.H. (1998) Chondritic meteorites. In J.J. Papike, Ed., 
Planetary Materials, 36, p. 3.1–3.398. Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochem­
istry, Mineralogical Society of America, Chantilly, Virginia.
Brocks, J.J., Logan, G.A., Buick, R., and Summons, R. (1999) Archean molecular 
fossils and the early rise of eukaryotes. Science, 285, 1033–1036.
Brocks, J.J., Buick, R., Summons, R.E., and Logan, G.A. (2003) A reconstruction 
of Archean biological diversity based on molecular fossils from the 2.78 to 
2.45 billion-year-old Mount Bruce Supergroup, Hamersley Basin, Western 
Australia. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 67, 4321–4335. 
Buick, R. and Dunlop, J.S.R. (1990) Evaporitic sediments of early Archaean age 
from theWarrawoona Group, North Pole, Western Australia. Sedimentology, 
37, 247–277.
Buick, R., Dunlop, J.S.R., and Groves, D.I. (1981) Stromatolite recognition in 
ancient rocks: an appraisal of irregularly laminated structures in an early 
Archean chert-barite unit from North Pole, Western Australia. Alcheringa, 
5, 161–181.
Burgisser, A. and Scaillet, B. (2007) Redox evolution of a degassing magma rising 
to the surface. Nature, 445, 194–196.
Burnett, W.C. and Riggs, S.R. (1990) Phosphate Deposits of the World: Vol. 3, 

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1715
Genesis of Neogene to Recent Phosphorites. Cambridge University Press, 
New York.
Button, A. (1982) Sedimentary iron deposits, evaporates and phosphorites: State of 
the art report. In H.D. Holland and M. Schidlowski, Eds., Mineral Deposits and 
the Evolution of the Biosphere, p. 259–273. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Byerly, G.R., Lowe, D.R., and Walsh, M.M. (1986) Stromatolites from the 
3,300–3,500-Myr Swaziland Supergroup, Barberton Mountain Land, South 
Africa. Nature, 319, 489–491.
Cairns-Smith, A.G. (1982) Genetic Takeover and the Mineral Origins of Life. 
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Cairns-Smith, A.G. and Hartman, H. (1986) Clay Minerals and the Origin of Life. 
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Caldeira, K. (1991) Continental-pelagic carbonate partitioning and the global 
carbonate-silicate cycle. Geology, 19, 204–206.
Caldeira, K. and Kasting, J.F. (1992) Susceptibility of the early Earth to irreversible 
glaciation caused by carbon dioxide clouds. Nature, 359, 226–228.
Cameron, E.M. (1983) Evidence from early Proterozoic anhydrite for sulfur isotopic 
partitioning in the Precambrian oceans. Nature, 304, 54–56.
Campbell, I. and Taylor, S. (1983) No water, no granites—no oceans, no continents. 
Geophysical Research Letters, 10, 1061–1064.
Canfield, D.E. (1998) A new model for Proterozoic ocean chemistry. Nature, 
396, 450–453.
Canfield, D.E. and Teske, A. (1996) Late Proterozoic rise in atmospheric oxygen 
concentration inferred from phylogenetic and sulfur-isotope studies. Nature, 
382, 127–132.
Canfield, D.E., Habicht, K.S., and Thamdrup, B. (2000) The Archean sulfur cycle 
and the early history of atmospheric oxygen. Science, 288, 658–661.
Canfield, D.E., Poulton, S.W., and Narbonne, G.M. (2007) Late-Neoproterozoic 
deep-ocean oxygenation and the rise of animal life. Science, 315, 92–95.
Canil, D. (1997) Vanadium partitioning and the oxidation state of Archean komatiite 
magmas. Nature, 389, 842–845.
——— (2002) Vanadium in peridotites, mantle redox and tectonic environments: 
Archean to present. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 195, 75–90.
Catling, D.C. and Claire, M.W. (2005) How Earth’s atmosphere evolved to an oxic 
state: A status report. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 237, 1–20.
Catling, D., Zahnle, K., and McKay, C. (2001) Biogenic methane, hydrogen escape, 
and the irreversible oxidation of early Earth. Science, 293, 839–843.
Cavosie, A.J. (2005) Geochemistry of >3900 Ma detrital zircons from the Jack 
Hills, Western Australia, 387 p. Ph.D. thesis, The University of Wisconsin, 
Madison.
Cavosie, A.J., Wilde, S.A., Liu, D., Weiblen, P.W., and Valley, J.W. (2004) Internal 
zoning and U-Th-Pb chemistry of Jack Hills detrital zircons: A mineral record of 
early Archean to Mesoproterozoic (4348–1576 Ma) magmatism. Precambrian 
Research, 135, 251–279.
Cavosie, A.J., Valley, J.W., and Wilde, S.A. (2005) Magmatic δ18O in 4400–3900 
Ma detrital zircons: A record of the alteration and recycling of crust in the Early 
Archean. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 235, 663–681.
Cavosie, A.J., Valley, J.W., Wilde, S.A., and E.I.M.F. (2006) Correlated micro­
analysis of zircon: Trace element, δ18O, and U-Th-Pb isotopic constraints 
on the igneous origin of complex >3900 Ma detrital grains. Geochimica et 
Cosmochimica Acta, 70, 5601–5616.
Cawood, P.A., Kroner, A., and Pisarevsky, S. (2006) Precambrian plate tectonics. 
GSA Today, 16, 4–11.
Černý, P. (1982a) Mineralogy of rubidium and cesium. MAC Short Course 
Handbook, 8, 145–162. 
——— (1982b) Petrogenesis of granitic pegmatites. MAC Short Course Hand­
book, 8, 405–461. 
Chaisson, E.J. (2001) Cosmic Evolution: The Rise of Complexity in Nature. 
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts. 
Chamley, H. (1989) Clay Sedimentology. Springer, New York.
Chang, S.-B.R. and Kirschvink, J.L. (1989) Magnetofossils, the magnetization of 
sediments, and the evolution of magnetite biomineralization. Annual Review 
of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 17, 169–195.
Chapman, C.R. (2002) Planetary science: Earth’s lunar attic. Nature, 419, 
791–79.
Chauhan, D.S. (1979) Phosphate-bearing stromatolites of the Precambrian Aravalli 
phosphorite deposits of the Udaipur region, their environmental significance 
and genesis of phosphorite. Precambrian Research, 8, 95–126.
Chen, M., Sharp, T.G., El Goresy, A., Wopenka, B., and Xie, X. (1996) The 
majorite-pyrope + magnesiowüstite assemblage: Constraints on the history 
of shock veins in chondrites. Science, 271, 1570–1573.
Christner, B.C., Morris, C.E., Foreman, C.M., Cai, R., and Sands, D.C. (2008) 
Ubiquiy of biological ice nucleators in snowfall. Science, 319, 1214.
Claire, M.W., Catling, D.C., and Zahnle, K.J. (2006) Biogeochemical modeling of 
the rise in atmospheric oxygen. Geobiology, 4, 239–269. 
Clark, P.E. (2007) Dynamic Planet: Mercury in the Context of its Environment. 
Springer, New York.
Clarkson, E.N.K. and Levi-Setti, R. (1975) Trilobite eyes and the optics of Des 
Cartes and Huygens. Nature, 254, 663–667. 
Cloud, P. (1972) A working model of the primitive Earth. American Journal of 
Science, 272, 537–548.
Cody, G.D. (2004) Transition metal sulfides and the origins of metabolism. Annual 
Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 32, 569–599. 
Cody, G.D., Boctor, N.Z., Brandes, J.A., Filley, T.R., Hazen, R.M., and Yoder, Jr., 
H.S. (2004) Assaying the catalytic potential of transition metal sulfides for pre­
biotic carbon fixation. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 68, 2185–2196.
Cohen, A.L. and McConnaughey, T.A. (2003) Geochemical perspectives on coral 
mineralization. In P.M. Dove, J.J. DeYoreo, and S. Weiner, Eds., Biomineraliza­
tion, 54, p. 151–187. Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, Mineralogical 
Society of America, Chantilly, Virginia.
Coker, V.S., Bell, A.M.T., Pearce, C.I., Pattrick, R.A.D., van der Laan, G., and 
Lloyd, J.R. (2008) Time-resolved synchrotron powder X-ray diffraction 
study of magnetite formation by an Fe(III)-reducing bacterium Geobacter 
sulfurreducens. American Mineralogist, 93, 540–547.
Cook, P.J. and Shergold, J.H. (1984) Phosphorus, phosphorites and skeletal evolu­
tion at the Precambrian-Cambrian boundary. Nature, 308, 231–236.
——— (1990) Phosphate Deposits of the World. Volume 1, Proterozoic and Cam­
brian Phosphorites. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Crowley, J.L., Myers, J.S., Sylvester, P.J., and Cox, R.A. (2005) Detrital zircon 
from the Jack Hills and Mount Narryer, Western Australia: Evidence for diverse 
>4.0 Ga source rocks. The Journal of Geology, 113, 239–263.
Dana, E.S. (1958) A Textbook of Mineralogy, 4th edition. John Wiley and Sons, 
New York.
Dardenne, M.A., Trompette, R., Magalhaes, L.F., and Soares, L.A. (1986) Protero­
zoic and Cambrian phosphorites—regional review: Brazil. In P.J. Cook and J.H. 
Shergold, Eds., Phosphate Deposits of the World, 1, p. 116–131. Cambridge 
University Press, New York.
Darwin, C. (1859) The Origin of Species. John Murray, London.
Dasgupta, S., Roy, S., and Fukuoka, M. (1992) Depositional models for manga­
nese oxide and carbonate deposits of the Precambrian Sausar Group, India. 
Economic Geology, 87, 1412–1418.
Dauphas, N., Cates, N.L., Mojzsis, S.J., and Busigny, V. (2007) Recognition of 
sedimentary protoliths with iron isotopes in the >3750 Ma Nuvvuagituk supra­
crustal belt, Canada. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 254, 358–376.
Deer, W.A., Howie, R.A., and Zussman, J. (1996) An Introduction to the Rock-
Forming Minerals, 2nd edition. Longman, Essex, England.
Delano, J.W. (2001) Redox history of the Earth’s interior since ~3900 Ma: 
Implications for prebiotic molecules. Origins of Life and Evolution of the 
Biosphere, 31, 311–341.
Desch, S.J. and Connolly, Jr., H.C. (2002) A model of the thermal processing of 
particles in solar nebula shocks: Application to the cooling rates of chondrules. 
Meteoritics and Planetary Science, 37, 183–207.
DesMarais, D.J., Strauss, H., Summons, R.E., and Hayes, J.M. (1992) Carbon 
isotope evidence for the stepwise oxidation of the Proterozoic environment. 
Nature, 359, 605–609.
Dickson, J.A.D. (2002) Fossil echinoderms as monitor of the Mg/Ca ratio of 
Phanerozoic oceans. Science, 298, 1222–1224.
Dixon, R.M.W. (1997) The Rise and Fall of Languages. Cambridge University 
Press, U.K.
Donahue, T.M. and Pollack, J.B. (1983) Origin and evolution of the atmosphere of 
Venus. In D.M. Hunten, L. Colin, T.M. Donahue, and V.I. Moroz, Eds., Venus, 
p. 1003–1036. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Donnadieu, Y., Goddéris, Y., Ramstein, G., Nédélec, A., and Meert, J. (2004) A 
“snowball Earth” climate triggered by continental break-up through changes 
in runoff. Science, 428, 303–306.
Donnelly, T.H., Shergold, J.H., Southgate, P.N., and Barnes, C.J. (1990) Events 
leading to global phosphogenesis around the Proterozoic/Cambrian boundary. 
In A.J.G. Notholt and I. Jarvis, Eds., Phosphorite Research and Development, 
52, p. 273–287. Geological Society Special Publication, London.
Dott, Jr., R.H. (2003) The importance of Aeolian abrasion in supermature quartz 
sandstones and the paradox of weathering on vegetation-free landscapes. 
Journal of Geology, 111, 387–405.
Dove, P.M. and Weiner, S. (2003) An overview of biomineralization processes and 
the problem of the vital effect. In P.M. Dove, J.J. DeYoreo, and S. Weiner, Eds., 
Biomineralization, 54, p. 1–29. Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 
Mineralogical Society of America, Chantilly, Virginia.
Dove, P.M., De Yoreo, J.J., and Weiner, S. (2003) Biomineralization, 54, 395 p. 
Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, Mineralogical Society of America, 
Chantilly, Virginia.
Dymek, R.F. and Klein, C. (1988) Chemistry, petrology and origin of banded 
iron-formation lithologies from the 3800 Ma Isua Supracrustal Belt, West 
Greenland. Precambrian Research, 39, 247–302.
Ebel, D.S. (2006) Condensation of rocky material in astrophysical environments. 
In D.S. Lauretta and H.Y. McSween Jr., Eds., Meteorites and the Early Solar 
System II, p. 253–277. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Edwards, K.J., McCollum, T.M., Konishi, H., and Buseck, P.R. (2003) Seafloor 
bio-alteration of sulfide minerals: Results from in-situ incubation studies. 
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 67, 2843–2856. 
Eiler, J.M. (2007) On the origin of granites. Science, 315, 951–952.
Eldredge, N. (2002) An overview of piston-valved cornet history. Historic Brass 

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1716
Sociey Journal, 14, 337–390.
Eldredge, N. and Gould, S.J. (1972) Punctuated equilibria: An alternative to phyl­
etic gradualism. In T.J.M. Schopf, Ed., Models of Paleobiology, p. 82–115. 
Freeman, Cooper and Co., San Francisco. 
Elie, M., Noueira, A.C.R., Nédélec, A. Trindade, R.I.F., and Kenig, F. (2007) 
A red algal bloom in the aftermath of the Marinoan Snowball Earth. Terra 
Nova, 19, 303–308. 
El Tabakh, M., Grey, K., Pirajno, F., and Schreiber, B.C. (1999) Pseudomorphs after 
evaporitic minerals interbedded with 2.2 Ga stromatolites of the Yerrida basin, 
Western Australia: origin and significance. Geology, 27, 871–874.
England, G.L., Rasmussen, B., Krapez, B., and Groves, D.L. (2002) Paleoenvi­
ronmental significance of rounded pyrite in siliciclastic sequences of the Late 
Archean Witwatersrand Basin: Oxygen-deficient atmosphere or hydrothermal 
alteration. Sedimentology, 49, 1133–1136.
Evans, D.A.D. (2006) Proterozoic low orbital obliquity and axial-dipolar geomag­
netic field from evaporite palaeolatitudes. Nature, 44, 51–55.
Ewing, R.C. and Chakoumakos, B.C. (1982) Lanthanide, X, Th, U, Zr, and Hf 
minerals, selected structure descriptions. MAC Short Course Handbook, 8, 
239–266.
Fairchild, I.J. (1993) Balmy shores and icy wastes: the paradox of carbonates 
associated with glacial deposits in Neoproterozoic times. In V.P. Wright, Ed., 
Sedimentology Review 1, p. 1–16. Blackwell, Oxford.
Falini, G., Albeck, S., Weiner, S., and Addadi, L. (1996) Control of aragonite or cal­
cite polymorphism by mollusk shell macromolecules. Science, 271, 67–69.
Falkowski, P.G., Katz, M.E., Milligan, A.J., Fennel, F., Cramer, B.S., Aubry, M.P., 
Berner, R.A., Novacek, M.J., and Zapol, W.M. (2005) The rise of oxygen 
over the past 205 million years and the evolution of large placental mammals. 
Science, 309, 2202–2205.
Farquhar, J., Bao, H., and Thiemens, M.H. (2000) Atmospheric influence of Earth’s 
earliest sulfur cycle. Science, 289, 756–758.
Farquhar, J., Savarino, I., Airieau, S., and Thiemens, M.H. (2001) Observations 
of wavelength-sensitive, mass-independent sulfur isotope effects during SO2 
photolysis: Implications for the early atmosphere. Journal of Geophysical 
Research, 106, 1–11. 
Farquhar, J., Peters, M., Johnston, D.T., Strauss, H., Masterson, A., Wiechert, 
U., and Kaufman, A.J. (2007) Isotopic evidence for mesoarchean anoxia and 
changing atmospheric sulphur chemistry. Nature, 449, 706–709.
Ferris, J.P. (1993) Catalysis and prebiotic synthesis. Origins of Life and Evolution 
of the Biosphere, 23, 307–315.
Fike, D.A., Grotzinger, J.P., Pratt, L.M., and Summons, R.E. (2006) Oxidation of 
the Ediacaran ocean. Nature, 444, 744–747.
Flicoteaux, R. and Trompette, R. (1998) Cratonic and foreland Early Cambrian 
phosphorites of West Africa: Palaeoceanographical and climatical contexts. 
Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 139, 107–120.
Folinsbee, R.E. (1982) Variations in the distribution of mineral deposits with time. 
In H.D. Holland and M. Schidlowski, Eds., Mineral Deposits and the Evolution 
of the Biosphere, p. 219–236. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Foord, E.B. (1982) Minerals of tin, titanium, niobium, and tantalum in granitic 
pegmatites. MAC Short Course Handbook, 8, 187–238.
Fortes, A.D. (2005) From Surrey to the moons of Jupiter (via Mars): The story of 
epsomite. Axis, 1, 1–28.
Frankel, R.B. and Bazylinski, D.A. (2003) Biologically induced mineralization by 
bacteria. In P.M. Dove, J.J. DeYoreo, and S. Weiner, Eds., Biomineralization, 
54, 95–114. Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, Mineralogical Society 
of America, Chantilly, Virginia.
Furnes, H., de Witt, M., Staudigel, H., Rosing, M., and Muehlenbachs, K. (2007) 
A vestige of Earth’s oldest ophiolite. Science, 315, 1704–1707.
Futuyma, D.J. (2005) Evolution. Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, Massachu­
setts.
Gaffey, M.J., Cloutis, E.A., Kelley, M.S., and Reed, K.L. (2002) Mineralogy of 
asteroids. In W.F. Bottke Jr., A. Cellino, P. Paolicchi, and R.P. Binzel, Eds., 
Asteroids III, p. 183–204. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Gaines, R.V., Skinner, H.C.W., Foord, E.E., Mason, B., and Rosenzweig, A. (1997) 
Dana’s New Mineralogy, 8th edition. John Wiley, New York.
Gehör, S. (1994) REE distribution in the phosphorite bands within the Paleopro­
terozoic Tuomivaara and Pahtavaara iron-formations, central and northern 
Finland. In M. Nironen and Y. Kahkonen, Eds., Geochemistry of Proterozoic 
supracrustal rocks in Finland. IGCP Project 179 Stratigraphic methods as ap­
plied to the Proterozoic record and IGCP Project 217 Proterozoic geochemistry. 
Geological Survey of Finland Special Paper, 19, 71–83. 
Ghosh, A., Weidenschilling, S.J., McSween, Jr., H.S., and Rubin, A. (2006) Aster­
oidal heating and thermal stratification of the asteroid belt. In D.S. Lauretta 
and H.Y. McSween Jr., Eds., Meteorites and the Early Solar System II, p. 
555–566. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Goldblatt, C., Lenton, T.M., and Watson, A.J. (2006) Bistability of atmospheric 
oxygen and the Great Oxidation. Nature, 443, 683–686.
Gorjan, P., Veevers, J.J., and Walter, M.R. (2000) Neoproterozoic sulfur-isotope 
variation in Australia and global implications. Precambrian Research, 100, 
151–179.
Gradstein, F.M., Ogg, J.G., and Smith, A.G. (2004) A Geological Time Scale. 
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Grinspoon, D.H. (1997) Venus Revealed. Addision-Wesley, Boston.
Grotzinger, J.P. and Knoll, A.H. (1999) Stromatolites in Precambrian carbonates: 
Evolutionary mileposts or environmental dipsticks. Annual Review of Earth 
and Planetary Sciences, 27, 313–358. 
Grotzinger, J.P. and Read, J.F. (1983) Evidence for primary aragonite precipitation, 
lower Proterozoic (1.9 Ga) dolomite, Wopmay orogen, northwest Canada. 
Geology, 11, 710–713.
Habicht, K.S., Gade, M., Thandrup, B., Berg, P., and Canfield, D.E. (2002) 
Calibration of sulfate levels in the Archean ocean. Science, 298, 2372–2374.
Halverson, G.P. (2005) A Neoproterozoic chronology. In S. Xiao and A.J. Kaufman, 
Eds., Neoproterozoic Geobiology and Paleobiology, 27, p. 231–271. Topics 
in Geobiology, Kluwer, New York.
Halverson, G.P. and Hurtgen, M.T. (2007) Ediacaran growth of the marine sulfate 
reservoir. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 263, 32–44.
Halverson, G.P., Hoffman, P.F., Schrag, D.P., Maloof, A.C., and Rice, A.H.N. 
(2005) Toward a Neoproterozoic composite carbon-isotope record. Geological 
Society of America Bulletin, 117, 1–27.
Hamade, T., Konhauser, K.O., Raiswell, R., Goldsmith, S., and Morris, R.C. (2003) 
Using Ge/Si ratios to decouple iron and silica fluxes in Precambrian banded 
iron formations. Geology, 31, 35–38.
Hanczyc, M.M., Fujikawa, S.M., and Szostak, J.W. (2003) Experimental models 
of primitive cellular compartments: Encapsulation, growth, and division. 
Science, 302, 618–622.
Hapke, B. (2001) Space weathering from Mercury to the asteroid belt. Journal of 
Geophysical Research, 106, 10039–10073.
Hardie, L.A. (1996) Secular variation in seawater chemistry: An explanation for 
the coupled secular variation in the mineralogies of marine limestones and 
potash evaporites over the past 600 m.y. Geology, 24, 279–283.
——— (2003) Secular variations in Precambrian seawater chemistry and the timing 
of Precambrian aragonite seas and calcite seas. Geology, 31, 785–788.
Harrison, T.M., Blichert-Toft, J., Müller, W., Albarede, F., Holden, P., and Mojzsis, 
S.J. (2005) Heterogeneous Hadean hafnium: Evidence of continental crust at 
4.4 to 4.5 Ga. Science, 310, 1947–1950.
Hazen, R.M. (2005) Genesis: The Scientific Quest for Life’s Origin. Joseph Henry 
Press, Washington, D.C.
——— (2006) Mineral surfaces and the prebiotic selection and organization of 
biomolecules. American Mineralogist, 91, 1715–1729. 
——— (2008) The emergence of chemical complexity. In L. Zaikowski and J.M. 
Friedrich, Eds., Chemical Evolution Across Space and Time, p. 2–14. Oxford 
University Press, New York.
Hazen, R.M., Griffin, P., Carrothers, J.M., and Szostak, J.W. (2007) Functional 
information and the emergence of biocomplexity. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences U.S.A., 104, 8574–8581.
Heaman, L.M. (1997) Global magmatism at 2.45 Ga: Remnants of an ancient large 
igneous province? Geology, 25, 299–302.
Hedges, J.I. and Keil, R.G. (1995) Sedimentary organic matter preservation: An 
assessment and speculative synthesis. Marine Chemistry, 49, 81–139. 
Hersum, T., Hilpert, M., and Marsh, B. (2005) Permeability and melt flow in 
simulated and natural partially molten basaltic magmas. Earth and Planetary 
Science Letters, 237, 798–814.
Hess, P.C. (1989) Origins of Igneous Rocks. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts.
Hoffman, H.J. (1990) Precambrian time units and nomenclature—the geon concept. 
Geology, 18, 340–341. 
Hoffman, P.F. and Prave, A.R. (1996) A preliminary note on a revised subdivision 
and regional correlation of the Otavi Group based on glaciogenic diamictites 
and associated cap dolostones. Communications of the Geological Survey of 
Namibia, 11, 77–82.
Hoffman, P.F. and Schrag, D.P. (2000) Snowball Earth. Scientific American, 
January 2000, 68–75.
Hoffman, P.F., Kaufman, A.J., Halverson, G.P., and Schrag, D.P. (1998) A Neo­
proterozoic snowball Earth. Science, 281, 1342–1346.
Holland, H.D. (1973) The oceans: A possible source of iron in iron-formations. 
Economic Geology, 68, 1169–1172.
——— (1984) The Chemical Evolution of the Atmosphere and Ocean. Princeton 
Series in Geochemistry, Princeton University Press, New Jersey.
——— (2002) Volcanic gases, black smokers, and the great oxidation event. 
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 66, 3811–3826.
Holland, H.D. and Rye, R. (1997) Evidence in pre-2.2 Ga paleosols for the early 
evolution of atmospheric oxygen and terrestrial biota: Discussion and reply. 
Geology, 25, 857–859.
Howard, P.F. (1986) Proterozoic and Cambrian phosphorites—regional review: 
Australia. In P.J. Cook and J.H. Shergold, Eds., Phosphate Deposits of the 
World, 1, p. 20–41. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Hurlbut, C.S. (1971) Dana’s Manual of Mineralogy, 18th edition. John Wiley, 
New York.
Hurtgen, M.T., Arthur, M.A., and Halverson, G.P. (2005) Neoproterozoic sulfur 
isotopes, the evolution of microbial sulfur species, and the burial efficiency 
of sulfide as sedimentary pyrite. Geology, 33, 41–44.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1717
Huston, D.L. and Logan, B.W. (2004) Barite, BIFs and bugs: Evidence for the 
evolution of the Earth’s early hydrosphere. Earth and Planetary Science Let­
ters, 220, 41–55.
Huston, D.L., Sun, S., Blewett, R., Hickman, A.H., Van Kranendonk, M., Phil­
lips, D., Baker, D., and Brauhart, C. (2002) The timing of mineralization in 
the Archean North Pilbara terrain, Western Australia. Economic Geology, 
97, 733–755.
Hutchinson, R.W. (1973) Volcanogenic sulfide deposits and their metallogenic 
significance. Economic Geology, 68, 1223–1246.
Ingersoll, A.P. (1969) The runaway greenhouse: A history of water on Venus. 
Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 26, 1191–1198.
Isley, A.E. and Abbott, D.H. (1999) Plume-related mafic volcanism and the 
deposition of banded iron formation. Journal of Geophysical Research, 104, 
15461–15477.
Jacobsen, S. (2001) Gas hydrates and deglaciations. Nature, 412, 691–693.
Jacobsen, S.B. and Pimentel-Klose, M.R. (1988) A Nd isotopic study of the Ham­
ersley and Michipicoten banded iron formations: The source of REE and Fe 
in Archean oceans. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 87, 29–44.
Jakosky, B., Anbar, A., Taylor, J., and Lucey, P. (2004) Astrobiology science 
goals and lunar exploration. NASA Astrobiology Institute White Paper, 14 
April 2004, 17 p.
James, H.L. and Trendall, A.F. (1982) Banded iron-formation: distribution in time 
and paleoenvironmental significance. In H.D. Holland and M. Schidlowski, 
Eds., Mineral deposits and the evolution of the biosphere, p. 199–217. Springer-
Verlag, New York.
Johnson, N.M. and Fegley, Jr., B. (2000) Water on Venus: New insights from 
tremolite decomposition. Icarus, 146, 301–306.
——— (2003) Tremolite decomposition on Venus II: Products, kinetics, and 
mechanism. Icarus, 164, 317–333.
Jolliff, B.L., Wieczorek, M.A., Shearer, C.K., and Neal, C.R. (2006) New Views of 
the Moon, 60, 772 p. Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, Mineralogical 
Society of America, Chantilly, Virginia.
Jolliffe, A.W. (1955) Geology and iron ores of Steep Rock Lake. Economic Geol­
ogy, 50, 373–398.
Jordan, T.H. (1978) Composition and development of the continental tectosphere. 
Nature, 274, 544–548
Kah, L.C. and Riding, R. (2007) Mesoproterozoic carbon dioxide levels inferred 
from calcified cyanobacteria. Geology, 35, 799–802.
Kah, L.C., Lyons, T.W., and Frank, T.D. (2004) Low marine sulphate and protracted 
oxygenation of the Proterozoic biosphere. Nature, 431, 834–837.
Kappler, A., Pasquero, C., Konhauser, K.O., and Newman, D.K. (2005) Deposi­
tion of banded iron formations by photoautotrophic Fe(II)-oxidizing bacteria. 
Geology, 33, 865–868.
Kargel, J.S. (1991) Brine volcanism and the interior structures of icy satellites. 
Icarus, 94, 368–390.
Karhu, J.A. and Holland, H.D. (1996) Carbon isotopes and the rise of atmospheric 
oxygen. Geology, 24, 867–870.
Kasting, J.F. (2001) The rise of atmospheric oxygen. Science, 293, 819–820.
Kasting, J.F. and Siefert, J.L. (2002) Life and the evolution of Earth’s atmosphere. 
Science, 296, 1066–1068.
Kaufman, A.J. and Xiao, S. (2003) High CO2 levels in the Proterozoic atmosphere 
estimated from analyses of individual microfossils. Nature, 425, 279–282.
Kaufman, A.J., Johnston, D.T., Farquhar, J., Masterson, A.L., Lyons, T.W., Bates, 
S., Anbar, A.D., Garvin, J., and Buick, R. (2007) Late Archean biospheric 
oxygenation and atmospheric evolution. Science, 317, 1900–1903.
Kemp, A.I.S., Hawkesworth, C.J., Paterson, B.A., and Kinney, P.D. (2006) Episodic 
growth of the Gondwana supercontinent from hafnium and oxygen isotopes 
in zircon. Nature, 439, 580–583. 
Kemp, A.I.S., Hawkesworth, C.J., Foster, G.L., Paterson, B.A., Woodhead, J.D., 
Hergt, J.M., Gray, C.M., and Whitehouse, M.J. (2007) Magmatic and crustal 
differentiation history of granitic rocks from Hf-O isotopes in zircon. Science, 
315, 980–983.
Kennedy, M.J. (1996) Stratigraphy, sedimentology, and isotope geochemistry of 
Australian Neoproterozoic postglacial cap dolostones; deglaciation, delta13C 
excursions, and carbonate precipitation. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, 
66, 1050–1064.
Kennedy, M.J., Runnegar, B., Prave, A.R., Hoffmann, K.H., and Arthur, M.A. 
(1998) Two or four Neoproterozoic glaciations? Geology, 26, 1059–1063.
Kennedy, M.J., Droser, M., Mayer, L.M., Pevear, D., and Mrofka, D. (2006) Late 
Precambrian oxygenation: Inception of the clay mineral factory. Science, 
311, 1446–1449.
Kerrich, R., Goldfarb, R.J., and Richards, J.P. (2005) Metallogenic provinces in an 
evolving geodynamic framework. Economic Geology, 100, 1097–1136.
Kimberley, M.M. (1989) Exhalative origins of iron formations. Ore Geology 
Review, 5, 13–145.
Kirk, J., Ruiz, J., Chesley, J., Walshe, J., and England, G. (2002) A major Archean, 
gold- and crust-forming event in the Kaapvaal Craton, South Africa. Science, 
297, 1856–1858.
Kirschvink, J.L. (1992) A paleogeographic model for Vendian and Cambrian time. 
In J.W. Schopf and C. Klein, Eds., The Precambrian Biosphere, p. 51–52. 
Cambridge University Press, New York.
Klein, C. (1974) Greenalite, stilpnomelane, minnesotaite, crocidolite, and carbon­
ates in very low-grade metamorphic Precambrian iron-formation. Canadian 
Mineralogist, 12, 475–498.
——— (2005) Some Precambrian banded iron-formations (BIFs) from around the 
world: Their age, geologic setting, mineralogy, metamorphism, geochemistry, 
and origin. American Mineralogist, 90, 1473–1499.
Knoll, A.H. (2003a) Life on a Young Planet. Princeton University Press, New 
Jersey.
——— (2003b) Biomineralization and evolutionary history. In P.M. Dove, J.J. 
DeYoreo, and S. Weiner, Eds., Biomineralization, 54, 329–356. Reviews in 
Mineralogy and Geochemistry, Mineralogical Society of America, Chantilly, 
Virginia.
Komiya, T., Maruyama, S., Masuda, T., Nohda, S., Hayashi, M., and Okamoto, K. 
(1999) Plate tectonics at 3.8–3.7 Ga: Field evidence from the Isua accretionary 
complex, Southern West Greenland. Journal of Geology, 107, 515–554.
Konhauser, K.O., Hamade, T., Raiswell, R., Morris, R.C., Ferris, F.G., Southam, 
G., and Canfield, D.E. (2002) Could bacteria have formed the Precambrian 
banded iron-formations? Geology, 30, 1079–1082.
Konhauser, K.O., Amskold, L., Lalonde, S.V., Posth, N.R., Kappler, A., and Anbar, 
A. (2007a) Decoupling photochemical Fe(II) oxidation from shallow-water 
BIF deposition. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 258, 87–100.
Konhauser, K.O., Lalonde, S.V., Amskold, L., and Holland, H.D. (2007b) Was 
there really an Archean phosphate crisis? Science, 315, 1234.
Korobushkina, E.D., Karavaiko, G.I., and Korobushkin, I.M. (1983) Biogeo­
chemistry of gold. In R. Halberg, Ed., Environmental Biogeochemistry, 35, 
p. 325–333. Swedish Research Councils, Stockholm.
Krot, A. N., Hutcheon, I.D., Brearley, A.J., Pravdivtseva, O.V., Petaev, M.I., and 
Hohenberg, C.M. (2006) Timescales and settings for alteration of chondritic 
meteorites. In D.S. Lauretta and H.Y. McSween, Jr., Eds., Meteorites and the 
early solar system II, p. 525–553. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Kump, L.R. and Barley, M.E. (2007) Increased subaerial volcanism and the rise of 
atmospheric oxygen 2.5 billion years ago. Nature, 448, 1033–1036.
Kump, L.R., Kasting, J.F., and Barley, M.E. (2001) Rise of atmospheric oxygen and 
the “upside down” Archean mantle. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 
2, 2000GC000114.
LaBerge, G.L. (1973) Possible biological origin of Precambrian iron-formations. 
Economic Geology, 68, 1098–1109.
Labrenz, M., Druschel, G.K., Thomsen-Ebert, T., Gilbert, B., Welch, S.A., Kemner, 
K., Logan, G.A., Summons, R., De Stasio, G., Bond, P.L., Lai, B., Kelley, S.D., 
and Banfield, J.F. (2000) Natural formation of sphalerite (ZnS) by sulfate-
reducing bacteria. Science, 290, 1744–1747.
Lahav, N., White, D., and Chang, S. (1978) Peptide formation in the prebiotic era: 
Thermal condensation of glycine in fluctuating clay environments. Science, 
201, 67–69.
Lathe, R. (2006) Early tides: Response to Varga et al. Icarus, 180, 277–280.
Leclerc, J. and Weber, F. (1980) Geology and genesis of the Moanda manganese 
deposits. In I.M. Varentsov and G. Grasselly, Eds., Geology and Geochemistry 
of Manganese, 2, p. 89–109. E. Schweizerbart’sche Verlagsbuchhandlung, 
Stuttgart.
Lee, M.R., Torney, C., and Owen, A.W. (2007) Magnesium-rich intralensar struc­
tures in schizochroal trilobites eyes. Palaeontology, 50, 1031–1037. 
Lenton, T.M. and Watson, A.J. (2004) Biotic enhancement of weathering, at­
mospheric oxygen, and carbon dioxide in the Neoproterozoic. Geophysical 
Research Letters, 31, L05202.
Lepot, K., Benzerara, K., Brown, G.E., and Philippot, P. (2008) Microbially 
influenced formation of 2,724-million-year-old stromatolites. Nature Geo­
science, 1, 1–4.
Liang, M.-C., Hartman, H., Kopp, R.E., Kirschvink, J.L., and Yung, Y.L. (2006) 
Production of hydrogen peroxide in the atmosphere of a snowball Earth and 
the origin of oxygenic photosynthesis. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Sciences U.S.A., 103, 18896–18999.
Lichtenegger, H.C., Schobert, T., Bartl, M.H., Waite, H., and Stucky, G.D. (2002) 
High abrasion resistance with sparse mineralization: Copper biomineral in 
worm jaws. Science, 298, 389–392. 
Liebau, F. (1985) Structural chemistry of silicates: Structure, bonding, and clas­
sification. Springer-Verlag, New York.
Lins, U., Keim, C.N., Evans, F.F., Farina, M., and Buseck, P.R. (2007) Magnetite 
(Fe3O4) and greigite (Fe3S4) crystals in magnetotactic multicellular organisms. 
Geomicrobiology Journal, 24, 43–50.
Lodders, K., Palme, H., and Wlotzka, F. (1993) Trace elements in mineral separates 
of the Pena Blanca Spring aubrite: Implications for the elocution of the aubrite 
parent body. Meteoritics, 28, 538–551.
London, D. (1987) Internal differentiation of rare-earth element pegmatites: Ef­
fects on boron, phosphorus and fluorine. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 
51, 403–420.
——— (2008) Pegmatites. Mineralogical Association of Canada, Special Publica­
tion 10, Quebec. 
Lowe, D.R. (1980) Stromatolites 3,400-Myr old from the Archean of Western 
Australia. Nature, 284, 441–443.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1718
Lowenstein, T.K., Timofeeff, M.N., Brennan, S.T., Hardie, L.A., and Demicco, 
R.V. (2001) Oscillations in Phanerozoic seawater chemistry: Evidence from 
fluid inclusions. Science, 294, 1086–1088.
Luth, W.C., Jahns, R.H., and Tuttle, O.F. (1964) The granite system at pressures of 
4 to 10 kbars. Journal of Geophysical Research, 69, 759–773.
Lyalikova, N.N. and Mockeicheva, L.Y. (1969) The role of microbes in gold 
migration in deposits. Microbiology, 38, 682–686.
Lyons, T.W., Gellatly, A.M., McGoldrick, P.J., and Kah, L.C. (2006) Proterozoic 
sedimentary exhalative (SEDEX) deposits and links to evolving global ocean 
chemistry. In S.E. Kesler and H. Ohmoto, Eds., Evolution of Early Earth’s 
Atmosphere, Hydrosphere, and Biosphere: Constraints from Ore Deposits, 198, 
p. 169–184. Geological Society of America Memoir, Boulder, Colorado.
MacPherson, G.J. (2007) Calcium-aluminum-rich inclusions in chondritic mete­
orites. In H.D. Holland and K.K. Turekian, Eds., Treatise on Geochemistry, 
1, p. 201–246. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Mann, S. (2001) Biomineralization: Principles and concepts in bioinorganic materi­
als chemistry. Oxford University Press, U.K. 
Marsh, B.D. (2006) Dynamics of magmatic systems. Elements, 2, 287–292.
Mason, B. (1967) Extraterrestrial mineralogy. American Mineralogist, 52, 
307–325.
Maas, R. and McCulloch, M.T. (1991) The provenance of Archean clastic metasedi­
ments in the Narryer Gneiss Complex, Western Australia: Trace element 
geochemistry, Nd isotopes, and U-Pb ages for detrital zircons. Geochimica et 
Cosmochimica Acta, 55, 1915–1932.
Maas, R., Kinney, P.D., Williams, I.S., Froude, D.O., and Compston, W. (1992) 
The Earth’s oldest known crust: A geochronological and geochemical study of 
3900–4200 Ma old detrital zircons from Mt. Narryer and Jack Hills, Western 
Australia. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 56, 1281–1300.
Mancuso, J.J., Lougheed, M.S., and Shaw, R. (1975) Carbonate-apatite in Precam­
brian cherty iron-formation, Baraga County, Michigan. Economic Geology, 
70, 583–586.
Mayer, L.M., Schtik, L.L., Hardy, K.R., Wagai, R., and McCarthy, J. (2004) 
Organic matter in small mesopores in sediments and soils. Geochimica et 
Cosmochimica Acta, 68, 3863–3872.
McCoy, T.J., Mittlefehldt, D.W., and Wilson, L. (2006) Asteroid differentiation. 
In D.S. Lauretta and H.Y. McSween, Jr., Eds., Meteorites and the Early Solar 
System II, p. 733–746. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Melezhik, V.A., Fallick, A.E., Makarikhin, V.V., and Lyubtsov, V.V. (1997) Links 
between Palaeoproterozoic palaeogeography and rise and decline of stroma­
tolites: Fennoscandian Shield. Precambrian Research, 82, 311–348.
Messenger, S., Keller, L.P., Stadermann, F.J., Walker, R.M., and Zinner, E. (2003) 
Samples of stars beyond the solar system: Silicate grains in interplanetary 
dust. Science, 300, 105–108.
Messenger, S., Sandford, S., and Brownlee, D. (2006) The population of starting 
materials available for solar system construction. In D.S. Lauretta and H.Y. 
McSween Jr., Eds., Meteorites and the Early Solar System II, p. 187–207. 
University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Meyer, C. (1985) Ore metals through geologic history. Science, 227, 1421–
1428.
Misi, A., Kaufman, A.J., Veizer, J., Powis, K., Azmy, K., Boggiani, P.C., Gaucher, 
C., Teixeira, J.B.G., Sanches, A.L., and Iyer, S.S.S. (2006) Chemostratigraphic 
correlation of Neoproterozoic succession in South America. Chemical Geol­
ogy, 237, 143–167.
Mojzsis, S.J., Harrision, T.M., and Pidgeon, R.T. (2001) Oxygen-isotope evidence 
from ancient zircons for liquid water at the Earth’s surface 4,300 Myr ago. 
Nature, 409, 178–181.
Mojzsis, S.J., Coath, C.D., Greenwood, J.P., McKeegan, K.D., and Harrison, T.M. 
(2003) Mass-independent isotope effects in Archean (2.5 to 3.8 Ga) sedimentary 
sulfides determined by ion microprobe analysis. Geochimica et Cosmochimica 
Acta, 67, 1635–1658.
Moore, P.B. (1982) Pegmatite minerals of P(V) and B(III). MAC Short Course 
Handbook, 8, 217–292.
Moore, S.E., Frrell, R.E., and Abaron, P. (1992) Diagenetic siderite and other ferroan 
carbonates in a modern subsiding sequence. Journal of Sedimentary Petrology, 
62, 357–366.
Morowitz, H.L. (2002) The Emergence of Everything. Oxford University Press, 
New York.
Mostefaoui, S. and Hoppe, P. (2004) Discovery of abundant in situ silicate and spinel 
grains from red giant stars in a primitive meteorite. Astrophysical Journal, 613, 
L149–L152.
Murakami, T., Utsinomiya, S., Imazu, Y., and Prasadi, N. (2001) Direct evidence of 
late Archean to early Proterozoic anoxic atmosphere from a product of 2.5 Ga 
old weathering. Earth and Planetary Sciences Letters, 184, 523–528.
Nesse, W.D. (2000) An Introduction to Mineralogy. Oxford University Press, New 
York.
Nittler, L.R. (2003) Presolar stardust in meteorites: Recent advances and scientific 
frontiers. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 209, 259–273.
Noffke, N., Nhleko, N., and Hazen, R.M. (2003) Earth’s earliest microbial mats 
in a siliciclastic marine environment (2.9 Ga Mozaan Group, South Africa). 
Geology, 31, 673–677.
Nordstrom, D.K. and Southam, G. (1997) Geomicrobiology of sulfide mineral 
oxidation. In J.F. Banfield and K.H. Nealson, Eds., Geomicrobiology: Interac­
tions between Microbes and Minerals, 35, p. 361–390. Reviews in Mineralogy, 
Mineralogical Society of America, Chantilly, Virginia. 
Notholt, A.J.G. and Sheldon, R.P. (1986) Proterozoic and Cambrian phosphorites—
regional review: World resources. In P.J. Cook and J.H. Shergold, Eds., Phosphate 
Deposits of the World, 1, p. 9–19. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Ohmoto, H. (1997) When did the Earth’s atmosphere become oxic? The Geochemical 
News, 93, 12–13, 26–27.
Ohmoto, H., Watanabe, Y., and Kumazawa, K. (2004) Evidence from massive 
siderite beds for a CO2-rich atmosphere before ~1.8 billion years ago. Nature, 
429, 395–399.
Ohmoto, H., Watanabe, Y., Ikemi, H., Poulson, S.R., and Taylor, B.E. (2006) Sulphur 
isotope evidence for an oxic Archean atmosphere. Nature, 442, 908–911.
Olcott, A.N., Sessions, A.L., Corsetti, F.A., Kaufman, A.J., and Flavio de Olivera, T. 
(2005) Biomarker evidence for photosynthesis during Neoproterozoic glaciation. 
Science, 310, 471–474.
Olive, K.A. (2008) Chemical origins: Nucleosynthesis in the early universe. In L. 
Zaikowski and J.M. Friedrich, Eds., Chemical Evolution Across Space and 
Time: From the Big Bang to Prebiotic Chemistry, p. 16–38. Oxford University 
Press, New York. 
Ono, S., Eigenbrode, J.L., Pavlov, A.A., Kharecha, P., Rumble, III, D. Kasting, J.F., 
and Freeman, K.H. (2003) New insights into Archean sulfur cycle from mass-
independent sulfur isotope records from the Hamersley Basin, Australia. Earth 
and Planetary Science Letters, 213, 15–30. 
Ono S., Beukes, N., Rumble, D., and Fogel, M. (2006) Early evolution of Earth’s 
atmospheric oxygen from multiple-sulfur and carbon isotope records of the 2.9 
Ga Pongola Supergroup, Southern Africa. South African Journal of Geology, 
109, 97–108.
Ono S., Shanks, W.C., Rouxel, O., and Rumble, D. (2007) S-33 constraints on the 
seawater sulfate contribution in modern seafloor hydrothermal vent sulfides. 
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 71, 1170–1182
Paige, D.A. (2005) Ancient mars: Wet in many places. Science, 307, 1575–1576.
Papineau, D. and Mojzsis, S.J. (2006) Mass-independent fractionation of sulfur iso­
topes in sulfides from the pre-3770 Ma Isua Supracrustal Belt, West Greenland. 
Geobiology, 4, 227–238.
Papineau, D., Mojzsis, S.J., Coath, C.D., Karhu, J.A., and McKeegan, K.D. (2005) 
Multiple sulfur isotopes of sulfides from sediments in the aftermath of Paleopro­
terozoic glaciations. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 69, 5033–5060.
Papineau, D., Mojzsis, S.J., and Schmitt, A.K. (2007) Multiple sulfur isotopes from 
Paleoproterozoic Huronian interglacial sediments and the rise of atmospheric 
oxygen. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 255, 188–212.
Paris, F., Bottom, B., and Lapeyrie, F. (1996) In vitro weathering of phlogopite by 
ectomycorrhizal fungi. Plant and Soil, 179, 141–150.
Parman, S.W. (2007) Helium isotopic evidence for episodic mantle melting and 
crustal growth. Nature, 446, 900–903.
Parnell, J. (2004) Plate tectonics, surface mineralogy, and the early evolution of life. 
International Journal of Astrobiology, 3, 131–137.
Pasek, M.A., Dworkin, J.P., and Lauretta, D.S. (2007) A radical pathway for organic 
phosphorylation during schreibersite corrosion with implications for the origin 
of life. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 71, 1721–1736. 
Pavlov, A.A., Hurtgen, M.T., Kasting, J.F., and Arthur, M.A. (2003) Methane-rich 
proterozoic atmosphere. Geology, 31, 87–90.
Pearson, D.G. (1999) The age of continental roots. Lithos, 48, 171–194.
Pearson, D.G., Parman, S.W., and Nowell, G.M. (2007) A link between large 
mantle melting events and continent growth seen in osmium isotopes. Nature, 
449, 202–205.
Perfit, M.R., Brueckner, H., Lawrence, J.R., and Kay, R.W. (1980) Trace element and 
isotopic variations in a zoned pluton and associated volcanic rocks, Unalaska 
Island, Alaska: A model for fractionation in the Aleutian calcalkaline suite. 
Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology, 73, 69–87.
Perry, R.S., Mcloughlin, N., Lynne, B.Y., Sephton, M.A., Oliver, J.D., Perry, C.C., 
Campbell, K., Engel, M.H., Farmer, J.D., Brasier, M.D., and Staley, J.T. (2007) 
Defining biominerals and organominerals: Direct and indirect indicators of life. 
Sedimentary Geology, 201, 157–179.
Peterson, R.C., Nelson, W., Madu, B., and Shurvell, H.F. (2007) Meridianiite: A new 
mineral species observed on Earth and predicted to exist on Mars. American 
Mineralogist, 92, 1756–1759.
Phillippot, P., Van Zuilen, M., Lepot, K., Thomazo, C., Farquhar, J., and van Kranen­
donk, M.J. (2007) Early Archean microorganisms preferred elemental sulfur, not 
sulfate. Science, 317, 1534–1537.
Pierrehumbert, R.T. (2004) High levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide necessary for 
the termination of global glaciation. Nature, 429, 646–648.
Pósfai, M., Buseck, P.R., Bazylinski, D.A., and Frankel, R.B. (1998) Reaction 
sequence of iron sulfide minerals in bacteria and their use as biomarkers. Sci­
ence, 280, 880–883.
Poulton, S.W., Frallick, P.W., and Canfield, D.E. (2004) The transition to a sulphidic 
ocean ~1.84 billion years ago. Nature, 431, 173–177.
Putnis, A. (1992) Introduction to Mineral Sciences. Cambridge University Press, 
New York.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1719
Rasmussen, B. and Buick, R. (1999) Redox state of the Archean atmosphere: Evidence 
from detrital heavy minerals in ca. 3250–2750 Ma sandstones from the Pilbara 
Craton, Australia. Geology, 27, 115–118.
Reid, R.P., Visscher, P.T., Decho, A.W., Stolz, J.F., Bebout, B.M., Dupraz, C., Ma­
cintyre, I.G., Paerl, H.W., Pinckney, J.L., Prufert-Bebout, L., Steppe, T.F., and 
DesMarais, D.J. (2000) The role of microbes in accretion, lamination, and early 
lithification of modern marine stromatolites. Nature, 406, 989–992.
Reith, F., Rogers, S.L., McPhail, D.C., and Webb, D. (2006) Biomineralization of 
gold: Biofilms on bacterioform gold. Science, 313, 233–236.
Ricardo, A., Carrigan, M.A., Olcott, A.N., and Benner, S.A. (2004) Borate minerals 
stabilize ribose. Science, 303, 196–197.
Ridgwell, A.J., Kennedy, M.J., and Caldeira, K. (2003) Carbonate deposition, climate 
stability, and Neoproterozoic ice ages. Science, 302, 859–862.
Rino, S., Komiya, T., Windley, B.F., Katayama, I., Motoki, A., and Hiratsu, T. (2004) 
Major episodic increases of continental crustal growth determined from zircon 
ages of river sands: Implications for mantle overturns in the Early Precambrian. 
Physics of Earth and Planetary Interiors, 146, 369–394.
Robb, L. (2004) Introduction to ore-forming processes. Blackwell, Oxford.
Rohrbach, A., Ballhaus, C., Golla-Schindler, U., Ulmer, P., Kamenetsky, V.S., 
and Kuzmin, D.V. (2007) Metal saturation in the upper mantle. Nature, 449, 
456–458.
Rose, N.M., Rosing, M.T., and Bridgwater, D. (1996) The origin of metacarbonate 
rocks in the Archaean Isua Superacrustal Belt, West Greenland. American Journal 
of Science, 296, 1004–1044.
Rosing, M. (1999) 13C-depleted carbon microparticles in >3700-Ma sea-floor sedi­
mentary rocks from West Greenland. Science, 283, 674–676.
Rosing, M.T. and Frei, R. (2004) U-rich Archaean sea-floor sediments from Green­
land—indications of >3700 Ma oxygenic photosynthesis. Earth and Planetary 
Science Letters, 217, 237–244.
Rosing, M.T., Bird, D.K., Sleep, N.H., Glassley, W., and Albarede, F. (2006) The 
rise of continents—An essay on the geologic consequences of photosynthesis. 
Palaeo, 232, 99–113.
Roy, S. (2006) Sedimentary manganese metallogenesis in response to the evolution 
of the Earth system. Earth Science Reviews, 77, 273–305.
Rubin, A.E. (1997a) Mineralogy of meteorite groups. Meteoritics and Planetary 
Science, 32, 231–247.
——— (1997b) Mineralogy of meteorite groups: An update. Meteoritics and Plan­
etary Science, 32, 733–734.
——— (2000) Petrologic, geochemical, and experimental constraints on models of 
chondrules formation. Earth Science Reviews, 50, 3–27.
Runnegar, B. (1987) The evolution of mineral skeletons. In R.E. Crick, Ed., Origin, 
Evolution, and Modern Aspects of Biomineralization in Plants and Animals, p. 
75–94. Plenum, New York.
——— (1991) Precambrian oxygen levels estimated from the biochemistry and 
physiology of early eukaryotes. Global and Planetary Change, 97, 97–111.
Russell, M.J. and Hall, A.J. (1997) The emergence of life from iron monosulphide 
bubbles at a submarine hydrothermal redox and pH front. Journal of the Geologi­
cal Society of London, 154, 377–402.
——— (2002) From geochemistry to biochemistry: Chemiosmotic coupling and 
transition element clusters in the onset of life and photosynthesis. The Geo­
chemical News, 113, 6–12.
Ruzicka, A., Snyder, G.A., and Taylor, L.A. (1999) Giant impact hypothesis for the 
origin of the Moon: A critical review of some geochemical evidence. In G.A. 
Snyder, C.R. Neal, and W.G. Ernst, Eds., Planetary Petrology and Geochemistry, 
p. 121–134. Geological Society of America, Boulder, Colorado.
Rye, R. and Holland, H.D. (1998) Paleosols and the evolution of atmospheric oxygen: 
A critical review. American Journal of Science, 298, 621–672.
Rye, R., Kuo, P.H., and Holland, H.D. (1995) Atmospheric carbon dioxide concentra­
tion before 2.2 billion years ago. Nature, 378, 603–605.
Sagan, C. and Chyba, C. (1997) The early faint Sun paradox: Organic shielding of 
ultraviolet-labile greenhouse gases. Science, 276, 1217–1221.
Sandiford, M. and McLaren, S. (2002) Tectonic feedback and the ordering of heat 
producing elements within the continental lithosphere. Earth and Planetary 
Science Letters, 204, 133–150.
Sangster, D.F. (1972) Precambrian volcanogenic massive sulfide deposits in Canada: 
A review. Geological Survey of Canada Paper, 72-22, p. 1–43.
Scherer, E.E., Whitehouse, M.J., and Münker, C. (2007) Zircon as a monitor of crustal 
growth. Elements, 3, 19–24.
Schidlowski, M. (1988) A 3800 million year isotopic record of life from carbon in 
sedimentary rocks. Nature, 333, 313–318.
Schopf, J.W. (1993) Microfossils of the early Archaean Apex Chert: New evidence 
of the antiquity of life. Science, 260, 640–646.
Schopf, J.W. and Packer, B.M. (1987) Early Archean microfossils (2.2 billion to 
3.5 billion-year-old) microfossils from Warrowoona Group, Australia. Science, 
237, 70–73.
Schulz, H.N. and Schulz, H.D. (2005) Large sulfur bacteria and the formation of 
phosphorite. Science, 307, 416–419.
Schwartzman, D.W. and Volk, T. (1989) Biotic enhancement of weathering and the 
habitability of Earth. Nature, 340, 457–460.
——— (1991) Biotic enhancement of weathering and surface temperatures on 
Earth since the origin of life. Paleogeography Paleoclimate Paleoecology, 90, 
357–371.
Scott, C., Lyons, T.W., Bekker, A., Shen, Y., Poulton, S.W., and Anbar, A.D. (2008) 
Tracing the stepwise oxygenation of the Proterozoic ocean. Nature, 452, 
456–459.
Scott, E.C. (2004) Evolution vs. Creationism: An Introduction. Greenwood Press, 
Westport, Connecticut.
Scott, E.R.D. (2002) Meteorite evidence for the accretion and collisional evolution 
of asteroids. In W.F. Bottke Jr., A. Cellino, P. Paolicchi, and R.P. Binzel, Eds., 
Asteroids III, p. 697–709. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Scott, H., Hemley, R.J., Mao, H.K., Herschbach, D.R., Fried, L.E., Howard, W.M., 
and Bastea, S. (2004) Generation of methane in the Earth’s mantle: In situ high 
P-T measurements of carbonate reduction. Proceedings of the National Academy 
of Science U.S.A., 101, 14023–14026.
Sharp, T.G., Lingemann, C.M., Dupas, C., and Stöffer, D. (1997) Natural occur­
rence of MgSiO3-ilmenite and evidence for MgSiO3-perovskite in a shocked L 
chondrite. Science, 277, 352–355.
Shen, Y., Buick, R., and Canfield, D.E. (2001) Isotopic evidence for microbial sulphate 
reduction in the early Archaean era. Nature, 410, 77–81.
Sherwood-Lollar, B., Frape, S.K., Weise, S.M., Fritz, P., Macko, S.A., and Welhan, 
J.A. (1993) Abiogenic methanogenesis in crystalline rocks. Geochimica et 
Cosmochimica Acta, 57, 5087–5097.
Sherwood-Lollar, B., McCollom, T.M., Ueno, Y., Yamada, K., Yoshida, N., Maruy­
ama, S., and Isozaki, Y. (2006) Biosignatures and abiotic constraints on early 
life—comment and reply. Nature, 440, E18–E19.
Shirey, S.B., Kamber, B.S., Whitehouse, M.J., Mueller, P.A., and Basu, A.R. (2008) 
A review of the isotopic and trace element evidence for mantle and crustal pro­
cesses in the Hadean and Archean: Implications for the onset of plate tectonic 
subduction. In K.C. Condie and V. Pease, Eds., When Did Plate Tectonics Start 
on Earth?, 440, p. 1–29. Geological Society of America Special Publication, 
Boulder, Colorado. 
Shukolyukov, A. and Lugmair, G.W. (1992) 60Fe—Light my fire. Meteoritics, 27, 
289.
——— (2002) Chronology of asteroid accretion and differentiation. In W.F. Bottke 
Jr., A. Cellino, P. Paolicchi, and R.P. Binzel, Eds., Asteroids III, p. 687–695. 
University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Silver, P.G. and Behn, M.D. (2008) Intermittent plate tectonics? Science, 319, 
85–88.
Silver, P.G., Behn, M.D., Kelley, K., Schmitz, M., and Savage, B. (2006) Understand­
ing cratonic flood basalts. Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 245, 190–201.
Singer, P.C. and Stumm, W. (1970) Acid mine drainage: The rate determining step. 
Science, 167, 1121–1123.
Smithies, R.H. and Champion, D.C. (2000) The Archean high-Mg diorite suite: Links 
to tonalite-trondhjemite-granodiorite magmatism and implications for early 
Archean crustal growth. Journal of Petrology, 41, 1653–1671.
Smithies, R.H., Champion, D.C., and Cassidy, K.F. (2003) Formation of Earth’s early 
Archaean continental crust. Precambrian Research, 127, 89–101.
Smithies, R.H., Van Kranendonk, M.J., and Champion, D.C. (2005a) It started with 
a plume—early Archaean basaltic proto-continental crust. Earth and Planetary 
Science Letters, 238, 284–297.
Smithies, R.H., Champion, D.C., Van Kranendonk, M.J., Howard, H.M., and Hick­
man, A.H. (2005b) Modern-style subduction processes in the Mesoarchaean: 
Geochemical evidence from the 3.12 Ga Whundo intraoceanic arc. Earth and 
Planetary Science Letters, 231, 221–237.
Sonett, C.P., Colburn, D.S., Schwartz, K., and Keil, K. (1970) The melting of 
asteroidal-sized parent bodies by unipolar dynamo induction from a primitive 
T Tauri sun. Astrophysics and Space Science, 7, 446–488. 
Squyres, S.W. and 49 others (2004) The Opportunity Rover’s Athena science inves­
tigation at Meridiani Planum, Mars. Science, 306, 1698–1703.
Stanley, S.M. and Hardie, L.A. (1998) Secular oscillations in the carbonate mineral­
ogy of reef-building and sediment-producing organisms driven by tectonically 
forced shifts in seawater chemistry. Paleogeography Paleoclimatology Paleo­
ecology, 144, 3–19.
Stern, R.J. (2005) Evidence from ophiolites, blueschists, and ultrahigh-pressure 
metamorphic terranes that the modern episode of subduction tectonics began in 
Neoproterozoic time. Geology, 33, 557–560.
Stolarski, J., Meibom, A., Przenioslo, R., and Mazur, M. (2007) A Cretaceous scler­
actinian coral with a calcitic skeleton. Science, 318, 92–94.
Strauss, H. (2003) Sulphur isotopes and the early Archaean sulphur cycle. Precam­
brian Research, 126, 349–261.
Stroud, R.M., Nittler, L.R., and Alexander, C.M.O’D. (2004) Polymorphism in preso­
lar Al2O3 grains from asymptotic giant branch stars. Science, 305, 1455–1457.
Sugitani, K., Mimura, K., Suzuki, K., Nagamine, K., and Sugisaki, R. (2003) 
Stratigraphy and sedimentary petrology of an Archean volcanic/sedimentary 
succession at Mt. Goldsworthy in the Pilbara Block, Western Australia: Impli­
cations of evaporite (nahcolite) and barite deposition, Precambrian Research, 
120, 55–79.
Summons, R.E., Jahnke, L.L., Hope, J.M., and Logan, G.A. (1999) 2-Methyl­
hopanoids as biomarkers for cyanobacterial oxygenic photosynthesis. Nature, 
400, 554–557.

Hazen et al.: Mineral evolution
1720
Sumner, D.W. (1997) Carbonate precipitation and oxygen stratification in late 
Archean seawater as deduced from facies and stratigraphy of the Gamohaan 
and Frisco Formations, Transvaal Supergroup, South Africa. American Journal 
of Science, 297, 455–487.
Tazaki, K. (2000) Formation of banded iron-manganese structures by natural micro­
bial communities. Clays and Clay Minerals, 48, 511–520.
——— (2005) Microbial formation of a halloysite-like mineral. Clays and Clay 
Minerals, 55, 224–233.
Thomas-Keprta, K.L., Clemett, S.J., Bazylinski, D.A., Kirschvink, J.L., McKay, 
D.S., Wentworth, S.J., Vali, H., Gibson, Jr., E.K., McKay, M.F., and Romanek, 
C.S. (2001) Truncated hexa-octahedral magnetite crystals in ALH84001: 
Presumptive biosignatures. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
U.S.A., 98, 2164–2169.
Tian, F., Toon, O.B., Pavlov, A.A., and De Sterck, H. (2005) A hydrogen-rich early 
Earth atmosphere. Science, 308, 1014–1017.
Tice, M.M. and Lowe, D.R. (2004) Photosynthetic microbial mats in the 3416-Myr-
old ocean. Nature, 431, 549–552. 
Tomlinson, K.Y., Davis, D.W., Stone, D., and Hart, T. (2003) U-Pb age and Nd 
isotopic evidence for Archean terrane development and crustal recycling in the 
south-central Wabigoon Subprovince, Canada. Contributions to Mineralogy and 
Petrology, 144, 684–702.
Tonks, W.B. and Melosh, H.J. (1993) Magma ocean formation due to giant impacts. 
Journal of Geophysical Research, 98, 5319–5333.
Touboul, M., Kleine, T., Bourdon, B., Plame, H., and Wieler, R. (2007) Late formation 
and prolonged differentiation of the Moon inferred from W isotopes in lunar 
metals. Nature, 450, 1206–1209. 
Towe, K.M. (2002) The problematic rise of Archean oxygen. Science, 295, 
798–799.
Trail, D., Mojzsis, S.J., Harrison, T.M., Schmitt, A.K., Watson, E.B., and Young, 
E.D. (2007) Constraints on Hadean zircon protoliths from oxygen isotopes, Ti-
thermometry, and rare earth elements. Geochemistry Geophysics Geosystems, 
8, Q06014, DOI: 10.1029/2006GC001449.
Tsikos, H. and Moore, J.M. (1997) Petrography and geochemistry of the Paleo­
proterozoic Hotazel iron formation, Kalahari manganese field, South Africa: 
Implications for Precambrian manganese metallogenesis. Economic Geology, 
92, 87–97. 
Tucker, M.E. (1982) Precambrian dolomites: Petrographic and isotopic evidence that 
they differ from Phanerozoic dolomites. Geology, 10, 7–12.
Ueno, Y., Yamada, K., Yoshida, N., Maruyama, S., and Isozaki, Y. (2006) Evidence 
from fluid inclusions for microbial methanogenesis in the early Archaean era. 
Nature, 440, 516–519.
Ueshima, M. and Tazaki, K. (1998) Bacterial bio-weathering of K-feldspar and biotite 
in granite. Clay Science Japan, 38, 68–92.
Ueshima, M., Mogi, K., and Tazaki, K. (2000) Microbes associated with bentonite. 
Clay Science Japan, 39, 171–183.
Valley, J.W., Cavosie, A.J., Fu, B., Peck, W.H., and Wilde, S.A. (2006) Comment 
on “Heterogeneous Hadean Hafnium: Evidence of Continental Crust at 4.4 to 
4.5 Ga.” Science, 312, 1139.
Van Kranendonk, M.J. (2006) Volcanic degassing, hydrothermal circulation, and the 
flourishing of early life on Earth: New evidence from the Warrawoona Group, 
Pilbara Craton, Western Australia. Earth Science Reviews, 74, 197–240.
——— (2007) A review of the evidence for putative Paleoarchean life in the Pilbara 
Craton. In M.J. Van Kranendonk, R.H. Smithies, and V. Bennet, Eds., Earth’s 
Oldest Rocks, 15, p. 855–896. Developments in Precambrian Geology, Elsevier, 
Amsterdam.
Van Kranendonk, M.J., Webb, G.E., and Kamber, B.S. (2003) Geological and trace 
element evidence for a marine sedimentary environment of deposition and bio­
genicity of 3.45 Ga stromatolitic carbonates in the Pilbara Craton, and support 
for a reducing Archean ocean. Geobiology, 1, 91–108.
Varga, P., Rybicki, K.R., and Denis, C. (2006) Comment on the paper “Fast tidal 
cycling and the origin of life” by Richard Lathe. Icarus, 180, 274–276.
Vollmer, C., Hoppe, P., Brenker, F.E., and Holzapfel, C. (2007) Stellar MgSiO3 
perovskite: A shock-transformed silicate found in a meteorite. Astrophysical 
Journal, 666, L49–L52.
Wächtershäuser, G. (1992) Groundworks for an evolutionary biochemistry: The iron-
sulfur world. Progress in Biophysics and Molecular Biology, 58, 85–201.
Wadhwa, M., Srinivasan, G., and Carlson, R.W. (2006) Timescales of planetesimal 
differentiation in the early solar system. In D.S. Lauretta and H.Y. McSween, 
Jr., Eds., Meteorites and the Early Solar System II, p. 715–731. University of 
Arizona Press, Tucson.
Walker, J.C.G. (1977) Evolution of the Atmosphere. Macmillan, New York.
Walker, J.C.G., Hays, P.B., and Kasting, J.B. (1981) A negative feedback mecha­
nism for the long-term stabilization of Earth’s surface temperature. Journal of 
Geophysical Research, 86, 9776–9782.
Walter, M.R. (1994) The earliest life on Earth: Clues to finding life on Mars. In S. 
Bengtson, Ed., Early Life on Earth, 84, p. 270–286. Nobel Symposium, Columbia 
University Press, New York.
Walter, M.R., Buick, R., and Dunlop, J.S.R. (1980) Stromatolites 3,400–3,500 Myr 
old from the North-Pole area, Western-Australia. Nature, 284, 443–445.
Warthmann, R., van Lith, Y., Vasconcelos, C., McKenzie, J.A., and Karpoff, A.M. 
(2000) Bacterially induced dolomite precipitation in anoxic culture experiments. 
Geology, 28, 1091–1094. 
Weaver, C.E. (1989) Clays, Muds, and Shales. Elsevier, New York.
Weisberg, M.K., McCoy, T.J., and Krot, A.N. (2006) Systematics and evolution of 
meteorite classification. In D.S. Lauretta and H.Y. McSween Jr., Eds., Meteorites 
and the Early Solar System II, p. 19–52. University of Arizona Press, Tucson.
Wenk, H.R. and Bulakh, A. (2004) Minerals: Their Constitution and Origin. Cam­
bridge University Press, New York.
Wheat, C.G., Feely, R.A., and Mottl, M.J. (1996) Phosphate removal by oceanic 
hydrothermal processes: An update of the phosphorus budget in the oceans. 
Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 60, 3593–3608.
White, A.J.R. and Chappell, B.W. (1983) Granitoid types and their distribution in 
the Lachlan Fold Belt, southeastern Australia. Geological Society of America 
Memoir, 159, 21–34. 
Widdel, F.S., Schnell, S., Heising, S., Ehrenreich, A., Assmus, B., and Schink, B. 
(1993) Ferrous iron oxidation by anoxygenic phototrophic bacteria. Nature, 
362, 834–836.
Wilde, S.A., Valley, J.W., Peck, W.H., and Graham, C.M. (2001) Evidence from 
detrial zircons for the existence of continental crust and oceans on Earth 4.4 
Gyr ago. Nature, 409, 175–178.
Wilks, M.E. and Nisbet, E.G. (1988) Stratigraphy of the Steep Rock Group, northwest 
Ontario: A major Archaean unconformity and Archaean stromatolites. Canadian 
Journal of Earth Sciences, 25, 370–391.
Witze, A. (2006) The start of the world as we know it. Nature, 442, 128–131.
Workman, R.K. and Hart, S.R. (2005) Major and trace element composition of the 
depleted MORB mantle (DMM). Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 231, 
53–72.
Xie, X., Sharp, T.G., and De Carli, P.S. (2006) High-pressure phases in a shock-
induced melt vein of the Tenham L6 chondrite: Constraints on shock pressure 
and duration. Geochemica et Cosmochemica Acta, 70, 504–515.
Yoder, Jr., H.S. (1976) Generation of Basaltic Magma. National Academy of Sciences 
Press, Washington, D.C.
——— (2002) Geology: Significant component of new multidisciplinary sciences. 
Proccedings of the American Philosophical Society, 146, 37–55. 
Young, G.M. (1976) Iron-formation and glaciogenic rocks of the Rapitan Group, 
Northwest Territories. Canada Precambrian Research, 3, 137–158.
——— (1995) Are Neoproterozoic glacial deposits preserved on the margins of 
Laurentia related to the fragmentation of two supercontinents? Geology, 23, 
153–156.
Yueyan, L. (1986) Proterozoic and Cambrian phosphorites—regional review: China. 
In P.J. Cook and J.H. Shergold, Eds., Phosphate Deposits of the World, 1, p. 
42–62. Cambridge University Press, New York.
Zaikowski, L. and Friedrich, J.M. (2008) Chemical Evolution Across Space and 
Time: From the Big Bang to Prebiotic Chemistry. Oxford University Press, 
New York.
Zegers, T.E. (2004) Granite formation and emplacement as indicators of Archean 
tectonic processes. In P.G. Eriksson, W. Altermann, D.R. Nelson, W.U. Mueller, 
and O. Catuneau, Eds., The Precambrian Earth: Tempos and Events, p. 103–118. 
Elsevier, New York.
Zhao, Z., Xing, Y., Ma, G., and Chen, Y. (1985) Biostratigraphy of the Yangtze Gorge 
Area. Geological Publishing House, Beijing.
Zolensky, M.E., Bodnar, R.J., Gibson, Jr., E.K., Nyquist, L.E., Reese, Y., Shih, C.-Y., 
and Weismann, H. (1999) Asteroidal water within fluid inclusion-bearing halite 
in an H5 chondrite, Monahans. Science, 285, 1377–1379.
Manuscript received February 14, 2008
Manuscript accepted May 21, 2008
Manuscript handled by Jennifer Thomson

