CRITICAL NOTICE
The Language of Tlwught. By JERRY FODOR. New York: Thomas Crowell,
1975; Hassocks, Sussex: Harvester Press, 1976. Pp. x + 214. £8.95.
D. C. DENNETT
We and other creatures exhibit intelligent behaviour, and since the regular
production of such behaviour requires thought, and since thought
requires representation, and since nothing can represent except within
a system, we must be endowed with and utilize a system of internal
representation having its own 'grammar' and 'vocabulary', which we
might call the language of thought.
This argument has seldom been brought into the open and examined,
but behind the scenes it has motivated and flavoured large bodies of
philosophical doctrine, and strongly influenced research strategies and
theories in psychology, linguistics, computer sciences and neuro-
physiology. It is worth asking why such an influential move has been so
comfortably ignored until recently. It is not plausibly one of those drifts
of thought that seem too obvious to need spelling out; perhaps it has
been avoided because once one attempts to put the argument in proper
and explicit shape, incoherenciea, paradoxes, infinite regresses and other
alarming implications seem to arise at every turning. Now Jerry Fodor
has done us the fine service of propounding and defending a vigorous,
unblinking, and ingenious version of the argument. Many of his con-
clusions seem outrageous, and the threats of incoherency are now close
to the surface, but Fodor argues with great persuasiveness that these are
in fact parts of the foundation of deservedly esteemed schools of thought
in philosophy, cognitive psychology and linguistics. If he has produced
an unintended reductio ad absurdum (a possibility he cheerfully admits),
some of our favourite edifices will topple with him. He may be wrong, of
course, but the challenge is well presented, and since recently thinkers
in all the jeopardized fields have been converging on just the perplexities
Fodor discusses, the challenge will not be ignored. The main issue
treated in Fodor's book is fast becoming a major topic" of interdisciplinary
interest, and philosophers of mind who have squeezed the last drops
of enlightenment out of the debate over the identity theory or the
individuation of actions should be pleased to find here some important
and fascinating problems to engage their talents. What is needed is
nothing less than a completely general theory of representation, with
which we can explain how words, thoughts, thinkers, pictures, computers,
animals, sentences, mechanisms, states, functions, nerve impulses, and
formal models (inter alia) can be said to represent one thing or another.
It will not do to divide and conquer here—by saying that these various
things do not represent in the same sense. Of course that is true, but
265
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

266 
D. c. DENNETT: The Language of Thought
what is important is that there is something that binds them all together,
and we need a theory that can unify the variety. Producing such a theory
is surely a philosophical endeavour, but philosophers must recognize
that some of the most useful and suggestive work currently being done
on the problems is being done by psychologists, linguists, and workers
in artificial intelligence.
For what it is worth, Fodor probably holds uniquely strong professional
credentials for the task of consolidating the insights from these fields, for
he holds a joint appointment in psychology and philosophy (at M.I.T.,
a major centre for work in linguistics and artificial intelligence) and has
made important contributions to experimental psycholinguistics and
linguistics in addition to his work in philosophy. Fodor is not beset by
the philosophical naivete' of many of his colleagues in psychology and
he has as powerful a grasp of current thinking in linguistics and psychology
as anyone in philosophy. Indeed, the overall savvy of his book is one of
its most striking characteristics, mainly for good but also for ill. There
cannot be many readers well equipped or disposed to appreciate all his
knowing nudges; the uninitiated will perhaps be the unpersuaded (and
unamused) as well. I fear that Fodor's unfailing high spirits and jocosity
may hurt his cause by irritating as many readers as they amuse. I find
the book genuinely witty, however, and can only urge those who resent
being tickled while engaged in such serious business to make an extra
effort to distinguish the medium from the message.
Fodor's message has three parts. First he describes and promotes a brand
of theorizing he calls cognitive psychology, but clearly he means to cast
his net wider, and in places narrower, than that term would suggest. The
distinguishing mark of this theorizing is the unapologetic utilization of
Intentional characterizations of processes and 'intellectualist' analyses
of perception and other 'cognitive processes' in terms of information-
flow, hypothesis-testing, inference and decision-making. Within its
boundaries fall much current psychology, linguistics, artificial intelligence,
and some strains of thought in current philosophy. Let us call it neo-
cognitivism, for it is not markedly continuous with earlier schools of
cognitive psychology, nor is it all clearly psychology. It has developed
largely in recognition of the impotence of (psychological and logical)
behaviourism, and its inspiration is drawn largely from linguistics,
computer science and (come to think of it) the last three hundred years
of epistemology. Fodor attempts to establish the credentials of neo-
cognitivism by showing how it avoids the doldrums of Rylean logical
behaviourism, steers between the Scylla of dualism and the Charybdis
of reductionism to emerge as the only straw floating—as Jerome Lettvin
once put it. In this first part Fodor has a strong and persuasive case on
almost all counts.
Fodor'8 second task is to show that this best hope for a confirmed,
powerful psychological theory inescapably requires the postulation of
internal representational systems. These systems, though designed for
computation rather than communication, have structures—end other
features—so like those of natural languages that we may—and should—
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

CRITICAL NOTICE 
267
speak of the language of thought: the medium in which the computational
transactions are performed that ultimately govern our behaviour and
the behaviour of other intelligent creatures as well. This is the philosophic
heart of Fodor's book, and will receive detailed attention below.
Third, Fodor completes his book with two lengthy chapters purporting
to show how evidence from linguistics and psychology establishes answers
to an impressive variety of questions about 'the structure of the internal
code'. Having proved the existence of Planet X, he proceeds to detail
its climate and geography for us, using data that had been available but
hitherto mute. These chapters are undeniably compelling, for every now
and then one gets glimmers of the sort of fruitful falling-into-place so
seldom encountered in psychology or philosophy of mind. Whereas, for
instance, behaviourism has always worn the guise of a properly endorsed
method (a 'methodology') in dogged search of results, here we seem to
see an abundance of results and tempting hypotheses to test for which
we must somehow concoct methodological permission.
For example, linguists have devised a variety of competing formal
systems for more or less algorithmically generating or analysing sentences,
and a question the psycholinguist asks is which if any proposed formalism
has 'psychological reality', or in other words describes or mirrors real
psychological processes occurring in the production or comprehension of
sentences. This empirical question is to be settled independently of the
elegance or power of the formal systems. (One way of dividing 67 by 12
is to subtract 12 from 67, then subtract 12 from 55, and so forth, while
counting the subtractions; another is long division; which if either has
'psychological reality' for an individual human calculator is surely an
empirical question, and asking the calculator is not the only, or always the
best, way of answering the question.) Subtle studies of reaction times,
relative difficulty of comprehension, patterns of errors, and so forth
often provide satisfyingly clearcut verdicts on these questions, but often
only if we make just the sorts of assumptions about representational
machinery Fodor is attempting to vindicate. Whether these investigations
will continue to ramify nicely is far from assured, however, and there is
an abundance of danger signals for sceptics to make of what they can.
The conclusion Fodor wishes to draw from this examination is bracingly
unqualified: '. . . having a propositional attitude is being in some com-
putational relation to an internal representation'. 'Attitudes to propositions
are . . . "reduced" to attitudes to formulae, though the formulae are
couched in a proprietary inner code' (p. 198). The inner code is innate,
and one's innate vocabulary of predicates must be sufficient to represent,
by logical construction, any predicate of anynatural language one can
learn. Once one learns such a predicate one may augment one's inner
code with a synonym, as it were, of the natural language predicate and
henceforward use this non-native inner word as an abbreviation for the
cumbersome truth-functional molecule of native mentalese (p. 152). We
aren't born with an inner code word for 'airplane' but if we couldn't
form at the outset a predicate of inner mentalese at least coextensive
with 'airplane' we could never learn what 'airplane' meant, could never
add an 'airplane'-synonym to our basic stock. So there is a sense in which
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

268 
D. c. DENNETT: The Language of Thought
one cannot 'acquire new concepts' by learning a language, even one's
mother tongue.
All this (and there is more) is hard to swallow, but what are the
alternatives? Thinkers as diverse as B. F. Skinner, Norman Malcolm
and Hubert Dreyfus have insisted that the very concept of neural systems
of representation is a monstrous error. Let us call that the extreme right
wing view. On the extreme left, then, would be researchers such as
McConnell and Ungar, who take brain-writing so literally that they
suppose one might physically extract token sentences of the inner code
from one creature and teach another by injection or ingestion. (Ungar
reports he has trained cats to fear the dark and then isolated a substance
in them, 'scotophobin', which injected into untrained cats causes them
to fear the dark!) Middle-of-the-road positions have yet to be formulated
in satisfactory detail, but it is safe to say that Fodor has laid claim to a
position far to the left of centre and is insisting that no less extreme
position can provide the foundations for the promising theories of neo-
cognitivism.
Let us return to the beginning and examine Fodor's case in some detail.
Fodor takes his first task to be protecting neo-cognitivism from two
philosophic threats: Ryle's attack on intellectualist theorizing, and the
physicalist demand that all theoretical terms be reducible somehow to
the terms of physics. Fodor sees these as in different ways suggesting the
charge that neo-cognitivism is dualistic (a verdict Fodor would view as
at least discouraging and probably fatal). The charge is familiar: the
characteristic predicates of cognitive psychology are Intentional or
'mentalistic' idioms, and since mentalism is dualism, cognitive psychology
is dualistic. Certainly in the past this has been an influential train of
thought; Brentano did after all reintroduce the concept of Intentionality
precisely as the distinguishing mark of the non-physical, and (though
probably not influenced by Brentano) Skinner has for years seen the
spectre of dualism in every variety of 'mentalistic' theorizing. The claim
has not however figured influentially in recent philosophic work in the
area. On the contrary, the coexistence of physicalistic doctrine with
Intentional or mentalistic vocabulary, while perhaps not having received
the justification it ought to have, is a typically undefended and unattacked
feature of current discussions.
It is a bit curious then that a rebuttal of the dualism charge should find
pride of place in Fodor. Perhaps he is addressing the many psychologists
who haven't heard and are still swayed by Skinner's suspicions. More
curious still is Fodor's choice of Ryle as the initial target of his rebuttal.
In Psychological Explanation (1968) Fodor went to great lengths to refute
his version of Ryle's 'logical behaviourism' and in 1975 he has still not
been able to remove his hands from this tarbaby. Now it is clearer why
Ryle should exercise him so, for he has clarified his interpretation with
a cute example. Why are Wheaties (as the ads say) the breakfast of
champions? Because, says the dietician, they contain vitamins, etc.
Because, says the Rylean, they are eaten for breakfast by a non-negligible
number of champions. The former is a 'causal' explanation, the latter is
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

CRITICAL NOTICE 
269
a 'conceptual' explanation and, according to Fodor, Ryle's view is that
the latter explanation is in competition with the former. When a question
should have a conceptual answer it can't have a causal answer as well.
Questions like 'What makes the clown's clowning clever?' have conceptual
answers and, according to Fodor's Ryle, therefore can't have causal
answers—'Alas for the psychology of clever clowning'.
Fodor's demolition of this notion should be, and is, obvious, and as an
interpretation of Ryle it is almost right; the Wheaties example does
most effectively illuminate a central Rylean distinction, and there are
many passages in The Concept of Mind that could be cited to support
the claim that Ryle deserves to be so interpreted. But Ryle does not, as
Fodor thinks, offer The Concept of Mind as a psychological theory or as
a substitute for psychology or as a proof that psychology can't be done.
Fodor seems to be pointing out that questions like 'What makes the
clowning clever?' are ambiguous, but he does not see, or accept, the
implication that in such cases there are two questions one can be asking.
If there are two questions, it can be true that one cannot answer a
question requiring a conceptual answer with a.causal answer, which is
Ryle's point, without it being true that psychology and philosophy of
mind are in competition. Fodor has construed Ryle's attack on intel-
lectualist theorizing (involving the postulation of inner cognitive
processes) as an attack on intellectualist solutions to problems in psy-
chology, while Ryle intended it primarily as an attack on intellectualist
solutions to the conceptual problems of philosophy. In fairness to Fodor's
interpretation, Ryle does strongly suggest that cognitivistic or 'para-
mechanical' hypotheses and the like are bankrupt as psychology as well
(see especially the last chapter of The Concept of Mind) and against that
excessive strain in Ryle's thought Fodor's arguments—and indeed the
whole book—are a welcome antidote. But in the process of magnifying
and rebutting the worst in Ryle, Fodor misconstrues Ryle in another
fashion that leads him to overlook a more penetrating Rylean objection
to his enterprise 'Ryle assumes', Fodor tells us, '. . . that a mentalist must
be a dualist; in particular, that mentalism and materialism are mutually
exclusive'. Hence the 'tendency to see the options of dualism and
behaviourism as exhaustive in the philosophy of mind' (p. 4). Were we
to replace 'Ryle' with 'Skinner' and 'philosophy of mind' with 'psychology*
in this passage there would be no quarrel, but in the sense of the term
in which behaviourism is the chief rival empirical theory to Fodor's
mentalism, Ryle is no behaviourist but a sort of mentalist himself.
Ryle does not attempt, as Skinner does, to explicate mentalistic predicates
'(just) in terms of stimulus and response variables' (p. 8). On the contrary,
his explications are typically replete with Intentional idioms. Ryle's
familiar account of vanity, for instance (whatever its problems) is not
that vanity is a disposition to perform certain locomotions, utter certain
sounds, respond to certain stimuli, but that it is a disposition to try to
make oneself prominent, to ignore criticism, talk about oneself, avoid
recalling past failures, 'indulge in roseate daydreams about his own
successes' (The Concept of Mind, p. 86). What kind of behaviourism is
that? Not any kind to be found in psychology. Ryle's disagreements with
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

270 
D. c. DENNETT: The Language of Thought
Fodor are fundamental, but they are not to be discovered by allying
Ryle with Skinner.
Perhaps Ryle's view can again be illuminated by a fanciful example.
Suppose someone were benighted enough to think the monthly bank
statement he received was a historical description of actual transfers
of currency among thousands of labelled boxes in bank vaults. He is
informed of an overdraft and puts forward a theory of anti-dollars,
vacuums and vortices to explain it. The Rylean explains that nothing
like that is what makes it the case that the account is overdrawn and
gives a 'conceptual' account of the situation. The 'logical behaviourist*
account of overdrafts is the one we are usually interested in. Of course
there is a mechanical story about what happens at the bank that can be
told as well, and perhaps knowing it will help us understand the con-
ceptual account, but the two are distinct.
Fodor does not seem to see this point in application to psychology, for
he wishes to maintain with regard to the clever clown 'that it is the fact
that the behaviour was caused by such [inner cognitive] events that makes
it the kind of behaviour it is; that intelligent behaviour is intelligent
because it has the kind of etiology it has' (p. 3—but see also n. 2 of p. 29,
where Fodor qualifies this). This claim burkes Ryle's distinction and
leads Fodor, I hope to show later, to a mistaken account of what makes
it the case that something represents something.
Setting aside this difficulty, Fodor has shown, contra Ryle, that there
is some real work that the mentalistic terms of cognitive psychology
might do, but could they do this work while being faithful to the spirit
of materialism? Fodor argues that the reasonable belief in the generality
of physics, and the reasonable desire that the various sciences be somehow
unified, have engendered unreasonably strong demands that the theo-
retical predicates of the 'special' sciences, and psychology in particular,
be 'reducible' to the predicates of physics. Fodor's critique of reduction-
ism and concomitant defence of functionalism is consonant with other
recent accounts, especially Putnam's, but makes important additions of
detail to this emerging orthodoxy. The unreasonableness of reductionism
is nicely illustrated by a discussion of its application to Gresham's Law,
a very clear account is given of type and token physicalism and natural
kinds, and there is an especially useful development of the claim that it
is a mistake to try to make the laws of the unreduced sciences exception-
less. We should look for the laws of physics to be exceptionless, but these
laws should not, as the reductionist requires, guarantee that the laws of
the reduced sciences have no exceptions, but rather provide an explanation
of the exceptions encountered. To reconstrue the laws of the special
sciences so that their predicates were locked with the predicates of
physics would be to abandon the very utility of the predicates that gave
birth to the special sciences in the first place.
Fodor offers a specific positive account of the logical relations that
may hold between the terms of a special science (say psychology) and a
reducing science (either physiology or physics) which goes far toward
establishing the proper independence of the former. I think it could go
farther. Fodor shows how a special science can be neutral with regard
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

CRITICAL NOTICE 
271
to variation in physical realization, and can tolerate variety in the physical
tokenings of its types even within the individual, but I think he un-
necessarily rules out the possibility that there could be a law of a special
science, even an exceptionless law, where there were no laws of the
reducing sciences relating all the tokenings (because the regularities in
token sequences could only be described by conditionals with highly
disjunctive antecedents and consequents). It seems essential that he
allow for and explain this possibility, for it is fundamental to the capacity
of well designed systems to 'absorb' random or merely fortuitous noise,
malfunction, interference. The account Fodor gives does not permit
the brain to tolerate typographical errors in the inner code, so far as I can
see.
Fodor supposes his arguments obtain methodological permission to
use mentalistic predicates in theory construction. Why should we want
them? Because it is 'self-evident that organisms often believe the be-
haviour they produce to be of a certain kind and that it is often part of
the explanation of the way that an organism behaves to advert to the
beliefs it has about the kind of behaviour it produces' (p. 28). In other
words, Fodor does not believe another reasoned obituary of behaviourism
would be worth space in his book. Very well, but what, exactly, is 'self-
evident'? Fodor believes that the everyday, lay explanations of behaviour
(of both people and beasts) in terms of beliefs and desires are of a piece
with the sophisticated information-flow explanations of the neo-
cognitivists, so that the self-evident acceptability of 'the dog bit me
because he thought I was someone else' ensures the inevitable theoretical
soundness of something like 'the dog's executive routine initiated the
attack subroutine because in the course of perceptual analysis it generated
and misconfirmed a false hypothesis about the identity of an object in
its environment'. Fodor recognizes that it is a fairly large step from
everyday, personal-level Intentional explanations to theory-bound sub-
personal level Intentional explanations but impatiently dismisses the
worry that anything important to his enterprise might hinge on how he
took the step: 'There is, obviously, a horribly difficult problem about
what determines what a person (as distinct from his body, or parts of
his body) did. Many philosophers care terrifically about drawing this
distinction . . . but. . . there is no particular reason to suppose that it is
relevant to the purposes of cognitive psychology' (p. 52). We shall see.
Fodor's next task is to show how neo-cognitivist theory is unavoidably
committed to a language of thought. He begins by offering three different
but related demonstrations, and similar problems attend each. First,
Fodor presents a schema for neo-cognitivist theories of 'considered action*.
Any such theory will suppose the
'agent finds himself in a certain situation (S) . . . believes that a
certain set of behavioural options . . . are available to him . . ., com-
putes a set of hypotheticals roughly of the form if Bi is performed
in S, then, with a certain probability, Cj. . .. A preference ordering
is assigned to the consequences. . . . The organism's choice of
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

272 
D. c. DENNETT: The Language of Thought
behaviour is determined as a function of the preferences and the
probabilities assigned' (p. 28-29).
In other words, a normative decision theory is to be adapted as a natural
history of cognitive processes in the organism, and for such a history to
be true, agents must 'have means for representing their behaviour to
themselves'. 'For, according to the model, deciding is a computational
process; the act the agent performs is the consequence of computations
denned over representations of possible actions. No representations, no
computations. No computations, no model' (p. 31). Moreover, 'an infinity
of distinct representations must belong to the system* for 'there is no
upper bound to the complexity of the representation that may be required
to specify the behavioural options available to the agent' (p. 31).
Note that this argument assumes there is a clear line between com-
putational processes and other processes, and another between con-
sidered action and mere reactivity. Fodor does not intend his argument
to apply only to the psychology of human beings, but how plausible is it
that a mole or a chicken or a fish is capable of representing behavioural
options of unbounded complexity? The famous four F's (fighting, fleeing,
feeding and sexual intercourse) would seem to be a plausible initial
tally of options, and even if we allow, say, a dozen variations on each
theme we hardly need a productive representation system to provide
internal vehicles for them all, and the process that led to the appropriate
'choice' in such a case would not often appear to be computational,
unless all processes are. Presumably a diving bell does not compute its
equilibrium depth in the water, though it arrives at it by a process of
diminishing 'corrections'. Does a fish compute its proper depth of
operations? Is there an important qualitative difference between the
processes in the fish and the diving bell?
Fodor's way of dealing with these problems is best understood by
contrast with the paths not taken. Fodor could have claimed that only
the behaviour of human beings (and other smart creatures of his choosing)
is governed by truly computational processes, or he could have gone to the
other extreme and granted the diving bell its computational processes.
Or he could have defended an intermediate position along these lines:
all creatures of noticeable intelligence make decisions (I who 'care
terrifically' would insist that at best something decision-like occurs
within them) and as we ascend the phylogenetic scale the decision-
processes are more and more aptly characterized as computational; all
creatures of noticeable intelligence have at least rudimentary representa-
tional systems, but only in higher creatures are these systems language-
like in being productive or generative. Instead, he adopts the line that
there is a radical discontinuity between computational and non-
computational processes: *What distinguishes what organisms do . . .
is that a representation of the rules they follow constitutes one of the causal
determinants of their behaviour1 (p. 74, n. 15). If Fodor is to distinguish
this claim from the other options he must mean that these rules are
explicitly represented (not implicitly represented in virtue of functional
organization, that is), and this is the radical heart of Fodor's position.
I will discuss some problems with it later.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

CRITICAL NOTICE 
; 
. 
273
Fodor's second demonstration concerns what he calls concept learning,
roughly, coming to distinguish and attach importance to some particular
class of things or stimuli in one's environment (e.g., learning about
green apples, or learning not to press the bar until the buzzer sounds, or
learning to put the red circles in one pile and everything else in another).
Fodor claims that 'there is oniy one kind of theory that has ever been
proposed for concept learning—indeed, there would seem to be only
one kind of theory that is conceivable—and this theory [that concept
learning proceeds by hypothesis formation and confirmation] is in-
coherent unless there is a language of thought' (p. 36). Why? Because
the hypotheses formed must be 'couched' in representations. A striking
point Fodor makes about this is that experiments can distinguish between
logically equivalent but 'notationally* different formulations of hypotheses
in concept learning. The idea is that taking the spades out of a deck of
cards is easier, oddly enough, than leaving all the cards that are not spades
in the deck. When presented with the latter task if one does not think
'in other words . . .' one's performance will suffer. Does this con-
sideration, and similar ones, not establish beyond a shadow of a doubt
the 'psychological reality' of the representations? As in the first case, it all
depends on how far Fodor is prepared to descend with his talk of rep-
resentations. What is somewhat plausible in the case of human beings is
not at all plausible in the case of lower animals, and it seems that even
insects can achieve some concept learning. Either some very primitive
concept learning does not require hypothesis formation and confirmation,
or if it all does, some hypotheses are formed but not 'couched', or just
about any feature on the inside of a creature can be considered a
representation. Certainly the psychological reality of something function-
ing in some ways rather like a representation is established by the results
Fodor cites, but Fodor has prepared a buttered slide for us and anyone
who does not want to get on it might well dig in the heels at this point
and ask for more details.
Fodor's third demonstration concerns perception. Here his point is
that, as empiricists have insisted (for all the wrong reasons) 'the sensory
data which confirm a given perceptual hypothesis are typically internally
represented in a vocabulary that is impoverished compared to the vocabu-
lary in which the hypotheses themselves are couched* (p. 44). For instance,
the empiricists would say that my hypothesis is that there is an apple
out there, and my data are that I seem to see this red round patch. Fodor
likes the idea of perception proceeding by a series of computational
processes taking descriptions in one vocabulary and using them to confirm
hypothesized descriptions in another vocabulary and the main thing he
sees wrong with empiricist versions of this is their penchant for couching
the given in the 'theory-free language of qualia* rather than the 'theory-
laden language of values of physical parameters' (p. 48). What is given
is the excitation of a sensory mechanism sensitive to a physical property.
'Hence, there is no reason to believe that the organism cannot be mistaken
about what sensory descriptions apply in any given case' (p. 48). But
here Fodor seems to me to have lost track of the important distinction
between the content of a signal to the system it informs and the content
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

274 
D- c- DENNETT: The Language of Thought
we on the outside can assign it when we describe the signal and the system
of which it is a part. For instance, one badly misconceives the problem
of perception if one views the retinal receptors as 'telling' the first level
of hypotheses testers 'red wavelength light at location L again', for that
level does not utilize or understand (in any impoverished sense) in-
formation of that sort. What it gets in the way of data are at best reports
with uninterpreted dummy predicates ('it is intensely F at location L
again') and out of these it must confirm its own dummy hypotheses.1 In
fact is either way of talking appropriate? The vocabulary of the signals
is not something that is to be settled by an examination of tokens, at
least at this level, and when we turn to indirect evidence of 'psychological
reality* any evidence we turn up will perforce be neutral between inter-
preted and uninterpreted predicates.
What content is to be assigned to events in the nervous system sub-
serving perception? That, I take it, is a rather important question for
cognitive psychology to answer. It cannot be answered, I submit, until
one gets quite careful about who (or what, if anything) has access to the
candidate representation—for whom or for what the thing in question is
a representation. As Michael Arbib has suggested, what the frog's eye
tells the frog's brain is not what the frog's eye tells the frog.
Fodor rather nonchalantly dismisses such distinctions. Why are they
important? Suppose we make the following extension of his main argu-
ment. The only psychology that could possibly succeed is neo-cognitivist,
which requires the postulation of an internal system of representations.
However, nothing is intrinsically a representation of anything; something
is a representation only for or to someone; any representation or system
of representations requires at least one user of the system who is external
to the system. Call such a user an exempt agent. Hence, in addition to a
system of internal representations, neo-cognitivism requires the postula-
tion of an inner exempt agent or agents—in short, undischarged homun-
culi. Any psychology with undischarged homunculi is doomed to
circularity or infinite regress, hence psychology is impossible.1
The problem is an old one. Hume wisely shunned the notion of an
inner self that would intelligently manipulate the ideas and impressions,
but this left him with the necessity of getting the ideas to 'think for
themselves'. His associationistic couplings of ideas and impressions, his
pseudo-chemical bonding of each idea to its predecessor and successor,
is a notorious non-solution to the problem. Fodor's analogous problem
is to get the internal representations to 'understand themselves', and
one is initially inclined to view Hume's failure as the harbinger of doom
for all remotely analogous enterprises. But perhaps the prima jade
absurd notion of self-understanding representations is an idea whose time
1 
Cf. J. J. C. Smart, Philosophy and Scientific Realism (1963), on 'topic-
neutral reports'. The epistemic status of reports with uninterpreted
predicates and reports with qualia-predicates would seem to be the
same.
2 
Cf. my 'Why the Law of Effect Will Not Go Away", J. Theory of Social
Behavior, October 1975, and Fodor's 'The Appeal to Tacit Knowledge
in Psychological Explanation', J. Philosophy, lxv (1968), 627-640.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

CRITICAL NOTICE 
275
has come, for what are the 'data structures' of computer science if not
just that: representations that understand themselves? In a computer, a
«)mmand to dig goes straight to the shovel, as it were, eliminating the
comprehending and obeying middleman. Not straight to the shovel, of
course, for a lot of sophisticated switching is required to get the right
command going to the right tools, and for some purposes it is illuminating
to treat parts of this switching machinery as analogous to the displaced
shovellers, subcontractors and contractors. The beauty of it all, and
its importance for psychology, is precisely that it promises to solve
Hume's problem by giving us a model of vehicles of representation that
function without exempt agents for whom they are ploys. Alternatively,
one could insist that the very lack of exempt agents in computers to be
the users of the putative representations shows that computers do not
contain representations—real representations—at all, but unless one
views this as a rather modest bit of lexicographical purism one is in
danger of discarding one of the most promising conceptual advances
ever to fall into philosophers' hands.
Fodor almost parenthetically makes these points (in a footnote on p. 74
where he roundly rebuts an ill-considered version of the homunculus
argument of mine). He is justly unafraid of homunculi, for they are at
most just picturesquely described parts of the switching machinery that
ensures the functional roles of the inner messages, but he fails to recognize
that they still play the theoretical role of fixing the 'topic* and 'vocabulary'
of the messages they communicate. If viewing messages of the inner code
as self-understanding representations in this fashion can save Fodor's
enterprise from incoherence—and in principle I think it can—it does so
by adding constraints to the notion of an internal representation system
that emphasize rather than eliminate the distinction between personal
level attributions of beliefs and desires and sub-personal level attributions
of content to intra-systemic transactions. If there is any future for internal
systems of representation it will not be for languages of thought that
'represent our beliefs to us', except in the most strained sense. Fodor
notices the strain (p. 52) but decides to tolerate it. The result, for all its
vividness, is at least misleading in a way that has an analogy in the history
of science. The problem of genetic inheritance used to look all but in-
soluble. Did the sperm cell contain a tiny man, and if so did the tiny man
have sperm cells containing tiny men and so forth ad infinitttmi Or did
the sperm cell contain a picture or description of a human being, and
if so, what looked at the picture or read the description? The truth turns
out to be scarcely less marvellous than the 'absurd' speculations, what
with self-reading, self-duplicating codes and their supporting machinery,
but anyone who had insisted all along that somehow the mother finds
out from the sperm what sort of baby the father wants would not have
been pointing in just the right direction. (This sidelong glance at DNA
serves the additional purpose of reminding the sceptics who view the
contraptions of artificial intelligence as hopelessly inefficient and
'inorganic' that nature has proved not to be stingy when it comes to
micro-engineering solutions to hard problems.)
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

276 
D. c. DENNETT: The Language of Thought
Earlier I claimed that Fodor's view of computational processes commits
him to a radical view of representation. The problems with this hard line
on the psychological reality of explicit representations are apparent—
indeed, are deliberately made apparent, to Fodor's credit—in his dis-
cussion of langage learning. His argument is that the process of learning
the meaning of a word, even the initial words of one's native tongue, is
and must be a process of hypothesis formation and confirmation, and in
particular,
among the generalizations about a language that the learner must
hypothesize and confirm are some which determine the extensions of
the predicates of that language. A generalization that effects such a
determination is, by stipulation, a truth rule (p. 59).
For instance, the truth rule for 'is a chair' is ' ry is a chair1 is true iff Gx'
where 'G' is a predicate of one's internal code. Fodor seems to think
that the only hypotheses which could determine the extension of a natural
language predicate would have to be confirmed hypotheses explicitly
about that predicate and having the explicit form of a truth rule. But to
play Fodor's own game for a moment, couldn't a child learn something
that determined the extension of 'is a chair' by disconfirming the following
hypotheses (and others):
rx is a chair1 is true iff x is red
rx is a chair1 is true iff x is in the living room
rx is a chair1 is true iff x has a cushion
and, perhaps, confirming—even wujconfirming—others, e.g., <r*x is a
chair1 is true if x is this object here or that object there', and <rx is a
chair1 is true only if x would support Daddy's weight', without ever
explicitly representing a confirmed truth rule for 'is a chair'? I suspect
that Fodor's reply would be that to learn something determining the
extension of 'is a chair' the child must explicitly conjoin all the confirmed
hypotheses and the negations of the disconfirmed hypotheses and that
somehow this amounts to the confirmation of the explicit truth rule for
'is a chair', but aside from the implausibility of this as a story of real
computational processes (but remember DNA) one wants to know what
could conceivably count against the presumably empirical claim that
whatever could determine the extension of a predicate has the explicit
form of a truth rule, if this example did not.
Perhaps Fodor has gratuitously .overstated his own best case, for it
seems as if he is committed to the impossible view that only explicit
representation is representation, and (roughly) nothing can be believed,
thought about or learned without being explicitly represented.
That is, one might think of cognitive theories as filling in explanation
schema[ta] of, roughly, the form: having the attitude R to proposition P
is contingently identical to being in computational relation C to the
formula (or sequence of formulae) F. A cognitive theory, insofar as it
was both true and general, would presumably explain the produc-
tivity of prepositional attitudes by entailing infinitely many substitu-
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

CRITICAL NOTICE 
277
tion instances of this schema: one for each of the propositional
attitudes that the organism can entertain (p. 77).
Perhaps we 'entertain' propositional attitudes either seriatim or at least
in manageably small numbers at any one time, but the propositional
attitudes we have far outstrip those we (in some sense) actively entertain.
For instance, it should come as no news to any of you that zebras in the
wild do not wear overcoats, but I hazard the guess that it hadn't occurred
to any of you before just now. We all have believed it for some time but
were not born believing it, so we must have come to believe it between
birth and, say, age fifteen, but it is not at all plausible that this is a
hypothesis any of us has explicitly formed or confirmed in our childhood,
even unconsciously. It is not even plausible that having formed and
confirmed other hypotheses entailing this fact about zebras, we (in our
spare time?) explicitly computed this implication.
Fodor does seem to be committed to some such view as this, however.
He backs into this corner by underestimating the viability of what he takes
to be the only alternative, which he characterizes as a dispositional
behavioural analysis of propositional attitudes. 'A number of philosophers
who ought to know better do, apparently, accept such views' Fodor says,
never doubting that he has seen clearly to the very heart of such silliness.
His version of dispositional analysis is so simplistic, however, that he
thinks the notion is adequately buried by a quip: 'Pay me enough and
I will stand on my head iff you say chair. But I know what "is a chair"
means all the same' (p. 63). It is of course true that the arduous piecemeal
composition of dispositional definitions of propositional attitudes would
be a bootless methodology for psychology (Ryle knew better than to
attempt to say, precisely, just what his 'multi-track' dispositions were),
but if, as Fodor supposes, the representation-talk of cognitive psychology
ultimately gets vindicated by such ploys as computer modelling of
cognitive systems and processes, he must be committed in spite of himself
to a version of Rylism. For a computer programme is just a very compli-
cated specification of a multi-track disposition (a disposition to be dis-
posed under conditions A, B, C to be disposed under conditions X, Y, Z
to be disposed . . . to give output O . . . etc.). Notationally distinct but
equivalent programmes are equivalent precisely in that they determine
the same multi-track disposition.
Suppose research reveals all the psychologically real computational
processes in Mary, and artificial intelligencers programme a robot,
Ruth, whose internal processes 'model' Mary's as perfectly as you like.
Suppose that Mary believes that p. So then does Ruth. But suppose the
artificial intelligencers then give another robot, Sally, a programme
equivalent to Ruth's, but notationally and computationally different.
Sally may not be a good psychological model of Mary, but Sally, like
Ruth and Mary, believes that p.1 That is, the ascription of all Mary's
beliefs and desires (etc.) to Sally will be just as predictive as their ascrip-
tion to Ruth so far as prediction of action goes. Sally's response delays,
1 
Perfect equivalence of programmes is a very strong condition. I would
hold it is a sufficient but not necessary condition for sharing Intentional
characterizations.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

278 
D. c. DENNETT: The Language of Thought
errors, and the like may not match Mary's, but this is not what belief
ascription is supposed to predict or explain (cf. Fodor, p. 123). If one
agrees with Fodor that it is the job of cognitive psychology to map the
psychologically real processes in people, then since the ascription of
belief and desire is only indirectly tied to such processes, one might well
say that beliefs and desires are not the proper objects of study of cognitive
psychology. Put otherwise, cognitivist theories are or should be theories
of the subpersonal level, where beliefs and desires disappear, to be
replaced with representations of other sorts on other topics.
But unless I am misreading Fodor, he will have none of this. His
position simply is that since believing that snow is white couldn't be
having a disposition to behave, it must be having a token of the mentalese
translation of 'snow is white' installed in some wonderful way in one's
head. Perhaps I am misreading him by interpreting 'being in a com-
putation relation to a formula of the inner code' as implying the existence
of a real token of that formula in some functionally characterized relation
to the rest of the machinery, but the weaker alternative, viz., that one
is in a computational relation to a formula if one can or would produce
or use a token of that formula in some way under some circumstances
invokes dispositionalism of just the sort Fodor has presumably forsworn.
None of this is to say that neural representations, even tokens of
brain-writing, are impossible. It is not even to deny that the existence
of such representations is a necessary condition for cognition. It may
well turn out to be. But Fodor, by making explicit coding criterial for
representation or contentfulness, has committed the very sin he imputes
to Ryle: he has confused a conceptual answer with a causal answer. Like
neo-cognitivists generally, Fodor wants to be able to assign content to
events or other features of systems, to treat them as information-bearers
or messages. What makes it the case ultimately that something in this
sense represents something within a system is that it has a function
within the system, in principle globally specifiable.1 To say that it has
the function of bearing a certain message or transmitting certain in-
formation is to talk in circles, but often in useful circles for the time
being. Content is a function of function, then, but not every structure
can realize every function, can reliably guarantee the normal relationships
required. So function is a function of structure. There are, then, strong
indirect structural constraints on things that can be endowed with
content. If our brains were as homogeneous as jelly we could not think.
Fodor, however, makes a direct leap from content to structure and seems
moreover to make structure in the end criterial for content.
On his view a prescriptive theory (e.g., natural deduction or decision
theory) can be predictive of behaviour only if it is descriptive of inner
processes. When we predict and explain the behaviour of a system at the
Intentional level our calculations have a certain syntactic structure: to
oversimplify, they are formal proofs or derivations, e.g., of descriptions
of best actions to take given certain beliefs and preferences. We predict
that the physical states or events to which we assign the premises as
1 
Ignoring for the moment the normative element in all Intentional attri-
butions. See my 'Intentional Systems', J. Philosophy, lxviii (1971), 87-105.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

CRITICAL NOTICE 
279
formulae will cause those states or events whose formulae are the later
lines of our calculations (see, e.g., p. 73). Fodor seems to suppose that
the only structures that could guarantee and explain the predictive power
of our Intentionalistic calculations (and permit us to assign formulae
to states or events in a principled way) must mirror the syntax of those
calculations. This is either trivially true (because the 'syntactic' structure
of events or states is defined simply by their function) or an empirical
claim that is very interesting, not entirely implausible, and as yet not
demonstrated or even argued for, so far as I can tell. For instance,
suppose hamsters are interpretable as good Bayesians when it comes to
the decisions they make. Must we in principle be able to find some
saliencies in the hamsters' controls that are interpretable as tokens of
formulae in some Bayesian calculus? If that is Fodor's conclusion I don't
see that he has given it the support it needs, and I confess to disbelieving
it utterly.
In a recent conversation with the designer of a chess-playing pro-
gramme I heard the following criticism of a rival programme: 'It thinks
it should get its queen out early*. This ascribes a propositional attitude
to the programme in a very useful and predictive way, for as the designer
went on to say, one can usually count on chasing that queen around the
board. But for all the many levels of explicit representation to be found
in that programme, nowhere is anything roughly synonymous with
'I should get my queen out early* explicitly tokened. The level of analysis
to which the designer's remark belongs describes features of the pro-
gramme that are, in an entirely innocent way, emergent properties of
the computational processes that have 'engineering reality'. I see no
reason to believe that the relation between belief-talk and psychological-
process talk will be any more direct.
Are all these doubts about Fodor's radical view swept away by the
material in the second half of this book, where evidence is adduced about
the structure, vocabulary and utilization of the inner code? The challenge
of these chapters to the sceptic is to find a way of recasting what cannot
be denied in them in terms less radical than Fodor's. I do not see that
this cannot be done, but saying it is not doing it, and doing it would
require a monograph. Fodor's account of the inner code in action is
packed with detail and bold speculation, and is supported by a variety
of elegant experiments and ingenious arguments. Fodor puts together
a more or less Gricean theory of communication and a more or less
Chomskyan view of the relation between surface features of utterances
and deeper levels, but comes out forcefully against semantic primitives
(at least in their familiar role in the production and comprehension of
sentences). He defends images as inner representational vehicles in
addition to his code formulae, and claims to show that the inner code
can represent its own representations and has a vocabulary about as rich
as that of English—to mention a few highlights. There are a few dubious
links in the argumentation (e.g., Fodor's cat and mouse example on p. 142
seems obviously mis-analysed, but it may not matter), but time and again
Fodor succeeds, in my estimation, in parrying the 'obvious' philosophical
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

280 
D. c. DENNETT: The Language of Thought
objections. One exception is in his account of communication. Unless
I am reading him too literally, he seems committed to the view that for
A to communicate verbally with B, A and B must not only share a natural
language but have the same version of mentalese as well. Once again
this is a claim that might be trivial or might be almost certainly false,
and we can't tell until Fodor is more explicit.
Faulting Fodor for not being sufficiently explicit in this instance is
a bit ungenerous, for Fodor has offered a detailed theory in an area
hitherto bereft of detailed theories, and has been more explicit than
anybody else about many of the murky issues. The book is exceptionally
clear, with excellent summaries of arguments and conclusions at just the
right places. The view Fodor has put forward is a remarkably full view;
seldom have stands on so many different issues been so staunchly taken
in this area, and even where I think he is wrong, it is usually the crispness
of his expression that suggests for the first time just exactly what is
wrong. Fodor challenges us to find a better theory, and I fully expect
that challenge to be met, but when better theories emerge they will owe
a good deal to Fodor's reconnaissance.1
TUFTS UNIVERSITY
I 
I am indebted to Georges Rey, Bosse Dahlbom, David Israel and Susan
Stafford for criticism of the first draft of this review.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/article/LXXXVI/342/265/988243 by The Wikipedia Library user on 29 November 2023

