 
 
An Adaptive Homomorphic Aperture Photometry Algorithm for Merging Galaxies
Author(s): J. C. Huang and  C. Y. Hwang
Source: Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific, Vol. 129, No. 973 (2017
March), pp. 1-6
Published by: Astronomical Society of the Pacific
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/26660070
Accessed: 28-02-2023 13:20 UTC
 
REFERENCES 
Linked references are available on JSTOR for this article:
https://www.jstor.org/stable/26660070?seq=1&cid=pdf-reference#references_tab_contents 
You may need to log in to JSTOR to access the linked references.
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Astronomical Society of the Pacific is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize, preserve and
extend access to Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Pacific
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:20:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

An Adaptive Homomorphic Aperture Photometry Algorithm
for Merging Galaxies
J. C. Huang and C. Y. Hwang
Graduate Institute of Astronomy, National Central University, Jungli, Taoyuan 32001, Taiwan; m969003@astro.ncu.edu.tw, hwangcy@astro.ncu.edu.tw
Received 2016 October 4; accepted 2017 January 4; published 2017 February 1
Abstract
We present a novel automatic adaptive aperture photometry algorithm for measuring the total magnitudes of
merging galaxies with irregular shapes. First, we use a morphological pattern recognition routine for identifying the
shape of an irregular source in a background-subtracted image. Then, we extend the shape of the source by using
the Dilation image operation to obtain an aperture that is quasi-homomorphic to the shape of the irregular source.
The magnitude measured from the homomorphic aperture would thus have minimal contamination from the nearby
background. As a test of our algorithm, we applied our technique to the merging galaxies observed by the Sloan
Digital Sky Survey and the Canada–France–Hawaii Telescope. Our results suggest that the adaptive homomorphic
aperture algorithm can be very useful for investigating extended sources with irregular shapes and sources in
crowded regions.
Key words: techniques: image processing – techniques: photometric
1. Introduction
An important issue in astronomical CCD photometry is
obtaining an unbiased ﬂux estimate for an extended source.
Usually, a circular or elliptic aperture is used for estimating the
total ﬂux of a source. While the aperture must be sufﬁciently wide
for including most of the ﬂux from the source, its size should be
limited in order to minimize the sky noise and avoid contamina-
tion from the nearby sources. Some adaptive schemes, such as
aperture methods described by Kron (1980) and Petrosian (1976),
have been proposed for optimization of results.
However, galaxy photometry is not a straightforward process.
For galaxies in a crowded region or for irregular galaxies with odd
shapes, it is difﬁcult to obtain the “best” aperture. Automatic
elliptical/circular apertures could include extra contributions from
the nearby sources or miss the faint parts of the irregular galaxies.
Sometimes, it is also difﬁcult to separate the nearby objects
with an elliptical or circular aperture in a crowded region. The
uncertainties in the ﬂux measurement not only stem from the
background noise but also from the shape and size uncertainties of
the integrating aperture itself.
Ideally,
the
sky
noise
could
be
minimized
and
the
contamination from the nearby sources could be avoided if
the aperture used is similar to or has the same shape as the
source. Isophotal technique has been applied for similar
purposes (Kibblewhite et al. 1984). However, isophotal
apertures might miss the faint edges of the objects and thus
could underestimate the ﬂux measurements from the objects; a
corrected
isophotal
aperture
photometry
has
thus
been
proposed to correct the problem (Maddox et al. 1990). The
corrected isophotal aperture assumes that the faint edge of an
object is mainly affected with Gaussian atmospheric blurring;
therefore, the total ﬂux owing to the object can be derived from
the isophotal aperture with a Gaussian blurring correction. The
correction might be suitable for point sources; however, it has
large uncertainty when applied to spheroidal galaxies (Bertin &
Arnouts 1996). Moreover, the wing of atmospheric point-
spread function was found to behave more like a power law
rather than a Gaussian proﬁle (Racine 1996).
For merging galaxies, which usually have more complex
morphology, we would likely include additional background
noise or contamination sources when applying elliptical
apertures. Isophotal technique might be quite suitable for
merging galaxies, but it might miss the faint structures of the
merging galaxies. Currently, there is no suitable aperture
technique that is speciﬁcally designed for merging galaxies. To
achieve this goal, we provide a completely different algorithm
by utilizing pattern recognition routines for obtaining an
adaptive aperture which is enlarged from the original shape of
the source by extending its boundary. We considered such an
enlarged aperture is “quasi-homomorphic” to the original shape
of the source. Such a quasi-homomorphic aperture is very
suitable for estimating the total magnitudes of irregular galaxies
or normal sources in crowded regions.
In this paper, we present a new technique for obtaining
adaptive
homomorphic
apertures
automatically
by
using
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc, 129:034001 (6pp), 2017 March
doi:10.1088/1538-3873/aa5786
© 2017. The Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc. All rights reserved. Printed in the U.S.A.
Original content from this work may be used under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 licence. Any further
distribution of this work must maintain attribution to the author(s) and the title
of the work, journal citation and DOI.
1
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:20:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

pattern recognition routines. In Section 2, we describe the
adaptive aperture photometry process in detail. This technique
was applied to the merging galaxies observed in several survey
projects, and the results are shown in Section 3. Finally, in
Section 4, we discuss our results and summarize our methods.
2. Methodology
We developed a new algorithm for measuring the magni-
tudes of irregular objects by using adaptive homomorphic
aperture photometry. The algorithm uses pattern recognition
routines to create homomorphic apertures that are similar to the
shapes of the irregular objects. The shapes of the sources and
the apertures are identiﬁed in binary images, which are
converted from the original CCD images based on detection
thresholds. Our photometry processes include background
subtraction, binary image creation and homomorphic dilations.
The software for these processes was implemented in the
Interactive Data Language.
2.1. Background Subtraction
Before measuring the ﬂux of a source in a CCD image, the
background has to be subtracted from the CCD image. A global
background value is usually not representative of the entire
CCD image. To do the background subtraction, we basically
follow the background subtraction steps in the SExtractor
package (Bertin & Arnouts 1996). Our algorithm ﬁrst divides
the CCD image into several grids (usually 200 × 200 pixels
for one grid) in order to get the local background values. After
rejecting the outliers, the algorithm estimates the mode
(Mode=3×Median−2×Mean, Kendall & Stuart 1977)
and the standard deviation for each grid. The algorithm applies
a 3×3 median ﬁlter on the grids to reduce the overestimation
around bright objects. In other words, for each grid the
algorithm selects the median value of its eight neighbors to
replace the value of that grid. The algorithm applies the bi-
cubic-convolution interpolation to the entire CCD image to
construct a smooth background map and a standard deviation
map for background subtraction and following processes.
2.2. Binary Image Process
The algorithm sets a threshold on the background-subtracted
image to create a binary image. A speciﬁc pixel value will be
set to 1(0) if the corresponding pixel of the background-
subtracted image has a value higher (lower) than the local
threshold. In the algorithm, the threshold is a free parameter,
measured in units of local standard deviation ssky. The default
threshold is 1.5 ssky in order to retain the faint structures of the
sources. In the binary images, a group of connected pixels that
exceed the threshold value is considered as an object.
To identify real sources, the algorithm applies the smoothing
operator Opening on the binary image. The operator Opening is a
combination operator of the image operators Erosion and Dilation,
which are two basic image operators in the area of mathematical
morphology (Soille 2003). The effect of Dilation/Erosion on a
binary image is to enlarge/reduce the boundaries of the objects.
Graphical illustrations of these processes are shown in Figure 1.
The operator Opening will eliminate the objects that are due to
background noise ﬂuctuations; these fake sources are usually have
the sizes less than 5 pixels in the binary images. Such a smoothing
process might not reduce some noise that is correlated, but the
correlated noise will not affect on the photometry of real sources.
The Opening operator also disconnects the weak links between the
object and nearby sources in the binary image. After completing
the Opening, the remaining group of connected pixels will be
considered as a real object, and its coordinates will be set at the
geometric center of the connected pixels.
2.3. Homomorphical Dilations
The adaptive aperture uses an irregular aperture that is quasi-
homomorphic to the real shape of a source. For an irregular
source, the sourceʼs shape can be derived from the binary image.
However, the ﬂux of a galaxy decreases slowly as a function of
radius and parts of the ﬂux could be below the detection
threshold, especially on the edges of the galaxy. To capture most
of the ﬂux of an irregular object, our algorithm takes the objectʼs
shape in the binary image to be its original shape and increases
the aperture size in a quasi-homomorphic manner, implying that
the apertureʼs size is enlarged while trying to preserve the
original sourceʼs shape. The quasi-homomorphic extension of
Figure 1. Illustration of the OPENING operation (combination of EROSION and DILATION operators). The result of the OPENING is shown for a cross-structure
element.
2
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc, 129:034001 (6pp), 2017 March
Huang & Hwang
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:20:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

the aperture is implemented by using the Dilation operator. The
Dilation operator can be applied more than once for obtaining
the best estimate of the ﬂux.
The “best” size of the aperture should be the smallest size that
captures all of the sourceʼs ﬂux. For an isolated normal galaxy,
this technique should yield the same results as other aperture
techniques. We selected several known normal galaxies, which
have well-deﬁned photometric information, for examining the
relation between the ﬂux measurements and the aperture sizes for
several different instruments. The sizes of the apertures could be
determined by comparing our results with the results for these
known galaxies. Because of the different sensitivity and obser-
vation conditions at different observations, the best aperture size
for different instruments might be different. The number
of Dilations was set as a free parameter in the algorithm, for
determining suitable aperture sizes for different observational data.
Once the number of dilations has been decided, the technique can
be used for obtaining the ﬂux of the source. Figure 2 illustrates
some examples of the adaptive homomorphic apertures.
3. Application
For testing the proposed method, we applied the algorithm on
the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS, York et al. 2000; Stoughton
et al. 2002) images and the Red Sequence Survey 2 (RCS2,
Gladders & Yee 2000) images. We selected a group of known
isolated normal galaxies for determining suitable parameters for
the images. We then applied the method by using these para-
meters for measuring the magnitudes of merging galaxies.
The SDSS Database provides well-calibrated background-
subtracted images. To test our algorithms, we selected 3219
isolated normal galaxies from the SDSS Data release 9 and 42
mergers from the Galaxy Zoo project (Lintott et al. 2011).
Figure 3 shows the ﬂux measurements with the adaptive apertures
of different Dilation operations for these 3219 isolated galaxies.
We note that the aperture size will become larger with more
Dilation operations. The results indicate that the best aperture
sizes require four Dilation operations with the threshold of 1.5
ssky. We applied the parameters to obtain the apertures for the 42
mergers, which were identiﬁed as interacting systems with SDSS
photometric results for each individual galaxies. We compared our
results with the SDSS Pertrosian measurements. Since we only
measured the total ﬂux of the merging galaxy system, we summed
the SDSS Pertrosian ﬂux of individual galaxies in the system for
comparison. As shown in Figure 4, for these irregular objects, our
algorithm was able to detect more ﬂux from the objects,
presumedly originated from faint structures of the objects, than
did the Petrosian aperture technique.
Hwang & Chang (2009) have found more than 13,000
merging galaxy candidates by analyzing the RCS2 images. The
RCS2 images were observed by the Canada–France–Hawaii
Telescope with the wide-ﬁeld imager “MegaCam” (Magnier &
Cuillandre 2004). We adopted the adaptive homomorphic
Figure 2. Examples of adaptive homomorphic apertures for 20 merging galaxies from the RCS2 r′ band images. The apertures were selected to include the whole
merging galaxy systems.
3
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc, 129:034001 (6pp), 2017 March
Huang & Hwang
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:20:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

aperture method for retrieving the photometric information of
these merging galaxy candidates. We used 1081 isolated
normal galaxies for estimating the best dilation number in
determining the size of the homomorphic apertures (Figure 5).
The empirical test shows that the best size of an aperture
requires 2 homomorphic dilations. With these parameters, the
photometric information on the g′, r′, and z′ bands for 13,290
mergers out of the 13,577 candidates has been successfully
obtained (Figure 2). For the 287 failure cases, 102 were owing
to the pollution of cosmic rays; 110 sources had objects in
immediate neighborhood, which were less than 0 6 (∼3 pixels)
away from the edges of the sources; the rest were owing to
false background subtraction.
4. Discussion
We developed an adaptive homomorphic aperture technique
for the ﬂux measurements of irregular objects. This technique
needs to decide suitable parameters in determining the best size
of an aperture. We can use a catalog of artiﬁcial sources or a
group of known isolated galaxies with regular shapes to decide
the suitable parameters. To contain minimum noise, the
adaptive homomorphic apertures should be as small as possible
but would capture the ﬂux of the sources as much as possible.
For irregular objects, this method might also contain faint
structures of the sources, which might not be included by other
automatically aperture techniques. Our test showed that our
algorithms could capture more ﬂux for merging galaxies than
did the Petrosian aperture technique (Figure 4), whereas these
two techniques demonstrated similar results for normal galaxies
(Stoughton et al. 2002). This results indicate that the adaptive
homomorphic apertures can be useful for measuring faint
structures, which are not accounted for by using the Petrosian
aperture.
In the algorithms, the threshold and the number of Dilations
are two main parameters that need to be decided. Threshold
value will determine the shapes of the objects. Using high
threshold values can minimize the contamination of back-
ground noise and separate very nearby sources but may lose the
structure information at the edges of the objects. Through the
test for the known isolated galaxies with regular shapes, we
found that the threshold value and the number of Dilations are
not independent; using high threshold values need more
Dilations in order to have more accurate estimation of the ﬂux
of the source.
The adaptive homomorphic aperture technique requires
different number of Dilations for yielding the best aperture
sizes for images with different sensitivity and resolutions. Our
tests showed that the number of Dilations for the SDSS images
is four; however, under the same threshold condition, the
number of Dilations for the RCS2 images is two. The diffe-
rences might be caused by the higher sensitivity and the better
seeing of the RCS2 images than those of the SDSS images. The
method might require a group of known isolated galaxies with
regular shapes for empirically deciding the suitable parameters
Figure 3. Left: measured ﬂux ratio distributions of 3219 galaxies from the SDSS images with different aperture sizes (different dilations). The measured ﬂux ratio is
deﬁned as the ratio of the measured adaptive homomorphic aperture (AHA) ﬂux and the SDSS Petrosianʼs ﬂux. The red, green, black, and purple lines represent the
photometric results measured by using the adaptive apertures with 0, 2, 4, 6 homomorphic dilations (NoD). Right: mean ﬂux ratios for different aperture sizes. The
error bars show the standard deviation of the measurements.
Figure 4. Comparison between the magnitudes derived from the adaptive
homomorphic
aperture
(AHA)
photometry
and
the
SDSS
Petrosianʼs
photometry of 42 merging galaxies from the Galaxy Zoo. The SDSS Pertrosian
ﬂux is obtained by summing the ﬂux of individual galaxies in the system.
4
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc, 129:034001 (6pp), 2017 March
Huang & Hwang
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:20:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

for different observations. The suitable number of Dilation
operations will be affected by the seeing; the dilated regions
need to be greater than or similar to the seeing.
The adaptive homomorphic aperture technique is also
useful for objects located in the crowded regions. Many
merging galaxies in the RCS2 images were detected with
additional nearby objects. The median seeing of the RCS2
images is about 0 7 and the pixel sizes are about 0 2. With
these observational conditions, we found that the homo-
morphic apertures can avoid contaminations from the nearby
objects as long as the nearby objects are more than 0 6 away
from the edges of the sources.
The images in different observing bands may require
different parameters in creating the best adaptive homomorphic
apertures. This might cause a problem when estimating the
colors of objects since the detected areas on different images
are different. To avoid this problem, we used a common
aperture for the ﬂux measurements of an object in different
observing bands. The basic shape in creating the common
aperture of an object was the union of three basic shapes from
aligned images of different observing bands.
This
technique
is
similar
to
the
isophotal
technique
(Kibblewhite et al. 1984; Bertin & Arnouts 1996). The
isophotal aperture photometry determines the aperture sizes
by considering the pixels that have signals above the detection
threshold, which is similar to the sizes of the original objects in
the ﬁrst step of the binary image process in our algorithm.
Generally speaking, the isophotal technique might miss the
faint structure of an object and might underestimate the total
ﬂux of the object. There is a corrected isophotal aperture
photometry attempting to correct the problem theoretically
(Maddox et al. 1990). The corrected isophotal aperture assumes
that the faint edges of the object mainly stem from the Gaussian
atmospheric blurring; thus, the total ﬂux of the object can be
derived from the isophotal aperture photometry by applying the
correction relation. On the other hand, our algorithm avoids this
problem by using the homomorphic dilation process. We
applied these three aperture photometry techniques on the
Figure 5. Left: measured ﬂux ratio distributions of 1081 galaxies from the RCS2 images with different aperture sizes (different dilations). The measured ﬂux ratio is
deﬁned as the ratio of the measured adaptive homomorphic aperture (AHA) ﬂux and the SDSS Petrosianʼs ﬂux. The red, green, black, and purple lines represent the
photometric results measured by using the adaptive apertures with 0, 2, 4, 6 homomorphic dilations (NoD). Right: mean ﬂux ratios for different aperture sizes. The
error bars show the standard deviation of the measurements.
Figure 6. Left: measured ﬂux ratio distributions of 3219 galaxies in the SDSS images by using different aperture methods. The measured ﬂux ratio is deﬁned as the
ratio of the measured ﬂux from different methods to the SDSS Petrosian ﬂux. The red lines are the results for the isophotal apertures (Isophot), the purple lines are the
results for the corrected isophotal apertures (CorIso), and the black lines are the results for the adaptive homomorphic apertures (AHA). Right: measured ﬂux ratio
distributions of 1081 galaxies in the RCS2 images by using different aperture methods. The methods and symbols of the measurements are the same as those of the left
diagram for the SDSS images.
5
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc, 129:034001 (6pp), 2017 March
Huang & Hwang
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:20:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

isolated normal galaxy samples of the SDSS and the RCS2 for
examining their performance (Figure 6). We found that the
results obtained by using our algorithm are comparable with the
results of the corrected isophotal technique for the RCS2
galaxies; however, for the SDSS sources, the results obtained
by our algorithm are consistent with those of the Petrosian
results, whereas both the isophotal and corrected isophotal
results seem to underestimate the true ﬂux. These results suggest
that the adaptive homomorphic aperture technique works well
for different observations and the photometry information can be
acquired in a straightforward manner.
The adaptive homomorphic aperture technique is applicable
to irregularly shaped extended sources and is also useful for
sources in crowded regions. However, it might be necessary to
decide the best number of dilations empirically for different
instruments. Once the number of dilations has been decided for
speciﬁc observation data, the algorithms can be used for
obtaining the ﬂux of the sources.
This work was partially supported by the Ministry of Science
and Technology (MOST) of Taiwan through grant MOST 103-
2119-M-008-017-MY3.
References
Bertin, E., & Arnouts, S. 1996, A&AS, 117, 393
Gladders, M. D., & Yee, H. K. C. 2000, AJ, 120, 2148
Hwang, C.-Y., & Chang, M.-Y. 2009, ApJS, 181, 233
Kendall, M., & Stuart, A. 1977, The Advanced Theory of Statistics, Vol. 1
(London: Charles Grifﬁn)
Kibblewhite, E. J., Bridgeland, M. T., Bunclark, P. S., & Irwin, M. J. 1984, in
NASA Conf. Publ., 2317, 277
Kron, R. G., Schawinski, K., & Bamford, S. 1980, ApJS, 43, 305
Lintott, C., Schawinski, K., Bamford, S., et al. 2011, MNRAS, 410, 166
Maddox, S. J., Efstathiou, G., & Sutherland, W. J. 1990, MNRAS, 246, 433
Magnier, E. A., & Cuillandre, J.-C. 2004, PASP, 116, 449
Petrosian, V. 1976, ApJL, 209, L1
Racine, R. 1996, PASP, 108, 699
Soille, P. 2003, Morphological Image Analysis: Principles and Applications
(2nd ed.; Berlin: Springer)
Stoughton, C., Lupton, R. H., Bernardi, M., et al. 2002, AJ, 123, 485
York, D. G., Adelman, J., Anderson, J. E., Jr., et al. 2000, AJ, 120, 1579
6
Publications of the Astronomical Society of the Paciﬁc, 129:034001 (6pp), 2017 March
Huang & Hwang
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:20:59 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

