Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society
 
 
GALACTIC LEFTOVERS: The Andromeda galaxy is still forming
Author(s): Michael Szpir
Source: American Scientist, Vol. 92, No. 2 (MARCH-APRIL 2004), p. 129
Published by: Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/27858360
Accessed: 28-02-2023 13:12 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
Sigma Xi, The Scientific Research Honor Society is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize,
preserve and extend access to American Scientist
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:12:44 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 my life," Eisner says. "Because we'd
 predicted it?wonderful footage
 where the stuff comes out at 2,600
 frames per second."
 It was Edgerton's footage that gave
 Mclntosh his first look at the insect in
 action, in a documentary that Eisner
 made with the BBC. "I thought wow,
 this is extraordinary," Mclntosh says.
 "That footage has been inspirational
 to me to see that, well, maybe we can
 learn from the combustion in this
 creature."
 In adapting the beetle's technique
 to engine reigniters, Mclntosh will
 first seek to understand the steam ex
 plosion involved in the beetle's de
 fense. Then he plans to model the
 heart-shaped combustion chamber us
 ing a methane-air explosion, to under
 stand whether the shapes of the
 chamber and nozzle are significantly
 effective at larger scales. By the end of
 his three-year project he may be
 studying actual ion production, the
 splitting of air and water vapor into
 its component parts, as happens in
 real engine reigniters. "That will be
 more complicated to numerically
 model," he says, "but we'll probably
 get to that by the end of the project."
 Biologist Eisner says he knows of no
 other engineering attempts to copy the
 insect's technique, "but I think this
 breakthrough in England is a very in
 teresting thing," he says. "I'm dying to
 find out what else the beetle can do."
 In his own work he's now studying
 large Venezuelan bombardiers to learn
 how the insects aim their weapons and
 to understand more about the glands
 involved. "It just doesn't end," he says.
 "The bombardier beetle is a constant
 source of joy."
 Beyond engine reigniters, Mclntosh
 says he can envision future applica
 tions of the bombardier's efficient
 mass-ejection technique, including
 rocket technology, automobile airbags
 and unmanned aerial vehicles, though
 all of these are beyond the scope of his
 current study.
 Both agree that biology has many
 remaining lessons for human design
 ers. "I think the natural world is full
 of excellent designs that we can learn
 from," Mclntosh says. "And I think
 there should be a lot more contact
 and interaction between good biolo
 gists and engineers. This interaction
 between the disciplines, I think,
 needs to be done an awful lot
 more."?Greg Ross
 GALACTIC
 LEFTOVERS
 The Andromeda galaxy is still
 forming
 As you sit peacefully in your easy
 chair reading this magazine, giant
 clouds of hydrogen gas are plung
 ing into our galaxy at velocities of
 several hundred kilometers per sec
 ond. The thought of these high
 velocity clouds may be frightening,
 even terrifying to you?but rest
 easy, such hurtling gobs of gas have
 probably been colliding with our
 galaxy for many billions of years.
 Indeed, the Milky Way is surround
 ed by a complex system of neutral
 hydrogen gas, which some theories
 suggest may be left over from our
 galaxy's formation.
 Now some new results suggest
 that our neighbor, the Andromeda
 galaxy, also shows evidence of con
 tinuing its evolution (The Astrophy'st
 eal Journal Letters, January 20, 2004).
 Using the Green Bank radiot?lescope
 in West Virginia, David Thilker of
 Johns Hopkins University and his
 colleagues found at least 20 discrete
 clouds and filaments within 150,000
 light-years of the great galaxy (lower
 left). This is the first time that an ana
 logue to the Milky Way's system of
 high-velocity clouds has been found
 around another galaxy.
 The significance of this network
 for the continuing formation of the
 Andromeda galaxy is still not clear.
 The neutral gas might be the "tip of
 the iceberg," write the authors, per
 haps tracing a much larger amount of
 ionized gas and even dark matter.?
 Michael Szpir
 Radio-wavelength observations of the Andromeda galaxy (left) reveal clouds of hydrogen gas that can't be seen in visible light (right).
 www.americanscientist.org
 2004 March-April 129
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:12:44 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

