 
 
A Galaxy Is Born
Author(s): Faye Flam
Source: Science, New Series, Vol. 254, No. 5036 (Nov. 29, 1991), p. 1294
Published by: American Association for the Advancement of Science
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2879584
Accessed: 28-02-2023 13:13 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
American Association for the Advancement of Science is collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Science
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:13:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 Superlight (in Theory, Anyway)
 Today's top-notch optical fibers can con-
 duct light signals for tens of kilometers. But
 over greater distances, absorption, scatter-
 ing, and other signal-degrading effects make
 boosting necessary. That can become an
 expensive and technically difficult require-
 ment, especially for optical cables running
 along on the ocean floor. Wouldn't it be
 grand if optical communication could take
 advantage of a phenomenon akin to super-
 conductivity, which lets electrons propagate
 indefinitely, resistance-free, through certain
 materials?
 Theorist Ze Cheng of the Chinese Center
 for Advanced Science and Technology in
 Beijing thinks such "superlight" is possible,
 at least in hypothetical crystals that fit his
 exotic theoretical bill. In the 11 November
 Physical Review Letters, Cheng proposes a
 mechanism by which fleeting vibrations of
 the crystal lattice called virtual transverse-
 optical (TO) phonons would bind the pho-
 tons of light into pairs that could propagate
 through the crystal without scattering.
 Cheng likens the photons' pas de deux to
 the pairing of electrons that accounts for the
 resistance-free flow of electricity in low-
 temperature superconductors.
 In Cheng's superlight scenario, laser light
 entering a so-called nonlinear polar crys-
 tal-a material in which certain properties,
 such as its index of refraction, change with
 the intensity of light-would "shake" the
 crystal lattice, inducing virtual TO pho-
 nons. The phonon-photon dynamic would
 link the photons together into pairs, whose
 binding energy would overcome the pho-
 tons' tendency to scatter out of the crystal.
 The result, according to Cheng: The crystal
 becomes a "superwaveguide," analogous
 to a superconductor, that channels light
 perfectly.
 Several quantum optics experts who have
 read Cheng's paper, including physicist Ri-
 chard Slusher of AT&T Bell Laboratories,
 are intrigued, though they suspect that there
 are holes somewhere in Cheng's daunting
 theoretical presentation. "It looks like a fun
 theoretical exercise, but it probably can't be
 realized," Slusher says, adding that he
 doubts a crystal with the extreme nonlinear
 properties required to realize the phenom-
 enon could be made.
 Physicist RIymond Chiao ofthe University
 of California, Berkeley, concurs. But he's
 more sympathetic to the idea that photon
 pairing reminiscent of the electron pairing in
 superconductors could someday be demon-
 strated. In the 9 September Physical Review
 Letters, Chiao and his colleagues Ivan
 Deutsch of Berkeley and John Garrison of
 Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
 published their own theory of photon cou-
 pling, in which photon pairing emerges from
 complicated atom-photon interactions.
 Chiao says that binding mechanism would be
 much stronger than the photon-phonon in-
 teractions described in Cheng's theory.
 But Chiao wouldn't bet on any superlight-
 powered leap in optical communications
 technologies. Even if photon pairing could
 eliminate all scattering losses from optical
 fibers, Chiao thinks absorption-a phenom-
 enon for which electricity has no parallel-
 would darken the picture. "I believe that
 absorption would kill this superlight."
 Until someone actually tries to make
 superlight, of course, that verdict won't be
 final. In his paper, Cheng suggests several
 experiments that could tip the balance be-
 tween him and superlight doubters-but
 only if someone figures out how to make the
 highly nonlinear polar crystals needed for
 the tests. * IVAN AMATO
 A Galaxy Is Born
 Galaxies, like the baby boomers here on
 Earth, are all getting older together. To see
 them in their youth, astronomers have to
 use their telescopes as time machines, catch-
 ing light that started toward Earth billions
 of years ago. Robert Brown and Paul
 Vanden Bout of the National Radio As-
 tronomy Observa-
 tory are pushing that
 strategy to the limit,
 peering four-fifths
 of the way back to
 the Big Bang. By
 using the 12-meter
 millimeter-wave tel-
 escope on Kitt Peak
 in Arizona, they've
 studied a galaxy at
 its very infancy-
 and for the first time
 they've seen so-me of
 the features that distinguish galactic youth
 from middle age.
 Michael Rowan-Robinson of Queen Mary
 and Westfield College, London, first spot-
 ted the galaxy earlier this year-a faint signal
 picked up by the infrared IRAS satellite. But
 when Brown and Vanden Bout observed the
 object at radio wavelengths, they found a
 hint of something unusual: In the millime-
 ter wavelength range, the galaxy shines 100
 times brighter than our own galaxy. The
 radiation, they concluded, had to be com-
 ing from a vast shroud of dust, heated by a
 concentration of intense young stars-the
 kind of stars expected to populate a new-
 born galaxy.
 A closer look at the millimeter-wave spec-
 trum revealed the spectral signature of car-
 bon monoxide, mingling with the dust.
 From the brilliance of the spectral lines,
 Brown estimates a staggering figure for the
 amount of gas: 100 times the mass of our
 own galaxy. And that gas adds a new detail
 to the picture of early galactic evolution.
 "What it is telling you
 is thatgalaxies-
 perhaps all galaxie
 fonned from a gas-rich
 phase very early on in
 -the universe."
 -Robert Brown
 "The gas is just astonishing," says Brown.
 "We didn't really know what we would
 see," he continues. "What it is telling you is
 that galaxies-perhaps all galaxies-formed
 from a gas-rich phase very early on in the
 universe."
 The composition of the gas is also making
 news among other
 astronomers and
 cosmologists be-
 cause it confirms
 that the first stars
 formed earlier than
 some scenarios for
 the formation of
 stars and galaxies
 suggest. The red
 shift of the newborn
 galaxy shows it ex-
 isted only 3 billion
 years after the Big
 Bang, and it must have taken shape even
 earlier than that to give molecules like car-
 bon monoxide time to form. Carbon
 monoxide's constituent elements, in turn,
 could only have been forged in earlier stars.
 The first generation of those stars, Brown
 and Vanden Bout conclude, must have lived
 and died within a billion years after the birth
 of the universe.
 But astronomers aren't ready to conclude
 that all galaxies once looked like this one.
 Anthony Tyson ofAT&T Bell Laboratories,
 for example, wonders whether this infant
 galaxy is a typical specimen. Its extraordi-
 nary brightness at millimeter wavelengths
 suggests to him that "something peculiar
 has to be going on." Brown agrees, adding
 that in order to know if this object is typical,
 he will have to observe many more of
 them-something he is planning to do.
 When it comes to understanding the evolu-
 tion of galaxies, says Princeton University
 cosmologist James Peebles, "we are still in
 kindergarten." * FAYE FLAM
 1294 SCIENCE, VOL. 254
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:13:35 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

