 
 
Do Comets Get a Nudge from the Galaxy?
Author(s): Charles Seife
Source: Science, New Series, Vol. 274, No. 5289 (Nov. 8, 1996), p. 920
Published by: American Association for the Advancement of Science
Stable URL: https://www.jstor.org/stable/2891277
Accessed: 28-02-2023 13:18 UTC
 
JSTOR is a not-for-profit service that helps scholars, researchers, and students discover, use, and build upon a wide
range of content in a trusted digital archive. We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and
facilitate new forms of scholarship. For more information about JSTOR, please contact support@jstor.org.
 
Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use, available at
https://about.jstor.org/terms
American Association for the Advancement of Science is collaborating with JSTOR to
digitize, preserve and extend access to Science
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:18:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

 until each spot of the surface has been touched
 by the disinfectant at least once?" he says.
 Now, the mathematical results are stimulat-
 ing new efforts to measure the persistence ex-
 ponents in other systems. Following a talk by
 Majumdar at Lucent Technology's Bell Labs in
 New Jersey, two experimentalists, Bernie
 Yurke and Andrew Pargellis, reanalyzed video-
 taped results of a past experiment in which
 liquid crystal molecules held between two
 plates could twist either clockwise or
 anticlockwise, resulting in light and dark
 patches when viewed in polarized light. Light
 and dark regions coalesced and grew in time,
 but some fraction of the original area between
 the planes never flipped, yielding a value of
 theta. "It turns out to be 0.19, very close to the
 diffusion approximation," says Majumdar.
 Zeitak, meanwhile, has been collaborating
 with Joel Stavans of the Weizmann Institute in
 Rehovot, Israel, and Wing-Yim Tam of Hong
 Kong University of Science and Technology
 on the collapse of foams. This effect, known to
 drinkers and brewers the world over, is the
 coalescence of small bubbles in a foam to make
 larger bubbles. Their results, currently being
 written up, indicate that the original small
 bubbles demonstrate persistence obeying a
 power law similar to that in diffusion models.
 Now Majumdar's team is beginning to ap-
 ply the concept of persistence to attack differ-
 ent types of problem. One example is so-called
 critical phenomena, in which systems undergo
 abrupt and dramatic changes in their proper-
 ties-the sudden magnetization of a lump of
 heated iron once its temperature falls below a
 critical value, for example. In the 28 October
 issue of Physical Review Letters, Majumdar has
 shown that a persistence power law can give a
 probability that, at the critical temperature, the
 system still has not flipped its magnetic direc-
 tion after a certain length of time-results
 backed up by Stauffer in the October issue of
 Intinational Joumal of Modem Physics C.
 The real power of persistence, and its ap-
 plication in real physical situations such as
 industrial reactions and biological systems,
 will have to wait for experimenters to come
 up with definitive ways of measuring the new
 exponents. Yurke, meanwhile, wonders what
 other surprises are lurking in effects that
 physicists thought they understood. "It
 makes me wonder about what else we might
 be overlooking in these systems," he says.
 -Andrew Watson
 Andrew Watson is a writer in Norwich, U.K.
 ASTRONOMY
 Do Comets Get a Nudge From the Galaxy?
 For decades, astronomers have known that
 most of the comets in the solar system are just
 rare visitors. Their true home is the Oort
 cloud, a vast spherical halo of icy objects that
 extends from beyond Pluto outward for more
 than a light-year. But what sends distant
 comets on their wanderings has been contro-
 versial. Now two astronomers at the Univer-
 sity of Southwestern Louisiana, John Matese
 and Daniel Whitmire, offer a new candidate:
 the mass of the Milky Way as a whole, all the
 way to its distant core.
 Matese and Whitmire, who present their
 idea in the 20 NovemberAstrophysicaljoumal,
 say the galaxy's influence is unmistakable:
 Their calculations of how the Milky Way
 would stir the Oort cloud mesh neatly with an
 analysis of comet orbits. But the idea that the
 feeble gravitational pull of the distant galaxy
 could be influencing the solar system is hard
 for some other astronomers to swallow. "I
 don't mean to say that they're wrong," said
 Brian Marsden of the Harvard-Smithsonian
 Center for Astrophysics. "But I've played
 around with the [comet] data for years-and
 you can see some very funny things."
 The roots of the puzzle go back to 1950,
 when the Dutch astronomer J. H. Oort cal-
 culated that the comets passing near Earth
 were shaken loose from a distant cloud.
 Oort's idea, says Matese, was that "a star
 came by and really shook them up" or some
 other "quasi-violent" event took place, kick-
 ing a few comets into elongated orbits that
 take them into the inner solar system every
 few hundred or thousand years.
 But in the past decade, many astrono-
 mers, pointing to the lack of evidence for the
 sporadic "comet showers" that violent dis-
 ruptions of the Oort cloud should unleash,
 have concluded that such events are respon-
 sible for only one-fifth or so of the comets we
 see. The most widely accepted explanation
 for the other four-fifths, says Matese, is that
 they are kneaded out of the
 Oort cloud by what he calls
 "gentle galactic tugging." But -
 the mechanism of that tugging -
 is poorly understood.o
 ,.~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~,
 .~~~~~~~~0
 Comets' perch. The galaxy may dislodge oc-
 casional visitors like comet Hyakutake (top).
 It has to come from some galactic tidal
 force that pulls on the orbiting comets, sap-
 ping their angular momentum so that they
 can plunge toward the sun. One possibility is
 the so-called z-tide, which comes from
 nearby 'stars and matter and pulls in a direc-
 tion perpendicular to the plane of the galaxy.
 The other, 16 times weaker, is the so-called
 radial tide-the combined gravitational pull
 of the matter in the galactic interior, includ-
 ing all the stars and dark matter in its very
 core-that pulls toward the center of the
 galaxy. Since the gravitational attraction of
 nearby matter is so much larger, many as-
 tronomers think the z-tide is the main effect
 pulling comets from the Oort cloud.
 Not necessarily, say Matese and Whitmire.
 The two astronomers claim that the weaker
 radial tide has a disproportionately strong ef-
 fect on some comets-strong
 enough to account for fully one-
 third of all long-period comets.
 The reason: It can act on comets
 that are untouched by the z-
 tide. The z-tide's orientation
 perpendicular to the galaxy
 means it can only reduce the angular momen-
 tum of Oort cloud comets whose orbits are
 tilted relative to the galaxy. The radial tide,
 on the other hand, can affect the motion of
 comets moving in the plane of the galaxy.
 For those comets, Matese says, the radial tide
 "is the only game in town."
 An analysis of comet tracks bears out the
 calculations, he and Whitmire say. Because
 the two galactic tides act in different direc-
 tions, the paths of the comets they dislodge
 should be different. The analysis showed the
 influence of the radial tide in one-third of
 the tracks, as predicted. And with more than
 80 comets in their database, says Whitmire,
 the statistical strength of their conclusion is
 "unheard of" in astronomy.
 But Marsden thinks the comet data just
 aren't good enough to support Matese's and
 Whitmire's analysis. "I have no problem with
 [their] theoretical analysis," he says, "but it's a
 miserable, crummy set of data ... I say that
 having provided a lot of that data myself."
 With better data or a different analysis,
 Marsden says, the effect might disappear-
 and another way for the galaxy to pluck com-
 ets from the Oort cloud might emerge.
 -Charles Seife
 Charles Seife is a free-lance science writer in
 Scarsdale, New York.
 (n
 a:
 LU
 LU
 I
 CL
 0
 I
 I
 0
 z
 IL
 0~
 920 SCIENCE * VOL. 274 * 8 NOVEMBER 1996
This content downloaded from 132.174.252.114 on Tue, 28 Feb 2023 13:18:31 UTC
All use subject to https://about.jstor.org/terms

