Book Review
Knowing By Perceiving, by Alan Millar. Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2019. Pp. xiii þ 222.
Millar has written a valuable monograph on perceptual knowledge. Knowing
By Perceiving is careful and detailed, at times laborious, delivering many
insights. Occasionally S sees an F, and there’s a bit of Cing and Fing, but
many of the examples have a pleasantly bucolic feel: wheelbarrows full of soil,
evening sunlight on a hillside, mushrooms on rotting logs, frost on the grass,
and ‘an island where there are sheep that make a distinctive bleating sound’
(p. 161; all page references are to this book).
As Millar remarks in the Preface, perceptual knowledge is a ‘paradigm of
knowledge’ (p. vii). Knowledge of the past, the future, and the occluded parts
of the present all require perceptual knowledge of one’s surroundings. He
embraces the ‘knowledge ﬁrst’ programme, a departure from his earlier view
in Reasons and Experience (Millar 1991). He notes that ‘there has been a
degree of bafﬂement at the idea that there could be an illuminating and
satisfying account of knowledge’ which was not ‘belief that satisﬁes certain
conditions’ (pp. 3-4); part of his project is to give such an account.
What is perceptual knowledge? Millar ﬁrst glosses it as ‘knowledge gained
from what you perceive by means of one or other of the senses of sight,
touch, hearing, smell, and taste’ (p. 4). This is a little too narrow, because
knowledge gained from (for example) proprioception is also perceptual
knowledge. The initial gloss is also too broad, because the operative concep-
tion of perceptual knowledge throughout most of the book is what Millar
later calls ‘simple perceptual knowledge’ (p. 164), which is a kind of recogni-
tional knowledge. In the case of vision, perceptual knowledge is ‘knowledge
that something is some way from the way it looks’; in the case of touch,
‘knowledge that something is some way from the way it feels’ (p. 5).
Testimonial knowledge and what Millar calls ‘knowledge from perceived
indicators’ (p. 5), for instance knowledge that the postman has delivered
the mail by seeing letters on the doormat, are ‘gained from what you per-
ceive’. Nonetheless, they do not fall under Millar’s operative conception of
perceptual knowledge.
One of Millar’s targets is the popular view that perceptual experiences,
conceived as ‘internal’ to the agent, ‘justify’ perceptual beliefs:
Mind, Vol. 00 . 0 . 2021
 Mind Association
doi:10.1093/mind/fzab065
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/advance-article/doi/10.1093/mind/fzab065/6384674 by Harvard Law School Library user on 09 January 2022

A widely held view is that on perceiving my keys I have a certain sort of experi-
ence—an experience such that it is just as if I am looking at my keys. Crucially,
though, having such an experience is conceived to fall short of seeing my keys. To
perceive the keys further conditions must be satisﬁed, including the condition that
the presence of the keys causes me to have the experience. As I shall argue later, it
is not obvious that experiences so conceived justify or contribute to the justiﬁca-
tion of beliefs. (p. 6)
Such remarks will be endorsed by a relationalist about perceptual experience,
someone who thinks that ‘the sensory experiences that are implicated in
episodes of perceiving mind-independent objects. . .[consist] in awareness
of (acquaintance with) mind-independent objects’ (p. x). Perceptual experi-
ences, on this ‘disjunctivist’ view, are not common elements between cases of
perception and matching cases of hallucination. Millar acknowledges the
inﬂuence of ‘disjunctivists about epistemological issues, notably. . .John
McDowell’ (p. x), but rejects relationalism.
Chapter 2 defends the view that ‘knowledge is explanatorily prior to justiﬁed
belief’ (p. 23). Millar works with ‘the reasons-conception of justiﬁed belief’, on
which ‘to be justiﬁed in believing something. . .amounts to having an adequate
reason to believe it and believing it for that reason’ (p. 24). (He concedes, given
the slipperiness of ‘justiﬁed belief’, that this is somewhat stipulative.) Reasons
to think something true are ‘normative reasons’, which are ‘constituted by
truths or facts’ (p. 24). Millar’s talk of ‘constitution’ can perhaps be dispensed
with, since his examples of normative reasons simply are truths or facts.
Although the idea that normative reasons are facts is well-motivated, some
of the details of Millar’s account are less compelling. He says that the ‘claim
that X believes that P for the reason that Q entails both that the reason in
question is a normative reason to believe that P and that it is true that Q’ (p.
28), but X may believe, say, that the coin will land heads for the reason that it
landed tails on the last ﬁve ﬂips. It is true that it landed tails ﬁve times but
that does not ‘favour or count towards’ (p. 24) its being true that the coin
will land heads. The ﬁrst part of the alleged entailment doesn’t seem right.
As to the second part, Millar says in a footnote that ‘people can believe for
reasons that are constituted by propositions that are false’ (p. 24, fn. 1); such
reasons are ‘motivating reasons’ (p. 24). But this appears to conﬂict with the
(very plausible) second part of the alleged entailment: ‘X believes that P for the
reason that Q’ entails ‘Q’. It would have been clearer to say that people can
believe for apparent or supposed reasons. To avoid the entailment, Millar adopts
the locution ‘X believed that P because, as he supposed, Q’ (p. 28), but that seems
basically the same as saying that X believed that P because of the supposed
reason that Q. There is no need to divide reasons into the true ones and the
false ones: they are all true, but people can take something to be a reason when it
isn’t. (These points, I should say, are peripheral to Millar’s central project.)
When is the fact that Q a reason for X to believe other things? If X’s belief
that Q is a lucky guess, then X cannot use the fact that Q as a premise to gain
2
Book Review
Mind, Vol. 00 . 0 . 2021
 Mind Association 2021
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/advance-article/doi/10.1093/mind/fzab065/6384674 by Harvard Law School Library user on 09 January 2022

knowledge or justiﬁed belief. Millar argues (plausibly) that X needs to know
that Q, in order for the fact that Q to be available to X as a reason. This is
looking very much like Williamson’s conception of evidence (Williamson
2000, ch. 9). According to Williamson, one’s evidence is one’s knowledge.
According to Millar—and setting aside ‘false’ reasons—one’s reasons com-
prise one’s knowledge.
In chapter 3, Millar defends both Direct Realism and ‘a non-relationalist
account of experience’, on which perceptual experiences are ‘episodes that
are metaphysically (constitutively) distinct from the presence then and there
of anything in one’s environment’ (p. 30). Direct Realism is the view that, for
example, we can see a goldﬁnch ‘not by means of seeing [or otherwise being
aware of] something else that is distinct and separate from it’ (p. 43). As
Millar notes, Direct Realism is ‘widely taken to be true’; nonetheless, he gives
Hume and Moore a good run for their money.
Non-relationalism is the negation of relationalism, which Millar explains
as follows:
[T]he experiences implicated by perception of mind-independent things. . .are
essentially relational, being episodes of awareness of (acquaintance with) such
things. . .It is crucial for the relationalist position that episodes of being visually
aware of, or acquainted with, a mind-independent thing, do not decompose into
the having of an experience that is not essentially relational plus the satisfaction of
further conditions. (p. 49)
The perceptual experience one has on seeing a goldﬁnch, according to the
relationalist, essentially involves the goldﬁnch itself. A qualitatively identical
experience induced by taking hallucinogens (assuming this is possible) would
presumably not require awareness of any physical object, and so would be
quite different in kind from the goldﬁnch experience. The non-relationalist,
by contrast, thinks that the two experiences are of the very same kind. In
Millar’s terminology, both experiences are ‘sensory’, but only the goldﬁnch
experience is ‘perceptual’. As he puts it: ‘Because experiences under the non-
relationalist conception are not essentially related to the presence of mind-
independent objects, being perceptual is not an intrinsic feature of an ex-
perience, but depends on a contingent relation between the experience and
the presence of the things perceived’ (p. 51).
The ‘most persuasive line of thought’ for non-relationalism ‘turns on
consideration of the causes of sensory experiences’ (pp. 51-2). In particular:
It is plausible that while for the most part our sensory experiences result from the
impact upon us of things in our surroundings, it is a merely contingent fact
concerning any experience that it has the causes that it has. It is possible that
you should have, for instance, a tactual experience such that it is just as if you feel
something tickling the back of your neck, though the experience is induced by
some subcutaneous event. Granted that feeling something touching you is not the
same as it being merely as if you feel something touching you, the question is
Book Review
3
Mind, Vol. 00 . 0 . 2021
 Mind Association 2021
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/advance-article/doi/10.1093/mind/fzab065/6384674 by Harvard Law School Library user on 09 January 2022

whether this difference should be taken to entail a difference in the character of the
experience gained. At the root of the non-relationalist’s position, I take it, is the
conviction that the fact that one episode is perceptual and the other not is no reason
to suppose that the experiences involved must differ qua experiences. (p. 52)
Suppose that Hamish sees a goldﬁnch—call her Gia—and let eG be
Hamish’s corresponding perceptual experience, caused (in part) by Gia.
According to the relationalist, eG constitutively involves Gia, which entails
(at least) that eG could not have occurred without Gia existing. One version
of Millar’s worry can be put as follows: since Gia causes eG, and effects can
occur without their actual causes, eG can occur without Gia, contradicting
the claim of constitution.
However, this is not very convincing. Consider a kissing of Hamish by
Gordon. We may suppose that this kiss constitutively and essentially involves
Gordon (and Hamish). Yet Gordon started it: he caused the kiss to occur. In
fact, the kiss could not possibly have occurred without Gordon causing it. Of
course, the mere presence of Gordon does not guarantee that the kiss will
occur: Gordon has to do something. But the same point holds for seeing Gia.
The mere presence of Gia does not guarantee that eG will occur. Gia has to do
something, at least in the broad sense in which being suitably situated with
respect to Hamish counts as doing something.
A deeper issue concerns sensory experiences themselves, which according
to Millar are ‘particular episodes in the mental lives of individuals’, which
‘extend over time and can vary in character over time, as when looking at a
changing scene or changing one’s position in relation to something at which
one is looking’ (p. 50). Are there such episodes? Evidently perception reveals
environmental episodes, as when one sees Gia ﬂy off a branch. And, on the
mental side of the ledger, one is in the state of seeing Gia ﬂy off. But the
alleged mental episode is less obvious. As Millar remarks, ‘the very idea of
experience is contested’ (p. 97); he also concedes that ‘the experience itself is
not something of which I am conscious in a perceptual or quasi-perceptual
way’ (p. 101). Still, Millar takes the existence of ‘sensory experiences’ as be-
yond dispute; arguably, he should not have (Byrne 2009).
Looking at a bush ‘in early spring, I think that this bush still has dead
heads of ﬂowers on it’ (p. 55, emphasis in original). On Millar’s view, the
bush has caused me to undergo a perceptual experience that is not ‘essen-
tially related to mind-independent objects’. It is then something of a puzzle
that I am in a position to think about this particular bush. How do non-
relationalists account for the fact that perception allows us to think about
particular objects, such as the bush? Millar faces up to the challenge, attempt-
ing ‘to sketch a promising account of how the non-relationalist should con-
ceive of the connection between perception and demonstrative thought’ (p.
61). Central to this account is the notion of being ‘experientially orientated’
towards an object, which in the case of vision amounts to the object
producing:
4
Book Review
Mind, Vol. 00 . 0 . 2021
 Mind Association 2021
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/advance-article/doi/10.1093/mind/fzab065/6384674 by Harvard Law School Library user on 09 January 2022

(1) a course of visual experience that in large measure matches ways the object and
its situation visually appear, and
(2) potentialities for activity, and in some cases actual activity, directed at coping
with the object’s presence.
Furthermore,
(3) the induced potentialities for activity, and any actual activity that is evoked,
(substantially) reﬂect the course of experience that is produced. (p. 57, emphasis in
original)
It is, Millar says, ‘constitutive’ of seeing an object that one is ‘experientially
oriented towards it’ (p. 60). The picture is supposed to at least demystify how
the non-relationalist can accommodate demonstrative thought.
(1) helps with the problem of explaining how perception enables the
thought that the F is green, where ‘the F’ is a description that picks out
this bush. However, (1) does not explain how perception enables the thought
that this (the bush) is green. The problem is that (2) and (3) do not move us
any closer to demonstrative thought. Take (2), for example: descriptive
thoughts about an object will allow me to ‘cope with its presence’, in
Millar’s sense. According to Millar, if these three conditions obtain with
respect to the bush, that guarantees that I can think demonstrative thoughts
about it. But here there seems to be a gap which Millar has not bridged.
Fortunately, for those unpersuaded by Millar’s non-relationalism, the core
of the book, in chapters 4 and 5, can be detached from it. There Millar gives
an account of perceptual knowledge in terms of abilities.
As noted at the start, perceptual knowledge for Millar is recognitional: one
knows ‘of the thing one perceives that it is of some kind or has some prop-
erty or is some speciﬁed individual or feature’ (p. 78). Perceptual recognition,
he says:
is a phenomenologically immediate reaction to the perception of something. For
instance, your recognizing a person as your colleague NN is phenomenologically
immediate in that it would simply strike you that she is NN. It is not constitutive
of such recognition that you judge that she is NN on the basis of an assumption as
to how she looks. With the usual conceptual resources you would take in, at the
level of belief, something of how NN appears, but your recognition is cued by her
appearance, not by your believing something as to her appearance. (p. 79)
The key claim is in this passage:
Perceptual recognition of a thing as being some way is achieved, not by doing
something else, but simply by exercising a suitable general perceptual–recogni-
tional ability, that is, an ability to recognize things that are that way as being that
way from some way that they appear. (p. 83)
What about the possibility of ringers, say bars of soap crafted to have the
look of lemons? If I perceptually recognize a lemon to be one, don’t I also
Book Review
5
Mind, Vol. 00 . 0 . 2021
 Mind Association 2021
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/advance-article/doi/10.1093/mind/fzab065/6384674 by Harvard Law School Library user on 09 January 2022

need to know that fake lemons are not in the vicinity? After all, that this
object has the lemony look is not good evidence by itself that it is a lemon:
fake lemons share that appearance too. Millar convincingly bats away this
worry. He doesn’t quite put it this way, but his point is essentially that
perceptual recognition cannot always rely on background knowledge, for
instance that one is not in fake-lemon country, because that requires per-
ceptual recognition too. If scepticism is to be avoided, we have to grant that
sometimes epistemic burdens must be ofﬂoaded to the environment. In a
‘favourable environment’, where only lemons have that distinctive appear-
ance, one may come to know that these objects are lemons, ‘going by the way
they look’ (p. 87); that the environment is favourable is an enabling condi-
tion of knowledge, not something that itself needs to be known.
Another worry is that recognitional abilities and recognizing are too in-
timately related for the former to explain the latter. Surely if I recognize that
this is a robin by seeing it, then I am able to recognize that this is a robin by
seeing it, and I have exercised that ability. Conversely, if I exercise my ability
to recognize a robin by sight then I will recognize a robin by sight. (In an
instructive discussion of abilities in chapter 6, Millar argues that one exer-
cises an ability to f only if one fs.) If recognizing a robin by sight is equiva-
lent to exercising the ability to recognize robins then one might worry that
Millar has not made much explanatory progress.
And Millar thinks that there is an equivalence. Early on in the book he
claims that it is ‘constitutive of such visual-recognitional knowledge that it is
acquired in exercising a visual-recognitional ability’ (p. 4). Suppose that, as a
novice birdwatcher, I am able to recognize a robin only if the bird is pre-
sented in the most stereotypical manner; recognition would fail with the
slightest adjustment in the bird’s orientation or posture. I have a ‘general
ability’ to recognize robins by sight, according to Millar. Naturally my ability
pales in comparison to the abilities of expert ornithologists, whose abilities
can be exercised in a much wider range of circumstances, but it is an ability
to recognize robins nonetheless.
Here is Millar replying to the charge that his account is ‘uninformative’:
The explication is an explication of one thing—as it might be, what it is for a
subject to know from its look that the bird before her is a robin—in terms of
something else—a general ability to tell of robins that they are robins from the way
they look. In adverting to the ability we are not invoking something, we know not
what, that produces knowledge, we know not how. For the ability is individuated
in terms of the implicated type of content, a sense-modality, and an appearance of
some corresponding sort (a look, sound, feel, etc.). We know perfectly well what it
is to have abilities of this sort and we know how to test whether people have them.
(p. 91)
That seems fair; still, one might wonder how much illumination this throws
on perceptual knowledge. Take an example of an ability Millar mentions in
chapter 6, the ability to land a passenger aircraft safely. Commercial airline
6
Book Review
Mind, Vol. 00 . 0 . 2021
 Mind Association 2021
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/advance-article/doi/10.1093/mind/fzab065/6384674 by Harvard Law School Library user on 09 January 2022

pilots have this ability, which ‘takes a lot of skill born of rigorous training’ (p.
132). In the course of training, a pilot might safely land an aircraft before he
or she has acquired the ability: often, acquiring the ability to f comes from
practising fing, sometimes failing but sometimes succeeding. If we want to
devise effective training programmes for pilots, so they may acquire the
ability to land safely, we need to know what is required to land safely in
the ﬁrst place. That does not preclude explaining why a pilot landed safely
by citing her ability to land safely, but that is because there is no equivalence
between landing safely and exercising the ability to land safely: a pilot might
land safely by a ﬂuke. However, on Millar’s view this is disanalogous to the
perceptual case, where the parallel equivalence does hold.
Now Millar does have some helpful remarks about recognizing a robin: it
involves (roughly) judging that the bird is a robin from the way it looks, in a
favourable environment in which fake robins are absent. As Millar points
out, this is not sufﬁcient for recognition:
An apprentice horticulturalist who has not quite got the hang of recognizing
various ﬂowers from their visual appearance as being of this or that species or
variety might correctly judge a ﬂower to be a rose, but could just as well have
judged a peony to be a rose. (p. 79)
Millar’s diagnosis of the apprentice’s lack of knowledge is that his ‘judgement
is not an act of recognition because it does not consist in the exercise of a
general ability to recognize roses as roses from the way they look’ (p. 79). But
there is an alternative diagnosis that allows some separation between percep-
tual recognition and the exercise of a general recognitional ability. What the
apprentice lacks is a general ability to judge correctly that objects are roses
from the way they look. He lacks this ability because he could easily have
(falsely) judged a peony to be a rose. (See Williamson 2000, ch. 5 on know-
ledge and ‘safety from error’.) This is an attractive account of perceptual
knowledge which is much like Millar’s, but which dispenses with the equiva-
lence between recognitional knowledge and recognitional abilities.
A separate point is that Millar’s account focuses on recognizing things with
distinctive visual appearances like robins and lemons, which allow the possi-
bility of ringers. Robins have a robinesque-gestalt of visual features. Fake
robins have that look too. In an unfavourable environment infested with
fake robins one cannot know that this robinesque bird is a robin, even if it
is the genuine article. Although Millar denies that one needs to know that the
bird is robinesque in order to recognize it from the way it looks, he does not
deny that one can also recognize that it is robinesque. How does one do that?
As Millar says, one can recognize that an object has a variety of ‘superﬁcial
features’, like colour, shape, and texture, and the distinctive combination of
these shared by robins and fake robins: ‘One can visually recognize tele-
visions as being televisions’, but also ‘visually recognize red things to be
red things’ (p. 83). On Millar’s account, visually recognizing that a scarlet
Book Review
7
Mind, Vol. 00 . 0 . 2021
 Mind Association 2021
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/advance-article/doi/10.1093/mind/fzab065/6384674 by Harvard Law School Library user on 09 January 2022

object is scarlet involves judging that the object is scarlet from the way it
looks—namely, scarlet. There is no other visible property of the object that
enables one to recognize that it is a particular determinate shade of red; this
makes recognizing scarlet objects unlike recognizing robins or lemons. We
may grant that in some thin sense, when one recognizes an object as scarlet,
one is exercising an ability ‘to recognize things that are that way as being that
way from some way that they appear’ (p. 83). The worry is not that this is
wrong, but that it doesn’t tell us much.
Chapter 5 is devoted to undermining:
the experientialist approach to perceptual justiﬁcation, [that] sensory experiences
justify or contribute to the justiﬁcation of belief. The view is not that facts or
considerations about experiences can play a justiﬁcatory role, but that experiences
themselves can have this role. This is a position that takes us well beyond the near
truism that perception can yield justiﬁed belief. (p. 97, emphasis in original)
One way experiences could contribute to the justiﬁcation of belief is if per-
ceptual evidence ultimately consisted in facts about experiences. Another—
perhaps less intelligible—way is if experiences simply are pieces of evidence.
As Millar points out, some philosophers swiftly move from the near-truism
that perception enables us to gain evidence about our environment to the
quite different thesis that ‘among the evidence we routinely gain through
conscious awareness is evidence comprising our own experiences’ (p. 101).
Chapters 6 and 7 will be of great value to any philosopher interested in
abilities, and in particular abilities as they ﬁgure in virtue epistemology.
Chapter 8 turns to ‘knowledge from a perceived indicator’, for instance
‘knowing that deer have recently passed along a path from the perceived
presence of certain markings on the path’ (p. 165). As mentioned, Millar
defends the view that in knowing that this is a robin from the way it looks,
one does not need to know a general premise to the effect that only robins
around these parts have that look. In the case of knowledge from perceived
indicators, the need for a general premise can seem more compelling.
According to ‘the covering generalization model’:
the presence of the markings on the path can serve as evidence on account of
which we can have knowledge, or at least a justiﬁed belief, that deer have recently
passed by only if we may infer from a statement of that evidence, together with a
suitable covering generalization, that deer have passed by. (p. 168)
Millar would grant that sometimes one knows that deer have passed by on the
basis of these markings because one also knows a suitable generalization. One
could learn from a book that only deer produce these markings in this area of
the country, for example, and then deploy this knowledge when one sees
markings like these for the ﬁrst time to conclude that deer passed by. If the
book turned out to be a work of ﬁction that only accidentally reproduced an
accurate claim about deer tracks, one would not know the generalization and
8
Book Review
Mind, Vol. 00 . 0 . 2021
 Mind Association 2021
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/advance-article/doi/10.1093/mind/fzab065/6384674 by Harvard Law School Library user on 09 January 2022

neither would one know that deer passed by. Thus on this occasion know-
ledge of the generalization is no mere accompaniment: without it, one does
not know that deer passed by. The same kind of example can be contrived for
recognizing that this is a robin from the way it looks.
Still, as Millar points out, a more realistic candidate for such a known
generalization is that ‘markings like those on the path are highly likely to
have been produced by deer passing by’ (p. 171), from which one would not
know by deduction that deer have passed by, only that it is highly likely that
they have. As he plausibly argues, knowledge of generalizations generally
comes second in the order of acquisition: the ability to know by perception
comes ﬁrst, with knowledge of a generalization being ‘an adjunct to possession
of the recognitional ability, rather than a prerequisite of having the ability’ (p.
170).
The ninth and ﬁnal chapter takes up some themes in contemporary epis-
temology, for instance the idea (elaborated by Barry Stroud) that a philo-
sophical understanding of knowledge should ‘[hold] in abeyance the very
knowledge for which we are trying to account’ (p. 191), and the closely related
idea that radical scepticism demands an answer on the sceptic’s own terms.
In a helpful discussion, Millar takes Stroud’s concerns seriously. However,
since Millar, like Mole in The Wind in the Willows, is evidently a grounded
animal, linked ‘to the frequented pasture, the lane of evening lingerings, the
cultivated garden-plot’, it is no surprise that he concludes that this approach
to epistemology is a ‘philosophically induced affectation’ (p. 207).
Knowing By Perceiving leaves some important questions about knowing by
perceiving unanswered. On the other hand, the book gives provocative and
(often) convincing answers to some others. It is a ﬁne achievement.*
References
Byrne, A. 2009. Experience and content. Philosophical Quarterly 59: 429–51.
Millar, A. 1991. Reasons and Experience. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Williamson, T. 2000. Knowledge and Its Limits. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
alex byrne
Department of Linguistics and Philosophy,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
abyrne@mit.edu
doi: 10.1093/mind/fzab065
* Thanks to E.J. Green, and especially to Alan Millar for correspondence and extensive
comments on a draft of this review.
Book Review
9
Mind, Vol. 00 . 0 . 2021
 Mind Association 2021
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/mind/advance-article/doi/10.1093/mind/fzab065/6384674 by Harvard Law School Library user on 09 January 2022

