Chapter 6 
Conclusions 
6.1 
Summary 
This thesis has presented theoretical and practical solutions to the problem of 
recovering reliable descriptions of curved surface shape. These have been de- 
veloped from the analysis of visual motion and differential surface geometry. 
Emphasis has been placed on computational methods with built-in robustness 
to errors in the measurements and viewer motion. 
It has been demonstrated that practical, efficient solutions to robotic prob- 
lems using visual inferences can be obtained by: 
1. Formulating visual problems in the precise language of mathematics and 
the methods of computation. 
2. Using geometric cues such as the relative image motion of curves and the 
deformation of image shapes which have a resilience to and the ability to 
recover from errors in image measurements and viewer motion. 
3. Allowing the viewer to make small, local controlled movements - active 
vision. 
4. Taking advantage of partial, incomplete solutions which can be obtained 
efficiently and reliably when exact quantitative solutions are cumbersome 
or ill-conditioned. 
These theories have been implemented and tested using a novel real-time 
tracking system based on B-spline snakes. The implementations of these theories 
are preliminary, requiring considerable effort and research to convert them into 
working systems. 

152 
Chap. 6. Conclusions 
6.2 
Future work 
The research presented in this thesis has since been extended. In conclusion we 
identify the directions of future work. 
Singular apparent contours 
In Chapter 2 the epipolar parameterisation was introduced as the natu- 
ral parameterisation for image curves and to recover surface curvature. 
However the epipolar parameterisation is degenerate at singular appar- 
ent contours - the viewing ray is tangent to the contour generator (i.e an 
asymptotic direction of a hyperbolic surface patch) and hence the ray and 
contour generator do not form a basis for the tangent plane. The epipolar 
parameterisation can not be used to recover surface shape. Giblin and 
Soares [84] have shown how for orthographic projection and planar mo- 
tion it is still possible to recover the surface by tracking cusp under known 
viewer motion. The geometric framework presented in Chapter 2 can be 
used to extended this result to arbitrary viewer motion and perspective 
projection. 
Structure and motion of curved surfaces 
This thesis has concentrated on the recovery of surface shape from known 
viewer motion. 
Can the deformation of apparent contours be used to 
solve for unknown viewer motion? This has been considered a difficult 
problem since each viewpoint generates a different contour generator with 
the contour generators "slipping" over the visible surface under viewer 
motion. Egomotion recovery requires a set of corresponding features visible 
in each view. Porril and Pollard [174] have shown how epipolar tangency 
points - the points on the surface where the epipolar plane is tangent to 
the surface - are distinct points that are visible in both views. Rieger [181] 
showed how in principle these points can be used to estimate viewer motion 
under orthographic projection and known rotation. This result can be 
generalised to arbitrary motion and perspective projection. 
Global descriptions of shape 
The work described in this thesis has recovered local descriptions of surface 
shape based on differential surface geometry. Combining these local cues 
and organising them into coherent groups or surfaces requires the applica- 
tion of more global techniques. Assembling fragments of curves and strips 
of surfaces into a 3D sketch must also be investigated. 
9 Task-directed sensor planning 
The techniques presented recover properties of a scene by looking at it from 

Chap. 6. Conclusions 
153 
different viewpoints. The strategies that should be used to choose the next 
viewpoint so as to incrementally describe the scene or accomplish a task 
requiring visual information must also be investigated. This requires being 
able to quantify the utility of exploratory movements so that they can be 
traded off against their cost. These ideas will be applicable to both visual 
navigation, path planning and grasping strategies. 
Visual attention and geometric invariants 
In the implementations presented in this thesis the object of interest has 
been placed in an uncluttered scene to allow the snake tracker to extract 
and follow the contour of interest. In less structured environments the 
system itself must find objects or areas of interest to which it can divert 
its own visual attention. We are presently investigating how to recognise 
target contours under arbitrary viewpoints. In principle it should be pos- 
sible to recognise planar contours and to group the apparent contours of 
surfaces of revolution viewed under weak perspective by affine differential 
and integral invariants. 
Visual tracking 
Finally the B-spline snake and the availability of parallel processing hard- 
ware, e.g. the Transputer, are ripe for application to real-time visual track- 
ing problems. The automatic initialisation of B-spline snakes on image 
edges, the adaptive choice of the number and position of the control points 
and the control of the feature search are current areas of research. B-spline 
snakes with reduced degrees of freedom, for example B-splines which can 
only deform by an affine transformation, will offer some resilience to track- 
ing against background clutter. 

