Chapter 4 
Qualitative Shape from Images 
Surface Curves 
of 
4.1 
Introduction 
Imagine we have several views of a curve lying on a surface. 
If the motion 
between the views and the camera calibration are known then in principle it is 
possible to reconstruct this space curve from its projections. It is also possible in 
principle to determine the curve's tangent and curvature. In practice this might 
require the precise calibration of the epipolar geometry and sub-pixel accuracy 
for edge localisation and/or integrating information over many views in order to 
reduce discrelisalion errors. 
However, even if perfect reconstruction could be achieved, the end result 
would only be a space curve. This delimits the surface, but places only a weak 
constraint on the surface orientation and shape along the curve (via the visibility 
and tangent constraints - see later). Ideally, rather than simply a space curve 
we would like a surface strip [122] along which we know the surface orientation. 
Better still wouht be knowledge of how the surface normal varied not only along 
the curve but also in arbitrary directions away from the curve. This determines 
the principal curvatures and direction of the principal axes along the strip. This 
information is sufficient to completely specify the surface shape locally. Knowl- 
edge of this type helps to infer surface behaviour away from the curves, and thus 
enables grouping of the curves into coherent surfaces. 
For certain surface curves and tracked points the information content is not 
so bleak. It was shown in Chapter 2 that the surface normal is known along the 
apparent contour (the image of the points where the viewing direction lies in the 
tangent plane) [17]. Further, the curvature of the apparent contour in a single 
view determines the sign of the Gaussian curvature of the surface projecting 
to the contour [120, 36]. From the deformation of the apparent contour under 
viewer motion a surface patch (first and second fundamental forms) can be re- 
covered [85, 27]. The deformation of image curves due to viewer motion, also 
allows us to discriminate the image of surface curves from apparent contours. 
A self-shadow (where the illuminant direction lies in the tangent plane) can be 

82 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
Figure 4.1: Qualitative shape from the deformation of image curves. 
A single CCD camera mounted on the wrist joint of a 5-axis Adept 1 SCARA 
arm (shown on right) is used to recover qualitative aspects of the geometry of 
visible surfaces from a sequence of views of surface curves. 

4.1. Introduction 
83 
exploited in a similar manner if the illuminant position is known [122]. Track- 
ing specular points [220] gives a surface strip along which the surface normal is 
known. 
In this chapter we analyse the images of surface curves (contour generators 
which arise because of internal surface markings or illumination effects) and 
investigate the surface geometric information available from the temporal evo- 
lution of the image under viewer motion (figure 4.1). 
Surface curves have three advantages over isolated surface markings: 
1. Sampling- Isolated texture only "samples" the surface at isolated points 
- the surface could have any shape in between the points. Conversely, 
a surface curve conveys information, at a particular scale, throughout its 
path. 
2. Curves, unlike points, have well-defined tangents which constrain surface 
orientation. 
3. Technological - There are now available reliable, accurate edge detectors 
which localise surface markings to sub-pixel accuracy [48]. The technology 
for isolated point detection is not at such an advanced stage. Furthermore, 
snakes [118] are ideally suited to tracking curves through a sequence of 
images, and thus measuring the curve deformation (Chapter 3). 
This chapter is divided into three parts. First, in section 4.2, the geometry 
of space curves is reviewed and related to the perspective image. In particular, 
a simple expression for the curvature of the image contour is derived. Second, in 
section 4.3, the information available from the deformation of the image curve 
under viewer motion is investigated, making explicit the constraints that this 
imposes on the geometry of the space curve. Third, in section 4.4, the aspects 
of the differential geometry of the surface that can be gleaned by knowing that 
the curve lies on the surface are discussed. 
The main contribution concerns the recovery of aspects of qualitative shape. 
That is, information that can be recovered efficiently and robustly, without 
requiring exact knowledge of viewer motion or accurate image measurements. 
The description is, however, incomplete. It is shown that visibility of points on 
the curve places a weak constraint on the surface normal. This constraint is 
tightened by including the restriction imposed by the surface curve's tangent. 
Furthermore, certain 'events' (inflections, transverse curve crossings) are richer 
still in geometric information. In particular it is shown that tracking image 
curve inflections determines the sign of the normal curvature in the direction 
of the surface curve's tangent vector. This is a generalisation to surface curves 
of Weinshall's [212] result for surface texture. Examples are included for real 
image sequences. 

84 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
In addition to the information that surface curves provide about surface 
shape, the deformation also provides constraints on the viewer (or object) mo- 
tion. This approach was introduced by Faugeras [71] and is developed in sec- 
tion 4.5. 
4.2 
The perspective 
projection 
of space curves 
4.2.1 
Review 
of space curve geometry 
Consider a point P on a regular differentiable space curve r(s) in R a (figure 4.2a). 
The local geometry of the curve is uniquely determined in the neighbourhood 
of P by the basis of unit vectors {T, N, B}, the curvature, ~, and torsion, r, of 
the space curve [67]. For an arbitrary parameterisation of the curve, r(s), these 
quantities are defined in terms of the derivatives (up to third order) of the curve 
with respect to the parameter s. The first-order derivative ("velocity") is used 
to define the tangent to the space curve, T, a unit vector given by 
T= 
r, 
(4.1) 
Ir~l 
The second-order derivative - in particular the component perpendicular to the 
tangent ("centripetal acceleration") -is used to define the curvature, g (the 
magnitude) and the curve normal, N (the direction): 
~N- 
(TArss) AT 
Ir~l 2 
(4.2) 
The plane spanned by T and N is called the osculating plane. This is the plane 
which r(s) is closest to lying in (and does lie in if the curve has no torsion). 
These two vectors define a natural frame for describing the geometry of the 
space curve. A third vector, the binormal B, is chosen to form a right-handed 
set: 
B = T A N. 
(4.3) 
This leaves only the torsion of the curve, defined in terms of deviation of the 
curve out of the osculating plane: 
rsss.B 
r- 
alr~l a. 
(4.4) 
The relationship between these quantities and their derivatives for movements 
along the curve can be conveniently packaged by the Frenet-Serret equations 
[67] which for an arbitrary parameterisation are given by: 
T8 
= 
Ir, l~N 
(4.5) 
N~ 
= 
Ir, l(-~T + rB) 
(4.6) 
Be 
= 
-IrslrN. 
(4.7) 

4.2. The perspective projection of space curves 
85 
a) Space curve and Frenet trihedron at P 
~,B 
e) Projection onto the Osculating plane 
L T 
S 
b) Projection onto B-T plane 
B 
J 
f 
d) Projection onto the B-N plane 
B 
f 
T 
S 
Figure 4.2: Space curve geometry and local forms of its projection. 
The local geometry of a space curve can be completely specified by the Frenet 
trihedron of vectors {T, N, B}, the curvature, n, and torsion, 7, of the curve. 
Projection of the space curve onto planes perpendicular to these vectors ( the 
local canonical forms [67]) provides insight into how the apparent shape of a 
space curve changes with different viewpoints. 

86 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
The influence of curvature and torsion on the shape of a curve are clearly demon- 
strated in the Taylor series expansion by arc length about a point uo on the 
curve. 
u 2 
?s 
r(u) = r(u0) + urn(u0) + -~-r~(u0) + -~-r~(u0) 
... 
(4.8) 
where u is an arc length parameter of the curve. An approximation for the curve 
with the lowest order in u along each basis vector is given by [122]: 
U 2 
U 3 
r(u) = r(u0) + (u + ...)T + (~-...)nN + (-6- + ...)nrB 
(4.9) 
The zero-order tcrm is simply the fiducial point itself; the first-order term is a 
straight line along the tangent direction; the second-order term is a parabolic arc 
in the osculating plane; and the third-order term describes the deviation from 
the osculating plane. Projection on to planes perpendicular to T, N, B give the 
local forms shown in figure 4.2. It is easy to see from (4~9) that the orthographic 
projection on to the T - N plane (osculating plane) is just a parabolic arc; on 
the T - B plane you see an inflection; and the projection on the N - B plane is 
a cusped curve. If ~ or v are zero then higher order terms are important and the 
local forms must be modified. These local forms provide some insight into how 
the apparent shape of a space curve changes with different viewpoint. The exact 
relationship between the space curve geometry and its image under perspective 
projection will now be derived. 
4.2.2 
Spherical 
camera 
notation 
As in Chapter 2, consider perspective projection on to a sphere of unit radius. 
The advantage of this approach is that formulae under perspective are often as 
simple as (or identical to) those under orthographic projection [149]. 
The image of a world point, P, with.position vector, r(s), is a unit vector 
p(s,t) such that 1 
r(s) = v(t) + ,k(s,t)p(s,t) 
(4.10) 
where s is a parameter along the image curve; t is chosen to index the view 
(corresponding to time or viewer position) A(s,t) is the distance along the ray 
to P; and v(t) is the viewer position (centre of spherical pin-hole camera) at 
time t (figure 4.3). A moving observer at position v(t) sees a family of views of 
the curve indexed by time, q(s, t) (figure 4.4). 
]The space curve r(s) is fixed on the surface and is view independent. This is the only 
difference between (4.10) and (2.10). 

4.2. The perspective projection of space curves 
87 
spherical perspective image 
v(t o) 
C~ 
q (s,to) 
image contour at time t o 
surface curve r (s) 
Figure 4.3: Viewing and surface geometry. 
The image defines the direction of a ray, (unit vector p) to a point, P, on a 
surface curve, r(s). The distance from the viewer (centre of projection sphere) 
to P is ~. 

88 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
4.2.3 
Relating 
image 
and space curve geometry 
Equation (4.10) gives the relationship between a point on the curve r(s), and its 
spherical perspective projection, p(s, t), for a view indexed by time t. It can be 
used to relate the space curve geometry (T, N, B, g, v) to the image and viewing 
geometry. The relationship between the orientation of the curve and its image 
tangent and the curvature of the space curve and its projection are now derived. 
Image curve tangent and normal 
At the projection of P, the tangent to the spherical image curve, t p, is related 
to the space curve tangent T and the viewing geometry by: 
T- 
(p.T)p 
(4.11) 
tv = (1 - (p.T)2)l/2" 
Derivation 4.1 Differentiating (4.10) with respect to s, 
r~ = A~p + Ap, 
(4.12) 
and rearranging we derive the following relationships: 
p A (rs A p) 
Ps-- 
A 
(4.13) 
(4.14) 
Note that the mapping from space curve to the image contour is singular (de- 
generate) when the ray and curve tangent are aligned. The tangent to the space 
curve projects to a point in the image and a cusp is generated in the image 
contour. 
By expressing (4.13) in terms of unit tangent vectors, t p and T: 
ps 
tp 
- 
IPs[ 
p A (T A p) 
(1 - (p.T)2)U 2" 
The direction of the ray, p, and the image curve tangent t p determine the ori- 
entation of the image curve normal riP: 
n p = p A t p. 
(4.15) 
Note, this is not the same as the projection of the surface normal, n. However, 
it is shown below that the image curve normal n v constrains the surface normal. 

4.2. The perspective projection of space curves 
89 
Curvature of projection 
A simple relationship between the shape of the image and space curves and the 
viewing geometry is now investigated. In particular, the relationship between 
the curvature of the image curve, x p (defined as the geodesic curvature 2 of the 
spherical curve, p(s, t)) is derived: 
t~p 
P ss'np 
IPs] 2 
(4.16) 
and the space curve curvature, x: 
xp = Ax[1 [p,T,N] 
(4.17) 
- 
(p.T)213/2' 
where [p, T, N] represents the triple scalar product. The numerator depends on 
the angle between the ray and the osculating plane. The denominator depends 
on the angle between the ray and the curve tangent. 
Derivation 4.2 Differentiating (4.12) with respect to s and collecting the com- 
ponents parallel to the image curve normal gives 
Pss.n p -- rss.nP 
A 
(4.18) 
Substituting this and (4.14) into the expression for the curvature of the image 
curve (4.16) 
rss.n v 
Aip~12 
(4.19) 
N.n v 
Ax (1 - (p.T):)" 
(4.20) 
t~P 
-- 
Substituting (4.15) and (4.11)for nP: 
tr p 
= 
Ate 
= 
Ate 
N.(p A T) 
(4.21) 
(1 
- 
(p.T)2) 3/2 
B.p 
(4.22) 
(1 
- 
(p.T)2) 3/2" 
A similar result is described in [122]. Under orthographic projection the ex- 
pression is the same apart from the scaling factor of A. As expected, the image 
curvature scales linearly with distance and is proportional to the space curve 
curvature ~. More importantly, the sign of the curvature of the projection de- 
pends on which side of the osculating plane the ray, p lies, i.e. the sign of the 
2 The geodesic curvature of a space curve has a well-defined sign. It is, of course meaningless 
to refer to the sign of curvature of a space curve. 

90 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
scalar product B.p. That is easily seen to be true by viewing a curve drawn 
on a sheet of paper from both sides. The case in which the vantage point is in 
the osculating plane corresponds to a zero of curvature in the projection. From 
(4.17) (see also [205]) the projected curvature will be zero if and only if: 
I. ~=0 
The curvature of the space curve is zero. This does not occur for generic 
curves [41]. Although the projected curvature is zero, this may be a zero 
touching rather than a zero crossing of curvature. 
2. [p, T, N] = 0 with p.T # 0 
The view direction lies in the osculating plane, but not along the tangent 
to the curve (if the curve is projected along the tangent the image is, in 
general, a cusp). Provided the torsion is not zero, r(s) crosses its osculating 
plane, seen in the image as a zero crossing. 
Inflections will occur generically in any view of a curve, but cusps only become 
generic in a one-parameter family of views [41]. 3 Inflections in image curves 
are therefore more likely to be consequences of the viewing geometry (condition 
2 above) than zeros of the space curve curvature (condition 1). Contrary to 
popular opinion [205] the power of inflections of image curves as invariants of 
perspective projection of space curves is therefore limited. 
4.3 
Deformation due to viewer movements 
As the viewer moves the image of r(s) will deform. The deformation is charac- 
terised by a change in image position (image velocities), a change in image curve 
orientation and a change in the curvature of the projection. Below we derive 
expressions relating the deformation of the image curve to the space curve ge- 
ometry and then show how to recover the latter from simple measurements on 
the spatio-temporal image. 
Note that for a moving observer the viewer (camera) co-ordinate is continu- 
ously changing with respect to the fixed co-0rdinate system used to describe R 3 
(see section 2.2.4). The relationship between temporal derivatives of measure- 
ments made in the camera co-ordinate system and those made in the reference 
3An informal way to see this is to consider orthographic projection with the view direction 
defining a point p on the Gaussian sphere. The tangent at each point on the space curve also 
defines a point on the Gaussian sphere, and so TG(s) traces a curve. For a cusp, p must lie on 
TG(s) and this will not occur in general. However, a one parameter family of views p(t) also 
defines a curve on the Gaussian sphere. Provided these cross (transversely) the intersection will 
be stable to perturbations in r(s) (and hence To(s)) and p(t). A similar argument establishes 
the inflection case. 

4.3. Deformation clue to viewer movements 
91 
spherical perspective image at t 
~wherical perspective image at t+ ~t 
v (t-I-~~ 
p 
Figure 4.4: Epipolar geometry. 
A moving observer at position v(t) sees a one-parameter family of image curves, 
p(s,t) - the spherical perspective projections of a space curve, r(s), indexed 
by time. Knowledge of the viewer's motion (camera centre and orientation) is 
sufficient to determine the corresponding image point (and hence the direction 
of the ray) in successive images. These are found by searching along epipolar 
great-circles. The space curve can then be recovered by triangulation of the viewer 
positions and the ray directions from a minimum of two views. 

92 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
frame is obtained by differentiating (2.12) and (2.13). In particular the tempo- 
ral derivative of the ray, the image curve tangent and the image curve normal, 
{p, t v, riP}, are related to temporal derivatives of the image curve measured in 
the viewer co-ordinate system, {q,tP, ~v}, by 
Pt 
= 
qt+f~(t) Aq 
(4.23) 
(4.24) 
(4.25) 
For a static space curve (not an extremal boundary of a curved surface) a 
point P on the curve, r(s), does not change with time: 
rt = 0. 
(4.26) 
This can be used to derive the relationship between the images of the point P in 
the sequence of views. Differentiating (4.10) with respect to t and substituting 
the condition (4.26) gives an infinitesimal analogue of the epipolar constraint in 
which the ray is constrained to lie in the epipolar plane defined by the ray in 
the first view p and the viewer translation U (figure 4.4): 
(U A p) A p 
(4.27) 
Pt--- 
A 
In terms of measurements on the image sphere: 
(UAq) Aq 
12 A q, 
(4.28) 
qt-- 
A 
where qt is the image velocity of a point on the space curve at a distance A. Equa- 
tion (4.28) is the well known equation of structure from motion [149]. Points on 
successive image curves are "matched" by searching along epipolar great circles 
on the image sphere (or epipolar lines for planar image geometry) defined by the 
viewer motion, U, ~t and the image position q. Note also that the image ve- 
locity consists of two components. One component is determined purely by the 
viewer's rotational velocity about camera centre and is independent of the struc- 
ture of the scene ()~). The other component is determined by the translational 
velocity of the viewer. 
4.3.1 
Depth from image velocities 
As with apparent contours, depth A (distance along the ray p) can be computed 
from the deformation (Pt) of the image contour under known viewer motion. 
From (4.27): 
U.nV 
A _ 
. 
(4.29) 
Pt.nV 

4.3. Deformation due to viewer movements 
93 
This formula is an infinitesimal analogue of triangulation with stereo cameras. 
The numerator is analogous to baseline and the denominator to disparity. 
Equation (4.29) can also be re-expressed in terms of spherical image position 
q and the normal component of image velocity qt.nP: 
U.n p 
= - 
(4.30) 
qt .np -]- (~-~ A q).nP" 
These equations are equivalent to those derived for an apparent contour. 
It 
is impossible to discriminate an apparent contour from a surface curve from 
instantaneous image velocities alone. 
4.3.2 
Curve 
tangent 
from 
rate 
of change 
of orientation 
of 
image 
tangent 
Having recovered the depth of each point on the space curve it is possible to 
recover the geometry of the space curve by numerical differentiation. Here, an 
alternative method is presented. This recovers the curve tangent and normal 
directly from image measurables without first explicitly recovering the space 
curve. The space curve tangent, T can be recovered from the temporal derivative 
of the image curve tangent tP as follows. 
Derivation 4.3 Rearranging (4.11) we see that the space curve tangent only 
has components parallel to the ray and image tangent. Namely 
T = [1 - (p.T)2]z/~t v + (p.T)p. 
(4.31) 
By differentiating 4.31 and looking at the normal components it is straightforward 
to show that the following relationship exists between the derivative of the image 
tangent and the space curve tangent: 
(p.T) 
(4.32) 
ttP'nP = 
[1 - (p.T)2]U ipt'np" 
This equation can be used to recover the coefficients of t p and p in (4.31) and 
hence allows the recovery of the curve tangent. Alternatively it is easy to see 
from (3.31) that the following simple condition must hold: 
T.n v = 0. 
(4.33) 
Differentiating (3.33) with respect to time t gives 
T.nP = 0 
(4.34) 

94 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape fi'om Images of Surface Curves 
since the space curve is assumed static and does not change with time. Equations 
(4.33) and (4.34) allow the recovery of the space curve tangent up to an arbitrary 
sign. In terms of measurements on the image .sphere: 
tip A (fit p + n A fly) 
(4.35) 
T = i~ p A (~7 + ~/X ~P)I" 
The orientation of the space curve tangent is recovered from the change in the 
image curve normal and knowledge of the viewer's rotational velocity. A similar 
expression to (4.35) was derived by Faugeras et al. [161] for the image motion of 
straight lines. 
4.3.3 
Curvature 
and 
curve 
normal 
We now show how to recover the space curve's curvature, n and normal, N, 
directly from measurements on the spatio-temporal image and known viewer 
motion. 
To simplify the derivation we choose a frame aligned with the curve normal 
with basis vectors {n p,nt; , T}. (It is easy to see from (4.33) and (4.34) that 
these three vectors are orthogonal, nt v is not necessarily a unit vector.) In this 
frame aN can be expressed as: 
aN = an; + fin~ + G'T. 
(4.36) 
From the definition of a space curve normal, "), must be zero. The other two 
orthogonal components of aN, nN.n p and aN.n p, can be recovered from the 
curvature in the image (4.20) and its temporal derivative as follows. 
Derivation 4.4 By rearranging (4.20) we can solve for a: 
N.n p 
(1 - (p.m)~) 
a p 
a 
----- -~-(1- (p.m)2). 
(4.37) 
Differentiating (4.20) and rearranging we can recover the other component, /3: 
at p 
---- -2n --~ 
(1-(p.m)2)'/2] - 
-(p.m) 2) 
p U.p] 
U.t p 
The space curve normal and curvature can be recovered directly from measure- 
ments in the image and known viewer motion. 

4.4. Surface geometry 
95 
For the analysis of the next section a simpler expression for the temporal 
derivative of the image eurve's curvature is introduced. This is obtained by 
differentiating (4.17) and substituting (4.27) and (4.17): 
xB.U 
3rip [(P'T)(U'tP)] 
(4.40) 
ntP= 
(1-(p.T)2)3/2 - A(1-(p.T)2)I/2' 
In the special ease of viewing a section of curve which projects to an inflection, 
i.e. n p = 0, or of the viewer nmving in a direction which is perpendicular to the 
image curve's tangent, i.e.U.t p = 0, the second term is zero and 
xB.U 
ntP= 
(1 -- (p.T)2)3/2 
(4.41) 
i.e. lhe sign of the deformation of the image curve encodes the sign of B.U (since 
n and the denominator are always positive). This is sufficient to determine what 
the curve normal is doing qualitatively, i.e. whether the curve is bending towards 
or away from the viewer. This information is used in section 4.4.3 to recover 
qualitative properties of the underlying surface's shape. 
If lhe image curve at time t has a zero of curvature at p(s0, t) because p lies 
in tim osculating plane, the inflection at so will not disappear in general under 
viewer molion but will move along the curve (see later, figure 4.9). Generically 
inflections can only be created or annihilated in pairs [42]. 
4.4 
Surface geometry 
4.4.1 
Visibility constraint 
Since the curve is visible the angle between the surface normal and the line of 
sight must be less than or equal to 90 ~ (otherwise the local tangent plane would 
occlude the curve). If the angle is 90 ~ then the image curve is coincident with 
the apparent contour of the surface. 
Tile visibility constraint can be utilised to constrain surface orientation. 
Since, 
- 1 _< p.n < 0, 
(4.42) 
if p is taken as the south pole of the Gaussian sphere, then the surface normal 
must lie on the northern hemisphere 4. Each position of the viewer generates 
a fresh constraint hemisphere (see figure 4.5a). For known viewer movements 
these hemispheres can be intersected and the resultant patch on the Gaussian 
4The convention used is that the surface normal is defined as being outwards from the solid 
surface. 

96 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
(a) 
(b) 
f 
viewer motion 
Figure 4.5: The visibility constraint. 
(a) The visibility constraint restricts the surface normal n to lie on a hemisphere 
of the (Gauss map) Gaussian sphere. (b) By intersecting these constraint regions 
for known viewer motions a tighter constraint is placed on the normal. 
(a) 
space curve tangent 
constraint on surface normal n 
(b) 
Figure 4.6: The tangency constraint. 
(a) The tangcnt constraint restricts the surface normal to lie on a great circle 
of the Gaussian sphere. (b) By intersecting this curve with the constraint patch 
from the visibility constraint, the surface normal is further restricted to an arc 
of a great circle. 

4.4. Surface geometry 
97 
sphere places a tighter constraint on n (figure 4.5b). 
Clearly, motion which 
rotates by 180 ~ about the object determines the surface normal, provided, of 
course, the point is always visible. The point will not be visible if another part 
of the surface occludes it, or if it has reached the extremal boundary (the back 
projection of the apparent contour in the image). However, when it reaches the 
extremal boundary the normal is fully determined [17]. 
The viewer motion must be accurately known in order to fully utilise the 
visibility constraint over a sequence of views. Uncertainty in motion could be 
included in a primitive fashion by intersecting regions larger than a hemisphere. 
The excess over a hemisphere would be bounded by estimates of error in viewer 
motion. 
The constraint on the normal provided by the visibility constraint is applica- 
ble to texture points as well as smooth curves. The following constraint exploits 
the continuity of the curve. 
4.4.2 
Tangency 
constraint 
The space curve tangent lies in the surface tangent plane and this constrains the 
surface normal n: 
T.n = 0. 
(4.43) 
This orthogonality condition generates a constraint curve which is a great circle 
on the Gaussian sphere (figure 4.6a) [23]. If the curve tangent could be deter- 
mined exactly, then intersecting the great circle with the constraint patch from 
the visibility constraint would restrict the normal to an arc of a great circle (fig- 
ure 4.6b). In practice there will be errors in the tangent so the constraint region 
will be a band rather than a curve. Combining information from many views will 
more accurately determine the tangent (and hence the constraint band). How- 
ever, no "new" information is generated in each view as it is using the visibility 
constraint. 
4.4.3 
Sign of normal 
curvature 
at inflections 
Even if the curvature and Frenet frame of a space curve lying on a surface are 
known, no constraint is placed on the surface curvature because the relation 
of the surface normal to the curve's osculating plane is unknown and arbitrary. 
However, it is shown below that at an inflection in the image curve, the sign of the 
normal curvature along the curve can be determined without first determining 
the surface normal. Moreover it can be determined without having to recover 
the space curve. It is shown that by following the inflection through a sequence 
of images, the sign of the normal curvature is determined along the curve. This 
can be done with incomplete, qualitative knowledge of viewer motion. 
The 

98 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
(a) 
The image plane 
image contour at time t a 
t 2 
image contour at time t 3 
tP 
n p 
~P =0~ 
direction of viewer translation 
P 
U p 
(b) 
The image plane 
image contour at time t 1 
0 
t 2 
image contour at time t 3 
t p 
n p 
P 
B 
P<O 
direction of viewer translation 
it 
U p 
Figure 4.7: Orientation of the space curve from the deformation at inflections. 
If the viewer crosses the osculating plane of the surface curve the curvaturc of 
the image will change sign - projecting to an inflection when the viewer lies in 
osculating plane (time t2). Two possible cases arc shown. 
(a) If N . p > 0 the space curve is bending away from the viewer (figure 7a) and 
the image curve changes locally from an arc with negative image curvature via 
an inflection to art arc with positive image curvature, i.e. ~Pt > O. 
(b) If N . p < 0 the space curve is bending towards the viewer (figure ~.8b) and 
the opposite transition is seen in the image, i.e. ~Pt < O. 

4.4. Surface geometry 
99 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4.8: Sign of normal curvature from osculating plane geometry 
The component of the surface normal in the osculating plane (n*) is constrained 
to lie within 90 ~ of the ray, p by the visibility constraint (n.p ~ O, shown shaded) 
and must be perpendicular to the surface curve tangent, T by the tangency con- 
straint (T. n = 0). The component of the surface normal in the osculating plane 
will therefore be parallel to the curve normal 1N - either in opposite directions 
(a) ifN .p > O, or (b) in the same direction ifN .p < O. The sign of the normal 
curvature in the direction of the curve tangent is determined by the sign of N . p 
which is obtained by noting the transition in image curvature at an inflection 
(fgure 4.7). 

100 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
only requirement is to know whether the viewer is translating to the left or 
right of the image contour. This result is a generalisation to surface curves of 
Weinshall's [212] result for surface texture. 
Theorem 4.1 (Sign of normal curvatures at inflections) 
Consider two 
views of a curve lying on a smooth surface. If a point P on the curve projects 
to an inflection in one view, but not in the other, then the normal curvature (in 
the direction of the curve's tangent) at P is convex 5 (concave) if the image of 
the curve at P has positive (negative) image curvature, n p, in the second view. 
The parameterisation of the curve is chosen so that U p . n p > O, where U p is 
the projection in the image of the translational velocity of the viewer. With this 
parameterisation sign(n n) = -sign(n p) where n s is the normal curvature and gv t 
the time derivative of image curvature at the inflection. 
']?he proof below is in three stages. First, the viewing geometry is established 
(curve viewed in osculating plane, so it may be thought of as a plane curve). 
This determines B = • 
and hence constrains N. Second, the sign of N 9 p is 
determined from the time derivative of image curvature (this determines whether 
the curve bends towards or away from the viewing direction), see figure 4.7. 
Third, the visibility constraint is utilised to relate space curve curvature (the 
bending) to surface normal curvature, see figure 4.8. 
Parameterisatlon 
The directions of the tangent vectors T, t v and the im- 
age curve normal, n v, are arbitrarily defined by choosing the parameterisation 
direction for the image curve. A convenient parameterisation is to choose the 
direction of the curve normal so that it is on the same side of the image contour 
as the projection of the translational velocity, i.e. U p 9 n p > 0. This is always 
a good choice since it only fails when U p 9 n p = 0 in which case the viewer is 
moving in the osculating plane and both views contain an inflection for the same 
point on the space curve. Since {p, t p, n p} form an orthonormal right-handed 
system (with p into the image plane), fixing the direction of the curve normal 
n p also fixes t p and hence T and the sign of ~v. 
Proof 
We first establish a relation between N 9 p and B - np. From (4.11): 
T=at 
e+3p, 
with 
a>0 
. 
(4.44) 
5If we define the surface normal as being outwards from the solid surface, the normal 
curvature will be negative in any direction for a convex surface patch. 

4.4. Surface geometry 
101 
Then 
N.p 
= 
p.(BAT) 
= 
B.(TAp) 
= 
 
B.(tPAp) 
: 
-aB 9 n p 
The last steps following from (4.44) and (4.15), and since a > 0 
sign(N- p) = -sign(B. n p) 
1. Osculating plane constraints 
. 
(4.45) 
(4.46) 
If a point on a surface curve projects to an inflection in one view, but not 
in another then (from section 4.2.3) the ray in the first view must lie in 
the osculating plane and from (4.17) 
B -p = 0 
(4.47) 
Since B 9 T = 0 we have from (4.44) 
B.t p = 0 
(4.48) 
Thus, using the orthogonal triad {p, t v, n v} 
B 
= 
+(p A tP) 
(4.49) 
= 
-4-n p 
(4.50) 
Sign of N 9 p 
The transition in image curvature at P from a point of inflection in the 
first view (~P = 0) to an arc with positive or negative image curvature, ~P, 
in the second view determines the sign of N .p (figure 4.7). 
We can express U in the orthogonal triad: {p, t p, n p} 
U=Tn p+St p+cp, 
with 
7>0; 
(4.51) 
the sign of 7 follows from the parameterisation choice that U p 9 n p > 0. 
Using (4.47) and (4.48) gives: 
B- U = 7U'n p 
(4.52) 
and hence from (4.41) (noting that t~ and the denominator are positive): 
sign(~t p) 
= 
-sign(B.U) 
= 
-sign(B .n p) 
= 
sign(N.p) 
(4.53) 
the last step following from (4.46). This result determines the orientation 
of the curve normal, N, relative to the line of sight (figure 4.8). 

102 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
. Sign of ~n 
We express the surface normal n in the orthogonal triad {T, N, B): 
n = &N +/}B 
(4.54) 
since from (4.43) T.n 
= 0. Hence, p.n 
= &N-p since from (4.47) 
B 9 p = 0. The visibility constraint restricts the sign as p 9 n < 0, and 
hence sign(N, p) = -sign(&). The sign of the normal curvature n~ then 
follows from the above and (4.53): 
sign(n n) 
= 
sign(N.n) 
= 
sign(&) 
= 
-sign(N.p) 
= 
-sign(nP)rq 
(4.55) 
Note that the test is only valid if the inflection in the first view moves along 
the image curve in the next since an inflection corresponding to the same point 
on the surface curve in both views Can result from either zero normal curvature 
or motion in the osculating plane. Two views of a surface curve are then suf- 
ficient to determine the sign of the normal curvature. However, because of the 
numerical difficulties in determining a zero of curvature, the test can be applied 
with greater confidence if a transition from (say) negative to zero (an inflection) 
to positive image curvature is observed. The component of viewer translation 
parallel to the image plane is only used to determine the direction of the curve 
parameterisation. No knowledge of viewer rotations are required. The theo- 
rem is robust in that only partial knowledge (or inaccurate knowledge but with 
bounded errors) of translational velocity will suffice. This can be estimated from 
image measurements by motion parallax [138, 182] or is readily available in the 
case of binocular vision (where the camera or eye positions are constrained). 
Applications 
Figures 4.9 - 4.11 show examples of the application of this result to real 
images. 
1. Determining the sign of normal curvature by tracking inflections 
Figure 4.9 shows a sequence of images taken by a CCD camera mounted 
on an Adept robot arm rotating around a vase (figure 4.1). Two image 
curves are selected - the projection of surface curves on the neck (hyper- 
bolic patch) and body (elliptic patch) of the vase respectively. These image 
curves are automatically tracked using B-spline snakes [50]. Crosses mark 
inflection points. As the viewer moves from left to right the inflections 

4.4. Surface geometry 
103 
Figure 4.9: Tracking inflections to determine the sign of normal curvature. 
Four images are shown from an image sequence taken by a camera moving (from 
left to right with fixation) around a smooth surface (a vase). The image con- 
tours are tracked by using B-spline snakes. Inflections (marked by a cross) are 
generated for points whose osculating plane contains the vantage point. Under 
viewer motion the preimage of the inflection moves along the surface curve. The 
change in the sign image curvature is sufficient to determine the sign of the 
normal curvature along the curve. For the top part of the curve on the neck of 
the vase the transition in image curvature is from positive to negative indicating 
concave normal sections along the curve. For the bottom part of the curve on 
the body of the vase the transition is the opposite indicating convex normal sec- 
tions. This information is consistent with the neck of the vase being hyperbolic 
and the body convex elliptic. Note that this classification has been achieved with 
partial knowledge of the viewer motion. The only knowledge required is whether 
the component of viewer translation parallel to the image plane is to the left or 
right of the image contours. 

104 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
Figure 4.10: Qualitative information for grasping. 
The left and right images of a Japanese tea cup are shown. 
The simple test 
can be used for the Chinese characters painted in the indentations created by the 
potter's thumb imprints. The transition in the sign of image curvature indicates 
a concave section. These thumb imprints are created to aid in grasping the tea 
cup. 

4.4. Surface geometry 
105 
Figure 4.11: Qualitative interpretation of rangefinder images. 
These images were formed by the projection of planes of light onto the workspace 
and viewing the scene with a camera whose centre is displaced to the left of the 
light plane. The surface is covered artificially with a set of planar curves. If these 
surface curves were viewed in their respective osculating plane (the light planes) 
their images would simply be straight lines (degenerate case of an inflection). 
The sign of the image curvature in the images shown is consistent with the sign 
of the normal curvatures along the curve. Positive, negative and zero image 
curvature indicate respectively convex, concave and flat sections. 

106 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
moves smoothly along each curve. For the curve on the hyperbolic section 
of the vase the transition in image curvature is from positive to negative 
indicating a concave normal section. 
For the curve on tile elliptic sec- 
tion the transition is the reverse indicating a convex normal section. The 
main advantage is that provided the position of the inflection in one view 
can be identified with a convex or concave arc in the second - say by a 
nearby texture point - then only partial knowledge of the viewer motion 
is needed. In the case shown the only knowledge required is whether the 
viewer translation is to the left or right of the image contours. 
2. Convexity/Concavity 
test of surface 
The test directly rules out certain types of surfaces as follows. If the normal 
curvature is negative then the surface could be convex or hyperbolic - it 
cannot be concave. 
Similarly, a positive normal curvature rules out a 
convex surface. Thus the result can be used as a test for non-convexity or 
non-concavity. This is similar to the information available from the motion 
of a specularity when the light source position is not known [220]. 
3. Combination with other cues 
The test is most powerful when combined with other cues. 
Extremal 
boundaries, for example, are an extremely rich source of surface shape 
information. Unfortunately they cannot provide information on concave 
surface patches since these will never appear as extremal boundaries. The 
information available from the deformation of other curves is therefore ex- 
tremely important even though it is not as powerful a cue as the image of 
the extremal boundary. For example at an extremal boundary the Gaus- 
sian curvature of the surface is known from the sign of the curvature of 
the apparent contour in the image. Consider an elliptic region (this must 
be convex to appear on the extremal contour), if there is a point P inside 
the extremal boundary with concave (positive) normal curvature (deter- 
mined using the test above), then there must be a t least one parabolic 
curve between P and the boundary. 
This information can be used, for example, to indicate the presence of 
concavities for grasping. Figure 4.10 shows an example of a Japanese tea 
cup. 
The application of the test to the image contours of the Chinese 
characters in the two indentations indicate the presence of concavities. 
These concavities (thumb imprints) are deliberately placed by Japanese 
potters when making tea cups since they are good for grasping the cup. 
4. Interpreting single images of planar curves 
It is well known that by making certain assumptions about the nature of 

4.4. Surface geometry 
107 
the surface curves humans can interpret the shape of visible surfaces from 
single images of surface curves. Typically this has been used to infer the 
orientation of planar surfaces. Stevens [188] has shown how the assump- 
tions of parallel contour generators (with the implicit assumption that the 
curvature perpendicular to the contour is a principal curvature with zero 
curvature) can be used to recover the shape of curved surfaces. The result 
described above can be used to make precise the intuition of Stevens that 
the appearance of planar surface curves is sufficient to tell us a lot about 
the shape of the surface. This is highlighted with a simple example based 
on the qualitative interpretation of range finder images. Figure 4.11 shows 
two images taken with a rangefinder system [29]. The images are formed 
by the projection of planes of light on to the workspace and viewing this 
scene with another camera whose centre is displaced away from the light 
plane. The effect is to cover the untextured surface with planar surface 
curves. The osculating plane of these curves is simply the light plane. If 
the camera is placed in the osculating plane the light stripes would appear 
as straight lines. (The straight line is simply a degenerate case of an inflec- 
tion.) By taking an image with the camera on one side of the osculating 
plane (the light plane) the straight lines deform in a way determined ex- 
actly as predicted by the test above. The sign of the image curvature is 
consistently related to the sign of the normal curvature along the curve. In 
the examples of figure 4.11 the camera is displaced to the right of the light 
plane projector and so convexities (negative image curvature), concavities 
(positive image curvature) and inflections (zero image curvature) indicate 
respectively convex, concave and zero normal curvatures. The cue is ex- 
tremely powerful, giving a strong sense of the shape of the visible surfaces 
without the need for accurate image measurements, exact epipolar geom- 
etry and triangulation which are required in the established, quantitative 
approach for interpreting rangefinder images. 
4.4.4 
Surface 
curvature 
at curve 
intersections 
If surface curves cross transversely, or the curve's tangent is discontinuous, more 
constraints can be placed on the surface geometry. In principle from two views it 
is possible to reconstruct both space curves and hence determine their tangents 
and curvatures at the intersection. (Equations (4.29), (4.31), (4.37) and (4.39) 
show how these can be estimated directly from {p, t p, n p} and their temporal 
derivatives under known viewer motion.) From these the normal curvatures 
g~(1), ~.(2) along the two tangent directions can be determined 
t~ n(1) 
: 
t~(t) N (1) .n 
(4.56) 

108 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
n ~(2) 
= 
n(2)N(2).n 
(4.57) 
where n is the surface normal 
T(1) A T (2) 
n -- [[T(~) A T(~)[[ 
(4.58) 
and ~(i), T(i), N(0 i = 1, 2 are the curvature, tangent and normals of the space 
curves at the intersection. An intersection of the two curves ensures sufficient 
information to recover the surface normal. It has the added advantage that the 
exact epipolar geometry is not required to match points in the two images since 
the intersection can be tracked. It also has the advantage that the surface normal 
can be computed by measuring the change in image curve normals and knowledge 
of camera rotation alone. This is done by applying (4.35) to recover both space 
curve tangents and taking their vector product to determine the surface normal 
(4.58). However, the recovery of two normal curvatures is not sufficient in general 
to determine the Gaussian curvature of the surface. (There are many convex and 
concave directions on a hyperbolic patch.) It can only constrain its sign. The 
problem is that although the angle between the tangent vectors is known, the 
relation between the tangent pair and the principle directions is unknown. From 
Eulcr's formula [67] we have 
tr ~(1) 
= 
al sin 2 t~ + ~2 cos 2 t~ 
(4.59) 
~n(2) 
~_~ 
~I sin2( ~ 4- Of) -b ~2 COS2( ~ 4- O~) 
(4.60) 
where a is the angle between the tangents in the tangent plane; 0 is the (un- 
known) angle between the tangent, T0), and principal direction; tr and g2 are 
the principal curvatures. There are three unknowns, 
gl, t~2, 8, and only two con- 
straints. If there is a triple crossing or higher there are sufficient constraints to 
uniquely determine the three unknowns. 
This is less likely to occur. However, 
we can catalogue the surface by the sign of the Gaussian curvature. 
Sign of ~n(1) and gn(2) 
Surface 
both negative 
not concave 
both positive 
not convex 
one negative, one positive 
hyperbolic 
Furthermore, it is easy to show that there is a lower bound on the difference of 
the principle curvatures, namely 
~(1) 
_ ~.(2) i 
(4.61) 
where a is the angle between the tangents in the tangent plane and ~(i) are 
measured normal curvatures. 

4.5. 
Ego-motion from the image motion of curves 
109 
Derivation 
4.5 Subtracting the two copies of (4.59) for the curvatures of the 
two curves and from trigonometry: 
~(1)_ 
~(2)= 
(~1 - tc2)(sin a sin (a + 20)). 
(4.62) 
Rearranging and inspecting the magnitude of both sides gives the required result. 
This is simply repackaging the information contained in the normal curvatures 
and the angle between tangents. However, in this form it is better suited to a 
first filter on a model data base. For example if it were known that the model was 
convex a negative sign test would reject it. Similarly if the principle curvatures 
were known not to exceed certain limits, then the lower bound test might exclude 
it. 
4.5 
Ego-motion from the image motion of curves 
We have seen that under the assumption of known viewer motion constraints on 
surface shape can be derived from the deformation of image curves. It is now 
shown that despite the aperture problem the image motion of curves can provide 
constraints on ego-motion. 
Equation (4.28) relates the image velocity of a point on a curve in space to the 
viewer's motion. In principle measurement of image velocities at a finite number 
of discrete points can be used to solve for the viewer's ego-motion [175, 138, 
159, 149, 150] - the five unknowns include the three components of rotational 
velocity t2 and the direction of translation U/IU I. Once the ego-motion has 
been recovered it is then possible to recover the structure (depth of each point) 
of the scene. This is the well known structure from motion problem. 6 
The structure from motion problem relies on the ability to measure the image 
velocities of a number of points. Although this is possible for distinct, discrete 
points - "corner features" - this is impossible for a point on an image curve from 
purely local measurements. Measuring the (real) image velocity qt for a point 
on an image curve requires knowledge of the viewer motion - equation (4.28). 
Only the normal component of image velocity (vernier velocity) can be obtained 
directly from local measurements at a curve - the aperture problem [201]. 
6In practice this is an extremely difficult and ill-conditioned problem. Apart from the 
obvious speed-scale ambiguity which makes it impossible to recover the magnitude of the 
translational velocity (and hence to recover absolute depth) there is a problem with the bas- 
relief ambiguity. This is the problem of differentiating between a deeply indented surface 
rotating through a small angle, and a shallowly indented surface rotating through a larger 
angle. That is, not all of the variables to be estimated will be well conditioned. Despite 
these drawbacks some attempts at the problem of structure from motion problem have been 
extremely successful. An excellent example is the system developed by Harris and colleagues 
[93, 96, 49] which tracks image corner features over time to solve for the ego-motion and to 
reconstruct the scene. 

110 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
image contour at time t 
trajectory of fixed point P on 
~
~
(
s
s
t
a
n
t
)
,
 .... 
/ 
~ 
t-parameter curve 
J 
~ 
1 ('s = constant) 
/
/
 
q (~o,0 
I 
image contour at time t + St 
Figure 4.12: Spatio-temporal parameterisations of the image. 
p is the projection of a point P (r(so)) on a space curve, r(s). Under viewer 
motion the image of P follows a trajectory q(so, t) in the spatio-temporal image. 
The tangent to this trajectory is the instantaneous image velocity, qt - shown as 
a vector ppt. The image velocity can be decomposed into two orthogonal compo- 
nents: the normal component perpendicular to the image contour (vector pptt) 
and the tangential component parallel to the image tangent (vector pttpt). From 
local image measurements and without knowledge of viewer motion it is impossi- 
ble to measure the real image velocity. It is only possible to measure the normal 
component. An alternative parameterisation is to define the t-parameter curves 
to be orthogonal to the image contours. Such a parameterisation can always be 
set up in the spatio-temporal image and it is independent of viewer motion. 

4.5. Ego-motion from the image motion of curves 
11l 
Knowledge of the normal component of image velocity alone is insufficient 
to solve for tile ego-motion of the viewer. By assuming no (or knowledge of) 
rotational velocity qualitative constraints can be recovered [106, 186]. By making 
certain assumptions about tile surface being viewed a solution may sometimes 
be possible. Murray and Buxton [158] show, for example, how to recover ego- 
motion and structure from a minimum of eight vernier velocities from the same 
planar patch. 
In the following we show that it is also possible to recover ego-motion without 
segmentation or making any assumption about surface shape. The only assump- 
tion made is that of a static scene. The only information used is derived from the 
spatio-temporal image of an image curve under viewer motion. This is achieved 
by deriving an additional constraint from image accelerations. This approach 
was motivated by the work of Faugeras [71] which investigated the relationship 
between optical flow and the geometry of the spatio-temporal image. In the 
following analysis a similar result is derived independently. Unlike Faugeras's 
approach the techniques of differential geometry are not applied to the spatio- 
temporal image surface. Instead the result is derived directly from the equations 
of the image velocity and acceleration of a point on a curve by expressing these 
in terms of quantities which can be measured from the spatio-temporal image. 
The derivation follows. 
The image velocity of a point on a fixed space curve is related to the viewer 
motion and depth of the point by (4.28): 
(UAq) Aq 
aAq. 
qt-- 
)~ 
By differentiating with rcspect to time and substituting the rigidity constraint 7 
At + q.U = 0 
(4.63) 
the normal component of acceleration can be expressed in terms of the viewer's 
motion, (U, Ut, Ft, f~t), and the 3D geometry of the space curve (A) s, 
Ut.n p 
(U.q) (qt.n v ) 
(q.U) (U.n v ) 
qtt.~l p 
-- 
_ _  
q- 
+(at .tP) + ((~2.q) 
+ (ft.fi p) 
(4.64) 
Note that because of the apcrture problem neither the image velocity qt nor the 
image acceleration qtt.rlP can be measured directly from the spatio-temporal im- 
7Obtained by differentiating (4.10) and using the condition (4.26) that for a fixed space 
curve, rt ~ 0. 
SThis is equivalent to equation (2.47) derived for the image acceleration at an apparent 
contour where because we are considering a rigid space-curve, 1/n t = 0. 

112 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
age. Only the normal component of the image velocity, qt.~ p, (vernier velocity) 
can be directly measured. 
Image velocities and accelerations are now expressed in terms of measure- 
ments on the spatio-temporal image. This is achieved by re-parameterising the 
image so that it is independent of knowledge of viewer motion. In the epipolar 
parameterisation of the spatio-temporal image, q(s, t), the s-parameter curves 
were defined to be the image contours while the t-parameter curves were de- 
fined by equation (4.28) to be the trajectory of the image of a fixed point on 
the space curve. At any instant the magnitude and direction of the tangent to a 
t-parameter curve is equal to the (real) image velocity, qt - more precisely ~t 8" 
Note that this parameter curve is the trajectory in the spatio-temporal image of 
a fixed point on the space curve if such a point could be distinguished. 
A parameterisation can be chosen which is completely independent of knowl- 
edge of viewer motion, q(~,t), where ~ = ~(s,t). 
Consider, for example, a 
parameterisation where the t-parameter curves (with tangent -~t .1~) are 
I 
chosen 
to be orthogonal to the ~-parameter curves (with tangent -~ t) - the image 
contours. Equivalently the t-parameter curves are defined to be parallel to the 
curve normal ~P, 
O~ 
=/3~v 
(4.65) 
g 
where/3 is the magnitude of the normal component of the (real) image velocity. 
The advantage of such a parameterisation is that it can always, in principle, be 
set up in the image without any knowledge of viewer motion. 9 The (real) image 
velocities can now be expressed in terms of the new parameterisation (see figure 
4.12). 
qt- 
O-~s 
(4.66) 
- 
-~8~-~_ t+~ 
. 
(4.67) 
Equation (4.67) is simply resolving the (real) image velocity qt into a tangential 
05 
component which depends on (-O-7]s) (and is not directly available from the 
spatio-temporal image) and the normal component of image velocity/3 which 
can be be measured. 
O~ s [ Oq t "~p +/3~p. 
(4.68) 
qt ---- 
-~" 
9Faugeras [71] chooses a parameterisation which preserves image contour arc length. He 
calls the tangent to this curve the apparent image velocity and he conjectures that this is 
related to the image velocity computed by many techniques that aim to recover the image 
velocity field at closed contours [100]. The tangent to the t-parameter curve defined in our 
derivation has an exact physical interpretation. It is the (real) normal image velocity. 

4.5. Ego-motion from the image motion of curves 
113 
The (real) image acceleration can be similarly expressed in terms of the new 
parameterisation. 
CO2q 
(4.69) 
qtt 
-~ 
CO2t 8 
02S 
2 
02q 
02t 8 coq 
_~ss t-l- (0_~___7~ s] 
",~ 
/ 
c92q 
CO COq 
(COS)2CO2q 
CO~8 0 (COq) 
.~V 
CO2q .~P(4.70) 
qtt. ap 
= 
O-ts 
~'~t'~v-t-2 
~ 
-~-~ 
t 
.1. -~ 
Apart from (~ [~) which we have seen determines the magnitude of the tan- 
gential component of image curve velocity (and is not measurable) the other 
quantities in the right-hand side of the (4.70) are directly measurable from the 
spatio-temporal image. They are determined by the curvature of the image con- 
tour, ~v; the variation of the normal component of image velocity along the 
contour, 
; and the variation of the normal component of image velocity 
perpendicular to the image contour respectively, ~ . 
In equation (4.64) the normal component of image acceleration is expressed 
in terms of the viewer's motion, (U, Us, fL g~t), and the 3D geometry of the 
space-curve. Substituting for A, 
U.~V 
A = 
(4.71) 
qt .rlP "1" ( ~."tP ) 
the right hand side of equation (4.64) can be expressed completely in terms of 
the unknown parameters of the viewer's ego-motion. 
In equation (4.70) the normal component of image acceleration is expressed in 
terms of measurements on the spatio-temporal image and the unknown quantity 
~ls which determines the magnitude of the tangential velocity. This is not, 
however, an independent parameter since from (4.28),(4.30) and (4.67) it can be 
expressed in terms of viewer motion: 
0q 
qt. 0~ t 
(4.72) 
05 
0-/8 
-- 
~ 
F U.i 
 
'-1 
_ 
1 
- 
/. 
~q 
/ 
I 
U 
(4.73) 
The right hand side of equation (4.70) can therefore also be expressed in terms of 
the unknown parameters of the viewer motion only. Combining equations (4.64) 
og 
and (4.70) and substituting for ~-~ I~ and A we can obtain a polynomial equation 

114 
Chap. 4. Qualitative Shape from Images of Surface Curves 
in terms of the unknown parameters of the viewer's motion (U, Ut, ~, gtt) with 
coefficients which are determined by measurements on the spatio-temporal image 
- 
{q, tP,fiP},gP,fl, ~ 
t and ~t ~" A similar equation can be written at each 
point on any image curve and if these equations can be solved it may be possible, 
in principle, to determine the viewer's ego-motion and the structure of the visible 
curves. 
Recent experimental results by Arbogast [4] and Faugeras and Papadopoulo [74] 
validate this approach. Questions of the uniqueness and robustness of the solu- 
tion remain to be investigated. These were our prime reasons for not attempting 
to implement the method presented. The result is included principally for its 
theoretical interest - representing a solution for the viewer ego-motion from the 
image motion of curves. In the Chapter 5 we see that instead of solving the 
structure from motion problem completely, reliable and useful information can 
be efficiently obtained from qualitative constraints. 
4.6 
Summary 
In this chapter the information available from an image curve and its deformation 
under viewer motion has been investigated. It was shown how to recover the 
differential geometry of the space curve and described the constraints placed on 
the differential geometry of the surface. It was also shown how the deformation 
of image curves can be used, in principle, to recover the viewer's ego-motion. 
Surprisingly - even with exact epipolar geometry and accurate image mea- 
surements - very little quantitative information about local surface shape is 
recoverable. This is in sharp contrast to the extremal boundaries of curved sur- 
faces in which a single image can provide strong constraints on surface shape 
while a sequence of views allows the complete specification of the surface. How- 
ever the apparent contours cannot directly indicate the presence of concavities. 
The image of surface curves is therefore an important cue. 
The information available from image curves is better expressed in terms of 
incomplete, qualitative constraints on surface shape. It has been shown that 
visibility of the curve constrains surface orientation and moreover that this con- 
straint improves with viewer motion. Furthermore, tracking image curve inflec- 
tions determines the sign of normal curvature along the surface curve's tangent. 
This can also be used to interpret the images of planar curves on surfaces 
making precise Stevens' intuition that we can recover surface shape from the 
deformed image of a planar curve. This information is robust in that it does not 
require accurate measurements or the exact details of viewer motion. 
These ideas are developed in the Chapter 5 where it is shown that it is 
possible to recover useful shape and motion information directly from simple 

4.6. Summary 
115 
properties of the image without going through the computationally difficult and 
error sensitive process of measuring the exact image velocities or disparities and 
trying to recover the exact surface shape and 3D viewer motion. 

