The role of particle colliders
DOE / NSF
HIGH ENERGY PHYSICS ADVISORY PANEL
DISCOVERING THE
QUANTUM UNIVERSE

Nine key questions define the field of particle physics.
1 
Are there undiscovered principles 
of nature : new symmetries, new 
physical l aws?
2 
How can we solve the mystery of 
dark energy?
3 
Are there e x tr a dimensions  
of space?
4
Do all the forces become one?
5 
Why are there so many kinds of 
particles?
6 
What is dark mat ter? How can we 
make it in the l abor atory?
7 
What are neutrinos telling us?
8 
How did the universe come to be?
9 
What happened to the antimatter?
Einstein’s Dream of  
Unified Forces
The particle world
The birth of the universe

DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
What does “Quantum Universe” mean?
To discover what the universe is made of and how it works is the 
challenge of particle physics. “Quantum Universe” defines the quest 
to explain the universe in terms of quantum physics, which governs the 
behavior of the microscopic, subatomic world. It describes a revolution 
in particle physics and a quantum leap in our understanding of the 
mystery and beauty of the universe.
THE ROLE OF PARTICLE COLLIDERS
DOE / NSF
HIGH ENERGY PHYSICS ADVISORY PANEL
DISCOVERING THE
QUANTUM UNIVERSE

JONATHAN BAGGER
Johns Hopkins University
BARRY BARISH
Caltech
NEIL CALDER
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center
ALBERT DE ROECK
CERN
JONATHAN L. FENG
University of California, Irvine
FRED GILMAN
Carnegie Mellon University
JOANNE HEWET T
Stanford Linear Accelerator Center
Stanford University
JOHN HUTH
Harvard University
JUDITH JACKSON
Fermilab
YOUNG-KEE KIM
University of Chicago
EDWARD KOLB
Fermilab
University of Chicago
JOSEPH LYKKEN, Co-Chair
Fermilab
KONSTANTIN MATCHEV
University of Florida
HITOSHI MUR AYAMA
University of California, Berkeley
JAMES SIEGRIST, Co-Chair
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
University of California, Berkeley
R AINER WEISS
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE 
COMMITTEE MEMBERS

02 
 
INTRODUCTION
04 
 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY :
 
 
LIGHTING OUT FOR THE TER ASCALE
07 
 
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE: 
 
 
AN OVERVIEW
08 
A 
Mysteries of the Terascale
10 
B 
Light on Dark Matter
12 
C 
Einstein’s Telescope
16 
 
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS
17 
 
The Higgs is Different
18 
 
A Shortage of Antimatter
21 
 
Mapping the Dark Universe
22 
 
Exploring Extra Dimensions
25 
 
Dark Matter in the Laboratory
26 
 
Supersymmetry
29 
 
Matter Uniﬁ cation
30 
 
Unknown Forces
33 
 
Concerto for Strings
35 
 
CONCLUSION
 
 
CONTENTS
 
SIDEBARS
06 
Postcards from the Terascale
15 
Large Hadron Collider
15 
International Linear Collider
19 
Not Just Colliders
20 
Seeing the Invisible – 
 
A Tale of Two Colliders
23 
Particles Tell Stories
27 
The Cosmological Cousins 
 
of the Higgs
28 
Synergy
31 
Precision

Right now is a time of radical change in particle physics. 
Recent experimental evidence demands a revolutionary new 
vision of the universe. Discoveries are at hand that will stretch 
the imagination with new forms of matter, new forces of nature, 
new dimensions of space and time. Breakthroughs will come 
from the next generation of particle accelerators – the Large 
Hadron Collider, now under construction in Europe, and the 
proposed International Linear Collider. Experiments at these 
accelerators will revolutionize your concept of the universe.
INTRODUCTION
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
02

03
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE

04
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
LIGHTING OUT FOR THE TERASCALE
Particle physicists are about to light out for a vast new 
scientific terra incognita. When they do, later in this 
decade, they will encounter a territory of discovery that 
many of them have theorized and dreamed about all 
their lives. This unexplored country is the Terascale, 
named for the Teravolts of particle accelerator energy 
that will open it up for scientific discovery. The next 
generation of particle accelerators are physicists’ tickets 
to the Terascale and the mysteries that it harbors about 
the nature of the physical laws that govern the universe. 
Once they’ve seen the Terascale, physicists believe, the 
universe will never look the same.
 
Although physicists have yet to explore the Terascale, 
they have ideas of what they may ﬁ nd. The past 30 years 
of experiment and theory have produced many clues and 
predictions of its features and contours – a detailed travel 
guide to a country that no one has yet visited. Experiments 
at the Large Hadron Collider at CERN in Europe will 
soon show what relation the theorists’ guidebook bears to 
Terascale reality. Real data from these experiments will 
rewrite the theorists’ Guide to the Quantum Universe.
 
About certain features of the Terascale, most predictions 
agree. Most physicists expect to ﬁ nd the Higgs boson – or, if 
not the Higgs, whatever it is that does Higgs’s job of giving 
mass to the particles of matter. Experiment and theory 
so far all seem to say that SOMETHING like the Higgs 
exists at the energy of the Terascale to keep the universe 
and everything in it from ﬂ ying apart at the speed of light. 
The LHC experiments will very likely discover it. When 
they do, the discovery will be a triumph of technology 
and human understanding. Less certain, but also distinctly 
likely, are discoveries of dark matter, extra dimensions 
of space, “superpartners” for all the familiar particles of 
matter, parallel universes – and completely unexpected 
phenomena. 
 
Like the discovery of an uncharted continent, the 
exploration of the Terascale at the LHC will transform 
forever the geography of the universe. But there will 
be limits to the LHC’s view. A true grasp of Terascale 
physics will require a source of comprehensive and 
nuanced information of a different kind. Along with the 
LHC, physicists propose a second particle accelerator for 
Terascale discoveries, one that would use different particles 
– electrons instead of the LHC’s protons – and different 
technology. With LHC pointing the way, this linear collider 
would make a whole new round of discoveries about the 
quantum universe. 
“I reckon I got to light out for 
the territory ahead of the rest…” 
Mark Twain, Huckleberry Finn

05
 
If, for example, the LHC experiments were to spot 
a Higgs particle, or something that looks like a Higgs, a 
linear collider would move in for a close-up. Is it in fact 
the Higgs? Is it all alone, or does it have relatives? How 
does it interact with the particles around it? 
 
The LHC experiments may well identify candidates for 
dark matter, the unseen mystery substance that outweighs 
visible matter in the universe ﬁ ve to one. A dark matter 
sighting by the LHC would be an extraordinary discovery; 
and again, a linear collider could discover the information 
physicists need: Is it really dark matter? Does it have all the 
characteristics that dark matter must have? Does it make up 
all of dark matter, or only a fraction? If LHC experiments 
see evidence for supersymmetry, extra dimensions or 
parallel universes, a linear collider would have the ability 
to discover their true nature.
 
With the perspective from the LHC experiments, 
a linear collider could range across the physics of the 
Terascale. It would also offer another unique capability. 
Using coordinates from LHC discoveries, it could detect 
the quantum effects of phenomena occurring at energies 
far beyond the Terascale, acting as a telescope from the 
Terascale to the energy regions Einstein dreamed of, 
where all of nature’s different forces may become one 
single force. 
 
A linear collider’s design would allow it to function 
as an all-terrain explorer of the Terascale, adaptable to 
investigate in depth what the LHC discovers. The more 
information the LHC uncovers about the Terascale, the 
more discoveries a linear collider would make. 
 
The deﬁ nitive map of the Terascale must await the 
results of experiments at these next-generation accelerators 
– the LHC a soon-to-be reality, the linear collider now at 
the stage of a proposal. Discovering the Quantum Universe 
gives a best estimate of the questions the experiments will 
answer about this new scientiﬁ c territory, following three 
themes: Mysteries of the Terascale; Light on Dark Matter; 
and Einstein’s Telescope.
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
1.  MYSTERIES OF THE TERASCALE. The LHC should 
discover the Higgs and other new particles. Experiments 
at the linear collider would then zoom in on these 
phenomena to discover their secrets. Properties of 
the Higgs may signal extra dimensions of space or 
explain the dominance of matter over antimatter. 
Particle interactions could unveil a universe shaped 
by supersymmetry.
2.  LIGHT ON DARK MATTER. Most theories of Terascale 
physics contain new massive particles with the right 
properties to contribute to dark matter. Such particles 
would ﬁ rst be produced at the LHC. Experiments at 
the linear collider, in conjunction with dedicated dark 
matter searches, would then discover whether they 
actually are dark matter.
3.  EINSTEIN’S TELESCOPE. From a vantage point at 
the Terascale, the linear collider could function as a 
telescope to probe far higher energies. This capability 
offers the potential for discoveries beyond the direct 
reach of any accelerator that could ever be built. In this 
way, the linear collider could bring into focus Einstein’s 
vision of an ultimate uniﬁ ed theory.
THE DISCOVERY SCENARIOS 
FOLLOW THREE THEMES. 

06
The sun warms planet Earth, but we live in a universe where 
the temperature of space is only three degrees above absolute 
zero. Its energy is so low that we can no longer see what space 
contained in the inferno of its birth. As the universe cooled from 
the Big Bang, it passed through a series of phases, each at a 
lower energy and each with its own set of particles and forces 
acting according to its own physical laws.
 
Particle accelerators give us the opportunity to go back and 
revisit the higher energies of our ancestral universe, to observe 
phenomena no longer visible in our own era. These high-energy 
phenomena are important to us, because our universe today still 
feels their imprint. The order behind what appears arbitrary in 
our own universe becomes clear at higher energies.
 
For example, many theories predict that at the extreme energy 
just after the Big Bang, all of nature’s forces were combined in 
one single uniﬁ ed force, splitting as the universe cooled into the 
four forces that we know today. Reconnecting to the early universe 
may reveal how gravity relates to electromagnetism as different 
aspects of a single principle of nature. 
 
Since the early cyclotrons of the 1950s, particle accelerators 
have served as the passports to higher and higher energies. 
The entire standard model of the structure of matter, with its 
fundamental particles and forces, has emerged from the increasing 
energies of particle collisions. Each generation of accelerators 
has built on the discoveries of previous generations to venture 
deeper into the history of the universe. Now, a new generation 
of accelerators with the highest energies yet will open up for 
exploration a region of energy – the Terascale – that has ten 
thousand trillion times the energy of space today. Postcards from 
the Terascale will answer basic questions about the universe. 
 
Moreover, the Terascale is not the end of the story. 
Discoveries there may reveal phenomena occurring at energies 
so high that no particle accelerator will ever achieve them 
directly. Such postcards from the Planck scale once seemed an 
unreachable fantasy. Forwarded from an address in the Terascale, 
they may one day arrive. 
POSTCARDS FROM THE TERASCALE
BACK TO THE BIG BANG:
BACK TO THE BIG BANG: PARTICLE 
ACCELERATORS ALLOW PHYSICISTS TO LOOK 
FARTHER AND FARTHER BACK IN TIME, TO REVISIT THE HIGH 
ENERGIES OF THE EARLY UNIVERSE AFTER THE BIG BANG. DO 
THE FOUR FORCES WE OBSERVE TODAY CONVERGE TO A SINGLE 
UNIFIED FORCE AT ULTRAHIGH ENERGY? PARTICLE COLLISIONS MAY 
PROVIDE THE FIRST EVIDENCE FOR SUCH UNIFICATION OF FORCES.

07
Starting with the discovery of the electron, particle physicists 
have ventured successively deeper into the unseen world within 
the atom. They have discovered a structure and simplicity neither 
expected nor predicted, even by Einstein. Their discoveries have 
redefined the human conception of the physical world, connecting 
the smallest elements of the universe to the largest, and to the 
earliest moments of its birth.
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE :
AN OVERVIEW
A  
MYSTERIES OF THE TERASCALE
B  
LIGHT ON DARK MATTER
C 
EINSTEIN’S TELESCOPE
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
AN OVERVIEW

08
Later in this decade, experiments at the Large Hadron 
Collider at CERN will break through to the Terascale, a 
region of energy at the limit of today’s particle accelerators 
where physicists believe they will ﬁ nd answers to questions 
at the heart of modern particle physics. 
 
The LHC will expose the Terascale to direct 
experimental investigation. Present-day experiments 
suggest that it harbors an entirely new form of matter, 
the Higgs boson, that gives particles their mass. Beyond 
that, physicists believe that the Terascale may also hold 
evidence for such exotic phenomena as dark matter, 
extra dimensions of space, and an entire new roster of 
elementary superparticles. 
 
The ﬁ rst target is the Higgs. Over the past few decades, 
theoretical breakthroughs and precision experiments have 
led to the construction of the standard model of particle 
physics, which predicts that an omnipresent energy ﬁ eld 
permeates the cosmos, touching everything in it. Like 
an invisible quantum liquid, it ﬁ lls the vacuum of space, 
slowing motion and giving mass to matter. Without this 
Higgs ﬁ eld, all matter would crumble; atoms would ﬂ y 
apart at the speed of light.
MYSTERIES OF
THE TERASCALE
A
 
So far, no one has ever seen the Higgs ﬁ eld. To detect 
it, particle accelerators must ﬁ rst create Higgs particles and 
then measure their properties. The LHC is designed with 
enough energy to create Higgs particles and launch the 
process of discovery.
 
To determine how the Higgs really works, though, 
experimenters must precisely measure the properties of 
Higgs particles without invoking theoretical assumptions. 
Such precise and model-independent experiments are a 
hallmark of linear collider physics, not available in the 
complex experimental environment of the LHC. A linear 
collider could determine if the Higgs discovered at the 
LHC is the one-and-only Higgs. Does it have precisely the 
right properties to give mass to the elementary particles? 
Or does it contain admixtures of other new particles, 
heralding further discoveries? A linear collider would be 
able to make clean and precise determinations of critical 
Higgs properties at the percent level of accuracy.
ARE THERE UNDISCOVERED PRINCIPLES OF NATURE : 
NEW SYMMETRIES, NEW PHYSICAL L AWS?
HOW CAN WE SOLVE THE MYSTERY OF DARK ENERGY?
ARE THERE E X TR A DIMENSIONS OF SPACE?
WHAT HAPPENED TO THE ANTIMAT TER?
RELATED QUESTIONS

09
 
A Higgs discovery, however, will raise a perplexing new 
question: According to our present understanding, the Higgs 
particle itself should have a mass a trillion times beyond 
the Terascale. Although the Higgs gives mass to Terascale 
particles, its own mass should be much, much greater. Why 
does the Higgs have a mass at the Terascale?
  
For years, theorists have tried to explain this mystery, 
devising multiple possibilities including supersymmetry, 
extra dimensions and new particle interactions. Which, 
if any, of the theories is correct? Sorting that out is a 
task for the LHC and a linear collider. The LHC will 
have enough energy to survey the Terascale landscape. 
Then a linear collider could zoom in to distinguish one 
theory from another.
 
Theories of supersymmetry and extra dimensions, for 
example, predict new particles that are close relatives of the 
Higgs. Some of these particles would be difﬁ cult to detect 
or identify at the LHC, and difﬁ cult to distinguish from the 
Higgs itself. Linear collider experiments would have unique 
capabilities to allow physicists to identify these particles and 
pinpoint how they are related to ordinary matter.
 
The Terascale may hold the answers to still 
more of particle physics’ most basic questions. The 
dominance of matter over antimatter in the universe 
remains a mystery, but part of the answer could lie in 
undiscovered interactions that treat matter and antimatter 
slightly differently – that is, in undiscovered sources of 
the matter-antimatter asymmetry physicists call CP 
violation. At the LHC, it will be difﬁ cult to extract CP 
information about Terascale physics. Experiments at a 
linear collider, however, could detect and measure new 
sources of matter-antimatter asymmetry. 
 
Mapping the Terascale will take physicists far into 
new scientiﬁ c territory, as complex theoretical frameworks 
come face to face with experimental data. From this clash 
of theory with data will arise a profoundly changed picture 
of the quantum universe. 
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
AN OVERVIEW
Science Magazine’s 125 Questions. 
Question #1: “What is the Universe made of?”
Installation of the ATLAS detector at CERN. Courtesy of CERN

10
The past decade has witnessed the startling discovery that 
over 95 percent of the universe is not made of ordinary 
matter, but instead consists of unknown dark matter and 
dark energy. Astrophysical observations have demonstrated 
that only four percent of the universe is made of matter like 
that here on Earth. Seventy-three percent is dark energy, 
and 23 percent is dark matter.
 
Dark energy is a mysterious force that ﬁ lls the vacuum 
of empty space, accelerating the expansion of the universe. 
Physicists don’t know what dark energy is, how it works, 
or why it exists. They do know that it must ultimately 
have an explanation in terms of particle physics. Are 
dark energy and the Higgs ﬁ eld related? The discovery 
of supersymmetry would provide a possible connection. 
Supersymmetry provides a natural context for both the 
Higgs ﬁ eld and dark energy.
 
Deﬁ nitive evidence for the dark universe has come 
from many sources, including astrophysical observations of 
clusters of galaxies that would have ﬂ own apart if visible 
matter were the only thing holding them together. As close 
to home as the Milky Way, visible matter alone would 
not hold the stars in their orbits. Dark matter holds the 
universe together.
 
What is this dark matter that binds the galaxies and 
keeps the universe from flying apart? Although dark 
matter is not made of the same stuff as the rest of the 
world, physicists have clues to its identity. Cosmological 
measurements favor “cold” dark matter – heavy particles 
moving at low speeds – as a major component. For now, 
though, the dark side of the universe remains a mystery.
 
Moreover, there is no reason to think that dark 
matter should be any simpler than visible matter, with its 
multiple quarks and leptons. New particles do not normally 
appear in isolation. The 1932 discovery of the positron, 
for example, signaled a new world of antimatter particles. 
Today, the challenge is to explore the world of dark matter 
by creating dark matter particles in the laboratory.
LIGHT ON DARK MATTER
B
WHAT IS DARK MAT TER? 
HOW CAN WE MAKE IT IN THE L ABOR ATORY?
RELATED QUESTIONS
Dark, adj. 1a. Lacking or having very little light. 
b. Lacking brightness…8. Difficult to understand; 
obscure. 9. Concealed or secret; mysterious.

11
  
If dark matter is made up of weakly interacting 
massive particles (something like heavy versions of the 
neutrinos), cosmological calculations suggest that they 
would have Terascale masses, in the energy region of 
the LHC and the ILC. Is this Terascale conjunction a 
coincidence? Most theories of Terascale physics, although 
developed with different motivations, posit particles 
that may contribute to dark matter. For example, an 
oft-invoked dark-matter candidate is the lowest-mass 
supersymmetric particle, the neutralino, theorized to 
reside at the Terascale. The LHC and the ILC have the 
potential to produce dark matter particles identical to 
the dark matter present in the universe.
 
Besides accelerator experiments, other experiments 
are watching for individual dark matter particles in highly 
sensitive detectors deep underground. Astrophysics 
experiments, in turn, are seeking the cosmic remnants of 
dark matter annihilation in space. However, none of these 
experiments can positively identify dark matter without 
help from accelerator experiments.
 
Accelerator experiments will be able to place dark 
matter particles into context. For example, the LHC may 
identify a dark matter candidate in particle collisions. A 
linear collider could then zero in to determine its mass 
and interaction strength – to take its fingerprints and 
make a positive identification. By a fine-tuned scan of 
the energy scale, a linear collider could also ﬂ ush out any 
potential dark matter candidates that might be hiding in 
the multitude of LHC collisions.
 
A linear collider’s measurements would allow 
calculation of a dark matter candidate’s density in the 
universe. In parallel, increasingly sophisticated cosmological 
observations will measure dark matter’s density to a 
corresponding accuracy. A match between the collider and 
cosmological measurements would provide overwhelming 
evidence that the candidate particle really is dark matter.
There are many possible candidates for 
the particles that make up dark matter. 
When particle physicists suspect that the 
underlying theory for something is complex, 
they call it a “moose”. 
Illustration: Michael S. Turner
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
AN OVERVIEW

12
On his death bed, Einstein asked for a pen and paper, 
to work on his calculations of a unified field theory. 
“I am optimistic,” he told a friend, “I think that I am 
getting close.”
 
The dream of today’s particle physicists, like that of 
Einstein, is to ﬁ nd a theory that describes a single uniﬁ ed 
force of nature. A century after Einstein, the combined 
capabilities of the LHC and the ILC promise to lead the 
way toward that ultimate theory. 
 
The precision of its electron-positron collisions would 
give a linear collider the potential to act as a telescope 
to see into energies far beyond those that any particle 
accelerator could ever directly achieve. As a telescope 
to the beyond, a linear collider could explore energies a 
trillion times that of the accelerator itself, in the ultrahigh-
energy realm where physicists believe all of nature’s forces 
become one.
 
A linear collider’s capability as a telescope to 
ultrahigh energies rests on the quantum properties of 
matter discovered in the past few decades. This hard-
won understanding gives physicists a means to measure 
the effects of phenomena occurring at energies beyond 
those that accelerators can reach.
EINSTEIN’S TELESCOPE
C
 
For now, though, the telescopic view to the beyond 
is obscured by lack of knowledge of Terascale physics. 
Data from the LHC and the ILC would part the clouds 
of physicists’ ignorance of the Terascale and allow a linear 
collider to act as a telescope to the unknown. 
 
In the current understanding of the universe, the laws 
of the large and the laws of the small do not agree. Is it 
possible to reconcile gravity (the laws of the large) with 
quantum theory (the laws of the small) and thereby address 
this central question of modern physics? 
 
Physicists believe that just one force existed after the 
Big Bang. As the universe cooled, that single force split into 
the four forces we know today: gravity, electromagnetism, 
and the strong and weak nuclear forces. Physicists have 
already discovered that remarkably similar mathematical 
laws and principles describe three of the four forces. 
However, at the final step of bringing gravity into the 
fold, ideas fail; some key element is missing. 
 
String theory is the most promising candidate to unify 
the laws of the large and the small. The theory holds that all 
particles and forces are tiny vibrating strings. One vibration 
of the string makes it a quark, while another makes it a 
photon. String theory brings with it a number of dramatic 
ARE THERE E X TR A DIMENSIONS OF SPACE?
DO ALL THE FORCES BECOME ONE?
WHY ARE THERE SO MANY KINDS OF PARTICLES?
WHAT ARE NEUTRINOS TELLING US?
HOW DID THE UNIVERSE COME TO BE?
RELATED QUESTIONS

13
concepts including supersymmetry and extra dimensions of 
space. Among the most exciting possibilities for the LHC 
is its very real potential to discover the superpartners of 
the known particles. 
 
Theorists cannot yet predict at what energy the 
evidence for extra dimensions – if they exist – will 
emerge. A linear collider’s sensitivity would make it the 
best window on quantum gravity, extra dimensions and 
the physics of strings that physicists are likely to have for 
a long time – perhaps ever. 
 
Physicists could use a linear collider to focus on the 
point where both forces and masses may unify, linked by 
supersymmetry into one theory that encompasses the laws 
of the large and the laws of the small. 
Albert Einstein, Edwin Hubble, and Walter Adams (L-R) in 1931 at 
the Mount Wilson Observatory 100” telescope, in the San Gabriel 
Mountains of southern California. It was here in 1929 that Hubble 
discovered the cosmic expansion of the universe. Courtesy of the 
Archives, California Institute of Technology
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
AN OVERVIEW

14
IF LHC DISCOVERS :
WHAT ILC COULD DO:
QU
Discover why the Higgs exists and who 
its cousins are. Discover effects of extra 
dimensions or a new source of matter-
antimatter asymmetry.
Detect the symmetry of supersymmetry. 
Reveal the supersymmetric nature of dark 
matter. Discover force uniﬁ cation and 
matter uniﬁ cation at ultra-high energies.
Discover the number and shape 
of the extra dimensions. Discover 
which particles are travelers in extra 
dimensions, and determine their 
locations within them.
Discover its identity as dark matter. 
Determine what fraction of the total 
dark matter it accounts for.
Discover that these eventually decay into 
very weakly interacting particles. Identify 
these “super-WIMPs” as dark matter.
Discover the origin of the Z-prime. 
Connect this new force to the uniﬁ cation 
of quarks with neutrinos, of quarks with 
the Higgs, or with extra dimensions.
Discover telltale effects from the 
vibrations of superstrings.
1,3,9
1,2,4,5
3
6
6
4,7
3,8
1  
ARE THERE UNDISCOVERED 
PRINCIPLES OF NATURE : NEW 
SYMMETRIES, NEW PHYSICAL L AWS?
2  
HOW CAN WE SOLVE THE MYSTERY 
OF DARK ENERGY?
3  
ARE THERE E X TR A DIMENSIONS 
OF SPACE?
4  
DO ALL THE FORCES BECOME ONE?
5  
WHY ARE THERE SO MANY KINDS 
OF PARTICLES?
6  
WHAT IS DARK MAT TER? 
HOW CAN WE MAKE IT IN THE 
L ABOR ATORY?
7  
WHAT ARE NEUTRINOS TELLING US?
8  
HOW DID THE UNIVERSE 
COME TO BE?
9  
WHAT HAPPENED TO 
THE ANTIMAT TER?
 
From “Quantum Universe”
LEGEND: THE QUESTIONS
A Higgs particle
Superpartner particles
Evidence for extra dimensions
Missing energy from a weakly 
interacting heavy particle
Heavy charged particles that appear 
to be stable
A Z-prime particle, representing a 
previously unknown force of nature
Superpartner particles matching the 
predictions of supergravity
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
This chapter presents nine scenarios illustrating discovery scenarios at the Large 
Hadron Collider (LHC) and International Linear Collider (ILC). The exact scenario 
will depend upon what nature has chosen, but the connection is clear. The more 
that researchers discover at the LHC, the greater the discovery potential of the 
linear collider.

LARGE HADRON COLLIDER
The Large Hadron Collider at CERN, the European Organization for 
Nuclear Research, will be the biggest and most powerful particle 
accelerator ever built when it turns on in 2007. It will operate in 
a circular tunnel 27 km in circumference, between France’s Jura 
mountains and Switzerland’s Lake Geneva. Experiments at the LHC 
will give scientists their ﬁ rst view of the Terascale energy region. 
 
The LHC will accelerate two beams of particles in opposite 
directions, smashing them together to create showers of new 
particles via Einstein’s famous equation, E=mc2. Colliding beams 
of protons will generate some 800 million collisions per second. 
 
Superconducting magnets will guide the beams around the 
ring. Each proton ﬂ ying around the LHC will have an energy of 
7 Tera electron volts to give a proton-proton collision energy of 
14 TeV. The protons contain quarks and gluons, each carrying a 
fraction of the proton’s total energy. A typical collision involves 
a quark or gluon from each proton colliding at lower energy, 
accompanied by debris from the remaining parts of the protons. 
The composite nature of the proton complicates the detection 
of the collision products. 
 
Four major particle detectors – ALICE, ATLAS, CMS and 
LHCb – will observe the collisions. ATLAS and CMS, each 
with over 2000 collaborators, will survey all aspects of the 
Terascale. LHCb will concentrate on precise measurement of 
matter-antimatter asymmetry. ALICE, using LHC’s ability to 
accelerate lead ion beams in addition to protons, will study 
matter at extreme energy densities.
 
The LHC experiments will record about 1000 Gigabytes of 
data every day. Particle physicists are working with computer 
scientists around the world to develop new grid networking 
technology. This will link thousands of computers worldwide 
to create a global computing resource to store and process the 
deluge of data from the LHC.
INTERNATIONAL 
LINEAR COLLIDER
The International Linear Collider is a proposed new 
accelerator designed to work in concert with the LHC to 
discover the physics of the Terascale and beyond. The 
ILC would consist of two linear accelerators, each some 
20 kilometers long, aimed at each other, hurling beams 
of electrons and positrons toward each other at nearly 
the speed of light. 
 
When electrons and positrons accelerate in a circle, they 
lose energy. The higher the acceleration energy, the more 
energy the electrons lose. At very high energies, a circular 
electron accelerator is no longer an option; too much energy 
is wasted. The solution is a straight-line collider.
 
In the design for the ILC, some 10 billion electrons 
and positrons are crammed into beams approximately 3 
nanometers thick. Positrons start from one end of the 
collider, electrons from the other. As the particles speed 
along the length of the accelerator, superconducting 
accelerating cavities give them more and more energy, 
until they meet in an intense crossﬁ re of collisions. The 
energy of the ILC’s beam could be adjusted to home in on 
phenomena of interest. ILC beams would also be polarized, 
adding power to the subsequent data analysis. 
 
The ILC Global Design Effort will establish the design 
of the ILC, focusing the efforts of hundreds of accelerator 
scientists and particle physicists in the Americas, Europe 
and Asia. The ILC will be designed, funded, managed and 
operated as a fully international scientiﬁ c project.
15
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
AN OVERVIEW

16
This chapter presents nine scenarios illustrating the LHC and 
linear collider discoveries listed in the table on page 14. Each 
individual case study shows how experiments at the next generation 
of particle accelerators will address the fundamental questions of 
particle physics.
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE :
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS
THE HIGGS IS DIFFERENT 
A SHORTAGE OF ANTIMATTER
MAPPING THE DARK UNIVERSE
EXPLORING EXTRA DIMENSIONS 
DARK MATTER IN THE LABORATORY 
SUPERSYMMETRY 
MATTER UNIFICATION 
UNKNOWN FORCES 
CONCERTO FOR STRINGS

17
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS :
THE HIGGS IS DIFFERENT
Discovery of a Higgs particle at the LHC would mark a 
giant step toward resolving the contradictions of Terascale 
physics. But a Higgs discovery would present mysteries of 
its own that would be even more challenging to solve than 
detecting the Higgs particle. For example, theory says that 
Higgs particles are matter particles, but in most respects the 
Higgs behaves more like a new force than like a particle. 
How can this be? In truth, the Higgs is neither matter nor 
force; the Higgs is just different. 
 
Physicists suspect the existence of many Higgs-like 
particles: Why, after all, should the Higgs be the only one 
of its kind? They predict that new particles related to the 
Higgs play essential roles in cosmology, giving the universe 
the shape it has today. If many Higgs-like particles exist, they 
should interact with each other. Thanks to quantum theory, 
when a Higgs particle is produced, it contains a bit of its 
Higgs-like cousins. Experiments at a linear collider would 
zoom in on the Higgs to discover these innermost secrets.

18
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS :
A SHORTAGE OF 
ANTIMATTER
The dominance of matter over antimatter in the universe 
remains a mystery. The family of Higgs particles may have 
deep connections with this question. 
  
In the instant after the Big Bang, physicists believe 
that the universe was too hot for the Higgs to do its job 
of dispensing mass. A short time later, the universe cooled 
enough for the Higgs to go to work. Within the known 
laws of physics, this explanation provides almost, but not 
quite, enough ingredients to produce an imbalance of 
matter over antimatter. What appear to be missing are a 
stronger source for this matter-antimatter imbalance and 
some additional interactions, such as interactions of the 
Higgs with other Higgs-like particles. 
 
The LHC can take the first step in investigating 
this scenario by discovering multiple Higgs particles or 
uncovering other evidence, such as superpartners. Then 
linear collider experiments could discover a new source 
for the dominance of matter over antimatter.

19
Discovering the Quantum Universe describes the role of the 
next generation of particle accelerators, the LHC and the ILC, 
in discovering laws of physics that will radically transform the 
human conception of the universe. While their role will be 
crucial, however, accelerators will not be the only tools that 
scientists use to answer the most compelling questions about 
the nature of matter and energy, space and time. Astrophysical 
and cosmological observations, in space and from the ground, 
are also exploring the fundamental parameters of the universe. 
Underground experiments are watching for the subtle signals of 
dark matter passing through ultrasensitive detectors. 
 
No single scientiﬁ c approach will sufﬁ ce. For example, it 
took results from astrophysical and cosmological observations to 
reveal that most of the universe is made of dark matter and dark 
energy. It will take discoveries at accelerators to show exactly 
what they are and how they work.
 
To answer the most challenging questions about the nature 
of the universe, all the approaches must converge. Results from 
accelerator experiments must agree with astrophysical observations 
and results from underground. Discovering the quantum universe 
requires combining the most powerful and insightful observations 
in each of these different scientiﬁ c approaches, in a synthesis 
far more powerful than any of them could achieve alone.
NOT JUST COLLIDERS
COLD DARK MATTER SEARCH (CDMS)
SOUDAN MINE, MN.
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS
Artist’s conception of the GLAST spacecraft in orbit 
above the Earth. Credit: Spectrum Astro
Gravitational lensing in galaxy cluster Abell 2218. NASA, 
A Fruchter and the ERO Team (STScl).

20
SEEING THE INVISIBLE – 
A TALE OF TWO COLLIDERS
In particle physics, discovery often depends on meticulous 
bookkeeping. The fundamental forces in high energy collisions 
can do their work in a septillionth of a second, creating highly 
unstable new particles that decay almost immediately into many 
“daughter” particles. Computers write an elaborate record for 
each collision event, determining as completely as possible what 
particles went in, what particles came out, how fast and in what 
direction each particle was moving. Physicists then reconstruct 
the most likely explanation for what happened in the collision.
 
In some events, the numbers don’t add up, and the books 
don’t balance. For example, the total energy of all the particles 
produced may be less than the total energy of the original 
collision; this is a missing energy problem. Another example is 
a new heavy particle that moves off at right angles to the colliding 
beams, with nothing to balance it in the opposite direction; this 
is a missing momentum problem. Missing energy and momentum 
can be signals of missing particles: particles that interact too 
weakly for direct detection but that betray their existence by 
carrying off energy and momentum. 
 
If dark matter particles are produced at colliders, they will 
pass through the detectors without a trace. To document their 
ﬂ eeting presence, physicists will look for signs of missing energy 
or momentum. By detecting the other particles produced in the 
same collisions, physicists can then infer the properties of the dark 
matter particles. These are the same techniques now employed 
to deduce the role of neutrinos in high energy collisions.
 
In proton collisions at the LHC, the composite nature of 
protons creates an additional challenge for particle bookkeeping. 
A proton is like a tiny bag of quarks and gluons. In any individual 
collision, the identities and energies of the particular colliding 
quarks or gluons are not known. While it is still possible to 
observe missing momentum, there is a fundamental gap in 
particle bookkeeping at any proton collider.
 
In electron-positron collisions, though, experimenters know 
the identities, energies and momenta of the colliding particles, 
allowing for simple and complete particle bookkeeping and making 
a linear collider an incisive tool for identifying dark matter.
INSIDE THE CMS DETECTOR AT CERN

21
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS :
MAPPING THE DARK UNIVERSE
Deep underground in an old Minnesota iron mine, the 
CDMS II experiment is using highly sensitive detectors 
to search for the tiny wake left by dark matter particles 
streaming in from space. Astrophysics experiments, 
meanwhile, are searching for cosmic radiation produced 
by the annihilation of dark matter particles elsewhere 
in the universe. A signal from any of these dark matter 
detection experiments would give insight into dark matter 
properties, and strongly motivate the search for dark matter 
at the LHC and ILC.
 
In fact, physicists are already reporting tentative 
hints of signals in dark matter search experiments. 
Unfortunately, the interpretation of these experiments 
is uncertain, because two unknowns cloud them. 
Uncertainties about the properties of dark matter particles 
cannot be disentangled from astrophysical uncertainties, 
such as the spatial distributions and velocities of dark 
matter particles in the galaxy.
 
The ILC is essential for resolving these uncertainties, 
by discovering the precise properties of dark matter 
particles. Dark matter detection rates could then provide 
unambiguous probes of dark matter distributions. Just 
as traditional telescopes have mapped the luminous 
universe, the combination of linear collider data with 
other experiments and observations would map the dark 
universe, shedding light on the structure of the cosmos.

DISCOVERY SCENARIOS :
EXPLORING EXTRA 
DIMENSIONS
22
The discovery of extra dimensions of space, a prediction 
of string theory, would dramatically change the concept of 
space and time. Each point in space would have additional 
spatial dimensions attached to it. The extra dimensions 
might be very tiny or otherwise hidden from view. 
Matter might be made of particles that already live in 
extra dimensions and feel their effects. A particle moving 
in an extra dimension would have extra energy, making 
it look like a heavier version of itself. Measurement of the 
mass and other properties of these travelers would show 
what the additional dimensions look like.
 
If new dimensions exist at the Terascale, then the LHC 
will discover them; experiments will look for high-energy 
collisions in which particles literally disappear into an extra 
dimension. Linear collider experiments could discover still 
tinier extra dimensions by detecting small disturbances in 
the behavior of ordinary particles. A linear collider could 
determine the number of dimensions, their size and shape, 
and which particles live inside them.
FERMILAB CONTROL ROOM, MAY 04
IN THE LIBRARY, MAY 05

PARTICLES TELL STORIES
For Newton, it was apples. For Einstein, it was trains and Swiss 
clocks. Today, physicists use particles to discover new laws of 
nature in the microscopic world. The discovery of a new particle 
is often the opening chapter of an entirely new story revealing 
unsuspected features of the universe. 
 
When the positron, the brother of the electron, was first 
detected, the discovery went beyond the identiﬁ cation of a particle. 
The positron revealed a hidden half of the universe: the world 
of antimatter. The positron showed how to reconcile the laws of 
relativity with the laws of quantum mechanics. The positron told 
a brand-new story about the structure of space and time.
 
When physicists ﬁ rst observed the pion in cosmic ray detectors 
atop the Pyrénées, they were puzzled. Soon, particle accelerators 
began producing myriad cousins of the pion: etas, deltas, rhos, 
omegas. Physicists were running out of Greek letters to name them 
all. Finally the story became clear. These were not elementary 
particles at all, but tiny bags of quarks, held together by a new 
force, a force so strong that no quark could ever escape it.
 
Other aspects of the universe may also unveil themselves in 
the form of new particles – extra dimensions of space, for example. 
An electron moving in tiny extra dimensions would not look like 
an electron to us; it would appear as a much heavier new particle, 
“heavier” because it is whirling around the extra dimensions. In 
fact, the tiny extra dimensions imply whole “towers” of new heavy 
particles. Producing some of these particles with an accelerator 
would be a great discovery; an equal challenge will be to pin down 
their identities as travelers in extra dimensions. How much we 
learn from these particles depends on how well we determine their 
properties. For example, by measuring their masses, physicists 
could discover the shape of the extra dimensions.
 
Using the LHC and a linear collider, physicists hope to 
produce particles of dark matter in the laboratory. They may well 
discover an entire dark world, with other new particles that tell 
a brand-new story of the dark and the visible universe.
23
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS
CONSTRUCTION OF PIC DU MIDI OBSERVATORY 
WHERE PION WAS DISCOVERED.
PUBLIC OUTREACH, ASPEN – AUGUST 05

JELLY BEAN UNIVERSE
Like the jelly beans in this jar, the universe is mostly dark: 95 percent consists of dark matter and 
dark energy. Only about five percent (the same proportion as the colored jelly beans) of the universe 
– including the stars, planets and us – is made of familiar atomic matter.

25
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS :
DARK MATTER IN THE LABORATORY
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS
Four percent of the universe is familiar matter; 23 percent 
is dark matter, and the rest is dark energy. Although the 
amount of dark matter in the universe is now well known, 
its identity is a complete mystery.
 
Physicists have proposed many exotically named 
dark matter candidates: neutralinos, axions, gravitinos, 
Q balls, and WIMPzillas. For simplicity, most theoretical 
studies assume that all of dark matter is composed of a 
single kind of new particle. But if the dark universe is 
as rich and varied as the visible world, this assumption 
may someday appear as simplistic as ancient theories of 
earth, air, ﬁ re and water.
 
A major goal of the LHC and ILC is to identify 
one or more components of dark matter by producing 
particles of dark matter in the laboratory and studying 
their properties. Astrophysical evidence suggests that dark 
matter particles will show up at the Terascale. The current 
understanding of particle physics and cosmology allows 
physicists to extrapolate back to early times in the history 
of the universe. Assuming that dark matter particles are 
weakly interacting relics of the Big Bang, physicists can use 
the observed dark matter density to estimate the particles’ 
mass. Detailed calculations in many different theoretical 
frameworks show that the mass of the dark matter particles 
place them at the Terascale.
 
Physicists working at the LHC are likely to find 
the first evidence for Terascale dark matter. But is it 
really dark matter? Is it all of the dark matter? Why is it 
there? A linear collider would be essential for answering 
these questions, making precise measurements of the 
dark matter particles and their interactions with other 
particles. Linear collider experiments could establish 
both the what and the why for this chapter of the dark 
matter story.

26
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS :
SUPERSYMMETRY
A major obstacle to Einstein’s dream of a uniﬁ ed theory 
is the clash of the laws of the large with the laws of the 
small. Quantum mechanics reveals an unruly subatomic 
world, bubbling with particles that pop into existence 
out of nowhere and then disappear. On the scale of the 
universe, we see stars and galaxies that proceed smoothly 
according to immutable laws of gravity. To reconcile the 
apparent contradiction, new principles must exist that 
bring order to the quantum universe. Supersymmetry, a 
prediction of string theory, could be the key. 
 
Supersymmetry says that all known particles have 
heavier superpartners, new particles that bring order to 
the subatomic world. The lightest superpartner is a likely 
candidate for dark matter, thus perhaps also explaining the 
structure of the cosmos. Supersymmetry could even explain 
the existence of the Higgs particle, and be responsible for 
many Higgs-like cousins. 
 
Some of the heaviest superpartners may be copiously 
produced at the LHC. They would then decay to the 
lightest superpartner and dozens of ordinary particles, 
leaving spectacular but complicated signals in particle 
detectors. A linear collider would be best suited for 
producing the lighter superpartners. Linear collider 
experiments could focus on one type of superpartner 
at a time, measuring their properties cleanly enough to 
detect the symmetry of supersymmetry, and to reveal the 
supersymmetric nature of dark matter. In this way, linear 
collider physicists could discover how supersymmetry 
shapes both the inner workings and the grand designs of 
the universe.
Simulation of the creation of superpartner particles at the LHC, 
as seen in the CMS detector at CERN.

THE COSMOLOGICAL COUSINS OF 
THE HIGGS
The discovery of the Higgs particle would open a new 
chapter in particle physics, because it would be the ﬁ rst of 
new breed of particle. Every elementary particle discovered 
so far spins like an eternal top. The Higgs particle would 
be the ﬁ rst elementary particle without spin.
 
Moreover, theorists predict that other Higgs-
like particles without spin as essential elements of 
cosmology. The Higgs particle will be the ﬁ rst step toward 
understanding such spinless particles and how they might 
give the universe the shape it has today.
 
Why is the universe so big? Theory suggests that 
the universe underwent a cosmic inflation from its 
microscopic beginnings to its current vast size. To power 
inﬂ ation, physicists postulate one or more Higgs-like 
particles called inﬂ atons.
 
Why is the universe speeding up? Cosmological 
observations conﬁ rm that the expansion of the universe is 
accelerating. Dark energy, which makes up a staggering 70 
percent of the universe today, is thought to be responsible 
for cosmic acceleration. Because dark energy is very 
similar to cosmic inﬂ ation, many physicists believe that 
dark energy may also involve Higgs-like particles.
 
Why are there particles that don’t spin? One possible 
explanation is supersymmetry, which says that particles 
that do spin have partners that don’t. Or, if there are 
extra spatial dimensions, particles spinning in the extra 
dimensions may appear not to spin in our dimensions. 
Once physicists discover the Higgs, they plan to ﬁ nd out 
why and how the Higgs exists and thus gain insights into 
the mechanisms for inﬂ ation and dark energy.
27
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS
Dark matter distribution in the galaxy cluster CL0152-1357 
detected by gravitational weak-lensing from the Hubble Advanced 
Camera for Surveys (ACS) observations. The intensity of the 
purplish color is proportional to the density of dark matter.

SYNERGY
Throughout the course of particle physics, results from one accelerator have 
stimulated discoveries at another. Early experiments smashing protons on protons 
produced new particles but did not reveal the structure of the proton itself. Finally 
experiments with electron beams discovered that protons are made of quarks and 
gluons. Later experiments showed clearly how quarks and gluons are distributed 
inside the proton – a requirement for understanding collisions at proton colliders. 
Experiments at electron-positron colliders discovered that high-energy quarks and 
gluons produce “jets” of particles inside detectors. Soon, physicists discovered 
such jets in collisions at a new CERN proton-antiproton collider. Jets are now a 
tool in all searches for new particles whose decays involve quarks and gluons. 
 
The discovery of the J/psi particle at SLAC and Brookhaven in 1974 
revealed the charm quark and antiquark. The proton-proton Intersecting 
Storage Rings were in operation at CERN, but the “trigger” for ISR detectors 
was set to detect different phenomena and missed the J/psi.  Redesigning the 
detectors with different triggers allowed observation of the J/psi and showed 
how it is produced by the strong interactions in proton-proton collisions. 
 
After the discovery at Fermilab of the Upsilon, containing the bottom 
quark, electron-positron machines soon found a whole spectrum of related 
particles. They led to an understanding of the strong force that binds quarks 
to antiquarks and to measurements of the properties of the bottom quark.
 
Electron-positron collider detectors equipped to measure submillimeter 
distances around a collision point allowed physicists to separate the point 
where the b quark is produced from the vertex of tracks at the point where 
it decays.  Using this telltale “displaced vertex” of the b quark in top quark 
decays, experimenters discovered the top at the Tevatron collider.
1977 - DETECTOR USED TO DISCOVER THE UPSILON AT FERMILAB.
SNOWMASS, AUGUST 05
COFFEE BREAK
ILC GLOBAL DESIGN EFFORT DIRECTOR 
BARRY BARISH

29
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS :
MATTER UNIFICATION
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS
The discovery of superpartner particles 
would allow definitive tests of matter 
unification. The converging bands would 
indicate that all of the superpartners 
started out as the same kind of particle in 
the first instant of the Big Bang.
In the everyday world, forces move things around and 
break things apart. In the subatomic world, forces can also 
transform one kind of elementary particle into another. 
These transmutations suggest that the particles that make 
up matter are related in fundamental but mysterious 
ways. One possibility is that there was only one kind of 
matter particle at the time of the Big Bang, which then 
took on many seemingly different forms as the universe 
cooled down. This would mean that the 45 different 
kinds of matter particles that are known today are really 
the same particle in different guises. This idea is called 
matter uniﬁ cation.
 
If superpartner particles are discovered at the LHC, 
physicists will be able to make deﬁ nitive tests of matter 
uniﬁ cation. The orderly patterns of particle masses and 
interactions enforced by supersymmetry would provide 
new ways of structuring matter. In particular, these patterns 
would relate measurements at the Terascale to the much 
higher energies where matter uniﬁ cation may be manifest. 
Experiments at a linear collider would have the precision 
to exploit this relationship, focusing like a telescope on 
the ﬁ rst instant of the Big Bang.
  
The discovery of matter unification would have 
profound implications. It would mean that all ordinary 
matter eventually falls apart, sealing the ultimate fate of 
the universe. It would also require the existence of new 
fundamental forces of nature, forces that would produce a 
strange particle alchemy beyond anything yet observed.

30
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS :
UNKNOWN FORCES
“THERE ARE UNKNOWN FORCES 
IN NATURE; WHEN WE GIVE 
OURSELVES WHOLLY TO HER, 
WITHOUT RESERVE, SHE LENDS 
THEM TO US; SHE SHOWS US 
THESE FORMS, WHICH OUR 
WATCHING EYES DO NOT SEE, 
WHICH OUR INTELLIGENCE DOES 
NOT UNDERSTAND OR SUSPECT.”
– AUGUSTE RODIN
Uniﬁ cation, extra dimensions and string theory all imply 
the existence of new forces of nature. The detection at 
the LHC of a new heavy particle called a Z-prime would 
mean the discovery of just such a new force. This would 
raise compelling questions: What kind of force is this? 
Why is it there? Does the new force unify with the other 
known forces at ultrahigh energies? Is the Z-prime particle 
a traveler in one or more extra spatial dimensions?
 
Linear collider experiments would have the ability to 
detect a very heavy Z-prime by using the accelerator as 
a telescope. The experiments would detect the quantum 
effects of heavy Z-prime particles on the production of 
pairs of light matter particles. Linear collider data could 
clearly discriminate among different origins of the Z-prime 
particle. For example:
• 
The Z-prime arises from a uniﬁ cation framework that 
naturally explains the origin of neutrino masses. 
• 
The Z-prime arises from a framework that uniﬁ es 
Higgs particles with matter particles.
• 
The Z-prime is moving in one or more extra dimen-
sions. Further analysis could conﬁ rm this by ﬁ nding 
other particles that move in these dimensions.

PRECISION
The role of precision measurements in discoveries runs through the 
history of physics. Precision measurements provide exacting conﬁ rmation 
that a proposed law of physics is correct; they exclude wrong guesses; 
and, most important, they can provide an opening to understanding 
aspects of the universe that not accessible to direct observation.
 
Precision measurement played a key role in one of the greatest 
discoveries in 20th-century physics. Einstein’s relativity theory says 
that no information travels faster than the speed of light. On the 
other hand, Newton’s familiar law of gravity says the force of gravity 
acts instantaneously on distant bodies. To resolve this paradox, 
Einstein proposed that matter bends and warps space and time, 
giving rise to gravity. 
 
It was not easy to test Einstein’s new theory of gravity, called the 
general theory of relativity. A precision measurement was required. 
 
Mercury, the innermost planet in our solar system moves in an 
elliptical orbit. Astronomers had found that the ellipse of Mercury’s 
path doesn’t quite come back to the same point; each time Mercury 
revolves around the sun, it always comes back very slightly ahead of 
the ellipse. The effect is extremely small: only 43 arcseconds per 
century. Scientists had noted this effect before Einstein, but could 
not account for all of it with Newton’s theory of gravity. 
 
Einstein’s theory of gravity predicts that Mercury’s orbit should 
come back slightly ahead of itself, just as observed. With this precision 
measurement came veriﬁ cation of a profound insight into nature’s 
workings, Einstein’s theory of gravity.
The orbit of Mercury is an elongated ellipse. At the end 
of each orbit it does not come back to exactly where it 
was before, but slightly ahead of itself. 
31
BRITISH PHYSICIST PHIL BURROWS 
DEMONSTRATES HOW NANOMETER BEAMS 
WOULD COLLIDE IN THE ILC.

32
BRIAN GREENE EXPLAINS STRINGS

33
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS :
CONCERTO FOR STRINGS
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
DISCOVERY SCENARIOS
String theory is the most promising candidate to unify the 
laws of the large and the small. Its goal is to understand 
the nature of quantum gravity and its connection both 
to the other forces of nature and to the cosmos. In string 
theory, gravity is connected to particle physics through its 
effects on supersymmetry. If supersymmetry is discovered 
at the LHC and ILC, physicists will be able to test string-
motivated predictions for the properties of superpartner 
particles. Precise measurements of these superpartner 
properties could then be mapped to properties of gravity 
and strings at ultrahigh energies.
 
This is physics at the ragged edge of our current 
understanding, but preliminary studies have looked at 
the ability of linear collider experiments to detect the 
telltale harmonies of strings. Here linear collider precision is 
essential, since the string effects appear as small differences 
in the extrapolated values of the superpartner parameters. A 
combined analysis of simulated LHC and ILC data shows 
that it may be possible to match the fundamental parameters 
of the underlying string vibrations. While not a direct 
discovery of strings per se, such an achievement would 
truly be the realization of Einstein’s boldest aspirations.

34

In graduate school at the University of Rochester, I decided to 
study particle physics, because to me it seemed the most exciting 
field I could imagine, and the most rewarding way to spend my 
life. But back then I never realized just how exciting it would 
be. In the past decade, we have understood that the beautiful 
and orderly universe we thought we knew so well, with its quarks 
and leptons and fundamental forces, is only a tiny fraction of 
what’s out there. Ninety-five percent of the universe is a com-
plete mystery: dark matter and dark energy. That’s paradise for 
a particle physicist: a universe of unknown particles and forces 
to discover. I tell my students they are taking part in a revolu-
tion, not just in particle physics but in the way human beings 
see the universe. Every day brings us closer to the most amazing 
discoveries. That’s what keeps me working late at night.
Young-Kee Kim
Physicist, University of Chicago
35
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE
CONCLUSION
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE

Professor Frederick Gilman
Chair, HEPAP
Carnegie-Mellon University
5000 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
Ofﬁ ce of Science
U.S. Department of Energy
CHARGE TO THE COMMITTEE
Dear Professor Gilman:
We wish to congratulate you on the widely successful 
Quantum Universe report that with clarity and elegance 
expresses the great discovery opportunities in particle 
physics today. It has made a positive impact in Washington, 
DC, in the Nation, and abroad in conveying the drivers of 
the coming scientiﬁ c revolution. As funding agencies and 
advisors of the Nation’s research portfolio in this ﬁ eld, our 
ability to bring clarity and focus to outstanding scientiﬁ c 
issues is an important responsibility. You have succeeded 
well with Quantum Universe.
 
This brings us to the following. The successful outcome 
of the International Technology Recommendation Panel, 
in coming to a clear technology recommendation, was a 
signiﬁ cant step toward a future Linear Collider. We now 
ask for your help in addressing another important issue in 
program planning and public communication. We need to 
explain clearly to the broad non-scientiﬁ c community the 
need for a second large particle accelerator in addition to 
the Large Hadron Collider (LHC). Inevitably, the question 
arises as to how a less energetic electron accelerator would 
work in tandem with a higher energy proton machine 
in exploring the energy frontier. How would these two 
accelerators complement one another? What crucial scientiﬁ c 
discoveries might not be made without the LC? 
 
To educate us and the public, and to clarify the matter 
more generally, we would like HEPAP to form a committee 
to write a document that addresses the following: 
• In the context of already known physics, i.e. our current 
understanding of the electroweak symmetry breaking 
sector, what are the synergies and complementarities 
of these two machines? How would an LC be utilized 
in understanding a Standard Model Higgs, or whatever 
fulﬁ lls its role in the electroweak interaction?
• In the context of physics discoveries beyond the Standard 
Model (supersymmetry, extra dimensions or other new 
physics) that are assumed to be made at the Tevatron 
or early at the LHC, what would be the role of a 
TeV Linear Collider in making additional and unique 
contributions to these discoveries, in distinguishing 
between models, and in establishing connections to 
cosmological observations? 
36

Michael Turner
Assistant Director
Mathematical and Physical Sciences
National Science Foundation
You may assume that the LHC will be operating over a 15-20 year timeframe with 
likely upgrades.
 
We are not asking for any new physics or simulation studies. As you know, there is 
by now a rather large body of work on this subject. Rather, we are asking for your help 
in distilling this body of work into a crisp, accessible, and persuasive case. The deliverable 
should be a short document (10 pages), accessible to knowledgeable non-experts (e.g., 
members of the EPP2010 Study, OSTP/OMB staff and ourselves). We ask that the report 
be completed as soon as practical but no later than summer 2005.
 
Finally, to further educate us as well as giving us an opportunity to reﬁ ne the charge 
in conjunction with the committee that you appoint, we would suggest a half-day session 
at an upcoming HEPAP meeting devoted to this topic. 
With best regards,
Robin Stafﬁ n
Associate Director
Ofﬁ ce of High Energy Physics
Ofﬁ ce of Science
U.S. Department of Energy
cc: Joseph Dehmer, NSF
   Bruce Strauss, DOE SC-20
37
DISCOVERING THE QUANTUM UNIVERSE

38
HEPAP
The High Energy Physics Advisory Panel 
has advised the federal government on 
the national program in experimental and 
theoretical high-energy physics research 
since 1967. HEPAP reports directly to 
the director of the U.S. Department of 
Energy’s Office of Science and to the 
assistant director, Mathematical and 
Physical Sciences, of the National 
Science Foundation. 
THE OFFICE OF SCIENCE
The Office of Science of the U.S. 
Department of Energy is the single 
largest supporter of basic research in 
the physical sciences in the United 
States, providing more than 40 percent 
of total funding for this vital area of 
national importance. It oversees—
and is the principal federal funding agency 
for—the nation’s research programs in 
high-energy physics, nuclear physics and 
fusion energy sciences. 
 
The Office of Science manages 
fundamental research programs in basic 
energy sciences, biological and environ-
mental sciences and computational sci-
ence. In addition, the Ofﬁ ce of Science 
is the federal government’s largest single 
funder of materials and chemical sci-
ences, and it supports unique and vital 
parts of U.S. research in climate change, 
geophysics, genomics, life sciences, and 
science education. The Ofﬁ ce of Science 
continues to strengthen partnerships with 
other science agencies, including NSF and 
NASA, in support of basic research in the 
physical sciences. 
THE NATIONAL SCIENCE 
FOUNDATION
Mathematical and Physical Sciences 
Directorate
The Mathematical and Physical Sciences 
Directorate (MPS) supports a strong and 
diverse portfolio of research and education 
in mathematics, astronomical science, 
physics, chemistry and materials research. 
The purpose of this work is both to deepen 
our understanding of the physical universe 
and to use this understanding in service 
to society. MPS is involved in many long-
standing, very valuable partnerships 
with its sister US agencies, including. 
DOE, NASA and NIH, as well as with 
international consortia. This mode of 
operation is sure to be augmented in the 
coming years.
Ofﬁ ce of Science
U.S. Department of Energy
Discovering the Quantum Universe was prepared in response to a charge 
to the High Energy Physics Advisory Panel by Dr. Robin Staffin, Director 
of the Office of Science of U.S. Department of Energy and Dr. Michael 
Turner, Assistant Director for Mathematics and Physical Science of the 
National Science Foundation. 

Discovering the Quantum Universe
Design and Production
End Communications
Chicago, Illinois
Photography
Fred Ullrich, Reidar Hahn
Fermilab Visual Media Services
Additional graphics
Juna Kurihara, SLAC
Terry Anderson, SLAC
Sandbox Studio
Filip Moortgat, CERN
Ianna Osborne, CERN


